25719 S120026 99855230 20711
Deus If I Depart I will send the comforter vnto you Iohn 16.7 Christ is risen from the deade. 1 Cor 15 4 I am tormented in this flame Luk 16 pray continually 1 Thes: 5:17 He was broken for or. sin̄es Esay. 53 5 He shall be called the son̄e of God luk 1:35 * And I saw 7 goulden Candlestickes & in the midst of the 7 candles i one like vnto the sonne of man clothed wth. A garment down to ye foot girt about ye paps wth. A goulden girdle This is etarnall life to know thee to be the true god Iohn 17 3 SEVEN GOVLDEN Candlestickes Houlding The Seauen Greatest lights of Christian Religion: Shewing vnto all men what they should beleeue, & how they ought to walke in this life, that they may attayne vnto eternall life By GR WILLIAMS Doctor of Divinity p: 369 with thee is the well of life & in thy light we shall see light 1624 Printed for Nathaniell Butter Delaram scup engraved title page
THE CONTENTS OF the whole BOOKE. 1 The Misery of Man. Rom. 6.23. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, At Pauls Crosse. 2 The Knowledge of God. Exod. 34.6.7. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, Before the King at Greene-wich. 3 The Incarnation of the Word. Ioh. 1.14. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, At S. Maries in Cam∣bridge. 4 The Passion of the Messias. Luk. 24.46. 5 The Resurrection of Christ. Matth. 28.5.6. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, VVithin the Cathe∣drall Church of S. Paul. 6 The Ascention of our Sauiour, and the Dona∣tion of the Holy Ghost. Ephes. 4.5. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, At S. Maries in Cam∣bridge. 7 The duty of Christians. 1 Thess. 5.28. The summe where∣of was prea∣ched, Before the King at Theobalds.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND truly Religious, PHILIP HERBERT, Earle of Montgomery, Baron of Sherland, and Knight of the most Honourable Order of the Garter; and to the most Vertuous and Zealously Religious Lady, the La. SVSAN, his most deere and louing Wife; and to those fiue blessed branches, their most sweet, gracious, and hopefull children, the Lord Charles Herbert, the Lady Anna-Sophia Herbert. Mr. Philip Herbert, Mr. William Herbert, and Mr. Iames Herbert; all grace and happinesse in this life, and eternall blessed∣nesse in the life to come. RIGHT HONOVRABLE: TO you seauen, I dedicate these seauen Golden Candlestickes; and to whom should I dedi∣cate the same, but to you? for in your house, and by your light I haue composed them; and God hath blessed you, not onely in making you great through the fauour of Muta∣ble men, but especially in making you good through the
im¦mutable grace and fauour of himselfe which changeth not, and which hath planted his feare in your hearts, and diffused those graces into your soules, that doe infalliby accompany saluation, and make you to shine as you doe, for the sincerity of your profession in the truth of the Gospell, and the vprightnesse of your hearts, which haue bin euer seene void of all double courtly dealing, amongst a crooked and peruerse generation, whereof I had almost said, the greatest part is either basely filled with hy∣pocriticall flattery, or most pittifully blinded with idolo∣latricall impiety; and as a sure pledge of his pure loue vnto your Honours, he hath giuen vnto you such an in∣estimable gift, so many, so sweet, and so gracefull children, which for all good parts and endowments of nature, and for infallible signes of grace, I dare boldly say it, (and I may the rather say it, because, rather then any other, I doe more experimentally know it) God hath annointed aboue their fellowes,Especially that worthily beloued child, my LORD CHARLES HERBERT; of whom for h s admired to∣wardnesse, I could truly say, more then any that know him not, would ea∣sily beleeue. that neither you nor all yours can be sufficiently thankefull vnto God for them; so great a blessing it is, to haue so many, so many such Oliue-bran∣ches round about your Table. And therfore as God hath blessed your Honors, and made you great lights to shine for godly zeale in this wicked declining world, and to be patternes of true piety vnto others round about you; So I doe assure my selfe, you will not disdaine to accept and peruse these my labours, which as a small expression of my vnfained thankefulnesse for those manifold testi∣monies of your loue and fauours vnto me, farre I con∣fesse beyond my deserts, I doe most syncerely dedicate vnto your Honours, for whose compleate happinesse my witnesse is in Heauen, that since first I belonged vnto you, I haue daily prayed vpon my bended knees; and I doe vnfainedly acknowledge that you deserue more from me, then I can performe, and haue performed more
vnto me, then I can any wayes deserue from you: And therefore I presumed to dedicate these Treatises vnto your Honours, not to shelter them from any stormes of maleuolent tongues, but to publish that thankefulnesse vnto the world, which my heart euer acknowledgeth to be due vnto you: For I know it is fit that whosoeuer publisheth any thing vnfit, should beare the whole bur∣then of his owne fault, and whosoeuer ventureth to ap∣peare in print, must expect the common lot of all Wri∣ters, to be variously censured of various dispositions; Some as Nebuzaradan burnt the Temple,Greg. Cur. past. 3. p. c. 20. Nazian. in pacif. 2. but kept the gold, will be content to take the matter, and yet blame the Author; others will reade it, , not to better themselues, but to censure others; In all these I would neuer desire Patrone to defend mee, nor feare enemy to depraue me; for what is good will defend it selfe, and to flatter those whose pennes are silent, and their tongues alwayes babling, to condemne others in what they cannot mend themselues, were impiety, and to feare them imbecility; for to please all is vnpossible, and to indeauour it is folly: And therefore I hope you will receiue them as I tender them. They be not vnbe∣seeming to be knowne by the greatest Monarches, for they containe not the smoaking fume of humane reaso∣nings, nor the meandrian windings of Controuersiall subtilties, but the purest lights of all Christian Religion; for I saw that as the Athenians were euer desirous of nouelties, so to satisfie this Criticke age, affecting nothing so well as quiddities, too many men haue addrest their mindes to disputable Controuersies; and I found, though with griefe, that the Aduersaries on either side, and especially the Pontificials, as if there were not Con∣trouersies enough in Religion, doe often forge tenents out of their owne braynes, and impute them each one
against the other; and so each Aduersary striues to make the other say what indeed he abhorres to thinke; where∣by it happeneth that a great part of disputations, being about imaginarie Controuersies, is but like a skirmishing in the ayre, which seemeth furious, but striketh no man; and is vainely spent to no purpose, but to increase Schisme, and to inuolue themselues within the thickets of inextricable labyrinths; because iarring and iangling about errours, they let passe the maine grounds of truth, and striuing to finde out new wayes, they doe quite for∣get the old way, which is the good way, and are become almost ignorant of the first and chiefest Principles of Re∣ligion. Such is the pollicie of Satan, to busie their heads about the lesse needfull Controuersies, thereby to make them the lesse diligent to inquire after the most necessary counsels of their saluation. And therefore considering with my selfe what the Apostle saith, that hee desired to know nothing but Iesus Christ, and him crucified; I haue applyed my selfe to treate of these ensuing Theames: I confesse my manner of handling them is like my selfe, plaine and homely, without any gorgeous garments of Rhetorical ornaments; because I euer desired to speak ra∣ther for the edification of my hearers, then for the often∣station of my selfe; but I assure you the matter is like them from whom I receiued it, sound and good; fit to feede all those Christians that desire rather to haue their hungry soules fedde with the sincere milke of Gods Word, then their itching eares tickled with the inticing speech of mans wisedome: for they doe containe the knowledge of our selues, how poore and miserable we are become by sinne, the knowledge of the true and eternall God, and the knowledge of Iesus Christ, God and Man, then whom there is no greater, no better; which few lessons are alone able to make vs happy. I neede speake
no more of the worke, let it speake for me: I referre all to God, who esteemeth of our indeauours, not by their euent, but by our intent; but remembring that presenting your Honours with a Booke, I must not make a Booke of an Epistle, I onely desire you to accept these notes of a Schollers obseruation, who desires not so much to make himselfe knowne, as to acknowledge his duty to God, and his desire to doe him seruice, to extoll his name in Heauen, and not to gaine himselfe a name on Earth, and to haue all his thoughts and workes to honour Christ, or to be dishonoured himselfe for no Christian. So with my daily prayers for you and all yours, I humbly take my leaue and rest; Your Honours true seruant and most humble Chaplaine, in all Christian seruice, euer to be commanded, GR. WILLIAMS.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, IOHN, Lord Bishop of Saint Asaph, and to the Right VVorshipfull, the truly Honoured Sir IOHN WYNNE Knight and Baronet; all grace and hap∣pinesse in this life, and eternall hap∣pinesse in the life to come. Right Reuerend Father: I Write not this vnto your Lord∣ship by base flattery, to beg any thing of you; for I doe endea∣uour alwayes to support my meane estate by meditating on the Apostles lesson, in any state to be contented; and I know, that as we came naked into this world, so we shall all returne na∣ked hence againe: but I pre∣sume to affixe these few lines vnto these my poore labours, to assure the world of mine vnfained ioy to see your Lord∣ship placed in that seate of gouernment wherein you are, in a certaine hope, that (as Saint Paul said of Timothy) according to the prophesies that went afore of you; that is,
the Propheticall expectation that all men conceiued of you; and the faire promises that your Religious and alwayes vpright carriage hath made vnto vs; your Lordship will be a great comfort, and a Diuine blessing vnto that whole Diocesse wherein you liue. I know it is the practise of ma∣ny, I dare not say of any Bishop, either basely to sell their spirituall promotions, or sinisterly to bestow them on their friends, their kinsmen and alliances; and yet I say not the Church of England doth imitate that painted Harlot of Babylon, nor that Ierusalem iustifieth Samaria; but as Demodocus said of the Milesians, they were no fooles, and yet they did the same things that fooles did; so I feare that we may say of many in the Church of England, we are no Pagans, no Popes, no Papists, no worldlings, no carnall men; and yet though I say not that any man doth ill, yet I doubt wee doe not all well, not much better then they vse to doe herein. I confesse the Apostle noteth it as a vice of the latter times, to be without naturall affection; but if gifts blinde the eyes of the wise, that they peruert iudge∣ment, I doubt not but this carnall loue of flesh and bloud will sometimes with Mydas, preferre Pan before Apollo: and this naturall affection to kinred, being vnworthiest, will not onely deiect the mindes of painefull men, and cause men rather to seeke to be allied to others, then to attaine vnto any worth in themselues; but it must also turne to the hurt and detriment of the whole Church of God, and doth apparantly shew such spirituall Patrons to be indeed car∣nally minded; for do not the Publicans and Sinners euen the same? and therefore though I wish all men to abound in loue and affection vnto their Kins-folkes, yet in this case, I would to God that all of vs,Deut. 33 8. wold imitate Leui, who saide vnto his father, and to his mother, I haue not seene him, nei∣ther did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his owne children, but obserued Gods word, and kept his couenant,
that we would set God alwayes before our eyes;Neither doe I say this to deny that men should doe for their kinsfolke being worthy men, but that they should not doe this, neglecting others farre more worthy. and laying aside all sinister respects, would doe onely what should be most for Gods glory, for the encouragement of painfull Preachers, and for the best benefit vnto the people of God: for if Christ being lost by Mary and Ioseph could not bee found among his owne friends and kins-folkes, these men should take heed they finde him not among theirs. I could say more of this point, and yet not so much as Saint Bernard saith vnto Eugenius, of many other points like to this: but this will serue to be a witnesse against some at the dread∣full day, and perhaps to stirre vp as much rage against my selfe, as the Iewes had against Saint Stephen, for speaking this truth against them that vse such dealing against God: If it doth, I say as Saint Chrysostome said of the rage of that cruell Empresse: If they keepe me poore, I know Christ had not an house to put his head in; if they silence me and thrust me out of their Sinagogue; so was that poore man that confessed Christ, and the Apostles inioyned not to speake in the Name of Christ; if they cast me into prison, so was Ieremy, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and many more; If I be forced to flie my Countrey, I haue that beloued Iohn, and that Atlas-like Athanasius for presidents of the like vsage, or whatsoeuer else should be done vnto mee, I haue the holy Martyres for my fellow sufferers, and I will neuer count my life deere vnto me, so I may finish my course with ioy; but I will by Gods helpe, be euer ready, with all my heart, to suffer any thing for the Name of Iesus Christ, and for the least iot of his truth. But I doe much reioyce in that assured confidence which I haue, that your Lordship will herein, as well as in all other points of true piety, be an hea∣uenly shining light and president vnto all other circum∣stant and succeeding Bishops, and other Patrons whatso∣euer; and to that end my prayers shall euer continue for your Lordship.
And for you my most worthy friend, and neuer to be forgotten Benefactor, Sir Iohn Wynne, I must, because I may truely say of you with the Poet, Ego te intus & in cu∣te noui, I am so intimately and inwardly acquainted with your very heart & affections, most earnestly pray to God for your long continuance amongst vs: not onely because of your continuall loue and fauours vnto me and mine, but especially to be, as you haue beene hitherto, the chiefest pillar of ciuill gouernment, the best relieuer of our poore and nee∣dy, and the most apparant patterne of all good workes of pie∣ty and charity in all these parts wherein you liue: and you haue not lost your reward; for God hath blessed you and your Lady with many blessed children, all fearing God; I said enough, though I could truely say much more hereof; such a comfort, that not many men haue the like; and God renueth your yeares as the Eagles, and I hope yet will adde vnto your dayes, as he did vnto the dayes of Ezechias: and yet this is nothing; Quia merces tua apud Deum; in re∣spect of that great reward which you shall haue of God; be∣cause that by continuance in well doing, you shall be sure to haue glory, and honour, and immortality; and therefore most worthy Knight, as I beare witnesse of this truth which I haue seene and know of your Religious heart, fearing God, full of good, so I say vnto you, as Christ saith vnto the Church of Smyrna, Goe on in your course of godlinesse, and be faithfull vnto the death, and you shall haue the Crowne of life, when the Lord shall say vnto you, Euge serue bone, Well done thou good and faithfull seruant, enter thou into thy Masters ioy. Amen. Your Lordships, and your Worships in all Christian seruice, to be commanded, GR. WILLIAMS
To the Christian READER. Deere and Christian Reader: THe more grace any man receiueth from God, the more thankefulnesse and ser∣uice he oweth to God: And I con∣fesse God hath shewed me farre more then vsuall fauours, which I assure my selfe he denyed to many farre more worthy of loue, then I poore worme could any wayes thinke my selfe to be; for he hath three times at least bestowed my life vpon me: first, in making me as he did all other men; secondly, in redeeming me, as he doth all righteous men; and thirdly, in preseruing me from the hands of wicked men, who though they gaue not any life vnto me, yet induced by the malice of Hell, and assi∣sted by the subtilty of Satan, did combine with a craftier cruel∣ty, then euer (that I could finde) the Arrian Bishops did against that innocent constant Athanasius, to take away my feeble life; for when the proud were risen vp against me;Psal. 86.14. and the congregation of naughty men had sought after my soule, and compassed me on euery side,Ecclus 51. so that there was no man to helpe me; yet when I prayed vnto my God,Vers. 2. that he would not leaue me in the dayes of my trouble, and in the time of the proud, when I had none other help, then did he awake as a Giant out of sleep, and preserued my body from destruction,Vers. 3. he saued me from the mouth of the King of Lyons, and according to the multitude of his mercies, hee deliuered mee from the teeth of them that were ready to deuoure me, and out of the hands of them that sought after my life;Vers. 7. yea, he was so gracious vnto me, that he left me not vntil mine eyes did see their desire vpon mine enemies, not their destructiō, which my soule desired they
might neuer taste of, and I pray God they desired the same themselues, but their suppression, so as they might neuer tri∣umph in the miseries of Gods seruants, nor trample the bloud of innocents vnder feet: And therefore seeing God hath been so gracious vnto me, I haue most constantly resolued by the assistance of his Spirit, not onely to praise his Name for his goodnesse and to tell what he hath done for my soule, but also to dedicate my whole life wholly to his seruice, to despise the vanities of this life, to abandon all the pleasures of this world, to be carelesse of all earthly things,Quae possessa onerant, amata inquinant, & amissa cruciant. but what may make in ordi∣ne ad deum, to helpe me the better to serue my God, and with Iohn Baptist to consume my life in the preaching and penning of Gods Word, and maugre all the malice of the proudest Pre∣lates in the world, to speake the truth, as my conscience tels me, though my wife and children should all begge, and my body be burned for the same: I will neuer count my life deare vnto me, to spend it in his seruice that so often gaue it me: And because I desired to doe that which I thought best for the edifying of Gods Church, I haue applied my selfe to treate of these ensuing theames, which doe containe the chiefest points and the most necessary grounds of all Christian Religion: for, besides my naturall inclination, euer tending rather to pacifi∣cation then contention, I thinke we haue more neede of funda∣mentall instructions, which are necessary for all men, then of any controuersiall positions, which may satisfie some men, that perhaps desire rather to informe their iudgement, then to reforme their manners: And in the handling of them I haue intermingled the positiue declaration of the truth, in a schola∣sticke forme, with a forcible application of the same vnto our soules, for the framing of our liues, to make vse of what wee learne: for I approue not so well the handling of Gods word with too slender inforcement of the same vnto our conscien∣ces, as the schoolemen did, & their too much addicted follow∣ers vse to doe; nor yet meerely to stand vpon exhortations with too slight expounding the most principle grounds of Religion, which I feare to be the fault of too many amongst vs: And therefore the one being but as a foundation without roofe, and the other as a building on the sand, or in the ayre vpon reeden
pillars, I haue euer adiudged it the best course to knit both to∣gether, to make both a perfect buiding. If I haue done well, it is that which I desired, but if I haue done slenderly, it is that I could attaine vnto;Aug. proaem. l. 3. de Trinit. And therefore I will be euer of that Fa∣thers minde, which in all his workes and writings, desired not onely pium Lectorem, a courteous Reader of his labours, but also liberum Correctorem, a free reprouer of his faults; but so that they doe it friendly, to blame in their iudgement where it is equity, but not to blaze my faults vnto the world, which is a breach of charity; and that they doe as well accept of what is good, as except against what is ill herein; for I know there be many, Momus-like, Qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt,Idem. contra Faust. l. 22. c. 34. vel reprehendendo non intelligunt; that doe shew their folly in repro∣uing others, when out of enuy or ignorance they blame that good of others which they haue not, or know not themselues: And for these there is none other helpe, but to be carelesse of their censures, and to pray against their wickednesse. There be faults escaped in the Printing, the most of them be literall, as the mistaking of e for ae, & econtra, and such like faults of no great moment, especially to him that knowes how hard it is to make things perfect; and therefore I hope they shall be ei∣ther mended with thy pen, or pardoned without thy censure: for other things I onely desire thy prayers for mee, and thou shalt euer finde his paines and prayers for thee, which loueth thee and all men in Iesus Christ, with all vnfainednesse. GR. VVILLIAMS.
This Trea∣tise cō∣taineth 1. The worke done, i. e. sin, and that is either 1. Originall sinne, where is considered, 1. What euill it bringeth. 2. How it is deriued. 2. Actuall sin where is shewed. 1. How it is defined. 2. How it is in∣crea∣sed. 1. In∣ward∣ly. 1. By the suggestion of Satan. 2. By the delights of the flesh. 3. By the consent of the spirit. 2. Out∣wardly. 1. Secretly committed. 2 Publiquely aduentured. 3. Vsually practised. 4. Exceedingly enlarged. 3. How it is cō∣mitted. viz. of 1. Ignorance. 2. Knowledge. 3. Infirmity. 4. Malice, which is 1. Wilfull. 2. Spitefull. * And from hence is seene, 1. The diuersity of sinners. 2. The in∣equality of sins, & yet, that 1. Euery sinne brings death. 2. The sin of any one brings death 3. The least sin of any one brings death. 2. The wages to be paid for sin, i. e. death, which signifi∣eth the curse of God ex∣tending it selfe, 1. Ʋpon all creatures, 1. Heauenly. 2. Earthly. 2. Vpon e∣uery man, to whom it bring∣eth a tre∣ble death. 1. Of the soule whereof it killeth, 1. Will. 2. Vnderstanding. 3. Memory. 2. Of the body: where is conside∣red. 1. What is meant by death, i. e. all miseries: 1. In all Ages. 2. In all States. 3. By all Creatures. 2. How farre it extendeth, ouer all men. 3. How variably it wor∣keth in respect of the 1. Manner. 2. Time. 3. Place. 4. Effectswhich are dif∣ferent; the cause whereof is, 1. The practise of a good life. 2. The meditatiō of our death. 3. The applic. of Christs death. 3. Of body and soule in Hell.
3. The e∣quity of this wa∣ges is seene, if we consi∣der, 1. That it is iust to punish sinne. 2. That God is the iustest Iudg that can bee found to punish sinne. 1. Because he loueth righteousnesse. 2. Because he iudgeth without respect of persons. 3. Because he punisheth euery man according to his desart. Where the inequality of Hell punishment is shewed. 3. That all the punish∣ment a∣fore-said inflicted for sinne, is most iust: 1. Not in respect of a sinners will eternally to sinne, if he did eternally liue: but, 2. In a iust pro∣portion of the punish∣ment to the hay∣nousnesse of the sin commit∣ted: which is seene in respect, 1. Of the leuity and easinesse to doe what God commandeth. 2. Of the transcen∣dent deformity of sinne, which is seene if we consider, 1. The Nature of him that is offen∣ded. 2. The quality of him that doth of∣fend. 3. The Nature of the sinne that is com∣mitted.
This Trea∣tise shew∣eth, 1. What God is, and how God is knowne, what he is, two wayes: 1. As he is in himselfe: so none knoweth God but God himselfe. 2. As he hath ex∣pressed himselfe to vs, and so he may be known, 1. By way of negation. 2. By way of affirmation. 3. By way of super∣excellen∣cy, and so hee is shewed to be 1. An eternall being in himselfe. 2. A giuer of being, 1. To all creatures. 2. To all his promises; which should teach vs to labour to be vni∣ted to him, to be thankefull, and to beleeue all his promises. 3. An absolute L. of all things, which should teach vs to serue him for 3. especiall reasons.
2. What maner of God he is; where the nature of God is shewed by three speciall attributes viz. 1. By his Power touching which is handled, 1. The number & quality of the ad∣uersaries of Gods power, which are 1. The Infidels, that will not be∣leeue in him. 2. The desperate men, that cannot hope in him. 3. The vbiquitaries of Germany. 4. The pontificialls of Rome. 2. How the actiue power of God is to be con∣sidered, in resp. 1. Of his inward operations. 2. Of his outward operatiōs; and so it must be cōsidered 1. Relatiuely, as it respecteth the will and decree of God. 2. Abso∣lutely, & so he can doe all things, 1. Which are not contrary to Gods Nature. 2. Which imply not contradiction. 3. The proofe of Gods om∣nipoten∣cy, which is shewed from 1. The Word of God. 2. The workes of God. 1. In the beginning of the world 2. Throughout the continuance. 3. In the end of the world. 3. The consent of all Diuines. 4. The testimony of many Heathens. 5. The confession of the very Diuels. 4. The an∣swering to the chiefest ob∣iections. 1. Of the Infidels. 2. Of the desperate. 3. Of the vbiquitaries. 4. Of the pontificials. 5. The vsefull appl. of this do, which serueth 1. To confute many heresies. 2. To comfort all the Godly. 3. To condemne all the wicked. 2 By his goodnes, and that seauen especial wayes, viz. that he is, 1. Mercifull, which consi∣steth in 1. Giuing of graces. 2. Forgiuing of sinnes. 3. Qualifying of punishments. 2. Gracious, which signi∣fieth. 1. Amiable. 2. Placable. 3. Liberall. 3. Slow to an∣ger, shewed, 1. By Scriptures. 2. By examples, old and new. 4. Abun∣dant in goodnes, 1. As he is in himselfe. 2. As he is to others; 1. Gene∣rally to all creatures by 1. Crea∣ting all things. 1. simp. g. 2. rela. g. 2. pres. thē frō euill. 3. enric. thē with g. 2. Speci∣ally to his elect. 1. by dec. their elec. 2. by their effect. cal. 3. by the filling of thē with his graces. 5. Abun∣dant in truth, 1. Essentially truth in himselfe. 2. Cau∣sally the fountaine of al truth 1. Of things. 2. Of the vnderstanding. 3. Of ex∣pression, which is, 1. Primar. in Scrip. 2 Secondarily from man to man. 6. Reseruing mercy for thou∣sands, that is, 1. Extensiuely. 2. Successiuely. 7. Forgiuing iniquitie and transgression, and sin, i. e. all kinds of sin, 1. Originall corruption. 2. Actuall commission. 3. Greatest abhom. if we repent. * The vsefull applic. of Gods goodnesse, teaching vs, 1. To be afraid to sinne. 2. Neuer to desp. of Gods goodn. 3. To imitate God in each one of the seauen forenamed points. 3. By his iustice, and that 1. Negatiuely, not making the wicked innocent. 2. Positiuely by visiting of the sins of the wicked, 1. Vpon themselues. 2. Vpon their chil∣dren, where is di∣stinguished of 1. Parents. 2. Sinnes. 3. Children. 4. Punishments.
This Trea∣tise con∣taineth, 1. An Introduction of the excellency of the knowledge of Iesus C. wher is shewed that 1. his life is our chiefest direct. 2. himselfe our onely consolatiō. 2. An explica∣tion of that great mystery of the Incar∣nation of the Word: where is hand∣led. 1. Who was made ; where is shewed; 1. That there can be but one God, and yet that there are three persons in the vnity of that one essence, & how these three persons are distin∣guished, 1. By their personal actions, 1. out∣ward which are, 1. Communic. 2. Transcient. 3. Voluntary. 2. In∣ward which are, 1. Permanent. 2. Necessary. 3. Incommu∣nicable. 2. By their nominall relation, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And that the person made is the second person of the blessed Trinitie; To his father. 1. Co-eternall. 2. Co-essentiall. 3. Co-equall. And this is fully pro∣ued, all obict. plaine∣ly answered; and from thence shewed, 1. The greatnesse of Gods loue. 2. The craftinesse of Satan. 3. The peruersnes of hereticks. 4. The vnthankfulnes of men. 2. Three especiall things touching the word , viz. 1. What  signifieth, i. e. the Word. 2. Why Christ is tearmed the Word. 3. Why the Euan∣gelist v∣seth this word, 1. Because this name of Christ was best knowne to the Iewes and to the Gentiles. 2. Because it was the fit st word that he could vse, to make way for his subsequent discourse. 3. The impulsiue and the finall causes of the Words in∣carnation; and the reasons why the Word rather then the Father or the holy Ghost was to be incarnate. 2. What he was made, flesh, where is shewed, 1. The manner of his conception, the reasons, and the end thereof. 2. The matter that hee assumed 1. All our humane nature, i. e. body and soule. 2. All our humane frailties both of body and soule, sinne onely excepted. And here is shewed many ex∣cellent lessons that we ought to learne in respect 1. Of God. 2. Of Christ. 3. Of our selues.
3. How the Word was made flesh, or how the two na∣tures, di∣uine and humane, doe make but one person in Christ: where is shewed. 1. The distinction of the two natures, diuine, and humane; that they doe still remaine intire, and inconfused, is fully proued, and the chiefest obiections made to the contrary, are plainly answe∣red. 2. The vnion of the two natures in one personis explai∣ned, and 1. The confirmatiō of the truth of this point is shewed and the greatest obie, made against it are sufficiently answered 2. The manner of this v∣nion, wherein it consi∣steth, is expres∣sed, viz. 1. Not as the Arrians say, onely in re∣spect of 1. Cohabitation. 2. Will and affection. 3. Co-operation. 4. Participation of his names and dignities vn∣to the manhood. 2. But in the communica∣ting of the subsistence of the Word with the subsistence of the manhood; where is she∣wed that this vnion is, 1. Inconuertible. 2. Indiuisible. 3. Inconfused. 4. Inseperable. 5. Substantiall. 6. Ineffable. 3. The chiefest benefits & effects of the said vnion, is shewed, and that 1. In respect of Christ: which are, 1. An exēpt. from all sin. 2. A collation of ineffa∣ble graces into the man∣hood of Christ. 3. A communication of the properties of each na∣ture, to the person of Ch. Where the obiection of the vbiquit, indeuou∣ring to proue the man∣hood inuested with Di∣uine properties, are fully answered. 2. In resp. of vs, viz our vnion and recon∣ciliation with God, & all the happinesse we haue in this life, or doe looke for in the life to come.
This Trea∣tise con∣taineth, 1 An introduction of the meditation of Christ his death, which is 1. Acceptable vnto God. 2. Profitable for vs. 1. To hinder sinne. 2. To kindle our charity. 3. To erect our hope.
2. A de∣claration of the pas∣sion of Christ; wherein is hand∣led 4. 1. The person suffering, which was 1. A Man. 2. A iust Man. 3. A good Man. 4. A King. 5. A Priest. 6. A Prophet. 7. A God. whereis shewed who are subiect to most affliction. 2. The suffe∣rings of Christ. 1. In the garden of Geth∣semane 1. Alone, where is shewed, 1. How the affecti∣ons of Christ differ from ours in re∣spect of the 1. Obiect. 2. Maner. 3. Effects. 2. The cause of his agony, in respect of 1. obiect. 2. subiect where isExplai∣ned. 1. What might grieue Christ. 1. In respect of himselfe 1. The greatnesse of his paine and shame. 2. The deferring of his death and punishment. 2. In respect of others 1. Small account he saw they would make of his death. 2. The greatnesse of their punish∣ment, which hee knew they must suffer for that their neglect. 2. What Christ might feare. 1. The waight of sinne. 2 The malice of Satan. 3 The wrath of God. 2 By o∣thers where is shew∣ed. 1. The treason of Iudas, where is shewed, 1. what Christ had done for Iudas. 2. why Iudas betrayed Christ. 3. how Iudas betrayed him. 2. The flight of all the followers of Christ. 3. The taking and binding of Iesus Christ. 2. Before his Iud∣ges. viz. 1. Before Annas, where 1. He is ex∣amined. 1. Of his Disciples. 2. Of his Doctrine. 2. he is strucken by the hie P. ser. 3. he is denied by his stoutest Ap. 2. Before Pilate the first time, where hee is accused; 1. Of impiety against God. 2. Of treaso against Caesar. 3. Before Herod, where the mystery of cloa∣thing Christ in white is explained. 4. Before Pilate the 2. time, where his scour∣ging, crowning with thorns, &c. is expressed, 3. In Gol∣gotha where is expressed 1. Those things that he suffered on the Cros. 1. An accursed, 2. A shamefull, 3. A painefull, 4. a lingring D: where also is shewed the generality of his suffering. 2. The 7. gracious words that he vttered, & many other speciall obseruat. full of comfort. 3. The necessity of Christ his suffe¦rings in respect of the causes viz. 1. Instru∣mentall. 1. The enuy of Satan. 2. The malice of the Iewes. 3. The couetousnesse of Iudas. 4. The desire of the multitude. 2. Efficient, God himselfe, for our sinnes, out of the loue he bare to man. 3. Finall. 1. In resp. of men. 1 To saue the Elect by the ver∣tue of his death. 2. To make the wicked without excuse for neglecting his death. 2. In resp. of God, for the glory of his blessed N. where is shewed that this should teach vs; 1. To compassionate his death. 2. To make vs thankefull for so great a benefit. 3. To cause vs to loue him a∣boue all things in the world. 4. To make vs ready to suffer any thing with him and for his sake. 4. The manner of his suffe∣ring these things. 1. So as the Prophets foretold, that he should suffer. 2. So as the Apostles and his Dis∣ciples saw, and declared vnto vs that he did suffer. And so in respect of himselfe, as it is incomprehensible vnto all men.
This Trea∣tise she∣weth, 1. The malice of the Iewes. 2. The deuotion of the wo∣men, where is shewed, 1. Their number, Three: and why? 2. Their names, 1. Mary Mag∣dalen. 2. Mary. Iacobi. 3. Mary Salome. whereby is shewed, 1. The fortitude. 2. The fruitfulnesse. 3. The peaceablenesse of the Church. 3. The action, where is consi∣dered, 1. The matter, a seeking of Christ. 2. The manner, which was a seeking him, 1. Early. 2. Earnestly. 3. Mournefully. 4 Onely. 5. Continually. 3. The end, to embalme him. 4. A question resolued, how these women, or one of them at least being so wicked, became so deuout; handled at large. 3. The office of the An∣gell. 1. In respect of Christ to doe him seruice. 2. In respect of the keepere to terrifie them. 3. In re∣spect of the wo∣men; 1. To com∣fort them, 1. By the manner of their apparition, 1. In white. 2. On the right side. 2. By their friendly al∣loc. teach. 1. Whom we ought to feare. 2. Whom we ought not to feare 3. How we ought to feare.
2. To in∣struct them, 1. What they shold beleeue, touching the resur∣rection of Christ: where is handled, 1. The resurre∣ction it selfe, is shewed, 1. Neg. that C. was not in the gra. 2. Affir. that he was risen & gone away, & therfore not there: where the corporall presence of Christ is handled at large. 3. Illustratiuely two wayes. viz. 1. A Priori from the pre∣dictions, that Chr. should rise; where is shewed, 1. Why he was to rise, in 1. resp. of Sat. 2. res. of Man. 3. res. of Him. 2. Why to rise on the third day, 1. of his Ene. 2. of his Disci. 3. of all Chas. To con∣firm their faith tou∣ching. 1. The quality of his Person. 2. The certainty of his resur. 3. The maner of our restau. 4. The declaration of our state and condition. 2. A Poste∣riori, from the subse∣quents of his resurre∣ction, and heere is shewed, 1. The Iewes reasons why they will not beleeue. 2. Our rea∣sons why we beleeue him to haue ri∣sen: 1. Angelicall assertion. 2. Manifold apparitions. 3. Many cir∣cumstantiall demonstrati∣ons. 2. The place from whence he rose is discussed: where the discention of Christ to hell, is shewed, the 1. Necessity requiring it 2. Scriptures prouing it. 3. The consent of all an∣tiquity, confirming it. 3, The manner how Christ rose, in re∣spect of the 1. The place, from the dead. 2. The time, early. 3. Person 1. Truely. 2. Perfectly. 3. Gloriously. 4. The application of the whole doctrine, where is shewed, that the resur∣rection worketh, 1. Our resurrection from sinne, which must bee as his was; 1. Speedily. 2. Truely. 3. Totally. 4. Constantly. 2. Our assurance of re∣surrection into glory. 2. What they should doe, where is shewed how necessary it is to ioyne practise vnto the profession of Christianity.
This Trea∣tise shew∣eth, 1. The glory or ascention of Christ, which is handled, 1. By way of expositi∣on. 1. Person ascending where is shewed foure sorts of ascen∣ders. 1. Angels. 2. Diuels. 3. Men. 4. God & Man Christ Iesus. 2. The as∣cension it selfe is shewed, where is more fully expressed 1. Person as∣cending, both in respect of his 1. Humi∣liation, where is shewed 1. That he was in hea∣uen before he descen∣ded. 2. The ex∣tent of his humiliati∣on. 2. His exaltation. 2. Particular circum∣stances concerning his Ascension. viz. 1. Time. 2. Place. 3 Manner. 3. The place where he ascen∣ded, into Heauen, where is shewed that there is a three-fold Heauen. 1. Materiall. 2. Spirituall. 3. Supersubstanti∣all, where is proued that the body of Christ is locall. 2. By way of appli∣cation. 1. For our cō∣solation, which is two-fold. 1. That Christ in our flesh is gone to take possession of Heauen. 2. That being in Heauen, he is not vnmindfull of vs that be on earth. 2. For our i∣mitatiō, where is shewed. 1. The place from whence we must ascend. 2. The meanes how wee may as∣cend. 3. The signes if wee haue ascen∣ded. 2. The victory of Christ which is vnderstood, 1. Passiuely for all our enemies, Hell, Death, Sinne, &c. 2. Actiuely for all those men that are deliue∣red from sinne, and set at liberty to serue their God.
3. The bounty of Christ, where is shewed 1. What maner of gifts Christ giueth, free gifts, to exclude merit. 2. What gifts are here meant, where is shew∣ed, that all gifts of God are ei∣ther 1. Temporall gifts. 2. Spiri∣tuall gifts, & they are 2 sorts. viz. 1. To edifie the Church, as 1. Ministers. 2. Gifts to ministers, especially 1. Tongues. 2. Knowlege. 3. Charity. 4. Constancy. 5. Contempt of the world. 6. Perfect power, &c. 3. Ministers indued with these gifts. 2. To sancti∣fie our soules, which are 1. Common gifts. 2. Spe∣ciall gifts, which are 1. faith which is 1. Historicall. 2. Of miracles. 3. Temporary. 4. Iustifying. 2. Hope, which is 1. Humane. 2. Diuine. 3. Charity. 4. Prouidence. 5. Patience, &c. 3. How God be∣stoweth his gifts. viz. 1. the gifts for edify∣ing the Church, he giues not al∣waies a∣like; for, 1. In the be∣ginning of the Church, visi∣bly; where is shewed how the holy ghost appeared. viz. 1. Like a cloude. and why? 2. Like fire. and why? 3. Like a Doue. and why? 4. Like winde. and why? 5. Like tongues. and why? Where is shewed the fil∣ling of the Apostles wi the holy Ghost, 4. signes of their fulnesse, and the effects thereof; 2. Now and to the end, sufficiently, but with our great industry; where is shew∣ed how we may know whether we haue the gifts of God or not. 2. Gifts for the san∣ctifying our soules, he giues by 1. Hearing the Word. 2. Receiuing the Sacrament. 1. Baptisme 2. Euchar. 4. To whō God bestoweth all these gifts; to whō it pleaseth him.
This Trea∣tise con∣taineth, 1. A most friendly cōpella∣tiō, where is hand∣led, 1. The vnity of brethrē, where is shewed, 1. How deerely Heathen brethren in former times loued each other. 2. How little loue and vnity is now among Christian brethren. 2. The pollicy of the Apostle in seeking to winne the Thessallo∣nians to pray for them; Where is shewed that there be three sorts of Preachers. 1. Discreete. 2. Parasites to Princes. 3. Flatterers of the people.
2. A most Christian request or exhorta∣tion, wher is shewed 1. The pietie of the Apo∣stle in perswa∣ding all men to pray: where is handled concer∣ning prai∣er, 1. The kindes of prayer. 1. In re∣spect of the matter, 1. Inuo∣cation. 1. To remoue euill. 2. To obtaine good. 1. grace, spirituall. bles∣sings. 2. peace, temporal. bles∣sings. 2. Thankesgiuing which is in∣forced by many reasons, &c. 2. In re∣spect of the forme. 1. Mentall. 2. Vocall. 3. Sudden. 4. Composed. 5. Conceiued. 6. Prescribed. 7. Priuate. 8. Publique. 9. Ordinary. 10. Extraord. 2. The party to whom we shold pray, i. e. God, for diuers spe∣ciall reasons: as 1. Because hee onely is omnipre∣sent. 2. Because hee onely is omnis∣cient. 3. Because hee onely is omnipo∣tent. 3. The place whereto pray, 1. Generally: euerywhere. 2. Specially the Church: and that for fiue speciall reasons. 4. The time when to pray, 1. With our heart and affect. alwaies. 2. With our voyce, at the appointed times. 1. For our priuate prayers. 2. For our publ. prayers.Where the neglectors of publique prayers are sharpely reprehended. 5. The man∣ner how to pray; 1. In humility. 2. In faith. 3. In zeale. 4. With constancy. 5. In charity. 6. In piety. 6. The motiues to per∣swade vs to pray; 1. In respect of God: because prayer is an essentiall part of Gods seruice. 2. In re∣spect of our selues 1. To obtaine our re∣quest, 1. Whatsoeuer we aske. 2. More then we aske. 3. Better then we aske. 2. To preuent iudgements. 3. To preserue al spiritual graces. 4 To weaken finne. 5. To sanctifie the creatures. 6. To ouercome all creatures. 7. To preuaile with God, 1. When hee is pleased. 2. When hee is angry. Where is shewed that the gift to pray, is the most excellentest grace that God bestoweth on man. 2. The charity of the Apostle in shewing how we should pray one for another; where is she∣wed that we must pray, 1. Specially for our selues. 2. Generally for al men, for three speciall reasons, and more par∣ticularly. 1. For Kings and all Magistrates. 2. For our ministers and that for three speciall reasons. 1. Because we owe this dutie to pray for them. 2 For our owne good. 3. To helpe themto discharge that great charge which is laide vpon them: where is shewed the dangerous estate of Mi∣nisters whatsoeuer they doe.
An Jntroduction to the whole BOOKE. WHen Almighty God had decreed from all eternity, to make certaine creatures partakers of his felicity, he did in that very period of the decreed time by his eternall Councell, create of nothing, all the things that are subsistent, and thereby he shewed himselfe to be, as all Gentiles confest it, optimus maximus, the very best of all that is good, and the ve∣ry greatest of all that is great: and, as Pliny saith well, especially hauing but the light of nature to enlighten him,Plutarch, in Panegyrico Train. dict. he did herein shew himselfe to be prius optimus quam maximus; because hee which was so eminently good, that he could not be bettered, did all this for them that were iust nothing: but alas, behold a re∣lapsed creature, from his most indulgent Creator, and see how this goodnesse of God, abused by the creature, became through the iust iudgement of GOD, an euitable cause of all mi∣series vpon all transgressors; for wee not contented with that blessed state wherein wee were established, did spurne against our God by a most ambitious vsurpation of his very Deity, and so aspiring vnto a blessed life as we thought, we brought vpon our selues a most accursed death, as we all finde: yet God still desiring to shew himselfe a God of mercy, he promised to send a Sauiour to redeem vs,Gal. 4.4. by taking our nature vpon him, and suffe∣ring in our flesh, whatsoeuer we deserued for our sinnes; and to this end when the fulnesse of time came, God sent his Sonne, made of a woman, made vnder the Law, subiect to the curse of the Law,
which was death of body, buriall in the graue, and discention in∣to hell, that he might free vs from eternall death, and then to rise againe the third day, to ascend into heauen, and to send his holy Spirit into our hearts, to worke in vs faith to apply all this vnto our selues, and all other graces whatsoeuer, that might fit vs and bring vs vnto euerlasting life. And this is the summe of all that is contained in this booke, to know our selues, to know God, to know Iesus Christ, borne, dead, raised, ascended, and now raigning in eternall glory, to guide his Church, and to confound his foes for euermore. Perhaps this worke may seeme as the water boughs of a fruit∣lesse tree, a superfluous branch vnto the Church of God; I wil∣lingly submit it to the iudgement of Gods children: they must all confesse it is the last houre of the worlds age, wherein ini∣quity is increased, impiety is enlarged, and all charity is almost abandoned, all things growing worse and worse by continu∣ance; Et satanas tanto feruentior ad sauitiam, quanto se sentit vici∣niorem ad paenam: and Satan hauing the greater rage to driue vs to transgression by how much the neerer he perceiues him∣selfe to destruction; And therefore let men say what they will, yet seeing we may truly demaund of them, Quid audiam ver∣ba, cum vidiam contraria facta? What booteth all our knowledge, seeing we doe nothing that we know, nor know nothing indeed as we ought to know? I say that it cannot be amisse to do what wee can to expresse those things that may best make for our happinesse; and I know these points are necessary to be knowne,Aetas parentum peior auis tulit, nos nequiores, mox daturos progienem visi∣orem Horat. car. 3.6. Greg, Moral l. 34. c. 1. and most profitable to be practised by all Christians. Reade them then, and I will pray to God that he will giue thee grace, Faeli∣citer currere & faelicius in Christi pietate cursam tuum consum∣mare; to vnderstand what thou readest, to beleeue what thou vnderstandest, and to practise what thou beleeuest, that so thou mayest attaine vnto euerlasting life, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
Courteous Reader, these errours and the like, if you meet them, I pray you correct them. Pag. Lin. Errata. Corrige. 5 19 predicatum praedicatum 7 24 as some, deleatur 15 21 infelicitas infaelicitas 18 13 predicatum praedicatum 22 30 nay no. 23 36 . . 28 21 occulos. oculos 29 20 Athenienes Athenienses 31 15 gnostrickes gnostickes.   praemit premit 37 1 equalities equalitie 38 2 quaa quantae   at as 44 9 seruat deleatur 45 10 meritrix meretrix 47 23 á as 71 8 71 6 presentes praesentes 77 12 laethi lethi 81 18 soules sculles 84 16 are is   27 elephat elephante 86 37 it in 93 4 dilicijs delicijs 102 18 diliciae deliciae 128 14 future tens for the present present tens for the future. 263 7 conquari conqueri 326 25 impleue impleuit 452 4 faerox ferox 463 1 progeniere progenuere 471 26 eterchangably interchangably 480 25 penae poenae 482 25 manibus maenibus 462 10 Querentis quaerentis 559 35 tum tam 571 12 fugentes fugientes 579 7 eo eos 669 31 honestatatis honestatis 676 34 lepido tepido. 692 after, effusion of, v. their deerest bloud to defend that in the field, which they with the diffusion of, &c. 707 1 propter praeter Marginall faults. P. Err. Corrige. 15 qud quad 19 Aetneum Aetnaeum 41 num nun 124 seeing being 196 prestare praestare 438 Hillarius Hilarius 690 Psal. pag. 695 Blando Blanda. And some other mis-quotations, which for want of the copie, I cannot directly amend.
The first golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The first greatest light of Christian RELIGION. Of the misery of MAN. ROMANS 6.23. The reward of sinne is death. EVery man (saith holy Iob) is borne to labour, ; yea, ne∣cessitie enioyneth all mortall men to la∣bour (saith Euripides) and euery labou∣rer is induced (saith Hugo Cardinalis) to performe his worke with alacritie vpon the assured hope of iust reward: and therefore the law required that no man should detaine the hyre of the Labourer vntill the mor∣ning, but as soone as euer hee had done his worke,Leuit. 19.13. to pay him his wages: because (as our Sauiour saith) the Labourer is worthy of his hyre, and we finde, that according as the payment is,Luc. 10.7. good or bad, so are the Labourers willing, or vnwilling, to doe their worke: for good and present payment makes a painefull and a cheerefull agent. Now here the Apostle setteth downe a worke performed, and
the wages thereof, not onely iustly deserued, but also presently dis∣charged, the reward of sinne is death, and in what day thou sin∣nest,Gen. 2.17. in that day thou shalt die the death, saith the Lord, few words but full of matter, Sinne and Death: the two most com∣mon things vpon the face of the earth; for all men sinned, ex∣cept Christ himselfe, and all men died, except Enoch and Elias, and yet two of the most lamentable, and most fearefull things in the world: for what is more lamentable then sinne, or what is more terrible then death?Iudges 15.4.5. and yet as Sampsons Foxes were tyed together by the tayles, and carried firebrands betwixt them to destroy all the Corne of the Philistimes, so here sinne and death are indissolubly linked together, with vnquenchable firebrands betwixt them, to deuoure all the whole race of mankinde: for the reward of sinne is death. But I must seuer them for a time, to examine these murtherers of men, that all wee may hate them, if we cannot shunne them: and therefore according to the num∣ber of the words of this text,The diuision of the Text. stipendium peccati mors, I desire you to obserue the parts of this tragedie, three words, three parts. 1 the worke performed, Sinne. 2 the payment rendred, Death. 3 the equitie shewed, the wages of sin is death. All which well considered will shew vnto vs all, the most wofull state and the manifold miseries, of poore distressed miserable man. CHAP. I. Of Originall sinne,The first Part. and how the same is deriued from the Pa∣rents vnto the Children. Of the worke that is done, i. e. Sinne.HEre you see, sinne is the roote of death, and death is the fruit of sinne. Sower must be the roote when the fruit doth proue so bitter, and sinne must needes bee execrable, when as death is a thing so lamentable, and therfore sinne makes me quake to thinke of it, and death should make you tremble to consider of it, because death is the wages of sinne.
And sinne is either 1 originall.Sinne is two∣fold. 2 actuall. the first is traduced vnto vs from Adam, the second is daily committed by our selues. For the first, In what day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt die the death (saith the Lord vnto A∣dam) but you may eate,Gen. 2.17. and you shall not die at all (saith the Diuell vnto Euah:) she beleeued the Diuell; and the man obayed his wife; and so both would needes eate, and therefore God can∣not be true, or else man must needes die, and he must iustly die, because he did vniustly eate.i. Of Originall sinne. Rom. 5.12. Here was the sinne committed by one; and from him it was deriued vnto all: for by one man, sinne entred into the world, and sinne went ouer all, and spread it selfe like that far-spreading tree which Olympias dreamt shee bare or like a vile gangrene, ouer all the face of the whole earth, and corrupted all the race of mankinde, for it is a schoole-point most infallible, that Adam now stood, not as a priuate person, or as one particular man, but as the roote of all the branches, and as bearing in his person the nature of all mankinde. And therefore if he had stood, we had all stood,Heb. 7.9. but as A∣braham paying tythes, Leui paid tythes in Abraham, so Adam sinning, we haue all sinned in Adam, Et omnes peccauimus in isto vno homine, quia omnes eramus iste vnus homo. And wee haue all sinned in that one man, because we all were that one man, saith Saint Augustine. And so both himselfe and wee all,The dammage that we receiue by Adams fall, is two-fold: 1. A depriuati∣on of all good∣nesse. doe by this fact of Adam, receiue a double dammage. 1. A depriuation of all our originall goodnesse, the image of God in vs, and the loue of God towards vs, and therefore if at the losse of earthly treasures we shew our selues so much grieued, O then how should our soules, for the amission of such heauen∣ly graces be continually perplexed, vntill wee see the same once againe restored? 2. An habituall naturall pronenesse to all kinde of wickednesse,1. A pronesse to all wicked∣nesse. and to commit sinne euen with greedinesse. In respect of the first, we are altogether vnable to doe any good: for who can bring a cleane thing out of that which is vncleane? how can wee, being voide of grace, bring forth any fruits of goodnesse? and, In respect of the second, wee are naturally inclined to all
kinde of euill, like a stone tumbling downe a hill, that can neuer stay it selfe vntill it come to the bottome; So Medea saith, Video meliora proboque, deteriora sequor, Though I see the good, yet am I naturally driuen to doe that which is euill; for our whole na∣ture being defiled, we are wholly inclined to fall from one wicked∣nesse vnto another, as the Psalmist speaketh. And in respect of both these wee are said to bee conceiued in sinne, borne in iniquiitie, destitute of grace, void of goodnesse, nothing but flesh, full of corruption, children of darkenesse, sonnes of wrath, heyres of damnation, slaues of death; for the reward of sinne is death. But here it may be questioned, and it is not easily to be resolued, how originall corruption is traduced from the Parents into the Chil∣dren. The question is not of the verity of the matter, for it is plaine,Ezech. 18. that our Fathers haue eaten sowre grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, and euery one may truely say with the Pro∣phet,Psal. 51.5. in sinne my Mother hath conceiued me, but it is of the Myste∣ry of the manner,Iohn 3.9. as Nicodemus said to Christ, how can these things be? for How originall sinne is tradu∣ced from the Parents into the Children.1. On the one side, they say the childe receiueth from his Parents, not his soule, but onely his body; for if the soule were ex traduce, begotten by naturall generation, then it must needs be traduced, either from the body, or from the soule of the Pa∣rents. Whether the soule is begot∣ten by the Pa∣rents.If from the soule, then is the soule subiect to deuision, to cor∣ruption, and then we might as well say, an Angell may beget an Angell, as to say, one soule may beget another; but to say that the body being an elementarie substance, subiect to corrup∣tion, should beget a spirituall soule that is incorruptible, is more absurd, as Aristotle doth most truely declare. And therefore they say that the soule creando infunditur, & infundendo creatur, is infused as it is created, and created as it is infused; and then, as cleane water powred into a foule Cisterne, must needes bee presently corrupted, so the pure soule infused into a polluted flesh, must needes be instantly defiled, for he that toucheth pitch, shall be defiled with pitch. And to confirme this supposition, they alledge that testimo∣ny of Scripture,Heb. 12.9. where the Apostle calleth our naturall Fathers,
, the Fathers of our flesh, and God , the Father of Spirits. 2. On the other side they say, if the soule should not proceed from the Parents, then not onely God might seeme to deale vniustly: 1. In not performing his law, when he saith:Ezech. 18.20. the soule which sinneth, the same shall dye, and not the soule which neuer sin∣ned. 2. In the composing and ioyning together of two substan∣ces, so vnequall to be vnited, a pure soule that neuer offended, in∣fused into a most vnpure substance wholly corrupted: but also, the flesh must needes be yeelded to be, the primarie seat of sinne: and though it be a corporall grosse composition wanting life, yet must it needes proue to be not onely the taynter and defiler, but also to predominate, and to be the guider and ruler of that spiri∣tuall substance which giues vs life, which is euery way most absurd. And so you see that (as Saint Augustine saith) of this traducta culpa, the traduction of this sinne, nihil ad predicandum notiu,Aug. de moribus Ecclesiae c. 22. nihil ad intelligendum secretius, nothing is better knowne to bee published; (for experience, wofull experience shewes it) that in Adam and through Adam, all the race of mankinde is corrup∣ted: but how this corruption is traduced in the propagation of the posteritie, nothing is harder to be expressed. For (as the Pro∣phet Dauid saith) we are fearefully and wonderfully made,Psal. 139.13. and ver. 5. and the knowledge thereof is so excellent, that we may well wonder at it, but no wayes well attayne vnto it. And therefore, as a fellow fallen into a dungeon, and cry∣ing vnto his companion for helpe, that his life might be preser∣ued; his friend wondring how hee came there, began to que∣stion with him, which way he had fallen, and how long he had continued: but he replied; Tu cogita quomodo hinc me liberes,Aug. de moribus Eclesiae: c. 26. non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras I pray thee rather thinke thou how I may be deliuered, then stand questioning how I came indangered; so should we rather earnestly seeke the meanes how this originall corruption may be remoued from vs, then curiously to search how it is traduced vnto vs. But because, as it seemed vnto Festus to bee vnreasonable to
send a prisoner,Acts 25.27. and not withall to signifie the crimes laide against him, so this seemes to me very vnfit, to propose the doubts, and not to doe our best to expresse the truth: therefore I will set downe mine opinion touching this question that is full of con∣tradiction. That God created all soules at once, as he did the Angels, in the beginning, and then infuseth them into the bodyes, as they are still begotten of their Parents, though it was an opinion much patronized by the Origenists, yet hath it beene long ex∣ploded, and truely confuted by the learned; and that God still ex nihilo, of nothing, createth the soules, as hee infuseth them into the bodies, I see as little shew of reason, as nothing, yet alledg∣ed;In what sence God is called the Father of spirits. whereby the said thesis may be confirmed. For the Apostle in the place aboue cited, doth not meane that God is more pro∣perly, a Father vnto our spirits, i. e. our soules (as if they were more immediately proceeding from God) then of our bodies; or that our naturall Parents are more properly the Fathers of our flesh then of our spirits: for though the soule, in regard of its spirituall being is neerer and more agreeable to the nature of God; then the body, yet in regard of its being, God is the au∣thor, the framer, and the principall Father, as well of the bo∣dy as of the soule,Psal. 139.12. for my raynes are thine, and thou hast couered me in my Mothers wombe, saith the Psalmist. And our naturall Parents may be truely said, to be the instru∣mentall authors and begetters of the soule, as well as of the body: for,Gen. 5.3. when it is said that Adam begat a childe in his image; wee must not referre this image onely to the similitude of the body, but also to the like qualities and properties of the soule, and so wholly like him both in body and soule: and the Apostle, by the Fathers of our flesh, doth vnderstand Fathers of our corruptible being, such as make vs naturall men and no more; and by Fa∣ther of spirits, he vnderstandeth the Father of our spirituall birth, which makes vs spirituall men; and so the meaning of the Apo∣stle is no more but this, viz. That euery godly man hath a double being.If we doe so reuerently and so contentedly suffer the corre∣ction of those Fathers, which giue vs our naturall being, quae nas∣cimur ad laborem, nascimur ad mortem, whereby we are borne to miseries, born to die: how much more contentedly should we
receiue the chastisements of that Father, which giues vs our spirituall being, qua nascimur ad salutem, nascimur ad vitam, whereby we are borne vnto Sanctification, and brought vnto eternall saluation? For all men may easily see from the context of the place it selfe, that the Apostle speaketh thus, not of the na∣turall and carnall men, that are borne only of flesh and blood, but of these spirituall and regenerate men, which are also borne of water and of the Spirit. And therefore seeing the Apostle here by Spirit, vnderstan∣deth the fruits of the Spirit, that is, the spirituall graces of regene∣ration, whereby we liue (sayth the Apostle) that is, eternally: as the coherence of the place, and the maine scope of the Apostle makes it playne, and not the Soules or Spirits of our naturall ge∣neration; I say that the parents begetting a childe, doe beget both Body and Soule: not that the Soule begetteth a Soule,That man and all other crea∣tures, receaued power to pro∣duce creatures like vnto themselues. Totum generat totum, hoc est corpus generat corpus me∣diante anima & anima gene∣rat animam, mediante cor∣pore. Psal. 51.5. or the Body begetteth a spirit, but that as all other creatures receiued power from God, to produce creatures like vnto themselues, as the seede of the vegetatiue to bring forth vegetatiue creatures, and the sensible, sensible creatures, so man consisting both of Body and Soule, should beget a creature like vnto himselfe, con∣sisting of the same parts: for otherwise sinne must needes bee in the body, before the Soule be infused: for if the schoole of the na∣turalists be to be belieued, the Soule is not infused into the Bo∣dy, vntill the thirtieth (as some) or fortieth day, as some affirme; and yet the Psalmist saith that he was conceiued in sinne: therefore, both Body and Soule were both conceiued at once, or else corruption was in the Body before the infusion of the Soule, and this liuing Soule by this dead flesh must needes be de∣filed, which is most absurd: for (as Saint Augustine sayth of A∣dam, It was not his corruptible flesh which made his Soule to be∣come sinnefull, but his sinnefull Soule made his flesh subiect to corruption, so it must needes be in the sonnes of Adam,Gene. 5.3. that not our flesh corrupts our Soules; but both body and soule are con∣ceiued in sinne, both produced of sinfull seede, and so sinne prin∣cipally resides in the Soule and not in the Body, because the Soule giues life and motion vnto the flesh: hence it is that Adam ha∣uing defiled both his Body and Soule, is sayd to haue begot a childe in his owne image: i. e. sinfull and polluted like himselfe, both
in regard of his body and Soule:Bosquierus de finibus bonorum. lib. 1. con 6. p. 27. Nam Adam vt persona publica sibi ac suis aut sapiebat aut delirabat, for now Adam standing in paradise a publique person (as I told you before,) was to make or to marre himselfe and all his posteritie: and therefore if this roote had continued holy, the branches had beene likewise holy, but the tree prouing to be euill,Rom. 11. the fruit could not possibly be good,Math. 7.18. for a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit, sayth our Saui∣our: and therefore Adam sinning, all his seede are become sinnefull, & all his ofspring, tanquam serie continuata, as in a conti∣nued line, doe like corrupted branches of a rotten tree, bring forth still corrupted fruits: and so make all their generation, so soone as they are begotten, liable to the curse of God for that first transgression: for the reward of sinne is death; and the Pro∣phet Dauid sayeth,Psal. 51.2. hee was shapen in wickednesse, and conceaued in sinne,Iohn 3.6. and our Sauiour sayth, that which is borne of flesh is flesh, i. e. he that is borne of a sinnefull man, can be nothing else but a sinnefull man:That Gods graces are not traduced from the best pa∣rents. (not that a godly man begets a godly man; for the graces of Gods spirit, are not begotten in our carnall generation, but they are giuen from aboue in our spirituall regeneration, and a man begets his childe, not as he is spirituall, but as hee is a crea∣ture consisting of body and soule) and therefore whosoeuer is borne of flesh and blood, must needes be tainted and corrupted with sinne and wickednesse: for flesh heere is not taken pro na∣tura carnis, sed pro vitiosa qualitate totius hominis, for the single nature of flesh, but for the corrupted qualitie of the whole man, as Saint Paul excellently sheweth, when hee sayth, in my flesh dwelleth no goodnesse,Rom. 7.8. i. e. in the corrupted nature of a natu∣rall man there is no grace, there is no goodnesse. And therefore hoc virus paternum, this hereditarie poyson (as Paulinus calleth it,What we learne from this doctrine.) this our originall sinne that is inbred in euery man, since the fall of the first man, may sufficient∣ly serue to teach vs. First, to iusti∣fie God.First, to iustifie God for inflicting death vpon euery man, though man should doe nothing else to procure his death: quia damnati antequam nati, because euery one is guilty of this sinne, and therefore of death, before hee commeth to this pre∣sent life; for the reward of sinne is death: and therefore the death of children and infants that haue done no actuall sinne, doth
proue them tainted with this sinne, because death cannot be iust∣ly inflicted vpon those that are no wayes infected with sinne; for the reward of sinne is death: but you see they are subiect vnto death, and therefore you may know they are tainted with sinne. Secondly,Secondly, to be humbled. this may serue to teach all those that stand so much vpon the honour and dignity of their naturall birth, to con∣sider wht they are and what they haue thereby, a sinnefull, cor∣rupted, and contagious being, children of wrath, subiects to death, slaues of damnation: be they Kings, Princes, Nobles, what you will, this is all they haue or can haue by their naturall birth:Iohn 3.6. for whatsoeuer is borne of flesh is flesh, i. e. all things that parents can conuaye vnto their children is but a corrupted natural being: yea, though the parties should be sanctified themselues, and thereby procure their children to bee receiued and reputed members of the visible Church before men, yet can they not infuse Grace,Perkins in Jud. 1. nor produce sanctified children in the sight of God. For though we reade of some that were sanctified in their Mothers wombe, as Ieremie, Iohn Baptist, and the like,Ier. 1.5. yet this sanctifying grace was infused by God, and not traduced from their parents:Luke 1.44. and therefore this should make all men to be of an humble spi∣rit, and to reioyce more in their second birth, in the Baptisme that they haue receiued, it may bee by the hands of some meane Minister, and their begetting vnto the faith of Christ, by the preaching of the word of God, then in all that glory and excel∣lencie that they haue gotten from their naturall parents: for they did but make vs Men, these must make vs Christian men. And thus you see that by the guilt of Adams sinne, euery childe of Adam deserues eternall death, before he comes to this present life. But because we would be sure enough of death, wee will ha∣sten it, and draw it on, as it were with cart-ropes throughout all our life, and we will not haue it sayd,Ezech. 18.2. our fathers haue eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, or, that Adam sinned & we are punished; nam errauimus cum patribus, for we haue sinned, & wil sinne with our fathers, & more then our fa∣thers, we will drinke iniquity like water, and adde vnto our origi∣nall corruption those daily heapes of our actuall transgressions.
And therefore you must giue me leaue to insist a little vpon this point, and to take a further view of this our immortall e∣nemie, this actuall sinne that bringeth death. I confesse it is an Hydrian beast, that hath many heads, it is like a continued quantitie that admits of infinite sections: I cannot touch them all, yet for methods sake and the furtherance of our memory, I desire you to consider these three points. Three things considered in the handling of actuall sin.1. The nature of it, how it is defined. 2. The degrees whereby it is increased. 3. The manner how it is committed. CHAP. II. Of actuall sinne, what it is: and by what degrees it inwardly increaseth. Aug. contra faustum. lib. 22. cap. 27. What actuall sinne is.SAint Augustine defineth sinne to be factum, aut dictum, aut concupitum contra legem Dei, any fact, or word, or thought, that is contrary to the Law of God; and Saint Ambrose briefer, sayth that sinne is the breach of Gods Law: but Zanchius fuller,Zanch. de pec∣cato actuali. lib. 1. thes. 1. pag. 161. and to my content, play∣ner, sayth, that an actuall sinne is an anomieA want of rule. whereby those humane acts, that doe proceede from the corruption of our flesh are contrary to the Will of God, ingraffed in the mindes of men, and especially reuealed in the word of trueth: for heerein is ex∣pressed both the matter and the forme of sinne. The matter of sinne must be a humane act.First, Materiale peccati, the matter of sinne, is sayd to be a humane act, whether thought, word, or deede, for otherwise it cannot be sayd to be an actuall sinne where there is no act: and therefore not onely in sinnes of commission, as adultery, murther, theft, and such like; but also in those sinnes which are called, sinnes of omission, as not to pray, not to doe that seruice vnto God which we owe vnto him, there is not onely a meere priua∣tion, but there must be also, aliquid positiuum, some act that makes the sinne: as when thou omittest thy duety, either because thou wilt not doe it, and there is an act of thy will; or because thou canst not remember and hast forgotten to doe it; and there is an
act of thy memorie; or else thy vnwillingnesse, thy vnablenesse, and thy forgetfulnesse, doe proceede from some act and occa∣sion either present or precedent,Furor iraque mentem preci∣pitant. which makes thee to omitte the things commaunded, and so to sinne; as when thy feare blindes thy iudgement that thou canst not discerne the trueth, or thy drunkennesse causeth thee to sleepe, when thou shouldest be hea∣ring the word of God. But you must not thinke euery humane act to bee a sinne, but onely those that doe proceede from the corruption of our flesh, and are contrarie to the Will of God. For: Secondly, Formale peccati,The very be∣ing of sinne, is an erring from the will of God. Psal. 40.10. (as the Schoolemen call it) the very being of sinne, is a deuiation from the Will of God. For the Will of God is to be alwayes set before our eyes, as the onely rule whereby we are to square all our actions; and therefore eue∣ry man should say with the Psalmist; In the volume of thy booke it is written of me that I should fulfill thy will, O my God, I am con∣tent to doe it; and euery man should doe as he saith, Thy will be done in earth as it is Heauen; for whosoeuer erreth from his Will sinneth against his owne Soule, but whosoeuer doth the will of my Father, the same is my brother, and my sister, and my mother,Mar. 3.35. sayth our Sauiour Christ. But because the will of God is not alwayes knowne to vs, neither can we search into that which hee concealeth from vs, therefore you must vnderstand that the reuealed will of God is lydius-lapis, that touch-stone which trieth euery action, and makes it either iust or sinnefull.The will of God is reuea∣led in our consciences, and in the Scriptures. Now this will of God is re∣uealed in the booke of euery mans conscience, and in the booke of holy Scriptures. For of the first, the Apostle saith, that the Gentiles though they had not the written Law of Moses, yet had they the Law of God written in their hearts, because there con∣sciences bare them witnesse what was to be performed, and what was to be eschewed, and did accuse them when they did ill, and ex∣cuse them when they did well: and therefore whatsoeuer they did against their owne conscience, they did the same against the will of God, reuealed and ingrauen in their hearts: and therefore the Apostle saith, that as many as haue sinned without the law,Rom. 2.14. verse 14. i. e. with∣out the written law of Moses, shall also perish without the Law: be∣cause they hauing not the law, were a law vnto themselues. And,
The word of God is diuided into two parts, id est, 1. The law, & 2. The Gospel. For the 2. wee must not onely vnderstand the Law of deca∣logue, or 10. commandements (although that bee the chiefest rule to expresse all sinne,) but we must also consider the Gospel, as a part of that booke wherin, the reuealed will of God is expres∣sed; for there are many things forbidden, and many things com∣maunded in the Gospell, which are not plainely expressed or mentioned in the Law, as to beleeue Iesus the sonne of Mary to be the Messias whereby all sinnes are taken away, and with∣out whom all sinnes doe remaine: for so Christ himselfe testifi∣eth,Iohn. 6.9. that the holy Ghost should reprooue the world of sinne, because they did not beleeue in him; and therfore whatsoeuer act is done a∣gainst the will of God reuealed either in the Law or the Gospell, the same is sinne. Secondly, For the degrees whereby sin is increased, we must note,Bernardus de grad: humili∣tatis. that nemo repentinè fit pessimus sed paulatim descendit, no man is suddenly desperately euil, but he descendeth to hel by lit∣tle and little: for the deuill is like a serpent, creeping, and sliding by little and little, when wee cannot perceiue his pathes: and therefore we should be very wary to marke his footesteps. Now as euery sinne is committed either inwardly or outward∣ly,Jsidorus de summo bono. Sinne is in∣wardly increa∣sed by three degrees. so euery sinne is increased either inwardly in our mindes, or outwardly in our actions. 1. Inwardly it increaseth and groweth by 3. degrees, 1. By the suggestion of Satan. 2. By the delight of the Flesh. 3. By the consent of the Spirit. The first we cannot well auoyde, because Satan is euer busie to suggest sinne into vs,Satan sugge∣steth sinne di∣uers wayes. sometimes horribly to prodigious villa∣nies, sometimes secretly hee insinuates himselfe vnder the shape of an Angel of Light, and suggesteth sinne vnder the shew of Ver∣tue: and thus in euery member of our Bodies, and in euery cor∣ner of our Soules, he lurketh and lyeth vpon a bed of fornication, suggesting falsehood into our hearts; lightnesse into our heads, adulteries into our eies, oathes into our mouths, intemperancies into our whole bodies. The first sug∣gestions of Sa∣tan are sinnes.And although this suggestion is from Satan yet is it a transgres∣sion in vs, Inest enim peccatum cum suggeritur, regnat cum delecta∣ris, primum peccatum cogitasse quae mala sunt: for sinne entreth
when it is suggested it raigneth, when thou consentest and art de∣lighted with it: because the first sinne is to haue any thoughts of sinne, saith Saint Hierome:Hierome: lib. 1. in Amos. and therefore we should labour and striue what lyeth in vs to preuent the comming of the Deuill, to suggest any sinne vnto vs, and this we may doe, if wee looke vpon him before he comes vnto vs, and if wee shut him out when hee comes vnto vs. Hee that would see the deuill comming,How we may auoyde the suggestions of Satan. must behold him be∣fore he comes too neere; for as in the optikes, if a man would per∣fectly see the perfection of any picture, hee must stand a pretty distance from it, so in the aspects of Satan, if a man would throgh∣ly perceiue the deceitfulnesse, and the vglinesse of his shadowes,1. By behol∣ding his vg∣glinesse in others. and the filthinesse of his forme, hee must looke vpon him be∣fore he comes to neere him; and this is the reason why many doe not detest him, because they neuer looked on him, before he imbra∣ced them: for as our eyes being too neere any obiect, the beames of our sight will be confounded, so-Satan hauing closed with vs, he darkeneth the eyes of our vnderstanding, that we cannot see him as he is. And therefore it would be well for vs, if we could bee indu∣ced to behold his pride, his drunkennesse, his oathes, his auarice, and all his foule deformities in other men, that this might make vs to detest him, and shunne him before he comes into our selues. for, Faelix quem saciunt aliena pericula cautum, euery schoole-boy learnt it: let vs all learne to practise it, behold the vglinesse of Satan in his sinners, before he comes into our Soules. and, Secondly, When wee haue beheld him,2. By the con∣tinuall follow∣ing of our vo∣cation. let vs not stand still while hee comes vnto vs: but let vs quickely runne vnto the workes of our vocations before he can fasten on vs any of his suggestions: For as a bird sitting still vpon the pearch when shee seeth the fowler, may bee easily catched; but if shee soone flies, she is safe enough from all danger: so a man giuing himselfe to idlenesse is soone tempted to wickednesse,Idlenesse is a great furthe∣rance to wic∣kednesse. Quaeritur Aegi∣stus quare sit factus adulter: in promptu causa est, desi∣diosus erat. How apt our flesh is to com∣mitte sinne. but if he giues himselfe to reading, praying, or any other worke of his vocation he shall be the freer from the deuills suggestion; and therefore Saint Hie∣rome exhorteth his friend Rusticus to be neuer idle: but alwayes busied about some good worke or other, vt quando diabolus
veniret, inueniret occupatum, that whensoeuer the deuill should come, he should finde him working in Gods vineyard. Secondly, When Satan by his wicked suggestions, hath emi∣sed the seed of sinne into our hearts like a father, then our cor∣rupted flesh, by wicked thoughts and imaginations, receaueth and conceaueth sinne as a mother; and it is as fruitfull of all manner of sinne as Diodorus Siculus reporteth the Egyptian I∣lands to bee of vermines: and therefore, (as the wise man sayth) cum omni diligentia obserua cor tuum,Prouer. 4.22. Looke not onely to thy hands, and to thy feete, to thy words, and to thy workes, (though these also should be carefully looked vnto,) but especi∣ally aboue all things, looke to the thoughts and inward affecti∣ons of thy heart;How wicked thoughts will bring foorth wicked works. for as the wood is, so the fire will be; vnsauo∣ry wood will make vnholesome fire, but sweete Frankincense or drie Iuniper, will yeeld a pleasant perfume: so wicked thoughts and affections will bring foorth Ieude words, and wicked actions:Matth. 12.34. for, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. Aug de trinit. lib. 12.And therefore Saint Augustine sayth, that our hearts should be very wary, neuer to be delighted with any sinne suggested by Satan: Nam cum sola cogitatione mens delectatur illicitis, for when the minde in the thoughts and cogitations onely,That the least titillation of the minde with sinne is sinne. is delighted with vnlawfull things, though it purposeth not to doe them, but doth as it were thinke of them and is tickled with them, that litle delight it conceaues of those thougths, Non negandum esse peccatum, etsi longe minus quam si & opere statuatur implendum: It cannot be denied but it is a sinne, though not neere so great as when we purpose to bring the said cogitations into actions, and therefore (saith he) Statim vt attigerunt animum, respui de∣bent, assoone as euer such thoughts of euill, do inuade or touch our mindes, we should presently smother them and cast them off, and then De talibus quoque cogitationibus venia petenda est, pectusque percutiendum atque dicendum, Dimitte nobis debita no∣stra: We should craue pardon of God for such wandering thoughts, and striking our breasts say, O Lord forgiue vs our sinnes, for who can tell how oft he offendeth, Thirdly, When Satan, like the serpent, hath perswaded and the concupiscence of our flesh, like Eua, is delighted when she sees
the fruite faire vnto the eye, and the sinne pleasant vnto the taste,Genesis 3. How the flesh laboureth to draw our mindes to yeeld consent to sinne. Rom. 7.17. Gregor. mar. 16. then they draw in Reason, like Adam, to giue consent, and so to finish all, and perpetrate the sinne; and this agrauates the sinne, and makes vs voide of any excuse: for whereas before, when the flesh was onely delighted, but the spirit was not consenting, a man might say, It is not I that doe it, but the flesh that is ioyned with me; and so if reason had refused when the flesh was deligh∣ted a man might in some sort be excused, quia peccata non nocent, si non placent, Because sinnes shall not hurt our soules, if our soules doe not delight in sinnes, and that man; haud est nocens,Seneca. in Her. oet. quicun{que} non sponte est nocens, is scarcely guilty that is not willing to offend, saith Seneca: and therefore recipe iam sensus hera, quid te ipsa lacerans, omnium aspectum fugis, mens impudicam facere non casus solet, those that are violently haled to sinne,Idem in hippol. Act: 3. like Lucretia that was rauished against her wil, need not so much vexe them∣selues with griefe, and shunne for shame the sight of men, be∣cause the minde yeelding or denying consent vnto the desires of the flesh, doth either aggrauate or extenuate the fact. But when the spirit yeelds consent vnto the desires and de∣lights of the flesh, as Adam tooke of the tree likewise,Idem epi. 58. We are fully miserable when we yeeld full consent and delight in sinne. and he did eate, then (as Seneca sayth) consummata est infelicitas, vbi non solum turpia delectant sed & placent: The miserie and iniquitie of man is perfected, when the sinne doeth not onely delight the flesh and sensuall part of man, but is also pleasing and ac∣ceptable vnto the spirit and reasonable part of man, and there∣fore (as Boetius sayth) voluntario facinori nulla est excusatio,Boetius rhet. nouor. lib. 2. to such witting sinnes delighting the flesh, & consented vnto by the spirit, there is not nor can be, any excuse: Nam vt nequius est odisse iustitiam quam non fecisse ita nonnunquam grauius est peccatū diligere quam perpetrare: For, as it is a viler thing to hate righte∣ousnesse then not to doe righteousnesse; so many times,Hierom. in quad. epist. it is a greater offence to delight in sinne, or to loue euill, then to commit euill, as Saint Hierome sayth. And the reason hereof is playne,The approba∣tion of our fleshly desires maketh sinne the more ex∣ceedingly sinnefull. because it is the consent of the will, and the approbation of the fleshly desires, that makes the sinne, without which some wayes, or in some respects, it cannot be sayd to be a sinne. Nam quemadmodum qui videt me∣retricem & scit esse meretricem, non est scortator, propter hanc cog∣nitionem:
For as he which seeth a harlot, and knowes her to be a harlot, is not thereby a transgressor, because of his know∣ledge of her; but if he consenteth, purposeth, or affecteth to be ioyned vnto her, Tum est scortator, aut actione aut affectione: Then is he a fornicator and offender, either in action or in affection:Iustin. Mart. in resp. ad Or∣thodox. ad q. 8. f. 273. Sic & bonorum & malorum hominum cognitio non est in causa vt boni sint aut mali: sed propositum quod eligit id quod ei visum est: So the knowledge of good or wicked men, is not that which causeth them to be either good or bad, but it is their will and purpose to choose that which pleaseth the same, which maketh them to doe well or ill: saith Iustine Martyr. If sinne did forcibly in∣uade the mind, the punish∣ment of sinne might seeme vniust.And as this consent of will maketh the sinne, so without this consent of will, there can be no sinne: Nam si defectus iste qui peccatum dicitur, tanquam febris inuitum occuparet, recte iniusta paena videretur, quae peccantem consequitur & quae damnatio nuncu∣patur: For if sinne, like a Feuer, did violently inuade vs, and take hold vpon vs against our wils, then the punishment which is damnation, and is imposed for the sinne vpon the sinner, would appeare to be vniustly inflicted; And therefore, Vsque adeo peccatum voluntarium malum est, vt nullo modo sit peccatum nisi aliquo modo sit voluntarium: Sinne is so voluntary an euill, that by no meanes it can be sinne, vnlesse by some meanes it be voluntary:Aug. de vera relig. Et hoc quidem ita manifestum est, vt nulla huic doctorum paucitas nulla indoctorum turba dissentiat: And this is so manifest, and so agreed vpon by all men, that neither learned nor vnlearned, doe deny the same, saith S. Augustine. And therefore though the Diuell, like a father, be alwayes ready to beget sinne, and the lust and concupiscence of the flesh, which is appetitus sensitiuus, be alwayes like a mother, apt to conceaue sin, yet if appetitus rationalis; If our reason be not intreated, as a Mid-wife, to bring forth sinne into action, it will prooue an abortiue, like the vntimely fruite of a woman, which perisheth before it seeth the Sunne; that is, though the least concupiscence (as I said before) be a sinne, yet this sinne will neuer prooue so odious in the sight of God, nor yet so dan∣gerous vnto man, as when the sinne is fully finished. Ob.But how then is that true (may some man say) which you said a little before, When the mind is any wayes delighted with
the least tickling thoughts and cogitations of euill, non negandum esse peccatum, we cannot deny the same to be sinne, therefore the sensitiue appetite of any euill makes it sinne, though the rationall appetite doth not consent vnto the same. I answere, that the Obiection answereth it selfe,Sol. for it saith when the minde is any wayes delighted; but the minde can∣not be any wayes delighted, without some consent of the rea∣sonable appetite; therefore this proueth not any sensitiue de∣sire to be a sinne without the consent of the reasonable ap∣petite. But we must note,The sensitiue facultie doth soone defile the reasonable soule. that here is aliquod malum propter vicinum malum, the will and affection of the reasonable soule, by reason of his contiguity and vicinity with the sensitiue lust and con∣cupisense of the flesh, is so dammaged, that, as no man toucheth pitch, but is presently defiled with pitch: and the fire can neuer touch the tinder but the same is presently kindled;How we should beware of sinne before sinne comes neere vnto vs. so the thoughts and the apprehensions of the sensitiue faculties, as soone as euer, they touch the discussiue facultie of reason, doe instantly taint and corrupt the same. And therefore that our reasonable will and affection doe not yeeld to the finishing of sinne, reason should haue her eyes alwayes open, and with an Eagles sight to behold sinne afarre off, to subdue the vile thoughts and desires of the flesh, before euer it enters vpon any faculty of the soule: And so you see how sinne is inwardly increased, Sathan suggesteth it, Lust conceiueth it, and the Will finisheth it. CHAP. III. By what degrees actuall sinne is outwardly increased. SEcondly,Isidorus de sum∣mo bono. Iacobus de va∣lentia: in Psal. 91. Actuall sinne is outwardly increased foure wayes. sinne is outwardly encreased and aug∣mented (saith Isidorus) three speciall wayes. 1. It is secretly committed. 2. It is publikely aduentured, 3. It is vsually practised: and to these wayes I may adde, that then 4. It is exceedingly, & most fearfully inlarged.
When we first practice sinne, we seeke by all meanes to conceale and to hide our sinnes.First, we will commit the sinne, credamus tamen, astudoloque tegere nos tantum nefas; yet then we wil seek by all craft and sub∣tilty, & by all other meanes, to conceale the same from the eyes of the world; for at the first we are like Adam, ashamed that God should see our nakednesse, or that the world should know those things that are dne of vs in darkenesse: and therefore wee will vse all our skill to couer it, and conceale it vnder the shdow of the fig-leaues, that if it be possible, neither God nor the world may espie the same. For sinne of it selfe is so vgly, and so deformed a thing, that the sinner himselfe, if hee could but truely see the same, would truely lothe it. How Satan seekes by all meanes to conceale the light of Gods WordAnd therefore Satan laboureth by all meanes to put out either verbum predicatum, the preaching of Gods Word, which is the true light and candle that shineth vnto euery man, and sheweth him the right wayes of godlinesse, or else verbum ap∣plicatum, the applying of this word vnto our soules, which is as the eyes whereby we doe perceiue this light, without which we are like blinde men that can see nothing in the clearest day: the first of these he put out in the dayes of superstition, when men walked in darkenesse, and knew not where they went, they knew not what was sinne: And the second hee puts out now in the Sun-shine of the Gospell, when the light shineth in darkenesse,John 1. and the darkenesse comprehendeth it not: and therefore he causeth more sinnes, and more horrible sinnes, to be committed now in the light of the Gospell,We care not what great sinnes we doe so we may conceale them. then euer were done heretofore in the night of ignorance; for now, hauing our owne eyes of the application of Gods light, put out by that myst of malice which blindeth vs, we care not how much, how great sinnes wee doe commit; so wee could put out the eyes of perspection, that the world might not see the same. As the Hypocrites care was altogether that their good works might be seene of men: so all our care is, that our euill works may not be seene of men. Sinne creepes into vs as the Serpent crept into Paradise, we know not how, we may well demaund the question, quomod intrasti? how camest thou in hither? but we shall finde the re∣solution, that it was most secretly and insensibly, and therefore we will conceale it as cunningly; either like Appollonius the Iugler,
who as soone as he was before the Iudge, was presently vanish∣ed out of his fight. Wee hide our sinnes that none my see them, and we will stand in sinne that we haue not sinned; and as Salomons harlot would wipe her mouth, and it was not shee, or, as Pilate would wash his hands when he had condemned the Innocent blood; So now the drunkard, when he cannot stand, will stand to it, that he is not drunke, and the swearer sweares and out-sweares all, and if you tell him of it, he presently sweares he swore not at all. And thus, as Rachel hid her fa∣thers Teraphim, vnder a smooth pretence,Gen. 31.35. that it was with her af∣ter the manner of women, or as Achan hid his wedge; so doth euery sinner seeke to hide his sinnes. And if we cannot hide them, but that sinne it selfe, like Abels blood, will cry so loud that it must be heard, then presently we will either lessen our sinnes with Saul, and say we did it indeed, but it was with no ill intent, I saued the fattest, but it was for a sacrifice for the Lord; or else with Adam, we will transferre our sinnes from our selues to others, light where they will, though it were on God himselfe: For, the woman that thou gauest me, gaue it me, and I did eate. So cunning is euery man to conceale his sinne. But alas:Quid ille qui mundum quatit, vibrans corus∣cat fulmen Aet∣neum manu, stator deorum? credis hoc posse effici inter vi∣dentes omnia vt lateas avos? Senec. in Hipol. act. 1. Iohn 1. That we can∣not possibly hide our sins from the eyes of God. Psal. 139. Iohn 1.18. Iohn 1.48. Melissa par. 1. serm. 16. Quid ille rebus lumen infundens suum matris pa∣rens? What if thou couldest escape the eyes of men, is it possi∣ble for thee to blinde the all-seeing eyes of God? for hee is the true light that shineth and giueth light to euery thing, and he behol∣deth the ends of the world, and seeth all things that are vnder Hea∣uen, saith holy Iob, He is about our beds, and about our pathes, and espieth out all our wayes, saith the Prophet Dauid; and his name is ; Because hee seeth and beholdeth all things; all things are naked in his eyes: and therefore what ad∣uantageth it thee to conceale thy sinnes from the knowledge of men, when thou canst no wayes hide them from the eyes of God? For though no man saw God at any time, yet God seeth man at all times: He saw Nathanael vnder the figge-tree, when Nathanael saw not him; and hee seeth thee committing sinne, when thou seest no man but thy selfe. And therefore beware of sinne, though no man seeth thee, Nam quemadmodum ignis, si tunica tegatur. For as the fire that is hid vnder thy coat, or in the straw, may bee concealed for a
time, but at last it will burst out to thy cost; so thy sinne, which thou doest in secret, may be kept secret for a while, but at last, like an vnwedded Virgins pregnancy, it will appeare to thy shame:Claudian de 4. consul honorij. Nam lux altissima fati, occultum nil esse sinit; latebras{que} per omnes intrat, & obstrusos explorat fama recessus. For there is no thought so secret that it shall goe for nought,Sap. 1.7.10. because the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world, and hath knowledge of the voyce, and the eare of ielousie heareth all things, & the voyce of murmu∣rings is not hid; and therefore our Sauiour saith, That whatso∣euer is done in secret, shall be preached openly. It may be in this life, as the adultery of Dauid, and almost all other horrible facts, as Treasons, Adulteryes, Murthers, and such like, whereof we see almost none, but God, strangely, and by vnknowne wayes doth bring to light; or assuredly in the next life, when God shall shew the Nations our shame, and discouer all our most secret sinnes in the sight of men and Angels. The longer we practice sinne, the more im∣pudent we grow in sinne.2. After that the Sinner hath accustomed himselfe to priuate and secret sinnes, then he begins to grow bolder and bolder, and as further and further from all goodnesse; so worse and worse in all wickednesse. For as Seneca saith. Seneca in Hip.Obstare primum est, velle nec labi via. pudor est secundus, nosse peccandi modum. When we haue cast off all shame of sinne, we are past all hope of good∣nesse?To withstand the sinne is the best, and not to fall; but if we haue fallen, to be ashamed that we haue learned the way to sinne, is the best planke after shipwracke, to saue a man; but when a man hath cast off all shame of his ill-doing, then is he almost past all hope of well-doing. For, not onely the Apostle saith, it is a shame to speake of those things which are done of them in darkenesse; but the very Heathen Poet could say: Quis furor est qua nocte latent in luce fateri, Ouid. l. 3. amor.Et quae clam facias facta referre palam? What a madnesse is it to speake openly, what abhominable sinnes thou hast committed secretly? And if it be a shame and a frenzie to speake of thine abominations openly; O then how lamentable is thy case, to commit them publikely in the sight of the Sunne?Isidor. de sum∣mo bono l. 2. Quia maior est culpa manifeste quam oeculte peccare, Because it is a farre greater sinne to commit any wicked fault openly, then it is to commit the same fact priuately and
secretly: for he is doubly guilty that sinneth publikely;What a hay∣nous thing it is to sinne pub∣liquely, and so to teach others by our ill ex∣amples. Matth. 5.19. Et quia agit, & quia docet; First, because he doth that euill himselfe; and secondly, because he teacheth others, by his example, to doe the like; and you know what our Sauiour saith: Hee that breaketh the least of these Commandements, and teacheth others so to doe, he shall be called the least in the Kingdome of heauen: i. e. None at all: He shall haue no place at all in Heauen. And yet as the Prophet Ieremie said of the Iewes, That they carryed their sinnes in their foreheads: and had Whores faces,Ier. 3.3. which would not be ashamed: so may we now say of our selues, we are as an impudent Strumpet, that will play the Harlot in the sight of her Husband, and are more abashed at our base apparrell, then we are at our wicked liues. Thirdly, when we are come to that passe, to commit sinne without feare, and to doe it openly without shame, to haue our conscience seared, and our hearts hardned in sinne, then (as the old saying is) Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati; Custome of sinning doth take away all the sense and feeling of sinne, & in familiaritatem grauissima adducit, and makes the heaui∣est sinnes, like Miloe's Oxe, seeme light and small vnto them: for now the sinner is in his owne element, and no element is heauy in his owne spheare: Ideo & peccata,Seneca de tranq. quamvis magna & horrenda, cum in consuetudinem venerint, aut parna, aut nulla esse credunt peccatores:The custome of sinning makes the greatest sinnes seeme but ve∣ry small. And therefore the sinners which are accu∣stomed to sinne, doe esteeme their sinnes, though they be neuer so horrid and horrible, to be either no sinnes, or but very little sinnes; and therefore though euery sinne in it selfe is like a talent of Lead, able to sinke downe the strongest soule to Hell: or like the poysonous iuyce of Aconite,Lurida terribi∣les miscent a conita nouercae (which they say is the mortallest poyson in the world; because, as the Poets faine, this hearbe grew from that froth that fell out of the Iawes of Cerberus, when Hercules dragg'd him out of Hell) yet doe these men carry all their sinnes away,Iudg. 16.3. as nimbly as Sampson did the Gates of Azza, and drinke vp the same as smoothly as the drunkards vse to sip vp their pleasant Wine. And when we haue accustomed our selues to sinne, then are we bound in sinne as with a chain more strong then those seauen greene Withes, or those seauen new Ropes wherewith
Dalila bound Sampson,The longer we continue in sinne, the harder it is for vs to for∣sake our sinnes. for he brake the same as a thread; but we shall hardly escape out of these miserable bonds of sinne: Nam vsitata culpa ita mentem retinet, vt nequaquam ad rectitudi∣nem surgere possit: For an vsuall custome of sinning, doth so retaine the soule in sinne, that it cannot rise to vertue; yea, though he should sometimes endeuour to rise, yet should hee alwayes faile to stand;Greg. in quad. Homilia. Quia vbi sponte diu persistit, ibi & cum noluerit cadit; Because where he willingly long persisted, there of necessity, he shall often nillingly fall: saith Saint Gregory. And so Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost ad∣uersus gentiles: ad Babylam Martyrem. that the soule of man which once tasted of the sweetnesse of sinne, and is not moued with sorrow or repentance for the same; causeth by her owne neg∣ligence, the strength of sinne alwayes to encrease. For as a sparke of fire falling among the stubble,How sinne will encrease, if it be not at the first resisted. doth instantly kindle it, and is more and more augmented, if it be not presently ex∣tinguished, and then it neuer leaueth burning, till all be consumed: Euen so is the nature of sinne, when it hath once seized vpon the thoughts of man, if it be not presently subdued, crusht in the shell, or as Saint Augustine speaketh of the children of the Babylonians, dasht to the walls, while they are yet tender and yong, it will grow further and further, and euer prooue worse and worse, and more and more wilde and vntamed: and so the latter sinnes doe alwayes proue the greater sinnes, and the end of such Sinners, farre worse then their beginnings, as our Sauiour speaketh; for seeing they would not quench the first flames of sinne, they are soone fallen into all kinde of sinnes. Chrysost. hom. 59. in Matth. What a slaue∣ry it is to serue sinne.And then, Quemadmodum qui sub mille paedagogis vitam degunt, Euen as those men which are kept vnder a thousand Schoole∣masters, dare not looke aside for feare of being espied of them; nay more, then the daughter of Inacus durst turne any where for feare of Argos eyes; so they that are filled with sins, cannot, nay dare not speake of vertue, no more then a seruant dares to speake against his Master:Iohn 8.34. He that doth sinne is the seruant of sinne,2 Pet. 2.19. saith our Sauiour: Et duram seruit seruitutem; and surely such a one hath but a hard seruice of it, as hereafter I shall shew vnto you. Hypocrat. l. 2. Aphor. 9.And therefore seeing, that as, ; the infected parts of the body the more
they are cherished, the more they are indammaged: So the soule daily accustomed to sinne, is the more infinitely endammaged by sinne. It were well for vs Christians, if we would often re∣member the Heathen mans saying, ; No wise man will twise commit the same sinne: and it would be better for vs, that we would follow the other mans counsell, which saith: Obsta principijs, sero medicina paratur Cum mala per longas conualnere moras. Giue the water no passage,Ecclus 25.25. no not a little (saith the Sonne of Syrach) and suffer not sinne to haue footing in thee,How we ought to be very carefull to re∣sist the begin∣nings of sinne. but withstand the very first motions, and the least beginnings of the same; so maist thou the easier keepe all these mad Greekes out of Troy, these deadly sinnes out of thy heart, if euery Prote∣silaus, euery first sinne that seekes entrance into thy soule, shall vpon the first footing, be there laid for dead. Otherwise, as Nature, though it can easily exclude some¦kindes of diseases which casually come, yet is it pressed and wea∣ried with those that are habituall:Thriuer. in A∣poth. 169. Euen so (saith Thriuerus) the soule of man that is but once wounded, may the easier be cured, and the Sin by repentance may be the sooner excluded, but the same wounds being still wounded, and the same sinnes being vsually practised, they will neuer, or hardly be subdued. For if an Ethiopian can change his blacke skinne,Ierem. 13.23. or a Leopard his spots that are vpon his backe, then can you doe well, hauing lear∣ned and practised all the dayes of your life to do euill, saith the Lord, and therefore as our Sauiour saith of rich men, I may as true∣ly say of these men,Matth. 19.23. that they can hardly enter into the Kingdome of Heauen. O then beloued Brethren, let vs not continue in sinne;Luc. 15.13. for the further we goe with the Prodigall Child, the harder it is for vs to returne, and the more steps we goe from any Citie, the more paines it will be for vs to returne to that Citie againe; so the more sinne we commit, the more must be our sorrowes for our sinnes, and the harder it will be for vs to forsake our sinnes;Great sinnes must haue great repen∣tance. for as, , Great sinnes and offen∣ces, deserue great punishments, so they must be greatly sorrow∣ed for, before they be pardoned; for whosoeuer sinneth wickedly
with Saint Peter, he must goe out with Saint Peter, out of wic∣ked company, out of his wicked sinnes, and weepe bitterly. And he that is vsed to sinne, and to leese grace, will hardly be induced to leaue his sinnes, and to seeke for grace: or if he should seeke it,Luke 2.46. That we ought suddenly to re∣turne vnto the Lord, and not to deferre our conuersion. yet will it bee very hard for such a one to find it: for when Mary lost Christ but one dayes iourney; she was three dayes seeking and searching after him, sorrowing, before she found him: and therefore questionlesse if we leese him thirty, forty, or fifty yeeres, (as many men vse to doe) it will be very hard for vs to finde him in an hower, in the last hower, when we haue no more howers left vnto vs; and therefore, to day if you will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts, but returne O Shu∣namite,Qui non est ho∣die, cras minus aptus erit. returne, returne, and seeke him diligently whom thy soule loueth, but seeke him quickely, and seeke him now, while he may be found. Fourthly, When the custome of sinning hath taken away the sence of the sinne, and that the consciences of the sinners are cauterized, and as it were seared with a hot iron, then they doe aggrauate each sinne, and make euery sinne exceedingly sinne∣full: for now, peccator non timet suam famam, sinne is growne to his tallest groweth, and the sinner hath eaten shame, and drunke after it, and therefore hee can well digest it, hee can fearelessely commit it, in all places, at all times, and before all persons. Iacobus de va∣len in ps. 91Nay now he will, First, Excuse it, and say, it is no sinne, or if it be, it is but a sinne of Infirmitie, issuing from the temperature of his body; a tricke of youth, or his heate and choller: or else it is but a sinne of Con∣formity, he doth but as the most men doe, because he would not be singular. 1 Sam. 13 12. What wicked men will doe to iustifie themselues.Secondly, They will lessen it, and pretending some ex∣cuses, they will say with Saul, that they presumed and forced themselues to doe such things; but they hope they are but trifles, small veniall sinnes; Tush say they, wil God be angry for such small sinnes? Why; if he will; then, Thirdly, They will cleere themselues, and say with the same Saule, wee haue performed all the commandements of the Lord; Matt. 19 20.we haue kept them from our youth vp as the young man in the
Gospell sayd: and if, as the bleating of the sheepe, and the lowing of the oxen told Saul that hee lyed, so their sinnes doe testifie vnto their face that they haue offended; then,1. Sam 15 15. as Saul layed all the burthen vpon the people, saying, the people spared the best of the Sheepe, and of the Oxen, and not I: and as Adam layd all the fault vpon his wife, saying,Gen. 3.12. the woman whom thou gauest to be with me, Shee gaue mee of the tree and I did eate, and therefore is shee in all the fault and not I: euen so doe they lay all their sinnes on others, euen on God himselfe, rather then they will confesse themselues guilty of sinne. Then, Fourthly, They will not onely cleere themselues from sinne, and blasphemously say, that either God is in fault that they doe sinne, or else because he did not make them so that they could not sinne, but they will also approue these sinnes in others, and knowing the iudgement of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not onely doe the same, but also haue pleasure in them that doe them:Ro  a most fearefull behauiour of most impudent men, and yet not all: for then, Fiftly, They will not onely consent with them that doe such things, but they will also teach them how to doe them: as our Sauiour sheweth; they will set vp a Schoole of wickednesse: these shall be the least in the Kingdome of Heauen, i. e. none at all,Matt 5.19. saith the blessed Veritie. And yet for all this, we are not come to the height of our times iniquity, for we will be sure to haue a note aboue Ela, to goe a little further then either Scriptures or times can giue vs presidents: and therefore, Sixtly, If these mens schollers be not able enough to learne to sinne, they will cause them and compell them to doe it: there is no resistance. See how the drunkards doe it in euery place, and many more, who take delight to driue men into Hell. And therefore now, this ▪ this spirit of slum∣ber, or this sleepe in sinne, which we may rightly call , the brother of death, or a deadly sleepe, makes these wofull sinnes to sit in the seate of the scornefull, that is, secure & pertinaciter perseuerare in delictis,Psal. 1 1. Mollerus in Psal. 1. & omnem pietatem habere pro ludibrio: most securely to continue, most obstinately to goe on in all iniquity, and most basely to esteeme of all piety: making but a mocke of God and of all godlinesse: And there∣fore
the Prophet sayth of such sinners, that they haue made a co∣uenant with death, and an agreement with hell it selfe, i. e. neuer to forsake that sinfull course of life, till death doth send them quicke to Hell. But I could wish that they would be herein false, and as they haue broken the couenant of their God,That wee should breake the couenant which we haue made with Hell, if euer we would goe to Heauen. which they haue made with him in Baptisme, so they would break this agreement with Hell, and cast off these cords from them: for the reward of sinne is death, and therefore much more of such fearefull sinnes as these bee. And so you see the degrees by which sinne is increased. CHAP. IV. Of the manner how euery Sinne is committed. THirdly, hauing seene how sinne is augmen∣ted,The manner how euery sinne is com∣mitted is foure-fold. and groweth more and more haynous by degrees like the Cockatrice egge, that in a short time prooues to be a destroying fiery Serpent, you must now vnderstand the manner, how euery sin is committed and that we find to be; 1. Of Ignorance. 2. Of Knowledge. 3. Of Infirmitie. 4. Of Malice. First, The heathen man sayth, : Whosoeuer knoweth nothing, sinneth nothing: and Diuines say, he that knoweth least sinneth least. That igno∣rance is two∣fold.But here you must vnderstand Ignorance to be twofold. First, Simple, when a man therefore knowes not, because he cannot learne. Secondly, Affected, when a man therefore knowes not be∣cause he will not learne, as those in Iob, who said vnto God, Discede à nobis quia scientiam viarum tuarū nolumus;Job. 21.14. Depart from vs, for we will not haue knowledge of thy wayes: and therefore the Prophet complaineth of such ignorant men, quod nolue∣runt intelligere vt bene agerent, that they refused to learne that they might doe well, & quod caeci licet, ducem tamen non modo non quaerunt, sed & oblatum respuunt; and that although they
were starke blind and could see nothing,Bern: in ep. ad magist. Ʋincent. yet not onely sought no guide, but refused and contemned them that were offered, as Saint Bernard speaketh. The first may excuse vs, à tanto licet, non àtoto,That simple ignorance doth extenu∣ate the sinne. Acts 17.30. 1. Tim. from the grea∣ter punishment, though not from blame, as Saint Paul sheweth of the Gentiles, saying, The times of this ignorance, God regarded not; and of himselfe, That God had mercy vpon him, because, in per∣secuting the Church, Hee did it ignorantly. For this circum∣stance doth much extenuate a sinne, when a man can pleade for himselfe with, Abimelech,Gen. 20.4. Lord wilt thou slay the righteous Nati∣on? As if he should haue sayd, O Lord, lay not this sinne to my charge, for if I had knowne her to be his wife, I would neuer haue intended to make her mine. And therefore this moued our Sauiour, at the time of his passion, to say, Father forgiue them,Luke 23.43. for they know not what they doe: Which is as if he should haue said, if they knew that I were the Messias, the sonne of God, and the Sauiour of the world, and would notwithstanding crucifie me,Luke 24.43. then would I not de∣sire thee to pardon them; but now these things are concealed from them, and therefore I desire thee that this sinne may not be imputed vnto them. And so Saint Peter, after he had declared their sinne, how They had denied the Holy and Iust, and had preferred before him, a most vniust and wicked murtherer, he deliuereth their com∣fort, that if they would repent, and beleeue in him, they should obtaine remission, and haue their sinnes done away at the time of refreshing,Acts 3.17. Because they had done all this through ignorance. And so the Lord himselfe sheweth this to be the reason, why he spared Niniueh, after the denouncement of her iudgement, because, There were sixescore thousand persons therein,Ionas 4.11. which could not iudge betwixt good and bad, which could not discerne betwixt their right hand, and their left. For a simple ignorance, in a deuoted and well-meaning man, such as Saint Augustine calls, fidelis ignorantia, a faithfull ignorance, or the ignorance of a good & faithfull man, whose heart like Iehosophat,2 Chron. 20.32.33. is vpright to∣wards God, though he faile in many particular duties, is either passed ouer in mercy, as was the superstition of our forefathers,Acts 10.
or else is illuminated with knowledge, in Gods appointed time,Psal. 50. vlt. as we reade of Cornelius, and as the Apostle sheweth, and the Psalmist promiseth, To him that ordereth his conuersation right, will I shew the Saluation of God. Bosq. de finibus bonarum, l. 2. conc. 12. p. 123.But the 2. that is, affected ignorance, Scaelus adcusat grauius non excusat, auget{que} non minuit supplicium, it doth inlarge the sin, & increase the punishment, and it should treble the same, sayth Bosquierus; First, For committing the sinne: Secondly, For neglecting to learne, and Thirdly, For affecting ignorance; for when things are not knowne, because men will not learne, such ignorance is without excuse, Quia aliud est nescire, aliud est nolle scire:Bernard. in ep. ad Valent: Chrysost. nescire ignorantia est, scire noluisse superbia est: Because this refusing to know, is rather Arrogancie, then Ignorancie; as Saint Bernad sayth. Gregor in Moral.And therefore of such ignorant men, quibus fuit inveniendi facultas, si fuisset quaerendi voluntas, Which had the meanes to know,How dange∣rous a thing it is to be wil∣fully igno∣rant of the will of God. if they had had the desire to learne, the Apostle sayth, si quis ignorat, ignorabitur, if any man know not God, the same shall not be knowne of God: for as the blinde, and lame, were not to enter into the Temple, so the iudge biddeth vs, educere foras, populum caecum occulos habentes, to bring forth, and shut out of his kingdome, those men which haue eyes, and cannot see, and which haue eares, and doe not heare, that is, which are borne to know, but will not learne, and which are capable of discipline, and yet will remaine vntaught. Cokus de iure regis ecclesia∣stico.And so in humane lawes, we find the same truth. Nam tan∣tum abest vt ignorantia excuset, &c. For it is so far from reason, that ignorance should any wayes excuse the fault of him, which might know the truth that hee ought necessarily to haue knowne, but through his negligence, or wilfulnesse, would not learne the same, as that there is very great reason that he should be, the more seuerely punished; because that to be ignorant of those things which a man ought to know, but will not learne, non pro ignorantia, sed pro contemptu haberi debet, is rather to bee iudged a contempt of knowledge, then an ignorance of the trueth. And therfore if for our sinnes we pleade ignorance, when we might easily haue knowne the will of God, if we had had any
desire or diligence, to search out the same, we shall but deceaue our selues, and be found guilty of greater condemnation. Secondly, For the sinnes of knowledge,Iohn 9.39. What a feare∣full thing it is to commit those sinnes which we know to be sinnes. Our Sauiour sayth of the Pharisees, that if they were blind they should haue no sinne, but because they said they did see, therefore their sinne remained: For as Adams great perfection, both in power and knowledge, made his sinne so vnexcusable, and the like transcendent excel∣lency of Lucifer, made his fall so vnrecouerable; so the more noble, the more powerfull, or the more excellent in knowledge we be, the more haynous and intollerable are our sinnes. And therefore Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. hom. 5. in Rom. . Hee that hath enioyed more instruction deserues to vndergoe the more punishment, if he transgresse: and our Sauiour saith,Luk. 12.47. that the seruant which knoweth his Masters will, and doth it not, shall be bea∣ten with many stripes: For to him that knoweth to doe good,James 4.17. and doth it not, to him it is sinne: i. e. Sinne . Sinne in the highest degree, saith the Apostle. And yet as an old man said of the Athenians, at the games of Olympus,Plutarch in la∣con. Athenienes norunt quid sit honestum sed eo soli vtuntur Lacedaemonij: They knew what was honest, but they did it not, they were excellent gnostrickes, but bad practitioners, like the Pharisees that sate in Moses Chaire, and taught what was good, but did none of those things themselues.That we doe those sinnes which we know to be grieuous sinnes. So might I say of many millions of men amongst vs: they know that swearing and drunkenesse, lewdnesse and prophannesse, and such like horrible sins, are most odious & damnable in the sight of God. They know the Sabbaoths should be sanctified, our poore Brethren should be releeued,Rom. 1. vlt. and our good God should be wor∣shipped, they know that they which commit such sinnes are worthy of death; and that they which doe such workes of pietie shall be sure of life; and yet you see how we doe continually com∣mit the one, and omit the other. Alas, beloued, we cannot say with Saint Paul,1 Tim. 1.13. we doe it ig∣norantly. We cannot say we know not these things to be sinnes, for we know them, we doe know them, and yet we daily doe them. And therefore, art thou inexcusable, O man,Rom. 2.1. whosoeuer thou art
that knowest these things,Bern. in Cantic. Ser. 36. or the like to be sinne; and yet wilt fearelesly & carelesly commit them, then of all other men thou shalt finde thy selfe at last to be most wofull and lamentable: for,The excellen∣cy of our knowledge makes vs the more horrible sinners in the sight of God. vt cibus sumptus & non decoctus perniciofus est; As meate re∣ceiued, and not digested, proues most dangerous; or as phy∣sicke taken inwardly, and not working outwardly, proues poy∣sonous; so the knowledge of the truth, which is the meate and physicke of our soules, being receiued in our vnderstanding, and not practised in our conuersation, will proue to be a most dangerous deadly disease vnto euery Christian soule. What the sins of infirmity are.3. We say those are the sinnes of infirmity, when in our hearts wee haue an earnest desire to serue our God, and to re∣fraine from sinne; but through the violence of Satans temptati∣ons, and the vntamed lusts of our owne flesh, (which is euer prone to euill, and vnapt to good) wee either neglect that duty which wee heartily desire to doe, or perpetrate those deedes which by no meanes wee would doe: for so our Sauiour saith of his Disciples,Math 26.41. that the spirit was willing, but the flesh was weake: So Saint Peter in heart was willing to die with his Master, but for feare of death, he was driuen to deny him, and to sweare that he knew him not;Cap 26.14. and so all other Saints of God doe finde, that how desirous soeuer they be to doe their duties, and to serue their God, their flesh is often times weake, and vnwilling to performe those good things, and most violently strong to draw their vnwilling soules to sinne. Aug. de eccles. dogmat. That no man is free from the sinnes of infirmity.And therefore Saint Augustine saith, that in respect of this infirmity of the flesh, Nullus Sanctus & iustus vacuus est peccato, nec tamen definit esse iustus, quia affectu semper tenet Sanctitatem: There is not any Saint that is void of sinne, neither yet may he be said for that to be no Saint, because in heart and affecti∣on he alwayes desireth, and to the vttermost of his ability, fol∣loweth after Sanctity: and so Saint Iohn sheweth, quod non est ho∣mo qui non peccat;Iames 3.2. That no man liueth, but he sinneth: for, in some things we sin all, i. e. through the infirmity of our flesh; and yet he that is borne of God,Iohn 3.9. sinneth not, that is, with his full consent, but doth euen then sigh and grieue in spirit, when his flesh drawes him on to sinne. But, that we may the better know those sinnes, which though
they be enormities in themselues, yet may be truely sayd to bee infirmities in the Saints, and may stand with grace,Galat. 6.1. as they are committed by them, it is obserued by Diuines, that they are; First, Such sinnes as are committed of incogitancie,Aug. de peccat. merit, & remiss: l 2. cap. 2. and besides the purpose generall or particular of the offender. i. e. sinnes of precipitation, and not of deliberation, as Saint Gregorie tearmes them: for so Saint Augustine, speaking of these sinnes sayth, Tentatio fallit & praeoccupat nescientes,How we may know sinnes of infirmity, by foure speciall differences they doe suddenly assault vs, and attache vs vnawares: and we are as it were ouertaken with the sinne, before we can see the sinne: So the adultery of Dauid, was not thought of, before it was suggested; and the deniall of Saint Peter, was neuer purposed, vntill it was acted. Secondly, Such sinnes as are euer resisted, to the vttermost of our abilities, before they be committed, and yet at last are perpe∣trated, quia tentatio praemit & vrget infirmos:Aug: quo supra. because the vio∣lence of the temptation subdueth the infirmitie of our flesh. Thirdly, Such sinnes as haue for their causes, some preua∣lent passions in nature; as the feare of death in Saint Peter, which is the most terrible of all euill, sayth the Philosopher; and the feare of shame in Dauid, which many men doe more feare then death. Fourthly, Such sinnes, as in the reluctation are many times subdued, and after they be committed, they bee not often ittera∣ted: (I speake not of the ineuitable lustings of the flesh, against the spirit, which no strength of grace, in the best men was euer able in this life to suppresse; but I speake of outward enormities, that are sometimes committed, through the infirmities of the Saints,) for so Saint Augustine, speaking of Noas sinne sayth, Aliquando fuit ebrius, sed non ebrosius:Idem. de peccat. merit & remiss. l. 2. c 10. that he was once drunke indeed, but he was no drunkard, quia vt actus virtutis, &c; be∣cause as one act of vertue makes not a vertuous man, so one act of sinne in a Saint, makes him not wholly vicious, sayth the Philosopher. But those that plot for iniquitie, and imagine mischiefe vpon their beds; those that neuer seeke to resist, but euer to kindle the sinders of sinne; that follow after drunkennesse, and hunt for opportunities, and like Salomons strumpet, will come foorth to meete sinne, and reioyce when they find it, and commit it with
greedinesse; I dare not not say they sinne of infirmity, but I ra∣ther feare, that they are in the gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of iniquitie. Acts 8.23. Esay 5 2.And therefore, though they that are mighty to drinke Wine, the common swearers, and blasphemers of Gods sacred name, the lasciuious talkers, and all leaude liuers, doe pretend infir∣mities, to excuse their sinnes, yet may they truely feare, that these spirits of infirmities, are no humane but hellish spirits, wherewith they are like the woman in the Gospell,Luke 13.11. most lamen∣tably possessed. Malicious sinnes haue two violent properties.Fourthly, For sinnes committed of malice, it is obserued that they haue two violent and bitter properties. 1. Wilfull. 2. Spitefull. First, They be wilfull sinners, and they doe commit their sinnes, with resolute wilfulnesse, i. e. with an absolute will, and with a full consent: for otherwise euery sinne is voluntarie, or else it cannot be iniquitie;Zanch. de pec∣cat: actuali li. 1. Thes. 1. pag. 101. Acts meerely violent are no sinnes. for those actions, quae mouentur a principio extrinseco, which are outwardly compelled by vio∣lence, and are meerely violent, without any consent of the will; as if a man were dragged by force, into the idols temple, or a wo∣man forced to adultery, and she no wayes yeelding consent of will, either before the deed, or in the doing thereof; wee say these things cannot bee sinnes: because they are outwardly compelled by force, and not inwardly moued by the will; & voluntati vis inferri non potest, and no outward force can worke vpon the inward will:Jdem ibid. but all those actions, quae mouentur a principio intrinseco, which proceed from within, and are done with any maner of consent of will, must needs bee sinnes, (if they be such acts as are contrarie to Gods will;) because they are voluntary, though not wholly, yet in part; in respect of the flesh, though not in respect of the spirit. But this sinne, that I am to speake of, which is done of ma∣lice, is not onely voluntarie In some respect, but wholly in all respects, with all greedinesse committed, and without any maner of vnwillingnesse effected; so as Satan doth no sooner tempt them to sinne, but they doe as readily attempt to commit the sinne: for as the godly are desirous to serue God,
, not by constraint but willingly,Examples of most wilfull sinners. so doe malicious sin∣ners perpetrate their sinnes, not through any great constraint, but with all willingnesse. And we haue almost infinite examples of this kind: the So∣domites would not be diswaded by any meanes,Gen. 19.8.9. from seeking to offer violence vnto the Angels of God; but still obstinately, and maliciously persisted, vntill they were wearied; and the Prophet Dauid, reporteth of the courtiers of Saul, that they said, our tongues are our owne, and we will speake, who is Lord ouer vs?Psal. 12.4. So the Israelites, in the dayes of Ieremie, being most earnestly in∣treated, by Gods seruants, to walke in the good way, which is the commandements of God, did most wilfully answere,Ieremie 6.16. Wee will not walke therein; and so are all those amongst vs, that not∣withstanding all the earnest admonitions of the preachers, and the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, that doth often times knocke, and call at the doore of their hearts for amendment, & the infallible testimony of their owne soules and consciences, that doe assure them they should not doe as they doe, yet will they commit all vncleannesse, all prophanes, , euen with all greedinesse. But they may assure themselues,How fearefull is the state of wilfull sinners. Deut. 29.19. that their state is very dan∣gerous, for hee that heareth the curse of the Law, and yet blesseth himselfe in his sinnes, and will still confidently and wilfully goe one in his wickednesse, the Lord will not be mercifull vnto that man, (sayth Moses) neither shall the iniquitie,Esay 22. of such a sinner be pardoned, (sayth Esayas;) quia in his nulla est excusatio in∣firmitatis, sed culpa voluntatis; because such sinners can pleade no excuse, either of ignorance, or impotencie, sayth Anselmus:Anselmus in heb. c. 6. and therefore the Lord is mightily prouoked, and most highly offended with all such wilfull resolute sinners. Secondly, The malicious sinners, are likewise spightfull sinners,Heb. 6. Examples of spitefull sinners. 2. Chron. vlt. 16. i. e. such as doe despight the spirit of Grace, and doe make but a mocke of Christ, and of all Christian Religion. Such sinners were those Iewes, that mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, vntill the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, so as there was no remedie: & such sinners were those stiffe-necked Iewes, who though they were not able to resist the spirit, to speake in Saint
Stephen, yet with their stones they stopped his mouth; and (as he sayth) did alwayes resist that spirit,Acts 8. to worke in themselues. 2. Tim. 4.15.Such a sinner was Alexander the Copper-smith, who did not onely distaste, but also withstand, yea vehemently withstand, the Preaching of the word of God: Such were Iulian the Apostata. Libanius the Sophister, Pope Iulius the third, and the like; who scorned Christ, and scoffed at all Christians; and such are those in our dayes, whosoeuer they be, and wheresoeuer they are, which not onely wilfully sinne, but also most lewdly, and pro∣phanely, make a mocke of Religion, and with Serapion, scoffe at all Preachers, and either wickedly hinder the free passage of the Gospell, or else secretly trample it vnder their feete. And therefore, being thus growne to the height of sinne, to sit in the seat of the scornefull;Psal. 1.1. The fearefull state of spight∣full sinners. 1. John 5 16. and with Achab to set and to sell themselues to commit wickednesse, presumptuously, and with an high hand to sinne against Heauen, and against the God of Heauen, they are not onely depriued of the prayers of the faith∣full, for them; because we are forbidden to pray for such sin∣ners,Iere. 7.11. (as Ieremie, was forbidden to pray for the Iewes, when the Lord himselfe sayd vnto him, Thou shalt not pray for this peo∣ple, nor lift vp thy voyce for them:) but they are also continu∣ally assaulted, with the prayers of the Saints, (like so many two-edged swords) against them: for so Dauid sayth, that hee would pray yet against their wickednesse:Psal. 59.5. and it is a heauie prayer that he vseth, that God would not be mercifull vnto them, that of∣fend of malicious wickednesse:1. Cor. 16.22. so Saint Paul accurseth euery one that loueth not the Lord Iesus: so did Simon Peter, pray against Simon Magus,Theodoret. l. 3. c. 9. and all the Christians against Iulian; and so doe wee pray against those malicious sinners, that despise Gods word, and scoffe at vs, and crucifie againe vnto themselues the Sonne of God. And then God, hearing the prayers of his Saints, hee giues these sinners ouer vnto a reprobate minde,Rom. 11. to doe those things that are not conuenient; and to fall from one iniquitie vnto another, vntill they bring vpon themselues swift damnation:Christ hom. 67. in Joh. Nam cum a Deo deseruntur, tum diabolo traduntur: for when God hath once forsaken them, then doth the Deuill wholly inioy them; and filleth their hearts with all wickednesse, and with the very
gall of bitternesse; and leaueth no place for repentance:Ansel: in Heb: 6. quia () prorsus lapsi;Aquinas in loc. . because they are altogether fallen (as Anselmus expounds the word, vsed by the Apostle) or, totaliter lapsi, totally fallen, and wholly eclipsed, and depriued of all the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit; and (as a stone, tumbling downe the hill, when it comes to the bottome, can goe no fur∣ther; so these men, cum in profundum venerint peccatorum, being thus fallen into the depth of sinne, they can fall no lower, till with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, they doe fall downe to Hell. And thus you see, what sinne is, how it groweth, and how it is committed. CHAP. V. Of the diuersitie of sinners, and of the inequalitie of sinnes. FRom this that I haue spoken, concerning sinne, there is no meane capacitie but may obserue, these two especiall points. 1. The diuersitie of sinners. 2. The inequalitie of sinnes.Of the great difference be∣tweene the sinnes of the godly and of the wicked, seene in three especiall things: 1. Reslution. 2. Reluctation. 3. Repentance. First, The diuersitie of sinners: for though all men doe sinne, yet all men are not alike sinners: for the Saints doe sinne, and it may be the same sinnes, as the wicked doe; but they doe not sinne in the same maner, with the wicked: for the godly doe either commit sinnes of ignorance, that is such sinnes as they know not to bee sinnes, or if they know them to bee sinnes, then are they certainely committed of infirmitie, and the doers haue euer with them these three properties. First, Before they sinne, they are firmely resolued, not to sinne. Secondly, When they doe sinne, there is such a reluctation, and such a conflict, betwixt the flesh and the spirit, that the Soule sigheth euen then when the flesh reioyceth: and so they neuer sinne with a full consent:Rom. 7.17. and therefore they may truely say, It is not wee that doe these sinnefull acts, but it is sinne that dwelleth in vs.
Thirdly, After they haue sinned, the spirit will presently draw the flesh to ioyne with it in repentance, which a little be∣fore had drawne the spirit to giue it motion to commit the sinne:Seneca in Agamem: and then (as Seneca sayth) Quum paenitet peccasse pene est innocens, When a man is sorrie that he hath sinned, he is almost as innocent as if hee had not offended; or as Saint Paul sayth, he is washed, he is sanctified; and he is restored vnto his former integritie. How the sinnes of the wicked differ in three things from the sinnes of the godly: 1. greedinesse to doe it.But the sinnes of the wicked, are not of ignorance, not of infirmitie; but of an obstinate will, and of a contemptuous spightfull malice: For, First, Before they sinne, they are as greedie to doe it, as Curio was ready to obay Casars commandes: they swell with desire, and burne with lust to haue it done: Et si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset; And if they may not doe it, they cannot liue without it;1. reg. 21.4. for they are as sicke for sinne, as Achab was for Na∣boths Vineyard. 2. Delight in the doing.Secondly, When they doe sinne, they haue their Iubilie, they are in their owne element, as Iudas is sayd to haue gone, in lo∣cum suum, into his owne proper place; and they haue their full content; and therefore they are sayd, to drinke iniquitie like water, which goeth downe smothely without any stop. 3. Content when it is done. Hieron. l. 1. in Amos.Thirdly, After they haue sinned, they are so farre from sor∣rowing for it, as that they doe euen reioyce, for the committing of it; & in suis complacent sibi delictis, and they doe delight themselues with their sinnes, as Saint Hierome sayth: Olim haec meminisse iuuabit, they doe delight to relate their sinnes: and therefore the Scripture sayth,Rom. 3.13. that as their feete are swift to shed blood; so their hearts doe reioyce in the workes of their owne hands. And so you see, how differently sinne may be committed: the godly are most vnwilling to commit any sinne; the wicked are most greedie to commit euery sinne: the godly are hardly drawne to sinne, the wicked draw sinne as it were with carte∣ropes: and in the godly, sinne is like a fire, which they inde∣uor to quench; but in the wicked, it is like a fire which they la∣bour to kindle. Secondly, We may see from what I haue spoken, that stoicall
paradoxe, of the equallities of all sinnes, sufficiently confuted:How some sinnes are a great deale more haynous then other sinnes. for sinnes publikely committed, are more haynous then those that are done in priuate; for that he doth not onely sinne; sed & peccat & docet, but he doth also teach others how to sinne, and likewise scandalize those, that doe detest their sinnes: & ideo qui publice peccat publice corrigendus est, hee that openly sin∣neth, should be openly punished, for his greater shame, by rea∣son of his greater sinne: and he that sinneth wittingly through knowledge, is worthy of many more stripes,Iustin Mart: in resp. ad ortho∣dox. ad q. fo: 271. then he that sinneth through ignorance, sayth our Sauiour: and therefore Quemadmo∣dum (autore Apostolo) sayth Iustin Martyr, fidelis qui rei suae non perspicit, deum negauit &c. Euen as hee which beleeueth in Christ, (as sayth the Apostle,) and prouideth not for his fa∣milie, hath denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidell; and as he which professeth Christian Religion, and with his know∣ledge, and Faith, and Baptisme, hath no good maners, no holinesse of life, and conuersation, which may expresse the liuelihood of this doctrine; but hath onely a certaine shew of Religion, ha∣uing denied the power thereof, is farte worse then an Infidell; so is he, which sinneth wittingly, through knowledge, by so much worse then he is which sinneth through ignorance, as an inex∣cusable sinne is worse then that which hath a iust excuse. And so Saint Isidore sayth,Jsidorus de summo bono l 2. that tanto maius peccatum esse cog∣noscitur, quanto maior qui peccat habetur, according to the quality of the offender, so is the qualitie of the offence:Criminostor culpa est, vbi honestior status. the greater the man is, which sinneth, the greater is the sinne, which he com∣mitteth: for, as Plato sayth, that ignorantia potentum robustorum∣que hominum, hostilis atque teterrima res est; the ignorance of great and mighty men, is a most vile, and hatefull thing;Why the sins of great men of eminent place are the greatest sins. because it may bee very hurtfull vnto many: so may we say, that the sinnes of great men, and of those that are in place and authori∣tie, are exceedingly sinnefull; and doe deserue the greater con∣demnation: not onely because their sinnes are exemplarie sinnes; as the old verse sayth: Regis ad exemplum totus compo∣nitur orbis; and as the prouerbe is, like Priest like People:Matth. 6.23. but also because in them is required the more eminent vertue; wee should bee the light of the world; and the great men, should be the defenders of the distressed, and the
helpers of the needy: and therefore, Si lumen quod in te est tene∣brae sunt, ipsae tenebrae quatae erunt? If thou, which shouldest be at patterne of all vertue, committest sinne; how great is thy sin? and if they, which should be Patrons of the poore Preachers, become robbers of the Church; and they which should be Re∣leeuers of the needy, become oppressors of their neighbours; how intollerable is that cruelty? Surely though these things should be but small sinnes in others; yet in vs they are horrible transgressions;Chrysost hom. 24 in c. 7. Matth. Quia impossibile omnino nobis est, ad ignorantiae praesidium aliquando confugere; Because it is vnpossible for vs to finde any excuse for our selues. And therefore, though Gentlemen and Courtiers, Citizens and worldlings doe leade their liues in lewdnesse, and turne the graces of God into wantonnesse; and thinke it no great sinnes, but either the infirmities of their youth, or but the custome of their times; yet in vs that are the Preachers of Gods Word, or in those that are the Gouernours of the people; the least sinne, or mis-cariage of our selues, which perhaps, alijs ignoscitur, nobis imputatur; is but a veniall sinne in others, and shall be pardo∣ned, will be found a haynous sinne in vs, for which we shall be surely punished;Bern. l. 2. de consid. ad Eugen. for so Saint Bernard saith, Inter seculares nugae, nugae sunt, in ore sacerdotis sunt blasphemiae: Triffles are but triffles among secular men, but in the mouth of the Priests, triffles proue to be blasphemies: and therfore the wise man saith, that the meane and the simple man shall obtaine mercy,Wis. 6.6. when the wise and the mighty, shall be mightily punished. CHAP. VI. How euery sinne, and the least sinne of euery one; bringeth death. YOu haue heard the diuersity of sinners, and the in∣equality of sinnes: and therfore I might now pro∣ceed vnto the second part, which is the reward of sinne: but that I may not forget to obserue that the Apostle saith, indefinitely, the reward of sinne is death, to teach vs these three speciall lessons:
1. That euery One sinne brings death. 2. That the sinne of euery one brings death. 3. That the least sin of any one brings death. for First, He sayth the reward of sinne is death; not of sinnes.That any one sinne is suffici∣ent to bring death vnto the Sinner. 1 Sam. 17. 2 Sam. 20 9. Sueton. in vit. Caesar. One is inough, if there were no more: For as one leake in a shippe, is sufficient to sinke it; and one vaynes bleeding, is inough to let out all the vitall spirits; and one wound may kill Golias, and Amasa: as well as 23 did Caesar: So one proud disdainefull thought, may cast Lucifer out of Heauen, one Apple may cast Adam out of Paradise, and one sinne may bring death, vpon any one of the sonnes of Adam. And therefore, seeing the puritie of God can abide no sinne, and his iustice will so seuerely punish euery sinne,Gen. 3.24. we should not giue way to any sinne: for though we keepe the royall Law,James 2.10. yet if we fail but in any one point, we are guilty of all; (not that he which committeth any one sin, committeh all sinnes; but that he is as guilty of death, by that one sinne, as if hee had committed all sinnes:) and God can as easily spie out one sinne in man, though he had no more, as well as he could spie out one man amongst his guests, which had not on his wedding garment.Matth. 22.12. Secondly, as One sinne, so the sinne of any one brings death:That the sin of any one man be he great or small brings death. Gal. 3.10. Jerem 22 24. for, cursed is euery one (whosoeuer he be) that continueth not in all things that are written in the Booke of the Law, for to doe them, saith the Lord: and, the soule which sinneth, that soule shall die, saith the Prophet, and Coniah if he offend, though he were as the Signet on Gods right hand, yet will God cut him off, saith the Lord. But what? haue not Kings and Princes, Lords and Ladies, great men, Knights, and rich men; haue not they any priui∣ledge to haue their pleasures, nor any prerogatiue to commit any sinne? must they haue no more liberty, then the poorest peasant? Yes, that they haue; for when the meane men can∣not offend, but presently they shall be reprooued, and it may be punished: whereby many times they are brought to repen∣tance, and are themselues cleansed and haue their sinnes pardo∣ned: the great men,The dange∣rous estate of Great men. because many of vs dare not reproue them for feare to offend them, and so to be offended by them; may goe on in their sinnes without controulement; they may
doe it without feare, though with the more danger: for though it be true of a poore fearefull Preacher, dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas: that he dares not reprooue these mighty men, yet with God there is no respect of persons: but, Veniam laeso numine nullus habet; If Moses the Prince of Gods people sinne, he shall not enter into the land of Canaan: If Aaron the Priest doth offend,Numb. 20.12. the wrath of God will be soon insensed: If the man of God, which was a Prophet doth offend, and transgresse the commandements of God; he shall bee slaine by the Lyon:2 Sam. 24. and if Dauid that was both Prince and Prophet,Dan. 4.35. sinne; he shall not goe vnpunished: and if Nebuchad∣nezzar which was the great Monarch, doth exalt himselfe in pride against God; he shall graze with the beasts of the field, vntill he confesse, that the most high God ruleth ouer all the King∣domes of the Earth. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned all ye Nobles, and all yee Iudges of the Earth; and as you keepe vs in feare to offend you, so let vs keep you in feare to offend your God: or else you may heare that dreadfull sentence, I lictor liga manus, Goe executioner, binde those Kings in fetters, and those Nobles with links of yron, and then cast them into vtter darknesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Psal. 149.8.Thirdly, we must note that as any one sinne, and the sinne of any one;That the least sinne brings death. so the least sinne, as well as the greatest sinne of any one brings death: for, not onely those seauen sinnes, which the Romanists call the seauen deadly sinnes, and which they briefly comprehend in the word Saligia; according to that verse; Vt mortem vites, semper Saligia vites, Where, S a l i g i Gen. 4.10. c. 19.13. Exod 22.23. Jam. 3.4.a signifieth 1. Superbiam, Pride. 2. Auaritiam, Couetousnesse. 3. Luxuriam, Luxurie. 4. Inuidiam Enuie. 5. Gulam, Gluttony. 6. Iram, Wrath. 7. Acidiam, Sloth. Nor yet those foure great sinnes, which the Scripture calleth crying sinnes: expressed in that distiche.
Clamitat ad Coelum, vox sanguinis & Sodomorum, Ʋox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum. 1. Murder. 2. Sodomie. 3. Oppression of Widdowes and Orphans. 4. Detayning of the Labourers wages. Nor yet that great Master-sinne Idolatrie; which doth quite separate vs from God, and doth for euer vnite vs vnto the Diuell, without great and vnfained repentance; doth bring death vnto vs: but euery sinne, and any sinne whatsoeuer, brings death vnto the sinner: For the reward of sinne, be it little, or be it great, is death: for as the small egge of a Cockatrice, will proue in time to be a deuouring Serpent, and as the little theeues, if they once get in at the windowes, will soone, like Si∣non, set open the doores, for the greater Theeues to enter in, and to despoile vs; so these little sinnes, that at the first we deem veniall, will grow by custome to be very great; and will in time make way for the greatest of all. But Saint Hierome saith, Nescio an possumus, leue aliquod pecca∣tum dicere, quod in dei contemptum admittitur. Hee knoweth no reason, why any sinne should be thought to be small, when as they are all, and euery one of them all, is committed against the eternall Maiestie of the incomprehensible God. And yet Satan at the first will perswade vs, that we need not make such great account of such small sinnes, such veniall sinnes,Richardus de differen: mor∣talu & ven∣peccati. quibus nunquam debetur poena eternae damnationis; to which eternall damnation can neuer be due, (as Richardus saith:) but when we haue vsually practised them, and throughout our whole course of life continued in them;How subtlely Sathan deales with men, to make them sinne, and then to bring them to despaire. then will he at last open our eyes, to let vs see our selues where we are; euen in the midst of Samaria, and in the hands of all our greatest enemies; and then (as Cyrus promised those that would warre with him against the Medes, to make euery Footman an Horseman: euery Souldiar, a Captaine; and euery Captaine, a Colonell:) so Satan will make euery veniall sinne mortall; and each mortall sinne irremissible: O quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore!Qui color albus erat, num est contrarius albo. O how is he, and how are our sinnes now changed? he that was an Angell of light, to perswade vs vnto sin, is now become a Diuell of darkenesse, to bring vs to despaire for sinne; and those sinnes which seemed to be but Mole-hills, doe now shew
themselues to be bigger then Mountaines. And no maruell: Nam sicut ebrius, quando multum vini ingurgitat, &c. For as hee that filleth himselfe with Wine, doth for the present feele no hurt;How sinne blindeth vs at the first, that we cannot perceiue its vglinesse. yea, though he sustained many losses: but within a while he shall cleerely perceiue how greatly hee was thereby indammaged; euen so, peccatum donec consummatur, obtenebrat mentem, &c. Sinne while it is in action, and before it be con∣summate, doth so obtenebrate and darken the minde of man, and as a thicke cloude ouer-shaddow it, that it cannot per∣ceaue the vglinesse of sinne; but when the sinne is once fi∣nished and those mystie cloudes of stupidity, which Sathan sets before our eyes, be vanished, Tum conscientia insurgit; then doth the conscience awake and arise, and worse then any ac∣cuser, lay to our charge the foulenesse of our sinne: and so vexe our soules, with the feare of the greatnesse of the punish∣ment:Sophocl. Sueton in vit. corum. as we may see in the liues of Oedipus, that incestuous King of Thebes, and of Tiberius Nero, and others: whereof you may finde more in my Treatise of The delights of the Saints. That we should carefully take heed, not to commit the least sinne.And therefore Saint Augustine doth most wisely aduise vs, Non despicere peccata nostra, quia parua: sed timere quia plura: Not to be fearelesse of our sinnes, because they are small, but rather, to be the more afraide of them, because they are many: and specially, seeing that the smallest beasts are as full of dead∣ly poyson, and the least creatures are as able to destroy vs, as the greatest:Aug. de dcem. chordis. for, nunquid minutissima sunt grana araneae: Are not the sands of Sea very small? and yet if you take too many of them into your Ship,Flumina magna vides paruis de fontibus orta, plurima colle∣ctis multiplican∣tur aquis. they are able to sinke her: Et quam minutae guttae pluviae; and how small are the drops of raine? and yet you see, flumina implent & domos deijciunt, what floods they make, and what mighty holds they haue ouerthrowne: They haue destroyed the whole world: Euen so, the least sinnes doe make vs as liable vnto death, as the greatest: for you see, A∣dams eating of an Apple, doth as well cast him out of Paradise, as Lucifers vsurping the dignity of God, and denyall to submit himselfe to Christ, did cast him out of Heauen; and Vzza's touching of the Arke, brings death vpon him, as well as Iudas his betraying of Christ, causeth him to hang himselfe: And
therefore, timenda est ruina multitudinis, etsi non magnitudinis: We should as well take heed to be destroyed by the smallest,Aug. de vera relig & in ep. 138. as by the greatest things: Nam quid interest, ad naufragium, &c. For what skils it, whether the Ship suffers wracke, from one huge billow that ouer-whelmes her, or by some small Leakes, which in time doth sincke her? So, what difference is it,Luc 16.21. with Diues to be sent to hell, for his daily denyall of his crummes of bread vnto poore Lazarus;1 King 21.16. or with Achab for once taking away of Naboths Vineyard; or with our continuall swaggerers, for daily swearing, and loose-liuing, or with the blood-like Caine, that doe, though but seldome, commitimmane and fearefull murthers? surely none but this: that they doe walke diuers wayes, but do meete in the end at the same place: And there∣fore the very heathen man could say,Cicerol. 1. offic. Qua parua videntur esse delicta, &c. Those sinnes which seeme to be so small, as that they scarcely be perceiued to be sinnes, by many; ought with all care & diligence be to auoyded: or otherwise we shal find our Sauiours words to be true; that, for euery moment of time that we haue spent in vaine,Matth. 12 39. and for euery idle word that we haue spoken, to no purpose, we shall render an account at the last day: For, the reward of Sinne (be it neuer so little) is Death. And so much for the first part, the worke done, i. e. Sinne.
Part. 2.PART. II. The payment for Sinne. i. e. Death: For the reward of Sinne is death. CHAP. I. Of the deceit of Sinne. Of the great deceit of sinne; in promising much, and per∣forming the cleane con∣trary.YOu saw the Worke, you see the Wages; and thereby you may see the deceit of sinne.—Fronte polita Astutum vapido seruat seruat sub pectore vultum. For, it will appeare at first with a Sy∣rens face, most delightful, but it wil proue at last to haue a Serpents sting, and to be most wofull: and you may easily find almost infinite instances of this trueth:Gen. 3.6.7. for Eue saw the tree was good for meate, and pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise: therefore she tooke and did eate, and gaue vnto her Husband: But then (saith Moses) their eyes were opened, and they knew they were naked: naked in body, naked in soule, naked of all grace, and naked of all goodnesse: and therefore you see, the Serpents promise to make them like Gods, made them like Diuells, and that the desire of delight and ostentation did worke their griefe and confusion:Cle. Al. l. 3. Strom Iustin Martyr apol. pro Christianis. Sulpit l. 1. de sac. hist. Gen 6.1.2. So the sonnes of God, that is, not the Angels as Clemens, Alexandrinus, Iustin Martyr, Sulpitius, Lactantius and others thought; but the godly sonnes of Seth, as Saint Augustine and others doe most truely collect, did see the daughters of men, that is of the posterity of Caine, that they were faire, and therfore they tooke them wiues of all that they liked; and what could they haue more then to haue their owne desires? but what saith the Text? when they thought themselues most happy, then did they feele the greatest misery: for suddenly the flood came and tooke them all away:Mat. 24.9. So Saul thought to make aduan∣tage
by sauing Agag, and the fattest of the Cattle, but thereby he lost his Kingdome from his Off-spring:1 Sam. 15.9. So Iereboam thought to establish his Throne by his Idolatry, but it proued to roote out all his Posterity,1 King. 12.28. and so (as the Scripture sheweth) we finde the same truth in all other particular sinnes, for though the Harlots words be sweet, her countenance faire,Prouerb. 7.27. &c. 9.18. and her bed perfumed, yet her house (saith Salomon) is the way to the graue, her chamber is the doore of death, and her guests are in the depth of Hell: and the very Heathen man could say: Meritrix meum herum miserum,Plantus Truc. sua blanditia intulit in pau∣periem, spoliauit bonis, luce, honore atque amicis: This Harlot with her cogging flattery hath impouerished and vndone my poore miserable Master, she hath spoyled and depriued him of all his goods, honour, friends, and all: So, though stolen waters be sweet, and the bread of deceit is pleasant vnto a man, yet afterwards his mouth shall be filled with grauell:Prou. 20.17. and though the Wine seeme Cos: to the drunkard; that is, to haue colorem, odorem & saporem; an excellent colour in the glasse, a pleasant smell in the nostrels, and a sweet taste in the mouth; yet in the end, it will bite like a Serpent,Prou. 23 32. it will hurt like a Cockatrice: It will Circe-like transforme Men to Swines,Ʋirgil. and make them with Vlysses fellowes, to become worse then the very beasts. When (as the Poet saith) Et pudor & probitas, & metus omnis abest: Wee shall finde in them, neither feare of God, nor shame of face, nor scarce any quality or propertie of man, besides humane shape: for, (as Propertius saith:) Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas,Propertius l. 2. eleg. vlt. Vino saepe suum, nescit amica virum. By Wine the beauty failes, by Wine man waxeth olde;Ʋt Venus ener∣vat vires sic copia Bacchi & tentat gressus debilitat{que} pe∣des. Festus Anieno de ven: & vino. by Wine the wedded wife, with strangers will be bold. And to be briefe, though young men and Gallants, doe reioyce in their youth, and walke in the wayes of their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, that is, inioy what pleasure soeuer they will, what their eye seeth, or what their heart desireth; yet in the end, God will bring them to iudgement for all those things, and then shall their bread in their bellies be turned into the gall of Serpents.Eccles 11.9. And so euery sinne is like it selfe, like Duke Ioab, whose words were smoother then oyle when he saide vnto Amasa;
Est ne pax mi frater,2 Sam. 20.9.10. Is it peace brother? and yet while the tongue called him brother, his sword stab'd him to death, like an ene∣mie: So sinne, as it were a cunning Apothecary, that writes on the out-side of his boxe, Pharmaca, medicines; when as within there is nothing but Venena, poysons: Proponit quod delectabile, supponit quod exitiale, vngit, pungit: It promiseth wealth, but it bringeth woes:Reuel 8.13. Woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth; Vae propter culpam, vae propter tribulationem mundanam, & vae prop∣ter paenam aeternam: Woe for our offences, woe for our mise∣ries, woe for our eternal punishment: and it annointeth vs with oyle; but it stingeth vs to death: And so indeed it is like the Deuill,Cyprian l. 1. ep 8. a lyer, and the father of lies. Quia peccatum mentitur vt fallat, vitam pollicetur vt perimat; Because euery sinne lies, that it may deceiue vs, and proposeth pleasure, that it may bring vs into paine. Venerab. Beda l. exhort. 4 &. 5.Venerable Bede, compareth sinne vnto a Witch, which transformeth euery man vnto a Monster; as Lust maketh a man like a Syren, or an Horse, to yeane after his neighbours wife; Sloth, makes him like an Asse, or Ostridge; Crueltie like a Wolfe, or Hyenna: Couetousnesse like the rauening Harpies: and so euery other sinne, makes the poore Sinner to become, Monstrum horrendum ingens cui lumen ademptum: The most vgly Monster vpon the face of the earth. Why then should we not hate this sinne, which speaketh friendly vnto vs, and promiseth great felicity, but in the end brings vs to the extreamest misery?Bern. insentent. Quia via peccati ingredientes contaminat, progredientes obstinat, egredientes exterminat: Because (as Saint Bernard saith) sinne in the first entrance defileth, in the progresse hardneth, and in its going out, destroyeth euery Sinner: and (as Salomon saith of the Harlot,) her wayes leade vnto death, and her footsteps take hold of Hell: so the same is most true of sinne: and therefore if any man should be asked, what hee doth in sinne, hee might iustly answer, as an old Courtier did, when he ws demanded,Euery sinne payeth the same wages, though it pro∣miseth se∣uerall plea∣sures. what he did in Court, I doe nothing but vndoe my selfe: For, the reward of sinne is death. And here likewise you may obserue, that although euery sinne doth not promise the same thing (for some sinnes pro∣mise pleasure, some profit, some honour, and some one thing,
and some another) yet euery sinne brings vs to the same end, and in the end payeth vs with the same reward: for the reward of sinne, of any sinne, is death. But because,Thriuerus Apoth. 19. as many doe make none account of most deadly diseases, by reason that they are ignorant of the dangerous effects of the same: Ita multi euidenter peccant, quia turpitudinem & consequentiam peccati, perspectam non habent: So many men feare not to sinne, but doe as smoothly drinke vp the same as pleasant Wine; because they doe not vnderstand the filthinesse and wretched effects of sinne: and because, as if a man might with his outward eyes, behold the beauty of vertue and good∣nesse; mirabilem amorem excitaret sui; It would wonderfully inflame their hearts with the loue thereof: So if we did behold the loathsomnesse of sinne, and consider well the fearefull euents thereof, it would make vs, with Iob,Iob 42 6. to abhorre our selues in Dust and Ashes: Therefore I will search a little further into this Labyrinth of sinne, and take a little more paines to vnfold the miserable effects of the same: for, the reward of Sinne is Death. When sinne is first committed, it wil presently gall and wound our consciences, and it will continually shew vnto vs, how good a Law is violated, how great a Maiestie is offended, and how grieuous a punishment we haue deserued: and (a the Po∣et saith) Occultum, quatiante animo tortore, flagellum;Juven Satyr. 13. When the great Tormentor will shake his hidden whip in the soule of the offender; then is he troubled night and day, walking in the hands of his executioner, and sleeping like the Nightingall, which hath alwayes a pricke before her breast. Neither is this all; for, the reward of sinne is death. Now by Death,By Death are vnderstood all the miseries contayned vnder the curse of God. we must vnderstand not onely the separati∣on, of the body and soule of man; but all other things that are comprehended vnder the curse of God; for the curse of God and the Death of Man, are Voces aequipollentes, equiualent termes, and doe signifie the same thing; and therefore as Saint Paul saith here, The wages of sinne is Death; So he saith else-where, out of Moses;Gal. 3.10. Cursed is euery one that continueth not in all things, that are written in the Booke of the Law for to doe them.
And we find, that the curse of God for the sinne of man ex∣tendeth it selfe. 1. To all those creatures that were created and made for the vse of man. 2. To all the properties, and faculties of each part of man. Rom 8 20. and 22.First, The creature was made subiect vnto vanity, and groa∣neth, and trauelleth in paine vntill now, not of it owne accord; but by reason of the transgression of man; the earth was accursed for his sake, and the very Heauens were subiected vnto vanity: and as then hee dealt with Adam; so euer since he dealeth in like manner with all the sonnes of Adam:Psal. 107.34. for he maketh a fruit∣full land barren, for the iniquity of them that dwell therein: that is, either such as bringeth forth no fruits at all, or else such as where, Infaelix lolium & steriles dominantur auenae: How the earth is accursed and her fruits, by reason of our sinnes.The good seed is ouergrowen with darnell, smothered with thornes, or spoyled with cockle: for though the earth was made, to yeeld vs fruits of increase; yet instantly vpon our sin∣ning, the grounds denied to pay her tribute; vnlesse (as the Poet sayth) iuncto boue, aratra trahuntur; we doe rippe vp her bowells, to fetch it out of her bellie: And yet this is not all; for though we manure the ground, and plant the seede, neuer so fayre: yet, except the Lord giues the increase, all our labour is but in vaine. And the Lord tells vs plainely, that if we cease to sinne and serue our God,Psal. 107.35. he will make the Wildernesse a standing water, and water springs of a drie ground; but if we continue in sinne, and sow iniquitie:Hosea 8.7. hee tells vs plainely, wee shall reape but vanitie; and if we sow the wind, wee shall reape, but whirlewind for our haruest. And therefore if God stoppeth the windowes of Heauen, and withholdeth the raine from vs,1 Reg. 17.1. as he did in the dayes of E∣lias, and so causeth the Heauens to be as brasse, and the earth to be as iron vnder our feete; the one yeelding no dew, the other bearing no fruit: or if God openeth the Cataracts and floodgates of Heauen,Gen. 7.11. as hee did in the dayes of Noah, and so cause the Heauens to weepe, and the floods to cary away our fruits, before
we can carry them into our barnes: then must we know,Saluian: Mas∣sali de guber. dei. that all this, and whatsoeuer of this kinde happeneth to vs, is in∣flicted vpon vs, for our sinnes; quia ira diuinitatis est paena pec∣cantis; because all the grieuous effects of Gods wrath,Gen. 3 17. are the iust deserts of mans sinne: for cursed is the Earth for thy sake. CHAP. II. How euery sinne slayeth the soule. AS sinne brings a curse vpon all creatures;How sinne brought on man a treble death. so it brings death vpon all men: for the reward of sinne is death: and we finde this death to bee three fold. 1. A spirituall death of the Soule, within the Body. 2. A corporall death of the Body: by continuall casti∣gation of the same throughout all our life, and a finall se∣peration from the soule, at the end of our life. 3. An eternall death, both of Body and Soule, in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone foreuermore. The first, is set downe in the 8. of Matth. 22.Chrysost. hom. 11. in c. 6. ad rom. Where our Sauiour sayth: Let the dead bury their dead: i. e. Let those that are spiritually dead, in trespasses & sinnes, (as the Apostle sayth) burie those that are naturally dead: to shew that a sinners body, is but the breathing Sepulchre of his sinnefull soule: and ther∣fore the Prophet Dauid sayth,Psal. 14.5. Rom. 3.13. that their throat is an open Sepul∣chre; which yeelds a more loathsome sent vnto the nostrils of God, from the corrupted putrified soule; then any graue can yeeld vnto the nostrils of man, from all its rotten carkases. The second, is set downe in the 11. of Iohn the 39.John 11.39. where Martha sayth, her brother Lazarus was dead and stinked: i. e. depriued of the fruition of the soule; and therefore loathsome to bee seene, and more loathsome to bee smell: for experience sheweth vs, that how sweete soeuer we be in our life, and how soft and tender soeuer our flesh bee; most amiably complexio∣ned, with that fresh and liuely blood, which be deckes the same with the fairest colours, and glides vp and downe in siluer veynes; yet are the best of these sweetest Ladies, but most loath∣some
stinking carrions, within a short space after death: all flesh being subiect to corruption. Luke 16.24.The third, is set downe in the 16. of Luke 24. where Diues being in torments, prayeth vnto Abraham, to shew that he had a soule, and desireth a drop of water to coole his tongue, to prooue that he had a body. But to speake of these three more fully. First, Wee must vnderstand that the spirituall death of the soule is two-fold. 1. Mori peccatis, to die to sinne. 2. Mori in Peccatis: to die in sinne. Macrob. c. 1. in som. scip. 13.For the first, ; the whole studie, and life of the Philosopher, was nothing else but a com∣mentary,Hieron ad He∣liod. ex Platone in Phaedone. or preparation for death, saith Macrobius: Nam mori dicimur, cum anima adhuc in corpore constituta, corporeas illecebras contemnit; for he may bee truely sayd to die, whose soule still remayning within the body, doth notwithstanding contemne and abstaine from all fleshly delights. And this was aymed at by the Philosophers, but it was onely attained vnto by the true Christians;What it is to die to sinne. for they that are Christs, haue crucified the flesh and haue mortified the lusts of the same, sayth the Apostle: these haue eares and heare not the Sirenian notes of sinne, nor the flattering suggestions of Satan; they haue eyes, and see not the alluring vanities of this world, any wayes worthy to bee desired: for I haue made a couenant with mine eyes,Job 31. that they should not looke, that is, vnlawfully, or with any lasciuious desire, vpon a maide, sayth holy Iob; and I sayd, I would take heed vnto my wayes, (sayth the Prophet Dauid) that I offend not in my tongue:Psal. 39.1. and therefore (as the Apostle sayth) they vse the world, as though they vsed it not. To die to sinne is a punish∣ment for sinne.And although this death be good, the onely way to bring vs vnto a better life; for hee that will not die before he dieth, shall neuer liue when hee dieth; yet is this the reward of sinne: for had it not beene for sinne, we had not needed to take this care and payne,Cyprian de duplici Mar∣tyrio. to fight against our selues; yea, to Martyr and mortifie our own flesh, by chastening our owne bodies, to bring them to subiection: least we should prooue to be cast-awayes, as the
Apostle speaketh: and therefore the chastisements of the Saints, are the punishments of their sinnes. For the second, to die in sinne,What it is to die in sinne. is when God forsaketh a sinnefull soule, and suffereth the same to lye and die in her transgressions: for as the soule is the life of the body; so is God the life of the soule, (sayth Saint Augustine:Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 13. c. 21. Matth. 4.4.) And therefore all those that liue by bread onely, and not by euery word which procee∣deth out of the mouth of God; i. e. which liue the life of nature, and not the life of grace; they are like those wanton wid∣dowes, whereof the Apostle sayth,1 Tim. 5.6. that they are dead while they liue: for though the soule be truely immortall, yet it hath a kind of death (sayth Saint Augustine;) and that is, when God forsaketh the same for sinne; and what a heauy case is this? Plangis cor∣pus quod deserit anima, & non plangis animam quam deserit Deus: We bewaile the body when the soule is parted, and shall wee not bewayle the soule which God hath forsaken? sayth Saint Chrisostome. Saint Augustine, being as then a Manichee, and reading the Hystorie of Aeneas and Queene Dido,A most excel∣lent considera∣tion of Saint Augustine. did weepe (as himselfe confesseth,) when hee came to the death of Dido: and there∣fore after that he was conuerted, hee most diuinely sayth; ô me miserum, &c. O wretched man that I was, that would bewaile the death of Dido, forsaken of Aeneas, and did not bewaile the death of mine owne soule forsaken of God: so we many times doe weepe for the death of our friends, but doe neuer weepe for the death of our owne soules. They may say vnto vs as Christ sayd to the daughters of Ie∣rusalem, weepe not for vs, but weepe for your selues,Luke 23.28. and for your owne soules, that are dead in sinnes: for euery one of vs may say with the poet; Atque vtinam lugenda tibi non vita,Repentance is the onely meanes to re∣uiue our dy∣ing soules. sed esset mors mea. — Our life is a great deale more worthy to bee bewailed, then our deth; in as much as the death of the soule, is a great deale more lamentable then the death of the body. But as wee haue no other remedie for the death of our friends, but onely teares, — Est quadam flere voluptas:Expletur lachry∣mis egeritur{que} dolor. for this is a great ease vnto the afflicted heart, and a kinde of
comfort vnto the sorrowfull soule; so we haue none other helpe for the death of our soules, but onely teares: Saepe per has flecti, principis ira solet; For though Gods anger did burne like fire, yet the teares of repentance is able to quench his wrath: and therefore Saint Peter when hee sinned,Matth. 26.75. in denying the innocent blood, hee went out and wept bitterly;Ambros. in Luc. vt lachryme lauaraent delictum, that his bitter teares might wash away his grieuous sin, and his true repentance giue life vnto his dying soule. Ʋade & fac tu similiter: goe thou, and doe the like: reuiue thy languishing soule with weeping teares: and I can say no more, quia non in∣uenio quid dixerit, sed quod fleuit, for I finde no more but that he wept; his teares perhaps drowned his word: but they re∣stored life vnto his dying soule; they layd hold on God with Israel, and would not suffer him to depart vntill hee had forgi∣uen him;Hierom. in Esayam. Nam oratio Deum lenit, sed lachrymae cogunt, for when words doe but desire him, but incline him; our teares will com∣pell him to be mercifull vnto vs. How sinne pol∣luteth the soule of man.You see then, hee that delighteth in sinne slayeth the soule, yea it defileth and polluteth the whole soule; and it makes it so odious, and so detestable, that God cannot endure it; for hee dwelleth not in a body that is subiect vnto sinne: and therefore Saint Chrysostome sayth,Wised. 1.4. that melius est luto pollui quam peccatis, it is farre better to tumble our bodies in the filthiest mire, then to touch our soules with the least sinne,No dirt so foule as sinne. for he which falleth into the mire, may in a short time be washed, and become as cleane as they that neuer were bemired: but hee that once falleth in∣to the puddle of sinne, receiueth such pollution, as that all the waters in the ocean Sea, can neuer wash him cleane; nor any thing else in the world, saue onely the blood of Iesus Christ, which cleanseth vs from all sinnes: and this also must be layd hold vp∣on to effect it,Chrysost hom. 12. ad Heb. & poenitentia diligenti & lachrymis: euen with the bitter teares of true repentance.
CHAP. III. How sinne slayeth euery facultie of the Soule. ANd further wee must vnderstand, that as sinne defileth the whole soule in generall, so it pol∣luteth euery facultie of the same in particu∣lar. Plato saith,That there are three spe∣ciall faculties in the soule of man. (and Aristotle from him) that in the soule of man there are three espe∣ciall faculties: The first, hee calleth . i. e. the vegetatiue facultie, which of others is called, virtus naturalis, the naturall vertue of increasing: and the seat of this in man, he sayth to be the liuer; the properties whereof are, to nourish, and to beget, &c. The second, he calleth . The sensitiue facultie, whose seate (he saith) is in the heart; and to which hee ascribeth the vitall vertue, and the motions of the sensitiue appetite. The third, hee calleth . The reasonable facultie, whose seate (sayth Galenus) is the head: and whose operations are, to imagine, to remember, to vnderstand, to iudge, and to guide all voluntary motions. And there is none of these but sinne defileth▪How sinne de∣fileth euery fa∣cultie of the reasonable soule. and especially aboue all the rest, the reasonable soule: for in it, we find three especiall faculties, 1. The will. 2. The vnderstanding. 3. The memorie: And we find all these excee∣dingly corrupted, and defiled by sinne. For, First, The Philosopher sayth, that there is no doubt of this;Arist. aeth: l. 10 c. 8. The chiefest perfection of man consisteth in the will of man. quin in affectu & voluntate perfectio summa consistit: But that all, or the chiefest perfection of man, consisteth in the will and af∣fection of man: for the will is not onely the immediate agent of all those actions, quae vocantur elicitae, which are called free acti∣ons; as to will, to nill, to choose, to refuse, to loue, to hate, to desire, and such like; but it is also the effecter of the other acti∣ons, quae vocantur imperatae, which are called compelled actions; because the will commandeth all; as the mind to thinke, and to consider, the vnderstanding to discusse, the iudgement to approue, and all the other faculties of the soule, to execute his command:
so that there is neither sinne, nor vertue, but the same is first in this commanding will, before it comes to any part either of soule or body. All actions are adiudged ac∣cording to the disposition of the will. Propertius: lib. 2. 10.And therefore are all actions, good or badde, adiudged and deemed, according to the disposition of the will. First, Good actions haue all their goodnesse from the will, for not onely the Poet sayth, Quod si dificiant vires, audacia certe Laus erit, in magnis & voluisse sat est: That the will is sufficient, where the power is wanting; but also Saint Augustine sayth,Aug. sup. Psal. 57. that whatsoeuer good thou woul∣dest doe, and canst not doe it, God accepteth the same as done: and Saint Paul himselfe saith, that in such cases, God accepteth the will for the deede:Gregor. moral. lib. 10. for God looketh not so much, quantum quilibet valet, sed quantum velit, into what a man is able to doe, as into what a man is willing to doe: and therefore our Sauiour commendeth the poore widdow, and preferreth her before all the rest of the rich men;Mar. 12.43. because, though her gift was lesser, yet was her will better then all the rest: for that they of their abundance, bestowed what they could well spare; but she of her penurie had cast in all that she had: and Dauid willing, and saying that he would build God an house,Ver. 44. 2 Sam. 7. was accepted as if he had built it: for, seeing God looketh not so much into the outward worke, as into the inward intention of the heart;Jdem ibid. l. 1. whatsoeuer is inten∣ded by the will, in the very heart of man, the same is reputed and deemed as done, in the eyes of God: sayth Saint Gregorie. Secondly, Euill actions haue the same estimation; for, si sit voluntas & desit potestas, &c. If thou hast a will to doe euill, and hast no power to doe it; thou art no lesse guiltie of the deed, in the sight of God, then if thou hadst done it: and there∣fore he that looketh on a Woman, that is, with a will to lust after her, hath committed adulterie with her in his heart alreadie, saith our Sauiour: and the very heathen Poet, subscribeth vnto the same truth, saying; In. 13.Ha patitur poenas, peccandi sola voluntas Nam scaelus intrase, tacitum qui cogitat vllum Facti crimen habet. Whosoeuer thinketh euill inwardly within his breast, must
needs bee guiltie of the outward fact;The will or de∣sire of sinne deserueth the punishments of sinne. Lanch. de ope∣ribus dei. p. 1. l. 4. c. 11. and so liable to the iust punishment that is due for such a sinne. And therefore (in the iudgement of the very heathen) the will of sinning, doth most iustly deserue the punishment of the sinne. For, It is obserued by Diuines, that although Satans power be ve∣rie great, to corrupt all other faculties of the soule of man, as to darken the vnderstanding, to dazle the fancie, to delude the sen∣ces, and to prouoke the appetite,That Satan hath no power to compell the will. yet that hee hath no power to re∣moue, or to turne the will; he may tempt, and perswade; but he cannot compell the same: for seeing this is the primum mobile, the highest wheele in the frame of our soule, that moueth and gui∣deth all our actions, and according to which they shall be dis∣cerned, and iudged: therefore in the middest of mans greatest assaults, God would not suffer Satan to preuaile and to com∣mand the will; but hee hath left the same in our owne libertie; so that Satan cannot destroy vs, vnlesse wee bee willing to de∣stroy our selues: and therefore Saint Ambrose sayth,Ambros: de vita beata. & habe∣tur. 15. q. 1. can: Non est. Non est quod cuiquam nostram ad scribamus armnam, nisi nostra voluntati, qui nemo tenetur ad culpam, nisi voluntate propria deflexerit; There is no reason, why any man should ascribe the cause of his miseries, to any thing in the world, saue onely to his owne will: for we perish, because we will perish; perditio tua ex te,Our owne will is the cause of all our woe. our destruction is from our selues, and from no where else: for no man is drawne to sinne, neither can it be a sinne, vnlesse the agent doth some way yeeld some consent of will: for if Sa∣tan had power to force the will, aliquis iustorum non remaneret, then not a righteous man should remaine vpon the face of the earth: and therefore are all his temptations, called perswasions, or suggestions, and not compulsions; because they are all vsed to make vs voluntary agents, to make vs yeeld consent of will; for that (as I sayd before) Non est peccatum nisi sit voluntarium, No act can be a sinne any way, vnlesse it bee voluntarie some way. And therefore, as Apollodorus the tyrant, dreamed that hee was flead by the Scythians, and boyled in a seething Caldron; and that his owne heart should say vnto him, I am the cause, of this thy fearefull torments; so it is most certaine that there is no damned soule in hell, but he may iustly say, his owne heart and
his owne will sent him thither: for let Sathan doe what hee will, and let him striue what he can, yet if man were true to himselfe, The gates of Hell should neuer preuaile against him: because no created power is able to compell the will of man. And yet, such is the power of sinne, that although reason should shew vs what is good;Video meliora, proboque dete∣riora sequor. yet it maketh vs to will onely that which is euill; to leaue the incommutable and infallible good, and to follow after base and vile affections: and then God, seeing vs nilling the good, and willing the euill, he giues vs ouer to a reprobate minde,Aug. de l. arbit: Vt cum vult homo recte agere non potest, quia quando potuit, noluit; & ideo per malum velle perdidit bo∣num pesse: That if we would will well, wee cannot; because when we could will well, we would not: and therefore, as our first Father Adam, so all we that are the sonnes of Adam, by willing euill, haue, and doe loose the power of willing good. For, Rom. 1.21.24. That our sinne hath depriued vs of all will to doe good.As because the Gentiles, when they knew God, glorified him not as God, neither were thankfull; therefore God gaue them ouer to vile affections, to doe those things that were not conuenient; So because, when we had our will free, and none could com∣mand it, wee willed euill, and not good; therefore God in Iustice giues vs ouer, to such wilfull greedinesse of sinning, that now of our selues we haue not the least will, to doe good, for if any man willeth good it is from infused grace, and not from our inbred will;Philip. 1.13. for God worketh in vs both the will and the deed, sayth the Apostle: but our naturall will is dead from good; for sinne hath so defiled the same, that it willeth and affecteth no∣thing but vile and vaine things; and so it compelleth euery part and facultie of the soule, to long and lust after euill: for the vis irascibilis, the irascible, distasting, and angry faculty which should be as a dogge, to keepe away sinne, doth now waxe angry at euery vertue: and that which should detest euill in his brother, doth rage and swell at the reproofe of his Father; and the vis concupiscibilis, the concupiscible faculty, or desiring ap∣petite, which should desire nothing but goodnesse, and what were iust and honest, doth now affect nothing but lewdnesse, and what is most vile and abhominable; and it cannot doe a∣ny otherwise:Max. l 1. de charitate. Nomquemadmodum passerculus pede alligatus, &c.
For as a little bird tyed by the leg, when he beginneth to flie, is presently drawne downe againe by the string; So the mind of man, tyed by base affections, if it seeke to mount vp to hea∣uenly thoughts, it is presently plucked downe againe by sinne: saith Maximus. And so you see, that Quam non mille ferae, quam non steneleius hostis Nec potuit quicquam vincere, vincit Adam: This will of man, which neither mortall enemies, nor yet infernall spirits, nor any other created thing, could subdue; is now defiled, polluted, and wholly corrupted by sinne.That no out∣ward enemy can compell our will. And therefore I can freely yeeld vnto our aduersaries, that wee haue free-will, in regard of any outward compulsion: for that Satan himselfe cannot compell it; for if he could, we could not iustly be condemned, for doing that vnwillingly, which we are whol∣ly and forcibly compelled to doe;Our inward naturall cor∣ruption is that which draw∣eth our will to sinne. but we haue not the least free-will, in regard of our naturall corruption: for, as a stone tumbling downe the hill needes no man to driue it; so the will of it selfe is so inclined to euill, that of it selfe, it can no more affect goodnesse, then a stone of it selfe to runne vpwards: and therefore Saint Iohn saith, of the regenerate;Iohn 2.13. that they are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Secondly, as no action can be good, vnlesse the will be right, and the will can neuer be right, vnlesse the vnderstanding be right, as Seneca saith; for though the will be the Mistresse, and the Commander of all the faculties of the soule,Our will is guided by our iudgement. saue onely the vegetatiue, as Nyssenus saith; yet of it selfe it hath no light, but is inlightned by the reason & iudgement of the vnderstanding:Ʋiues l. de anima. And therefore actus voluntatis à voluntate producitur, sed à ratio∣ne suadetur; The Act of the will is produced by the will, but it is induced and moued by the reason, saith Viues: And there∣fore if the vnderstanding be darkened,Matth 15.14. it is no maruell that the will should be corrupted; for, if the lame will, carry and com∣mand the blinde vnderstanding, and the blinde reason, doe leade and guide the lame will, then are both like to fall into the Ditch.Of the perfe∣ction of Adams vnderstan∣ding. But, though the vnderstanding of Adam, in Paradice, was so perfect, that he knew his God, which made him; his wife to
be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, though hee neuer saw her before, and all the other creatures so well, that at the first sight, he was able to giue them names agreeable to their natures;Gen. 2.20.23. yet now the vnderstanding of all men i so blinded, that it cannot see the light of any Diuine truth:How our vn∣derstanding is now darke∣ned through sinne. Peccatum enim tenebrae, for sinne is as the blacknesse of darknesse, and as a deepe dungeon, wherein there is no light; and all sinnes are called the workes of darkenesse; not onely because they are done in darkenesse: or at least desired to be kept secret, but also because they are the workes of them, whose vnderstandings are so darkned, that they cannot perceiue the excellency of the Grace of God,Rom 13.12.13. but doe thinke all the mysteries of our faith to be, not onely mirabilia, strange and wonderfull; but also incredibilia, impossible and incredible: and therefore whatsoeuer we doe say of grace, and of spirituall things,Ephes. 5.8. they are but foolishnesse vnto them; for, as in the night time, when there is no light, a bush seemes a man, and a man a beast, and we iudge Lead to be siluer, Brasse Gold, and Gold no better then Copper; So those men, qui sordide viuunt,Chrysost. hom. 4. in Iohn. which do loue, & liue in iniquity, can no wayes vnderstand the excellency of piety, saith Saint Chrysostome. And therefore sinne brought this infirmitie vpon vs, to bee , Darkned in our vnderstandings; and our fathers affected-knowledge of good and euill, brought inflicted ignorance of all good, vpon all his children: for as we reade of a certaine Widdow,Ephes. 4.1. that desiring to see better then she did, had her eyes so cunningly closed, by a subtle and a false Physition, that while she hoped for a greater measure of sight,How Adam by affecting know¦ledge brought ignorance vp-all his poste∣rity. he stole away all the treasure that she had, and then hauing her eyes opened, and seeing how shee was cozened, shee worthily complained that she saw worse then euer she did before. So Adam, desiring to know much, and to see better then he did before, became in∣deed to know iust nothing, and to see himselfe in a farre worser state, then euer he was before: for, God is light, and in him there is no darknesse at all: and therefore falling away from God, wee are depriued of all light,1 John 1.5. and are plunged into the place of vtter darkenesse:Iohn 12.35. and therefore as he that walketh in darknesse, know∣eth not where he goeth; so, we being separated from God, wee know not what is truth, we know not what is good.
And the Philosophers themselues, the seekers and searcher after Knowledge, did finde, to their endlesse griefe,The Philoso∣phers saw and professed the blindnesse of all men. that when they had turned their strength into weaknesse, their marrow into drynesse, and their colour into palenesse, by their continu∣all watchings, and indefessed vnwearied studies, and mu∣sing to get knowledge; they attained at length, to no more, but hoc vnum scire, se nihil scire to know this one thing, that they knew iust nothing. And (as our Sauiour said to Nicodemus, in the like case) if they could not attaine to the knowledge of earthly things,Iohn 3.12. how should they vnderstand heauenly things? For although the vnder∣standing, which Nazianzene calleth, , the eye and lampe of reasn, should be exceeding sharpe, to discerne the alterations of the skyes, to enter into the secrets of nature,How sharpe our vnder∣standing is in natural things. & to reach vnto the height of heauen, and the deepnesse of Hell it selfe; yet in things concerning God, he could reach no fur∣ther, then , such points as might be manifested by de∣monstration: as Saint Clement speaketh. For if we talke of Christs conception, by the holy Ghost,How blockish euery man is naturally in the mysteries of our Faith. without the helpe of man; of his birth of a pure Virgin, with∣out breach or impeachment of her Virginitie, of his Death, as the Sonne of God personally vnderstood, (for otherwise the Diuine Nature is impassible;) and so of his resurrection, as hee is the Sonne of Man, and of the resurrection of all flesh at the last day; and such li Mysteries of our Faith; then both the wise Grecians, euen all the Schoole of Athens, and the foolish Iewes, euen all the whole ranke of Rabbies, will count each point , a fained thing; & cry out with the Athenians,Act. 17.18. What will these bablers say? for, as the eye of man (saith S. Augustine) being either blinde or pur-blinde, cannot presently discerne the clee∣rest obiect: euen so (saith he) Animus pollutus, aut mens tur∣bata, deum presentem videre non potest: the minde that is distra∣cted with worldly cares, or the soule that is polluted with filthy sinne, can neither vnderstand God nor godlinesse. And therefore Moses saith, that all the imaginations of the thoughts of mans heart, were onely euill continually;Gen. 6.5. Tit. 1 15. Rom. 8.6. and Saint Paul saith, that our very mindes are defiled, and our wisedomes death: but, if the light that is in thee, be darkenesse, how great is that
darkenesse? if our mindes and vnderstandings be thus blinded, and defiled through sinne, in what case shall the other faculties of the soule be? What an ex∣cellent facul∣tie the memo∣ry is. Sabel. l. 10. c. 9. Exemp. de me∣mor.Thirdly, for the memory, It is a faculty, qua repetit animus quae fuerunt; Whereby the soule retaineth, as it were in her sight and knowledge, all the things that are past; Et hoc nil sanctius, nil v∣tilius homini dedit Deus; and it is the best and most excellent gift that God bestowed on man, saith Sabellicus: for, this is the Treasurer of all Learning, and the Keeper of all those Arts, and Knowledge, which by great study and labour, we haue attained vnto: and therefore in vaine were our vnderstanding; in vaine were all our seeking and searching after Knowledge, if the me∣morie did not faithfully retaine what wee haue industriously found. Plato in Crat. & in tymaeo. That forget∣fulnesse is an infernall fiend.And therefore it is a common saying, that tantum scimus quantum memoria tenemus; We know no more, but what wee remember. And for this cause, Plato saith, that memory is the mother of the Muses; and Aristotle compareth it vnto a Scribe, intus manens & omnia scribens, that sitteth alwayes within, and recordeth all things that are done, either within or without; and the Poets placed Lethe, that is, obliuion and forgetfulnesse, which is alwayes the enemie contrary to the memory, in Hell, a∣mong the infernall spirits. Wherein the memory ex∣celleth the o∣ther faculties of the soule.And in this we find the memory to be preferred, and inriched with more excellent prerogatiues then any other faculty of the soule; that the vnderstanding hath much a doe to discusse of things, and by reason to finde out the truth; and the will ma¦ny times is thwarted, and contradicted by reason; when wise∣dome sheweth, the will should not affect many things so in∣directly as it doth: but the memory is neuer distracted by any forraine foe, but retaineth peaceably at home (like a good Huswife) both what the will affecteth, and what the vnder∣standing findeth. How God re∣commendeth his benefits vnto our me∣mories. Exod. 20.2.And therefore God in the deliuering of the Law, doth chiefly worke vpon this faculty of the memory, by presenting vnto the Israelites what he had done for them, saying: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out out of the house of bondage; And so Christ in the sealing of the
Gospell by the participation of his blessed body and blood, re∣commends that excellent benefit vnto our memories saying: Doe this in remembrance of mee:Luc 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24. for in vaine should God doe his wonderfull workes, vnlesse they were had in remembrance: if so soone as he had done them, we should with the Israelites presently forget them: for as the meat is receiued in vaine into the stomacke, vnlesse it be retained vntill it be digested; so are all the workes of God, done in vaine for vs, vnlesse the Memory, like a good stomacke, (as Saint Bernard cals it) doth retaine them vntill they haue wrought their appointed ends, vpon our soules. And yet now, this excellent faculty of the soule is so defiled,How the Me∣morie is defi∣led by sinne. and corrupted by sinne, that like a raw bad stomacke, it receiueth not, it retaineth not, it degesteth not, that good meate that is offered vnto it; but is onely delighted with those corrupter things that do turne to bad humors, & crudities, for to increase the diseases, and to hasten the death of the soule: For, First, touching vaine things, and vnprofitable matters,Autore Plinio. How faithfull is our memory in vaine or euill things? we see the fidelity of this facultie, that admirable things are recorded of the same. Cyrus could remember the name of euery Soul∣dier that was in his huge armie; and Mythridates King of Pon∣tus, learned to speake two & twenty seuerall languages: & Por∣tius Latronus, could rehearse any speech, verbatim, that hee had once written, without missing of any word thereof: and the like memory had Themistocles, Lucullus, Hortentius, Seneca, and diuers others. So now in all men, tenacissima est iniuriae memoria;Scribit in mar∣more laefas. Cicero. l. 2. Ora∣tore. Wee can neuer forget ill turnes done vnto vs; we write these things in marble; yea though we say that we doe forgiue them, yet, we do professe that we shall neuer forget them; (a fine distinction to destroy our soules, & a witty way to goe to hell:) and so of many other things, that do oftentimes teare our hearts & vexe our mindes, with vnspeakeable griefes; we cannot (though wee would neuer so faine) forget them: and therefore Themistocles, when it was told him, that Simonides had found out the art of memory, said that he would like better of him, that could teach him the art of forgetfulnesse, that hee might forget those things which he should not, and would not, remember. But,
How soone we forget good things.Secondly, touching good things, that should be had in euer∣lasting remembrance, we see quam facilis est obliuio boni: How easily they are forgotten, as Saint Hierome saith: there be but ten commandements, ten words saith Moses, but two saith our Sauiour,Mar. 12.30.31. Rom. 13.8. but one saith, the Apostle; and that is but a short one too, Loue, and that is all: and yet how hardly doe we learne it, and how soone doe we forget it? how many thousand, haue we in England, that can tell you a thousand tales, but cannot say their Prayers, their Creed, and their ten Commandements? there is but one God: and as the Poet saith, —Est deus in nobis, agitate calescimus illo. This God is not onely present with vs, about our bed, and a∣bout our pathes, as the Prophet speaketh; but he is also within vs; for in him we liue,Psal. 139.2. Act. 17.28. we moue, and haue our being, as the Apostle saith; and yet we doe quite forget him, we thinke not of him: yea, we forget our selues, and whatsoeuer is good for our owne soules:Luk 10.12. for though there be but vnum necessarium, one thing that is needfull for vs, (as our Sauiour testifieth) yet alas you see, how few of vs doe remember that one thing: and therefore forgetting this one thing, we forget all things; and wee can re∣member nothing that is good for our owne selues. Thou shalt remember (saith Moses vnto the Israelites,) that thou wast a bond-man in Egypt, and the Lord thy God redee∣deemed thee thence;Deut. 14.18. but they soone forgate, saith Dauid what God had done,Psal 78.12. What wee should alwaies remember. and the wonderfull things that he had shewed for them. So we should remember Gods blessings, that wee might be thankefull to him, and we should remember our owne sinnes, that we might be sorrowfull for them: wee should remember Gods Iustice, that we might feare to sinne, and wee should re∣member his mercy, that we might not fall to despaire. But alas, alas: such is our nature, such grieuous sores doe possesse our soules, and this excellent facultie of our memory is so wounded by sinne,Francisc. Pe∣trarch. dialog. 8. de memoria. that as we reade of Messala Coruinus, who became so sottish, as to forget his owne name; so wee are become to that passe, Vt discenda discimus, & discenda dedisci∣mus; We alwayes remember, what we should forget; and we euer forget, what we should euer remember. And so I hope you see, (as to our griefe we feele it) how fil∣thy
sinne slayeth the soule; corrupting and defiling each part and facultie of the same; the will, with lewde affections; the vnderstanding, with grosse ignorance; and the memory, with sottish forgetfulnesse: so that now wee will indirectly, wee iudge darkely, and wee remember nothing that is heauenly. Hence it comes to passe,How our soules are fuller of diseases then our bodies. that our bodies are not so subiect to diseases, as our soules be to sinnes: for pride, is the soules tympa∣ny: when it doth— turgescerefastu, waxe big, and swell through the distaine of others; enuie, is the worme that gnaweth at the heart: then which, it is most certaine that —Siculi non inuenere tyranui, tormentum maius.— The Sicilian Tyrants did neuer feele a more fearefull tor∣ment: and wrath, is a plurisie, that will not be appeased without blood: for of the raging man it is most truely said, Mad that his poyson cannot others kill, He drinkes it off himselfe, himselfe to spill. And therefore of all the men in the world, we are aduised to keepe no company with an angry furious man; but as the Poet saith, Dum furor in cursu, currenti cede furori;Ouidius lib. 1. de rem amor. Difficiles aditus, impetus omnis habet. To turne aside from euery furious wight, Cause fury, will haue passage in despight. And Lust, is the soules feauer: the flames thereof, are the flames of fire: and the waters thereof are aqua  the wa∣ters of folly and madnesse. And in this,How the sicke∣nesse of the soule is worse then the sicke∣nesse of the body. the sicknesse of the soule doth exceed all the sicknesse of the body: for the body hath some respite, from its sickenesse; but the soule hath none from sinne: and euery sicknesse of the body kils it not, but euery sinne slayeth the soule: for the reward of sinne, that is, of euery sinne, is death, saith the Apostle. And hence likewise, in my iudgement, that branch of Pella∣gianisme, taught also by Lactantius, that the light of Nature, if it were well vsed, might make way for Diuine instruction; may bee sufficiently confuted: for, though they teach that man by sinne hath not quite killed his soule; but wounded the same, like the
man that fell among theeues, and was left halfe aliue: and there∣fore might,Lactan diuin. iustit. c. 5. That Nature though neuer so well vsed cannot pro∣cure the gifts of grace. Ephes. 2.1.5. Coloss. 2.13. (saith Lactantius) come to the same doctrine, that we doe follow, Si quae, natura ducente sanserunt, defendissent: If they had constantly maintained those things which Nature taught them: yet the Apostle saith here, that sinne brings death vnto the Sinner: and if death, then sure there was no life; i. e. no life of Grace in him. And so in many other places, the Apo∣stle sheweth as much; for he saith, that we were dead in trespasses and sinnes; and that God hath quickned vs by Iesus Christ. And therefore it is apparently plaine, that at the beginning of our conuersion, we are altogether passiue, and haue no power in the world, to releeue our selues, vntill grace hath quickened our soules. Ob.But against this, it may be obiected, that the Apostle saith, the Gentiles knew God;Rom. 1.21. ; so much as might be knowne concerning God; that is, his eternall power and God-head, when they considered him in his workes; and therefore the light of Nature, was not quite extinguished in them. Sol. That sinne ex∣tinguished all knowledge of God, but what God reuealeth to man.I answere, that this knowledge of God, was not from the light of Nature in them; but it was reuealed by God vnto these na∣turall men, to make them without excuse, as Zanchius well ob∣serueth: for so the Apostle sheweth in the 19 verse of the same Chapter; where he saith, Deus enim illis manifestauit, for God reuealed the same vnto them: and therefore I say that the sinne of Adam, did quite kill the soule of euery man: for, the reward of sinne is death: and therefore we may all of vs cry out with the Apostle,Rom. 7.24. O wretched men that we are, who shall deliuer vs from this body of death? And here-hence we may also see, the iudgement of God threatned in Paradise,Gen. 1.17. In what day thou eatest of the tree of Know∣ledge of good and euill, thou shalt die the death; to be truely and presently inflicted vpon Adam: for, though his body seemed to liue, yet was his soule separated from God, and therefore must needs be presently dead. Aug. de ser dom. in monte, & habetur de poenitent. di∣stinct. 2.But as sinne is three manner of wayes committed, (as I shew∣ed before) so is the death of the soule three wayes inflicted: and they are prefigured by those three sorts of dead men, which our Sauiour raised in the Gospell, as S. Augustine sheweth.
The first, was Iayrus his daughter: she was a Virgin, nd was as yet within the doores; and therefore our Sauiour went into the house, and put out all the people, and vouchsafed to take her by the hand, and to say Talitha cumi, Damosell,Mar. 5.41. Of a three-fold death of the soule. I say vnto thee arise. This signifieth that soule, which sinned onely by consent, but hath not yet brought forth the sinne into fact: and therefore God will be mercifull vnto such, and will not require to shame them before the world; but hee will goe in himselfe, and accept of their inward repentance for such in∣ward sinnes. The second, was the Widdowes sonne of Naime, and hee was caried out to be buried; and therefore our Sauiour in the presence of them all, Did touch the Beere, and said,Luk 7.14. Yong man I say vnto thee, arise; and he sate vp, and began to speake. And this signifieth the soule that sinneth in fact: and therefore as she publikely sinned, so she must be publikely restored; and as by her sinne she offended many; so by her sitting vp,They that pub∣likely sinne, must publikely testifie their repentance. i. e. by her standing, and constancy in grace, and by her talking, i. e. by her confession of her sinnes, she must giue satisfaction vnto many: Nam qui publice peccat, publice corrigendus, pub∣lice restaurandus est: For he that publikely offendeth, is pub∣likely to be reprooued, publikely to be restored: saith the Law. The third was Lazaus,John 11. and hee was dead and laid in his graue; and therefore Iesus was faine to goe a great iourney to raise him: and when he came to him, he groned in his spirit, and was troubled; he wept and he groaned againe;Ver. 35. he lifted vp his eyes, he prayed, and he cryed with a loude voyce, saying,Ver. 43. Laza∣rus come forth: and then he came forth, but how? bound, hand and foot (saith the Euangelist;) with graue clothes, and his face bound with a Napkin: so that his friends and standers by, were faine to loose him, and to let him goe.Ver 44. And this signifieth the soule that is accustomed to sinne, that is dead and buried in sin: and therefore many groanes and sighes,How hard it is to recouer a sinner accu∣stomed to sinne. many teares and prayers, and loud cryes, must be vsed, before such a soule can be raised from her sinnes: and because the accustomed sinners are bound with sinnes, as with a chaine, and haue their faces bound vp with shamelesse impudency, and couered with the same, as with the Napkin: therefore the Ministers of the word,
their friends, their neighours, by reproofes, by counsell, and by all other meanes must doe their best, to loose them, and to let them goe: that is, to withdraw them from their euill wayes, and to cause them to walke in the pathes of Righte∣ousnesse. Well then, seeing , the life of sinne is the death of the soule; yea, seeing euery sinne slayeth the soule, and that it is so hard a thing to reuiue the soule from accustomed sinnes; Oh why should we accustome our selues to sinne? for it is more dangerous to sleepe with one sinne, then with an hundred Scorpions: For they can but kill the body, but sinne killeth both, the body and soule. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. That the loue of goodnesse should moue vs to hate sinne. Siscirem deos ignosciturs & homines ignorturos: Tamen propter peccati turpi∣tudinem pecca∣re dedignarer. Seneca.We know that good men will not sinne, for the very loue they beare to vertue, and for the detestation they beare to vice; for so we reade that Seneca, though a Heathen, hated sinne; least it should defile his soule; and Anselmus, that good Christian saith that if hee should see all punishments, without sinne, on the one hand; and finde sinne with all the pleasures of sinne, on the other hand; and were compelled to make choice of one of them as Origen was, either to commit Sodo∣mie with a Blackamoore, or to cast Thuibilum his censer into the fire, for to sacrifice vnto the Idols; hee would surely imbrace the punishments, and forsake the sinne; because all the Saints of God, doe euer esteeme it better, to suffer affliction with the people of GOD,Heb. 11.25. then to inioy the pleasures of sinne for a season. But if we will not imitate these good men, to forsake sinne, for the filthinesse of sinne: yet, as many wicked men are saide to haue done it,That wicked men should forsake sinne for feare of punishment. so let vs doe it — formi ine poenae; for feare of the reward of sinne: for the wages of sinne is death, and that not onely of the soule in sinne, but also of the body for sinne. And so I come to the second kinde of death.
CHAP. IIII. How sinne slayeth the body, by inflicting on it, all the miseries of this life: and of the large extent of death, ouer all men. SEcondly, Touching the death of the Body: that wee may the more fully take a view thereof, and the more orderly proceed in this point, I must desire you to consider these three things. 1. How it is defined. 2. How farre it extendeth.Three things to bee consi∣dered concer∣ning naturall death. 3. How variably it worketh. For the first, : death is said to bee the dissolution of the body and soule; that is, the separation of the one from the other, and not the destruction of either: And wee must note, that whatsoeuer worketh or cau∣seth the diuorse and dissolution of these two, must needs be a branch of this tree: and therefore by death, is vnderstood,By death is vnderstood all that is contai∣ned in the curse of God. not onely the last finall stroke, and fatall seperation of the body and soule, but also all other fore-runners, and fore-causers of this dissolution; as sicknesse, griefe, sorrow, and all the other miseries that doe happen throughout the whole course of mans life: for (as I told you before) the death of man, pro∣nounced here, and the curse of God denounced elsewhere, are aequiualent, the like reward of sinne: and therefore whatso∣euer is the curse of God, the same must needs be contained vn∣der the name of death: but we know, that all the miseries of man, doe proceed from the curse of God for sinne: and there∣fore all the miseries, and troubles, and sorrowes of this life, must needs bee vnderstood vnder the name of death: for as the last stroke of a tree, is not the onely cause that doth throw downe the tree, but that, with all the rest, are properly sayd to hue cut it downe: so the last stroke of death, cannot be sayd to be the sole killer of any man; but that, with all the rest of his prece∣dent miseries. So death daily strikes, to beate vs downe, and
the more sorrowes are suffered, or the more dayes are passed, the more chippes are chopped off, from this tree of life. Now the whole life of man, is nothing else but a mappe of miseries; and my life would bee too short to relate it: yet see∣ing all, is the wages of sinne; for man suffereth all that he suffe∣reth for his sinnes: (as the Prophet sheweth,) my text calls mee to speake a little of all, and the time bids me to speake but a lit∣tle of the same: and therefore I desire you to consider, The manifold miseries of all ages.1. How all ages. 2. How all estates. 3. How all creatures. Doe accumulate, & heape vpon man heapes of mi∣series. For the first, In our infancie, wee come crawling into the world, without any strength. Ouid. Met. l. 15.Editus in lucem iacuit, sine viribus infans, and as Lucretius sayth — Nudus humi iacet.Lucret. l. 5. Iob. 1. We come naked out of our mo∣thers wombes, and haue not any, the least, couering to hide vs, saue onely the blood of filthinesse: and if we had vnderstanding to see it, we might perceiue our mothers halfe-dead by giuing vs a little life, and that if wee were not helped by others, the houre of our birth, would be the end of our life: and therefore as the Poet saith: Lucret Ibid.Ʋagitu{que} locum lugubri complet, vt aequum est Cui tantum in vita restet, tranfire laborum. The poore infant, now begins with dolefull cries, (and teares within a while) as his best orators, to expresse his owne miseries:Iustin. hist l. 1. and you neuer saw, neither haue we euer read of any one, saue onely of Zoroastres king of the Bactrians; that either laughed or smiled at his birth: nor yet in forty dayes after (sayth Arist.) except it be sometimes as they sleepe & are at rest.Arist. histor. animal. l. 7. c. 10 After wee are thus cast into the world, weake, wailing and miserable;Galenus de diffi. medicis. our whole life is deuided by Galenus into foure parts, whereof he maketh the, 1. . iuuenum, of children, till 15. The age of man is diuided into 4. parts.2. . vigentium, of youths, till 30. 3. . mediorum, of men, till 50. 4. . senum, of old age, till death, as Ʋarro distributeth the same. Yeares of their age. First, In our childehood we are all alike, the heyre differing no∣thing
from a seruant, though hee bee Lord of all, all Lords or what you will; but they must be vnder Tutors and Gouernors sayth the Apostle, and because — exultat leuitaete puer — children are childish, and apish, rather delighting in toyes, then imbracing instructions; therefore they are kept vnder correcti∣on, and brought vnto vertue, by good discipline while they may be taught: for as it is prouerbially sayd, Flexilis est iuncus, salices flectuntur amarae, Robora dura minus. — the tender branch may bee easily bowed; but the well-growne Oke,Prouer. 29.18. and c. 4.3.4. will bee sooner broken then straitened: so wee may teach a childe, a trade in his youth; but we shall hardly teach an old Horse to amble: and therefore, the wisest among the sonnes of men, aduiseth all men to correct their children, though they be neuer so deere in their sight: because this is as necessarie vnto the children, as their foode, and as comfortable vnto the parents as the childe himselfe; in as much, as to haue a good childe, is better then to haue a childe. And yet this instruction, and especially the correction, is such an intollerable burthen, so heauie for them to beare,What a bur∣then correcti∣on is vnto children. as that they thinke no creatures more miserable then themselues, when they see all others free, and themselues onely (as they thinke,) bound vnder the rod; and therefore would they giue all they haue, to be once rid out of this seruile bondage. Secondly, In our youth, we are like vntamed colts, wilde and wanton, vnable to rule our selues, and vnwilling to be ruled by others: and therefore wee doe loosen our bridles to all licenti∣ousnesse; and euery young man is for the most part, as the Poet describeth him briefly. Inuidus, iracundus, iners, vinosus, amator. We burne with lust while we be youths,How dissolute we are in our youth. Ouidius l. 13. Metam: Dum mihi lae genas conuestit flore inuentus, militiae ingredior castra cupido tu: and are still infla∣med with that vntameable fire of wanton loue: — neque enim robustior aetas Vlla, nec vberior, nec quae magis ardeat vlla est. Pleasure and youth, doe smile on vs, to woe vs To taste vaine lusts, tasted they vndoe vs. Therefore S. Iere. sayth, That it is almost impossible to find a young man, that is not sometimes tempted with fleshly lusts: and Saint Ambrose sayth, Inter omnia certamina christianorum, durissima
sunt praelia caftitatis;Prodigus, & cu∣rae vacuus, teme∣rarius, audax, Omne genus vitae liberioris amo. Among all the combats of Christians, it is the hardest thing for vs to ouercome, and subdue our owne lusts: and to keepe our owne flesh a chast and a modest virgin: And as we are inflamed with lust, so we are drowned in drunken∣nesse; we swell with pride, and we fill our selues with all filthy∣nesse; and thereby we doe many times, (as wee daily see in many desperate youthes) by drinking, whooring, swearing, quarrelling, and such like effects of deboysnesse, suddenly cut off our selues, in our owne wickednesse: and what greater mise∣ries can there be, then these? and yet behold I will shew thee greater abhominations. For, The miseries incident to vs in our Man∣hood. Nunc me ludus habet, nunc me formosa puella, nunc fera pro pacta praelia nocte gro; Sedvelut her∣ba perit, sic flos cadit ipse inuentae, faelix qui potuit dicere talis eram.Thirdly, In our manhood we are come to the midst of mise∣ries; so that quocun{que} afpiciam quocun{que} lumina vertam: Where∣soeuer we looke and turne our eyes, we shall see nothing, but our selues swimming in a Sea of sorrowes, and there tumbled and tossed with many waues of woes: micat ignibus aether, Cloudes of darkenesse, are in stead of comforts; and about our heads we shall finde haile-stones and coales of fire: for now we finde the affaires of the world, the feares of enemies, the cares for families, the discontents at home, many times of thy Wife, that lyeth in thy bosome; many times of thy Children, the fruits of thine owne bowels; the wrongs of Neighbours abroad, the suites of Law, and a thousand such bitter fruits of sinne, doe so vexe and affright the heart of man; that they make him of∣ten sleepe like the Nightingale, that is said to haue alwayes a pricke before her breast; and then to rise vp early, and late to goe to bed,Psal. 127.3. and to eate the bread of carefulnesse, and all to no purpose; for after we haue wearied, and worne out our selues in the pur∣suite of this world, all our workes and labours are but as the Spiders webbe; it will make no garment for vs: and when wee haue brought our yeares to an end, as it were a tale that is tolde; then, notwithstanding all our former pompe and power, wee shall be as poore as when we were borne, euen as poore as Iob: for,The miseries incident to vs in old age. Iob. 1.21. as we came naked into the world, so naked wee shall returne a∣gaine: and so this is not onely the misery, but also the folly and madnesse of men. And yet behold a little more. For, Fourthly, In old age. Vs{que} adeo grauis vxori, gnatis{que}, sibi{que}, vt captatori moueat fastidia Cosso. Wee are troublesome to our selues and others.
.Nunc mihi cum medicis res est, & iudice sum∣mo, & misere vitam semise∣pultus ago, rixo∣sae inuestant vetula, execra∣bile vulgus, in∣uidus in terra parta recondo snum. Eccles. 12.1. An old man is troublesome vnto youths, saith Menander: yea, our owne Wiues, though they cannot leaue vs, yet doe they loathe vs: and indeed our selues, doe now begin to hate our selues: Laudat praeteritos, presentes despicit annos, For these be the dayes wherein there is no pleasure. . Because olde age is like an heauy burthen vnto men, that makes them stoope downe to the earth, Nec coelum spectare licet, sed prona senectus Terram, à qua genita est, & reditura videt: and neuer suffers them to rise, or scarce to looke vp towards Heauen, vntill they returne to the earth,Gen. 3.19. from whence they were taken. Alas then, what a misery is this, to consider the miseries of olde age? our bodies are weakned, our beauty vanished, our senses blunted: the eyes cannot see, the eares cannot heare, the hands cannot worke, and the feete cannot walke: and then besides, —Circumsilit agmine facto morborum omne genus — We are seized vpon by all kinde of diseases; our heads ake, our hearts faint, and all our bodies tremble; Coughes, Rheumes and Feauers, doe now seeme to be our vitall spirits: and so the Heathens saw, and so they said, that no age was free from mise∣ries, yet, not one so bad as this: for notwithstanding all this, and that they see they cannot liue, and Nature tels them they must needs die; yea, all these fore-runners of death,Auri sacra fa∣mes, & amor sceleratus ha∣bendi, assolet imprimis excru∣ciare fenes. doe daily tell them, that they are euen drawing their last breath; yet the neerer they be vnto their death, the more couetous they are, the more worldly minded, the more desirous to liue, and the more loath to leaue this wretched life. Secondly, as all the Ages of mans life,The miseries of all estates. so all the estates of life, are full of the punishments of sinne: For, First, if thou beest poore: —Nihil habet infaelix paupertas, Thou shalt be sure of nothing, but contempt, which is pouer∣ties necessary attendant; for, the poore man shall be despighted of his own brethren: and it is strange to see, what pains and drudge∣ry,
those poore snakes (as we call them) doe take,The miseries of the poore. Gen. 3.19. and indure both at home and abroad, to get a little maintenance; in the sweat of their face, it may be in the coldest Winter, they doe eate their bread, and perhaps scarce sufficient to satisfie meere nece∣sity; as if they onely were allotted to sustaine that heauy sen∣tence that was first denounced against man for sinne: and there∣fore Menander saith,—: No burthen is more burthensome then pouerty: and Plautus saith: Om∣nibus modis,Plaut. rud. qui pauperes sunt, misere viuunt: The poore are mi∣serable euery way: and it was the common receaued opinion of the Gentiles, miseros esse deis inuisos; that they were hated of the gods which were thus plagued by the gods; and the Iewes thought little lesse;Deut. 28.22.23. because this is numbred among the curses of the Law: and therefore Hecuba, being brought to such ex∣treame pouerty, as that she had neither clothes to couer her nakednesse, nor yet foode to satisfie nature, cals her mis-for∣tunes and miseries ; Such as surpas∣sed the sufferance of any creature; and Plutarch reports, that many men, to auoid the same, did preuent this misery of life, by a sudden and vnnaturall death; choosing to die, rather then to liue in extreame pouerty: and so with the vnpatient Fishes, they did but leape out of the Frying-pan, into the fire; and run away from that misery which for a while they would not in∣dure, into that intollerable torments, which now they must eternally suffer. The misery of the rich.Secondly, If thou beest rich, then art thou enuied of others, and shalt be very like to be consened of thy goods; for theeues will seeke to robbe thee, thy friends to betray thee, and thy neighbours to deceiue thee; which makes the rich men to take more care to keepe their wealth, then they tooke paines to get it; and thereby they are vexed and crucified of them∣selues: Inuenal. Satyr. 10.Nam plures, nimia congesta pecunia cura strangulat.— For gold and siluer haue destroyed many a man; saith the Sonne of Syrach:Eccle. 8. for riches are like thornes, saith our Sauiour Christ; because they haue the same power to teare our hearts,Mar. 4.18. as the others haue to rend our garments. Neither is this all the euill,
that riches bring vnto vs; but they puffe vs vp with pride, they make vs to disdaine our Inferiors, wrong our neighbours, forget our God, and to thinke our selues, poore wormes, to be no lesse then gods on earth: and therefore the Lord saith, that he is greatly angry against rich Nations; Because,Zephan 1. they that will be rich, doe fall into temptation, and a snare,1 Tim. 6.9. and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts, which drowne men in perdition and destruction: and our Sauiour saith,Matth. 19.23. it is a very hard thing for a rich man to en∣ter into the Kingdome of Heauen. And therefore, though pouerty be an extreame misery,Whether to be poore, or to be rich, is the more misera∣ble. yet doe not I know well, whether to be wealthy or to be in want, is the worser: for though to, be poore, is a miserable thing in this life, yet to be rich, is a great hinderance for vs to eternall life: and therefore I finde that the sonne of Iakeh, prayed to God, that he would giue him neither pouerty nor riches:Prou. 30.3. but feed him with foode conuenient: Because the meane state is the best state. And yet, Thirdly, If thou beest meane, then art thou accounted base,The miseries of the meane estate. and deemed vnfit for the Society, nay, for the seruice, of many men: for now Gentlemen, and not good men, are the men that are most generally required for the seruice of great men. Fourthly, If thou beest Noble,The miseries of Nobility. then art thou euer in feare of disgrace, and must, perhaps in forraine warres, with the imbru∣ing of thy hands in others blood, mainetaine the reputation of thine owne blood at home. Fiftly, If thou beest one of the vulgar people,The miseries of the com∣mon people. then art thou at others command, and euer in feare of thy Iudges anger. Sixtly, If thou beest a Magistrate, then must thou labour and toyle for the good of others; and many times,The miseries of Magistrates. disturbe thine owne rest, and peace; yea, disburse thine owne state, and suffer many other hazards, to vndergoe, to procure rest and peace vnto thy neighbours: and when in any difference, be∣twixt men, thou hast done thy best, and dealt as iustly as Iustice it selfe could doe; yet, for his saying, that is righted, and per∣haps but coldly too, that thou hast done well, thou art like to bee sure, of him that would haue done the wrong, to be more wronged thy selfe, by his railing and proclayming thee to be a corrupt and vnrighteous Iudge.
The miseries of the Mini∣sters.Seauenthly, If thou beest a Minister, and a teacher of Gods people, then shalt thou see, that this highest calling in Gods Church, is subiect to the greatest miseries in the world: for, they are sent as sheepe into the midst of Wolues,Matth. 10.16. and they are incident to be punished by God many times for the sinnes of others, when they make them their owne,Ezek. 18. because they reprooue them not: and to be scorned and contemned of men when they do their best: and we see many of them, euen of the best, to be left vnre∣garded, vnrewarded. And what should I speake of more, Fathers, Children, Husbands, Wiues, Masters, Seruants, and whatsoeuer else, no estate is free from sinne: how can they then be free from miseries? How all crea∣tures do heap vp miseries vpon man.Thirdly, we know that when God made man, he made Lord of all his creatures; the trembling trees bowing, yeelded their fruites, the siluer streames running offered their seruice, the Ly∣ons roaring after their prey, and all other creatures, standing in their order, subiected themselues willingly vnto man; but hee, not contented to be a man aboue these; but desiring to be a god aboue all, was made a worme and no man, inferior vnto all; and then all, like Acteons dogges, seeing vs metamorphosed from men to worse then beasts, began to rebell against vs, and most furiously to pursue vs:Gen 19.24. the fire to consume vs, as it did Sodome and Gomorrah;2 Sam. 24. the ayre to infect vs, as it did the Israelites, in the time of Dauid; the water to drowne vs, as it did the whole world in the dayes of Noah;Gen. 7.23. the earth to swallow vs, as it did Corah,Num. 16.32. Dathan, and Abiram; and all other creatures to deuour vs, as the beares did those children that mocked Elizeus: the Starres in their order,Judg. 5.20. did fight against Sisera: and since we haue sinned and rebelled against the Lord, there is no creature but hath cast away the created yoke of obedience, and haue rebelled against vs: so that now hic labor hoc opus est: It is a taske too great for Hercules to bring them againe to the obedience of man. And thus you see, that from our first entrance into this wret∣ched life, sinne laboureth still to kill vs; and doth at all times, and by all meanes, vexe vs, grieue vs, weaken vs; by passions, sorrowes, sicknesses, and such like, and will neuer leaue vs vntill it layeth vs downe in the dust: and therefore, that all these are the prodromi, the fore-runners, and beginnings of death, or
rather like so many little deaths, that doe bring vs, vnto our last and fatall death: For all these are the reward of sinne, and there∣fore branches of this death. And so you see what is meant by Death. For the second point, hauing seene what is meant by death,Of the large extent of death. that is, all the miseries that doe consume and waste our liues: we are now to consider how farre this death extendeth. And this the Apostle sheweth briefly, when he saith, Statutum est om∣nibus semel mori; It is appointed for all men once to die;Heb. 9.27. and the very Heathens say as much;Seneca. Lex vniuersa iubet nasci & mori: It is an vniuersall Law, and a debt that we owe, and must pay to Nature, that euery one which is borne to life, should passe away by death:Laertius lib. 2. c. 3. And therefore when it was told Anaxa∣goras, that all his sonnes were dead, he answered, Sciebam me genuisse mortales; I knew that I had begotten mortall creatures: for as, nullis amorest medicabilis herbis, so, nihil est moderabile morte; There is nothing in the world that can moderate the rage, or preserue vs from the fatall stroke of death. Non Torquate genus,Horatius lib. 4. non te facundia, non te restituet pietas, saith Horace vnto his friend, Torquatus. And we see the faith of Abraham, the strength of Sampson, the wisedome of Salomon, the riches of Craesus, and the Kingdomes of Alexander could not preserue them from Death. Polydor Virgil writeth, that King Canutus, seeing the Sea be∣ginning to flow, said, I command thee not to touch my feete; but his command was bootlesse, for he had scarce ended his Edict, but the surging waue dashed at his teeth: So we may out-braue death in words, but we may be sure, that as the Sea, so Death,How vnresista∣ble is death. antiquum obtinebit, will keepe his old wont: Yea, though wee could hinder the course of the Sea, for meanes haue been found to tame the fiercest beasts, to breake the hardest marble, to mol∣lifie the impenetrable Adamant, and to deale with the Seas as Xerxes did with the waters of Hellespont, or Caesar with all the Riuers of Germany; yet is there no meanes in the world to escape the hands of death: and therefore Saint Augustine saith,August. Psal. 121. Resistitur ignibus, vndis, ferro, resistitur regibus, imperijs, venit vna mors, & quis ei resistit? Fire, Waters, Swords, Kings, King∣domes were resisted, but who hath euer withstood the stroake
of death: Quia nec miseretur inopum, nec reueretur diuites; Be∣cause (as Saint Bernard saith) it neither pittieth the poore,Ber. de conu. cler. nor regardeth the rich; but Nereus the faire, Thirsites the soule, Craesus the rich; Irus the poore; Solym the cruell; Solyman the magnificent, Diomedes the Prince; and Damaetas the Pea∣snt, must all fall downe at Deaths feet: Because that no teares, no prayers, no threatnings, no intretings, will serue the turne, to turne away the face of death. So stiffe, so deaffe, so inexo∣rable is death. How the Egyp∣tians expressed death to be the sole ene∣mie of all men.And therefore the Egyptians in their Hierogliphickes painted Death like a Goddesse, holding a sickle in her hand, with this inscription, Nemini parco; I spare no man. And because they found her so hard-hearted, so implacable, and so inexorable, that nothing could appease her wrath, when she did meane to cut vs downe, but that she tooke the Husband from the bosome of his louing wife, and the Parents from the poore helpelesse In∣fants; and so fulfilling her owne will, and carefull for none else: therefore they built her no temples, they offered no sacri∣fice, they celebrated no rites vnto her: but seeing she vsed all alike, Constantinus imperator, & famulus meus; making no diffe∣rence betwixt Agamemnon and Thirsites: therefore all vsed her alike, and stood all vpon their guards to defend themselues, so well, and so long as they might, against all her darts; though they knew that in the end, she would ouercome them all: be∣cause they had all sinned; and the reward of sinne is death. Psal. 50.22.O consider this, all ye that forget God; all ye that neglect God, all whosoeuer, Kings, Lords, and great men; old and yong, rich and poore, one with another: for though you liue like gods; and none dare say, why doe you so? yet you shall die like men, and if you fearelesly commit the sinne; I dare boldly say, that you shal be sure,Aequo pode pul∣sat pauperum tabernas, re∣gumque turres. Horatius. most fearefully to indure the punishments: for, as you see Death spareth none, but cutteth downe, as well the Cedars of Lebanon, and the Oakes of Bashan, as the Shrubs of Cades; So, much lesse will God spare any man that sinneth.
CHAP. V. How Death worketh variably in diuers respects, and the diuers causes thereof. FOr the third point, we must consider, that although Death passeth ouer all, yet that it worketh not vpon all alike: but worketh variably, and that, (as we find it) in foure speciall respects. 1. Of the manner. 2. Of the time. 3. Of the place. 4. Of the effects: or, consequents of Death. For the first, we finde that there be more wayes of death, then there be meanes to preserue our life: for as the Poet saith, Mille mods laethi, miseros mors vna fatigat. Though there is but one way for all men to come into the world, yet there is 1000. wayes,How death hath diuers wayes to shor∣ten life. Prou 17.22. Act. 5.10. for euery man to goe out of the world. And so we finde, some haue perished with sudden death, as Ananias and Saphira; some with Gluttony, as Domi∣tius Afer; others with drunkennesse, as Attila King of Hunnes; some by fire from Heauen, as the Sodomites,Gen. 9. the two fifties that were sent to fetch Elias, and Anastatius the Emperour, an Eu∣tychian Hereticke: others by waters, as Marcus Marcellus,Exod. 24.28. King Pharaoh, and all his hoast, and all the old wicked world, excepting those eight persons that were saued in Noahs Arke.Gen. 7 21. 1 Pet 2.5. Numb. 16.32. Some with hunger, as Cleanthes; others with thirst, as Thales Milesius; some were swallowed vp quicke to Hell, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; and others by earthquakes were stric∣ken dead, as Ephrasius Bishop of Antioch. Some were stifled with smoake, as Catulus; others dyed with a fall, as Nestorius; some were taken in their lasciuious dalliances, as Cornelius Gal∣lus; others with ouerwatching, as M. Attillius; some with poyson, as Phocion; others choked with flies, as Pope Adrian; some at the disburdening of Nature, as that wicked Arrius; o∣thers torne in pieces by wilde beasts; as Heraclius, Lucian,2 King. 2 24. and Acteon by dogges, Hypolitus by wilde Horses; Licus the Em∣perour, and the disobedient Prophet, by Lions; Ancaeus King of Samos by Bores; and Hatto Bishop of Mentz by Rats;
and so some die with ioy, as Chylo the Lacedemonian, and Diago∣ras the Rhodian: who seeing his three sonnes crowned Cham∣pions in one day, he reioyced so much, that he dyed for ioy in the very place: More die with griefe, Quia spirtus tristis exic∣cat ossa; Because a broken spirit dryeth the bones; and a heauy heart doth hasten to death: and therefore the Prophet Dauid, when he found hmselfe so melancholicke and discontented, did rouze vp his heart and spirits, saying, Why art thou so heauy, O my soule? and why art thou so disquieted within me? yet put thy trust in the Lord, for he is thy helper and defender: and so should wee doe,Bosquier. de fini∣bus bonorum & mal. pag. 31. & 32. when either cares, or crosses, doe dismay vs. But most men die with sicknesses and diseases, Feauers, Fluxes, Gouts, Plagues, and 1000. more; they being so many, that neither Galenus nor Hypocrates, nor all the best Physitians can number them, saith Bosquierus, the generations of men here on earth, being as Homer saith, . Tale, quale est foliorum: Like vnto the leaues of a tree, where∣of some doe perish, and others spring in their places. They spring, they flourish; they waxe old, and soone wither away; Et tum quoque cum crescimus,Senecal 3. ep. 24. vita decrescit, and our life then de∣creaseth, as our yeares increaseth. Vt rosa mane viget, & sero mox vespere languet, Sic modo qui fuimus, cras leuis vmbra sumus. We bring our yeares to an end, as it were a tale that is told. For the second, that is, the Time when death doth attach vs; We see some are taken yong, and some are left vntil they be very old;Death taketh men of all. ages. some taste of death before they doe see the light; when their mothers wombes, are as the tombes for their buriall: some die in their Cradles, as the babes of Bethelem; and some liue so long, that they are weary of life. And sometimes the good are soonest taken, as Enoch; sometimes the bad, as Onan: Et vo∣cantur ante tempus boni;Gen. 5.24. Gen. 33. ne diutius vexarentur à noxijs: And the good are often taken away, that they should be neither vexed, nor corrupted, by the wicked; and the wicked are some∣times taken away, that they should not persecute the godly any longer; and that they might be an example of Gods vengeance, vpon all such as feare not God.
And sometimes death fore-warneth vs, as it did Ezechias; by sending his messengers, to bid vs to set our houses in order, that we may be prepared for death; as age, sickenesses, and such like: and sometimes it preuenteth vs, and takes vs afore we are aware of it: as it did yong Onan, and old Ely, who were both suddenly met by death; when death was looked for by nei∣ther of them. For the third, that is, the Place where death will meete vs,Death smiteth in euery place. we know death is not very scrupulous; be it faire or soule; wide, or narrrow; priuate or publike; in the field, or in the Church; or wheresoeuer; where hee meetes vs, there hee will arrest vs: Poet Euulus and his wife, both a bed: Ʋrias in the field, and Ioab at the hornes of the altar. And all this taking of vs, in any Manner, at any Time,That we shld be alwayes ready for death. and in any Place; is to teach vs, to be alwayes ready, and to looke for death, at all times, and in all places. Omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum: For seeing thou knowest neither the time nor the place, where death meanes to arrest thee; it is thy chiefest wisedome to be ready for death at all times; and to waite for the same in euery place. For the fourth, that is, the effects of death; we must note,Death is a comfortable thing to the godly. that they are very different, both about the time of the dissolution, and after the time of the separation of the body and soule: for first, at the time of their dissolution, bona mors iusti, right deare in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints: And this is the thing they longed for, to be losed from the bonds of sinne, and to be with their Sauiour Christ in happinesse; to be with him, which was dead, and is aliue, and liueth for euermore.Reuel. 2.8. And therefore to these men —Mors vltima poenae est,Lucan. l. 8. nec metuenda viris — Death is the ending of their paine, and the beginning of their pleasure: nay, more as Prudentius saith, Tormenta, carcer, vngulae stridensque flammis lamina, at{que} ipsa poenarum vltima mors, Christianis ludus est, All the bitternesse of the bitterest death,Prudent. in hymno de Vin∣cent. is ioy and sweetnesse vnto them: for that in death they see their life, they behold the An∣gels pitching their tents round about them, and ready to receiue
their soules to glory, before their bodies can be laid in their graues: and therefore well might Salomon say that the godly man hath hope in his death:Prou. 14.32. for he knoweth not, what to feare; be∣cause he knoweth, in whom he beleeued. The death of the wicked is most terri∣ble vnto them.But, mors peccatorum, pessima, the death of the wicked is most fearefull; and therefore the very remembrance of it is most bitter vnto them; for now, before it shuts the eyes of their bodies, it will open the eyes of their consciences; and they shall see that they must part from all the things that they haue gathered; but that not one of those sinnes will part from them, which they haue committed; and least they should forget them; Satan will now open his booke, and set all their sinnes before their eyes: and then he will bestirre himselfe, because he knoweth his haruest is great, and his time is but short: and therefore he will tell them,Matth. 19.17. that if they would haue entred into life they should haue kept the commandements; as our Sauiour Christ himselfe doth testifie;Rom. 2.13. he will alleage against them, that not the hearers, but the doers of the Law, shall be iustified; and he will inferre, that if the iust shall scarce be saued, it is intollerable for them being wicked men to appeare;How Satan discourageth the wicked at their death. and what the Preachers of God now cannot beat into the thoughts of these carelesse men, this wicked, dam∣ned spirit will then irremoueably settle, in their deepest conside∣rations;1 Cor. 6.9.10. viz. that neither adulterers, nor fornicators, nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor vsurers, nor extortioners, nor lyers, nor enuious men, nor haters of men, nor any such like, shall inherit the Kingdome of God, and of Christ. O then, what agonies and perplexities, will inuade, and teare the wofull hearts of wicked men? In that day, saith the Lord, I will cause the Sunne to goe downe at noone,Amos 8.9.10. and I will darken the earth, in the cleare day; I will turne their feasts, into mournings, and their songs into lamentations: that is, they shall be sure then to haue the greatest griefe and vexation, when they haue the greatest need of comfort and consolation: for I will make all those things, that were wont, most sweetly to delight them, now most of all to torment them; the pleasure of sinne, shall now turne to be as bitter as Gall: and now they shall see that they must die, and liue they can no longer: and that Satan, whom they would not forsake all their life-time: will not forsake them
now at their death-time: but wil be still sounding in their eares Me you haue serued, and from me you must expect your wages. We read the Deuil assayled the best-Saints, Saint Martin, Saint Bernard, Eusebius, Ignatius and others;Luke 23.31. and if these things be done in a greene tree, what shall be done in a withered, saith our Sauiour? If he be so busie about the Saints,Pet. 4.17: which haue the Angels of God round about them to preserue them;Psal. 91.11. What shall he doe to sinners, who haue nothing but deuils round about them to confound them? This is the state of wicked men at their dying day: and therefore, mors peccatorum pessima, of all terri∣ble things, the death of sinnefull men is the most terrible. Secondly, After the seperation of the body and soule,How death aequalizeth the bodies of all men. then death indeede makes different effects: for though it makes the bodies of all alike; their dust is so mingled, and their bones are so like one another; that we know not Irus from Craesus: as Diogenes, being demaunded by Alexander, what he sought for among the tombes, sayd; he sought for his father Phillips bones, but among so many dead mens soules, hee knew not which they were; yet in respect of the soules,How death sendeth the soules of the good to Hea∣uen, and of the wicked to hell. it worketh very different consequents, for it sends the good soules into Abra∣hams bosome, and the wicked soules to hell, to be tormented in fire, for euermore. Now, that the efficiente cause of death, which is sinne, should be the same in all men; and that the fruites and effects, or sub∣sequents of death, should be so different in the godly, from all o∣ther men, we find a treble reason.A three-fold reason of the subsequent different ef∣fects of death. The 1. Is, the practise of a godly life. 2. Is, the meditation of our owne death. 3. Is, the application of the death of Christ. These things (as Sampson sayd in his riddle) out of the eater, bring meate, and out of the strong sucke sweetenesse: these things doe translate the sting and curse of death, into a sweete and a blessed life. Of the first Saint Augustine sayth, Mala mors putanda non est,Aug. de ciuit. dei. l. 1. c. 21. That to liue well, is a spe∣ciall meanes to make vs die well. quam bona vita praecessit: It is impossible that his death should be ill, whose whole life hath beene alwayes good: quia nun∣quam Deus deserit hominem quovs{que} homo deserat deum; because God will neuer forsake that man at his death, which hath true∣ly
serued God, throughout all his life: and therefore Seneca sayth,Seneca in quad. epist. Ante senectutem curaui vt bene viurem, vt in senectute bene morerer; While I was young all my care was, to liue well, that when I were old, I might die well, and so let vs doe: if wee would die well, let vs liue well: let vs learne, artem viendi, the art to liue the life of the righteous; and wee shall bee sure to die the death of the righteous: for seeing the wages of sinne is death, it must needs be, that the lesser and the fewer our sinnes be, the better our death will be: But if we liue like Baalam, which lo∣ued the gaine and wages of vnrighteousnesse, it is vnpossible that we should die the death of Israel: for God beheld there was no iniquitie in Iacob,Numb 23 21. nor any peruersenesse in Israel: and therefore the Lord his God was with him. Godly sorrow for sinne and the meditati∣on of our death, is the death of sinne.Of the second, Bosquierus sayth, that, à culpa natae sunt duae filiae, Tristitia & Mors, & hae duae filiae hanc pessimani matrem de∣struunt; Sinne brought forth two goodly damosells, Sorrow and Death: and these two daughters, like the brood of vipers, doe eate through the bowells, and destroy that wicked mother, For, First, Paenitudine commissa delentur, by repentance wee wash a∣way the sinnes that are past: and therefore Iohn Baptist sayth, O generation of Vipers, if you would kill your cruell wicked mo∣ther,Matth. 3.7, 8. that is, Sinne, bring foorth fruits meete for repentance; for that is the onely way for you to escape death, and to flee from the wrath to come. And, Secondly, Meditatione mortis futura cauentur, by the frequent meditation of death, we come more and more to detest and to beware of sinne,Aug l. 1. contra Man: for so Saint Augustine sayth, that, nihil sic reuo∣cat hominem à peccato, quam frequens meditatio mortis; Nothing is so powerfull to make a man hate sinne, as continually to consider of this bitter fruit, and reward of sinne, which is death: and Seneca before him, sayth the same thing: and therefore he aduiseth euery man,Seneca epist. 25. efficere mortem sibi familiarem, to make death his companion, and as his wife that should euer lye in his bosome; that by the continuall sight of death; he might be euer kept to abstaine from sinne: for the couetous man, might be the easier drawne to contemne the trash and trumperies of this vaine and transitorie world, if hee did beleeue that hee
should presently dye: for so prophane Esau sayth, Loe, I die,Facile contem. nit omnia, qui credit se cito mo∣ritrum. Hieron. in ep: ad Pau∣lin: Eccles. 10. Incert. autr. and what good will my Birth-right doe vnto me? So the proud man would let fall his Peacocks feathers, if he could thinke that hee is but dust and ashes, and that when he dieth, hee shall inherite wormes: as the wise man sayth, Omnia Caesar habet, sed gloria Caesaris esse desinit, & tumulus vix erit octo pedum. And that if he triumphed in his life, like Caesar, to bee the sole Monarch of the world; yet would his glory soone fayle when death should locke him vp in his coffin: and so of all other sinnes, the frequent meditation of death, is the onely preserua∣tiue against them: For, as one truely sayth of himselfe, Quum recordor quod sum cinis, Et quam cit venit finis; Sine fine pertimesco, Et vt cinis refrigesco: When I thinke I am but dust, And how soon to earth I must,Bernard in carm. Then incessantly I shake, And as dust it doth me make. So, questionlesse if wee did continually thinke of death, and fixe that fearefull day of Gods iust iudgement before our eyes; it would bee a maruelous great meanes, to deterre vs from all sinnes. And as the meditation of death doth preuent sinne;Bosq. p. 12. de finibus honorum. so it sweetneth death, and makes it farre the lesse terrible vnto vs: for if our eyes be dead, and weaned from beholding vanities;The frequent meditation of death is a great meanes, to preserue vs from the feare of death. our eares, from hearing the Syrens songs of sinnefull pleasure: and our hearts especially, from the loue of vaine and worldly things; then certainely they will not, (being thus mortified, and ac∣customed with this death to sinne,) bee any whit afrayd of the death of the body; which is the reward of sinne: but as a horse that is to runne a race, hauing often walked his way before, is the more fearelesse to goe on, when hee comes at the day of triall; so the man that is acquainted with the wayes of death, through the daily meditation of death, is not afrayd to die when he seeth the day of his dissolution Palladius reports it, that an Eremite, being at the point to die, his schollers and friends asked him, if death did not seeme terrible vnto him; hee smilingly answered, that death was no stranger, but a most fami∣liar acquaintance to him: it was his manuall, and his vade mecum, his table-booke, which he alwayes carried about him:
and therefore dying, he did but now repeate that his old lesson, which hee had beene long in learning, O that it were so with euery one of vs; that throughout all our life, wee would learne to die;The applicati∣on of Christs death, is the onely cause that maketh vs happie after death. Osee 13.14. that hauing made death present with vs before it comes, it may neuer proue terrible vnto vs when it comes! Of the third, the Diuine veritie sayth, that the chiefest cause, the onely cause indeed of this different effect of death, is the application of the death of Christ; for it is he that saith, O death I will be thy death, O graue I will bee thy destruction: and therefore, as when Alexander ouerthrew the walles of Thebes, Phryne, a harlot, promised to build them vp againe if shee might in∣graue vpon them, this inscription: : Alexander battered downe this Wall, but Phryne built it vp againe: so we may truely say, that Eue threw downe, these muddie walles of ours, but Christ doth rayse them vp: for though the wages of sinne are death,Rom. 6.23. yet the grace of God brings eternall life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. And the manner how he doth deliuer vs, and metamorphose death, to become life vnto vs; he himselfe doth shew, when hee sayth, if I be lift vp, I will draw vp all vnto my selfe: i. e. if I die, I will destroy the power of death: for so the Apostle sayth, That forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh and blood,John. 8.28. and C. 12.32. Heb. 2.14, 15. he himselfe likewise tooke part of the same; that through death, hee might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Deuill, and deliuer them that through the feare of death, were all their life time subiect vnto bondage:1 Machah 6.46 Iudges 16.30. and therefore, as Eleazer by his owne death, did put the great Elephat to death, and Sampson by pul∣ling downe the house vpon his owne head, did put to death all the Philistines; so Christ by his owne death, did put the de∣uills,Origen hom: 8. in Iohan: and all the powers of darkenesse, vnto death: and there∣fore Origen sayth, that vpon the crosse of Christ, two were cruci∣fied; that is, Christ and the deuill, but after a diuers manner, for Christ was crucified, visibly, and most willingly; for hee layd downe his life himselfe, but the deuill was crucified inuisibly, and most vnwillingly;Matth. 12.29. for this strong man armed, was faine to bee bound, be∣fore Christ could spoyle his house. And the Lord speaking of his enemies, and saying, that hee would be vnto them as a Lion,Ose 13.7. & would obserue them as a Libbard,
in the way of Ashur; doth foreshew vnto vs, both the destru∣ction, and the manner of the destruction of these our spirituall e∣nemies; for in being like a Lion, he sheweth their destruction: and in being like a Libbard; he sheweth the manner,The manner how Christ by death ouer∣came death. how hee would destroy them: for it is obserued of the Libbard, that he vseth this pollicie to kill those Apes that doe molest him: first, he lyeth downe as dead, and suffereth the apes to mocke him, and trample him, and to insult ouer him, as much as they will; but when he perceiueth them to be wearied, with leaping, and skipping vpon him; he reuines himselfe on a sudden, and with his clawes and teeth he teareth them all to pieces: euen so, our Sauiour Christ suffered the deuill, and death, and all the wicked Iewes, like apes to mocke him, to tread him, and trample him vnder feete; to crucifie him, to burie him, to seale vp his graue, and to haue armed Souldiers to watch him, that hee should not rise any more; and it may be, to knocke him on the head againe, if he sought to reuiue: but when hee saw they had done their worst, and that they could doe no more,Psal. 78.66.67. Hee waked as a giant out of sleepe, and smote all his enemies vpon the cheeke bone, and brought them vnto perpetuall shame; and as the Apostle sayth,Collos. 2.15. hee spoyled principalities and powers, and led away captiuitie captiue,Ephes. 4.8. and receiued gifts for men. And therefore, as many as lay hold vpon this death of Christ, they need not feare their owne death: for they may say with the Phenix; Moritur, me moriente, senectus. Sinne and misery dieth in vs, but wee doe still liue with Christ. And therefore Saint Cyprian sayth, that,Cyprian de mortalitate. eius est timere mortem qui ad Christum nolit ire; it is enough for them to feare death, which will not beleeue in Christ his death:John 11.26. for hee that beleeueth in him shall neuer die: but they that will not beleeue in him, may well feare and tremble at the remembrance of this death: because after death comes iudgement; and then shall they feele another death, which is eternall death: for the reward of sinne is death, that is indeed, eternall death in hell,Marke 9.44. where their worme dieth not, and their fire is not quenched.
CHAP. VI. How sinne brings eternall death both of Body and Soule. THirdly, Touching eternall death, wee must vn∣derstand,What eternall death is. that this is a separation of man from God, which is paena damni, the losse of eternall happinesse; a losse farre exceeding the losse of all the world; and an allegation of a dam∣ned soule, in a tormented body: non viuend sed dolendi causa; not to giue any comfort of life or ioy, but to giue the true sence and feeling of eternall death and sorrow; which is paena sensus, the payne of feeling, and suffering the grea∣test paynes that can be conceiued: for when the wicked are called by God, to be adiudged for sinne, they shall bee condemned by Christ,Of the intol∣lerable paynes of hell. and then caried by the deuils, into euerlasting tor∣ments; into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone for euer∣more: and there their musicke shall be horrors, and howlings; their meate shall be balls of fire, and their drinke shall be foun∣taines of teares; alwayes distilling downe from their eyes; and yet neuer procuring them any ease: there, their torments shall be intollerable, their times endlesse, and their companions deuils: for so Saint Augustine sayth,August. ser. 55. de tempore. that, in inferno nec tortores deficiant, nec miseri torti moriantur, sed per milia milia annorum cruciandi, nec tamen in secula liberandi: in hell neither the cruell tormenters shall be wanting, nor the miserably tormented shall bee eased; but for thousand thousands of yeares bee plagued, and neuer thence to bee deliuered:Isidorus de summo bono. and as Isidorus sayth, Ibi erit semper velle, quod nunquam erit, & semper nolle, quod nunquam non erit, there shall bee a will neuer satisfied, and a nille neuer gratified; neuer inioying the ease they would; and euer suffering the paynes they would not. And if we diue into the depth of that dolefull tragedie, of miserable Diues; wee shall see this trueth fully confirmed: for, as the Scripture sheweth, that here, iudge∣ment shall be without mercy, and that euery one shall receiue his punishment, in waite and measure, according to the measure of their sinnes; so wee find it true it him, who as hee denied the crumbes of bread to poore Lazarus; so is he now denied, the
least drop of water, to coole his burning tongue;How the least comfort shall be denied vn∣to the damned. and the least dramme of mercy to refresh his poore distressed soule: quis ta∣lia fando sustinet a lachrymis? Who can indure to dwell in de∣uouring flames? and yet behold, this is the reward of sinne: for the wages of sinne is death. Oh then,A most earnest perswasion to forsake sinne. (beloued brethren) seeing euery sinne slayeth the soule, within the body, corrupteth the body in the graue, and e∣ternally tormenteth both the body and soule in hell; let vs hate and detest all sinnes: for though wee reade of many tyrants, Nero, Phalaris, Caligula, Heliagabalus, and such like; that were carniuorants, and blood-thirsty men, sauage beasts in the shapes of men, delighting themselues onely in blood, & cruelties; yet we neuer reade of such a tyrant as Sinne: for the blood of death would quench these mens rage; but no payne, no death, but eternall death, a death that neuer dieth, and a paine that neuer endeth will satisfie this tyrant Sinne. This is the deceit of sinne; as the Poet sayd of Ʋenus: Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet. To present pleasure, or profit, vnto our eyes, but assoone as o∣uer the sinne is done, to deale with vs,2 Sam. 13.18. as Ammon did by Tha∣mar, thrust her out and hate her: wound our conscience, and destroy our soules. And therefore (once againe I beseech you) let vs forsake our sinnes, let vs leaue our drinking, our swaggering, and our swea∣ring; and instead of, by God, by God, and more fearefull oathes (which I am afraid to name) at euery word, which is the most odious, yet most carelesse custome, both of Court and Coun∣trey, let vs say, in truth, in truth: the words are as easie, and they will bring more ease vnto our soules: for swearing graceth not your speech; but disgraceth you, and dishonoureth God: and therefore one day you must greatly repent you of it, or you shall fearefully die for it: and I beseech you pardon mee for speaking it; for it is my dutie that I owe you, and it would bee my destruction if I did conceale it from you,Clemens. l. 1. recog. as S. Clemens sayth in the like case; and I desire not so much, with Aristotle, my God of Heauen is my witnesse that I lie not, to bee deemed a great Scholler, as with Gregorie Nazianzen, to bee indeed an honest man, to liue as I teach, and to discharge my duety in re∣prouing
sinne, rather then to shew my knowledge in any Sci∣ence; and therefore, I humbly intreate you all, to giue me leaue, to beseech you, to leaue your sinnes; and because wee cannot quite forsake them, to confesse them, and to bee ashamed of them;John 1.19. for if we confesse our sinnes, God is mercifull and iust, to for∣giue vs all our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteousnesse. But the deuill cannot indure that we should confesse them, least God should thereby forgiue them; and therefore as he perswa∣deth vs, euer to commit them; so he perswadeth vs, euer to con∣ceale them, and neuer to confesse them: For I read that on a time, a sinner being at confession,That the de∣uill cannot in∣dure wee should confesse our sinnes. the deuill intruded himselfe and came to him; and being demaunded by the Priest, wherefore he came in, he answered, to make restitution; and being asked what he would restore, hee sayd shame; for this sayth hee I haue stollen from this sinner, to make him shamelesse in sinning, and now I come to restore it, to make him ashamed to confesse his sinnes: And surely thus hee deales with vs all; hee makes vs shamelesse to commit all sinnes, euen with Absolon, in the sight of all Israel,2 Sam. 16.22. and in the sight of the Sunne; but he makes vs ashamed to confesse any sinne. But if wee feare this punishment of sinne; all miseries in this life, death shortning life, and eternall torments after death, and would bee deliuered from it, then let vs not make the Ministers afrayde to reproue our sinnes, nor be our selues asha∣med to confesse our sinnes; for as the first degree of righteous∣nesse is, not to sinne; so the second is, to acknowledge and forsake our sinnes. If we had not sinned, we had not died; and if we doe acknowledge, and forsake them, we shall receiue no dammage by death: but if we continue in sinne, we shall die; and we shall iustly die, for, the reward of sinne is death. And so I come to the third part, which is the equitie of this reward: because, death is the wages of sinne.
PART. III. The equity of this payment, Death is the stipend of Sinne.Part. 3. CHAP. I. How iust a thing it is to punish Sinne. The reward of Sinne is Death. YOu haue heard of a world of miseries, that are inflicted on man for sinne, here in this life; you haue heard of eternall death, and intollerable torments for euer and euer, that shall be inflicted on sinfull soules in the future life; and now it re∣steth, that I should shew the equity of this punishment; how iust it is with God, to render all this on man for sinne: and therefore, that I may the more fully cleere this point,Three points to be conside∣red, to shew the equity of the punish∣ment of sinne. I must desire you to consi∣der these three especiall things. 1. That it is iust to punish sinne. 2. That God is the iustest Iudge that can be found, to punish it. 3. That this punishment which God imposeth and inflicteth for sinne, is most right and iust. First, there is nothing in the world,Cicero de nat. deorum l. 1. (saith Cicero) more agreeable to reason, then that true and honest labour should bee commended and rewarded, and the vices of men should be seuerely punished, according to their iust desert: for, it is vnpos∣sible (saith he) that either house or Common-wealth should stand, Si in ea nec rectè factis proemia extant vlla,Idem l. 3 de nat. deor. nec supplicia pecca¦tis: if there be not in the same both rewards for good deeds, and punishments for sinnes: and therefore Solon being deman∣ded, what was most profitable for the well-fare of a Common-wealth, said; Si boni proemijs innitantur, & mali paenis coercentur,Stobaeus ser. 41.
to defend and reward the good, and to restraine and punish the bad: and M. Cato saith, that there is nothing more perni∣cious vnto any state,Plutarch in Apoth. Quam si improborum mores paena non coerce∣antur, then to suffer wicked men to goe away vnpunished: and therefore he would haue those Magistrates that did not pu∣nish the impieties of the wicked and dissolute fellowes, Non tan∣tum non ferendos,The Law of Nature tea∣cheth, that sinne should be punished. sed lapidihus obruendos, not onely not to be suf∣fered, but to be stoned with stones to death: and so the Lawes of all Nations doe prouide, that good and vertuous deeds should be rewarded, and euill deeds should be punished: for wee finde it very true by experience that, impunitas delicti inuitat ho∣mines ad malignandum:To forbeare the punish∣ment of sinne doth increase the number of sinners. Prou. 17 15. because punishment is deferred, the hearts of the children of men, are euen set to doe euill: and there∣fore God himselfe doth say, that whosoeuer iustifieth the wicked, is a like culpable before him, as if he had condemned the inno∣cent; and Saint Ambrose tels vs plainely, that it is sometimes miserecordia punire, & crudelitas parcere, a pious work to punish, and a cruelty for to spare; for this doth not onely incourage sinners, to goe on from one wickednesse to another; but it is an ill patterne, and a great prouokement to draw others to doe the like: and therefore wee may well conclude this first point, that it is a most iust thing to punish sinnes and offences. CHAP. II. How God is the iustest Iudge to punish Sinne. SEcondly, that God is the iustest Iudge that can be found to punish sin, it appereth by these 3. reasons. God loueth righteousnesse. Psal. 45.7.8. Heb. .9.First, because he loueth righteousnesse; For it is the propertie of a iust Iudge, not onely to iudge righte∣ously, to iustifie the innocent, and to punish the offenders, but also to loue righteousnesse, and to hate iniquitie; but of God, the Prophet saith:Psal. 5.5. Thy throne O God, is for euer and euer, thou hast loued righteousnesse and hated iniquitie: wherfore God, euen thy God, hath annoynted thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes: And againe, thou hatest all those that worke vanitie.
Secondly, because he iudgeth without any respect of persons:God is no re∣specter of per∣sons. for this is one of the chiefest properties of a righteous Iudge; to iudge according to the equitie of the cause, and according to the quality of the person: and therefore Iethro, Iehosophat,Exod. 18.21. and others, doe make this not respecting of persons,2 Chron 19 7. to be one of the essentiall properties of a righteous Iudge:Prou 24.23. 1 Sam. 6.7. Act. 10 33. Gal. 1.6. Psal. 50.10. Psal. 149 8. Deut. 26.7. but with God there is no respect of persons: for he will not be corrupted with the reward of the rich; for all the beasts of the Forrest are his, and so are all the cattell vpon a thousand hills; he will not be terrified for feare of the mighty; for he will binde Kings in fetters, and Nobles in linkes of iron; neither is he angred or molested with the incessant com∣playnings of the poore; but he will heare their cry,Psal. 145.19. and will helpe them, Psal. 145.19. Indeed with men, it is a common practise,With men we finde Iustice often peruer∣ted. to haue our lawes like a spiders webbe; wherein the little flies are catcht, and the great buzzing bumble bees, doe easily passe through: and therefore it is truely said of mans Law, That Dat veniam coruis vexat censura columbas. It spares the rich, but spoiles the poore. But Gods law is rete Vulcanium, like Vulcans iron net,That God is most iust which apprehends and condemnes all alike: for if the greatest men hurt the poorest, and those poore men cry vnto me, saith the Lord, I will heare them; that is, to helpe the oppressed, and to punish the wrong doer: and therefore Moses saith of him,Deut. 10.17. that he is a great God, mighty and terrible, which accepteth no person, nor taketh reward; but doth iustice and right, vnto the Orphanes, and the Widdow: and Dauid saith, Deus iudex iustus est,Psa. 7.12. God is a righte∣ous Iudge, and that the Heauens shall declare his righteousnesse, i. e. approue and iustifie him in his iudgements. And Saint Paul saith, that he shall haue the crowne of righteousnesse,2 Tim. 4.8. which the Lord, the righteous Iudge, shall giue him in that day: and the ve∣ry Heathens say as much: for not onely Euripides saith. , that Iustice is not in the eyes of mortall men; but Hesiod goeth further, saying; , Ipsa autem Iustitia est virgo, ex Ioue nata; That Iustice is a pure Virgin, and an immaculate daughter of the chie∣fest God; that is indeed, a true and essentiall propertie of the true and euerliuing God: and therefore it must needes follow, that
of all Iudges, God is the iustest Iudge, that can be found, to punish sinne. That God iud∣geth euery man according to his desert. Valer. l. 1.Thirdly, because he rendereth to euery man, according to his workes, and punisheth great sins, with the greater punishment: and the longer he stayes to expect our amendment, the sorer will be our punishment, if we doe not repent. Lucius Apuleius do asino aureo.I haue read of an Asse, that hauing an huge burthen vpon his backe, by chance stumbled at a stone and fell; her master presently began to chide, and to beate her; whereat the poore Asse repined and bemoaned her selfe, saying, in what a miserable state doe I liue, and what a cruell master doe I serue? for I haue done him many good and faithfull seruices, and yet see, how for one fault by chance committed, I am thus most grieuously handled. The fable shewes vs,Men reward not men ac∣cording to iust deserts. that men many times doe neither reward, nor punish according vnto iust deserts; but doe oftentimes suffer good deeds, to goe vnrewarded, and punish small offences, with se∣uerer punishments then in the rigor of Iustice they haue de∣serued; and it may be, often suffer the greater sinners, to escape all punishment. But it is not so with God: for if we doe well, and haue our hearts vpright, to doe him seruice, he will not alwayes be chiding, though we should commit many faults: but if we doe ill, Sinne lyeth at the doore,Gen. 4.7. ready to accuse vs, and God the righteous Iudge will deale with vs according to our sinnes, whether they be great or small.Gregor. in mor. Nam iniustus quisquis eo attrocius in tormentis ob∣ruitur, quo altius inpeccatis eleuatur; For euery sinfull wretch, the more haynous hath beene his sinnes, the more grieuous shall be his punishments,Hieron. super Ezech. saith Saint Gregory, So Saint Hierome saith, Cui dubium, quin inter tres peccatores; Gentilem, Haereticum, & Ecclesi∣asticum, multo maioribus paenis dignus sit, qui maioris fuerit dignita∣tis?That God pu∣nisheth the greater sinners with the grea∣ter punish∣ment. Who maketh any doubt of this, but of three sinners, that is, the Gentile, which is without the Church; and the Hereticke which is against the Church; & the Hypocrite that is within the bosome of the Church, he (that is, the Hypocrite) shall be the most seuerely punished, which had the chiefest place, and was most dignified with that honourable title of a Christian? And so Saint Augustine saith,Aug. l. 3. de lib. arb. Mitissima omnium paenarum erit eorum, qui preter peccatum quod originale contraxerunt, nullum insuper
addiderunt: Of all punishments theirs shall be the least, which besides their original sinne, haue committed none other sinne. And the diuine Scripture is as plain in this point as need to be: for the Lord, speaking of Iezabell, saith, Quantum in dilicijs fuit, tantum date illi tormenti; That as much as she hath beene in pleasure, i. e. of sinne and iniquitie, so much torments shall bee laide vpon her: and our Sauiour saith,Matth. 11.12.24. It shall be easier for So∣dome and Gomorra, and more tollerable for Tyre and Sydon in the day of iudgement: then for Corazin and Bethsaida, and o∣ther like sinfull Cities which heard our Sauiour Preach, and did see his mighty workes, and yet would not repent. But against this it may bee obiected:Ob. How can it bee that they should be all in the same place, tyed in the same lake, and burning in the same fire, and yet that they should not feele the same punishment? To this we answere,Sol. that they shall feele the same punish∣ment, but not in the same measure; the same for length of time, but not the same for quantitie of paine. Nam sicut vno sole om∣nes tanguntur, &c. For, as men (saith S. Gregory) sitting in the heat of the same Sun,That the tor∣ments of Hell are not equall vnto all Greg. in Moral. are not heated & warmed in the same man∣ner; because the weight of the heat is felt according to the quality and disposition of the body; Sic damnatis vna est gehenna, quae affligit, & tamen non omnes vno calore comburit; quia quod hic agit dispar valetudo corporum, hoc illic exhibet dispar causa meritorum: Euen so, though there be but one hell which tormenteth all; yet doth it not torment all alike: for as here the different dis∣position of their bodies, doth cause men differently to perceiue the heate: So there, the inaequality of their merits, will be the cause of disparity in their torments. And therefore seeing God loueth righteousnesse, iudgeth all without respect of persons, and in his iudgements, rendreth vnto euery man according to his deeds; it is most apparant that God is the iustest Iudge that can be found to punish sinne.
CHAP. III. That God doth not inflict eternall punishment vpon the foresight of any act of the will, that we would eternally sinne. How a tempo∣rall sinne can deserue an e∣ternall punish∣ment.THirdly, that this punishment, which God inflicteth on man for sinne, is most right and iust; it is concluded by all Diuines: but how this can be, that a sinne tempo∣rally committed, should be eternally puni∣shed, it seemes a doubt not easie to be decided: for, some say, it is because the sinners will is eternally to liue, that hee might eternally sinne: So Saint Gregory saith; Iniqui ideo cum fine deliquerunt, quia cum fine vixerunt; nam voluissent vti{que} sine fine viuere vt potuissent sine fine peccare: The wicked doe there∣fore make an end of sinning, because there is an end of their be∣ing; for they would desire to liue without end, that they might sinne without end; for this sheweth, that they doe alwayes de∣sire to liue in sinne; because while they liue, they neuer cease to sinne.Et nullus detur iniquo terminus vltionis, quia quamdiu vixit, habere noluit terminum cri∣minis. Ad magnam igitur iudicantis iustitiam pertinet, vt nun∣quam careat supplicio, cuius meus in hac vitae nunquam voluit earere peccato; And therefore (saith he) it sheweth the great sincerity of the Iudge, and it behoueth his iustice to deale so with them, that they should neuer want punishment, whose wis and mindes in this life, would neuer want sinne; and that there should be no end set to the torments of the wicked, because while they are able, they set no end to their wickednesse. Bern. Ep. 252.And Saint Bernard is of the same minde: for he saith, that for this cause is the sinne of an inflexible and obstinate minde, eternally punished,Whether God punisheth a sin∣ner eternally, because hee willeth to liue eternally, that he might sinne eternally. though it be temporally committed; Quia quod breue fuit tempore vel opere, longum esse constat in pertinaci vo∣luntate, ita vt si nunquam moreretur, nunquam velle peccare define∣ret; imo semper viuere vellet, vt semper peccare posset; Because that which was but short in time or action, doth appeare to be long in an obstinate will and affection; so that if he neuer died, he would neuer leaue to sinne; nay, hee would desire euer to liue, that he might euer sinne. And I finde most of our owne
moderne Diuines, to ioyne with these Fathers in the same iudgement. But for mine owne part, I cannot fully yeeld vnto this opi∣nion: for if this be true, then God damneth them for sinnes that they would haue done, and not for the sinnes that they haue already done. Indeede it was the opinion of Pellagius,Propter praeuisa bona quae factu∣ri essent si vixis∣sent. that GOD receiued many into glory for those good workes they would haue done, if they might haue liued; and damned others propter praeuisa mala, for the euill workes that they would haue done, if they could haue liued to doe them; for hee that would doe any thing whether good or euill, it is as done in the sight of God: because hee seeth as well the inward intention of the heart, as the outward execution of the worke,Matth. 5.28: as our Sauiour sheweth in the example of him, that looketh vpon a woman to lust after her; and is said thereby to be,That God pu∣nisheth no man for the sinnes he neuer did. Aug de praedst. c. 12. & l. de per∣seueran. c. 9. an adulterer in his heart al∣ready; but, To this Saint Augustine answereth, that it cannot be, that any man should receiue, either glory or punishment, for the workes that he neuer did; but would haue done, if hee might haue liued to doe them: for, First, the Apostle saith;1 Reason. We must all appeare before the iudge∣ment seate of Christ,2 Cor 5.10. that euery one may receiue the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, i. e. while he liued, whether it be good or bad. Where wee must obserue, that he doth not say, according to that he would haue done; but according to that which he hath done. So our Sauiour saith,Iohn 5.29. that they which haue done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life, and they that haue done euill, to the resurrection of damnation. Where againe, we must note, that he doth not say, they that would haue done euill; but they that haue done it: so, when he saith,Matth. 25.35. &c. Come ye bles∣sed into euerlasting life, and sheweth the reason; for I was hungry, and ye gaue me to eate; and to the wicked, Goe ye cursed; for I was hungry, and you gaue me no meate; it is to be obserued, that he saith not, you would haue giuen me, or you would not haue giuen me; but you haue giuen me, and you haue not giuen me: and therefore God saueth none, for any good workes foreseene, that they would haue done; nor condemneth any, for any sinnes foreseene, that they would haue committed.
2. Reason.Secondly, if this were true, that God iudgeth according to what men would haue beene, if they could haue continued; then the Tyrians, and the Sidonians, and many other wicked men, should be saued, or could not well be iustly condemned: for,Matth. 11.21. If the great workes and wonders, which our Sauiour did among the Iewes, had beene done amongst them, they would haue re∣pented them of their sinnes, in dust and ashes: And so many of the godly, must of necessity haue beene condemned; for they are speedily taken away, least that wickednesse should alter their vnder∣standing,Sap. 4.10. or deceit beguile their soule; for the bewitching of naughti∣nesse doth obscure things that are honest. 3. Reason.Thirdly, if this were true, it must needes follow, that God should foresee those things, as future things, which were neuer to be; which doth imply a contradiction; for though God know∣eth, what may be done, though it be neuer done; yet can he not be said to foresee any thing to be,Zanchius de na∣tura Dei. l. 5. c. 2. p. 530. which indeede shall not be; for things that are existent, and haue a being, are seene; things that are possible to be, are knowen; and all future things, that shall be, and are to be, are as present with God as if they were; but those things, that were neuer to be, nor shall euer be, cannot be said to be present with him: and therefore, to say that God will pu∣nish them eternally, because they would haue sinned eternally, if they had eternally liued, is neither agreeable to the iustice of God, to punish them for the things that they haue neuer done; nor to the truth of God, which saith, they shall receiue their reward, according to what they haue done,2 Cor. 5.10. and not according to what they would haue done; nor yet to the reason of man, that sinnes neuer committed should be so seuerely punished. That the desire of the heart is an act done.To the reason alledged, that the will of sinning, is the same with God, as if they had actually sinned; I answere first, that sinne is two wayes to be considered; first, as it is in the heart, and intention; and secondly, as it is in the acte, and execution; Now our Sauiour doth not say, that he which looketh on a wo∣man, to lust after her, hath committed the fact, in the sight of God, but is guilty of the sinne, in respect of the desire and in∣tention, which is an act alreadie done, and not in respect of the outward act, which is not done at all: and therefore he sayth, that such a one hath committed adultery with her in his heart, i. e.
inwardly but not outwardly: and therefore is he onely so farre guilty, i. e. so farre forth as the act is done, but no further: Se∣condly, I say that if their will were, to desire to liue euer, that they might sinne euer;That to will to sinne euer is a tempora∣rie act. yet this is but a temporarie act of the will, and doth not include an euerlasting willing of the same; be∣cause we see there is no necessitie to continuate the same act of the will, but that it nilleth now, what it willed a little before: and because no act can exceed the bounds and limits of the agent; but the agent sailing, the act is ended: and therefore man being temporarie, being but a while to liue here; his will being tem∣porarie, being no longer properly the will of man then it re∣steth in man: therefore all acts of the will, while it is in this life, must needs be temporarie, and so all sinnes done, or of the will to doe them, must be likewise temporarie. And therefore I say, that God doth not punish them,God punisheth onely sinnes done. for any fore-seene facts, that they would haue done, nor for any fore∣seene continuance of the will, in the same desire to liue euer in sinne; nor for any other foreseene future thing whatsoeuer; but onely for those things that are done in this life; either those workes that are outwardly acted; or those desires of the heart, and acts of the will, which it produceth, while it is in this life, and no otherwise: so that God punisheth onely sinnes done, and not sinnes that would be done. And if wee search a little further,Two things make a tempo∣rarie sinne to deserue eter∣nall punish∣ment. into the nature of the sinne done: wee shall see the haynousnesse of the offence, and the equitie of this inflicted punishment in two respects. 1. A leuitate praecepti iniuncti, from the easinesse of the things commaunded. 2. A grauitate peccati perpetrati, from the haynousnesse of the sinne committed.
CHAP. IIII. How easie and light are all the Commandements that God doth giue, and how hard are the wayes of sinne. John 5.3.FOr the first, Saint Iohn sayth, His commandements are not grieuous; and our Sauiour sayth, His yoke is easie,Matth. 11.30. and his burthen light; so easie, that the Prophet Dauid sayth,Psal. 119. he did runne the way of Gods commandements, when God had set his heart at libertie, i. e. had vntied him from those bonds of sinne wherewith he was so tied by his naturall corruption, that he could not stirre, nor walke one iot in this easie path,How the way to Heauen is said to be hard. and therefore, if the way be cragged & at the gate narrow and straight, that leadeth into life; it is in respect of our vnablenesse now, to performe any thing that is good, and not in respect of any difficultie, or hardnesse, in themselues simply considered. Looke into the commandement, that God gaue vnto Adam,What a small matter it was that God com∣manded Adam. and you shall easily finde this trueth: for at that time, there was no Man to be enuied; no Man to be opprest; no Wo∣man to be defiled, no Churches to be robbed: and therefore hee cumbred them not with many precepts, all was but one; to for∣beare the fruites,Gene. 2.17. but of one Tree, they might eate of all besides that one: and as his precepts were not many, but one; so this one was not great; not to create Worlds, not to remoue Moun∣taines, but to forbeare the fruites of that one Tree. Alas, was this so great, was this so grieuous? what if hee had forbidden all, but one? had it not beene right that wee should obay? and if we had asked him, what hee would haue done with all the rest; might not hee haue iustly sayd,Matth. 20.15. May not I doe what I will with mine owne? and what is that to thee? Doe thou as I command thee;John 21.22: but he was contented to make himselfe, as it were, poore, to giue them store; for he gaue them leaue to eate of all the rest, and reserued but one for himselfe; yet would they needs eate of that one; & as if they longed to breake this one Comman∣dement of God; they would presently eate of the Tree, and it
may be, before they tasted of any other Tree, sure, before they saw any other day: Quia non pernoctauit in honore, For hee re∣mained not one night in his dignitie, sayth the vulgar-latine. So looke into the Commandements he giueth vnto vs,What a small matter it is that God re∣quireth at our hands. and wee shall soone see the same trueth: they are Pauca, breuia, le∣uia, & vtilia: Few, short, easie, and profitable: for he giues not many, but tenne, but two, but one: and that one not long, one word, one sillable, Loue; it is vnpossible therefore to forget it: and it is easie enough, it is naturall enough, to performe it, to Loue: the poorest, the youngest, the eldest, the richest, at home, and abroad, may doe this: who can say hee cannot doe it? there needs no wealth, there needs no wisedome to Loue: and there∣fore all may doe it, if they would doe it, and it is for our profit to doe it; for to that end doth the Lord require it;Deut 5.33. and C. 29.9. that It may goe well with Vs and our Children. But on the other side,What a slauery and bondage it is to serue sinne. the wayes of Wickednesse are verie hard, and full of labour; for all the world may see, that the en∣uious man doth more vexe his wretched soule, at the prosperitie of the Righteous; then the Godly man doth his righteous soule, either at the sinnes or prosperitie of the Wicked; that the wrathfull man takes more paynes, and frets and chafes more, to execute his furie, then the patient man doth, in suffering all his iniuries; that the tyrants were, and are more tormented, in tor∣menting the poore Christians; then the Christians are, in suffe∣ring all their exquisite strange inuented torments: that the worldlings doe weare and wearie themselues, a great deale more, in pursuing after the vanities of this life, and purchasing vnto themselues eternall miseries; then the Righteous doe, in seeking for the grace of God, to attaine vnto euerlasting Happinesse: and that the Deuill requires more time, and greater paynes, to serue him, then God doth to keepe his Commandements; for God giues vs sixe dayes to prouide for our selues, and requires but one day to be serued of vs, himselfe; but the Deuill will haue the sixe, the seauenth, and all, to serue him; and all is to little two: for we must serue him day & night, and God requires but one houre, or two, of that one day, that he reserueth for himselfe, to heare his Word, and to call vpon his Name, and that for our owne good: (as I shewed vnto you before:) but the
Deuill requires not onely many houres,That sinners take more payne to goe to Hell then the godly doe to attaine vn∣to eternall happinesse. and them not onely, to be spent in vayne pleasures, and vanities, but also in horrible sinnes, and iniquities; but he would haue vs also, to forget that one day of Gods seruice, and to spend the greatest part of those few houres, wherein we should chiefely serue our God; Aut malè agendo, aut nihil agendo; either in doing nothing, or in do∣ing worse then if we had done nothing at all. And so in all other things, the workes of darkenesse are a great deale more hard and difficult then the workes of light; so painefull are the wayes of wickednesse, as that it is most true of the sinner,Gene. 3.16. which God pronounced of the woman; that in sor∣row she should bring forth: and so themselues, when it is too late, doe most lamentably confesse;Wisd. 5.7. Wee haue wearied our selues in the wayes of wickednesse, yea, we haue gone through deserts, where there was no way, but rockes, and cragges, and dangerous pathes: and no maruell; for as it is a great deale harder, to worke, or to walke in the darke, then in the light; so it is a great deale more difficult, to doe the workes of darkenesse, then to doe the workes of righteousnesse. And so wee see; A proud man takes more paynes, to make himselfe ready in the morning, then the hum∣ble man doth: and the malicious man laboureth more to re∣uenge, then the peaceable man doth to forgiue; and so of all other sinners, though wee bee naturally inclined to all sinnes, yet wee take a great deale of paynes to goe to hell; as a stone tumbling downe a rockie hill, shall haue many a knocke be∣fore it comes to the bottome. And therefore, as one sayd vnto his friend, that would faine see the games of Olympus, but was discouraged, with the tediousnesse of the iourney; that if he would goe euery day, but so much as he vsed to walke for his recreation, he should at last ariue vnto his iournyes end; so may I say vnto euery man; that if he would take as much paynes, to attayne vnto the ioyes of Heauen, as wee doe to gaine the vani∣ties of this world, we should both soone, and easily, ariue to happines. And yet for all this, (though the way of Ʋertue be neuer so easie, and the way of Sinne neuer so hard,) such is our wilfull frowardnesse,Psal. 127.3. that wee had rather, to rise vp early, to goe late to bed, to eate the bread of carefulnesse, to spend all our time, and to
weare out our whole life, in these inextricable workes of darke∣nesse, then to follow this pleasant pathe, and to doe these sweet and easie workes of grace, which doe leade vs vnto salua∣tion. And therefore seeing the labour is so small,The smalnesse of the dutie required, de∣serues the greatnesse of the punish∣ment inflicted. the commande∣ment so easie, and the burthen so light, what maruell is it that the punishment should be so great, if we neglect to doe so small a seruice? If a King should say vnto his Subiect, hee that will not say, Good morrow King, shall haue his goods confiscate, his house subuerted, and himselfe condemned to perpetuall impri∣sonment; would ye not thinke that he iustly deserued it, which would refuse to obey so light a precept, and neglect to performe so small a dutie? And yet God in a manner requires as little at our hands; to aske of him what we want, to giue him thankes for what we haue: for, who so offereth him thankes and praise, he honoureth him: And therefore iustly doe wee deserue so great a punishment, because we refuse so small a seruice: for lesser at our hands he could not require; and therefore lesser at his hands we cannot deserue. CHAP. V. Of the haynousnesse of every sinne, in three respects. FOr the second, We must consider that as the le∣uitie and smalnesse of the seruice required; so the grauity and greatnesse of the sinne committed, doth most iustly require the height of all punish∣ment. Now the greatnesse of the sinne, is seene in a three-fold respect. 1. Of him that is offended.The haynous∣nesse of sinne is seene in a three-fold re∣spect. 2. Of him that doth offend. 3. Of the offence that is done. First, Touching the Person that is offended, we must consider his, 1. Greatnesse. 2. Goodnesse.
The person of∣fended, is a great God, mighty, and terrible.First, If thou strikest thy fellow, the offence is not so haynous; but if thou strikest a King, a Prince, or a Priest, thine offence de∣serues the greater punishment; for the quality of the offended, doth aggrauate and adde vnto the quantity of the offence: but we by our sinnes, do offend not any one of the earthly Kings, and Potentates of this world, whereof the best and the greatest is but Man, as we are, and his breath is in his nostrels: but wee offend the great God of Heauen and earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Cuius magnitudinis non est finis; Of whos greatnesse there is no end: and therfore offending an infinite God, his anger is infinite, and our punishment must needs be infinite. Secondly, if thou shouldest kill a Tyrant, whose delight is in the ruine of his subiects, and whose intention euery way, is to worke thy destruction; thy fault were the more tollerable though not iustifiable, but it thou shouldest offer violence, vnto such a Prince, as not onely is the life and happinesse of his subiects; by doing good to all; ill to none, like Titus Vespasian, that was Diliiae generis humani, The very ioy and delight of all man∣kinde, but also hath raised thee from the dust, inriched, inno∣bled and indowed thee with all the indowments that possibly could be heaped upon thee: Oh what a miserable Caitife, and how worthy of all punishment, would all men iudge thee most iustly to deserue? surely they would thinke no punishment, to be sufficient enough for such a wretch. Of the incom∣prehensible goodnesse of God to man, and what a good God we doe offend.But our God whom we offend, is good and gratious vnto all, ill to none, he hateth nothing that he hath made. When Adam was created, he raised him out of the dust, —Diuino semine fecit; He made him in his owne image and likenesse, and he made him sole Monarch of this whole world: and as if euery soile were not fit for such a crea∣ture, he placed him in Paradise, the choisest place of al pleasure: he put all things in subiection vnder his feete,Psal. 8.6.7. and looking if there was any thing wanting for his happinesse, hee saw that it was not good for him to be alone; and therefore he made him an helpe meete for him; such a helpe, as that Adam as soone as euer hee saw her,Gen. 2.23. said; This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: as if he had saide, among all the other creatures, which thou Lord hast brought vnto me, I could not satisfie my minde with any
mate; but now I am fully pleased, and cannot dislike this mate, while I like my selfe, because she is of my selfe. Thus did God looke that man might want nothing that might make him happy. Say thou wert none of Adams race, but wert an indifferent Iudge to censure such a creature, that should offend so good a God, Et reddere malum pro bono, And render vnto him euill for good, and hatred for his good will; what punishment I pray thee, wouldst thou thinke too great, for such great ingratitude? for as the Prophet Dauid, at the consideration of Gods goodnesse vnto man, saith; Oh God,Psal. 8.4. what is man that thou art so mindfull of him, or the Sonne of man that thou so regardest him? So at the con∣sideration of mans sinne against God; we may all cry, and cry againe; Oh man what is God, that thou art so vnmindfull of him, or, the Sonne of God that thou so little regardest him? And as God was then good and gracious vnto man, so now, and euer since the fall of man, we may say with the Pro∣phet: Oh how good a God is the God of Israel? How many are raised from the dust, like Saul, that seeking his fathers Asses,1 Sam. 9. Psal. 78.71. found a Kingdome; or Dauid, that from the Sheepfold, was raised vnto the Scepter; and how doth God continually bestow his bles∣sings vnto men, and make his Sunne to shine vpon the good,Matth. 5.45. and vpon the bad, and send his raine, yea, and that a gracious raine vpon the iust, and vpon the vniust, and cause our wiues to be like the Ʋine that is by the house-side, and our children to be like the Oliue branches round about our Tables, our Oxen strong to la∣bour, and our sheepe to bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets? And therefore as he saith vnto the Israelites,Esay 5.4. What could I doe more for my Ʋineyard? So may he say to euery man, what should I doe more for thee, then I haue done? If thou thinkest others in better state then thy selfe, thou must know that thou doest not know thine owne estate, nor vnderstandest what is best for thy selfe; Sed quid profit vel obsit, nouit medicus non aegrotus: But God knoweth what is best for euery man, and he euer worketh all things together for the best,Rom. 8.28. for them that loue him. And therefore for silly man, to offend such a good God, that doth so much good for man; I know not how this sin should
be sufficiently punished; to eate his bread, to enioy his Sunne, to re∣ceiue his blessings, and to spurne him with our heeles, to teare him with our teeth, and to abuse him in all our actions; It is such a trans∣cendent sinne as it passeth all vnderstanding to imagine punish∣ment enough for the same. The basenesse of the offender doth euer ag∣grauate the offence.Secondly, we must consider the quality of the Offender: for if a King should iniure his subiect, or a Master his seruant, the of∣fence is not so great, as if a Subiect should rebell against his Soueraigne, or a seruant lay violent hands vpon his master: and therefore humane lawes decreed, that the basenesse of the of∣fender should be censured with the seuerer punishment; as if a Master should kill his Seruant, hee should but hang for his la∣bour; but if a Seruant should kill his Master, he must be burnt all to ashes; as for a sinne against Heauen and against Nature. What a poore miserable thing is Man that doth of∣fend so great and so good a God.But what are we that doe offend so great and so good a God, which the very Heathens tearmed, Optimus Maximus; best and greatest? Wee are but men, and no Angels; but wormes and no men; dust and ashes, things of nothing, and worth nothing; base and beggerly; not able in need to releeue our selues with one drop of cold water to coole our tongues. Omnia sunt hominum, tenui pendentia filo, Et subito casu quae valuere ruent. All our strength is but like a rush, that may be soone knapt a sunder;Psal. 1.5. and all we haue is but like the dust, which the winde can easily scatter away from off the face of the earth. The very Hea∣thens tell vs, that omnis homo bulla est, Euery man is but like a bubble of water, soone blowne vp, and sooner off. Sic in non hominem vertitur omnis homo. So meane, and so base a thing is man:Psal. 144.4. He is like a thing of naught, and his time pas∣seth away like a shadow. And yet these silly wormes, like as the poore Psilii would warre against the winde, vntill they were all ouerwhelmed with the sands; so will they , with the Gyants, rebell and warre against their God, (Impar congressus Achilli) vntill (as the Pigmies were by Hercules) they shall see themselues to be far ouer-matched with this God of Gods, that holdeth the Winds in his fist, and rideth vpon the Heauens as vpon a Horse: And there∣fore
what maruell that their punishment should be intermina∣ble, whose rebellion is so intollerable? Thirdly, we must consider the quality of the Offence:How we offend God, and as it were sell God for trifles, for nothing. For if once for some great matter we did offend; it might be thought the more tollerable; Nam si violanda fides, regnandi causa violan∣da est: For small matters should neuer make vs to breake our word, saith the Heathen man: And therefore the Romanes were so vpright, and so faithfull vnto their confederates, that they would neuer offer to breake faith and promise, but in case of dominion, of very great aduantage; for they deemed him a ve∣ry foole, that would vndoe himselfe for nothing; and so our owne Citizens here haue learnt this rule of the Romans; for, when they breake, they will neuer doe it for nothing but for hundreds, and thousands,Luke 16.6.7 8. that they may with the vniust Steward, gaine something to themselues, for the losse of their honestie. But how doe we offend our God? euen for nothing; for as Saint Paul saith, An idoll is nothing in the world;1 Cor. 8.4. so may I say of Sinne; it is nothing in the world; it is no substance, it is no being in the world; but it is the corruption of being, and it brings vs no∣thing in the world, but the least and vaynest momentary plea∣sure that euer can be imagined: and so themselues in Hell confesse, saying, What hath pride profited vs,Wisd. 5.8. or what good hath our riches, with our vaunting, brought vs? What are they the better for their daily swearing, swaggering, drinking, and such like vile and horrible sinnes, which I doe abhorre to name, but that I must in such grosse tearmes, because I loue not to guilde sinnes, and to giue them better names then they deserue; they are all pst away like a shadow: Transit quod extollitur,Gregor. in Mo∣ral. perma∣net quod punitur: The pleasure is past as soone as euer the fact is done; but the punishment remaineth neuer to bee abo∣lished. And yet, for such a trifle, for such a momentary pleasure, we will aduenture to offend our God:Gen. 3. Adam for an Apple will forsake his Creator: Iudas for thirty pence, will sell his Redee∣mer: and we, for a cuppe of drinke to make vs drunken, for a little trash, it may be one peny to make vs richer, for an oath of our mouth, to shew our selues Gallants, and for such like o∣ther
things of nothing, will not be afraid to offend our God, to lose his fauour, and to cast him off for euer. I remember that when God sheweth how little hee respe∣cteth wicked sinners,Psal. 44 13. the Prophet saith; Thou sellest thy people for naught and takest no money for them; as if they were worth nothing in the world: euen so doe these men deale with God, they sell him for naught, and esteeme him worth nothing in the world; for putting God on the one hand, and the least pleasure or profit of sinne on the other hand; they will imbrace that sinne, and forsake their God: and this they will not onely doe once or twice, and then leaue; but they will doe it daily and hourely, and euery moment; neuer leauing to sinne vntill we be compelled to leaue the world; for euery one of vs may say with Manasses,Vt februm re∣cidiuarum ma∣iora pericula, & vt vulnerum post cicatrices, &c. Bosquierus de passione Dom: conc. 3. p. 692. Peccaui super numerum arenae maris, My sinnes are more in number then the sands of the Sea: And therefore as often wounding the same scarres, doth increase the danger, (saith Bosquierus;) So the continuall committing of the same sinnes, doth euery way much increase and aggrauate the offen∣ces; for if we did it but once, it might be thought we did it precipitately of inconsideration; but when we doe it continually, it is apparant that we doe it wilfully, with delight and delibera∣tion, and therefore must be left euery way without excuse. Ansel. in l. de casu diaboli.Anselmus comparing the sinne of Satan with his owne sin, saith, Diabolus nulla praecedentis vindicta superbiens, peccauit; ego visa eius paena non continens, ad peccatum properaui: ille in innocen∣tia constitutus, ego vero restitutus: ille perstitit in malitia, deo repro∣bante; ego vero deo reuocante: ille obduratur ad punientem; ego ve∣ra ad blandientem; & sic vter{que} contra deum; ille contra non requi∣rentem se; ego vero contra morientem pro me; ecce cuius imaginem horrebam, in multis aspicio me horribiliorem. The Diuell not see∣ing any vengeance vpon any former sinner, by waxing proud did sinne; but I though I saw his punishment for sinne, did notwithstanding hasten vnto sinne: He sinned in his innocency, wherein he was first created; I after I was againe restored; hee persisted in his malice, God forsaking him; I persist in my sinne, God still seeking to reclaime me from sinne; he was hardned against God, punishing him: I against my God, that gently and mildly intreated me: and so both of vs did sinne against God;
he against him, that after he sinned, sought him not; but I against him, that after I had sinned, sought me, and dyed for mee: and therefore behold I find my selfe in many things, more vile and horrible then him, whom for his obstinacy against God, I doe so much hate and detest. So infinitely great,Man is not able to com∣prehend the infinite defor∣mitie of sinne. and so transcendent∣ly horrible is the sinne of man: insomuch that Diuines con∣clude, that as God is infinite, Propter summam formositatem, In regard of his excellent beauty; so is sinne infinite in respect of vs, Propter summam deformitatem, By reason of its vnspeakea∣ble deformitie: and therefore that it can deserue no lesse then infinite punishment. Well then, beloued Brethren, seeing the person offended,All punish∣ment ought to be answerable to the offence. is so great and so excellent; the offenders so base and so beggerly: and the offence so haynous and so intollerable: and that the punishment of a sinne, Vt nec maior crimine, ita nec minor esse debet, As it ought not to be more, so it should not be lesse then the offence deserueth; what man can imagine a punishment great enough for such, and so great offences as wee daily com∣mit against our God? Hence it is that Saint Paul, willing to shew the equity of this inflicted punishment, calleth it  stipendia: The stipend, or the wages of sinne. Now, stipendium Dr: a stipe: A stipend is an hirelings reward, and was wont to be called the wages that was appointed to be paide the Souldiers, to make prouision for their daily meate and drinke, to sustaine themselues vntill they receiued their full pay: this was called , their stipend; and none can say, but the poore Souldier which aduentureth his life and his limbes euery moment, for the defence of his Prince, Peeres, and Countrey, is iustly worthy of this small mea∣sure of meate. Now Death, saith the Apostle, is the stipend of the Sinner: and therefore Death is as due to him,Aretius in Rom. c. 6. 25. Vti militi sti∣pendium suum: as is the stipend vnto the Souldier, saith Aretius. And so you see, the Worke, Sinne; the Wages, Death; and the Equity of it, as iustly due to him, as the stipend is to the Souldier: For, the wages of Sinne is Death.
CHAP. VI. Of the especiall application of each one of these three parts of the whole Text. ANd now to presse each one of these, to make im∣pression in our hearts, let vs euer learne and re∣member; that, First, seeing sinne is so various, so ambigu∣ous, so horrible, and so odious, in its meandrian windings; we should be very carefull to looke into the secret corners, and tortuous labyrinths of the same; for it comes (as I shewed you) creeping by degrees, and it comes vayled with shadowes. As the Serpent crept into Pa∣radice, so the Diuel creepeth into our harts, and draweth vs into the height of sinne by lit∣tle and little.Looke into all the Ecclesiasticall Stories, and you shall see that neither Idolatry nor Superstition stept into its height at first, but rather crept on by little and little. Saint Peters Succes∣sor was long before he could come to weare a triple Crowne: so Satan seekes to bring in sinne; and therefore, seeing that — Serò medicina paratur, Cum mala, per longas conualuere moras: It is hard to cure an old festered disease; we should, obstare principijs, with∣stand the very first beginnings of sinne, and hate the very gar∣ment,Jude, verse 23. that is any wayes spotted or stained with iniquity: That is, the very least thing that may occasionate euill. How we may withstand and hinder the groweth of sinne.But you will say, how shall this be done? you tell vs what we should doe, but you shew vs not the way to doe it? I an∣swere, that I finde two especiall meanes, whereby Satan sought to inlarge the Kingdome of Sinne; and by which, he had al∣most ouerthrowne the Kingdome of Israel. The one was, the aduice of Baalam,Numb. 24 14. the sonne of Beor, a great Prophet, that taught Balak King of Moab,1 Cor. 10.8. to intangle Israel, by making mutuall matches, and mariages betwixt their Children; whereby the an∣ger of the Lord was so kindled, that hee slew of them three and twenty thousand in one day. 1 Kings 12.31.The other was, the practice of Ieroboam, the sonne of Nebat, a great King, that to establish his Kingdome, did make Officers,
and Priests, of the basest of the people;1 Kings 12.31. and thereby hee made all Israel for to sinne. And therefore, if you would suppresse, or hinder the increase of sinne; you must take heede, among other things, of these two especiall points. First, Marry not your Children vnto sinners;That we should not marry our Children but to the best men. but looke ra∣ther into the sincerity of their Religion, the purity of their pro∣fession, and the vprightnesse of their conuersation, then the great∣nesse of their reputation here amongst men: and if you finde them Drunkards, Swearers, Players, Idolaters, superstitious, or leud liuers, or any wayes inclined to these, or the like sinnes; decline you from them, and meddle not with them; least their sinnes doe bring a plague and punishment, to consume both you and yours: for though it be a good thing to bestow thy Daughter in marriage; yet is it not good, vnlesse it be to a man of vnderstanding, saith the Wiseman: but they are a people void of reason, and a Nation destitute of vnderstanding, that turne the Diuine Verity, into Idolatry; or that doe any wayes erre from Gods Commandements. Secondly, make not any Officers, especially Priests,That we should not make any Officers, espe∣cially Priests, but those that are truly reli∣gious and ho∣nest. of the basest of the people; but looke into their liues, and consider well their profession; yea, marke their inclination: and whom you see corrupted with sinne, or any wayes infected with the poyson of iniquity, drunkennesse, prophanenesse, cruelty, idolatry, or superstition, promote them not vnto your seates of Gouernment; or if they be promoted, and preferred by o∣thers, yet haue you nothing to doe with this stoole of wickednesse; receiue them not into your Houses, entertaine them not at your Tables, haue no commerce or conuersation with them, meddle not with them, fauour them not; for you may be sure that they will fauour sinne; and you should feare, least by medling with them, you should be defiled, and tainted with sinne: for the bewitching of naughtinesse,Wisdome 4.10. doth soone obscure things that are honest. But make much of them that feare the Lord, and whom you see zealously affected, to follow the true Religion, and earnestly labouring to leade an vpright conuersation; O let them be hel∣ped, and furthered, to be promoted both in Church and Com∣mon-wealth;
for you may be sure,That we should make much of those that are good and godly men, and doe our best to pro∣mote such into dignity. that they will faithfully doe what lyeth in them, to suppresse Idolatrie and all iniquitie: Who so is wise, will ponder these things; and he shall vnder∣stand, and perceiue, and feele, the louing kindnesse of the Lord. And as sinne seekes to creepe by degrees, so if you looke into the liues of men, you shall see how it comes fairely clad; and vayled, with the shaddowes of vaine excuses. Sometimes of infirmity, either of Age, or of Nature: young men thinke it too soone for them to be precise; old men are weake, and are not able to endure any longer seruice; the wrath∣full man,Gen 4.23. with Lamech, layeth all the fault on his fury; if he slayes a man in his wound, and a young man in his hurt: the Drunkard saith, it was his drinke, and not he, that acteth all the mischiefe; and the lasciuious man excuseth himselfe, with the heate of his bloud, and the lust of his flesh. Of the mani∣fold excuses that sinners haue to lessen and to excuse their sinnes. Gen. 3.7.Sometimes of conformity, the proud, the drunken, the am∣bitious, the couetous, and the like sinnefull men, they doe but as most men doe; and why should they be singular? Sometimes of simplicity, there meaning is good, what euill soeuer they doe. And thus sinne couers it selfe, like Adam, with the fruitlesse figge-leaues of hypocrisie. But alas beloued, we must know, that for Gods Husbandry, no season proues vnseasonable; but young men and maidens, old men and children,Psal 148.12. must praise and serue the Lord: and Nature must be subdued by Grace, if euer we will be the Children of Glory; and all your excuses of sinne, will not free your soules from eternall death; but as the Prouerbe is, Kill a man when thou art drunke, and thou shalt be hanged when thou art sober: So sweare, and raile, and rage, and offend thy God, and abuse man, when thou art in thy drinke, in thy fury; and God will lay the punish∣ment on thee, and not on thy drinke, when thou shalt not haue a drop of drinke to quench thy thirst, nor a droppe of water to coole thy tongue:Luc. 16.24. That we ought to keepe our selues spotlesse in the midst of the wicked. And we haue learnt in Gods Schoole, that Iuda must not sinne, no, though all Israel should play the Harlot; but as the Riuer Alphaeus conuayes it selfe through the Seas, into his beloued Arethusa, and yet participates not at all with the Sea-saltish humour; so must Lot preserue himselfe chaste in the middest of Sodome, and the Saints in the middest of the
World; as I haue shewed at large in my Treatise,The Delights of the Saints. Page 47. of the Delights of the Saints: And the Schoole of Diuinity teacheth vs, that Bonum est de integra causa, The beginning, meanes, and ending of euery action, must needes be right, or the whole action will proue wrong: and therefore wee must take away these vailes from sinne, if we would perceiue the vglinesse of sinne; and so escape the wages of Sinne, which is Death. Secondly, seeing Sinne is the reall, and radicall cause, Et mali, & morbi, & mortis, Of weakenesse, sickenesse, miseries, death, and destruction, (a pernicious parent of most dreadfull and deadly off-spring;) for foolish men are plagued,Psal. 107.17. because of their offences: and I will smite thee (saith God himselfe vnto Iacob) be∣cause of thy sinnes, and it is an axiome infallible,Mich. 6.13. that sinne and punishment, are inseparable companions; so inseperable, that the Hebruists doe often call them both, by one name; as where the text sayth, Sinne lyeth at the doore,Gene. 4.7. and ver. 13. and My sinne is greater then I can beare; and againe, your Sinne shall find you out; there Arias Montanus, and Tremellius translate it, punishment:Numb. 32.23. That wee should ac∣knowledge our owne sinnes to be the true cause of all our miseries. Jere. 44.17. there∣fore, if we feele any plagues or miseries, either Dearth of Corne, or decaying of Trade, increase of Superstition, or decrease of Re∣ligion, or any such like plagues and miseries; let vs not blame the times, nor trueth of God; but let vs lay the fault where it is, vpon our selues, and vpon our owne Sinnes: for though the many multitude say, it was a good world with them, When they sacrificed vnto the Queene of Heaven; yet the King of Heauen knowes, what a wofull time it was for Man, when the Crucifixe was kissed with the kisses of their Mouthes, and Iesus Christ was crucified againe with the workes of their hands; and when they changed, The trueth of God into a lye, and Worshipped and serued the creature, made a god with their owne hands;Rom. 1.15. More then the Creator who is blessed for euer. Amen. And if we would be free from plagues, free from punishments; let vs free our selues from sinne. I know that feare of Poperies comming againe, with super∣stitions hath spread it selfe ouer the face of this whole Iland; but alas, Wee feare where no feare is: for I dare confidently affirme, that it neuer was his Maiesties minde, nor the purpose of the State, to bring in Idolatry and superstition into this land
againe,Cantic: 5.3. for We haue washed our feete, and shall we foule them againe? But the secrets of State, is more then either I can perceiue, or most of you well vnderstand. Or if they did, yet were it vayne, Quia non est concilium contra Dominum: because no deuice of man, can subuert the truth of God; vnlesse our sinnes doe pro∣uoke our God,Reuel. 2.5. Nulla nocebit aduersitas si nulla domine∣tur iniquitas. Gregor. Cyprian. to remoue our Candlesticke, and to take away our light: and therefore though all the Iesuites of the world, and all the Cardinals of Rome, nay, though all the Deuils of Hell, should doe their worst against vs; yet if we feare our God, and forsake all Sinne; the diuels may haue all their seruants, before they all shall be able to hurt any one seruant of the Lord: quia non plus valet ad deijciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigendum di∣uina tutela;1 John 4.4. because, He that is in vs, is greater then he that is in the World; and is more able to preserue vs, then the Prince of darkenesse is to destroy vs. That wee should turne to the Lord our God.And therefore, if you thinke Poperie to be euill, and would be free from superstition, neuer feare the State; nor lay the blame on others; but leaue your sinnes, and Turne to the Lord your God, with all your hearts, and with all your soules, and you shall see the Saluation of the Lord, which hee will shew vnto vs this day,Exod. 14.13. for the Egyptians, whom you haue seene, and feare; you shall see them againe no more for euer; the Lord shall fight for you, and you may be sure no euill shall happen vnto you; it shall not come nigh your dwelling: for the onely way to escape all punishments is to forsake all sinnes. Neither doe I say this, as if we could be cleane from sinnes: for I know it was Nouatus his error, and we must all know it for an error,Hieron: adversus. Pelag. that a Christian after Baptisme doth not sinne, and it was but a Pellagian conceite, before him inuented by Pythago∣ras, that the exercise of Vertue, rooteth out all the seede of Vi∣ces;Matth. 7.18. for a Bad tree cannot bring foorth good fruit, and in some things, sayth the Apostle, I feare I may say (as it is in our last English translation) in many things wee Sinne all:Iames 3.2. 1 Iohn 1.8. And if wee say wee haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and there is no trueth in vs. But I say this, that we should haue a feruent desire, not to sinne, and to say with the Prophet, O that my wayes were made so direct, that I might keepe thy Commandements; and that wee
would endeuor, pro virili; to the vttermost of our abilities, not to sinne; and labour alwayes with the Apostle,Acts 24.16. to keep a cleere conscience in all things, both before God and Man, Thirdly, Seeing all miseries, death, and damnation, are as iustly inflicted vpon the sinner, as the poore Souldier may iustly claime his little stipend; we should not complaine against God,Sueton. in vita Ʋesp. C. 10. with Ʋespasian, Immerenti sibi vitam aripi, that he tooke away his life without any fault of his; or without any fayling on his part; but we should with the Leuites in Nehemiah, with Daniel, with Ieremie, and with all the rest of the men of God; commend the Lord, and condemne our selues; saying, surely thou art iust in all that is come vpon vs, thou hast dealt truely,Nehem. 9.33. but wee haue done wickedly. And thus I haue shewed thee, O man, quid sit malum, what is euill; and you haue heard, a large discourse of Sinne, and the most lamentable effect, and wages, of Sinne: And now it is a thousand to one, that the first thing, many one of vs will doe, is to goe home, or perhaps afore wee goe home, to sinne: some to sweare, some to their whores, some to be drunke, some to deceiue, and most of vs to some sinne or other: But if euer any of you doe, for those sinnes, receiue this pay; remember I haue told you, what you should haue, Death; for the wages of Sinne is Death: and I can doe no more, but pray to God, that he would giue vs grace to forsake Sinne, that we may escape Death, through Iesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three distinct Persons, of that one eternall in diuided Essence, be giuen, as is most due, all prayse, and glory, for euer and euer. Amen.
A Prayer. O Blessed God, which hast created Man; we doe acknow∣ledge that thou hast made him righteous, but he sought out many inuentious, and hath most grieuously sinned against thy diuine Maiestie, and thereby hath most iustly pulled vpon himselfe, and all his posteritie, all miseries, death, and damna∣tion: But thou desirest not the death of a Sinner, but rather that hee should turne from his wickednesse and liue: And therefore we doe confesse our sinnes, we doe detest our sinnes, and we doe most humbly pray thee, euen for thy mercies sake, to bee mercifull vnto vs; to deale with vs, not according to our offences: but according to thy Grace, to giue vs Grace to serue thee; that so we my be deliuered from our iust deserued punishment, and be receiued into thine euerlasting fauour, to prayse and mag∣nifie thy blessed Name, for euer and euer. Amen. A wearied loathed Life I leade, content with onely Sadnesse, To see my selfe opprest with Sinne, and with this worlds Madnes. I alwayes striue with wicked Sinne, yet doth my Sinne preuaile I therefore hate my Selfe, because my Sinnes I cannot quaile. And I doe likewise wish for Grace, that I might neuer offend, But truely serue my Master Christ, and please him to my end. And yet I see this tyrant Sinne, and wicked men doe wrong me, To Hell the one, to Miserie, th'other still would throng me. But reason bids me for to Waite, till God deliuereth me, And fetch my prison'd Soule from hence, to liue at libertie. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Second golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The second greatest light of Christian RELIGION. Of the Knowledge of GOD. EXODVS 34.6.7. Iehouah, Iehouah, Strong, Mercifull, and Gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and trueth. Reseruing mercy for thousands, forgiuing iniquitie, and transgression, and sinne, and that will by no meanes cleare the guiltie, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vp∣on the children, and vpon the childrens children, vnto the third and fourth generation. YOu haue heard in my former Treatise, the poore and miserable estate of distres∣sed Man:The coherence of this with the former Treatise. how lamentable hee made himselfe by Sinne; I am now to shew you a poole of Bethesda, wherein, if wee can but bathe our selues, wee shall bee made perfectly whole, and most comfor∣tably deliuered from all diseases:Iohn 5.2. and therefore, I beseech you, let this Panchrestum, this medicine for
all maladies, be diligently acquired, & bee most carefully applied to euery sickned soule. You shal finde it in Ierusalem, i. e. in the Church of God, and no where else: for extra Ecclesiam non est salus, no saluation is out of the Church; and you shall finde it by the Sheepe-market, i. e. in the place where the sheepe of Christ, and children of God, doe finde all prouision for their soules; that is, the Holy & Heauenly Scripture; and there if you looke, you shall finde a porch ample enough for you to enter into this Bethesda, in these words which I haue read vnto you. The Lord, the Lord God, or else, Iehoua, Iehoua, Strong, Merci∣full, and Gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodnesse, and trueth, &c. And I hope you will giue the more diligent heede vnto my words, Quia speciosi pedes Euangelizantium pacem, be∣cause (as the Pro. Esay sayth) the feete of thē that bring tydings of good things are most welcome vnto vs:Esay 52.7. and (as the Angell sayd vnto the Shepheards,Luke 2.10.) I bring you tydings of great ioy, which shall be vnto all people; For I am now to preach and to expound, that gracious Sermon vnto you here which God himselfe hath Preached heretofore vnto Moses, in Mount Sinay; and it con∣taines the whole discription of Almighty God, so farre forth, as himselfe thought it fit,Chrysost varior: loc. in Matth. Hom. 9. to reueale himselfe at this time vnto his people: and therefore Excutite pigritiam, quia non est res leuis quam audituri estis; I doe must humbly craue your attention, and most diligent obseruation of these things: for I thinke that you can neither heart, nor reade, a sweeter text, if God giue me grace to handle it well. It is large indeed, I must confesse, and my allotted time is short, and it is as difficult to contract much into a little, as to inlarge a little into much; yet seeing I cannot speake all that I would, I will, by Gods helpe, speake a little of all, as I may. The Occasion of these wordsThe occasion hereof is playne enough, in this precedent Chapter: Moses desired to see God: God tells him he cannot; because it is as naturall vnto him, to be inuisible, as to be a God: and therefore Saint Iohn sayth,Iohn 4.12. no man hath seene God at any time; yet, (to satisfie Moses, so much as was fit for his happi∣nesse) God sayth; that he should see his backe-parts; that is, hee should vnderstand so much concerning God, as the weake
vnderstanding of Man could possibly comprehend; for hee saw nothing at all, after any visible manner, but onely heard this voyce describing God; and we must know that God hath ni∣ther forepart nor backepart, that can be seene, with any mortall eyes: and therefore this phrase, of seeing Gods backeparts, is one∣ly vsed, quoad captum nostrum, after a humane manner; and it importeth thus much in effect; thou shalt see, that is, thou shalt vnderstand or see with thine eyes of knowledge, my backeparts,That God is not to be seene with any mate∣riall eyes. that is, so much concerning me, as thy weake apprehension shall be able to comprehend: For, First, That God is no otherwise to bee seene, then with the spirituall eyes of our Faith, and vnderstanding, it appeareth playne; because Moses here saw no visible thing, but onely heard a voyce: So, when God appeared to Elias,1 Kings 19.11.12. there passed be∣fore the Lord a mighty strong winde, but the Lord was not in the Wind; then an Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake; and then came a still soft Voice, and the Lord was in the Voyce; and so when he deliuered the Law, he sayth; Ye saw no similitude, saue a voyce; therefore, as God sheweth himselfe none other∣wise then by a voyce, so he can be seene none otherwise then by the spirituall eyes of our vnderstanding. Secondly, That by the backeparts of God, is vnderstood,By the backe∣parts of God is vnderstood so much know∣ledge of God as we are able to compre∣hend. so much knowledge of God, as our weake apprehension can con∣ceiue, it is apparant in this place: for Moses neither saw nor heard any other thing, but onely this voyce, proclayming these words, that I haue read vnto you, and therefore this is all one, as if the voyce had sayd vnto him, this is all that thou canst vnder∣stand of me, that I am such and such a one, as I shew vnto thee. It is true indeed, that I am so glorious, to excellent, so ineffable, and so incomprehensible in my selfe, that if I should shew thee my Maiestie, and fully declare vnto thee mine excellencie, what I am; thou wert not able to comprehend it; and therefore humano more loqui, to speak vnto thee as a man, that thou mayest the bet∣ter vnderstand how farre thou mayest know me; I would haue thee to looke vpon a Man, and to consider how much more glorie and excellencie, shineth in his face, then in his backe∣partes: euen so thou must vnderstand, that all this which I shew vnto thee, concerning my selfe, in comparison of what I am, in
the excellency of my Maiestie,That we can conceiue but the least part of Gods ex∣cellencie. is but as the back-parts of a man, in comparison of his face and fore-parts: So farre short is this, that thou canst know of me, to what I am; and yet this least part of my excellency, is so much as thou, or any man breathing vpon the face of the earth is able to comprehend. And therefore the meaning of this phrase, to see the backe-parts of God; is nothing else, but the reuealing of himselfe vnto Moses, so farre as Moses was able to comprehend; that is, a little, but not neere all his properties; for to be incomprehensible, is as proper to God, as to be Inuisible; Secundum essentiam incog∣nitus, secundum maiestatem immensus; His Maiestie is immeasu∣rable,Thalas. apud Paulinum Praes∣byt. Iob 28.24. and his being vnconceiuable, saith Thalassus, ; For he is euery where, and he seeth euery thing, when as nothing can see him. Ob.But here it may be, some will say; that although now by rea∣son of sinne that blindeth vs, we can neither see his Essence, nor comprehend his excellency;Cor. 15.53. yet when this corruption shall put on incorruption, and this vaile of ignorance, shall be taken from vs, we shall fully see him, and comprehend him in his excellen∣cy;1 Cor. 13.12. for, we shall see him face to face, we shall see him as he is; and we shall know him as we are knowne: And therefore he is neither so inuisible, nor so incomprehensible, but that hee might bee seene, and comprehended, were it not for our sinnes and igno∣rance, that doe so blinde our vnderstandings, that we cannot per∣ceiue him. Sol. That the Es∣sence of God shall not be seene in Hea∣uen, but in the face of Iesus Christ.To this I answere, that if Adam had neuer sinned, yet could he neuer haue seene the essence of God, vnlesse God would haue taken some visible shape vpon him to appeare vnto him; and so I say, that in the life to come, when the Saints shall be free from all sin, and indued with a farre more excellent measure of knowledge and vnderstanding, then euer Adam was in Pa∣radise, they shall neuer see the Dietie, any otherwise then in the face of Iesus Christ: for so the Apostle sheweth, that God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkenesse, hath shined in our hearts,2 Cor. 4.6. to giue the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Iesus Christ:Iohn 14.7. & 9. & 10. v. And our Sauiour himselfe more plainely saith, when Philip desired to see the Father; He that knoweth me, knoweth the Father; and hee that seeth me, seeth the Father;
because I am in the Father, and the Father in me: And therefore I say, that Visio Dei beatifica, The blessed fruition of the God∣head, which the Saints shall haue in Heauen, shall bee no otherwise reueiled vnto vs, then in the face of the Man Ie∣sus Christ; because the Deitie considered in it selfe, Inhabitat lu∣cem inaccessibilem,1 Tim. 6.16. dwelleth in the light that no man can attaine vnto. And so you see the occasion of these words; that God ha∣uing told Moses he could neither see his Essence, nor yet fully vnderstand his Excellency; he would notwithstanding so farre satisfie his desire, as to shew him all that he could possibly com∣prehend; viz. that he was Iehoua, Iehoua, strong, mercifull, and gracious, &c. Et sic condescendit nobis Deus, vt nos consurga∣mus ei: And thus God doth most graciously condescend, and make himselfe knowne to man, that man might ascend, and, as much as possibly lyeth in him, know his God. In all this Diuine description of Almighty God,The diuision of the Text. I find these two especiall things set downe. 1. Quid est 2. Qualis est Deus, i. e. 1. What God is, and 2. What manner of God he is. And in the handling of these two points, I shall by Gods helpe spend and finish this whole Treatise. CHAP I. Of the description of God, how he maybe knowne; what he is:Part. 1. and of this speciall Name, IEHOVA. TOuching the first Part; Danda imprimis opera est, vt Deum noscamus, quotquot faelices esse volu∣mus: It must be the chiefest care of all that would bee happy, to know God, which is the chiefest happinesse of all: for to feare God and to keepe his Commandments; Hoc est omnis ho∣mo: This is the dutie, and this is the felicity of euery man.Bernard. At non potes aut amare quem non noueris, aut habere quem non amaueris;
But thou canst not either loue him, whom thou dost not know, or imoy him whom thou dost not loue; Quia ignoti nulla cupido, Because Knowledge is the ground of loue; and whom we loue not, we can neither seeke any helpe from him, nor yet render any seruice to him:Iohn 17 3. and therefore our Sauiour saith, that this is eternall life to know him to be the onely true God, and whom he hath sent Iesus Christ. And this is the reason why so many thou∣sands shall be destroyed;2 Thess. 1.8. because they know not God: And this the very Heathens perceiued, though they could not attaine it, when among all their Precepts, this was their chiefest lesson: ; Know God. That there are three wayes of knowing God.Now we must vnderstand that there are three wayes of know∣ing God, (I speake not of that knowledge which the Booke of Nature teacheth; for that is too small to make vs happy, but of that which we doe collect out of the Booke of God) and those according to the Schooles, are these: Exod. 23.19.20.23.The first is according to that, which he is in himselfe, where∣by he is , vnspeakeable, infinite, and incomprehensi∣ble; and thus, none knoweth God, but God himselfe; and the reason hereof is, that although, Nihil magis intelligibile quam Deus, No∣thing of his owne nature is more intelligible, then God; be∣cause he is the first,Zanch. de nat. Dei l 3. c. 2. p. 199. the perfectest, and the truest being, most pure and simple, and free from any matter; yet is our vnderstanding towards God, but as the eyes of the Owles, or Reremouse, which are not able to behold the brightnesse of the Sunne: and therefore, thus if we seeke to know him,That we are not able to know God as he is in him∣selfe. wee shall be but like Symonides, that being commanded by the Emperour, to tell him, what God was, demanded three dayes respite for to resolue so great a quaere: and when hee came, hee required sixe dayes more: and being therefore asked why he prolonged so the time, and thereby so deluded him, he ingeniously answered; because the more I search into him, the further I finde my selfe from attaining to him; And therefore in this respect we should, Sapere ad sobrietatem, Bee wise vnto sobriety, and not curiously search into his ineffable Maiestie, but rather with the Cherubims, to couer our faces with two of our Wings;Esay 6.2. because we are not able to know him as he is. The second is according to that, which may be knowne of vs,
and may be any wayes comprehended in our mindes and best vnderstandings. And thus we conceiue him to be most admi∣rable; but yet by infinite degrees inferior to that which he is in himselfe; and therefore we should striue and labour what we can, to vnderstand and know him more and more; for the more fully that we shall know him, the more perfectly we shall loue him, and the more perfectly wee loue him, the more happinesse wee shall adde vnto our owne felicity. The third is, according to that which may be spoken or written by the best of men: And this is the narrowest way to expresse him: and yet we can reach no further; for as he is in himselfe, he is (as I said before) a light of an infinite brightnesse,1 Iohn 1 5. in whom is no darkenesse at all; and as the Apostle saith, Hee dwelleth in the light that none can attaine vnto:1 Tim. 6.16. no Eagles eye can fully look vpon the brightnesse of his light, no vnderstanding can compre∣hend the incomprehensible excellency of his Maiestie; and therfore we must rest our selues contented, to know him so, as we are able to conceiue of him; and to expresse him so, as our slender speech will giue vs leaue.Casman. in thest de Deo. And thus we finde three speciall wayes of expressing what he is. First, by way of negation, by remouing from him what we finde in the creatures, or what euer is said of any of them;Aug in l. de cognit. verae vit. & de ver∣bis dom ser. 38. as when with the ancient Philosophers, wee say God is not the Sunne, not the Moone, not a Man, not mooueable, not finite, &c. & this is the best part of our Knowledge of him, (as Saint Au∣gustine saith,) when we know rather what he is not,That there are three especiall wayes of ex∣pressing what God is. then what he is: For, as a curious Statue is composed and perfected, by hewing and cutting something still from it, and not by adding any thing vnto it: So is our God knowne of vs, by denying him to be such and such things, as are common to the crea∣tures, and by paring away humane conceits from him, when we goe about to conceiue what he is. Secondly, by way of affirmation and perfection, as when wee do analogically, and in respect of certaine similitudes, ascribe vnto God the best and most excellent things that can be found in any creatures, and so we say, he is great, strong, faire, mercifull, iust, &c. Thirdly, By way of supereminency, and transcendent excel∣lency; as when we ascribe to God, whatsoeuer excellencies that
are spoken, or may be spoken of him; farre aboue all the excel∣lencies of all other creatures whatsoeuer: and so we doe referre and reduce all excellencies vnto him, as vnto the common cause of them all; or as vnto the fountaine from whence all these little channels of excellencies doe flow: And therefore we say not onely in the concrete, that God is iust, mercifull, wise strong, good,That the ab∣stract names of all excel∣lencies, are onely proper vnto God. and such like, but also in the abstract, that he is iustice, mer∣cy, wisedome, strength, and goodnesse it selfe, which cannot be said of any creatures: for that all the best excellencies of the chie∣fest creatures, are but as little sparkes in respect of a huge infinite fire: or as a few drops of raine in comparison of the whole Oce∣an Sea, if we should compare them to the excellency of God: Nay, we should find their wisedomes follie, their strength weake∣nesse, their beauty baldnesse, and all their goodnesse to be no∣thing in respect of the goodnesse of God: for, he chargeth his Angels with folly, and the Heauens are not cleare in his sight, saith holy Iob. A description of God by way of 1 Negation. 2 Affirmation. 3 Superemi∣nencie. Now according to these three wayes, God is described to be an immortall, inuisible, incomprehensible, spirituall, infinite, eternall Essence, the cause of all causes, and the Author of all excellencies. Here is a boundlesse Ocean, and a very large description of God; and I may sooner loose my selfe, in the prosecuting of the same, then to finde him fully as he is, in any place, which is fully and truely in euery place. Aug. de trini∣tate.But I remember that excellent rule of Saint Augustine, Ca∣uendum est, ne dum de deo cogitamus, & non possumus inuenire quid sit, aliquid de eosentiamus quod non sit: We must take great heed least in seeking to know what God is, we thinke him to bee what he is not: and therefore that I may not erre in this point, I will say no more, but with himselfe, which knowes himselfe best; that he is Iehoua, this he is, and this is his Name for euer, and as the old saying is, Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis, & of all his Names, this is the onely Name that doth expresse the Essence and the Nature of God; for all other Names are but adiuncts, expressing, Qualis est essentiae, Of what manner of being hee is, as Eternall, Omniscient, Omnipotent; or else qualis non est, what he is not, as Immortall, Inuisible, incomprehensible, or deriued from the roote of this, as Eheich,  &  (as some
would haue it) but Iehoua, Nomen tetra grammaton, This Name of foure letters, the most Venerable, and Ineffable Name amongst the Iewes, (as Galatinus saith,) deriued of Haiah,Galat. l. 2. c. 9. The name Jehoua, is the most proper Name of God. (as the Hebritians note) which signifieth Esse, an euerlasting being; Est solummodo proprium & essentiale nomen Dei; is the onely pro∣per and Essentiall Name of God: Because all the other names of God (whereof Saint Hierome collecteth nine) besides Ie∣houa, and such as are deriued from the roote thereof, are names attributed vnto him in respect of his workes: either internall, as Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, and such like, which are names attributed vnto him,Hieron. in epist. ad Marcell. in respect of the inward operations of God: or else externall, as El, Shadai, Lord, Creator, and such like, which are names attributed vnto him in respect of his out∣ward workes; as Galatinus sheweth. And therefore when Moses desired to know the Name of God, God nameth himselfe Eheich Ascher Eheich,Exod. 3.14. which the Sept. translated, . I am that I am, (putting the present Tense for the future Tense;) is my Name; and it is all one, as if hee had said more plainely, Hee that was, hee that is, and hee that euer shall be: For if you looke neuer so farre backe, you shal neuer finde where his being began; or if you inquire neuer so curiously into the time to come, you shall neuer finde like∣lihood of his ending; for, Thou art God from euerlasting, and world without end, saith the Psalmist: and so Yesterday, to day,1 Tim. 1.17. and the same for euermore, saith the Apostle: and in this respect, he is called, the King of Ages, which hath made the times,Esay 57.15. and doth in∣habit eternity. Moreouer, it is obserued, that in this name Iehoua, (besides many other Mysteries, that the more curious searchers into the same doe collect) there is not onely shewed, the being of God, but also the manner of that being; that is, the three manner of subsistings, in that one simple and eternall being: or the Trinity of persons in that Vnity of Essence. And I confess, that seeing there cannot be but one Iehoua, one infinit & eternall being; & that both the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Spirit,Each person of the Trinity, is the true Iehoua. are called each one of them Iehoua, as you may most apparently see, if you compare the 6. of Esay and the 9. where the great Iehoua saith vnto the Prophet, Goe and tell this people, heare and vnder∣stand
not; see, but perceiue not; make the heart of this people fat: with the 12 of Iohn 41. Where the Euangelist saith, that these words of the Prophet, were spoken of Christ: when hee saw his glory, and spake of him; and with the 28 of the Acts 25. Where Saint Paul saith, The Holy Ghost spake these words by Esayas the Prophet: and if you looke into the first of the Reuelations 8. where Christ assumeth the same name vnto himselfe, saying, I am Alpha, & Omega: the beginning, & the ending; , which was, which is, which is to come: And so into the 8 of Iohn, the 58. where our Sauiour alludeth vnto the same Name, saying; Before Abraham was, I am, It doth sufficiently proue each one of these persons, to be an infinite God, subsisting in that one eternall Essence;Zanch. de na∣tura dei l. 1. c. 13. p. 35. because it is most certaine, that the Name Iehoua, is so propper vnto God, that it can be ascribed to none else: as Zanchius saith. But because many other places of Scripture, are more plaine and pregnant, to proue this great Mystery of godlinesse; I will not insist to wring out an apparant truth from the obscurest places:Chrysost. hom. 2 in Heb. and because, as Saint Chrysostome saith, Nequue ad loquen∣dum digne de Deo lingua sufficit, neque ad percipiendum intellectus praeualet. Our tongues are not able to speake worthily enough of God, and our vnderstandings are not sufficient to conceiue of him as we ought to doe: yea, and that, De deo loqui etiam vera aliquando periculosissimum est; It may be dangerous some∣times to speake truths of God: for as Euclides being demaun∣ded of one, what God did; and in what things he most delighted, did most truly answere; that he knew not well what he did: but he was certaine he delighted not in vaine and curious persons:Maxim. ser. 33. That it is not safe to search too farre into the seeing of God. so I say that curiosity in this highest point of Diuinity, is very dangerous; or, as Saint Bernard saith; to inquire too farre into this point, is peruerse curiositie; to beleeue it as the Scripture tea∣cheth, is infallible security; and to see him as he is, is most abso∣lute felicity: therefore I will wade no further into this depth; but I will exhort and desire you all, Potius glorificare eum qui est, quam inuestigare quid est;Chrysost. quo supra hom. 2. in Heb. Rather most faithfully to serue him, which is, then curiously to search what he is, Ne & in hac illicite curiosi, & in illa damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati; least in this, wee be found vnlawfully curious,Prosper de vo∣cat: gentium. and in the other most damnably vnthankefull; as Prosper speaketh.
CHAP. II. How God is the giuer of Being to all Creatures, and the fulfiller of all his promises. AND yet, I must note vnto you,Zanch de natura Dei. l. 1. c. 18. Why Jehoua is twice repeated. that here Ie∣houa is twice repeated, not to make Moses the more attentiue, (as some doe thinke it,) for the very speech of God, at such a time, and in such a manner, was enough, in my iudge∣ment, to moue attention; but rather, to sig∣nifie (as I take it) that as he is an eternall being in himselfe, so he giueth being to all things else; viz. 1. To all Creatures. 2. To all his promises. For First, In him we liue, we moue, and haue our being;Acts 17.1.28. saith the most learned Apostle of the Gentiles, euen in the streetes of Athens: and of him, and for him, and through him, are all things,Rom. 11.36. saith the same Apostle vnto the Romans, the sole Monarchs of the whole World; and so GOD himselfe saith,Esay 44.24. I am Iehoua that made all things: Which is all one, as if hee had said; As I am called the Creator, because I haue made,That all things doe subsist in God. and created all things: so I am called Iehoua, Being; be∣cause I gaue, and doe giue their being, vnto all the things that are. And it is obserued, that as in the Hebrew word Iehoua, there is nothing but Consonants, Iod, He, Vau, Am, which with∣out their prickes, that doe stand for the vowels, can not be pro∣nounced; to shew how ineffable,How ineffable is God. and how vnexpressable the es∣sence of God is: So in the Latine word Iehoua there are con∣tained all the vowels, a. e. i. o. u; without some of which, no word can be spoken, no name can be vttered; and that in it there is nothing but vowels, excepting h. which is no letter, but the aspiration of the word; to note vnto vs,That God is the very life of all things. that as the vowels together with the aspiration, is the life, and as it were the soule of euery word: so is Iehoua, the Lord God, the very life, and being as it were of euery Creature that can be named; be∣cause that, of him, and for him, and through him are all things.Rom. 11.36. Non quod illa sunt quod ipse est, sed quia ex ipso sunt; Not that
they are the same,Bern. in cant. serm. 4. that he is; but because they haue their exi∣stence and perfection from him, as Saint Bernard saith. Exod. 6.3. This place of Exodus explai∣ned.Secondly, when God saith, He was not knowne vnto Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Iacob, by his name Iehouah; it is not to be vnder∣stood of his essentiall being; for so they knew him, euen by this very name, Iehouah; as we may see in the fifteenth of Genesis, and the seauenth verse; and in the eight and twenty of Genesis, and the thirteenth verse, of the originall Text; and so Tremel∣lius reades it:Gerard. l. 3 de nat. Dei. Neither is it to be vnderstood, De gradibus diui∣narum patefactionum, Of the degrees of the diuine manifestati∣ons of God, (as Gerardus saith) because sometimes it is the manner of the Scriptures, to say, that things are then, when they are manifested to be,Alsted. Lexic. Theol. c. 2. as it is said of the holy Ghost, Quod nondum erat, quia nondum innotuerat, That he was not, because as yet he had not manifested himselfe to be;Iohn 7.39. for so he may be said not to be knowne vnto Moses, nor vnto any man else, because neither himselfe, nor any of his names can be knowne of any man,1 Cor. 13. but onely in part, as the Apostle sheweth. And the exam∣ple alleaged of the holy Ghost, is mis-interpreted; because the Euangelist speakes not there of the person of the holy Ghost, nor yet of the inuisible bestowing of the gifts of the holy Ghost; for so they euer knew him to be, and his gifts to be giuen vnto the Saints: and therefore they did vse to pray with the Psalmist, That God would renew a right spirit within them.Psal. 50.11.12. But the meaning of the Euangelist is, that the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, were not as yet plentifully, visibly, and miraculously giuen; because that Iesus was not yet glorified: for that, according to the prophecie of Dauid,Psal. 68.18. Christ was first to ascend vp on high, and to leade captiuity captiue; and then in that manner to bestow gifts on men. But these words, that he was not knowne vnto them, by his name Iehouah; are to be vnderstood of the performing and accompli∣shing of those promises, which he made vnto them, of the giuing of the Land of Canaan vnto them, and their posterity: for the words going before, I haue appeared vnto them by the name of Almighty God; and the words immediately following, and I haue established my couenant with them, to giue them the Land of Canaan, the Land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers;
doth make it sufficiently plaine, that the meaning of the holy Ghost is this; videlicet, that although by the creation of the World, and the destruction of the same, and so by the restaura∣tion, and the continuall preseruation of the World, and of them∣selues especially, in all their pilgrimage,Vide Zanch. de nat. Dei l 2. c. 13. hee had sufficiently shewed himselfe vnto them to be Almighty; yet by the giuing of the Land of Canaan vnto them, and their posterity, he had not shewed himselfe a fulfiller and accomplisher of his promise; because that same promise of giuing them the Land of Canaan, though it was faithfully made vnto Abraham, yet was it not ful∣ly accomplished, vntill the dayes of Iosuah. And therefore, God hereby would giue Moses,That God is a faithful perfor∣mer of all his promises. and vs all to vnderstand, that as he is an eternall Iehouah, or being in him∣selfe, and the giuer of being vnto all Creatures, so would hee performe, and giue being vnto all his promises; and as hee was now mindfull, to accomplish this promise which hee made with Abraham, of giuing the Land of Canaan; so would he be as mindfull to performe that great promise, which hee chiefly aimed at, and intended by this; viz. of giuing eternall life vnto Abraham, and all his faithfull Children: for wee must vnder∣stand, that whatsoeuer was done, or said vnto the Patriarchs, and Fathers of the Old Testament,1 Cor. 10.11. Omnia in figura contingebant illis; They were but Types and Figures, and had relation vnto farre more excellent things: and therefore the chiefe meaning of God herein is, that although he had but promised vnto A∣dam, that the seede of the Woman should breake the Serpents head;Gen 3 15. Gen 22.18. and vnto Abraham, that in his seede all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; and should through the said seede be brought to possesse and enioy the euerlasting Canaan; and had not as yet performed the same in their time: yet as now hee intended by him, and especially by Iosua, to giue vnto the posterity of Abra∣ham, the temporall Land of Canaan, (as their owne eyes should immediately see) so he would as certainely in his due time, by, and through, Iesus Christ, (whereof Iosua was but a type and figure) giue vnto all the faithfull sonnes of Abraham, the possession and inheritance of the spirituall Canaan, that is, eternall life: and then they should all see, and perceiue him to be, as true a Iehouah, that is, as true a performer, and giuer of
being, vnto this his promise of their redemption, and eternall sal∣uation; as they doe see him, and know him to be an eternall being in himselfe, and the giuer of being, id est, The Creator of all the things that be; or as the Children of Israel doe see him, to performe his promise, of giuing the Land of Canaan vnto the posterity of Abraham. And so much for the most especiall things, that we may obserue out of this name Iehouah. CHAP. III. Of the vsefull instructions, that we may gather out of the for∣mer Doctrine. WEll then, beloued Brethren, let vs apply this truth vnto our selues: and first, seeing that good is no good, which wanteth perpetuity, (as Nazian∣zen saith,) and that God onely, is that eternall being, which hath, and giueth immortality; it teacheth vs, where to seeke for our eternity. In∣deed, of our selues we shall be euer: for though God made vs, Ex nihilo,How wee may attaine vnto immortality. Out of nothing; yet he did not make vs, Ad nihilum, To returne to nothing: There may be a dissolution of soule and body for a time, but there cannot be an annihilation of neither, because they must be re-vnited againe, to remaine for euer; but euer (without God) in eternall misery: and therefore, seeing it is a deadly immortality, to be immortall onely for immortall tor∣ments, we ought to ascend to him, and be vnited to him, if wee would be happy, and desire to make our immortality profitable vnto vs. 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 13.14.Why then should we place our rest on Earth, where we be strangers and pilgrimes, and haue no continuing Citie? and not rather crie to God,Claud l. 2. in Eut. Eripe nos tandem seruilibus eripe regnis. Reuel. 6.10.How long tarriest thou, holy and true? or when commest thou, O good God, to free vs, E lutulentis manum operibus, from this more then Egyptian bondage in this wicked world, and to bring vs Lord vnto thy selfe, where we shall haue a most
hap bing, and a most glorious Kingdome, without ending? For here alas, Mille parit luctus mortalibus vna voluptas. We haue a thousand bitter sighes, for euery little smile; Et praeterit iucunditas non redditura, & manet anxietas non peritura, And our little pleasure will soone vanish, and yet leaue a sting and a torment, that shall neuer be finished: but in thy presence, there is fulnesse of ioy,Psal. 16.12. and at thy right hand there is pleasure for euer∣more. Secondly, seeing we, and all things else, haue our being from God: Iupiter est quodcum{que} vides quocun{que} moueris,Lucan. l. 9. That we ought to be thankfull vnto God, be∣cause we hue all things from God. For whatsoeuer we are, or wheresoeuer we are, we are all, and haue all from God: Why then should we be so vngratefull, and so vndutifull as we are vnto God? For had we not had our being, all the titles of honours, all the confluence of wealth, and all the pompous things that we haue from Parents, Kings, Masters, Friends, or whom you will, had auailed vs nothing; nay, had wee not had these things from God, wee had had nothing at all; because hee gaue them their being, and then gaue them to vs, Per manus eorum, By the hands of them which brought them vnto vs: for he is the giuer of euery good and perfect gift;Iames 1.17. and all other things are but the instruments, whereby hee conuayes and sends those gifts vnto vs:1 Cor. 9.7. And therefore why should we not wholly dedicate our selues and ours, vnto the seruice of God? For, who planteth a Vineyard, and eateth not of the fruits thereof? And yet God may iustly say of vs, Filios enutriui,Esay 1.2. I haue nou∣rished and brought vp Children, but they haue despised me; for though he made man, and made all things for man: yet cannot all these things, make man to serue him, as he ought to doe; but that euery one of vs will follow after the lusts, and concupi∣scence of his owne flesh, which (as the Poet saith) Et nocitura placet, & placitura nocet; Doth euen wound vs, when it most de∣lighteth vs. Thirdly, seeing God giueth being vnto all his promises,Psal. 146.4. and keepeth his promise for euer, as he hath done already, in sending a Ioshua, to giue the Land of Canaan vnto the Israelites; and especially in sending Iesus Christ, to giue eternall life vnto all beleeuers: And that, dicta Iehouae sunt dicta pura; The words of
the Lord are pure words:That we should neuer doubt of Gods promises. 2 Pet. 2.4. Wee should expectare imp a em, neuer doubt of the performance of Gods promises, nor say with those incredulous Athiests, in the second of Peter, 2.4. Where is the promise of his comming? But we should beleeue them to be as sure and as certaine, as if they were already accompli∣shed: For he is Iehoua, that will giue them their being, in their appointed time.Matth. 24.3. Heauen and Earth shall passe away, but his Word shall not passe: That shall be surely accomplished. CHAP. IV. Of the word LORD, and how many wayes it is taken, and of the reasons to perswade vs to serue him. I Might now passe vnto the second part, but that the translating of this word, Iehoua, by our last Translators into the word Lord; (for so we reade it, The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull and gracious, &c.) must here stay me a while: For searching into the reason, why Iehoua should be transla∣ted Lord,Why Iehoua is translated Lord. I found that the seauenty Interpreters doe translate it so in euery place; and that because  or , from whence  is deriued, signifieth, I am; which is the same in effect, as Iehoua; and also because he is properly called , The Lord of any thing, Qui plenum,  & , in eadem rem habet, Which hath full right, and a most absolute authority ouer the same thing; for, Dominus primo dicebatur, à domo: He was at the first called Lord, which was the Master of the House, and had full right and authority ouer all the Houshold: and wee finde that none but God alone, can simply and absolutely say, that he hath full right and authority ouer any thing in the World; be∣cause he onely is the Maker, and preseruer of all things, and of euery thing:Polanus Syntag. l. 2. c. 6. and therefore all other Lords are but Lords vnder him, and from him; and he onely is, , Lord of him∣selfe, and so indeede Lord of Lords. And in this respect, we finde , Lord, and Iehoua, to be
equiualent, and to fall into the same thing:That God one∣ly is an absolute Lord. Tertul. in Apol. c. 34. Lamprid. in A∣lex. Seuer. and therefore Augustus, the first founder of the Roman Empire, refused to be called Lord; and so did Alexander Seuerus, and diuers others, because they thought the name of Lord, to be too high a title for so meane Creatures, as they knew themselues to be. But we distinguish betwixt a Lord simply, and a Lord , in some respect. In the first sence, none is Lord but God alone; and there∣fore in this respect, our Sauiour saith, Be not you called Lords; but, In the second sence, Dicam plane imperatore Dominum,Tertul. quo sup. saith Tertullian; I may, and will call the Emperor Lord: and so saith Obadiah, vnto the Prophet Elias, Art not thou my Lord Elias?1 Reg 18.7. Because God, which gaue them their rule, and dominion, in his stead, hath also innobled them with his own names; Et ego dixi, dij estis, And I my selfe (saith God) haue called you gods,Psal. 82.6. and haue giuen these names vnto you, to be called Gods; and so Lords. And yet they should remember Saint Peters rule, , Not to Lord it so, as to ouer-rule Gods people; or, as Saint Augustine saith, Non dominandi superbia, sed officio consu∣lendi: Not for the loue of Soueraignty, but in a desire to doe them good, and to imitate God himselfe. Parcere subiectis, & debellare superbos: To defend and helpe the innocent, and to punish the wrong doer. And so you see how Iehoua, is rightly translated , Lord, because truely and absolutely hee alone is Lord of all things, as the sole giuer of their being,That we should feare and serue our Lord. Malach. 1.6. Psal. 24.2. and preseruer of them in that be∣ing. And this should incite vs, to feare, and to serue this our Lord: for, Si Dominus, vbi timor? If I am a Lord, where is my feare? The Prophet Dauid saith, that the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, because he hath founded it vpon the Seas, and pre∣pared and established it vpon the flouds: And so this Iehoua is our Lord, because he made vs, and hath giuen vs our very being; and yet wee finde that hee is our Lord in a more excellent re∣spect: for as those,Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 15. which by right of warre might iustly be put to death, and yet were redeemed and preserued aliue, were called
seruants; and those that redeemed them, were called their Lords; so are we called Gods Seruants, and he our Lord; not onely be∣cause he made vs, but also because when we might haue beene iustly put to eternall death for our sinnes, we were redeemed, and saued by the death of Iesus Christ. And in this respect, we finde, that although the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, be each one of them our Lord, as our Creator, and the giuer of our Being; yet is Christ generally, and most commonly throughout all the New Testament, called our Lord: as if this name were now wholly and solely to be appropriated vnto him,Why Christ is most properly called Lord. because he is our sole Sauiour and Redeemer. And there∣fore, seeing the very name of a Seruant, doth include seruitium, a seruice to be performed vnto our Lord and Sauiour; and that indeede we were preserued to that end, that we might serue him, as Zacharias telles vs, That wee were deliuered from our enemies, that wee might serue the Lord in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life: Wee ought to endeauour what lyeth in vs to serue this Lord; and we should the more ioyfully doe it, be∣cause as Philo saith,Philo in l. de Regno. : To serue the Lord, is not onely better then liberty, but also more excellent then all Soueraignty. And Hugo de prato set∣teth downe three especiall reasons, to perswade all men to serue the Lord. Hugo de prato ser. 6. de temp.1. Because we owe our seruice vnto God. 2. That we may obtaine a good reward from God. 3. That we may escape the punishment of them, that neg∣lect to serue God; for, Three speciall reasons to per∣swade vs to serue God.First, The Lord hath made vs, redeemed vs, preserued vs, inriched vs with all that we haue: and therefore, What reward shal we ren∣der vnto the Lord, for all the benefits that he hath done vnto vs; vn∣lesse we will be contented, to take the Cuppe of saluation, and to call vpon the name of the Lord; and so dedicate our selues wholly to the praysing and glorifying of his name? Secondly, if we will serue him, we shall be sure to haue in this life, his grace to guide vs, his Angels to guard vs, his holy Spirit to comfort vs, and whatsoeuer he knoweth to be needfull for vs;
and in the life to come, wee shall haue eternall happinesse: wee shall haue the Crowne of euerlasting glory. Thirdly, if we will not serue him, but say, Nolumus hunc reg∣nare super nos, We will not haue him to be our Lord, and Master; but wee will serue our selues, and the lusts of our owne flesh; then you must know what he will say to such, Those mine ene∣mies that would not serue me, bring them hither, and slay them before me: nay, if you will despise my Statutes, and abhorre my iudge∣ments, so that you will not doe all my Commandements; I also will doe this vnto you: I will euen appoint ouer you terror, consump∣tion, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sor∣row of heart; and you shall sow your seede in vaine,Leuit. 26.15.16.17. and I will set my face against you; hee manes here in this life: and at the last dreadfull day, they shall be bound hand and foote, and cast into that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone for euermore: There shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. And therefore, to discharge our duty, to attaine vnto eternall felicitie, and to escape this endlesse miserie; let vs serue the Lord with feare, and reioyce vnto him with reuerence: And blessed are all they that serue him.Psal. 2.11. And so much for the first Part, What God is, or of the Essence of God.
PART. II. Of the Nature of God,Part. 2. or what manner of God he is. CHAP. I. Of the power of God, and how many sorts of Aduersaries there be, which doe oppose the Truth of this Doctrine of the power of God. YOu haue heard what God is, IEHOVA, that is, an Eternall being in himselfe, and a giuer of being vnto all the things that doe subsist, and now we are dili∣gently to consider, The nature of God, or, what manner of God he is: for, I find that God doth here expresse him∣selfe vnto Moses by three especiall at∣tributes, 1. His Power, to make vs beleeue in him. 2. His Goodnesse, to make vs loue him. 3. His Iustice, to make vs feare him. 3. excellent points to bee throughly knowne: to be e∣uer learnt, & neuer to be forgotten: for, The first attri∣bute of God, i. e. His Power.First, the Doctrine of Gods Power, is the very Anchor of our Faith, and the foundation of all Christian Religion; for hence proceede all Heresies; because the Heretickes know not the Scrip∣tures, nor the Power of God; and hence proceeds all Faith; be∣cause we beleeue with the blessed Virgin,Stella in Luc. c. 1. p. 36. b Quia potens est, that God is able to doe all these things, which Reason is not able to comprehend; and therefore here, immediately after Iehoua, he addeth E L:Jeron. tom. 3. p. 95. in ep. ad Marell. which the Septuagint. turned and translated , GOD: and Aquila, searching into the Etymologie of the word, interprets it, , that is, Strong; saith Saint Hierome, and so Zanchius euery where; Tremelius and some other Latine
versions, and the old English Translation reads it strong:How needfull is the Doctrine of the Power of God. Psal 62.11. and so in Lege credendi in the Symbole of our Beliefe, as soone as euer he sheweth himselfe to be, he sheweth himselfe to be Almigh∣ty; and so the Prophet Dauid saith, God spake once and twice, I haue also heard the same, that Power belongeth vnto God. And surely this Doctrine of GODS Power, is so vsefull for all Christians, and so necessary for the vnderstandng of the Scriptures; that among all the Attributes of God this deserueth first to be discussed because, there is, almost no page of Scripture,Zanch. de nat. Dei. l. 3. c. 1. wherein there is not some mention made of the Power of God; and the ignorance, or not rightly vnderstanding of this Truth, is the cause of so many Infidels and Heretickes in the world: and therefore I must craue leaue to insist a little vpon this point of Doctrine, of the Power of God: And for Method sake, I will diuide my whole discourse of this point, into these foure heads. 1 I will set downe the number,Foure points handled, tou∣ching the Power of God. and the qualitie of the Ad∣uersaries of this Truth. 2 I will explaine this point, and shew wherein and how farre this Power of God extendeth. 3 I will sufficiently confirme the truth hereof, and answere to whatsoeuer is, or can be said against it. 4 I will briefly shew the vsefull application of the whole Doctrine. For the first, the Aduersaries of this Truth, which doe ei∣ther exceedingly erre, or be mightily deceiued; are almost infinite: but I may reduce the chiefest of them into these foure sorts; whereof two by impayring and denying his Power, doe vnto him the greatest wrong; that is,Foure sorts of men doe erre, about the Truth of this Doctrine, of the Power of God. 1. The Infidels, that will not beleeue in him. 2. The desperate men, that will not hope in him. Because they thinke he cannot do those things, which in very deed are most facile and easie for him to doe. And the other two, by mis-vnderstanding the extent of his Power, doe not shew much lesse indignitie vnto God, then the former: and they are 1. The Ʋbiquitaries of Germany, 2. The Pontificials of Rome. Which say hee
can doe those things, which indeed are agreeable, neither to the Power, nor to the Truth of God. And so as Goclenius saith; Crimen in excessu, nec non defectus aberrat Sd verum, medium qui tenucre, tenent. We must walke in the middle-way, if wee would not walke awry. Psal. 14.1.First, for the Infidels, The foole hath said in his heart, there is no God; and what he saith in his heart, he testifieth and confirmeth by his workes; for, by their workes they deny God, saith the Apo∣stle, and some in plaine tearmes, as Diagoras and others: And therefore seeing they deny him to be, what maruell is it that they should deny him to be Almighty? and therefore one of the Captaines,2 Reg. 7.2. and a Lord of the King of Israel, said vnto Elizeus; If the Lord should make windowes in Heauen to raine downe Corne like hayle-stones, yet how can he doe those things that thou hast spo∣ken? and the wicked in Iob say, Quis est omnipotens vt seruia∣mus ei?How the A∣theists and In∣fidels deny the Power of God. or, quid est omnipotens, as Tremelius reads it, who, or what is Almighty God that we should serue him? as if they said we know none such. But what doe I stand vpon Infidels? the most learned of their Philosophers, the wittyest of their Poets, and many Heretickes haue made but a scoffe of that Doctrine, of the Omnipotent Power of God: and did with all their strength maintaine, that Ex nihilo nihil fit, Of nothing, nothing could be made: and therefore concluded it was impossible for God, Ex non ente ens producere, To make any being of that, which had no being in the world:Arist. l 1. & 2. de caelo & mun∣do. and thereupon Aristotle, the Prince of all the Philosophers, doth striue with all his might to proue, that this world is Eternall, and neuer had any beginning: and they that yeeld it was made, doe affirme that it was composed of a prae-existent matter: this was the opinion of the Stoiks, and Peripateticks,Cicero l. 3. de nat. deorum. which Cicero imbraceth; So Seleucus and Hermi∣as (as Sebastianus Medices witnesseth) and Hermogines (against whom Tertullian writ a most elegant booke) haue said,Medices in summa haeres. that the matter and the substance of the Elements, whereof the world was made, was not made by God; but was coeternall with God:D. Sicul. l. 1. c. 1. Euseb. de prepa∣rat. Euang l. 1. all which, with many others (whose opinions, Diodorus Siculus, and Eusebius Caesariensis haue most painefully collected, and which is needlesse for me to rehearse) haue erred in this
point; because with Petrus Abaylardus (as Medices saith) they were ignorant of the Omnipotent Power of God. But against all these, and the like,How the Pow∣er of God is prooued. the Power of God may bee easily shewed, both from the Creation of the world, and also from the Gubernation of it, and of all things that are therein: for the World it selfe, saith Saint Augustine, Ordinatissima sua muta∣bilitate, & mobilitate, &c. by his most comely mutability and mobility, and all visible things in their kinde,First, from the creation of things. doe as it were ta∣citely, and after a secret manner, proclaime it selfe to be made; Yea, and to be made by none other, but by that most ineffable and inuisible excellent God: and therefore, although Aristotle in saying that this world was eternall, was farre wide from the Truth: because that whatsoeuer doth consist of a solide & a ponderous body, as it must of necessity haue an ending,Diuers Hea∣thens confes∣sed God to haue made the world. so it must needes be, that at some time or other, it hath had its beginning: yet diuers of the very Heathens, haue by the light of Nature, seene and confest this Truth; for we reade that Orpheus saide, , &c. There is one of himselfe, i. e. God,Justin. Martyr. in l de Monar∣chia. and from him alone, are all things that are, and Pythagoras (as Iustin Martyr cites him) said, , . If any man (besides that one euerliuing God) doth say, I am God; let him create a world like vnto this, and say this is mine: And so Epicurus himselfe, did in this thing confesse the Truth;He ydelpheldius de deo. c. 2. and say that this world had beginning and must in its due time haue ending; and so many others of the most ancient Philoso∣phers, did professe this Truth, and left their faith written for their posterities: If any man desire to see it, let him looke into Iustin Martyr, in his exhortation vnto the Gentiles, and in his Booke of Monarchy; and to Eusebius Casariensis de preparat: Euangel: and especially into Lactantius Firmianus, l. 1. c. 5. 6. & 7. By whom the sayings and opinions of the former Age are most carefully collected. And yet not one of them was able, either to shew any rea∣son, or to expresse the manner how any of these things should be made, (which was the cause that Aristotle and his followers,
that would haue the reason of euery thing,No man by the light of Nature is able to shew the reason how the world should be made. Heb. 11.3. or else would beleeue nothing; to say it was not made at all:) because they were all ignorant of those Diuine Oracles, whereby God had made knowne this Truth vnto men; and especially, because they were destitute of that Spirit, whereby we are perswaded to be∣leeue this Truth; for that (as the Apostle saith) through faith we vnderstand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God. Secondly, Gods Power is prooued from the go∣uernment of the world. Quintus Curt. de rebus gest. Alexand.And as the Creation of the World, so the Gubernation of the same doth as fully shew the Omnipotent Power of God: for I may truly say, Non minor est virtus quam condere, facta tueri: It requires as great a power, or greater, to sustaine all things, that they turne not to nothing, as to create all things of nothing. When Alexander asked a certaine people what thing they feared most, (thinking they would say they feared him) they scoffingly answered, the falling of the Skies; & indeed if we knew all, we might feare both the falling of the Heauens, and the ouer∣flowings of the Seas, and the vntamed furie both of men and beasts; were it not for Almighty God; which rideth vpon the Heauens as vpon a Horse,Psal. 68 4. and by his Power ruleth the rage of the Seas, and the noyse of his waues, and the madnesse of the people. And therefore well doth that Christian Poet conclude, Est Deus omnipotens, qui temperat omnia nutu. That he must needs be an Omnipotent God, which ruleth and guideth all things with his becke, or with a word, according to his owne will. And Victorinus Strigelius saith, that it is worth the obseruation, to consider out of Histories, the beginnings and in∣largements, the declinations, and subuersions of Empires; be∣cause that this consideration, doth illustrate, and confirme vnto vs, the song of the blessed Virgin, and the Power of the great Creator, Qui fecit Potentiam & deposuit potentes; Which raiseth the poore out of the mire, and bringeth downe the high lookes of the proude; because his hand is able both to exalt the one, and to deiect the other; as Aesope being demaunded, what God did, answered; Exaltat humilia & deijcit alta, He exalteth the lowly, and casteth downe the mighty;Victor. Strig. in Iustin. epit. p. 296. and this may be seene, as in all things, and in all Ages else; So especially in those Empires which wee call the foure Monarchies, saith Strigelius. And Poet Iuuenal saith;
Fortuna multis dat nimis, nulli satis Si fortuna volet, fies de consule rhetor, Si volet haec eadem, fies de rhetore consul. Fortune we see doth giue too much to many,The Heathens did falsely as∣cribe that to Fortune which is true indeed of God. And yet alas giues not enough to any. If Fortune will, thou maist be a Consull made And if that will, thou mst vnto thy former trade. And therefore Maro considering this admirable disposition of things, doth positiuely pronounce; Fortuna omnipotens, & ineluctabile fatum.Ʋirgil. Aeneid. l. 8. That Fortune is Omnipotent, and destinies vncontroulable. All which, Mutato nomine. If we change the name of Fortune, (which was their error to say,—Te facimus fortuna deam, And to ascribe all to chance) into the vnchangeable prouidence of God, wee finde it to bee most apparantly true: and therefore of an vnanswerable validitie, to confirme and proue the power of God. Secondly, for the desperate men: All wicked wretches,How wicked sinners thinke God cannot forgiue there sinnes. Deut. 32. when they are growne vnto the height of sinne, or fallen downe into the depth of all iniquity, and shall on the one side, see God exceedingly angry with them for their sinnes, and the fire kindled in his wrath, which shall burne vnto the bottome of Hell; and on the other side, the deuouring Gulph, ready to receiue them, and to detaine them in euerlasting flames; then doe these men, not so much  Atheists without the Knowledge of God, as  Infidels, without Faith or Hope in God, say with wicked Caine; Our sinnes are more then can be forgiuen vs: for that our iniquities which are so horrible, and Gods Iustice which is so vncorruptible, hue such a , great Gulfe and distance betwixt them, that Non bene conueniunt, nec in vna sede morantur; They can neuer be reconciled; and therefore our iniquity can neuer be remitted. Neither doe I truely, finde these men, to be much more stu∣pid then the former, whereof I haue euen now spoken; for al∣though I finde many men affirming, the powerfull Creation of all Creatures, others saying, the conseruation of the said created
things, and others the Incarnation of the Sonne of God, to bee the greatest worke, and argument of Gods diuine Power; yet I finde many Diuines not meanely learned, most confidently to auerre,That to for∣giue sinnes, is the greatest worke of Gods power. the remission of our sinnes, to bee simply and absolutely the greatest and most remarkeable worke of Gods power: and not without reason neither; because it is easier to create a thousand worlds of nothing, then it is to forgiue one sinne that is committed: for to the bringing forth of all creatures hee did but Speake the word,Psal. 33.9. and they were made; hee commaunded and they stood fast: But to obtaine for vs, remission of our sinnes, multa dixit magna fecit, dira tulit, hee spake many words, he did grat workes, and he suffered grieuous wrongs; as Saint Ber∣nard sayth: for Sinne is such a transcendent thing that as God himselfe in regard of his infinite beautie,Heydelpheld: C. 2. de deo. p. 9. so sinne in respect of its infinite deformitie, cannot be defined, nor shewed how hay∣nous a thing it is: and therefore the Church in the Collect vp∣on the eleuenth Sunday after Trinity, (which also I found ob∣serued by Aquinas) sayth; God which declarest thy Almighty power, most chiefly in shewing mercy, and pittie: And so Christ himselfe,Mar. 10.25. that knoweth all things, shewing how hard it is for a rich Man to enter into eternall life, doth seeme to shew as much: and therevpon his Disciples were astonished out of measure, saying among themselues;verse 26. Who then can be saued? Tantae molis erat caelestem condere gentem. So hard a thing it was, to pardon sinne; though we poore blinded fooles,That God is able to forgiue sinnes. doe esteeme it nothing to sinne. But yet against despaire, that it is not impossible with God to remit all sinnes; our Sauiour brings this reason, because all things are possible with God:Mar. 10. v. 27. and the blessed Apostle Paul dispu∣ting of the incredulous Iewes; and saying, that they also if they remained not in vnbeliefe, should be ingraffed againe into the Oliue tree, doth frame his argument, from the power of God; saying,Rom. 11.23. That God is able to graffe them in againe: for seeing that as a bough which is cut off, cannot graffe it selfe into the tree a∣gaine; so no more can a man, dead through sinne, reuiue him∣selfe any more, nor an infidell cast off his infidelitie, and poure faith into his owne heart againe: therefore the Apostle con∣fesseth, this is not of our selues; and sheweth that indeed all gra∣ces:
our Conuersion, our Faith, our Perseuerance, and all else, are scited in the sole Will and Power of God: because he alone, doth vinifie the dead, and call those things which are not, as if they were; that is, to cause those Men, which are dead through sinne, to be reuiued againe by grace; and those things which are not at all, in rerum natura, to haue their existens and being his onely word, without any labour or paynes, but as easily, or easier then we doe call the things that are; whereof both is, entis simpliciter ex non ente productio;Parraeus in Rom. C. 11. a production of being out of nothing, sayth Parraeus: and therefore is vnpossible to bee effected by any created power; but not with God: because all things are possible with him: and therefore is hee able,Mar 10.27. Esay 1.18. to make our sinnes that are as red as Scarlet, to become as white as Snow. Thirdly, For the Vbiquitaries: they doe conclude that by the omnipotent power of God, the man Christ Iesus, by reason of the communication of the properties of the one nature vnto the other, may be, & is omniscient, omnipresent, i. e. euery where, in all places, euen at one and at the selfe same time: for thus Mentzerus reasoneth against Sadeel; He that is omnipotent,Mentz contra Sadeel. p. 269. can be presente where he will; but the Man Christ Iesus, or Christ as man is omnipotent; therefore Christ, as man, can be present where he will; in the Church, in the Sacrament, in the midst of his enemies, or in any other place, where hee pleaseth: whereas Sadeel, on the other side sayth, that if God should intend and indeuour to extend all the nerues and synewes of his omnipotencie,The error of the Vbiqui∣taries. yet can he not make one numericall, and naturall Body, to be in many places at one and the selfe same time: which in very deede is most true, as hereafter I shall shew vnto you. Fourthly, For the Pontificialls;The error of the Church of Rome about Gods power, to prooue transubstan∣tiation. Bellarmine doth most stoutly withstand vs, and to establish his opinion of Transubstantiation he sayth, (but most falsely) that God can make the true and na∣turall body of Christ, though finite & numerically one, to be sub∣stantially present in all those places, whersoeuer their Masse is ce∣lebrated; and to be orally receiued, and eaten of all those Men, that doe communicate; whosoeuer those Men should be: and so the rest of them taught herein, by that Arch-heriticke the deuil, doe striue with all their might, to confirme the probabilitie (for
the veritie they shall neuer doe) of that opinion, from the om∣nipotent power of God.Augustin: in Iohan. And truely this is nothing else, but most cunningly to hide their true faults, and false errors, vnder the pretext and vayle of the power of God. Miserable men (herein I assure my selfe) qui dum volunt esse mali, nolunt esse veritatem, qua condemnantur mali, who while they desire to bee in error, doe wholly oppose the light of Trueth, whereby their errors are re∣proued, and doe bring their subtilties, and fallacies, into the Church of God; intruding falsehoods into the roome of Trueth, and bare names, accidents without any subiects, (euen as Ixion imbraced a Cloud for Iuno) to bee receiued of vs for true and reall things: and because we will not yeeld to be thus seduced, and to bee made fooles, they call vs Fooles, and Here∣tickes, full of Heresies, and I know not (as I care not) what. But it is easier for them, to call vs then to proue vs so: and they are but parties and not iudges of this controuersie, and parties must not be Iudges, in the same case wherein they are parties: And therefore wee will not iudge of them, least wee should bee iudged; neither will wee giue them any other names, then the members of the Church of Rome, the patrons and defenders of her doctrines, and such as beseemeth Modestie and Christia∣nitie: for we know the spirit of Christ is a spirit of Loue, not of hatred, a spirit of Meekenesse, not of harshnesse, and a spirit of Peace, not of strife and contention: but according to true rea∣son, and the iudgement of all antiquitie, and especially the di∣uine veritie of the most holy Scripture (whose propertie is, iudi∣cium , & infallibile, to giue an absolute and infallible iudgement of trueth,) wee will by Gods helpe, discusse this poynt, of the power of God: because the knowledge, of this poynt, is so exceedingly necessary for the Church of God.
CHAP. II. How many wayes the power of God is to bee considered, and how farre the absolute power of God extendeth. FOr the second point, that is, how farre the power of God extendeth; we must first note, the diffe∣rence betwixt  & , Power and Au∣thoritie; for Authoritie is that which is establi∣shed by right: and of this our Sauiour speaketh, when hee sayth, Mihi data est omnis potestas,Matth. 28.18. All power is giuen vnto me, in Heauen and in Earth; i. e. all au∣thority ouer all creatures, both in Heauen and Earth: and of this I am not to speake in this place; it was formerly expressed in the word, Lord: But Power is that facultie of doing any thing, which consisteth in strength, and might,Wolfg. Muscul: de omnipot. dei. as Musculus sayth: and this is that which I am to speake of; And it is either, 1. Passiue. 2. Actiue. First, A passiue Power is nothing else,Power is ei∣ther Actiue or Passiue. but ens in potentia a being in power; or else a power to bee such and such a thing; and it is opposed to the act; And this wee vtterly deny to be in God; because God is, , vni∣forme, hauing himselfe by himselfe alwayes alike, and the selfe same manner, and neuer receiuing any wayes, any change or alteration, being without any shadow of turning,James. 1.17. as the Apostle sayth. Secondly, An actiue power is that,What Actiue power is. whereby such and such acts are fully done and accomplished; and this also (if wee speake properly) is farre from the nature of God, because God is a meere, and a pure act: and nothing aduentitious can bee sayd to be in God; But to retaine the vsuall manner of speaking, for our better vnderstandings sake; we say that an actiue power is in God; But then we must further note that an Actiue Power is either, 1. Accepta, receiued, Or 2. Innata, inbred.
The first is of the Creature, the second is of the Creator: That subsisteth by anothers strength, so long as it doth indure, as our Sauiour sheweth, Without me you can doe nothing; because he giueth the power of working; This neuer subsisteth by any other strength, but by it owne proper might for euer: That, is particular and limited: particular, because no creature is so powerfull, that it can vniuersally worke all things, (God giuing not such a perfect power vnto any man, saue onely vn∣to his onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ,) and limited, because, to doe infinite things, is impossible for any creature; and be∣cause those things which are possible for them to doe, are not so possible vnto them, as that they can performe any iot of them,John 15.5. That the power of the most powerfull creatures is limited. beyond the measure of the limitation giuen of God: and therefore the power of Kings, Monarchs, & Potentates; yea, of the very Angels, and Deuils; as it is giuen them from aboue, so it is limited, how farre it shall goe: They may slay the bodyes, but they cannot touch the Soules: and they can for a while, and in some measure, execute their rage and tyrannie against the Saints of God; but if they could doe as much as they would doe; not a Righteous man should be left vpon the face of the Earth: and therefore often times, either by death, or by some singular iudgement of God, their power is terminated, and some∣times turned to their shame and confusion. The Second, that is, the Inbred power of the Creator, is to bee considered either, 1. In respect of the inward acts & Operations Of God. 2. In respect of the outward acts & Operations Of God. First, The power of God, considered in respect of his in∣ward operations, is that, whereby God doth inwardly vnderstand, loue, and worke for euer and euer, because he cannot, non , not to worke, by reason of the necessitie of his immutability, those things which are called,  i. e. aeternorum, the acts of eternitie; and this power is likewise two-fold. The power of God in respect of his inward acts is two∣fold: 1 Speciall.1. Speciall to each person. 2. Common to the Father, Sonne and Holy-Ghost. First, The speciall power is that which pertaineth vnto one per∣son, and not vnto the other, as potentia , the power of be∣getting is proper vnto the Father, and not to the Sonne, nor to
the Holy Ghost: because this Power is his Power, as hee is a Father, and not as hee is God; therefore it is proper and not common; because that for the Father to beget, and not to be begotten, and for the sonne to be begotten, and not to beget, and for the Holy Ghost to proceede, and not to beget, nor to be begotten, are, Proprietates , personall proprieties; whereby the persons of the Godhead are distinguished betwixt themselues. Secondly, the common Power,2 Common. is that which doth appertaine to each person in generall, as well to the one, as to the other: as the Power of working those internall operations which are common vnto the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost; such as are, those acts of louing each other, vnderstanding each other, and the like. Secondly, the Power of God considered,All the out∣ward actions of God, are com on to each person of the God∣head. in respect of his outward operations, is that, whereby God created all things, gouer∣neth all things, and can doe all things, whatsoeuer pleaseth him. And this is so common to the Father, the Sonne, and the Ho∣ly Ghost, that it is most rightly said, that opera trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa; The outward workes of the Trinity are indiuisi∣ble, that is, common to each person: And therefore this Power of God in respect of these outward operations, though in our Creed it is ascribed vnto the Father; lest that, because he is cal∣led Father, we should imagine, some defect and impotency to bee in him; as to the Sonne, we finde Wisedome ascribed; lest that because he is called Sonne, we might conceit some ignorance, or in experience to be in him: yet, as the wisedome of God,Gen. 1.2. Iohn 1.3. Heb. 1.2. Iob 26.13. so is this Power of God, and the workes of this Power, common to each person of the Deity: as we may see in the first of Iohn and the third, Heb. 1.2. Gene. 1.2. Iob 26.13. And we find this Power of God, to be 1. Proper vnto God. 2. Absolute in all things.That the pow∣er of God is so proper vnto God, as that it cannot be communica∣ted to any creature. First, It is proper, yea, so proper vnto God alone, as that it cannot be communicated to any creature: no not to the hu∣manitie of our Sauiour Christ: because the humanity, existing and hanging vpon the crosse, was not able to helpe it selfe; but was faine to cry vnto his Father, My God, my God, why hast thou for∣saken
me? And therefore Aquinas doth most truely conclude, that the soule of Christ was not capable to receiue into it selfe infinite Power; no more then a creature is able to containe or comprehend his Creator: and yet I confesse with the Apostle, that in him,Coloss. 1.9. i. e. in the person of Christ, dwelleth the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily: yea, and that the man Christ Iesus, receiued grace, not by measure, Sed vsque ad plenitudinem, but euen vnto the fulnesse, i. e. so much as a creature is any wayes capable of: because the Godhead did Communicate such perfections vnto the humanity, as the condition of a creature could possibly beare: yet is it manifest, that all those perfections, and excellencies, wherewith the manhood of Christ was indowed, and inno∣bled, were all of them created excellencies; because no attribute of God, can be Communicated vnto any created substance; be∣cause euery attribute of God, is God himselfe: but whatsoeuer is giuen, nd bestowed vpon any creature, must needs be a crea∣ted thing: and therefore neither the wisdome, nor the power, nor the goodnes, which are attributed vnto God, as they are the essen∣tiall properties, nay, the very Essence of God it selfe, can be any wayes communicated to any thing; but that which is communica∣ted vnto vs, must needes be some other thing from them: as the goodnesse which we haue, is a created goodnesse, and not that, nor any part of that goodnesse, which is in God; and therefore, though the Power, Wisedome, and goodnesse of God, (as they are God himselfe) are indissolubly vnited by a personall vnion vnto the humanity of Christ, innobled with all possibly created excellencies; yet are they so proper vnto the Deity, as that they cannot be communicated, to be the Essen∣tiall properties of it; or of any other creature whatsoeuer: and so the very names of them, that they are the properties of God, doth sufficiently shew, that they cannot be the properties of any other thing. Secondly, as this Power of God, is proper vnto God alone, so it is absolute, because it is not so limited, by the vniuersall Law of Nature,That the Pow∣er of God is absolute in three respects. as if beside, or aboue it, God could not do any thing that he would; but it is plenary, and vniuersall; because no∣thing is vnpossible vnto him, but that without all limitation, or determination, he can do all, and euery thing, which, howsoeuer
and whensoeuer it pleaseth him. And it is called absolute, or omnipotent in three respects: First, because he can doe whatsoeuer he will doe:First, he can doe what he will. Psal. 135.6. for whatsoe∣uer pleaseth the Lord, that did he in Heauen and in Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deepe places: and the Wise man saith, that he can shew his great strength, at all times, when hee will: and it is worth the obseruing, that as he can doe what he will;Sap. 11.21. so he c n doe it, as he will; he need but say the word, and they are done. Let there be light, and there was light:Gen. 1.3. He can do any thing with∣out meanes, with meanes, with small meanes, and many times contrary to the nature of the meanes that hee vsually vseth. Without meanes, as in creating all things of nothing; with meanes,Hosea 2.21. as to fructifie the earth, by the dropping of the cloudes;Psal. 77.20. with weake meanes, as to leade his people out of Egypt, by the hands of Moses and Aaron; and by the foolishnesse of Preaching,1 Cor. 1.21. to saue those that beleeue: and contrary to the nature of meanes,Sap. 19.20. as when to let Israel passe through it, he caused the red Sea to stand vpon heapes; and to preserue the three children,Dan. 3.27. he made the fire to forget his owne vertue, and not to singe an haire of their head: so absolute is his Power, that what he will, and as he will, he can easi∣ly bring to passe. Secondly, his Power is said to be absolute, Quia est :Secondly, he can hinder what he will not. Gen. 11.8. because hee is subiect to no hinderance; he can easily hinder whatsoeuer is intended against his will; as he did to build the Tower of Babel; and Saul to persecute his poore Church; but none can hinder him, to doe whatsoeuer he will: for as the Prophet Esay saith, There is none that can deliuer out of his hands,Esay 43.13. and if hee will worke, who shall hinder it? no counsell, no strength, no indeuour of any created thing, can any thing pre∣uaile against God; and therefore Daniel saith, that the Throne of God was like a fiery flame, and his wheeles like burning fire: to shew that against God there is no resistance, saith Amandus Polanus.Polan. tom. 1. p. 513. And Saint Augustine saith, that in this respect God is said to be omnipotent: Quod faciat quae vult, & non patiatur quae non vult. Because he doth what he will, and suffereth nothing to be done that he will not: None can hinder him to doe what he will: but he can hinder any thing that he will not; and therefore Salomon saith, Many deuices are in a mans heart,Prou. 19.21. but the counsell of
the Lord shall stand: that is, let men plot what they will, nothing shall be effected that God will not. Gods Power to b conside∣red two wayes.Thirdly, his Power is said to be absolute, because he can de more then either he doth, or will doe: for we must vnderstand that the Power of God is to be considered, either 1. . absolutely, or 2. Ex hypothesi, relatiuely, as it hath respect and re∣lation vnto the will and Wisedome of God.Goclen. disquit. Plot os. p. 133. In the first sence, the absolute Power of God, is that whereby God can simply doe, whatsoeuer hath the possibility of being; and therefore by this Power, God could and can doe many in¦finite things, more then he doth, and more then he hath reuei∣led vnto vs, that he wil do: as by and by I shal declare vnto you. That the will and decree of God, is the rule and mea∣sure of the or∣dinary Power of God.In the second sence, the hypotheticall or conditionall Power of God, which is called the Actuall Power of God; and vnto which pertaineth the ordinary Power of God, (whereof Sca∣liger speaketh, Exercitatione, 365. Sect. 8.) is that whereby God can doe onely what he will: and not those things which he will not, and so his Power extens it selfe no further then his will; nor his will any further then his Power; but as Saint Ambrose saith, Ʋoluntas eius potestas cius; his will and his Power are both alike: And therefore it is apparant that God by his absolute Power, can doe a great deale more then he doth, or can doe by his ordinary Power; because by that hee can doe all things that are possible to be done; but by this he can doe but onely those things which he willeth, and hath decreed to bee done. To make it more plaine: God could of these stones raise vp children vnto Abraham:Matth. 3.9. saith Iohn Baptist; that is, by his abso∣lute Power; but hee could not doe it, by his ordinary Power; because he would not: So the Father could haue beene incar∣nate, and made man by his absolute Power; because this doth neither destroy his nature, nor imply a contradiction: but he could not doe this by his hypotheticall or conditionall Power: because it repugneth with the decree of Gods will: so he could and can create a thousand worlds, by his absolute Power; but he cannot doe it by his ordinary Power; because he willeth no more: and to say all in a word, God can doe onely these things which out of his goodnesse and wiseddme (which is the rule,
by which the ordinary Power of God is guided) he hath from all eternity decreed, that he would doe by his limited and ordina∣ry actuall Power; but hee can doe not onely this, but also all things else, that he can will, and many thousand times more then either he doth, or willeth to be done, by his absolute, and illimi∣ted power. This is the truth; you shall heare the proofe. For, First, Our Sauiour Christ himselfe saith vnto Peter,That God by his absolute power can doe more then he doth, or euer did. Matth. 26.53. Put vp thy sword into his place: Thinkest thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently giue me more then twelue legions of Angels? And therefore it is apparant, that both he could haue asked his Father, & that his Father could haue supplyed him; & yet neither of them would do that which they were able to doe. Secondly, the Fathers doe thus explaine this Truth: for, Saint Augustine saith, Consequens est, vt quod est, esse potuerit, &c.Aug in Enchi∣rid. ad Laurent. c. 95. & in l. de nat. & grat. c. 7. It is consequent that that which is, might be; but it is not con∣sequent, that that which might be, is: for, because the Lord raised Lazarus from the graue, it is without doubt that hee could doe it; and because he did not raise Iudas, i. e. spiritual∣ly from sinne, shall we say that he could not doe it? therefore he could, but hee would not: for, if hee would haue done it, hee might with the same power, haue raised him from sinne, as hee did the other from his graue: because,Iohn 5.21. the Sonne quickneth whom he will. So Tertullian in his booke against Praxeas, saith,Tertul. contra Prax. Non quia non potest facere, ideo credendum est illum non fecisse, etiam quod non fecerit; sed an fecerit requirendum; We must not there∣fore beleeue, that God hath not done those things which hee hath not, nor will not doe, because he cannot doe them; but we must enquire what he hath done, or will doe; for assuredly he could, if he would, haue giuen vnto man, wings to flie withall, as he did vnto the birds of the ayre; he could presently destroy Praxeas, and all other Heretickes whatsoeuer; and yet he doth not doe it, because he can doe it;1 Cor. 11.19. Luk. 24.46. for there must be Heretickes and it behooued Christ to haue suffered: In this respect, may any thing be said to be hard for God to doe, that is, whatsoeuer hee will not doe; not because hee cannot doe it; but because hee is not willing to doe it; Quia Dei posse velle est, & non posse nolle est: because that to bee able with GOD, is to be willing; and not to be able, is to be vnwilling; because hee
can doe whatsoeuer hee will doe.Damasc. ad Cal∣cem. l. 1. And so Damascen saith: . He can doe whatsoeuer he will, but willeth not whatsoeuer he can; for he can consume the world, but hee willeth it not. And so we see that God can both will and doe much more things then he did, or doth, or will doe, by his absolute and illimi∣ted Power. Anselm. in l. qui dr: cur deus homo. The saying of diuers Authors reconciled by this distincti∣on of Gods ordinary and absolute power.And this distinction well obserued, doth make way to re∣concile the writings and the opinions of diuers, both ancient and moderne Writers, in many points, concerning the power of God: for whereas Anselmus thinketh it was so needfull for humane kinde, to be repayred by the passion of Christ, as that otherwise it could not possibly haue beene redeemed; because no meere, or bare creature could possiby effect so great a repairati∣on; It is most true of the ordinary Power of God, and in respect of the necessity of conueniency, and the appointed ordinance of the Diuine wisedome; because God had decreed it so to be: and therefore it could not otherwise be. And whereas Scotus saith, Aliter potuisse  fieri, That the ransome of mans re∣demption, might haue beene otherwise paid, Quam per  mortem, then by death of him that was both God and Man: so that which Saint Augustine saith, Alium modum redimendi hominem, Deo non defuisse; that God could otherwise haue re∣deemed man, if it had pleased him; it is most true, if we vnder∣stand it of his absolute Power; to which all things are subiect, as Saint Augustine speaketh.Aug. l. 13. de Trinitate. And so in like manner that saying of Damascen, ; That it is vnpossible for nature to subsist, if you take away the natu∣rall proprieties therof, is true; if we vnderstand it of Gods ordi∣nary Power; but it is false if we vnderstand it of Gods absolute Power: because that whatsoeuer is created, is so created; that any thing may be made of any thing, by the absolute power of God: as blood may be made water,Psal. 78.45. Iohn 2.9. Dan. 3.25. and water wine; the fire, not to burne, and the water not to quench: for though the ordinary power of God is limited and guided by his will, to doe all things according to his prescribed rule; yet is his absolute power so free, and so large, that as his will can will any thing that is willi∣ble;
so can this power doe any thing that is possible, or hath the possibility of being. But now we are come into the greatest depth of this Do∣ctrine to know how farre this absolute power of God exten∣deth;Of the extent of Gods abso∣lute Power. or to know what are those things which by this absolute and vnlimited power of God, may be effected: for, Some affirme, or rather faigne, that by this absolute power of God, all things simply may be done, which can be either spoken or imagined; yea, euen those things which are impossible in their owne nature to be done, and do imply the greatest contradicti∣ons: as they which do contend & striue to proue, that God can make a humane and a naturall body to be euery where:The erronious conceits of many men about the ab∣solute Power of God. and that bread should be bread, and yet transubstantiated into flesh, and that accidents should subsist without their subiects: and so the greatest part of the vulgar sort, which thinke that God is there∣fore called Almighty, because he can doe all things that can be imagined: Nam qui dicit omnia, excludit nihil; for hee which saith all things, excepteth nothing: and if there be any thing which he doth not do, that this happeneth; because he wil not, and not because he cannot. But such fictions are to be reiected, and the blasphemies of them which attribute such an absolute power vnto God, as that he can sinne, and lie, and doe all things else, without order, without reason, without truth, and without Iustice, are to be ex∣ecrated and accursed: because the Apostle saith himselfe, there be some things which God cannot doe: as God which cannot lye,Titus 1.2. which cannot deny himselfe;2 Tim. 2.13. and therefore others of a sounder iudgement, for the more fully expressing the truth of this point, haue vsed diuers formes of answeres: but they all fall at last to the same end: as, First, some say that God can do all those things which neither signifie imperfection, nor imply a contradiction; To sinne, to sleep, to walke, and such like, doe argue imperfection in them that doe them; and to cause those things which haue been done, not to haue been done, or the things that are, not to be, doth imply a contradiction.How diuers men haue explained this point. Secondly, others say that God can doe all those things wich are nothing derogatory to the Power of God: but all
those things which denotate a priuation of power, Et quae  potius quam  significant, and which shew an impotency rather then omnipotency, must needs be derogatorie to the Power of God: So, to sinne, is a signe of weaknesse; because it signifieth a priuation of rectitude in any action; So to moue, because the mouer cannot be euery where; and to suffer, because the suffe∣rer cannot resist; and to die, because we cannot liue; and such like, they doe all shew impotency, and weakenesse in the doers: and therefore, Gods not being able to doe these things, doth suffici∣ently argue the infinitenesse of his Power;Aug. l. 1. c. 1. de Symbolo. Jdem de Tri∣nitate l 15. c. 15. for if he could sinne, or die, eceiue, or be deceiued, then could he not be omnipo∣tent, saith Saint Augustine; Ideo magna Dei potentia mentiri non posse; And therefore it is from the greatnesse of Gods Power that he cannot lye, that he cannot deny himselfe, saith Saint Au∣gustine. Thirdly, Others doe more briefly say, that God can doe all those things which are not repugnant to the nature of God; and this answere they doe collect out of Saint Augustine,Idem in l. de spiritu & li∣tera. where he saith, that God cannot doe any iniustice, because he is Iustice it sele; neither can he deny himselfe, because he is faithfull, as the Apostle speaketh; nor die, because he is life; nor he, because he is Truth; nor sinne, because he is the chiefest goodnesse; nor doe any corporall acts, such as are to walke, to moue, to eate, and the like, because he is an immoueable Spirit, and the purest act, with whose nature, no corporall act can square, to fall on him. And so as Saint Augustine saith, in another case, Alij atque alij, alijs atque alijs loquendi formulis vsi sunt; Diuers men haue fra∣med diuers answeres vnto this point, and I out of them all, doe with the most learned Zanchius say,Zanch. de na∣tura Dei. that God can doe all those things, Quae neque apud deum, neque sua natura simpliciter sunt : Which are neither contrary to the Nature of God, nor yet of their owne Nature simply impossible to be done. What things are repugnant to the Nature of God.First, of the first kinde are all those actions, which though they may be done of the creatures; yet haue they no place with God; and such are to sinne, to moue, to die, to walke, to eate, and all other humane acts; and so whatsoeuer doth repugne the nature of God, or be any wayes contrary to his essentiall, or personall properties: because, to be able to doe these things, were
to euert and destroy the nature and properties of God: And therefore God cannot imagine any folly; because this doth con∣tradict his Wisedome:August. ser. 119. de temp. he cannot suffer any sinne to goe vnpu∣nished, because that is contrary to his Iustice; neither can he lye; because that is contrary to his Truth; neither can he doe, but he must be iust good, wise, pure, inuisible, incorporeall, & so forth; not onely because that to be able to doe this, would argue a de∣fect of power; but especially because the denyall and sublation or taking away of these properties, is the negation and destru∣ction of the Essence of God: ; For the taking away of the essentiall properties,Theodor. Dialog. 3. is the a∣bolishing of the nature; saith Theodoret: And therefore these, and the like things, which doe repugne with the essentiall, or personall properties of God, cannot be done, on Gods part, nor by God, though they may be done by the creatures; be∣cause in very deede, he cannot by any meanes will to doe these things: for none can naturally will,That God can∣not will those things that are contrary to his nature. to bee contrary to that which naturally he willeth to be; as no man can naturally will himselfe to be miserable; because euery man naturally willeth felicitie: and therefore seeing God is naturally Wise, True, and Good, it is most absolutely necessarie, that hee should alwayes Will Wisedome, Trueth, and Goodnesse; and cannot possibly Will the contrary, as Theodoret doth most excellently say; Do∣minus Deus nihil vult eorum, quae non sibi suapte natura insunt, potest quaecunque vult, & vult quae naturae suae apta & conuenientia sunt: God cannot will any of those things, which are not naturally agreeable vnto him; he can doe what he will,Jdem quo supra. and he can will whatsoeuer is apt, and agreeable to his nature. Secondly, Of the second kinde, are all those things,How contra∣dictories doe destroy each other. which implie a contradiction: as for a thing to bee, and not to bee toge∣ther, because all such things  & , sunt , are simply, and absolutely impossible; as contradictorily re∣pugning, and so destroying one another; and therefore can no wayes be done: Quia res talis, non potest habere rationem facti∣bilis; Because, such a thing, hath not the reason, nor way, nor possibilitie of being done, as Thomas sayth: and therefore wee doe say that God can neither doe, nor will contraries, as good and euill; (which in a nature absolutely, and euery way sim∣ple,
cannot subsist:Trelcatius in thesi de Deo. & Amand: Polan: in Synt:) nor yet contradictories, as to make a thing to be, and not to be; which in the essence of God; voide and cleere from all falsehood, and most perfect in all trueth, can haue no place; sayth Trelcatius. And so we doe affirme, that God cannot make, that a trian∣gle should be a triangle, and yet not to haue three angles, or cor∣ners; or that a triangle should haue three angles, and not three angles; that that which is, while it is, should not be; that those things which haue beene made,How all anti∣quitie teacheth that God can∣not doe con∣tradictories. Mark 10.27. should not haue beene made; that a body should be a true naturall body, and yet destitute and free from all those naturall proprieties, which doe as it were consti∣tute, the very being of the thing; and without which the very diffinition of the thing, is taken away: and all other such things, which doe simplie implie a contradiction. And we finde all Men, in all ages, to haue confest, and to haue taught the same trueth; for venerable Bede, expounding those words of Marke, All things are possible with God, sayth; it is not so to bee vnder∣stood, that the couetous & proud men, can with their pride and couetousnesse, enter into the kingdome of Heauen; because this is impossible vnto God; because neither the Couetous, nor the Proud, as God himselfe doth testifie, by the mouth of his Apostle,1 Cor. 6.9.10. shall inherite the kingdome of God; but that it is possible for God, (as often it hath beene done, and we daily see it to bee done) so to worke, in the hearts of these wicked and vngodly Men, that by the preaching of his Word, and the working of his spirit, they should be conuerted, and weaned from the loue of worldly things, and be inflamed with the longing desire of Heauenly things;Venera. Bede in. Marc. C. 11. Et à perniciosa superbia, ad humilitatem salu∣berrimam reducantur, And bee reduced from their aspiring, and pernicious pride, vnto that most wholesome practise of humi∣litie; in which words, hee plainely sheweth, that God cannot doe those things which doe implie a contradiction: So S. Augustine, against Faustus the Manachie, and in many other places, and so Aquinas,The most hor∣rible impieties of them, which say God can worke all con∣tradictories. and all Schoole-Diuinitie, doe all of them teach the same trueth: And they that say otherwise, doe but mocke both God and Man; and take away all trueth from Diuine and Hu∣mane things, and lay open a most vnsufferable and vnrepairable gappe, for all wicked Hereticks: for God which is immutably
and infallibly true, & , and the verie trueth it selfe, can neither will, nor suffer, that an affirmation should bee a nega∣tion, that an yea should bee a nay, or that trueth and falshood should bee mixed together in the very selfe-same simplest sub∣iect: as this is fire, and not water, and this very selfe-same thing, is water, and not fire, at the same time, and in the same respect; or this is bread, and not flesh; and this is flesh, and not bread, that is, one thing to bee two distinct things, at the selfe-same time, and in the selfe-same respect; I say it is vnpossible for the trueth of God to doe;Aug. cont: Faustum. l. 26. c. 81 as Saint Augustine doth most excellently and largely shew against Faustus Manichaeus. And therefore, I cannot sufficiently wonder, who hath be∣witched our Vbiquitaries, which doe so stiffely contend, that the Body of Christ remayning a true body, and yet notwithstanding may bee, and is, euery where, illocall, inuisible, and so forth: for if these things be not meerely contradictorie,That euery true naturall Body must be locall. I know not what are: because euery true body hath his quantitie, and is defined, and hedged by the bounds and limits of his quantitie; and be∣cause euery body is limited with the bounds of his ternarie di∣mensions, length, breadth and depth; and so measured and finite: & the taking away from any body, the proper passion of a body, namely the possessing of one place, must necessarily in∣clude, the destruction and abolishment of the forme, nature, and essence of the body it selfe; for as much as the property of occupy∣ing one place, floweth of necessitie, from the very forme and na∣ture of a body; and cannot, by Gods power, be seperated there∣from, without destroying the subiect it selfe, on which it depen∣deth. And that this confining of a body to one place, is a true propertie, or proper passion of a body, it is euident, because it suiteth with bodyes, vniuersally, onely, and alwayes, and is recipro∣cated with a body, (as the Schooles speake:) and there∣fore, it must necessarily follow, that euery body must bee locall, and no humane body can bee illocall: for if you take away the localitie, or place from a body, you must first take a∣way the quantitie and the limits of his trinarie dimensions, and you must take away, the definition of a body: and so of ne∣cessity a body shall be no body: and therefore S. Augustine,Aug. in ep. ad Dardan. doth most rightly say, Tolle locorum spatia corporibus & nusquam
erunt, & quia nusquam erunt, non erunt: take awy the spaces of places from bodyes, or bodies from places, and they shall be no where, and because no where, not at all: but to be, and not to bee at all, is so contradictorie, as I know nothing more: and there∣fore, for the body of Christ, to remayne a true body, and to bee euery where, or in diuers places at the same instant, is a thing im∣possible to be done: God himselfe by all his power cannot doe it, and that not by reason of any want of actiue power in God, but by defect of a passiue power in the creatures, which cannot suffer their essentiall, and concomitant properties, to bee torne a∣way from the maine stocke, without the destruction of the whole nature, and essence of the subiect. Furthermore, seeing that contradictories cannot be done, be∣cause they take away all the reason and possibility of being;That no crea∣ture can be made capable of Infinitenes or of infinite perfections. it must needs follow that God in this respect cannot make an An∣gelicall nature, or the soule of Man, or any body, or any other created thing, to be actually infinite: because no creature is capa∣ble of Infinitenesse, but is euer shut vp, and bounded within his limits, and is euer distinguished from his Creator, by this perpe∣tuall and immutable condition, To be finite: and therefore a creature which is produced from nothing vnto his being, is not capable to bee Coeternall vnto his Beginning or Maker,Damasc. de fide orthodox. C. 8. as Damascen doth most rightly sy. And here I cannot silently passe, a most memorable saying of a late Schoole-Doctor, which is this, Communicauit Deus creaturis eas perfectiones quas conditio creaturae ferebat, &c. God hath communicated vnto his creatures, all such perfections, as the condition of a creature was able to beare, but those per∣fections which exceeded the state and condition of a creature, that is, which suffer not a creature to be a creature, (as to be e∣uery where, Infinite, Omniscient, and such like,) God neither ought, nor could communicate vnto his creatures; hee ought not, because the creature had beene then, in all things, aequall to his Creator; and he could not, because then hee should haue made his creature to be a God; & so there should be two Infinites, and two Gods, which is impossible: and this not being able to doe these things, doth most manifestly shew, the most incompre∣hensible excellencie of God; to whom no creature, either in
essence, or perfection, or in vertue, or in continuance, or in any such things, can be equall: and it sheweth also the defect of euery created thing, that it hath not the reason of the possibility, or capacitie to bee made such a thing, that is, infinite; to bee made a God. And therefore, hence likewise it must needs follow, that the omnisciencie, and omnipresencie of the body of Christ,Casman: Phischolog: parte 2. p. 13. cannot stand: for seeing the essentiall properties of God, (as is his infi∣nite vbiquitie) are the very essence of God; and that neither these properties, without the essence, nor yet one essentiall propertie, without the others, can indeed bee communicated to any other, and that (as the Prophet testifyeth) God will not, nay, cannot,Esay 42.8. giue his glory vnto another, by reason of the incapacitie of euery creature, to receiue or comprehend in himselfe his Glorie; that is, his Dietie: and the vnabilitie of God,That it is vn∣possible for the body of Christ to be euery where at the sme time. to make a creature to be a God: therefore it is vnpossible, that the Body of Christ, should bee indued with this infinite vbiquitie. And seeing, that God is essentially infinite, and so euery where according to his essence, wholly in euery place; and that that which is of the essence of God, cannot be in any creature, no not in the humane nature of Christ; therefore neither the omnisciencie, nor the om∣nipresencie, nor any other essentiall propertie of God, can bee in the humanitie of Christ; for that nature which is neuer transfer∣red into the essence of another, can neuer obtaine the essentiall properties of the other into it selfe; but the humane nature of Christ, though it be capable of the infinitnesse of the Word, by inhabitation, and personall vnion, yet was it neuer changed in∣to the essence of the Word; neither did it euer receiue into it selfe, as into a subiect of inheriencie, the essentiali properties of the Word; Quia propria non egrediuntur sua subiecta, because proprieties doe neuer passe their owne subiects; and a crea∣ted thing (as I sayd before) cannot possibly receiue into his essence, infinite proprieties; otherwise it should bee a crea∣ture, and no creature; a creature because a humane bo∣dy, and no creature, because omniscient, omnipresent, and in∣finite, which is most absurd, which is incredible, and which is impossible. And so you see all those things which are said to be im∣possible
to be done,An obseruati∣on about the phrases of be∣ing able, and not being able to doe things. Zan hius de po∣tentia Dei. or which God cannot doe; touching which, we must note this one thing, concerning the phrase of being able to doe things, that there are many things, which though in respect of the name, may seeme to expresse some power, yet in respect of the thing it selfe, it plainely sheweth a great defect; as, to be able to suffer, to be able to dye, and such like; according to the forme of speaking, they doe seeme to expresse some power, but in very deede they doe shew a defect of power: so, not to be able to dye, not to be able to suffer; according to the phrase of speech, they doe seeme to deny a power, or to shew an impoten∣cie, whereas indeede they shew the greatest power; and therefore those affirmations, to be able to die, to be able to suffer, in regard of the substance of the matter, haue the force of negation, because they deny him to be impassible which can suffer, and him im∣mortall which can die; and those negations not to be able to die, not to be able to suffer, haue the force of affirmations; because they affirme him to be eternally life, which cannot die, and to be the purest act, which cannot suffer: And therefore we say, that God cannot doe those things, which imply and signifie a de∣fect of power, and which is infirmity, and not power, to doe them: for there is nothing which God cannot doe, which is of power to doe; and there is nothing which he can doe, which is of infirmity to doe it,Bonauent. Ser. 35. saith Bonauenture. And so much for this point, how farre the power of God extendeth. CHAP. III. The proofe of Gods infinite power, and the answering of the chie∣fest obiections that are made against the fore-shewed truth of this Doctrine. HAuing well considered, and vnderstood all the premises, it will not be hard for me to proue vnto you the most infinite and absolute power of Almighty God; that is, how mighty and how powerfull he is in all things: for, First, the Scriptures are most copious in
this point. The Prophet Dauid saith;How the Scrip∣ture sheweth the power of God. Psal. 93.5. Psal. 89.9.10.14. The waues of the Sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet, the Lord that dwelleth on high, is mightier. And againe, he saith, O Lord God of Hosts, who is like vnto thee? for thou rulest the raging of the Sea, and thou stillest the waues thereof when they arise; thou hast a mighty arme, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. This shewes him to be mighty, and wee can shew him to be Almighty; for though the He∣brewes haue no word that signifieth Almighty, yet doe the Greekes elegantly, and with a full significant word, call him , He that can doe all things,Wolf. Musc. de omnipot. Dei. p. 402. Gen. 17.1. Exod. 15.3. Gen. 18.14. as Wolfgangus Musculus saith: And therefore in the vulgar version we reade, Ego Deus omnipotens, I am the Almighty God; And againe, Omnipotens no∣men eius, Almighty is his name: And therefore the Angell said vnto Abraham; Numquid Deo quicquid est difficile? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? And the Angell Gabriel saith vnto Mary, Non est impossibile apud Deum omne verbum; that is,Luc. 1.37. Bernard. hom. 4. sup. Missas. No word is impossible with God: That is, (saith Saint Bernard) whatsoeuer God saith, or will command; that he can easily doe. If it were as easie for men to doe, as it is to say what they will, then should no word be impossible vnto them neither: but there is a great deale of difference betwixt speaking and doing a∣mongst men, as Aiax saith; Satius est contendere verbis,Ouidius Metam. l. 13. quam pugnare acie: But with God it is all one, to doe, as to say; to say, as to will. And so Euthymius interprets it; Whatsoeuer the Lord saith, that is not impossible for him to performe; because he did but speake, and they were made; he commanded, and they stood fast.Psal. 33.9. But others, putting thing, in stead of word, doe more rightly in∣terpret it, saying, that with God nothing shall be impossible.Barrad de an∣nunt. Angel. l 7. c. 9. Pag 332. And so our last Translation hath it, because the Hebrew word Dabar, doth signifie both word, and thing, saith Barradius: And our Sauiour plainely saith, All things are possible with God; And therefore it is apparant, that he is not onely strong, and mighty,ar. 10.27. but also strength it selfe, and Almighty. Secondly, not onely the Word of God,The workes of God doe shew the power of God. but also the workes of God, doe sufficiently proue the power of God: And not onely his wonders which he did in Aegypt, and at the Red Sea; but also all other workes which he did from the beginning, and which he now doth, doe most apparantly shew him to be a most Om∣nipotent
God: For as the Prophet Dauid saith, The Heauens de∣clare the glory of God,Psal. 18.1. John 5.36. and the Firmament sheweth his handy worke. And the workes that I doe, they testifie of me, saith our Sauiour. Of these workes of God, Saint Hillary saith; If there were none other reason, yet this it selfe would serue, to shew how wonder∣full, and how worthy of all prayse, are the workes of God; that they are mightily effected, and most powerfully done by him, which is not onely said, to doe a thing, but mightily to doe it: for he could, and can with his sole word produce any thing out of nothing, by creation; to continue the species, or any kinde of things by propagation, and to change any compleat sub∣stance into another, by his powerfull operation; as he did Lots wife into a pillar of salt:Gen. 19 26. yea, he could, and can worke all naturall things, supernaturall things, miracles, and wonders (as the Psal∣mist saith,Psal. 72.18. Which onely doth wonders;) and impossible things in Nature; i. e. such as doe exceed the vsuall and ordinary course of Nature,Josua 10.12. Dan 3.27. as to make the Sunne to stand, the fire not to burne, the heauy Iron to swimme vpward vpon the top of the water; and of stones to raise vp Children vnto Abraham:Math. 3.9. because the order, and the Law of Nature, is in all things to giue way vnto this God of Nature, which can doe any thing that implyes no con∣tradiction, or repugneth not with the definition of the thing, as Aquinas saith. How the power of God appeareth at all times.And this power of God appeared in the beginning, when God created all things of nothing; it appeared euer since, and will ap∣peare vntill the ending, by preseruing them that they turne not to nothing; Quia fundauit Deus mundum supra nihilum, vt funda∣ret se mundus supra Deum: For God established the World vpon nothing, that the World might relye, and settle it selfe vpon God: And therefore the Prophet Dauid saith, The Earth is weake, and all the Inhabitants thereof:Psal 75.4. he beareth vp the pillars of it; and it will appeare in the end of all things, when God shall burne the world, raise the dead, blesse the good, and condemne the bad into euer∣lasting fire. Thirdly, the Fathers doe most excellently extoll (for they cannot fully expresse) this power of God: For Saint Hillary saith,Hilar. in Psal. 144. p. 635. Haec Dei prima & praecipua laudatio est, &c. This is one of the chiefest commendations of God, that he hath no meane, nor
measure in him; for his power, his vertue, his Maiestie,How the Fa∣thers doe ex∣toll the power of God. cannot be contained in place, determined by time, expressed in words, nor conceiued in our best vnderstandings; our sence is too nar∣row, our wit is too blunt, and our tongue too mute, to performe so great a taske; because as the Psalmist speaketh,Psal. 145.3. There is no end of his greatnesse: And therefore Saint Augustine saith excellently well, Demus Deum multa posse, & nos intelligere non posse; That we must grant, that God can doe many things,Aug. ep. 3. ad Volusian. which we must confesse, wee can neither search out the cause, nor vnderstand the things; because the power of God is not to be straitned within the compasse of our shallow apprehensions:How great a sinne it is, to say any thing derogatory to the Power of God. And there∣fore we ought to take great heed, that we neither say, nor con∣ceiue any thing derogatory, to the power of God: for if it be or∣dained by humane Lawes, that he which should offend the Ma∣iestie of a King, though but a man, should leese his head for his offence; Quis finis contemnentium diuinam omnipotentiam erit?Bernard. in cant. What should become of those that contemne, or speake against the Diuine Omnipotency of God? saith Saint Bernard. Fourthly, the very Heathens, Poets, Phylosophers, and all of the learneder sort, haue confest as much as is sufficient to proue the Omnipotent power of God:Homer Odyss. 3. p. 65. for Homer brings in Minerua speaking vnto Telemachus, and saying, ; Which is as much, as if shee said; That God can doe what hee will, and none can hinder him: because, as one saith; Ille potest solis currus inhibere volantes,How the very Heathens haue extolled the Omnipotency of God. Ille velut scopulos, flumina stare facit. He can hold still great Phoebus wayne, as he did in the days of Ioshua, at he did at thered Sea. And stoutest streames he can restraine. For though (as another saith) Astra regunt mundum, These sublunary Creatures are generally guided by the influences of the higher Orbes; yet to conclude the verse, he saith, Sed regit astra Deus, The God of Heauen doth rule the Heauens; and rideth vpon the same, as vpon an Horse: And therefore an Indian Gymnosophist, being demanded by Alexander what God did, answered; What he will, Et quod nulla creatura facere potest; And what no mortall man, nor any other creature can doe: for
they daily saw how by his strength vnlikely matters haue come to passe, the greatest imaginations haue beene dissolued with a blaste, and dying hopes haue beene reuiued from their graues: and therefore they all concluded, that, Ludit in humanis, diuina potentia rebus. It was an easie matter for Gods power, to deale with all Creatures as he listed; and, How the very Diuels haue confest the Power of GodFiftly, the very Diuels doe acknowledge, and confesse, and obey the power of God; For, Apollo being demanded of one, by what meanes he might with-draw his wise from Christiani∣tie; He answered, That he might easier flie through the Ayre, or write in the Sea, then plucke her away from Christ; because God was so powerfull to preserue her,Heydelf. de Deo: c. 2. and the Diuell so weake to striue against him; and being requested by Augustus to informe him who should succeede him in his Empire, hee saide; Peucerus de Oracul. p. 251., , &c. The Hebrew Childe hath inioyned me to silence, and I must hence-forth obey his voyce: And so the Scripture saith; That the vncleane Spirits were obedient vnto Christ; and as the winde and the waues, so did they yeeld, and doe whatsoeuer Christ commanded them. Much more might be said to confirme this point;Quid satis est cui Roma pa∣rum? but all is but to light a candle before the Sunne: And therefore seeing I am no wayes able to speake what I ought, to expresse this truth; I will proceede, to see what the sonnes of darkenesse can say against this truth. And as I distributed the ad∣versaries into foure Classies, so I finde their obiections to be foure-fold. The Obiecti∣ons that are made against the truth of Gods Power, answered. Sol. That there be three sorts of Agents.First, the Naturalists say, that Ex nihilo nihil fit, Of nothing, nothing can be made: And therefore God is not so powerfull, as to be able to produce things of nothing, and to create this Vniuerse out of no subsistent matter. To this I answere, that there be three sorts of workers; 1. The lowest. 2. The middlemost. 3. The highest. or else 1. Artificers. 2. Nature. 3. God. First, Artificers can doe nothing, but of some body compo∣sed of the first matter, and a substantiall forme, into which they
doe induce an accidentall forme; as the Baker out of his Dowe makes Bread; or the Potter out of his tempered clay, makes his Potts. Secondly, Nature, or naturall Agents, can likewise produce nothing into being, vnlesse there be first some matter, or sub∣iect, whereunto it induceth a naturall forme; so from any na∣turall seede, is composed the fruit of each seede in his kinde, as, from the seede of man is ingendered man: and so of all other things whatsoeuer. And in these two sorts of Agents, the axiome is most true,That God can produce any thing of no∣thing. that of nothing, nothing can be made; but of the third agent, that is, God, it is most false: for as he did create all things of no∣thing, so he can yet as easily of no being, produce any being; as he can change any compleat being, into another. And there∣fore, to argue from the creature, vnto the Creator, or from the faculty of the inferior agent, vnto the faculty of the superior; as the Artificer cannot doe it, therefore Nature cannot doe it: or Nature cannot doe it, therefore the God of Nature cannot doe it; is most absurd and foolish: Euery Childe can perceiue the weakenesse of this childish reasoning. Secondly,  the desperate men doe obiect against their owne soules, that Gods Iustice is so strict, that it requires euery sinne, and the least sinne to be punished with eternall death; and their sinnes are not onely few, and small, but most infinite in number, euen as Manasses saith; My sinnes are more innumerable then the sands of the Sea: and most haynous for quality, euen as Caine saith; My sinne is greater, Quam vt venia merear,Gen. 4.13. Then I can deserue pardon; or, they be greater then can be pardoned: And therefore say they, God cannot pardon our sinnes; but we must die, and die eternally for our sinnes. To this I answere, first,Sol. that it had beene very good for them they had reasoned so before they had sinned; for that perhaps might haue preserued them in the feare of Gods Iustice, and now from the despaire of his mercy: But seeing they did not, I say secondly, that it is most true, that the least sinne of man can neuer be pardoned, without an intermedium, a meanes wrought,That no sinne can be pardo∣ned without satisfaction. or interposition of satisfaction, betwixt the sinne of man, and the iustice of God; therefore did the wisdome of God deuise and
decree, that by the death of one righteous man, in whom there should be no sinne, and who for his worth should be of that ine∣stimable value, as to be infinitely more then counteruailably sufficient to pay for all sinnes, the Iustice of God should be sa∣tisfied, and euery sinner that would lay hold vpon his death, might thereby be freed from all his sinnes, of what number, or nature soeuer they be: And to this end he sent his onely begot∣ten Sonne,Gal. 4.4. That the death of Christ is a sufficient satis∣faction for the greatest sinnes. made of a Woman, and made vnder the Law; to die for our sinnes, and to redeeme vs that were vnder the Law, from the eternall curse of that Law. And his death is of that inesti∣mable value, that Saint Cyprian saith, Modicam guttam sangui∣nis Christi, propter vnionem hypostaticam pro redemptione totius mundi sufficisse; 1. Circumcisione. 2. Oratione. 3. Flagellatione. 4. Coronatione. 5. Clauorum in fixione. 6. Lancea. The least droppe of his bloud, by reason of that hypostaticall vnion with the God-head, had beene sufficient to make satisfaction for all the sinnes of the whole World: And yet we reade, that he shedde his bloud, not once, but often, sixe seuerall times at least; and that not sparingly, but abundantly, it trickled downe to the ground; In which respect the Psalmist saith,Luke 22.44. Psal. 130.7. that with God there is Copiosa redemptio, Plenteous re∣demption; or satisfaction enough in store, to pay for the sinnes of any one, be they neuer so great, be they neuer so many: And therefore there is no sinne so great, no sinnes so many; but God can, and that without any impeachment of his Iustice, easily remit it, if we can but lay hold vpon the death of Christ; and he can worke this faith in vs, to beleeue in Christ, if we can but beleeue he can doe it, as our Sauiour shewed vnto him, that came, and said; Domine, si quid potes, Sir, if thou canst doe any thing;Marke 9.23. saying, Si potes credere, If thou canst beleeue, thou mayest easily see that I can doe that which thou requi∣rest, and all things else whatsoeuer they be; they be pos∣sible for me to doe them; onely beleeue, and thou shalt see it. Thirdly, the Vbiquitaries say, hee that can doe all things whatsoeuer, can make the Body of Christ to be in euery place wheresoeuer, but God can doe any thing whatsoeuer; Ergo. He can make the Body of Christ to be euery where, and so inuest the manhood of Christ with Diuine proper∣ties.
I answere to the minor proposition,Nam qui inde∣finitè deum omnia posse di∣cit, non tantum bona sed etiam horum contra∣ria mala quae diabolo conue∣niunt compre∣hendit. Theod. Dialog. 3. that he can doe any thing, that is possible to be done, or that hath the possibility of being, but not all things whatsoeuer they be: For he that saith, God can doe all things simply, and indifinitely; hee comprehen∣deth not onely the good, but also all the contrary euill, which are properly belonging vnto the Diuell, and not to God, saith The∣odoret: And therefore I say, that there be two sorts of impossible things which God cannot doe. First, some things, ex hypothesi, in respect of the constant truth of Gods decree, and the immutability of his will;God can doe nothing con∣trary to what he hath de∣creed. and thus God could not conceale from Abraham, what he intended to doe vnto the Sodomites, nor doe any thing vnto Sodom, vntill Lot was deliuered from them: because God had decreed, to re∣ueale all that vnto Abraham, and to preserue that righteous man, from the destruction of the Sodomites; and thus all things are said to be impossible for God to doe, which doe contradict the Eternall purposes and decrees of God; because he is a God that changeth not,Mal. 1. and that cannot alter the things that are gone out of his mouth. Secondly, some things are simply impossible for him to doe,God can doe nothing that is contrary to the nature of God. Propter constantem Dei naturam, By the reason of the constancy and immutability of Gods Nature; Thus God cannot be said to doe any humane Acts, because he is an Eternall Spirit; nor to sin, because he is the chiefe good, nor to doe any contradictory, because he is Truth it selfe. As I shewed vnto you before. But against this, it may be obiected: First, that God can doe  any humane act; for he is said, to draw nigh vnto vs,Iames 4.8. and to de∣part from vs; and so to performe many other such like humane acts. Ergo, these things are not impossible for God. To this some men doe answere,Sol. that humane acts are not to be ascribed to Gods Nature, because he is an incorporeall sub∣stance; and yet they are not to be secluded from his Power, but are all performed through it; because God worketh all things in all his creatures: for, in him we liue, and in him we moue,Act. 17.28. saith the Apostle. But indeed, when these, or the like things are spoken of God, they are to be vnderstood metaphorically; as the Sunne is said, to enter into the house, when his heate and beames doe shine therein; so God is said, to draw neere vnto vs,
when we doe perceiue the influence of his grace and goodnesse:All humane Acts are done by the power of God, not by the Essence of God. and so I say, that although humane acts are done of vs, through the Power of God; yet they cannot be done by the Essence of God. Secondly, they may obiect that God can doe euill; First, be∣cause  the Philosopher saith, Potest Deus & studiosus praua fa∣cere;Arist. Topic. l. 4. c 5. Gen. 22.2. Gen. 11.2. 2 Sam. 16.10 secondly, because God commandeth many euils to be done; as Abraham to kill his sonne, the Israelites to robbe the Egyptians, Shemei to curse Dauid, and such like; and thirdly, because the Apostle saith, that he worketh all in all. Ergo, He can doe euill. Sol.To these I answere; First, that the Philosopher saith this, not positiuely, but according to the opinion of the vulgar: or, That whatso∣euer God doth or biddeth to be done, is no sinne.Secondly, I say, Quod potest Deus praua facere, sed minime praue; That God can doe those acts, which done of vs were euill, but done by him are no wayes euill: for sinne is the of∣fending of his will; or, the not obeying of his command: and therefore whatsoeuer God willeth, is no sinne: and whatsoe∣uer God biddeth, or willeth to be done, is no sinne; nay, if Abra∣ham had not done it, he had sinned; because he had not obayed Gods command. And thirdly, to the words of the Apostle I say, that in euery sinne there is two things to be considered, 1. The Act. 2. The deformity of the Act. First, for the Act, we confesse, that to doe any naturall Act, we doe receiue power and ability from God: for, in him we liue and moue,Act. 17. as the Apostle saith. Secondly, for the deformity of the Act, which is indeed for∣male peccati, i. e. the sinne; we say this is wholly from our selues: Quia peccare est deficere in agendo, vel aberrare àrecto sco∣po: Because the sinne is a deficiency, and an erring from the scope or will of God: and God is the efficient cause, or the cause of the efficiency, and not of the deficiency of any thing; And therefore he cannot be said to worke the sinne, though he giueth the power to doe the Act. Ob.But you will say, that he can doe whatsoeuer he will, but hee willeth the sinne, for if he were not willing, no sinne should be; Therefore he can doe the sinne. Sol.I answere, that we may be said to will a thing, two wayes.
1 Properly, for it owne sake, because it is desireable; and thus, God onely willeth good. 2 Improperly, for some other good, that may arise from that thing that is willed; so a man willeth many times the losse of a limbe to saue his life: And thus God may be said to will euill, not properly for it owne sake,Aug. de cor. & grat. c. 7. but in respect of some other good, that may from that euill accrew: So hee willed that Iudas should be elected, Ad opus damnabile, vt per il∣lud, opus venerabile (i. e. mors Christi) compleretur, To performe a damnable worke, that by the same a most comfortable worke might be effected: and so he willed the death of his Sonne, that he might be the Sauiour of all his seruants: and this is rather to be called a voluntary permission, then an effectuall willing of sinne. Thirdly, they may obiect, that he can worke contradictories;  because he can make, that those things which haue beene, and are, should not haue beene; for he that can doe that which is impossible of it selfe, can more easily doe that which is impossi∣ble by accident: but to make those things which haue beene, not to haue beene; is onely impossible by accident: and there∣fore, God can make them, not to haue been; and if he can make those things which haue been, not to haue been, he can worke contradictories. To this I answere,Sol. that he can reduce all things into nothing as he hath created all things of nothing; and that he could, not to haue made any thing of those things that he hath made; be∣cause he is, liberrimus agens, so free an agent, as that hee might haue chosen, whether he would haue done any thing or no∣thing; but now being done, I say that he cannot doe, but that they haue been done: for as it is most true,That it is sim∣ply impossible to make those things which haue beene made, not to haue beene made. that Quaedam habu∣erunt rationem possibilium, dum erant fienda, iam autem deficiunt à ratione possibilium, dum sunt, facta; As some things haue had the possibility of being done, while they were to be done, and haue now lost the possibility of being done, being already done; So it is as true, that God had the possibility of not doing them, before they were done: but now he hath not the possibility of causing those things, which haue been done, not to haue beene done: and therefore though for that which hath beene, not to haue
beene,Quod factum est infectum fieri non potest. may in some respect be said, to be impossible by acci∣dent. Yet, if we consider a thing past, in respect of its being past, and not to haue beene past; it is not onely impossible of it selfe, but absolutely impossible; yea, Magis impossible quam mortuos su∣stitare, A great deale more impossible to doe, then to raise all the dead, saith a Father. And therefore S. Augustine saith excel∣lently well, that if any man would say, If God be omnipotent, lt him make those things not to haue beene done, which haue beene al∣ready done;Aug. contra Faustum Manic. lib. 26. c. 8. Hee should consider that this is all one, as if hee should say; If he be omnipotent, let him bring to passe that those things which are true may be false; euen in the same respect for which they are true, which is impossible for God to doe. And so you see, that notwithstanding all that can be said, it is most apparantly true, that although God can doe, Omnia pos∣sibilia, that is, not all things that are possible for him to doe, as a man may be said to be able to doe, what is possible for a man to doe; for this were but a circulation, to say God can doe all things that he can doe, or that are possible for him to doe; but simply & absolutely all things that are possible to be done; yet, that hee cannot simply and absolutely doe all things whatsoeuer; as especially those things which are repugnant to his Nature, or doe imply a contradiction. Ob.But then the Vbiquitaries will obiect, that for the Body of Christ to be in euery place, is no contradiction; for they doe not say, that it is circumscribed in one place, and vncircumscribed in euery place, which indeed is contradictory; but they say, that as the Deity is limited to no place, but is vnlimited in eue∣ry place; so is the body of Christ, by reason of the hypostaticall vnion;Iohn 1.14. (the word being made flesh) not bounded to any one place, but euery where, in euery place wheresoeuer the Godhead is; and herein (say they) there is no contradiction: no more then to say that God is euery where, which is none at all. Sol.To this I answere, first, that to proue their Vbiquity, from the vnion of the word with the flesh, is, Fallacia non causae vt causa, A fallacie, when that is alleaged for a cause, which is indeede no cause; for that hypostaticall vnion doth not make that one na∣ture should be the other, nor that one nature should be as the other: but that each one of them should intirely preserue their
owne properties; else had the Diuine nature beene passible, and the humane nature impassable; which is most absurde. Secondly I say, that a thing may be sayd, to be euery where, either, 1. Per se, by it selfe, and so nothing is euery where but God. 2. Per accidens, in respect of some other thing: and thus the Body of Christ,How, and in what fence, the body of Christ, may be sayd to be euery where. in some sence may be sayd to be euery where; because it is vnited to that Dietie, which is euery where: and further I say that a thing may bee sayd to be, or to doe by accident Two wayes. 1. Properly. 2. First, That is sayd to bee, or to doe properly by accident, which hath anothers vertue, properly communicated vnto it; as water made hot, hath the heate of the fire communicated vnto it. Secondly, That is sayd to be, or to doe improperly by accident, which is onely ioyned vnto that, which is of it selfe. In the first sence wee say that the body of Christ is euery where, that is, in the word, but not in himselfe; and so we yeeld the Soule of Christ to be omniscient, and the humanitie omnipo∣tent, in the word, but not in it selfe, And, In the second sence, wee finde the Church, by reason of our spirituall coniunction with Christ, to bee called Christ, and to bee sayd, to haue risen with Christ, and to fit with Christ in the Heauenly places. And againe, I say that whatsoeuer is either in one place, or euery where must be either 1. In substance, without quantitie, as the Angels. 2. In quantitie, as all corporall things. 3. Or in Vertue & qualitie, as the Sunne, by his vertue, and powerfull operations, may bee sayd, after a sort to bee euery where; and thus the Body of Christ in respect of the Hypostati∣call vnion, propter virtutem seruatricem, by reason of Saluation, it worketh euery where, may bee sayd to be euery where; but to say, that the Body of Christ, as it is a body quantatiue, or limited with the bounds of quantitie, is euery where, I say it is vnpossible; because nothing that is quantatiue can be infinite, but is measu∣red, and bounded by place alone, Quia numerica vnitas corporis finiti non potest consistere sine continuitate, because (as Iulius Sca∣liger
sayth) the numericall vnitie of a finite body,Scal. extra: in Card: cannot consist without continuitie, e. i. except it bee alwayes contained in some place, and wee find all the Fathers of this iudgement, as Cyrillus Alexandrinus in Dialog: de trin: l. 2. Tertull: de trinit. p. 610. Ambros in luc: l. 10. c. 14. Vigilius l. 4. contra Euty∣chet: Fulgentius. l. 2. ad Trasimundum, and many others, which that thrice worthy Zanchius,Zanch. l. 2. c. 6. de nat. dei. p. 107. &c. together with their sayings and ar∣guments, doth set downe at large. And therefore, though to say, that that which is no quantitie, nor circumscriptiuely locall in one place, (which is onely pro∣per vnto the God-head) is in euery place, is no contradiction; yet seeing the Body of Christ is a true naturall body, and that eue∣ry true body, whiles it remaines a body, must consist of his cer∣taine and limited dimensions: and therefore of necessitie must be locall in one place, and cannot possibly bee in euery place; to say that this is euery where, is the greatest contradiction that may be: for to say that that thing which is, and must bee in one place, is in euery place, is such a contradiction as I know nothing more; and therefore if they will prooue him to bee euery where, they must first disproue him to bee a true and a naturall body, and so proue the Body of Christ to bee truely and really made a God: And indeede so they seeke to doe. For, They say, that although he assumed a true body, yet it fol∣loweth not, that it must still retaine his true dimensions: but that now, by reason of its glorification, it is freed from those necessa∣rie conditions of a Mortall body, and really indued with these Diuine properties; and this is no more contradiction, to say that God can disrobe a body of its naturall properties, and to in∣due it with supernaturall faculties; then it is to say that God at the day of Iudgement, will change our Mortall bodyes, to bee Immortall, and cause this corruption to put on incorruption, as the Apostle speaketh:1 Cor. 15. and therefore, God can make the body of Christ to be euery where. That the glo∣rification of a body doth not take away the dimensions of a body.To this I answere; first, that the glorification of any body doth no wayes disrobe him, or free him from the essentiall properties of that body, in respect of its quantitie or substance: for that were, to make a body to be no body; but onely in respect of the quali∣ties, whereof those that are ill, shall bee quite abolished, and those
that are good, shall bee more fully perfected: and therefore I say that the bodyes of the Saints glorified, or clarified, shall be but changed in qualities, as indued with agility, and subtilitie, per∣fection, and immortalitie, and shall no wayes be changed in sub∣stance, but shall still remaine the same quantatiue bodyes, boun∣ded and limited with their naturall dimensions: for otherwise, how should Iob see God with the same eyes that hee had,Iob 19.27. while hee liued? or how should we beleeue the happinesse and felicitie of our bodyes, if our bodyes be so changed, as to be no bodyes at all? they shall therefore be indued with most vnspeakeable perfecti∣ons, and most perfectly clarified from all imperfections, but they shall not be disrobed of their naturall proprieties. Secondly, I say that the Body of Christ,That the body of Christ was a glorified bo∣dy from the first moment of his con∣ception. though in some things it is otherwise now then it was before his resurrection, and ascension, as to be impassible; for now, Christ being dead dieth no more, sayth the Apostle, and to bee more apparantly glorified, being then as it were vayled from our eyes, that we could not see the true glorie which indeed it had; yet was it truely a most clarified and glorified body from the first moment of his conception: for it was freed from all corruptions, and indued with all possible perfections; and as the Apostle sayth,Colloss. 2.9. The ful∣nesse of the God-head dwelt in Christ bodily: And therefore how could it be, but that a body vnited to the God-head, should bee a body glorified from the first moment of that Hypostaticall v∣nion? and so it appeared at his transfiguration on mount Thabot,Matth. 17.2. which was not an imposition, or donation of more glory vnto the body of Christ, then it had before; but a translation of the vayle, which couered his Glory, by reason of their inabilitie to behold it, and a reueiling of his glory vnto them; and yet wee must needs confesse, (vnlesse wee will fall into damnable he∣resie) that this glorified body of Christ, was then quantatiue and limited, with the bounds of his dimensions; else how could the Prophet say, that a Woman should compasse a Man? or how could the Euangelist say, that he was layd in a manger, that he wal∣ked from one place to another, that he was nayled to the crosse,Luke 12.16. John 19.18. Matth. 27.60. that he was layd in his graue, and so forth, if his body was not limited in any one place, but incircumscriptiuely in eue∣ry place?
Therefore it is most manifest, that the Body of Christ though glorified in Heauen, is still a true Phisicall body, limited with his dimensions, and locally seated in his appointed place: and therefore also, seeing to be in one place, and to be in euery place at the same time, and in the same respect, is such a palpable and grosse contradiction, I conclude that it is vnpossible, that God should be able, to make the Body of Christ to be euery where, in Heauen and in earth both at once. What the Ie∣suites say to proue Tran∣substantiationFourthly, The pontificialls and Iesuites doe obiect, that to transubstantiate bread into flesh, or to make the Body of Christ, to be in all those places where the Masse is celebrated, and re∣ceiued of all those that doe communicate, doth no wayes im∣plie a contradiction,Bellar: de Euch: l. 3. c. 4. p. 7. 297. in 8. Quia ad esse circumscriptiue in loco nihil re∣quiritur nisi vt locatum sit commensuratum suo loco, & non vt sit alibi in alio loco, For that it is inough to shew the veritie of a body, that it be circumscribed, and limited with its place, and time; and not that it cannot bee in many places, so it bee circumscribed in euery place where it is, sayth Cardinall Bellarmine: and there∣fore God can make the body of Christ, to bee in many places, though not to be in all places: for to bee in many places, doth include that he must be prescribed, and limited in all those places where he is, which is agreeable to the definition of a true Phisi∣call body, but to be in all places, doth necessarily conclude, that he must be vnlimited and indefinite; which is altogether contra∣rie to the definition of a true body: and thus; Clodius accu∣sat Maechum, Catilina Caethegum: Ephraim will bee against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, and both against Iuda. Sol.But to this I answere. First, That to proue the vbiquitie of the body of Christ,That we must not argue from the power of God, vnlesse we can prooue it from the will of God. or the transubstantiating of the bread into the flesh of Christ, or any other point of Diuinitie, Non licet theolo∣gicè, & positiuè argumentari, ab omnipotentia Dei, nisi praecedat vo∣luntas Dei, It is no wayes sufficient to argue Theologically and positiuely, from the power of God, that he can doe such a thing, vnlesse wee haue some testimony of the Will of God, that hee hath done, or will doe, such a thing: for the secret things belong vn∣to the Lord our God,Deut. 29.29. but those things which are reueiled, belong to vs, and to our Children for euer.
Secondly, I say, that in this their assertion of transubstantiation,That there is a double con∣tradiction in the doctrine of Transubstan∣tiation. there is a double contradiction, which is vnpossible by all the wit of man to be reconciled. First, that Bread still remaining Bread, should be notwithstan∣ding transubstantiated into Flesh. Secondly, that the Body of Christ numerically one, and local∣ly in Heauen, should be notwithstanding many thousand com∣plete bodies, and in many thousand places all at once: and what greater contradictories, can there be then these? for, First, we confesse God can produce any thing of nothing,God can change any substance in∣to another substance. Gen. 19.26. Iohn 2.9. Matth. 4.3. and reduce any thing into nothing; and he can change any thing into any thing; as to make stones Bread; Bread flesh; Lots wife, a pillar of salt, or any such like thing: for wee see God hath done it, and Christ changed the Water into Wine; and the very diuell knew he could doe it, when he said vnto our Saui∣our, If thou beest the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. But that God should change one substance into another; and yet, that this thing which is said to be changed, should re∣maine still the same thing which it was, before it was changed; and be also the substance of the thing into which it was changed; it is so impossible, as that there can be nothing more: for when the Lord changed one substance into another;Exod. 4.3. as Moses his rodde into a Serpent, or Lots wife into a pillar of Salt, or the Wa∣ter into Wine: Neither of these,That the sub∣stance chan∣ged cannot be what it was, and what it is both at once. were both the things at the same time: but when Moses rod, was a rod, it was no Serpent; and when it was a Serpent, it was no rod; so when Lots wife was a Woman and Lots wife, she was no pillar of Salt; and when she was a pillar of Salt, she was no more a Woman, nor Lots wife; and so when the Water was Water, it was no Wine, and when it was Wine, it was no Water: and therefore to say that the bread remaining bread, should be transubstantiated or changed into Flesh, and so for the same substance at the selfe-same time, to bee two seuerall and distinct things, Bread and Flesh: I say that, as it is incredible for vs to beleeue it, so it is vnpossible for God to effect it. For if these things be not direct contradictories, I know not how any man can name any contradictories in the world. But to this they answere, that they doe not say that the same thing is both Bread and Flesh, for they all know that this is
vnpossible to be done: but they say that the substance of the bread is vanished and reduced into nothing, which God can doe, as we all confesse; and that the sole substance of the Flesh is there remaining, to be receiued of the beleeuer, of the Commu∣nicant, be he faithfull or Infidell; yea, of Rattes, Kattes, Dogges, and Serpents, if they can come by it. I answere, that I doe admire the subtilty of Satan, to sow such seed of strong delusions, to deceiue simple soules: and the more I follow these sophisticall shifts, the more I doe abhorre these vile deceits: for I beseech you marke what absurdities, what contradictions, what impossibilities doe still more and more ac∣crew: for, The most ri∣diculous ab∣surdities that must follow the doctrine of transubstan∣tiation.First, the substance of the Bread is gone, Nihil est, It is reduced to nothing; and yet behold, the colour of it is there, the forme of it is there, the taste of it is there; thine eye sees it Bread, thy hand feeles it Bread, thy mouth findes it Bread, and yet it is no Bread. I would faine know what Aristotle, or all the Schoole of Phi∣losophers would define this to be; Bread, and no Bread; Bread in the iudgement of all the world; and no Bread in the iudge∣ment of all the Iesuites of the world: a strange thing that God should worke such strong delusions. I finde that Satan did them often, but neuer that God did euer the like: and yet this is not all: for here must be Flesh to, though neither seene, felt, heard nor vnderstood: If it be so, let all men iudge; For I blush to say more in a point so cleere. Secondly, we confesse, that as God can produce any substance of nothing, so he can multiply any one thing into a thousand things;Matth. 14.17. as he did the fiue loaues to feede fiue thousand men, be∣sides women and children: but that he should make that which is numerically one,Mar. 6 36. to be fiue thousand things, and yet to be but one thing,John 6.5. at the very same time that it is fiue thousand things; and that that one thing should be, but in one place, and yet at the same time should be in fiue thousand places; we say there cannot be a greater contradiction:How Christ multiplied the loaues of Bread. for as when the loaues were multiplied, if he multiplied them in number, he did not multiply them to bee more then fiue; and yet to remaine but fiue; or if he multiplyed them in quantity (which I rather thinke) he did not make them to be of a greater quantity, and yet to remaine of the same lesser
quantity that they were before; for this is meerely contradicto∣ry; to be more in number then fiue, and yet to be but fiue: or to be augmented in quantity, and yet to be but the same in quan∣tity; but when any part thereof was diminished, he still multi∣plyed the remaining quantity into the same quantity as it was be∣fore, or greater; as he di the meale in the barrell, and the oyle in the cruse of the Widdow of Sarepta, in the dayes of Elias.1 King 17.16. That it cannot be that one body should be but in one place, and yet to be in a hundred places at the same time. And herein is no contradiction: euen so, if God should mul∣tiply that one body of his Sonne, to be fiue thousand bodies, it cannot be, that it should be one and fiue thousand both at once, or if hee should cause that body which is in one place, to be in fiue thou∣sand places all at once: it cannot be, that it should be in fiue thousand places, and yet but in one place; as euery child almost may easily perceiue. And therefore seeing it is apparant, that Christ hath but one true, naturall, and Phisicall body, else we shall make Christ to be no Christ; and that it cannot be, that that one should still re∣maine one, and yet be fiue thousand millions of bodies; and that that one must still remaine in one place,Act. 3.21. as Saint Peter shew∣eth, and yet should be at the same time, in many millions of pla∣ces; I hope it is as plaine, that these things are meerely contra∣dictory, and so simplie impossible to be done; as that the Sunne doth shine at noone-day. But they instance,D. Hall relates it. How they re∣late lies to boulster vp their errors. that one Xauier (as Tursellian reports it) was at the same time seene, both in a Ship, and in a Boat: and I read it alleadged out of Bellarmine, that hee relates the like of Saint Antony of Padua, that he was seene Preaching in a towne of Italy, and at the same time was seene in another place; and therefore a body may be commeasured to its place, and yet be in other places at the same time. To these Instances I say, not onely with Plautus,Plaut. Amphyt. Tun'id di∣cere audes, quod nemo vnquam homo vidit, nec potest fieri, tempore v∣no, homo idem duobus vt locis simul sit? How dares any man say, that which neuer any man did see, nor can be; that at the same time, one man should be in two seuerall places? but I say al∣so with Aquinas of the locality of Angels,Thom. in Mag. l 1. d. 32. q. 1. art. 1. that by the same rea∣son, that he might be in two places, he may be in a thousand pla∣ces at once; and therefore if Xauier or Antony was in one place,
it must needs be the Diuell that was in the other place, to teach such lies to delude the credulous. But yet still they will reply, that we must not conceiue of Di∣uine things, and especially of Gods Power, by the rule of hu∣mane reason; For subtill Philosophy, doth many times obscure pure Diuinity; and Aristotles Bookes of Nature, haue caused many a Doctor to corrupt the Scripture: for he made Aetius to follow Arrius saith Socrates:Socrat. l. 2. c. 28. Eccles. hist. and therefore we must attaine vnto the knowledge of these things, not by the reason of man, but by the rule of Faith,That Faith seeth what Reason cannot conceiue. which Philo calleth Fidem oculatum, so well-eyed, and so sharpe-sighted, that as the Eagles eye, being aloft in the cloudes, can notwithstanding espie, Sub frutice le∣porem, & sub fluctibus piscem, Vnder the waues a Fish, and vnder the shrubs a Hare; so Faith, here in earth, can notwithstanding search into the deepe things of God in Heauen, and can most per∣fectly see those things which humane sence can no way per∣ceiue. Aug. ep. 3. ad Volusian.To this I answere with Saint Augustine, that wee confesse God is able to doe, as he hath done, many things which we are not able to vnderstand: in all which we beleeue them, without searching the reason of them; because in such things (as Saint Augustine saith) Ratio facti, est potentia facientis; The whole reason of the deede, is the Power of the doer; but, as for the ioyes of Heauen, though it passeth all vnderstanding to know posi∣tiuely, what excellent things are there, yet negatiuely wee doe certainely know what is not there; for there is no sorrow, no sickenesse, no euill; and as we know not perfectly what God is, yet wee doe certainely know what hee is not, for hee is not the Sunne,Danaeus Isagog. de Deo. the Moone, nor any other creature whatsoeuer: Euen so though we know not, the height or greatnesse of Gods Power, what infinite things he can doe, aboue what we can speake or thinke: yet we know many things that he cannot doe; which I haue shewed vnto you before. And therefore that bread should be transubstantiated into flesh, and yet remaine bread; that acci∣dents should subsist without their subiects; that Christ should sit in Heauen, and lie in the Bread which we doe eate; that hee should be visibly there, and inuisibly here: and that hee should be one, and many; continued, and discontinued; intire in one
one place, and at the same time intire in a thousand places; and such like assertions, which doe ouerthrow,We beleeue not the asserti∣ons of the Ie∣suites, not be∣cause we know not how they may be done, but because we know they cannot bee done▪ not onely the huma∣nity of our Sauiour Christ, but also the order of things, and the very principles of Nature, and doe exceede the bounds of all sence and reason, and repugne indeede the very truth of God; wee can in no wayes beleeue them, not because we know no reason how they may be done, for so we beleeue many things, as all the mysteries of our Faith; but because we haue many rea∣sons, euen out of the Word of God, to assure vs, that these things cannot be done: And so much for the chiefest obiections that are vsually made against the truth of this Doctrine of Gods Power. CHAP. IV. Of the vsefull application of this Doctrine of Gods Power. YOu haue seene the truth of this Doctrine of the Power of God; it may serue for many especiall ends: As first, for the confutation of a world of er∣rors, and the cutting downe of many infinite he∣resies, especially those whereof I haue already spo∣ken; and therefore I neede not say any more of them in this place. Secondly, this Doctrine of Gods Power,A great com∣fort to the godly, that God is able to deliuer them. Math. 10.16. Dan. 3.17. may serue for the consolation of the godly: for they are inuironed with many ene∣mies, they are sent as Sheepe into the middest of Wolues, and they are hated of all-men for Christ his sake; but (as the three Chil∣dren said,) We know that God is able to deliuer vs from the burning fiery Furnace, and from the hands of all that hate vs, and to pre∣serue vs blamelesse vntill the day of the comming of Christ: And therefore though we be beset with enemies on euery side,Bosquier. de in∣cruent. victor Christi. p. 567. espe∣cially the World, Tanquam Syrena dulcis, Like the alluring Mermaides; The flesh, Tanquam Dalila blandiens, Like a false flattering Dalila; and the Diuell, Tanquam Leo rugiens, Like a roaring Lyon, that doe seeke by all meanes to destroy vs; Presentem{que} viris intendunt omnia mortem:Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1. Reuel 2.10. Yet, we neede not feare any of those things, that we shall suffer:
Quia non plus valet ad deijciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigen∣dum diuina tutela; Because all the power of darkenesse is not so able to suppresse vs, as our gracious God is to support vs: for o∣therwise, Si Diabolus nocere posset, quantum vellet, aliquis iustorum non remaneret; If either Satans malice, or the hatred of wicked men, or the furie of bloud-thirsty Tyrants, might preuaile a∣gainst the godly seruants of Christ, so much as they would, then not a righteous man could remaine vpon the face of the Earth; but God can put a hooke in their nostrils, and say vnto them, as he sayes vnto the Seas, Hitherto shalt thou goo, and no further:Rom. 8.31. And therefore, If God be with vs, we neede not feare who be against vs; Quia maior est, qui est in nobis, quam qui est in mundo,1 Iohn 4.4. Because (as Saint Iohn saith) He is greater, and stron∣ger, which is in vs, then he that is in the W rld. Euen so we haue the lusts of our owne flesh, the messengers of Satan,1 Pet. 2.11. that doe buffet vs, and fight against our soules, and make vs many times, when it compells vs to doe the euill that we would not doe, nd to leaue vndone the good that we would doe; to crie out with the Apostle,Rom. 7.19. O wretched men that we are, who shall deliuer vs from this body of death? or who shall preserue vs vnto eternall life? And to say with the Poet, O ter{que} quater{que} beati, queis ante ora patrum contigit oppetere; O happy had wee beene, had wee died before wee had sin∣ned; but if we cast our eyes to looke vpon Gods Power, we may be presently comforted, because the Saints of God, though they be shaken, and sifted, and winnowed, like wheate, yet are they kept, not by their owne strength, for so they should soone faile,1 Pet. 1.5. but by the Power of God (saith Saint Peter) through faith, vnto saluation: And this indeed is the sole comfort of all Christians, that we shall neuer perish;Iohn 10.28.29. because our Father which gaue vs vnto Christ, is greater then all, and none is able to take vs out of his Fathers hands. This is that Foundation which remaineth sure, and therefore happy is that man, which buildes vpon this Foun∣dation. Thirdly, this Doctrine of Gods Power, may serue for the re∣prehension of the wicked: for he can destroy all the workers of iniquitie,Math. 10.28. and cast both body and soule into Hell fire; And there∣fore will ye not feare to offend so great a God? Remember, I
beseech you, what he hath done to the old World, to Sodome,That the wic∣ked should feare to offend thi powerfull God. Deut 29.19. and Gomorrah, to Cora, Dathan, and Abiram, to Pharaoh, Iudas, and many more; remember that he can doe whatsoeuer hee will doe; and remember what he saith. Hee will doe vnto them that heare the words of the curse of the Law, and yet will blesse themselues in their hearts, saying; We shall haue peace: And let these things moue you to be humbled before the mighty and of God; and to cause you here to feare his power,1 Pet. 5.6. that hereater you may not feele his anger: For,Heb. 10.31. it is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God; and they that now goe on in sinne, and make but a sport of iniquitie, without either beleeuing his truth, that he will punish sinne, or fearing his power, that he can pu∣nish them, shall then finde and feele, that it had beene better for them neuer to haue beene borne; or to haue had a milstone hanged about their neckes, and to haue beene cast into the middest of the Sea, then to haue broken the least Commandement o this powerfull and Almighty God. And so much for the first attri∣bute of God here expressed, that is, his Power: and now fol∣loweth the second attribute, which is, Gods Goodnesse. CHAP. V. Of the Mercy of GOD, and wherein the same chiefly consi∣steth. YOu haue heard of the Power of God,2. Attribute. i. e Gods good∣nesse. we are now to see how God proclaimeth his Goodnesse; according as he had promised before, I will make all my good∣nesse to passe before thy face.Exod. 33.9. A Doctrine farre more comfortable then the former: for not hee that can, but he that will helpe vs, is best vnto vs; and hee that is willing to doe what he can, though it be but little, is farre more deere vnto vs, then he that can do much, but will do nothing: but the power of God sheweth that he is able, and this goodnesse of God proueth that he is willing to releeue vs; and therefore the good∣nesse of God is the anchor of our hope, and the foundation of all our comfort; and it is well coupled with the former attribute:
for in vaine were his willingnesse to helpe vs, vnlesse he were a∣ble, and in vaine were his ability to helpe vs, vnlesse hee were willing; the former being but a fruitlesse wish, and the latter but a gracelesse power:Prou. 25.11. but both ioyned together, it is like apples of gold in pictures of siluer; And therefore, as before he had shewed his power, that hee was able to helpe vs, so now hee sheweth his goodnesse, that he is most willing to releeue vs: And to shew how plenteous his goodnesse is, he expresseth the same by seauen spe∣ciall and seuerall particles. I will handle them by Gods helpe, as they lye in order. The first particle of Gods goodnesse here expressed, is, that hee is Mercifull: Touching which, we must vnderstand, that Mercy in God, is no passion, nor any griefe of minde, conceiued through the miserie of another;Cicero in 4. Tusc. Senec. de clem. Aug de ciuit. Dei. l. 9. c. 5. Jer. 31.20. (as mercy is commonly defi∣ned to be) vnlesse you vnderstand it, per , im∣properly spoken, onely for our better apprehension; as when he saith, My bowels are troubled for Ephraim: Or as it is ascri∣bed to the Sonne of God Christ Iesus, who doth indeed con∣dole our miseries, and sympathize in our afflictions; because he is man as we are, and subiect to all like passions as we be, sinne onely excepted:Heb. 2.17. But mercy in God, signifieth a propensitie, and a readi∣nesse of minde, to helpe not onely the miserie, but also the wants, and all the defects of man. Mouet enim pium iudicem, fragilitas considerata peccantium:Cassiod. in Psal. What mercy in God signi∣fieth. For he remembreth that we are but dust; and therefore he pittieth our frailties, and he helpeth our infirmities; yea, hee cryeth and calleth, and seeketh after vs, when wee by our sinnes doe runne away, and flie apace from him: For, When Adam by the wisedome that he got by the Serpent, had found him a way to runne away from God, and so to fall in∣to the depth of despaire, and as a man without helpe, without hope, voide of grace, and full of sinne, to become free amongst the dead, excluded from God, and exiled from the Land of the liuing, a slaue of Satan, which makes me abhorre to thinke of it, and a fire-brand of eternall destruction, which makes me tremble for feare of it; yet then behold the neuer-dying mercy of the God of all mercy, did presently finde the meanes to bring him backe againe by repentance, and to make him an example
of his mercie, to many babes that were as then vnborne; for he tht doth neither slumber nor sleepe, would not suffer him to lye and sleepe in sinne; but presently runnes after him, that was running from him; and cries, Adam where art thou,Gene. 3.9. and what is become of thee? and he did this; not because he knew not where Adam was, which knoweth euery thing; but be∣cause he would haue Adam to know where himselfe was, in a state, destitute of all grace, and replenished with all miseries; that so finding himselfe in the depth of such miseries, hee might the more earnestly seeke vnto God for mercies. So he did to Dauid,Examples of Gods infinite mercies, in the speedy seeking after his Saints when they hd sinned against him. 2 Sam. 24.10. Jonas 1.4. when Dauid had offended him in num∣bring Israel, hee stirred vp his heart, that it presently smote him, that he might not be smitten of God; so to Ionas, when hee be∣gan his iourney to flie from God, he sent the windes to flie after him, and as a purseuant to arest him, and to bring him backe againe to him, who otherwise would haue posted to hell: so to Peter, when he denied his Master, and swore that hee knew him not, to whom a little before hee had sworne tht hee would die with him; he looked backe vpon him, to bring him backe againe to repentance, and hee caused, the Cocke to crowe,Matth. 26.74. the dumbe Beast to crie, vnto him, to send him out, to crie vnto God for mercie, and to weepe so bitterly for his sinnes, vt lachrymae laua∣rent delictum, that God seeing his sorrow and teares, might bee inclined to heare his prayers; and so he doth vnto vs all, when we doe fall, and sinne, and sleepe and sinne, he sends his Prea∣chers still to call vs, and his owne spirit into our hearts, to moue vs to repentance, not to bee repented of, and to promise to shew compassion on vs, and to receiue vs into his grace, if wee would shew our contrition, and promise to leaue and to forsake our sinnes. O then, that this mercifull seeking of vs,That the goodnesse of God seeking after vs should moue vs to seeke vnto God. would make vs to seeke vnto him, while he may bee found; and that this calling after vs, to recall vs from our miseries, would make vs call vnto him for mercie: for if wee doe seeke and pray for Grace, wee may assure our selues, that our Saluation is neerer then wee thinke; but if we still continue in sinne, we may be sure our damnation is neerer then we feare: for the day of grace passeth away, and the night of death commeth, when no man can worke: and therefore
while it is to day let vs heare his voyce,John 9.4. so louingly calling vs, so carefully seeking vs, & so mercifully offering to receiue vs, to kisse vs with the kisses of his mouth, to deliuer vs frō the shadow of death, and to bring vs vnto the land of euerlasting life; such is the ne∣uer-dying streames of the mercie of God; it is like a bound∣lesse Ocean, there is no end of his goodnesse: and therefore Saint Bernard in admiration thereof, crieth out vnto God: saying, Quam diues es in misericordia, & magnificus in iustitia, & munifi∣cus in gratia, Domine Deus noster? O how rich art thou in Mer∣cy, how magnificent in Iustice, and how bountifull in Grace, O Lord our God?Nam tu mune∣rator copiosissi∣mus remunera∣tor aequissimus & libera∣tor pijssimus. For thou art a most liberall bestower of Heauenly gifts, thou art a most righteous rewarder of humane workes, nd thou art a most gracious deliuerer of all that trust in thee; Yea, and besides all this, Tu gratis respicis humiles, tu iustè iudicas innocentes, & tu misericorditer saluas peccatores; thou doest freely exalt the lowly, thou doest iustly deliuer the inno∣cent, and thou doest most mercifully saue those sinners that doe put their trust in thy sufferings: and therefore, Quis similis tibi? O Lord, our God, who is like vnto thee, that when there was not a righteous man vpon the face of the earth,August. in p. 48 not one that did good, no not one, thou sentest one from Heauen, that by him wee might bee all brought vnto Heauen? So great is the Mercy of God towards vs poore wretched Men. And it is obserued by Diuines, that the Mercy of God con∣sisteth chiefely in these three things, viz. In Wherein the mercie of God doth chiefely consist.1. Giuing of Graces. 2. Forgiuing of sinnes. 3. Qualifying punishments. The first, extendeth it selfe vnto all creatures; the second vnto his Saints; and the third both to Saints and sinners; both to the best of Men, and to the worst, both of Men and Angels. For the first, the Prophet Dauid sayth, the earth is full of his mercie, quoniam bonus est vniuersis; because all creatures taste of his goodnesse;Psal. 147.9. Hee openeth his hands, and filleth all things liuing with plenteousnesse, and he feedeth the young Rauens that call vpon him: and therefore, omnia in te sperant domine, the eyes of all things doe looke on thee O Lord, and thou giuest them their meate in due season.
For the second, that is, the forgiuing of sinnes,Many particu∣lar points to be considered in the forgi∣uing of sinnes. we shall the bet∣ter vnderstand it, if we doe, though but briefely, consider these few particulars; as First, Who forgiueth; God omnipotent, who hath no neede of sinners, Et qui nec melior si laudaueris, nec deterior si vituperaueris,Aug. in Psal. 1 Who for∣giueth. and which is so eminently good, and so immutably blessed, as tht all which thou canst doe, cannot better him; Quia summe & perfectissime bonus; because he is so good that he cannot bee better; nor any thing that thou canst say or doe, can make him one iot the worse, as Saint Augustine speaketh. Secondly, What hee doth forgiue; crimen laesae maiestatis,2 What God forgiueth. sinne, horrible sinne, and high treason against himselfe; a thing so haynous, that it would require a whole treatise to ex∣presse it. Thirdly, To whom hee doth forgiue this;3 To whom he forgiueth. to his owne crea∣tures, and seruants, that doe , rebell and make warre like those slaues (whereof Iustine speaketh) that made warre a∣gainst their Masters, against him that made them,Psal. 69.9. that feeds them, and that blesseth them, euen then when they curse him. Fourthly, How he doth forgiue all this;4 How he for∣giueth. by laying all vpon his Sonne, The rebukes of them that rebuked thee, are fallen vpon mee, sayth Christ; yea by slaying his innocent Sonne, to saue vs his wic∣ked seruants: for the Scripture sheweth, that the Sonne of God was made the Sonne of Man, that the sonnes of sinne, might bee made the sonnes of God; the Lord of glory was vilified, that the sonnes of shame might be glorified, and the Lord of life was deliuered vnto death, that the sonnes of death might be restored to life: and thus as the Christian Poet sayth, — Deus emit sanguine seruos Mercari exiguo nos piget aere Deum. God shed his bloud, to purchase those, That for his loue giue not a rose. So strange is mans vn∣gratitude vnto this most mercifull God. Fiftly, How often he doth forgiue vs; euery day,5 How often he forgiueth. and that many a time God knoweth, and none knoweth but God, for who can tell how oft he offendeth? septies in die cadit iustus,Prou. 24.16. the iust man falleth seauen times a day, sayth Salomon; and if the iust man falleth seauen times, then certainely the wicked falleth
seauenty times seauen times, by their leud thoughts, wan∣ton lookes, idle words, cursed oathes, wicked lyes, and sinnefull workes. 6 After what manner he forgiueth.Sixtly, After what manner he forgiueth all this; so a that he forgiueth all, neuer to recall them, neuer to remember them; for as the Distich sayth, Larga dei bonitas, veniam non dimidiabit, Aut nihil aut totum, te lachrymante dabit. He forgiueth all, or none at all: Et semel remissa nunquam re∣deunt, and sinnes once remitted are neuer after questioned: for I the Lord change not,Malac. 3.6. and my gifts are , without re∣pentance; and therefore sinnes once remitted are neuer after to be found:Iere. 50.20. for the iniquities of Israel shall bee sought for, and there shall be none; and the sinnes of Iuda, and they shall not bee found,Esay 44.22. Ezch. 18.21. but they shall euer bee forgotten: for I will do away thy transgressions as a cloude, and thy sinnes as a myste, and I will put a∣way all thy wickednesse out of my remembrance, sayth the Lord: that is, they shall bee cleane forgotten, as a dead man, out of minde, or as the thing that had neuer beene. Psal. 77.10.And yet the Prophet Dauid sayth, quod non obliuiscetur mi∣sereri Deus, that God cannot forget to be mercifull, for though the wrath of the Lord endureth but the twinckling of an eye,Psal. 136. yet as the same Prophet sayth, (and that seuen and twenty times in the same Psalme) the mercie of God endureth for euer; and so it is euerlasting: and that (as the Schooles obserue) two manner of wayes: The mercie of God is euerla∣sting two wayes. Gab. Biel. in sent. dist. 1. q. 5.First, Essentially, for God is mercy; quia in Deo nihil est quod non sit ipse Deus, because the Diuine essence, identificat sibi omnia quae sunt in diuinis, doth identifie to it selfe all things that are in the Dietie, and so God hath not things as qualities, but is the things that are spoken of him, as his essence; and therefore mercy being of himselfe, and euer himselfe, it must needs be eter∣nitie it selfe. Aug. sup. Gen: l. 5.Secondly, Relatiuely, as it respects the creatures, and makes impression on them, Quia omnia priusquam fierent, in notitia fa∣cientis erant, because the creatures had their being in God, ac∣cording to his eternall purpose (as the Apostle sayth) from all e∣ternitie;Ephes. 1.4.9. and 11. v. quia nihil noui accidit deo, because no new thought can
happen to the minde of God, and so euer they needed mercie, to continue and to accomplish that their intended being; and there∣fore thus ex parte ante, the mercy of God is euerlasting, because it is from all eternitie: & now since they had their being, and so long as they shall haue their existence, in there naturall causes, they doe and euer shall neede his mercy; and therefore also thus, ex parte post his mercy is euerlasting, because endlesse. And therefore, Let the house of Aaron now confesse,Psal. 117.3. that his mercy endu∣reth for euer, and Let the house of Iuda now confsse, that his mercy endureth for euer, and therefore also, let vs all confesse, that (as the Prophet sayth) he cannot forget to be mercifull. O most excellent argument of exceeding comfort, hee can forget our sinnes, (as I sheed you before,) but he cannot forget to be mercifull; Can a Woman forget her owne childe? Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque Mater:Virgil: in Egl. If she should, that child were very vnhappy, and that Mother full of crueltie, yet because some Progne-like haue done it; there∣fore, Though a Woman should forget her owne child, yet will not I for∣get you sayth the Lord. Well then, here is a comfort vnto vs all;That the chie∣fest and the su∣rest comfort of euery man is ro relie vpon the mercie of God. for if thou beest a man full of sinnes, here is a God full of mercy; and in verie deede, this is our chiefest comfort; for be we Kings, Nobles, rich or poore; yet after all our pompe and power, when wee see our selues, and consider our owne sinnes; when death approacheth and sickenesse seizeth vpon vs, wee must all say with king Dauid, Miserere mei deus; haue mercy on me O God according to the multitude of thy mercies, or with poore Bartimaeus;Marc. 10.48. haue mercy on me, O Iesu thou sonne of Dauid. Et hoc tutissimum est, and this is the safest course for all sinners, as Bellarmine wisely acknow∣ledgeth, totam spem, totamque fiduciaem in sola misericordia dei re∣ponere: to place all our trust and confidence in the sole mercie of our most mercifull God: for otherwise, who dares present his best workes to bee iudged without mercie; because (as Saint Augustine sayth) Vae laudabili vitae hominum, si remota mise∣ricordia discutiat eam Deus, Woe to the purest life of the holiest Saint, if God should discusse the same without mercy? And there∣fore after wee haue gone with the prodigall childe,Luc. 15.13. into a farre countrey of wickednesse; after we haue wasted all our goods, all
our graces, and haue committed all our sinnes; yet let vs not despaire,Gen. 4.13. and say with Caine, My sinnes are greater then can be par∣doned, but let vs rather returne vnto our Father; and say with the prodigall childe,Luk. 15 21. Father I haue sinned against Heauen, and against thee, and I am no more worthy to be called thy Sonne; Yet I pray thee make me as one of thy hyred seruants: or else let vs cry with Saint Augustine,Aug. l. Meditat. saying, O bone Domine, noli attendere malum me∣um, ne obliuiscaris bonum tuum; O good Lord, doe not remember my wickednesse, lest thou shouldst forget thine owne good∣nesse; but consider, O my God, that although, Ego admisi vnde me damnare potes, tu non amisisti vnde me seruare soles, I haue com∣mitted that for which thou canst damne me, yet thou hast not forgotten that whereby thou art wont to saue me; and though my sinnes be many, yet thy mercies are more; and the more thou forgiuest vnto me, the more it will expresse thy goodnesse, and the more bound I shall be, to be thankefull vnto thee: For hee loueth much,Luk 7.47. to whom much is forgiuen, saith our Sauiour Christ. How God qua∣lifieth pu∣nishments. James 2.13. Niceph l. 17. c. 3.For the third, that is, the qualifying of punishments, we finde that in his greatest anger against sinne, mercy reioyceth against iudgement, and that (as Nicephorus saith) Vindicta gladium mi∣sericordiae oleo semper acuit, He steepeth his sword of vengeance, in the oyle of mercy; and he doth alwayes punish, lesse then our iniquities deserue:Ezra 9.13. as Ezra saith. And this he doth not onely vnto the elected Saints, but also to the reprobates, and to the di∣uels themselues. For, First, Touching the Saints, it is apparant that their punish∣ments doe proceed from mercy; for when they are afflicted in this life,Heb. 11. they are chastned of the Lord that they should not be con∣demned of the world. Secondly, touching the reprobates, both men & Angels, both here and hereafter, the mercy of God abateth much of that pu∣nishment, which they haue most iustly deserued. For, Ruffin. eccl. hist.First, Here God being not like vnto Theodosius, that put all the Thessalonians to the sword, for the offence of few; nor like that angry Goddesse Pallas, — Quae exurere classem Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1.Argiuum, at{que} ipsos voluit submergere ponto, Ʋnius ob noxam.— That would destroy the whole
Nauie of the Argiues, for the onely offence of one onely Aiax, but (if it be lawfull to vse the comparison) as the Persian Ge∣nerall spared Delos for Apollo's sake: So God in this life, spa∣reth whole multitudes of wicked men, for a few good mens sake;Act. 27.24. as he spared the liues of all the people that were in the ship with Saint Paul, for the loue that he bare vnto this blessed Apostle; and, as he would haue spared fiue wicked Cities;Gen. 18.32. if but ten good men had beene found therein; and sometimes hee spareth the sinnes of the wicked, for the very loue he beareth to the persons of the vngodly: and though they still sinne against him, yet doth he still spare them; to see if his patience,Rom. 2 4. and long sufferance will at any time lead them to repentance. Secondly, hereafter, Quia non datur summum malum,August. in Enchirid: cap. 12.13. That God in the strictnesse of his Iustice might inflict more punish∣ment vpon the damned soules then he doth. quo∣niam malum non inhaeret nisi in subiecto bono: Because the being both of reprobates and diuels, is euer good: therfore the mercy of God pittieth that good, and cannot be seuered from it; but still loueth the same, euen in its greatest torments; and in that respect, doth euer mitigate some part of that torment, which the sinner iustly deserued, and which God in the rigor of his Iu∣stice might rightly haue inflicted on him. But you will say the Scripture teacheth, that they shall be pu∣nished in measure, and that they shall haue iudgement without mercie: And therefore how can they be said then, to haue the least iot of the mercy of God;Luke 16.24.25. Diues being denyed one drop of water to coole his tongue? I answere, that they shall neuer be eased of the least iot of that punishment that is once inflicted vpon them; but I say, that God neuer imposeth so much torments on the damned, as in the strictnesse of his Iustice he might iustly doe; and yet are they said, to haue iudgement without mercie, because the greatnesse of their insufferable paines, doth swallow vp all sense, and perseuerance of mercy, and makes them thinke that God could not possibly in∣flict greater torments on them then they endure.Zah de nat. Des. l. 4 c. 4. q. 4 p. 378. Whereas in∣deed, (if they perceiued it) it is most certaine that they are not punished, according to the height of that measure of punishment which their sinnes deserued, and which God iustly could inflict vpon them; but that in them also the Apostles words must take place, that mercy reioyceth against iudgement.
Psal. 25.10.And therefore, well might the Prophet Dauid say, that all Gods pathes are mercy,Psal. 145 9. and that his mercy is ouer all his workes; because there is no place which can be imagined, wherein there is not some impression of Gods mercy: nor any Creature, that can be named, which can say, that he doth no way taste of the mercy of God: for God pittieth his owne workes, euen then when he punisheth our workes, that is, our sinnes. And yet here we must obserue, that the mercy of God is two∣fold: 1. Generall. 2. Speciall. For, First, the generall mercy of God, is that which extends it selfe towards all, and ouer all Gods works; but That God is onely merci∣full to them that loue him.Secondly, the speciall mercy of God, is onely extended vnto the godly, and wholly denyed vnto the wicked: for so the Lord himselfe saith, I will haue mercy on whom I will haue mercy; that is, not vpon all; but vpon some, whom I will, and who are those? the Scripture sheweth:Exod. 23 36. for Moses saith, Miseretur Iehoua seruo∣rum suorum, The Lord will repent himselfe, or be mercifull vn∣to his seruants;Deut. 32.36. Psal 103.3. and the Prophet Dauid saith, that as a father pit∣tieth his owne children, so will the Lord be mercifull to them that feare him;Exod. 20.6. and so God himselfe saith, I will shew mercy on them that loue me; but they that feare him not, that serue him not, that loue him not, he will deale with them in his furie; and his eye shall not spare them,Ezek 8 18. neither will he be mercifull vnto them. That the wic∣ked haue no part in the speciall mer∣cie of God.And therefore, though God be mercifull vnto the wicked, and sheweth many singular effects of his mercy vnto them; as to create them, and to preserue them from many euils; yea, from many sinnes, which otherwise they would fall into; and to be∣stow many gifts and graces vpon them; yet haue they no part, nor portion in this speciall mercy of God; because (as the Lord himselfe saith of the wicked;Mal. 1.10.) Non est mihi voluntas in vobis, God hath no pleasure, he hath no delight in them. And no maruell; for seeing the mercie of God springeth from the loue of God, as may be collected from the words of those Iewes, who seeing how Christ sighed and mourned, and wept ouer Lazarus,Iohn 11.36. said presently, Behold how he loued him; and as the Apostle plainely sheweth in the 3. of Titus, and the 4.
verse: and 1 Tim. 1.2. It is most apparant that where there is no speciall loue of God, there can be no speciall mercy of God:That God lo∣ueth not the wicked. but the speciall loue of God, is onely extended vnto the Saints, and chosen children of God; and not vnto the wicked reprobates; as might be easily shewed from those especiall effects of this speciall loue of God; such as are their eternall election, their effe∣ctuall vocation, their singular preseruation, and the bountifull do∣nation of many heauenly gifts and graces, which he giueth not vnto the reprobates; (as I purpose by Gods helpe more fully to declare in some other place:) and therefore the speciall mercy of God is onely shewed vnto Gods Elect, and none else: for, he will haue mercy on whom he will haue mercy,Rom 9 18. and whom he will he hardeneth. Well then,That we should carefully exa∣mine whether we loue and serue God or not. beloued Brethren (seeing the speciall mercy of God, pertaineth onely vnto the Saints, let vs all examine our selues, and if we finde we feare not God, we serue not God, wee may assure our selues, that although we daily feele many in∣fallible arguments of Gods generall mercy and fauour towards vs; yet are we destitute of the least assurance of this speciall mercy of God; I know many deceiue themselues herein;Psal. 69.23. and make those things, which should be for their aduantage, to be vnto them an occasion of falling: when as continuing in sinne, they notwith∣standing, doe appropriate vnto themselues, this speciall mercie of God; which indeed is onely proper vnto those Saints that feare him; for though after a generall manner, he is mercifull vnto all, to make them, and to preserue them, and to bestow many blessings vpon them: yet after this speciall manner, to forgiue their sinnes, and to bring them to eternall life; he is onely mercifull to them that feare him; to them that loue him; to them that serue him; as the Scriptures doe most plainly shew vnto vs: And therefore I would aduise all wicked men, either to serue the Lord, or not to thinke that they haue any part in this mercy of God: for I doe here confidently assure them, that if they doe still continue in sinne, they shall not taste of this Cup of mercy; but shall be forced to wring out euen the dregs of tht red Wine of the wrath and indignation of God.Psal. 75.8. And so much of the first Par∣ticle of Gods goodnesse: Mercifull.
CHAP. VI. Of the Grace of God: and what the same chiefely signifieth. What is meant by the word Gracious.THe Second Particle of Gods Goodnesse, here expressed is, that hee is Gratious: a word, very large and ample in signification; and it is diuersly taken: but chiefly it signifieth one that is, 1. Amiable. 2. Placable. 3. Liberall. First, It signifieth that affability and louelinesse of person, whereby the beholders are inflamed with the loue and sweet∣nesse thereof; for when Christ is said to haue increased, in wise∣dome,Luk. 2.52. First, he that is louely, is gra∣cious. and stature, and in fauour, or in grace (as the originall hath it) with God and man; the meaning is, that he grew to be more and more amiable, and beloued both of God and men; and therefore we may say that a sweet, affable, amiabl man, is a gra∣cious man. Secondly, he that easily re∣mitteth offen∣ces is gracious.Secondly, it signifieth that readinesse of minde, to forgiue all the offences done against one, and to receiue the offender into his fauour againe; for when Noah, Mary, and other are said, in∣uenisse,  apud deum; to haue found grace with God; it signifieth that they found him fauourable vnto them; both in remitting of their offences,Gen. 6.8. and in receiuing them into his fauourable countenance;Luke 1.30. and therefore, we may rightly say, that he which easily receiueth offenders into his fauour, is a gracious man. Thirdly, a bountifull man is a graci∣ous man. Gen. 33.5.Thirdly, It signifieth a bountifull giuing, and bestowing of any gifts; for so the Scripture sheweth, all the gifts of God, whether temporall or spirituall, to be the graces of God; as Iacob said vn∣to his brother, these be the children, Quos Deus gratificatus est mihi, which God of his free grace, and fauour gaue vnto me; and so it is said of Barnabas that when hee saw ; the grace of God,Acts. 11.23. i. e. the gift of God bestowed vpon the beleeuers, he reioyced: and therefore a liberall and a bountifull man, may be truely said, to be a gracious man.
Now in all these respects, wee finde God to bee most graci∣ous. For, First, It is said of Christ,That God is gracious in all respects. Psal. 45.3. that he was fairer then the sonnes of men, and that his lips were full of grace; yea, so full of grace, that all men wondred at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth: And indeed, howsoeuer he was contented to become Sanguino∣lentus propter te; without forme or beauty for our sake;Esay 52.3. Quan∣do velauerunt faciem eius, when the accursed Iewes, buffeted, and bespitted his glorious face, yet was he alwayes gloriesissimus in se, most gracious, and glorious in himselfe: and so the Apostles testifie, that they saw his glory,Iohn 1.14. as the glory of the onely begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth: And yet they saw the same but in part, because of the infirmitie of their Flesh, while they liued here in this life. But Christ is the image of the Father,Heb 1.3. That God is of an incom∣prehensible beauty. and the ingraued forme of his person; and therfore God must needs be gracious, and amia∣ble, yea, so amiable, so louely, that it is no maruell the very Saints & Angels do so vehemently desire to see the face of God, in Iesus Christ; & do esteem it their chiefest happinesse to be alwaies con∣templating vpon the same. And the reason why all men are not inflamed with the loue of his excellent Maiestie is; because they know him not, they haue not tasted how sweet the Lord is; Quia ignoti nulla cupido: for if men did know how graecious and how amiable the Lord is, they would with Saint Paul, long to be dissolued that they might but see him. Secondly, God is not onely gracious in himselfe,That God is easie to be reconciled but he is also placable & reconcileable vnto vs; for though God be pro∣uoked euery day, yet doth his wrath indure but the twinckling of an eye; & he is ready to receiue vs into his fatherly fauour,Psal. 77.7.8.9. if we would but be willing to be reconciled vnto his Maiestie: & ther∣fore the Prophet Dauid examining this point, & saying, Will the Lord absent himselfe for euer, and will he be no more intreated? Is his mercy cleane gone for euer, and is his promise come vtterly to an end for euermore? Hath God forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure? At last he concludeth,Psal. 77. v. 10. that it was his owne infirmity, that is, his vnablenesse to returne to God, and not Gods vnwillingnes to be reconciled vnto him; for the Lord is euer gracious & ready to forgiue vs, if wee were ready to
receiue his grace; yea, hee beseecheth vs to be reconciled vnto himselfe, and not wilfully to refuse his grace and fauour, which he so louingly offereth vnto vs: And therefore, I wish to God that we had but that grace, to accept his grace, when it is so gra∣ciously offered vnto vs. That God is most bountiful vnto all his people. Ezech. 16.7.Thirdly, he is not onely ready to receiue vs into his fauour, but he is also willing to inrich vs with all kinde of graces; for though we be polluted in our owne bloud; i. e. Loathsome in our selues, and odious in his sight; yet doth he wash v in the bloud of Christ, and then indue vs with his most excellent graces, faith, hope, and charitie, and all the other vertues and good things that are in vs: And though we be come naked into this World, yet doth he clothe vs,Job 1.21. and feede vs, inrich vs, and raise vs to all that we haue. And in this kinde he is not onely gracious vnto the godly, but also vnto the wicked; for what hath any of them, which he hath not receiued of the Lord? It is he that filleth the Barnes of Diues, as well as the Pallace of Dauid: And therefore Saint Iames saith; That , Euery good giuing; i. e. Euery temporall gift,Iames 1.17. . , and euery perfect gift, that is, Euery spirituall grace, that is giuen to bring vs to perfection, is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of Lights. The difference betwixt the gifts that God giueth to the godly, and to the wicked. Math. 6.16.But herein is the difference, he bestoweth temporall graces vpon the wicked; yea, many times more plentifully then to the godly; for hee seeth their desire is onely set on worldly things: Therefore, as he said of hypocriticall Fasters, They haue receiued their reward; that is, Acceperunt suam, sed amiserunt meam, They haue what they would haue, though they leese thereby what I would haue giuen them; which is a losse not counteruailed with any gaine: So he dealeth with the World∣lings,God giueth temporall ri∣ches vnto the worldlings. He filleth their hearts with his hidden treasure, and he giues them often times, (especially to most of them) their hearts desire; that is, the riches, and the vanities of this life; So foolish are they and ignorant, euen as it were a beast before him: But to the godly, who loue not this World, nor the things of this World, hee shewes himselfe gracious, after a more speciall manner, in giuing them his heauenly graces; that is, graces which will bring them vnto Heauen; and in giuing them worldly blessings too, so
much as hee sees needfull and conuenient for them: Because, Godlinesse hath the promise of the life that now is,1 Tim. 4.8. and of that which is to come. And so you see, how God is gracious in all respects, amiable in himselfe, placable vnto men, and liberall vnto all his Crea∣tures; and in all these respects, gracious after a speciall manner vnto his elected Saints, and Seruants.Psal. 107.8.15. O that men would there∣fore praise the Lord for his goodnesse, and declare the wonders that he doth for the Children of men; And that (as the Apostle saith) We would not receiue the grace of God in vaine: i. e. That wee would not vainely abuse the good gifts and graces which our most gracious God doth so freely and so graciously bestow vpon vs. And so much for the second particle of Gods goodnesse, Gracious. CHAP. VII. Of the patience and long sufferance of God. THe third Particle of Gods goodnesse here ex∣pressed, is, that he is slow to anger; that is,How slow the Lord is to re∣uenge our sinnes. that he is such a one, that although we by our daily sinnes, doe giue most iust occasions to prouoke his wrath and indignation against vs, to destroy vs, and to consume vs from off the face of the Earth; yet the fire of his wrath is not suddenly kindled, and his furious vengeance is not speedily executed: But he is slow to anger, full of patience, long suffering, and in a word, such a one as reioyceth not to see the sinne committed, that he may punish, but still expecteth if the sinner will at any time repent and amend, that he may spare him: For so the Prophet saith; The Lord will waite, that he may be gracious vnto vs, i. e.Esay 30.18. He doth tary and stay and looke if at any time, or by any meanes, we will for∣sake our sinnes, that hee may stay his iudgements, and be gra∣cious vnto vs. O most sweete and excellent saying: And there∣fore the Prophet addeth; Blessed are all they that waite for him. And the testimonies of Scripture that doe confirme this point, are almost infinite. Ionas saith, That he knew God was a gracious
God,Ionas 4.2. and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repen∣ting him of the euill: Therefore he would not goe to threaten de∣struction, because he knew God was so ready to spare. And the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 78. in the 78. Psalme, and in the 106. Psalme, and in many other places,Psal. 106. doth most fully and plainely set downe this truth. Examples of Gods slow∣nesse to punish sinne.But the examples of Gods patience, and long sufferance▪ makes it more plaine: For when Adam sinned, hee came not presently, but staid to the coole of the day, before he would call him to account; and when Adam was called, Gods wrath did not appeare to be kindled; for he said no more, but, Adam where art thou?Gen. 3.9. v. 11. And when he appeared, he said, but, hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I said vnto thee, that thou shouldest not eate there∣of,Ionas 4.8. lest thou diest? So when Ionas was angry vnto death, for the gourd that sprung in a night, and withered in another; the Lord said no more, but Ionas, doest thou well to be angry? So, when Iudas betrayed the Sonne of God into the hands of sinners, he said no more, but, Iudas betrayest thou the Sonne of man with a kisse? So when the old World had so defiled it selfe, that it made God sorry in his heart that euer he made man;Gen. 6.6. yet would he not suddenly destroy this Augaeum stabulum, but gaue it 120. yeeres to repent:Verse 3. So he gaue to the Niniuites forty dayes, and to the Israelites in the Wildernesse forty yeeres; throughout all which time,Psal. 78.3.8.39. he was so mercifull, that hee forgaue their misdeeds, and destroyed them not, nor would not suffer his whole displeasure to arise: So for Iericho, there were more dayes spent in the destru∣ction of the same, then in the creation of the whole World: for the World was made in sixe dayes, but Iericho was to be com∣passed seauen dayes before it should fall.How God spa∣red the whole World, and so spareth vs, not∣withstanding all our wicked∣nesse, to this very day. And so for this whole World, notwithstanding the wickednesse of so many genera∣tions of men, it stands vnpunished to this very day; as if iudge∣ment were forgotten, or God were loath to be moued to be an∣grie: And for our selues, alas, how many times doe we offend our God, neglect his Sabboath, blaspheme his name, contemne his Word, and abuse his seruants? and yet still God stayeth his anger from vs, and spareth vs, when we spare not him: And whence comes this? but onely hence, that our God is slow to anger; for, Si quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina mittat Iupiter;
If God should punish vs as often as wee offend him, wee should all perish, and soone come to a fearefull end. But it is obserued by many Diuines, (writing vpon those words of the Prophet,The act of pu∣nishing is least agreeable to Gods Nature. that God should rise as in Mount Pera∣sim, and should be wrath as in the vallie of Gibson, that he might doe his worke, his strange worke, and bring to passe his act, his strange act;) that the act of punishing, is the furthest from God, and least a∣greeable to the nature of such a soueraigne goodnesse: for as the motiue of shewing mercy, is within him; and therefore is he cal∣led ; The Father of mercies; as if mercy did as na∣turally proceede from him,Mercy procee∣deth naturally from God. as the Childe doth issue from the Father: So the motiue of executing iudgement, and reuenge, is without him, in our sinnes; and therefore is he neuer called, the Father of vengeance, but is as it were compelled either to pu∣nish vs, or to be vniust in himselfe, Quia abyssus abyssum inuocat; because the greatnesse of our sinnes doth still crie for venge∣ance against the sinners:God is com∣pelled to pu∣nish. And therefore many times when the Sword is drawne, and the hand ready to strike, yet mercy steppes in; and as the Angell cried to the foure Angels, to whom power was giuen to hurt the Earth, and the Sea: saying, Hurt not the Earth, nor the Seas, nor the Trees,Apoc. 7.2.3. till we haue sealed the seruants of God in their fore-heads; Or, as the Angell said vnto Abraham, Lay not thine hand vpon the Lad,Gen. 22.12. neither doe thou any thing vnto him: So doth mercy say to God, stay yet a while, O Iustice, and destroy them not, vntill I haue tried them one yeere more, whether they will bring forth any fruits of repentance, or not; for how shall I deliuer vp Israel?Hosea 11.8.9. or why should Ephraim be destroyed? Mine heart is turned within me, and my repentings are indled together; And therefore, O doe not execute the fierce∣nesse of thine anger, but stay a while, to see what they will doe; and so mercy stayes the hand of Iustice,Our turning from our sins, doth perfectly turne away Gods wrath from vs. and many times gets the victory; and when it can moue vs to turne to GOD, it turnes all the weapons in the Armory of Heauen, like the Raine-bow; which is a Bow indeed, but without an Arrow, with a full bent, but without a string, and with the wrong side towards vs; as if now hee meant to shoote at Christ for our sinnes, and not at vs, which are the sinners. And thus, God which is euer ready and willing to shew
mercy and compassion, is still loth and slow to suffer his anger to be kindled, to worke our woe and destruction: And both these are excellently represented vnto vs, in a twofold passage of the Scripture;Luc. 15.10. the one, in the Father of the prodigall Childe, who runnes to meete his returning wandring sonne; to shew vnto vs,Didacus stella in Luc. 15. Quod non sit lenta ne{que} tarda, diuina misericordia, ad sub∣veniendum compunctis corde: That the mercy of God is neither slow, nor slacke, to helpe and releeue repenting soules, but is al∣wayes ready and willing to receiue them into his fauour: and therefore, cucurrit, he ranne, when he saw an occasion to shew mercy:Gen. 3.8. God is quicke to shew mercy, slow to punish. the other in God, seeking Adam in Paradice, who wal∣ked with a slow pace, (as the originall word imports) to shew how loth he was to be too quicke in indignation; and there∣fore ambulauit, He did but walke, and come with a slow pace; because he is slow to wrath, yea, when nothing will preuaile to recall vs from our sinnes, but that he must punish vs; yet as a compassionate Iudge pronounceth sentence against a malefa∣ctor with weeping eyes,Qui fruitur pae∣na ferus est, le∣gum{que} videtur vindictam pre∣stare sibi. and a melting heart, euen so God is grieued, and his bowels yearneth when we are punished. And surely, this vnwillingnesse of God, to punish vs, should make vs all to be vnwilling to offend him; and this his slownesse to anger, should make vs quickely to repent: For, the patience and long suf∣ferance of God, is vsed to leade vs to repentance, saith the Apostle. And so much for the third particle of Gods goodnesse; Slow to anger. CHAP. VIII. Of the superabundant Goodnesse of God. THE fourth particle of Gods Goodnesse here expressed,What good∣nesse is. is, that he is, Abundant in goodnesse. Touching which we must note, that Goodnesse is the perfection of things, for which they are de∣sireable; and wee haue learned of the Prince of Phylosophers,Bonum id esse quod omnia ap∣petunt. Arist. aethic. l. 1. c. 1. Perfectum id esse cui nihil deest; That perfection imports freedome from all defects, and a fulnesse of all excellencies: but what is more perfect, or more desireable
then God? the very deuils knew this, when perswading our forefathers to offend God, they told them, they should become as God: and therefore God must needs be good. But Aristotle distinguisheth good, to be two-fold,Arist. l. 7. aethic. as 1. That which is good in it selfe.That there is a two-fold good. 2. That which is good vnto others. For there be many things, which are good in themselues, which are not good to others; as all the creatures which God hath made, are good in themselues; for God beheld all that he had made, & loe, they were exceeding good,Gen. 1.31. & therfore the very deuils, in respect of their nature and being,That the na∣ture or being of all things is good. as they are the works of God, must needs bee good: but they are not good for others; so (as the same Aristotle sayth) a man may be good in himselfe, and good to himselfe; and yet not good to others, as hee that is bonus vir, & malus ciuis, a good man, but an euill gouernor: but God is good both wayes, for, First, He is good in himselfe; because his essence is most per∣fect, wherein nothing is wanting that can bee desired, and then which, nothing can be more desireable: and, Secondly, He is good to all things else;Psal. 73. How God is good vnto all things. the whole earth is full of his goodnesse; and so, the verie creation of all things, so admi∣rably good; the sustentation and gubernation of them so excee∣dingly well; and the donation of so many excellent gifts vpon them; especially the sending of his deerest Sonne to die for vs men, doe sufficiently shew the goodnesse of God. Nam si ista bona, dulcia & pulchra videntur, &c. For if God were not good vnto them, from whence haue they receiued all the goodnesse that they haue? sayth Saint Bernard. And therefore I doe won∣der how Marcion could say, that this God, which made all things, and preserueth all things, and which had made him a man, and not a beast, was not good: for reason it selfe will tell vs, that bonum est sui diffusiuum; it is the propertie of good to diffuse it selfe vnto others: & eo melius est,That thing is euer best which commu¦nicates most goodnesse vn∣to others. quo latius se alijs com∣municat; and that good is euer best, which communicates it selfe farthest vnto others: as the Sunne is therefore sayd to bee the best Planet, because it yeeldes most light vnto all sublu∣narie creatures: but God doth so largely communicate him∣selfe vnto all things; as that, whatsoeuer strength, sence, life, mouing, or being they haue, they haue them all com∣municated,
and conferred vpon them, from this goodnesse of God. And therefore we say that God must needs bee good, yea, so good that hee is iustly sayd to bee abundantly good, that is, per∣fectly and absolutely good. 1 Iohn 1.5.First, Perfectly good, because that, as he is that light, in whom there is no darknes at all; so hee is that goodnes, in whom, and from whom, as from an efficient cause, there can bee no euill at all; and therefore it is rightly sayd,Gen. 1.31. that whatsoeuer he did, they were exceeding good. Secondly, He is absolutely good, i. e. good in all respects; bonum vniuersale non contractum: vniuersally good, for all things, and vnto all things: and that by an inbred goodnesse in him∣selfe, and from himselfe: whereas the goodnesse of all other things is but bonum particulare, good for some speciall end, and not simply in all respects: and a goodnesse not inbred in them∣selues, but by participation of the goodnesse of God, that is, re∣ceiued from him;1 Cor. 3.8. Iames 1.17. as both Saint Paul, and Saint Iames doe shew. And therefore well might our Sauiour say, that there is none good but God, no not himselfe, as he was Man: because the goodnesse of his Man-hood,Mar. 10.18. was communicated vnto him from the Dietie, and was no more then his humanitie was capable of: and therefore much lesse is any other creature good, i. e. simply and absolutely good; but God is eternally good in him∣selfe, and vniuersally good to all things else. Now this goodnesse of God, which is, extrase, extended from God vnto his creatures, is either That the goodnesse of God is two-fold.1. Generall. 2. Speciall. The generall goodnesse of God is seene in two things.First, The generall goodnesse of God, is chiefely seene in two things. 1. In the creating 2. In the sustayning of his creatures. In the creation he made all things doubly good. First, Simply good, in respect of their being; for hee beheld euery thing that he had made,Gene. 1.31. and loe, it was very good, that is, so
perfectly good, as that nothing more can be desired, for the per∣fecting of the essence of any thing, nor the lest iot can bee sub∣tracted from any thing without some want or missing of the same; and so Galenus did ingeniously confesse,Galenus de vsu paium. when hee con∣sidered the most admirable fabricke, and composition of mans body: and therefore though we confesse, that God could, if it had pleased him; haue indued all creatures, with farre more excellent gifts, then he did, in respect of their accidentall good;That God made euery thing perfectly good in his kinde. for he might haue made Man so, that he could not haue fallen; yet we say that, Nihil in sua specie perfectius esse potuit, quam à deo creatum sit, nothing in the world could bee made more perfect, in respect of their essentiall good, then God created them. Secondly, He made all things relatiuely good; that is,That God made all things good for some vse. good and vsefull in respect of some other things, as the Earth, the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, they are not onely essentially good in themselues, but they are also relatiuely good, for other creatures. And thus we say,Hieron. de Medicis in Thom. p. 1. q. 23. artic: 3. that although God made not euery thing vniuersally good, that is, good for all things; because though God be good to euery thing, yet non communicauit omnibus omne bonum, he made not euery thing, good for euery purpose; as we see the fire, which is good to heate, is not good to coole any thing; yet God made euery thing good in some respect, and for some vse. And this is the reason why many things, which are good in themselues, and good to some things, may not∣withstanding be euill and hurtfull vnto other things, as wee see many times, that feedeth and nourisheth one creature, which is poyson and death vnto another:Aug. de ciuit. Dei. l. 11. c. 18. And therefore if wee see some men abstayne from some things, which are good in them∣selues, and good to many others; yet let vs not presently con∣demne them for superstitious, because that thing may be good for one, which is not good for another, and if wee see things, not good for vs, or whose goodnesse wee know not; let vs not by and by, with the Manichees say, God made them not; because wee know not to what end they are good: but rather, let vs confesse with Saint Augustine, Omnia esse pulchra, in suo genere, that all things are good in their kinde,Jdem de Gen. contra Man. although many things become hurtfull vnto vs for our sinnes, and we know not
to what end many things were created, by reason of that igno∣rance which is in vs. Secondly, God sheweth and extendeth his goodnesse vnto his creatures by their continuall sustentation: and this also hee doth two wayes; 1. Liberando à malo: by freeing them from euill. 2. Largiendo bona: by inriching them with good. For the First: Euill is either 1. Of sinne. 2. Of punishment. And God deliue∣reth from both: for, How the goodnesse of God with∣holdeth all men from fal∣ling into ma∣ny sinnes.First, Though God suffered Adam to fall into sinne; yet had not God withheld, and vpheld him, euen in that very time of his sinning, no doubt but he had with Satan, vnrecouerably fallen away from God: and so euer since; did not God with∣hold the sonnes of men, they would become more abomina∣bly sinnefull, then the deuils; and all their sinnes would proue to bee, peccata clamantia; such horrible and hideous sinnes, that the earth would not be able to beare them: but God puts a bridle in their iawes, and a hooke in their nostrils, and sayth vnto sinners, as he doth vnto the seas; Hitherto shalt thou goe, and no further, Here shalt thou stay thy proud waues: and this we see in Saul,Acts 9.1. when he went, breathing out slaughters against the Church, God layd a blocke in his way, and hindered him to runne into the height of iniquitie:1 Kings 13.4. and so hee did to Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, and to many other wicked men, that would haue become most intollerably wicked, had they not beene hindered by this goodnesse of God. Gen. 3.17.Secondly, Though God hath cursed the Earth for the sinne of Man, and hath most iustly inflicted punishments, and miseries vpon vs all, and vpon all other creatures, for our sakes; yet is there not any creature, but had bin swallowed vp by his deserued miseries,How God su∣spendeth the punishments that we haue most iustly de∣serued. were it not preserued, and the iust punishment thereof suspended, by this goodnesse of God. I know men slightly deeme of their deliuerances, and doe seldome thinke of their preserua∣tions: but if they truely weighed the same in the ballance of good consideration, they should herein finde, abundant testi∣monies of Gods goodnesse towards them: for if we would seri∣ously obserue those abhominable sinnes, and Luciferian pride, that raigneth euery where in the world, wee should not only
adore with reuerence, that infinite patience, and long-suffering of God, that still giues them leaue to walke after the lusts of their owne hearts; but wee should also admire with all humilitie this vnspeakable goodnesse of God, that not onely hindereth the wrath of God to consume vs, but also withholdeth those plagues and punishments from vs, which otherwise, our sinnes would soone pull downe vpon vs. For the Second, that is,How God in∣richeth his creatures with all good things. the good things which wee receiue from God: Non est dignus peccator pane quo vescitur, neque lumine caeli quo illuminatur; the best of vs, is worthy of nothing, and yet God heapeth vpon vs beneficia nimis copiosa, multa & magna, priuata & positiua; innumerable, admirable blessings; and his a∣bundant goodnesse, fluit acrius amne perenni, doth most plenti∣fully flow ouer all the world; and none can say, hee hath not tasted of it: for the eyes of all waite vpon thee, O Lord:Psal. 145.15.6. and thou giuest them their meate in due season: thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things liuing with plenteousnesse, and as Saint Paul sayth,Acts 17. In him we liue, and moue, and haue our being. In this respect Saint Paul sayth vnto the Lyconians, that God left not himselfe without witnes, in that he did good,Acts 14.17. & gaue vs rayne from Heauen, and fruitfull seasons; filling our hearts with foode and gladnesse: and yet such is the stupiditie, and sencelesnesse of men, that although God should, as hee doth euery day, shower downe his goodnesse in plentie vpon them: yet if they haue not wealth, and promotion, and euery thing else that they would haue, they are ready to quarell with Gods Goodnesse: but alas, if we would but looke within our selues, there is not one of vs all, but he should easily finde a plentifull theame of Gods good∣nesse: for be it, that wee haue not such plentie of wealth as wee desire; yet we haue our health, our limbes, our sight, our sences, and are these nothing? an diuitias bonitatis contemnis? what, shall we contemne these things, that are better then all wealth? Oh that wee would therefore prayse the Lord for his goodnesse, and shew the wonders that he doth for the children of Men. Neither doth hee onely confine his goodnesse vnto these tem∣porall blessings; but he doth many times, bestow vpon many of the children of this world, many excellent gifts & graces of his spirit: as not onely the calling of them from their sins, and
the shewing vnto them the way of Righteousnes, by the preachers of the word,Matth. 13.20. but also the working in them, of some ioy, at the hea∣ring of the same, and some Faith to beleeue the same, and to bring forth some fruits of repentance,Heb. 6.4.6. and diuers other graces, which are common to some of the wicked, with the Godly, and which are rightly termed by Bucer, initia fidei, the beginnings of sauing faith. All which, are sufficient arguments of Gods goodnesse, and might bee the meanes to bring them vnto Happinesse,Zanch. de nat. dei. l. 4. c. 1. q. 3. thes. 1. but that, through their contempt, and diffidence, and abuse of Gods good∣nesse, by turning the graces of God into wantonnesse, they make them all, like the vntimely fruit of a woman, which perisheth before it seeth the Sunne: or like the grasse vpon the house toppe, that withereth before it be plucked vp. How God is not alike good vnto all men.Secondly, Though it is most certaine, that God is good vnto all, yet is it as certaine, that hee is not alike good vnto all: but, as the master of a house is good vnto all that are vnder him; and so prouideth for them all, men and beasts; yet is there a grada∣tion of his loue, and goodnesse towards them; in as much as he loues his wife, and children, better then he doth the rest of his familie; so God is good vnto all, but in a more speciall manner, he is good to some, rather then vnto others: so among the An∣gels, he was good vnto them all, in that he made them, and in∣dued them with most admirable gifts of nature; but he shewed more goodnesse, vnto them which he preserued by his grace, that they should not fall into condemnation, then hee did vnto those, which hee suffered to runne into destruction; and so a∣mong men,2 Tim. 4.3. though he be the Sauiour of all men, and doth good vnto all men; yet is he specially good to them that beleeue, or as the Prophet Dauid sayth,Psal. 73.1. to them that are of a right conuersation: And therefore (speaking of Gods goodnesse towards men) wee say, that although God be good vnto all, in respect of his gene∣rall goodnesse; yet in respect of his speciall goodnesse, he is onely good vnto his Church, vnto his Saints, and chosen children: he is good, to them that feare him & that put their trust in his mercie. And this speciall goodnesse of God towards his Saints, is chiefely seene in these two things; which he extendeth and ex∣hibiteth vnto them and not to others.
1. In the decreeing of our eternall election.Gods speciall goodnesse to∣wards his Saints, is seene in two things. Aug. de fide ad Pet. c 35. & cont. Jul. Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. &c. 2. In the executing of this decree for our saluation. First, God foreseeing all the whole race of Adam, in the state of sin, wherin they had fallen, did before the foundation of the world, intend & purpose, to assume into his fauor, a certain num∣ber of men, out of all that masse of corruption, on whom hee would confer more speciall fruits of his goodnes, then he meant to do on all the rest; that they might be the speciall vessels of his mercie and goodnesse, and made fit to follow the Lambe wheresoe∣uer he goeth. And this election of some, and not of all, is suffici∣ently shewed, in many passages of the holy Scriptures: as in Ephes. 1.4. Matth. 20.16. where our Sauiour saith,God electeth some men and not all. Many are called, but few are chosen; and Ioh. 13.18. I know whom I haue chosen, and so the Fathers, Schoole-men, and all; are all of the same iudgement, that God decreed to glorifie some, and not all. Secondly, As he shewed his goodnesse towards them, more plentifully then the rest, in thus purposing to saue them, rather then the rest: so he doth farre more plentifully shew the same vnto them, in the executing of this decree of election; and in bringing of them vnto eternall saluation. And this hee doth two wayes. 1. By effectually calling them, 2. By giuing and conferring many singular graces vpon them. First, though God sent his Sonne to die for all men,That God effe∣ctually calleth none but his Elect. that whosoeuer beleeued in him should not perish, but haue life euerlasting, and sends his Preachers to call all men to beleeue in him; yet is all this ineffectuall, to all those, that are not inwardly called by Gods Spirit; Quia inanis est sermo docentis, nisi intus sit qui docet, For we finde many called, and often called by the Preachers of the Word, which yeeld not obedience vnto the Faith of Christ:Matth. 20.16. because (as our Sauiour sheweth) they are not chosen vnto life. But whom God hath decreed to saue, he doth inward∣ly & effectually call by his Spirit; and when we do outwardly Preach the Word, he doth graciously open their hearts, as hee did the heart of Lidia,Act. 16.14. that they should imbrace and beleeue the same. And this Saint Paul sheweth, when he saith, that whom God did fore-know and predestinate, them he called, i. e. Inwardly and effectually, and so powerfully that when hee doth so call
them,1 Sam. 3.10. they doe presently answere, Loe, I come; or with Samuel, Speake on Lord, for thy seruant heareth. And thus he calleth none, but those whom he hath decreed to saue: for so our Sauiour saith, That no man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and he to whom the Sonne reuealeth him, i. e. thus effectually by his Spirit: And therefore God sheweth more goodnesse vnto them then hee doth vnto all others, in that he doth more graciously call them, rather then all others. Secondly, when he hath thus effectually called them, he be∣stoweth many speciall and singular graces vpon them, which he doth not vpon all others, as chiefly, Of certaine speciall graces, that God be∣stoweth vpon his Saints.1. The grace of Preseruation. 2. The grace of Iustification. 3. The grace of Sanctification. 4. The grace of Glorification. First, the grace of Preseruation is that which keepeth and pre∣serueth these chosen, and peculiarly beloued Saints of God, from many euils both of 1. Sinne. 2. Punishment. For, First, though (as I shewed you before,) the goodnesse of God preserueth the wicked many times from committing ma∣ny horrible sinnes, which otherwise they would doe; yet doth he after a more speciall manner, guide the godly with his coun∣sell,Psal. 73.24. (as the Psalmist saith) that they runne not with the wic∣ked into the same excesse of riot.How God pre∣serueth the Godly from many sinnes. Fot seeing by nature, we are all equally indifferent, to all sinnes; how comes it to passe, that wee abstaine from may abhominations, and haynous impieties, that wicked men doe practice? is it from our selues? or from the goodnesse of our Nature? or is it not rather from the goodnesse of God, that giueth his holy spirit vnto vs; that as he preserued Noah from partaking with the wickednesse of the old world,Gen. 6 9. and Lot from following after the abhominations of the Sodo∣mites,Gen. 19.7. Gen. 39.8.9. Ioseph from consenting to the lewd inticements of his Mistresse, Elias from the Idolatry of Israel, and the like; so he might preserue vs from those lewd actions that the wic∣ked doe?Aug. Soliloq. l. 16. Saint Augustine makes it plaine; For Tentator defuit
(saith he) Satan was away, and time and place was wanting to doe the deed; but this was thy goodnesse to preserue mee; the Tempter came in time and place conuenient; but then thou withheldest me from consenting; and so when I had will I wan∣ted ability; and when I had ability, I wanted opportunity and all this was from thy blessed goodnes that preserued me:To abstaine from sinnes, is from God. And there∣fore if we doe abstaine from drunkennesse, lewdnesse, or any o∣ther sinne, let vs not robbe Gods grace, to ascribe it to the good∣nesse of our Natures, but let vs truely acknowledge it to pro∣ceed from the goodnesse of God; that preserueth vs rather then the rest; for had God preserued the wicked from their sinnes, they would haue abstained from them, euen as we doe; and had he not preserued vs, we should haue runne into the same ex∣cesse of riot, euen as they doe: Our abstaining from sinne is not from our selues. Secondly, he doth not onely preserue vs from the euill of sinne; but also from many plagues and punishments, that hee suffereth other men to fall into: for so the Psalmist saith, that Mis-fortune shall slay the vngodly,Psal. 34.16. but GOD preserueth the righ∣teous that not one of his bones shall be broken: And againe he saith, that although Gods plague should be so great, and so hot a∣gainst the wicked, as that a thousand of them should fall beside the righteous, and ten thousand on his right hand;Psal. 91.12. yet it should not come nigh him: because God doth so command his Angels, to preserue them in all their wayes that they dash not their foot a∣gainst a stone. Thus he preserued Noah out of the flood, Lot out of Sodome,How God pre∣serueth the godly from many plagues and punish∣ments. Wisd. 10 4.6. Moses and Aaron out of the hand of Pharaoh, and the three children out of the fiery furnace; and thus at all times he preser¦ueth his little flocke, and faithfull children, out of many mise∣ries and dangers. And we haue in a large measure tasted of this goodnesse: for as Noah had been drowned in the flood, and Lot had beene consumed in Sodome, had they not been pre∣serued by this speciall goodnesse of God:How merciful∣ly God deliue∣red vs in An∣no 1588. and from the Gun-powder trea∣son. so except the same goodnesse had beene on our side, When men rose vp against vs, in 88. and in the Gun-powder Treason especially, it had not failed but our soules had been put to silence; and we should haue bin swal∣lowed vp of our miseries. I need not instance any particular deli∣uerance
of priuate men, each man doth best know that him∣selfe: and for mine owne part, I haue so aboundantly seene the goodnesse of God herein, that I can neuer thinke, how gratiously God preserued me, so many times from so many, and so mighty enemies, Qui oderunt me gratis, which hated me freely without a cause, (God he knoweth my simplenesse,) but exultauit cor meum,Psal. 13.21. & eructauit verbum bonum, O how plentifull is thy good∣nesse vnto them that feare thee, and that put their trust in thy mercy? If any man hath found experience of the like, or any other preseruation from any euill; let him neuer thinke it is from any chance or fortune, but solely from this goodnesse of God: for see∣ing we are all the sonnes of Adam,No man priui∣ledged from common ca∣lamities. all sinners; and that no man hath a pattant of exemption, or a priuiledge of immunity to be free from common calamities; and yet we see, one break his legge, another his necke, one slaine, another drowned, one dis∣eased, another disgraced, one leese his estate, another his libertie, a third his life, and it may be vniustly too; and we our selues deliuered from these, or the like miseries; how can we choose but see the aboundant goodnesse of God, in our deliuerance from these calamities, which we daily see incident to other men? Ob.But here it may be some will obiect, how doth God shew more speciall goodnesse vnto his Saints, by deliuering them from plagues and punishments, rather then the wicked; when as we see they are more commonly plagued and scourged then the wicked be? as the Prophet Dauid plainely sheweth vnto vs. Sol.I answere, that although God many times preserueth his seruants from the punishments of the wicked; yet doth he not alwayes deliuer them from all afflictions; but doth often me∣nace them,The Saints in their afflicti∣ons doe most of all perceiue the goodnesse of God. and sometime whip them too, with the rod of cor∣rection. And yet this goodnesse of God is no lesse seene to re∣flect vpon them in these showers of aduersitie, then at any other time in the Sun-shine of prosperity. For, When the wicked in their afflictions doe gnash with their teeth and consume away,1 Sam. 28.7. through griefe & despaire; and so grow worse and worse, as Saul did from Samuel vnto the Witch, and from the Witch vnto the Diuell. The godly in their afflictions are more humbled, more deiected in themselues; and more
earnest suppliants vnto God to helpe them,Premuntur iusti, vt pressi clament, cla∣mantes exau∣diantur, exau∣diti, glorificent Deum. Quintus Curt. lib 8. and to deliuer them out of their distresse, for the righteous are therefore often pressed that they might cry, and crying might be heard; and heard, might glorifie God: And so (as Alexander was, Sem∣per bello quam post victoriam clarior; More famous in his warre then in his Peace) the Saints of God, doe euer grow better and better in their afflictions, and as the Poet saith; Saepe tulit lassis succus amarus opem; They gather honey, not onely with the Drones from the Hiue; but also with the Bee, from the Thistles: and as a Pearle in the darke, they doe shew more lustre, and more tokens of their goodnesse, Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, and many other graces, in their afflictions, then euer they did or could haue done in their exemption and freedome from all miseries. And all this is not, because afflictions and punishments makes them better, but because God preserueth them, and deli∣uereth them from all the hurts and euils that otherwise these af∣flictions would bring vpon them, as well as vpon other men; and giues them grace to make a right vse of these their iust de∣serued chastisements: for so the Prophet saith,Psal 34.18. Many are the troubles of the Righteous, there is their iust deserts; but God deli∣uereth him out of all, there is Gods goodnesse towards him; yea, more a great deale in deliuering him out of these troubles, then if he had preserued him from the hauing of any troubles at all: For, as that man is to be commended as most valiant, which hath beene in Warres, and receiuing many wounds at the hands of great and many enemies, hath victoriously escaped them all; ra∣ther then he which neuer fighting with any, hath kept himselfe safe and free from any danger; so he that deliuereth mee from the hands of mine enemies, and preserueth mee from fire and water, from all troubles and afflictions; doth shew a great deale more loue vnto me, and more fauour to deliuer me from my mi∣serie, then onely to remaine with me in my prosperity, &c. And therefore if we be free from troubles; it is Quia bonus Deus Israeli, from the goodnesse of God, that preserueth vs; if we be punished and afflicted, repose thy trust in God,Forti animo ma∣la fer, nec bis miser esto do∣lore. and bee not deiected to adde griefe vnto griefe; but thinke it is because it is good for vs to be afflicted; and if we be deliuered from our afflicti∣ons,
and preserued from that poyson of despaire, and other euils, that they bring on others; it is from this goodnesse of God,Rom. 8.28. which worketh all things together for the best for them that loue him. What the grace of Iustification is.Secondly, the grace of Iustification, is that infused Faith, which hee worketh in the hearts of his Elect, whereby they doe lay hold, and apply vnto themselues all the merits of Iesus Christ; and doe by that imputatiue righteousnesse of him, stand iustified in the sight of God. What the grace of Sanctificati∣on is.Thirdly, the grace of Sanctification, is that, whereby we are heartily sorry for all our fore-passed sinnes, and doe euery day indeuour more and more to liue in all holinesse and righteousnesse, to the prayse and glory of God. What the grace of Glorificati∣on is.Fourthly, the grace of Glorification is that, whereby we liue holily in this life, and shall liue happily in the life to come: be∣cause (as Aquinas saith) God glorifieth his Saints; Per profectum virtutis & gratiae, & per exaltationem gloriae, By making them holy here on Earth, and bringing them to the happinesse of Heauen. All these graces, and what grace soeuer else is depen∣dant vpon any of these, are rought in the Saints by this speciall goodnesse of God:Rom. 8.30. for, whom God did predestinate, them he also cal∣led; and whom he called, them he also iustified; and whom he iusti∣fied, them he also glorified: This is the golden way, and the royall degrees of Gods goodnesse, whereby the Saints of God are saued. And therefore if any of vs doe finde these graces in our selues, let vs not ascribe them to our selues, but to the grace and good∣nesse of God: for, this is the worke of God, that ye beleeue in him, whom he hath sent,Philip. 1.29. saith our Sauiour Christ: And it is giuen to be∣leeue,That if there be any good∣nesse in vs, we should ascribe it all to God. saith the Apostle. And herein let vs admire with reuerence, and acknowledge with all thankefulnesse his speciall, and his sin∣gular goodnesse towards vs, more then towards others, which perhaps naturally are aswell, if not better deseruing then our selues: for had he bestowed faith and repentance vpon them, they would haue beleeued on him, and serued him euen as we doe; and had hee not bestowed these graces on vs, wee should haue beene poore and naked of all goodnesse, euen as they are. But then here it may be obiected, that if we doe no good, but what God giueth vs to doe, and that the very reprobates would
beleeue in God, and serue him, if God would bestow those effectu∣all and powerfull graces vpon them, which he bestoweth vpon his Saints: then it must needes follow, that the wicked are not altogether so culpable, for the omission of those required duties; because God giues them not the grace, and ability to performe them; Quia nullus actus potest excedere potentiam agentis, Because no act can exceede the power of the Agent: And therefore, whosoeuer limiteth the power, is the cause of the intermission of the consequent act, and of the euent that floweth thereby; And therefore, God circumscribing our ability, must needes be the cause of our deficiency. To this I answere,Sol. that we ascribe all the goodnesse of the Saints vnto the grace and goodnesse of God, to magnifie Gods goodnesse, and to vilifie our owne basenesse; to shew that wee haue no∣thing in the World whereof to boast: And we thinke our Saui∣ours words sufficient to confirme this truth, where he saith; A man can receiue nothing, except it be giuen him from aboue:Iohn 15.5. That of our selues we can doe nothing that is good. And againe, Without me ye can doe nothing. And we say that the wic∣ked would doe these things, if God would giue them, I say not sufficient, but effectuall grace to doe them; because it is vnpossible, but the same measure of effectuall grace, should produce the same measure of effects: for if God would worke in them that sanctifie which he doth in his Saints, how could they resist his will? Or is it possible that this will of man, should withstand the will of God? no wayes. And I see no reason, why any man should except against this truth, but that hereby they feare that imputation of iniustice, which (as they thinke) must needes light on God, if hee should condemne them, for not seruing him, and yet not giue them the grace or ability to serue him; or at least wise of partiality, if he, without any manner of desert of the one more then the other, should notwithstanding choose the one sort, and inrich them, and leaue the other sort, and condemne them. But to this I answere, that if God should require such duties as are not due to him, or command them to doe that which they neuer receiued power from him to fulfill, we might per∣haps thinke him vniust in his demands; For, ; Lawes must be made according to the rule
of mens ability to performe them; or if God did take away this power againe from the Agent, then might he likewise be said to be the cause of the deficiency of the subsequent act: but if God requires nothing at our hands,God taketh not the power of seruing him from any man. but that which is our duety to doe, & what he made vs able to performe; and we through our owne default, and wilfulnesse, Male vtentes potestate, Abusing this ability, which God hath giuen vs, like those that spend their wealth on whores, which they should imploy to maine∣taine their Wiues and Children; haue lost this power, that wee had receiued, and brought vpon our selues an ineuitable impo∣tency; the very Law of humane reason, will here take part with God against vs: Non habere excusationem, &c. that he hath no excuse for himselfe, which is the cause of his owne impedi∣ment, as a Father saith: And therefore, seeing man lost the power of seruing God, by his owne fault in offending God; and that God is not bound to restore it againe: God, in not giuing it, is no efficient cause of their not seruing him: but, as the Sunne is the cause of darkenesse, Non per se, sed per accidens, Not because properly it effecteth darkenesse, but accidentally, by reason of its departure from vs: So is God onely the cause, why the wic∣ked serue him not; not because he worketh any vnwillingnesse in them to serue him; but because hee denieth his grace vnto them, whereby they might be inabled to serue him: and this deniall of his grace, is no iniustice in God; because their owne sinnes haue made this separation betwixt GOD and them,God is not bound to giue the wicked power to serue him. and makes euery man like vnto Turnus soule, Fugit indig∣nata per vmbras; To hide himselfe from this shining light: And God is a debtor to no man, that hee should inlighten any, but whom it pleaseth him. Secondly, I say that this extending of his speciall goodnesse vnto some, and not to others, is no accepting of persons in that sence, which the Scripture saith; God is no accepter of persons: For, First, Saint Augustine tels vs, that Ibi est acceptio personarum, vbi quae aequalibus, ex aquo debentur, inaequaliter distribuuntur; There is the acception of persons,What it is to be an accepter of persons. where those things which are equally due to all men, are vnequally distributed to some men: but where those things which are due to none, are freely
giuen vnto some, and vnequally distributed vnto those; yet herein is neither partiality, nor iniquity: because as our Sauiour saith; God may doe with his owne what he will,Math. 20.15. and giue the same to whom he please: And thereby, Huic facit misericordia, tibi non fit iniuria; He doth but shew mercy vnto the one, and he doth no iniustice to the other. Secondly, the meaning of the holy Ghost, in saying that God is no accepter of persons, is not, that he chooseth not one man rather then another; for, so hee chose Iacob, and hated Esau;Mal. 1.2. but that he chooseth not any man in regard of the outward in∣dowments, or naturall gifts, or any other thing, that is in that man rather then in other men; as not Achitophel for his wise∣dome; not Absolon for his beauty; not Sampson for his strength;God chooseth no man, for the loue of any thing that is in man. not Diues for riches; nor Iacob, for any thing that was in Iacob more then in Esau: for whom he chooseth, he chooseth meere∣ly out of his meere grace and goodnesse; towards the one, ra∣ther then the other: as he himselfe plainely sheweth, I will haue mercy, on whom I will haue mercy.Exod. 33.19. And so you see, how abundantly God is good, eternally in himselfe, generally vnto all, and more especially vnto his Saints: Oh then let vs not be like the Aegyptians, that found out the streames of the Riuer Nilus; but knew not the springs from whence they issued. Let vs not be ignorant of that spring and Fountaine from whence wee receiue so many benefits,That we should acknowledge all our good∣nesse to pro∣ceede from God. and so many streames of goodnesse: for this were but like the Swine, to eate the Acornes that fall on the ground, and neuer to behold the Tree from whence they fall; or, to beare the name of God written in our hearts, by the Pen of Nature, and yet to be like the Athenian Altar, wherein was ingrauen , to the vn∣knowne God: but rather in all things whatsoeuer wee haue, or inioy; health, wealth, or prosperity, spirituall, or temporall grace; let vs with Saint Iames acknowledge the same, to descend from aboue, and to proceede vnto vs, from this abundant good∣nesse of God: And for the same,Iames 1.17. let vs ascribe vnto God the ho∣nour due vnto his name, to worship him with holy worship. And so much for the fourth particle: Of the abundant goodnesse of God.
CHAP. IX. Of the superabundant truth of God. THe fift particle of Gods goodnesse, is, that hee is abundant in truth. Now truth (saith Anselmus) is as Time, or as Light, which though but one yet is it diuersly distinguished: So Truth (saith the Phylosopher) is variously considered: and that either Arist. aethic. l. 4. c. 7. & Mo∣ral. l. 1. c 33. What morall Truth is.1. Morally. 2. Physically. In the first sence, , Truth is a vertue, euenly placed betwixt arrogancy and simu∣lation; or as Cicero defines it, (and which Saint Augustine holds to be the best definition of it) Veritas est per quam immu∣tata quae sunt, quae fuerunt, & quae futura sunt, dicuntur: Truth is that, i. e. (that vertue) whereby things past, things present, and things to come, are immutably related as they are. And this Truth, though it be in God, or rather from God, because he al∣wayes saith and relateth things immutably as they be; yet is it not in him, as in vs; because in vs truth is a morall vertue, whereby, as by an habite, we are propense and inclined to shew forth the things as they be: but in God, it is not as a quality, but an essentiall property, whereby he is, what he is, and can no more leaue to be, or to relate Truth, then he can leaue to be a God. What Physical Truth is.In the second sence, Ʋeritas cuiuslibet rei, est proprietas sui esse, quod stabilitum est ei: The truth of euery thing, is the pro∣priety of his being, or (as Saint Augustine saith) Ʋerum est id quod est; That is true which is: Illud enim omnes verum dicunt esse, quod tale reuera est,Agust Soli{que}. l. 2. c. 5. quale esse videtur, &c. For all men (saith he) ffirme that to be true, which is indeede as it seemes to be; and that to be false, which is not as it seemes to be; as the Image of a man in a glasse, seemes to be a man, and is not; and there∣fore though it be a true image of a man, yet is it a false man: And so hee is a false friend, which seemes to be a true frend and is not. A most heauy sentence against them, which say, They are Iewes,Reuel. 2.9. and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan;
which say they are Christians, but serue not God; and which seeme to be iust, and honest men, but inwardly are rauening Wolues; because they being not what they seeme to be, doe de∣ceiue themselues, and the truth is not in them: And therefore,1 Iohn 1.6. Ni∣hil prodest illis nomen vsurpare alienum, & vocari quod non sunt; It will auaile them nothing to vsurpe a wrong name, and to be called what they are not: for though they may deceiue the World, yet Christ which is truth it selfe, and knoweth all truth, will tell them at the last day, that he neuer knew them; that is,Math 25.12. to be true Christians, which they seemed to be, but were not. And thus God is truth, and that two wayes. 1. Essentially in himselfe. 2. Causally in all things. First, God is essentially true, yea trueth it selfe, as Moses, and as our Sauiour sayth; quia est quod est,Deut. 32.4. because he is that which he is, and that which he seemes to be; and thus proper∣ly nothing can be sayd to be trueth, but God, because nothing is, or can be sayd to be of himselfe, but God. Secondly, As God is essentially truth, so hee is causally truth:Iohn 14.6. The manner how all Truths doe proceede from God. that is, the fountaine of truth, from whence, all other channells of truth doe flow: for this is the order of all veritie. First, The trueth of all things is conceiued, in the Idea and no∣tion, or practicke knowledge and vnderstanding of God, from all eternitie; because all things had their being in the diuine vnderstanding, before they had their being in themselues: then, Secondly, This truth floweth to the things existing in them∣selues: which are therefore true, because they are adaequated and conformable to that truth conceiued in the minde of God, concerning them: then, Thirdly, This truth of things passeth to the vnderstanding both of Men & Angels, when the vnderstanding is adaequated and conformable to the things conceiued, as they are in them∣selues, i. e. when we truely vnderstand things to be as they be: then, Fourthly, This truth conceiued in the vnderstanding, procee∣deth vnto expression, either by words, or writings, when our ex∣pression of things, is agreeable to that conception, which wee haue
of them in our vnderstanding, that is, when we speake, or write, as we thinke. And therefore, whensoeuer our words doe any wayes swarue from our minds, and vnderstanding; they cannot be true: quia mendacium est contra mentem ire, because a lye is to goe against our owne mindes, or to say otherwise then wee thinke, sayth Saint Augustine; and a truth of words, is the adaequation and conformitie of the tongue with the minde and vnderstanding; and whensoeuer we vnderstand any thing otherwise then it is, there can bee no trueth in that vnderstanding; because the truth of the vnderstanding, is the adaequation of the same, to the things existing, and being in their naturall causes, and whensoeuer things doe any wayes swarue from that aeternall notion and conception of them, in the minde and vnderstanding of God, they cannot therein be true: because the truth of all things, consisteth in their adaequation, and conformitie to the truth, eternally conceiued of them in the diuine vnder∣standing. How the di∣uine vnder∣standing, is the rule that mea∣sureth all Truths.But when our words are agreeable to our mindes, our minds and vnderstandings to the things conceiued, and those things to the minde of God; then are they true: because (as the Schooles truely teach) Intellectus diuinus est mensurans non mensuratus, &c. the diuine conception of things, is that which measureth the trueth of all things, and is not measured it selfe by any thing; Et res naturalis est mensurata & mensurans, and euery naturall thing, thus measured by the notion of God, doth measure the truth of our vnderstanding, and our vnderstanding measured by the truth of things conceiued, doth measure the truth of our words. And so you see Truth to be primatiuely in God; as the light in the body of the Sunne; and thence to be deriued, in res ex∣istentes; into the things wherein it resteth subiectiuely; like vn∣to the light of the Moone, and the starres, which they receiue from the Sunne; and so to passe into the vnderstanding ter∣minatiuely, like the reflection of the light of the Moone, and the Starres, vpon these lower orbes; and lastly to our words, or writings, expressiuely like vnto the manifestation of things, by that light which shineth vpon them.
Now, this verum declaratiuum, this expressed trueth, is to bee considered two wayes: 1. Primarily. 2. Secondarily. First, As it is directed by God, and guided by his Spirit, so as therein there can be no cōmixtion of error; and in that respect it is called, the diuine Truth, because it is wholy Truth, and expressed by the Diuine Spirit: for, as Saint Peter saith,2 Pet. 1.21. The holy men of God, spake as they were moued by the holy Ghost; This is, Theologi∣call Truth, and it is wholy contained in the holy Scripture,Coloss 1.5. which is therefore called, The Word of Truth. And this Truth, though I might alledge many other reasons, to proue the worth, and the excellency thereof; yet is this suf∣ficient in stead of all, that (besides what Zorobabel saith of it) it is in many passages of the Scripture compared vnto the Light, as the Psalmist saith; Send forth thy Truth and thy Light: And that especially in three respects; for, as the Light is 1. The dispeller of darkenesse.The excellen∣cy of the di∣uine Truth. 2. The shewer of things. 3. The effecter of generable Creatures. So is Truth: for, First, As the Light, when it ariseth, chaseth away all darke∣nesse, and suffereth not the same to adhere vnto it; whereupon the Apostle saith,2 Cor. 6.14. Truth expel∣leth errors. What agreement is there betwixt light and darke∣nesse? Euen so, this Truth when it shineth, dispelleth, and driueth away all errors and ignorance from the mindes of all wherein it resteth: And therefore Father Zachary saith, That Christ, which is Truth it selfe, when hee came to preach this Word of Truth; came, To giue light to them that sit in darkenesse,Luke 1.79. and in the shaddow of death: i. e. To disperse those mysts of ignorance and errours, which had ouer-shadowed the whole face of the Earth. Secondly as the Light when it shineth, displayeth it selfe, and pierceth euery transparent body, though neuer so solid, and maketh all things manifest, what they are; for in the darke,Ephes. 5.13. Truth sheweth what euery thing is. there is no certainty of colours, white from blacke is scarce discerned; there is no certainty of things, Gold cannot be knowne from Copper: but when the Light shineth, it presently sheweth what euery thing is. Euen so, though while we are ignorant of Gods
will, euill may be deemed good, and good, euill; yet when this Truth of God shineth: i. e. this Word of God is Preached, it ma∣keth knowne euery thing what it is; it sheweth the true God from the false, the true seruice of God, from the false superstition of men; the true Church of Christ, from the false Synagogue of Satan, and the true members of Christ, from the false hypocrites of the World. Hence it, is, that the wicked cannot abide the Truth,John. 3.19. Because their workes are euill; and by the preaching of the same, their workes are manifested to be so: And therefore Saint Paul saith, That the Preachers of Gods Word, are oftentimes become enemies vnto the wicked,Gal. 4.16. because they tell them the Truth. Truth begets vs vnto God.Thirdly, As the Light when it ariseth, doth so heate, and hearten euery thing, that it is most truly said; Sol & homo gene∣rat hominem, The Sunne and Man begets a Man: Euen so this Truth of God, and the Preaching of the same, is the onely meanes whereby we are regenerate, and begotten againe, to be the Sonnes of God; as the Apostle sheweth. And this is that Truth, whereby God sheweth himselfe to be abundantly true; because as Hugo saith, In sacra Scriptura non solum bonitas est, quod praecipitur; & faelicitas, quod promittitur; sed etiam veritas est, quod dicitur: Whatsoeuer is said in the holy Scripture,2 Cor. 1.20. it is absolutely true, without any errour; and the pro∣mises of God are as sure, as if they were already performed: for he is yea, and Amen, i. e. True in himselfe, true in his workes, and true in all his words: And this Truth of the Lord indureth for euer; for, He will not alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, neither will he suffer his Truth to faile: But when we forget both him and our selues,Luke 1.72. he will still be mindfull of his promise, and re∣member his holy couenant. And therefore, seeing that as the Light is so excellent a thing, the first-borne of all visible Creatures, and the very comfort of euery afflicted heart, that dispelleth all darkenesse, discouereth all things, and the procreatiue cause of all Creatures; so is this Truth of God,What we ought to doe. of that transcendent excellency, as that it is the best guide of our liues, and the sole meanes to saue our soules. It should teach vs, First, Comparare veritatem, To purchase this Truth, and to
get the same vnto our selues by any meanes.First, to spare no cost to get that Truth. Matth. It is that Treasure id in the field, to gaine which the wise Merchant sold all that euer he had: no labour is too great, no cost is too deare, to gaine this Truth. Multa tulit, fecit{que} puer, sudauit & alsit.Horat. And as another saith; —Ardua quamuis sit via, non metuit virtus inuicta laborem. If the Gentiles did toyle, and moyle, and sweat, and spare no paines to get a little measure of humane learning, which did al∣most nothing else but puffe them vp with pride; what paines ought we to take, to search and seeke for this Diuine Truth, which is onely able to saue our soules? Secondly, Retinere veritatē, to let passe this truth,Secondly, to hazard all we haue in de∣fence of this Truth. when once we haue attained vnto the same, by no meanes; but to keepe it and to retaine it vnto death: for so Salomon saith, Buy the truth, but sell it not, i. e. when you haue gotten it part not from it: and this is no small taske: Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri: But it is as difficult a thing, to retaine it, as it is to finde it: for seeing the truth is like the light, and the light is many times obscured with cloudes and darkenesse; so the truth is oppo∣sed by errour and ignorance; it is enuied and hated by the sonnes of men; and as Tertullian saith, it hath beene euer seene,Juellus in Apol. ex Tertul. Apol∣loget. Ʋeritatem in terris peregrinam agere, & inter ignotos facile calum∣niatores inuenire; That the truth was entertained on earth but as a Pilgrime, and a Stranger, that easily findeth enemies in euery place, and scarce friends in any place: and so the Booke of God, and the story of times doth make it plaine; how the Professors of this Truth, were alwayes persecuted; and the Truth it selfe sought to be suppressed by the sonnes of darkenesse. Mo∣ses and Aaron were withstood by Pharaoh, and resisted by Ian∣nes and Iambres, and the rest of the Sorcerers of Egypt. The Prophets were so vehemently and so generally persecuted by the Iewes, that Saint Stephen asketh them,Acts 7.52. Which of the Pro∣phets haue not your Fathers persecuted? and Christ himselfe, which was borne to this end, Vt testimonium perhiberet veritati, That he might beare witnesse vnto the Truth,John 18.37. was resisted vnto death; and so all the Martyres and faithfull witnesses of this
eternall Truth, can beare witnesse what they suffered in the de∣fence of Truth. What is need∣full for vs, if we would re∣tain the Truth.And therefore, if we would retaine the truth, wee haue need of Patience, we haue need of Courage, and of a constant Resolu∣tion, neuer to suffer this Heauenly Truth to bee taken from vs, vntill our selues be taken out of this wretched life. Let vs lay be∣fore vs the examples of the Patriarkes and Prophets, of Christ himselfe, of his holy Apostles, and of all his blessed Martyres, which thought not their liues too deare to defend this Truth; & let vs not be degenerate children of such worthy Progenitors, as transmitted this Truth vnto vs with the losse of their liues. That Truth at last will euer preuaile.And though wee haue neede of Patience, to suffer much in the defence of Truth, yet wee may be confident, that Truth will preuaile and get the victory; for as no darkenesse can so swallow vp the light, but that in its appointed time, it will glori∣ously returne againe; so no power of darknesse can so suppresse the Truth, but at last it will appeare as the cleare day. Because as the nature of errour is such,Cokus de iure regis Eoclesia∣stico. that although none be to with∣stand it, yet as the smoake, at last it will vanish of it selfe; so the nature of Truth is such, that although neuer so many doe op∣pugne it, yet at last it will preuaile as Zorobabel saith; and as the Comicke saith, ; Time will bring out the Truth into Light at last: And therefore seeing the Truth, is of that inuincible power, that although it may be obscured, yea, for a time with Christ himselfe be buried, yet it cannot be extin∣guished, nor remain perpetually intombed, but that the time will come wherein nothing is hid which shall not be reuealed, nothing is couered which shall not be manifested. We should arme our selues with confidence and sure trust in God, which according to his Truth, will at last bring all Truth to light, and saue all them that put their trust in him. But here me thinkes I heare some saying, they would wil∣lingly spend their liues in defence of Truth, if they could tell what were Truth: for now there are so many Religions, so ma∣ny Professions, and so many diuersities of Opinions in the world, that it is farre easier for them to spend their life, then to find out what is Truth. I answere that as Claudian saith, Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sen∣tentia
mentem, curarent superi terras, an nullus inesset rector.—He was much distracted, and knew not what to resolue, whether there was a Diuine prouidence or not; because when he saw the most admirable course of things, he said,Claud. l. 1. in. Ruff. Tunc omnia rebar consilio firmata Dei; He thought it was vnpossible, that that could pro∣ceed, but from a superiour cause: but on the other side, when (as the Prophet Dauid saith) He saw the wicked in such prosperity, and the Righteous hang downe their heads like a Bull-rush; yea, and hnged many times like the wicked sonnes of euill do∣ers;—Rursus labefacta cade∣bat religio. then hee thought it could not bee that there should bee any God; because he cared not (as he thought) for the righ∣teous people: Euen so I must needes confesse, that when I consider the sincerity of that Religion which wee teach, the summe of it plainely expressed in the Scriptures, and the end of it, tending onely to the glory of God: I doe assure my selfe, that we haue amongst vs the very Truth of God: but on the other side, when I consider Quomodo commutauerunt veritatem Dei in mendacium, How many of vs doe change this Truth of God into a lye, when they doe liue cleane contrary to what they Professe; and some of the best of vs, euen of the Teachers of this Truth, doe leade our liues, not onely as they doe, whom we daily condemne for such intollerable corruptions, vnbesee∣ming Christians; but also in many things, as Pagans who know not God; It makes me often muse, and Nicodemus-like to aske, how can these things be?John 3. to haue the Truth amongst vs, and yet to haue such pleasure in vanity, and to seeke after leasing:Psal. 4. For our Sauiour prayeth for his seruants, that God would sancti∣fie them through the Truth:Iohn 17.17. and yet behold the fruits of our San∣ctification. It was said of old, Mos est praelatis praebendas non dare gratis;ô Monachi ve∣stri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi; vos estis Deus est testis turpissima pestis. Sed bene nummatis aut corum sanguine natis.
And now the world saith of some of vs; Wee sell our Churches, we purchase Lands, we raise our sonnes to worldly honours, we suppresse whom we lift, though neuer so good, we raise our friends though neuer so bad, and what not? What should I say any more? what (say they) can Rome doe more? or what more doe we then the Heathens doe? or as our Sauiour saith, Doe not the Publicans and Sinners euen the same? and if these  things be done in a greene tree? If this be the life of vs that are as the light of the world, what shall we say of others, which by Pro∣fession are lay secular men? I take God to witnesse, before whom I stand, and by whom I shall be iudged, that I haue admired, and often grieued at my heart, not onely to heare, what perhaps the aduersaries of the Truth, or some lewd dissolute men that nei∣ther loue God, nor his Ministers, but are euer ready to speake the worst of all, for the offence of few, might falsely say against vs; but also to see how dissolute, how worldly, and how con∣formable to the world, boone companions, fashionable to all Com∣panies, a great many of vs doe liue: Nec Iouis imperium, nec Phlegetonta timent. And therefore I wonder not, that the simple are brought to their nonplus to see Truth and Wickednesse thus linked together in the same persons: Rom. 1.18.But when I consider what the Apostle saith, that the Gentiles did hold the Truth in vnrighteousnesse; I must needs acknow∣ledge that wicked men may haue the theoricke knowledge of the Truth, and teach this Truth vnto others; and yet be castawayes themselues; for so our Sauiour saith, that many shall come in the last day, and say, Lord open vnto vs, for we haue prophesied in thy Name, and done many great workes through thy Name, to whom the Lord shall answer, I know you not; depart from me you workers of iniquity. Rom. 3.3.Besides, as the Apostle saith of the Iewes, What if some did not beleeue, shall their vnbeliefe make the faith of God without effect? God forbid:c. 10.16. or what If all did not obey the Gospell, or that some of the branches be broken off? Shall this hinder the saluation of the rest? God forbid; So I may say of vs: What if some of vs, what if many of vs, euen the best of vs, should be, as the world saith we are? should that preiudice the rest, and especially the Truth of God? God forbid: I hope I may boldly say it, that the world cannot say, nor any man in the world deny it, vnlesse he putteth on the face of the father of lies; but, as we haue had ma∣ny Reuerend and faithfull Bishops, many graue and painfull Preachers, that haue spent their strength in the expressing, and sacrificed their deerest bloud in defending this Truth; so wee haue still many worthy and godly Bishops, and many holy and
heauenly Ministers,Parcite pauco∣rum diffundere crimē in omnes. Spectetur me∣ritis quilibet apte suis. that doe most vprightly walke in the Truth of God, and shall these be condemned and reproached for the of∣fence of others? Shall all be blamed for the offence of few? No, God forbid, let euery horse beare his owne burthen: for euery man shall be iudged according to his owne workes. And therefore though as in the field of Gods Church, there are Tares as well as Wheat; so in our Priestly dignity there are many amongst vs, that are not of vs, (of whom I vnderstand what I said before) that are like Statuae Mercuriales, which shew the way to others, but walke not one steppe themselues; or like those skilfull Cookes that dresse good meate for others, but taste not a bit thereof themselues; or rather that feed not the flocke at all, but feed themselues vpon the flocke of Christ: and gather wealth to themselues in steed of gayning soules to God; yet let GOD be true, and euery man a lyar, and let not the wicked life of some men, scandalize this eternall Truth of God: we haue it now amongst vs: It was purchased by paines, preserued by blood, and most gloriously continued to this very day: and I doe assure my selfe, that as there were seauen thou∣sand men in Israel which bowed not their knees to Baal:1 Kings 19.18. so there be many thousands of men in England, that if they wanted Inke to defend that Diuine Truth which we doe Professe, would maintaine the same with their deerest blood; and I boldly set it downe, that if Satan should be let loose to persecute the Saints of God; I doe vnfainedly wish my burning bones might first giue light vnto all them that desire to walke in this Truth But we haue more cause to pray to God to defend the Defendor of this Truth: not onely by his Royall Authority, whereby wee doe inioy this Truth in a blessed peace, but also by his owne Di∣uine Penne and industry, whereby he shewed himselfe, Esse quod est; to be of the Truth indeed, rather then any wayes in the least manner to feare or suspect the disturbance of the same: for God, who is abundant in Truth, will preserue his owne Truth for euermore. And therefore seeing that, though some of vs be wicked, yea, though all of vs should be wicked and depriue our selues of happinesse, which I hope our greatest enemies will not dare to say: yet doth not that make the Truth of God of none effect: Let vs be Gens Sancta, custodiens veritatem; a Righte∣ous
and a holy Nation,Esay 26. to hold fast this Truth of God, not shew∣ing our selues like Rehoboam, that found shields of gold, but left behinde him shields of Brasse; to receiue the cleere Truth, from our fathers, and to leaue the same darkened vnto our chil∣dren. Secondly, As the word of God is the primary and most absolute declared Truth, wherein there is no possibility of error, Quia dicta Iehouae, dicta pura; Because the words of the Lord are pure words; So the words of men, agreeable to their vnderstan∣ding conformed to the Truth of things,Iohn 8.44. are secondarily the Truth of God; because as euery lye is from the Deuill, though it should be vttered from the tongue of a Saint, as our Sauiour sheweth; so euery Truth is from God, though it were spoken from the mouth of a Diuell; because the Spirit of God is the Spi∣rit of Truth, Et omne verum à quocun{que} dicitur, à Spiritu sancto est, And all Truth (whosoeuer speaks it) doth spring from the Spi∣rit of God, saith Saint Ambrose. Euery Truth whatsoeuer, whosoeuer saith it, pro∣ceeds from God.A sufficient reproofe for them that will not heare the Word of God, but from the mouth of Saints: for we are not to respect who speake, or what they be that speake, but what is spoken: and therefore if Balaams Asse should preach me Christ, I would willingly be his disciple; for Saint Paul tels me, that none can say,1 Cor. 12.3. that Iesus is Christ, but by the Spirit of God, and therefore hee did not so much care, who preached, nor how they preached, so they preached Iesus Christ, because he knew that euery truth must needs proceed from the Spirit of Truth. hat we should say nothing but Truth.And therefore this should teach vs to make much of Truth, and not onely to beleeue the Truth whosoeuer speakes it; but also to speake the Truth, euery man vnto his neighbour, whatso∣euer comes of it; though it should be like Cassandra's Pro∣phesie, not beleeued; or, O dium parere, Beget hatred, as the Co∣micke speaketh: Quia dilexit Deus veritatem, because as all Truth is from God; so God loueth all Truth whatsoeuer. Corruit in pla∣tea veritas.And yet we see, Quod diminutae sunt veritates à filijs hominum, The Truth is troden downe in the street, and the faithfull are minished from among the children of men;Psal. 12.1. we are all like the Cre∣tians, alwayes lyars; and though the godly man keepeth his pro∣mise vnto his neighbour,Psal. 15.5. though it were to his owne hinderance;
yet, now we seldome think of any promise, vnlesse it be for our furtherance to attaine vnto our owne desires: so farre are wee from Truth. But we must all loue Truth, and follow after Truth, if we would be children vnto him that is abundant in Truth. And so much for the fift Particle of Gods goodnesse: Of Gods abun∣dant Truth. CHAP. X. Of the large extent of Gods mercy, and of the remission of all kinde of sinnes, and the vsefull application of the whole Attribute of Gods goodnesse. THe sixt Particle of Gods Goodnesse, is,God is merci∣full to all men. that hee re∣serueth mercy for thousands, and that (as I vn∣derstand it) two manner of wayes; 1. Extensiuely. 2. Successiuely. First, he meaneth that his Mercy is not like a carnall Patrons loue, which commonly reacheth no further then his kindred; he can preferre none else: Nor yet like great mens fauours, which extendeth no further then their seruants, their greatnesse is no greater; but Miserationum Dei multitudo numerari,Basil in regulis contract. q. 15. & mag∣nitudo mensurari non potest; The mercies of God are so many, that they cannot be numbred, and so great that they cannot be measured: so that he hath enough in store, to helpe not onely a few, but also many multitudes, thousands: he hath enough for all: being not like Isaac that had but one blessing;Gen. 27.38. for he hath many blessings for euery one. Secondly,Gods Mercie lasteth for all times, euen for euer and euer. he meaneth that his Mercy is not for any set Period of time, which is the property of all other things, euen of the greatest Monarchs: they haue but their time, and when that time is gone, they can do nothing, which a little before seemed to be able to do all things: but Gods mercies are tyed to no time, but they continue frō generation to generation: they are like a springing well, that can neuer be dryed; or like the Lampe that is fed with
the oyle of immortality: And this the Word reseruing, doth most plainely shew, that he hath mercy enough in store, not onely for the fathers that beleeue in him, but also for their children & for their childrens children, euen vnto a thousand generations, of them that loue him and keepe his Commandements:Good Parents doe leaue the best patrim∣ny vnto their children. Rom. 11.28. O then what a Patrimony doe good parents purchase vnto their children, to haue the Mercies of God reserued and laid vp in store for thou∣sands of them; and (as the Apostle saith of the Iewes) to make them to be loued for their fathers sakes? Most happy are those chil∣dren which haue such fathers as doe feare God, and keepe his Commandements. And so much for the sixt Particle of Gods goodnesse. Reseruing Mercy for thousands. Forgiuenesse of sinnes, our chiefest com∣fort. Rom 4.7.The seauenth Particle of Gods goodnesse is, that he forgiueth iniquitie and transgression and sinne: Here is the last but not the least act of Gods goodnesse expressed: For herein consisteth all our happinesse, Blessed is the man whose vnrighteousnesse is for∣giuen, and whose sinne is couered. And here by these three words God vnderstandeth three sorts of euill. 1. By Iniquity, is vnderstood originall corruption. 2. By Transgression, is meant the outward & actuall commission. 3. By Sinne, is vnderstood the height of all abhomination, No sinner ex∣cluded from hope of par∣don.The custome of sinning, and the greatest sinnes: For God depriues not these from hope of Pardon, if these come to him with penitent hearts: and therefore, that none should despaire of his goodnes, he sheweth that he can forgiue all these, and forgiuing these, he forgiueth all. But here I must haue leaue to take away the vaile frō Moses his face, and to looke further then the Iewish Tabernacle; for as in Ezekiels vision,Ezek. 10.10. Rota erat in rota, Gospel was in the Law; & Law in the Gospell; (as Saint Gregory expounds it;) so here I finde all this to be Gospell, and I see Iesus Christ in euery word; for in Christ,Coloss. 1.14. we haue Redemption through his blood, the forgiuenesse of our sinnes: and so of all the rest of these Graces, wee haue them all by Christ: for though the Law came by Moses, yet (as Saint Iohn saith) Grace and Truth, yea, Mercy and Peace, and all the other good that we haue,John 1.17. we haue them all through Iesus Christ our Lord.
And thus by the helpe of Gods Spirit, wee haue thus farre sayled through the boundlesse Ocean of Gods goodnesse, and in all this we can shew you no more then little drops of raine, or small sparkes of fire,What wee should learne from this do∣ctrine of Gods goodnesse. in comparison of the huge elements of fire and water; so great is his goodnesse, and so vnable is our small vnderstanding to apprehend the greatnesse of Gods goodnesse. It should teach vs, First, to be afraid to sinne; for there is mercy with God,First, to be afraid to sinne. that he may be feared, or if we haue sinned, to make vs presently to forsake our sinnes and to be sorrowfull for our offences; for the mercy of God leadeth vs to repentance, saith the Apostle. And herein is the difference betwixt the wicked and the godly mans application of Gods goodnesse. First, the wicked considereth how gracious and how mercifull the Lord is, as well as the best; but he maketh the worst vse of this that possible can be, for he saith vnto himselfe,Ezek. 18.32. that the mer∣cy of God is great, and he desireth not the death of a sinner, which is most true; but then he inferres a most damnable consequence,How the wic∣ked doe abuse Gods good∣nesse. Rom. 2.5. that therefore he may the more boldly goe on in sinne, or at least with the lesse feare offend his God: and so he maketh the grace and goodnesse of God, to be as an horse to carry away his sinnes, or as his sole incouragement, to goe on in sinne, and ther∣by he heapeth vnto himselfe wrath against the day of wrath; because (as the wise man saith) Mercy and wrath come from God, and his indignation falleth downe vpon sinners. But, Secondly, the godly considering the goodnesse of God, doe thereupon exceedingly feare to sinne, because they are loath to offend so good a God,The conside∣ration of Gods goodnesse is a meanes to preserue the good men from sinne. that hath beene so gracious and so bounti∣full vnto them; and if at any time through their infirmitie, they doe offend him, they will presently returne to God, because they know God is euer ready to receiue them; and so they make the consideration of Gods goodnesse, to be a hinderance of their sin∣ning, and offending God; and to be a furtherance of their re∣penting, and returne to God. And I would to God wee would all make this vse of the Mercy of God, and say with that Chri∣stian Poet, Ah miser, an summi quoniam propensa parentis Ad veniam est bonitas, in scelus omne ruis?
Ah wretched men that we are; shall we abound in sinne, be∣cause God abounds in goodnesse? God forbid: for that were, to turne the grace of God into wantonnes: and to abuse his goodnes for our destruction, and not to vse it for our saluation. And therefore the better God hath beene to vs, the more wee should bleed to offend that God: we should call to minde, if wee can, wherein God wronged our names, that wee should so often, at euery word almost, abuse the most sacred name of God; or when hee was hard to vs, that we should so hardly deale with him, as by our sinnes we doe, to render him euill for good, and hatred for good will. Secondly, ne∣uer to despaire of Gods Mer∣cie. Rom. 5.2.Secondly, this Doctrine teacheth vs, neuer to despaire of Gods Mercy, for where sinne aboundeth grace superaboundeth, i. e. though thy sinnes be neuer so great, neuer so many, yet the Mer∣cie of God is greater; and therefore thou art deceiued Caine, to say,Gen. 4.13. Thy sinne is greater then can be forgiuen thee: for though my sinne were greater then euer hath beene committed, yet it is not greater then God can forgiue me; or though I were neuer so full of sinnes, yet is God more full of mercies; because no sinnes of man can exceede the Mercy of God,Chrysost. hom. 19. in Gen. as Saint Chrysostome saith: and therefore though my sinnes were neuer so many, euen as many as haue beene committed in the world, since the be∣ginning of the world;Esay 44.22. yet seeing the Lord can put them all away like a cloud, and though they were neuer so haynous, euen as red as scarlet, yet seeing the Lord can make them as white as snow, I ought neuer to despaire of the grace and Mercy of God, Quia semper inueniam Deum benigniorem quā me culpabiliorem; Because I shall be sure to finde God more Mercifull, then I am sinfull, as Saint Bernard saith;Bernard. ser. 1. Et quia vberior Dei gratia, quam precatio no∣stra, semper plus tribuens, quam rogatur; And because God is euer redier to forgiue, then we are to craue pardon; and doth alwayes bestow more then vsually we desire, as Saint Ambrose saith;Ambros. super Luc. l. 5. Et deserentes se non deserit, And doth not alwayes leaue them which forsake him, as Saint Gregory saith; Sed & impios quaerit, qui eum non quaerebant, But doth oftentimes seeke for those wicked men,Greg. ho. 22. super illud, Ecce caeperunt excu∣sare, &c. that neuer sought for him. And this is the chiefest end, and the rightest vse of the Mercy of God; for as Medica∣mentum propter vulnus, The salue is made for the wound, and
not the wound, because I haue a salue; so the Mercy of God is taught to heale our wounded soules, and not to incourage, vs to wound our soules with sinne, saith Saint Augustine. But here it may be obiected,Ob. that there is a sinne against the Holy Ghost, which cannot be pardoned, and therefore all sin∣ners cannot from hence conceiue hope of pardon. I answere, first,Sol. What the sinne against the ho∣ly Ghost is. Beza ho. 28. de pass. Dom. That sinne is called irre∣missible, three wayes. that although we may partly know what this sinne is, viz. A willing, witting, malicious, totall apostacie; yet I say we can neuer discerne where it is, Sine rarissimis inspirationi∣bus, Without some rare and speciall inspiration, (as Beza saith) which few or none can now say he is sure of. Secondly, I say that a sinne may be called irremissible three wayes. First, Priuatiuely, when the sinne by congruence of merit deserues damnation, though by the congruence of Gods Mer∣cies, it may be pardoned; and so are all sinnes irremissible, if we consider their iust desert. Secondly, Contrarily, when the sinne doth not onely de∣serue punishment, but also opposeth pardon, and refuseth all the meanes of remission: and so is the sinne against the Holy Ghost irremissible, because it not onely not seeketh, but also reiecteth and opposeth pardon. Thirdly, Negatiuely,That there is no sinne in the world, but God can forgiue it. when the sinne can no wayes be remit∣ted, and so in my iudgement is no sinne vnpardonable. For though in regard of our impenitency, and perpetuall obstinacy, in resisting the holy Ghost, as S. Steuen said of the stiffe-necked Iewes, this sinne shall neuer be forgiuen, as our Sauiour saith; yet in regard of Gods infinite Mercies, which both for number and greatnesse, doe exceed all sinnes; and in respect of Gods power, which is able to doe all things, and to subdue all things vnto him∣selfe; I say this sinne, and all sinnes are pardonable, and can bee forgiuen if we could repent, and aske forgiuenesse of the same; else should our sinnes be more infinite then Gods mercies; which is impossible: And therefore whatsoeuer thy sinnes haue beene, neuer so great, neuer so many; sinnes of darkenesse, sinnes of Death, sinnes more in number then the sands of the Sea, yet if thou hast but that grace, to wish for grace; (if thou doest it from the bottome of thy heart,) despaire not of the Mercy
of God, but call, and cry, and say vnto him, Lord be mercifull vnto me a sinner;1 Iohn .7. and the bloud of Iesus Christ shall cleanse thee from all sinne:Esay 42.3. for a bruised reed he will not breake, and a smoaking flaxe he will not quench. O Lord, who is a God like vnto thee? What a hay∣nous sinne it is to despaire of the Mercie and goodnesse of God.It is sayd of Iudas that he sinned more in despayring of the mercy of God, then in betraying of his Sauiour Christ, for the betraying of his master, was but the corruption of man, but the despairing of Gods mercy, was a denyall of this goodnesse of God: and so to make God cruell, at least not so good, as he was euill; then which, a greater indignity cannot be imagined, against the Diuine Maiestie: and therefore whatsoeuer our liues haue been, as bad as Salomon,2 Chron. 33.1.2. &c. or worse then Manasses, yet let vs vs not adde this vnto all the rest of our sinnes, which alone will proue vnto vs worse then all the rest, to despaire of the grace and goodnesse of GOD;Heb. 4.16. but rather let vs in the name of Christ, draw neare vnto the Throne of Grace, and we may be sure, to finde mercy against the time of neede. Thirdly, to imitate God in all these particulars of Gods good∣nesse.Thirdly, This Doctrine teacheth vs to Imitate God herein, in all these speciall points of goodnesse. For though there be many inimitable workes of God, wherein it is a sinne to at∣tempt to doe the like, as Mundos fabricare, mortuos suscitare, & inter fluctus, ambulare, To create worlds, to raise the dead, to walke among the waues, and the like, yet we are commanded to be holy as he is holy, and to imitate him in goodnesse, that so wee may bee the Children of our Father which is in Heauen. And therefore,First, to bee Mercifull. Luke 6.36. Ouid. de ponto cleg. 9. Staus in The∣baide. First, we should be mercifull, as he is mercifull. Regia (crede mihi) res est succurrere lapsis. And as another saith, Pulchrum est vitam donare petenti; It is a pleasant thing to be pittifull: But the man of bloud, or the sonne of cruelty, can neuer be the Childe of the God of mercy; for,Iob 6.14. Matth. 26.11. he that hath no mercy, hath cast away the feare of the Lord, saith holy Iob. And yet alas, mercy is now gone out of our Coun∣trey; The poore are euer with you (saith our Sauiour) and neuer so many poore as now;That there is a great want of Mercy a∣mongst vs. for in Court and Countrey, in Church I am sure, we are almost all beggars, and yet we may labour not onely all night, with the Apostles, but all the dayes of our life, and get nothing; because we haue nothing to giue, such is our
time, that if euer that saying was true, it is now true; Si nihil attuleris, ibis homere foras: Most is sold, soules and all, little is gi∣uen, either in Church or Common-wealth; and all is spent vpon our selues, and vpon our friends, and not vpon the painful seruants, or poore members of Iesus Christ.2 Sam. 24.23. It is said of Arau∣nah, that being but a Subiect, as a King he gaue vnto the King; but we goe like Princes, in soft rayments, and we fare like Kings,Luke 16. daintily euery day; and we giue like bankerouts, not a bit to the poore, not a penny to the painefull: But, O beloued, Mute∣mus vitamsi volumus accipere vitam. We must change this course of life, if euer we looke for eternall life; And we must remem∣ber the afflictions of Ioseph, and put on the bowels of mercy and compassion, if euer wee be the Children of this God of mercy. Secondly, we should be gracious, that is, amiable,2. To be gra∣cious. and affa∣ble, and curteous one to another, rather like Titus Vespasian, that was, Deliciae generis humani; The delight of mankinde, de∣lighting onely in doing good; and not like Cinicke Diogenes, or carping Zoylus, that were vnsociable, and vnfit for any so∣cietie. Thirdly, we should be slow to anger; for,3 To be slow to anger. Ecces. 7.11. Prou. 14.29. Anger resteth in the bosome of fooles: but, he that is slow to wrath, is of great wisedome; because (as the Poet saith,) — Furor ira{que} mentem praecipitant. Wrath and fury doe so blind the minde and iudgement of man, Ne possit cernere verum; That as Cato saith, He cannot discerne betwixt good and euill: And therefore Euripides saith, ; Whosoeuer precipitately fostereth anger, must needes fall into an euill end, because nothing can more preiudice man in the whole course of his life, then the poysonous weede of wrath, and the bitter fruits of hasty anger. Fourthly, we should abound in all goodnesse;4. To abound in all good∣nesse. for the more good we doe, the more excellent, and the more god-like we shall be: for good cannot proceede but from God, and cannot tend any where but to God. And wee are all Trees in Gods Vineyard, well planted, well fenced, and well watered; for our
Land is good, our Law is good, our Seruice and our Sermons good: And therefore we should be good, and bring forth good fruits,Math. 3.10. meete for repentance; or else, we shall be hewen downe, and cast into the fire: for, though it be very true, that hee is a good man,S. Chrysost. in serm. de virt. & vit. which doth no euill; yet is it as certainely true, Malum esse non fecisse bonum, That he is an euill man, which doth not good; because there are priuatiue sinnes, not to doe good, as well as positiue sinnes, to doe euill: And therefore the Iewish Rabbines that haue beene curious to account all the Commandements in Moses Law,Munster in pre∣cept. aff. & neg. haue found 365. negatiue ones, iust as many as there be dayes in the yeere, and 248. affirmatiue ones, iust as ma∣ny as there be limbes or bones in a mans body; not only to teach vs,Psal. 103.1. & 35.10. that all parts of man, at all times of the yeere, are to be im∣ployed in Gods seruice, but also to shew vnto vs, that wee are not onely to abstaine from euill,1 Cor. 15.58. but also to doe good: because not onely the riotous, and wastfull Steward, that imbezelled his Ma∣sters goods, but also the idle, and thriftlesse seruant, that did no good with his Masters goods, shall be bound hand and foote, and be cast cut into vtter darkenesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And so we reade of Diues, that he is tormented in flaming fire, Non quia tulit aliena, sed quia non dedit propria; Not because he did euill to any, but because hee did not good to poore Lazarus:Luke 18 11. And therefore we should all striue, not onely with the Pharisee, to be truly able to say, that we thanke God we are not Adulterers, Swearers, Extortioners, Drunkards, Raylers, Lyars, or such like; but also (as Saint Peter bids vs) to adde vnto our Faith,2 Pet. 1.5. Vertue; and to our Vertue, Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to Pa∣tience, Godlinesse; and to Godlinesse, Brotherly kindnesse; and to Brotherly kindnesse, Charity; and so to goe on, from one grace vnto another, vntill at last we doe attaine vnto the perfection of goodnesse: for assuredly to doe good, will be our chiefest comfort,Rom. 2.7. in life, in death, and after death; for, glory, and honour, and peace, shall be to euery one that doth good; and God himselfe will say vnto him, Euge serue bone; Well done, thou good and faithfull seruant,Math. 25.23. enter thou into thy Masters ioy. Fiftly, we should loue the Truth, and say the Truth, euery man vnto his Neighbour; yea, and so accustome our selues to Truth,
Vt mentiri lingua prorsus ignoret,5. To accu∣stome our selues to say the Truth. That our tongus should not know how to lye: for, as God is Truth, so Truth makes vs the Children of God: And therefore Pythagoras being demanded, wherein men become likest vnto God, answered, Cum veri∣tatem exercent;Stobaeus Ser. 11. When they accustome themselues to say Truth. I doe not know two more excellent things,Zach. 8. Veritatem & pacem diligite. and more com∣fortable for the life of man, while hee liues here in this World, then Peace and Truth; Peace to free vs from all euill, and Truth to preserue vs in all good. And yet I feare me, we may now take vp the Prophet Esayes complaint, that Truth is fallen in the streete; yea, and (as Ieremy saith) Is perished, and cleane gone:Esay 59.4.14. Jerem. 7.18. for though (as Euripides saith) . Truth is a simple speech, that requires neither welt nor guard, yet now we doe so cunningly and craftily adorne lyes,That there is a great want of practising to say the Truth amongst vs. and fals∣hoods, that we make them passe currantly for Truth; and he that cannot dissemble, and deceiue his Neighbour, is accounted but a foole, that cannot liue in the World: So that now it is growen into a common speech, to say, We know not whom we may trust; and we doe verifie that ancient saying, Multis annis iam peractis, Nulla fides est in factis Mel in ore, verba lactis Fel in corde fraus in factis. Many yeeres past and gone, Faith in deeds there is none: Hony in mouth, words sweete, Gall in heart, deceit in deede. But if we will haue any part in this God of Truth, we must neither vse to speake a lye, nor to conceale the Truth: for, Qui veritatem occultat, & qui mendacium prodit, vter{que} reus est; ille quia prodesse non vult, iste quia nocere desiderat;Aug. in l. de A∣gon: christiano. He that conceales a Truth, and he that inuenteth lyes, are both alike culpable in the sight of God; the one because hee will not doe good, the other because hee desireth to doe euill: And though Veritas odium parit; The Preachers of Truth shall finde little grace with men (as Saint Ambrose saith) yet must we not hide the Truth, for any feare; nor yet speake a falshood, for any gaine: but in all things we must hold fast the Truth,Heraclid. in sua hist. Theat. Zwing. if we will be like vnto this God of Truth. It is reported of one Idor an Abbat, that for three things he was most excellent.
First, that he neuer lyed at any time. Secondly, that he neuer spake euill of any man. Thirdly, that hee neuer spake any thing, without great ne∣cessitie. I onely wish we were all like him herein. 6. To abound in the workes of mercy.Sixthly, we should reserue mercy for thousands, that is, to a∣bound in the workes of mercy, and compassion; and that to∣wards all men, either in action, or affection: for, where effe∣cting meanes are wanting, God neuer reiects a charitable mea∣ning; whereas the doing of good, without good will, or a large giuing, with small charitie, proues to be of no validity; because he giues but externally some things without himselfe, and not internally, De semetipso; From his heart: And thus our mercy should extend it selfe to thousands, because wee haue alwayes those before our eyes that haue neede of mercy; and that in a double respect. The outward workes of mer∣cy, are princi∣pally sixe.1. Of a corporall necessitie. 2. Of a spirituall miserie. The Schooles auouch the first to consist chiefly in sixe points. 1. Visiting the sicke. 2. Feeding the hungry. 3. Clothing the naked. 4. Redeeming the Captiue. 5. Intertayning the Stranger. 6. Burying of the Dead. And for the second, I see not lesse formes of pitty, then there be deeds of Charity, or acts of iniquity: In the first respect, the rich may be mercifull, and shew pitty vnto the poore; and in the second respect, the rich may be pittied by the poorest men in the World; because none are more lamentable, then those that are poore, and naked, and destitute of the true spirituall riches: And therefore in both respects, we ought euer to shew mercy and compassion, vnto our distressed Brethren. Now in mercy there are two speciall acts.Sinners are the men that are chiefly to be pittied. 1. To see their miseries. 2. To helpe their infirmities. 1. To see with our eyes, and then to helpe with our hands, or at least to pitty with our hearts: Diues saw Lazarus full of sores; and we see men now full of sinnes, and yet he did not pitty him, nor these will not be helped by vs; for, if either by reprehension,
or instruction, or by the mildest manner of aduising them, yea, or by most humbly requesting, the Spirituall Lords,That it is dan∣gerous to seeke to re∣dresse the dan∣gerous estate of great men. and tempo∣rall Potentates of this age, to looke into their miserable estate, wee would seeme to pitty them, or make any attempt to helpe them; they would make vs all to be pittied our selues: & there∣fore, onely lamenting that any of our Lords Spirituall should be so much temporall, as in any thing to follow the steppes of this world; and our Lords temporall so little Spirituall, in seeking the Kingdome of Heauen as they vse to doe; I will turne my speech to perswade all men, to remember the af∣flictions of Ioseph, and to bee mercifull vnto the poore distressed members of Iesus Christ. And although I might easily insert many motiues,Motiues to perswade vs to be mercifull. Matth. 18.33. to per∣swade all men to be mercifull, as, that it is a due debt, which wee owe vnto our brethren, as our Sauiour sheweth, oughtest not thou to haue had compassion on thy fellow, euen as I had pitty on thee? and the great benefit, that we shall reape, by being mercifull; because He that hath mecy on the poore lendeth vnto the Lord,Molissima corda humano generi dare se natura fatetur quae lachrymas dedit. and the Lord will recompence him, that which hee hath giuen, and many more forcible reasons to perswade all men to practise Mercie; yet I will chiefely commend this same, viz: that hereby wee become most like vnto our heauenly father: for wee say, that child, is most like his father, which doth neerest represent him in his face, and countenance; and the mercy of God is called the face and countenance of God, as the Prophet Dauid sheweth when he sayth, God bee mercifull vnto vs and blesse vs,Psal. 6.7.1. and shew vs the light of his countenance and be mercifull vnto vs, and therefore in shewing mercy wee become most like vnto God: and there∣by we do best please our heauenly Father, which reserueth mercy for thousands. But now the mercifull and pittifull men are minished from a∣mong the children of men: they are dead, and gone, and vn∣mercifull Naballs are stept vp in their stead, who thinke all too little for themselues, and euery little too much for the poore. It might bee easily prooued that the most powerfull men, are the least pittifull vnto the poore, and that they which haue most money, haue least mercy: In former times they sold their lands, and gaue the money vnto the poore, but now they sell the
Poore, and begger many, to buy them lands and liuings; and as the Prophet sayth, To ioyne house to house, and land to land, vntill there be no place for the poore to dwell mong them. For behold the Stranger, the Fatherlesse, and the Widdow, how vnmercifully they are dealt withall; the Stranger is strangely lookt vpon, the Orphans goods is vniustly detayned, and the poore Widdowes wrongfully molested. It is with vs, as with the fishes in the seas, whereof Alciat sayth, Pisciculos aurata rapit medio aequore sardas: That the little sprats, being vnder the water, are chased and deuoured by the great-ones; and if for feare they spring out of the sea, they are presently swallowed of the Sea-mues; euen so the poore are oppressed at home by their rich neighbours, and if by Law, they seeke to be releeued, they are presently consumed by the greedie Lawyers; and so, pauper vbique iacet, they doe herein, but leape out of the frying-panne into the fire. But let these vnmercifull men take heede; for the Lord is the auenger of all such, and when their teares runne downe their cheekes, they goe vp into Heauen,Ecclus 35 15. Psal. 10.14. and the Lord will heare their crie, and will helpe them. And therefore it were well for vs, if wee would striue,Luke 6.36. to imitate God herein, and to bee mercifull as our heauenly Father is mercifull. And yet I must tell you, that although we must be mercifull vnto all, we must know how to be mercifull vnto euery one. For, as there is an vndeserued misery,Arist. rhet: l. 1. c. 8. wherein mercy is alwayes to bee shewed, so there may be a iust calamitie wherein iustice sometimes must be executed, and therein, as Saint Ambrose sayth, est crude∣litas parcens & misericordia puniens, to spare is crueltie, & to pitty impietie, because among Godly men, to spare wicked and vnpa∣raleld varlets, Claudian de 6. consul. honorij.— Violentior armis Omnibus, expugnat talis clementia gentem: It would be the ruine of the righteous, and the cherishing of such serpents,Natura me cle∣mentem, respub∣lica seuerum fecit. as would most maliciously poyson vs: and there∣fore Mercy and Truth must goe together; and so shewing mer∣cie, we shall be sure to obtaine mercie. Seauenthly, Wee should bee readie and willing, to forgiue one another,7. To be most ready to for∣giue one ano∣ther. euen as God for Christ his sake hath forgiuen vs. For how
shall we thinke, that God will write our sinnes in the Sands, if we will write our brothers faults, in marble? or that he will for∣giue vs a thousand pounds, i. e. iniquitie, transgression, and sinne; if wee will not forgiue our fellow seruant an hundred pence, i. e. some small offence conceiued, and conceited against vs? And yet now; — Scribit in marmore laesus. It is strange to see what memories wee haue, perpetually to keepe in mind, the least conceiued indignitie, done vnto vs; O we can neuer forget it; we wil forgiue him, but we cannot forget him, hee shall come into my Pater-Noster, but not into my Creede; i. e. into my Prayer, but not into my fauour; a strange distinction, which Aristotle neuer found in all the bookes of Nature,That wee should forget whatsoeuer we remit vnto our neighbours. and I am sure, cannot be found in all the booke of God: It was in∣uented in Hell, by that prince of subtill Sophisters, to bring many a soule into Hell; for when God forgiueth our sinnes, doth he not say, that he will blot them out of his booke? there is no reading of them any more, doth hee not say, that hee will put them out of his remembrance? There is not the least thinking of them, to bee in the least manner offended with vs for them: and doth he not say, he will put them away as a cloude,Esay 1.18. and hee will wash vs as white as snow, and then will talke together, & walke to∣gether with vs, and be as louing, and as friendly vnto vs, as if we had neuer offended him, there is not the least signe that euer he was offended with vs; and when hee threatneth the wicked a∣busers of his most holy name, doth hee say any more but that he will not hold them guiltlesse? that is,Exod. 20.7. hee will not forget their a∣busing of him, but hee will remember it, when they thinke least of it, and haue perhaps quite forgot that euer they did it: and I thinke you will say, this is a fearefull saying: and therefore to say I will forgiue him, but Ile thinke on him, is but a fruitlesse forgiuenesse of a reuenging minde, or at least of an vnreconci∣led heart. And therefore though I say not, we should repose trust of state or life in mine aduersarie, without good tokens of sincere reconciliation: because (as Salomon sayth) wee must not too hastily, or vnaduisedly trust a reconciled enemie; yet I say that in our owne hearts, and soules wee must so forgiue him whatsoeuer
is past, as neuer to remember it, neuer to thinke on it, as to bee a meanes, in the least manner, to disturbe our charitie towards him, to hinder him of any good, or to doe him the least euill whatsoeuer; but, as we are towards all others, to be in as perfect loue & charitie towards him, as if he had neuer offended vs; yea, and to be so readie, and so willing to imbrace his loue and so∣cietie, as wee are to imbrace the loue of any other, if wee thought his heart to be as vpright towards vs, as wee know our owne,2 Kings 10.15. to bee towards him; as Iehu sayd vnto Iehouadab. And thus if we be mercifull, and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in all goodnesse, and truth, reseruing mercy, to the vttermost of our abilitie, for all men, and be ready, to forgiue one another, euen as God forgiueth vs; and as in our daily prayers, wee desire God to forgiue vs; then shall we be happy and blessed, and be the children of the most highest. And so much for the second attribute of God here expressed, that is, his Goodnesse. CHAP. XI. Of the Iustice of God, how iust is God in all his workes, and especially in the not absoluing or cleering of wicked vnre∣pentant sinners. 3. Attribute, i e. Gods Iustice.WE haue seene come small sparkes of Gods boundlesse incomprehensible goodnesse, wee are now to consider the last part of his discription, i. e. his Iustice, and se∣ueritie against sinne and sinners; an act neuer vsed vntill we abuse his good∣nesse; and therefore left last to bee ex∣pressed; to see if by the first, we will bee reclaymed: if not, God will not bee vanquished; but not holding the wicked innocent, hee will visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children, and vpon the childrens children, vnto the third and fourth generation. It is obserued by diuines, that God sheweth himselfe to worke and to doe things in many respects, especially,
1. As the absolute Lord, and owner of all things. 2. As the God or maker and preser∣uer of all things. 3. As the Father, and Husband, of his Church. 4. As the Iudge, and Iust rewarder of all men. And in all these wayes,Zanchius de iustitia dei. l. 4 c. 5. q. 2. p. 398. God is sayd to be iust & righ∣teous: but his Iustice, in all these manner of wor∣king, is not the same: for, First, As the absolute Lord of all things, whereby hee chooseth or reiecteth, giueth or denieth his grace, to whom het will; the Iustice of God herein, is the Will of God, as our Sauiour sheweth, saying; May not I doe what I will with mine owne?Matth 20.25. or as the A∣postle sayth, Hath not the potter power ouer the clay, of the same lumpe to make one vessell vnto honour, and another vnto dishonor:Rom. 9.21. And in all these things there is no iniquitie with God: but he is righ∣teous in all his wayes, and holy in all his works; & his Will is the rule of iustice: and must needs be iust, because he hath, ius absolutum, a most absolute right ouer all things:Whatsoeuer God doth is iust, and all things that are iust, are iust because hee doth them. and therefore all those acts must needs be iust, which are done by him, which is iustice it selfe, and that pure fountaine, from whence all springs of iustice doe proceede: for it is a sure rule, that God cannot bee sayd properly to doe things, because they are iust, but that those things are iust, because hee doth them: therefore Abraham thought it a iust thing to sacrifice his sonne, because it was Gods Will to require it: so that in this respect, the Will of God is the Iustice of God. Secondly, As the God of all things; that is, the Creator,Esay 46.4. Preseruer, and guider of all things; the goodnesse of God is sayd to be the Iustice of God. Thirdly, As he is the Husband of his Church,1 Tim. 4.10. and the Father of his Elect; the mercie of God, in giuing Christ, and the obe∣dience of Christ in satisfying the Law for vs, is sayd to bee the Iustice of God. Fourthly, As a Iust-Iudge; the Iustice of God is, the distribu∣ting of reward vnto euery man, according to his iust desart; and so  Iustitia, is quasi  bipartitio; a parting to euery one his owne due deserued portion; and it is called iustia di∣stributiua
a distributiue iustice. And this is that which is meant in this place when hee sayth, that by no meanes hee will make the wicked innocent, but will visite the sinnes of the fathers vpon the children and it is here set downe, two speciall wayes. Gods distribu∣tiue Iustice is here expres∣sed two wayes.1. Negatiuely, by the negation of absolution vnto the wic∣ked, not making the wicked innocent. 2. Positiuely, by the expression of the greatnesse of the pu∣nishment which shall be inflicted vpon them, but visiting the sinnes of the fathers vpon the children. For the first, he saith that absoluing hee will not absolue the wic∣ked; and alas, We are all gone astray,Psal. 14.2.4. wee are all become wicked, and there is none of vs that doth good, no not one: and therefore what shall we doe, if God will not doe this fatherly fauour, to ab∣solue vs? Nay, he sayd euen now, that he would doe it; that he would forgiue iniquitie and transgression and sinne: and therefore now with the same breath to say, he will by no meanes cleere the wicked, seemeth strange.Aug. de ciuitate dei. l. 8. c. 3. I answere, that for the cleering of this point alij atque alij aliud atque aliud opinati sunt, (as Saint Augustine sayth in another case) diuers men haue made diuers answeres. Some say that sinnes must be distinguished; as, into sinnes of humane infirmitie, and simple ignorance; as when we doe the things we would not doe, or many times wee doe the things wee know not to bee euill: and these sinnes God is alwayes ready to forgiue: because he remembreth that we are but dust, and cannot doe the things wee would doe: or into sinnes of wilfull igno∣rance, when men will not vnderstand, that they may doe well; but doe make a couenant with death,Esay 28.15. and an agreement with hell it selfe,Job 2.14. and doe say vnto God, depart from vs, for we will not haue the knowledge of thy wayes: and into sinnes of obstinate malice, from whence proceede, those horrid and horrible fearefull sinnes, that doe exceedingly prouoke the wrath of God: as That idolatrie is a most hor∣rible sinne.First, Idolatrie, which is either the worshiping of the true God, with false worship, or the giuing of the true-worship, onely due to the true God vnto the creature, whether visible or inuisi∣ble, whether inwardly conceited in our mindes, or outwardly exposed to our senses; for so the Apostle saith, that because the Gentiles knowing God, glorified him not as God, but changed his glory
into the Image of birds, beasts and creeping things;Rom. 1.18.24. therefore the wrath of God, was reueiled from Heauen, against their vngodlinessse,Deut. 32.17. and he gaue them vp to vile affections,Deut. 7.26. to doe those things which were not conuenient: for this sinne of Idolatry, is so offensiue vnto God, that it is tearmed a seruice of the Diuell: and therefore ab∣hominable, and accursed by God, and most dangerous vnto Man. Secondly, a perfidious tempting of God,The doubt∣ing of Gods goodnesse to∣wards vs, is a most horrible wickednesse. Psal. 78. &c. 1 Cor. 10.9. as whether hee be with vs, or whether he can or will doe what he promised for vs: for so the Psalmist saith, that the Israelites tempted God in their hearts, and spake against him saying; Shall God prepare a table in the Wildernesse? He smote the stony Rocke, so that the water gushed out, and the streames flowed withall; but can he giue bread also, or prouide for his people? and therefore the Lord was so wroth: that the fire was kindled in Iacob, and there came vp heauy displea∣sure against Israel; because they beleeued not in God, and put not their trust in his helpe: for God is so able and so willing to helpe his owne seruants, that none can doubt thereof, without hor∣rible inignity offered him; And therefore we should euer relye upon him, and neuer doubt of this infinite goodnesse of God. Thirdly, a murmuring against God,To murmure, or to be dis∣contented with God, a heauie sinne. Gen. 4.5. and complaining secretly as it were in our hearts, that he doth either presse vs sore with heauy yoakes and punishments; or that he dealeth not so gent∣ly and so louingly with vs, as he doth with others: for thus Caine murmured against God, that he accepted the oblation of Abell better then his; and thus the Apostle saith,1 Cor. 10.10. the children of Israel murmured against God, that he had dealt hardly with them, in bringing them out of Egypt to suffer hunger and thirst in the wildernesse; and therefore they were destroyed of the destroyer: and therefore we should beware of murmuring, which is nothing worth, and take heed of this muttering against God; for there is no thought so secret, that it shall goe for naught,Wisd. 1.11. Iob 13.15. Rom. 8.28. but we should with Iob in all estates put our trust in him, though he kils vs know∣ing that he worketh all things for the best for them that loue him. Fourthly, an obstinate contumatious rebelling against God,To refuse to obay God, a fearefull sinne. as when we refuse to heare his word, & wil not be obedient vnto his lawes; but will say with the Iewes, Let vs breake his bonds asunder
and cast away his cords from vs:Psal. 2.3.4.5. for against these the Psalmist saith; He that dwelleth in Heauen shall laugh them to scorne, the Lord shall haue them in derision; and then shall he speake vnto them in his wrath, and vexe them his sore displeasure: And therefore we should take heed of rebelling, and refusing to heare and to obey the Word of God, least the wrath of God should be suddenly kindled against vs, and consume vs. To oppose the knowne truth, a most horrible sinne. Num. 14.37.Fiftly, Blasphemy against God, and the slandering of the Truth of his Doctrine, especially when we oppose it fully, though wee know it to be Truth most certainely; as the spies that were sent to view the Land of Canaan did; and therefore dyed by the plague, before the Lord: for this is a sinne, of a malicious wicked∣nesse, and a branch of that vnpardonable sinne against the Holy Ghost; and therefore we should euer take heed to oppose the Truth against our consciences. Deut. 27. Disobedience to Parents a most feare∣full sinne.Sixtly, Disobedience, and dishonoring of our Parents; for so the Lord saith, Cursed be he that despiseth his Father & his Mother, and let all the people say, Amen. And therefore we finde heauy iudgements inflicted vpon Cham; Absalon, and all other like children of disobedience; and the Lord requiring, that vpon the bare testimony of the Parents, saying, This our child is disobedient, and will not be ruled by vs; they should carry him out of the Ci∣tie, and stone him with stones till he dyed. Gen. 4.10. The shedding of mans blood, a most hay∣nous sinne.Seauenthly, The shedding of Innocent bloud, especially of those that are the sonnes of God; for the voyce of blood, as may be seen in Abell, is such a shril, piercing, vndeniable voyce, that it will spee∣dily ascend to Heauen and neuer depart, vntill vengeance bee powred out vpon the sinners. Oppressing the poore a fearefull sinne.Eightly, The oppressing of the poore, the fatherlesse and the Widdowes: for if you hurt the Poore, and they cry vnto me, (saith the Lord) Et indignabitur furor meus, I will surely heare their cry, and my wrath shall waxe hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your Wiues shall be Widdowes, and your children fatherlesse. Vntamed lusts, a most odious sinne.Ninthly, Vnbridled wandring lusts, such as were the lusts of the Citizens of Sodome, and of all those that giue themselues, to doe adulteries, whoredomes, and following after strange flesh: for the Lord hateth all such lasciuious liuers; and therefore de∣stroyed of them three and twenty thousand in one day,1 Cor. 10.8. and
wrought a most grieuous slaughter vpon the whole tribe of Beniamin,Judg. 19.25. for that one foule abuse offered vnto the Leuite Wife. Tenthly, Sacriledge and prophaning of holy things; for this is a robbing of God, (as the Prophet sheweth;Mal. 3.8. Sacriledge a fearefull sinne.) and such a high transcendent sinne, as that I could farre easier fill whole volumes of most fearefull examples of Gods vengeance, executed against sacrilegious persons, then finde you one man, either in Diuine or humane stories, that wronged and robbed the Church of God, and scapt vnpunished, both in himselfe and his posterity, vn∣to the third and fourth generation. Eleuenthly,Continuall swearing a most dange∣rous sinne. Continuall swearing and prophaning of the blessed Name of God; for of all the sinnes forbidden in the Com∣mandements, this onely, with Idolatry, is forbidden with sub pae∣na, with a curse, yea a grieuous curse denounced against vs, if we will not shunne it: for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his Name in vaine. These and such like lewde and wicked sinners, they say, God absoluing will not absolue; because the doers hereof, haue no loue of goodnesse, no care of godlinesse, no sence of sinne, no remorse of conscience; and therefore is the Wrath of God so exceeding∣ly kindled against these sinners, sinners , these grieuous, huge, and horrible sinners, that he will neuer forgiue them, with∣out exceeding great repentance. Indeed I confesse, that such grieuous sinners are in a grieuous case; and that it is not likely, God would haue vsed such feare∣full threatnings, but against haynous sinners; yet I told you be∣fore, that no sinne was so great, but the Mercy of God is greater, and able to forgiue, if they be able to repent. And therefore, Others say, that the former clause, forgiuing iniquity and trans∣gression, and sinne; is to be vnderstood of the sinnes of Gods E∣lect, be they great, or be they small, he forgiues them all; and this latter clause, not making the wicked innocent, to be vnderstood of the sinnes of the Reprobate, of what quality soeuer they be: for, he will haue mercy on whom he will haue mercy,Exod. 33.19. and whom hee will he hardneth, &c. And I yeeld this to be true in it selfe; but, because God onely
knoweth absolutely,How both sen∣tences are re∣conciled. Ex priori, from the causes, infallibly, who are his; and we know it onely, Ex posteriori, by the effects of Gods fauour: and the fruits of his Spirit; if we would be assu∣red of the remission of our sinnes, and would more certainely know how both these sentences may be reconciled; I say briefly, that the first sentence, is to be vnderstood, of the penitent and amending sinners, of what quality soeuer their sinnes haue beene; and the latter clause of continuall vnrepentant trans∣gressors: for, God will pardon any sinne if you be sorry for it, and forsake it; but no sinne if you continue in it. For God shall wound the head of his enemies,Psal. 68.21. and the hayrie scalpe of such a one as goeth on still in his wickednesse, saith the Prophet. And therefore if any of vs haue sinned, yet let vs not continue in sinne; for mercy and wrath come from God, and if we continually sinne in the time of grace, we shall suddenly be destroyed in the day of ven∣geance; Quia non delinquenti sed peccata relinquenti misericors De∣us est, Because God will not be mercifull vnto them that offend of malicious wickednesse,Rom 3.8. and doe still goe on in sinne, that grace may abound, whose damnation is iust, as the Apostle speaketh. But thou wilt say, thou hopest God will giue thee grace to repent, and thou meanest to leaue thy sinnes, before thou beest compelled to leaue the world: It is true (beloued) that our sinnes shall be pardoned, whensoeur we repent: but we cannot repent,That men can∣not repent when they will. whensoeuer we will; because repentance is the gift of God; and we haue not God at our command; but as a Fa∣ther truely saith? Qui dat paenitenti veniam, non semper dat pec∣canti paenitentiam; God which alwayes pardoneth the repen∣tant sinner, doth not alwayes giue repentance vnto sinners; but as they neglected him,Rom. 2.5. so he reiecteth them, and suffereth them to heape vnto themselues wrath, against the day of wrath. And therefore, though God be slow to anger, and suffereth long: yet he is full of Iustice and will not suffer euer; but at last the fire of his fury will be kindled, and then, Furor arma ministrat, His wrath will quickly afford him weapons: and as Lactantius saith, Tarditatem irae grauitate supplicij compensabit, He will requite the slownesse of his wrath, with the seueritie of his vengeance; for as the old distich saith,
Ad veniam tardus Deus est,Serior esse solet vindicta Jeue∣rior. ad praemia velox Sed pensare solet, vt grauiore moram. God vseth to come to punish on leaden feet, but he payeth home with iron hands: he will reach them farre, and hee will smite them full. And therefore, To day if yee will heare his voyce,Psal. 95.8. harden not your hearts, and deferre not your amendment till to morrow; for, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit; If thou wilt not doe it to day, it will be farre harder for thee to doe it to morrow; and if thou wilt not doe it at all, thou art in a most feareful case; for, God absoluing will neuer absolue thee, that is, he will neuer forgiue thy sins, because thou wilt not forsake thy sinnes. And so much for the denyall of pardon and absolution vnto the wicked. CHAP. XII. Of a two-fold visitation of God, and the full opening of that point, how God doth, and that iustly visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the children, and yet punish none but for his owne sinnes. FOr the second, GOD saith, not onely, that he will not absolue the wicked, but he addeth further, that hee will visite the sinnes of the fathers vpon the children. Touching which we must first obserue; that visi∣tare est post longum tempus recordare; To visite is af∣ter a long time, to call to minde, to remember,That there is a two-fold visitation of God. and to see those things againe, which we seemed to haue quite forgotten: and we finde a two-fold visitation of God. First, when he seemeth to forget our miseries, to sleepe in our afflictions, euen sometimes, vntil we be almost ouerwhelmed, with the raging waues of this world,Matth. 8.24. as the Disciples were with the waues of the Sea: Yet at last, when he seeth his time,First, God vi∣siteth the affli∣cted. and not when we thinke it sit, he will awake, as a Gyant out of sleepe, and he will asswage the windes, and rebuke the Seas, and deliuer his people out of all their miseries: thus he remembred Noah,Gen. 8.1. thus hee visited his people that were in Egypt,Exod. 3.7. and thus when wee
seeme to be forsaken of God, because wee are despised among men;Luke 1.68. he will, when he seeth time, visite vs, and redeeme vs ot of our distresse. Secondly, God visiteth the wicked.Secondly, When God suffereth the wicked to goe on in sinne, and to passe from one wickednesse to another; and yet still to flourish like a greene Bay-tree, to build them houses, to enlarge their possessions, and to haue all things at their desire; he seemeth to forget their impieties, or to haue taken no notice of their wickednesse; yet at last (as the Prophet speaketh) when they least thinke of it, He will visite their iniquities with the rod,Psal. 89.32. Psal. 50.21. and their sinnes with scourges. Yea, he will reprooue them, and set before their faces, the things that they haue done: and then he will seuerely punish all their sinnes, and that two wayes: 1. In themselues. 2. In their children. First, It is iust with God, (and so it seemeth iust with men) To render vengeance to them that feare not God: For this cause we finde,2 Pet. 2.4. He spared not the Angels that offended; Nor any man that sinned: but thrust Adam out of Paradise, destroyed the whole world by the deluge,God will pu∣nish sinners. Sodome and Gomorrha with fire and brim∣stone, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Saul, Nabuchadnezzar, Iudas, Herod, and many more he hath most seuerely punished, for their sinnes;Ezek 18. and so in briefe he saith of euery one, The soule that sinneth, that soule shall die. And therefore this should teach vs. First, Not to frame vnto our selues a God, all of Mercie, and not to sing of mercy alone, but of mercy and iudgement toge∣ther; that as we are to loue his mercy, to be filled with grace; so we might feare his Iustice, to preserue vs from sinne. For these be the two feet of God (saith Saint Bernard) whereupon hee walketh all his wayes,That we should as well feare Gods Iustice as hope for his Mercie. and these be the two wings of a Christi∣an, whereby he may flie vp into heauen; Therefore seeing the one without the other, is vnauaileable to support vs, let vs not seperate those which God hath here & euery where else ioyned to∣gether; but let vs imbrace Gods goodnesse to keepe vs from despaire, and let vs feare Gods Iustice to preserue vs from pre∣sumption. Secondly, This teacheth vs to expect a day of retribution, for
seeing the Iustice of God requireth that wicked men should bee punished (as the Apostle sheweth) and that here many of them doe scarce taste of Gods anger, it must needs be,That the Iu∣stice of God requireth, there should be a day of retribution. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rom 2.5. 2 Pet. 2.11. that all must ap∣peare before the Iudgement seat of Christ, that euery one may re∣ceiue the things done in his body, according to that hee hath done, whether it be good or bad: and therefore what manner of men ought we to be in holy conuersation and godlinesse? Secondly, God will not onely punish wicked men in them∣selues for their sinnes,That God pu∣nisheth wic∣ked men in their children. but he will also punish them in their children; Tanquam in carne sua charissima, As in the deerest things that they loue: for he will visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the children. And so punishing their children he plagueth them; because euery man herein is like the woman of Canaan, who said vnto our Sauiour, Miserere mei Domine, O Lord be mercifull vnto me, my daughter is grieuously vexed with a diuel.Matth. 15.22. ;Basil. sel. ser. 19. For that the Deuils being in her daughter, was a torment, and a misery vnto her selfe;Simon de Cassia in Euang. l. . c. 24. Quia amor natorum dolorem traijcit in pa∣rentes; Because the loue which the parents beare vnto their children, doth transferre the griefe of the children vnto the parents: and therefore doth God punish a wicked man, both in himselfe and in his children. But although it be Iust with God, to visite the sinnes of the fathers vpon the children; yet this seemeth strange with men, especially considering the Prophet saith; Filius non portabit iniquitatem patris: The sonne shall not beare the fathers sinnes, neither shall it be said any more,Ezek. 18. that the fathers haue eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; but euery man shall beare his owne sinne, and the soule which sinneth, that soule shall die. And therefore to reconcile this clause of the Law, with that of the Prophet, wee must discusse this point more at large. Saint Augustine disputes it,How it stands with Gods Iustice to pu∣nish the fathers sinnes vpon the children. how the child should beare his fathers sinnes, but hee doth not directly (as I finde) con∣clude it. Saint Gregory concludes it, that if a child follow the sinnes of his fathers, he shall not onely be punished for his owne sinnes but also for his fathers sinnes: but he did not sufficiently dispute
it. And therefore that we may rightly conclude vpon sure pre∣mises, I must with the Schooles distinguish, 1. Of Fathers. 2. Of Sinnes. 3. Of children. 4. Of Punishments. First, Fathers are either proximiores, those that beget vs, or re∣motiores those from whence we are deriued, as Adam: That the sinne of Adam, was not onely imputed, but also deriued into his posteritie, experience it selfe makes it plaine; and the reason is, (as Aquinas truely saith) because Adam now stood, not as a personall man, but as specificall, i e. as one bearing in himselfe (as the stocke of a tree doth beare all the branches) the whole species, or race of all mankinde: and therefore, if this roote had continued holy,Rom 11.16. the branches had beene likewise holy: but hee sinning, he produced a most sinfull of-spring like himselfe: be∣cause an euill tree could neuer bring forth good fruit;Matth. 7.18. but in euery other man, there is onely the person of this or that indiuiduall man;Sinnes are not traduced from the Parents vnto the chil∣dren. and therefore the Schooles conclude; that no actuall sinne can be traduced from the next fathers vnto the children: not vertue frō the good, not vice from the bad; for so experience sheweth, that a good man doth not alwayes beget a vertuous child, nor a drunkard alwayes beget a drunkard, but sometimes the cleane contrary; as when the sonne of a miserable wretched niggard, proues to be the most dissolute prodigall spend-thrift in the world; (else would they ingrosse the whole world to them∣selues and their posteritie) or when an euill man begetteth a most vertuous and a godly child, which doth not vnusually happen among men. And yet we say, that seeing in euery child, there is the ele∣mentall seed of all vices, which we haue naturally and originally traduced from Adam, there be two especiall things which doe commonly cherish and preserue the immediate and next fathers sinnes in their children,Two things that further the sinnes of the Parents to continue in the children. that is, 1. Inclination. 2. Immitation. For, First, seeing we receiue our whole substance from our parents, we are naturally inclined to follow either the vertues, or the vi∣ces;Sepesolet simi∣lis filius esse patri. either the good qualities, or the bad qualities, of the same substance from whence we are produced: as the child of a good
father to be good, and the child of a vitious father to be euill. Secondly, seeing children are like Apes, apt to imitate,Children very apt to imitate their Parents vices. and the examples of our Parents, are like Spurres to driue their chil∣dren on, to follow what they see, the good carriage of a godly father, is a great incitement and a most effectuall meanes to worke goodnesse in his children, and the bad example of wicked Pa∣rents, is as a hammer to driue sinne and wickednesse into their children: for we see, Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabitodorem testa diu— Whatsoeuer vertues or vices doe take roote in our bones, when we are children, will hardly be rooted out of our flesh when we are men. And if to these two wee adde instruction, either in good or euill things; I know nothing more that can be said, to make a perfect man, or a perfect sinner. These be the inducements and the causes, why wicked men, haue commonly wicked chil∣dren: (vnlesse they be preuented by Gods speciall grace,) and we daily see, that in these respects,Quis tulcrit Graum de se∣ditione loquen∣tem? not onely families to be of like conditions with their Progenitors, as the Grachi to be sediti∣ous, the Iulij ambitious, the Tarquins proud and lasciuious, the thildren of Idolaters to be Idolatrous, and so of the rest; but also Nations and Countries, to be inclined and much adicted, and as it were indued which hereditary vices, and that not only in respect of the climate, which I confesse may somewhat moue the same, but especially in respect of their inclination, and pronesse of imi∣tation, to doe what their Parents doe. For so we see, how gene∣rally it is for men to say, My fathers were so, and therefore I will be so. And so the Psalmist saith, Errauimus cum patribus, Men are apt to erre with their Fathers. But, Secondly, we must note,This threat∣ning exten∣deth but to the great sins of grieuous sinners. that God doth not threaten to visite all the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the children, but the great and grieuous sinnes of haynous transgressors, as Idolaters, Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Sacrilegious persons, and Dispisers of godlinesse, and the like: for so the Lord himselfe here intima∣teth, saying, That he will visite the iniquity, not the iniquities; that is, Non quamuis iniquitatem, sed eam qua spirituale coniugium dissoluitur, Not euery kinde of iniquity, but that whereby the spirituall marriage betwixt God and vs is dissolued, and so
makes all our Children, Tanquam meretricios partus; As the Children of an Harlot, which hath broken her faith with her Husband: And so he expresseth himselfe more plainely, in his Law, saying; That he will visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children, vnto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate him: And therefore, not of all that doe offend him, but of those that hate him; like the man that will not; with the Iewes, put a∣way his wife for euery cause, but for adultery or some like grie∣uous crime; whereby he is iustly prouoked to forsake her, and all her brood:Hosea 1.2. c. 2.2. & Ezech. 16.22, &c. This threat∣ning holds not against all the Children of wicked men. And so the Lord sheweth the same at large in Hosea, 1.2. & c. 2.2. & Ezech. 16.22. &c. And yet, Thirdly, Wee must obserue that this holds not in all the children of those that are exceedingly wicked; but as a man renouncing his wife, and children, may notwithstanding retayne some one, or more, which he liketh; so doth God, sometimes, accept, some children of some wicked parents; for so wee finde Abraham was faithfull, though his father Terah, was Ido∣latrous; and King Iosias was religious, though his father Amon was most impious: and therefore Saint Gregorie and others haue distinguished, that this threatning onely holdeth in those children, which doe naturally sucke, and willingly imitate there Fathers vices: But I finde this too short of the whole truth, be∣cause God many times visiteth the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children, which not onely imitate their Parents in the like sinnes, but doe perhaps follow after cleane contrary sinnes, as I shewed vnto you before. And so the Apostle saith, that be∣cause the Gentiles became Idolatrous, and regarded not to know God, but ranne a whoring after other Gods, and so committed spirituall fornication against him; therefore God gaue them and their posterity ouer, to become so horribly vicious, as to burne in lust,Rom. 1.24. and vile affections one towards another, and so to com¦mit carnall fornication and abomination among themselues, and to doe those things that were not conuenient. This threat∣ning is not onely against those that imi∣tate their Pa∣rents vices.And therefore I say, that this threatning holdeth not so much, in those which giue themselues to imitate their Fa∣thers vices, as in those which God in iustice thinketh good to punish for their Fathers offences: for, in that he saith, I will vi∣site the iniquity of the Fathers vpon the Children; that is, I will pu∣nish
the Fathers sinnes in his Children, I see not how the Childe can any wayes by declination from his Fathers sinnes, escape this infliction laid on him by God; because (as I collect it) this punishment is not so much attracted by the Childrens imi∣tation, as inflicted by God for the Fathers transgression, and is ra∣ther a punishment of the Fathers sinne laide vpon the Childe, then a punishment of any sinne committed by the Childe: And therefore he doth not say, He will visite those that imitate their Fathers sinnes, but he will visite the sinnes of those that hate him vpon their Children; and yet (as I said before) this doth not hold in all, for wee see often many godly Children of wicked Parents: Neither doth this threatning passe at most, or in the worse, but to the third or fourth generation; and sometime he stayeth his hands at the first, and giues plentifull graces to the immediate Children of most Idolatrous and impious Parents; as we see in Iosias, and others before cited: for,Exod. 33.19. he will haue mer∣cy, vpon whom he will haue mercy. And therefore this threatning can be vnderstood of none else, but of those Fathers, which are so odious to God, as that he thinkes iust to punish their posterity, for their sinnes: And of those Children of them Fathers, which God in his secret and vnsearchable councell thinkes fit, thus to punish for their Fathers faults. And so we are come to consider the punishment to be inflicted, or the manner how God doth this, and yet remaineth iust: for, Fourthly, we are to vnderstand, that all punishment, is (as some say) either 1. Paenall. 2. Criminall. or, To speake more plainely; all punishment is either, 1. Corporall. 2. Spirituall. For the first, That for the Fathers sinnes, the Childe should bee temporally or corporally punished; there is no que∣stion of it: for so wee finde Dauid sinned, and the Childe begot in Adultery, suffered for it: And for Salomons sinnes, Rehoboam lost tenne Tribes of Israel. And thus not onely those Children which imitate their Parents-sinnes, but also those that neuer actually offended, are many times vnquestio∣nably punished for their Fathers faults; yea, and many times,
many other righteous men,The godly are many times corporally pu∣nished, in the punishment of the wicked. are thus punished in the punishment of the wicked; as those Children which perished in the de∣luge, and in the destruction of Sodome, and many other men and Infants that dyed at the besieging of Ierusalem: And this seemes to be no iniustice in God, because otherwise we must take away all iustice from men: for wee finde it vsuall in all Nations, for great offences; as, Crimen lesae maiestatis, Treasons, murthers, and such like, to depriue the Children of their Fathers goods, or Lands, by reason of their Fathers euils: nay, not onely the Children,Quint. Curtius de rebus gestis Alexandri. but euen all the kindred of a Traytor, were thereby tainted, and disparaged by the Macedonian Law: And therefore we must abridge God of that which we see iust in man, or else we must yeeld it is iust in God to visite and to punish the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children. But, For the second, That for the Fathers sinnes the Child should be spiritually punished, or inflicted with criminall punishments, it seemeth more then strange; and therefore Aquinas, and many others, thinking thereby to reconcile this place of the Law, That God will visite the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children: And that of Ezechiel, where God saith; The innocent Childe shall not beare the iniquity of his wicked Father, doe say; that God here doth vnderstand it of temporall punishment, or corporall casti∣gation, which God often times layeth vpon the Children for their Fathers sinnes: But in Ezechiel, God meaneth that he will not spiritually punish, or eternally plague the Childe for the Fa∣thers sinne. And, I confesse, that that place of Ezechiel is to be vnderstood, that God will not eternally punish the Childe, simply for the Fa∣thers sinne; for God vseth not to punish any one man, for the sinne of any other man: But as the Lord saith himselfe, The soule which sinneth,Ezech. 18.4. A difference betwixt spiri∣tuall, and eter∣nall punish¦ment. that soule shall dye; yet I say, that in Ezechiel he denyeth not what here he affirmeth, and that hee meaneth the same thing in both places, if both be rightly vnderstood: for I make a great difference betweene a spirituall and an eter∣nall punishment; that God will eternally punish the Childe for the Fathers sinne, I vtterly denye; but that hee will spiritually punish the Childe for the Fathers sinne, I see neither place denying it: For as here hee doth not say, that hee will eternally punish the
Childe for his Fathers sinnes; so there he doth not say, that hee will no way spiritually punish the Childe for the Parents faults: but, as here his meaning is not, that he will inflict any positiue euill vpon the sonnes of the wicked, for the wickednesse of their Parents; but that for the iniquity of the Parents, hee will shut his hands, and with-hold his grace from their Children: and so willingly and iustly suffer them to commit the like, or worse sinnes, then their Fathers did; because we being all natu∣rally borne in sinne, inclined and prone to all euill, if God doth not by his sanctifying and preuenting grace preserue vs, wee shall be sure enough of our selues, without any intrusion or infli∣ction of any positiue euill from God, to fall from one wickednesse to another, and to commit all sinnes euen with greedinesse: So there his meaning is not, to deny the with-holding of his grace from the Children of the wicked, (which is all that here hee threatneth) but that he will not inflict any positiue punishment vpon them, for their Fathers sinnes. And therefore though God saith in Ezechiel, that he will not punish the Children for their Fathers faults; i. e. by any positiue punishment; yet doth hee not denie,That God de∣nyeth his gra∣ces vnto the Children, for the Parents sinnes. but that the priuatiue pu∣nishment of denying his grace vnto them, for their Fathers sinnes, should be inflicted vpon them: and that suffering of vs to sinne, or not hindering of vs to sinne, iustly inflicted vpon vs for our Fathers sinnes, is a most lamentable, and a most fearefull thing; because such Children, so iustly refused to be helped by GOD, and so deseruedly left in the councell of their owne hands, shall bee sure of sinnes enough of their owne, to be plagued for; that they shall neuer neede to say,Ezech. 18.2. The Fathers haue eaten sowre grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge: or that they are punished for their Fathers sinnes. And so you see, how God visiteth the sinnes of the Fathers vpon the Children, and yet punisheth euery man, but for his owne sinnes. The first he doth by a spirituall desertion, and deniall of grace vnto the Children, for the Fathers sinnes; and The second hee doth by a positiue infliction of punishment vpon euery man, according to his owne sinnes: for, As he promiseth to blesse the Children of the godly, for the loue that he beareth vnto their Parents; (as hee saith vnto
Abraham,Gen. 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seede after thee.) So hee denyeth his grace many times vnto the Children of the wicked, for the very hatred that he beares against their Fathers sinnes; as most innumerable wofull examples doe make it plaine: for you see the Iewes forsaking God, to be forsaken of God, to this very day; and that bloud of Christ, which their Fathers spilt, to remaine vpon the Children of so many generations: And we see so many Nations of men suffered,Luc. 1.79. To sit in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death; as the seauen Churches of Asia, and many other famous places of Greece, and other Countries; be∣cause their Fore-fathers haue forsaken their first loue, and through their negligence, haue extinguished the light of Truth. And be∣ing thus left of God, and depriued of grace, what can be left in them, or deriued from them, but the fruits of that naturall cor∣ruption which is ingraffed in all men? And therefore as it is truly said of all the off-spring of Iero∣boam, that being bereft of grace, and left vnto themselues, (euen for their Fathers sinnes) They walked in the wayes of Ieroboam,1 Kings 15.34. the sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to sinne; So we may say of the Children of wicked Parents, that being left as they were borne, in their pure naturals, for their Fathers impieties, they doe imitate the same workes, and tread in the same steppes, or worse,. then their Fathers did: And so it falles out true, that as an euill Crow brings forth an euill egge, so euill Parents, doe bring forth for the most part, euill and wicked Children: God in iustice visiting the iniquity of the Parents vpon the Children, vnto the third and fourth generation. And so you see, how God visiteth the iniquity of the Fa∣thers vpon the Children,Why God with-holdeth his graces from the Children of the wicked. by with-holding his grace from them; and how iust it is with God to doe the same, because hee is a debtor to no man: and the reason why he dealeth thus with the sonnes of men, is, First, To shew the height of his hatred against sinne; fire is kindled in his wrath, and it shall burne to the bottome of hell; and if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.Psal. 2.12. Secondly, To punish the offenders, (as I said before) in their dearest flesh; to see, if their loue to their Childrens welfare, will
make them any wayes feare to sinne; for we see many men so obdurate, and so hard-hearted vnto themselues, as that they care not what is done, or what becomes of themselues; but as Dauid was much moued, when he saw the people smitten for his sinnes;2 Sam. 2.17. and as Iacob halted, when the Angell smote him on the thigh;Gen. 32.31. so are we many times more grieued to see, and more affraid to heare, that our Children, and the fruits of our loynes, shall be punished then our selues. And therefore, seeing that feare∣full curse of the Prophet,To serue God, is the greatest good that wee can doe vnto our Children. Let the iniquity of his Father be had in remembrance, and let not the sinne of his Mother be done away; doth light so heauily vpon the Children of the wicked, it should teach all Parents that loue their Children, To feare the Lord; and to striue more to get Gods blessing, rather then the greatest patrimony vnto our Children: for they may assure themselues that (as the old verse saith) De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres. If they haue inlarged their substance by wicked meanes, it will be the onely meanes to cut off all their posterity; as may be seene in Saul, Achab, Ieroboam, and the like: but the blessing of the Lord perpetuateth the same: And therefore, as some for the loue that they beare vnto their Children, will giue them∣selues vnto the Diuell, by committing all sinnes, in oppressing others, to inrich them; so let vs, if we loue our Children, cease to sinne: for this will free our selues from woe, and bring the best blessing vnto them; and Secondly, It should teach all Children to be humbled, and to pray to God with our lyturgy, saying, Remember not Lord our offences, nor the offences of our Fore-fathers; but spare vs good Lord spare thy people, and giue vs thy grace, and forgiue vs all our sinnes, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. And thus I haue shewed thee, O man, Quid sit optimum, What is the chiefest good; and what we may learne concerning God, that he is an Omnipotent eternall being, good vnto all, speci∣ally vnto his Saints, and iust vnto sinners: And now, Quid nisi vota supersunt, What remaineth but to apply all this vnto our soules, to beleeue in him, to loue him, and to feare him, and to prayse his name, his blessed name for euermore: for, it is a good thing to sing prayses vnto our God; yea, and it becommeth well the iust
to be thankefull:Psal. vlt. Verse vlt. And therefore prayse thou the Lord, O my soule, and all that is within me prayse his holy name; and let euery thing that hath breath, prayse the Lord, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen, Amen. A Prayer. O Eternall God, whom to know as thou art, is vnpossible, as thou hast reuealed in thy Word, eternall life; wee most humbly beseech thee, to open the eyes of our vnderstanding, that wee may see thee at all times, in all places, and in all our actions; and giue vs O Lord thy heauenly grace, that seeing thee, wee may loue thee with all our hearts, feare thy power, extoll thy goodnesse, and admire thy iustice, to preserue vs from all sinnes, and to retaine vs in thy wayes, to thine eternall glory, and to our endlesse comfort. Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Third Golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The Third greatest Light of Christian RELIGION. Of the Incarnation of the WORD. IOHN. 1.14. . And the Word was made Flesh. I Haue described in my formost Trea∣tise, (O Theophilus,The cohe∣rence of this Treatise, with the former Treatises. O dearely beloued of God) the miserable estate of that poore man that was eiected out of Para∣dise, and left halfe dead, betweene Ieru∣salem and Iericho, betwixt Heauen and Hell; being already excluded out of Heauen; but not fully thrust and in∣truded into Hell: and in my next Treatise I haue shewed vnto thee a poole of Bethesda,John 5.2. and brought vnto thee a good Sama∣ritan, that is onely able and willing to heale all thy maladies: but as yet thou wantest an Angel to stirre the Waters; and this good Samaritan hath not alighted: and therefore I must now shew you how to apply the salue vnto the sore, and how the
Angel of the Couenant, Iesus Christ alighted and descended from the throne of his Maiestie, which is his horse; for he i∣deth vpon the Heauens,Psal. 68.4. as vpon an horse; to releeue this poore di∣stressed and afflicted man. And this by Gods helpe I shall doe out of these words; The Word was made flesh: for here is the ,Esay 7.14. the salue laid vnto the sore; here is Emmanuel, God with vs; the blessed God which I haue described in my last Treatise, vnited and made one with vs, which in my first Tract I haue shewed, to be so miserably afflicted: and therefore we may now reioyce and be assured of our health, and saluation, because the Word is made flesh. CHAP. I. Of the excellency of the Knowledge of Iesus Christ. God hath fixed many impres∣sions of his goodnesse in the creatures.WHosoeuer will religiously and seriously obserue those manifold impressions of the Diuine good∣nesse, which the Lord God hath not slightly planted in the natures of all liuing creatures, for a short space to be preached, but hath also indelibly fixed in the memory of all ages, most seriously to be considered; he shall surely finde sufficient mat∣ter of reuerence, loue and admiration; but he shall be neuer able, sufficiently to comprehend the excellency of so huge an Ocean of goodnesse, within the straight and narrow compasse of his vnderstanding. This were but with Saint Augustines Boy, to empty the Ocean Sea with an Oyster-shell, into an hole: and therefore the serious and continuall contemplation of such plen∣tifull and farre-spread goodnesse of God, did so inuade and fill the thoughts of that Kingly Prophet Dauid; that being as it were rauished or wrapt in an extacie, at the inexplicable expres∣sion, and vnconceiueable consideration of the same, hee brea∣keth forth into these heauenly acclamations: saying, O Iehoua, In coelis est benignitas tua:Psal. 36.5.6.7. O Lord our Gouernour, How ex∣cellent is thy Name in all the world? thou that hast set thy glory a∣boue the Heauens, thy faithfulnesse reacheth vnto the cloudes; thy
righteousnesse is like the strong mountaines,Psal. 147. thy iudgements are like the great deepe, thou sauest O Lord, both man and beast. But I will not suffer my speech at this time, to enter into that infinite Ocean of Gods goodnesse, whereby he giueth food vnto all flesh, feeding the young Rauens that call vpon him; and whereby he adorneth the fields with all kinde of fruitfull trees and plea∣sant flowers, and all flowers with sweet smels and delicate co∣lours; neither will I enter into any part or parcell of his excel∣lent prouidence; whereby he gouerneth the whole world by his wisedome, sustaineth all things by his power, and relieueth all things by his goodnesse: for this is too large a field for me to post ouer in so short a space, as is now allotted me to speake: and therefore I will rather bathe my selfe in those fountaines of Gods admirable loue, wherby he imbraced Mankinde, the Epy∣tome of the whole world, and especially the Church of Christ; the epytome of this epytome, before it was created, and pittyed the same when it was fallen, and promised to restore it, and to reuiue it when it was dead; and to shew his mercy vnto it,Gods promise touching the Incarnation of the Word Gen. 3.15. when it was in miserie: for he said first in Paradise, that the seede of the woman should breake the Serpents head? And after∣wars to Abraham, that in his seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed; and then to Dauid,Gen. 22.18. that of the fruit of his body he would raise one to sit vpon his seate: And so more and more cleere∣ly vnto the rest of the succeeding Prophets; and I will chiefe∣ly insist vpon that chiefest token of Gods loue,Psal. 132.12. and that grea∣test argument of Gods goodnesse towards vs, the most merci∣full fulfilling of these gracious promises so much desired, and so long expected by all the blessed Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the rest of the holy men of God: for when the fulnesse of time came, God sent his Sonne made of a woman,Gal. 4.4. made vnder the Law to redeeme them that were in bondage vnder the Law, that we might receiue the adoption of children. And this my Text doth fully and plainely shew vnto vs. . And the Word was made flesh. The most excellent speech that can be vttered, is euer measu∣red (saith Fulgentius) by these two properties, breuity, and sua∣uitie; and here is both in this Text; few words, full of matter, and the sweetest matter that euer was heard; God made Man:
and therefore I may say of these words, that they are all in all, and (as Saint Hierome saith of the Catholike Epistles of Saint Peter,Hieron. ad Pau∣lin. Saint Iohn, Saint Iames, and Saint Iude) Breues esse, pari∣ter & longas; That in these few words are contained all words, all things, all matters. For the summe of all knowledge is Diui∣nitie, this is the Lady and Mistresse; all other Arts and Sciences, are but seruants, like Penelopes handmaides, helpes and meanes to bring vs to the speech of this chaste mistresse; the summe of all Diuinity, is the Scripture: for this is sufficient to make the man of God perfect,2 Tim. 3.17. Rom. 1.16. being instructed to all good workes: the summe of the Scripture is the Gospel; for the Gospell is the power of God vnto saluation, to euery one that beleeueth, and the summe of the Gospell is, , This word, that is made flesh: for these things, (i e. the Gospell) are written, That you might beleeue Iesus Christ to be the Sonne of God,Iohn 10.31. and that in beleeuing you might haue eternall life. Christ the Word, the sum of all things.This is Ʋerbum abbreuiatum, That contracted word, into which all words are reduced, as the Riuers into the Seas: from this Word they came; vnto this Word they tend; and within this Word they are all contained: for he is the First, hee is the Last, he is α Legis, & ω Euangilij, The beginning of the Law, and the end of the Gospell; Velatus in Veteri, reuelatus in Nouo Testamento: Veyled and shadowed in the Old, reueiled and ex∣hibited in the New Testament;All the men of note, and all the names of dignity, were but types of this eternall Word. promised in that, preached in this; there shewed vnto the Fathers in Types, here manifested vnto vs in Truths: for the Tree of Life, the Arke of Noah, the Ladder of Iacob, the Mercy seat, the Brazen Serpent, and all such mysticall Types, and typicall Figures that we reade of in the Old Testament; what were they else but Christ; obscurely shadowed before he was fully reueiled; and so all the men of Note, Noah, Isaac, Ioseph, Moses, Aaron, Iosua, Sampson, Dauid, Salomon, Kings, Priests, Prophets, Titles of Dignities, Names of Honour, or whatsoeuer else was ascribed to them to expresse their Soue∣raignty;Omnia in figura contingebat il∣lis. 1 Cor. 10.11. Esay 9.6. Aug. in Soliloq. c. 31. they were onely vsed to expresse those transcendent ex∣cellencies, which these personall types did adumbrate, and shew most properly to belong vnto this King of Kings, This mighty Counsellor, and this Prince of Peace. For, as Saint Augustine tels vs, that hauing gone through all creatures, and inquired of
them for God, each one of them did answere, I am not he,Iohn 1.20. Sed per ipsum sum, quem quaeris in me, But I haue my being from him whom thou seekest in me; so if we would runne ouer the whole classie of the Patriarchs and Prophets, to inquire for Christ, wee should finde that they would euery one of them answere with Iohn Baptist, I am not the Christ, but doe looke and expect for him, and trust in him as well as you. And to speake all in a word, the whole word of God con∣taineth nothing else but this Word God: for the world being not worthy, and our weakenesse being not able to behold the brightnesse of his comming all at once; and so God himselfe being not willing, suddenly in an instant,Christ would not roueile himselfe vnto the World all at once. to shew wholly so rich a Iewell, he did at sundry times, and in diuers manners; sometimes in types, sometimes in prophesies, before his Incarna∣tion; sometimes in parables, sometimes by similitudes, and sometimes by his myracles in the time of his Apostles, before his Ascention, and since that time, plainely with open face, re∣ueile himselfe, and cause himselfe to be preached vnto all people: so that in very deed, we might (if we had our spirituall eyes al∣wayes opened) Behold and find this word God, either couertly shadowed, or else plainely expressed almost in euery page, in eue∣ry verse, in euery line, in euery word of the whole Word of GOD. And therefore vnhappy is that man,To know Christ, is the onely thing that makes vs happy. which (though he know∣eth all things else) knoweth not this Word: but happy and blessed is that man, which knoweth this Word, though he know none o∣ther words in the world: and he that knoweth this Word, and knoweth all other things together with this Word, is neuer a whit the happier for the knowledge of all other things; but he is onely happy for the knowledge of this onely Word: for this is eternall life, to know thee, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ:Iohn 17.3. and as one truely saith; Haec est nobilissima scientiarum, & scien∣tia nobilissimorum, scire , factum carnem; This the noblest of all Sciences, and the fittest Science for the noblest men, to know that the Word was made flesh: Nam omnia habemus in Christo, & omnia in nobis Christus: Because we haue all things in Christ, and Christ is all things vnto vs, especially,
1. His life is our chiefest direction. 2. Himselfe is our onely consolation. For, Aug de vera religione.First, Tota vita Christi in terris, per hominem quem gessit, disci∣plina morum fuit; The whole life of Christ which he spent here on earth, was, and is a patterne for all Christians, saith Saint Augustine,Christ despised all worldly vanities. Nam omnia bona mundi contempsit; For he dspised all the pompe and vanitie of this world; he was borne poore; his Inne was a Stable, his Cradle was a Manger, and his couering were poore swadling clouts: he liued poore; for hee had not an house to put his head in, and he dyed poore. Saint Augustine when he dyed made no Will; because he had no wealth, but his bookes; which he gaue to the common Library;Posidon: in vita August. saith Possidonius; but Christ was poorer; for he had no goods, but his garment; this was all the Souldiers got by him; to teach vs, in his mundanis faelicitatem non reponere, That we should not greedily seeke, nor childishly place our delight, in these vaine and worldly toyes, but if riches increase, not to set our hearts vpon them Et omnia ma∣la sustinuit;Christ suffered all miseries. and he suffered all the sorrowes of this world; hun∣ger, thirst, cold, and nakednesse, lyings, slanders, spittings moc∣kings, whippings, death it selfe; to teach vs, Vt nec in illis quaere∣retur faelicitas, ita nec in istis infaelicitas timeretur; That as wee should place no felicity in the vanities of this life; so we should not feare all the miseries of this life;Iudg 6.12.14. but to say with Debora, March valiantly, O my soule, and with the Angel vnto Gideon, Goe on thou mighty man of Warre, and passe through all the ranks of miseries: for, —Dabit Deus his quoque finem. God will make an end of these things; and will bring his people vnto rest, which shall continue without ending: and therefore Saint Bernard saith, Incassum laborat in acquisitione vir∣tutum, qui eas alibi quam in Christo quaerit; That there is no way in the world for vs to attaine vnto any goodnesse;Christ the most perfect patterne of all vertue. but onely through Christ, nor to learne any true vertue, but onely from the example of Christ. For, If thou wouldest learne humilitie, Let the same minde be in thee which was in Christ Iesus,Phil. 2.5.6.7. who being in the forme of God, and thought it no robbery to be equall with God, yet did he make himselfe
of no reputation, and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant: If thou wouldest learne truth and vprightnesse; set the example of Christ before thy face, for in him there was no sinne,1 Pet. 2.22. Bernard ser. 2. super Cantic. Prudentia vera in eius doctrina, iustitia in eius misericordia, temperantia in vita, & forti∣tudo in eiusdem pssione reperi∣untur. and in his mouth was found no guile; and to be briefe, if thou dost seriously looke, thou shalt easily finde that (as Saint Bernard saith,) True Wisedome is found in his Doctrine; Righteousnesse in his Mercy; Mercy in his Iustice; Temperance in his Life; Truth in his words; Fortitude in his sufferings; and all vertues in all his actions. All the Aethicks of Aristotle, all the morality of Sene∣ca, and all the wisedome of Greece, can no wayes describe ver∣tue neere so perfectly; as wee see it expresly portrayed in the liuely example of our Sauiours life. And as there is no way for vs to finde true vertue,The know∣ledge of Christ the onely meanes to sup∣presse all vices. but onely in him which is vertue it selfe: so there is nothing in the world, that is so auaileable to suppresse all vice, as is the true know∣ledge of Iesus Christ: Nam haec irae impetum cohibet, superbiae tu∣morem sedat; For this will refraine the violence of anger; when they consider how he suffered all violence and villanies,Esay 53.7. and yet as a Sheepe before his shearer was dumbe, so opened hee not his mouth: This will allay the swellings of Pride; when they con∣sider how he was the noblest of all creatures,Psal. 45.3. and the fayrest among the sonnes of men: and yet was he meeke and lowly in heart;Matth. 11.29. his will heale the wounds of enuy, it will stoppe the streames of luxury, it will quench the flames of lust, it will temper the thirst of couetousnesse, and it will keepe thee from the itching desire of all filthinesse; when we consider how much hee loathed these, how free he was from these, and how earnestly hee disswaded vs from these, and from all other vices whatsoeuer. And therefore (saith he) Ne mundi gloria seu carnis volupta∣tibus abducaris, dulcescat tibi pro his sapientia Christus,Ne spiritu men∣dacij & erroris seducaris luces∣cat tibi veritas Christus & ne aduersitatibus fatigeris com∣fortet te virtus Dei Christus. Lest thou shouldest be with-drawne from God, through the pompous vanities of this world, or the lustfull and delightfull pleasures of thine owne flesh, let Christ, the true wisedome of God, waxe sweet vnto thee; Lest thou shouldest be seduced by the spirit of lies and of errors, let Christ the true light shine vnto thee; and lest thou shouldest be wearied and waxe faint vnder the burthen of aduersities, let Christ the power of God refresh thee.
Secondly, As all Christs actions are our instructions, so is Christ himselfe all our consolation; Nam cum defecerit virtus mea, non conturbor; For if I see mine owne strength and good∣nesse faile me, yet I neede not be disturbed, I neede not be de∣iected; Quia quod ex me mihi deest vsurpo ex visceribus Domini, Because whatsoeuer wanteth in my selfe,Whatsoeuer we want, Christ alone is all-suf∣ficient to sup∣ply our neede. to helpe my selfe, I may freely and boldly assume it, to supply my wants, from my Lord and Master Iesus Christ: for as that seruant neede not want, that hath free leaue to vse his Masters full purse at his owne command; so neede not they want any grace, that haue the grace of Christ, because (as I told you before) Omnia habemus in Chri∣sto & Christus omnia in nobis; We haue all things in Christ, and Christ is all things vnto vs. If thou art sicke with sinne, and thy soule wounded, or poyso∣ned vnto death, and wouldest be healed; Christ is thy best, and alone Physician; onely he, and not one but he, can cure thee: If thy soule doth hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, and wouldest be satisfied,Joh. 6.35. he is the Bread of Life, and the Fountaine of liuing waters, Whosoeuer eateth him, shall neuer hunger; and whosoeuer drinketh of him,C. 7.38. shall neuer thirst: for, out of his belly shall flow riuers of waters of life. If thou art as naked of all goodnesse, as thou wert of all clothing, when thou camest out of thy Mo∣thers wombe, and wouldest be adorned with the best robes of vertue; Christ is the garment of righteounesse: And if thou doest put on the Lord Iesus Christ,Rom. 13 14. (as Saint Paul aduiseth thee) then all thy garments will smell of Myrhe, Aloes and Cassia, it will be like the smell of a pleasant field,Gen. 27.27. which the Lord hath blessed; or what∣soeuer thou wantest, and wouldest haue, thou mayest fully and freely haue the same from him: Vita ab errore, gratia à peccato, & mors à morte liberabit; His life will preserue thee from error, if thou wilt follow it, his grace will free thee from sinne, if thou wilt receiue it, and his death will deliuer thee from eternall death, if thou wilt beleeue in it. And if thou be simple, he is thy wisedome; if thou be sinnefull, he is thy righteousnesse; if thou wouldest be holy, he is thy sancti∣fication; if thou beest the slaue of hell, and held captiue by the Diuell,Ephes. 4.8. he is thy redemption that hath ledde captiuity captiue: And to comprehend all in a word, This word is, All in all; Vt
qui omnia propter Christum demittit, vnum inueniat pro omnibus, Christum: That he which forsaketh all for Christ his sake, might finde all in Christ, and Christ in stead of all, farre better then all vnto his soule; And so might ioyfully sing with the Psalmist, The Lord is my portion, and I haue a goodly heritage; the Lord is my Shepheard, and therefore I can want nothing: For,Psal. 23.1. (as Seneca said vnto Polibius) Fas tibi non est, saluo Caesare de fortuna conquaeri, quia hoc incolumi, nihil per didisti; It is not fit for thee to com∣plaine of Fortune, for want, or pouerty, or any other aduersi∣tie, so long as thou hast the fauour of Caesar,Nam in hoc pro omnibus, hic tibi omnia est, ideo non tantum sic∣cos sed & laetos oculos esse opor∣tet. and him so friend∣ly vnto thee; for that hauing him, thou hast lost nothing, which thou canst not soone and easily recouer againe, because he and his loue is better then all things vnto thee; and there∣fore thou shouldest more reioyce in hauing him, then grieue for the leesing of all things else: Euen so may I farre better say the same vnto all Christians; What matter though we want, or leese all the things of this World, if wee haue, and enioy Iesus Christ? for all the accessions, and accumulations of worldly things, can adde nothing vnto the felicity of a Christian; and all the defects, or wants of the same things, can detract nothing from the happinesse of him that hath Iesus Christ: for whosoeuer hath him, hath all things, and whosoeuer wanteth him, hath no∣thing. For, All our knowledge is but heathenish Science,All the things of this World without Christ, will auaile vs nothing. Iohn 14.6. able to make vs proud, not to make vs happy; If this word be not Obiectum adae∣quatum, The chiefest, yea, and sole obiect of the same; all our faith in God, is but vngrounded confidence, if it be not grounded vpon this word: for, No man commeth vnto the Father, but by me; All our righteousnesse is but as Pollutio panni, Menstruous cloutes, if it be not washed in the bloud of this word: For,1 John 1.7. It is the bloud of Iesus Christ, which cleanseth vs from all sinne; And all our patience, temperance, chastity, and all other vertues that ei∣ther Nature planted, or education effected in vs, are but Splendida peccata, Glittering guilded sinnes, vnacceptable vnto God, and vnprofitable vnto our selues, able to make vs prouder, not better; if they be not guided by the grace, and directed to the glory of this euerlasting Word. For as the Bird cannot flye without her wings, nor the body moue without the soule; so no more can
any man doe any thing that is good and acceptable vnto God, without the helpe of this heauenly Word: For, Without me, you can doe nothing, saith our Sauiour Christ; but in him, God is well pleased,John 15.5. Philip. 4.13. not onely with himselfe, but also with all vs; and through him, We can doe all things, as the Apostle saith. And therefore, as Duke Ioab when hee had fought the field, and got the vpper hand of his enemies, did send for Dauid to carry away the credit of the victory; so the Prophets, the Apo∣stles, and all the holy men of God, in all their heauenly words, miraculous workes,That if there be any good∣nesse in vs, wee should ascribe the glory of it to Iesus Christ. paines, and preachings, would neuer suffer any part or parcell of the credit to rest vpon themselues, but did most forcibly repell it, and most faithfully acknowledge it all to belong vnto this Omnipotent Word: So Saint Peter after the healing of the poore lame Cripple, said vnto the people (when he saw them ready to adore them for so admirable a miracle) Why looke you so earnestly on vs,Acts 2.12.16. as though by our owne power or holi∣nesse we had made this man to walke? No, no, it is not so; but it is The Name of Iesus Christ, and our faith in his Name, that made him perfectly whole; i. e. He is the Author, we are the Instruments, and our faith is the meanes whereby this man receiued strength; and therefore doe not you ascribe the honour of this worke vn∣to any of vs, which of our selues can doe nothing; but ascribe it vnto the Name of that Almighty Word, which of himselfe can doe all things. So Saint Paul, after he had said, that he had la∣boured more then all the rest of the Apostles, least any man should thinke that he did assume the honour of that diligence vnto himselfe, and not ascribe the same vnto Christ; he pre∣sently addeth; and yet it was not I that did it, but the grace of God which was in me: And so all the Saints of God, after all their vo∣luminous and laborious workes, they conclude all with Laus Christo, Let all the prayse be giuen to Christ. And as they referred all the honour of their owne actions vnto Christ, because they were all done by the grace and power of Christ; so did they desire nothing in the World but Christ: They forsooke all,Math. 19.27. The Saints de∣sired nothing but Iesus Christ. and followed him; and still cryed vnto him with Saint Augustine, Da mihite Domine, Take away all from vs, and spare not, so thou giue thy selfe vnto vs; that leesing all, we may leese nothing at all, because we gaine thee, which art the greatest
gaine in the World: So Saint Paul saith, He trampled his owne righteousnesse, and all his owne goodnesse vnderfeete,Phil 3.8. that he might finde the righteousnesse of Christ; he deemed all the riches, and all the other things of this World, but as dung and drosse,1 Cor. 22. and losse vnt him, that he might gaine Iesus Christ; and he desired to vnderstand nothing, to know nothing, to remember nothing, to haue nothing, but Iesus Christ, and him crucified: And there∣fore well might Saint Augustine call him, the best Childe of grace, because as Saint Iohn, that best beloued Disciple, was the most louing vnto his brethren, and did most of all expresse the loue of God to men, and require the loue of men to God; so did this chosen vessell of grace, best of all suppresse the pride of man, and extoll the grace of Christ. So did Saint Augustine in his time, that was, Strenuus defensor gratiae, A most valiant Champion to fight for grace; so did that worthy Zanchius in these latter times, and so will all Christians doe, that doe loue Iesus Christ ascribe all good to him, and nothing to our selues, Quia nostrum nihil est, Because nothing that is good, is of our selues. I reade of one Iohannes Alexandrinus, a most excellent holy man, that when hee had distributed all that euer he had vnto the poore, hee fell downe vpon his knees, and thanked God, that now hauing nothing left, hee desired nothing else,The Authors earnest and hearty wish both for the Cleargy, and Laity. but his Lord and Master Iesus Christ. Oh that it might be so with euery one of vs, that this word, which did all good vnto vs, tooke all infirmities from vs, suffered all punishments for vs, and finished all the workes of our redemption to vs, might be all in all, within vs all! First, That we the Preachers of Gods Word, would leaue our iarring, and our iangling about shaddowes,That we should not contest a∣bout trifles. about things of no∣thing; An ater sit contrarius albo, As, whether it be better to weare a white Surplesse, or a blacke Gowne, in the administring of the Sacrament: Much like the contention in Rome betwixt the Augustine Friars, and the vulgar Canons, whether Saint Au∣gustine did weare a blacke weede vpon a white coate, or a white weede vpon a blacke coate; for by this meanes, in stead of bread, we shall giue our Children stones, to throw at one another; and in stead of fish, wee shall giue them Scorpions, to sting one ano∣ther:
And therefore I wish, that we would all leaue these things, and would be, Pythagoricè mundo, & Ciceronicè Christo; Mute vn∣to the World, mute vnto all worldly vanities, and vse all our words, all our eloquence, to expresse the excellency of this super-excellent word: And so by the helpe of this word, to preach of this word, and to write of this word, to the eternall prayse and glory of this word; that is, to preach not our selues, but him; not for our owne gaine, but for his glory. That we should imploy all our strength, to ex∣presse the glory of Christ.It is reported of Saint Bernard, that hauing made with great art and study, a most curious elegant Sermon, he passed home without any applause; and the next day, making a plaine, con∣scionable, and comfortable Sermon vnto his Auditors, he re∣ceiued many a blessing from those well-edified hearers: And being demanded by one of his Colleagues, how it happened that his most learned Sermon, was so strangely neglected, and his farre more playne one, so ioyfully imbraced; he most humbly answered, Heri praedicaui Bernardum, hodie Iesum Christum; Ye∣sterday I preached my selfe, to shew my wit, and my learning; to day I preached Iesus Christ, to shew his grace, and his good∣nesse. I wish that none would preach Saint Bernard, that is, preach a Sermon rare and seldome, filled with words and fine phrases, to gaine vnto themselues credit, and thereby preferment, as the onely rare Schollars of our times; and so they are rare indeed, for they are but seldome seene to preach; like the Swal∣lowes, that come but once a yeere: but that we would preach Iesus Christ, to gaine soules vnto the Church of God. And I confesse against my selfe, that when I tooke greatest paines to make, and compose a Scholler-like Sermon, (as I thought) and saw the same vnregarded; and when with lesse diligence, but with good conscience, I saw other of my poore labours most acceptably receiued,That we should preach Iesus Christ, and not our selues. I deemed it was for want of iudgement in mine Auditors; whereas now I perceiue it was an error in my selfe, that I did not alwayes so, as might best tend for edification; and not so, as might any wayes sauour of ambition: Because our chiefest care should be, not to spinne a fine thred, but to winne a faire soule to Christ. And therefore that is an excellent rule, which Saint Augustine giues vnto all Preachers, Non delectent verba vestra, sed prosint; quia sapientes verum magis amant in verbis
quam verba; That our words should not so much delight the eares, as our matter edifie the soules of men: because all wise Christians, doe loue the truth, and excellencie of the matter, ra∣ther then the fluent elegancie of the words: though I denie not, but (as the Poet sayth,) est aliqua gloria frondium, an excellent matter exprest in fit and decent words, is like apples of gold in pictures of siluer. And therefore O my Soule so preach thou the Word of God, that whatsoeuer men thinke, or say of thee, this Word God, at last, may say vnto thee; euge serue bone, well done thou good and faithfull seruant, enter thou into thy Masters ioy. Secondly, I wish that all hearers, would thinke of nothing, speake of nothing, heare of nothing, loue and long for nothing, but for this onely one thing: that they would villifie and nul∣lifie all things else, to magnifie and to omnifie the excellencie of this excellent Word: that we would prize, and value him, aboue all things; that wee would loue him, and long after him, vntill we languish, and be compelled to crie with the Spouse;Cantic. 2.5. Stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sicke of loue; and that we would so inquire after him, as men vndone without him, and rather be contented to want all the world, then to want this Word, which made the world of nothing, and still preserues the same, that it turne not to nothing: for I doe much feare, that if we could see the hearts of men, we should finde many of them, not as we would, but rather (as Saint Bernard calls them) sine Christo Christianos: such as haue this word Christ often in their mouthes, to sweare and blaspheme him, but not in their liues to yeeld any seruice to him. Mammon is their chiefest god; and this God, which is the first and the last, is the last and the least in all their thoughts: all their delight is in filthie communicati∣ons, and leaude words, all words that may doe hurt, but they haue no delight in this word God: The wise Merchant,Matth. 13.46. sold al that euer he had, to gaine this inualuable Pearle, but as many a foole will leese his best friend, rather then his basest iest, so will the foolish worldlings sell this, and leese all that belongs to this, rather then they will leese their vayne and wanton pleasures: So foolish are they and ignorant, euen as it were beasts before him. I haue read of Honorius a Roman Emperour that when one
told him Rome was lost, he was exceedingly grieued, and cried, alas alas, for he supposed it was his henne, so called, which he ex∣ceedingly loued, but when it was told him, it was his Imperiall Citie Rome, that was besieged by Alaricus, and was now taken and lost, then his spirits were reuiued, that his losse was not so great, as he imagined: we may well thinke this, to bee a simple and a childish disposition: and yet our selues are worthie of the same condemnation, for if we leese a little wealth, a little pleasure, a little vanitie, things of themselues good for nothing, because of themselues they can make nothing good; and then (as the prouerbe goeth) that is too deere of a farthing which is good for nothing; yet for these trifles, wee will vex, and fret, weepe and wayle,Zechar: 12.11. and our mourning wil be, Like the mourning of Hadadrim∣mon in the valley of Megiddo: but when we leese our soules, in the desarts of sinne, and when wee leese our God, for sinne, then with the Israelites, wee sit down to eate and drinke, and rise vp to play.Exod. 32.6. But seeing (as the Emperor Seuerus sayd) though wee bee all things, and haue all things that the world can afford vs; yet all things will auayle vs nothing, without this thing, be∣cause (as I said before) Christ is all things; and all things with∣out Christ are nothing: seeing with Ixion they doe imbrace, a cloud for Iuno, a shadow for the body, trash for treasure, and a short momentarie dreame of pleasure, in stead of the true and eternall rest, which seeke their rest, but not in Christ; and seeing (as hee sayth himselfe) it is eternall life to know him, with his father,John 17.3. to bee the true and eternall God; I will therefore craue your Christian patience, and desire your carefull attention to hearken vnto the seuerall parts of this text, and to retaine in your memories, those chiefest obseruations, that I shall collect from the same, all I cannot; and as I would I cannot, I must ingene∣ously confesse it: Nam mysterium singulariter mirabile, & mira∣biliter singulare, for it is a mysterie singularly wonderfull, and wonderfully singular; and indeede the mysterie of all mysteries: and therefore, Si profundum in profundo non reperiam, humanam fragilitatem non diuinam potentiam confundo: If I doe not handle the same, as I ought to doe, I shall but bewray mine owne hu∣maine frailtie, and no wayes impeach or disparage this diuine
veritie. And because, as it is the first, the greatest, the chiefest, and the comfortablest point of all Christian Religion; so it hath beene, and is, and (I feare) euer will be, most chiefely oppugned, and depraued on all sides, by all sorts of enemies, and wicked Heretickes: therefore, as this mine introduction is somewhat large, yet not to large, either preparation, or expectation, for so great a matter as followeth after; so you must giue mee leaue, to insist the longer about it: and not Myndus-like to suffer my porch to bee greater then my towne. And if I shall seeme harsh in the prosecution, and not giue full satisfaction vnto your de∣sires, and expectation; you must know that they are poynts to informe the iudgement, and apprehension; and not to moue or to inflame the affection: and therefore harder a great deale, and more painefull for vs, to handle them, then to treat of any mo∣rall poynts of exhortation; and though they be lesse delectable, for the present; yet are they farre more profitable, for the future time; especially vnto them, that will most seriously consider them, and most carefully remember them. . And the Word was made flesh. In which words (as you may easily see) the holy Euangelist setteth down, the incarnation of this eternall Word; and I for the fuller explanation of the same,The whole treatise deui∣ded into two parts. must desire you to consider these two things. 1. The summe and substance, of this Words Incarnation. 2. The chiefest cirumstances, requisite for its explanation. The 1. is heere fully expressed. The 2. is from the other Euangelists, plainely collected. Touching, the first, here are three especiall things ex∣pressed. 1. The thing that was made, , the Word, 2. The thing that it was made, , Flesh. 3. The manner of his making, , it was made. Or playner thus, 1. Who was made. 2. What it was made. 3. How it was made. the Word Flesh. . Not created, not changed, but made; for the Word was made Flesh: and of these by Gods helpe in order.
CHAP. II. Of the Trinitie of Persons in the Vnitie of Diuine Essence. The first branch of the first part.FIrst, We must consider, who was made , the Word was made: for the vnderstanding of which point, wee must know that the diuine Essence is onely one impartible and indiuisible. For so the Scripture teacheth vs,Deut. 6. c. 32. heare O Israel the Lord thy God is one God: and therefore know you that I am God alone, and besides mee there is none other sayth the Lord himselfe,1 Cor. 4.8. and so Saint Paul sayth, wee know that there is none other God but one. Athanas. in Symbolo.Secondly, So the Fathers teach vs: for though the Father is God, and the Sonne is God, and the Holy-Ghost is God, yet are there not three Gods, but one God, sayth Athanasius: and these three are one, if you consider the Diuinitie; and this one is three, if you consider the proprietie,Nazin. orat. 3. de Theol. Amb. de fide. l. 1. c. 2. sayth Saint Gregorie Nazianzen; and so sayth Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hillarie and all the rest. Thirdly, So reason it selfe teacheth vs: for God is summum cns, the first and chiefest being, as himselfe professth, I am that I am, and we haue learned that of the prince of Philosophers, that there cannot bee, but one chiefest being; Quia ens & vnum conuertuntur, because that being, & one are all one. Secondly, God is infinite and therefore but one, because that which is infinite comprehendeth all things within the circle of it selfe. Thirdly, If there were more Gods then one;Reason shew∣eth that there can be but one God. then they must bee either all without beginning, or one must proceede from other, either by creation or generation: that they should be all without beginning, is impossible; for then it must needs follow that there should be, multa principia prima, disparata, in vna voluntate non conuenientia, many first causes, and vnequall beginnings, that could neuer agree, and be of the same minde and will: and therefore, to say they should bee all without beginnings, is most absurd. If one be from the other, by creation, then is the second a creature, and therefore but one God vncreated; and if one bee from the other
by generation; then the first gaue the second, either a part or his whole substance: if a part, then is God partible, & may be diuided, which cannot be said of such spirituall indiuidible substance; and if the first gaue the rest his whole Essence, then haue all the same Dietie, and so all must be the same Godhead: And so An∣isthenes saith, it was the opinion of the best Philosophers, Plures esse Deos populares vnum naturalem: That although the people worshipped many Gods, yet indeed there was but one onely God by Nature. And therefore against the Valentinians thirty couple of gods,Jrenaeus contra Valentin. and all others that professe many gods; it must needes follow, euen from reason it selfe, that there can be no more gods but one, not specificall, but numericall, i. e. so absolutely one,Tertul. l. contra Hermog. e. 17. that he is one alone, besides whom there can be none other, and is therefore cal∣led , onely one; for we deny all number in the Deitie, vn∣lesse you meane in the personall proprieties: and therefore Gre∣gory Nissen saith well, Quod in multitudinem extendere numerum Deitatum, eorum duntaxat est,Nyssen. ad Eu∣stach. l. de trin. qui laborant multitudinis deorum er∣rore; That to extend the number of the Deities into a multitude, belongs onely vnto them which doe erroniously maintaine a multitude of gods: for the Catholicke faith is this, that wee should worship the Trinity in Ʋnity, and the Vnity in Trinity: that is,Basilius Ep. 141. ad Caesarium. the trinity of Persons, and the vnity of Essence: because all num∣ber is to be reiected from the Essence of God, saith Saint Basil. For the Diuine Essence is so simple, and so numerically one, that no diuersitie can be giuen, whereby the very persons doe differ, in regard of the Essence: and therefore in respect of this identi∣tie, and vnitie of Essence in the three persons of the Godhead, our Sauiour saith, I am in the Father, and the Father in me:Iohn 14.10. Wher∣upon Saint Cyril addeth further for the explanation of the same: that we may not say that, the Father is from the Sonne, nor contained in the Sonne, nor the Sonne to be in the Father, as we are said to be, and to liue in God: for that we are onely by the effects of his grace, he in the vnitie of his essence, i. e. wee are one with God by grace: but the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost are one, by Nature; so that whatsoeuer the Father essen∣tially is, the Sonne is the same, and the holy Spirit is the same.
That the Es∣sence of God is distingui∣shed into three persons. Gen. 1.And yet we must know that this one onely one indiuisible Essence, is distinguished into three persons, which we call the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: for so the Scriptures plainely teach vs; as, Let vs make man in our image; and, behold the man is become like one of vs, saith the Lord himselfe; to shew that in this vnity of Essence, there is a plurality of persons: and againe, the Lord rained vpon Sodom, and vpon Gomorrha, from the Lord out of Heauen;Gen. 19. that is, the Sonne rained from the Father, as Iustin Martyr, Tertullian, Epiphanius, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebi∣us, Cyrill, Sozomen, the Councell of Smyrna, held in the yeare of Christ 336.Socrates Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 30. wherein Marcus Arethusius against the heresie of Photinus, and many others, doe so expound that place. And so the three men that appeared vnto Abraham, and that Hea∣uenly harmony of Cherubims, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabboth,Esay 6. doe sufficiently declare the Trinitie of persons in the Ʋ∣nity of Gods Essence. Ob.But then it may bee some will say, these and the like pla∣ces are too obscure, to confirme the truth of so great a point. Sol. Why God did not fully and plainely re∣ueile the my∣steries of the Trinitie at the first.I answere, that God at first would not shew this great mystery vnto all, lest that being so prone, as they were in the infancie of the Church, to fal into Idolatry, they should shake off the seruice of the true God, & therby be drawn to worship many Gods, but the more his Church did increase in abilitie to vnderstand, the more did God reueile vnto it, both this mystery of the Trinitie, and also many other mysteries of the Incarnation, Passion, Resur∣rection, and Ascention of Iesus Christ: And therefore what hee obscurely shadowed in the time of the Patriarchs, hee did more cleerely shew vnto his Prophets, and most plainely in the time of the Apostles, proclaime the same vnto all people: For Christ bad them goe and baptize all men,Matth. 28. in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne,1. Iohn 5. and of the Holy Ghost. And so Saint Iohn saith, there be three that beare witnesse in Heauen, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit: And yet these three be but one, saith the Apostle. For as in one Sunne there are, the body of the Sunne, the Sunne beames, and the heate;Aug. de Trinit. the beames are begotten of the Sunne, and the heate doth proceed both from the Sunne and the Sunne beames; but the Sunne it selfe proceeds from none: Euen so, in
the one Essence of God, there are the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost; the sonne is begotten, of the Father; the Holy Ghost proceeds from both; but the Father is of himselfe alone: and as the fountaine begets the brooke,Jdem de verbis Domim. and both the fountaine and brooke doe make the Poole, and yet all three is the same wa∣ter: so the father is the Fountaine which begets the Sonne, and from the Father and Sonne proceeds the Holy Ghost;That there are certaine similitudes of the Trinity, to be seene in the creatures. and yet is the Deity of all three, the same; in like manner, the fire hath motion, light and heate, and yet but one fire; and in the soule of man there are three faculties, the vegetatiue, the sensitiue, and the rationall; and yet but one soule; and in all other creatures wee may behold certaine glimpes and similitudes, that doe after a sort adumbrate and shadow out this ineffable and inexpressable mysterie: for by their greatnesse, we may consider the power of the Father; by their beauty, we may see the wisedome of the Sonne: and by their vtilitie, we may note the goodnesse of the Holy Ghost. God left not himselfe without witnesse, no not whol∣ly of the manner of his subsistence, if not to proue this blessed mysterie, yet at least to illustrate it;Thom. p. 1. q 32. art. 1. and to proue (as Aquinas saith) Non esse impossibile quod fides praedicat, That those things are not impossible which faith preacheth. But it may be some will aske (touching my former illustra∣tion) why is power ascribed to the Father, Wisedome to the Son,  and goodnesse to the Holy Ghost, whereas all and each of the three persons haue the same power, wisedome, and goodnesse? Saint Augustine answereth, that amongst the creatures,Resp. it is wont to be obserued that in a Father is found a defect of power, by reason of his antiquitie; in a Sonne is seene ignorance, by reason of his youth and inexperience of things; and in the name of a Spirit, there seemeth to be a kinde of fearefull vehemency;Esay 52. as Quicscite ab homine cuius spiritus in naribus eius; Whose Spirit is in his nostrils: and therefore least the like might be thought to be in these Diuine persons; we find power ascribed to the Father, wisedome vnto the sonne, and goodnesse vnto the Holy Ghost; whereas indeed, each one of them is of the same power, wisedome, and goodnesse, as the others bee. And although the Essence of God can neither be diuided
nor distinguished; yet the three subsistences, or the three diuers manner of being, in the Diuine Essence, which we call the three persons,The three per∣sons are di∣stinguished one from ano∣ther two waies. Father, Sonne, and Holy Spirit, may be distinguished two wayes. 1. By their personall actions. 2. By their nominall relations. First, the actions of the persons are either 1. Outward or 2. Inward. The outward workes of God are common to each per∣son of the Tri∣nity.First, all outward actions, are called communicable: because although after a sort, they are appropriated to each person, as the Father to send the Son, and to create the world; the Son to be sent to be Incarnate, & to redeeme mankind, and the Holy Ghost to appeare in the form of a Doue, & like clouen tongues of fire, & to worke in our hearts, for our consolation and sanctification; yet, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indiuisa: these outward workes of the Trinitie, are so indiuisible, that we cannot so properly ascribe them to any one; but we finde that they may be like∣wise ascribed to any other: for as Nazianzen truly affirmeth of the three persons themselues, Non possūtria discernere quin subito ad vnum referar, nec possum vnum cogitare quin trium fulgore con∣fundar; So may we say, of their outward operations; that al∣though they be affirmed of one, yet may they presently be re∣ferred to all three; and so we finde them in many passages of the holy Scriptures: as redemption and sanctification to the Father, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.2. Creation and Sanctification to the Sonne, Iohn 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.2. And creation and redemption to the Holy Ghost, Psal. 33.6. Ephes. 4.30. And besides; these outward operations are transient & volun∣tary: for that God in these things is, Liberrimus Agens, A free Agent, so that he might haue chosen, whther to doe them, or not doe them; and therefore in all these workes, Election, Creati∣on, Gubernation, Redemption, Sanctification, Glorification, there can be ascribed none other cause, but quia voluit, because he would; for whatsoeuer pleased the Lord, that did he in Heauen, and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all deepe places. And therefore these outward actions, and so likewise those names, which are giuen vnto these persons, in regard of these actions, as Creator vnto the Father,
Redeemer vnto the Sonne, Comforter and sanctifier vnto the holy Ghost, are not altogether sufficient, to expresse the differences of these persons. Secondly, the inward acti∣ons of these persons are 1. Permanent. 2. Necessarie. 3. Incommunicable. First, they are so permanent,The inward actions of God are euer in doing. that as the Sunne doth alwayes beget his beames, and both Sunne and beames, doe send forth the heate; so the Father from all eternity euer did, and now doth, and euer will beget his Sonne: and both Father and Sonne, doe spire and breath forth the Holy Ghost: and there∣fore Origen saith excellent well,Origen. hom. 6. in Ierem. Saluator noster splendor est glo∣riae; splendor autem non semel nascitur, & deinceps desinit nasci, &c. Our blessed Sauiour is the brightnesse of Gods glory:Sed quotiescun{que} ortum fuerit. lumen ex quo splendor oritur, toties oritur splendor gloriae. Luke 12. but the brightnesse of glory, is not once begotten, and then afterwards leaues to be begotten; but as often as the light riseth from whence the brightnesse springeth, so often doth the brightnes of glory arise. And our Sauiour (saith he) is the wisedome of God, but the wisedome of God is the brightnesse of that eternall light; Et ideo saluator semper nascitur,The Father doth euer be∣get the Sonne. And therefore as the Scripture saith, Ante colles generat me, Before the Mountaines were laid, he begetteth me; and not (as some doe erroniously read it) Generauit me: He hath begotten me; So the truth is, that the Sonne of God is euer begotten, and the holy Spirit euer proceeding. Secondly, these inward actions are no voluntary operations,The inward actions are necessary. I meane such, as that the Father might either beget the Sonne, or not beget him, and the Father and the Sonne, might either spire forth the Holy Ghost, or not spire him forth; but they be so absolutely necessary, that they cannot otherwise be;Cyrillus l. 1. c 3. thesauri. because it is the property of the nature of God the Father, to beget God the Sonne, as it is for him to be a God; so that he can no more relinquish or leaue to beget the Sonne, then hee can leaue to be a God, as Saint Cyril sheweth. And, Thirdly, these inward actions are so incommunicable,The inward actions are incommuni∣cable. that what∣soeuer is proper to the one, can no wayes be ascribed to the other, Quia hoc est proprium patris, quod solus est pater; & quod ab alio non
est nisidse: For this is the property of the Father, that he alone is the Father,Et hoc est pro∣prium filij, quod à patre genitus est solus à solo; & hoc est pro∣prium spiritus sancti, quod nec genitus nec in∣genitus est, sed à patre & filio, aequaliter proce∣deus. and that he is not from any other but onely of himselfe; and this is the property of the Son, that he alone is be∣gotten of the Father alone, coequall vnto him and coessentiall; and this is the propertie of the Holy Ghost, to be not made, not begotten, but from the Father and the Sonne equally proceeding. And therefore we say, that these incommunicable and proper ope∣rations of the persons doe so make the true and reall distincti∣on of the persons, that the Father cannot be the Sonne, nor the Holy Ghost; that the Sonne cannot be the Father, nor the ho∣ly Ghost; and that the Holy Ghost cannot be the Father nor the Son; so that in a word all three is the same Essence; and yet neither of the three can be the person of the other. Secondly, from these inward operations of these persons doe proceed, the nominall relations, of the one vnto the other; as fa∣ther, Sonne and Holy Ghost, which doe likewise make a true, reall distinction of the persons; for the Father is not a name of Essence but of relation vnto the Sonne; and the Sonne is not a name of Essence, but of relation vnto the Father; and so the Holy Ghost proceeding, is not a name of Essence, but of relation to the Fa∣ther, and the Sonne; and therefore these names are so proper to each person, that the name of the one cannot be ascribed to the other. But you wil say that the Sonne is called Father as Esay 9.6.Sol. he is said to be the Father of eternities. I answere that the name of Father is taken two wayes 1. , Essentially. 2. , Personally. Ob.First, Essentially and so in respect of the creatures, each per∣son of the Trinitie, may be rightly tearmed Father. The name of Father is taken two-wayes.Secondly personally, and so the first person onely is Father: because he onely doth beget his sonne. And thus you see, that although the Diuine Essence, is onely one, yet that there are three persons in this one Essence; not that the Essence begets either Essence or person; but because the person of the Father begetteth the person of the Sonne, and both Father and Sonne doe eternally spire and send forth the person of the Holy Ghost.Athana. 2. Dialog. de Trinit. But for the manner, how the Father begetteth the Sonne, or how the Father and the Sonne doe spire and send
forth the holy Spirit; I must answere, as Galenus did,Galenus. l. 15. de vsu partium. . in a point farre inferior to this, which is of infinite profundity: How this is done, if you enquire, you will be taken for one that hath no vnder∣standing, either of your owne infirmity, or of the power of the Creator. And the Fathers doe often dehort vs from the curiosity of ex∣plaining the manner of diuine mysteries: for, that worthy Na∣zianzene saith; You heare the generation of the Sonne,. Nazian. orat. 1. de theolog. . That we should not enquire too farre into the manner of Diuine Myste∣ries. be not curious to know the manner; You heare, The Holy Ghost proceedeth; be not busie, to enquire how: And in another place he saith, Let the generation of God be honoured with silence; it is much for thee to haue learned, that he was begotten; As for the manner how, wee grant it not to be vnderstood by Angels, much lesse by thee. If the Fathers of the Councell of Lateran had followed the councell of this Father, they had neuer gone so farre, to enquire how Christ is in the Sacrament, and so positiuely to conclude it, to be, by that vnheard, vnknowne, incredible, and impossible way, of transubstantiation: And therefore if we would not erre with them, or beyond them, in this point, farre more difficult then that; let vs not be too curious to enquire how these things can be, but let vs faithfully beleeue them to be, a Trinity of Per∣sons, in the vnity of the Diuine Essence; and each person to haue the whole Diuine Essence so communicated vnto it, as that all the three persons must needes be co-eternall, co-essentiall, and co-equall. But because the second Person, which is the Sonne, and which the Euangelist here meaneth by the Word, (as hereafter I shall shew vnto you) was incarnate, and made flesh; you must giue me leaue to insist chiefly vpon that person, and to discusse these three especiall points concerning the same. 1. Touching this person, how excellent he is. 2. Touching this name here vsed, why hee is called , the Word. 3. Touching this worke, why he was incarnate, and made flesh. For the first, I will onely shew these three things. 1. That for time he is God,Three things handled tou∣ching the per∣son of the Son. co-eternall 2. For nature, co-essentiall: and 3. For dignity, co-equall vnto his Father.
CHAP. III. Of the Coeternity of the Word with his Father. That the Word was, before he was made flesh.FIrst, That this Word was, before he was made Flesh, the words , & ; the first vsed here, and the second in the fourth Chapter to the Galathians, doth make it plaine; for that they signifie one, that first was, and afterwards was made, that which hee was not: And therefore hee doth not say, that the Word was made first, and then was made Flesh, but that the Word, which in the beginning, and before all beginnings was, in the fulnesse of time, was made flesh: And this may be further proued, by al∣most infinite arguments; as, First, He is the Sonne of the Father, the wisedome and the power of God; and therefore either the Father was without a Sonne, (and then he could be no Father) and God was without his wisedome, and without his strength, or else he was neuer with∣out his Sonne; but to say that God was without his wisedome, or without his strength,Aug. ep. 6.6. is most absurd: Ergo, Non ex tempore genitus est, qui cuncta tempora condidit; And therefore he was not begot∣ten in time, which created all times, saith Saint Augustine. Secondly, He is God: for, Si Dietas verbi non nostrae est in∣sita carni, tum Christus falsi corporis vmbra fuit; Either Christ is God, or he is no man, nor any Sauiour of man: and he is no titular God, but by Nature God; hee is the true Iehoua, which was, which is, and which shall be: And therefore euerlasting▪ for, thou art God from euerlasting, and World without end. But, That Christ is a true God, is proued.That he is a true God, both apparant Scriptures, and vnan∣swerable reasons drawne from Scriptures, doe make it plaine. For, First, from Scriptures.First, The Scriptures call him the true Ieheua, as we may see by the collation, and comparing of these places, viz. Exodus 3.2.13.4.14.24.20.2. and Acts 7.30.32. 1 Cor. 10.4.9. &c. And so the Scriptures call him God, as Gen. 32.28. Psal. 45.7. Esay 7.14. Mathew 3.3. Heb. 1.8. And there∣fore Saint Iohn saith; . And the Word was God; And Christ himselfe saith,Iohn 17.3. This is eternall life to know thee to be
the onely true God, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ; For these words are thus to be expounded, that they know thee, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ, to be the onely true God, because these two persons, are but the very selfe-same Essence: So Thomas saith vnto Christ, My Lord, and my God.Iohn 20.28. And so we finde the same truth expressed, Acts 20.28. Rom. 8.5.1 Iohn 3.16. 1 Iohn 5.20. 1 Tim. 3.16. Psal. 47.6. and in many other places of the Scripture, which wee may obuiously meete,Secondly, by vnanswera∣ble reasons drawne from Scripture. First, from the incommuni∣cable proper∣ties of God. and would be here tedious to relate. Secondly, We may shew the same by infallible and vnan∣swerable reasons, drawne from Scriptures; as, First, From those incommunicable properties of the Deity, which are properly ascribed vnto him; as, First, To be Omnipotent, Iohn 3.31. Heb. 1.3. Philip. 3.21. Apoc. 1.18. Secondly, To remit sinnes; not onely instrumentally, as the Ministers doe; as we see in Mathew 16.19. Iohn 20.23. But ab∣solutely by his owne proper power and authority, as wee see in Mathew 9.6. Mar. 2.5.7.9. Luc. 5.20. Thirdly, To be in many places at the same instant, as Mathew 18.20.28.20. Fourthly, To haue the same equall power with the Father, Iohn 5.17. c. 16.15. Fiftly, To raise himselfe from the graue, Rom. 1.4. Ioh. 10.18. Sixthly, To send forth, and to giue the Holy Ghost, Zach. 12.10. Iohn 16.7. Secondly, From those relations that he hath with God,Secondly, from the relations that he hath with God. as to be , The onely begotten Sonne of God; Iohn 1.18. To be the Image of the Father; Iohn 14.7.8 9. 2 Cor. 4.4. Coloss. 1.15. And to be the very forme of God: for the Apostle saith, That He being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God. Therefore he must needes be true God. First, Because the forme of God, is most simple and essentiall, and not compounded, or accidentall; for that in God there is no composition, no accidents; Et nihil est in Deo, quod non sit ipse Deus: Nor any other thing, which is not God;Gabriel: Biel. super 1. sentent. dist. 1. q. 5. Because the Diuine Essence, Identificat sibi omnia quae sunt in Diuinis; Doth identifie, or deifie all things that are in the De ty.
To bee the forme of God is to be a very God.Secondly, because the word  one existing and being in the forme of God, doth plainely signifie the verie nature of God: for as his being in the forme of man, proueth that hee was a verie man, so his being in the forme of God, and his iust, and lawfull thinking, that it was no wrong, or robberie to bee equal with God; doth most substantially proue that hee was a very God by nature; before hee was incarnate and made man: for who can bee in the forme of God but verie God? or who can rightly be aequall with God,Esay 40.18. but God? For to whom will yee liken God, or what likenesse will yee compare vnto him? sayth the Pro∣phet: and therefore Saint Basil sayth, that to bee in the forme of God is as much,Basilius l. 1. cont. Euno∣mium. as to exist in the essence of God; for that, as to take vpon him the forme of a seruant signifieth that our Lord was made partaker of the humane nature; so by saying that hee was in the forme of God, hee ascribeth vnto him the proprietie of the nature of God:Colloss. 1.15. and so discussing the words of the Apo∣stle, which is the image of the inuisible God; he sayth, that this image was not made with hands,Ambros. l. 7. Ep. 47. Aug. l. de fide ad Pe∣trum, & l. 1. c. 1. de trinit: Hiar. l. 12 de trinit: Lom∣bard l. 3. dist. 5. neither was it the worke of any arte or cogitation; but a liuing image, yea life it selfe; retayning the identitie of the Godhead, not in the similitude of any figure, but in the substance of the same, and so Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hillarie, Pet. Lombard, and diuers others doe most truely interpret this being of him in the forme of God, to proue him to be a true and eternall God. Thirdly, From those Epithets which are ascribed vnto him, and are onely agreeable to the Diuine nature,Thirdly, from the Epithets ascribed vnto him. as First, To be the author of our Election, Iohn 13.18. Secondly, To know the secrets of our hearts, Matth. 9.4.5. Mar. 2.8. Luke 5.22. Thirdly, To Illuminate vs. Iohn 1.9. Fourthly, To heare the prayers of them that call vpon him. Iohn 14.14. Fiftly, To Iudge the quicke and the dead, Iohn 5.22. Sixtly, To giue vnto his seruants euerlasting life. Iohn 5.24. Seauenthly, To bee truely rich and so able to doe, and to be∣stow these great rewards vpon his seruants; for he that is truely rich must needs be the true and eternall God: but Christ (sayth the Apostle) is rich for hee being rich for our sakes became poore,2 Cor. 8.9.
therefore hee must needs bee the true God. That Go dis truely rich, it appearth hence, that he onely is El shadai, a God of all sufficiencie, and therefore hee sayth,Psal. 50.12. If I bee hungry I will not tell thee, for all the world is myne, and all that therein is, and he onely may most truely say: Mille meae siculis errant in montibus agnae; All the beasts of the forrest are mine, and so are the cattell vpon a thousand hills: Neither is he onely rich in temporall riches;Rom. 2.11. but in spirituall gifts, and graces also: for Saint Paul speaketh of the riches, of the Benignitie and Lenitie and long sufferance of God, and in Ephes. 1.18. He speaketh of the riches of his grace, where hee calleth God rich in Mercie, or rich in glorie; and Rom. 11.33. He crieth out O the deepenesse of the riches both of the Wisedome and Knowledge of God: and therefore it is most playne, that God is truely rich. And that none else is rich, but God; it may bee as easily confirmed: for that euery man, if hee doth but consider his owne estate, may say with the Prophet Dauid, I am poore and in miserie, and our wants are a great deale more then our wealth: and what we haue wee haue not of our selues, but wee haue receiued them from God, for what hast thou that thou hast not receiued sayth the Apostle?1 Cor. 4.7. and what thou hast receiued is properly none of thine: and therefore as thou camest naked, and broughtest nothing into the world, so thou shalt returne naked,Job 1.21. and carrie nothing out of the world againe. But against this you will obiect that the Scripture sayth,Ob Abraham, Lot, Iob, and diuers others were very rich: and yet no Gods; and therefore, that euery one which is rich is not a God. I answere first, that these men were not truely rich,Sol. No man in this world is truely rich. but were so thought to bee in the opinion of men; and therefore so called after the manner of men: for he onely is a rich man, qui nihil quaerat, nihil appetat, nihil optet amplius, which neither doth, nor can seeke, nor wish, nor desire, any more then he hath, as Cicero sayth; but none of these were such; for Abraham and the rest of them did professe, that they were pilgrimes and strangers here on earth; and therefore sought their countrey aboue in Heauen.Heb. 11.14. And secondly, I say that these worldly riches are no true riches, but onely vaine and imaginarie riches: for they haue made
many proude,That the ri∣ches of this life are not the true riches. none better: if they had, why did the wisest Phi∣losopher, so pronounced by the voice of the Oracle, cast all his gold into the sea that he might be happie, and the wisest among the sonnes of men, so pronounced by the voyce of God, pray aswell against riches as pouertie,Prou. 30.8. and the best kings in this Iland, and many other princes in many other countreyes, besides the Apostles that forsooke all to follow Christ,Matth. 19.27. change their princely thrones, for poore cells; and their kingly scepter, for the diuine Scriptures? and therefore he was a better husband then Philo∣sopher, that termed these riches, goods: but hee mended the matter well that called them goods of fortune; false goods ascri∣bed to a false patrone, for as there is no goodnesse in them, so there is no fortune to giue them; the meaning therefore (as I take it) is this,Doctor Hall. that it is a chance, if euer these riches proue good to any: for many times they hurt the owners, and disquiet others, and as many time and ofnter too, the worse men haue them, and the best men want them; and yet they are neuer the better for ha∣uing them, nor the other neuer the worse for wanting them: for I heare Saint Peter and Saint Iohn (the eldest and deerest Apo∣stles) say, gold and siluer haue I none, and I reade that Iudas (the youngest and the worst Apostle) bare the bagge; and I reade that the Deuill sayd all these things will I giue thee, and they are mine to giue; and that Diues was rich, and Lazarus poore; and yet now the poore is made rich and caried vp to Heauen, and the rich is poore and sent downe to Hell: and therefore it is apparant, that these false goods can be no true riches, and so consequent∣ly that none is truely rich but onely God. Now to proue that Christ is rich, besides the foresaid testi∣monie of the Apostle, our Sauiour himselfe sayth, all that the Fa∣ther hath,Iohn 16. are mine, & of the holy Ghost he sayth, he shall receiue of mine and declare vnto you; and so the Euangelist sayth that of his fulnesse we haue all receiued,Iohn 1.16. and grace for grace: and therefore Christ being truely rich, inriched with all the riches of the Die∣tie, power, strength, wisedome, goodnesse, mercie and such like, he must needs be the true and eternall God. Fourthly, from the pro∣per workes of God.Fourthly, from the vniuersall effects and proper workes of God; for he that created, and preserueth, and gouerneth all the things, that are created, is the true and euerlasting God; but this
word, Created all things, and doth still sustaine and gouerne all things, and therefore he must needs be the true God. The maior is cleere of it selfe,Gene. 1.1. because (as Moses sayth) In the beginning God created the Heauen and the earth: And The minor is confirmed,That Christ created all things. Psal 45.7. Psal. 102.25. by the testimony of the Holy Scriptures, which sayth, Thy throne O God is for euer and euer the Scepter of thy kingdome, is a right Scepter; and in an other Psalm. he sayth, And thou Lord in the beginning hast layd the foundation of the Earth, and the Heauens are the workes of thy hands; so the Euangelist sayth, that all things are made by this Word,Iohn 1.2. and with∣out this Word, was made nothing that was made; so Saint Paul sayth that all things were created by him aswell those things which are in Heauen, as those things which are in Earth.Colloss. 1.16. And so all the orthodoxe fathers doe subscribe vnto the same trueth: for Igna∣tius speaking of Christ, vseth the verie words of the Euange∣list, that he was in the world, and the world was made by him,Jgnatius in ep. ad Tarsenses. Iust. Mart: orat. 1. ad graecos. and yet the world knew him not; and Iustin Martyr sayth that by this Word both Heauen and Earth, and all other creatures were crea∣ted, and Irenaeus l. 2. c. 2. against heresies, Athenagoras in his apollogie for the Christians, Clemens Alexandrinus, l. 1. Pedagogi. Tertullian in his Apollogetico, Saint Cyprian in his second Booke against the Iewes; and many more; doe largely,That Christ gouerneth all things. and plainely proue, by inanswerable arguments, that all things were created by this Word. And that Christ gouerneth all things, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes sayth,Heb. 1.2.3. that he beareth vp all things with his mighty Word, and our Sauiour sayth vnto the Iewes, my father worketh yet, and I worke;Iohn 5.17. and Saint Paul sayth, that hee is before all things,1 Colloss: 17. and that by him all things doe consist. Fiftly, from the prayers, which all Saints haue made,Fiftly, from the prayers of the Saints. and that Diuine worship which they exhibited, and which indeed is due to him; for we are to pray to none but to God: because wee beleeue in none, but in God; and because none, but God can, at all times heare vs, and at any time, helpe vs:Iohn 5.23. but prayers shall bee euer made vnto Christ and dayly shall be praysed,1 Ioh. 2.22.23. sayth the Psal∣mist; and so the Saints doe, and euer haue prayed vnto him,Rom. 14.11. as vnto the onely God,Philip. 2.10. which can deliuer them out of their distresse: and therefore this Word that was made flesh, did make
all flesh, and is indeede the true and eternall God, as wee may see in Prouerbes 8.12. Iohn 1.1. Apoc. 1.8. and as I haue by these inanswerable arguments sufficiently proued vnto you. The obiecti∣ons of the Arians a∣gainst the e∣ternall God∣head of Christ.But against this eternall generation, and euerlasting Godhead of this Sonne of God; both the old Arians and the new vpstarte Ministers of Transiluania, that like euill weeds did spring vp out of Arius his ashes, doe obiect, and indeuour with the witt of hell to proue that this God of Heauen, was no God, before his in∣carnation, and was made man: for First, They doe obiect that Saint Luke sayth, hee shall be cal∣led the Sonne of God; therefore he was not called before his incar∣nation;Esay 9. and so Esayas saith, that vnto vs a child is borne, and vnto vs a sonne is giuen, and he shall be called wonderfull, the mighty God, and the prince of Peace; and therefore as Magistrates are not called Magistrates, before they are made Magistrates: so was not hee called the mighty God, before hee was borne and giuen vnto vs: This was the opinion of Arrius and Seruetus, that the Sonne of God was nothing before his incarnation, but onely a decree in the mynde of God, to make this man Iesus Christ, and to re∣plenish him with abundant gifts of the Dietie. Sol.But to this Danaeus briefely answereth, that these men say, he shall be called, after the manner of the Hebrewes, pro vere mani∣festabitur;Danaeus Jsagog. he shall bee truely manifested, and declared to bee the Sonne of God;Christ was a God from e∣ternitie, but he began to be a God existing in the humanitie, when he was made flesh. so that, he shall be called, doth not signifie that he should then begin to be, but that then he should begin, to bee ma∣nifested, what he was before. Besides, wee may yeeld, that then he should begin to bee, and to bee called a God, subsisting in the humane nature: for this may apparantly bee collected out of the words, both of the Prophet and Euangelist: for in that the Prophet sayth, vnto vs a Childe is borne; this is to bee vnder∣stood of his humane nature, and in that he sayth, vnto vs a Sonne is giuen, it is to be vnderstood of his Diuine nature: Quia natus ex humanitate, datus ex diuinitate, datus qui nesciret exordium, na∣tus qui sentiret occasum; datus quo nec Pater esset antiquior, natus qui & matre esset iunior, & sic qui erat datus est, & qui non erat na∣tus est; Because he is borne in respect of his humanity, and giuen in respect of his Dietie, for hee was giuen, which had no begin∣ning, and he was borne, which should haue ending, hee was giuen,
which was as auncient as his father, and hee was borne, that was younger then his mother; so hee that was, was giuen vnto vs, and he that was not, was borne vnto vs, as Eusebius Emissenus sayth; and therefore this Sonne, that euer was a God, in respect of his Diuine nature; could not bee called nor sayd to bee a God, existing in the humane nature, vntill this Sonne was giuen to bee in carnate, and till this Childe was borne vnto vs; and so I say of the words of Saint Luke; that hee which was euer the Sonne of God, in respect of his Godhead, should now bee called the Sonne of God, existing in the Manhood. Secondly, They obiect, that Saint Iohn calleth him ,  The Word of God; but God spake no words before the Crea∣tion, when first he said; Fiat lux, Let there be light: and there∣fore this word before then could not be. To this I answere, first,Sol. that they doe exceedingly corrupt the Text, in calling him, The Word of God: for Saint Iohn doth not call him, The Word of God; but simply the Word, to shew the difference betwixt that Word of the Lord, which came vnto the Prophets and Apostles, and is left vnto vs in the Scriptures, or that was at any time spoken by God, at the Creation, or since the Creation, vnto the Patriarchs, or any other seruant of God; and this euerlasting Word, which euer was, and is an eternall God: And therefore Saint Cyril saith,Cyrillus, l. 1. Thesauri That Christ is no accidentall, but an eternall essentiall word. That he is not , seu , Any sound of the Ayre, which is breathed out of the mouth of God, and is vttered by the helpe of the tongue; because God hath neither mouth, lippes, nor tongue; neither is he, , nec , nec , any inward, or inbred word, or significatiue voyce, of any such conceiued words; because none of these, is any subsistent thing, but as it were, an accident in the subiect, which cannot be said to be in God: but hee is ; The essentiall, substantiall, and subsistent word, as hereafter I shall more amply and plainely shew vnto you, when I come to discusse the rea∣sons, why he is called ; The Word. Thirdly, they doe obiect, that the wisedome of God, saith,  Dominus creauit me initium viarum suarum, ante secula fundauit me; Which according to the words, is thus in English:Prou. 8.22. God created me the beginning of his wayes, before the Worlds he esta∣blished me.
Sol.I answere, that concerning this place of Salomon, I finde diuers sorts of expositions. First, the Iewes say, that by this Wisedome, is vnderstood the Law, which was created to be the beginning of Gods wayes; and as they say, two thousand yeeres before the World was made; because in the thirtieth verse they finde two iom: that is, two dayes, which they interpret of two thousand yeeres, be∣cause a day with God, is as a thousand yeeres. Psal. 90.4.Secondly, the Samosatenian Heretickes say, that this place is to be vnderstood not of Christ; but of that vertue of God, whereby he hath wisely created, and discreetly gouerneth all those things that are created. Thirdly, the Arians yeelding that it was spoken of the Sonne of God, doe say, that it proueth him to be made and created by the Father; and therefore not eternally begotten of the Fa∣ther. That the Law was not crea∣ted.But against the Iewes, I say, that it cannot be spoken of the Law; because the Law is not created, but promulgated and shewed vnto vs; to teach vs to know what is good and acceptable vnto God; for if it were created, then it must be created of nothing, and must be either a substance or an accident, and the breach thereof would proue to be the offending of a creature, and not the Creator, which is most absurd; and if it were created, yet that it should be created two thousand yeeres before the World was made, is more absurd; for that it should be then created be∣fore any time, because time beganne when the World was made; (as Moses sheweth:) And therefore, if the Law were created two thousand yeeres before the World was made, then Moses doth not well, to make Time to haue his beginning, when the World beganne; and therefore the meaning of those words, I was Deliciae eius, die, die; (which is an Hebraisme, signifying Quotidie, daily, or alwayes) is this; that Christ before all Worlds was euer and alwayes the onely ioy and delight of God, in whom (as he saith himselfe) he was well pleased, hee was fully satisfied and contented. Secondly, Against the Somosatenians, I say, that whatsoeuer is spoken of any vertue, or any wisedome of God, must needes be spoken of Christ;Luc. 11.49. because hee is the vertue and wisedome of
God, as Saint Luke sheweth: And therefore the same things that are here ascribed vnto that wisedome of God, are else-where ascribed vnto Christ, the Sonne of God; as you may see, Iohn 1.1. Heb. 1.2. Colos. 1.17. And so Iustin Martyr,Justinus in Dia∣log. cum Tryph. and Clemens Alex∣andrinus, doe expound this place of Salomon, of the Sonne of GOD. Thirdly, Against the Arians, I finde diuers answeres.Whether the Arians corrup∣ted the Text. First, Some thinke the Arians, as they vsed to doe in other places, corrupted the Text, and writ,  pro ; i. e. Created me, in stead of possessed me; but I thinke this could not be, be∣cause Iust. Martyr, that liued before the Arians were hatched, and Athanasius himselfe doth reade it, , Created me: and therefore, Secondly, Epiphanius, Saint Basil, Saint Hierome, and others,Epiphan. heres. 69 Basil. l. 2. contr. Eunom. Hieron. in ep ad Cypr. doe thinke that the vulgar Edition is not well translated; for that the Hebrew word which Salomon vseth, should not be tran∣slated , with a iota; but  with an  in the middest of the word: The first is, He created me, and the other is, he posses∣sed me; and therefore Aquila translates it thus, : And Tremellius,Whether the Hebrew word, bee rightly translated , created. Iehoua possidebat me principio viae suae, or, ab initio operum suorum, as others will haue it; And so is the vulgar Latine, and our owne last English Tran∣slation: The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way; And if this be true, then those ancient Fathers, Saint Athanasius, Saint Basil, Saint Cyril, and others, that were much troubled about this place, might haue easily answered vnto this obiection of the Arians, if they had corrected the Greeke Translation, out of the Hebrew Text. But the Iewes contend, that the word in the Originall, doth aswell signifie to create, as to possesse, as Rabbi Shelomo Iarchi, vpon Genesis 14.19. doth declare: for there Moses vseth the same word which Salomon vseth here; and although our last English Translation reades it, Possessor of Heauen and Earth, yet the vulgar Latine, and the Septuagint reades it, Creator of Heauen and Earth: and therefore, Thirdly, Fulgentius answereth,Fulgent. in resp. ad hanc ob. Ar∣rian. that although Salomon should say, The Lord created me; yet could that make nothing against the eternall being of the Sonne of God; for that we may easily see
Salomon speaketh here of a two-fold generation of the Sonne of GOD.That Salomon speaketh of a two-fold gene∣ration of Christ. First, Of his Incarnation, in these words, The Lord created me the beginning of his wayes; and then, Secondly, Least we should with Arians imagine, that he was not, before he was incarnate; He sheweth, that Ante colles geni∣tus erat, Before the mountaines he was begotten, and brought forth; i. e. In respect of his Diuinity. First, of his in∣carnation, to be made man.That in the first place he speaketh of his incarnation, and this making of him to be flesh, there followeth none absurdity: for, though hee speaketh in the present tense, or preterperfect tense, after the Latines; yet is it set downe for the future tense, after the manner of the Hebrewes, who doe oftentimes, especially in things pertaining to God, set downe the future tense, for the pre∣sent; because they are as certaine to bee done, as if they were al∣ready done; as Tertullian obserueth: And the words immediate∣ly following, To be the beginning of his wayes; doth make this ex∣position, the more apparantly true: for what is it, to be the be∣ginning of his wayes? Nisi quod ipse via nobis est factus; but that hee was made to be the way for vs, to walke in? for hee was not made, that hee should create new Creatures, but that hee might renue those that were lost: And therefore Saint Iames vseth the like speech of the godly,James 1.18. saying, Of his owne will begate he vs with the Word of Truth, that wee might be as the first fruites of his Creatures; And the Prophet Dauid vseth the like speech of himselfe,Psal. 51.10. when he saith; Create a new heart in me O God. And therefore, to be the beginning of the wayes of God, is to be the first fruites of those that are renued, and not of those that are crea∣ted; for if you looke into the workes of Creation, you shall heare him say; Before the mountaines were setled, and before the hills, was I begotten. Secondly, of his eternall ge∣neration, as he is God.That in the second place, hee speaketh of his eternall genera∣tion, it is most manifest; for hee changeth his phrase, and saith, Ante colles genita eram, Before the mountaines was I begotten, as the Chalde paraphrase hath it; or, Filiata eram, I was sonned his sonne, as some translate it: for wee must note, that created and begotten, in the person of the Sonne of God, are to bee di∣stinguished; or otherwise, if we make created and begotten to be
the same, wee may say, that the World was begotten; which is most absurd: And therefore, seeing hee saith, that this wisedome of GOD, was both created and begotten, and that these two words, doe signifie two distinct and speciall things; wee should consider in what respect hee is said to be created, and in what respect he is said to be begotten, and then we should plainely see, that he is said to be created, as he is the Sonne of man; and that he is said to be begotten, as hee is the eternall Sonne of God: for, here Salomon sheweth, that he is said to be created, in respect of that nature, wherin he calleth his Father Lord; for the Lord (saith hee) created me: But hee calleth his Father Lord, in respect of his humane nature; and neuer calleth him Lord in respect of his diuine nature: for, he that is borne a seruant of his Fathers hand∣maide, according to the saying of the Psalmist;Psal. 116.14. O Lord I am thy seruant, and the sonne of thine hand-maide; is also begotten of his Fathers Essence, according to the saying of Christ;Iohn 8. I and my Father are one: And therefore, though he calleth his Father Lord, in respect of his humanity; yet doth he neuer call him so, but alwayes Father, in respect of his Diuinity; as I came from the Father; and wee saw his glory,John 1. as the glory of the onely begotten Sonne of the Father. And so you see, that these words of Salomon,Naz. or. 4. de theolog. Athan. ser. 3. cont. Arr. Cyril. l. 5. c. 4. 5. 6. 7. Thesauri. Aug. l. 1. c. 12. de trinit. The Lord created me, are to be vnderstood of his incarnation; and therefore can proue nothing against his eternall generation: And this exposition of Fulgentius is confirmed by Nazianzen, Athanasius, Saint Cyril, Saint Augustine, and others. And yet, Fourthly, Saint Hillary in l. de Synodis, Aquinas, l. 4. c. 8. con∣tra gentes, and Bellarmine, l. 1. c. 18. de Christo, doe answere, that the eternall generation of the Sonne of God, is sometimes called generation, and sometimes creation; because it is so ineffable, that it cannot be fully expressed by any one word; for generation signifieth a production in the same substance, but with a certaine mutation of the begetter;How the Word may be said to be both begot∣ten & created. but creation signifieth a production of another substance, but without any mutation of the Creator; and the Sonne of God is so produced, as that hee receiued the sub∣stance of the begetter: And therefore, in that respect, he is said to be begotten; but he receiueth it without any mutation or alte∣ration of the begetter; and therefore in that respect, he may be
saide to be created: And so he is sometimes said to be begotten, and sometimes said to bee created, not that any man should thereby denie his eternity, and thinke him to be a creature; but that from both these words, wee might receiue what is fitting, and reiect what seemeth to be vnfit, for the declaration of this ineffable and inexplicable mystery. Fourthly, They doe obiect the words of Dauid; Thou art my sonne, this day haue I begotten thee: And therefore, before that day, wherein hee was begotten his sonne, hee was not his sonne. Sol. The words of Dauid are spo∣ken of Christ, in respect of his manhood.I answere, That the words, Inquire of me, and I will giue thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the vttermost parts of the Earth for thy possessions: doe sufficiently proue, that these words are spoken of his incarnation, and not of his eternall generation; for how should he, according to his Diuinity, demand the ends of the Earth for his possessions, when as hee giueth the Kingdome of Heauen, which is a thousand times more then the Earth, to them that loue him? And therefore he which according to his God-head, possesseth all things with his Father, according to the forme of a seruant, which hee assumed for our saluation; he requireth of his Father, that hee might haue, The Gentiles for his inheritance, and the vttermost parts of the Earth for his possessi∣ons:Act. 13. And thus the Apostle doth expound this place, in the 13. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Fiftly, They doe obiect the words of the Apostle, that he is, The first-borne of euery Creature;Coloss. .15. and therefore created in the number of the Creatures. Sol. That the words of the Apostle are to be vnder∣stood of the humanity of Christ. Rom. 8.29.I answere, That this is also meant of his humanity, for that the Apostle speaketh here of the Creatures restored, and not crea∣ted; because he is said to be, Primogenitus ex mortuis, The first fruites of the dead: for if he were called, The first fruites of euery Creature, according to his Deity; by what testimonies can it be shewed, that he is, The first-borne of the dead before all Creatures; when as they could not be said to be dead, which were not yet created? And therefore the Apostle saith; That whom he did fore∣know, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Sonne,Iohn 1. that he might be the first-borne among many brethren; To shew, that he which according to his Deity, is the onely begotten
Sonne of God, without brethren, is according to his humanitie,&c. 3. the first-borne among many brethren: for we must vnderstand this difference betwixt the first-begotten Sonne of God, and the onely begotten Sonne of God: that the first sheweth his humanity, whereby he became man, the first and chiefest among many bre∣thren; and the second his Diuinitie,Iohn 1. whereby hee is the eternall Sonne of God, without any brethren; or otherwise it were in vaine to call him, the onely begotten Sonne of God: for that hee gaue power vnto others, euen as many as beleeue in him, to bee made the Sonnes of God: and therefore if hee be not his Sonne by nature, then without doubt he lost the name and the truth, of being the onely begotten Sonne of God, after he began to haue many brethren. But because none of his sonnes by adoption,Fulgen. in resp. ad ob. Arrian. can be said to be the onely begotten sonne of God; nor to be the Son of God, ather then the rest be; because the same name of sonnes, is ac∣ommodated vnto them all; although diuers rewards of retri∣bution is promised vnto them, according to the diuersitie of heir labours: therefore is Christ still said to be the onely begot∣ten Sonne of God; because, though there be many sonnes of God by grace; yet there is none but he alone his Sonne by Nature. And this difference doth our Sauiour Christ himselfe shew vn∣to vs; when he saith, I goe to my Father, and to your Father,Iohn 20.17. to my God and to your God; because he is otherwise my Father and my God, then he is your Father and your God; for he is my Fa∣ther eternally by nature, and he is yours in time by grace: and therefore hee that is first begotten in respect of his man-hood, among many brethren; is likewise still the onely begotten Sonne of God; in respect of his God-head without any brethren. And so you see, that maugre all the spite of Hell, it is most appa∣rantly true, that this Word is the true God, for time, coeternall vnto his Father.
CHAP. IIII. Of the coessentiality of the word with the Father, and the obiections that are made against the same sufficiently answered. SEcondly, you haue heard of the eternall God∣head of this Word, it followeth that I should shew vnto you how for nature he is coessentiall vnto his Father: touching which point Atha∣nasius saith, Non res quaepiam extrinsecus adin∣uenta est filij substantia, neque ex nihilo inducta est, sed ex patris essentia nata est, The substance of the Sonne is no outward thing, either found or created, but begotten of the very Essence of his Father; euen as you see the brightnesse springing from the light, or the vapour from the water; Neque enim splen∣dor neque vapor est ipsa aqua, aut ipse sol, neque res aliena: For nei∣ther the light is the Sunne it selfe, nor the vapour the water it selfe; and yet they are none other things, of another kind, then be the substances from whence they spring: euen so the Sonne issueth from the substance of his Father; Et tamen patris sustan∣tia non perpessa est partitionem: And yet the substance of the fa∣ther amits no partition; for as the Sunne remaineth still the same,Athanas. in ep. cont. Eusebium. and is no way lessened or diminished, in respect of those beames that flow from him, so the Father suffereth no mutation by hauing & begetting, Suam ipsius imaginem filium, This his Son and eternall image: but remaining still the same, he begetteth his Son of the same Essence: and we find not only all the Or∣thodox fathers, but also the Scriptures plain enough, to confirm the same truth; for our Sauiour saith, I and my Father are one: And so S. Iohn hauing spoken of the Father,Iohn 10.3. the Word, and the Spirit,1 Iohn 5.7. saith, That these three are one: And reason it selfe must needs confirme the same; for seeing the Diuine Essence is most simple, impartible, and indiuisible, and that the Father is God, (as none denyeth) and that the Sonne is God, (as I haue al∣ready proued) and that the Holy Ghost is God, (as all the holy Fathers haue as sufficiently confirmed) & yet that there are not
three Gods but one God;Athan. in Sym. (as Athanasius sheweth) therefore it must needs follow, that all three haue but one and the selfe∣same Essence, and consequently, that the Sonne is  Patri, Consubstantiall or co-essentiall vnto his Father: and therefore also hence it must needs follow, that (as Caluin saith) our Sauiour Christ is , A God of himselfe independent, as absolute as the Father is. And yet for the better vnderstanding of this point, how Christ may be said to be , God of himselfe,Thom. p. 1. q. 33. we must con∣sider that, Aliud est habere essentiam Diuinam à seipso,How Christ is God of himselfe. aliud habere essentiam diuinam à seipsa existentem; It is one thing to haue his Diuine Essence from himselfe, and another to haue his Diuine Essence existing of it selfe; To say that the person of the Sonne, hath his Diuine Essence, that is, his personall being from himselfe, we cannot; because it is from the Father, the Father commu∣nicating his whole Essence vnto the Sonne; and therefore we say that the Sonne, Ratione , in respect of his per∣sonall being, is not , God of himselfe, but God of God, and Light of Light; (as the Nicen Councell hath it:) because the person of the Sonne existeth from the person of the Father; but to say that the Sonne hath his Diuine Essence existing of it selfe,Idem. ibid. is most certaine; Quia remota relatione ad patrem, sola restat essen∣tia, qua est à seipsa; for taking away the relation of the Sonne vnto the Father, there remaineth but the Essence, which is of it slfe: and therefore we say that the Sonne, Quoad essentiam ab∣solutam, In respect of his absolute Essence, is , A God of himselfe, because the Essence of the Sonne, is the very same that the Essence of the Father is: And so to this truth, set downe by Caluine, Bellarmine himselfe subscribeth.Bellar. de Chri∣sto. But the old and new Arrians cannot endure to yeeld him to be , of the same Essence with his Father, but rather , of some other such like Essence, but not of the same substance, as Athanasius sheweth.Athan. in l. de expositione fidej. And therefore they doe obiect, First, against the Word here vsed by the Fathers, to expresse this truth. Secondly, against the truth and true meaning of the matter, contained and declared by this Word.
Ob. Idem in l. de decret Con. Nicen.First, for the word , though first found out by them∣selues, yet of all others, the Arrians could not indure it, as A∣thanasius witnesseth; because (as they said) neither , essence, nor , of the same essence, can be found any where in all the Scriptures. Sol. That the word Essence is plainely de∣riued out of Scriptures. Rom 1.20.To this Epiphanius answereth, that although the name of essence in plain tearme, is not found either in the Old or New Testament, yet the sense and signification thereof, the Synono∣mie and aequiualencie of the same, is obuiously found in many places: for the Apostle speaketh of his eternall power, , and Godhead; and what is , his Godhead, but , the very Essence of God?Philip. 2. and so he speaketh, , of the forme of God, but the forme of any thing is no lesse Philoso∣phicall then the Essence of that thing, and Saint Peter saith,  That wee might bee made partakers of the Diuine Nature;2 Pet. 1.4. but the nature of God and the Essence of God, are both the same. Besides, Essence is deriued of esse, to be; and it is the abstract of the name or Word, which in the concrete is called ens, being, but God is said to be both ens & esse,Exod. 3.14. the chiefest being, and to be, in the Scriptures: as ego sum , I am that I am; and hee that is, hath sent me vnto you: and therefore if the Scriptures call him ens, the being, why may not we call him essence? for though it cannot be well said,That abstract names are most agree∣able to God. that man is humanitie, in the abstract; yet because God is most simple by nature, we may as well speake of him in the abstract as in the concrete, nay the abstract names are more properly agreeable vnto him, then the concrete, as to say that he is Truth, rather then true; Wisdome, rather then wise; iustice,Dionys. de Di∣uin. nominibus. rather then iust; and so essence or being, rather then to be, as Dionysius saith. And further we finde the word Essence, vsed in the Scripture; for, where the prodigal Child saith, ,Luc. 15.12. Father giue me the portion of thy substance, which pertaineth to me, he vseth the word , to expresse his fathers substance: and what is the riches or the substance of God, but his Diuinitie? and therefore the word Essence is not improper, nor altogether inuented without Scripture to expresse the Nature of GOD.
And for the word , coessentiall, or of the same essence,That the word , of the same Es∣sence, was not first vsed by the Fathers of Athanasius time. the fathers answere, that it was not first inuented by the fathers of the Nicen Councell (as the Arrians falsely affirmed) for one of themselues denying the Deitie of Christ, said, that if they should yeeld Christ to be a true God, then must it follow, that he is , of the same essence with God: whereupon Hosius and the rest of the Orthodox fathers concluded that he was , of the same essence with God: and it was vsed long before that time, (though not controuerted;) by Dionysius Romanus, Diony∣sius Alexandrinus, Origen, Theognostus, and others, as Athanasius affirmeth. Secondly, they say that it was not so far fetcht, as the words, , of another essence, and  of the like essence, which themselues vsed to deny the coessentiality of the Sonne of God with his Father: so free were they to deuise what they would to maintaine errours, and so strict against the defenders of the truth. Thirdly,Luk 6. Deut 7.6.14.2.26: Ambros. l. 3. c. 7. de fide. they alleadge that the Scriptures vsed the like words, as . And Moses calleth the children of Israel, : which we translate, a speciall people, or a peculiar chosen people vnto himselfe: a people, as it were, of the like nature with God. Fourthly, they affirme that although the word it selfe is not found in the Scriptures; yet that the full sense and meaning of the word is plainely found,Aug. tract. 79. In Joh. Cyrillus l. 1. de trinit. as Saint Augustine doth most ex∣cellently proue out of those words of our Sauiour; I and my Father are one, Iohn 10. And that it is deriued from the Scrip∣ture; for it is deriued of  Essence, and  is deriued of , and the Lord saith of himselfe, Ego sum , I am he that is, or, I am that I am, Exod. 3. And therefore seeing this , their verball winde shakes no corne, nor cannot derogate any thing from the coessentiality of this word with his Father, they proceed against the matter. And so Secondly, they doe obiect against the truth of the matter declared by this Word. And First, they argue thus. Whose wils are diuers, their natures  and essences are diuers, but the will of the Father, and of the Sonne, are diuers: for the Sonne saith vnto his Father, Father, if
it be possible,Matth. 26.39. let this cup passe from me, neuerthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt; therefore their Essence must needes be diuers. Sol. That Christ as he hath two Natures, so he hath a two-fold Will.I answere, that the proposition is to be distinguished; for whose wils are diuers, hauing the same natures, their natures must be diuers; but in Christ there are two natures, diuine and humane; and therefore that his will is diuers, or not the same will as his fathers is, in respect of his humane nature (though it be alwayes subiect and agreeable to the same) we easily grant: but that his will in respect of his diuine nature, is any wayes dif∣ferent, or diuers from his Fathers will, we vtterly deny: and we say not that the whole person of Christ, but that Christ in respect of his diuine nature, as he is the second person of the Trinitie, is co-essentiall vnto his Father; and therefore though the will of Christ, as he is the Sonne of man, be not the same, as his Fathers will is; yet that doth not proue the will of Christ, as hee is the Sonne of God to be not the same as his Fathers will is: because Christ hath a two-fold will; the one as he is the eternall Word, and the other as he is made Flesh. Secondly, they say: he that is mediator betwixt God and men, is not of the same essence with God; but Christ, is the Me∣diator betwixt God and men,1 Tim. 2.5. saith the Apostle: therefore he cannot be of the same essence with God. Sol. That there are two sorts of Mediators.I answere, that the proposition is to be distinguished: for it is true of such a mediator, as Moses was, the Messenger of God to men; but it is false of such a Mediator, as reconcileth wicked men to God, by appeasing his wrath, and making satisfaction for their sinnes: for that no man can do so, but he that is God by nature. Now Saint Paul sheweth Christ to be such a Mediator, as doth appease the wrath of God, and therefore he sheweth euen there∣by, that Christ must needes be a God by nature, and of the same Essence with his Father. Thirdly, they say Christ is a Mediator and an Aduocate with God, but he is no Mediator nor Aduocate with himselfe, therefore himselfe is not of the same Essence with God. Sol.I answere, that the Name of God is to be taken two wayes. First, Essentially; and so Christ is a Mediator with God. Secondly Hipostatically, for any person of the God-head; and so Christ also is Mediator with God, if you vnderstand God for
the person of the Father, not excluding the Sonne, or the Holy Ghost; for otherwise it is false: because he is not onely Medi∣ator with the person of the Father, but also with himselfe and the Holy Ghost: So likewise in the conclusion, if you take God , for the person of the Father, we yeeld Christ is not God, because God the Sonne, is not, nor cannot be God the Father. And to the minor, I say,That Christ reconcileth vs to himselfe. that Christ may bee said to bee a Mediator with himselfe; if we consider the office of mediati∣on; Nam sacrificij modum, non sicut vnus quidam ex nobis, sacerdo∣tibus affert seruiliter; For he doth not seruilely, like some of vs, or any vnder the Law, bring the substance of our sacrifice vnto the Priests, which should first offer for themselues, and then for the sinnes of their people; because he hath nothing herein common with vs, that he should receiue it at our hands, to of∣fer it for vs; but as he is our sacrifice himselfe,Cyrillus l. de recta fide ad reginas. Sic sibi ipsi conciliat & per ipsum, & in ipso patri, So he reconcileth vs vnto himselfe, and through himselfe, and in himselfe, vnto his Father, as Saint Cyrill saith. Fourthly, they say: If he be of the same essence with the Fa∣ther,  then is he essentially in the Father; but he is not essenti∣ally in the Father; for the Word was with God, and not in God,John 1.1. saith the Euangelist; but to be with God, signifieth not to be in God, but without him, as a booke held in my hand, is with me, though it be not in me: therefore Christ is not essentially in the Father, & consequently not of the same essence with the Father. To this Fulgentius answereth diuers wayes.Sol. 1. If all that is sayd to be with God, be without God,Fulgent. in resp. ad obiect. Arria∣norum. and all that is sayd to bee in God, bee within him; then are wee neerer vnto God then the Sonne of God; for here you see he is sayd, but to be with God, and we are sayd to be in God:1 Cor. 8. for there is but one God the Father, by whom are all things, and wee in him, sayth the Apostle; but this is most absurd, to say, that wee are neerer vnto God then the Sonne of God, and therefore it is as absurd to say that all which is with God, is without God, and all that are sayd to be in him, to be within him. Secondly, Hee proueth, that to be with God, or with man, doth not alwayes signifie to bee without God, or without man; for it is sayd, that the vngodly reasoned with themselues,Wisd. 2.1. but
when a man reasoneth, he doth it within himselfe, and not with∣out himselfe,C. 4.1. and it is sayd, that the memoriall of Vertue is immor∣tall, because it is knowne with God, and with men: but it can∣not be knowne with men, vnlesse the memorie thereof be with∣in men;John 14.15. and so our Sauiour Christ sayth, If any man loue mee and will keepe my saying, my Father will loue him, and wee will come vnto him and make our abode with him: but to abide with vs, doth not signifie to remaine without vs, but to dwell within vs; as the Apostle sheweth,Ephes. 3.16, 17. when hee prayeth that the Saints might bee strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man, and that Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith. That to bee with God and to be in God is the same.Thirdly, He proueth that to be with God, and to bee in God, is aequiualent, and the very same in many things: for Moses sayth, God is faithfull, in whom there is no iniquitie, and Dauid sayth, the Lord is righteous, and there is no iniquitie in him, and yet Saint Paul sayth, numquid iniquitas apud Deum, is their iniquitie with God? God forbid; and Saint Iames sayth, with whom there is no variablenesse, nor shadow of turning, i. e. in whom there is no mutabilitie: and therefore as the Euangelist sayth eere, The Word was with GOD, so our Sauiour sayth else-where,Iohn 10.38. I am in the Father, and the Father is in mee. And therefore it appeareth plainely, that Christ is not with God as one man is with another, as Saint Paul sayth that hee remained with Saint Peter fifteene dayes: for so to be with one, is to be without him, as a guest, by the affection of charitie, and not to be substantially in him, as the same, by the law of equity; but Christ is with God, as the word is within the minde, or the councell is within the heart, or life it selfe within the soule; so that, as the soule cannot bee without life, no more can God bee without this Word: And therefore also, wee must obserue, a great difference,That we are not in God as Christ is in God. betwixt our being with God, and in God; and Christ his being with God, and in God; for when it is spoken of vs, our naturall vnion with God is no wayes meant; but either the power of the Creator, or the pietie of the redeemer, is alwayes vnderstood: and therefore it is sayd, that hee gaue vs power to be the sonnes of God, but this Word is not made, but natu∣rally, and eternally begotten the Sonne of God; and therefore though we be called sonnes, and hee called Sonne; wee called Gods,
and he called God; we sayd, to be begotten and hee sayd to bee be∣gotten; yet heerein is the difference, that hee is so naturally, and essentially; we so called by grace, whereby it is giuen vnto vs to be made the sonnes of God. And so much for the co-essentialitie of the Word, with his Father. CHAP. V. Of the co-equalitie of the Word with his Father, and the chiefest obiections made against the same, most cleerely and sufficiently answered. THirdly, You haue seene, that this Word is co-eter∣nall and co-essentiall with his Father; it fol∣loweth that I should speake of his co-equalitie with his Father: and this poynt is as cleere as the former; because in an essence most simple, there cannot be so much as imagined, more or lesse: and therefore Fulgentius sayth most excellently, that see∣ing Christ is from euerlasting,Baruch. 3.25. because he is the eternall Wisedome and power of God, seeing he is immeasurable, because hee is great and hath no end, and seeing he is most highest, as Zacharias shew∣eth in his speech of Iohn the Baptist,Luke 1.76. that hee should bee called the Prophet of the most Highest, that is, of Christ, he must needs be in all respects equall vnto his Father; Nam quid anterius sempi∣terno, quid maius immenso, quid superius altissimo? For what can be before him, that hath beene before all things? what can bee greater then that, which is immeasurable? or what can be higher, then that which is highest? and so Saint Iohn sayth, that the Iewes sought the rather to kill him,Iohn 5.1. because hee did not onely breake the Sabboth, but also sayd that God was his Father, making himselfe equall to God. But the Arrians doe obiect, that Christ did not teach him∣selfe  to bee equall with his Father, but that the Iewes mistooke him, and thought he did so. I answere that this is false, for (as Saint Cyrill,Sol. That the Iewes rightly vnderstood, that Christ taught that he was aequall with God. Saint Chry∣sostome, Saint Augustine and others doe affirme) the Iewes did rightly vnderstand our Sauiour; and the Euangelist sheweth as
much: for if they had either mis-conceiued his meaning, or mis-construed his words, then surely either Christ or the Euangelist, would haue giuen vs some notice thereof; that so we might not erre after them, especially in so great a matter: for so we finde, that when the Capernaits vnderstood his words of an Orall ea∣ting of his flesh; our Sauiour perceiuing their error, how they mis-vnderstood his words,John 6.62. sayd presently; the flesh profiteth nothing, and that the words which hee spake, were Spirit and Life; and so when he sayd,John 2.20. Destroy this Temple and I will build it vp againe in three dayes, and the Iewes thought that he spake it of their stately, Materiall temple,v. 21. that was forty sixe yeeres a building; the E∣uangelist presently tells vs, that hee spake it of the temple of his Body; but neither Christ, nor the Euangelist, doe here giue vs the least intimation of their mistaking of his meaning; but doe ra∣ther approue their right apprehension of our Sauiours words: and therefore it must needs follow, that Christ taught himselfe to be aequall vnto his Father. Secondly, They doe obiect that Christ himselfe sayth, my Father is greater then I,Iohn 14.20. and therefore, Christ is not aequall vnto his Father. Sol. Basil: l. 1. in Eu∣nomium. Nazian orat. 4. de Theol. Hilar. l. 9. de trinit:To this Saint Basill answereth: that the Father is greater then the Sonne, ratione principij, in respect of his beginning, for that there is noted a certain kind of authoritie or maioritie in the Father, because hee is the beginning of the sonne, and doth com∣municate his whole essence vnto the sonne, which the sonne doth not vnto the Father; that is, that the Father is the beginning of the person of the sonne, but not of the essence of the sonne, as I sayd before. Others, would haue the Father to be greater then the sonne, ratione nominis, onely in respect of the name, because the name of a Father seemeth to be greater then the name of a Sonne. How the Fa∣ther is greater then Christ.But Athanasius (in my iudgement) answereth best, that Christ is aequall to the Father as touching his Godhead, but in∣feriour to the Father, as touching his manhood: for Christ sayth, I goe to the Father,Iohn 4.28. because the Father is greater then I; and there∣fore he is inferiour to the Father in respect of that nature, wherin he goeth to the Father; but hee cannot bee sayd to goe to the Fa∣ther, as he is a God: for so hee is alwayes with the Father; but he
goeth to the Father as he is a man; and therefore he is inferior to the Father, as hee is a man; and thus Saint Cyrill, Saint Chrysost. Saint Aug. and Gaudentius doe expound it. Thirdly, they doe obiect that our Sauiour sayth, I came  downe from Heauen, not to doe mine owne will,John 6.38. but to doe the will of him that sent mee, therefore hee that sent him, is greater then hee that is sent. I answere first, that Christ hath two wills; the one as man,Sol. That Christ hath two wils. the other as God; and hee came downe, not to doe his owne will, which he had, as hee was man: but to doe the will of his Father, that sent him, which was also his owne will as he was God: for hauing the same essence, hee must needs haue the same will with his Father: and therefore as hee was inferior to his Father in respect of his humane will, so he was equall to his Father in re∣spect of his diuine will. And secondly I say that he was not sent, Per modum imperij;That the Fa∣ther sent not the Sonne by way of com∣mand, or su∣perioritie. In respect of any superiority that the Father had, to command him; but by way of consent; the Father being willing, to let his Sonne goe, as the Sonne was to be gone: so that misit, is no more then emisit, they were both willing, that the Word should be made Flesh. But they vrge that he descended to doe the will of his Father;Ob. but he descended not as Man, but as God: therefore he was in∣feriour to the Father, not onely as Man, but also as God. I answere, that the descending of Christ,Sol. That the des∣cending of of Christ is the assuming of ur flesh. is nothing else but his exinination, his incarnation and assuming the forme of a ser∣uant; for otherwise the Godhead can neither be said to ascend nor descend: and so his son thus humbled, thus incarnate, did obay his Father, and performe the Will of his Father; but not in respect of the forme which he had in Heauen; with his Father; but in respect of the forme of a seruant, which hee humbling himselfe, assumed in earth. And, Fourthly, they doe obiect that S. Paul sayth, that when Christ  hath subdued all things, yet then,1 Cor. 15.27.28. the sonne shall be subiect vnto his Father, which hath subdued all things vnder him, and therefore the sonne is inferior to the Father. To this some doe answere,Sol. that then the humane nature of Christ shall bee swallowed vp, and wholly conuerted into the
Dietie: but this cannot bee; for that Saint Paul in this very place sheweth the contrarie; because the subiection argueth a distinction: whereas if it were quite swallowed vp, there could bee no distinction: and therefore seeing there must be still a subiecti∣on there must be still that nature remaining, which shall bee sub∣iect to the other. Nyssenus. Chrysost. Cyril. and others.Others will haue this saying of the Apostle to be spoken of the whole Church of Christ; or of Christ as hee is in his mem∣bers; so that the sence should bee this, then the whole body of Christ shall be so subiect vnto God, that not any one member of the same, shall in any thing bee contumacious or rebellious a∣gainst the will of God. But although this may passe without absurditie, as being true in respect of the matter; yet I doe not finde, that it agreeth with the Apostles meaning in this place: for hee speaketh of him, to whom all things are subdued; but all things are sub∣dued vnto the person of Christ, considered in himselfe; an not vnto the whole body of Christ, or vnto Christ considered in his members, as both the Prophecie of Dauid, and this place of the Apostle, make it playne: and therefore Saint Ambrose Oecumenius and Theophilact, doe expound it of the Sonne of God absolutely considered; and that it signifieth not a seruile subiection, any wayes betokening an inferioritie, but an vnani∣mous agreement of the sonne with the Father, which sheweth their vnitie and equalitie. That Christ in glory for euer and euer as man, shall be still inferi∣our and sub∣iect vnto the God-head.But I like best of Saint Augustines and Primasius exposi∣tions; which doe interpret it of the humane nature of Christ, which then shall bee truely subiect vnto God; not because it was not subiect before then, but with a more emphasis the Apostle would giue them to vnderstand, that as euer before, it was sub∣iect vnto God; so then also, in that excellent glorie, when all things are subdued vnto it, it shall be subiect vnto God: and the reason hereof is, (as some of the Greeke Fathers haue obser∣ued,) because he writ vnto the Corinthians, which were but ve∣rie lately conuerted vnto the Christian Faith, from the vaine fables of the Gentiles, which taught that the Gods did contest, and striue amonst themselues. And therefore, least they should thinke, that Christ subduing
all things, and putting all things vnder his feete, would doe vn∣to his father, as they sayd Iupiter did to his father Saturne, adi∣bus & sedibus effugari, to driue him out of house and home, hee sayth, all things shall be subiected vnto Christ, excepting him, which hath subdued all things vnto him: and not onely this, (that all things shall be subiect vnto Christ, but the Father) but also; that as now it is; so it shall be then, in that glory and triumph; after all things shall bee subdued vnto the Man Christ Iesus, yet then shall his humane nature, that is, Christ himselfe as he is man, be still subiect vnto God his father: so that hee which is, and euer was equall to his father, as touching his Godhead, is and euer shall be, inferior and subiect to his father as touching his Manhood. Many other obiections they haue, against the Dietie, coessen∣tialitie, and coequalitie of the Sonne of God with his father; but they are all so triuiall that they deserue no answere: and are all deduced from those places that are spoken of Christ, as hee is a man; and misapplyed by them, to denie his excellencie, as hee is a God; and therefore I neede not proceede any further in this point; but onely to desire you from hence, to obserue these few branches of instructions, that doe most naturally spring from this roote; as, 1. The greatnesse of Gods loue.This doctrine, that the word Incarnate was a true God, teacheth vs foure speciall things. 2. The craftinesse of Satans dealing. 3. The peruersenesse of Heretickes. 4. The vnthankefulnesse of men. First, wee see this Word, this Sonne of God, was not made flesh to dignifie or to better himselfe; for hee was before (as I shewed you before) a God in the best and highest degree, from euerlasting, , a God of himselfe,How greatly God loued vs, that God would be made man for our good. A loue like himself, incom∣prehensible. coessentiall and coequall vnto his father: what therefore should hee merit, or wherein could he be dignified by his Incarnation, more then he was before his Incarnation? Gloria eius augeri non potuit, no∣thing could be added vnto his glorie; or if it could, his loue to vs could not be so great; for then it might bee sayd, hee did it not onely for our sake, but also for his owne sake, that himselfe might thereby be the more dignified and exalted: but seeing he was so high before, that he could not bee higher, so great that hee could
not greater, and so good that he could not be better; it is most certainly apparant, that he descended from the height of his dig∣nitie, vnto the very depth of humilitie, to be made flesh, onely for our sake: and therefore wee may well say, that greater loue then this cannot be; that he, which is the highest, chiefest, euerlasting God, should descend and be made the Sonne of Man, that wee might be made the sonnes of the immortall GOD through him. How Satan hath euer la∣boured more to obscure the truth concer∣ning the per∣son of Christ, then any other point of do∣ctrine what∣soeuer.Secondly, we may from hence see both the subtiltie and the cruelty of Satans dealing, for he knoweth that this is the greatest benefit that euer man receiued from God; the giuing of this Word to be made Flesh, this his eternall Sonne to be made man; Quia in creatione dedit te tibi Deus, Because in thy creation, hee did but giue thy being vnto thee; but in this his Incarnation, hee gaue himselfe vnto thee: and therefore Satan would faine ob∣scure this benefit, either by debasing the person, and perswading vs to beleeue that he was not so excellent as hee was, i. e. not a God, or if a God, not so high, not so excellent as his Father was; or else by corrupting the action, and suggesting vnto vs, that hee did not all for our sakes onely, but chiefly for his owne merit, (as if he were ambitious of vaine-glory, which is blasphemy to thinke) that he might thereby get him a name aboue all other names. And this is his vsuall practise, to seeke alwayes at the chiefest, to corrupt the greatest points, and to ouerthrow the strongest pillars of Christian religion;Math. 4.3. for he tempted Christ himselfe, and would faine haue ouercome him: for hee knew that if the Captaine were once conquered, then all the Souldiers would soone be vanquished; if the Shepheard were once smitten, then all the sheepe would be scattered; and so since the comming of Christ, he stirred vp more and greater heresies concerning Christ, either his person, or his offices; then he did concerning any other point of Christian Religion; for as there is no point so great, so waighty; no point more comfortable then this, concer∣ning the person of our Redeemer; because this is eternall life to know him to be the true and eternall God:Iohn 17.3. So Satan did neuer be∣stow more paines about any point, to ouer-throw it, and corrupt it; then he did about this same; as they that are but meanely read in the Ecclesiasticall stories, and counsels, may easily per∣ceiue:
And therefore I haue euer thought no paines too great, no discourses too long, no time mispent, that is spent to discusse this truth, and to dispell those cloudes of errours that doe seeke to obscure the dignity and excellency of the person of the Sonne of God; Quia bonum est esse hic, For it is good to dwell on this Rocke, and here to build vs Tabernacles, as Peter saith, Iuvat vsque morari. Thirdly,How malici∣ously Here∣ticks haue de∣nyed the God∣head of Christ. we may from hence see the peruersnesse of wicked Heretickes, for that it is not enough for them, to offend God, but they will deny him to be a God, and as the Athiests will be wicked , in the highest degree, by serching so farre into God, as to say at last, there is no God; so will they search so farre into the nature of the Sonne of God, that they deny him to be a God, vntill the vengeance of God, doth make them see their abhominable sinnes: and therefore we should all take heed, that the God of this world doe not so blinde our eyes, as to make vs to deny God our Sauiour. Fourthly,How thanke∣full we ought to be vnto God for the giuing of the Word to be made flesh. wee may from hence consider how thankefull wee ought to be; and yet how vnthankefull we are to God: for here wee see, that more then this he could not doe for man, for the highest God to be made man, yea a man of sorrowes (as I shall by his helpe in my Treatise of his Passion shew vnto you) that we might be made the sonnes of God and the heires of ioy; and yet we seldome or neuer set this great benefit before our eyes, to be thankefull to God for the same: for if we did, how could we finde in our hearts with the sight of this goodnesse, to heape vp such horrible wickednesse, as we doe against his Maiestie? to blaspheme his name, to abuse his Word, to dispise his seruants, and to be to euery good worke reprobate; O beloued, remember what our Sauiour saith, If you loue me keepe my Commandements:Iohn 14.15. and if you be thankefull to God, for this his great loue to you, to be vilified, and made flesh, and made of no reputation for you, offend not his Maiestie, and render not vnto him euill for good, and hatred for his good will. And so much touching the ex∣cellency of the person that was made flesh, he that was the true and eternall God, co-essentiall and co-equall vnto his Father.
CHAP. VI. Of the word , The word here shewed by the Euangelist, to expresse the person that was incarnate, and what it signi∣fieth, and why the Euangelist vseth it. SEcondly, hauing seene the excellency of the person that was made flesh, we are now to con∣sider, the Word here vsed, to declare that person, , the Word; touching which I will onely discusse these three points. 1. What  signifieth. 2. Why Christ is tearmed . 3. Why the Euangelist saith here, The Word was made flesh, rather then, the Sonne of God, was made flesh. What  signifieth.First, some say that  signifieth reason, and that the Sonne is therefore called , Reason, because as reason is most inward with vs, so is the Sonne with the Father, as Saint Basil, and Na∣zianzen say; or because he maketh vs obedient to yeeld vnto reason, as Origen saith: others will haue  to signifie definiti∣on, because Christ defineth and expresseth the whole nature of his Father,Heb, 1.3. he being the brightnesse of his glory, and the ingrauen forme of his person, as Nazianzen and Euthymius vpon those words of the Apostle doe affirme. Others translate it sermo, (which I translate speech) as Prudentius. Ades pater supreme, patris{que} sermo Christe. So Beza, In principio erat sermo; and so Tertullian, Saint Cy∣prian, Saint Hillarie, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Hie∣rome, and diuers others: and some call him the voyce of God, according to that of the Psalmist, The voyce of God is a glorious voyce, as Claudian, Christe potens, redcuntis conditor aevi, Vox summi sensus{que} Dei, quem fudit ab alta Mente pater.— O mighty Christ, maker of the world, thou voyce and sence of the highest God, which the Father begets in his most inward minde.
But most commonly the Fathers, and almost all the Schoole of Diuinity, following the vulgar Latine, doe expound , to signifie verbum, the Word; because Sermo, speech, doth seeme to consist of many words: whereas a word doth altogether deno∣tate, and declare vnity. But then it may bee obiected,Ob. that none can expresse his whole minde by one simple word; and therefore that speech is more likely to be the meaning of the Euangelist. I answere, That man indeed, with one conceiued word,Sol. can hardly expresse his whole minde and wisedome;That as God is one act, so he can ex∣presse him∣selfe with one word. but it is not so with God: for, as he is but, Vnus simplicissimus actus, One most simple act; so hee doth apprehend, and vnderstand all things, Vno ictu, & vno conceptu; at one instant, and can expresse him∣selfe with one word: And multiplicity of words, doth shew the infirmity of man, that with few words, cannot expresse himselfe; but the vnity and simplicity of Gods Word, denoteth the superex∣cellencie of God, that so briefly, and so easily, can doe all things. Secondly, We are to note, why Christ is termed ,Why Christ is tearmed the Word. the Word: Touching which point, we must vnderstand, that what∣soeuer speaketh, vttereth forth words; And wee finde that God, Angels, and Men, doe speake, though after a different and a diuers manner: for, though God being a Spirit, wanteth mouth, lippes, and tongue; and that the Apostle speaketh hyperbolically of the tongues of Angels,Zanch. l. 3. c. 19. de operibus sex dierum. (as Zanchius noteth) yet this is cer∣taine, that God and Angels doe often speake; as we reade Gene∣sis 1. Zach. 2. Esay 6.2.3. Although the speeches, and the communications of the Angels, be farre vnlike to ours,Hieron to. 7. p. 187. in c. 24. Jobi. (as Saint Hierome saith) and that we can neither know, nor vnderstand af∣ter what manner, they either doe, or haue heretofore spoken at any time, either outwardly vnto the eare, or inwardly in the minde of any man, as Saint Augustine saith: And therefore we say, that there is a Diuine, Angelicall, and a humane word; And to each of these, i. e. God, Angels, and Men, wee doe ascribe a two-fold word. 1. One inward of the minde and vnderstanding.That there is a two-fold Word. 2. Another outward of the voyce and tongue. After the first manner, we are saide to speake, when wee doe conceiue certaine thoughts, and cogitations within our minde;
As,Psal. 53.1. Sap 2.1. Matth. 9. the foole hath saide in his heart there is no God, and, they saide within themselues, but not aright. And, After the second manner, wee are saide to speake, when by any outward word,Fulgent in resp. ad ob. Arr. or voyce, we doe expresse, and declare our in∣ward cogitations; And this is said to be onely the outward signe and voyce of the inward word: for that the inward conception of any word is most properly said to bee the Word, as Saint Augustine affirmeth. Hilarius l. de Synod. How in some things the Word God re∣sembleth our outward word.Now Christ is not any outward vocall word, nor any transi∣ent voyce of God, (as diuers Heretikes said hee was) but he is the inward, essentiall, and permanent word of God; as Epipha∣nius, Saint Basil, and Saint Augustine doe declare: And yet (as Saint Basil saith) hee hath some certaine similitudes and resem∣blances with our outward word; for as the same springeth from our inward minde, (because the tongue vttereth what our minde conceiueth;Matth. 12.14. for out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh;) So is the Word God, begotten from the minde of the Father; and as the vocall Word, is the liuely Character of the inward thought, and doth represent the image of the same; so is the Word God, the liuing Image of the begetter, and the very effigies, or the in∣grauen forme of his person,Heb. 1.3. as the Apostle speaketh. But he hath a farre more propinquity and likenesse with our inward and mentall Word, (as Saint Augustine teacheth.) For, The likenesse of the Word with our in∣ward word Aug de Trini∣tate. l. 15. c. 10. &c. 11.First, As a man conceiueth, and brings forth this Word in his minde, so doth the Father beget his Sonne by his vnderstan∣ding. Secondly, As the Word of the minde is from our knowledge, our knowledge from reason, and reason from the minde, imma∣terially produced, , without any passion, or corruption; so is the Word God begotten of the Father, as Saint Basil, and Nazianzene doe declare.Nazian orat. 4. de Theolog. Thirdly, As the minde doth so beget the Word within in selfe, as that still the same remaineth in the minde,Fulgentius ad Monimum. (as Fulgentius no∣teth:) So the Word God is so begotten of his Father, as that he remaineth alwayes with the Father, as, The Sonne which is in the bosome of his Father, he declared vnto vs; and, No man hath ascen∣ded vp to Heauen,Iohn 3.13. but hee that came downe from Heauen, euen the
Sonne of man which is in Heauen; Nam cum ad terrena descendit coe∣lestia non dereliquit: For when hee descended to the Earth, and was made flesh, he left not Heauen, but as the word of the minde doth alwayes remaine in the minde; so doth this Word God, al∣wayes remaine in the bosome of God. Fourthly, as the conceiued word of the minde, is the beginning of all working, so is this word God the beginning of all creatures, for by it all things were made,John 1. and without it was nothing made that was made. Fiftly, as the mentall word is shewed by the voyce, so is the word God manifested by the assuming of our flesh. And yet because it is vnpossible to accommodate little, vile,How the Word God differeth from our word. Basilius contra Eun. Aug. Ser. 190. de tempore. and terrene things, fully to expresse, or in all things to agree with diuine and eternall things, as Saint Augustine doth most excel∣lently declare, saying, Cum Deus comparatur non potest comparari aequali scilicet comparatione, When God is compared, he cannot be compared with any equall comparison: for, to whom will you compare me, or what similitude will you make like vnto me, saith the Lord? therefore we must note, that although in somethings, this word God is like vnto our inward word, yet in many things they doe differ; As First, our Word hath a beginning of time, when we frame the same in our vnderstanding; but the word God hath no beginning.Apoc. 1.8. For he is α and ω, the first and the last, that neuer had begin∣ning, and that neuer shall haue ending, for thou art God from euer∣lasting, and world without end, saith the Psalmist. Secondly, our minde is before any of our words, but this word God, is co-eternall vnto his Father, as I haue formerly de∣clared. Thirdly,Athanas. in Symbolo. Cyril∣lus de trinitate. Aug in Joh. our word differeth from the minde that produceth it; but this word God is , of the same essence with the Fa∣ther: for, I and my Father are one, saith our Sauiour, i. e. one sub∣stance, though not one person, as I haue likewise shewed vnto you before. Fourthly, our word is an accident, in the subiect of our mind, but the word God is a most perfect substance, and the cause of all beings, in whom and by whom are all things; as the Apostle saith.
Fiftly, our word of it selfe, can doe nothing at all; but the word God can doe all things. Sixtly, our word is a dead word, wanting life; but in the word God, there is not onely life, but he is life it selfe. Seauently, our word is manifold; for wee produce many thoughts and intelligences; but the word God is onely one; be∣cause God with one act doth vnderstand himselfe,Aug. in Psal. 61. and all things else: and therefore Saint Augustine vpon the Psalmist, Semel loquutus est dominus, The Lord spake once, expoundeth the same of the word Christ. And so you see these differences betwixt the word God, and the word of man; he that desires to see more dis∣crepances betwixt them; let him read Athanasius in his third Sermon against the Arrians. Whether the Word be a name of per∣son or of office.But here it may be demaunded, whether  the word, be a name of his person, as he is God, or a name giuen him, in respect of his office of Redeemer, as he is God and Man. I answere that it is a name of his person, and that in respect of his God-head onely: for it is obserued, that none of the Euan∣gelists,Malden. in John c. 1. nor of the Apostles, doth call him the Word, but onely S. Iohn; nor he neither, doth call him , the Word, after he had said, that the Word was made flesh; to note vnto vs, that as Saint Iohn onely was specially set a part, to declare the Deitie of Christ; so he onely calls him by that name, which is onely proper vnto him, as he is God, and none else: and he calls him onely so, before his Incarnation; to shew that he is the Word, as God,Why Saint Iohn vseth this word , the word. and not as Man. Thirdly, we are to consider why Saint Iohn saith, the word was made flesh; rather then the Sonne of God was made flesh; tou∣ching which, Theophilact and Euthymius thinke that he saith, The word was made flesh;Hillar. in l. con∣tra Constant. least that if he should haue said, the Sonne was made flesh, the Reader might perchace imagine, some passible or carnall thing, as the Arrians dreamed; as Saint Hillarie witnesseth. But this reason seemes not solyd enough to me; because Christ hath many other names, besides this, as wisedome, light, brightnesse, and such like, which signifie neither passion, compositi∣on, nor corruption; as both Origen, and Saint Basil haue obser∣ued: and therefore others doe alleadge these two especiall reasons.
First, because this word , was an acceptable and a knowne name, both to the Iewes and Gentiles. Secondly, because it was the most proper, and the fittest name that he could vse, to make way to expresse that thing, which hee was immediately to declare. First,That this name of the Sonne, the Word, was the best known name of Christ among the Iewes. It is manifest that there was no name of the Sonne of God among the Iewes, so generally vsed, and so well knowne as , the word; as it might be easily shewed out of the Chaldee paraphrase; for wheresoeuer that paraphrast thinketh, the Name of God should signifie the Sonne, he alwayes translates the same, and reades it the word: the which without doubt he did; because he saw this word and name of him, was vulgarly best knowne amongst them: for Philo the most learned of all the Iewes, & the most expert in the mystery of the Trinity,Philo in l. de opificio mundi. though he neuer calleth Christ the Sonne, yet doth he often call him the Word in many passages of his Workes. Neither was his name , the word, onely knowne among the Iewes, but among the Gentiles and Ethnicks also:That the Gen∣tiles were not ignorant of this Word, for it is ap∣parant that although the way to Heauen, was vnknowne vnto them; yet did many of them (especially of their Philosophers) dispute and deliuer many things concerning the true God; For Aristotle, or whosoeuer he was that wrote those bookes De mundo, did finde that in this rare piece of worke, and frame of the world, there is most excellent conueiance, without confusion; great variety, concurring in vnitie; and diuersitie of all things, without disorder; all which he attributeth to the powerfull working of the inuisible God; of whom the said Author conceiues, that for his power he is most mighty; for his beauty most excellent; for his life immortall, and for his vertue most absolute; and that (as Empedocles saith) from him proceeded; All things that were, that are, and shall be here, Plants, men, beasts, birds, and fish in waters cleere. And entring into further consideration of Gods nature, he saith, that although God be but one, yet we call him by many names, as  & , Because we liue by him; , because he is of an immutable nature; , because nothing is done by chance, but according to his most certaine decree; , because no
man can possibly auoid him, or flye from him; , because he abideth for euer; and as for that fable, (saith he) of the three Sisters of destiny,Clotho filum ba∣inlat, Lachesis net, Atropos occat. Clotho that spinneth, Lachesis that draweth out to a iust length, and Atropos that cutteth off the thred of mans life, it is to be vnderstood of God onely, who is the beginning, mids, and end of all things; and to conclude, he saith, there is a Iustice, that is neuer separated from God, which is, the reuenger of all transgressions committed against the Law of God, where∣in euery one must be well instructed, that would be partaker of humane felicitie and happinesse. All which doth most apparantly proue, that the Gentiles had so much knowledge of the true God, as not onely was able, I say not with Clemens Alexandrinus to bring them to saluati∣on, but to make them without excuse in the day of retribution; because that they knowing God, glorified him not as God, but also as doth exceed the knowledge of many which make pro∣fession of Christianity, and will no doubt rise in iudgement, to condemne them in the latter day. And as we see many of them vnderstood many things con∣cerning the most true and euerlasting God, so we finde some of them haue deliuered some things concerning this word, and Son of God:Heron. in ep. ad Paulinum. for, though S. Hierome, speaking of this word, saith, Hoc doctus plato nesciuit; This word, eloquent Demosthenes was ignorant of it;1 Cor. 1.19. because it is written, I will destroy the wisedome of the wise,Aug. l. 5. c. 3. de haeresibus. and cast away the vnderstanding of the prudent; Yet Lactan∣tius saith, that Zeno affirmed , the word, to be the maker of this vniuerse; and that Mercurius, syrnamed , thrice great, did often describe the power and Maiestie of this word; and Saint Augustine affirmeth that the said Trismegistus did com∣pose a booke, whose title was, , i. e, the perfect word; and that therein he left written, Monas genuit monada, & in se suum reflexit ardorem: Which is as much as if he had said, the Father begate the Sonne, or the minde begate the word, and from both proceeded the Holy Spirit,Idem l. 7. c. 9. confess. and l. 7. Confess. c. 9. hee saith, that he saw certaine books of the Platonists wherein he found, though not in the same words, yet the very selfe-same matter, proued by many reasons, that in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God.
Saint Cyrill also saith, that the Philosophers haue affirmed the essence of God to be distinguished into three subsistences,Cyrillus l 8. cont. Iulian. and sometimes to haue deliuered the very name of Trinitie: and Theodoret doth affirme, that Plotinus and Numenius haue col∣lected, out of Plato, that there are three eternities; Bonum, & mentem, & vniuersi animam, i. e. Goodnesse, which answereth the Father, that is the fountaine of the Deity, the minde, which sig∣nifieth the Sonne, and the soule or life of this whole vniuerse,Gen. 1.2. which is the holy Spirit; that as in the beginning of the crea∣tion, he presently moued vpon the waters, to sustaine the same;Clemens Alex. l. 5. strom. so euer since he spireth and preserueth euery liuing thing: and Clemens Alexandrinus saith, that Plato in his Epistle to Era∣stus and Coriscus, hath manifestly spoken of the Father and the Sonne; and so Eusebius likewise, and Eugubius and many o∣thers haue collected out of their writings, that this name of the Sonne, , the word,Seneca Traged. Oedip. was not altogether vnknowne vnto the Gen∣tiles; but that as Oedipus in the Poets, knew that he had a Fa∣ther, though not who he was; so they did conceiue a certaine kinde of knowledge and vnderstanding, though vndigested, and imperfect, ouershadowed as it were with humane reaso∣nings, concerning this eternall word God, enough to saue them, if they beleeued in him; or else to make them without excuse, if they knowing, though not simply, Verum , sed ali∣quid veri , This true word, but something of this word, did neglect and not seeke further into the knowledge of the same. And this knowledge they might attaine vnto,How the Gen∣tiles came to haue any knowledge of the Word God. either by 1. The illumination of God himselfe. 2. The diuination of the diuels. 3. The traditiō of their elders, 4. Their owne exceeding dili∣gence, to seeke and search after the knowledge of diuine mysteries. For, First, the Apostle saith that ,Rom. 1.19. what may bee knowne of God, that is, his eternall power and Godhead, God hath shewed it vnto them; and as the Deitie it selfe,1 Cor. 13.12. might bee contemplated in his creatures, as in a glasse; or read by them,Basilius hom. 11. hexam. as in a booke, as Saint Basil saith; So no doubt but he left therein cer∣taine impressions of the Trinitie of his persons,Ph. Mornaeus de veritate re∣lig c. 5. Rom. 1.16. which though they could not fully attaine vnto the knowledge thereof, no more then an vnskilfull Arithmetician can finde, the iust summe that cyphering characters doe import; yet they might
perceiue something thereby, and know, that there was such a thing to be knowne. And thus much God himselfe might shew vnto them, not as Clemens Alexandrinus thought, thereby to bring them vnto saluation; because (saith he) Phylosophy was vnto them, as the Law was vnto the Iewes, a Schoolemaster to bring them vnto Heauen; but that (as the Apostle saith,) They knowing this God, and not glorifying him as God, nor seeking to be saued by this God, might be without excuse in the sight of God. August. de cog∣nit. verae vitae. c. 37.Secondly, The very Diuels might make knowne the same vn∣to them; for the Diuels beleeue that there is a God, and they know him to be but one God, : One in himselfe, one in all things; and they know him to be , The most High, and Omnipotent God; neither doe they know the Father onely, but they know Christ also: for the euill Spirit said vnto the Sonnes of Scaeua,Acts 19.15. : Ie∣sus I know, and they know him to be the Son of God, & God himselfe, as Sozomen out of this verse of Sybill doth declare. O lignum foelix in quo Deus ipse pependit. I may thee call a happy Tree, whereon a God to hang I see: And they know the sacred mystery of the Trinity, for by them this disticke was related vnto a certaine Egyptian, that de∣sired to know this truth. Serapis ad Thu∣lem. Selneccerus. l. 1., . Principio Deus est, tum Sermo, & Spiritus istis Additur, aequaeua haec sunt, & tendentia in vnum. The Father, Sonne, and Spirit; all three Are one God, of the same eternitie. Aug. in Expos. Ep. ad Rom.And so the Diuels knowing these things, might suggest them, and reueale them, though aenigmatically, and darkely vnto the Sybilles, (which as Saint Augustine saith, were none of Gods Prophets;) from the Sybils they might bee spread vnto their Priests; from the Priests, vnto the Phylosophers, Poets, and O∣rators; and from them they might be divulged and spread vnto the lowest ranke of the vulgar people. Neither must we thinke, that Sathan did it with intent to doe them good, and to bring
them vnto the true sauing knowledge of their Sauiour; but as God by his true Prophets did foreshew the comming and in∣carnation of this Word; so would Sathan play the Ape, and by his Prophets teach them, (like as Oedipus,Seneca in Oedi∣po. blindly seeking his Father, did vnfortunately slay his Father,) by seeking thus after Christ, to worship himselfe in stead of Christ, and so to offer sa∣crifices vnto Diuels, (as the Apostle saith) and not to God. Thirdly, They might by the continuall tradition of their El∣ders, retaine some reliques of that promise made vnto Adam, That the seede of the woman should come,Gen. 3.15. and breake the Serpents head: for wee finde by their rites and ceremonies, their Priests and Sacrifices, and such like, that they had a kinde of corrupted Diuinity still remaining amongst them; and that they did con∣ceiue some thing by these outward things, that should expiate their sinnes, and appease the wrath of God for them. Fourthly, Their owne great diligence,That the Phy∣losophers were wonderfull di∣ligent to attain vnto all kinde of knowledge. might bring no small knowledge, and vnderstanding of diuine things vnto them: for they were exceeding great searchers of all antiquities, and most wonderfully greedy of all kinde of knowledge, and lear∣ning; and therefore they did search into the Oracles of the Cal∣deans, Aegyptians, and Hebrewes, that so much as they could, they might find out the truth both of humane and diuine things. And so Theodoret, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Iustin Martyr, doe plainely affirme, that Plato read the Bookes of Moses, and the Prophets; and both Saint Ambrose and Eusebius say, that Numenius a Platonist, was wont to say, : That Plato was none else but Moses in the Graecian Tongue: And Saint Augustine himselfe saith, That Plato lear∣ned the Diuine Scriptures, from the Prophet Ieremie,Aug de Doct. Christa. l. 2. c. 28. Jdem de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. 11. when the Iewes were in their captiuity at Babylon; but I finde he retracted this opinion in his eight Booke and eleuenth Chapter, De ciui∣tate Dei; for there, by the computation of their yeeres and times, wherein both of them liued, he findes that Ieremie dyed, almost a hundred yeeres before that Plato was borne; (the captiuity being in the time of Cyrus, and Darius, Kings of Persia, and Plato borne but a little before Alexander, King of Macedon) yet there he denies not, but that Plato, by his industry, when he trauelled into Egypt, might by some Interpreters learne the
Scriptures: for, as yet the Septuagint had not translated them in∣to the Greeke Tongue; and yet Aristobulus (as Eusebius citeth him) saith, that certaine parts and parcels of the Scriptures, were translated by others before the Septuagint; out of which Plato might learne many points of the diuine Truth. Or if this know∣ledge was not had out of the Hebrew Bookes, yet might hee learne much, as Herodotus did in other points, from the Egyp∣tian Priests: for it is not likely, that the Egyptians had lost all knowledge of Diuinitie; but that still there remained some reliques of that verity, which Ioseph and the Children of Israel when they dwelt in Egypt, did spread and leaue amongst them;Psal. 105.22. for God sent Ioseph to instruct the Princes of Pharaoh, and to teach his Senators wisedome; not onely to prouide foode for their bodies, but also for the happinesse of their soules. All these things being well considered, it seemeth not ab∣surd vnto me, to say that Plato, and other learned men among the Gentiles, were not altogether ignorant of the knowledge of this truth, concerning this eternall Word. Nay, they could not be ignorant of the same:That the Gen∣tiles expected the comming of a Messiah. for it is well knowne, that the Gentiles did expect the comming of the Messias, as well as the Iewes; though for want of the Diuine Oracles, they had not the know∣ledge of many particulars of his comming, so well as the Iewes had: And therefore he is called, Expectatio gentium; The hope and expectation of the Gentiles: And so those many multitudes that became Proselites of the Iewish Religion, those Sybils, and Prophets, Zoroastres, Baalam, and others, that prophecyed of his comming;Numb. 24.17. and those Magi, that came from the East, To worship him as soone as euer he was borne, doe sufficiently proue that the Gentiles expected the comming of this Word,Math. 2.1. &c. before hee was made flesh: And therefore seeing , the Word, was most chiefly knowne, or likeliest to be knowne, both among the Iewes and Gentiles, and that the Euangelist desired to apply himselfe to both Nations, that he might winne and gaine the more to Christ, he vseth the word , and saith; The Word was made flesh. And, Secondly, The word , was the fittest word, that hee could choose, to make way for him to expresse what hee meant immediately to declare; for he intended presently to say, that
all things were made by him; but he could not call him, by whom all things were made, by any fitter terme then the Word; because all men did know, that God made all things by his Word: for by the Word of the Lord, were the Heauens made;Psal. 32. when God spake the Word, and they were made, hee commanded,Psal. 148.5. and they stood fast. And so you see these few obseruations, touching , the Word here vsed by the Euangelist, to expresse the person that was made flesh. Now seeing this Word,What a shame it is for vs to be ignorant of this Word now already incarnate. is the chiefest Word in the World, and was the Word best knowne to all the best men of the World; Kings, Priests, Prophets, Phylosophers, Orators, and the like, it should put vs euer in minde, neuer to neglect the knowledge of this Word: for what a shame is this to vs that we are so full of idle words, yea, of leud and wicked words; and this Word God, should be so strange vnto vs? and that the very Hea∣thens knew it, euen before he came into the World, and we should be so ignorant of it, now after hee is come, and is preached throughout all the whole World? that they were so diligent to finde him out, and we so negligent to accept him offered vnto vs, and preached euery where, to euery one of vs? without doubt, they shall rise in iudgement against vs, and condemne vs. And so much for this Word , here vsed, and why that word is here chosen by the Euangelist. CHAP. VII. Of the chiefest Causes, why this Word was made Flesh. THirdly, We are to consider, why this Word was incarnate, and made flesh: Touching which, I say, that, First, Causa ,Why the Word was made Flesh. the impulsiue cause in respect of vs, was, our most wofull miserable case and condition, wherein we lay all, depriued of the grace and fauour of God: and causa , the impul∣siue cause in respect of God, was, his great loue, and tender com∣passion towards mankinde, so lying in misery, vnder the tyran∣ny and bondage of the Diuell, and the performing of his pro∣mise,
Gen. 3 15. which he made vnto Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, that the seede of the Woman should breake the Serpents head; And therefore because he would not alter the thing that was gone out of his mouth,Luke 1.72. nor suffer his truth to faile; hee remembred his holy Couenant, and the Oath that hee sware vnto our Fathers, and at the fulnesse of time, he sent this Word to be made flesh. Secondly, The finall cause, in respect of vs, was the restoring of mankind vnto the fauor of God againe: And therfore we pro∣fesse in our Creede,Concil. Nic. that for vs men, and for our saluation, he came downe from Heauen,Matth. 20.28. and was made man; And so our Sauiour saith,Iohn 12.46. that he came not to be serued, but to serue, and to giue his life a ransome for many:Aug. in Joh. & gloss. in 1 Tim. 1. And Saint Augustine saith, Non eum de coelo ad terram merita nostra, sed peccata nostra traxerunt; It was not our goodnesse, but our wickednesse, our sinnes, our grieuous sinnes, that brought downe Iesus Christ out of Heauen. And so Hugo saith,Hugo in l. de sacrament. Nulla causa veniendi fuit nisi peccatores saluos facere, tolle morbos, tolle vulnera, & nulla est causa medicinae; There was no cause, that he should come to vs, but to saue vs; for where there is no wounds, where there is no diseases, there is no neede of medicines, there is no vse of playsters; because the whole neede not the Physician. To shew the errour of Osiander, who saide, that if man had not sinned, this Word had beene incarnate; be∣cause there was nothing that could bring him out of Heauen, or to moue him to be made man, but onely to bring vs into Heauen, and to make vs the Sonnes of God through him: And the finall cause, in respect of God, was his owne glory; for hee made all things for his owne sake, and he gaue his Sonne for vs, that wee might ascribe all praise and thankes vnto him: And therefore the Angels said vnto the Shepheards,Luke 2.14. Glory be to God on high, peace vpon Earth, and good will towards men; And reason good, that seeing wee haue peace with God, God should haue glory, and praise from vs. Why God de∣creed the In∣carnation of the Word, for the saluation of man. Gen. 1.26.But here first it will be demanded, (as Saint Augustine saith) Quare non potuit Dei sapientia, aliter homines liberare? &c. Why could not the wisedome of God deuise, and the power of God effect, some other way to deliuer and saue sinnefull men, then by sending his Sonne to be made man, to be borne of a woman, and to suffer such shamefull things, of shamelesse sinners?
To this Saint Bernard frameth this witty answere, that as in the creation of man, God did as it were consult with his wisdom, how to make him, when he said, Let vs make man in our image; So after the transgression of man, there was (as it were) a consul∣tation in Heauen, what should become of man; for truth and Iustice stood vp against him, and said, that man had sinned, and therefore man must die,Cap. 2.17. or else that they must needs be viola∣ted; for thou saidst (say they to God) In what day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and euill, thou shalt die the death; But Mercie and Peace rose vp for man, and said;Quo quis{que} est maior magis est placabilis ira. regia (crede mihi) res est succurrere lapsis, It is a royal thing to releeue the distressed, and the greater any one is, the more placable and gentle hee should be; and that God himselfe had said, he was the God of Peace, and the Father of Mercies; and therefore they conclu∣ded, that although man had sinned, yet man must be pardoned, or else they must needes be abandoned; therefore the wise∣dome of God became an vmpire, and deuised this way to recon∣cile them, that as one man had sinned, and thereby destroyed all men; So, Vnus homo nobis patiendo restituet rem,Bosquier. de pass. domini. ser. 13. p. 793. One righte∣ous man should suffer for all men, and so Iustice should be satisfi∣ed; and then all that beleeued in that man, should be pardoned, and so Mercie should be shewed. Then, all thus contented, God looked downe from Heauen vpon the children of men, to see if there were any that would vnderstand and seeke after God;Psal 14.4. but they were all corrupted, and become abhominable; and there was none that did good, no not one; and therefore the wisedome of God, that had found out this way, was contented to performe this worke himselfe; and to be made man, that mercy might bee extended, and to suffer death for man, that Iustice might be satis∣fied: and so in him, Mercie and Truth met together, Righteous∣nesse and Peace kissed each other. But Saint Augustine,Aug. de trinit. l. 3. c 10. Gregor. moral. l. 20. c. 26. and Saint Gregory doe more solydly answere, saying; Omnia Deus poterat si voluisset, That in regard of his wisedome, God could haue deuised another way, and in re∣gard of his power he could haue performed the saluation of man, without the incarnation of his Sonne. But, if he had done it o∣therwise, it would, no doubt, haue likewise displeased our foo∣lishnesse: for God appeared visibly (saith Saint Augustine)
that he might prepare vs to inuisible things; and therein, hee displeased the couetous man,How hard it is for the wise∣dome of God to please foo∣lish man. because he brought not a body of gold; he displeased the lasciuious, because hee was borne of a woman; he displeased the Iewes, because he came so poore, and the wise men of this world, because he erecteth his Kingdome by the foolishnesse of preaching, and so he should haue displeased man, what other way soeuer he had inuented to saue man: for the wisdom of God is not sufficient to satisfie the foolishnes of men. Aug. de annunt. Domini. ser. 3.And therefore he that knowes all things best, Sic voluit ru∣inam vasis fragilis reformare, vt nec peccatum hominis dimitteret impunitum, quia iustus erat, nec insanabile quia misericors, So God would repaire the ruine of fraile and fickle man; that neither the sinne of man should escape vnpunished, because God is iust, nor yet miserable man remaine vncured, because he is mercifull; and although he could otherwise haue saued man, Quantum ad potentiam medici, in respect of the power and skill of the Phi∣sitian; yet he saw there was no fitter way to doe it, Quantum ad medicinam aegroti, & quantum ad iustitiam Dei, In regard of the state of the patient, to free him from sinne, and to satisfie the Iustice of God. For it behoued the Mediator betweene God and man,Ne in vtro{que} deo similis longe esset ab homine, aut in vtro{que} homini similis longe esset à Deo. to haue something like vnto GOD, and to haue something like vnto man, lest that in all things being like vnto man, hee might be so too farre from God, or being in all things like vnto God, hee might be so too farre from man; and therefore Christ betwixt sinfull mortall men, and the iust immortall God, did appeare a mortall man with men, and a iust God with God:1 Tim 2.5. and so the Mediator betwixt God and men, was God and man Christ Iesus; and fitly too, saith Saint Au∣gustine: Quia ille congruè satisfacit qui potest & debet, Because that is most agreeable to reason that he should make satisfacti∣on,Two speciall reasons; why Christ was made man. which ought and can satisfie, but we know that none ought to doe it but man; and none can doe it but God: and therefore God was contented to be made man; and that for these two especiall reasons. First, to shew the greatnesse of his Loue to man.First, to shew the greatnesse of his loue; for hee had seemed to haue loued vs the lesse if he had done lesse for vs: but now, Quid tam pietate plenum, quam filium Dei pro nobis factum esse faenum? What can more commend the loue of God to man, then to see
the word God made flesh for man?Iohn 3.16. and therefore the Euangelist to shew the greatnesse of Gods loue to mankinde, saith, God so loued the world, that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne, that is, to bee incarnate, to be made flesh, and to suffer death, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life. Secondly, to erect our hope, that was already deiected,Secondly to erect the hope and to streng∣then the faith of man. and to strengthen our faith which was alwayes wauering: for wee saw two things that were to be done for man, and yet could not be done by any man but such a one, as should be God and Man. The first was a remoueall of that great euill which suppres∣sed vs. The second was a restoring of that great good, that we were depriued of. First, Magnitude mali,The euill that oppressed all men was foure-fold. the greatnesse of that euill which sup∣pressed euery man, and could not be taken away by any man, consisted in foure things. 1. The waight of sinne. 2. The height of Gods wrath. 3. The power of death. 4. The tyranny of the diuell. And these could not be abolished, by any creature, but onely by him that created all creatures, and can worke all things mighti∣ly according to the purpose of his owne will. Secondly, Magnitudo boni,The good that man lost was two-fold. the greatnesse of that good which was taken away from all men, and could be restored by no man, consisted in two things. 1. The repairing of Gods image, here in this life. 2. The enioying of the blessed vision of God in the next life. For, none could restore the image of God to man, but hee that was the liuing image of God,Heb. 1.3. and the ingrauen forme of his per∣son: and the Kingdome of Heauen, none could giue, but God that giues it to all that loue him: and therefore to take away the euill, which we had deserued; and to restore vnto vs that good, whereof we were depriued; God himselfe that made vs, was con∣tented to redeeme vs, by taking our flesh vpon him; Vt natura offendens satisfaceret, That the nature offending might make satisfaction: and because satisfaction could not be made with∣out bloud; for without bloud there is no remission,Heb. 9.22. saith the Apo∣stle;
he was made flesh, that he might die, and shed his bloud for vs;Aug. serm. 101. de tempore. Vt iniusta mors, iustam vinceret mortem, & liberaret nos iustè dum pro nobis occiditur iniustè: That so his vniustly inflicted death, might ouercome our iustly deserued death, and might most rightly free and deliuer vs; because he was most wrongfully slaine for vs, as Saint Augustine speaketh. Secondly, It will be demaunded, why the word, that is the Sonne, should be incarnate and made flesh, rather then the Fa∣ther or the Holy Ghost. Resp. Why the Son rather then the Father, or the Holy Ghost was made man.Saint Augustine thinketh that the cause pertained more speci∣ally vnto the Sonne then to the Father, or to the Holy Ghost, for that the Diuell attempted to vsurpe the dignitie and authority of the Sonne of God, saying in his heart, that he would be like vnto the most highest, that is, the image of the Father, and sought to intrude himselfe into his glory, to be the Prince of this world, and the Head of euery creature, which things were onely pro∣per vnto the Sonne of God; and therfore it behoued the Sonne to come into the world, to ouercome the Diuell, that would haue wronged him, and all other men that were to be members of him. But we finde many other reasons, to shew why the Word was made flesh, rather then the Father, or the Holy Ghost: As First, because it is the office of the Word to declare the minde of GodFirst, because the Incarnation of God was made for the ma∣nifestation of God, but we declare and manifest things by words; and Christ is the word of the Father, the wisedome, the knowledge and the interpreter of his Fathers will, euen as our word is the interpreter of our minde; as Origen and Clemens Alexandrinus doe declare: and therefore the word was rightly incarnate, that God in him might be seene, and heard, and vnderstood of vs, ac∣cording to that saying of the Euangelist, that which wee haue heard and seene,1 Iohn 1.1. and our hands haue handled of the word of life, that declare we vnto you: For as he is , the word, in respect of his person, which is a name of relation vnto the minde, as Sonne is to the Father, so is he the word in respect of his office, i. e. of his office, as he is the second person of the Trinitie: for as it is the propertie and office of the eternall minde, i. e. the Father to be∣get the word, i. e. the Sonne; so it is the propertie and the of∣fice of the Word to declare the Minde: but because this spiri∣tuall,
inuisible, and ineffable Word, as he is God, could neuer be seene, nor heard, nor vnderstood of vs, therefore was he made flesh, that he might be heard and seene. And this the Apostle seemes to shew vnto vs, when hee saith, God heretofore at sundry times,Heb. 1.1. and in diuers manners spake vnto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in these last dayes he hath spoken vn∣to vs by his Sonne; for this is all one, as if he had said, that the word heretofore was vttered by other mens mouthes, but now af∣ter he was made flesh, he spake and reueiled his Father vnto vs by his owne voyce, and with his owne proper mouth: for so Tertullian saith, that he which spake vnto the Fathers, was this word GOD; and so Saint Paul sheweth, when hee brings in God, saying, The Word is neere vnto thee, euen in thy mouth,Rom. 10.8. and in thy heart, and then he expoundeth this word of Christ, saying, This is the Word of Faith which we preach: for they preached Ie∣sus Christ; & so Saint Iohn himselfe seemeth to shew this reason, why he had called Christ the Word, when he saith,John 1.18. The onely be∣gotten Sonne which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared: for this is all one as if he had said, This onely begotten Sonne is therefore the Word, because he declareth the minde of God vnto vs: so when he saith, what we haue heard of the Word of life. i. e. he is therefore the Word, because we haue heard him, and so when he saith, There be three that heare witnesse in Heauen,1 John 5.7. the Fa∣ther, the Word, and the Spirit: for why should he say the Word, when as the name of Father required that he should rather say the Father, the Sonne, and the Spirit; but because the Sonne, as the word of the Father doth beare witnesse vnto vs of his Fathers will: and therefore seeing it was the office of the Word to declare the minde of God, it belonged vnto the Word to be made Flesh, that he might be heard and seene of vs. But then it may be obiected that the Holy Ghost should be incarnate, as well as the Sonne: for Saint Basil saith,Ob. Whether the Holy Ghost is termed the Word. that the Holy Ghost is called , the word, as well as the Sonne, and that hee is therefore called the Word, because hee is the interpreter of the Sonne, euen as the Sonne is the interpreter of the Father; for he shall teach you all things, saith Christ: and to proue this, he citeth those words of the Apostle, that we should take the sword of the Spirit, which is , the Word of God;
and those words in the first Chapter to the Hebrewes, that Christ beareth vp all things with the word of his power,Basilius l 5. c. 11. contra Eunom. Sol. or his migh∣ty Word: that is his Holy Spirit, saith Saint Basil. To this Aquinas answereth, that Saint Basil herein speakes improperly, for that the Sonne of God alone, is properly called the Word; and that Saint Paul by the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, doth not vnderstand the Holy Ghost, but the word which came vnto the Prophets, and was left vnto vs in the holy Scriptures: and that the words of the Author to the Hebrewes, are to be vnderstood of the command of Christ; as if the Apostle had said, that Christ beareth vp all things, and go∣uerneth all things by his mighty command, or according a him∣selfe defineth,Ʋictorinus in l. aduers. Arrium. and would haue all things to be, as Ʋictorinus saith; or else that Christ sustaineth all things by his mighty word, that is, after an Hebrew phrase, by himselfe, which is the mighty Word of his Father,Maldonat. in Iohn 1. as Maldonate saith. Secondly, the Word was made flesh, Propter ordinem seruan∣dum,Secondly, be∣cause God would obserue good order in all things. because God which is the God of order, would keepe good order in all things: As First, that the world might be repayred by the same instrument by which it was created; but the Father made all things by his Word, therefore he would redeeme mankinde by his Word. Secondly, that he which was the essentiall and vncreated image of God, might restore that created image of God, which was corrupted in vs. Thirdly, that the naturall Sonne of God might make vs the adopted sonnes of God. Fourthly, that the Sonne by his example might teach vs the obedience of sonnes. Thirdly, be∣cause God would shunne all inconue∣iences that might arise, if he had not beene incar∣nate.Thirdly, the Word was made flesh, Propter vitandum inconue∣niens; because God would auoide all absurdities that otherwise might seeme to ensue: for, if the Father had beene incarnate, then there had beene two Fathers, and two Sonnes; the Father in the Deitie had beene the Sonne in the Humanitie, and the Sonne in the Dietie had beene the Father of the Humanity, and neither of them had beene of himselfe, without beginning; but he that was the beginning of the Sonne in the Deitie, had had his beginning from the Sonne, in the humanitie; but now
he that is from the Father in the Deitie, is likewise from the Fa∣ther in the humanitie, and he that is the Sonne in the Deitie, is likewise the Sonne in the humanitie: and if the Holy Ghost had beene incarnate, then there had beene two sonnes, one in the Deitie, and another in the humanitie; Et nomen filij ad alterum transiret, qui non esset aeterna natiuitate filius; And the name of Sonne had passed to another, which was not a Sonne by an eternall natiuitie: and therefore in all respects it was fittest, and agreeable to all reason, that the Word should be incarnate, and made flesh, as Saint Augustine saith. But against this it will be obiected,Ob. that seeing Opera trinita∣tis ad extra sunt indiuisa, The outward workes of the Trinitie are indiuisible, and common to each person, so that whatsoeuer any one of them doth, it is done by each one; and that this is an outward worke of the Trinitie, common to each person; each person being an agent in this action; the Fathers power, the Sonnes wisedome, and the Holy Ghost his goodnesse, all concur∣ring in this incarnation: For, First, how can the Creator and the Creature,That all three persons were the makers of the flesh of Christ. especially a creature relapsed from God, be ioyned together without great power? the power of ioyning the disagreeing elements, was very great, & the power of ioyning them to a created spirit, was grea∣ter, but hypostatically to ioyne a creature, disioyned from his Creator vnto an vncreated spirit, must needes be the greatest power that can be. And therefore this incarnation of the Word could neuer haue beene done without the infinite power of God. Secondly, how can the first and the last, be vnited together, without great wisedome? for this Word was the beginning, yea, before the beginning of all things, and Adam was the last of all Gods creatures: And therefore the Word God, and the flesh of man could neuer be vnited without infinite wisedome. Thirdly, how can the Creator communicate himselfe so neerely vnto his Creatures, without the greatest goodnesse that can be? for it was a great benignity and kindnesse of God, to communicate himselfe vnto all creatures by his presence, and it was a greater kindnesse to communicate himselfe to all the godly by his grace, but it is the greatest of all, to vnite himselfe
hypostatically by his spirit, vnto our flesh: And therefore this could not be done without infinite goodnesse, and so in this re∣spect, we find this worke of the incarnation ascribed to each per∣son; for the Father sent me, saith our Sauiour; and I came into the world, saith he of himselfe; and the Holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouer shadow thee, whereby thou mayst conceiue, saith Gabriel vnto the blessed Virgin. And therefore, seeing the whole Trinitie was the Maker of this Word flesh, how can it be but that the whole Trinitie should be incar∣nate and made flesh? Sol. That the Son onely assumed our Flesh.I answere that this worke of the words incarnation, is to bee considered, 1. Inchoatiue. 2. Consummatiue. As it was inchoated and begun. As it is consummated and finished. In the first sense, it is common to all the three persons of the Trinitie, for it was made by them all three; but in the second sense, it was proper onely vnto the Word; because it was assumed onely by the Word,Aug. in Enchy∣rid. C. 38. as Saint Augustine sheweth: for, as if three Maides should spinne and make a garment, and then put it vp∣on one of them to weare, all three should be the makers, yet but one should be the wearer of the same: Euen so, though the Fa∣ther did appoint Christ a body, and this body was conceiued by the Holy Ghost, yet neither the Father, nor the Spirit did assume that body, but only the person of the Sonne of God: and there∣fore Saint Augustine saith truly,Idem. Ser. 3. de temp. that, Impleuet carnem Christi pa∣ter & spiritus sanctus, sed maiestate, non susceptione: The flesh of Christ was filled with the Maiestie of the Father, and of the Ho∣ly Ghost, but it was onely vnited to the person of the Word. Ob.But then againe it may be obiected, that seeing the nature of the Father, and the nature of the Sonne be the very same; for, they be both , of the very selfe-same essence (as I haue sufficiently shewed vnto you before,) and the whole diuine es∣sence, is in euery one of them; therefore how can it be but the Sonne being incarnate, the Father should be incarnate also? Sol.To this we answere briefly, that although the nature of the Father, and the nature of the Sonne be the very same, yet, Ali∣ter est in patre, & aliter est in filio: This very selfe-same essence is
otherwise, or after another manner in the Father,The diuine na∣ture limited in the person of the Sonne, was made Flesh. and after ano∣ther manner in the Sonne; and therefore we say that the Di∣uine nature simply considered cannot be said to be incarnate; Sed natura diuina determinata & limitata in persona filij, But the diuine nature limited and determined in the person of the Son: And this Saint Augustine doth most excellently expresse a∣gainst the Iewes, saying, O Iudae Cytharam respice, &c. Behold, O Iew, the Harpe, when it yeelds sweet and pleasant tune, there be three things that seeme to concurre alike, the skill, the hand, and the string, and yet there is but one sound heard: Ars dictat, manus tangit, chorda resonat, The Art or skill directeth, the hand toucheth, and the string onely soundeth; Tria pariter operantur, they doe all three worke alike, and yet neither the skill, nor the hand doe yeeld the sound, but onely the string: Sic nec pater,Operatio in tri∣bus constat, sed quemadmodum ad solam chor∣dam soni reddi∣tio, sic pertinet ad solum Chri∣stum carnis hu∣manae susceptio. nec spiritus sanctus susceperunt carnem, & tamen cum filio pariter ope∣rantur; So neither the Father, nor the Holy Spirit did assume the flesh, and yet they did all agree in the working and making of this flesh; but as the string alone doth yeeld the musicall har∣mony; so the word alone did assume the flesh; the worke is seene in all three; but as the sound of the musicke pertaineth vnto the string alone, so the assumption of our flesh, pertayneth to the word alone: and if any incredulous Iew, with Nichodemus demaunds, how this Word should be made flesh of a Virgin with∣out the helpe of man; let him tell me how Aarons rod,Aug. de incarnat. Dom. cont. Iu∣daeos. being a drie sticke, could blossome and beare ripe Almonds, and I will tell him how the Virgin did conceiue and beare a Sonne; but he cannot tell the former, though the lesser miracle; and therefore no wonder that I cannot expresse the latter, which is so ineffable a mysterie, saith Saint Augustine. And so you see the first Branch of this Text, touching the person, who was made, the Word, the Sonne, the second person of the blessed Trinity, fully discussed.
BRANCH II. CHAP. I. Of Christ his apparition before his incarnation, and of the con∣ception of Christ; the manner of it, and the reasons why hee was so conceiued. 2. Branch. Tres misturas fe∣cit omnipotens illa maiestas in assumptione carnis nostrae, ita mirabiliter sin∣gularia & sin∣gulariter mirabi∣lia, vt talia nec facta, nec facien∣da sint amplius super terram.SEcondly, We are to consider what hee was made, Flesh; for the Word was made Flesh: Saint Bernard saith, God did three workes, three mixtures, as hee calleth them, in the assumption of our flesh, so singularly wonderfull, and so wonderfully singular, that the like were neuer made before, nor shall be made hereafter vpon the face of the Earth; Coniunct à quippe sunt ad invicem Deus & homo, mater & virgo, fides & cor humanum: For now are ioyned together God and our Flesh, a Mother and a Virgin, a diuine Faith, and a hu∣mane Heart; for the Word, and Soule, and Flesh haue met, and made but one Person. These three are one, and this one is three, not by the confusion of substance, but in the vnity of person; This is the first and most super-excellent mixture, or coniuncti∣on; The second is a Virgin, and a Mother, a thing so admirable & so singular, that since the World beganne it was neuer heard, that shee which brings forth a Childe, should be a Maide, and that shee should be a Mother, which still remaines a Virgin; The third is Faith, and Mans Heart; Inferior quidem, sed non minus forsitan fortis; an inferior copulation, but perhaps not deseruing much lesse admiration: For it is a wonder to see how the Heart of Man can yeeld Faith and beliefe vnto these two, and to be∣leeue that God should be made Man, & that shee should remain a Virgin, which had borne a Sonne; for as Iron and a Gally-cup can neuer be coupled together,Bernard. Ser. 3. in vigil. natiui∣tatis. so no more can these two, vn∣lesse they be glewed and coupled by Gods Spirit: And therefore this is an excellent coniunction; the second is more excellent, but the first is most excellent, that the Word should be made Flesh.
But to descend a little into more particular examination of the same. We must obserue, that he doth not say,That there is a great diffe∣rence betwixt Christ his ap∣parition in the shape of man, and the as∣sumption of our flesh to be made man. The Word ap∣peared in Flesh, but the Word was made Flesh; To note vnto vs a speciall difference betwixt his apparitions in the forme and shape of man, vnto the Fathers of the Old Testament, and his incarnation, and making himselfe man now in the time of the New Testament: For it is most certaine, that this Word, at diuers times, did appeare, and conferre with the Fathers, in the visible forme and shape of man. It is not improbable, nor to many men incredible, that hee assumed vpon him the forme and shape of Man, when hee crea∣ted man, and so made man not onely in his owne Image, which he had as God; i. e. In holinesse and true righteousnesse, but also like vnto himselfe, in respect of that forme and shape which hee then assumed, and which he intended to be made himselfe there∣after; for which cause it is said, that hee made man in his owne Image and likenesse, to shew by these two words,That Christ diuers times as∣sumed the form of a Man, be∣fore hee was made man. that as he pur∣posed to bee made like vnto this man, which hee was now to make, so this man should be made like vnto him in a double respect; that is, both of this forme assumed, and of those Diuine Excellencies wherewith he should be indued. And this may be collected out of Moses, where he saith; That Adam heard the voyce of the Lord God, walking in the Garden; For God, as he is a God, hath neither voyce to speake, nor feete to walke, but assu∣ming the forme and shape of a man, hee did both walke and talke with him: And in respect of this bodily presence of God, the man did specially seeke to hide himselfe among the Trees of the Gar∣den, when hee heard his voyce, and not before.Gen. 3.8. But to Abraham, it is apparant that he appeared two seuerall times at least. First, In the plaine of Mamre, for Moses saith, not onely,Gen. 18.13.20. that the Lord talked with Abraham, but he saith also, that Abraham calleth him, The Iudge of all the World;Verse 25. which can be ascribed to none but Christ, which is the Iudge of quicke and dead. But against this it may be obiected,Ob. that the Apostles which are the best Interpreters of the Old Testament, doe interpret this of the Angels, and not of Christ; as the Authour of the Epi∣stle to the Hebrewes sheweth, saying; Be not forgetfull to enter∣taine
strangers,Heb. 13.2. for thereby some haue entertained Angels vna∣wares. That Christ is often called an Angell.To this I answere briefly, that an Angell, being a name of Office, and not of Nature, that signifieth a Messenger, or one that is sent: Christ is oftentimes called an Angell, because he was sent from God, to performe those Offices that he did in those assumed formes, on the behalfe of God; So he is called, The Angell of the Couenant:Esay 63.9. And so Esayas saith, That the Angell of Gods presence should saue his people; that is, Iesus Christ: for it is he, and none but he that shall saue his people from their sinnes. And therefore I say, that which appeared vnto Abraham, was none other but Iesus Christ, accompanied with two Angels; to shew both the mystery of the blessed Trinity, and the soueraignty of Christ ouer all his Creatures; and therefore Abraham speakes to one, as to the Lord, and calles but one of them the Iudge of all the World. Secondly, He appeared vnto Abraham in his returne from the Conquest of the foure Kings;Ieron. in Epist. ad Eust. Petrus Cunaeus de republ. Heb. for though Saint Ierome, and diuers others old and new Writers, of good esteeme in the Church of Christ, doe reiect the iudgement of one, which in Saint Ieromes time did say, that Melchisedecke which met A∣braham and blessed him, was the Sonne of God; and that opi∣nion of Origen likewise, who thought this Melchisedecke to be an Angell of God, and saith, that he was one of the Inhabi∣tants of Canaan, and a King of Shalem, and alledgeth for the confirmation of his opinion, the iudgement of Ireneus, Hippo∣litus, Eusebius Caesarensis, Eusebius Emissenus, Apollinarius, and Eustathius, first Bishop of Antioch; and though some of our la∣test Diuines haue imagined him to be Seth, the sonne of Noah; yet if we search out this truth without partiality, we shall finde this man to be none other then Iesus Christ, the Sonne of God. For, That Melchise∣decke was no Inhabitant of Canaan.First, it is not likely that he should be an Inhabitant of Ca∣naan, and a King of Salem: first, because it is certaine that hee must be a greater and a holier man then Abraham; for the lesser is euer blessed of the greater. Secondly, because S. Paul explaining the story of Melchisedecke, saith, .
He was first, by interpretation, King of Righteousnesse,Heb. 7.2. and after that also King of Salem, which is (saith he) King of Peace: So that although there was a towne in Canaan called Salem, yet the Apostle sheweth that he was called Melchisedeck, not be∣cause hee was King of such a towne, but because hee was indeed a King of Peace. Thirdly, because then,Verse 2. there must be of necessitie another euerlasting Priesthood, beside the Priest∣hood of Christ; For that this Melchisedeck had, neither begin∣ning of dayes, nor end of time, but remaineth a Priest for euer.Verse 3. And whereas they that would haue this Melchisedeck to be a mortall man King of Salem, doe answere hereunto, and say that he was not eternall; but is so said to be, by the Apostle, to haue neither beginning of dayes, nor end of time, because the Scripture, especially there where he is named Melchisedeck makes no mention of it; I say that this is a weake and simple answere; for how many Leuites, Priests, and worthy men, haue we in Scripture, whose beginnings and endings are not men∣tioned? and shall we therefore say that they were eternall? Fourthly, because then, this Priest must needes be of a more ex∣cellent order and perfection, then the Leuiticall Priesthood; and this is not like to be, that in Salem, a towne in the midst of Ca∣naan, there should be now a more excellent order, then that which God himselfe gaue vnto the Priesthood of the Iewes; and therefore I conclude,That Melchi∣sedeck was the Sonne of God in a humane shape. that this Melchisedeck could not be a∣ny mortall man. And Secondly, it is most probable, that it was none other then Iesus Christ. First, because the Apostle saith,Ʋerse 7. that he was greater then A∣braham, which is said to be the Father of the faithfull. Secondly,Heb. c. 5. v. 11. because the Apostle going to speake of this Mel∣chisedecke saith, that he had many things to say concerning him, which were , hard to be explained; which certainly he would neuer haue said, had he not vnderstood this Melchisedeck to haue beene some excellent and ineffable person. Thirdly, because the Apostle saith not,Verse 8. whose death is not men∣tioned by Moses, for so he might be dead, though his death is not spoken of: but he saith, that Dauid testifieth of him , that
he liueth, to shew the difference betwixt this Priest and those Leuiticall Priests which dyed. Heb. 7 3.Fourthly, because the Apostle saith, that this Melchisedeck, was like vnto the Sonne of God, euen as Nebuchadnezzer saith, that the fourth man, which walked with the three chil∣dren, in the fiery furnace, was like vnto the Sonne of God; So here the Apostle saying that he was ,Dan. 3.25. like the Sonne of God, meaneth no doubt that he assumed a body of the same likenesse and habite, and countenance, as afterward he meant to vnite personally vnto himselfe; for that it is an vsuall thing in Scripture, to say, that he which is, is like vnto himselfe, as where the Apostle saith,Phil. 2.7.8. that he was found in shape as a man, and tooke vp∣on him the forme of a seruant, and was made in the likenesse of men, that is, he was made indeed a true and a naturall man. Fiftly, because Abraham did giue vnto him Tythe of all, as perceiuing vnder that visible forme, and shape of man an inuisi∣ble Diety to subsist, to whom Tythe is only due, and euerlastingly due, because he is an euerlasting Priest. And therefore I say that this Melchisedeck was no mortall man, but the immortall Sonne of God, which assuming this visible shape, did appeare vnto A∣braham and offered (as a type of our blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper) Bread and Wine vnto him, after his victory, o∣uer his enemies. And it may be that our Sauiour had respect hereunto,Iohn 8.56. when he said, that Abraham saw his dayes and reioy∣ced, i. e. not onely with the eyes of faith, (as all the rest of the Patriarchs and Prophets did) but also in a visible shape, which he assumed, like vnto that whereunto he was afterward to be vnited. So that man which wrestled with Iacob was none other but the man Christ Iesus: for himselfe said, that Iacob should be called Israel,Gen. 32.28.30. a wrestler and preuailer with God; and Iacob cal∣led the name of the place Peniel; because he had seene God face to face: And so that man which appeared vnto Iosua, and came as a Captaine of the heast of the Lord,Josua 5.14. was none other then Iesus Christ, as Peter Martyr doth most excellently by many arguments confirme. Whereby you see Christ did heretofore assume vnto himselfe humane formes, wherein he appeared vnto the Fathers, to be as a
praeludium of his Incarnation; but in none of these apparitions, and assumptions of such formes, was he euer said to be made the thing that he assumed, or to vnite himselfe hypostatically vn∣to any of the said formes: for those bodies he formed of the ayre, or of nothing, and when he had finished the worke, for which he had assumed them: Tum redit in nihilum, quod fuit ante nihil. Then it returned into that, out of which it was framed. But now the Euangelist saith,The concepti∣on of the Word. that this word did not onely appeare, or assume vnto himselfe our flesh for a time, to discharge some speciall offices, and then to depose, and to lay aside the same againe, but that he was made flesh; that is, really made man: like one of vs (sinne onely excepted) and eternally to remaine man for euer and euer. And therefore that we may truely vn∣derstand this point how this word was made flesh, we must well consider these two especiall things. 1. The manner of his conception.Two things to be considered for the vnder∣standing of Christs con∣ception. 2. The matter or substance from which he was formed. First, the word , made, here vsed, doth plainly shew vnto vs, (as both Saint Chrysostome and Tolet doe obserue) Mirabi∣lem eius conceptionem, non virili virtute sed diuina potentia eum esse conceptum; His wonderfull conception, that he was made, not by any vertue of mans seede, but by the power of Gods Spirit, who without any seede of man, did frame and make the man Christ in the wombe of his Mother: and therefore we are to obserue. Of this wonderfull and diuine conception. 1. The reason. 2. The manner. 3. The end. First,Neuer any one was made, as Christ was made. we reade that mankinde before Christ his comming was made three manner of wayes; First, without any man to be his father, or any woman to be his mother, as Adam; Se∣condly, of a man without a woman, as Euah; Thirdly, of man and woman, as all the off-spring of Adam: but Christ af∣ter a fourth & a more wonderfull manner, was made of a woman, without the helpe of a man; and so we neuer reade of any o∣ther before him, nor of any other after him; for as the Flowers (saith Protagoras) Solummodo habent in coelo patrem, & in terra
solummodo matrem, Haue onely a Father in Heauen; that is, the Sunne, by whose heate and vertue they grow; and a mother onely in earth, i. e. the ground from whence they spring; so Christ, the flower of the roote of Iesse, hath onely a Father in Hea∣uen without a mother; and a mother onely in earth without a father: and yet he is not another from his father, and another from his mother; Sed aliter est a patre, & aliter est ex matre, But he is otherwise from his father, and otherwise from his mo∣ther; that is, a true God, of God his father; and a true man, of the Virgin his mother; of two natures subsisting in one and the selfe-same person. And the reason why he was borne of a woman,Ambros. in Luc. 24. Why Christ was borne of a Woman. (as Saint Ambrose saith) was, Ne perpetui reatus apud viros opprobrium sustinerent mulieres, Lest women should still suffer the reproach of perpetuall guiltinesse and blame, in the sight of men, for their first transgression; for her yeelding vnto the Serpent, and the seducing of her Husband, made her and all her Sexe to bee deseruedly subiect vnto much reproach: and therefore though because the mankinde is more noble, Christ would be made a Man, yet because women should not be contemned, he was contented to be borne of a woman; Et sic for∣mam viri assumendo,Aug. cont. faust. & de foemina nascendo, vtrum{que} sexum hoc modo honorandum indicauit; And so he did sufficiently honour both sexes; the men, by assuming the forme of a man, and the women, by taking his flesh from a woman; that as a woman was the meanes to make man a sinner, so she might be the instrument to bring him a Sauiour: but he would be borne of such a wo∣man that was a Ʋirgin, because it became not God to haue any mother, but a maide; and it beseemed not a maide to haue any sonne,Barrad. l. 7. c. 10. but a God, saith Barradius. And so he was made of a woman,Why Christ was borne of a Virgin. of a woman that was a Virgin, and of a Virgin with∣out the helpe of a man, and that for diuers reasons; As, First, because that woman was a Ʋirgin by whom sinne en∣tred into the world,Jrenaeus. l. 5. c. 19. (as Irenaeus thinketh) and all probability confirmeth. Secondly, because God had promised, that the seeds of the wo∣man,Gen. 3.15. that is, of the woman onely, without the helpe of man; should breake the serpents head:Esay 7.14. and therefore Esayas saith, Be∣hold a Virgin shall conceiue and beare a sonne.
Thirdly, because he was to be most pure, without any the least spot or contagion of sinne; which hee could not haue beene, if he had beene borne after the vsuall manner of men: for as Adam, so all the posterity of Adam begetting Children, doe beget the nature of man,Iohn 3.6. together with the guilt and corrup∣tion of nature: And therefore our Sauiour saith, Whatsoeuer is borne of flesh, (that is, after the vsuall manner of flesh and bloud) is flesh. i. e. fleshly, corrupted, and defiled. Fourthly, Because this Word had a naturall Father in Heauen, and therefore hee was to haue none in Earth, lest thereby hee should be said to haue two Fathers. Fiftly, Because he was to be a Priest, after the order of Mel∣chisedecke, who was without Father, and without Mother, to shew that Christ should be , without Mother as he was a God, and , without Father as he was a Man: And so I might collect many other reasons, why this Word being to be made Flesh, would be made of a Ʋirgin; but I will proceed. Secondly, Touching the Agent,Of the manner how Christ was conceiued. and the manner of the act, how this substance should be framed, and this Child should be conceiued without the helpe of man, Saint Luke doth most plainely and fully declare vnto vs, saying;Luc. 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the highest shall ouer-shadow thee: Which words are not to be vnderstood so, as if he were begot∣ten spermaticcos per concubitum, By any carnall effusion of seminall humour, as Iansenius seemeth to imagine; nor of the Essence, or substance of the Holy Ghost, as some Heretickes haue said: for so the Holy Ghost being God, should haue begotten him not man, but God; Quia omne generans generat sibi simile, Because euery begetter begets his like; and,John 3.6. that which is borne of the Spi∣rit, is Spirit. ; But hee was conceiued by way of manufacture, that is, by the handy worke, or operation, or by the vertue of the Holy Ghost, whereby the Virgin did conceiue, as Iustine Martyr saith;Just. Martyr. Apol. 2. pro Chri∣stianis. Aug Ser. 3. de temp. Basilius. ser. de natiuitate. or else by the energeticall command and or∣dination of the Holy Ghost, as Saint Augustine saith; or by the benediction and blessing of the Holy Ghost, as Saint Basil saith▪ whereby that part of the Virgins bloud, or seede, whereof the body of Christ was to be framed, was so clensed and sanctified, that in it there should be neither spot nor staine of originall pollu∣tion:
(for otherwise the seede of that blessed Virgin, before it was sanctified by the Holy Ghost, was tainted and infected with sin;) and then was so composed & framed, that it became a perfect Christ.The manner of Christ his con∣ception, is inef∣fable. And because wee should not search too much into this mystery, to know the manner of this conception; it is said, that the power of the Almighty should ouer-shadow her: To teach vs, that as we cannot perfectly see, nor know the things that are couered or ouer-shadowed from our eyes; so we cannot perfectly know the manner of this conception. Scio quod verbum caro factum est, sed quomodo factum sit, nescio; miraris quia ego nescio, omnis creatura ig∣norat: I know that the World was made Flesh, but how he was made, I know not; neither is it any wonder that I know not, because euery creature is ignorant of it,Chrysost. Hom. 5. saith Saint Chrysostome: And therefore as the Prophet Dauid saith of himselfe, I am fearefully and wonderfully made;Psal. 139 13. So we may say of this Sonne of Dauid, that he is most wonderfully made: for, First, His Mother was sanctified with the fulnesse of grace, with the ouer-shadowing of the Holy Ghost, and with the inha∣bitation of the Sonne of God; And therefore Saint Bernard saith, that shee was, Sine pudore faecunda, sine grauamine grauida, & sine dolore puerpera; Great with Childe, without breach of chastity; a Mother, and yet a Maide; a Woman, and yet escaping the curse of all Women: for the Law had accursed them all; Virgins because they were barren,Luc. 1.25. and the married Wiues, because they should beare in sorrow;Gen. 3.16. but the blessed Virgin escaped both, Quia virgo genuit & dolorem non sensit; For that shee conceiued without sinne, and was deliuered without paine; as Saint Augustine sheweth, by the example of the Sunne, that shines through a glasse, and yet breakes it not; and of the fire that Moses saw in the bush, and yet consumed it not; but whether shee felt any paines or not, I cannot tell; onely this wee may be sure of, that the greatnesse of her ioy and gladnesse, to bring forth such a Sonne, might well swallow vp the greatest paine and griefe: And as shee con∣ceiued a Virgin,That the bles∣sed Virgin continued still a Virgin. so shee continued a Virgin, as all the most iudi∣cious Writers haue affirmed; for it is neither piety to speake, nor reason to thinke, that Ioseph being so iust, and so godly a man, as the holy Scriptures doe testifie of him; and being eighty yeeres old, when hee was espoused vnto Mary, (as Epiphanius
saith) should haue any desire to know her, whom hee knew did beare his Sauiour; or that shee especially should yeeld to the desire of any man, after she had conceiued, & brought forth a God. Secondly, Though the substance and the parts of other men, in ordinary generation be framed successiuely by degrees; for the seminall humor, first becomes an Embryo, then a body inorganicall, then are the liuer, heart, and braine fashioned, and then the rest one after another perfected; and it is at least forty dayes,That Christ was conceiued a perfect man, in the first mo∣ment of his conception. before the body of any Childe in the wombe be fully for∣med; yet Christ in the very instant of his conception, Quoad perfectionem partium, non graduum, In respect of the perfection of all parts, was made a perfect man in body and soule, voide of sinne, and full of grace: And so in a moment, Totam naturam hu∣manam vniendo formauit, & formando vniuit; He was perfectly framed, and instantly vnited vnto this eternall Word, perfect God and perfect man; because it is the property of the Holy Ghost, Subito operari, To worke instantly and perfectly: And therefore Damascene saith, ;Damascen l. 3. c. 2. de fide orth. as soone as euer the Flesh of Christ was conceiued, it was presently vnited, and made the Flesh of this Word God:Aug l. de fide ad Pet. c. 18. And Saint Augustine biddeth vs to beleeue assuredly, Carnem in vtero non esse conceptam, prius∣quam susciperetur à verbo; That the Flesh of Christ was not con∣ceiued in the wombe, before it was assumed of the Word: And so Saint Hierome vpon the words of the Prophet Ieremy,Ierem. 3. Pet. Martyr. in Symbol. Amand. Polan. Syntag. theol. de persona Christi, l. 6. c. 14. where he saith, that a Woman shall compasse a Man; is of the same minde: And not onely the ancient, but also the moderne Writers doe most of them agree in this same point. And therefore when we consider how wonderfully and inex∣plicably this Word was made Flesh; how a Starre gaue light vnto the Sunne, a Branch did beare the Vine, a Creature gaue being vn∣to the Creator; how the Mother was yonger then what shee bare, and a great deale lesser then what shee contained; and how this Childe was suddenly made, perfectly made, holily made, without the helpe of man; wee may well say with the Apostle, that great is the mystery of godlinesse:1 Tim. 3.16. And we should say with Saint Augustine, Rem credo, modum non quaero; I doe most faith∣fully beleeue the matter, but I will not curiously search into the manner of his conception.
Christ was conceiued of a Virgin, that he might be free from all sinne.Thirdly, Touching the end, and finall cause of this his ex∣traordinary and miraculous conception; It was, as I haue partly shewed before, two-fold. First, That he might be pure, and free from all originall sinne; because it was requisite, that hee which should saue sinners, should be himselfe free from all sinne. Ob.But against this it may be obiected, that all those which were descended from Adams loynes, did sinne in Adam; for if the roote be holy,Rom. 11.16. the branches are likewise hol; but if the roote be rot∣ten, the branches must needes be corrupted: And Saint Paul saith, That by one man sinne entred into the World,Rom. 5.12. and by sinne death; and so death went ouer all men, because all men had sinned: But Christ ac∣cording to the Flesh, descended from the Ioynes of Adam; for so Saint Luke fetcheth his Pedegree,Luc. 3. vt. euen from Adam: and therefore Christ cannot be quite free from all the contagion of sinne. Sol.I answere, that the guilt of Adams sinne, diffused it selfe one∣ly vpon such as were in him, both according to the substance of their flesh,That Christ commeth not from Adam af∣ter the vsuall manner of ge∣neration. Et secundum rationem seminalem, and according to the carnall and vsuall way of propagation, as Aquinas saith: But Christ, though he came from Adam, according to the substance of his flesh, yet was hee not produced from him according to the ordinary way of naturall generation; for he was conceiued of the Holy Ghost, and borne of a pure Ʋirgin, who neuer knew man carnally at any time: And therefore it is most true, which Saint Peter saith;1 Pet. 2.22. That he did no sinne, neither was any guile found in his mouth:Heb. 7.26. and that also which Saint Paul saith, He was pure and vndefiled, separate from sinners. Secondly, He was thus conceiued in all purity, that hee might thereby hide and couer our impure conception from the sight of God: for he was conceiued after a new manner, that he might take away that sinne which humane generation attra∣cteth, and getteth, by the accompanying and coupling of sinne∣full flesh. And so Saint Augustine saith; God was in carnate in the wombe of his Mother a Virgin,Aug. de fide ad Petrum. c. 2. without any carnall copula∣tion with any man, and without any lust of the conceiuing Vir∣gin; that by the God man, which (being conceiued without any lust) the inuiolate wombe of the Virgin hath brought forth, that sinne might be washed away, which all other men that are be∣gotten
with mans seede, are infected withall; because the con∣dition of our birth is such, that our Mothers cannot performe that worke of fruitfulnesse, vnlesse they first leese the virginity of their flesh; and so with the emission of seede,That it was not the purity of the Virgin, but the working of the holy Ghost, that caused Christ to be conceiued without sinne. send forth an in∣fection of sinne, which corrupteth both the begetters and the begotten: And therefore hence it is apparant, that seeing he was not onely sanctified by the Holy Ghost, that he might be holy, and without staine of sinne, and so fitted to be vnited to the person of the Sonne of God, but was also made by the Holy Ghost without any helpe of man; we neede not runne with the Franciscan Friars to the purity of his Mothers conception and birth, to make him pure, and without sinne: for indeed, it is the manner of his conception by the Holy Ghost, and the sanctifying of that substance which he assumed of his Mother, and the pur∣ging of it from all disposition or inclination vnto euill; and not the purity of his Mothers conception, or her want of originall corruption, that frees our Sauiour Christ from all imputation of originall infection: And therefore though we acknowledge her the most blessed amongst Women, and sanctified aboue the or∣dinary degrees of any other man, or woman;Rom. 5.12. yet to say that shee was no wayes tainted with originall sinne, I dare not af∣firme; because both the Scriptures,Luc. 2.48. and those fruits that we read of, which doe spring from this naturall roote,John 2.4. doe sufficiently seeme vnto mee to contradict the same. And so you see the manner how the substance of his man-hood was conceiued. CHAP. II. Of the matter whereof the Flesh of Christ was formed and that he had a true naturall Body. SEcondly, We are to consider the matter from which the Flesh of Christ was composed; for as there are diuers kindes of bodies, coele∣stiall bodies, aeriall bodies, and terrestriall bo∣dies: So there are diuers kindes of Flesh; for all flesh is not the same flesh,1 Cor. 15. but there is one kinde of flesh of Men, another flesh of Beasts, another of Fishes,1 Cor. 15.39. another
of Birds; And therefore to expresse what kinde of flesh hee tooke,Gal. 4.4. Saint Paul saith; He was made of a Woman: that is, of the flesh and bloud and substance of his Mother; and so he saith, That he was made of the seede of Dauid:Rom. 1.3. And therefore it must needes follow,Heb. 4.15. that hee was made in all things like vnto his bre∣thren, sinne onely excepted; for the seede of the Parents, is the first matter and substance whereof the man is made. And if it be true what Aristotle and the Phylosophers doe affirme, that Se∣men patris in substantiam fatus non cadit, sed ad menstruum mulieris se habet tanquam artifex ad artificium; The seede of the man doth not fall into the substance of the Childe, but doth so dispose the seede of the woman, as a workeman frameth and disposeth his worke, to make the same into the forme of man, (as this is most probable to be true, although Galenus and the Physicians say the contrary,) then haue we no reason at all to thinke that hee tooke not all the whole nature of man, because he had another worker to dispose and to frame the same substance into the forme of man, seeing he was made of the same whole substance as all other men are made of; and especially, seeing hee had a farre more excellent agent to worke the same, then any seede of man can be: for seeing, Ibi potior effectus, vbi nobilior est causa; The effect is euer better where the cause is more excellent: Reason it selfe sheweth, that we haue no reason, to thinke that he was defectiue in any thing, that pertained to the perfection of hu∣mane nature, or of the naturall properties of the same. And therefore seeing he was made of a woman; i. e. of the seede and substance of the woman, as all other men be, differing onely in the manner of his conception, or in the agent and worker of his substance, which made him free from all sinne, (because to the same end he was conceiued by the Holy Ghost) which all other men could not be, (because they are conceiued by the helpe of mans seede,) it is most apparant, that he assumed, 1. All our humane nature, that is, a true humane body, and a reasonable humane soule. 2. All our naturall properties and infirmities, sinne onely excepted. That Christ was made a perfect man.First, That he was a perfect man, of a reasonable soule and hu∣mane flesh subsisting, it may be thus confirmed.
First, because he is a perfect Mediator: for he cannot be a per∣fect Mediator except he be a perfect man: but the Apostle saith,1 Tim. 2.5. that there is one Mediator, i. e. one perfect and absolute Media∣tor betwixt God and man, euen the Man Christ Iesus; there∣fore he must needs be a perfect man. Secondly, because he is a Priest; for euery Priest by the Law was to be perfect in all parts, or if he was maimed in any part, he was to offer no sacrifice vnto GOD; but Christ is a Priest for euer; therefore he must needes be a perfect man,Psal. 110.4. wanting neither soule nor body. Thirdly, because he is our sacrifice; for the Law requireth that euery sacrifice should be perfect, and to want no part, nor to haue any blemish at all; but Christ is our sacrifice, and hath offe∣red vp himselfe a sweet smelling sacrifice vnto God for vs: and therefore hee must needs bee perfect, without defect, without blemish. Fourthly, because the whole nature of man, that is both body and soule, was to be redeemed, for that both body and soule were captiuated vnto Satan:Matth. 18.11. but the Sonne of Man came to seeke and to saue that which was lost: Therefore, hee must consist both of body and soule;Fulgent. l. 1. de Mysterio re∣demption. ad Trasim. That Christ had a true humane body. for seeing the diuine pitty was contented to de∣liuer all, it behoued the diuine Maiesty to assume all: saith Fulgentius. And more particularly, that he had a true and a perfect hu∣mane body it may be thus proued, and shewed vnto vs. First, by the Scriptures of the old Testament, for the Lord said in Paradise,Gen. 3.15. that the seed of the woman should breake the Ser∣pents head: and afterward vnto Abraham,Gen. 22.18. in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; then to Isaac, for in Isaac shall thy seed be called; then to Iacob, for Iacob haue I loued,c. 21.12. and Esau haue I hated; then to Iuda, for the scepter shall not depart from Iuda, vntill Shilo come; then to Issay,Malach. 1.2. for a rod shall come out of the roote of Issay; and then to Dauid,Gen. 49.19. for I will cause the branch of Righteousnesse to grow vp vnto Dauid:Esay 11.1. and because he was the best and the worthyest of all the Kings of Israel, for he was a man according to Gods owne heart, Et rex super vniuersum Israel;Jer. 23.5. and a King ouer all Israel; therefore all the Prophets after him, doe still play vpon his Harpe, and alwayes inculcate vpon this
point, that the Messias should come of the seed of Dauid: for the Lord had sworne vnto Dauid,Psal. 132.12. saying, Of the fruit of thy body will I set one vpon thy throne; and therefore the Prophet Esay saith, that there should come forth a rod of the stocke of Issay, and a graffe should grow out of his roote; and the Prophet Ieremy saith, that he would raise vnto Dauid a righteous branch;Quo supra. As I said be∣fore. And therfore seeing he is the seed of Abraham, the seed of Dauid,That Christ was made of the very sub∣stance of his Mother. the fruit of Dauids bellie, the rod of Dauid, and the branch of Dauid; it is most apparant that he took vpon him the substance of Dauid; for who can deny but that the seed, the flower, and the branch is of the same nature and substance that the tree is of, which beareth the flower and the branch? why then should we be more cruell against our Sauiour Christ, which is the branch of Dauid, and the flower of the Ʋirgin his Mother, thē we are against the flowers of the field, by denying that vnto him, which we yeeld vnto them; for seeing he is the flower of the Virgin; therefore it is apparant, that as the flower of a rose cannot spring forth of a Vine-tree, so no more can the flesh of Christ, take his originall of any other thing then the body of the Ʋirgin. Secondly, this may be proued by the Scriptures of the New Testament, for the Angell Gabriel said vnto Mary, that she should conceiue and beare a Sonne, and Elizabeth saith of that sonne, Blessed is the fruit of thy wombe, but what is it to conceiue, but to administer part of her substance vnto her sonne? and what is it to be the fruit of the wombe, but to be of the same substance as his mother was of? for how can that be called the fruit of a tree, that neuer had the nature of a tree; for I would suppose it to bee madnesse, to call a Pomegranate the fruit of the Orange tree; and therefore it was as great a madnesse to call Christ the fruit of Maries wombe, if he had brought his body with him, either from Heauen, or from any other place; and the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes saith,Heb. 2.14. That for as much as the children were parta∣kers of flesh and bloud, he himselfe also tooke part of the same: And againe,Heb. 10.5. he bringeth in Christ himselfe, saying; Sacrifice and of∣fering thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me: And therefore, when the Apostles thought that they had seene a phan∣tasme,Luke 24.39. or a Spirit, he said vnto them, Handle me and see, because a
Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you see me haue: and aboue all,Gal. 4.4. the words , vsed by Saint Paul, and , here vsed by the Euangelist, which signifie to take our nature vpon him, and to be made flesh, if they be diligently marked, and well vnderstood, doe make it most apparantly plaine; that the Sonne of God tooke vnto himselfe personally, the true nature of man, and the very substance of his mother: for the Apostle doth not say, Factus de muliere, sed factus ex muliere; Made in a woman, but made of a woman, (as Nicolaus de Gorram well obserueth) euen as the bread is made of the wheate, and Wine of Grapes: and therefore though Christ had his Principium formale, His formall beginning from the Holy Ghost, yet it is most certaine, that hee had Principium materiale, his whole matter and substance from the body of his Mother. Thirdly, the same truth is confirmed by the vniforme con∣sent of all Orthodoxe antiquity; as the great Councell of Chalcedon, that had in it 630. Bishops;Fulgentius l. 2. de persona Christi. the Councell of Late∣ran, the Councell of Toledo, Tertullian, in his booke De Carne Christi, Fulgentius, Saint Basil, Saint Augustine, Venerable Bede, and diuers others, whose pithy sayings,Basilius in l. de hum. Christi generat. and vnanswerable ar∣guments to confirme this point, I might here alledge; but that Theodoret, Leo, Vigilius, and Gelasius, haue so fully collected what the Fathers before them had written hereof,Aug de trinit. l. 13. c. 18. that more proofe neede not be required, and more excellent arguments cannot be composed, for the manifestation of any truth;Beda in 11. Luc. l. 4. c. 48. and therefore not willing to write Iliads after Homer, I referre my Reader vnto them: if hee desires any further comprobation of this point. And yet for all this, Macedonius and Valentinus affirmed,L. 2. de trini∣tate. L. de diuina maiest. huma∣nitatis Christi. that Christ brought with him a celestiall body from Heauen, and that Dogge Seruetus, and his fellow Memnon taught, that the Body of Christ was begotten of the substance and essence of his Fa∣ther; and so Apelles, Marcion, and Apollinaris, auouched that he had an aeriall body, and a syderiall flesh: So Gasper Swenkfeldius saith, that Christ in respect of his humanity, is a true God, as if his very flesh had beene begotten of God, as Seruetus said;Bucanus lo. 2. p. 21. Loc. com. so Mani∣chaeus saith, that he had but an imaginary body; a phantasme on∣ly in shew, and no true body in substance, and so the Anabaptists
of our time do now auouch it, that he tooke not vpon him the very nature of man, nor the very flesh of the Virgin; but that he had onely the shew and phantasme of a man, which passed the wombe of his Mother,Cochlaeus in l. de erroribus. Monaster. Anabap. as water passeth through a Conduit: and this is one of their most principall points, as Iohannes Chochlaeus witnesseth. And therfore to maintaine their damnable errors, to obscure this cleere light of veritie, and to shew themselues Grand Captaines of that Arch-Hereticke and aduersary of Christ and all Christians, the Diuell, they doe obiect, First, that Christ himselfe saith, No man ascendeth into Heauen, but he that descended from Heauen,Iohn 3.13. the Sonne of Man which is in Heauen: And againe, speaking of the Iewes, he saith, You are from below,Iohn 8.23. 1 Cor 15.47. I am from aboue, you are of this world, I am not of this world. And that Saint Paul saith, The first man is of the Earth Earthy, but the second Man, i. e. Christ was from heauen heauenly; and therefore (say they) he had the substance of his flesh from Heauen and not from the substance of his Mother. Sol.I answere that all these and the like places, are spoken of the whole person of Christ, to whom the properties of each nature, in respect of the communication of properties (which hereaf∣ter I shall more fully declare vnto you) may be fitly ascribed; and they teach vs, that the Sonne of God descended from hea∣uen, not by any change of place, but by his voluntary humbling of himselfe,That we must not referre that to the body of Christ which is spo∣ken of the whole person of Christ. to receiue the forme of a seruant, and that hee was conceiued after a Heauenly manner, by the operation of the Ho∣ly Ghost, and not after any Earthly generation; and therefore they doe impiously and most falsly referre that to the substance of his flesh, which is indeed spoken of the whole person of Christ, and of the heauenly manner of his conception; for though it be true that I should say, I am a reasonable creature, which doth both heare and vnderstand; yet doth this no way proue, that my Body alone without the soule, is such, or can doe either of these; euen so, though Christ saith, that he descended from Heauen; be∣cause he was a God that euer was in Heauen; yet that doth no way proue that his flesh which he assumed on earth, descended from heauen: because hee had that from his Mother, and brought it not downe from aboue. And that he is not of this world, but from aboue, or from Hea∣uen
heauenly, is nothing else, but that he is not worldly minded, or swayed with the lusts of the flesh, or any wayes earthly affe∣cted; and this (though in a farre inferiour degree to him) hee saith of the Apostles, You are not of this world,Iohn 15.19. because (as Saint Paul saith of all Christians) they minde not the things of this world, but haue their conuersation in Heauen?Phil. 3.30.20. Secondly, they say that in what body he appeared to the Fa∣thers  of the Old Testament, he appeared in the like body to the Apostles, and Disciples in the New Testament; but he appeared vnto the Patriarchs in no true body, but onely in the shew and shape of a body; therefore he appeared in no true body to the Apostles. To this I answere, first, that the minor is false,Sol. That Christ appeared to the Patriarchs in a true body. for he appea∣red vnto the Fathers in a true body, as may be easily proued from those actions, of eating, drinking, walking and such like; and when he had ended that businesse, for which he was sent of his Father, he deposed that body, which for that end hee had assumed; and so he laid downe his body againe; because hee had not as yet, really and hypostatically vnited himselfe vnto the same. Secondly,Christ in for∣mer times did but assume a body for some speciall end, now he was made flesh to remaine man for euer. I say that if it were so that he appeared vnto the Fathers in a phantasme, yet it followeth not that he did so like∣wise vnto the Apostles; for before, he assumed it onely for a time, to performe some one speciall act; but now he is made flesh, which he hath really vnited vnto himselfe for euer, to performe the greatest worke in the world, the redemption of mankinde: and therefore S. Iohn to expresse the truth thereof so fully as words could doe it, saith, that himselfe and the rest of his fel∣low Apostles did beare witnesse of that which they saw with their eyes, and heard with their eares,1 John 21. and their hands had handled of the word of life: and that this word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs;Iohn 1.14. which was neuer spoken of any of the formes that hee assumed in the Old Testament. For though wee reade that hee appeared vnto the Fathers at sundry times, and in diuers formes,Heb. 1.1. yet we doe neuer reade, that he made himselfe of no reputation, by taking those formes vpon him;Phil. .7. or that therefore he was made to be the things that he appeared to be; because he neuer assumed them vnto himselfe, as to vnite them personally vnto himselfe.
Thirdly, they say that the Scriptures teach not, that he had a true naturall body, but onely the shew, and likenesse of a body: for Saint Paul saith,Phil 2.78. that Christ tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant; and that God sent his Sonne in the similitude of the flesh of sinne,Rom. 8 3. or of sinfull flesh: and Saint Iohn saw one walking among the seauen golden Candlesticks,Reuel. 1.13. which was like vnto the Sonne of Man; therefore he assumed no true body, but onely a shew and a likenesse of a body. Sol.I answere that these words, and the like, doe giue them no such ground, nor any shew of reason, to build any such conclu∣sion thereupon: for the Scripture saith, that Adam did beget Caine,Gen. 5.3. Christ in re∣gard of his meane condi∣tion did ap∣peare like a sinfull man, but was with∣out sinne. Abel, Seth, in his owne image and likenesse; but we might iustly account them very foolish, that would hereupon inferre, that neither Caine, or Seth had not the very nature of Adam; but onely a bare shadow, and similitude thereof: and therefore the Apostle in saying that hee was sent, in the similitude of sinfull flesh, giues vs to vnderstand, that he was conceiued and borne without sinne; and yet to haue flesh like vnto sinfull flesh; be∣cause, though it was without sinne, yet it seemed to be full of sinnes, by reason of the punishment that he was contented to vn∣dergoe for our sinnes. And this is most excellently declared by Tertullian,Tertul. in l. de carne Christi c. 17. where he saith, that Saint Paul affirmeth Christ to be made in the similitude of sinfull flesh; not that he tooke the likenesse of flesh, or the image of a body, and not a true body; but that he would giue vs to vnderstand, that Christ tooke vpon him true flesh in the similitude of sinfull flesh; Quia similitudo ad titulum peccati pertinebit;Idem l. 5. contra. Marcion. Because the word similitude is to be referred to the iniquitie of sinne, and not to deny the veritie of his substance; for he would not haue added the word sinne, if he had vnderstood and meant that the word similitude, should be referred to the substance of his flesh, to deny the veritie of the same; but when he thus frameth his speech, saying, That hee came and tooke vpon him the likenesse of the flesh of sinne, or of sinfull flesh, Et substantiam confirmauit, i. e. carnem; & simili∣tudinem ad vitium substantiae retulit, i. e. peccatum: Hee doth con∣firme the veritie of his substance, that is his flesh, and he referreth similitude to the vitiousnes of the substance, i. e. sin, which in the sight of the Iewes he seemed to haue, though in very deed hee
had none: So Cassianus saith,Cassian. collat. 22. c. 11. that Similitudo non ad carnis veri∣tatem, sed ad peccati imaginem referenda est; The word simili∣tude hath relation not to flesh, to denie the truth thereof, (for that was true flesh) but to this word sinfull: Quia in veritate corporis sed sine veritate peccati, suscepit dominus speciem peccatoris; Because that in the true nature of man without any sinne, hee appeared (and was so esteemed of many) like a sinfull man,Amb. de spiritu Sancto l. 3. c. 9. saith Saint Ambrose. And so when the Apostle saith, that Christ was made in the si∣militude of Man, he doth not meane so to referre the word si∣militude, Ad naturam humanam; as that we should vnderstand him, to be made onely in the likenesse of our humane nature;The manhood of Christ seene by the suffe∣rings of Christ. but by the similitude of man he vnderstandeth, Conditionem abie∣ctam, that abiect and meane condition of man, whereby Christ was made like vnto all other men; and therefore Saint Paul doth hereby more confirme the truth of his humane nature, then any wayes weaken the same;Iustin Martyr. in expos. fidei. because (as Iustin Martyr speaketh) Deus quidem intelligitur ex prodigiorum operatione, ho∣mo autem ostenditur, ex aequalibus nostrae naturae perpessionibus; His Godhead is sufficiently seene by the working of his miracles, but his Manhood is chiefly seene by the like sufferings and infirmi∣ties of our nature. And to that place of the Apocalyps, I say that Saint Iohn saw him in a Propheticall vision, his body being in heauen and not on earth, and therefore this of all other is alledged most im∣properly to deny the truth of that flesh, which Saint Iohn of all other had so plainely declared vnto vs. And so you may see that neither these places, nor any other place, though neuer so much wringed, and wrested from the true meaning of the Ho∣ly Ghost, no nor the gates of Hell it selfe, can disproue the truth of this point; that Christ hath a true and a naturall body.
CHAP. III. Of Christ his true and perfect humane Soule. That Christ had a true rea∣sonable hu∣mane soule.AND further we must consider, that as he had a true humane body, so he had a perfect reasona∣ble soule; for, First, The testimonies of the Scriptures are most plaine and pregnant herein; As, My soule is heauy vnto death:Math. 26.38. And againe, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Heb. 2.17.Secondly, Reason it selfe confirmeth it; for, He was made in all things like vnto his brethren, Sinne onely excepted; and he is, The Shepheard of our soules:1 Pet. 2. And therefore he must needes consist of body and soule. Thirdly, The whole Schoole of Diuinity, did euer teach the same Truth: for Nazianzene saith; Quod non assumpsit non sal∣vabit, Either he had a soule, or he will not saue a soule; And Saint Augustine saith,Aug de tempore. Ser. 145. Totum suscepit vt totum liberaret verbum: The Word tooke all vpon him, i. e. both body and soule, that he might saue both body and soule. And so Fulgentius doth most largely and excellently proue this point, in his first Booke, De Mysterio Mediatoris,Fulgentius de myst. med. ad Tras. l. 1. vnto King Trasimund, where I referre my Reader to a most elegant, and learned discourse of this matter. Ob.But against this, many of the Arrians and Apollinaris doe ob∣iect, (as Nazianzene, Athanasius, and Saint Cyrill doe affirme) that Christ had no humane soule,Iohn 1.14. but onely a liuing flesh, because the Euangelist saith; That the Word was made Flesh: And Saint Paul saith,Rom. 1. That he was made of the seede of Dauid, according to the Flesh. Sol.To this I answere, that it is an vsuall thing in Scripture, to speake synechdochically, and sometimes, totum denominare ex parte praestantiori, to put the soule for the whole man; as seuenty soules, that is, seuenty men went downe vnto Egypt; and, the soule that sinneth,Exod. 1.5. that soule shall die; and, let euery soule be subiect to the higher Powers:Ezech. 18.20. and sometimes, totum denominare, ex parte minus praestantiori,Rom. 13.1. to put the body for the whole man; as, all Flesh. i. e.
all men had corrupted their wayes before God; and,Gen. 6.12. all flesh shall see the saluation of God; and, to thee shall all flesh come; that is, all men. And therefore hee was made Flesh, signifieth,Athanas in Sym. that hee was made Man, of a reasonable soule, and humane flesh sub∣sisting. And the reason why the Euangelist saith, He was made flesh,Why the E∣uangelist saith, he was made flesh, rather then he was made man. rather then, He was made man, is diuersly rendered by the Fa∣thers: For, some say, it was to shew what part of Christ was made of his Mother; that is, his Flesh; for his Diety was in∣created, and his soule (say they) was created of nothing, and his body onely was made of his Mother: And therefore hee saith, The Word was made Flesh. But this cannot satisfie them which beleeue the Soule to be ex traduce, by traduction from the Parents: And therefore, Secondly, others, with Theophilact say, the Euangelist saith, The Word was made Flesh, to expresse the greatnesse of Gods loue, who for our sakes would be contented to be made the vi∣lest thing: for, all flesh is grasse.Esay. 40.6. Thirdly, others, with Saint Augustine say, It was to shew the greatnesse of Christ his humility; Ex parte ignobiliori, to be named by the meanest name, and the basest part of man; he was contented to be made flesh, for so we finde, that in this respect, i. e. to shew the greatnesse of his humility, though hee was the Sonne of God, yet most commonly would hee terme himselfe, The Sonne of man; to shew vs, how hee debased himselfe, and was well contented with the meanest and most abiect titles, for our sakes; and to teach vs by his example not to stand so much vp∣on our dignities, but to humble our selues, that we may be ex∣alted. Fourthly, others, with Saint Cyrill say, It was for our greater confidence, that we should not doubt of Gods loue and fauour to∣wards vs, because our flesh, which was the part most corrupted, is now vnited vnto God; and because Christ is now become our brother, and our kindred, according to that of the Euangelist, Behold thy Brethren, and thy Kinsmen stand looking for thee;Mar. 3.32. for that, Consanguinity is in regard of flesh and bloud. Fiftly, others say, It was, Vt infimum summo poneret; that he might put the highest and the lowest together: for he had called
Christ the Word, which sheweth the highest power of God; for thy Word is Almighty,Heb. 1. and hee beareth vp all things by his mighty Word: And therefore as hee had set downe his Deity by , the Word, which declareth his greatest power, so hee would shew his humanity by , Flesh; which expresseth our greatest infir∣mity: for, as Summa dignitas in verbo, the greatest dignity is ex∣prest in the word; So, Summa infirmitas in carne, the greatest infirmity is shewed in the flesh: And therefore he saith, The Word was made Flesh; to declare vnto vs, Quantus Deus quantillus factus est homo, How great a God, was made so meane a man. All these reasons are very good, and may well stand all of them, to shew why he saith; The Word was made Flesh, rather then, He was made man. Yet, Tertul. l. de carne Christi. Jrenaeus. l. 3. c. 11.Sixtly, I like best of Tertullians reason, alledged also by Ire∣naeus, Saint Chrysostome, and others, that the Spirit of God fore∣seeing what Heresies would follow after, and soone creepe to in∣vade the Church of Christ; did therefore purposely here, and in many other places, set downe most euident and vnanswerable arguments to conuince them whensoeuer they should arise; that so the light of Truth might be cleered, and the mouth of all wic∣kednesse might be stopped:God before he∣resies came, prouided for vs, that we might be pre∣serued from them when they came. And therefore I say, that the Pen of the Euangelist was here directed by Gods Spirit, to say, The Word was made Flesh; not because he had not a soule, but to assure vs against Marcion, Macidonius, Valentinus, Manichaeus, and o∣thers, that Christ had a true and a naturall flesh, assumed from the very flesh and substance of his Mother, and vnited vnto his God-head. And so you see that Christ had not, Ideam humanae naturae. An imaginary patterne of humane nature, but the whole nature of man, In vno indiuiduo, Consisting both of body and soule.
CHAP. IIII. Of Christ his being subiect to all the humane infirmities that are without sinne. SEcondly, As Christ had all the parts of a true man,That Christ was made sub∣iect to all our humane fraile∣ties, which are without sinne. that is, body and soule; so he had all the properties that doe concerne mans nature, or doe belong either to the soule or to the body of man; as length, breadth, thicknesse, vnderstanding, will, affection, &c. and all other infirmities that we haue, sinne onely excepted: for, as in the creation of man, God made man like vnto himselfe, by stamping in him the Image of his owne nature; so in the as∣sumption of our flesh, this word made himselfe like vnto vs, by taking vpon him the infirmities of our nature: So that as God said heretofore, in a pittifull derision, Behold, the man is become as one of vs; so now we may say in a ioyfull exultation, Behold,Gen. 3.22. our God is become as one of vs; of the same nature, and subiect to the same infirmities as wee are; as the Apostle saith of Elias,Jam 5 7. He was subiect to the like passions as we are. But is it possible (may some man say) that hee which came to destroy the workes of the Diuell,Ob. and to swallow vp death into victory, should disarme himselfe of strength and power, and be cloathed with our weakenesse and fraileties? To this the Prophet answereth,Sol. That Gods wayes are not as our wayes, nor his thoughts as our thoughts;Esa 55.8. for we find many times God working one contrary out of another, as creating all things of nothing, bringing light out of darkenesse,Gen. 1.1. making his power knowne through weakenesse, and by the foolishnesse of preaching, destroying the wisedome of the wise,That God ma∣ny times wor∣keth one con∣trarie out of a∣nother. and sauing those that beleeue in him: And therefore as Dauid laid aside the Sword, and bri∣gandine of Saul, and tooke his staffe and slender sling, when he went to encounter great Goliah; So Christ the Sonne of Dauid did assume the infirmities of our flesh, (a slender staffe to relie vpon) that so, not by his strong arme, but by his weake, yet holy arme, he might get vnto h mselfe the victory. And it was requisite (saith Saint Ambrose) Vt infirmitates nostras susciperet, That he should take vpon him our infirmities.
First, To demonstrate the truth of his assumed humanity; for else,Ambros. in. Luc. l. 10. c. 22. Quomodo discipuli crederent fuisse hominem, nisi humanas in∣firmitates comperissent; How should his Disciples beleeue him to be a man, if they had not found and seene him touched with the infirmities of man? And, Secondly, To strengthen, and vnderprop the weakenesse of our declining Faith; for, Vt patientem docere non potest, qui subie∣ctus passionibus non est, As he can neuer teach a man how to be patient, which was neuer troubled with any passions himselfe, saith Lactantius;Lactant. insti∣tut. l 4. c. 16. so he can neuer so well succour those that are afflicted, which neuer hath beene afflicted himselfe: But now, seeing we haue a High Priest which is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, we may with boldnesse accede vnto the Throne of Grace,Heb. 4.14. and assure our selues to finde mercy in the time of neede. And yet here wee must distinguish and vnderstand, that all the infirmities and the defects of our nature, are either, 1. Culpable and blame-worthy. 2. Inculpable and blamelesse. Or else, 1. Sinnefull without paine. 2. Painefull without sinne. That infirmi∣ties are of two kindes.The first, are , damnable and odious in the sight of God, (as Damascen calleth them:) The second are Miserabiles, Miserable, and to be pittied before God and Man, as Saint Au∣gustine saith. 1. Sinnefull. 2. Painefull. Those of the first kinde, hee was absolutely free from; be∣cause he was conceiued without sinne, borne without sinne, liued without sinne,Christ tooke none of our sinnefull infir∣mities. and died without sinne: And therefore let not the couetous man, whose desire is as large as Hell, thinke that Christ tooke vpon him the vnsatiable affection of couetous∣nesse, nor the ambitious man imagine, that he was tainted with an aspiring minde, nor any man suppose, that this immaculate Lambe, was any wayes blemished with inordinate affection; for, he was a true Israelite, in whom there was no guile. Those of the second kinde, we say with the Schooles, that they are either 1. Detractabiles. 2. Indetractibiles. that is, either 1 Personall. 2 Naturall.
First, personall or proper to some men;That those infi mities which are not sinfull, are either, 1 Personall. 2 Naturall. as to be affected with malady, infeebled with infirmitie, or disfigured with deformity: or else, Secondly, naturall or common to all men; as to be borne weake; and to liue incompassed with humane frailties. Those that are personall, we say not that he tooke; for though many of vs, be wholly corrupted from the sole of the feete,Esay 1.6. vnto the Crowne of the head;That Christ tooke no per∣sonall infimi∣ties vpon him. yet the body of Christ being framed by the Holy Ghost of the purest Virgin bloud, was proportioned in most equall Symmetry and correspondency of parts; and there∣fore hee was Speciosus forma prae filijs hominum; fairer then the sons of men, wholly pure, more pure then the body of Absolon,2 Sam. 14. in whom there was no blemish. So Cassiodorus saith,Cassiod. in Psal. 45. Forma eius lactei coloris decore illuxit, & insigni statura, prae-eminuit; His body of the best composed stature, did excell all other men; and so Saint Hierome saith, that his countenance, carryed hidden, and vayled in it, a starre-like shining brightnesse,Matth. 19.27. which being but a little re∣ueiled, it so rauished his Disciples hearts, that at the first sight thereof they left all, and followed him, and it so astonished his enemies, that they stumbled and fell to the ground: But, Those that are naturall or common infirmities,That Christ tooke all the infirmities which are common and naturall infir∣mities. Iohn 18.6. Heb. 2.17.4.15. wee affirme that he had them in all things, like vnto vs. First, because he was to be in all things like vnto his brethren, sinne onely excepted. Secondly, because the prayer of Christ, in the garden of Geth∣semane proceeded from the infirmity of his humane nature; as most Interpreters doe affirme. Thirdly, because an Angell from Heauen appeared vnto him, comforting him; for his Diuine vertue had no need to be streng∣thened, but his humane infirmity required to be assisted. Fourthly, because all ancient antiquity, and the moderne vnanimity of all Diuines, haue euer taught and maintained this truth: for we confesse saith Damascen, that Christ tooke all the naturall Passions of man which are without sinne;Damas. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 20. Et scire mihi prodest (saith Saint Ambrose) Quod propter me suscepit Chri∣stus omnes infirmitates meas;Ambrosius de fide ad Grat. l. 2. c. 4. And it auaileth me much to know that Christ tooke all mine infirmities vpon him: and Fryar Discipulus saith, that euery man was subiect vnto twelue natu∣rall
defects and infirmities: whereof (saith he) our Sauiour Christ hath vndergone tenne of them, and hath suffered the same, euen as we doe. First, Cold, Secondly, Heat. Two infirmities incident to euery man, and denyed by no man to bee in Christ: else could he not be a man. Matth. 21.18.Thirdly, Hunger, as when he came to the Figge-tree, and would haue eaten. John 4.7. & C. 19.28.Fourthly, Thirst, as when he asked Drinke of the woman of Samaria, and cryed, I thirst, vpon the Crosse. John. 4 6.Fiftly, Wearinesse, as when he sate by the Well to rest him. John 19.17.Sixtly, Weakenesse and Paine, as when he was not able to beare his Crosse any further: but was faine to haue Simon of Cyren to helpe him.Matth. 27.32. (And these sixe were infirmities of his Body, the other belonged more properly vnto his soule, and must bee warily distinguished: if we would truly vnderstand them, as they are in him.) Matth. 26 38.Seauenthly, Heauinesse and Sorrow, as when his soule was hea∣uy vnto death,Luke 19.51. and when hee wept for griefe, ouer the Citie of Ierusalem. That there is a two-fold sorrow.But here we must distinguish, and know, that this heauinesse and sadnesse of Christ, was in him as an affliction, and not as a trans∣gression; and that it was in his sensuall and not in his rationall will; or if in his reasonable will, that he was sorrowfull, because he would be sorrowfull;Iohn 11.33. Et turbatus quia turbauit seipsum; And was troubled because he troubled himselfe: and therefore his sor∣row was, Subiacens, non praesidens; turbans, sed non perturbans eum; Ruled by reason, and not ouer-ruling reason, and so onely distur∣bing,Marke 6.6. but no wayes disordering him. Eightly, Shamefastnesse, and admiration; as when hee mar∣ueiled at the infidelity of the Iewes,1 Kings 18. euen as Elias was ashamed of the iniquity, and wondered at the stupiditie of the Israelites. But here also we must know, that it was externally moued, by the sinnes of others, and not internally procured by any act of his owne. Heb. 5.7.Ninthly, Feare, as when his Father heard him, in that which he feared: and in this, as through wearinesse he willingly fainted, so through feare he was exceedingly astonished.
But here likewise we must distinguish that his feare was,That there is a two-fold feare. Fili∣alis, non seruilis; A filiall feare, adioyned with Hope, and not a seruile feare proceeding from despaire, that is, not a sinfull, but a pious feare, which might moue him in his considerations, but no wayes remoue him from his godly intentions. Tenthly, Anger, as when he looked angerly vpon them; and so, when he droue the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.Matth. 21.13. That there is a two-fold an∣ger. But yet still we must distinguish, that his anger was stirred vp, and moued; Per zelum, non per vitium; through a godly zeale, and not through any inordinate affection; and it was nothing else in him, but Voluntas vindicatiua malefacti; A desiring will to punish the sinne; and not a sinfull passion to be reuenged on the person of the sinner; as Bonauenture saith. These are the tenne infirmities which Discipulus saith, were in our Sauiour Christ; thus, and after this manner, as I haue shewed you. The other two which he denyeth to be in him, are 1. Sinne. 2. Ignorance. For the first, that is, Sinne, we all know that he had none. For the second, that is, Ignorance, we must distinguish that it was either 1. Crassa. 2. Mera. That is, either 1. A sinfull ignorance. 2. A simple ignorance. The first we call Ignorantia prauae dispositionis;That there is a two-fold ignorance. An ignorance of a wicked disposition, as when men know not, or will not know the things that they ought or might know: and this we say was not in Christ, because it is sinfull, and the cause of many sinnes. The second we call, Ignorantia merae priuationis; An igno∣rance of meere priuation; Et ignorantia negatiua, seu nescientia plu∣rimorum; and a negatiue ignorance, or the not knowing of many things, which are not of absolute necessitie to be knowne, and this ignorance we say was in our Sauiour Christ. First, because Adam had the same, in the state of his inno∣cency
for he was ignorant of many things that God did know,Jgnatius in ep. 2. ad Tralli∣an. That Christ was ignorant of some things. and he knew not that he should be seduced by the Serpent. Secondly, because he did increase in wisedome and knowledge, i. e. in his acquisite and experimentall wisedome; and not in his infused or diuine wisedome; for he had them perfect from the very first moment of his conception:Damasc. l. 3. Nazian. l. 2. de fil. and therefore by his ac∣quisite and experimentall wisedome, he learned some things, that he knew not before. Thirdly, because he knew not, that there were no Figges on the Fig-tree, vntill hee went and saw there was none; and hee knew not the houre and the day of iudgement. Polanus in Sym∣pho. Catholica thesi. 7. c. 9. Scotus in sent. dist. 14. q. 1. & 4Fourthly, because all ancient Orthodoxe Fathers doe con∣firme the same truth, as Amandus Polanus sheweth. And yet we say, that although Christ knew not these things; Ex natura humanitatis, by the manhood; yet he did know them in natura humanitatis, in the manhood: for the Schoole∣men doe well distinguish of a two-fold knowledge in Christ: 1. In verbo, in the word, whereby he seeth all things as in a cleere Chrystall glasse. 2. In genere proprio, in each proper nature, whereby he seeth all things as they are in themselues, and from himselfe. In the first sense, wee say, the man Christ Iesus knoweth all things, because he is hypostatically vnited vnto that eternall word, which made, and seeth, and knoweth all things. And, In the second sense, we say that the knowledge of Christ is twofold, 1. Infused. 2. Acquisite. First, the infused knowledge at the very instant of his concep∣tion, was granted and powred into his manhood, so much as a finite creature could be capable of. But, In what sense Christ may be said to be ignorant of any thing.Secondly, the acquisite knowledge did increase daily more and more, as his experience acquainted him with many things, that practically he knew not before: and in this respect, we may lawfully say, that Christ was ignorant of many things in his youth, which afterwards he learned in his age. And so you see, that as Christ assumed our nature; so he assumed all our natu∣rall
imperfections, that are voide of sinne, though they were full of paine. But here we must obserue that he assumed them all (as Saint Augustine saith) Non miseranda necessitate, sed miserante volun∣tate; Not by any imposed necessitie, but by a voluntary assuming of them; to deliuer vs from them: because he freely subiected himselfe vnto them, when no Law could haue compelled him to vndergoe them. And thus I haue shewed you how this word was made flesh: that is, a true, and a naturall man, in all things, like vnto his brethren, sinne onely excepted. CHAP. V. Of the comfortable instructions that we may collect from this Doctrine of the incarnation of the Word. YOu heard what the Word was made, Flesh:What we may learne from this doctrine of Christ his Incarnation. and from thence we may learne many comfortable, excel∣lent lessons, for our instruction: especially in respect, 1. Of God. 2. Of Christ. 3. Of our Selues. First, in respect of God, we may see, and we ought seriously to consider it; first, his great loue and charity towards vs;First, Gods loue to man. that he should giue his onely Sonne to be made flesh for our sake: and therefore seeing he gaue his Sonne for vs, and that while we were yet sinners, while we were yet enemies vnto God, how can it be, but that he should giue vs all things together with his Sonne, espe∣cially now being reconniled vnto him through his Sonne?Rom. 5.10. for in him he is well pleased, and through him he cannot bee offended with vs: and therefore Christ to shew how dearely God loueth vs through him, saith, Whatsoeuer you aske the Father in my Name, it shall be giuen you. Secondly, we may from hence see the faithfulnesse and truth of God in performing his promise,Luke 1.73. and the oath that he sware vnto
our Fathers,Secondly, that God is a true performer of all his promi∣ses. Numb. 23.19. touching the giuing of this Word to be made Flesh: and therefore wee may assure our selues, that whatsoeuer hee saith, shall come to passe: for, he is not as man that he should lie; or as the Sonne of Man, that he should alter the thing that is gone out of his lip. Secondly, in respect of Christ, we may from hence see these two things. First, Christs perfect obe∣dience.First, His great obedience, in that he was contented in all things to submit himselfe vnto his Fathers Will; and therefore we that doe beleeue in Christ, should herein follow the example of Christ, to be obedient vnto our heauenly Father. Secondly, how Christ hum∣bled himselfe.Secondly, his rare and singular humilitie, in that he being the Sonne of God and the eternall Word of God, that could haue commanded all the Angels, and by his stretched-out-arme, with∣out the assumption of our weakenesse, haue made all his ene∣mies his footstoole, was notwithstanding contented, Exininare seipsum; to emptie himselfe, as it were of his diuine riches, and to clothe himselfe with our humane nakednesse, and so to become the Sonne of Man, and to be made flesh, i. e. a vile, a base, and an abiect thing for vs:Psal. 144.4. for man is like a thing of naught, his time pas∣seth away like a shadow; And therfore we should not lift vp our hornes on high,Phil. 2. nor speake with a stiffe necke; but we should labour to haue the same minde in vs, which was in Christ Iesus; and learne of him to be meeke and lowly in heart.Matth. 11. It was an humble speech of King Dauid, when hee said, I am a worme and no man, a very shame,Psal. 22.6. or scorne of men, and the out-cast of the people: Hee was lowly in his owne eyes; and did imitate herein our Sauiour Christ; who (as I shewed you before) was not onely contented, to be made a true man, but also in the iudgement of the World, to be∣come no better then one of the basest of the people; so rare a pat∣terne of humility, did he leaue vnto vs: And yet now as the Po∣et saith, Maxima quae{que} domus seruis est plena superbis. How farre we are from true humilitie.Euery man is full of pride, and as the prouerbe is, euery Iacke will be a Gentleman. Proijcit ampullas, & sesquipedalia verba. It is strange to see how we strout our selues, and speake great swelling words, magnifying our selues, by contemning others,
swaggering them out of countenance, and thinking our selues to be gods and not men, and with the Church of Laodicea, to be rich and want nothing, to be wise and valiant;Reuel. 3.17. and neither our manifold sinnes, which are as the sands of the Sea, nor our mise∣rable estate, which is most fraile and feeble; so weake, that a little sickenesse will euen vs downe with the dust; can humble vs be∣fore the mighty hand of God: so farre are we from learning true humility. And, Thirdly, we see from hence our Sauiours loue,Thirdly, the great loue of Christ. Bernard ser. 1. de Epiphan. and his aboun∣dant great charity towards vs; for, quanto pro me vilior tanto mihi charior; The viler and baser he made himselfe for me, the dea∣rer he shewed that he loued me; but how could he euer debase himselfe more then he did? not onely to appeare for a time in the visible shape of a man, but also to assume for euer, the true nature of man? and, though we be loath to take his sweet and easie yoke vpon vs, yet he willingly tooke our heauy and bitter yoke on him: for he tooke our infirmities, and carried all our sorrowes:Esay 53.4. and therefore, O thou sweet Iesus, that vsest to clothe thy selfe with the cloudes, as with a garment, and now clothest thy selfe with my naturall nakednesse, that I might be adorned with thy supernaturall riches; we beseech thee inflame our spirits with the loue of thee, that nothing but thy selfe may be deare vnto vs, because it so pleased thee, to vilifie thy selfe for vs. Thirdly, in respect of our selues, we may from this doctrine of the words incarnation, collect vnto our selues, these singular comforts: As, First, generally, what fruits and benefits we haue,What great benefits we receiue by the incarna∣tion of the Word. from this in∣carnation of the Sonne of God; Beneficia nimis copiosa, multa & magna, priuata & positiua; and they are exceeding great blessings, innumerable and inualuable; as repentance, remission of our sinnes, Grace, Faith, Righteousnesse, Wisedome, Sancti∣fication and Redemption; and in a word, whatsoeuer blessing, grace, or goodnesse we haue, we haue the same from this incar∣nate Word; for,Collos. 2.3. in him are hidden all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge; and from his fulnesse we all receiue, and grace for grace.Iohn 1.16. For neither his Deitie onely, Quia non debuit, Because he ought not; nor his humanity onely, Quia non potuit;Aug. c 12. hom. de vibus. Because that could not; was sufficient to bee a Mediator betwixt God
and man: Sed inter diuinitatem solam, & humanitatem solam, me∣diatrix est diuina humanitas & humana diuinitas Christi; but be∣tweene the bare humanity, and the bare diuinity, the diuine humanity, and the humane diuinity of our Sauiour Christ doth mediate for vs vnto God; and therefore by reason of this Incarnation of the Word God, we are made Kings and Priests, and a peculiar people vnto God,Reuel. 1.7. How Christ hath perfor∣med all things for vs. euen for euer. For this Incarne Word, this God and Man Christ Iesus, hath performed all things that are necessary for our saluation; he liued for vs, he dyed for vs, he rose againe for vs, and he became the Phisitian and the me∣dicine both of our originall and actuall sinnes: For against the corruption, and guilt of originall sinne, the pure birth and vnde∣filed conception of Christ, is a sufficient salue; and against the guilt of actuall sinne; the Sanctitie, and innocent life of Christ, tat was without any spot of sinne, is a sufficient remedy; and against the punishment, either of originall or of actuall sinnes, te most pretious death of Christ is a sufficient satisfaction; Quia in∣iusta mors iustam vicit mortem,Aug. ser. 101. de tempore. & liberauit nos iuste, quia pro nobis occisus est iniustè; Because his vniust death, hath iustly ouer∣come our death, and he hath most iustly deliuered vs, because he was most vniustly slaine for vs.That good examples, are meanes to fur∣ther godlines. Besides, the Word being made flesh, we haue his life, as a most perfect patterne to frame our liues thereby; for wee are all like Apes apt to imitate; and we say the life of our Minister would more moue vs to godlinesse, then his doctrine; and no doubt, but it would doe much to them that hate not their Minister, because he will not be as deboyst as themselues: for a good ex∣ample to good men, is as a light set vpon a Candlesticke, that all they which come into the house,Iohn 3.19. may see the light; although to euill men,Christ an in∣fallible pat∣terne for men to imitate. it moues them to the more indignation and wrath; be∣cause it makes their sinnes appeare the more exceedingly sinfull, and will be a iust witnesse against them in the day of wrath; for that seeing the light of a good life, shining amongst them, they hated the same, because their deeds were euill: And therefore, if we would be led by examples, and would not erre; let vs lay the the example of Christ before our face: for this is a true looking glasse, that is euer laid open before euery man, and will neuer deceiue nor flatter any man: and it is not onely a patterne for
our practice, but the continuall inspection and looking into the same, is also in some measure an efficient cause,Cyrillus l. 4. c. 5. and impul∣siue motiue to incite vs to the imitation thereof, and to the per∣formance of all godlinesse: because Christ is the giuer of all such graces, whereby men do liue a godly life: as the Apostle sheweth.1 Cor. 4.7. That we may boldly come to God. Moreouer, Christ hauing vnited his Deitie with our humani∣tie, and hauing so well tempered his Maiestie with humility we may the more confidently and boldly draw neere vnto the throne of grace; for that as his Deity confoundeth, so his humani∣tie comforteth our faint and feeble soules; and as his Maiestie amazeth, so his humility animateth vs to come vnto him; and to seeke of him whatsoeuer is needfull for vs. And further, this Word being made flesh; Naturam humanam nobilitauit; He hath so innobled our humane nature, (as Saint Augustine saith) that we, which were wormes and no men, are now, , pertakers of the Diuine nature, and as it were Gods and no wormes: so that now,2 Pet. 1.4. That we at∣taine to a farre better state in Christ then we lost in Adam. Bernard ser. 1. de Epiphan. our nature being re∣payred, it is exalted farre aboue the dignitie of its first originall: and it hath obtained to a farre better state in Christ, then it had, and lost in Adam; because Adam was but is the image of God, but wee are ioyned and made one with God; as Saint Bernard saith: and therefore, foelix culpa, quae talem meruit redemptorem; happy was that fault (as it happened vnto vs) which brought foorth such a Sauiour; to be made partaker of our flesh, that wee might be partakers of his Spirit, as Saint Gregory speaketh. Secondly, & more particularly,That both our bodies and our soules shall be saued. in that he was made a true and a perfect man, consisting both of body and soule, we may assure our selues of the saluation both of body and soule; for as our sinnes deserued damnation vnto both; so the assuming of both by this Word, hath brought deliuerance vnto them both. And in that he was made subiect vnto all our humane frail∣ties, passions, and miseries, being made in all things like nto vs, sinne onely excepted,Heb. 2.17. c. 4 15. we may (as I haue already touched before) conceiue thereby an exceeding comfort: for as Queene Dido said vnto the distressed Troians; Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco. Experience of miseries hath taught mee to succour all those that are miserable; euen so, Christ hauing felt all infirmities,We may be sure of com∣fort in distresse.
and suffered more miseries then any of vs can endure, will be mercifull and compassionate towards vs, when hee seeth vs in di∣stresse; for, he became like vnto vs, that he might be mercifull vnto vs; and he was tempted and suffered, that he might be able to helpe and succour them that are tempted,Heb. 2.17, 18. saith the Apostle: And there∣fore, seeing wee haue not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but is a pittifull and a compassio∣nate Redeemer, if we be inuolued in miseries, and doe suffer all kindes of infirmities, wants, scornes, sickenesse, paines, or what∣soeuer else, let vs goe boldly vnto the Throne of Grace, and beg confidently his mercy and grace,Heb. 4.16. to helpe vs in the time of neede; for as hee which in our Creation formed vs, according to the Image of God, was contented now by his incarnation, to take vpon himselfe the Image of man; So wee which by our trans∣gressions made our selues like vnto the Diuell, shall bee most happy and blessed; if as Christ became like vnto vs in flesh, so we doe endeuour to become like vnto him in the graces of his most blessed Spirit. And so much for the second point, that he was made, Flesh. BRANCH III. CHAP. I. Of the distinction of the two Natures of Christ, how each of them remaineth entire, inconfused; and the obiections made against this truth sufficiently answered. Branch 3.THirdly, We are to consider, how this Word was made, and still is, Flesh; which manner may be collected out of this word : He was made Flesh. Touching which, wee must well obserue these two speciall points, Two things to be considered.1. The distinction 2. The vnion of the two natures, the Word and the Flesh; that is, the Deity and the humanity of our Sauiour Christ.
First, The distinction of these two Natures, is most excel∣lently shewed by Saint Paul, where hee saith,That in Christ there are two distinct na∣tures. Rom. 1.3.4. that Christ was made man, , according to the flesh, and declared mightily to be the Sonne of God; , accor∣ding to the Spirit of Sanctification: for that according to his humane nature onely, he was made of the seede of Dauid, which according to his diuine nature was declared still to be the eter∣nall Sonne of God; So that here Saint Paul sheweth two natures to be in Christ; that is, his diuine and his humane nature, still re∣maining entire after his incarnation: because, as hee was made onely of the seede of Dauid, in respect of his manhood, (for that his God-head was not made of the seede of Dauid;) so was hee declared onely to be the Sonne of God, in respect of his God-head; for that his manhood was not the omnipotent, and the eternall Son of God. But against this place of the Apostle,Ob. The most blas∣phemous sub∣tilties of Here∣tickes, to denie the truth of the two natures of Christ. the Somosatenian Here∣tickes doe affirme, that Saint Paul meaneth not hereby, to shew a two-fold nature to be in Christ, but a two-fold natiuity; i. e. a car∣nall and a spirituall, which we finde to be in euery faithfull Chri∣stian: for to be made of the seede of Dauid (say they) according to the Flesh, doth shew his carnall generation, and to be declared to be the Sonne of God according to the Spirit of Sanctification, is to shew his spirituall regeneration. The first they seeke to confirme, out of those places of Scriptures, where the Apostle saith, The Iewes were his Kins∣men, according to the flesh; and where hee calleth them,Rom. 9.3. Israel according to the flesh: for herein (say they) the Apostle meaneth by these words, according to the flesh, nothing else,1 Cor. 10.18. but according to the vulgar and common sort of generation; And therefore to be made of the seede of Dauid, according to the flesh, is nothing else, but to bee made of him, according to his carnall genera∣tion. And, The second they seeke to confirme, out of the words of Saint Iohn, where he saith, That the faithfull are not born of bloud,Iohn 1.13. nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; And therefore, as these phrases and limitations, according to the flesh,It is a horrible thing to say, that all those phrases which are true of vs' must be like∣wise true of Christ, in the same sence considered. Rom. 1.2. Sol. and according to the spirit, doe signifie the double natiuitie of euery faithfull man, and doe no wayes proue a double nature to
be in any man: Euen so in Christ they signifie the same things, that is, two natiuities; but not two natures. To this I answere first, that this phrase , according to the flesh, neither in the place vrged by me, nor in any other place alledged by them, doth signifie the common and carnall ge∣neration; but doth imply a difference and distinction betwixt kindred according to the flesh, and kindred according to the spirit: for otherwise all Israel was in respect of their common generation, kindred according to the flesh; And therefore the meaning of the Apostle is, to shew, that although all of them were the chil∣dren of Abraham, according to the flesh, yet that but few of them were the Children of promise. Secondly, I say, that the miraculous and singular birth of Christ, is not insinuated so much in the words, according to the flesh, as it is plainely shewed in the word made; for the same be∣ing in the originall , and not ; it doth most ap∣parantly shew, the extraordinary making of his flesh; not after the vsuall and common sort of carnall generation by any hu∣mane seede, but by a supernaturall generation, through the vir∣tuall operation of the Holy Ghost,Tertul. l. cont. Prax. Iraeneus l. 3. c. 32. Ʋigilius l. 5. contra Eutychet. Aug. l. 1. c. 5. de trinitate. as Tertullian, Irenaeus, Ʋigilius, Saint Augustine, and others haue obserued. Thirdly, I say, that there is a great deale of difference betwixt the two-fold generation of the faithfull Saints, and the two-fold ge∣neration of Christ; for when they are said to be borne of the flesh, and of the Spitit, we confesse, that not two natures are thereby signified,That Christ was so borne, free from all sinne, that he needed no further sancti∣fication or regeneration. but two beginnings of their diuers births: But this can∣not be said of Christ, because he was so sanctified in the first mo∣ment of his conception, that he needed not any second regenera∣tion; neither is he said to be borne of the spirit, in respect of any regeneration, as we are; but declared to be the Sonne of God, according to the Spirit: that is, manifested to be a true God, ac∣cording, or in respect of his owne sanctifying Spirit; that is, his God-head. And therefore, though such a limitation might proue a double generation in the rest of Gods Children; yet this can∣not shew a double generation of him in whom there is no dou∣ble generation, in respect of his manhood; but it must needes shew plainely two natures to be in Christ: for all other faithfull men are the Sonnes of God, by adoption and grace; but Christ is the
naturall and the essentiall Sonne of God his Father; He being the brightnesse of his glory, and the engrauen forme of his person:Heb. 1.3. And all other men are so borne, that except they be borne againe, they cannot enter into the Kingdome of Heauen;Iohn 3.5. But Christ was so conceiued and borne, that there was neither neede, nor any possi∣ble way of any further sanctification of his person; because that in him dwelled the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily. But this truth of the two natures of Christ, may be confirmed by most apparant and vnanswerable arguments; for the Iewes said, that he did not onely breake the Sabboath, but also said,John 5.18. that God was his Father, making himselfe equall vnto God: And Christ him∣selfe said, I and my Father are all one;Iohn 10.30. And therefore the Pharises did rightly collect, that Christ by these words had affirmed himselfe to be a God: And yet he saith,John 14.28. My Father is greater then I; but it cannot possibly be, that Christ according to the same nature, should be equall, nay, one with the Father, and yet inferior to the Father: And therefore it must needes follow, that he hath one nature, according to which he is equall to his Father, and another nature, in respect whereof hee is inferior to his Father. Besides, our Sauiour saith, Before Abraham was, I am;John 8.58. And yet Saint Luke saith, He was borne in the dayes of Augustus Caesar;Luc. 2.7. but it cannot be, that, Idem secundum idem, The same one, in the same respect, should be before Abraham, and after Abraham:All Orthodoxe antiquitie con∣fessed two na∣tures to be in Christ. And therefore hee must needes haue two natures in him, accor∣ding to one whereof, he was before Abraham, and according to the other, he was after Abraham. And further,Ʋigilius l. 2. cont Eutych. Philip. 2. we finde the same confirmed and confessed by all antiquity, for Vigilius writing vpon those words of the Apo∣stle, who being in the forme of God, tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, saith; Mirum est, &c. It is a wonder to thinke, why some are afraide to say, that Christ had two natures, when as the Apostle saith, that he had two formes: and the great oecumenicall Councell of Calcedon, wherein were 630 Bishops,Concil. Calced. Act. 5. in Symb. fidei. left this con∣fession vnto all posterity; Confitemur in nouissimis diebus, filium Dei vnigenitum in duabus naturis inconfuse, immutabiliter, indiuise, inseparabiliter agnoscendum, nunquam sublata differentia propter vnionem: We confesse, that the onely begotten Sonne of God,
which came in the last dayes to be incarnate, is now to be ac∣knowledged, to be, and to subsist of two natures, (i. e. Diuine and humane) inconfused, immutably, inseperably, and vndiuidedly vnited together; and that the differences or distinction of these natures, is neuer to be abolished and taken away, by reason of the vnion of the same. All the actions of Christ doe manifestly shew the two natures of Christ.And so in very deed, we finde all the actions of our Saui∣our Christ while he liued here on earth, to make inanswerable proofe of the same truth: for, as Saint Augustine saith, Iacebat Christus quantum ad carnem mortuus in sepulchro, mortuos suscitans in inferno, vitam tribuens vniuersis in caelo: Christ according to the flesh lay dead in his graue, yet did he then in Hell (i. e. in respect of his soule) according to his Godhead, raise the dead here on earth,Aug. sup. Mat. 5. contra Foeli∣cem. and giue life to all them that were in heauen; Quia vt nec mundum dimittens ad coelum ascendit, ita nec coelum deserens venit ad nos; sed vno atque eodem tempore totum totus impleuit: Because that as now he hath not left the world, though he be ascended in∣to Heauen; so then he did not leaue the Heauens, when hee came to be made flesh on earth; but was wholly at one and the selfe-same time, in all places, replenishing and filling all things; And Gregorie Nazianzen doth most excellently shew, how the properties of both his natures concurred together, and might be easily discerned in him, from the very beginning of his dayes,Luc. 2.7. to the last end of his being here on earth: for he is borne of his mother, and wrapped in swadling clouts, as being a man, but a starre doth manifest him,Matth. 2.11. and the wise men adore him as being a God;Matth. 3.16. he is baptized in Iordan, as being a man, but the Holy Ghost descends vpon him from Heauen, as being a God; he is tempted of the Deuill,Mar. 1.12. as he is a man, but he ouercomes and ex∣pels the Diuels,Iohn 4.6. as he is a God; he trauels and is thirstie, he is hun∣gry and is weary, as he is a man, but he refresheth the wearie, hee feedeth the hungry,Iohn 7. and he giueth drinke vnto the thirstie, as hee is a God;Matth. 24.26. he sleepes in the ship, and his Disciples awake him, as he is a man, but he rebukes the windes, and stilleth the rage of the Seas,Matth. 8.20. as he is a God; he is poore and needy, and hath not an house to put his head in, as he is a man, but he is rich and mighty and cannot be contained in the heauens, as he is a God; he his sorrowfull and sad, he weepes, and he prayes, as he is a man, but he
heareth our prayers, and comforteth the sorrowfull,Matth. 26. as hee is a God; he is subiect to infirmities, as he is a man,Iohn 14. but he healeth all our infirmitie, as he is a God; he is whipped and crucified, as hee is a man, but he renteth the vaile of the Temple,Esay 53. and causeth the Sunne to hide his face for shame to see him crucified, as hee is a God; he saith, Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachthani; My God, my God,Matth. 27.46. why hast thou forsaken me? as he is a man, but hee saith vnto the theefe, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, as he is a God;Luke 23.43. he dyeth and is buryed, and lyeth in his graue, as he is a man, but he ouercommeth Death, and destroyeth the Diuels,Matt. 27.50.60 and raiseth himselfe vnto life againe, as he is a God; and being risen, he appeares vnto his Disciples, and eates and talkes with them,Luke 24. v 15. 31. as he is a man, but he vanisheth out of their sight, and ascendeth vp vnto Heauen, as he is a God, and so now; the Heauens doe containe him, and he sitteth there on the right hand of God,Psal. 68.4. as he is a man, but he sustaineth the Heauens, and rideth vpon the same, as vpon an horse, as he is a God; and so Fulgentius saith,Fulgent. ser. de Epiphan. Iste puer in praesepi quidem paruulus collocatur, sed magnus in coelo mirabiliter operatur: permittit se manibus in terra portari, sed praecipit sibi coe∣lestia famulari: That little child is laid in a cratch, i. e. as he is a man, but he doth wonderfully worke in heauen, i. e. as he is a God; and he suffereth himselfe to be carryed in their armes, as he is a man, but he supporteth all things, and commandeth all the hoast of Heauen, to doe him seruice, as he is a God. And therefore it is most apparant, that the person of Christ so subsisteth; Ʋt cum in homine Christo, videtur veritas hominis,Idem de perso∣na Christi l. 2. ad Tamrisi. in eodem Deo Christo, cognoscatur paternae veritas deitatis; as when we see the veritie of the Manhood in the Man Christ Ie∣sus, we must know and acknowledge the eternall Deitie, in the same God Christ Iesus: because he is still a perfect God, and a perfect man, and of these two natures subsisting in one person inconfused. But against this, Eutyches and his followers,What the Eu∣tychian here∣tickes say a∣gainst this truth. haue and doe most impiously affirme, that in Christ after his Incarnation, there is but one onely nature, made of the Word, and of the flesh by the conuersion of the Deitie into the humanitie; because the Euange∣list saith, that the Word was made flesh, euen as when the Water was made Wine, it was no more Water, but was presently con∣uerted
into Wine;Nazian. in Ep. ad Clidonium. or else by the conuersion of the flesh into the Deitie; because Gregory Nazianzen, and Gregory Nyssen say, that Caro Christi est deificata, the flesh of Christ is now deified; and to confirme the same, they doe obiect; Ob. 1. Concil. Cal. act. 1. post Ep. Cyrilli.First, the authority of some ancient Fathers, alledged in the councell of Calcedon; for Eustachius affirmeth that Saint Cy∣rill writ, Non oportere intelligere in mysterio incarnationis duas na∣turas, sed vnam naturam dei verbi incarnatam; that wee must not vnderstand in the mysterie of the Incarnation two natures to be in Christ, but one nature of the word God incarnate and made flesh. Sol. How the Word may be said to be incarnate, or made flesh. James 1.17.I answere that the nature of the Word may be said to be in∣carnate, if it be rightly vnderstood; i. e. Non per conuersionem in carnem, sed per vnionem cum carne in vna hypostasi; Not by the conuersion of it into flesh, which could not possibly be; because God is immutable and without any shadow of turning, but by the vniting of the same, with the flesh in the same subsistence; so the words of Nazianzen and Nyssen doe onely shew, the vnion and coniunction of the flesh with the Dietie; and not the conuersion of the manhood into the Godhead: and for the words of Eustachius alledged out of S. Cyrill, I say that they be none of the words of Eustachius, but of Dioscorus, or some other Eutychian Here∣ticke, that hath most impiously and falsly inserted that sentence, among the words of Eustachius. Ob. 1.Secondly they do obiect, that S. Iohn saith not, that the Word did assume flesh, but was made flesh; and therefore as the water that is made wine, hath no more two natures, but onely one; be∣cause the nature of the water, is conuerted into the nature of the Wine; so the Word, though before his incarnation, he had a na∣ture different from the flesh; yet now being made flesh, hee hath onely the same nature with the flesh. Sol.To this Theodoret answereth, that the flesh was assumed of the word; and he proueth the same out of these Scriptures, where Saint Paul saith,Phil. 2.7. that Christ being in the forme of God, did take vpon him the forme of a seruant; And againe, where hee saith, that he tooke not on him the nature of Angels,Heb. 2.16. but he tooke on him the seed of Abraham; And againe, Saint Iohn himselfe, in this very Chapter and verse, immediately after he had said, that the Word
was made flesh, doth adde;That Christ did assume our flesh. (that we should not thinke it to bee made by the conuersion of the Word into the flesh;) Et habitauit in nobis; And he dwelt in vs; for this is all one as if he had said, the Word was made flesh, because that hauing assumed and vni∣ted our flesh vnto himselfe, he began now to remaine and to dwell in our flesh for euer. But the Holy Ghost fore-seeing that Nestorius would affirme Christ to consist of two persons,Why the E∣uangelist saith the Word was made flesh. as if the diuine person had assu∣med the humane person, (which is most blasphemous) there∣fore he directed the Pen of the Euangelist to write, the Word was made flesh, and not to say, the Word assumed the flesh, to shew that he is no more twaine but one Christ. And yet least we should fall into the error of Eutyches, to say that Christ after his incarnation had but one nature, because he had but one person, he addeth, and he dwelt in vs: to shew vn∣to vs that he is not so made one, by the conuersion of either na∣ture into the other, but that still each nature remaineth whole and intire, without confounding either the substance, or the pro∣perties of either nature, for the humane nature of Christ is not deified by the cōuersion of the flesh into the nature of the word,Aug. de heresi∣bus heres. 55. nor the Word made flesh by the conuersion of the same into the nature of flesh (as Apolinaris taught;) but the flesh is said to be deified,How the flesh is said to be deified, and the Word in∣carnate. and the Deity is said to be incarnate and made flesh, by reason of the vnion and coniunction of the flesh with the word in one person; euen as the soule and body remayning still two intyre natures, without the conuersion of either into the na∣ture of other, are vnited together, to make one person, i. e. one man: and therefore Saint Augustine saith, that his diuine na∣ture was not consumed, when his humane nature was assumed: Humana quippe natura accessit, diuina non recessit, homo factus,Aug. ep. 120. natu∣ram suscipiendo nostram, non amittendo suam; Because the humane nature was adioyned, and the Deity was not abolished; but he was made man by taking our nature vpon him, and not by lee∣sing or casting his owne nature from him;How Christ notwithstan∣din his incar∣nation remai∣neth still what he was before. and the duine Poet Prudentius saith. Ide manet quod semper erat, quod non erat esse incipiens. What he was, he alwayes is; but is otherwise for our blisse; And so the common distich hath it.
Sum quod eram, nec eram quod sum, nunc dicar vtrum{que}: ignoras, nisi me stirpe ab vtra{que} tenes. I am what I was, but I was not, as I am: for now I am both God and man, and thou knowest me not, if thou knowest not, me to be of both these natures:Nazian orat 3. de Theolog. and so Gregory Nazianzen saith, Permansit quod erat, & assumpsit quod non erat; Hee remained what he was; and he assumed what he was not; because the Word was made flesh; Non deposita, sed seposita maiestate; Not by cancelling or laying away, but as it were by concealing and lay∣ing aside, for a time, the most glorious appearance of his diuine Maiestie:Emyssen. hom. 2. de natiuit. as Eusebius Emyssenus doth most briefly and excel∣lently declare. How one thing may be made another thing three wayes.And that we might the better vnderstand, how this Word was made flesh, Euthymius sheweth, that one thing may be made another thing three manner of wayes. First, When one thing is turned, and changed into another thing,John 3.9. as when the meate that we eate, is turned into bloud; the milke into cheese;Gen. 19.26. the water into wine; Lots wife into a piller of Salt; and such like; and thus the Word was not made flesh; be∣cause without any change, hee remained still, what hee was before. Secondly, when some accident only is added vnto the sub∣stance; as when the brasse or stone, or any other mettall, is made a statue, or receiues any other impression: And thus likewise, the word is not made flesh, because the diety is incapable of any other forme but the forme of GOD, and no accident can be in GOD. The Word is made flesh, not by chan∣ging either nature into the other, but by vniting the one to the o∣ther.Thirdly, when one substance is adioyned vnto another, and yet is not transferred or changed into the nature of the other; as a Souldier putting on his armour, is made an armed man; or a man wearing on his garments, is no more a naked but a cloa∣thed man: And so the Word is now cloathed with our flesh, te same Word, but after another manner; before, onely subsi∣sting of the Deity; now, of both natures; being made flesh, not as water is made wine, but as Aaron was made Priest, and Dauid King, not by changing him into a Priest or King, but by begin∣ning to be what they were not; and not leauing to bee what they were: or, because this doth not so fully shew it, the Priestly
or Kingly dignity, being but an accidentall title conferred vp∣on these persons, as a naked man is cloathed and made an appa∣relled man; or a Souldier harnessed, and made an armed man, when all his harnesse is put vpon him; as Theodoret,Theodoret in Dialog. Saint Au∣gustine, and others doe declare. And so you see that in our Sa∣uiour Christ, the two natures doe still remaine intire, incon∣fused. CHAP. II. Of the vnion of these two natures of Christ, in one and the selfe∣same person, and some obiections answered. SEcondly, touching the vnion of these two na∣tures, the Deitie and the Humanity, wee must know, that although this eternall Word, the Sonne of God, was so made flesh, i. e. a perfect man, of the seed of Dauid, as that still each nature remaineth intire and inconfused; yet we must not imagine that he is therefore two sonnes or two per∣sons (as Nestorius thought;) but that he is one onely person, consisting of both these natures: And because this point of the vnion of these two natures, is not of small moment, but is a point full of comfort, much opposed, and of great difficulty; I will diuide all that I meane to say concerning the same vnto these three principall heads. First, The truth hereof shall be confirmed,Three things handled con∣cerning the vnion of both natures in Christ. and the obiections of our aduersaries shall be answered. Secondly, The manner of this vnion, wherein it consisteth, shal be shewed. Thirdly, The chiefe benefits and effects thereof, shall be de∣clared. First, for the vnion of these two natures:A very good simily of Justin Martyr, to ex∣presse the manner of the vnion of the two natures in Christ. the Word and the Flesh: Iustin Martyr saith, Sicut post vnitionem primigenij luminis cum solari corpore, &c. as after the collection, and the vnition of the light, with the body of the Sunne; no man can plucke them asunder, neither doth any man call the one, a part, the Sunne, and the other the light, but both of them ioyntly toge∣ther
we terme the Sunne: euen so after the vnition of our flesh, with this true light the Word. No man will call the Word a∣part, to be one Sonne of God, and the Sonne of man to be ano∣ther: but he will vnderstand both these together, to be one, and the selfe-same Christ; as by the name of Sunne, we vnderstand both the light, and the body which containeth the light: and as the light and body of the Sunne are two seuerall natures; so there be in our Sauiour Christ, two distinct and seuerall na∣tures; Altera nostra, altera nobis superior: The one is ours, the other is Gods; and as the light is actually in the Sunne, so that none can seperate it, from that body wherein it is fixed, and contained;Hoc exemplo diuinae vnitio∣nis adducto, nos ad magis cognitionem confugimus, si non omnino ipsá veritatem asse∣quuti, certe quandam simili∣tudinem quae pescrutanti∣bus sufficiat. Iustin Martyr. de recta confess. siue de coessent. trinit. yet we may easily discerne the nature, and the proprietie of each one from the other; Sic in vno filio dei, vni∣uersam vim nemo seperauerit ab vnica filietate, naturae tamē eius pro∣prietatem, ratione quiuis discreuerit: So in that one Sonne of God, no man can seperate his whole vertue, i. e. of the Word and Flesh, from that onely Sonneship, and yet in our vnder∣standings we may discerne the different proprietie of each na∣ture. And so (saith the Father,) By this example, we flie vnto the more holy cogitation of the diuine vnion of these two natures: and if hereby we be not altogether able to attaine vnto the truth thereof, (as what can be fully sufficient to ex∣presse so great a mystery?) yet certainly we haue herein a most excellent similitude, which will greatly helpe, and contentedly suffice the godly and moderate searchers of this truth. The vnity of Christ his per∣son most cleer∣ly proued from Scriptures.But indeed the holy Scriptures doe of all other writings, most fully and cleerely shew that these two natures doe make but one person in our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: for when Christ asked his Apostles, whom doe men say that I the Sonne of man am? Saint Peter answered, that he was Christ, the Sonne of the liuing God;Matth. 16.13. therefore he is but one person; because Saint Peter confesseth the Sonne of man to be the Sonne of the liuing God:Ʋerse 16. And the Angel said vnto the Virgin, that holy thing which shall be borne of thee,Luke 1.35. shall be called the Sonne of God: therefore hee is but one person, because he which was born of the Virgin, was & is none other, but he that is truly called and is the true Sonne of God: And Saint Paul speaking of Christ, as he was the eternall Sonne of God ,Rom. 2.3. in respect of his Godhead, and as he
was the sonne of Dauid, , in respect of his Manhood, yet doth he not say of his Sonnes, as of two; but of his Sonne made and declared to be his Sonne; to shew vnto vs, that as be∣fore his making, so now after his making, he is still but one Sonne, one person of the two distinct natures subsisting.Iohn 20.31. And Saint Iohn more plainely saith, that these things are writ∣ten, that you might beleeue that Iesus is the Christ, the Sonne of God: that is, that Iesus the Sonne of Mary, is that same Christ which is the Sonne of God: And in his first Epistle he doth almost no∣thing but confirme this truth; that is,1 Iohn 1.1. that there is but one per∣son in the God and man Christ Iesus. For Chap. 1. he saith, that which was from the beginning, which we haue heard, which wee haue seene with our eyes; therefore he must needs be but one person: for to see with their eyes that word which was from the begin∣ning, could no wayes be, but onely in respect of the vnitie of the person. So Chap. 2. he saith,Chap. 2. v. 22. Who is a lyar but he that denyeth Iesus to be the Christ? So Chap. 3. he saith,Chap. 3. v. 16. In this we perceiue the loue of God, that he laid downe his life for vs. So Chap. 4. he saith,Chap. 4. v. 3. Euery spirit, Qui soluit Iesum, which looseth or diuideth Iesus, i. e. to make two persons of him, is not of God, and so in many other places, hee doth most plainely shew, that the eternall word, and our hu∣mane nature, vnited vnto the same word, is but one and the selfe-same Christ, i. e. one Christ, one person. And this is confessed by all antiquity;All our Creeds and all anti∣quity confes∣seth the same truth, touching vnity of Christ his person. for in the Apostles Creede, we say; that we beleeue in Iesus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord, which was conceiued of the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary; and therfore he is but one person, because he which is said to be the onely Sonne of God, is said also to be borne of the Virgin Mary: the same is said in the Nicen Creed: and in the Creede of Athanasius it is said, that although Christ be both God and Man, yet is he no more twaine but one Christ: and that not by confounding of the substances, but by the vnity of person, i. e. by the vniting of both natures into one person: What should I re∣hearse any more? for the third Councell of Ephesus, the great Councell of Chalcedon, the Councell of Lateran, and all the an∣cient Orthodoxe Fathers; as Iustin Martyr, Irenaeus, Saint Basil, Saint Nazianzen, Saint Damascen, Saint Hillary, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint Augustine, and the rest of them, haue
most truely confessed, and most learnedly confirmed this truth; that although Christ hath two natures, the Word, and the Flesh, yet doe these two make but one person, one Sonne of God, one Sauiour of men. What the He∣reticks haue conceiued, and most impiously thought, con∣cerning the person of Christ.But against this, Cerinthus, and certaine of the Pelagian He∣reticks, and afterwards Nestorius, seperating Iesus from Christ, or rather Christ from Himselfe; haue affirmed that Iesus was but meere man, hauing not onely a humane nature, but a hu∣mane person; and afterwards to be made Christ, at the time of his baptisme, when the Holy Ghost descended vpon him in the forme of a Doue; and therefore they conclude, that as he consi∣steth of two natures, so he is likewise two persons, which notwith∣standing may be said to be one, in respect of their co-habitati∣on, affection, operation, and participation, as hereafter I shall further shew vnto you. And to confirme this damnable errour against the inuiola∣ble truth, they doe obiect, that our Sauiour said; Destroy this Temple, when he spake of his humanitie, and therefore the God Christ,Iohn 2.9. and the man Christ, are two seuerall persons: for hee doth not say, destroy me, but destroy this Temple, and I will reare it vp in three dayes: to shew vnto vs that the Temple and the dweller in the Temple, or the raiser vp of the Temple, are not the same, but diuers persons. Sol.To this I answere briefly, that this alledged instance may well proue two natures to be in Christ, but not two persons; for the soule of man is said to dwell in the body, as in a tabernacle, be∣cause the nature of the soule is different from the nature of the body, and yet man hath not two, but one person, which consi∣steth of both natures, i. e. soule and body: for Iob saith, that men dwell in houses of Clay,Iob 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.1. and Saint Paul saith, if this earthly house of our Tabernable be dissolued. And therefore Saint Chrisostome vp∣on these words of Saint Iohn, and he dwelt in vs, doth most true∣ly gather that in Christ there are two natures; but from these, or from any other places, it can neuer be proued, that in him there are two persons. Againe, they doe obiect, that the Sonne of Mary had an An∣gell to comfort him,Matth. 27.46. Iohn 12.27. and said, My God, my God, why hast thou for∣saken me? And againe, Father, Saluifica me ex hac hora: Saue me
from this houre, and such like speeches, which are not consonant, and agreeable to the Sonne of God; and therefore the Sonne of Mary is one different and another person from the Sonne of GOD. To this I answer with S. Cyrill,Sol. that as there are many things which doe agree with him, according to the forme of God, which cannot be agreeable to him, according to the forme of a seruant; so there are many things that do agree with him, accor∣ding to the forme of a seruant, which doe not agree with the Sonne of God absolutely considered; because he is both, a true God, and a true man, so vnited together, as that the properties of neither nature are confounded; (as hereafter shall be shewed:Cyrillus def∣fnt. 4. Anath. contra. Theodor.) and therefore all such sayings, and allegations which are said of him, or be referred vnto him, in respect of one nature, which are not properly agreeable to the other nature; doe onely shew, and most rightly proue two natures, but not two persons, to be in our Sauiour Christ. CHAP. III. Of the manner of the vnion of the two natures, and wherein this vnion chiefly consisteth. SEcondly,Wherein the Hereticks haue affirmed the vnion of both natures in Christ to con∣sist. for the manner of this vnion of these two natures in one person, or wherein chiefly it consisteth, herein resteth the greatest difficul∣ty: For, First, the Nestorians and their followers say: that both these natures are saide to bee one, by the vnitie of, 1. Co-habitation. 2. Will and affection. 3. Operation. 4. Participation. First, by the vnity of Co-habitation, because the Word dwelled in the man Christ, as in his choicest House and Temple, accocding to that saying of the Euangelist; and he dwelt in vs.Iohn 1.14. Secondly, by the vnity of will and affection, because the will of Christ was alwayes agreeable to the will of God: and this they
doe illustrate by the example of Man and Wife, which though they be two persons,Math. 19.5. yet are they said to be one flesh, in regard of their mariage knot, and especially in respect of their vnanimous hearts; so the Sonne of God, and the Sonne of Mary, are two persons (say they) and yet may be said to be one Christ, in regard of that indissoluble spirituall coniunction, and affection that is betwixt them. Thirdly, By the vnity of operation, because the man Christ, was the Instrument, which the Word God vsed for the effecting of all those great workes that he did, while hee walked here on Earth. Fourthly, By the vnity of participation, because the Word God, did impart vnto the man Christ, his name and dignity, that hee should be called God, and the Sonne of God, and should be wor∣shipped of all Creatures, not for his owne sake, but for his sake to whom hee was thus vnited. How falsly the Heretickes af∣firme the vnion of the two na∣tures to consist in the aforesaid points.But how false and fained are all these subtle infernall distin∣ctions, to misteach the manner and the matter, wherein the true vnion of these natures chiefly consisteth, it will easily appeare, if we doe but obserue, that all this may, and doth agree with all the Saints, and faithfull seruants of God: for, First, God dwelleth in his Saints, as in his Temples; for, We are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,1 Cor. 3.16. 1 Cor. 6.19. and the Spirit of God dwelleth in vs, saith the Apostle. Secondly, The Saints are one with God, by will and affe∣ction:1 Cor. 6.17. Math. 6.10. for the Apostle sheweth vs plainely, that he which is ioy∣ned vnto the Lord, is one spirit; and wisheth rather, that Gods will may be done, then his owne; as they doe daily in their prayers: Thy will be done. Thirdly, That the Saints are Gods Instruments, (as be ma∣ny times the wicked also) whereby God worketh many excel∣lent things, the same Apostle sheweth, where he saith; That al∣though there be diuersities of operations,1 Cor. 12.6. Rom. 15.19. yet, it is the same God which worketh all in all. Fourthly, That the Saints are called, The Sonnes of God, and some of them also said to be Gods,1 Iohn 3.1. by the participation of many graces and titles which God hath giuen vnto them, it is most plaine;Psal. 82.6. for, I said you are Gods, and the Children of the most High:
And so the Apostle sheweth, Gal. 4.6.7.Gal. 4.6.7. and so in many other places: And therefore seeing all the faithfull seruants of God, may be truly said to be vnited vnto God, in respect of the coha∣bitation of God in them, and of their will and affection agreeable to the will of God, and of the working of God in them, and the bestowing of his names, titles, dignities, and graces vpon them; and that the vnion of this Word with our Flesh: i. e. of the Diuine Nature with the humanity, is farre otherwise, then the vnion of the Saints with God; it must needes follow, that although it be true, that there is a most perfect vnity of cohabitation, affection, operation, and participation betwixt the two Natures of Christ; yet this is not all, but the vnion of them consisteth in a farre more excellent respect then any, and all of these. And therefore, Secondly, Brentius, Smidelinus,What the Lu∣therans teach concerning the vnion of the two natures of Christ. and the rest of their Lutheran followers, doe affirme, this vnion of both these Natures, to con∣sist in the communication of the properties of the Deity, to the hu∣manity of Christ; so as they are really transferred, and the hu∣manity inuested with the diuine properties: And therefore they doe conclude, that in respect of this reall communicating, and transferring of attributes, the manhood of Christ is omniscient, om∣nipotent, omnipresent, and so forth. But how grsse this error is, and how derogatory to the truth of Christian Doctrine, it will easily appeare, if we doe but con∣sider those intollerable absurdities that of necessity must needes follow the same: for, First,The absurdi∣ties that must needes follow the Lutheran Doctrine. The Father and the Sonne should be hypostatically vnited one to the other, and so be made one person; for that it is most certaine, (as themselues must, and doe confesse) that the Father hath, and doth communicate all his essentiall attributes, and properties vnto the Sonne, and therefore if the vnion of these two Natures consisteth in the communicating of properties, the Fa∣ther and the Sonne must be vnited into one person; but this is most horribly absurd: Therefore the other, Secondly, The whole Trinity should be incarnate, because all the essentiall attributes of the Deity, are common to the whole Trinity, and to each person of the Trinity. Thirdly, The two natures of Christ could not be hypostati∣cally vnited, because there are certaine diuine properties, which
cannot be said to be communicated to the humanity of Christ, as to be increated, to be infinite, to want beginning of time, to be Ens independens, an independant being; and certaine things, which Christ in respect of his Flesh had not before his passion, and resurrection: as to bee impassible, immortall, and such like. Fourthly, If this vnion consisted in the communicating of the properties, then this transfusion of them must be reciprocall; that is, as the diuine properties are transfused into the humanity, so the humane properties must bee likewise transfused into the Deity: And then it must needes follow, that as Omnipresency, Omnisciency, Vbiquity, and such like, are transfused into the hu∣manity; so passibility, mortality, and such like, should be really transfused into the Deity: but it were most absurd to say, that the God-head is capable of humane fraileties; And therefore it is as absurd to say, that the Manhood was inuested with diuine Excellencies as they are Diuine: And, Fiftly, If this were true, then the humanity should be no hu∣manity at all, because freed from humane fraileties, and inuested with diuine properties; And therefore to expresse truly where∣in this vnion consisteth. Wherein the vnion of the two natures truly consisteth is shewed.Thirdly, We say, that the vnion of these two Natures consi∣steth in the communicating of the subsistence of the Word, with the humane nature that it assumed: i. e. of the very being of the Word with the being of our Flesh, so that it is an hypostaticall or per∣sonall vnion; that is, such an vnion, as that both natures doe make but one person of Christ, euen as the soule and body doe make but one person of man:Jn Ep. Alex. Concilij. ana∣them. 2. for so saith the Councell of Calcedon, the Councell of Lateran, the Councell of Toledo, Saint Cyril, and all the Oxthodoxe Fathers, that writ thereof. Si quis non confi∣tetur carni secundum subsistentiam vnitum Dei patris verbum, ana∣thema sit; Whosoeuer confesseth not the eternall Word of the Father to be vnited vnto our flesh, according to his subsistence, let him be accursed. And further wee say, that the vnion of these two natures, i. e. the God-head, as it is limited to the second person of the Trini∣tie, and the Manhood of Christ, is,
1. Inconuertible. 2. Indiuisible. 3. Inconfused. 4. Inseperable.Sixe speciall things obserua∣ble in the vni∣on of the two natures of Christ. 5. Substantiall. 6. Ineffable. First, Inconuertible, because neither the Diuine Nature is turned into the humanity, nor the humanity into the Deity. Secondly, Indiuisible, because the Natures are so vnited into one person, that they can neuer be separated, vnlesse we diuide the person of Christ, which is most hereticall. Thirdly, Inconfused, because the Natures remaine still in∣tire, without confounding either their Essence, or their proper∣ties, or their willes, or any other operations whatsoeuer; and therefore (excepting onely his subsistence, which is one, that we make him not two persons with Nestorius) we do affirme, that in Christ there are two natures, two willes, two naturall proprieties and operations, intire and vnmixed, that we may not confound them with Eutyches: for sith the natures are neither confused,How the pro∣perties of each nature doe re∣maine intire, and inconfused to each nature. nor transfused each into other, the properties also must needes remaine intire to either Nature, without that supposed transfusion of them each to other: for that rule can neuer bee disproued; Confundens proprietates essentiales, confundit naturas, Confound the naturall or essentiall properties of any things, and you take away the nature of the things: And therefore in that one and selfe-same subsistence of Christ, there must needes be a diuine and a humane nature, a diuine and a humane wisedome, a diuine and a humane will; and so of all other properties of each nature, they must be as well inconfused, as indiuisible. And this Christ himselfe briefly sheweth, where hee saith, I lay downe my life, and I take it vp againe;John 10.17. for though the actions of each nature, are inseparably ioyned together, in respect of the person; that is, though the same person is said to doe the acti∣ons of each Nature, yet are the actions neuer confounded, but doe still remaine distinct, and proper to each nature, as to lay downe his life, is the proper worke of the humanity, and to take it vp a∣gaine, is the proper worke of the Deity: And this Damascene doth explaine, by the example of a fiery Sword, wherein both the natures of the fire and of the Sword, and so likewise the acti∣ons and proprieties of each of them, are preserued intire, to each
nature;Damasc. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 15. Nam ferrum habet virtutem incidendi, ignis vrendi, For the Iron retaineth still, and retaineth onely the power of cutting, and the fire of burning; Euen so it is in the person of Christ, the Diuinity doth still retaine the propriety of working diuine opera∣tions, and the humanity still retaineth the propriety of working all humane operations. And Theodoret vseth the same similie, though not in the like words,Theodor. Dialog. 2. f. 166. An example shewing how the two natures though vnited, doe remaine inconfused. yet to the very same effect, saying, Si ignis cum ferro comixtio, quae ferrum ita ostendit, vt etiam ea faciat quae sunt ignis, eius naturam non mutat, ita nec Dei cum corpore est mu∣tatio corporis, &c. If the commixtion of the fire with the Iron, doth make the Iron not onely to appeare like fire, but also to doe the same things, (as to dry, to heate, and to burne) which the fire doth; and yet this fire changeth not the nature of the Iron: Euen so the vnion of the Word with our Flesh, doth not change the nature of our flesh, but as a man hath his soule and body both vnited, and inconfused; Ita multo magis Christus habens diuini∣tatem cum corpore, habet vtra{que} permanentia, & non confusa: So much more, Christ hauing his diuinity vnited with our flesh, hath them both remaining intire, and inconfused. Fourthly, Inseparable, because the Natures are so inseparably vnited, as that the humane nature, which the Word assumed, can neuer be separated from the same; And therefore when Christ died, Subtraxit visionem, sed non soluit vnionem: The soule parted from the body, but the Deity was separated from neither, as Leo saith; For in respect of this vnion of the Deity, with either part of Christs humanity,Psal. 16.11. When Christ died, and body and soule were parted, the Godhead par∣ted from nei∣ther of them. the Man Christ saith vnto the God-head, Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Hell, nor suffer thine holy one: i. e. my body in the graue, to see corruption: but as a Tree cut in twaine, the Sunne cannot be cutte, but that it may still shine on either part; so the body and soule of Christ being parted, the Deity was still vnited vnto them both; and could neuer be separated from the manhood, after he had once assumed the same into the vnity of his person. That there are three speciall kindes of vni∣on.Fiftly, Substantiall, for (as Bellarmine well obserueth) diuers things may be vnited three manner of wayes. First, Essentially, as when of many things, is made one essence, after which manner the matter and forme, the kinde and diffe∣rence, are ioyned and vnited together: And thus the vnion of
these Natures in the words incarnation, is not made; first, be∣cause that if it were so, then there should be in Christ but one nature, and that should be neither diuine, nor humane, but a cer∣taine third kinde of nature out of them both: And secondly, because that this essentiall vnion is neuer made, but of imperfect natures; or if they be perfect, then is it by a certaine corruption, or conuersion of them: but the natures of Christ are perfect and intire, and therefore not essentially vnited. Secondly, Accidentally, as when accidents are adioyned to the subiect, or when a substance is ioyned to a substance, but of that coupling ariseth nothing else but an accidentall forme, as when of Timber and Stones we doe compose and frame a House; and thus also the hypostaticall vnion of Christs two natures, is not made, because God is no accident, nor the subiect of any acci∣dents. Thirdly, Substantially, as when a substance,That the vni∣on of Christ his natures is substantiall. which other∣wise existeth of it selfe, is drawne to the being of another supposi∣tum; i. e. of another, of it selfe existing substance, and depen∣deth on the same, as a part thereof: And thus is the vnion of the Word with our Flesh, for wee say, that the Word is substantially made Flesh; i. e. a true, and a perfect man, whose being is no acci∣dent, but a substance. Sixtly, It is ineffable, so absolutely perfect,That the man∣ner of the vni∣ting of the two natures, is inef∣fable. and so exceedingly mysticall, that it can neuer be perfectly declared by any man; for though the Fathers sought by many examples and simili∣tudes, to expresse and to illustrate the same, as by the vnion of the body and soule, of a branch ingraffed into a Tree, of a fie∣rie Iron, and such like; yet all come too short, for the full expres∣sing of this inexplicable mystery: And therefore Saint Bernard compareth this ineffable mystery, of the vniting of these two na∣tures, vnto that incomprehensible mystery of the Trinity; and so indeede that of the Trinity is greatest, and this of the incar¦nation is like vnto it, farre exceeding mans capacity: for, his wayes are in the Seas, his pathes in the great waters,Psal. 76.19. and his foote∣steps are not knowne. And so you see, how that these two natures, doe make but one person of our Sauiour Christ, and how they are really, though ineffably, vnited in that one and selfe-same subsistence of Christ.
CHAP. IIII. Of some of the chiefest effects and benefits of this vnion of these two Natures of Christ. The effects and benefits of the vnion, are of two sorts.THirdly, For the effects and benefits of this hy∣postaticall vnion of these two Natures, we must vnderstand, that they are especially of two sorts. 1. Some in respect of Christ. 2. Others in respect of Christians. First, Those in respect of Christ, are likewise three-fold. 1. The benefit of the vnion of the two natures in respect of Christ, is three-fold. Esay 53.12. 1 Pet. 2.22.1. An exemption of all sinne and corruption from Christ. 2. The collation of ineffable graces into the humanity of Christ. 3. The communication of the properties of each Nature to the per∣son of Christ. First, We finde, that although Christ appeared like a sinfull man, and was numbred among the wicked, yet in very deede, he did no sinne, neither was any guile found in his mouth; for though, In carnis assumptione, condescendit mihi, in culpae tamen vitatione consului sibi,1. To free the manhood from all sinne. He assumed the true nature of man, yet by reason of his pure conception, and of this hypostaticall vnion, hee was conceiued, and liued without sinne; and so as Leo saith, Qui non alienus ab hominum genere, alienus fuit à crimine: He tooke vpon him the seede of man, but not the sinne of man; he vnited himselfe to our nature, but he shunned all the iniquity of our na∣ture. Secondly, The graces callated vnto the humanity of Christ, by reason of this vnion of the two natures, are very many, espe∣cially these sixe. 2. To inrich the manhood with these, and the like speciall graces.First, His subsistence, and that in the second person of the Tri∣nity, whereof it selfe, as of it selfe, is destitute. Secondly, An extraordinary dignity, in that it is a peculiar Temple for the Deity of Christ to dwell in, and the place where the Godhead shewes it selfe more manifestly, and more gloriously, then in any other Creature whatsoeuer; for though God shew∣eth himselfe by his prouidence, to be in all his Creatures, and by
his grace, to be after a more speciall manner in his Saints, yet is he onely most gloriously, eternally inhabiting, according to the fulnesse of his Deity, by an hypostaticall vnion, in the humanity of Christ; for, In him dwelleth the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily:Collos. 2.9. And as now in this life, No man commeth vnto God but by Christ, so hereafter in the next life, No man can see God, but in the face of Iesus Christ. Thirdly, A more neere familiarity with the Godhead, then any other Creature, (whether Men or Angels) either had, or haue, or can haue; for that to all other Creatures he is adioyned onely by the presence of his grace, or glory, but to the humanity of Christ, he hath personally vnited himselfe for euer: So that as he said, My Father and I are one; that is, one essence, he may as truly say, the Manhood and I are one; that is, one onely person for euer. Fourthly, An extraordinary measure, without measure, of ha∣bituall graces, wisedome, vnderstanding, holinesse, and the like; such as dwels not in that measure in any other Creature whatsoeuer, no, not in the very chiefest Angels of God: for to all them were giuen grace by measure, but to the humanity of Christ,Ephes. 4 7. was giuen grace without measure,Iohn 3.34. (saith the Baptist) euen so much as a Crea∣ture is any wayes capable of. Fiftly, A partner agent with the Godhead, according to its measure in the workes of redemption, mediation, and such like. Sixtly, To be adored and worshipped with diuine honour, not as it is considered in it selfe, without respect vnto the Deity, but as it is vnited with the Godhead: Ne{que} tamen creaturam adoramus,Athanas. Orat. 5. contra Arrianos Wee worship not the flesh a∣lone conside∣red, but wee a∣dore the person of Christ, which consisteth of the Word and our Flesh. absit, sed dominum rerum creatarum, incarnatum verbum deum, ado∣ramus; And yet we adore no Creature, God forbid, but we wor∣ship and adore the Lord of all Creatures, the incarnate Word God, Iesus Christ, saith Athanasius. Nam veluti si quis nostrum, &c. For as if any one of vs should finde a purple roabe, or a Kingly Diademe, lying vpon the ground; would he worship the same trow you? but when the King is clothed, and decked with the same, he is guilty of death, that despiseth, and refuseth to worship and honour them, together with the King that weareth them: euen so in our Sauiour Christ, wee doe not adore the sole and
bare humanity,Aug. de verbis Domini sec. Joh. Ser. 58. but being vnited vnto the Deity, whosoeuer shall despise to adore with diuine worship, that onely Sonne of God, true God, and true man, hee shall vndoubtedly suffer the paines of eternall death, saith Saint Augustine. 3. To haue the properties of each nature to bee indiffe∣rently predi∣cated of the whole person of Christ.Thirdly, For the communicating of the properties, we are to consider it, First, In respect of those properties which are common to both natures ioyntly considered. Secondly, In respect of those properties which are peculiar to either nature, seuerally considered. First, The Office of a Mediator is ascribed to Christ, in re∣spect of both natures, Quia totus Christus secundum diuinitatem & humanitatem est Mediator & Intercessor, because whole Christ according to his Deity and humanity is our Mediator and Intercessor, saith Saint Augustine. Secondly, The peculiar properties of either nature, are said to be communicated, when they are predicated, or spoken of the whole person of Christ in the concrete, and largest extent; and this communicating of properties, is nothing else, but a forme of speech, whereby those things are spoken of the whole person of Christ, which indeede are proper to either one nature, and not to the other: for oftentimes it comes to passe, that by reason of the personall vnion of these two natures, each one of them doth interchangeably take the concrete names each of other in pre∣dication,Acts 20.28. as when it is said, That God purchased the Church with his owne bloud; not that the Godhead shed bloud, but because that person which was a God, did shed bloud, to procure redemp∣tion; not which it had as God, but which it had in respect of the Manhood vnited vnto it. So the Sonne of man talking with Nicodemus,Iohn 3.13. is said, To be in Heauen, not that hee was in Heauen, as he was man, while he was on earth; but because that person, which was the Sonne of man, was by something that was in his person, that is, his Deity, in Heauen: So Saint Paul in the first Chapter to the Romans,Rom. 1.4. Verse 3.4. doth giue vs a perfect patterne how to interpret all such alternate predicati∣ons; for there hee saith, That the Sonne of God was made of the seede of Dauid: but how? not according to his diuine Sonne∣ship or Deity, which hee had from all eternity, but in respect
of his humane nature, which was personally vnited vnto the Sonne of God. And therefore though it be most vsuall in the Scripture, to heare things properly appertaining to the Manhood, to be affir∣med of our blessed God and Sauiour, and also things properly belonging to him as he is God, ascribed to the man Christ Iesus; yet is it most hereticall, to confound the one nature with the other, as the Eutychians did; or to communicate properly the spe∣ciall properties of one nature vnto the other, as the Lutherans doe: for in the concrete, and not in the abstract, (as the Schooles doe speake) wee say,1 Cor. 2.8. That they haue crucified the Lord of glory; as noting that person which was, and is the Lord of glory; and vnderstanding it of his person, not in respect of that nature whereby hee was the Lord of glory, but in respect of the other nature personally vnited thereunto, wherein hee was passible, and might be crucified. And so speaking of his person, in respect of his other nature, we say, That the man Christ is Almighty; because hee is so in re∣spect of his diuine nature, personally vnited vnto his humanity;Pamas l. 3. c 3. 4 de fide ortho∣doxa. Theodoret. in Dialog. but as we may not say, That they haue crucified the Godhead; so wee may not say, That the manhood of Christ is Almighty: for when any thing is affirmed of Christ, in respect of that one na∣ture which properly belongeth vnto the other, the meaning thereof is not to inuest the one nature, with the properties that are peculiar to the other; but thereby to shew the truth and cer∣tainty of the vnion of both natures in one person. And we haue a good example hereof in man, as hee consisteth of body and soule, for wee may truly say, that man is heauenly and immortall, and that man is mortall and earthly: And againe wee may say, that the soule sleepeth, and the body heareth, whereas to sleepe, is the property of the body, and to heare, is the property of the soule, and yet they destroy the nature of man, that would either turne the one of these natures into the other, or confound one of these with the other; or inuest the one nature really with the proper∣ties that are peculiar vnto the other: Euen so we may say, that God was borne of a Virgin, and the Virgin to be , the Mother of God, that God suffered, and was crucified, and did redeeme the Church with his owne bloud; yet not simply,Acts 20.28. Sd
; but in this or that respect, that is, in respect of another nature, which God hath vnited vnto himselfe; because God here, is a concrete Word, and not an abstract, and signifieth the person of Christ, and not the diuine nature of Christ; And so we say, that the man Christ is Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipre∣sent, &c. yet not simply in respect of his manhood, but in respect of the person which is the same, God and man; or of the other nature, of the man Christ Iesus: for that here man also is a con∣crete Word, signifying the whole person, and not the humane nature of Christ. And so in this respect, and after this manner, the speciall pro∣perties of each nature, may be predicated and affirmed of the other nature, Quia vt Deus propter vnitatem propria ducit hu∣mana, sic homo propter vnitatem propria ducit diuina; Because that as the God Christ,Cyrillus de in∣carn. c. 26. in respect of the hypostaticall vnion of the two natures, assumed all the humane properties; so the man Christ, in respect of the same vnion, is partaker of all the diuine proper∣ties; as Saint Cyril speaketh: But on the contrary side, we may not say, that the Deity of Christ was borne of a Virgin; or that Mary is the Mother of the God-head, or that the diuinity of Christ was passible, and mortall; nor that the humanity of Christ is Almighty, Omniscient, Omnipresent, or the like; because the deity and humanity, are abstract words, i. e. such words as doe note vnto vs the two natures of Christ, the one diuine, the other humane, and not the person of Christ. And therefore if we doe but rightly distinguish, betweene prae∣dicata absoluta et limitata; the things that are spoken absolutely in the largest sense, and the things that are predicated by way of limitation in the strictest sense, we shall easily see, that the com∣munication of the properties of both natures, doe no wayes proue such a reall trans-fusion of the properties of each nature, into the other, as that the humanity of Christ, should receiue into it selfe from the Deitie, a power to be omnipotent, omniscient, or omnipresent in it selfe, but as the natures are distinct, so the proper∣ties of each nature are still distinct, without trans-fusion, or con∣founding the one with the other.
CHAP. V. Of certaine obiections and arguments, endeuouring to proue the inue∣sting of the humanity of Christ with diuine properties, answered; and the effects of this vnion in respect of all Christians, shewed. ANd yet notwithstanding all this, and all else that hath beene spoken, by all the most fa∣mous Diuines of this latter time, the Lutherans say, that Christ did such miracles in his natu∣rall body, and that there are such things as∣cribed to the manhood of Christ, as doe suffici∣ently proue, that his humane nature, is really inuested with the diuine properties. For, First, they doe obiect that when the Iewes would haue  throwne him downe the hill, he passed away inuisibly from amongst them all; therefore the man Christ Iesus is inuisible. To this Ludolphus answereth, that this happened not,Sol. by making the Body of Christ inuisible,Ludolphus p. 1. c. 65. p. 155. but by the sudden striking of his enemies with such stupified blindnesse, as were the Sodomites when they sought for Lots doore, vntill they were wearied. Secondly, they doe obiect that Christ came into the roome  where the Apostles were, the doores being shut; therefore the body of Christ is voide of that grossenesse, incident to a naturall body, and is now made inuisible and inpalpable. To this some doe answere, that he came in,Sol. the doores being shut i. e. at that time, when the doores are vsually shut in euery place; but this could be neither strange to the Apostles, nor any extraordinary act of Christ:Zanch. tom. 8. p. 389. and therefore Zanchius doth more truely answere, that this proueth not any mutation to bee in the body of Christ, nor any inuestment of the same, with Di∣uine properties; but that by the omnipotent power of his Deitie, he caused the doores to goe backe,That the doores opened themselues to Christ. and to open them∣selues vnto him, to make way for the true and solyd Body of Christ to enter in; as the stone was rolled away from the doore of the sepulchre, to make way for the same solyd body, to passe
forth: And we reade, that to others he did the like to this: for, Saint Peter being in prison,Act. 12.10. and the doores being shut, they o∣pened themselues vnto him, and he came forth; and all the Apostles (if we beleeue Master Harding) came into the Chap∣pell to helpe Saint Basil to say Masse, though the doores, were shut: and therefore the opening of the doores by the power of Christs Deitie doth no way prooue the inpalpabilitie of his Body. Thirdly, They doe obiect that he walked vpon the Sea like a Spirit,Mar. 6.49. and therefore his Body was inuested with the leuity and agility of the Deity. Sol.To this I answere that he walked vpon the Seas, not by the alleuiating or making light his body, or specially by the leesing of the properties of a true naturall body; but by the consolida∣ting, and confirming or strengthening of the waters, through the power of his Deitie, to make them able to beare him vp: and so they were strengthened to beare vp the body of Saint Peter, vntill Saint Peters faith began to faile. Fourthly, They doe obiect, that the heauens must containe the Body of Christ vntill the restitution of all things,Act 9.3. as Saint Peter saith; and yet that Christ in respect of his humanity, did ap∣peare vnto Saint Paul,Act. 22.6. as he went towards Damascus; and there∣fore either the saying of Saint Peter cannot be true, or Saint Paul did not see him, or else his humanity, by reason of the vnion with the Deity, hath obtained those Diuine properties, to be om∣niscient and omnipresent with the Deity. Sol.To this some doe answere, that Christ might for that time, and to that end frame a body of the ayre, to speake vnto Saint Paul, as he did many times vnto the Fathers of the Old Testa∣ment; and so the Heauens did containe the true and naturall bo∣dy, and he appeared vnto Saint Paul in a body that he assumed for that purpose. Others thinke that Christ might for a short space of time leaue the Heauens, and descend into the Ayre to speake with Saint Paul; and yet the saying of Saint Peter to be still true, thus vnderstood, that the heauens vsually, and alwayes without some rare and speciall dispensation doe containe him, vntill the restitution of all things.
But, it is vnlikely that he would assume any created forme vp∣on him, after he had once really vnited himselfe to our nature; and we haue no argument to proue that euer he did it; and it is not probable that he would leaue his throne voide in heauen, for the least moment of time, after hee was once seated in that excellent Maiestie: and therefore I thinke with Zanchius, that Christ remaining in Heauen, might appeare vnto Saint Paul, as he did vnto Saint Stephen; the heauens were opened, and his eyes were indued with a most excellent sharpenesse of sight, that he saw Christ standing on the right hand of God:Act. 7.55. for Saint Paul doth not say that Christ appeared vnto him on earth,That Saul saw no body on earth, as he went to Da∣mascus. but that suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heauen; and that he heard the voyce of the Lord, saying vnto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and all this might be without any pre∣sence of Christs Body; for Christ might speake in Heauen, and cause that same voice to be head here on earth,Matth. 3.17. or he might frame a voyce in the Ayre; as the Father did at the baptisme of Christ, where the voyce was framed and heard, but no body seene nor assumed. Fiftly, They doe obiect that the Body of Christ doth viuifie  vs, and raise vs vp, and doe such other effects, which are onely proper vnto the Godhead, and therefore it is inuested with the properties of the Godhead. To this Damascen answereth by this similitude,Sol. Vrit ignitum ferrum, non naturali ratione, vstivam possidens actionem;How the flesh of Christ is said to doe diuine opera∣tions. sed ex vni∣one ignis ad ferrum, illud obtinet: That as a hot fiery iron will burne any thing, not that it hath naturally the facultie or pro∣priety of burning, but by reason of the vnion of the fire vnto it; So the humanity is said to doe many things, not that it hath any property in it selfe to do thē; but being vnited vnto the Deitie,Damasc. de fide orthodoxa. l. 3. c. 17. it is said to doe the same; though indeed, as it is not the iron that burneth, but the fire that is vnited vnto the iron; So it is not properly the flesh that doth any of these, but the Word vnto which the flesh is hypostatically vnited. And therefore it is ap∣parant, mauger all that can be said against it, that Christ by this communicating of properties, hath neither lost the properties of a true naturall body, nor that his humanity is really inuested with the properties of the Deity.
Secondly, the benefits of the vnion of the two natures of Christ, in respect of vs. Esay 1. Ephes. 4.18.Secondly, The other effects and benefits of the vnion of these two natures, which are in regard of vs, are, our spirituall vnion with God, and thereby the inriching of vs, with all those graces that doe prepare vs, and bring vs vnto euerlasting happinesse: for our sinnes had seperated vs from God, and made vs aliens, and strangers from the life of God; they were, and are, like a partition wall betwixt God and vs; they keepe vs farre from God, and make vs indeed to be , men without God in the world: but now as God made the personall vnion of soule and body, for the constitution and continuation of the whole and com∣mon nature of mankind; So he vnited the Word with our flesh, that our nature might be restored in the person of Christ; and that they which before were at variance, God and Man, might now be reconciled through this vnion of God and man, in the person of Iesus Christ: for seeing Christ hath personally vnited our nature vnto himselfe, he hath thereby naturally vnited vs vnto God; Quia natura nobis est , because by nature hee is of the same nature with vs, and we are of the same with him, though we be not carnally in him, but as we are ingraffed, Et consortes Christi per fidem;Basilius p 41. ad Caesariens. and pertakers of Christ by faith, as Saint Basil saith. And so now by reason of this vniting of our nature vnto the Sonne of God, and thereby our communion and fellowship with God; we receiue (as all the members doe receiue life and moti∣on, by reason of their vnion with the head) all those gracious motions, and gifts that are necessary for sustaining of our spi∣ritull life: and shall hereafter fully attaine vnto the blessed frui∣tion of God for euer. And so you see the particulars of this great mistery of the words incarnation: How the word was made flesh.
CHAP. VI. Of certaine reasons why these deepe doctrinall points were so largely handled. NOw if any man doth maruell, (as no doubt but many doe, and blame me too perhaps) that I should so largely treate of the eternity and diuinity of the word, against the Arri∣ans, of the verity of his Humanity against the Marcionists, of the distinction of the two na∣tures against the Eutychians, of the vnion of the natures against the Nestorians,Why the for∣mer points were so large∣ly handled. and of the communicating of the properties against the Lutherans; seeing (as Hyperius aduiseth vs) we should ra∣ther deale against the iniquitie of the times, and those present euils, that are raging and raigning amongst the people in euery place; then by needlesse mention of old buried heresies, to giue occasion vnto any man to inquire into them; I answere, that I haue done the same for sundry and diuers reasons: As, First, because these points concerning Christ, are the most principall points of all Diuinity, and the most comfortable for all Christians: for this is eternall life,Iohn 17.3. to know thee to be the onely true God, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ.The chiefest knowledge, is the know∣ledge of Iesus Christ. And therefore I did euer loue to be euer fishing in this Sea, to be euer studying in these points, and I did neuer thinke, that I could either stay too long, or speake too much, in discoursing about Iesus Christ. Secondly, because the Apostle saith, there must be Heresies, & that in these our dayes,1 Cor. 11.19. we are as apt & as prone to fall into all sorts of Heresies; as euer were men in any dayes, since the beginning of dayes;The Diuell is most desirous to keepe vs ignorant of this truth, or else to corrupt this Truth. and that we know the Diuell is more de∣sirous to obscure this light, and to corrupt the truth of this do∣ctrine, concerning Christ, then any other point of Diuinity whatsoeuer: And therefore I thinke it were good, if this truth were more fully handled, and more generally divulged vnto all people then it is: not only, that our armour might be in a readi∣nesse; but also that hauing oyle in our lampes, and our loynes girt, and these points by continuall hearing and reading of the
same, perfectly knowne and understood, wee might be able to quench the fiery darts of Satan, and to stop the mouthes of all Hereticks, if at any time Satan should stirre them vp to speake against the truth. By seeing the villanies of Satan, wee ought the ra∣ther to detest him, and to beware of him.Thirdly, because it is not onely our parts, onely to set down ablatiue directions, to confute or preuent errours; but, as wee are to recite the long fore-passed benefits of God, that wee may see the greatnesse of his goodnesse, and be thereby induced to shew the more loue and thankefulnesse to his Maiesty; so we are to relate the long fore-passed villanies, miseries, and Heresies, where∣vnto that cruell enemy of mankinde hath plunged vs, that so men may see, and haue it alwayes before their eyes, what destruction and miseries he hath brought continually vnto the sonnes of men, and may be hereby induced euer to hate and de∣test that cruell fiend. Luke 5.4.Fourthly, because we are debters both to the wise and vn∣wise, and must oftentimes launch forth into the deepe, (as our Sa∣uiour commanded Peter) if we will catch a good draught of fish:The best way to teach vs to lay a good foundation. for we find that popular exhortations, not grounded vpon the sure doctrinall points of instructions, are like roofes built without foundation; and therefore Tertullian saith, it is the property of Hereticks first mouere, to perswade and then, docere, to teach, and euer to spend more time in morall perswasions, then they doe in the fundamentall points of diuine instructions; but the true labourers with Saint Paul, are most desirous euer to lay downe a good foundation:1 Cor. 3.11. and other foundation can no man lay better then this, to know Iesus Christ and him crucified. The doctrine of diuinitie is very deepe.Fiftly, because we are to shew how Diuinity is like a bound∣lesse Ocean, and of an vnwadable depth, wherein the greatest Elephant may swimme, and how great is the mystery of godli∣nesse,1 Tim. 4.16. God manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spirit, seene of An∣gels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and recei∣ued vp into glory; that so the people may see how laborious and painefull is the calling of the poore Ministers;2 Cor. 2.16. for who can ex∣presse his noble Acts? ? or; who is sufficient for these things? or to attaine to the knowledge of any of these things, without seruent prayers for Gods assistance, and indefatigable paines, with all diligence continually; and that
both Priests and People, should alwayes striue and labour,How deligent we ought to be to attaine vnto the knowledge of Iesus Christ. Et orando, & audiendo, & legendo, & bene viuendo, vt intelligant? By praying hearing, reading, and all other possible meanes, that they may vnderstand so much as their weake capacities can vnblameably comprehend, both of these and all other truthes concerning Christ: for all knowledge without this will auaile vs nothing: the knowledge of all morall vertues, of all naturall causes, of all Crafts and Sciences can neuer bring vs vnto eternall happinesse, but this is eternall life to know Iesus Christ: and there∣fore, for mine owne part; I had rather weare and weary out my selfe, in this difficult study of Christ, then to bath my selfe in those fountaines, or to be crowned with the sweetest Garland flowers, of Philosophy or morality. Sixtly, because hereby is seene, that greatnesse of Gods loue to mankinde, in that he was pleased to open and to search the treasure of his wisedome, that he might deuise and finde out, the meanes to saue vs,That no wise∣dome but that insearchable wisedome of God could e∣uer haue found this way to saue sinfull man. which of our selues could neuer so much as to haue inuented the way, much lesse to effect the meanes: to helpe our selues: for if it be now so ineffable, and so incompre∣hensible, that we can neuer fully vnderstand, nor perfectly at∣taine vnto the depth of these mysteries, how the Word should be incarnate, and the two natures, so farre in nature disagreeing one from the other, should notwithstanding be vnited into one per∣son, for the accomplishing of our redemption, being already done, and so plainely shewed by Christ, and vnfolded by so many faithfull seruants of Christ; how should we euer haue inuented, or found out the way to effect so great saluation, before it was done? for many can tell how to deuise the way, and learne to know the meanes that might doe them good, but can∣not tell how to effect the same: but we could neither performe the worke, nor yet deuise the way how we might be reconciled vnto God; and therefore as the Psalmist saith, The helpe that is done vpon earth, God doth it himselfe; And he did it wholly him∣selfe: for when we could doe nothing to helpe our selues, no not so much as to imagine which way to doe our selues any good; God of his meere loue was moued, through his wise∣dome, to finde out this meanes of vniting the Word with our Flesh, that we might be vnited vnto God againe. O that wee
would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnesse,Psal. 107.8. and shew the won∣ders that he doth for the Children of men; That wee would offer vnto him, The sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing, and shew forth his prayses from one generation to another. Seuenthly, Because hereby is shewed the difference betwixt the Law and the Gospell: for that the Fathers vnder the Law, did see these things darkely, and beheld Christ through the grates and lattices; i. e. vnder the types and shaddowes of the Law, as it were with Moses, in foramine petrae, through the holes and clefts of the rocke, to behold a few glympses of the glory of God; but we with open face may see him, as in a glasse; for now the vayle is taken away from Moses his face,Cant. 2.14.15. all types are now ac∣complished, all ceremonies are abolished, and all the mysts of darknesse,The difference betwixt the Law and the Gospell. errours, and Heresies are now especially dispersed; for that not onely the day-starre hath appeared, but also, the Sun of Righteousnesse hath risen, and shineth ouer the face of the whole world: and this great mystery of godlinesse is, and hath beene long preached, vnfolded, and most plainely shewed vnto the Gentiles, as the Apostle sheweth. Heb. 5.11.And therefore it is a shame for vs, if we be dull in hearing, and vnapt to vnderstand all necessary truthes: for though the Iewes of old might be excused for their ignorance, because they sate in darkenesse, and in the shadow of Death; yet are we without ex∣cuse, because the cleere light of truth is continually preached vn∣to vs: and therefore it will be our condemnation, if we loue dark∣nesse more then light,Iohn 3.19. and desire rather to be still groping in the twy-light of morality, i. e. the precepts of morall men; then to walke in the true light of Diuinity; which is the Doctrine of Iesus Christ. And yet such is the misery of our dayes, and the dulnesse of our people, that as the Church of Rome teacheth implicite faith to suffice a man for his saluation, i. e. to beleeue what the Church beleeueth, though he know no more what that is, then Baalams Asse vnderstood her owne voyce;Numb. 22. 31. So many amongst vs (whom God hath indued with sufficient capacities, to vn∣derstand many mysteries of faith, if they would apply their de∣sire & diligence to learne them) are contented with confused, or at the best, very generall notions: that Christ died for them,
and that they hope by him to be saued;That many men are very ignorant of the chiefest points of Chri∣stianity. and if you enter into the particulars, concerning his person, they presently frame vnto themselues, false and erronious conceits, thinking perhaps Christ to be a man, by an humane person, and so are Nestorians; or to be a meere man, and so are Arrians, or to haue his natures confounded, and so are Eutychians; or else the properties of these natures confused, and so are Lutherans; and so are wrapped in many monstruous Heresies, not for want of meanes, but for want of desire, or diligence to vnderstand these truths. But if any will be such; that is, not looke vpon the light for feare of blinding his eyes, let him take heede of that fearefull say∣ing, Qui ignorat ignorabitur; He that will not know Christ,1 Cor. 14.38. shall not be knowne of Christ: and yet I meane not that euery one, especially of the meaner vnderstandings, should labour for perfect or exquisite knowledge herein; or more then their ca∣pacities are able to comprehend, for as we must not be too care∣lesse, so we may not be too curious in these vnsearchable myste∣ries: but my meaning is, that men should not satisfie them∣selues, onely with inuolued, implicite faith; or some generall noti∣ons, concerning Christ; but should labour, euery man accor∣ding to the measure of vnderstanding that God hath giuen him, to learne and know, in some competent measure, the particular mysteries of our faith. And so much for the first part of this Treatise; the summe and substance of the words Incarna∣tion.
Part. 2.PART. II. The chiefest circumstances that are requisite to be knowne for the vnderstanding of this mystery, of the words Incarnation. CHAP. I. Of the Ancestors and family from whence Christ descended. And what we may learne thereby. SEcondly, the chiefest circumstances con∣cerning the words Incarnation, are especi∣ally these three: First, His family, from whence he was descended. Secondly, His natiuity, whereby hee was declared: And Thirdly, His testimony, by which hee was approued vnto the world, to be the true Messias. First, for the family from whence Christ should descend. It was prophesied long before,Matth. 1. that the Messias should come of the seed and linage of Dauid; and the Euangelists say, that Christ was borne of a Ʋirgin,Luke 1.27. whose name was Mary. First, of a Virgin, to fulfill the prophesie of Esay, Chap. 7.14 And that he might be conceiued without sinne, because hee was to redeeme vs from sinne. Secondly, of a Virgin called Mary that the verity of the Sto∣ry might appeare most manifest, and that the certaintie of his pe∣degree, might be the more easily shewed. Ob.But it may be obiected that Christ was to be like Melchise∣decke, without Father, and without mother; and therefore the Sonne of Mary is not likely to be the Christ, because he hath a mother. Sol.I answere, that some affirmed Melchisedecke to haue both a Father and a Mother,Hieron. ad. Euagr. and is thought by Saint Hierome and di∣uers others, to be Sem the Sonne of Noah: but he is said to be
without Father, and without Mother, because by that name, and in that place where be is said to haue come, and to haue blessed Abraham, there is no mention made of his Father, or of his Mo∣ther, or of his beginning, or of his ending; but for mine owne part, I answere, (as I shewed before) that this Melchisedecke was Christ himselfe, and that he may be truly said to be without Fa∣ther, and without Mother, if we vnderstand the same aright; for that as God, hee hath no Mother, and as man, hee hath no Father; because Ioseph was but his legall, and not his naturall Father. But you will say then,Ob. that hee could not come of the seede of Dauid, because Mary was the Daughter of Ioachim,Aug. contra faust. Man. l. 23. c. 3. 4. Luke 1.36. a Priest of the Tribe of Leui, as the Manichees, and others haue affir∣med; because the Scripture saith; Behold, thy Cosen Elizabeth, which was the wife of Zacharias the Priest. To this diuers men doe diuersly answere: for,Sol. Origen thin∣keth that they were Cosens, not in respect of Tribe, but in re∣spect of Nations, as Saint Paul calleth all the Iewes his Kinsmen, according to the Flesh; but then Elizabeth had beene her Co∣sen none otherwise then all the rest of the Iewish Women: Theophilact thinketh they are said to be Cosens,Theoph. in 1 Luc. Exod. 6. because Aaron married the Daughter of Aminadab, of the Tribe of Iudah; but then it may be said, That this is farre-fetcht, and therefore might be soone forgotten, too ancient a kindred, to make any great reckoning of it: Saint Augustine thinkes,Aug. q. 47. sap. Iudic. That Elizabeth the wife of Za∣charias, was of the Tribe of Juda. that some Wo∣man of the Tribe of Leui, was married vnto some one of Christs progenitors, of the Tribe of Iuda, that so Christ might descend both of the Priestly and the Kingly stocke: But the truth is, that Elizabeth was of the Tribe of Iuda, and was mar∣ried vnto Zacharias the Priest; for though it was forbidden to all the other Tribes, to match with any that were not of their owne Tribe, yet was it lawfull for the Priests to take Wiues out of any Tribe; and therefore Aaron married Elizabeth, the Daugh∣ter of Aminadab, of the Tribe of Iuda;2 Chron. 22.11. and Iehoida the Priest married the Daughter of King Iorom, and sister vnto Amasia King of Iuda.That the bles¦sed Virgin Ma∣ry was of the Tribe of Juda. Or howsoeuer, let Elizabeth be of what Tribe you will, yet is it most manifest, that Mary was of the Tribe of Iuda; for as
Saint Mathew setteth downe the Pedigree of Ioseph, so Saint Luke setteth downe the Pedigree of Mary; to shew vnto vs, that both Ioseph and Mary were lineally descended of the Tribe of Iuda: for Hely, whose Sonne Ioseph is said to be by Saint Luke, (because it was the manner of the Iewes, to continue their Ge∣nealogies in the Male kinde) was the naturall Father of Mary, and but Father in Law to Ioseph; euen as Naomi called Ruth her Daughter, being but her Daughter in Law: for Saint Ma∣thew saith plainely, that Iosephs owne naturall Father was Iacob, and not Hely: And therefore Hely was the naturall Father of Mary,Damasc. l. 4. c. 15. Affrican. apud Eusebium. as both Damascen and Affricanus testifie; and hee was also called Ioachim, as Saint Hierome witnesseth: And therefore it is most apparant, that for his Family, hee descended lineally from Iuda, and from the seede of Dauid. Q.But then againe it may be demanded, how he came of Da∣uid, whether of Salomon or of Nathan, both Sonnes of Dauid. Sol.I answere, that Saint Mathew setteth downe the legall descent of Christ from Salomon,That Christ came not of Sa∣lomon, but of Nathan the Son of Dauid. because hee succeeded him in the spiri∣tuall right of the Kingdome, he being the true King of the Iewes; and therefore reckoneth foureteene Kings in his Pedegree, and he omitteth three, that is, Ahazia, Ioas, and Amasia, either be∣cause they were wicked Kings, and repented not of their abhomi∣nations, (as some of the other wicked Kings had done:) And therefore as their names were odious in the Booke of God, and it may be, blotted out of the Booke of Life; so were they not wor∣thy to be once mentioned among the Auncestors of Christ; or else he omitteth them, because hee would bring his Pedigree to three foureteene generations: But Saint Luke setteth downe the naturall descent of Christ, and so hee came from Nathan, not him that was a Priest and a Prophet, as both Saint Ambrose and Beda thinke, (for then he could not come from Dauid, and it is certaine that hee came from Iuda, and not from Leui) but of that Nathan which was the Sonne of Dauid, and brother vnto Salomon, not onely by his Fathers side, but also by his Mothers side,Ambros. in Luc. Beda in Luc. Damasc. l. 4. c. 15. Paraeus in Rom. as both Damascen and Paraeus thinke: And yet Origen and Eusebius thinke, he came of Salomon, because in Saint Mathew the words, He begate, are still repeated, which are not so in Saint Luke; but to this wee answere, that this reason is not suffi∣cient;
because Saint Matthew saith, Iechonias begate Salathiel: where indeed Iechonias died without issue, as we may see in Iere∣mie, the 22.30.Jerem. 22.30. and Salathiel was the naturall sonne of Neri (as Saint Luke plainely affirmeth; and therefore the meaning of the Euangelist, in saying, that Iechonias begate Salathiel, is no more, but to shew vnto vs, that Iechonias dying without heire, appointed Salathiel according to the Law, to succeede him, and to be his lawfull heire. And therefore, seeing all the posterity of Salomon ended in Iechonias, whose right then passed vnto Sala∣thiel which lineally descended of Nathan; it is apparant that our Sauiour Christ came of the seed of Dauid by Nathan, and not by Salomon. And this teacheth vs,Psal. 89 i 32. that if our chidren forsake Gods Law and walke not in his ordinance, he will visite their offences with the rod, and their sinnes with scourges; yea, be they as wise as Salomon,To serue God, is the onely way to perpe∣tuate our po∣sterity. bee they as noble and Heroike, as were all the Kings of the posterity of Salomon, be they as deere vnto God, as the signet vpon his right hand; yet if they forsake his Lawes, he will cut them off. He told Dauid this before, that though he loued him neuer so deere, yet would he deale with his children, as they would behaue them∣selues in his wayes: but they would not be warned; Salomon first offended, and all the Kings of Iuda excepting Ezechias and Iosias followed after, and were defectiue; and therefore they were cut off, and their right passed vnto Salathiel the Sonne of Neri: as I haue shewed vnto you before, And therefore if we would continue in Gods fauour, let vs goe on in Gods seruice, for he shall establish his posterity for euer, that establisheth the same in the feare of God: the seed of Dauid shall neuer faile, because he feared God; the seed of Salo∣mon shall be finished, because he hath offended God: and there∣fore it is neither wisedome, nor power, nor wealth, nor any thing else, but onely the feare of God, that perpetuateth both our selues, and our posterities; blessed are they that feare him. And so much for the family from whence Christ descended.
CHAP. II. Of the time when our Saviour Christ was borne, and of the place and manner of his birth. SEcondly, for his Natiuity whereby hee was brought forth and manifested vnto the world, we must consider these three especiall points. 1. The time. of his birth. 2. The lace. of his birth. 3. The manner. of his birth. Gal. 4.4.First, for the time when this Word was made flesh, Saint Paul saith it was,That there be three things that measure all durations. in the fulnesse of time: for there be three things which measure all durations; First, Eternity; Secondly, Mortality; Thirdly, Time. The first is proper to God, which wanteth beginning and ending. The second is proper to seules and spirits, which haue begin∣ning, but shall neuer haue ending. The third is proper to all compound bodies, which as they had beginning, so they shall haue ending: Quia omnia orta occi∣dunt, & omnia aucta senescunt; Because all raised, or created things shall fall, and whatsoeuer increaseth, waxeth old. After the first sense, the Word was neuer made in any time, but is the Father of all times, and before all times. After the second sense, the Soule of Christ was made in time, but to continue euer immortall for all times: And How Christ was made in time.After the third sence, the Body of Christ was likewise made in time, and to continue here, but for a time, in respect of his mortall condition, before it was inuested with the indowments of immortality. And so both Body and Soule of Christ were made in time to subsist in the person of him that made all time; & that time wher∣in he was made thus to subsist, was in the fulnesse of time, saith the Apostle: for as places, so times haue their fulnesse and their emptinesse; some places are empty hauing nothing in them but onely ayre, and some are full of gold and pearles and precious
things: euen so, some times are voyde of strange accidents,How time hath his ful∣nesse. and sometimes are full of admirable occurrents; and in such a time, was the Word made flesh; the Sonne of God made man: for now the time was full of peace, full of plenty, and full of wickednesse; the Diuell had broken loose, and had possest the minds of most, and the bodies of many men, more then euer before, or euer since, as some imagine; by reason of those multitudes that they reade of, to be really possessed with Diuels in our Sauiours time. And therefore being so full of all vnrighteousnesse,Rom. 29. he that was the fulnesse of grace, came; to root out the euill weeds of our sinnes;Iohn 1.16. and out of his fulnesse, to offer vs grace for grace. For, First, hee would not come before Adam fell, because that had beene superfluous, to seeke the sheepe before the sheepe were lost. Secondly, he would not come presently after; because thereby he would shew the greater loue to mankinde; for, though in some cases it be true, that gratia ab officio quod mora tardat ab∣est, delayed kindnesse, looseth halfe his goodnesse; yet herein, the long tarrying of Christ, before he came to be incarnate, was a manifest signe of his greater goodnesse towards vs, for these three speciall causes. First, that by the Law of nature,Why Christ stayed so long before he came. and by the written Law of God, man might be conuinced, and see his owne sinnes, and so be the more moued to seeke his Sauiour. Secondly, that he tarrying for a while, might be the more earnestly desired, and make him, being obtayned, to become the more acceptable vnto vs; Quia diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur, because that things long desired, are more sweet, when they are obtained, as Saint Augustine speaketh. Thirdly, that due preparation might be made, by the Patri∣arches and Prophets, before his comming, and the people made by them apt and ready to receiue him, and to imbrace his com∣ming; that so his comming, might be the more profitable vnto them; for they were sent to prepare,Matth. 3.3. and to make straight the way of the Lord: and therefore, as his tarrying now from comming to iudgement, is an exceeding great argument of his goodnesse, because he doth it to see, if his long patience will leade vs to repentance; so his long tarrying then, was a sure signe of his greater loue, because
he would haue vs thereby to be fitted to make the better vse of his comming; and yet, Why Christ would not stay any longer then he did.Thirdly, he would not stay vntill the last end of the world, Ne fides & spes de promisso semine nimis tardatae perirent; Least staying so long, there should be no hope left to expect him, no faith to beleeue in him, and no charity to loue him, when hee should come. For though there was but a little goodnesse then, God knowes: Patrios ante dies filius quaerebat in annos: Yet there is a great deale lesse now, all the world sees: Terras A∣straea reliquit; For our Sauiour told vs, that towards the end of the world, The loue of many should waxe cold, and faith should scarce be found vpon the face of the whole earth. And therefore seeing that to come in the beginning of the world, had beene too soone, and to tarry till the latter end had been too late, he came in the fittest time, in the fulnesse of time, to be incarnate and made flesh. The particu∣lar time of the Words incar∣nation.And if we search a little further, to know more particularly what time was, this fulnesse of time, we shall finde it to be. 1. In the sixt Age of the world. 2. In the Raigne of Augustus and Herod. 3. In the tenth Moneth of the yeare. 4. In the shortest Day of the Moneth. 5. In the first Day of the Weeke. 6. In the first Houre of the Day. First, We must note, that as man, which is, , the little world; so , the great and large Vniuerse, hath his times and his ages; for Damascen, Lucidus, and others, (as Cli∣cthouaeus collecteth) doe affirme that the worlds age is seauen∣fold. How the world is diuided into his seuerall ages.First, the infancy of it, from Adam to the flood; Secondly, the child-hood of it, from the flood to Abraham; Thirdly, the youth of it, from Abraham to Moses; Fourthly, the riper and liuelier youth,, from the Law to Dauid; Fiftly, the man-hood of it, from the Temple of Salomon, to the Captiuity; Sixtly, the maturity of it, from the Captiuity of Babylon, vnto Christ; Sea∣uenthly,Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. vlt. c. vlt. the dotage of it, from Christ vnto Iudgement: but Saint Augustine, Saint Chrysostome, Saint Isidore, Bede, Arrias Monta∣nus,
and others; though they say the world doth consist of sea∣uen ages, yet they doe diuide them otherwise, viz. 1. From Adam vnto Noahs Flood. contai∣ning 1656. yeares.The diuision of the worlds age. 2. From Noahs Flood vnto Abraham. 293. or, 383. 3. From Abraham vn∣to Dauid. 941. 4. From Dauid to the Captiuity. 485. and 6. Moneths. 5. From the Captiui∣ty vnto Christ. 620. 6. From Christ to the day of Iudgement. 1624. hitherto; and how many more none can tell; As our Sauiour shewth; Of that day and houre knoweth no man. 7. From the day of Iudgement vnto all E∣ternity, for euer and euer. And so according to this account, Christ was borne in the yeare of the world, 4085. but according to the seauenty Inter∣preters account, he was borne in the yeare 5461. and according to our account, he was borne in the yeare 3948. and so I find in the account of yeares; Alij atque alij aliud atque aliud opinati sunt: Diuers men haue diuers iudgements; but in diuiding the worlds age into seauen parts, I finde most agreeing in the same iudgement: and in affirming Christ to be borne in the sixt age of the world, the latter end of the same,That Christ was borne in the sixt age of the world, and why? if we follow Damascens account, or in the beginning of the same, if we follow Saint Augustines account: but which soeuer: it was in the sixt age, that there might be a correspondencie betwixt the workes of creation and of redemption: Nam sicut primus Adam conditus fuit sexta aetate, ad totius creaturae perfectionem: Because, that as the first Adam was made on the sixt day, to be the complement and perfection of all creatures; so the second Adam was made in the sixt age of the world, to restore all mankinde vnto their integrity. And this teacheth vs, patiently to waite for the comming of
Iesus Christ: for, if God deferred the first comming of Christ al∣most 4000. yeares; but did at last fulfill his promise, and came in his appointed time; we may assure our selues, that he will doe the like for his second comming,2 Peter 2 4. against all those that say; Where is the promise of his comming? Why Christ was borne in the raigne of Augustus and Herod.Secondly, He was borne in the Raigne of Augustus, the two and fortieth yeare of his raigne, as Tertullian and Saint Augustine say, and in the one and thirtieth yeare of King He∣rods raigne, as Beda saith: or the two and thirtieth yeare, as Eu∣sebius saith. And he was borne in the raigne of Augustus, to shew vnto vs, first, that as Augustus was a temporall monarch, so Christ should be a spirituall Monarch, for that as the world can no more beare two temporall Monarchs, then the heauens can beare two Sunnes, —Omnis{que} potestas impatiens consortis, erit— so the Church of Christ can haue but one head. Secondly, that as Augustus was the second Emperour; so Christ was the second person of the Trinity. Esay 9.6.Thirdly, that being borne when all the world was at peace, and yet taxed; we might hereby see, that although Christ was the Prince of peace,Matth. 11.29. that immaculate Lambe, which was meeke and lowly in heart; yet he should be taxed for our sinnes, and bur∣thened for our transgressions.Esay 53.5. And hee was borne in the raigne of Herod, i. e. Herod the great, to distinguish him from Herod Antipa, and Herod Agrip∣pa,: whereof, Ascolanita necat pueros, Antipa Iohannem, Agrippa Iacobum, mittit{que} in carcere petrum. this first killed the children, the second Iohn Baptist, and the third Iames the brother of the Lord; to shew vnto vs; as both Saint Chrysostome and Leo obserue,Chrysost. in. Matth. hom. 9. Leo hom 3. in Epph. Josephus antiq. lib. 14. c 26. Phila de part. temp. that this is that Shiloh, which was for to come, because a Prince (as Saint Hierome reads it) or the Scepter should not depart from Iuda, vntill Shiloh came; but now Herod, Patre Idumes & matre ortus Arabica, being an I∣dumean, hauing got the Scepter from Iuda, by Augustus his meanes, and hauing in the thirtieth yeare of his tyrannicall rule, destroyed all the Sanhedrim, i. e. the Eldership of seauenty
Iudges of the house of Dauid, it must needs be the Messias must be borne. Thirdly,Why Christ was borne in December. He was borne in December the tenth moneth of the yeare, to shew that he came to make satisfaction for the 10. commandements: and to shew, that as 10. consist of the fi∣gure 1. and the cipher 0. so his person did consist of the figure of his Deity, and the cipher of our humanity, as some Diuines haue obserued. Fourthly, He was borne in the shortest day of this moneth,Three things obseruable in this day of Christs Nati∣uity. which was the fiue and twentieth day in the Winter Solstice, in which day, three things are obseruable: first, the Cold is grea∣test; secondly, the Sunne is lowest; and thirdly, thence-forward the dayes begin to increase; So Christ was borne in the coldest day, to teach vs not to pamper vp our vntamed flesh; hee was borne when the Sunne was lowest, to teach vs true humility, and as when the day is shortest, the Sunne is in his Tropicke, so cal∣led of , to turne; because now it turneth towards vs, and so increaseth the length of our dayes more and more,Ambros. ser. 2. de Natiuit. and ascen∣deth vp into the Heauens higher and higher, so from the day of Christs Natiuity, the fauour of God is turned to vs, our com∣forts are increased, and the Kingdome of Heauen is inlarged: for as Iohn Baptist saith, I must decrease, and he must increase;John 3.30. so we find that after the birth of Iohn Baptist, which was in the longest day, as the Sunne descended, so the obseruation of the ceremoniall and iudiciall Lawes decreased; for the Law and the Prophets continued vntill Iohn, but after the birth of Christ,Matth. 11.13. which was in the shortest day, as the unne thence ascended, so the Kingdome of Heauen increased more and more. Fiftly, He was borne vpon the first day of the Weeke,That Christ was borne vp∣on the first day of the Weeke, which is our Saboath. i. e. vp∣on the Sunday, as Rupertus, Antoninus, Bonauenture, Petrus de Natalibus, S. Augustine, and others doe affirme; Vt quo die dixe∣rat fiat lux, & facta est, eiusdem diei nocte oriretur in tenebris lumen rectis corde, retinens ordinem mirabilium suorum: That vpon the same day, as he said,, Let there be light, and it was so; there should spring vp light for them that are true of heart; and therefore Saint Augustine saith, that this day was euer venerable; because that on this day, God the Father began to create the world; on this day God the Sonne began to redeeme the world; on this
day God the Holy Ghost began to sanctifie the world, when he appeared on the Apostles,Act. 2.3. like clouen tongues of fire; on this day, God made the light; on this day was the true light produced, that lighteneth euery one that commeth into the world;John 1.9. on this day the children of Israel came out of Egypt; on this day Christ came out of his graue; and like enough, that on this day Christ will come, to giue vs an euerlasting rest: and therefore we should alwayes sanctifie this day, aboue all the dayes of the yeare; that when he commeth, he may not finde vs singing in the Ta∣uernes, but seruing him in his Church. Tertul. l. 6. c. 9. contra Marc.Sixtly, Tertullian, and Saint Augustine say that he was borne in the night-time, in the time of darkenesse; because he came to dissolue the workes of darkenesse;Luc. 2.8. and to proue this, they al∣ledge, not onely what Saint Luke saith, that the Shepheards watched at night,Psal. 190. when the Angel came vnto them, and told them, that Christ was borne, but also the saying of Dauid, where he saith, Ante Luciferum genui te; Before the morning, I haue begotten thee. And Cardanus that great Astronomer, com∣menting vpon Ptolemies Quadripartite, and there treating of Christs Natiuity, he makes the 11. degree of Ʋirgo, to ascend in the 1. house about 10. of the clocke, and 15. minuts; and therefore affirmeth CHRIST then, and at that very houre to be borne; and not vnlikely, that the Sonne of a Virgin, should bee then borne, when the heauenly figure Virgo did ascend. That Christ was borne presently after mid-night.But I thinke rather with Saint Hierome, and Saint Bernard, that he was borne about midnight, or presently after, because it is said, that while all things were in quiet silence, and the night was in the midst of her swift course, thine Aghty word leapt downe from heauen out of his royall throne;Sap. 18.14. an  maruell, that the greatest light should be produced in the time of greatest obscurity, and that he should come in medio noctis, about mid-night, which came to be the medium, and mediator, betwixt God and man: and as this place of wisedome sheweth, that hee was borne a∣bout midnight; so it may be collected (as I take it) out of Luke, that it was rather presently after, then either at that very instant, or at any time before; for the Angell said vnto the Shepheards, This day is borne vnto you a Sauiour,Luke 2.11. which you must vnderstand,
of the day artificiall, which beginneth presently after mid∣night, and not of the day naturall, which beginneth with the light, and so hee may be said to be borne that day, though it should be but the first houre after midnight. And this should teach vs, that our spirituall birth should be∣ginne betimes, for you see Christ was borne betimes, the first houre of the day; hee rose out of his graue betimes, before the morning watch, and all to teach vs, to serue God betimes; and as Salomon saith, To remember our Creator in the dayes of our youth:Eccles. 12.1. And not to put it off while to morrow, but to say with Saint Augustine, Quamdiu cras, quare non modo finis turpitudinis meae?Aug. in Confess. How long shall I say to morrow; and why should I not now forsake my filthinesse? For, Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit. He that is not fit to day, shall haue to morrow a harder way. Secondly, For the place where the Messias should bee borne, the Prophet saith; Thou Bethlehem Ephrata,Micha 5.2. art little a∣mong the thousands of Iuda, out of thee shall he come forth vnto me, that shall rule my people Israel: But Saint Mathew saith,Math. 2.6. saith, And thou Bethlehem in the Land of Iuda, art not the least among the Princes of Iuda; for out of thee shall come a Gouernour, which shall rule my people Israel:Of the place where Christ was borne. Wherein we see they speake almost cleane con∣trary, for Micah saith; Thou art little among the thousands of Iu∣da: as if he said, Thou art but a little poore Village, the least among thousands, and Saint Mathew saith, Thou art not the least among the Princes of Iuda; As if hee said, Thou art a great Princely Towne, the chiefest among thousands: for when wee say a thing is not the least, wee meane that it is in the number of the greatest. But to reconcile these places, I say, that Micah speaks of it, as it was indeede, a little, poore, and ignoble Ʋillage so meane, that it is not reckoned in the number of those Cities,Iosua 1. that fell by Lot vnto the Tribe of Iuda; but Saint Mathew speakes this, either as a true Historiographer, relating not the saying of the Prophet,How the Pro∣phet Micah, & Saint Mathew are to be re∣conciled. but the saying of the Scribes vnto Herod; or else as it was in re∣putation, not so much for the excellency of it selfe, as in this respect, that Christ the Sauiour, refusing thousand greater
Townes, should choose this to be borne in, and so make this lit∣tle, yea, the least, not the least blessed City. And so you see the place that Christ was to be borne in, was a poore and a meane scattering Village; it is like, it had not many Houses, or they did not vse halfe so much tipling as wee doe; for we reade but of one Inne that was in all the Towne; and yet in this Towne did Christ choose to be borne: And that for three reasons. Why Christ choose to be borne in Beth∣lehem. 1 Cor. 3.9.First, in respect of the prediction that Christ should be borne in it. Secondly, In respect of the present condition, a poore place, fittest for him that made himselfe poore for vs. Thirdly, In respect of the mysticall signification: for Bethle∣hem (saith Saint Gregory) signifies the House of Bread; and therefore he which is,Greg. hom 8. in Euang. Chrysost. hom, 1. ex varijs in Math. The true bread of Life, was rightly to be borne in Bethlehem, as Saint Chrysostome saith. And this sheweth the difference betwixt Gods dealing, and the World: for wee ayme at the brauest things, he at the meanest; and hee chooseth the foolish things of this World, to confound the wise; and the weake things, to confound things that are mighty, and base things,1 Cor. 1.27.28.29. and things that are despised, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Now the meanes how he came to be borne in Bethlehem, Saint Augustine obserueth,Aug. de concord. Euang. how Saint Mathew omitteth, but that Saint Luke declareth the same: Augustus would haue all men to goe into their owne Cities, to be taxed; and therefore Ioseph and Mary went to Bethlehem, and while they were there, Mary was deliuered. From whence wee may see, the most admirable prouidence of Almighty God, who as in the great worke of Creation, made the Light out of darkenesse,Aug. in Enchi∣rid. c. 101. so in the wonderfull workes of gu∣bernation, hee can fulfill his owne will, being good, by the wils of wicked men, that are not good: for Augustus thought on no∣thing lesse,Of the admira∣ble prouidence of Almighty God. then to haue Christ borne at Bethlehem; when hee sent euery one to their owne Cities: But behold how God di∣sposeth of this Edict for the fulfilling of his promise; so God bringeth many things to passe, through vnknowne wayes; and
there is nothing happeneth, but through his prouidence: we per∣ceiue it not, while things are in doing, but wee shall plainely see it, when they are done; and therefore we should euer pray vnto God, that he would guide, and direct all our actions to his glory, and to our comfort; and then no doubt, but as this long and te∣dious iourney of Mary, did redound to her exceeding ioy, so those things which for the present seeme harsh and bitter vnto vs, will in the end proue to our great aduantage. Thirdly, For the manner of Christ his birth, it is recorded,Of the man∣ner of Christs birth, how meane it was in many re∣spects. that it was very poore, and meane; meaner then ordinary; or ex∣traordinary base: for he was borne of poore Parents, they trauel∣led on foote, they had not an Asse to ride on; in a poore Towne, little Bethlehem, which is by interpretation, An House of Bread; but such a poore House of Bread, that there was scarce any bread in the House: And then being come from darkenesse in∣to light, Non poterat verbum fari verbum; This word could not speake a word, but hee was wrapped in poore swadling cloutes, it may be his Mothers ragges; and then laid in a poore lodging, euen in the Manger; and so he was indeed made lower then the An∣gels, for he was consorted, and laid among the Beasts that perish: Quia non erat locus in diuersorio, Because there was no roome in the Inne, for these poore innocent people, among the drunken swaggering companions; for these will be sure to haue roome: Et pauper vbi{que} iacet, And the poore shall bee thrust out of doores: And yet Christ was well contented, he desired no better,Why Christ would be born so meanely. Psal. 22.6. but chose indeede to come after this meanest manner. First, To fulfill the Scriptures: for the Prophet Dauid said in the person of Christ, I am a worme, and no man, a very scorne of men, and the outcast of the people: And the Prophet Esay saith, He should grow vp as a roote out of a dry ground, i. e. wrinckled and al∣most withered for want of radicall moysture, He hath neither forme nor comelinesse, and when wee shall see him, there is no beauty,Esay 53.2.3. that we should desire him; he is despised and reiected of men. Secondly, To teach vs true humility, Descendit quo inferius non decuit, vt ascenderet quo superius non poterat; For he made him∣selfe of no reputation, that he might be exalted,Phil. 2.9. and haue a name giuen him about all other names; to shew vnto vs,Luke 18.14. that Who∣soeuer humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted.
Thirdly, To condemne the courses and desires of worldly men: for they desire nothing so much as wealth, honours, and promotions; and yet all the Monarchs of this World, with all their pompe and power, with all their riches and greatnesse, cannot reconcile one soule to God; They must let that alone for euer: But Christ poore, stript, and naked, hath so pleased God, that through him, God cannot be displeased with vs; for it is goodnesse and not greatnesse, to be void of sinne, and not to be full of riches, that our God respecteth. Fourthly, To procure true riches vnto vs; for so the Apostle saith,2 Cor. 8.9. that Christ, though he was rich, yet for our sake, he became poore, that we through his pouerty, might be made rich. Fiftly, To shew the difference betwixt his first and his second comming, for now he came in pouerty, but then hee shall come in maiesty;Math. 16.27. He shall come on the glory of his Father with his Angels: The Earth shall burne, the Heauens shall melt, and all the powers of the same shall be shaken: And therefore seeing (as Emyssenus saith) Talis & tantus sit horror venientis, quis poterit terrorem su∣stinere iudicantis? That comming of his shall be so terrible, as that all the wicked crue of damned sort, shall exceedingly howle and cry, and pray the mountaines to fall vpon them, and to hide them from that fearefull day; let vs make the right vse of this his first comming, that wee may escape the terror of his second com∣ming: And so you see the manner of his birth, weakely, poorely, and meanely. That we should be well conten∣ted with any state.And this should teach vs, to be euer contented with our poore and meane estate; for if the Sonne of God, who made all things, and whose all things are, All the Cattle vpon a thousand hilles, was well contented, and made choyce of this low estate; why should we be discontented with the same? for wee are vnworthy of the very Bread wee eate, and of the very Light of Heauen, where∣with we are illuminated, we are very base, and miserable beggars, begging of God the very crummes that wee eate,Math. 6.11. saying; Giue vs this day our daily bread; and yet such is our pride, and haugh∣tinesse, that wee are ready to snatch it out of his hands, and not to stay while he giues it vs: Such is our disdaine and discontented∣nesse, that the daintiest fare will scarce please vs, and such is our desire and ambition, that euery man still cryeth with the Daugh∣ters
of the Horse-leech, More, more; Our eyes are neuer satisfied with seeing, nor our eares with hearing, nor our hearts with enioying the vanities of this World. But alas Beloued, Beware of murmuring,Wisedome 1. 11. which is nothing worth; and let the same minde be in you herein, as was in Christ Ie∣sus: If you would be happy, remember how he came,Phil. 2.5. Math. 8.20. poore and meane, remember how he liued, meane and miserable; for, He had not an House wherein to put his head; We haue more then that: and remember how hee was entertained, cold and comfortlesse;Math. 10.24.25. for, He came amongst his owne, and his owne receiued him not: And therefore seeing he found such cold entertainement in the world, why should wee looke for any better, or be any wayes discon∣tented at the like? for, The Seruant is not aboue his Master; but it is enough for the seruant to be as his Master is. CHAP. III. Of the testimonies which proue that Christ the Messias is borne. THirdly,Of the witnes∣ses that testifie the birth and comming of the Messias. For the testimony and witnesse whereby he was approued, and confirmed vnto the world, to be incarnate, and made Flesh, for to be the Sauiour and Redeemer of the World; I finde the same especially to be two-fold. 1. The Creatures. 2. The Creator. First, The testimony of the Creature is three-fold. 1. The Angels of Heauen. 2. The Starres in the Skies. 3. Men on Earth, First, An Angell said vnto the Shepheards,Luke 2.11. Ʋnto you is borne this day in the City of Dauid, a Sauiour, which is, Christ the Lord; And immediately there were not sixe Cherubims (as Esayas saw) nor foure and twenty Elders,Esay 6.2. (as Saint Iohn saw) but a multi∣tude of heauenly Angels, that by their heauenly Halelu-iah did confirme the same: And therefore the truth hereof is infallible,
because the Angels though they bee mutable by nature, yet they be now cōfirmed by grace;Isidorus. l. 1. c. 12. de summo bono. Ne à veritate voluntatem auer∣terent, That they cannot lye, nor fall away from truth, as Isido∣rus saith. Secondly, The gentile Prophet Baalam, prophesied, that there should come a Starre of Iacob;Numb. 24.17. Iustin. lib. 1. And Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, a man excellent in all learning, (as Iustin saith) left this as a tradition among the Gentiles, and afterwards it was more plainely published by the Sybils, that a Day-starre should appeare, before the arising of the Sonne of Righteousnesse: And this was fresh among the Gentiles, vntill the very comming of Christ; for Virgil (though misapplying the same) saith, Virgil. Egl. 4.Ecce Dionaei praecessit Caesaris astrum. Rightly applyed thus, That the glorious Starre long expected, should precede and fore-shew the comming of the Sauiour. Fulgent. fol. 657. in Octauo. Ser. de Epiphan.Yet Fulgentius saith, That Puer natus nouam stellam fabricauit; Christ being borne, did of nothing frame this Starre: And so indeede it is called, His Starre; his Starre, because he made it, and his Starre, because it bare witnesse of him: for the Magi, the Wise-men being vpon the Mountaine Victorialis, worshipping their God,Chrysost. hom. 2. op. impf. in Ma∣theum 2. (as Saint Chrysostome saith) a starre did appeare vn∣to them, in the likenesse of a little Childe, and so shewed vnto them, and to all others, that this Childe, and Sonne of God was borne. Thirdly, Men, both Iewes and Gentiles, did beare witnesse vnto his birth. Math. 15.24.First, The Iewes, because hee was chiefly sent vnto the lost sheepe of the House of Israel; Therefore immediately after his birth, the Angell told the Shepheards, that Christ was borne: And the Shepheards when they had seene him, that they might be sure of the truth thereof,Luke 2.17. did make knowne abroad, the saying that was told them concerning that Childe. Why the birth of Christ was first reuealed to the Shep∣heards.And here one thing is very obseruable, that the Angels made choyce of Shepheards, to be the first partakers of this blessed newes, and the first proclaimers of our Sauiours birth: That the great Clearkes and Schollars of the Iewes, the Scribes and Pha∣rises, that knew best Christ should come, and where Christ should be borne, should notwithstanding be vtterly discarded;
and these Heards-men bee so graciously admitted, to see that, which so many Wisemen and Prophets desired to see,Math. 13.17. and haue not seene. To teach vs, how much God fauoureth holy and modest sim∣plicity, and disalloweth impious and scrupulous subtilty; These Shepheards that followed their vocation, and kept their Sheepe, did first finde that good Shepheard, that giues his life for his Sheepe; because as the wooll that hath receiued the die, and tincture of no colour, is best capable of any colour; so these Shepheards, that were neuer before indued with any kinde of humane wisedome, were the fitter Subiects to be inlightened with this diuine know∣ledge: And those great Doctors of the Law, were excluded from these tydings of the Gospell, because insolent presumption of our owne knowledge, is that indeede, which depraueth our affecti∣ons, and depriueth our soules from sauing grace. Secondly,That the Magi beleeued this Childe to be 1. A Man. 2. A King. 3. A God. The Gentiles were called to be witnesses of the birth of this Childe, for the Starre appearing vnto the Magi, it did cast forth three especiall beames, whereby the Wisemen did perceiue that Childe which was borne, to be First, A Man; secondly, such a man that was to be a King; and thirdly, such a King, as should be both God and Man: And therefore they addressed themselues, both in their speech and actions, to testifie as much; for, First, In their speech vnto Herod, they say, Where is he that is borne? to shew that he was a man; King of the Iewes, to shew that he was a King: for, We haue seene his Starre, and are come to wor∣ship him; to shew that he was a God. Secondly, In their actions, they shew the very same;Basil in sermo∣ne de hum. Chri∣sti generat. f. 138. for they offered vnto him Myrhe, Gold, and Franckinsence. First, Myrhe, to shew that he was mortall; because they vsed to put Myrhe to the bodies of the dead. Secondly, Gold, to shew that he was a King, that should haue a Crowne of pure Gold to be put vpon his head. Thirdly, Franckinsence, to shew that he was a God,Chrysost. hom. 6. in c. 2. Mathew. Quia thus ad honorem diuinum concrematur; Because Franckinsence was v∣sed to be burned in honour of God. Et capitur minimo thuris honore Deus. And this is most manifestly shewed, that they beleeued him
to be a GOD, by all the particulars of their actions. For, Ammon. Alex. in harm. Niceph. li. c. 13.First, Though Ammonius Alexandrinus, and Nicephorus thinke, that the Starre appeared two yeares before Christ his birth; that so they might make preparation, for so long a iour∣ney; because these Magi were Kings themselues, as Saint Cy∣prian deliuereth it from the tradition of the Church;Cyprian. ser. de Baptis. Chrys. hom. 6. in 2. Matth. and Saint Chrysostome seemeth to consent; and Bosquierus laboureth to confirme; yet I thinke rather with Saint Augustine: that these three wise men, Iter vnius anni in tredecim diebus peregerunt. Did performe that iourney which was enough for a whole yeare, in thirteene dayes; because (as Remigius saith) Puer ad quem properauerunt, potuit eos in tam breui temporis spatio ad se ad∣ducere; That child vnto whom they hastened, might helpe and further them forward to come vnto himselfe, in so short a space: and therefore this their diligence and speedy hast to come to Christ, doth sufficiently shew that they beleeued this new-borne Babe, to be the true and eternall God. Secondly, Their behauiours being come, doth in a farre plainer manner shew, that, puerum quem viderunt hominem, ag∣nouerunt redemptorem;Chrysost. quo supra. the child which they saw to be a man, they did acknowledge to be their God; for though they saw him dandled in the lap of his poore Mother, wrapped about with silly clouts, and hauing not the least signe of any humane Kingly dignity, yet they did homage vnto him, as vnto the King of Kings. For, First, They fell downe, to shew their Humility. Secondly, They worshipped him, to shew their Faith. Thirdly, They offered their gifts, to shew their Charitie. Jn gremio pau∣peris matris positum, & pan∣nis vilibus in∣uolutum, & nullum regiae dignitatis hu∣manae signum habentem.Quid? adorant regem nuper natum, &c. And what is this, that they adore this child newly borne, and sucking on his Mothers Breasts, and would not adore that King which had beene long ordained, and was most gloriously raigning on his Kingly throne, what is the cause of this? Ille natus in pallatio contemnitur, iste natus in diuersorio quaeritur; That he which was borne in the Pallace should be contemned, and he which lay in the Manger should be adored? Saint Chrysostome, Maximus, Leo, Fulgentius, and all, doe all agree, it was, because the Wise men knew, that he Quem dixe∣runt
regem Iudaeorum erat Creator Angelorum, & quem viderunt paruum in praesepio, erat immensus in coelo; Whom they had called King of the Iewes, was the Lord and Maker of the Angels, and whom they saw little and poore in the cratch, was rich and im∣measurable in Heauen. Quod non capis, quod non vides,Fulgentius ser. de Epiphania Thom in hymn. Animosa firmat fides, Praeter rerum ordinem. Their faith did shew them that he was their God. And so that starre which sent forth these three fore-named beames of light into the hearts of these Wise men, did send from thence by reflection, three other beames of light, for our instruction: for here we see this starre wrought in them. First, Illumination and Faith in their hearts;What effects the Starre wrought in the Wise men. for when they saw him, they beleeued in him. Secondly, Confession and Inquisition in their Mouthes; for when they lost him, they made diligent search and inquisition after him, saying, Where is he that is borne King of the Iewes.Deut. 6.16. Thirdly, Diligence and Obedience in their Actions, for they made hast to goe vnto him, and when they came, they came not empty-handed: but they brought vnto him Gold, Frankin∣sence and Myrrhe. Aurea nascenti fuderunt munera regi, Thura dede deo, myrrham tribuere sepulchro: And so herein these Wise men, were wise indeed; not because they had all the wisedome of the Gentiles; but because they did thus seeke and find him, In whom are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge. Oh that it were so with vs; that wee did know him, beleeue in him, goe vnto him, search and seeke him, and offer him our selues and ours, to doe him seruice! Pro myrrha lachrymas, auro cor porrige purum, Pro thure ex humili pectore funde preces. And we shall not neede to fetch gold from Ophire,What we shold offer vnto Christ. but the gold of a pure Faith, which will abide the fiery tryall, neither shal we need to goe to the Apothecaries, to buy their Frankinsence, or Myrrhe, but the sweet perfume of deuout prayers, and the bit∣ter teares of godly sorrow, for out vngodly sinnes: these are the most acceptable sacrifices vnto Christ.
And as the fore-named witnesses, which were primitiae Mar∣tyrum, the first fruits of his witnesses, both of the Iewes and Gen∣tiles, doe testifie this truth vnto the world; so to these are added, the testimony of Iohn the Baptist, for, he was sent to beare witnes of that light:Iohn 1.8. and he testified and bare witnesse of him, that he was that Lambe of God,John 1.29. which taketh away the sinnes of the world. And because we should the better beleeue him and his testimonie herein, he sheweth how he came to know him to be the true Messias, euen by the testimony of the Spirit of truth: for, I knew him not (saith he) but he that sent me to baptize with water. i. e. the holy Ghost, said vnto me, vpon whom thou shalt see the Spirit des∣cending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost: and I saw (saith he) and bare record that this is the Sonne of God.Iohn 1.33. And then the testimony of all the Euangelists, the Apostles, the Fathers, the Martyres, and all the holy Men of God, which haue testified and sealed this truth vnto vs, some with their words, some with their workes, and some with their deerest blood. That God himselfe testi∣fied Christ to be his sonne. Matth. 3.17.Secondly, if these testimonies of the creatures be not suffici∣ent to proue Iesus the Sonne of Mary, to be the Eternall Sonne of God; we find God himselfe the Creator of Heauen and Earth, testifying the same: for though the testimony of Iohn was suffici∣ent,Iohn 5.35. to satisfie any man, because he was aburning & a shining light, in whom the Iewes themselues were willing to reioyce for a sea∣son, as our Sauiour witnesseth, yet Christ needed not to receiue testimony from man,John 5.36. because he had a greater witnesse then that of Iohn, euen the Father himselfe which sent him, he bare witnesse of him, and with an audible voyce he proclaymed the same twice from heauen, saying, first at the Riuer Iordan, and then on Mount Thabor;Matth. 7.5. that he was his Beloued Sonne, in whom hee was well pleased.John. 5.36. And these are sufficient witnesses; Quia dicta Iehouae dicta pura; Because the words of the Lord are pure words, as the Psalmist saith. Or if any Athiest will not beleeue these Diuine Oracles, let him beleeue his owne eyes; If he will beleeue neither Angels, Men, nor GOD, let him beleeue himselfe,Matth. 7.16. for the very workes, that I doe, testifie of me: for the workes of euery man doe testifie of him, what he is; because that is a sure rule of our Sauiour, By their fruits you
shall know them: But then you must not vnderstand their workes, as they are reported to bee, for so wee are, and may be many times deceiued; for, Iohn came,Matth. 11.18. neither eating nor drin∣king, and they said he had a Diuell; and, our Sauiour came eating and drinking, and they said, behold a Glutton, and a Wine-bibber; And the Prophet Dauid saith, They laid to his charge, things that hee neuer knew: So the Christians of the Primitiue Church, that were as carefull as men might possible be for their liues, to leade a strict and an vpright life; yet is it incredible almost to thinke, what wicked reports were raised of them: and therefore not the workes of man, as they are by enuy, or malice bruited to be, for what will not enuy say? but as they are in deed and verity, doe manifestly shew what any man is: and therefore Christ saith vnto the Iewes, If you were the sonnes of Abraham,Iohn 8.39. you would doe the workes of Abraham; and Saint Iames saith,Iames 2.18. Shew me thy Faith by thy Workes; for the workes of a man truely considered, is an infallible argument to shew what he is: so the workes that our Sauiour did, while he did liue on earth, doe sufficiently proue him to be both God and Man; and so his very enemies testified, saying, He hath done all things well,Mark. 7.37. he maketh both the deafe to heare, and the dumbe to speake; and those that doubted of him, whether he was the true Messias, or not, said,Iohn 7.31. When Christ commeth, will he doe more miracles then these which he hath done? and the works that he doth now, raigning in heauen, doe suffi∣ciently proue him to be the Maker, Preseruer,Heb. 10.12.13. and Redeemer of men: for, he sitteth on the right hand of God,Rom. 8.34. 1 Cor 15.35. Matth. 11 6. making intersession for his Saints, and ruling till he hath put all his enemies vnder his feete. And therefore I conclude, as I began, that the Word was made flesh, and blessed is he that is not offended in him. Why then, O thou incredulous Iew, wilt thou not receiue thy Sauiour? is it because he came poore, without any shew of worldly pompe? why? that should make all men the rather to imbrace him, and the more thankefully to acknowledge him; because that he which might haue come in Maiestie, Cum cae∣lestibus, Attended on by Angels, would come in pouerty, and haue his bed made cum iumentis, among the beasts that perish, that so by his comming poore, we might be all made rich through him; and therefore O Iew, I doe aduice thee, that as
thy Fathers accomplished the decree of God, in condemning him; so doe thou according to the will of God, in beleeuing on him, and thou shalt be happy; for, he that beleeueth in him shall neuer perish. To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be as∣cribed all Honour, Thankes and Praise, both now, and for euer∣more. Amen. A Prayer. O Eternall God, who, as in all things else, so more especially in giuing thy dearest Sonne, co-eternall, coequall, and co-essentiall vnto thy selfe to be made flesh, subiect to our humane frailties, and in all things like vnto vs, sinne onely excepted, hast shewed thy goodnesse, and thy loue to man, to be like thy selfe, infinite and incomprehensible; we most humbly beseech thee to giue vs grace to know thee, and whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ, to be the onely true God, whom to know, is eternall life, through the said Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Fourth Golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The Fourth greatest Light of Christian RELIGION. Of the Passion of the MESSIAS. LVKE. 24.46. . And thus it behoued Christ to suffer. YOu haue heard (dearely beloued) how miserably man is distressed by sinne,The coherence of this Trea∣tise, with the former Trea∣tises. how he may be releeued onely by the Mercy of God, and how this reliefe is applied vnto vs, by the Incarnate Word; for he is the true Samaritan that doth helpe the wounded man; he is the bles∣sed Angell that doth stirre the poole of Bethesda, and giue vertue vnto the water, to heale our sores; to helpe our soules: But alas, this Angell as yet, is but descended, and the waters are not troubled: and this Samaritan is but alighted, and the poore semi-dead Traueller, is not set vp vpon his horse, to be carryed towards his Inne: that is, hee hath not yet entred into the waters of tribulations to saue our soules from
drowning in Hell; neither hath he put our sinnes vpon his backe, that we being freed from the burthen, might walke on towards Heauen; this resteth yet behind, and this Tragedie is yet vnheard: and therefore, though he much humbled him∣selfe by his Incarnation; yet is that nothing; it is but the begin∣ning of sorrowes, in respect of his sore and bitter Passion: For, to redeeme our soules from sinne, the deepe waters must enter in∣to his soule, and all our sinnes must be laid vpon his backe; and for our sinnes; It behoueth Christ to suffer. Hic labor, hoc opus est. And this is that which we are now to treat of. Thus it behoued Christ to suffer. CHAP. I. Of the manifold vse and commodities that we reape by the con∣tinuall meditation of the sufferings of Christ. Three things that mooue attention.THere be three speciall things that doe vse to moue attention. 1. An eloquent Author. 2. An important matter. 3. A compendious breuity. And all these three doe here ioyne and meete together in this Text of Scripture. For, First, the Au∣thor of these words is Christ. Luk. 11.49.First the Author of these words, is Iesus Christ: the wisedome of God; Wisedome it selfe, so incomprehensibly wise, that all men wondred at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. Secondly, the summe of these words, is the Tragedy of Iesus Christ.Secondly, the matter is the Tragedie of himselfe; the labori∣ous life, and the dolorous death of the Sonne of God: the chiefest Tragedy of all Tragedies; for the Catastrophe hereof, hath the effusion of bloud, and the mourning, not onely of the Sufferer, or Parents and Friends, but of Heauen and Earth, and all the whole world, farre more dolefull then the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in Valley of Mgyddo. The Actors of this Tragedy, are Kings, Vice-Royes, Dukes,
Scribes, Pharises, High-Priests, Elders of the people;The Actors of this Tra∣gedy. the Apostles themselues, and others: all great. Christ the King of Kings, Herod the great King; Pilate, the Vice-Roy, Annas and Cay∣phas, high Priests; Peter and Iudas, great Apostles; and those that were mute, as the Sun, the Earth, the Stones, the Vaile of the Temple, and the very Graues, did by apparant signes, most dole∣fully bewayle the nefarious death of the Son of God: yea more, the Angels mourned, and the Diuels trembled to behold the same. The Theater on which it was acted, was Ierusalem,The Theater was Ierusalem. the very midst and heart of the earth, as some imagine; according to that saying of the Psalmist, Operatus est deus salutem in medio terrae, GOD hath wrought saluation in the midst of the Earth. Heere is the place where it was acted: —Hic, hic, mors & vita duello, —Conflixere mirando. Here life and death did striue for victory: and here the be∣holders were men of all Nations; Hebrewes, Greekes, and Ro∣mans: and the time was their most solemne feast, wherein all did eete to eate their Paschall Lambe. And therefore if there be any Theame that may challenge our eares to lysten, and our hearts to meditate vpon the same, it is this; for this is one of those things that was once done, that it might be thought of for euer, that it might be had in euerlasting remembrance. And the continuall meditation thereof is; 1. Acceptable vnto Christ. 2. Profitable for vs. For, First,The continuall meditation of Christs passi∣on what it doth. if the rod of Moses which wrought so many miracles in Aegypt, and the Manna which fed the children of Israel 40. yeares in the Wildernesse; and the Booke of the Law, which was deliuered vnto Moses vpon Mount Sinai, were to be preser∣ued in the Arke,First, It is most acceptable vnto Christ. as testimonies of Gods loue throughout all ge∣nerations; how much more should we keepe the remembrance of the Crosse of Christ, of the Body and Bloud of Christ, and of the glad tidings of saluation, which we haue by the death of Christ in the Church of God for euermore? Our Sauiour gaue but two Sacraments vnto his Church; and one of them is chiefely instituted to this end; for a remembrance of his suffe∣ring: for, as often as you eate this Bread, and drinke this Cup,Luc. 22. you
shew the Lords death vntill he come.1 Cor. 11.1. And the remembrance of Christs death (saith Saint Chrysostome) Est beneficij maximi re∣cordatio,Chrys. hom. 8. in Matth. caput{que} diuinae erga nos charitatis; Is the commemora∣tion of the greatest benefit that euer we receiued from God; and the chiefest argument of his Diuine loue towards man: for though it was great loue, to be clothed with the vaile of our flesh, and to take the infirmities of our fraile and feeble nature; yet is it farre greater loue, to be compassed with the shadow of Death, and to vndergoe the penalty of our sinfull nature. And therefore seeing the mercifull and gracious Lord hath so done this maruellous worke,Psal. 111 4. that it ought to be had in remembrance; I may well say with the Prophet;Lam. 1.12. Haue ye no regard, O all ye that passe by the way? Stay here and consider, and behold, If euer there were any sorrow, like his sorrow, or any suffering like the suffering of Christ? your businesse may be great, and your occasions vrgent, yet none so great, none so waighty as this; and none so accepta∣ble vnto God as this: for if you must remember when he rested, how much more, should you remember how he suffered? Secondly, It is most profita∣ble vnto men, in three re∣spects.Secondly, As no worke more acceptable vnto God, so none more profitable for vs; for the serious meditation of the suffe∣rings of Christ effecteth in vs, (besides many others) these three especiall good. 1. It hindereth vs to sinne. 2. It kindleth our charity. 3. It erecteth our Hope. For, Orosius sup ep. ad Rom. l. 6.First, Tanta vis crucis vt si ante occulos ponatur, &c. So great is the power and efficacy of the sufferings of Christ, that if it were alwayes fixed in the mindes of the faithfull,How the me∣ditation of Christs Passi∣on driueth away sinne. so that they did in∣tentiuely behold the death of Christ, no concupiscense, no lust, no enuy, no fury could ouercome them; but presently vpon the consideration of Christ his sufferings, the whole hoste of the flesh, and of sinne, would flie away saith Orosius, and Saint Bernard saith,Bern. ser. 62. in Cant. Quid tam efficax ad curanda cōscientiae vulnera, nec∣non ad purgandam mentis aciem quam Christi vulnerum sedula me∣ditatio? What can be more powerfull, to cure the sinfull wounds of our consciences, yea, and to purge our mindes from all sinnes, then the sedulous meditation of the wounds of Christ? for the Passion of Christ sheweth how dearely it cost him to re∣deeme vs from sinne, and therefore it should make vs afraid to
sinne: for when the Harlot Lais asked of Demosthenes 1000. Dracmas, i. e. almost 24. pound of our money, or as some re∣port, 10000. Dracmas, i. e. 200. pound for one nights lodging, with her, he wisely answered her, Non tanti emam paenitere; I will not buy repentance at so deare a rate; so when Satan suggesteth vs to sinne, if we did but consider the great price, that Christ did pay for sinne, and must be paid before it can be pardoned; for we are bought with a price; yea, with a great price,1 Cor. 6.1. saith the Apo∣stle; there is no doubt but it would be a great meanes to pre∣serue vs from sinning: for it is most certaine, saith Origen,Origen in. c. 6. ad Rom. that the true consideration of the Passion of Christ, in the heart of a Christian, is the chiefest munition to guard vs against euery sinne; for, as Ʋriah said vnto King Dauid, The Arke, and Israel,2 Sam. 11.11. and Iuda, abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the seruants of my Lord, are incamped in the open field,Sap. 2.8. and shall I then goe downe into mine house, to eate and drinke, and to lie with my wife? as thou liuest, and as thy soule liueth, I will not doe this thing. So euery good Christian man will say, My Sauiour Christ did weare a Crowne of thornes; and shall I say come, let vs crowne our selues with rose buds? his hands are extended vpon the Crosse to imbrace me, and shall I stretch forth mine hands vnto wicked∣nesse to disgrace him? he being ready to die, had gall to eate, and vineger to drinke; and shall I being perfectly whole, say with them in the booke of Wisedome, Come,Wisedome 2.7. let vs fil our selues with Wine and pleasant oyntments? He suffered his breast, his side, and his heart, to be opened and pierced for me, and shall I harden my heart, and shut the doore of my soule against him? he was contented to heare himselfe reuiled and scorned for mee, and shall I still scorne him, and stop mine eares from hearing him, so graciously speaking, and so louingly calling me, by the mouth of his holy seruants? And, as Origen saith, Pro me Dei filius iugulatus est, & iterum me peccare delectat? The Sonne of God was slaine for my sinnes, and shall I euer againe delight in sinne? So will euery true remembrancer of Christs sufferings say, the desire of mony betrayed my Sauiour, and shall I euer after that, loue couetosnesse? my wanton pleasures, my vaine delights, my swelling pride, my greedy desire, and all my wicked sinnes, were the onely cause of
my Sauiours want,Chrys hom. 88. in Matth. of his bitter sorrowes, and his shamefull, cruell death: and shall I euer loue those sinnes that brought these sor∣rowes vnto him? no sure, I will not doe it, saith euery soule that thinkes of this: Etiam si lapis esset; yea, though his heart were made of stone, yet the true meditation hereof, would molli∣fie the same like waxe; and cause him to depresse his pride, and to detest all sinne, saith Saint Chrysostome; for as the destroying Angell could not hurt any of them, whose doore-posts were sprinkled with the bloud of the Paschall Lambe; so the subtlety of Satan, that destroying enemie, can neuer preuaile against them, which haue their mindes and hearts alwayes sprinkled with the true meditation of the suffering, and shedding of the pretious blood of Iesus Christ. Gal. 6.14.And therefore, as that blessed Apostle Saint Paul saith; God forbid that I should glory in any thing,The medita∣tion of Christs Passion can∣not choose but make vs to loue Christ. saue in the Crosse of Iesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world; that is, whereby all worldly vanities and pleasures, are become loathsome vnto me, and I am become a hater and detester of them; as being the cause of Christ his Crosse; so I say vnto euery man; if euer Satan, or the lust of the flesh, inticeth thee to sin; I pray thee doe but this one thing, before thou dost the sin, call to mind and consider, what thy deare Sauiour suffered for thy sinnes, and I doubt not but it will proue a most wholesome antidote, and a most excellent preseruatiue against sinne. And, Secondly, As the consideration of Christs Passion, is a great meanes to preuent sinne, so it is of maine force to stirre vp our loue, and to kindle our affection towards Christ: as Saint Ber∣nard saith, Nihil est, quod eum ita nobis amabilem reddit, quam ca∣lix ille,Bern. ser. 20. in Cantic. quem pro nobis bibit; nothing in the world makes Christ to be loued of vs more then that Cup which he hath drunke vp for vs. Quia amor amoris magnes, & durus est, qui amorem non rependit; Because loue is as a loadstone to draw loue againe; and, greater loue then this, hath no man; that a man should giue his life for his friends; and therefore the remembrance of this can∣not choose, but cause vs to loue him againe. Euripides in Alceste.It is reported—subeuntem fata mariti Alcesten,— that Alcestes was contented, to vndergoe the destinies of
her husband; for when Apollo had obtained of the Fates, to spare Admetus life, if any one of his friends or kindred would willingly die for him; and that all his friends refused the same, his wife Alcestes redeemed his life with her owne death: So was Pythias ready to die for Damon, and Damon likewise for Pythi∣as: and so the Codri for the Athenians; and the Curtij for the Romans did willingly giue themselues to die: Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit. And surely these are arguments of great loue; yet farre farre short of the loue of Christ. For, First, these did it for them that loued them as much,Lactant. institut. l. 5. c. 18. and were as ready to doe as much for them againe: but Christ did it for vs, when we were his enemies.Rom. 5.8. Secondly, these owed so much vnto their friends and coun∣trey: for in that they were, they were from these, and whatsoe∣uer they had, they had from them; and therefore,Cicero. l. 1 offic. Partem ortus nostri patria, & partem patres sibi vendicant: Our Country, our friends, and our parents, doe rightly challenge no small part of euery man, saith Cicero: and as Lucan saith. —Haec duri immota Catonis.Lucan. l. 2. secta fuit.— Nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo. It was Cato's mind, that he was not borne for himselfe, but to doe what good he could to others; but Christ oweth vs no∣thing, he is a debter to no man: for who hath first giuen vnto him,Rom. 5 8. and it shall be recompenced vnto him againe? And therefore seeing the loue of Christ to vs was so great, as when we deserued no good at his hands; but deserued so much euill, as is due to mortall and perfidious enemies; to suffer so many things for vs; how can it choose, but the remembrance therof, should exceedingly kindle our loue towards him againe? for who can behold and consider the gr price that was paid for his redemption, and not loue his Redeemer? or who can thinke of that bitter potion, which he drunke for our saluation, and not be inflamed with the loue of his Sauiour? There be 3. things (saith Mirandula) that doe moue vs to loue any one. First, The vertues of the person.Mirand de mor∣te Christi li. 1. c. 17. Secondly, The benefits that we haue receiued of him.
Thirdly, The good that we doe expect from him. But Christ is the vertue of God his Father, the chiefest good, and all goodnesse; and although euery vertue doth challenge loue, yet no vertue deserueth the same so much as liberality; and what greater bounty or liberality can there be then this, to shedde his precious bloud, and to offer vp himselfe vpon the Altar of his Crosse, to deliuer vs from eternall death? and what greater good can be desired, then that eternall happinesse which hee hath pur∣chased for vs, and which we doe expect from him? And there∣fore who would not loue so good a Sauiour? It is reported of Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, that he did so continually meditate vpon those great things, which Christ had done and suffered for him,Jdem quo supra. c. 10. that hee was thereby brought so in∣tirely to loue him, as when he was demanded, why hee would not forsake and forget Christ, rather then suffer himselfe to be torne and deuoured of wilde and sauage Beasts? He answered, That hee could not forget him, because the sufferings of Christ, were not onely words transient in his mouth, or remoueable ob∣iects before his eyes, but they were indelible Characters, so en∣grauen in his heart, that all the torments of the Earth could neuer race them out: And therefore being commanded by that blou∣dy Tyrant Traiane, to be ript and vnbowelled, they found Iesus Christ written vpon his heart, in Characters of Gold. Oh that it might be so with vs, that wee would euer set the sufferings of Christ before our face, and with Saint Paul, desire to know nothing but Iesus Christ, and him crucified; that so by the continuall consideration of Christ his great loue to vs, we might be induced to loue him againe. The meditati∣on of Christs suffering, sup∣porteth our hope.Thirdly, As the continuall meditation of Christs suffering, sup∣presseth sinne, and kindleth our loue, so it supporteth our hope: for though I haue sinned grieuously, and my conscience is much troubled, yet it shall not be ouer-cha  despaire; Quo∣niam vulnerum Domini recordabor, & od ex me mihi deest, vsur∣po ex visceribus Domini:Bernard Ser. 61. in Cant. Becaus  will remember the wounds of my Lord Iesus, and whatsoeuer is wanting in my selfe, I will as∣sume from the bowels of my Sauiour: for when my wisedome fai∣leth, my righteousnesse sufficeth not, my holinesse helpeth not, the sufferings of Christ shall suffice for all: This shall be my last re∣fuge,
this shall be mine onely remedy, saith Saint Bernard.Idem. Ser. 22. in Cant. And so Saint Paul, after hee had shewed how, doe he what he could, he serued with his flesh many times the Law of sinne; and therefore cryeth out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the body of this death? He saith, I thanke God,Rom. 7.24.25. through Christ our Lord; As if hee should haue said, Seeing I am so prone to sinne, and so vnapt to goodnesse, I haue none other refuge, but onely to flie vnto the sufferings and merits of Iesus Christ: and I know that is sufficient for me, in stead of all; for, as Israel sucked honey out of the rocke, and oyle out of the flint stone,Deut. 32.13. so doe wee sucke all our comforts, and refresh our selues with those streames of teares, and bloud, that gushed out of that stonie Rocke Iesus Christ; And as the high hilles are a refuge for the wilde Goates,Psal. 104.18. and the stony Rockes for the Conies; those poore silly fearefull Creatures, that haue none other shift to saue their liues, but to hide themselues in the holes of the Rockes; so the poore silly simple soules of sinnefull men, haue none other place to hide themselues in from the wrath of God,Cantic. 2.14. but onely with the Doue (in the Can∣ticles) In foraminibus petrae; In the clefts of this Rocke, in the se∣cret places of his stayres, (as some translate it,) that is, in the wounds and stripes of Iesus Christ: for, By his stripes we are healed.Esay 53.5. And therefore, seeing the sufferings of Christ, is that precious balme of Gilead, that soueraigne salue, which is sufficient to heale euery sickned soule, to hinder vs to sinne, to kindle our loue to God, and to erect our hope in God; no man can treate, no man can heare of a matter more excellent, then is the dilating of the sufferings of Christ. Thirdly, Here is a compendious breuity, a theame short e∣nough, but foure words; Ita oportuit Christum pati:3. Here is a∣bundance of matter in few words. Thus it be∣houed Christ to suffer, or, Christ must thus suffer. And they be certaine in sence, and full of matter: And therefore you may ea∣sily remember the words, because they be so few; and you should diligently muse, and daily meditate vpon the matter, and bee throughly excited to an vnwearied hearkening or reading, and to a faithfull retaining of the same, because so excellent, and I may be truly excused, for my large preamble, and long perambu∣lation vpon the same; because there is, Multum in paruo,Hieron. ad De∣metriad. A great deale of matter couched here, in a little roome; euen as the
whole World is expressed in a little Mappe. For though the men of Myndas might well shut their large gates,Laertius. l. 6. lest their little City would runne out; yet huge spacious Cities must haue their Gates bigger then little Wickets, least their people should get nei∣ther in nor out: And therefore though these words be but few, yet seeing herein there is contained infinite matter, and an huge building; Centum sublime columnis: for, what higher mystery, or what ampler discourse can wee finde, then the sufferings of Iesus Christ? you must giue me leaue to insist a while, to behold the stripes, and to search into the wounds of Christ; for I may not shut a large foote into a little shooe, and I cannot inclose so many Ili∣ads of sorrowes (as one did the Illiads of Homer) within the compasse of a nut-shell: And therefore, by Gods helpe, though I meane not to build Tabernacles, and to stay euer in the expoun∣ding of that, which shall be euer in my remembrance; yet I will Sistere gradum, Make a stop, and stay a while: To treate of these words of Christ, Thus it behoued Christ to suffer. In which words (as the Holy Ghost hath set them downe) I note these foure e∣speciall points. The diuision of the Text.First, The person suffering, Christ; thus it behoued Christ. Secondly, The suffering it selfe, it behoued him to suffer. Thirdly, The necessity of his suffering, it behoued him to suffer. Fourthly, The manner of his suffering: Thus it behoued Christ to suffer; i. e. As the Prophets fore-told, and as you haue seene hee did. CHAP. II. Of the surpassing excellency of the Person suffering. 1. Part.FOr the first, The excellency of the person; that is, the subiect of any action, doth giue the most life vnto any matter: for the exploits of Kings, or the deedes of Nobles, doe of themselues craue attention, a hundred times more then the story of any one of base condition. Consider wee then the person, that is to vndergoe this passion.
First, We shall finde him to be a man; for so Pilate saith,That Christ was a Man. Be∣hold the man: And himselfe commonly giues himselfe none o∣ther title, then, The Sonne of man; to shew indeede, that he was a true man, as we are. And this should moue in vs compassion; for humanity it selfe at the torments of the very bruite Beasts, is something touched; and Diogenes the Cinick, in this respect is said,Laertius l. 6. Bonauent. in vi∣ta. S. Francis. to haue redeemed many times the Beasts from slaughter: And Saint Francis like∣wise is said, to haue ransomed the poore Lambes from the But∣chers hands; because it grieued them, to see any Creature tortu∣red; and therefore much more should we be moued with com∣passion, at the passion of any man: for if one member suffer,1 Cor. 12.26. all the members suffer with it, saith the Apostle. Secondly, Christ was not onely a man,That Christ was a iust man. but he was also a iust man; Non erat dolus in ore eius, There was no guile found in his mouth: His enemies themselues confesse it,Math. 27.19. Resolution of Pilate Pag. 47. Haue thou nothing to doe with that iust man, saith Pilates wife; and Pilate oftentimes (as I haue shewed in my Booke of the resolution of Pilate) con∣fessed, and by many arguments confirmed his assertion, that Christ deserued no punishment at all;Luke 23.14. and that hee could not finde (though hee had most diligently searched) any cause of death in him: and therefore to cleere himselfe from the imputa∣tion of iniustice,Leo Ser. 3. de pass. that he should ijsdem labijs eum mittere ad cru∣cem, quibus pronunciauerat innocentem, With the same lippes send him to be crucified, whom euen now he had iustified; he washed his hands in the view of the multitude, saying, I am innocent from the bloud of this iust person: So Herod,Math. 27.24. though he had derided our Sauiours silence, yet dared hee not condemne his innocency; for, I haue sent him vnto Herod, and loe,Luc. 23.15. nothing worthy of death is found in him, saith Pilate; So Caiphas the High Priest prophesieth of him, whom he persecuteth, and absolueth him whom he accu∣seth, for hee pronouncing the mystery of our saluation, said, It was necessary that one should die for the people:John 11.50. Therefore hee must be a iust man, or else hee could not satisfie for the sinnes of men: And so the Diuell himselfe, though hee violently persecu∣ted, and most maliciously accused yet bee cleerely iustified our Sauiour Christ; for it was he (as many of the ancients doe conie∣cture) that told Pilates wife, and incited her to tell her Husband,
that the man thus maligned, and condemned as nefarious, was notwithstanding iust and righteous; for the Diuell knew, that since he first knew him, he knew no sinne in him: And it may be that to this our Sauiour alludeth,John 14.30. Talem vix repe∣rit vnum, mili∣bus è multis ho∣minum consultus Apollo, Iohn 8.46. when he saith, The Prince of this World commeth; Sed in me non habet quicquam, but hee hath nothing in me: As if hee should haue said, When hee searcheth, and seeketh, and sifteth what he can; yet shall he finde no euill, no sinne, no, not the least cause of death in me. For he might iust∣ly say, Which of you can rebuke me of sinne? Quia ab omnibus acce∣pit testimonium innocentiae, Because hee had the testimonies of all men,Iren. l. 4. c. 14. of all sorts, as Irenaeus saith, to iustifie him; God, Men, Angels, Diuels, Friends, Foes, Acquaintance, Strangers, and all iustified him, that he was voide of sinne, full of grace. And therefore, as we haue euer more compassion of them that suffer, and be innocent, then of those whom wee coniecture to be Malefactors; so the consideration of Christs suffering, being as the Doue, as innocent as innocencie it selfe, should moue in vs not onely a commisseration of the sufferer, but also a detestation of the persecutors: for who can heare, or reade, of the death of righteous Abel, by that wicked Caine; the burning of Lauren∣tius, by that Tyrant Decius; the flaying of Saint Bartholmew, by his bloudy enemies; or the dragging of Hippolytus with wilde Horses, and such like cruell and bloudy Tragedies, without a detestation of such horribly wicked Actors? And can we heare the sufferings of innocent guiltlesse Christ, without a deadly de∣testation of those inhumane Butchers? That Christ was a good man. Acts 10.38.Thirdly, He was not onely a iust man, that did no hurt to any man, but he was also a good man, that did good to euery man: for, He went about (saith the Apostle) doing good; and that both in words and workes: for, first, He often taught them, in the Temple, in the Synagogue, vpon the Mount, in the High-wayes, in Houses, in all places; his goodnesse would not suffer him to conceale any thing in silence, that might be any wayes profitable vnto his hearers; but to dispell with all diligence, all mysts and cloudes of errors, from the inward eyes of the people, and to instruct them cleerely in all the heauenly mysteries of salua∣tion. Secondly, He cured the bleeding wounds of afflicted con∣sciences,
he reclaimed & brought home many stragling sheepe, and wandring sinners; he gaue eyes vnto the blinde, feete vnto the lame, speech vnto the dumbe, eares vnto the deafe, bread vn∣to the hungry, yea, many times hee restored health vnto the diseased, and sometimes the dead vnto their lamenting friends: And as Saint Paul saith, Who is weake, and I am not weake;2 Cor. 11.23. who is offended, and I burne not? So might our Sauiour more truly say, Who is burthened, and I am not grieued at it? for he com∣misserated the corporall and spirituall infirmities of all men, yea, he did not onely pitty them in vs, but he put them all vpon himselfe, Et tulit in se vt à nobis tolleret, and tooke them all vp∣on himselfe, that he might take them all from vs, as Saint Chry∣sostome saith. And therefore, if the people did so much condole the naturall death of Dorcas,Acts 9.39. because shee was so good a Crea∣ture, as to bestow some few clothes vpon some few poore distres∣sed people; how much more ought wee to bewaile the shamefull and the dolefull death of Christ, that did so much good, and ne∣uer any ill, all the dayes of his life? Fourthly, He was not onely Iustus & bonus, A iust and a good man, or an innocent man, voide of sinne, and a vertuous man, full of grace, but he was also more honourable and noble then all the sonnes of men: for he was Christus,That Christ is, 1. A King. 2. A Priest. 3. A Prophet. Math. 2.2. Annointed to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet. First, King; Simul natus, simul Caesar, He was a King by birth; Where is he that is borne King of the Iewes? He descended of the regall race, Saint Mathew reckons foureteene Kings in his pede∣gree, and hee was a King to his dying day, Iesus of Nazareth,John 19.22. King of the Iewes; Pilate writes it, and he will not alter it: for, God himselfe had spoken it,Psal. 2.6. I haue set my King vpon my holy hill of Sion. Secondly, Priest; for, The Lord sware it,Psal. 110.4. and he will not repent it, that he is a Priest for euer after the order of Melchizedecke. The noblest Order, and the royallest Priesthood in the World: for this holy Priest was also a noble King;Esay 9.6. for hee was King of Sha∣lem, King of peace; euen as Esayas calles him, The Prince of peace. Thirdly, Prophet; for,Deut. 18.15. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise vnto you: And he shall be a Prophet, , in the highest
degree, euen the Prince of Prophets, and so great a Prophet, that Whosoeuer will not heare him, he shall surely die. Ier. 22.18.And therefore if Ieremie taketh vp that mournefull lamenta∣tion, for the death of King Iosias, and say, Alas for that noble Prince, ah my Lord, or, ah his glory; and yet he came to an honou∣rable death in the Field, without any shame, and but little paine: then what shall wee say, for the death of this King of Kings, this Priest of the most High God, and this great Prophet of the Lord, that was annointed with the Oyle of gladnesse aboue his fellowes?Psal. 45.8. The Lord had said, Touch not mine Annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme;Psal. 105 15. yet we see Kings, the Annointed of God, are slaine, and Ierusalem killed the Prophets, and stoned those that are sent vnto them:Luke 13.34. But behold a greater then all Kings is here, Et quasi vnus è decem milibus, And such a one as ten thousand Kings are not equal vnto him; and yet he is not brought to an honorable death, of a Priest at the Altar, or of a King in the Field, but to a most shamefull and reprochfull death, the most accursed death of the Crosse, among the wicked: O then let vs consider, if euer such a person came to such a death! That Christ was a true and eternall God. Math. 17.54.Fiftly, He was not onely the highest among all the Sonnes of men, but he was also the Sonne of the most High God; Pilate heard it, and feared; the Centurion saw it, and confest it, Truly this was the Sonne of God; And the very Diuels felt it, and proclaimed it, We know who thou art, euen the holy one of God: yea, the trem∣bling Earth quaking,Luke 4.34. the flinty Rocks cleauing asunder, and the dolefull graues opening themselues, did by a visible voyce confirme him to be a God: And so that strange Eclipse that was seene at his death, and that vnexpected darkenesse, that vayled the face of the Sunne for three houres together, because it was no defect of Nature, (the Moone being at the full,) and the day being at the middest, and therefore could not be any vsuall E∣clipse, caused by the head or the tayle of the Dragon, (vnlesse you meane that olde Dragon, the Diuell) it made that great Phy∣losopher Dyonisius,Dionys. in Ep. then in Athens, to say, That now the World was at an end, or the God of Nature suffered violence; so strange were these accidents, beyond the power of Nature. The enemies of Christ a∣scribe that to him in mocke∣rie, which he was indeede. Mat. 26.68.Nay, the very enemies of Christ acknowledged him to be a Prophet, a King, a God; for while the people play vpon him, and
contemne him, yet notwithstanding they confesse him to be a Prophet, saying, Prophesie vnto vs thou Christ, who is hee that smote thee: And as Saint Ambrose saith, Compungentes coronant, & il∣ludentes adorant; While the Souldiers denied him to be a King, they Crowne him, they giue a Scepter vnto him,Ambros. 10.6.23. and they put a purple garment vpon him, which are the chiefest ornaments of the greatest Monarchs; and while they all deride him, and denie him for their Sauiour, they doe in the meane time adore him as a God, and bow their knees vnto him, to whom all knees shall bow: And so the vnspeakeable wisedome of Almighty God, did so hiddenly dispose of the sufferings of Christ, that his very ene∣mies should attribute that to him in mockery, which hee was in deede and verity. And so you see the person suffering, a man, a iust man, a good man, a King, a Priest, a Prophet, a God; yea, that God,Ierem. 2.6. which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, which ledde them through the Wildernesse, through a Land of desarts and pittes, and of the shaddow of death, and through a Land where no man dwelt, where no man passed through;Psal. 78.24. which fedde them in the Wilder∣nesse, with the bread of Angels; which kept them as the apple of his eye, which suffered no man to doe them harme, but reproued Kings for their sakes; and brought them into a wealthy place, and gaue them the Lands of the Heathen, and the labours of the people in pos∣session: This is that person which endureth all this passion. And therefore be astonished O ye Heauens,Ierem. 2.12. and be ye horribly afraide at this, that this hatefull and hated Nation, this cruell and abho∣minable people, this people voide of wisedome, and destitute of vnderstanding, should not onely forget that God which made them, but also defile that glorious face in Mount Sion, with their stincking spittles, which they could not behold vpon Mount Horeb without great astonishment; yea, that they should dare to murther him without feare, whose very name they durst not vtter without trembling, much like our godlesse people, that doe abhorre the very name of the Diuell, but will boldly imitate, and reioyce to doe the workes of the Diuell. Oh that my head were full of waters,Ierem. 9.1. and that mine eyes were a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night; for then I would bewaile with the weeping of Iaser, this Ʋine of Shibma;Esa. 16.9. I
would water thee O Heshbon, and Elealeh, and I would most fully shew my sorrow, because they haue so fully shewed their cruelty against the Sonne of God. That of all creatures, men are most sub∣iect to sorrowBut from hence wee may see, who are most exposed to dan∣ger, and who be subiect to the greatest sufferings. First, Man, because he is most sensible, most intelligible, and most deseruing miseries; and therefore of all other Creatures, man is chiefly borne to labour,Esay 53.4. and he is full of miseries: You see Christ himselfe hauing taken our Nature, he tooke our infirmi∣ties, and he carried our sorrowes. [Oh sors grauis, ô sors dura, ô lex dira quam natura promulgauit miseris; Homo nascens cum maerore, vitam ducis cum labore, & cum metu moreris:] For this is the Law of Nature, divulged and executed among all Nations, that euery man should be borne in sorrow, liue in paine, and die with feare; And therefore Seneca saith, That as, Quicquid facimus de coelo est, Whatsoeuer noble act we doe, it is from aboue: So Quicquid patimur mortale est; Whatsoeuer wee suffer, is but a signe of our condition, and a praeludium, a fore-shew of our mortalitie: Nam quemcum{que} miserum vides, hominem scias; For whensoeuer we see any man in miserie, wee must know that to be the property of humanitie. The more righteous men be, the more they shall be afflicted and persecuted by the wicked.Secondly, The iust and righteous man, the best and godliest man, is most subiect to the greatest sufferings: It were no won∣der, that man suffereth, because man sinneth; but that the iust and righteous suffer, it seemeth strange: for, as the Psalmist saith, Iu∣stus quid fecit, What hath the righteous done? And yet as Ari∣stides was banished out of Athens, Iustus quia iustus, Onely be∣cause he was a iust man; And as Christ saith, Oderunt me gratis, They haue hated me frely without any cause, or fault of mine, O God; so the righteous shall be troden as the clay in the streetes, they shall be sure enough to suffer, and there is cause enough for it, Quia inutiles nobis, & contrarij operibus nostris; Because they are vnprofitable for vs, we gaine nothing by them, no pleasure, no profit,Wsed. 2.12. no contentment, and they be cleane contrarily disposed to all our actions, say the wicked among themselues: And therefore though all men suffer, yet doe the righteous suffer most of all; for many (yea, and great) are the troubles of the righteous, saith the Psalmist; and though neuer so many, yea,
though they perish, yet no man layeth it to heart,Esay. 57.1. saith the Pro∣phet. Thirdly, Of all the righteous men, Kings, Priests, and Prophets,Kings, Priests, and Prophets' most exposed to all dangers. must be the chiefe in sufferings; Nam oportuit Christum pati, For it behoued the Annointed of God to suffer: And these be Christi Domini, The Annointed of the Lord; and therefore of all o∣thers, these are appointed to suffer for the Lord. Fourthly, Among these, the more godly they be, the more will godlesse people afflict them: for Saint Paul was a chosen vessell, a most vpright, and a most excellent man; therefore he must suffer many things for my names sake, saith the Lord.Acts 9.16. And Christ saith of all his Priests and Preachers, Behold, I send you forth as Sheepe in the middest of Wolues; and you shall be hated of all men for my names sake: What? of all men? that were a wonder, that good men, nay, the best men, should be hated of all men;The best Kings & best Priests, are often ha∣ted. for where saw you a good Preacher, and an honest man hated, or ill spoken of, say the Worldlings? Yet behold it is true, for our Sauiour saith it, You shall be hated of all men; And there is great reason for it: for in all men there is corruption, more or lesse;How it is that all men both more and lesse hate the best men. and they must be enemies to all corruption; they must reproue all the workes of darkenesse, all the sinnes and vices of men: And therefore it were more strange, that they should be the true reprouers of all sinne, and yet not be hated of all men; for the more strictly a man is addicted to vertue, the more hee is reiected by the vicious; and the more hee approues or tollerates sinne in them, either by not reprouing the same in them, or by walking in the same steppes of good-fellowship with them, the more acceptable hee is vnto them; though the lesse warrantable in the sight of God: And therefore it cannot be, that any one of vs should be a iust and an vpright man, and should not be hated of all men. I, But will the good and godly men hate them, who doe con∣fesse their sinnes, and doe alwayes striue against their owne cor∣ruptions? The wicked men may hate them, but surely the godly will not. I answere, That the more godly men be, the lesse they hate them; yet because in them, sinne stickes so close vnto them, that although they confesse, and detest it with their soules, yet hath their flesh alwayes some loue and affection vnto the same; in so
much that Saint Augustine in one of his Meditations confes∣seth, That in his spirit and soule, he did so heartily pray against his sinne, that his flesh and carnall desire was afraide God would heare the prayers of his soule, and so depriue them of their de∣lights;Gal. 5.17. for in the best men, The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and drawes them oftentimes to doe what they would not doe: And therefore as in the best men there is still remaining naturall corruption, so the same will still oppose it selfe against all them, that will seeke to dispossesse this olde Adam from their soules. And therefore, seeing Christ did suffer, Christians suffer, and that the more godly they be, the more enemies they shall haue; we should not iudge of men, and especially of the Preachers of Gods Word, according to their outward appearance; of their ene∣mies, crosses, and afflictions; but we should iudge righteous iudge∣ments: And we that suffer, may, and should reioyce and be glad, that We are counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. And so much for the Person suffering. PART. II. CHAP. I. Of the sufferings of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane. Of the suffe∣rings of Christ.SEcondly, We are to consider the sufferings of this Person, Iesus Christ. Thus it behoued Christ to suffer: Well might it haue agreed with his excellent Nature, to haue conferred benefits, and to bestow gifts on the Sonnes of men; but to suffer torments, and to endure all indigni∣ties at the hands of sinnefull men, is strange and admirable; so incompetible is the Person and the Passion of Iesus Christ. And yet if we diligently obserue all those Tragicall Scenes that are seene in the Records of the Euangelists, and marke all the dole∣full passages of his whole life, euen from the first houre of his birth, vnto the last moment of his breath; we shall finde the same to be nothing else, but a Mappe of miseries, or a tempestuous Sea of all calamities: for he was no sooner borne, but hee beganne to
beare our sorrowes; he was cast into a Cratch,That the whole life of Christ was but a con∣tinuall suffe∣ring. the breathings of the Beasts perhaps did warme his cloutes, to preserue his life; and he liued not long, but hee suffered the effusion of his bloud, and the sharpenesse of circumcision: He was no sooner circumci∣sed, but he was designed vnto the slaughter; Herod seekes his life, and hee will slay all the Children of Bethlehem, or he will put this Childe vnto the Sword: And therefore in the middest of Winter, he must flie to Egypt to saue his life; there hee liued a while, and hee must needes liue poore: for they that haue no∣thing among their friends, may very well bee thought to haue lesse among strangers; when he returnes, he must retire himselfe into corners, for feare of Archilaus;Matth. 2.23. and when he begins to shew himselfe to the World, hee must beginne to combate with the Diuell; he is no sooner baptized,Chap. 4.2. but he is tempted forty dayes together, without meate, without drinke, without sleepe: and he can no sooner beginne to publish the glad tidings of saluation, but they presently accuse him of sedition; His friends say hee is madde, his enemies say he hath a Diuell: All seeke his life,Iohn 8.48. and this is the summe of his whole life, Pouertie and miserie, hun∣ger, thirst, weakenesse, wearinesse, reproaches, lyings, slaunders, and what not? Yet all these sufferings were but flea-bitings,Christs chie∣fest sufferings in these three speciall places. they were but tastes of that bitter Cuppe, whereof hee sucked out the very dregges and all. 1. In the Garden of Gethsemane. 2. In the presence of his Iudges. 3. In the Mount of Caluerie. These were the places of his torments, and in all these places we must consider, both the greatnesse of his griefe, which is, Pae∣na sensus, the paine of feeling; and the smalnesse of his comfort, which is, Paena damni, the paine of leesing: And therefore by Gods assistance, I will chiefly insist vpon those sufferings that he suffered in these places. First, It is concluded of all Diuines,That Christ suffered both in soule and body. that the sufferings of Christ was both in soule and body; sorrowes of soule, and paines of body: for, He hath carried our sorrowes, saith our Translation; our paines, saith another: to shew, that whether wee regard his disconsolate soule, or his tender body, it was a painefull and a sor∣rowfull suffering; so painefull, and so sorrowfull, that as it was
well-neere intolerable vnto him, so it is almost incredible vnto vs: for though at the bringing of Christ into the world, to bee the Sauiour and Redeemer of his Church, the Prophet Esay saith,Esay 52.7. How beautifull vpon the mountaines, are the feet of them that bring these glad tidings of peace? i. e. How ready is euery man to embrace this newes; yet when he goeth about to expresse the manner of our diliuerance, by such sorrowes, paines, and suffe∣rings,Esay 53.1. he makes a stand, and saith Who beleeueth our reports? For, The first de∣gree of Christs suffering was that he was made passible.First, I told you before, that this sufferer was a God, blessed for euer; and the God-head is impassible: no sorrow, no griefe, no paine could fasten vpon the Deity; and therefore how could our Sauiour suffer? To this the Prophet answereth, Sa∣crifice and burnt offerings thou wouldst not haue; ;Leo Ser. 8. de Passione. but a body hast thou ordained me; (as both the Septuagint and the Author to the Hebrewes hath it) Nam cum mortis acu∣leum, non possit accipere natura deitatis; nascendo tamen, suscepit de nobis, quod pati posset pro nobis, For seeing the Deity could not suffer death; The Word was made Flesh, that hee might goe the way of all flesh, and make a passage vnto his Passion, that so hee might really suffer,Hillar. de Trin. lib. 10. and not appeare to suffer, (as Saint Hillary, o∣therwise a most excellent Author, doth imagine:) And indeed Hoc primum tormentum, & magnum mysterium, quod passibilis factus est; This was his first suffering torment, and an vnspeakeable mystery, that he was made able to suffer torments. That the Hu∣manity onely suffered.And we say that Christ suffered, not in respect of his Diuine nature; but in respect of his humane nature; for though the Deitie was in the sufferer, yet was it not in the suffering; though it was in the Body of Christs Passion; yet was it not in the Passion of Christs Body; but the humanity onely suffered, and the omnipotency of the Deity sustained the impotency of the Humanity; and while the flesh groaned vnder the anguish of his Passion,Matth. 26.39. and cryed, Father if it be possible, let this Cup passe from me; and so breathed out that mournfull complaint; My God my God,Matth. 27.46. why hast thou forsaken me? Yet then the Deity tri∣umphed ouer all the bitternesse of death, and the enemies of our flesh.Damasc l. 3. c. 26. de fide Orthodoxa. And this is excellently expressed by Damascen, saying; Quomadmodum si quis ignito ferro superinsundat aquam; Euen as if a man should poure water vpon a red-hot-iron, that which is
passible or capable to suffer by the water, that is, the heat & fire, is extinguished; but the iron remaineth still sound, and impassi∣ble; because the water hath no power to corrupt it; euen so the Humanity of Christ may suffer paine and death, but the Deity in∣seperably vnited vnto the same, can notwithstanding suffer no manner of Passion. And, Secondly, As it is a thing incomprehensible, (and therefore may well haue a quis credidit? who hath beleeued our report?) that God should be made passible, so it is a thing more incredible,Heb. 11.37. that he being iust, being King, being Priest, being God, should notwithstanding really suffer; yea, so suffer, as to be destitute, afflicted, and tormented; and so tormented, that the Prophet Esay may fitly call him, Virum dolorum, A man of sorrowes; as if he had beene wholly composed of miseries;Lament. 1.12. and the Prophet Ieremy truely demaund, Si fuerit dolor, sicut dolor suus? if euer there was any sorrow like vnto his sorrow:Jbidem. yet behold he was op∣pressed and afflicted, saith the Prophet; and the Lord did afflict him in the day of the fiercenesse of his wrath: And therefore, let o∣thers wonder at the rising of this Sunne; I admire his going downe; let them maruell, to see him layed in the cratch, I much more to see him nayled vpon the Crosse;The conside∣ration of Christs suffe∣ring admira∣ble. and let them admire to see him sleeping betwixt two beasts, and I will much more ad∣mire to see him suffering betwixt two theeues: But he was woun∣ded for our trangressions, and he was bruised for our iniquities, saith the Prophet; and therefore, let vs the rather giue the more heed vnto those things that he suffered for vs; least the neglect and not regarding the same, shall adde wrath vnto our soules, in the day of wrath. Well then, seeing the Sonne of God was made passible, apt to suffer, and that he knew his time was drawing neere, that hee must suffer, he went out of the house, out of the Citie,Why Christ went out of the house be∣fore he was taken. into the gar∣den of Gethsemane, saith the Euangelist. First, He went out of the house where they had eaten the Passeouer. First, Least his Hoste that had so kindly receiued him into his house, should any wayes for his sake be vnkindly vsed of his enemies: so sacred a thing was the law of guests among the an∣cients, that neither the Lodger, nor the lodged would hurt each
other if they met in the open fields,Valerius Maxi∣mus. l. 5. 1. vnder the Colours of two deadly enemies: and therefore Lot offered his owne Daugh∣ters vnto the Sodomites,Gen. 19. rather then they should abuse those Strangers that were come vnder his roofe: and the Poet notes it, as an argument of the great perfidiousnesse of the most corrup∣ted latter age;Ouid. Met. l. 1. Non hospes ab hospite tutus; That there was no truth betwixt the Hoste and his Ghest. Plutar. in Sert.Secondly, Least (as Sertorius was found of Perpenna amongst his banquets, he might be accused to be a Wine-bibber, and bee said to be a boone-companion, and be a president of ill example vnto others; if he had beene found in the Inne amongst his Guests: for it is a great deale fitter to finde a Scholler in his stu∣dy, then in the Tauerne. Why Christ went out of the Citie.Secondly, He went out of the Citie, out of that famous Citie Ierusalem. Theophil. in Mar. 14.First, Least any commotion or tumult should be raised; so dearely did this Prince of Peace, affect and seeke to preserue the Peace of Ierusalem: for they would haue taken him many times, but they feared the people; therefore he goeth out of the Citie, that they may doe it without feare, i. e. without feare of sedition. Secondly, To shew that as they had shut him out of their hearts; so now, he begins to depart out of their walls. Egressus est à filia Sion omnis decor eius:Lament. 1.13. and so all the glory of Sion is de∣parted from them, and as the Poet saith of Troy: —Ruit Ilium, & ingens gloria Teucrorum,— We may say the same of Ierusalem:Luke 19.44. the time of her desolation draweth neere, and it must bee made an heape of stones: Be∣cause,Excessere om∣nes adtis aris∣que relictis, dij, quibus imperi∣um hoc stete∣rat. now God, which had been the vpholder of them, was gone out of their wals, and departed from them: and therefore wee should euer take heed, that we shut not Christ out of our hearts, least he will hereupon shut vs out of his fauour. Thirdly, He went into the Garden of Gethsemane. First, That, as our fall was in a garden, so the worke of our Redemption should first begin in a garden. Secondly, That his enemies might the more easily find him:
for it was a place that he had often frequented,Why Christ went into the Garden of Gethsemane. saith the Euan∣gelist; and therefore he went not there as seeking to hide him∣selfe, but rather to expose himselfe, and like a noble Champi∣on, to appeare first in the field, and to expect his enemies: for, although they sought him like a Partridge vpon the mountaines; yet, noluit dolo teneri ne derogaretur praescientiae plenitudo; Hee would not be craftily taken in a net by a guile; least that might be derogatorie to his omnisciency: and therefore knowing they were desirous to take him, he goes to meete them into the garden of Gethsemane. And as soone as euer he came into the Garden,What befell vnto Christ in the Garden. John 12.27. Mar. 14.35. Luke 22.42. Matth. 26.38. Prou. 18.14. Ecce hostem inuenit; behold his enemy was there as soone as he; for he be∣gan presently, Cantristare, & pauere, & moestus esse; To be trou∣bled in soule, saith Saint Iohn; to be in anguish of mind, saith Saint Marke, and to be in an agony, saith Saint Luke, and to haue his soule exceeding sorrowfull vnto death, saith Saint Matthew. Alas, what shall we say to this? for the spirit of man will sustaine his infirmities but a wounded spirit who can beare? yet behold his Spirit, his Soule is sorrowfull vnto death: no doubt but his A∣postles saw it, yet like a barrell full, and wanting vent, hee must needes burst forth, and confesse it;Spem vultu si∣mulat, premit altum corde do∣lorem. he doth not here Aeneas-like, dissemble his griefe with a fained countenance; his sorrow is greater then can be contained; for it is vnto death, that is, not onely extensiuely such as must continue for the space of sea∣uenteene or eighteene houres, euen vntill death it selfe shall finish it; but also intensiuely, such and so great as that which is v∣sed to be at the very point of death, and such as were able to bring death vnto me, were I not reserued to a greater and a hea∣uier punishment. And therefore he kneeled downe, and fell grouelling vpon his face, and said, Father if it be possible, let this Cup passe from me;Matth. 26.39. and there praying, he fell into a dreadfull agonie, his thoughts were troubled, his spirits affrighted, his heart trembled, his pores opened; Et totus sudore defluit; and he sweat great drops of bloud, that streamed downe to the ground: and so panting, hee prayed, and sweating still he prayed, and the more hee was affli∣cted, the more he prayed, and fainted, as it were in the bathe of his owne bloud; weeping, not onely with his eyes, but euen
with all his members,Bern Ser. 3. as Saint Bernard saith: And therefore the end of his Passion must needes be mournefull, when the begin∣ning of it is so fearefull; and the cause of this agony must needs be supernaturall, when it proceeds so contrary to the course of nature: for it was in a cold season, in the open ayre, (and they were faine to make a fire within doores,) without any exercise, without any man neere him to offer him violence; and there∣fore naturally he should be inclined to a cold chilly operation, rather then to a bloudy sweating agony; yea not onely to sweat some cold, thinne, faint sweat, which is called sudor diaphoreti∣cus, but in such abundance of great drops (saith the Euange∣list) that they were able to die his garments with crimson red; according as the Prophet Esay saith, (though properly in an∣other sense, yet in some respect may be applyed to this) Where∣fore art thou red in thine apparell,Esay 63.2. and thy garments like him that treadeth in the Wine-fat: And as the Christian Poet Houedemi∣us saith, Sudor fluit vn∣di{que} riuis, san∣guineae manant tanquam de vulnere guttae.Cum cor sentit amoris gladium, Cruor carnis rubricat pallium. When through loue, his hearts-vaine bled, It dyed his garments crimson red. And that these drops did not onely distillare, drop out, but decurrere, runne and streame downe so fast to the ground, from all the pores of his body, as if they had issued out of most dead∣ly wounds. Wynton in Ser. sup. Thren.It is well obserued, by our learned Bishop of Winchester out of Saint Hierome, and the Chaldee paraphrast, that the greatnesse of his sorrow melted him, so as if he had stood by some burning furnace, which was able to cast him into that sweat, and to turne that sweat into drops of bloud: and it appeares the rather, be∣cause the Prophet Ieremie saith in the same place, that a fire was sent into his bones, and that might well melt all his mar∣row, and cause the bloud to distill from his flesh, and to tric∣kle downe to the ground: O happy garden watered with such teares: thou must needes surpasse the garden of Eden, that was watered with foure goodly riuers; for this bloud of Christ, doth speake better things,Heb. 12.24. and bring forth better fruits, then the bloud of Abell: for that cryed out of the earth for vengeance, against
his brother; but this cryeth for mercy vnto all the earth; euen to his enemies; Father forgiue them,Luk. 23.34. for they know not what they doe: and whereas our fruitfull Land, (the Land of our hearts) was made barren, for the sinne and iniquity of our fore-Father, to bring forth thornes and thistles (sinnes and wickednesse) yet now being watered with these heauenly showers of his bloud, he maketh it very plenteous, to abound in all grace and god∣linesse. But alas,  what was the cause that should make him so super∣naturally to sweat so strangely, to kneele so deuoutly, and to pray so earnestly; that, if it were possible, that houre might passe from him? Thomas Aquinas answereth,Resp. that the cause of all passions is to be considered; either 1. Ex parte obiecti: In regard of the obiect. Or, 2. Ex parte subiecti: In respect of the subiect. That as in the conception of gold in the bowels of the earth, there is Aestus solaris, & ignis subterranius; A concurren∣cy of the heate of the Sunne from aboue, with a sulphurious fire from below; So in the Passion of our Sauiour Christ, we must know, that in respect of the obiect, he saw the Diuine wrath from aboue, ready to be powred forth for the sinnes of men; and in respect of the subiect, hee saw the Church which was his body, so iustly punished by this wrath of God; and all that punishment to alight on him which had vndertaken to satisfie Gods Iustice, and to free his members from euerlasting torments. And therefore no doubt but the cleere sight,The cause of Christ his agony in the Garden. and the deepe consideration of that Cup, which he was so sheerely to drinke vp, was the cause that made him both so vehemently to pray a∣gainst it, and lso in the vehemency of the feare of it, to be in such perplexed agony, as thereby to sweat the drops of bloud.
CHAP. II. Of that fearefull Cup, what it was, which our Sauiour was to drinke of, and that he so much feared and prayed against it. What was the Cup which our Sauiour was to drinke.BVt what was this Cup which hee was to drinke of? we cannot easily determine. For, Some thinke this prayer, this feare, this agony proceeded onely from the weakenesse of his humanity, that was now, though not dis-vnited, yet vnassisted of the Deity; and that they were chiefly effected, through the feare of that death, which so neerely approached; and therefore though they were vttered, as proceeding from Passion, or at least humane affection, yet were they presently seasoned, and as it were corrected, with more deliberate consideration: when he said; Not my will, but thine be fulfilled. But, To these men I answere; that, although Christ tooke our infirmities vpon him, as well the spirituall Passions of the soule, as the corporall infirmities of the body: i. e. all such as are one∣ly miserable, but not damnable; penall, but not culpable; or those that are painfull without sinne; but not those which are sinfull without paine; as both Damascen, Saint Augustine, and Aqui∣nas, haue most excellently obserued; yet we say that these affe∣ctions in Christ, doe much differ from ours, in three respects. That the Hu∣mane affecti∣ons of Christ, differ from ours, in three respects.First, In respect of the obiect; for we many times feare, where there is no feare, and we doe loue the things which we should despise; but he onely feared the things that are to be feared, and loued the things that are to be loued indeed. Secondly, In respect of the manner, for will wee will we, these affections will inuade vs; and when they haue once taken hold vpon vs, we doe many times feare, and loue, and hate, if not against reason, yet surely beyond, and beside all reason; and so, that as we cannot guide them; so we cannot leaue them, when we would: but CHRIST is angry, reioyceth, feareth, loueth, when, and where, and so much as iust reason directeth
him: for these affections master vs, but he mastereth them: and therefore Saint Augustine saith, that,Aug. in Johan. potestate non infirmitate tur∣bauit seipsum; These affections are rather signes of his omnipo∣tency then arguments of his infirmitie, because he mastereth their willingnesse to oppresse him, when they cannot find any weake∣nesse in him to be oppressed. Thirdly, In respect of the effects, for our passions and affecti∣ons blinde vs, so that we cannot see the light of truth; in whom we loue we see no sinne, our loue is blinde; and in whom we hate, we can see no goodnesse; for, malitia corum exaecauit eos: the ma∣lice of the wicked blindeth them, saith the wise man; and as the Poet saith of wrath, (Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere verum.) That it blindeth our eyes, and disturbeth our senses, so as wee know not what is what; So might I say of feare, of loue, and of euery other vehement passion; Non modo memoriam excutit,Plutarch. in l. de Fortuna Alexand. sed & quoduis constitutum, & quemuis conatum impedit; It doth not onely disturbe our memories, but it hindereth all our purpo∣ses, and indeuours; so that in respect of these, we forget many times and are hindered oftentimes to doe those things, which our selues most of all desire to effect:Psal. 55.5. and therefore the Psal∣mist according to the vulgar Latine, saith, Timor & hebetudo mentis venerunt super me, & contexerunt me tenebrae; Feareful∣nesse and trembling came vpon me, and then darkenesse hath inuironed me, or, an horrible dread hath ouer-whelmed me; and the reason hereof is truely rendred by the Philosopher;Auicen rer. nat. lib. 6. c 5. Quia po∣tentiae naturales intensae, mutuo se impediunt: The naturall powers stretched to the highest straine, doe mutually disturbe and hinder each other, to discharge their right functions; and therefore exceeding ioy swalloweth vp griefe; and so of all the rest:Arist. aethic. l. 7. c. 14. the more intentiue we are to see any thing, the lesse able wee are to heare any other thing; according to that vulgar saying: Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus. The sense intent to many things, To each one truth it neuer brings. But in Christ they could neuer diuert him from his desire, they could neuer darken his vnderstanding, nor any wayes hin∣der the execution of his Office: Neither concourse of many,
yea, of most contrary passions, and affections; as loue and hatred, ioy and griefe, and such like, any wayes mitigate or stupifie the sharpenesse, or liuely-hood each of other; but that euen now when he most feareth this deadly Cup, he exceedingly reioyceth at the benefits that he seeth shall accrew thereby. And therefore though I easily grant that nature it selfe ab∣horreth death, the soule and body being euer loth to part, and euery thing desirous of life; yet that death should be thus feared, thus prayed against, thus melt our Sauiour Christ into such a bloudy sweat; I cannot willingly yeeld. For, Iohn 8.20.First, Desiderio desiderauit; With a longing desire did hee wish this houre, and he calleth it his houre; as if in that houre he were to inioy his longing; and he makes no more account of his death then of his dipping in the water;Luke 12 5. for be calleth the same a Baptisme,John 2.4. saying, I must be baptized with a baptisme, and how am I troubled till that be ended? i. e. How am I payned and grieued,Iohn 11. not because I must vndergoe it, for that is my chiefest de∣sire, but because I must stay yet a while; Mine houre being not yet come, before I may doe it: and therefore to this end, Quasi ambiens mortem; as one that would euer keepe himselfe in his enemies sight, or as one desirous to be dissolued, he goeth vp vnto Ierusalem, he raiseth Lazarus from the dead, that the wrath of the Iewes,Iohn 13.27. being stirred vp by this present miracle, he might be the sooner condemned vnto death; he biddeth Iudas to doe quickely what he meant to doe, not commanding the Act, but as desiring the speedinesse of the Act, as Caietan saith, and knowing, that his howre was at hand; and his enemies neere, hee saith vnto his Disciples, Come, let vs goe meet them, because they were not so desirous to take him,Matth. 26.46. as he was to be taken by them: And therefore I cannot see, how so much feare of death, as to cause such an agony, and such a greedy desire of death, can stand together, especially in such a person, whose Passions can∣not inuade him beyond the limits of his owne Commission; but that we must ascribe farre greater matters to be the causes of this great and fearefull agony. Seconly, We see his Saints and seruants not onely willing to die, but also running with Ignatius vnto the beasts; and singing (with the Salamander) in the midst of the fire; and therefore
shall we thinke that this heauenly Physitian, which healed o∣thers, would not heale himselfe; and which strengthened others, to call, and cry for death, would thus vehemently pray and cry onely for feare of death? But to this it is answered,The Saints at their death were suppor∣ted by God. that the Saints were supported by the power of his grace, and they were enabled by the helpe of his Spirit; and therefore no wonder though they desired it; but Christ though he was both God and Man; yet was he now lest destitute of te helpe both of God and Man; for all his friends forsak't him; and the God-head himselfe, which was himselfe, did now sequester and withdraw all his helpe from this poore, destitute and distressed man, Iesus Christ: and therefore no maruell that he being wholly left to himselfe; nay, not him∣selfe, but the Humanitie it selfe, should be thus moued and troubled at the sight of death. I confesse, that although Martyres non eripuit; God did not deliuer his Martyres from death; yet nunquam deseruit; He did neuer forsake them at their death;Whether Christ was wholly desti∣tute of all assi∣stance from the Godhead. but distilled still into their hearts abundant comforts of his heauenly Spirit; and it is most true that very much of the influence of Gods comfort, and of the comfortable beames of the God-head; were now restrayned from the assistance of the Man-hood of Christ (as hereafter I shall more fully shew vnto you) yet I say that all the Diuine comforts were not detained from him; for then the Humanity could not haue indured so great an agony, had he not beene somewhat sustained by the Deity. Nay be it so,Winton. in Pass. Ser. sup. Thren. 1 p 3. (as some would haue it) that his soule was euen as scorched heath-ground: with∣out so much, as any drop of dew, of Diuine comfort; yet I say he was not depriued of his reasonable soule, he had all the powers and faculties of reason, and vnderstanding, in a farre more excellent measure, then any other man whatsoeuer; and these faculties were not disturbed, nor any wayes darkened with the vehemen∣cie of any Passions, as I shewed vnto you before; and there∣fore I cannot see how the feare of a naturll deth onely, could so exceedingly affright him, as to make him so earnestly to pray against the same: for we find that euen naturall men, not know∣ing God, and therefore not guided by the light of God, doe, and haue by the light of Humane reason, made light account of
death: and yet you see Christ, a man of perfect knowledge as man, so much as man could haue; is here grieuously troubled, and vehemently affrighted at the consideration of that Cup which he was to drinke of: and therefore that Cup did con∣taine a great deale more then that little draught of naturall death. And, Heb. 5.7. That Christ was heard, and therefore de∣liuered from what he fea∣red.Thirdly, The Apostle vnto the Hebrewes, saith, That when Christ offered vp prayers and supplications, with strong cryings, and teares, vnto him that was able to saue him from death; he was heard in that which he feared; or, for his piety, as the originall hath it. Now this must be referred vnto his feruent prayer, and those bloudy teares in the Garden: for we doe not reade, that in any place else, he did offer the like prayers and teares vnto God: and therefore, seeing he was heard. i. e. so heard that he obtained his request; Prae reuerentia; for his modestie, or for the respect that God had vnto him, and was deliuered from that which he feared; it must needes be, that it was not his owne naturall death that he so much feared, and so earnestly prayed against it: for, from this he was not deliuered, but he suffered, dyed, and was buried. Psal. 75.9.And therefore, as the Prophet Dauid saith, In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, the wine is red, it is full mixt, as for the dregs thereof,That Christ was to vnder∣goe the pu∣nishment of all others. all the vngodly of the earth shall drinke them and suck them out: So I say of this Cup of Christ, it is a Cup of many ingredi∣ents; it is full red, and it hath many dregs: and although in this good seruant, there was found no sinne; yet seeing he was con∣tented to vndergoe the punishments of all bad seruants, and to suffer the iust desarts of all the vngodly; therefore hee must drinke and sucke vp the very dregs of this Cup: and yet, if we duely obserue it, we shall see, that he was heard in that which hee feared: for though he drinkes it vp sheere, yet it shall cleerely passe from him: and his prayer was no more, for hee prayed not, that he might not drinke of it, but that it might passe from him; euen as a man that drinketh a cup of poyson, and yet there∣by is not poysoned: And so it did with Christ; he dranke vp all; and yet it did him no hurt at all; for though it made him sweat the drops of bloud, though it grieued him, and pained him, and made him cry out,Matth. 27.46. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee?
yea, though it cast him into a sleepe, and laid him dead in his graue, and there sealed him for a time; yet presently within the space of forty houres, or thereabouts, he reuiued, and awaked, as a Lion out of sleepe; or, as a Giant refreshed with wine, and then he smote all his enemies vpon the chee-bone,Psal. 78.66.67. and put them to a per∣petuall shame; And through that short and momentary death of his, he purchased vnto his Church euerlasting life. And therefore seeing this Cup which Christ feared, was not onely that little draught of naturall death; that was but the least drop thereof, but was a Cup of many ingredients; Let vs (so farre as we may gather it out of the word of God,) obserue and learne, what those ingredients might be, which were contai∣ned in that Cup; that so we may the better know what he suffe∣red, and what he prayed against. CHAP. III. Of diuers particular things that were in that Cup which our Sauiour dranke of. ANd if we diligently search into the particu∣lars, we shall finde, that therein might be;The difference betwixt feare and sorrow or griefe. First, Somethings that he grieued at, which troubled him. And Secondly, Somethings that he feared, which he prayed against. For, there be great differences betwixt , griefe, and , feare: and betwixt the causes of sorrow and feare; for the obiect of sorrow and griefe, may be as well euill past, as the paine present; but the obiect of feare, is onely euill to come; or that which is present; but as yet not wholly passed ouer; feare alwayes going before the paine, sorrow and griefe following after: and yet I say that the same things now in Christ might, and did worke, both feare and griefe; because he fore-saw those things that were to come, as present; or as already past; and therefore he feared them as things to come, and he grieued for them, as if they had beene already past.
Of the first sort there were somethings, 1. In respect of himselfe. 2. In respect of others. What Christ griued at.1. In respect of himselfe, he fore-saw these two things. 1. The greatnesse of his paine and shame. 2. The deferring of his death and punishment. 2. In respect of others, he fore-saw likewise these 2. things. 1. The small account that they would make of so great a worke. 2. The greatnesse of that punishment which they must suffer for this smalenesse of their account. And would not these things grieue a man? What Christ feared.Of the second sort there were especially three things, 1. The waight of sinne. 2. The malice of Satan. 3. The wrath of God. And would not these enemies, so many in number, so mighty in power, and so terrible to behold, make a man to feare, to tremble and to sweat? And yet from all these he was deliuered, and so as the Apostle saith, He was heard in that which he feared. But to speake of these a little more particularly. What Christ fore-saw in respect of him∣selfe. First, his pu∣nishment.First, He fore-saw that he should indure; Supplicium quo nul∣lum maius, & opprobrium quo nullum vilius; A punishment, then which there could not be greater, and a shame, then which there could not be viler: The first (which was but the least thing that grieued him) yet it caused a colluctation of the flesh with paine,Aristot. 3. aethic. with death; because the flesh naturally is desirous to escape them both: Et omnium terribilium terribilissimum est mors: And of all terrible things, death is the most terrible thing, saith the Philosopher; and therefore the very remembrance of the same,Secondly, His Shame. The Shame∣full handling of Christ was more grie∣uous vnto him then all his corporall sufferings. must needs bring a terror vnto flesh and bloud. And the second, (which was the shamefull things that were to be done vnto him: to be scorned and scoffed, accounted as wicked, taken by the wicked, and condemned with the wicked, and so shame∣fully handled, shamefully deemed, shamefully dying) did a great deale more perplexe and grieue him then the former; any man wishing rather to dye, then to suffer shame; shame being a grea∣ter punishment, vnto the minde and soule; then any torture can
be vnto the flesh:Nature al∣wayes relee∣ueth the part most distressed. for nature (cleane contrary to the course of the world, which alwayes taketh part with the stronger-side, and layeth helpe vpon them that are mighty) vseth alwayes to assist the weaker part; as it appeareth plainely in the letting of bloud in the arme, or in any other place: for then nature, as it doth still send the bloud; Quasi agmine facto; as it were on heapes from all the parts of the body thither, vntill the said rupture be stopped vp againe; and so likewise, when the heart of man, which is the seate of feare, begins to be troubled with any vehe∣ment or horrible feare; then will nature presently collect the bloud about the same, for to assist it, whereby the face is left pale, and all the exterior parts, as it were voide of life: and when the face of man, which is the seate of shamefastnesse and honesty, is aspersed with shame and reproach, then presently the bloud relinquisheth all the interior parts, and gathers it selfe vnto the face, as to that part which now hath most need to be sustayned, wereby we truely say, that Pallor timentium, rubor erubescentium est signum: To blush is the signe of shame, and to be pale, is an argument of feare. And therefore, though the feare of his punishment, and of death did neerely touch him, yet to shew that the consideration of this most shamefull handling of him, did more perplexe him, his bloud did not collect it selfe vnto the heart, (though the same was much affrighted;) but leauing the heart, as it were destitute of all helpe, it flew into his face, as vnto that part, which for shame of their dispitefull vsage of him, had most neede to be assisted, and from thence, as the pretious oyntment that was powred vpon Aarons head, ranne downe vnto his beard, and from thence vn∣to the skirts of his cloathing; So this pretious bloud of Christ, gushing out chiefly at his face, it plentifully trickled downe to the ground. Secondly,The deferring of his suffering much grie∣ued our Saui∣our. As the consideration and fore-sight of these things did much grieue him; so the dilation and deferring of them, did not a little trouble him: for as the expectation of death, is ma∣ny times more grieuous vnto the affrighted flesh, then death it selfe; so was the dilation of that good, which was to proceede from his death, a great deale more grieuous vnto him, then ma∣ny deaths: for hee was most greedy of our saluation; and as the
Horse made ready vnto the battle, and hearing the Trumpets sounding, Virgil. l. 4. Ae∣neid.(Stare loco nescit, micat auribus, & tremit artus, —& fraena faerox spumantia mandit:) doth fame and fome, and cannot stand, but still striueth to goe forward; so Christ, hauing this baptisme to be baptized with, he was exceedingly pained, vntill that was ended: Quia spes quae differtur, affligit animam; Because (as Salomon saith) hope de∣ferred, or expectation prolonged, languisheth the soule; and there∣fore as Ionas sad, Irascor vsque ad mortem; I am exceedingly angry, euen vnto death; that is, because death comes not to me; for I doe seeke for death, and it flies from me; so Christ was grie∣ued vnto death;Ambr. 7. in Luc. Non ex metu mortis suae, sed ex mora redemptio∣nis nostrae; Not for any feare of his owne death, but by reason of the delaying of our deliuerance, from euerlasting death, as Saint Ambrose saith. What Christ fore-saw in re∣spct of vs.Secondly, As he fore-saw these things, in respect of himselfe, so in respect of others he fore-saw. First the neg∣lecting of his bloud.First, The small account that many men would make of this his so great a suffering; he saw how few would imbrace it, and how many would contemne it; and therefore when he conside∣red with himselfe; Quae vtilitas in sanguine suo: What profit might accrew from his bloud, knowing that the least drop of it, was of sufficient value to saue the whole world: and yet (by reason of the iniquitie and incredulity of men) that all of it, being spilt and shed, it should notwithstanding saue but a remnant; and a small company of men; it could not choose but grieue and vexe his righteous soule to see his bloud spilt in vaine: for would it not grieue any man to pay an infinite price to saue a base slaue from death, and to see that villaine presently cast him∣selfe to death, and with all his strength and wit to seeke the death of his Redeemer? this was the case of Christ; for he was willing to redeeme vs with his owne most precious bloud: and yet he saw the wicked would trample this benefit vnder foot, & account the bloud of the couenant as an vnholy thing,Heb. 10.29. and make none other vse of it, but most fearefully to sweare by it, and abuse it; and so bringing vpon themselues swift damnation: and therefore seeing euery sin grieues God, this must grieue him most of all?
O then beloued brethren, seeing, as it grieueth the Husband∣man, to see his ground well manured, still continuing barren; so it is a griefe to Christ, to see his bloud grow fruitlesse, and that it is a ioy to him, (by our conuersion) to see the fruits of his labours; O let vs neuer cause him to say;Esay 49.4. In vacuum labo∣raui; I haue laboured in vaine, but let vs truely repent vs of our sinnes, and faithfully lay hold of his death, that so both the Angels and this Lord of Angels may reioyce. Secondly, He fore-saw the great punishment and aduersitie, that should light vpon many men, and vpon many sorts of men, for,The dispersion of the Apo∣stles. Zach. 13.7. and by meanes of this his sufferings and his cruell death. As, First, Vpon his owne Disciples and decrest Apostles; for, I will smite the shepheard, and all the sheepe shall be scattered, saith the Prophet: Here Iudgement begins at the house of God:1 Pet. 4.17. These sheepe must be scattered, and so they were; for all of them did perfidiously forsake him, and the stoutest of them did plainely forsweare him, and yet he warned them of it, he told Peter of his infirmitie, but he vanted of his magnanimity,Matth. 26.34.35. he told him that he should deny him thrice, but he said he would rather die then de∣ny him at all: and he willed them all to watch; but they all gaue themselues to Sleepe; and therefore Saint Hillary saith,Hillarius l. 10. de Trinitate. that Christ, Non pro se tristis erat, neque sibi orat, sed pro illis quos movet orare peruigiles; was more sorry for them then for himselfe; and prayed not so much for himselfe, as he did for them whom he commanded to watch and pray. And Saint Ambrose saith,Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. Quod discipuli dormiunt, & nesciunt dolere pro quibus Christus do∣lebat; That his Disciples Slept, and knew not how to grieue, for whom Christ did so much grieue, to see he did so much for them, and they so little regarded him, so little regarded their owne soules, that had he not prayed for them, that their faith should not faile, Satan had not onely sifted them all like wheate, but hee would haue also blowen them away like chaffe from off the face of the earth. Secondly, Vpon that cursed Nation of the Iewes: he fore-saw how that their glorious Temple,Psal. 48.2. which was the ioy of the whole earth should be subuerted, their houses ruinated, them∣selues
slaughtered,The reiection of the Iewes. and die, some with cruell famine, and some with the raging Sword, —Ante orapatrum —Solimae sub maenibus altis. Perhaps in their mothers armes, or before their parents faces, vn∣der the very walles, and in the spatious streetes of Ierusalem, which should be made an heape of stones: and therefore Saint Ambrose,Ambr. l 10. in Luc. Aug in Psal. 88. and Saint Augustine say, Quod tristis erat pro persecuto∣ribus; That as heretofore he wept ouer Ierusalem, when he con∣sidered of her subuersion; so now it grieueth him, that this wick∣ked Nation, whom he had chosen as peculiar vnto himselfe, of all the Nations of the earth; should by their nesarious handling of him, pull downe such fearefull punishments vpon them∣selues: because indeed it grieueth God, —Quoties cogitur esse ferox; Whensoeuer, by our sinnes we doe compell him to powre out the Viall of his vengeance vpon our selues. The condem∣nation of all those that would not beleeue in him.Thirdly, Vpon all the rest of the generation of men, that would not lay hold vpon this his precious death: for hee knew full well, that not the least drop of his bloud should fall to the ground, but it should bring forth fruit, either to satisfie Gods Iustice, and to pacifie his Fathers wrath against all beleeuers in him; or else to kindle his indignation against all contemners of him; for whosoeuer will not lay hold on the benefits of his Pas∣sion, for his saluation, he shall be sure to be accountable vnto God for all his sufferings, to his further condemnation; because thy sinnes did cause them, and for thy redemption he endured them.Heb. 6.6. And because he saw so many millions of men, that would rather (as we doe) Crucifie againe this Sonne of God, and make a mocke of him, and so treade him vnder feet, rather then lay hold vpon his death, by the hand of faith; therefore it much grieued him that this great price, which he so louingly offered for our redemption, should through our owne negligence and wicked∣nesse; so fearefully redound to our further and greater condem∣nation. And these be the things hee grieued at; the greatnesse of which griefe to see his owne miseries, so vniustly inflicted vpon him, and the punishment of the wicked so iustly imposed vpon
them; combating with the greatnesse of his ioy, to see hereby the wrath of his Father appeased,The things which our Sa∣uiour feared. and the eternall saluation of his Church purchased, might very well bring him into his grie∣uous, sweating, bloudy agony. And yet, Secondly, Those things which he feared, were more grieuous things to behold, and more intollerable things to indure then these. For, First, Hee saw the waight of sinne, or of that punishment which euery sinne deserueth, which he was now to vndergoe; and this he knew to be most insupportable;Zach. 5.7. for euery sinne is like a talent of lead that presseth down the bearer, euen as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues; the very earth it selfe is not able to beare the waight of sinne,Rom. 8. Psal 37. but groaneth vnder the same vnto this day: and therefore the Prophet Dauid saith, that his iniquities were like a sore burthen, too heauy for him to beare: But vpon Christ was laid the iniquities of vs all; and he was to make a full satisfaction for them all: and he saw that no sinne could be pardoned without great sorrow, without great paine; for as no sinne is committed, but that first it is in the minde and soule, be∣fore it proceedeth out of the body, and the rule of Iustice requi∣reth: Vt per quae quis peccat, per haec & torqueretur:Cypr. de laps. & vt inde inci∣peret paena, vnde incipit crimen; That by which a man sinneth, by that he should be punished, and this punishment should there begin where his sinne began: therefore seeing we our selues were neither able nor willing to sorrow sufficiently for our sinnes, he began to be troubled and grieued in minde, and to be excee∣dingly sorrowfull for vs: and so Aquinas saith, Christus non tan∣tum doluit de amissione vitae temporalis, quantum de peccatis omni∣um aliorum. Christ did not grieue so much for the losse of his owne life, as he did for our sinnes: and so Saint Ambrose saith,Ambr. de fide l. 2. c. 3. Mihi compatitur, mihi tristis est, mihi dolet, quia pro se nihil habuit quod doleret: He pittieth me he is sad for me, because he had no∣thing, he did nothing that he should be grieued for himselfe: and therefore he bewayled and was grieued at; Non supplicia sua sed vulnera nostra, Not so much his owne death, as our sinnes: and because, as we not knowing the greatnesse of sinne, doe not know the greatnesse of that sorrowe that we owe for sinne; so Christ, knowing both, and being to vndergoe the sorrow of all
sinnes,Thren. 2.13. he did exceedingly sorrow and grieue; Magna vt mare contritia tua; and his griefe was like an Ocean Sea, bottomelesse and boundlesse. And therefore what maruell if he did excee∣dingly feare, sweat, and prostrate thus himselfe vpon his face, to pray to be deliuered from such a griefe, such a burthen? for as the Poet saith, —Gemit sub pondere currus. The strongest pillars must needs bowe, if you lay more waight vpon them then they are able to beare. Atlas en ipse laborat. Secondly, He saw the malice of Satan, and his full leaue and license, not as it was to Iob, with limitation, doe what thou wilt, but saue his life; but without restriction, the whole power of darke∣nesse was let loose to vse all his violence, and to afflict him what he could; and this our Sauiour intimateth, when he saith, That the prince of this world commeth,Iohn 14.33. and calleth that houre, the houre of the power of darkenesse: And hee knew his power to bee very great, and his malice to be nothing lesse then his power; and therefore he might well feare and pray against the same. Thirdly, Hee saw the wrath of God so infinitely kindled a∣gainst euery sinne of man, and (as it is agreed vpon by all Di∣uines) he saw now God sitting in Iudgement vpon the world, for so the words of our Sauiour sheweth; Now, that is, euen at hand, Is the iudgement of this world, and the prince of this world shall be cast out;Iohn 12.31. and himselfe bearing the sinnes of all men, stan∣ding before this Iudgement seat of God, and to vndergoe all the punishments due to man, that so he might satisfie the Iustice of God for vs: and he knew that it was a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God;Deut. 4.24. for the Lord our God (saith Moses) is a consuming fire; and therefore, as the Prophet saith, My flesh trembleth for feare of thee, and I am afraid of thy Iudgements; so what maruell is it, if the manhood of our Sauiour Christ, seeing the Maiestie of God, and the greatnesse of his fury against sinne; and it selfe now to answere for all sinnes, was brought into this fearefull agony? and was thereby moued, so earnestly to pray to God: First, Against eternall malediction in the behalfe of his Church.
Secondly, Against the insupportable burthen of corporal casti∣gation, in respect of himselfe. For, First, Hee saw that eternall damnation was due to vs for our transgressions: and he now in vs and for vs, stood to be ar∣raigned, and we in him stood to be punished; and therefore as hee said to Saul; Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? when his Church onely, and not Himselfe was persecuted; so here hee saith; Let this Cup passe from me: i. e. from me and mine, from me and all my Church, which is my Body, which is my Selfe: for this is Ʋox Ecclesiae in Christo, The voyce of the Church vttered by Christ; or else Vox Christi in Ecclesia,Galat. 2. The voyce of Christ, spoken in the behalfe of his Church;Rom. 6. Coloss. 3. because now the Church was comprised in his Body, in which it was crucified, bu∣ried, and raised together with him, as the Apostle teacheth. Secondly, He saw that his Humanity,That God would lay no more punish∣ment vpon him then his manhood should be able to support. which was to suffer the iust punishments of all sinnes, inflicted by the malice of the Di∣uell, for the satisfying of the wrath of God, was but flesh and bloud; fraile, and weake: and therefore he might well feare and pray that God would not lay heauier punishments vpon him, then his patience and obedience could endure; and so the mea∣ning of this prayer, let this Cup passe from me; should be this, viz. let it not oppresse me, for so the words immediately following seeme to shew, Not my will but thy will be fulfilled: as if he should haue said, my desire is not, that it should so passe from mee, as that I doe not drinke of it at all, and so not fulfill thy will, but that I drinking of it, to fulfill thy will, may notwithstanding be not oppressed, not subuerted, not wholly swallowed by it, that it may so passe from me as a Cup of deadly poyson, that is wholly drunke vp, and yet is at last quite voyded without the finall fall or death of the drinker. And these are the things that hee feared, and hee was heard, ; in that which hee feared, saith the vulgar Latine; or, prae reuerentia; for the reuerence and respect had of him, as Oecumenius, and Saint Chrysostome doe interpret it: God laying on him but supportable paines, and deliuering his Church from insupportable punishments. And this was the beginning of his suf∣ferings, in the Garden of Gethsemane.
CHAP. IIII. Of the treason of Iudas, of the flight of all his followers, and of the taking and binding of Iesus Christ. Three speciall things that happened in the Garden after his ago∣ny.AFter that our Sauiour had thus prepared himselfe for death by Prayer; wee finde three speciall things that befell him in that very Garden of Gethsemane. 1. The Treason of Iudas. 2. The flight of his followers. 3. The taking and binding of him. For the first, we shall the better vnderstand it, if we consider these three points. 1. What Christ had done for Iudas. 2. Why Iudas betrayed Christ. 3. How he betrayed him. First the trea∣son of Iudas.First, Saint Augustine collecteth the summe of those fauours, that Christ had conferred on Iudas, as the healing of his father from his leprosie, and his mother with whom hee is said to haue often committed most odious incest,A briefe cata∣logue of those benefits that Christ did for Judas. from the palsie; the choosing of him to be one of his twelue Apostles, the appointing of him to be his purse-bearer, and to keepe all the wealth he had; the preseruing of his life, when he with the rest of his fellowes, were well-nigh drowned in the ship;Aug. Ser. 28. ad fratres. the concealing of his theft and falshood, which our Sauiour often knew, to salue his credite; the giuing vnto him of his blessed Body and Bloud; the washing of his feet; the fore-warning of him of his fact, that hee might pray for grace; to preserue him from the Diuell: and many more benefits of lesser note, which should haue eternally obliged him vnto Christ. But here it may be demanded, why our Sauiour, knowing him to be so wicked, and that hee would betray him, would choose him to be his Apostle. Resp.I answere that Christ did it for diuers reasons, as specially these. First, That it might be no preiudice, or cause of vpbraiding
good men, that wicked men should be of the same calling,Why Christ did choose Ju∣das to be his Apostle. or profession: for it is vsuall in the world, to twitte vs, with the wickednesse of our fellowes; none so couetous, none so contentious, (say the people) as you Preachers be; alas, if some be so, wee cannot helpe it; there was a Caine in Adams house, and a Cham in Noahs Arke, and here a Iudas among twelue Apo∣stles; and therefore among so many of vs, what maruell that there should be many euill? but doe you looke, that you con∣demne not the righteous with the wicked, or grieue the good, by vpbraiding them with the faults of the bad. Secondly, to shew vnto vs,Nazian. orat. 4. de theol. that men may be called to eminent and holy places, & yet be cast-awayes: because it is not the excel∣lency, or the Sanctity of the calling, but our holy and vpright con∣uersation in our callings that makes vs acceptable in the sight of God. Thirdly, To testifie Christ his innocencie, that had alwaies his enemie, to behold his conuersation. Fourthly, For our example, to be patient,Aug. li. 18. c. 49: de Ciuitat. to suffer wicked men amongst vs. But againe, it may be demanded, why he made him his Purse-bearer, knowing him to be a thiefe? To this Aquinas answereth,Thom. in Iohn 12. that God vseth to commit his spirituall graces, to his best seruants, and his temporall gifts to those that are more worldly minded, to see if by any meanes, he may gaine them, to serue him:Why Christ made Iudas his Purse-bearer. for the worldlings will serue God many times when God blesseth them with all manner of store; therefore Christ knowing Iudas to be a couetous wretch, he made him his steward, and committed to his hands all their wealth; to see if this might moue him to bee true and faithfull vnto him: All this Christ did for him; and yet as the Prouerbe is, Improbus à nullo flectitur obsequio, saue a thiefe from the Gal∣lowes, and he will be the first that will seeke to hang thee; so Iu∣das had put all these blessings in a riuen dish, and as the Leopard is saide to be most sauage vnto them that doe most good to him, so doth Iudas here, first betray his Master, that was his best friend, and had done most good vnto him: but wee must con∣sider, Secondly, why Iudas betrayed Christ?Why Judas be∣trayed Christ. The Euangelist sheweth
briefly, that because the oyntment which was poured on Christ, was not solde for 300. pence, and put into his bagge, he went vnto the high Priests,Lex talionis. and sels Christ for 30. pence, decorum pre∣tium, a goodly price to haue for the Lord of heauen and earth: and therefore cleane contrarie we reade that 30. Iewes were sold for one pennie; but for Iudas we see how the desire of money is the roote of all mischiefe. What a horri∣ble sinne is co∣uetousnesse.— quid non mortalia pectora cogit, auri sacra fames? Or as Iuuenall saith, Iuuen. Sat. 14.— quae reuerentia legum, quis metus aut pudor est vnquam, properantis auari? What will not couetousnesse cause a man to doe? what feare of Law, what loue of Vertue, what shame or honestie can you finde in couetous wretches?Boet. 2: 5. Nam saeuior ig∣nibus aetnae, fer∣uens amor ardet habendi. For, it made Achan hide the wedge of gold, to the losse of his owne life; it made Achab a murthe∣rer of innocent Nabaoth, it made Polymnestor kill his Nephew Polydorus; and here it makes Iudas to betray his owne Lord and Master Iesus Christ, yea, and to bee the formost man of all the wicked companie, to shew withall, that as the old distich saith, Non audet stygius daemon tentare quod audet Effraenus monachus, plenaque fraudis ánus: Jerem. 24.2.None is so bad as wicked Priests: for they are like Ieremies figges; either exceeding good, or extreame euill; either most faith∣full for Christ, or most feruent for Antichrist. Thirdly, the Euangelist tells vs how he did bring to passe his wicked fact; for he gaue them a signe, that whosoeuer hee should kisse,That there are fiue kindes of kisses. the same was he: and wee finde that there are fiue kindes of kisses; the first a whoorish kisse; as Salomon saith of the Harlot, that she caught a young man, and kissed him: the second, a chaste kisse;Prou. 7.13. Gen. 29.11. as Iacob kissed Rachel: the third is a kisse of courtesie, as our Sauiour said vnto Simon the Pharise, Thou gauest me no kisse; the fourth, is a Symbolicall kisse, for a signe of loue, as the Apostle saith,Luc. 7.45. Greet one another with an holy kisse: the fift is a treacherous kisse,2 Cor. 13.12. as Ioab kissed Amasa, and presently killed him whom he kissed: and thus Iudas kissed Christ, for he had said, Whomsoeuer I shall kisse,2 Sam. 20. the same is he, hold him fast: Where obserue,
First, That he gaue them a signe, to know him;Why Iudas gaue them a signe. because it was night when they tooke him; and because Iames that was called the brother of the Lord, and was afterward Bishop of Ierusalem, was so like him,Ignat. in ep. ad Joh. si vera ep. Ignat. that it was very hard to know the one from the other; and therefore, lest they should mistake him, and take ames or some other for him, hee gaue them a signe to know him. Secondly, That this signe was a kisse,Why the signe that Judas gaue was a kisse. that he might the more cunningly worke his purpose; Nam doli non sunt doli, nisi astu co∣las; for deceits are no deceits, vnlesse they be cunningly carried, and that if this way fayled, he might as he thought, haue still re∣tained his place and credit; because he had but dutifully saluted him: And therefore he comes and kissed him; saying, Aue Rab∣bi, Master, God saue you; but herein we see, 1. His arrogancy. 2. His iniquity. First, His arrogancy, that he would presume with those lippes, vnder which was the Poyson of Aspes, to kisse those lippes, in which was found no guile; Iohn Baptist thought himselfe vnwor∣thy to vntie the lached of his shooes: and Iudas will presume to kisse his mouth: and so all wicked men are euer more presump∣tuous then the godly; and they are bold and impudent, when the Saints doe feare and tremble. Secondly, His iniquitie is herein seene, that in two words hee vttereth forth two lyes, for hee saith Aue, God saue you, to him, whom he desired to perish; and he saith Rabbi, Master, to him whom he refused to follow; and so you see sweet words, from a poysoned heart; a praying for his life, and a betraying of him to death: Ille mihi tam exosus est, quam inferni portae, Qui aliud animo occultat, aliud ore profert. An Act so horribly base, that the very Heathen man could say, he hates him as the gates of Hell, that will say one thing and doe another thing. And yet behold how our Sauiour deales with this wicked Traitor, he kisseth him with the kisses of his mouth:How our Saui∣our sought to reclaime Iudas and to bring him to repen∣tance. and what grea∣ter signe of loue: and whereas he might haue angerly and iustly reuiled him for his treachery, he doth mildly and kindly salute him, by the name of friend; and what better name could hee
vse; for Father, Wife, or Children, are but vaine names, vnlesse they be friends. O then, Si honoras dulcis domine, Inimicum, ámici nomine, Quales erunt, amoris carmine Qui te canunt, & modulamine? sweet LORD, if thou callest him friend that betray∣ed thee, how gra∣ciously wilt thou honour them, that doe serue thee? but he go∣eth on to recall him to repentance; for in saying, Wherefore ca∣mest thou, he sheweth his compassion towards him; because they be, Ʋerba miserentis, non querentis; Words of pittying him, as if he had said, al s poore wretched man, what dost thou meane to doe? to runne from God vnto the Diuell? for Christ knew well enough to what end he came: and therefore hee addeth, Iudas, betrayest thou the Sonne of man with a kisse? Iudas is thy name, a name Honourable and Noble among the Iewes; and wilt thou now so stayne it, that it shall be for euer so odious among all Christians, that not any one of them will be called by it, but distaine it as a most infamous appellation, euen for euer: Et tradis, and wilt thou proue a Traitor, to betray, yea and to betray the Sonne of man, and that with a kisse? for if thou wouldst needs betray him, why so hypocritically with a kisse? O sig∣num sacrilegum,Aug. Ser. 3. post. pal. fer. 2. de pass. ex Bosq. O placitum fugiendum, vbi ab osculo incipitur bel∣lum, & per pacis indicium pacis rumpitur sacramentum; O most horrible, and a most hatefull fact, when Warre is begun with a kisse,Tuta frequens{que} via sub ami∣ci fallere nomen; tuta frequensq, licet sit via, crimen habet. and peace is broken, vnder the colour of Peace! to proue the prouerbe true, Quicquid id est, timeo Danaos & dona feren∣tes; Whatsoeuer mine enemie doth, yet still I feare him; and I will loue rather the wounds of my friends, then the kisses or gifts of my foes least they proue like the kisses of Iudas, or the mutu∣all gifts of Hector and Aiax, to be the chiefe instruments of their destruction. Esay 5..But, quid debuit; Nay, quid potuit vltra facere, quod non fecit? What could Christ doe more to recall this Iudas to repen∣tance, then he did? O that he had had the grace, to vnderstand it, and to make a right vse of this blessed Sermon of our Saui∣our Christ; Iudas, betrayest thou the Sonne of man with a kisse? for, he desired not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent, and liue.
Yet nothing could preuaile to doe him good;Nothing can reclaime an obstinate sin∣ner. Te saeuae pro∣geuiere ferae: He was so hardened in his wickednesse, that no∣thing could bring him to repentance; to shew the fearefull case of those men, that notwithstanding all our preaching will still goe on in their old vsuall sinfull courses; and neuer turne vntill with Iudas they come, (as it is said of him) into their owne places i. e. the pit of destruction. And therefore, as Caesar said, Etiam tu Brute; So our Sauiour seeing not a stranger; but, Hominem pacis suae; Iudas, one of the twelue Apostles, his companion, and his owne familiar friend, which did also eat at his Table, yea, and dipped his hands in the same dish with him, Magnificare supplantationem, to lift vp his heele against his Master, his Maker, his Redeemer,Aug. Ser. 117. Et officio sanguinem fundere, and to betray him so treacherously with a kisse; yea, and also to contemne this his gracious Sermon, as to make no vse thereof: this must needes be a griefe and a sorrow vnto him, especially if wee consider how hee doth alwayes grieue more at our destruction, then he doth at his owne suffe∣rings, and most grieuous Passions. Now the practice of Iudas, to betray his Master with a kisse,What wee should learne from the con∣sideration of this Treason of Iudas. should teach all Masters, not to trust euery seruant too farre; for as all is not honey that is sweet, nor all gold that glistereth: So is not euery man a faithfull seruant, that saith, Haile Master, God saue you: And the reward of Iudas, to hang himselfe, to destroy himselfe, to damne his soule, and with that little gaine he got, to buy a field of bloud for others, and to purchase Hell for him∣selfe, should teach all seruants, to take heede that they betray not their masters, and all men to beware of couetousnesse. Secondly, Iudas had no sooner betrayed him, into the hands of sinners; but all his followers presently fled: his best beloued Iohn was now deiected, and the stoutest Peter did follow aloofe, & all the rest did basely hide their heads, and withdraw themselues cleane away. Not long before he had fed them with his own bo∣dy, and refreshed their spirits with his most pretious bloud; and yet now they all forsake him which should support him; and he was left alone in the hands of the barbarous souldiers: well hee might looke (as the Prophet saith) for some to haue ptty vpon him; but looke while he would, there was no man to helpe him,
no,Zach. 13.7. nor yet to pitty him; for, I will smite the shepheard, and all the sheepe shall be scattered: And what a griefe it is to a man, to see himselfe destitute of all friends, and forsaken of all his familiars; as if heauen and earth had conspired to leaue him helpelesse; let any man iudge. Thirdly, Iudas hauing giuen this signe, then the whole cohort, the whole company of armed souldiers, consisting of 1000. men, as Vatablus saith, or of 55. footmen, and 56. horsemen, as others thinke, comes in the midst of the night, with swords and staues to take him, and to lay hold vpon him; which they might haue peaceably taken in the day time, teaching in the Temple, but that as Saint Ambrose saith,Ambr. in Mat. 26. Factum congruit tempori, & per∣sonis; The fact, and the time, and the persons doe well agree; be∣cause that a worke of darkenesse, done by the children of dark∣nesse, was fittest to be done in the time of the greatest darke∣nesse: and when the souldiers had apprehended him, they pre∣sently bound his hands, and perhaps shackled his feete with chaynes;Ecce trahebatur passis priameia virgo crinibus. Virgil. Ae∣neid. 1. because Iudas had willed them before, to hold him fast; and because they would hereby fore-shew, that hee should die, they neuer vsing to bind any, but those whom they vndoubtedly purposed to crucifie: and especially, because the Holy Ghost would hereby signifie, that as Theeues are wont to be bound, so our Sauiour Christ was contented to be bound, not for his owne, but for Adams theft; he was bound for vs, that we might bee loosed from the bonds of sinne: And being thus bound, they drew him by the haires of the head, as Leo seemes to affirme, when he saith,Leo Ser. 7. de pass. Trahunt volentem trahi, & sinentem sibi fieri quic∣quid sacerdotum instinctu, popularis furor audebat; They drew him, that was willing to be drawne, and contented to suffer them to doe vnto him whatsoeuer pleased their malicious rage. And it may be, they dragged him through the brooke of Cedron,Psal. 109. and so made him to drinke of the brooke in the way, as the Psalmist saith: And thus you see how they bound him which came to loosen them;Cyril l. 11. in Iohn c. 37. as Saint Cyrill saith. O Lord Iesus, let this thy binding satisfie thy Fathers wrath; that we be not bound, hand and foot, and cast into that vtter darkenesse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. And so much for the sufferings of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane.
CHAP. V. Of the sufferings of Christ before Annas, Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate. SEcondly,What Christ suffered before his Iudges. Hauing heard some part of Christs sufferings which he vnder-went in the Gar∣den of Gethsemane; we are now to see, what hee suffered before his Iudges,First, before Annas. and first before Annas: for when they had bound him, they brought him first vnto Annas, saith the Euange∣list: but what was done here, it is not fully agreed: for Saint Augustine, and the common receiued opinion is,Origen. tract. 35. in Iohn. that he was examined here before Annas, and strooke vpon the cheeke by the high Priests seruant, and denyed the first time by Saint Peter;Tolet. annot. 8. in John. but Origen, Tolet, Iansen▪ and others thinke that here was nothing done vnto him, but that the souldiers brought him to Annas, in ludibrium, to bee mocked and scoffed at; and that hee be∣ing the chiefe of Sanhedrim, i. e. of the 72. Elders of the Iewes, & father-in-Law to Caiphas, & to be high the Priest the yeare fol∣lowing, might assent vnto their act; and perhaps giue them some money for their paines in taking of him, and for their ob∣seruance of him, to bring Christ vnto him. And I will not discusse which of these is truest, but receiuing the last as most probable,Secondly, what he suffered be∣fore Caiphas. I will passe to see what was done vn∣to him in Caiphas house: and here I finde foure speciall parts in this Scene. 1 He is examined by the High Priest. 2. He is strucken by the base seruant. 3. He is denyed by his owne Apostle. 4 He is most fasly accused by many false witnesses. First,Annas exami∣neth Christ of two things. Here the Iudge of all the world stands to be examined by a wicked man, and hee demaunds of Christ two speciall things. 1. Of his Disciples. 2. Of his Doctrine. First, of his Disciples, he asked perhaps how many he had,First, of his Disciples.
and where they were, or what was become of them; and to this our Sauiour answered nothing, because he thought it inough for them to haue himselfe,Christ would not reueile his seruants faults to shame them. one for all: and though he might haue iustly said, the one hath sold me, the rest haue forsaken me, and the stoutest of them will, as thou mayest see by and by, forsweare me, that hee knew me not; yet hee had rather say nothing then say euill of them: because, it is not good to speake euill of the tea∣chers of the people;Theodor. li. 1. cap. 11. and therefore Constantine was wont to say, that if he saw a Priest offend, hee would rather couer it with his Gowne, then suffer the same to be reuealed vnto the people; Ne inde Laicus peccare licenter aggrediatur: Lest others knowing the same, might thereby take the more liberty of sinning. Secondly, He is questioned about his Doctrine: and to this our Sauiour answereth; and, prefixing two speciall notes of a faithfull teacher, First, To teach publikely, for, I spake openly in the world, and not in any secret corners, as one that hated the light, which is a great suspition of euill;Iohn 3.20. because, euery one that doth euill, hateth the light; Secondly, To doe it in the Church of God, for, I taught in the Temple, and in the Synagogue, and in those places that are ap∣pointed for Gods seruice; He saith nothing in particular, that might commend or dis∣commend the same; but biddeth him aske those that were there, about him, what he said: for, it may be he saw some standing there that were his hearers, and could testifie vnto him what he taught; and he knew it was not the part of a wise man, either to praise or dispraise himselfe. Nec te collaudes, nec te culpaueris ipsum, Hoc faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis. And if he had spoken any thing to iustifie himselfe and his do∣ctrine, he knew that must be to small purpose; Quia illi quem pro latrone traxerunt, detraxerunt fidem; because in bringing of him there, as a theefe and a seducer of the people, they had made him of no credit, whatsoeuer he had said: and therefore hee saith, he were better to aske of them which were of better credit with him then he was, what he taught; for these doe know what I haue said. You see the wisedome of our Sauiour, and the milde∣nesse
of his answere. Yet this serued not. For, Secondly, Our Sauiour hauing thus meekely and discreetly answered vnto the demaund of the High Priest; his seruant strooke him on the cheeke; it is likely with his fist, as hard as hee could; and it is thought, this seruant that smote him,How Malabus vseth our Sa∣uiour Christ. was Mal∣chus, whose eare Christ had formerly healed; a poore beggerly slaue, which sheweth his great ingratitude; that like Aesopes Snake, he would render vnto Christ, euill for good,2 Cor. 11. and strike our Sauiour vpon the cheeke, a thing noted by the Apostle to be most disdainefull; and therefore Saint Chrysostome saith,Chrysost. hem. 82. in Iohn. Alapa nihil ignominius, nihil contumeliosius; Nothing can be more dis∣gracefull, then to be smitten on the cheeke;Chrys. hom. 2. de incompre∣hen. dei nat. and yet I read not of a word that the High Priest said to this wicked slaue; but suffered him to doe this wrong to this innocent man: a grea∣ter fault in the Master then in the seruant; because the Ma∣ster is bound to restraine the wickednesse of his seruants, as much as possible lyeth in him: but we see the indulgence of the Masters, doth incourage and imbolden wicked and most gracelesse seruants, to wrong and abuse the dearest Saints of God: they are ready to doe all wickednesse, sweare, steale, kill, and what you wil for their Masters; & as the Poet saith; Seu ver∣are dolos, ceu certae occumbere morti: and therefore their masters beare with them; and our Sauiour suffers at the hands of both. Neither is this all that he suffereth here. For, Thirdly, He is denyed, by his first, and chiefest, stoutest Apo∣stle; our Sauiour fore-told him,Of the mani∣fold infirmi∣ties of Saint Peter. that he might prepare himselfe by prayer against this temptation, (Quia tela praeuisa minus nocent) that he should deny him thrice, and yet for all his boasting, that although all men should be offended, because of him, yet would not be be offended. He doth here accumulate, and heape one sinne vpon another; for, First, He fled with the rest, and left our Sauiour all alone.First, he fled. Secondly, He waxeth cold,Secondly, he waxeth cold in loue. not onely through the coldnesse of the night, but also through feare, which driueth away the bloud, and causeth the same to hide, and to congeale it selfe, as it were in some secret corners, as the Poet saith: Gelidusque, per ima cucurrit ossa, tremor;Virgil. Aeneid. 2. A trembling feare makes all the members cold, and especially through want of
loue and affection vnto Christ; Nam si amore in deum corda in∣flammarētur, perparum aut nihil vis frigorum corporibus esset nocitu∣ra;Frigora ne possim gelid sentire profundi, Qui calet in cpido pectore, praestat amor. Ouidius ep. Leand. Heron. For, as carnall loue driueth away all cold, as Leander saith vnto Hero, So much more he that burneth with the heauenly loue of Christ, will scarce feele any outward cold: and there∣fore Christ saith vnto his beloued spouse, My head is full of dew, and my lockes with the drops of the night; and yet because he loued her, he patiently bore it all: but Peter, it may be, hearing the wicked seruants relating, how one had cast him downe to the ground, another had thrown him into the brook of Cedron, and a third had smote him vpon the cheeke; then begins to waxe pale, and fearefull, and to forsake his first loue; and therefore he had need to warme his hands at the high Priests fire, when his heart was cold in the loue of God. Thirdly, hee denieth and forsweareth his Master.Thirdly, He denyed Christ, with a lie, with an oath, with a curse and that presently, at the voyce of a Woman, a silly wench, not any of the greatest Ladies, but a poore seruing-maide that kept the doores. O quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore? What, dost thou Peter, deny Christ? who then will confesse him? for thou saidst,Matth. 16.16. that he was the Sonne of the liuing God, and dost thou now sweare, thou knowest not whence he is? Why Christ suffered Saint Peter for to fall.And yet Christ, though to humble him now that was so ar∣rogant before, and to teach vs to be afraid to fall; for if so great a pillar fell, how much easier may we be hurled downe if we be not wary? & to erect our hope, that if with this Apostle through infirmity, we do fal, we shold not despaire with Iudas, but still vp∣on our repentance trust in God;Matth. 14.31. yet as formerly, when he wal∣ked vpon the water, and began to sinke; Christ vpheld him, with an outstretched arme; so now, when he walked through the pathes of death, and was well-nigh swallowed in the gulfe of perdition; Christ looketh vpon him with the eyes of mercy; and saueth his soule by his compassionate grace: for he causeth the Cock to crow,Numbers 2.28. the dumb beast like Balaams Asse to reproue the iniquity of the Apostle; and as not respecting his owne indignity, so much as his seruants infelicity,How merci∣fully Christ preserueth Saint Peter. hee looketh backe on him that had forgot himselfe, and thereby reuiuing his memory, to thinke vpon his masters words, he sent him out to weepe bitterly, that so he might restore him mercifully.
Fourthly, Hee is falsly accused,How Christ is falsely accused of his enemies. and charged with the things that he neuer knew, that he neuer said: for they sought false wit∣nesses; for true witnesses they could haue none: and there came many witnesses against him, but they could not agree, some say∣ing one thing, some another: yet, at last comes two sonnes of Belial, children of their Father the Diuell; that peruerting our Sauiours sence, and changing his words, said, they heard him say∣ing, that he could destroy that Temple made with hands,Marke 14.58. and build another in three dayes; then the high-Priest adiured him by God, to tell them what he was; and when Christ did meekely and mldely say the truth, he furiously rent his cloathes and said, hee blasphemed against God, as if God could, or would blaspheme himselfe, then all the foolish Clearkes of this wicked Priest did say, Amen. —Et quae sibi quis{que} timebat Vnius in miseri exitium conuersa tulere. And approuing what they knew not,How all con∣sent to cruci∣fie Christ. as a iust reward for sa∣uing many of their wretched liues, they all consent to put him to an accursed death: and then followeth their acclamation, Crucifie him, crucifie him; their saying is doubled and redoubled, he must be put to death; there is nothing else will satisfie these bloud-thirsty men; and therefore, he is now to be kept by the base Sargiants, and the most barbarous Souldiers, as a condemned man; and to make themselues merry, as at a banquet of Wine, or as if they had beene at an enterlude play,What grieuous things Christ suffered after he was con∣demned by Cayphas. to passe away this tedi∣ous night, they doe eterchangeably sport at him; and first they mocke him; secondly, they beat him; thirdly they spit in his glo∣rious face, and so make that face, which the Angels desire to be∣hold, to become so deformed by reason of their blowes, and spitles that it seemed as in a leprosie,Esay 53.4. and as hauing neither forme nor beauty; fourthly, they hoodwinke him; fiftly, they beat him with their hands and fists; sixtly, they scoffingly say, prophesie vnto vs who hath strocken thee. O sweet Iesus Christ! Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando Explicet aut possit lachrymis aequare dolorem? Who is able to expresse thy bitter sufferings, to declare thy heauy thoughts, and to shew forth all thy griefe, which thou en∣durest throughout all that long and tedious night? And yet,
though he could haue easily stayed their fury, and haue sudden∣ly strucken them all starke dead, with the least word of his mouth, he opened not his mouth, but he did patiently suffer what∣soeuer they did violently offer vnto him: and when they had done what they would, they consulted and consented to send him vnto Pilate. How and whereof Christ was accused before Pilate.And here before Pilate they doe accuse him of two speciall things. First, Of his impiety against God, because (as they sayd) they found him, peruerting the Nations and people of the Iewes, and teaching them strange and pernitious doctrines; breaking the Sab∣baoth, condemning their traditions, and no wayes obseruing Moses his Law. Secondly, Of iniquity against man, no lesse then high Trea∣son against their soueraigne Emperour, because he denyed to pay tribute vnto Caesar, and said that himselfe was King. And the more to induce Pilate to beleeue them & to incense him against Christ, they said that he began in Galilee; because Galilee had brought forth many seditious and rebellious persons,Act. 5. as Iudas Galileus, Theudas, and others; and because Pilate had formerly shewed that he could not indure the Galileans,How fully they seeke to incense Pilate against Christ. not one∣ly because they were vnder the iurisdiction of Herod, which till that time was a profest enemy vnto Pilate, but especially be∣cause they had so prouoked Pilate, that he caused the bloud of many of them to be mingled with their sacrifices. And so they ioyne subtilty and iniquity both together, for a subtiller way they could not inuent, and a greater iniquity they could not effect:How false was their accusa∣tion of him. for he truely explained Moses, wherein their sophisticall Rabbies and Pharisaicall Doctors had most falsly corrupted him; and he did not onely bid them giue vnto Caesar what belonged vnto Caesar; but he paid tribute vnto Caesar, both for himselfe and for his seruants: and therefore as they had most maliciously accused him, so herein they haue most falsely slande∣red him vnto Pilate. But as the darnels may passe for wheate, vntill they be fifted; so falshoods may carry the colour of truth, vntill they be discussed; and therefore Pilate examineth the matter, and in the carriage of this businesse he doth something well, and in many things ill:
as I haue shewed at large in my treatise of the resolution of Pilate,Resolution of Pilate. pag. where I referre my Reader, for his fuller satisfaction in this point. Now Pilate hauing played his part,What was done to Christ before Herod. and vnderstanding (as I shewed you before) that he was of Galilee, hee sends him vnto Herod; and there the Euangelists say, that Herod and his men of Warre, set him at naught,Ʋbi Iesus non respondebat, ibi vt ouis sile∣bat, hoc est, sicut agnus in∣nocens non ap∣peruit os suum; vbi vero respon∣debat ibi sicut pastor docebat. Aug. in Johan. and mocked him and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe; and Christ, though they questioned with him in many things, yet answered nothing: and therefore they deri∣ded his silence, and exposed him to the greater laughter: and the Souldiers that had formerly imbrued their hands in the bloud of the innocents, doe now most impiously batter and buf∣fet the Sonne of God; and they disgorge their filthiest foame vpon his most glorious face: and to increase their owne sport and his griefe, Induunt eum veste alba, they arrayed him with a white glittering, and a gorgeous raiment. And so,The mystery of clothing Christ in white, expres∣sed. against their wils they doe herein after a mysticall manner, sufficiently testfie, both the excellent dignity, and the most innocent probitie of the man: for as Cicero saith; Color al∣bus praecipue decorus deo est; That the whitest colour is most a∣greeable to the highest God:Cicero l. 2. de legibus. hee appeared many times in white, but neuer in any other colour; and therefore, not one∣ly the Wise man saith, Let thy garments be alwayes white, but also the very Saints of Heauen are said to be clothed in long white robes,Reuel. 4. and Iuuenal saith, Sufficiunt tunicae summis aedilibus alba; that white robes are fittest for the greatest Peeres, euen for Kings and Cae∣sars, saith Iansenius. And the white colour is the chiefest note of ioy and innocency: for the Poet wishing for ioy, saith, Suma∣tur fatis decolor alba meis.Cicero pro milo∣ne meminit, A literae salu∣taris, C. autem tristis. And as the ancients by letters did ex∣presse ioy or griefe, life or death: as Υ to shew the patterne of our humane life, the lower part signifying youth, which is vncertaine which way it will goe; and the vpper part on the right side, the way of vertue, and on the left side the way of vice: and there∣fore Persius saith of this Letter, Et tibi quae sameos deduxit litera ramos Surgentem dextro monstrauit limite callem. Which one translateth thus. The branches of the letter first in Samea found,
How the An∣cients by let∣ters and co∣lours did vse to expresse diuers things.Of mans life doth shew the high way and ground: And Θ which hath a dart in the middle, was the Character of death, and therefore was wont to be set by the Iudges, as a marke vpon the heads of those that were condemned to die, whereupon the Poet saith: O multum ante alias infaelix litera Theta: And so Tau was the letter of life, so intimated by Eze∣chiel, and so expressed by the Gentiles, and vsed as a marke on them that were to be preserued aliue; euen so they did vse to ex∣presse the same things by diuers colours, as white to be the signe of innocency and absolution; and blacke to be the token of guil∣tinesse and condemnation: whereupon Ouid saith: Ouid. Met. l. 15.Mos erat antiquis niueis atris{que} lapillis, His damnare reos, illis absoluere culpa. The fashion was in ancient times, By blacke or white to expresse our crimes. And therefore certainely these things, that they should clothe him in white, before they send him vnto Pilate backe againe, —Non sine numine diuum, Eueniunt.— doe apparantly shew that they were directed herein by diuine prouidence, and declared plainly against themselues, that Christ, should rather be absolued, as an innocent then condemned for a malefactor. Yet all this would not serue, but as he was posted from An∣nas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod; so now he must be returned to Pilate once againe. And although the former Scenes were Tragical enough; yet were they nothing to these that follow; for now begins those dolefull Acts, which proue that saying to be most false; —Nullum caruit exemplo nefas, No villanous deed doth want the like;How no age did euer pa∣ralell this vil∣lany done to Christ but presidents may bee found as bad as it: for if you aske the dayes of old, and search all the Stories of the whole world, since the day that it was first created; yet shall you neuer be able, to shew me such indigni∣ties offered to any man, as was here done vnto the Sonne of God; for now Pilate by the approument of Herod, and the mes∣sage of his owne wife; who, as the Poet saith of Cassandra,
(Tunc etiam fatis apperit Cassandra futuris Ora dei iussu, nequicquam credita Teucris.) did now beginne to Prophesie; nay,How Pilats wife iustified Christ. to testifie of the truth of Christ his innocency; and therefore presently sent, and earnestly aduised her husband, to haue nothing to doe with that iust man; yea and shewed a very good reason for it; because shee had suffered many things that very day, because of him: I say Pilate hereby per∣ceiuing his innocency, and fearing his Deity, and therefore seek∣ing to loose him, deuiceth a cruell way to satisfie the Iewes, and to iustifie Christ, and so to let him goe:Bosq. de pass. dom. pag. 80. for stripping him of all his clothes, he caused sixe hangmen, sixe varlets, saith Saint Hierome, to scourge him, and whip him while they could; whereof two whipped him with rods of thornes, and when they had wearied themselues; another two whipped him with ropes,Costerus med. 24. or whip-cords tyed and knotted like a Carters whip; and when they were tyred, the other twaine scourged off his very skinne with wyres,How grieuous∣ly Christ was scourged. or little chaines of iron: and the number of his stripes, (as some report it) amount to 5400. or as others say, to 5370. or at the least according to the number of the Band of Souldiers, to 660. a scourging able to kill any man, and would haue killed him,How he was Crowned with thornes. but that he was preserued by the Godhead to indure, and to suffer a more shamefull death: and when hee was thus scourged, the Souldiers platted a Crowne of thornes, and put it vpon his head; a goodly Crowne for the King of Kings: for I read of many sorts of Crownes, as of the Triumphall, Laurall, Nauall, Murall, and such like, but neuer till this, did I reade of a Crowne of thornes; for this shamefull and this dolefull Diademe, was made like a Crowne to delude him,Osorius de Pas∣sione domini. and it was made of thornes to tor∣ment him; for it bored his head with two and seauenty wounds, as Osorius saith: and then they put vpon him a purple robe, and scoffingly si, Haile King of the Iewes;Squallentem barbam, & con∣cretos anguine crines vuln∣ra{que} illa gerens, quae circum plurima muros accepit patrios. Virgil. l. 2. Aeneid. and spitefully smote him with their hands. And after they had thus lashed him, almost vnto death, and most cruelly diuided those Azure channels of his guiltlesse bloud, they bring him out, it may be; by the haire of the head, & expose him to the publike view of the scornefull company; and Pilate saith vnto them, Ecce homo; Behold the man: Be∣hold, I say, not your King, to prouoke you the more against
him, nor yet the Sonne of God, which you say hee maketh him∣selfe to be; for if he were so, he might haue easily rescued him∣selfe out of his enemies hands: But behold a poore, silly, miserable, distressed man, and see how hee lieth disfigured with wounds, weltring and panting in a crimson Riuer of his owne bloud; and let this sufficient, yea, more then sufficient punishment, suffice to satisfie your rage against him: Quia homo qui in homine cala∣mitoso est misericors, meminit sui; Because a man pittying an affli∣cted distressed man, doth thereby shew hee is mindfull of him∣selfe, who may fall into the same case, that another man is fallen into. That we should euer contem∣plate, how Christ stood before the people in his Robes and Crowne of thornes.And therefore, let vs behold in contemplation, the counte∣nance of this man: Behold, the fairest among men, being both white and ruddie, the chiefest among tenne thousand; his head being as the most fine gold; his eyes as the eyes of Doues, by the Riuers of wa∣ters; his cheekes as a bedde of spices, and his lippes like Lillies drop∣ping sweete smelling Myrhe: And see how lauish and prodigall are these prophane and sacrilegious Cannibals of his most di∣uine and sacred bloud, and how hee stands here before these wicked Iudges, to be iudged for vs, wicked men; his strength fain∣ting, his heart panting, and his hands bound, that he could by no meanes wipe off those flouds of teares and bloud that trickled downe his cheekes, and flowed from all the pores and passages of his precious Body: And let this consideration moue vs to com∣passionate him, to condemne them that did it, and especially to detest that (that is our sinne) which was the onely cause of all this his dolefull sorrowes.Parcere prostra∣tis scit nobilis ira leonis: at lupus & turpes instant morientibus vr∣si, & quaecun{que} minor nobilitate fera est. Ouid. They vrge a three-fold ar∣gument to moue Pilate to crucifie Christ. 1. Their Law. Leuit. 24. But to returne vnto the Iewes, that most enuious and malicious people, the more Pilate did to appease them, the more they were inraged against him: for seeing how Pilate sought to loose him, they had taught that vnstable multitude of vngratefull people, for all the good workes that hee did vnto them, healing their sicke, restoring their dead, and feeding their soules with the foode of life, to cry out with one consent, Away with him, away with him; crucifie him, crucifie him: And the chiefest of them doe with a three-fold argument vrge Pilate, to condemne our Sauiour Christ. First, That they had a Law, and by their Law hee must die,
because he maketh himselfe the Sonne of God; so the ignorant and the arrogant Pharises, and the Doctors of their Law, doe accuse the Author and the Publisher of the Law; not knowing that ancient rule, Eius est absoluere, cuius est condere legem, He may lawfully abolish, which hath the power to establish any Law. Secondly, They threaten him, that if he let him loose,2. The friend∣ship of Caesar. he is no friend to Caesar; a most forcible, though not infallible reason: for who would not then, as the case stood, haue almost condem∣ned any man, rather then to be accused by so many audacious impudent men, of high Treason against Caesar? Thirdly, They doe engage themselues for him, saying,3. Their inga∣ging for him. Let his bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our Children; Doe thou the deede, let him be condemned, and if thou fearest any thing, we are wil∣ling to vndergoe the danger; let the vengeance of his bloud light on vs, and on our Children for euer. Then Pilate hauing attentiuely heard, did most diligently con∣sider all these things. And First, Musing whether he was the Sonne of God or not, He beganne to feare, both for what he had already done, in scourging and deluding him, and what hee was presently to doe,Discite iustitiam moniti, & non temnere diuos. To passe sentence vpon the Sonne of God; for he assured himselfe, the Gods would reuenge all wrongs, especially done against themselues: Mezentius felt it for a lesser fault then this,Flectere si ne∣queo superos A∣charonta moue∣bo. for he was thrust to Hell, for saying, The damned spirits should helpe him, if that the Gods would not assist him; And therefore he desires Christ to tell him, Quo sanguine cretus, From whence he was: But to this our Sauiour giues him none answere; for to what end should he an∣swere? because hee had already made knowne vnto them that he was the Sonne of God, and that his Father and he were all one: And this was the chiefest motiue, that moued them to conuent him, and perswaded them so earnestly to seeke for to condemne him. Neither would he answere, saith Athanasius,Athanas. de pas∣sione & cruce. Ne si re∣spondisset timiditate & formidine mortis, id fecisse videretur; Least if hee had done so, hee might be thought to haue done it for feare of death, and to preserue his life:Why Christ would not an∣swere Pilate, whence he was. Or (as others thinke) he would not answere, least by his eloquence he should haue escaped death; insomuch that Pilate, who vniustly condemned him, iustly admired this, that he which was wont to open his mouth in
Parables, and to teach others the way vnto eternall life, would not at this time open his mouth to speake one word for himselfe to saue his life. Secondly, Pilate being much affraide to be thought an ene∣mie vnto Caesar,Marke 15.15. and being most willing to please the people, as the Euangelist noteth, he determined to deliuer him to be cruci∣fied: And these were the motiues that caused Pilate to condemne our Sauiour Christ; and these cause many a man to sinne, when we feare man more then God;What moued Pilate to deli∣uer Christ to be crucified. and are desirous rather to please the people, then to discharge our consciences: from which two fearefull things, good Lord deliuer euery faithfull soule. Thirdly, Because Pilate knew, that for enuie the Iewes deliue∣red him to be crucified, and his owne conscience by many ar∣guments testified vnto him, how vniustly hee condemned that iust man;Math 27.24 The poor shift of Pilate to ex∣cuse himselfe. therefore that it might happen vnto the Iewes accor∣ding as they had concluded themselues, His bloud be vpon vs, and vpon our Children: He taketh water, and washeth his hands, saying, I am innocent from the bloud of this iust person; See ye to it: And then he gaue sentence that it should be as they required, that IESVS CHRIST should be presently CRVCIFIED.The sentence of Christs con∣demnation. Ah sencelesse sinnefull man, a man voide of wisedome, to commit such an horrible sinne against thy God, and to con∣demne life to death! Alas, what auaileth it thee, to wash thy hands in water, and to defile thy heart with bloud? for, how shalt thou answere this? not onely to condemne an innocent, Sed & ijsdem labijs illum condemnare quibus pronuntiaueras innocentem? But also with the same lippes to condemne him as guilty, which euen now had pronounced him guiltlesse: Surely God may say to thee, as to all those Iudges that follow thy steppes, to make a long speech to iustifie themselues,Luke 19.22. and in few words to condemne the innocent, Out of thine owne mouth will I condemne thee, O thou euill seruant; and I will iustly condemne thee to eternall death, because thou hast vniustly condemned an innocent man to death. O consider this, ye that forget God, and ye that be called Gods on Earth; cleanse your hearts from all euill, and let not your hands deale with wickednesse; so shall you be innocent from the great offence. And so you see what the Iudge of all the World suffered, before these petty Iudges of this World.
CHAP. VI. What Christ suffered in Golgotha, the place where he was cru∣cified. PIlate hauing passed sentence vpon Christ to be crucified, the Souldiers take him, and laying his Crosse, a heauy Crosse vpon his shoulders, as Isaac carried the wood wherewith himselfe should be sacrificed,Gen. 22.6. 2 Sam. 11.14. or as Vrias carried the Let∣ters of his owne death, they compelled him to carrie it so long as he was able to stand vnder it; then meeting Simon of Cyrene comming from his perambulation in the fields, they make him carrie that Crosse of Christ vnto the place of exe∣cution: and placing the same in Golgotha, which was the place where Adam was buried,Ambros. l. 5. Ep. 1. (as Saint Ambrose thinketh) they nayled and fastened Christ vnto it, vpon that very day of the weeke that Adam was created;Two things considered vp∣on the Crosse. and (as is thought) he was han∣ged vpon this Tree, vpon the very same houre of the day, as Adam did eate of the forbidden Tree. And here wee must consider two especiall things. 1. The grieuous things that he suffered.Tantum disten∣tus sum, vt cor∣pore nudo in mo∣dum tympanica pellis distento, facile possint om∣nia ossa mea di∣numerari. Bern. de pass. c. 7. 2. The gracious words that he vttered. For the first, they stretched his body, as Saint Bernard saith, and then they nayled him to the Crosse; which was a grieuous torment vnto any, but especially vnto him, because his body of all other men, was the most tender; as being onely shaped of a Ʋirgins substance, without any commixture of the male nature: and yet the most sensible parts of this tender body, must be bored and mangled by his cruell enemies; for his feete, that afore were washed with Maries teares, must now be teared with iron nayles; and those blessed hands,Bosquier. de pas∣sione Domini. p. 847. in fol. that had wrought so many wonderous workes; must now be fastened Vnto this wooden Crosse; and there he must hang vntill he die; Horrendum dictu, A most odi∣ous and a most grieuous death, and that in foure respects. First, Because it was an accursed death, so esteemed by man,1. An accursed death. and so denounced by God himselfe; where he saith; Cursed is
euery one that hangeth vpon a Tree:Deut. 21. Gal. 3.13. Tripartit. hist. l. 1. c. 9. 2. A shamefull death. And therefore Constantine the Great and good, made a Law, that no Christian should be cruci∣fied vpon a Crosse. Secondly, Because it was an ignominious and a shamefull death, inflictd chiefly vpon those slaues and seruants, that either falsly accused, or treacherously conspired their Masters death, and it was neuer imposed vpon free men, vnlesse it were for some haynous and notorious crimes, as robberie, murther, sedition, rebellion, or such like. 3. A painefull death.Thirdly, Because it was a most painefull death, for that they were fastened to the Crosse, not with any little nayles, but with bigge purposely made nayles, that might hold them sure and fast enough vnto the Crosse; so bigge were the nayles that pierced Christ his hands and feete, that being found, they were found sufficient to make a bridle and a Helmet,Socrates. Hist. l. 1. c. 17. as Socrates saith; and then the whole waight of their bodies, hanging by these parts, made their paine intollerable, and killed them at length without any deadly wound: And therefore Cicero that most eloquent man, which wanted no words to expresse any thing else, when hee came to consider of this accursed death, was brought to that passe,Cicero. Orat. 7. in ver. to that non-plus, as to say, Quid dicam in crucem tollere? What shall I say of that cruell and most painefull shamefull death of the Crosse? 4. A slow and a lingring death.Fourthly, Because it was a slow and a lingering death, for that (as the Poet truly saith) Mors{que} minus penae quam mora mortis ha∣bet, To be long in paine, is worse then death; a soone dispat∣ched riddance out of paine, being a great fauour vnto a langui∣shing life; and although in other deaths, they should be quick∣ly dispatched, and soone rid out of all their paine, yet here they hanged, either till their bloud distilled by little and little out of those wounds that were made in their hands and feete, or till they died with the extremitie of hunger; vnlesse in pittie their tormentors would by violence hasten their much desired death, by a butcherly breaking off their legges; and so dismembring of their tortured bodies, as they did vnto those two theeues, that were crucified with our Sauiour: And this was the death, the accursed, base, seruile, ignominious, and most painefull death, that our Sauiour Christ was put vnto. It is reported of Aristides,
that he dying by the bite of a Weesell, said,Aelian. de var. Hist. lib. 14. c. 4. that his death would haue been more pleasant, & more acceptable vnto him, if he had died more honourably, by the clawes of a Lyon, or a Libbard, and not by the teeth of such a contemptible beast: And what a griefe was it vnto the Sonne of God, to be put vnto this, I know not whether more shamefull, or more painefull death? And besides, it is worth the obseruing,All circumstan∣ces doe aggra∣uate the griefe of Christ vpon the Crosse. that they crucified him then, and at that time, when he had deliuered their Fathers out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage: In com∣memoration of which benefit, their Passeouer was to be celebra∣ted, and a great concourse of people was then euer present at Ie∣rusalem. And further, they did not onely exclude him out of their Citie, and put him to death without their gates, as Saint Paul noteth, but they did also consort him with the wicked, and cruci∣fied him betwixt two theeues; so cruelly they did deale, and so base∣ly they did esteeme of him. Secondly, After they had thus nayled him vnto the Crosse, in stead of the comfort of pittying him, which wee vse to shew vnto the vilest Malefactors in such extremities, and which is some kinde of satisfaction vnto the sufferer, he findes his friends forsaking him, not daring to say, Alas for him;How they scof∣fed at Christ vpō the Crosse. and he seeth his enemies deriding him in the middest of his sorrowes, and sha∣king their heads at him, and saying, O thou dissembling and di∣sloyall wretch, thou sauest others, but thy selfe thou canst not saue; thou canst destroy the Temple, and build it againe in three dayes; but thou canst not come downe from the Crosse, to preserue thy life: for if thou beest the Sonne of God, come downe from the Crosse,Why Christ came not downe from the Crosse. and we will beleeue in thee. But to this Saint Ambrose answe∣reth, O stulte & caece grex sacerdotum, nunquid impossibile erat ei, de paruo stipite ligni descendere, qui descendit è caelorum altitudine? O foolish, blinde, and sencelesse Flocke of Priests, doe you thinke it vnpossible for him to come downe from a little piece of wood, which came downe from the height of Heauen?Non venit vt se liberare, qui sub∣serutute non e∣rat, sed vt nos de seruitute redime∣ret. Ambros. in 27 Math. or doe you thinke, that your bonds, or nayles, or fastening of him to the Crosse, were able to detaine him there; when as the Heauen an all the Host of Heauen, were not able to hold him from descen∣ding, from this ascending to the Crosse? for hee came not to free himselfe from death, but to deliuer himselfe to death, tat hee
might free vs from eternall death: And therefore hee patiently suffered all, all paine, all contempts, and all disgraces; yet they still went on, from one degree of scoffes vnto another, for when he in a most disconsolate state, cried, Eloi, Eloi, Lamasabachthani, They doe in a most barbarous scoffing manner say, Stay, and see if Elias will come to helpe him: And thus was he flouted and de∣rided by all that beheld him, by the Souldiers, by the High Priests, by them that passed by, yea, by the very Theeues that were han∣ged with him. And what is this, but to adde an vnspeakeable sor∣row vnto an insufferable paine; and so (as Salomon saith) to grieue him more and more, that was already too much afflicted at the heart? How they gaue him vinegar to drinke.Thirdly, When hee most lamentably, in the middest of this hotte and grieuous conflict with Satan, sinne, and the wrath of God, cried, I thirst; they most despightfully giue him vinegar to drinke; a sweete drinke for a dying man, to augment his griefe, but not to quench his thirst. How they diui∣ded his gar∣ments.Fourthly, They take those blessed Garments, wherewith he had wrought many a Heauenly miracle, and before his face they diuide the same among the wicked, and most barbarous bloudy Souldiers. And How Christ being dead, they still raged against him.Fiftly, When he was quite dead, their malice still remained a∣liue; so that he might iustly say, — Nec mors mihi finiet iras, Saeua sed in manes manibus arma dabant. They did most furiously rage against his harmelesse Ghost, for though they saw that he was already dead, yet still they perse∣cute him; Et miles validis ingentem viribus hastam, In latus contorsit. And one of those immane and bloudy Souldiers, pierced his side with such a mighty speare, that it made so deepe a wound, as that Thomas might well put his hand into the same: And thus did our Sauiour suffer in Golgotha, in the Fields of Cal∣uarie. Diuers obser∣uable things to be considered.First, Of all sorts of men, Iewes, Gentiles, Princes of the peo∣ple, Priests, Souldiers, Masters, Seruants, Friends, Strangers, Young, Old, Male, and Female.
Secondly, In all the things, wherein it was possible for a man to suffer, as first in his friends, for they all forsooke him, and not one of them assisted him, when hee was thus persecuted by his foes. Secondly, In his good name, for they loaded him with lies, and accused him of blasphemies. Thirdly, In his outward goods, which we call goods of For∣tune; for, though he had nothing but his cloathes, yet they strip∣ped him of his garments, and left him starke naked, but what had beene abscene for themselues to see, in the sight of all men. Fourthly, In all his sences; for his holy eares heard nothing but shamefull reuilings, his bright eyes saw nothing but cruell ene∣mies, his feeling could perceiue nothing, but sharpenesse of nayles, his smelling, but their stincking spittles, and his taste but gall and vinegar. Fiftly, in all the members of his body,How Christ suffered in all the members of his body. for his head was woun∣ded with a crowne of thornes; his face was defiled with their filthy spittings, and most shamefully buffeted with their sacrile∣gious fists; his eyes dazeled with blowes, and amazed to see their outragious cruelties; his hands and feete nayled vnto the Crosse, his heart pierced with a speare; and in a word, his whole body was so pittifully rent and torne with whippings & scourgings, that we may truly say, Totum est pro vulnere corpus; That from the sole of his foote, vnto the crowne of his head,Esay 1.6. there was nothing whole in him, but wounds, and swellings, and soares, most full of grie∣uous paines. And in all this his great and grieuous sufferings, we must know them to be the sharper, in respect of the tendernesse of his body, and the senciblenesse of his spirit; because (as Ari∣stotle saith) Quo complexio nobilior, & quo mens dexterior,Aristot. l. 2. de anima. c. 9. co tene∣rior esse solet caro: The more noble our complexion, and the more quicke and nimble is our apprehension, the more sencible is our flesh of the least paine and correction; but the flesh of Christ of all other men must needes be the most tender,The tenderer our flesh, and the quicker our spirits, the more sensible wee are of paine. because (as I shewed you before) he was soly begotten of a pure Ʋirgin, and his minde must needes be most intellectiue, and most apprehensiue of all paine, because he was of that age which is most sensitiue; and therefore the sufferings of Christ, in all respects must needes be most insufferable.
And yet all this was but the least part of his sorrowes, not neere the halfe of his sufferings; for hee was to wrestle with the wrath of God, that was due to vs for our sinnes; yea, hee was to tread the fiercenesse of the wrath of God:Reuel. 15.5. And there can be no con∣flict in the World so great, as to grapple with an angry God; for the Prophet Dauid speaking hereof,Psal. 76.7. saith; Thou, euen thou, art to be feared, and who can stand in thy sight when thou art angry? The Earth trembled and quaked,Psal. 18. v. 7. & 15. the very foundations also of the hilles shooke, and were remoued, because he was wroth; yea, the springs of waters were seene, and the foundations of the round World were dis∣couered,That the suffe∣rings of Christ were a great deale more then are ex∣pressed by the Euangelists, or then can be conceiued by any man. at thy chiding, O Lord, at the blasting of the breath of thy displeasure: And if his anger and displeasure be so great, O who can endure the height of his furie? who can ouercome by suffe∣ring the fiercenesse of his wrath? And therefore, to shew how vnspeakeable, and how dangerous a ting it is for any man to define, what the vnspeakeable sufferings, and the incomprehensible feelings of Christ were, both in the Garden of Gethsemane before his Iudges, and especially vpon the Crosse in Mount Caluarie; the Fathers of the Greeke Church in their Lyturgie, after they had recounted his bloudy sweate, his shamefull crowning, his spite∣full handling, and all the other particular sufferings which are recorded by the Euangelists, they doe most excellently con∣clude, ; By thine vnknowne sorrowes, and by those infinite sufferings, incompre∣hensible to vs, though most sensibly felt by thee, Haue mercy vpon vs, and saue vs O Lord our God. And in all this, he truly suffered, not imaginarily, as some haue imagined, Sed vere languores nostros ipse tulit; But he truly bare our infirmities, and carried our sorrowes: Not as the Priests of the Law,Leuit. 10.17. which were likewise said to beare the sinnes of the people; i. e. typically in the figure, but truly in the fact, hee bare the punish∣ment of them all; and that, not in outward appearance, as mali∣cious Marcion held it,Tertull. contra Marc. l. 4. 8. Aug. de haeresi∣bus ad Quodv. heres. 46. and afterwards the Manichees maintai∣ned it, as Saint Augustine saith; but as he was a man, , physically and truly, so hee endured and suffered all these sorrowes Vere, & sicut verus homo, Most truly, as being a true naturall man, as Aquinas saith; He did most sencibly and feelingly suffer them all: for it was not with him, as it was with
the three Children in the third of Daniel,Dan. 3 27. who were cast into the fierie Furnace, and yet came out, not hauing their hayre singed, nor their coates changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them; but as Plutarch reports of Coriolanus, hee can yet shew his wounds that he suffered, and make demonstratiue expressions of his sor∣rowes, farre beyond the apprehension of any man to conceiue them. But if any man demand, how Christ being God, could suffer any paine, seeing the Deitie is subiect to no passion;Heinsius. P. 81. Heinsius answereth, that Christ suffered not in respect of the diuine nature, which he had as God, but in respect of his humane nature, which he had as he was Man; for though the Deity was in the sufferer, yet was it not in the suffering,How the God∣head suffered not, but sustai∣ned the man∣hood that it might suffer. though it was in the Body of Christs passion, yet was it not in the passion of Christs Body; but (as I shewed vnto you before, Page 438) the humanity onely suffered, and the Deity sustained it, that it might suffer; because the impotency of the one, required the omnipotency of the other; Christ being a man, that he might suffer, and being a God, that he might be able so to suffer, such insufferable things: And there∣fore we say, that Christ in respect of his Deity, remained still in∣tire, vntouched, invulnerable, impassible; and that very then when his humanity suffered, and was dead, the Deity liued impassibly, and rent the vayle of the Temple, sealed vp the Sunne-beames vnder a signet of Cimmerian Cloudes, caused the Earth to tremble, the Centurion to auerre that Christ was the true and es∣sentiall Sonne of God, and raysed vp the interred Carkasses from their graues: And we say, that it was the humane nature of Christ, that stood and suffered vpon the Crosse, and in the anguish of its passion, breathed out that dolefull complaint, euen to the God∣head hypostatically vnited vnto it, as well as to the Father, and to the holy Spirit, saying, My God, my God,Math 27.46. why hast thou forsaken me? And although the , the distance betwixt these two Natures be so great, and the disparity be so euident, as that the one was passible and mortall, the other impassible and immortall; yet are they so combined and vnited in our Sauiour Christ, that al∣though he is not one nature, yet is he but one person, one Christ, one Redeemer; and when the humanity suffered, and was buried, yet was it not, neither could it be possibly cast off, or forsaken by
the Deity, vnto which the linkes and ligaments of Gods loue, had so strictly and eternally obliged it, by an hypostaticall and indissoluble vnion. Thus Christ though he was God, yet as man, Dixit multa, gessit mira, pertulit dura, dura verba, duriora verbera, durissima sup∣plicia; He bore and suffered an incredible paine, and vnsuffera∣ble sorrowes;Esay 53. so great and so grieuous, that Esayas may well call him virum dolorum,No sorrow like the sorrowes of Christ. a man of sorrowes, and Ieremy may well demaund, si fuerit dolor, if euer there was, or if euer we heard of any sorrow like vnto the sorrow of Christ: and yet for all these paines and sorrowes; these incredible sufferings both of body and soule, he bore them patiently, hee indured them quietly, and as a Father saith, Perdidit vitam ne perderet obedientiam; hee would rather leese his life, then faile in his obedience; but as the sheepe before his shearer was dumbe, so opened he not his mouth; not for all the paines, that hee endured, not for all the sorrowes that hee sustained; so great was his Humility, according to the greatnesse of his Maiesty. But, CHAP. VII. Of the gracious words that Christ vttered vpon the Crosse. Of the seauen gracious words that Christ vt∣tered vpon the Crosse.FOr the second, that is, the gracious words that he vttered, while he stood crucified vpon his Crosse; as all the Annals and Records of time can neuer shew his paralell in his sufferings, ne∣uer man suffered as he suffered; so in all the bookes and writings of men, in all the words that were euer vttered by voyce, we shall finde not one saying equa∣lizing any one of the sayings of Christ: Neuer man spake as hee spake,Iohn 7.45. his owne enemies confesse it; and as his words were euer gracious; so neuer more gracious then now vpon the Crosse: For, First, In the mids of all his sufferings, the first words that hee spake, were not against any man, but an earnest suite for his
greatest persecuters; Pater ignosce illis, i. e. illis qui dixerunt cruci∣fige; Father forgiue them, for they know not what they doe.The first words Christ spake vpon the Crosse. A les∣son neuer to be forgotten; to teach vs all to be euer ready, not onely to forgiue, but also to pray for our enemies; for here we see Christ prayes for them, which mocke and persecute him; and therefore we must doe likewise, if we will be Christians: And this may serue also for our exceeding comfort;Bernard Heb. poenos. How effectuall was the prayer of Christ? for if hee thus prayed for them that not onely crucified him, but also cursed themselues; saying, His bloud be vpon vs and vpon our children; Yea, if his prayer was so effectuall for his persecuters, that it brought 3000. soules of them vnto his Father at the hearing of one Sermon of Saint Peter,Act. 9.1. and made Saul that most vio∣lently breathed out slaughters against his Church, to serue him most faithfully while he breathed vpon the earth; and caused that very Souldier (as some doe thinke) which pierced his heart, to be connerted by his Spirit, and to become a Christian,Chrysost. in Matth. hom. 88. Matth. 27.44. a Professor, a faithfull Bishop, and a constant Martyr of Christ; then what may we thinke that he will doe, or how powerfull will be his prayers for them that serue him, for them that loue him? Secondly,The second saying of Christ vpon the Crosse. After that the theeues had most contemptuously mocked and flouted him, as Saint Matthew testifieth; one of them seeing and considering not onely how vndeseruedly hee was condemned, but also how patiently he endured all his paines, and how piously he prayed for his greatest enemies;Luke 22.42. hee began to relent, and to repent him of his former reuiling of him, and to conceiue some hope of some fauour from him, and said; Lord remember me when thou commest into thy King∣dome; our Sauiour presently answered, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise; a most sweet and comfortable answere,Verse. 43. vn∣to a most comfortlesse malefactor: No sooner had he requested, but he obtained pardon, and was acquitted from the death of his soule, though he suffered the death of his body; yea, and when he desired but to be remembred, he was granted presently to be admitted vnto euerlasting happinesse; for, This day (saith Christ) shalt thou be with me in Paradise; and from a malefactor on the Crosse, thou shalt be translated to be a Martyr in Hea∣uen. To teach vs, To giue to them that aske, and from them that
seeke, neuer to turne away our face; and to assure vs that if we pray to God, we shall be heard, we shall be helped. The third say∣ing of Christ vpon the Crosse. Iohn 19.26, 27.Thirdly, After he had thus kindly dealt with his foes, hee turnes himselfe vnto his friends, and saith vnto his Mother, Wo∣man behold thy Sonne; and to his beloued Apostle Saint Iohn, hee saith, Behold thy Mother; to shew that as neuer man so pittyed his foes, so neuer man so loued his friends as he did; and to teach vs by his example, neither in prosperity, nor in aduersity, to forget that dutie which we doe owe vnto our Parents. The fourth saying of Christ vpon the Crosse. John 4 34.Fourthly, When he had gone ouer those in particular, hee said, I thirst, not so much for any drinke, as for the health and saluation of vs all; for this was meate and drinke vnto him, to doe his Fathers will, to pacifie his Wrath, and to satisfie his Iustice, and so to bring many sonnes vnto glory; to teach vs that if Christ in the mids of his sorrowes did so much thirst for our health, how much more should we hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, and after the saluation of our owne soules, and not (as we doe) thirst and wither away for thirst, after the pride and pompe of these worldly vanities? The fift saying of Christ vpon the Crosse.Fiftly, Hauing shewed his loue to his foes, to his friends, to all mankinde, he returned vnto himselfe, (for as yet he seemes to haue forgotten himselfe, and his owne paine, through the ve∣hemency of his loue which he bare vnto others) and not one∣ly perfectly seeing, but also sensibly feeling, the incomprehensible paine and sorrow, that through the fiercenesse of Gods wrath, was throughly inflicted vpon him, and which he had already so long sustained for our sinnes; he lifts vp his eyes, and sends forth those words with a dolefull voyce,Matth. 27.46. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Not that he was or could be forsaken of the Godhead, so hypostatically vnited vnto it, but to shew vnto vs, what infinite sorrowes he then suffered aboue all that we can con∣ceiue or thinke; and to teach vs in all distresse, to haue our chiefe recourse to God; & in all humility, to expostulate with his Maie∣stie, why he should create vs, to forsake vs; for so with Christ, we may be sure to be heard and releeued in what we feare, and in good time to be deliuered out of our distresse. The sixt saying of Christ vpon the Crosse.Sixtly, When Christ saw that the Scripture, in euery particu∣lar thing that was written of him vntill his death, was fulfilled,
he said, Consummatum est, All is finished;Iohn 19.30. not onely to declare vnto vs that by his death, the royall Law was fulfilled, and the redemption of all mankinde was now fully effected; but also to teach all Christians, to finish the course of their life according to the will of God. Seauenthly,The seauenth and last say∣ing of Christ vpon the Crosse. Luke 23.46. When he considered and vnderstood all things that were to be done of him, to be fully ended, he saith; Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit; to teach euery man, especial∣ly in affliction, to cast himselfe in sinum diuinitatis, euen into the armes of Gods protection, and so to relie wholly vpon God, as vpon a sure foundation, and as at all times else so chiefly when we see death approaching neere to vs, to commend our soules into the hands of God, euen as our Sauiour did.Many worthy obseruations to be conside∣red in the manner of Christ his crucifying, Iohn 19 23. Thus Christ suffered, thus he preached, and thus he prayed vp∣on the Crosse; and in this time of his suffering, it is ob∣serued. First, That as he bowed the Heauens and came downe to be in∣carnate and made flesh; so here he boweth his head, to imbrace vs, and to kisse vs with the kisses of his lips Secondly, That his armes were extended and stretched out,Psal. 22.16. to receiue all men throughout the compasse of the whole world into his grace and fauour againe. Thirdly, That the nayles were fixed through his hands and feete, not onely to shew that hereby thy hands are inlarged to doe good workes, and thy feet are set at liberty,John 20.25. that thou maist runne the way of Gods commandement; but also to teach vs how the remembrance of his Passion should be so fixed in our hearts, as that nothing in the world should be able to roote it thence. Fourthly, That he was vnstripped of his garments, and his body extended naked vpon the tree,Iohn 19.23. to shew that hee forsooke all to redeeme vs, that all things are patent and open in the eies of God, and that we poore sinnefull men are miserable and na∣ked of all goodnesse, vntill we be clothed with the righteous∣nesse of Iesus Christ. Fiftly, That his side was opened with a speare, to make way for the effusion of his bloud, to satisfie for our sinnes,Iohn 20.34. and to make roome for vs to come neerer to his heart; and to hide our selues
with Moses,Exod. 33.32. in foramine Petrae, in this sluce of his side, in this hole of the Rocke, vntill the anger of God be ouer-past. And, Many other points of great moment, I might here shew vn∣to you, as the darkning of the Sunne for shame and sorrow to see the Sonne of God put to such a shamefull death; the quassation and trembling of the Earth, and cleauing of the Stones, for horour to beare her Maker dying, and to condemne the most cruell hardnesse of a sinners heart, that seeing the Stones renting, will not relent from his sinnes: and the cleauing of the Temple from the top to the bottome, to shew that the Leuiticall Law should be no longer a partition wall betwixt the Iewes and the Gentiles; and that the way to Heauen is now made open to all beleeuers, but that to speake all I might of this point, would inlarge a Treatise into a Ʋolume;That it is vn∣possible for an one man to expesse all the paticu∣las of Christ his Passion. and that indeed the Witte and Lear∣ning of any one man, is no more able to expresse all the myste∣ries and most excellent points that wee might collect and learne from the Passion of Christ; then one poore Fisherman is able to catch all the Fishes in the Ocean Sea: And therefore commending all vnto your meditation, to muse vpon the parti¦culars of this great worke, that was once done that it might ne∣uer be forgotten: I will end this point of his Passion; and pro∣ceede vnto the third part of my Text, which is the necessitie of his suffering. For thus it behooued Christ to suffer.
PART. III. CHAP. I. Of the necessity of Christ his suffering. THirdly, Hauing heard the chiefest particu∣lars of the sufferings of Christ, wee are now to consider the necessitie of his suffe∣ring, expressed here by Christ himselfe, in these words,That there is a threefold necessity. Thus it behoued Christ to suf∣fer. Touching which we must consider that there are three kinds of necessities. The first is an obsolute necessitie, as when a thing in regard of the nature of it, cannot be other∣wise; so the Sunne mooueth, and the fire burneth, as wee see, necessarily: because it is the propertie of their nature so to doe, as it is for euery light thing to ascend, and for euery heauy thing to descend downewards towards the center. The second is, a necessity of constraint,That Christ suffered, be∣cause he wil∣linly gaue himselfe to suffer. as when a malefactor is constrained, and must necessarily suffer, whether hee will or not; because the sentence of the Law hath passed ouer him, and his strength is not sufficient to saue himselfe. And in these two sences our Sauiour Christ was not of ne∣cessitie for to suffer; because God might, if he had would, haue vsed a 1000. other wayes to haue saued man, without the death of his onely Sonne: and there was neither Law to inioyne him, nor any force that could compell him, for to suffer; for he saith Abba Father, all things are possible vnto thee; and,Marke 14.36. he could pray to his Father, and haue more then twelue legions of Angels to haue assisted him: And therefore no absolute necessity, that he should suffer, Sed oblatus est quia voluit; But he was offered vp for vs, because he would; he gaue his soule an offering for sin,Esay 53.10. & he yeelded vp himselfe into the hands of his enemies; he could but he would not be rescued; and he gaue Pilate power against himselfe:
for vnlesse he would, hee needed not to haue suffered; Iustice could not seize vpon him, because he was a Lambe without spot; and constraint could not compell him, because all things were possible vnto him, and he had all the Angels at his command: and therfore as the Prophet Esay saith, that he did beare the bur∣then imposed by his Father,Esay 63.6. so he did assume the same himselfe; & S. Paul saith,Rom. 8.32. that as God gaue Christ for vs, Rom. 8.32. So Christ gaue himselfe for vs: and our Sauiour saith; No man taketh my life from me,Gal. 2.20. but I haue power to lay downe my life, and I haue pow∣er to take it vp againe: and so it was, that he himselfe layd downe his life,Iohn 10. as a man layeth downe his garment; for it is obserued by the Euangelists,Crucem sustinuit voluntate non necessitate. S. Hieron. in Esayam. c. 53. Iohn 19.30. that when he would die, he seeing that impotent man could not take away his soule, he bowed downe his head, and gaue vp the Ghost, as calling and yeelding vnto the stroke of death; which otherwise durst not for feare, to approach him: and so Christ shewed his power in weakenesse: for though it be a great infirmity to die, yet so to die is an argument of infinite Maiestie:Nazian. & Bern. Ser. 4. Hebdom. paenosae. and Saint Hierome doth well obserue, that the Centu∣rion hearing his prayer with a loud voice, to shew that he was farre inough, and free inough from the touch of death; and seeing him, Statim spiritum sponte demisisse, tradidisse, (saith Saint Iohn) emisisse (saith Saint Matthew) and presently to haue yeel∣ded,Et quod emit∣titur volunta∣rium est, quod amittitur ne∣cessarium. and most willingly to haue sent forth his Spirit out of his body, as Noah sent his Doue out of the Arke; Commotus signi magnitudine; being troubled with the greatnesse of that won∣der, hee said forthwith, truly this man was the Sonne of God: So wonderfully strange was this his yeelding vnto death;Hierom. q. 8. ad Hedib. Aug tract. 119. in Iohn. and so Saint Augustine largely expresseth the same: to shew vnto vs that the laying downe of his life, was no imposed punishment a∣gainst his will, nor any forcible inuasion of death vpon him, but a voluntary sacrifycing of himselfe for sinne, and a tende∣ring of his death to satisfie Gods wrath for our sake. The third is not an absolute, not a primatiue, not an imposed necessity, but a voluntarily assumed necessity, of conueniency; in respect of the end, as armour and weapons are necessary for him that goeth forth to fight: or a necessity by consequent, presup∣posing the decree and ordinance of Almighty God: and thus it was necessary that Christ should suffer, because it was the best
and most conuenient way that God in his wisedome saw fittest,In what sense it was necessa∣ry for Christ to suffer. Esay 53. to performe that great worke of mans saluation; and because God had promised that the Messiah should suffer, should be slain: and therefore Christ saith vnto Peter, that if he were rescued out of the hands of his enemies, How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, which said, that thus it must be? for God had decreed,Dan. 9.26. Matth. 26.54. Esay 53.14. or∣dained, and reueiled in his Scriptures, that Christ should die. CHAP. II. The instrumentall and efficient causes of the sufferings of Christ. BVt because the necessity of euery thing depen∣deth vpon the causes that doe necessitate the same, as euery man must die,Of the causes which did ne∣cessitate the sufferings of Christ. because hee sinned against his God, and euery compound body must be corrupted, because they are all compo∣sed of elementarie substance, and indued with re∣pugnant qualities, therefore we must vnderstand the causes which did necessitate Christ to suffer, if we would truely know how and why it behoued Christ to suffer. Now for the causes of Christ his suffering, I finde them to bee manifold, and especially, 1. Instrumentall. 2. Efficient. 3. Finall. First, The Instrumentall causes of Christ death, I find likewise to be foure-fold. 1. The enuy of Satan. 2. The malice of the Iewes. 3. The couetousnesse of Iudas. 4. The desire of the people. First.First, the enuy of Satan. Satan whom he had often vanquished and dispossessed of mens soules and bodies, was most obstinate in malice against him, and thinking now to haue fit opportunity, hauing as it were leaue to doe what he would or could doe vnto him, hee entreth
into the heart of Iudas (saith the Euangelist) and so,Iohn 13.27. no doubt he did into the hearts of many of the rest, and together with them, he complotted all this most exquisite torments of purpose to be reuenged on him,Iob 1. and to see if by this meanes hee could bring him, as hee saith of Iob, to curse God and die, that so hee might haue him as a prey, which otherwise he feared would de∣stroy him: And this our Sauiour intimateth saying, I was daily with you in the Temple,Luke 22.53. and ye stretched forth no hands against mee, but now this is your houre and the power of darknesse; i. e. now is Sa∣tan let loose,Foure speciall things inraged Satan against Christ. now he hath leaue to rage, and now I am set as a Butte for him to shoote all his shafts at mee. And we find foure speciall reasons that might moue Satan the more infinitely to rage against him: As, First, the good∣nesse of the man.First, the goodnesse of the man, for the better any man is, the more cruelly is Satan euer bent against him: The things that hee possesseth are in peace; but the more godly we be, the more wee shall be persecuted of him: and therefore Christ being without sinne, he would doe his best, to heape vpon him all sorrowes. Secondly, the rebukes he had receiued from Christ.Secondly, The manifold checks and rebukes that he had for∣merly suffered at the hands of Christ, for so the Euangelists tell vs that Christ had often rebuked the vncleane spirits, and comman∣ded them to hold their peace; and therefore he enuyed him, and hated him, and would now be reuenged on him; such is the nature of the wicked when they are reproued. Thirdly, the victories of Christ.Thirdly, The many victories that Christ had formerly ouer Satan, as in the Wildernesse, in a single combate, and when hee dispossessed him out of those miserable creatures whom he tor∣mented. Fourthly, the losse of his ser∣uants.Fourthly, The losse of those his slaues, which Christ had al∣ready freed from his subiection, and of all those hee feared Christ would free, if hee should not now subdue him. Haec se∣cum.Nec dum causae irarum saeui{que} dolores excide∣rant animo. And therefore considering all these things, and knowing that sometimes; Victis redit in praecordia virtus; The conquered haue happened to become conquerors, he resolueth with him∣selfe like a desperate man, either to kill, or to be killed: and in that resolution,Ʋna salus vi∣ctis nullam spe∣rare salutem. hee commeth forth, hauing great rage against our Sauiour Christ; and therefore (as the prouerbe is) He must needs goe whom the Diuell driues: So he must needs suffer, which
like Iob, hath Sathan for his tormentor, especially being as hee was, so inraged against our Sauiour Christ; and hauing now leaue to impose vpon him the most exquisite torments that he could deuise. Secondly, The Iewes did maligne him,2. The malice of the Iewes a∣gainst Christ. and euen hated him vnto the death: And as the Psalmist saith, Astiterunt reges terrae, The Kings of the Earth stood vp; and the Princes tooke coun∣sell together, against the Lord, and against his Christ;Psal. 2. So we finde that the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Herodians hunted after him, as for a Partridge vpon the Mountaines; they watched all his wayes, and sought to intrap him in all his words, and to take him, that they might condemne him. Thirdly, Iudas for very griefe,3. The couet∣ousnesse of Iu∣das. Marke 14.5. that he had lost the price of that Oyntment, wherewith the Woman annointed Christ, and which he had valued at three hundred pence, went out as I shew∣ed you before, and sold Christ for thirty pence, and then betrayed him into the hands of sinners. Fourthly, Christ being treacherously betrayed,4. The desire of the people violently appre∣hended, and most falsly accused, by the Sonnes of Belial; the High Priests for very malice that they bore against Christ, and for feare that the Romans, if they let him escape, would come and take away that rule and authoritie that was left them; thought him worthy to die, and deliuered him vnto Pilate, and did teach the ignorant, ingratefull, and vnconstant multitude, most earnestly to desire the death of Christ, saying, Crucifie him, crucifie him; and therefore Pilate for feare of the Priests, and to please the people, when he had scourged Christ, condemned him, and deliue∣red him to be crucified. And yet all these were but instrumentall causes of these mani∣fold sufferings of Christ, there were other more efficient, and farre greater causes then all these: For, Secondly, The efficient cause of Christ his death,The efficient cause of Christ his death. Esay 53.10. was God him∣selfe; for so the Prophet Esay saith, It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to griefe; to bruise his body with tortures, through the malice of the Iewes towards him, and to strike his soule with griefe through the mercy of God towards vs. And so the Prophet Ieremie speaking of these sufferings in the person of Christ himselfe, saith, That they were sorrowes and sufferings; Quae
fecit mihi Deus,Lament. 1.12. That God him∣selfe laide all this punish∣ment vpon Christ. Whereby God hath afflicted me: God who is termed, A deuouring fire, and an ouer-flowing torrent of wrath, doth now make our Sauiour Christ, as the onely Butte to shoote at him all the shafts of his furie; he openeth him, and powreth into him all the vials of his indignation; and as Iob complaineth, That the terrors of the Lord did set themselues in array against him: So Christ when he saith;Mar. 14.34. ; My soule is in∣compassed with sorrowes on euery side, sheweth how God had set himselfe against him; yea, though God afflicteth sometimes in mercy, euen as a Father when hee correcteth his dearest Childe; yet is he here said to haue done this, In the fiercenesse of his wrath: And therefore how could Christ choose but suffer? for when God will smite, who is able either by strength or wit to escape out of his hands? Why God af∣flicted Christ.But here it may be well demanded, what moued Gods wrath to be thus kindled against Christ? for God hateth nothing but sinne; and in Christ there was no sinne, neither was any guile found in his mouth: And therefore seeing God neuer doth as Annas did, to cause Christ to be smitten, without a cause; why should God be so much displeased, as thus grieuously to punish his onely Sonne, in whom hee was alwayes well pleased, and with whom he was neuer in any wayes offended? Dan. 9.27. God afflicted Christ for vs, and not for himselfe.To this wee must answere, with the Prophet Daniel, that the Messias must be slaine; but not for himselfe: for hee tooke vpon him the person of vs all; and if a man that oweth nothing, be∣comes a surety for a debtor, if the principall becomes bankerout, the surety shall be compelled to make a plenary satisfaction, and he must pay that which he neuer tooke: And therefore Christ vn∣dertaking the payment of our debts, and to discharge vs from Gods wrath to come,Esay 53.4, 5, 6. He tooke vpon him our infirmities, hee was wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our transgressions. Luc. 22.64.And so if the tormentors should say, as once they did, Prophe∣sie vnto vs who it is that smote thee; We may quickely become Prophets, and most truly answere for him, that our sinnes smote him, our iniquities whipt him, our pride crowned him with a crowne of thornes, our drunkennesse gaue him that vinegar to drinke; and in a word, our sinne, our grieuous sinne, what sinne soeuer it be, did thus haynously murther Christ, and fast nayled
him vnto the Crosse: Quia solum peccatum homicida est,Our sinnes crucified Iesus Christ. For alas it was not Pilate, nor Caiphas, nor any one of that complicie of confederate Agents, that were the efficient cause of his death; for they were but the instruments and executioners onely of that punishment, which our sinnes, the sinnes of each man had laide vpon him; and the Executioner cannot be said properly to be the cause of that mans death, which by the Law is adiudged to die: but to say the truth, our sinnes haue killed the Sonne of God. And therefore as Nathan said vnto Dauid,2 Sam. 12.7. Thou art the man that did the deede; So I may say to euery sinner, Thou art the man, for whose sinnes, God in the fiercenesse of his wrath, did thus punish and afflict his onely Sonne. O that this would make euery one of vs, to crie out with Io∣nas, Propter me haec tempestas, I am the cause of all this troubles,Ionas 1.12. of all this stormy windes and tempest; Take me and cast me into the Sea: And as Dauid, hen he saw the miserable death of the peo∣ple for his sinne, was vexed at the heart, and cried vnto the Lord, saying; Behold, I haue sinned, and I haue done wickedly,2 Sam. 24.17. but these sheepe what haue they done? So I wish that euery one of vs would see it, and say it; It is I Lord that haue sinned, but for this innocent Lambe, this harmelesse Doue, alas, what hath he done? And I hope this would make vs to hate and detest our sinnes, when we consider that they were the onely murtherers of the Sonne of God. You see then, that as in the Law it was ordained that a man should bring his Beast to the doore of the Tabernacle, and should put his hand vpon the head of it, when hee offered the same for a burnt offering vnto God, to shew vnto vs, that the man himselfe had indeede deserued to die,Leuit. 1.4. and that the Beast was onely slaine for his offences: So here our Sauiour Christ was put to death, not for any cause of his owne, but as Saint Peter saith,1 Pet. 3.18. The iust suffered for the vniust; he was wounded for our sinnes, and crucified for our transgressions. But then againe it may be demanded, What moued Christ to vn∣dertake our debts. Resp. why should he vnder∣take our debt, and make satisfaction for our sinnes, when as wee had no wayes deserued any kindnesse at his hands, and could by no meanes requite so great a benefit. I answere, That it was requisite and necessary, that he should
suffer for our sinnes, to fulfill the truth of God, because hee had promised that the seede of the Woman should breake the Serpents head;Gen. 3.15. Dan. 9.26. and that the Messias should suffer for our sinnes, and be bro∣ken for our transgressions.Esay 53.5. And the Father promised this for none other cause,The loue of God to man∣kinde, moued God to doe all this for vs. but this; Because he loued vs: For God seeing vs in such a miserable state, as we had made our selues by sinne, was moued with compassion ouer vs, and was contented to giue his one∣ly begotten Sonne to be crucified for vs, rather then we should be eternally separated from him. So our Sauiour saith, God so loued the World; i. e. So admirably, so exceedingly, and so in∣comprehensibly,John 3.16. That he gaue his onely begotten Sonne; that is, to die for vs, That whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue euerlasting life: And so Saint Paul saith, God setteth out his loue to∣wards vs, seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for vs. And surely it was a farre greater argument of his loue, to giue his Sonne to die for vs, then if hee had forgiuen our sinnes, and acquitted vs without any satisfaction at all; And therefore Saint Paul speaking of this loue of God, calles it, Too much loue, as the vulgar Latine reades it: Deus propter nimiam charitatem, God through his great,Ephes. 2.4. or too much loue, wherewith he loued vs, hath quickened vs with Iesus Christ. And this great loue of God will appeare the greater, if wee consider, that this Sonne of God, which hee gaue to die for vs,Omnis in Asca∣nio Charistat cura parentis. was not onely his onely begotten Sonne, which was very great, that hauing but one onely Sonne, he would giue that one, to die for vs; but was also such a Sonne, in whom onely God was well pleased, and with whom he was neuer offended, as I shewed vnto you before. And as the Father shewed, Tantam charitatem, so great loue, in giuing his Sonne to die for vs; so the Sonne shewed the like equall loue, in being so willing as he was to suffer for vs: for in the beginning, or in the volume of the Booke it is written of me, (saith Christ) that I should fulfill thy will O God;Hebrewes 10.7. and I am content to doe it: That is, I am as willing and as ready to fulfill it, as thou art to conceiue it; yea, I am grieued, I am pained, till I haue fulfilled it: For it is meate and drinke to me (saith Christ) to doe my Fathers will. And therefore once againe, behold the great loue wherewith Christ hath loued vs: Surely (saith Saint Bernard) Dilexisti me magis quam teipsum, quia pro me mori voluisti; Thou hast loued
me more then thou didst thy selfe, because thou gauest thy selfe to die for me: For greater loue then this hath no man,John 15.13. that a man should giue his life for his friends; especially for his enemies;Rom. 5.8. as he did for vs, Cum inimici essemus, While we were yet sinners, nd regarded neither him, nor our selues:Bern. de Caena Domini Ser. 13. And therefore Saint Bernard doth most truly say, that he did this, Tanto dignantius quanto pro minus dignis; So much the more wonderfully worthy of loue, by how much the lesse worthy we were of his loue. And in very deede, there is no man breathing,No Creature able to express the great loue of Christ to mankinde. that is able to expresse how great was the loue of Christ towards mankinde. But my conscience is my witnesse, (O my Sauiour) what I haue done to thee, and thy Crosse doth witnesse what thou hast done for me; for thou wast God and I a man, and yet thou a God woul∣dest be made man for me; yea, to become exiled, poore, and base for vs, that were the vilest of all Creatures, poore, and base misera∣ble sinners: And not onely so, but also to die a most cruell, bitter, and a shamefull death, to deliuer vs from eternall death. O what couldest thou haue done more for vs, that thou hast not done? The like example cannot be found in any History;Rom. 5.7. for one will scarce die for a righteous man: It may be they will ride and runne to saue a good mans life; but to die for another, we shall scarce finde any that will venter it.Titus Liu. De∣cad. 1. l. 2. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 6. It is true that the Curiatij and the Horatij are reported, to haue aduentured their liues, for the li∣bertie of their Countrey: And so Decius, Curtius, and Codrus did freely offer themselues to death, for to preserue their peoples life; but they did this either for ambition, to be honoured for their facts, and to be numbred among the Gods; or else in desperation of their liues, to be ridde out of their griefe, when they saw none other helpe of their miseries; but Christ when there was no necessity to compell him, did all this, and farre much more then I haue shewed, for vs; And that not onely, Sine nostris meritis, sed cum nostris demeritis; When we deserued no good,Bern. Ser. 15. in Cant. but especially when we were worthy of so much euill at his hands, as was due to most deadly enemies; as Saint Bernard saith.
CHAP. III. Of the finall causes why Christ suffered, both in respect of Men, and in respect of God himselfe. AND so you haue seene the instrumentall cau∣ses of Christ his death; and you heard the ef∣ficient cause, why God punished Christ; for vs, and for our sinnes; and why for vs; because he loued vs with a great, exceeding, incomprehen∣sible loue: And how this should teach vs, that as our hearts doe hate Iudas & Pilate, and all the rest of our Sa∣uiours bloudie persecutors, which were but the Instruments of his death; so much more should we loath and detest our owne sinnes, and wickednesse, which were the maine principall cause, that moued God thus seuerely to punish him. And now it rest∣eth,The final cause of Christ his death. that we consider the finall cause thereof; and I finde that to be two-fold. 1. In respect of Men. 2. In regard of God. 1. In respect of Men.First, In respect of Men, I finde it likewise to be two-fold. 1. The sauing of all the Elect. 2. To make the reprobate without excuse. Math. 20.28.For the first, Our Sauiour faith, That he came to giue his life a ransome for many, and to saue those that were lost; And so Saint Paul saith,Gal 4.4. That Christ was made vnder the Law, to redeeme them that were vnder the Law; and that Iesus Christ was sent into the World to saue sinners. Now wee must know, that as Bellarmine noteth, there are diuers kindes of redemption; as, That there were diuers kindes of re∣demption.First, By Manumission, as when the Lord did willingly of his owne accord let his slaues goe free. Secondly, By permutation, as when one prisoner was exchan∣ged for another. Thirdly, By force, as when by their friends they were rescued out of the hands of their enemies. Fourthly, By a ransome, as when a price, thought counter∣uaileable
to the prisoners, was paide for the deliuerance of the Captiues. And thus Christ redeemed vs: for we had solde our selues (or rather giuen away our selues; because we doe it for such trifles, for nothing, that it deserues not the name of a sale,) vnder sinne; and we had past away our selues vnto Sathan, and he would neuer suffer vs freely to be freed out of his hands, nei∣ther was there any force nor friends that could any wayes restore vs vnto our former dignitie; and therefore Christ came to re∣purchase vs; that is, to buy vs backe againe vnto God: And though we fell our selues for nothing, yet Sathan like a cunning Merchant, that knowes well the worth of Soules, would not part with vs at any reasonable rate; and therefore Christ was faine to pay for vs, not gold, or siluer, or any such like corruptible thing,1 Pet. 1.18. but his owne deare and precious bloud: So dearely was he faine to pay for vs, so dearely it cost him to redeeme our soules. And so Christ came and offered himselfe,How deerely it cost Christ to redeeme vs. vpon the Altar of the Crosse, as a sufficient sacrifice to pacifie his Fathers wrath, and to satisfie his iustice to saue our soules; yea, the soules of all them that beleeued in him from the beginning of the World to this present day,That the bloud of Christ was the price to saue all men, as well before his comming, as now after his comming. Gal. 4. and so forward to the finall period of all flesh: For, It was not the bloud of Goates, or Calues, that was the true propitiatory Sacrifice, for the sinnes of the Fathers that liued vnder the Law; but it was the bloud of Iesus Christ, that was onely figu∣red and signified by these Leuiticall shadowes, by the Paschall Lambe, by the Brazen Serpent, and by whatsoeuer else that was giuen them as a Schoolemaster to bring them vnto Christ, which pur∣ged their consciences from dead workes, to serue the liuing God: For he is said to be the Lambe slaine, that is, slaine in the figure,Reuel. 13.8. slaine in the purpose of God, and slaine in the vertue of his pas∣sion, to euery one that beleeueth him to be slaine for him, from the beginning of the World: And therefore, all those that went before, and all those that came after, cried; Hosanna to the Sonne of Dauid.Math. 21.9. For as the looking to the Brazen Serpent, was the onely meanes to saue all those people from death, which were bitten by the fierie Serpents, whether they were before it, or behind it,Numbers 21.9. or on ei∣ther side of it, neere it, or farre from it; so the beleeuing in the death of the Sonne of God, was, and is the onely meanes to pre∣serue all men from the sting of sinne; aswell those that went
before him,Et vnde mundi Philosophus eru∣buit ibi Aposto∣lus thesaurum reperit, & quod illi visum est slultitia, Aposto∣lo factum est sa∣pientia Quest. That the me∣rit of Christs suffering, de∣pends vpon the worthi∣nesse of he person. Resp. as those that doe come after him: And therefore, Quod est grande ludibrium impijs, est grande mysterium pijs; The death and passion of Iesus Christ, which is foolishnesse vnto the World, is the sole comfort and consolation of all Christians, as Saint Augustine doth most sweetly comment vpon those words of the Apostle, God forbid that I should reioyce in any thing saue in the Crosse of Iesus Christ. Gal 6. But here it may be demanded, how the sufferings of Christ being but of short continuance, should be of that worth and dig∣nitie, as to be a sufficient price for our eternall deliuerance, and to make a plenary satisfaction for the sinnes of the whole World. To this I answere, that the merit of his suffering, depends not vpon the quantity of paine, or the continuance of time, but vpon the worthinesse of the sufferer; and that in two respects: Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 1.19.2.22.First, Of his Innocency; for he was holy, harmelesse, and vndefi∣led; a Lambe without spot, in whose mouth was found no guile: And therefore, Iustum est, saith Saint Augustine; It is a most iust and a righteous thing,Aug. l. 13. c 14. de trinitate. that the debtors should be set free, be∣cause he which owed nothing, did pay all our debt. Maxim. qua∣dragess. Ser. 1.Secondly, Of his Excellency; for he was not onely a most in∣nocent man, Quem nullum maculauit delictum, But he was also a most omnipotent God, as the Apostle sheweth, when he bid∣deth vs,Acts 20.28. To take heede vnto the Flocke, which God hath purchased with his owne bloud: And therefore, as the Father is infinite, which was prouoked, so the Sonne is infinite, which made the satisfaction; that for an infinite offence, there might be an infinite attonement; and so the person dying, being both God and Man, his death must be of a greater value, then the deaths of all the men of tenne thousand Worlds: And therefore Saint Cyprian truly af∣firmeth, Modicam guttam sanguinis Christi propter vnionem hy∣postaticam, pro redemptione totius mundi sufficisse; That the least droppe of the bloud of Christ, by reason of the vnion of the Dei∣tie vnto the Manhood,That the sole sufferings of Christ, is fully sufficient to sa∣tisfie for all sinnes. to make but one person of Christ, is of full sufficient vaine, to make satisfaction for the sinnes of the whole World. And this doth sufficiently confute all those that ioyne the afflictions of the Saints, with the sufferings of Christ, as a
part, or the accomplishment of the price of their redemption, as if with Christ alone there were not as the Prophet saith,Psal. 130.7. plente∣ous redemption: for though the Apostle saith, I reioyce in my sufferings for you, and fill vp that which is behinde of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church;Coloss. 1.24. yet this is not to be vnderstood of the propitiatory sacrifice for sinne; for so Christ onely suffered all that was to be suffered for our sinnes, as both the Prophet Esay, Chap. 53.4.5.6. and the holy Apostles of our Sauiour Christ, Saint Paul, and Saint Iohn,Esay 53.4.5.6. Heb. 9.26. 1 Iohn 2.2. doe most fully and sufficiently declare; He, that is, He  by himselfe, hath purged our sinnes; and as Dauid onely entred the lists against Golias,Heb. 1.3. when all the Israelites were but meere specta∣tors; So did Christ alone vndertake the combate against Sa∣tan, and hath troden the Wine-presse alone,Esay 63.3. as the Prophet spea∣keth: and therefore Christ said, All is finished, that is, not onely all that is written of me, is now fulfilled,Ille solus sordes omnium potest abluere. Aug. hom. 108. de tempore. or all the ceremonies of the Law are now ended; but especially all that is to bee suffered for the sinnes of men, is now fully accomplished: But the suffe∣rings of the Saints doe profit the Church, not by way of satisfa∣ction for their sinnes, but by way of example and consolation, to strengthen them in their faith,Aquinas par. 3. sum q. 48. art. penult. and to confirme them (saith the Glosse) In gratia dei, & in doctrina Euangelij; In the grace of God, and in the doctrine of the Gospell: and they are called the rest of the afflictions of Christ,How the suffe∣rings of the Saints doe pro∣fit the Church. not because the sufferings of Christ were imperfect, or not sufficient to satisfie for all sinnes, but because of that simpathy and fellow-feeling that Christ hath of all the sufferings of his Saints; in which respect he saith vnto Saint Paul vnconuerted, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?Act 9.4. be∣cause he accounteth all euill or good done vnto them, to be as done vnto himselfe; and therefore though we should reioyce in our afflictions,Rom. 5.3. because he doth account vs worthy to suffer for the name of Christ; yet seeing the suffering of all the miseries that can befall a man, cannot make vs worthy of this glory of Hea∣uen, as Origen saith;Act. 5.41. we should wholly relie vpon the all-suffici∣ent merits of Christ his sufferings, for the saluation of our soules; because all sacrifices ended in this selfe-sufficient sacrifice, which was not onely the abolishment of all other oblations whatsoeuer, but was also the most perfect and most absolute holocaust, yea and
the one onely hylasticall and propitiatory sacrifice that was to be offered for the sinnes of the whole world. Suet. in vit. Aug. Caesaris.Suetonius tels vs that when Augustus Caesar either out of Hu∣mility or Policy, desired that the Senate would adioyne two Consuls with him for the gouernment of the State; the Senate answered, that they held it a diminution of his dignity, & a dispa∣ragement of their owne iudgement, to ioyne any one with so worthy a one, as Augustus was: and surely it would much more derogate from the worth of our Sauiours sufferings, and shew vs to bee meerely fooles, if with the inualuable sufferings nd sacrifice of Christ, to satisfie the wrath of God, we would ioyne the momentaric affliction of any man. The sufferings of Christ com∣forteth and confimeth all Christians.And as this Doctrine of his suffering for the satisfaction of all sinnes doth confute all them, that ioyne the afflictions of the Saints, with the sufferings of Christ, for the making vp of the price of our redemption; so it doth sufficiently confirme and comfort all those that do most faithfully put their trust in Christ. For though our sinnes be very great, and though we haue sate in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death; yet seeing Christ hath suf∣fered for vs, both what God in Iustice could require, and what our sinnes could iustly deserue, we should not despaire, wee should not feare; because the bloud of Christ, as the Apostle no∣teth speaketh better things then the bloud of Abel,Heb. 12.24. that, crying for vengeance, this, for pardon vnto his brethren. And as it serueth to confirme vs against despaire; so it may be applyed to assure vs of whatsoeuer we need:Rom. 8.32. for so the Apostle reasoneth, he that spared not his owne Sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death; how shall he not with him also freely giue vs all things? hee that loued vs so deare, as to giue vs his onely Sonne, what will he thinke too deare for vs? and therefore if we want any thing let vs aske of God,James. 1.5. and he giueth vnto all men liberally whatsoe∣uer he seeth fit and conuenient for them. How the death of Christ ma∣keth the wic∣ked without excuse.Secondly, As our Sauiour dyed thus, to satisfie the wrath of God for the sinnes of all men, and to bring his Saints vnto euer∣lasting glory; so he did it to make the wicked without excuse; be∣cause they tread vnder feet the Sonne of God, and account the bloud of the couenant, as an vnholy thing, and will not lay hold and beleeue in Iesus Christ.
But if any man should demaund whether Christ suffered and dyed for all men without exception, or for those elected Saints onely, which he had chosen vnto saluation; or whether hee dyed sufficiently for all, and effectually onely for his elect, (which in my minde is but a poore distinction; because it is most certaine, that his death and suffering, if it had pleased God to giue them that grace to apprehend it, and by a liuely faith to apply it vnto their soules; is of sufficient value to ransome the sinnes of all men and diuels) and many other such like questi∣ons about the generality and efficacy of Christs death,See the De∣lights of the Saints▪ par. 1. pag. 30. I referre him to my Treatise of the Delights of the Saints, where I haue handled this point more at large. And so you see why Christ suffered in respect of men. Secondly, He suffered all this in respect of God, for the praise and glory of his owne blessed Name; for as God hath made and created all things, so he hath redeemed all men, for his owne sake; that his wisedome, his power, and his goodnesse might bee knowne vnto men, and so praised and magnified of men for euer∣more. And therefore this should teach vs to doe what lyeth in vs to glorifie the Name of God for all these great things that Christ hath done, and hath suffered for vs. CHAP. IIII. Of the vsefull application of this Doctrine of the sufferings of Christ: what we ought principally to learne from the consideration thereof. ANd as generally this suffering of Christ,The conside∣ration of Christs suffe∣rings should worke in vs foure speciall effects. out of his meere loue to man, should moue vs all to praise the Lord, and to serue him; so more especially, it should worke in vs, these foure speciall things. 1. To moue vs to compassion, 2. To make vs thankefull. 3. To cause vs to loue him. 4. To worke in vs a readinesse to suffer any thing with him and for his sake, that suffered all this for vs.
First, to moue vs to compas∣sion. Iob 10.For the first, the Prophet Dauid musing of Gods great loue towards mankinde, saith, O Lord, what is man that thou art so mindefull of him? And to this holy Iob answereth; saying, Thou hast made me as the Clay,vers. 11. & vers. 9. and thou wilt bring me into the dust, and I shall be consumed as a rotten thing, and as a garment that is moth∣eaten. And yet to saue this poore, contemptible thing, Christ tooke vpon him our nature in the wombe, and vndertooke our death vpon the Crosse; yea, and whatsoeuer he suffered as man, he suffe∣red for man;Omnis creatura compatitur Christo morienti, sol obscuratur, &c. Solus miser ho∣mo non compa∣titur, pro quo solo deus pati∣tur. Hiron. in Mat. and therefore, how can we behold his head resting vpon a pillow of thornes, his hands pierced with iron nayles, and his heart bleeding for our sinnes, and not to bee moued to a godly sorrow, for those our horrible sinnes that caused all his sorrowes? It is reported in the Gospell, that when our Sa∣uiour suffered, the Sun withdrew his light, as being ashamed to see so wofull a spectacle, the earth quaked and trembled, as it were for feare to see her Creator put to death, and the stones did cleaue in sunder; yea, wicked Iudas that betrayed and sold our Sa∣uiour, when he saw the indignities that were offered vnto him, did repent, and grieue, that he had betrayed that innocent bloud: and therefore what strange hearts haue wee, worse then Iudas and harder then stones, if we can behold the torments of his Pas∣sion, and not be touched with compassion? The naturalist telleth vs that the Adamant stone is of an impenetrable hardnesse,Plinius l. 37. c. 4. and yet he saith, that if it be steeped in the warme bloud of a Goate, it will be mollified: and therefore if the bloud of Christ, which is farre more excellent then the bloud of Buls, or of Goates, cannot intenerate our hard hearts, wee are worse then the Adamants, and no better then the Diuels: That Christ should bleed for vs, and we not weepe for our owne sinnes. Secondly, To make vs thankefull.For the second, Our Sauiour hauing suffered all this for sin, to saue sinfull men, and to eternize mortall men; He hath broken the head of the Serpent, he hath wounded the great Leuiathan, and by the merit of his Passion he hath subdued Hell, conque∣red the graue, rebated the sting of death, taken away the force and guilt of sinne, and remoued those Cherubims, and that fla∣ming sword which was placed to afright vs, and to keepe the way of the tree of life,Gen. 2.2. and he hath blotted out the hand-writing of ordi∣nances that was against vs, and laid open vnto vs, the gates of eter∣nall
life; and therefore now we should all say with the Psalmist, What shall we render vnto the Lord for all his benefits that hee hath done vnto vs?Psal. 116 11. for we must not thinke it inough to weepe in commiseration of Christ his paine, but we must be also thanke∣full for Christ his suffering. The whole world knoweth what great loue hee hath shewed to vs, and what bitter Passion he hath suffered for vs; and there∣fore vae tacentibus de te domine; Woe be vnto them, whose in∣gratitude hath silenced them from praising thee; Sed faelix lin∣gua, quae non nouit nisi de te Sermonem texere; but most happy is that tongue which can praise thee, O Lord, though it should be able to speake of nothing else; because not onely nothing can be carried better in our mindes, nothing can be sweeter in our mouthes, nothing more melodious to our eares, as Saint Augu∣stine saith, then deo gratias, to ascribe all praise, and to render thankes vnto the Lord our God; but especially, because (as Saint Bernard saith) no sacrifice can be more acceptable vnto God, for who so offereth me thankes and praise, hee honoureth mee; and nothing can be more offensiue vnto Satan, then to praise the Lord; for though thou watchest, he careth not; because him∣selfe neuer sleepeth; though thou fastest, hee regards it not; be∣cause himselfe neuer eateth any thing; but if thou beest thanke∣full vnto God for his great loue to thee, then is Satan grieued; because thou being a silly worme on earth, dost performe that here in the vally of misery, which he being a glorious Angell in Heauen, could not performe in that seat of Maiestie; and there∣fore as the Prophet Dauid saith,Psal. 107.15. that he would rise at midnight to praise the Lord for his righteous iudgements, so with the Prophet Dauid I wish to God, that men would praise the Lord for his good∣nesse, especially for this great goodnesse, and declare the wonders that he hath done, and especially this suffering, this great suffering, that he vnderwent for the children of men; and that they would praise him from the ground of the heart. And because, virtus nisi cum re vilior alga;That we should shew our thankfulnesse to Christ by our workes. Luke 2. Matth. 2. thankefulnesse con∣sisteth more in workes then in words, therefore let vs not onely with the Angels sing, Glory be to God on high, but let vs with the wise men, present our gifts vnto him, gold, to clothe the naked, and to feede the hungry soule; Frankinsence, to maintaine the
preaching of Gods Word; and Myrrhe to be prepared for our death,Macrob. Satur∣nal. l. 2. c. 4. that we may liue for euer with him. Macrobius tels vs that a certaine souldiour of Augustus Band, that had often aduen∣tured his life in Caesars cause, being to appeare before those Iud∣ges whom he feared, he desired Augustus for to assist him; and the Emperour presently wished him, to choose whom he would, and he would appoint him for his aduocate: but the Souldier replyed, O Caesar, I appointed no Deputy, when your life was in danger to be lost, but I hazarded mine owne life, and receiued all these scarres (which he then shewed in his body) to pre∣serue you from all hurt; and doe you now appoint another to pleade for me? what, haue I done so much for you, and will you refuse to do so small a kindnes for me? euen so beloued brethren, Christ did not onely hazard his life, but gaue himselfe to death, and suffered scarres and wounds, and the shedding of all his bloud, of his dearest bloud for vs; and shall wee doe nothing for him?Matth. 25 40. O yes, beloued, let vs euer doe what lyeth in vs, for the poore members of Iesus Christ; for, whatsoeuer you doe to any one of them you doe it vnto me, saith our Sauiour. Thirdly, to teach vs how dearely and how truely we ought to loue our Sa∣uiour Christ.For the third, as Christ hath so dearely loued vs, as to suffer all these things for vs, so we should truely loue Christ againe; and we should the rather loue him, not onely because hee hath done all these things for vs, but also because he requireth nothing for all these things, but loue: he exacts no tribute, hee requires no ho∣mage, he expects no requitall but loue; O then let vs not say with the vncleane spirits in the Gospell, What haue wee to doe with thee,Marke 1.24. O Iesus thou Sonne of God? but let vs rather say with the Church,Cantic. 2.5. in the Canticles, Stay me with flagons, and comfort mee with apples,Bern. in Ser. de pass. dom. for I am sicke of loue: and as thy loue to me, Erat ta∣lis & tantus vt nesciret habere modum; was such and so great, that it could not containe it selfe within the compasse of any bounds, so my loue to thee, is and shall be such and so much, as I shall be possibly able to expresse. Fourthly, to make vs wil∣ling to suffer with Christ.For the fourth, Saint Bernard tells vs that in the Passion of Christ, there are three things especially to be considered. 1. The Worke. 2. The Manner. 3. The Cause.
And he saith, that Christ shewed; first, in the worke, singular patience, secondly, in the manner, admirable humility▪ and thirdly, in the cause, inestimable charity; and therefore if wee would truely honour God for the giuing of his Sonne, wee must labour what we can to imitate Christ herein. First, In patience, Quia crux non ad impotentiae documentum sed ad exemplum patientiae suscepta est; Because (as Saint Augu¦stine saith) the Crosse of Christ is as a Schoolemaster, to teach patience vnto all Christians: And so Saint Peter saith,1 Pet. 2.21. Christ suf∣fered for vs, leauing vs an example, that we should follow his steps.That the suffe∣rings of Christ is an example to teach vs how to suffer. 1 Mac. 6.34. In the first of the Machabees, and the sixt, It is said that Antiochus being to fight with Iudas, Captaine of the hoste of the Iewes, He shewed vnto his Elephants the bloud of Grapes and Mulberies, to prouoke them the better vnto the fight; and so the Holy Ghost hath set downe vnto vs what iniuries, what contumelies, what torments our Sauiour Christ did beare, and how patiently he did beare them, to incourage vs to indure whatsoeuer calamnities shall betide vs, during this our pilgrimage here on earth: for we see our Sauiour Christ; Sine peccato venit, & tamen sine fla∣gello non exijt; Though we doe all know, that he came into the world without sinne, yet you doe see, he went not out of the world without sorrow, without suffering; and therefore,Chrys. in 27. Matth. Quae no∣bis erit contumelia, post quam haec Christus passus est? What if wee suffer reproaches, pouerty, shame, death? what matter, what shame is that to vs, seeing Christ hath suffered all those things for vs? nay, what a shame is it vnto vs, if we will not be ready to suffer any thing for his Names sake, that hath suffered so much for our sinnes? But we must note that our suffering with Christ,We suffer with Christ two manner of wayes. is two wayes to be considered. First, What we voluntarily assume, to be made like vnto Christ. Secondly, What is malitiously imposed, and we patiently suf∣fer for the Name of Christ. In the first sense, Saint Gregory tels vs, that duobus modis crux tollitur, aut cum per abstinentiam affligitur corpus, aut cum per com∣passionem animi, affligitur animus; Wee take vp our crosse two manner of wayes, either when through abstinence, fastings,1 Cor. 9.27. wat∣chings,
praying, we bring our bodies vnto subiection, that they bring not our soules vnto destruction;That as mem∣bers of the same body we should willing∣ly suffer when we see others suffer. or else through a compassi∣onate fellow-feeling of others miseries, we make our selues co∣partners with them in all distresses: and therefore we should euer crucifie and mortifie all the inordinate lusts of our flesh, all our wanton and lasciuious cogitations; and we should with all dili∣gence, fight against them, as they doe fight against our soules; and as members of the same body, we should all suffer inward griefe, when we see any man indure outward paine. In the second sense, we ought patiently to suffer, whatsoeuer God in his wisedome, or men in their malice shall lay vpon vs; and that not onely because we cannot auoide them, but because we are contented to vndergoe them; for if the minde resisteth when the body suffereth, we rebell in what we can, and we doe onely suffer what we cannot helpe; and God respecteth not so much the sufferings of the Martyres, though their torments were almost intollerable, as their meeke patience in suffering: and therefore it is noted in our Sauiour Christ,Esay 53 7. That God re∣specteth our patience in suffering, more then our suffe∣ring. that he was car∣ried as a Sheepe to the slaughter, and as a Lambe that was dumbe, and opened not his mouth; to teach vs (as Saint Gregory saith) that it is not the sword, or the flame that makes a Martyr; but the patient and willing minde of him that suffereth any thing, for the name and truth of Christ: Quia sine ferro & flamma Martyres esse possumus, sine patientia non possumus; Because wee may be Martyres without the paine of sword or stake,Cyprian de du∣plici Martyrio. but wee cannot be Martyres without patience, though wee should suffer by the sword, or be burned at the stake, as Saint Cyprian doth most excellently declare: And therefore seeing Christ hath suffered for vs, and hath suffered for our example, to teach vs how we should suffer for his sake;That we shold be most ready and willing to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ. though the world should rage and swell, and lay vpon vs all the waight of miseries that it could heape vpon vs; pouerty, reproaches, banishment, imprison∣ment, death it selfe, or any kinde of death, fire, sword, or what∣soeuer, yet let vs patiently suffer whatsoeuer shall be imposed vp∣on vs; and let vs say with holy Iob, Though the Lord should kill vs,Iob 13.15. yet will we trust in him: for seeing he suffered so much for vs, to saue our soules from eternall death, it were a shame, if we should be vnwilling to suffer any thing for him and his truthes sake,
that it might be well with vs, and our children for euer, and that wee might haue for our selues eternall life. Secondly,Matth. 12.29. As we are to imitate Christ in patient suffering vnto death, so we are to learne of him, true humility; to bee meeke and lowly in heart, throughout all our life. Thirdly, We should imbrace that Queene of vertues, Diuine charity, that as Christ in loue,That as Christ loued vs, so we should loue him, and loue one another for the loue of Christ. and for the loue of man descended from Heauen, and suffered all this for vs; so we should, for the loue of him, suffer any thing, rather then to swarue a nayles-bredth from him, and doe what good wee can vnto all our neighbours: for if we loue him, we must needs loue one another; And yet it is a lamentable thing to consider what strifes and contentions, what hatred and heart-burning raigneth, not onely betwixt the children of this world, but also betwixt Christians in the Church of God. I pray God we seeke not our owne, rather the things that are Iesus Christs, and make Religion to be a co∣lour to make way for vs to execute our owne greedy mindes and desires, to commit all wrong and oppression. It was said of old, when the Pope sent his Buls to fulfill his owne will, that in nomine dei incipit omne malum;How the want of loue is the cause of many mischiefes in the world. I onely pray it may neuer be so with any Christian soule, that we make not the truth of God, (with all reuerence be it spoken) as a Packe-horse to support our vile desires. I am sure, if there were more loue and charity among Christians, lesse faults, lesse errours would appeare to bee in the Church of God, then now there seemes to be:1 Cor. 13. for cha∣rity suffereth all things, beleeueth all things, and is euer willing to make faults and errours lesser then they be; whereas the want of loue will make the worst of euery thing, euery errour to be an Heresie, and euery infirmity to be hainous impiety; nay, want of loue will make sinnes where God made none,We ought to loue all men, and to hate all vices, in whomsoeuer they be. and make vertues to be vices; whereas perfect charity will neuer hate the man, though he be full of iniquity: and therefore my conclusion of this point is, that as Christ hath loued vs, and gaue himselfe for vs so let vs loue Christ, and loue one another for Christ his sake; and he that doth these things shall neuer fall.
PART. IIII. CHAP. Of the manner of Christs suffering, how he suffered all that I haue shewed, so as the Prophets fore-told, and as the A∣postles had seene the same with their eyes. The incom∣prehensible manner of Christ his sufferings.FOurthly, Hauing heard of the person suf∣fering, Christ; of the chiefest things that he suffered, which are recorded by the Euangelists, and of the necessity of that suffering in respect of those causes which did necessitate the same; wee are now to cōsider the maner how he suffe∣red, expressed in the word , so to suffer that is, so humbly, so louingly, so meekely, so patiently, and so, euery way in respect of himselfe, as that neither the tongues of men nor Angels are neuer able, by any like to expresse it, by any words to declare it,That all pre∣dictions tou∣ching the Mes∣sias, were all accomplished in Iesus Christ. or by any apprehensions or thoughts of man to conceiue it. And so, in regard of men, as the Prophets had fore∣told, and the Apostles had already seene; for so it pleased Al∣mighty God before the comming of the Messias, to fore-tell almost euery thing that should happen throughout all the whole life of the Messias, euen from the first moment of his conception, vnto the very last act of his Ascention, that so all men might beleeue in him, in whom they saw all those predicti∣ons fulfilled, & none other; for the Prophet Esay had said, that a Ʋirgin should conceiue and beare a sonne:Esay 7.14. Mich. 5.2. Hos. 11.1. Esay 9.1. Micheas said, that hee should be borne in Bethlehem-Iuda, Hoseas foretold of his flight into Egypt; and to be briefe, the place of his dwelling, in the borders of Nepthali; the manner of his liuing, Healing all manner of infirmities,Cap. 53.4. and preaching the glad tydings of saluation, and almost euery one of the least particulars that should happen vnto him at his death;Zach. 2.9. as how he should be sold and betrayed by his owne Disciple,Psal. 41 2. how all his followers should flie from him, how craftily and maliciously he should be apprehended,Esay 53.10. how falsly he should be
accused, how basely he should be handled, buffeted, whipped, and spitted vpon, how vniustly hee should bee condemned, and how cruelly he should be fastned vnto the Crosse, to die an ac∣cursed death, and as most accursed, betwixt the wicked, and how he should be generally mocked, his garments taken from him, and haue Gall to eate, and Vinegar to drinke, and what not? all was fore-shewed that should happen vnto the Messias: and therefore it behoued Christ so to suffer, because it was prophesied that he should so suffer. And as the Prophets did fore-shew how the Messias should suffer, so the Euangelists and Apostles testifie how Christ did suf∣fer all and euery one of those things that were written of him; for they were eye-witnesses of the same;1 Iohn 1.1. and soth ey testifie vnto vs; that which was from the beginning, which we haue heard and seene, and our hands haue handled of the Word of life, that testifie wee vnto you; i. e. that all the things that were written of him which was promised from the beginning, wee haue seene them fully accomplished & fulfilled in him which liued and con∣uersed amongst vs, and which we preach vnto you, Iesus Christ. S. Mathew recollects 32. seuerall Prophesies that he saw fulfilled in our Sauiour Christ; Saint Iohn addes many other, and so doe the rest diuers more; So that whosoeuer would with the men of Berea, search the Scriptures, from the first Booke of Moses, vnto the last Prophet Malachy, and marke out all the things that were spoken of the Messias, that was for to come, we shall, if we doe but looke, finde them all recorded in the writings of the Apostles and Euangelists, to be most fully fulfilled in the per∣son of Iesus Christ. A sufficient condemnation to all Iewes, that still looke for an∣other Christ; for why should not they beleeue their owne Pro∣phets? they said the Messiah should suffer these things; Christ suffered them so, as they were prophesied; who then can be the Messias, but he, in whom all these prophecies were fulfilled? but Saint Paul tels vs why they will not beleeue in him;Why the Iewes beleeue not in Christ. Rom. 11. be∣cause partly blindnesse is come vpon them, vntill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in: And now Lord, if it be thy will, open their eyes, that they may see this truth, and circumcise all infidelity from their hearts, that they may beleeue thy Sonne Iesus Christ to be the Sauiour of the world.
And as this condemneth all vnbeleeuing Iewes, so it confirmeth all true Christians in the faith of Christ: and I wish to God, that as the seeing of all these things fulfilled in Christ, makes vs all to beleeue in Christ; so the suffering of all these things for vs, would make vs all to praise this our Lord Iesus Christ for his goodnesse, to feare him in all our wayes, to loue him with all our hearts, and to serue him truly and faithfully all the dayes of our life; O blessed God grant this vnto vs, for Iesus Christ his sake, To whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit three distinct persons of that one indiuided essence, be ascribed all praise and glo∣ry, both now and for euermore. Amen. A Prayer. O Most blessed God, that hast giuen thy dearest, and thine onely Sonne, not onely to be made man, subiect to all infirmities, but also to suffer all miseries, throughout his whole life, and in the end to be put vnto a most shamefull, painefull and accursed death, by wicked men, for sinnefull men, that hee suffering what wee deserued, wee might be deliuered from thy wrath; we most humbly beseech thee in his Name, and for his sake, to forgiue vs all our sinnes, to accept his death as a ple∣nary satisfaction, to acquit vs from euerlasting death, and to giue vs thy grace, that for this, and all other thy louing sauours vnto vs, we may be truely thankefull, and most dutifully obe∣dient to please thee, and to praise thy blessed Name, for euer and euer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Fift Golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The Fift greatest Light of Christian RELIGION. Of the Resurrection of CHRIST. MATH. 28.4.5.6. And for feare of him, the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men: And the Angell answered, and said vnto the Women, feare not you, for I know that you seeke Iesus, which was crucified; He is not here, for he is risen as hee said, come see the place where the Lord lay. OVR blessed Lord God,The coherence of this Trea∣tise with the former. and louing Fa∣ther, out of his excellent prouidence, and secret loue to Man, hath so tempered all the accidents and whole course of mans life, with such proportion and equall counterpoyse, that euer and anon ioyes and sorrowes are mixt together; as wee may easily see in our blessed Sauiour, for vpon Mount Thabor he was transfigured in glory,Math. 17.2. that his face did shine as the Sunne; and vpon Mount Caluary, he was disfigu∣red in sorrow, that confusion went ouer his face; and that in him
there was neither forme nor beauty; and vpon Mount Oliuet, euen now,Esay 53.2. Luke 22.43. Verse 44. an Angell comforting him, and by and by an agony af∣frighting him; so vpon the Crosse, euen now he cries as destitute of all helpe, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? yet by and by after, as assured of comfort, he saith; O my Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit:Math. 27.46. Euen so it is with vs all; Nocte pluit tota,Luke 23.46. redeunt spectacula mane; Heauinesse may indure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning: To day we may be sicke at the point to die, to morrow wee may be restored to life againe; to night in prison and in distresse, to morrow at liberty and aduan∣ced to dignitie: And this we see plaine in my Text; for the last day was a day of cloudes and darkenesse, a day of griefe and sor∣row, for the passion and suffering of the Sonne of God: But be∣hold, this day is a day of ioy and gladnesse, a day of Iubile, for the most glorious resurrection of this Omnipotent Son of God; for as it behoued him to suffer for our sinnes, (as you heard) so it be∣houed him to rise againe for our iustification, saith the Apostle: And so this Angell testifieth that he did;Rom. 4.25. He is not here, but is risen, as he saide; Come see the place where the Lord lay. And In these words we may obserue, The diuision of the Text.1. The persons here mentioned. 2. The action of each person plainely expressed. First, The Persons mentioned, are especially of three sorts. 1. Keepers. 2. Women. 3. Angels. Secondly, The actions expressed, are 1. Of the Keepers watching Christ. 2. Of the Women seeking Christ. 3. Of the Angell, 1. Terrifying the former. 2. Comforting the latter. And from all this, we may see these three things. 1. The malice of the Iewes. 2. The deuotion of the Women. 3. The Office of the Angels. And the maine summe of all is, The Resurrection of Christ.
PART I. CHAP. Of the malice of the Iewes against our Sauiour Christ. FIRST, The malice of the Iewes against our Sauiour Christ, is seene, in that they did not onely spitefully oppose them∣selues against him, throughout all his life, and most vniustly deliuer him to a most shamefull death, but also malici∣ously watched him in his graue, that he might not rise, (to shew the right pro∣perty of the wicked, not onely to throw the righteous downe, but also to keepe them downe, and to trample them still vnder feete) and to hire the Watchmen to belie both themselues and his Disciples, that the truth of his Resurrection might not be knowne and beleeued for our saluation. O miseri, quae tanta insania ciues! O wretched men that you are; what, is your rage as strong as death? nay, stronger then death? and longer then death? For the man is dead, and he is buried; And yet, Ʋos excandescitis ira, Your rage is implacable; you set armed Souldiers to watch and ward ouer this dead, harmelesse man: And so we finde what the Scripture saith of the wicked, to be true in you, Malicia eorum excaecauit eos;Wisedome 2.21. Your malice and your wickednesse haue blinded your eyes. Nay, but this deceiuer said (saith some of them) That after three dayes I will rise againe. A deceiuer indeede; Sed pius seductor,How wicked men are de∣ceiued. But of them onely that deceiue themselues, either, First, By relying too much on his mercy, and not thinking of his iustice; or, Secondly, By fearing too much his iustice, and forgetting all his mercy: or,
Thirdly, By not beleeuing his power, either to saue the peni∣tent beleeuers in him, or to punish the wicked contemners of him: for of all these and the like, the Prophet saith; The Lord will de∣ceiue you, (that is, suffer you to deceiue your selues,) He will make his Arrowes drunken in bloud,Deut. 32.42. and hee will cause his Sword to goe through your sides: But them that truly trust in him, he will ne∣uer deceiue, nor suffer them to be deceiued in him; For, our Fa∣thers hoped in him,Psal. 22.4. and were not confounded. But what if you had seene him rise againe? what would you haue done? would you haue beleeued in him? no surely: for you know he rose, his Disciples testifies it to your faces, and your owne Souldiers sayes it; and you are faine to hyre them to say the contrary: What then would you haue done? would you haue crucified againe the Lord of life? Yes, no doubt; such is the malice of the wicked, that the death of the godly, decies re∣petita placebit, is neuer often enough inflicted. O therefore good Lord, thou King of Heauen, Giue me any head, saue the head of a Serpent; and any malice, saue the malice of an enemy: For death it selfe cannot hide me from these, but they will rage and rayle on my very Ghost. And so much for the malice of the Iewes. PART II. CHAP. I. Of the number, and the names, of these Women that came to seeke our Sauiour Christ in his Sepulcher. SEcondly, The deuotion of the Women is here commended, in that they are said to come early, while it was yet darke, to seeke Iesus,Iohn 20.1. for to imbalme him: And for the better vnderstanding of this point, these three especiall things must bee consi∣dered.
1. Their number. 2. Their names. 3. Their action. First, Saint Mathew here seemes to say, they were two;Why three Women went together vnto the Sepulcher. Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary: but Saint Marke saith plainely, that they were three; and that (as we may gather) for three spe∣ciall reasons. First, For decency, because it was not so fit to see a Woman gadding all alone: for it is neither customable nor com∣mendable for Matrones, like Dina, to walke single. Secondly, For mutuall society; Quia vae soli, For woe to him that is alone, especially at so vnwonted a season as the night, so dismall a place, as the graue; and in so heauy a case as death. Thirdly, For the better confirmation of the truth; for that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, euery word shall be established: And therefore there went three of them. And, Secondly, They were all three called by the same name,Haymo in postil in die resur. Mary; Et vno nomine censentur quia vna voluntas, And they had but one name; First, Because they had but one will, they had the same desire,What it signifi∣eth, that all the three Women were called by the same name. they all desired, and all sought, but onely Iesus Christ that was crucified▪ And, Secondly, Because they all signified the same thing, i. e. the Church of God in generall, or euery Christian soule in parti∣cular. For the first, the Scripture saith; Vae duplici corde, Woe to him that goeth two manner of wayes; that hath two tongues, two hearts, two affections, one to seeke for God, and another to seeke the World; because such, in seeking both, doe leese both: for the World they cannot keepe, though they seeke neuer so much after it; and God, for seeking the World, they shall neuer finde: And therefore these three Women hd but one heart, one will, one desire; they all seeke for Iesus that was crucified. For the second, they all signifie the same thing; for Maria in the Syriach Tongue, signifieth Dominam, a Lady or Mistresse; and Mara in Hebrew, signifies bitternesse: So is the Church of Christ, and so is euery Christian soule, a Mistresse for her affecti∣ons, and bitter for her afflictions.
How the Church is to rule her Chil∣dren.First, The Church ruleth ouer her Children, and the Soule ouer her desires; shee makes all her affections yeeld obedience vnto reason, and reason it selfe to faith: for where humane rea∣son faileth, there diuine faith attaineth to the height of many mysteries. Math. 8.24. How the Church was euer subiect vnto afflicti∣ons.Secondly, The Church is like that Shippe that was tossed to and fro, with the mightie waues, and billowes of the raging Seas; neuer at rest, vntill it arriueth at the Hauen of eternall hap∣pinesse: The storie of the Church doth make this plaine. Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine creuit, Sanguine succreuit, sanguine finis erit. And so is euery Christian soule, full of sorrowes, full of bit∣ternesse; we may see our selues as in a glasse, if wee looke into the state of these three silly soules seeking Christ; for they are be∣reaued of him, whom their soules loued: And therefore, as the Spouse saith in the Canticles,Cant. 3.1. In my bed I sought him, whom my soule loued, I sought him, but I found him not; So these Women seeke him, whom their soules loued, and not in their beddes, but in the Garden; for they range, and rage, and runne vp and downe like as it were a Lyon, or a Beare robbed of her whelpes, and yet they finde him not; they see the nest, but the Eagle is flowne away, and the Watchmen can tell no tydings of him: And there∣fore they stand apalled, all woe-begone with griefe, their hearts are all sobby and swolne, like the lower allies, that drinke vp the droppes of Heauen, and for want of teares, to expresse their griefes, (hauing emptied their bottles afore by continuall cry∣ing) each one of them doth now lamentingly say; Quis dabit capiti meo aquam? Who will powre water into the Cesterne of our heads, that we may powre out our plaints like a Nightingale robbed of her brood, and mourne like a Turtle for the loste of our dearest Lord? For hee being taken from vs, our life is loath∣some to vs; Sit mihi posse mori; It were well for vs, if we could ie;Lament. 3.15. for as our names be Marah, bitter, so he hath filled vs with bitternesse, and made our soules drunken with wormewood. This is the state of these Women; and this is the state of euery Christian soule, Teares must be her meate day and night, whiles they say vnto her,Psal. 137.4. Where is now thy God? for how shall we sing the
Lords song in a strange Land, and whiles we are as strangers from the Lord? And so you see, why all three were called by one and the same name. And yet we finde, that they were all distinguished; for the 1. Was, Mary Magdalen. 2. Was, Mary the Mother of Iames. 3. Was, Marie Salome. And this sheweth either three speciall properties,How the three Maries were distinguished, and knowne the one from the other. both in the Church, and in euery member of the Church, or else the diffe∣rent gifts and faculties which God bestoweth vpon his seruants, to euery one as pleaseth him. For, First, Mary Magdalen was so called, à Castello Magdalo, from a Tower which was loftie and strong; Marie Iacobi was the Si∣ster of the blessed Virgin, and the Mother of Iames, an Apostle and follower of Iesus Christ; and Mary Salome, was so called, either of her Husband, or of a Village named Salome, which sig∣nifieth peaceable: And therefore by these three Women,Three speciall properties sig∣nified, by the three women. these three Maries, are signified, three speciall properties. 1. Fortitude. 2. Faecundity. 3. Peace. So is the Church, so were these Women, and so is euery Christian soule. For, First, Salomon saith of the fortitude of the Church,1. Fortitude. Cantic. 4.4. Sicut tur∣ris Dauid collum tuum; Thy necke is as the Tower of Dauid, that is as high as Heauen, and so strong, as that the gates of Hell can neuer preuaile against it: And in these Women here,Math. 16.18. we finde a peerelesse patterne of Christian fortitude; for though they were the weaker Sexe, yet I finde them stronger in affection then Men; for the Apostles ranne, and out-ranne these Women,How fearelesse the Women were in seeking Christ. yet was their deuotion sooner spent, and themselues sooner out of breath: for they stayed not, but these Women, as they had for∣merly come vnto the graue, so now they stand longer at the graue; for so it is said of Mary Magdalen, Quod stetit, That shee stood still, and stood to it: And so no doubt they did all, not like Peter, who fearefully following afarre of,Iohn 20.11. and warming his
hands in the High Priests Hall, benummed his heart for want of faith;Math. 26.58. nor yet like Ioseph of Aramathia, who secretly for feare of the Iewes, begged of Pilate the body of Iesus: but like te stoutest Heroickes steeled with a manly resolution, they feare not death it selfe; And as the Poet saith of that valiant Scaeua, Lucan. l. 6.Qum non mille modi mortis, &c. So these fearelesse Women feared not a thousand sorts of death: So should euery Christian soule be vnwearied to seeke, and vndaunted to professe our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ; For whosoeuer will be ashamed of him here on Earth,Marke 8.38. he will be asha∣med of him before his Father which is in Heauen. 2. Faecundity. How these Women la∣bour to in∣crease the number of true beleeuers.Secondly, For the faecundity of the Church, shee is like Sara that bringeth forth more fruite in her age, then shee could doe in her youth; her seede is as the sand of the Sea, which cannot be numbred: So these Women, they runne and tell his Friends and Disciples, that Christ is risen from the dead; and so by this meanes, they doe what lyeth in them, to increase the number of Gods Children; and so should euery man doe; when he is con∣firmed, to strengthen his brethren: for it is our dutie to incite all others to beleeue in Christ, and to declare Christ vnto them, That they also may haue fellowship with vs,1 Iohn 1.3. in the fellowship which we haue with te Father, and with his Sonne Iesus Christ. 3. Peace. How pecea∣bly the women came to seeke for Christ.Thirdly, For the peaceablenesse of the Church, the Scripture saith, tht it is a vision of peace, the Daughter of peace, and the Mother of peace: So these Women, they came peaceably, not armed like the Souldiers, but harmelesly like Noahs Doue, with nothing in their hands but sweete flowers, nothing in their mouthes but sweete words;Iohn 20, 15. good Sir, If thou hast taken him away, then tell vs where thou hast laide him, and as the Church saith, Ʋbi pascit, vbi cubat in meridie; That wee may know where he is, where he lyeth: So should euery Christian man lay aside all bitternesse, all maliciousnesse, and put on the garment of meeke∣nesse, and gentlenesse: for seeing God is a God of peace, and the Church a vision of peace, a City at vnitie within it selfe; that man can neuer be the Sonne of God, which is not the Childe of peace.Euery Son of God, must be the Childe of peace. And so you see, that as these Women, so euery man or woman that seeketh Christ, must be valiant, fruitfull, and peace∣able. And yet,
Secondly, As these Women, though they had each one of them all these graces in a good measure, yet each one of them had not these, or the like graces in the like measure; for as Mary Magdalen was lesse fearefull, so Mary Iacobi was more fruitfull then the rest:How God be∣stoweth his gifts diuersly vnto men. So God distributeth his gifts and graces euen as pleaseth him, to one he giueth the gift of prophecying to another the gift of healing, to Iohn the gift to speake of his Diuinity a∣gainst Ebion; to Marke the gift of handling his humanity against Marcion; to Saint Peter the gift to worke mightily in the con∣uersion of the Iewes; to Saint Paul in the conuersion of the Gen¦tiles, to some he giues the gift to be famous Orators, excellent in perswasions, like Apollo; to others to be iudicious expositors of more positiue instructins, as beneficiall vnto the Church, though perhaps more preiudiciall vnto themselues; to some he giues the gift like Mary Iacobi, to be fruitfull in number, to preach of∣ten, and to bring forth many Sermons; to others like Mary Salome, to be more peacefull, yet no lesse faithfull then the rest; to doe it seldome, yet to doe as well as their fellowes. And so in all the rest of Gods graces, hee giues not the same gifts to all persons; for Lactantius was good to confute the Gentiles, but hee was not so good to confirme the Christians; Origen was famous in the mysticall interpretation, but not so iudicious in the literall exposition of the Scriptures: Saint Au∣gustine most excellent to discusse controuersies, to confound He∣retickes, and most iudicious to interpret all positiue points; but he was not so millifluous in his exhortations; so among the practi∣tioners of Religion, some are faithfull to suffer, some are painefull to worke, some zealous to pray, some are desirous to heare, some like Mary Salome, blessed peacemakers, others like Mary Iacobi, painefull inlargers of Gods Church, and others like Mary Magdalen, faithfull sufferers for Gods truth; all good, but not all the same gifts: for as among Dauids Worthies, all reached not to the first three, so among the Worthies of Christ, all haue not the same measure of grace.That euery man should be contnted with the gifts that God doth giue him. And this should teach vs, euery man to be contented with those gifts, and with that measure of grace as God hath giuen him; and euery man to labour according to the grace he hath receiued in his owne element, whereto he is most inclined, and
not in other mens straine, whereto perhaps he is more affected: for the fruites of affectation, can neuer be so sweete vnto the pa∣late of an other, as are the fruites of our speciall inclination. And this should teach vs all, so to affect one grace, as not to reiect the other; so to magnifie one man, indued with such gifts, as not to vilifie another, inabled with some other gifts: for this were to re∣ceiue the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ,Iames 2.1. with respect of persons; and it is not in man to haue what gift he pleaseth, but it is God that distributeth and disposeth of his graces, euen as it pleaseth him. CHAP. II. Of the action of these Women, which was a right seeking of our Sauiour Christ. Three proper∣ties required to make euery action good.THirdly, The action of these Women is here ex∣pressed, according to those three essentiall pro∣perties of euery good and godly action. 1. The matter iust. 2. The manner lawfull. 3. The end pious. All men are euer seeking for some thing.First, The matter and substance of their worke, is said by the Angell to be an inquisition, a seeking; ye seeke (saith he) and so we doe all seeke: for since Adam, like a griping Vsurer, who extorting more then his due, leeseth principall and all, desiring to be as God, lost both God and himselfe; the whole World is at a quare, and in a continuall seeking: but most of vs doe seeke amisse. For, Some seeke for wealth.Some seeke for wealth, Quaerenda pecunia primum; And they preferre that before the health of their soules: And therefore surely they may well feare, because they carrie two heauy bur∣thens vpon their backes; the one is deliciarum putredo, the rust of their couetous desires; and the other is Curarum magnitudo, The greatnesse of worldly cares; Quorum vnumquod{que} ad subigendum nauigium sufficit, Whereof each one is able to sinke a Ship: the rust of our riches to be a witnesse against vs, and the cares of this World to choake vs, and drowne vs in perdition. Some seeke for vaine-glory, which is an intollerable drunken∣nesse
of the minde, as Saint Chrysostome saith:Some seeke for vaine-glo∣rie. And I feare that many of our selues in seeking Christ, doe seeke for this; and we seeke for it after the basest manner; for as the olde Monkes were proud of humility, so many of vs would be accounted most lear∣ned, by shewing no learning at all: And therefore I thinke, that the Prophecy of Esay is now fulfilled, Like people, like Priests; for in the Primitiue Church, the Priests were better then the Peo∣ple; and in the times of Popery, the People were better then the Priests: Ideo non potuit dici, vti est populus ita est sacerdos, There∣fore it could not be said, As is the People, so is the Priest; because the People were not halfe so bad as the Priests: but now they are all alike; the People for fancy will heare but whom they like, and beleeue but what they list; and the Priest for aduantage, will speake but what may please. O Lord deliuer me from the num∣ber of these men, and into their councell, let not my soule come.Gen. 49.6. And so some seeke for pleasure, where the best Ale is, where the strongest Wine is, and where the fairest Woman dwells; some seeke for honour, some for pride, some for reuenge, some for one thing, and some for another thing; Et nemo Christum quaerit, And so seeking their owne, they seeke not that which is the Lord Iesus: And therefore these seekers may all feare, least finding these things, they leese themselues. But these women seeke for a better thing, they seeke for God;The godly doe onely seeke for God. and so doth euery man; for though we found all other things that we seeke for; yet all things cannot content vs, vntill wee finde our God; for the heart of man being as a triangle, and the whole world being round, and a round thing cannot possibly fill a triangle; therefore it is impossible that any thing should satis∣fie and content the heart of man, but onely the blessed Trinity; and therefore Saint Augustine truely saith,Aug. in confess. Irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec revertatur ad eum, That as the heart of man pro∣ceeded from God, so it can neuer be quiet vntill it be with God: and therefore all seeke for God, but all doe not seeke aright: because they seeke him not in Christ,Iohn 14.6. for none commeth vnto the Father but by me: And therefore these women seeke for Iesus: and so likewise many seeke for Iesus, and yet finde him not; for so the Scriptures say, they shall seeke me, but they shall not finde me, they shall call vpon me, but there shall be none to answere; and so the
Church saith, In my bed I sought him whom my soule loueth, I sought him but I found him not; because shee sought him amisse, in her bedde,Many seeke for God but not aright. at her ease, shee sought him drowsily at home, and not carefully both at home and abroad: so many shall seeke Iesus, but shall not finde him; because they seeke him a∣misse; for some faine vnto themselues a false Iesus, and seeke not the true Iesus, which is able to saue their soules: and therefore these women goe one step further, and seeke Iesus of Nazareth (as Saint Marke saith) the true flower of Iesse; and be∣cause many seeke for Iesus of Nazareth; and yet faile of their felicitie, as those that sought him for their bellies sake, to be fed by him,Many seeke Christ amisse. but not to feede him in his members; to be cleansed by him, but not to serue him; as those nine leapers that came with reuerence to be healed, but gaue him no thankes when they were cleansed: therefore these women proceede to the highest staffe of Iacobs ladder, and seeke not onely Iesum Nazarenum, i. e. Iesum floridum, Iesus in prosperity, for prosperities sake, but they seeke Iesus that was crucified; for all those that can be con∣tented to eate the sweet bread in the Passeouer, and not to taste of the sowre hearbs, or with Saint Peter to build Tabernacles on Mount Thabor, and to forsake and forsweare him in Mount Cal∣uarie, i. e. to professe his Name in the times of peace and dele∣ctation, and to start aside like a broken bow in the dayes of per∣secution,How we ought to seeke for Iesus if we would find him. they may well seeke Christ, but they shall hardly finde any benefit by Christ, because this is to seeke their owne, and not to seeke that which is Christ Iesus. And therefore as these women sought Iesus that was crucifi∣ed, and the Apostle saith, God forbid that I should glory in any thing saue in the crosse of Iesus Christ, i. e. in the power of his Passion, and in the benefit which I reape from the sufferings of Christ. Quia non siluestris arbor sed virtus crucifixi salus nostra; Because it is not the wooden Crosse, but the grace and vertue of him that suffered vpon the Crosse, that is the cause of our saluation; so let euery one of vs, seeke Iesus that was crucified, & reioyce in nothing but in that Crosse, that Passion of Iesus Christ; and though this be to the Iewes a stumbling blocke, and to the Grecians foo∣lishnesse, yet to them that beleeue both of the Iewes and Gentiles, It is the power of God vnto saluation:Rom. 1.16. So you see what they
sought for Iesus of Nazareth, that was crucified. Secondly, For the manner of their seeking of him, it is here many wayes expressed. First, They seeke him early, while it was yet darke,First, that wee seeke for God betimes. saith the Euangelist, they came in that time vnto the graue, when by course of nature they should haue been in their beds, and so they take away from nature to giue to grace; and perhaps all that night, they gaue no sleepe vnto their eyes, nor slumber vnto their eye-lids, for musing of him, who neither slumbreth nor slee∣peth; but their eyes, like the morning watch, did continually watch for the morning, that they might seeke him early whom they loued so intirely. So should we seeke Christ betimes,Eccles. 12.1. in the dayes of our youth, else if we neuer seeke him vntill wee haue gi∣uen ouer seeking all things else, we may iustly feare to misse him; because it is iust with God, that they which neuer sought him in their youth, should neuer finde him in their age. Secondly, They seeke him earnestly,Prouerb. 2.4. Judg. 15.18. Secondly, that we should ear∣nestly seeke for Christ. euen as Salomons Schol∣lers sought for wisedome, or as Sampson sought for drinke; that is, with all diligence, for they came often vnto the graue, they in∣quired often for him; Et discipulis recedentibus, mulieres non rece∣debant; And though Saint Peter the Disciple that is said to loue Christ best, and Saint Iohn, that is said to be best beloued of Christ departed, and went their wayes, yet would not these women goe, but still stayed to seeke him, vntill they should finde him; for as Wormewood is good for ill stomackes,Marcus here∣mita l. 2. de legi spirituali. saith Marke the Heremite) because it stirreth vp the appetite vnto a desire of meate; so the sorrow and bitternesse of these women, for the lesse of Christ, did the more eagerly stirre and prouoke them to search and seeke for Christ: so should we most earnestly seeke for Christ as for hid treasure, till we finde him. Thirdly, They seeke him mournefully, with watered eyes;Iohn 20.11. Thirdly, That we should seek Christ sorrow∣ing till we finde him. and with heauy hearts; for so Iohn saith, that Mary stood without at the Sepulcher weeping; and surely not without cause doe they de∣plore his absence, in whose presence is the fulnesse of ioy; for the losse of him is more then the losse of all the world: and there∣fore they seeke him sorrowing; so should wee; for if we put on mourning robes, and weepe for our ordinary friends departed, how
should we weepe and waile,Luke 2.48. Bernard. Ser. 2 de alt. & bass. cord. Fourthly, that we should seek for nothing but for Christ. when Christ for our sinnes is parted from vs? Fourthly, They seeke him onely; for wee doe not finde that they inquired for any thing, so as for him, nor any thing beside him, nor any thing after him, saith S. Bernard; so should we seek for Christ, and for Christ alone; for as the Poets say of the Clito∣rian well, Clitorio quicun{que} sitim de fonte lauarit, Vina fugit, gaudet{que} meris abstemius vndis. Whosoeuer drinkes of it, will neuer drinke Wine after it; so the Scriptures say of Christ, Whosoeuer eateth his flesh, shall neuer hunger,Iohn 6. and whosoeuer drinketh his bloud, shall neuer thirst; there∣fore as Iacob said,Gen. 45.28. when he heard that Ioseph was aliue, I haue enough; so will euery Christian say, I haue enough, that I haue Ie∣sus Christ. Fiftly, that we should neuer leaue seeking Christ till we finde him. Psal. 105.Fiftly, They seeke him continually vntill they finde him; to teach vs, that we should seeke the Lord and his strength, and seeke his face euermore. Thus these women sought him, and thus wee should seeke him; and thus we are taught to seeke him; and I thinke, neuer people more faithfully taught then we be: and yet alas, I feare that as Plinie saith, There be certaine trees, which he calleth, Indociles arbores,Plin. l. 14. in praem. quia in alienas non comeant terras; Indocible trees, because they will grow no where, but where they are bred; so there be too too many of vs, that will not be taught to seeke after God; but as they are bred of the earth, so they will seeke for nothing but earthly things. To what end the women sought for Christ.Thirdly, For the end of their action, and the very depth of their intention, it is here said to be, not as the Souldiers sought him in the Garden of Gethsemane, to crucifie him, but to imbalme him; not because they could adde any sweetnesse vnto him, which was , wholly delectable, and, , sweetnesse it selfe (as Nazianzen cals him;) but because they would shew their loue and affection vnto him: So should wee seeke him, to imbalme him, i. e. to pray vnto him, and to praise his Name; Quia aromata mulierum significant preces sanctorum; Because their balmes signifies our prayers, saith a Father: And therefore we should seeke for him with these women, to imbalme
him with our prayers: and finding him, wee should say with King Dauid, Let our prayers be directed in thy sight, as the incense, and the lifting vp of our hands, as the euening sacrifice:Psal. 142.2. And so you see the deuotion of these women, here, accompanied with eue∣ry circumstance of a most iust and holy action. But here it may be some will aske,  how came these women now so deuout, so zealous, and so religious, to seeke,Mary Magda∣len was a sinne∣full woman. and so earnest∣ly to seeke for Iesus that was crucified? for not long before, one of them was most sinnefull for life, and most hatefull for her luste; prostibula, an vnchaste Lady, nay a common Curtizan, and a most publique Publican, liuing in all kind of lasciuious luxury; how then comes she so suddenly so deuout? Alas beloued, they runne farre that neuer turne: It is true, that she was plunged in sinne, and possessed of Diuels; and all that while, shee neither sought God, nor confessed Christ; but when she was conuerted, and had her eyes opened, then she hated her sinnes, and forsooke all wantonnesse, and began to seeke Christ; and most earnestly to loue her Sauiour. I, but how came shee to forsake the one, and to follow the o∣ther? or how came she then, and not before then to doe it? I answere, that as Adam neuer sought God,Resp. How we can neuer find, nor seeke after God, vntill God seeke after vs. vntill God first sought him, and cryed, Adam where art thou? so this daughter of Adam, this lost sheepe had neuer sought for this now lost shep∣heard, had not this shepheard formerly sought for this long wan∣dring sheepe; for it is most certaine, that all our power and abi∣lity to come to him▪ proceeds from him; his Spirit must spirare, breathe vpon vs, before we can aspirare, aspire to him: and his hand must moue the golden Cymbell before we can yeelde any pleasant note: And so Saint Bernard saith,Bern. de delig. deo. Nemo domine te quae∣rere valet nisi qui prius inuenerit: No man, O Lord, can seeke for thee, but he who hath first found thee, i. e. when thou hast first found him. And we haue examples enough for the illustration,God is the first authour of our conuer∣sion. and ap∣parant proofes for the confirmation of this truth. For, First, When Saint Peter denyed Christ, Peter neuer repented, vntill the Cocke crowed, & Christ looked on him, i. e. looked out∣wardly, and moued him inwardly to goe out, and weepe bitterly: and the poore blinde man, that was blinde from his birth,Iohn 9.1. had
neuer seene Christ, had not Christ as he passed by, seene him, and had compassion on him; so Saint Paul had neuer asked the Lord, What wilt thou haue me to doe? had not the Lord said first, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Iohn 6.44.Secondly, Christ saith expresly, that as No man commeth vnto the Father but by him, i. e. as he is a Mediator betwixt God and man; so, no man commeth vnto him, i. e. to beleeue in him, to be his Sauiour, except the Father, , doth draw him; and so the Church saith,Cant. 1.4. Draw me and I will runne after thee: where you see, grace is promised, and then the action is performed: So when the Spirit said vnto Esayas,Esay 4.6. Cry, he knew not what to cry, vntill the Spirit had first taught him; so when the Spirit said vnto Ezekiel,Ezech. 2.1.2. Sonne of man stand vpon thy feet, the Spirit himselfe did set him vpon his feete, before he could stand; and so the Prophet Ieremy saith,Lam. 5.1. Turne vs, O Lord, and we shall be turned; and so the Apostle, after he had said, Worke out your owne saluation with feare and trembling, lest that any man should mistake him, and thinke that he hath any manner of power of himselfe to doe the same, hee sheweth immediately that all such power is from God;Phil. 2.13: That we can doe no good but what God worketh in vs. because it is God that worketh in vs both , to will and to effect: and so Saint Augustine saith, Da domine quod iubes, & iube quod vis: Giue vs, O Lord, power to performe what thou commandest, and then command what thou wilt: and so I might heape a cloud of witnesses, to proue, that neither this woman could, nor any other man can turne to God, or per∣forme the will of God, vntill God himselfe doth enlighten them, assist them, inable them, and draw them to doe it. That God compelleth not his ser∣uants to doe any good.And yet we must not so vnderstand it, as that he doth it vio∣lently by way of coaction, but sweetly and gently by way of insinu∣ation, for he draweth vs, Leui spiritu non dura manu; by an inward sweet influence, and not by any outward extreame violence; for the will is no will if it be compelled; and therefore as Satan cannot force vs to sinne, but onely by way of suggestion; so God will not compell vs to grace, but onely by way of inclination, and a sweet secret operation of his Spirit vpon our wils and affections,How God wor∣keth our wil∣lingnesse to doe good. without which notwithstanding, as I shewed you before, wee shall neuer be able to seeke for Christ to come to God; and therefore to expresse both the necessity of such helpe, and the
manner of Gods working it in vs; our Church excellently saith, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, and incline our hearts, not to compell them, but incline them to keepe this Law:Why the wic∣ked seeke not God. And therefore hence it is apparant, that the reason why all men doe not seeke for Christ, and serue their God, is, because God in Iustice leaues them, and doth not thus incline their hearts to seeke for him; for if he did it, how could they withstand it?Rom. 9.19. for who hath euer resisted his will? If then you will say the fault is in God,Ob. that all men doe not seeke for God; because hee doth not moue and incline their hearts to seeke after him. I answere, that this is a false conclusion,Sol. laide vpon no good foundation; for in the actions of the wicked he doth not driue them to sinne, nor hath the least finger in their iniquity; but he onely leaueth them to their owne inuentions; and so the Pro∣phet saith, Thy destruction is from thy selfe;Hosea 13.9. and he is a debtor to no man, that he should be bound to sustaine him: and therefore, if to the one, he sheweth fauour, and doth incline his heart to leaue his sinnes, and to seeke for Christ; Illi facit indebitam misericor∣diam; He doth it freely out of his mercy: if to the rest hee doth not this, he cannot be reprooued of any fault, Quia illis facit debi∣tam iustitiam; because he doth but iustly leaue them. And therefore I cannot sufficiently wonder at those men, eminent in place, and excellent for words, that lessening this helpe and fauour of God, which is the α and ω, the beginning, continu∣ing, and finishing of all the good things that are in the Saints of God; would, I know not for what cause, ascribe more power and ability vnto man, then is in any of themselues. And yet, I may cease my wondring, because as the Sodomites groped for the doores in the cleere day;Gen. 19.12. and the Iewes notwith∣standing all the inuincible, and vnanswerable apparant arguments to proue the comming of the Messiah, would neuer beleeue it to this very day: So that subtile Serpent, still striueth to darken our eyes, many times, that we cannot see the cleerest light; And so you see the action of these women, and how they came to be so full of zeale and deuotion.Two speciall obseruations from the for∣mer doctrine. Out of which we may obserue these two speciall points for our instruction. That many Women haue beene found most zealous, and reli∣gious
in the seruice of God:First, that ma∣ny women were made Instruments of great good∣nesse. for though Sathan hath much ble∣mished the beauty of this Sexe, by making them his often In∣struments to worke mischiefe, as Eua to seduce Adam, Dalila to intrap Sampson, Iezabel to infatuate Achab, and many others, to further many Heresies; so hath God much honoured them, in making them partakers of great mercies, and often instruments of his glory; as Mary to conceiue him, Elizabeth to prophesie of him, Hanna to reioyce to see him, Mary Magdalen to annoint him, Martha to entertaine him, and these three gracious Women to be the first seekers, and the first seers of him after death, and the first witnesses of his Resurrection vnto life. I might reckon many other women that trusted in God, and were famous in their ge∣nerations, and as Lampes shining in the world, whereof some were faithfull Martyrs of Iesus Christ, some bountifull entertainers of the seruants of Christ, some able to conuert their vnbeleeuing Husbands, and some to instruct their Housholds in the feare of God; as that elect Lady, vnto whom Saint Iohn writeth: And I might speake of Sara,2 Ep. Iohn v. 1. Rebecca, Debora, Iudith, Abigaile, Bath∣sheba, Hester, Dorcas, Loyse, Phaebe, Claudia, Maxima, Monica, Pulcheria, Gorgonia, Trasilla, and many more. But seeing, when it was granted to no man to be the father, God vouchsafed to ac∣cept a woman to be the mother of Christ, this onely thing is suffi∣cient to shew, how abundantly he loued, and how worthily hee deserueth the loue of women. Wherefore elect and blessed Ladies, deare and Christian wo∣men, let vs blesse that God, which hath so honoured and blessed you; let vs remember that honour is deceitfull, and beauty is vani∣ty,Prou. 31.30. but the woman that feareth the Lord shall be praised: and there∣fore imitate not that gracelesse Iezabel that painted her face with diuers colours,Esay. 3. and defiled her minde with haynous sinnes, nor those daughters of Ierusalem, which the Prophet Esay descri∣beth, and who tooke such delight in their tinckling ornaments, and trumperies of vanities, and did loue to sit at ease in Sion; but imitate that good daughter of Sion, whose beauty and glory is within,Psal. 45.14. and those Elect Ladies, and blessed women, whose praise is in the Gospell. And if at any time heretofore, you haue followed Iezabell, and those dainty Dames in transgression; doe you now and
euer hereafter follow Mary Magdalen in your true conuer∣sion, for she loued much, because much was forgiuen her,Luke 7.47. and she li∣ued most strict and religiously in her age, because shee had liued so loosly and so dissolutely in her youth: for as Dyonisius and Egesippus doe record, she betooke her selfe to a most solitary life, sequestred from all worldly pleasures, in the mountaine Bal∣ma, full thirty yeares together; in all which time shee gaue her selfe to meditation, fasting, and prayer; and as Iosephus writeth, could neuer indure any company; for now she had giuen a per∣fect bill of diuorce vnto all wantonnesse, and had disrobed her selfe of all her sumptuous weedes and alluring paludaments, and chose rather to suffer a short affliction, and to endure a hard penance with the Children of God,Heb. 11.25. then to enioy the pleasures of sinne for a season. Secondly,That we should neuer despaire of any mans conuersion. That seeing the grace of God to moue and incline our hearts must be the first agent in the conuersion of our soules, and that God hath his owne times and houres, and moments, to call vs into his Ʋineyard, some at the sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the eleuenth houre, we should not despaire of the conuersion of any one; for as to commit sinne is the death of the soule, so to despaire, is the stepping downe to the lowest Hell:Isidor. de sum∣mo bono. and therefore seeing God is multus ad misericordiam, of much mercy, to forgiue many sinnes, and of great mercy,Esay 55. to forgiue great sinnes, let vs neuer despaire of the eternall and omnipotent mercy of God; for though thy sinnes were as haynous as Mary Magdalens, yet one word of Christs mouth is able to cast out all Diuels; though they were as odious as Peters, yet one looke of Christs fauour is able to worke grace and repentance in thy soule; and though they were as many as Manasses, and as red as scarlet, yet one drop of the bloud of Christ, is able to wash them all away, and to make thy crimson soule as white as snow; and therefore returne, O Shunamite, returne, and call to God for grace; say vnto the Lord, that it is time that he haue mercy vpon thy soule, yea, the time is come. And so much for the deuotion of the women.
PART. III. CHAP. I. Of the Angels seruice vnto Christ, and how terrible they be to the wicked. THirdly, The Office of the Angels is here plainely expressed; for though Saint Marke saith, hee was a young man, yet Saint Matthew saith, he was an Angell: for Angels many times assumed outward formes,The Angels often appea∣red like men, but were ne∣uer made men. to performe some offices, and de∣posed the same againe, after the finishing of their worke, and so they vsed those formes as one vseth his garments, to put it on and off at his plea∣sure, and not as our Sauiour did: for Christ really vnited him∣selfe to the forme that he assumed, and assumed it, neuer to de∣pose it: and therefore they are said onely to appeare like men, but Christ is said to be made many. This Angell then being sent to comfort, and not to astonish these women, he tooke vpon him the forme of a man, which is a forme most customable, that he might not affright them, and hee tooke the forme of a yong man, which is a forme most ami∣able,Aug. in Psal. 104. that he might delight them: and he is called an Angell, Ab officio, non natura: In respect of his office, not of his nature; Nam ex eo quod est, spiritus est, ex eo quod agit, Angelus est; For in that which he is, he is a Spirit, in that he is sent as a Messenger he is an Angell, saith Saint Augustine: and therefore hee is a Spirit, ab essentia, in respect of his being; he is a yong man, à for∣ma, in respect of the forme wherein he appeared, and hee is an Angell, ab officio, in respect of that duty and office which he was now to discharge:The office of the Angell here expressed is three-fold. And I finde the same here to be three-fold. 1. In respect of Christ. 2. In respect of the Keepers. 3. And principally in respect of the Women.
First, The Angels are excellent in all things, but for three things most excellent. First, Purity of substance,Matth. 18.10. for they alwayes behold the face of God, into whose presence no impure thing can approach. Secondly, Readinesse of obedience, for the Prophet speaking of their seruice saith, He rode vpon Cherub, and did flie,Psal. 18.10. hee came flying vpon the wings of the winde. Thirdly, Feruentnesse of charity, for,Heb. 1.7. hee maketh his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire; whereby they burne in loue, not onely one towards another, but also towards vs poore miserable men; for they reioyce at our conuersion;Luke 15.10. and being conuerted, they become our Guardians in our conuersation;Psal. 91.11. to preserue vs in all our wayes, that we dash not our foot against a stone. And these three things were shadowed in those Cherubims,1 Kings 6.23. made by Salomon to ouer-shadow the mercy seate, for they were made of fine gold, to note their purity,2 Chron. 3.12. with their wings spread, to note their celerity, and with their faces looking one to∣wards another, to note their charity. And yet for all their excellency, when God brought his first begotten Sonne into the world, he commanded them all to doe him seruice, saying, Worship him all yee Angels; and so they did:Heb. 1.6. for when he was to be conceiued, the Angell brought tydings vnto that blessed Virgin; when he was borne,How the An∣gels alwayes did seruice vnto our Saui∣our Christ. the Angels told the same vnto the shepheards; when his life was sought for by Herod, the Angell reuealed the same vnto Ioseph, and warned him to flie into Egypt; when Herod was dead, the Angell bad Io∣seph returne into the land of Iury; when Satan had left tempting him, the Angels came and ministred vnto him; when his soule was exceeding sorrowfull vnto death, the Angels attended to comfort him: and here, when his Body was to be raysed from death, the Angel descended to rolle away that mighty stone which his ad∣uersaries had laide vpon his graue; Non propter impotentiam Christi, sed propter obedientiam Angeli: Not that Christ was vn∣able to doe it himselfe, (for he that is able to shake the earth, and of the stones to raise vp children vnto Abraham, shall we thinke him vnable to lift vp a stone?) but to declare his soueraigne au∣thority ouer these creatures of soueraigne dignity; he needs but
say vnto his Angel, Doe this and he doth it: And therefore if the Angels which neuer offended him, be euer so ready to doe him seruice, how much more willing should we be to serue him? for to whom much is giuen,Luke 12.48. of them much shall be required; and wee know he gaue more to vs for he gaue his Son vnto vs; and he did more for vs, for hee dyed for vs; and hee shewed more loue to∣wards vs, for he was made one with vs, then euer hee did vnto the Angels: and therefore I say no more, but wee are obliged to the more thankefulnesse. How the An∣gels punish wicked men.Secondly, The Angel here descended, to affright and terrifie these wicked Keepers; and therefore the Keepers at the sight of him, Intus timent exterius concutiuntur, vt ferè exanimes red∣duntur;Caietan. in Math. c. 28. were astonied, and became as dead men: for though they haue a charge to cherish the godly, and to preserue them so,Psal. 91 11. in all their wayes, that they dash not their foote against a stone; yet they are likewise charged to punish the wicked, and to dash them in pieces against euery stone; and therefore they consu∣med Sodom,Gen. 19. Exod. 12.29. 2 Kings 19.35. they plagued Aegypt, they destroyed 100. 80. and 5000. men, in the hoste of the Assirians; and here the very countenance of one Angel doth so terrifie these wicked men, that they are astonied and become as dead men: and no maruell, for his countenance is admirable, it was like lightning; and his garment white as snow; their voyce is terrible, as the voyce of God; and I heard thy voyce, (saith Adam vnto God) and I was afraide:Gen. 3.10. for as it is Ʋox suauiter dulcis & dulciter suavis; a voice like the sweet and melodious voyce of Harpers, harping with their harpes vnto the godly; so it is Vox mirabiliter terribilis, & terri∣biliter mirabilis; a voyce like the sound of many waters, that is, wonderfully terrible vnto the wicked, it shaketh the Cedars of Libanus,Reuel. 19.6. and terrifieth the very hearts of the vngodly; and their power is incredible, Ye Angels of his, (saith Dauid) that excell in strength.Psal. 103.20. O therefore sencelesse, godlesse men, will ye not feare him, that as he hath his army of little ones, that are able to destroy the greatest Potentates of the world, as the frogges, flyes, and caterpil∣lars subdued Pharaoh and all his kingdome; so he hath his Army of great ones,Reuel. 10.1. of these mighty Angels, as the Apostle cals them, to fight against you, poore silly wormes of the earth? Alas,
if their countenance be so admirable, their voyce so terrible,That it is vn∣possible to e∣scape the hands of any destroy∣ing Angell. and their power so incredible (as I shewed before,) what shall you do, when they shall haue a power super added, a power giuen them to destroy the earth, & a shaking blade put into their hands, not onely to keepe the way of the tree of life, but also to cut downe the wicked like grasse, and to cast them forth into eternall death? O consider this you that forget God, lest hee teare you in pieces while there is none to helpe you: for this is a dolefull and a fearefull case;Psal. 69.23. a most grieuous curse pronounced by Dauid, To haue those things which should be for your aduantage, an occasion of falling, to haue those glorious Angels which are appointed by God to saue and preserue you, if you serue God, to be transmuted by your sinnes to destroy and consume you: and therefore, Kisse the sonne, lest hee bee angry, for if his wrath be kindled, yea, but a little, blessed are all they that trust in him. Thirdly, This Angell here descended in respect of the women, and that for two speciall ends. 1. For their consolation. 2. For their instruction. CHAP. II. How the Angell comforteth these women diuers wayes. FIrst,How the An∣gell comfor∣teth the Wo∣men. The Angell comforteth these women many wayes, but especially, 1. By the manner of his apparition. 2. By his kinde and friendly allocution. For, First, He appeared vnto them, not in a blacke mournfull robe, but in a garment white as snow, which signifieth purity, and is the ensigne of ioy and felicity; and he assumed the shape of a yong man,Marke 16.5. Haymo in postil. super Euangel. die pasch. whose forme must needes be amiable vnto all men; and he sate on the right side, which signifieth a successiue happinesse vnto their intentions: All good signes, all signes of comfort. But, Secondly, As these dumbe shewes, doe a little consolate their afrighted soules; so his gracious speech, doth wholly expell all feare and sorrow from their afflicted hearts: for he said vnto the wo∣men,
Feare you not, for I know that you seeke Iesus that was crucified, Wherein is intimated three especiall things. 1. Whom we ought to feare. 2. Who ought, and who ought not to feare. 3. How we ought to feare. That we need not feare men, Angels, diuels.First, We need not feare Men, Angels, Diuels: for that is the meaning of the Angels words vnto the women; you need not feare the Iewes, you need not feare me, you need not feare the very Diuels;Matth. 10.28. for they are but your fellow seruants, and the greatest of all these can (and without the leaue and permission of God they cannot) but confiscate your goods,Rom. 8. and cast your bodies into the fire; for when they haue done so, they can doe no more, saith Christ; but God can cast both body and soule into Hell fire: and therefore as wee should hate nothing but sinne; because nothing but sinne makes vs to be hated of God; so wee should feare none but God; because, if God be with vs, none can hurt vs, nothing can harme vs. Ob.But against this it may be obiected, that we should feare our superiours, as Kings, Magistrates, Parents, Preachers, and such like; therefore others besides God, are to be feared. Sol.I answere, that our superiours haue a power and authority o∣uer vs: but first it is potestas data, non innata; a power giuen them from aboue, and not inbred in themselues; for (as our Sauiour saith vnto Pilate) there could be no power in man, except it were giuen him from God:Iohn 19.12. and secondly, it is potestas limitata; a pow∣er limited, so farre as God permitteth and no further; for God saith vnto them, as he doth vnto the sea, Hitherto shalt thou goe, and no further, here shalt thou stay thy proud waues: and therefore I confesse that they are to be feared, , in respect of that concessed and receiued power which they haue from God; and so indeed we feare not them but the power and authority of God in them: but not absolutely; because they haue not absolute pow∣er;In what sense and how farre parents, and magistrates are to be feared. but God hath all and absolute power, a power both of body and soule: and therefore God onely is to be feared absolutely, in all respects. But then, Secondly, It may be said, that obiectum timoris malum; The obiect of feare is euill; for we loue and desire the good, and we feare
onely that which is euill: And therefore, how can it be, that we should feare him, which is the chiefest good? I answere, That it is true, that the obiect of feare is euill, and that euill to come; for what is past, we call , Heauinesse, which is the relique and the effect of that euill which we haue suffered: but that which is to come, we call ; Feare. And yet I say, that wee may feare that which is good in two re∣spects. First, We may feare that which is good,In what sense we may be said to feare God, which is the chiefest good. Ne bonum à nobis per malum auferatur, Lest that good be taken away from vs, by rea∣son of our euill; So the body feareth death, lest by that death it should be depriued of the fruition of the soule: So we feare God, tht is good, lest that for our euill he will leaue vs, and depriue vs of the fruition of his most blessed Societie. Secondly, We may feare that which is good; Ne per bonum propter malum, malum nobis inferatur, Lest that which is good, should inflict some euill vpon vs, for our euill: So the Malefa∣ctor feareth the Iudge, lest the vprightnesse of the Iudge, should cause punishment to be inflicted vpon him, for his euill deedes; So we feare the good God, lest he should punish vs for our euill: And so in very deede, the thing that we feare, is not his good∣nesse, but the iust desert of our owne wickednesse: For to speake properly, God, as he is , a louer of man, and the chiefest good, cannot be feared; but he is onely to be feared as he is a iust Iudge,2 Thess. 1.8. which rendereth vengeance to them that know not God. And therefore, though the obiect of feare be euill, yet in tese respects, we ought while we liue on earth, (for in Hea∣uen there is no feare,1 Iohn 4.18. because perfect charity expelleth feare) to feare God the chiefest good: And blessed is he that alwayes feareth; for he that feareth the Lord, will doe no euill; But as the bankes of a Riuer doe bound in the waters from ouer-flowing, so doth the feare of God hedge in our affections, that it suffereth not our soules to sinne; whereas the bankes being broken and troden downe, the waters then Velut agmine facto, Will rush in heapes, and soone couer the whole face of the plaines: So the feare of God being once reiected, Bloud toucheth bloud;Hosea 4.2. as the Prophet saith, and all sinnes and wickednesse will be committed euen with greedinesse.
Secondly, The Angell doth herein denotate, who ought, and who ought not to feare; for he saith vnto the Women, Feare you not; because you seeke Iesus of Nazareth that was crucified; which is all one, as if he said, They that seeke Christ, or goe about to doe the will of Christ, to honour him, to imbalme him with their odoriferous prayers, and the sweete swelling flowers of pious and religious workes, as you doe, they neede not feare; no euill can happen vnto them, because God is vnto such a most louing Father, that will doe them good, and not euill all the dayes of their life: but they that seeke to presse him downe and to tram∣ple him vnder feete, like the Tyrants, or to suppresse his truth, like the Heretickes, or seeke him not crucified, but to crucifie him a∣gaine, and to make a mocke of him, by their wicked sinnes, as the Apostle saith;Heb. 6.. They may well, with these cursed Keepers feare, and tremble; because God will be vnto such a most iust Iudge,Rom. 2.6. that will render vnto euery one according to his deedes. And so you see, who neede not feare, those good and godly Saints that seeke for Christ, that liue like Christians; for the more godly we are, the lesse we neede to feare: If we had no sinne, we had neede of no feare; for in Heauen among the Saints, there is no feare, because there is no sinne;Sinne brought feare into the World. but there is perfect loue, and perfect loue expelleth feare; because feare is the defect of loue, and the effect of sinne: for if Adam had neuer sinned, Adam needed neuer to haue fea∣red; but when he had once transgressed, then assoone as euer he heard the voyce of God,Gen. 3.10. he feared: For so he saith, I heard thy voyce in the Garden, and I was afraide. But they that goe on in sinne, and drinke iniquity like water, they may well feare and tremble, and the more they sinne, the more they should feare;Psal. 5.5. Heb. 10.31. The more sin∣full we are, the more we ought to feare. because the Lord hateth all them that worke wickednesse, and it is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God: And therefore Saint Iames saith, That the Diuels feare, and tremble; and no doubt but their feare is exceeding great, because their sinnes are great. And therefore, Feare not, O Iacob my seruant (saith the Lord) but reioyce O ye Righteous, and be glad all ye that are true of heart: For the more you feare, the lesse you neede to feare; the more you feare your selues to fall to sinne, the lesse you neede to feare my wrath to punish you for your sinnes; this blessed feare to sinne, expelleth feare of vengeance:
But goe-to-now you carelesse wicked wretches, weepe and howle▪Iames 5.1. for your miseries that shall come vpon you: For seeing you haue no feare to sinne, you should feare and tremble at the consideration of that punishment which you must suffer for your sinnes: for so our Sauiour saith,Luke 12.5. You should feare to haue both body and soule cast into Hell fire; As if he said, Though you feare not to sinne, yet you may and should feare this punishment for sinne. Thirdly, The Angell (perhaps) herein,How, or after what manner we ought to feare God. would intimate how we ought to feare; for there is too little feare, and this proceedeth, Ex carentia fidei, through want of faith; and there is too much feare, and this springeth, Ex superabundantia spei, through too much confidence and excesse of hope; and both these sorts of men Tum sperando tum desperando miserè pereunt, By hoping vainely, or fearing desperately, doe miserably perish: And therefore the Angell might well disswade these Women from both these kindes of feare, and say; Feare you not: Too little you doe not, for I see you affrighted; and too much, you may not, you neede not, be∣cause you seeke Iesus that was crucified; but in a meane, and a middle sort, you may, and you should feare: for, Blessed is the man that alwayes feareth; Because there bee three states of a Christian man. 1. Of grace. 2. Of laps. 3. Of recouerie. and, Feare must be wanting in none of these. For,That God ought to be feared in euery state. 1. Of Grace. Rom. 11.20. 2. Of Laps. Luke 23.40. First, In the state of grace, we must feare to leese the goodnesse of God: for so the Apostle saith, Thou that standest by faith, be not high minded, but feare. Secondly, In the state of laps, wee must feare to feele the iu∣stice of God: for so the good thiefe said vpon the Crosse, Fearest thou not, seeing thou art in the state of condemnation? Thirdly, In the state of recouery, God must be feared,3. Of Recoue∣rie. Psal. 130.4. for his double fauour; for so the Prophet saith, With thee there is mercy, that thou maist be feared: That is, Mercy to forgiue, that we may be afraide to offend. And thus Saint Bernard saith, In statu gratiae time, ne non digne opereris ex ea; In the state of Gods fauour feare, lest thou turne the graces of God into wantonnesse; as the false
Steward, that wasted his Masters goods, and the slothfull seruant, that hid his Lords Talent:Luke 16.1. In statu lapsus time, quia reliquit te cu∣stodia tua spiritus Deus,Math. 15.18. & 25. & Angeli Dei; In the state of sinne feare, because God hath forsaken thee, and the Angels of God haue no charge of thee: In statu restitutionis time, quia deterius est recidere quam incidere; In the state of restauration feare to relapse, be∣cause recidiuation is farre more dangerous then the first trans∣gression. And so you see the meaning of this Angels consolatorie words vn∣to the women,Iames 2.19. Feare you not; That is, not me, not men, not deuils: for they feare themselues, and tremble, and they cannot hurt you, because you seeke Iesus that was crucified, and you walke in the light, therefore you cannot stumble; for he that walketh in the light,Iohn 11.9. stumbleth not, saith our Sauiour: but you may, and should feare God, with a filiall feare; that is, To stand in awe to offend his blessed Maiestie, for this expelleth all sinne and wickednesse from vs, and continueth the loue and fauour of God vnto vs. And so much for the Angels comforting of these weake and comfortlesse Women. Euery benefit requires a du∣tie.Secondly, This Angell doth not onely comfort and shew benignity vnto these Women; but he doth also instruct them, and require a duty from them, Quia beneficium exigit officium. Because euery fauour shewed, requires a willingnesse to haue our seruice performed; and as Aristotle saith, ;Aristot. aethic. l. 5. 5. It behoueth the party gratified, to be proportionably seruiceable to him that did him kindnesse, so that euery good turne in nature is obligatory, and whatsoeuer bene∣fiteth, ipso facto bindeth: And therefore this Angel setteth downe vnto these Women, two especiall lessons. The first of Theorie, which they must know. The second of practice, which they must doe.
CHAP. III. How the Angell informeth the Women of the Resurrection of Christ many wayes, and how the vbiquity of Christ his Body is here confuted by this Angell. FOR the first, In the lesson of Theorie,The Angell sheweth the resurrection of Christ, three manner of wayes. this An∣gell sheweth vnto these Women the Resurre∣ction of Christ, and that as you may see three especiall wayes. 1. By way of Negation, He is not here. 2. By way of Confirmation, For he is risen. 3. By way of Illustration, For he is risen, as hee said, and as you may see; Come see the place where the Lord lay. First, The Angell saith, Christ is not here; that is,That this asser∣tion of the An∣gell quite o∣uerthroweth that doctrine of the vbiqui∣ty of Christs Body. in respect of his corporall presence: for otherwise as he is God, he was there, and in all other places of the World; but as he is a man, consi∣sting of a true naturall body, defined and measured with quantity, and bounded with the limits of his trinary Dimensions, bredth, length, and thickenesse, and all other properties of a true body, he was gone, and was not there: And therefore this onely place of Scripture, if there were none other, is sufficient to disproue all the vbiquitaries in the World; for if his body was in euery place, how could the Angell say, that he was not in that place? It is true, that Christ may be said to be euery where, and that the Virgins Sonne may be said to haue created the World,Bonauent. l. 3. sent. dist. 22. q. 2. but how? Non per proprietatem naturarum, sed per communicationem proprietatum, Not by the propriety of Natures, but by the com∣munication of properties, and that not as transfused, the proper∣ties of the one Nature into the other, but as predicated of whole Christ in respect of the personall vnion of the one Nature with the other: For though the Apostle saith,Coloss. 2.9. That in him dwelleth the fulnesse of the God-head bodily; yet we must note a difference be∣tweene Diuinitatem communicari humanitati, To communicate the Deity, and all the diuine properties vnto the humanitie,Bellar. de incar. Christi. l. 3. c. 16. Et di∣uinitatem inhabitare in humanitate, And to haue the Diuinity, and
all the diuine properties to dwell in the humanity,How Christ may be truely said to be eue∣ry where. and so to dwell, not as he doth in vs, by his grace, but by a personall vnion vnto his Nature: And therefore as a House, by reason of a mans dwelling in it, cannot be said to goe or to speake, but the man dwelling in the House may be said to doe the same; so the bo∣dy of Christ, by reason of the inhabitation of the Deity, cannot be said to know all things, or to be euerywhere; but the God-head that dwelleth in that body, may be, and is euery where: for though the humanity of Christ subsisteth in the person of the Sonne of God, (and in that respect may be said to be euery where,In what sense the manhood of Christ may be said to be euery where. because that hauing no subsistence of it owne, it subsi∣steth in a person that is euery where,) yet in respect of its Es∣sence, being a finite creature, it is no wayes capable of the diuine properties: And therefore though Christ personally may be said to be in all places, or the Body of Christ vertually, respectu vir∣tutis seruatricis, that is, in respect of his sauing vertue, as the Sunne, which is essentially in Heauen, but vertually in all inferior bo∣dies, may be said to be euery where; yet the Body of Christ local∣ly, or the manhood of Christ solely considered, must needes be in one place: Otherwise how could his manhood be contained within the straights of the Virgins wombe, if his manhood was euery where? How could his body be nayled to the Crosse, wrapped in clothes, laide in the Sepulcher, if that his body was so spacious as that no limits could containe him? Or how could the Angell say,Bellar. de in∣car. l. 3. c. 12. He is not here, if he was euery where? Surely this would euert all the Articles of our Faith, that we doe professe tou∣ching the humanity of our Sauiour Christ, and make Christ in∣deede to be no Christ at all. Secondly, The Angell confirmeth his assertion of Christs not being in his graue, by a sufficient reason: For he is risen; for if he had said,Luc. 24.6. But he is risen, (as Saint Luke saith it) it had beene a fur∣ther affirmation of his Resurrection; but saying, For he is risen, it is likewise a confirmation of his former assertion, He is not here: And the reason is naturall, and in nature it is vnanswerable. He is risen, and gone to another place, therefore hee cannot be here, in this place; he is aliue on Earth, and therefore not dead here in the graue: And therefore, Why seeke ye the liuing among the dead? why seeke you Christ where he is not?
A doctrine surely to be well obserued, Not to looke for Christ where he is not, either in respect of 1. His spirituall 2. His corporall presence. First, For his spirituall presence, we know where he is,Gregor. moral. l. 18. c. 15. In sinu matris Ecclesiae, In the bosome of our Mother the Church: For where two or three are gathered together in my name,Matth. 18.20. there am I in the middest of them; And therefore, If thus we would finde Christ,Luke 2.44. let vs not with Ioseph and Mary seeke him among our Kinsmen, and Acquaintance, and worldly Friends; Nam quomodo,That Christ is no where to be found but in the Church. O bone Ie∣su, inter cognatos meos te inueniam, qui inter tuos minimè es inuentus? For how is it possible, O sweete Iesu, saith Saint Bernard, that I should finde thee among my Kindred, when thy Mother could not finde thee among thine owne Kinsmen? (and I would to God, all the Bernards of our time would thinke on this,) but let vs with the Church in the Canticles,Lyra ad loc. cant. 1.8. follow the foote-steppes of the Flockes vnto the Tents of the Shepheards; that is, Vestigia fidelium ad sedes doctorum, The foote-steps of the faithfull to the seats of the Doctors and Teachers of Iesus Christ: There he was found by his Mother, and there he is still to be found of his Children. And, Secondly, For his corporall presence, we know where he is,That Christ is no where cor∣porally but in heauen. Act. 3.21. sit∣ting at the right hand of God in Heauen, not in Earth; for, the Heauens must containe him vntill the restitution of all things: In∣deede Mary Magdalen, and the rest of these Women here, thought him to be in his graue; but as yet he had not ascended in∣to Heauen, and they knew not what was become of him: And therefore their ignorance may be excused, for seeking Christ where he was not; but we know where he is, and therefore our negligence and preposterousnesse must needes be condemned, and our selues shall be found void of all excuse: Si quaeramus in tumulo,Aug de tem∣pore Serm. 133. quem adorare debemus in coelo, If we seeke him not where he is, and not still looke for him where he is not. Our Sauiour tells vs, (and I cannot here omit it,) That there should arise false Prophets, and they should say vnto you, Loe here is Christ, or loe there is Christ; but he aduiseth vs to beleeue it not: And surely wee haue many such false and deceitfull Prophets,
euen all the patrones of transubstantiation, that teach vs to seeke for Christ where he is not:Looke Doctor Sheldon in a Sermon prea∣ched before the King, inti∣tuled, Christ sitting on his throne and not in popish se∣crets, where this is largely handled. Aug. l. de vnit. eccl. cap. 3. Aquinas in cat. sup. Matth c. 24. for I doe assure my selfe, (as Ma∣ster Doctor Sheldon hath most learnedly and largely proued) that the prediction of Christ, concerning the practise of those pseudochristians, whereof he speaketh Matth. 24.26. saying, that they should say vnto vs; behold, he is in the secrets, is prin∣cipally to be vnderstood of these men. For, Although diuers of the ancient interpreters, as Origen, Saint Augustine, Aquinas, and others, doe expound those words of Christ mystically, of the priuate conuenticles of hereticks, that doe challenge vnto themselues only the spirituall presence of Christ; and I confesse this to be true, yet I say, that this is not all the truth; nor yet the chiefest intention of our Sauiour Christ: and it is no maruell that the Fathers attained not vnto the full meaning of our Sauiours words; because, euery pro∣phesie is, as a riddle, or a booke sealed vp, hard to be interpreted, as Ireneus saith, contra heres. lib. 4. cap. 43. but I say, that Christ forewarneth vs to take heed of such, as would pretend to teach him, the true Christ to be personally present, in most hidden and secret places, wherein I beseech you to obserue these three particulars. That Christ warneth vs to beware of thē that would seeme to teach the true Christ.First, that I say, Christ forewarneth vs to take heed of such as pretend to teach the true Christ; for he saith, that these false prophets shall preuaile so farre in their perswasions, as that the very elect shall be in danger to be seduced by their subtilties; and therefore this doth plainly proue to me, that they shall not denie the true Christ, nor pretend to preach any other Christ, (for if they did so, the elect might be said to be more in danger of persecution then seduction) but that they should with lying arguments, out of Christs owne words, and in Christ his owne name (as they will professe in the latter day) teach and seeke to proue him, the true Christ, to be in secrets; that is, in those places,That Christ warneth vs to beware of thē that teach his bodily pre∣sence any where, but in heauen. where he is not. Secondly, that I say, Christ forewarneth vs to beware of such as teach him, the true Christ, to be personally and corporal∣ly present in those secret places wherein they auouch him to be; for Christ bidding vs, not to beleeue, that hee is in such secrets, setteth downe these two reasons to shew why we should not beleeue it.
First,That Christ v∣seth two speci∣all reasons to proue that hee wil neuer come bodily to any secrets, till the day of iudge∣ment. because that as the lightening commeth from the East and shineth vnto the West, so shall the comming of the sonne of man be: which is all one as if he had said; when they shall tell you that I am personally present in any place, beleeue it not, because I shall neuer come personally, (spiritually I doe euery day) vntill I come as a lightening, i. e. suddenly, gloriously, manifestly, which shall be his comming to iudgement. Secondly, because that wheresoeuer the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together; for though Origen senseth the body,Origen. tract. 30 in Matth. to be the Church; the Eagles to be the Doctors; and their ga∣thering together, to be their harmonious and ioynt-consent in truth; and though Saint Ierome, Theophylact and others,Hieron. in Matth. 4. and Theophylact. in Matth. 24. do by the body conceiue Christ crucified, by the Eagles all the Saints, and by their gathering together, the applying of the merits of his passion, vnto our soules: yet Saint Chryostome, Stella, Ferus, and Mal∣donate, and many more, euen of our Iesuites doe interpret these words, of Christ his comming to iudgement; and say that the body signifieth the personall presence of Christ, the Eagles the Saints, and their gathering together the meeting of him in iudge∣ment: and therefore by this reason, Christ doth plainly inti∣mate, that they should not looke, nor beleeue any personall pre∣sence of him in any secret places; because hee is that body, or that carkeise, as both Theophilact and Beza vse the word, vnto whom all the Saints shall be visibly gathered together; and he at no time come bodily vnto them, vntill they likewise come, and be gathered vnto him. And in both these reasons (as you see) he speaketh of a per∣sonall presence of himselfe, publikely shewed, and in this last nameth his body or carkeise; and therefore in his predictions, he forewarneth vs to beleeue not them, which teach any per∣sonall or bodily presence of him in any secrets; for otherwise it had beene to no purpose to bring these reasons of his not comming bodily, vntill he should visibly come to iudgement, to disswade vs from beleeuing any his spirituall comming: for his not comming personally till the day of iudgement, doth no way proue, but hee may as he doth come spiritually euery day to bee present with his Saints in many secrets; but his not comming personally till then is a sufficient reason, to disswade vs from
beleeuing any personall comming of him in secrets. And, That Christ willeth vs to beware of them that teach him to be bodily pre∣sent in many places at once.Thirdly, that I say, Christ forewarneth vs to take heed of such as teach him, the true Christ, to be thus personally present, in many secret, vnknowne places, all at once; for the very word, which our Sauiour vseth, to expresse the subtilties of these false prophets, doth proue as much: for, First hee sheweth vs, that they shall say, he is : in secrets: which is a word that signifieth, a most secret, vnknowne place; a little cupboord where they vse to set their bread; and so the word, vsed to expresse the same in the vulgar Latine, in penetralibus, doth signifie the most inward, and most hidden place of any place. Secondly, he sheweth vs, that those false prophets should tell vs, that the true Christ is not onely : in some one secret place, but in penetralibus, in secrets, i. e. in many places, and in diuers secrets all at once. That the de∣fenders of Transubstan∣tiation teach all these points which Christ bad vs herein to beware of.And I say, that I could neuer see, how this prediction can be more properly applied, to any heretickes, old or new, then to the teachers and defenders of Transubstantiation: for, First, they perswade vs to beleeue no other Christ, but onely the true Christ to bee there, vnder the formes of bread and wine. Secondly, they perswade vs, that he is personally and bodily there, flesh, bloud, bones, and all: Thirdly, they teach, that he is there in so secret, hidden, and in∣uisible manner, as that it can no wayes, by any humane sense be conceiued, but onely by a diuine faith to be beleeued. And I am sure no false prophets in the world could, or euer can teach a more mysticall and secret presence of Christ personally and bodily, then this manner is▪ and Fourthly, they teach, that he is thus wholly and hiddenly in many thousand places all at once, euen wheresoeuer any bread in the Masse is consecrated, there is Christ personally in all such se∣crets; according to their ancient distich: Constat in altari, carnem de pane creari; Hic panis Deus est, qui negat hoc, reus est: The bread on th'altar, as wee say, is turned by the Priest his breath, To be Christs flesh; who euer saith nay, is guilty of his death.
And therefore seeing the prediction of Christ concerning the practise of the false apostles, is so plainely seene to be fully accomplished in these deceiued and deceitfull teachers; I aduise all men to follow our Sauiours councell, beleeue them not, be∣leeue them not; for, though we doe acknowledge, a true, reall, sacramentall presence of Christ, effectually and really working,How the body of Christ may be said to bee truly and real∣ly in the Sacra∣ment. by a true and liuely faith in all the worthy receiuers of that blessed bread; because, as the Angells are said truely and really to be, not only where they diffinitiuely are, but also where they doe effectually worke; and as the Sunne is said truly and really to be, not onely where he is locally fixed in heauen, but also where it doth virtually shine, and worke here on earth; so the bodie of Christ may bee said to bee truly and really, not onely in the heauens, where it is locally present, but also here in the sacred mysteries, where he effectually worketh in all the worthy recei∣uers of the same; yet for any other reall bodily presence of Christ, in the bread and wine, we vtterly deny he is not here; for the same reason that the Angell vseth to proue, hee was not in his graue; because he was risen, and gone to another place; so we say, he is not here; because we know he is in heauen, where he sitteth on the right hand of God, and from thence he will not come personally into any hidden and secret place, vntill hee comes apparantly, like the lightening that commeth from the East, and suddenly shineth vnto the West, as himselfe doth testifie. And so much for the confirmation of this Angells assertion, that Christ was not there, in the graue; because hee was risen, and gone to another place; and so likewise of my application and inference thereupon, that we are not to beleeue Christ to bee in the secret places of bread and wine; because hee is ascended to another place, where he sitteth on the right hand of God: He that hath eares to heare, let him heare; for here I doe professe,What the Au∣thor thinketh of transubstan∣tiation. before almighty God, and before his sonne Iesus Christ, that in all my poore reading (which I desired might bee so much as my time and ability would giue mee leaue) I did neuer finde a point, more contrary to the truth, more derogatory to the honour of God, more destroying the nature of Christ, and more dangerous vnto men in all the writings of our aduer∣saries then is this incredible and impossible point of Transub∣stantiation:
loe, I haue told you what I beleeue. And here likewise we must further note, that (as I shewed vnto you before) Saint Luke saith, He is not here, but he is risen; to teach vs▪ that these words are so excellently couched by the E∣uangelist, as they might serue, both for a confirmation of his for∣mer speech, he is not here; and also for an assertion and declaration of the chiefest matter that the Angell intended to instruct these women in: that is, the resurrection of Christ: for he is risen. CHAP. IIII. That the Messias was to rise againe, and why: Certaine obiections answered: and why he was to rise againe the third day. THirdly, the Angell doth not onely affirme, but he doth also illustrate and confirme this assertion of Christ his resurrection, by two infallible arguments. First, à priori, from those typicall instructions, and Propheticall predictions, which foreshewed that the Messias must rise againe. Secondly, à posteriori, from those cleere demonstrations that doe proue this Christ to haue risen againe. For the first he saith; that, Christ was risen as he said i. e. formerly by his Prophets, and lately by himselfe; for the resurrection of Christ was not onely prefigured by Adams sleepe, by Isaacs lay∣ing vpon the Altar, by Iosephs imprisonment, by Sampsons breaking of the gates of Gaza, and such like, but in a more plaine and speciall manner, it was prophecied and foretold by Moses, Dauid and others of the Prophets, which spake of the resurrection of Christ, and so likewise by our Sauiour Christ himselfe.Three speciall reasons shew∣ing, why Christ was to rise a∣gaine. First, to mani∣fest Satans conquest. Secondly, to assure vs of our deliuerance. And the reason why the Messias was to rise againe is specially three-fold. First, in respect of Satan, that his subiection might be mani∣fested, for he had said, that the Prince of this world was to be cast forth, this Prince was conquered at his passion, but this conquest was manifested at his resurrection. Secondly, in respect of vs men, that we might bee assured of our deliuerance from sinne and Satan; and of our iustifi∣cation
before God, by the  vertue and power of his passi∣on; for if Christ be not risen from the dead, our faith is vaine, our hope is vaine, our religion is vaine, and wee of all men most miserable: for in this onely point, consisteth the greatest diffe∣rence, betwixt vs and the Iewes, and all other vnbeleeuing Gen∣tiles: Nam Christum esse mortuum ratio humana concedit, for they will yeeld that Christ was dead, humane reason might proue that vnto vs;Ambros. l. 24. c. 26. in Joh. sed eum esse suscitatum ex mortuis omnem fidem rationis excedit, but that hee should rise againe from the dead, they cannot thinke, they will not beleeue; because this ex∣ceeds the reach of reason: and therefore Saint Ambrose saith, that although sibi cur resurgeret rationem non haberet, he had no reason to rise in respect of himselfe, yet, there was great reason that hee should rise for the confirmation of our faith: and so Saint Paul saith,Rom. 4.25. that hee rose againe for our iustifi∣cation; not that any part of the price of our redemption was vnpaid at his passion, but that the euidence of our deliuerance was not manifested vntill his resurrection: for as hee died to deliuer vs, so he rose againe to shew that he had deliuered vs. Thirdly, in respect of himselfe,Thirdly, to shew himselfe a most victorious con∣queror of all his enemies. that he might shew himselfe a victorious conqueror of all his enemies, and a trampler of hell, sinne, and Satan vnder his feet; as of those that could detaine him no longer in their hands: and that he might shew him∣selfe to be the Sonne of God, coequall and coeternall vnto his Father; for as he was to declare himselfe, truly to be the sonne of man, by yeelding vnto death; so he was to declare him∣selfe mightily to be the Sonne of God, by the resurrection from the dead;Esay 53. and as he should be led (by Esayas prophecie) as a sheepe to the slaughter, when he was to be crucified; so he should come from the spoile, (by Iacobs prophecie) as a Lions whelpe,Gen. 49.9. when he was to rise from the dead: and therefore Saint Ber∣nard saith, that he, Qui agnus extiterat in passione, factus est Leo in resurrectione, which stood as a lambe at his passion, to take away the sin of the world, became a Lion at his resurrection, to spoile all principalities and powers, and to make an open shew of them.Collos. 2.15. But here it may bee some will say, doth resurrection from the dead declare a man to haue conquered death, hell and Sa∣tan, and proue him to bee the eternall and omnipotent Sonne of
God?1 King. 17.22. Marke 5.41. Luke 7.14. Iohn 11. why then the widdowes sonne of Sarepta, the sonne of the Shunamite, the daughter of Iairus, the widdowes sonne of Naime, Lazarus, and all that did rise with Christ, and appeared to their friends in Ierusalem, may be said to be the conquerors of death and the eternall sonnes of God: but this is most absurd, and therefore resurrection from the dead is no sufficient argument to proue the conquest of our enemies, and the diuine omnipotency of our Sauiour Christ. Sol.I answere, Quod hi resurrexerunt mortui, iterum morituri, that these men rose when they were dead, to die againe, after they were raised; but Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more (saith the Apostle) death hath no more dominion ouer him. Rom. 6.8.Secondly, I say, that all those were raised virtute aliorum, by the vertue and power of others, as the widdowes sonne of Sarepta was raised by Elias,That all which were raised from death but Christ, were raised by o∣thers and died againe. the Shunamites sonne by Elizaeus, and they did it potestate precaria non propria, by a power obtai∣ned by prayer, not proper in themselues; a power non innata, sed data desuper, not their owne naturally, but supernatural∣ly giuen them from aboue; and therefore though in their life time, they raised others, yet being dead, they could not raise themselues; but our Sauiour Christ did not onely raise o∣thers in his life time, but also being dead, laid in his graue, pressed with stones, sealed by the Priests, watched by the Soul∣diers,That Christ raised himselfe from the dead and sought to be detained by all the power of darkenesse; yet hee, virtute propria vt victor prodijt de sepultura, as a most inuincible conqueror, by his owne proper power, rai∣sed himselfe to life; and by the strength of his owne arme, hee caused all things,Bernard. de re∣sur. Christ. to make way vnto himselfe. And this the Prophet Esay, in the person of Christ cleerely expresseth; say∣ing,Esay 63.3.5. I haue troden the wine presse alone, and of the people there was none with me; and I looked, and there was none to helpe; and I won∣dered that there was none to vphold: and therefore mine owne arme brought saluation vnto mee, and my fury it vpheld me; for as no man could take away his life from him, he laid it downe him∣selfe, as a man layeth downe his garments; so though there was none to helpe him; yet was it vnpossible, that any, or all his enemies should keepe away his life from him, hee had equall power to take it vp, as hee had to lay it downe at
his pleasure: and therefore St. Peter saith,Act. 2.24. Ob. Act. 5.30. Act. 2.24. cap. 4.10. Ephes. 1.20. Rom. 8.11. Sol. that he loosed the sor∣rowes of death, because it was vnpossible that he should be holden of it. But against this it may be obiected, that the God of our fa∣thers is said to haue raised vp Iesus from the dead; and so in ma∣ny places the suscitation and resurrection of Christ is ascribed vnto the Father: and therefore Christ did not raise himselfe. I answere that this doth not shew, he raised not himselfe; but it sheweth that the resurrection of the manhood of Christ is the indiuisible worke of the blessed Trinity essentially, common to all the three persons; for as the Father raised him, so he rai∣sed himselfe, for (whatsoeuer the Father doth, I doe, saith Christ;) and so the holy Ghost raised him: and therefore this rather confirmeth the truth of his resurrection, by his owne power and vertue, then any waies seeme to infring the same. Neither was it onely prophesied that he should rise againe from the dead, but it was also more particularly shewed,Hosea 6.2. that he should rise againe the third day: for the Prophet Osee speaking of our Sauiour Christ, saith; after two dayes hee will reuiue vs, and in the third day he will raise vs vp, and we shall liue in his presence; and Christ himselfe more plainly saith,Matth. 12.40. that as Ionas was three dayes and three nights in the Whales belly, so should the sonne of man be three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth. And the reason why hee was so directly to rise againe the third day, may be said to be, to fulfill all predictions,That God fore∣shewed Christ should rise a∣gaine the third day. that were fore-spoken concerning him, that so the Scriptures might be fulfilled, as our Sauiour himselfe doth testifie: and so the Angell said, that he was risen, as he said: and he said that he should rise againe the third day. And this he said, 1. Formerly in the old Testament. 2. Lately in the new Testament. First, by his Prophet Osee hee said in plaine termes, that in the third day he would raise vs vp, i. e. his Son vnited to vs, or else our flesh assumed by his Son: but because as many of vs do now heare the Sermon and hate the Preacher, praise his words, and neuer practise the matter, so did the Iewes then, heare the pro∣phesies but kill the Prophets, retained the words, but neuer beleeued the true substance of the matter: therefore God did not onely by these dead letters, but also by most liuely figures,
expresly shew, that the Messias, which should be slaine, should in the third day be raised vp: for, Typicall testi∣monies shew∣ing that Christ should rise the third day. Gen. 22 4.First, Isaac going with his Father to be sacrificed, as a true type of that eternall Priest which was sacrificed for all men, vntill the third day was no better then a dead man; but at the third day he was reuiued, restored, and as it were raised againe from the dead. Secondly, Ioseph being sold to Egypt, and sent by God to be a ruler next vnder Pharaoh,Gen. 41.1. (as Christ is vnder God his Father) that he might be a type of this eternall King, vntill the third yeare, was no better then a dead man, but in the third yeare, hee was deliuered and made gouernour ouer all the land of Egypt. Ionas 2.2.10.Thirdly, Ionas being sent into the land of Niniue, that hee might be a type of that great Prophet which the Lord our God had promised to raise vnto vs out of our brethren: for three dayes was no better then a dead man, lying all that while in the whales belly; but after three dayes he was deliuered out of the belly of Hell, and vomited out vpon the dry land. All these fore-told the resurrection of Christ: and therefore Christ to fulfill all these, did rise againe the third day. Christ himselfe shewed, that he should rise againe the third day.Secondly, Neither did these preach louder vnto the Iewes, that the Messias which was to come, should rise againe the third day, then Christ himselfe did vnto his Apostles that he would rise againe the third day: for as soone as euer Saint Peter, in the name of them all, had confest that hee was the Christ the Sonne of the liuing God; he did presently professe vnto him and the rest, how hee must be killed and raised againe the third day: and therefore to performe his owne words, spoken by himselfe, aswell as his Fathers words spoken by the Prophets, hee would be mindefull of his promise, and rise againe the third day; and this the Angels doe excellently note, when they said vnto the Women,Luk. 24.6. Remember how he spake vnto you, while he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Sonne of man must be deliuered into the hands of sinnefull men, and be crucified, and the third day rise againe. An exceeding comfort vnto vs all, that Christ will euer per∣forme his word, fulfill his promise, and obserue his time to a mi∣nute; for he is not as man that he should lie: and therfore we should
euer giue credence vnto his words, for he will performe them all in their appointed times. But here it may be demaunded,Ob. why God appointed and de∣creed this third day to be the definitiue and set time of his resur∣rection, rather then the second, fourth or fifth, or any other day before or after? To this I answere, that God is liberrimus agens,Sol. That we are not curiously to search the reason of Gods free actions. a free wor∣ker of his owne affaires, and it is not for vs to know the times and the seasons which the Father hath kept in his owne power; but as he doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him, so hee doth them whensoeuer it pleaseth him. Secondly, I say that we find very excellent reasons (that it pleased God to reueile vnto vs) why Christ raised himselfe the third day: that is, 1. In respect of his enemies.Christ raised himselfe the third day in three respects. 2. In respect of his Disciples. 3. In respect of all beleeuers. First, His enemies,First, of his enemies. both in respect of the praedictions of the Pro∣phets, and the speeches of Christ himselfe knew, that the Messias should rise againe the third day: and therefore they hyred soul∣diers, and appointed a guard to watch,Turtul. aduers. Iudaeos. c. 13. and to keepe the sepul∣cher, that vpon that day this Iesus should not rise; lest if he did, he might be then thought to be the Messias indeed: and there∣fore vpon that day he did rise, that his enemies might be con∣uicted by the testimony of their owne watchmen, and bee brought therefore, either to confesse their faults, or to remaine without excuse; if they knowing the truth, would notwithstan∣ding seeke (as they did) to conceale and suppresse the truth. Secondly,Secondly, of his disciples. His friends and disciples vpon the foresaid appre∣hensions, did expect his resurrection vpon this third day; for so the two disciples trauelling towards Emaus after they had said many things concerning him,Chrysost. hom. 9. in Matth. and that they trusted it had beene hee which should haue redeemed Israel, they adde this, as a most speciall obseruation, besides all the rest,Luk. 24.21. that to day is the third day since these things were done: and therefore to confirme their weake faith, and to comfort their disconsolate soules, hee did rise againe the third day.
Thirdly, of all Christians.Thirdly, We were all to reape and to receiue the fruits and benefits of his resurrection: and therefore chiefly (as hee rose) so hee rose the third day in respect of vs all, i. e. to confirme our faith, and that especially in these foure respects. The Resurre∣ction of Christ the third day confirmeth our faith in foure respects1. Touching the quality of his person. 2. Touching the certainty of his resurrection. 3. Touching the manner of our restauration. 4. Touching the manifestation of our state and condition. First, Our Sauiour Christ consisted both of a Diuine and a Humane nature: Humane, that he might die; and Diuine, that he might rise againe: and to shew his death, it was requisite that he should rise no sooner then the third day; because in lesse time then that, a man cannot well bee saide to bee dead, but may bee suspected to be in a sound or in a fit of an apoplexie,How the third day was the fittest time for Christ to rise in respect of the person of Christ. or some other fained fit: and in respect of the Diuine nature, it was vnpossible that he should be held of death any longer then three dayes; for it is the opinion of most, grounded vpon experience, that in all dead carkasses, and a wounded body especially, putrefaction and corruption beginneth the third day; so Martha saith of La∣zarus, he hath beene dead foure dayes, and he stinketh: then no doubt but he began to stinke the third day; but the humane na∣ture of our Sauiour Christ, in respect of its hypostaticall vnion with the Deity, euen then, when it lay in the graue, could not see, much lesse feele corruption;Psal. 16.11. Act. 2.24. as the Prophet Dauid sheweth: therefore it was vnpossible (saith Saint Peter) that he should bee holden of the paines of death, i. e. be stayed so long by death, vntill putrefaction or other like penalties and consequences of death had seized vpon him; and therefore as in respect of his humane nature, it was not conuenient he should rise any sooner: so in re∣spect of his Diuine nature it was vnpossible hee should be stayd any longer.Christ stayed while the third day, to shew the verity of his deth, nd no longer, to shew the cer∣tainty of his resurrection. Secondly, Our Sauiour was to shew both the verity of his death, and the certainty of his resurrection: but if hee had risen sooner then three dayes, the verity of his death might be called into question; and if he had promised after a long time to haue raised himselfe againe, (as Mahomet said, that after 800. yeares he would reuiue and reuisite his Sarazens againe) then might
the falshood thereof lurke in the length of time; and indeed if he had staid in his graue any whit longer then he did, it might be easily obiected and with some probability, by his aduersaries, that there was no certainty of his resurrection, whether it was he that was crucified had raised himselfe, or some other that ap∣peared in his name; or whether he had raised the same body that was buried, or had assumed some other body, like vnto the same: because the countenance of a dead body is soone chan∣ged, and our memory and knowledge of such is soone stupified, as we see these three dayes time, made most of them, that they knew him not, prima facie, vpon the first sight: therefore Christ to shew the verity of his death, stayed while the third day; and he would stay no longer, to shew the certaintie of his resurrection. Thirdly,Christ rose the third day might paralell our creation. Christ in our redemption was to paralell our crea∣tion; and in many things this second Adam was to resemble the first Adam; for Saint Paul speaking of Gods oeconomie and dispensation of his grace vnto vs, sheweth, how Almighty God purposing to redeeme mankinde, did so sweetly dispose of the manner of our redemption, that as by man came death, so by man came the resurrection from the dead: and so a due proportion and resemblance should be in many things betwixt the first and se∣cond Adam. But we finde that the first Adam was formed out of the earth, as from a sole mother without any Father, by the Word of God, and was both created and fallen in the sixt day, the day before the Sabbaoth: therefore the word God,Amb. l. 5 ep. 19. in the sixt age of the world, was made the second Adam, of a sole mother, with∣out a father; and in the sixt day of the weeke, the same day wherein Adam was created, and transgressed, and about the same hower that the first Adam sinned by eating the fruit of the forbidden tree, was this second Adam crucified vpon a tree, and in the same place (as some doe thinke) wherein the first Adam was buried: and as the Father after his creation, rested vpon the Sabbaoth; so Christ after our purchase and redempti∣on, rested in his graue all the Sabbaoth; and then as his Father pon the first day of the weeke, had begunne the world; so Christ vpon the first day of the weeke did beginne to renue the world, and caused, as Lactantius saith: Omnia cum domino dona
redire suo; All graces to bee renued, all men that beleeued in him to be reuiued, and now to beginne againe to liue a new life vnto God with him. And this was prefigured in the Law, where Moses sheweth, that the sheafe of their first fruits was to be brought vnto the Priest,Leuit. 23.11. and the Priest was to waue the same before the Lord, on the morrow after the Sabbaoth, which was the Sabbaoth of the Passeouer;Ʋers. 15. to note vnto vs, that Christ which is the true first fruites that is offered vnto God for vs all, was to be waued and raised vp the immediate morrow after the Passeouer; that as Adam was created the last day, and then dyed, and so begat Ecclesiam morientium, a Congregation of sinners, all subiect vnto death; so Christ the first day of the weeke was raised vp, and liues for euer, to beget Ecclesiam resurgentium, a Congregation of belee∣uers, that through him might liue to God and with God for euer. Christ rose the third day to be a pat∣terne of our condition.Fourthly, Christ by his example, was to set downe a patterne and a sampler of our state and condition: and we are all to learne of him, and to doe as he did, if we desire to be happy where hee is; but here we see Christ had his three dayes and no more: and therefore we must haue the same three dayes, and the same like to his, if we would be Christians like to him. Now these three dayes of Christ were thus distinguished: the first day was called the day of preparation, and this was the day of his Passion: the second day was called the Sabbaoth, and this was the day of his rest, and the third day was called the first day of the weeke, and this was the day of his resurrection; and so must our three dayes beare equipage, and proue to be like his, if we would be his. The first day is a day of Passion.The first is a day of preparation, a day of Passion, a day of cloudes and darkenesse, wherein with strong cries, and teares, and prayers, we must commend our selues vnto the tuition and pro∣tection of God; for in this day we must striue and struggle a∣gainst sinne and Satan; wee must suffer all their bitter darts against vs, and we must fight till we die against them: and though this bee a day of sorrow, yet wee haue some com∣fort in this day; for as this his first day, was the shortest of all his three dayes; so is our life but a day; giue vs this day our
daily bread, and this day is but a span long, the shortest time that may be, like vnto a dreame, or a tale that is told: and therefore we should be the more ready, and willing to beare our crosse;Our suffering is but short. because the time of our suffering is but very short. The second is a day of rest in our graues,The second day is a day of rest. The third day is a day of re∣surrection. where our flesh shall rest in hope, to be raised vp at the last day. And, The third is a day of resurrection vnto glory, the first day of the weeke, and the first beginning of a neuer-ending world. But as Christ could not haue risen in glory, had he not rested in hope, neither could he haue rested in hope, had he not suffered and dyed in faith; so cannot we attaine vnto a ioyfull resurrecti∣on vpon our third day, vnlesse we rest in hope in our second day; neither can we rest in hope in our graues the second day, vnlesse we doe valiantly fight and suffer vnto death on the first day; for this is the order that Christ tooke, and the Disciple is not aboue his Master: and therefore if any bid vs come downe from the Crosse let vs stoppe our eares, like the Cockatrice, and let vs bide on still with Iesus, that so we may rest and rise with Iesus: And so you see how, and why our Sauiour Christ was to rise againe the third day. But here it may be some will say (as they qui disputare mal∣lent quam credere,Ob. which had rather dispute about his resur∣rection, then beleeue in his resurrection;) that he was not only to rise the third day, but also to remaine three dayes,How Christ remained three dayes in his graue. and three nights in the heart of the earth: and yet we finde that he was buried by Ioseph and Nicodemus about three houres before Sunne-set on Good friday; and rose againe about foure or fiue a clocke on Sunday morning, which maketh not in all aboue thirty sixe, or thirty eight houres, or not aboue forty houres, if wee cast it to the highest account: and therefore how could hee bee three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth? To this Leo answereth, that Christ,Sol. Leo Ser. 1. de resur. lest his long absence should too much perplexe the afflicted mindes of his Disciples, Denuntiatam tridui moram tum mira celeritate breuiauit, &c. Did so exceedingly shorten the fore-spoken three dayes space, that while the last part of the first day, and the first part of the last day is numbred with the second day, the time is onely shortned,
but the number of the dayes is not diminished: and so Saint Augustine saith, that the last part of the first day, is taken for the whole day, and so likewise the first part of the last day, is taken for the whole day. Ob.But then, though this taking of part for the whole might bee sufficient to proue his being three dayes in the earth; yet this is deficent, to shew how he was three nights as well as three dayes in his graue;Matth. 12 40. for our Sauiour saith, Hee must be three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth: whereas by this reckoning wee finde but two nights in all: and therefore to say what I thinke, Sol.I answere, that twelue houres was the Iewes perfect day, ac∣cording to that saying of Christ,Iohn 11.9. How Christ re∣mained three dayes & three nights in his graue. Are there not twelue houres in the day? and the very same twelue houres in the opposite Region of the Heauens, is a perfect night, and wee finde that Christ re∣mained in his graue, three whole twelue houres, cast it how you will: and therefore thus he may be truly said to be three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth: Or else, I say secondly, that if wee measure the time according to Gods measure of a day in the beginning, i. e. from the begin∣ning of the Euening, vntill the Euening returned againe; as the Euening and the Morning was the first day, i. e. the Euening of the night, and the Morning of the day, was the first day: then I say, that vnder these parts of the first and last day, must be (as there in Moses it is) vnderstood the nights also:Gen. 1.5. for as Moses reckoneth the Euening and the Morning of the day, for the day and night; so must we here vnderstand these three dayes, for three dayes and three nights; and so Christ remained three dayes and three nights in the heart of the earth. And thus wee see both by types and the predictions of the Prophets, and by the assertion of Christ himselfe, that the Messias and Sauiour of the world should be slaine, and must rise againe the third day,
CHAP. V. Of the Iewes reasons why they beleeue not Iesus the Sonne of Mary to be the Messiah, and why they thinke he raysed not himselfe from the graue. SEcondly, For the confirmation of this point,The question betwixt vs and the Iewes. à posteriori, From the apparant proofe of the ful∣filling of the same truth in the person of any one that was slaine, and did rise againe the third day, The question is betwixt vs and the Iewes; whether Iesus the Sonne of Mary, whom they crucified and buried, and whom we preach and be∣leeue in, be the true Messias or not, and whether he raysed him∣selfe from his graue, yea, or no. To both these the Iewes answere no: Not the Messias, not raysed from the dead. First, Not the Messias, because hee came not downe from the Crosse, when he was fast nayled vnto the same: for, If he be the King of Israel, (said the chiefe of them, their high Priests and El∣ders of the people,) Let him now come downe frrom the Crosse,Math. 27.42. and we will beleeue in him. Ah foolish Nation, a Nation voide of vnderstanding, and Chil∣dren of your Father the Diuell, Nam{que} haud tibi vultus humanus, nec vox hominum sonat: For here you sing the same song,Math. 4.6. and you harpe vpon the same string as he did; If thou beest the Sonne of God, cast thy selfe downeward, saith the Diuell; and if he be the King of Israel, let him come downe from the Crosse, say these Children of the Diuell:Chrysost. hom. de cruce. So you see the one would haue him to descend from the Temple, the other from the Crosse, the one from seruing God, the other from suffering for man; and both to descend, whereas God made man to ascend. Os homini sublime dedit caelum{que} tueri inssit. — And of all his Creatures, he made him onely straight,God made man to ascend. to looke vp towards Heauen, and bids men alwayes to haue Sur∣sum corda, Their hearts like their heads, lifted vp, their thoughts in Heauen, and their conuersations in Heauen:Phil. 3.20. And therefore
whensoeuer we are inticed to descend from the height of Gods seruice, or suffering vpon our Crosse, and to settle our affections here vpon the base things of this World, let vs know, it is the voyce of Satan, not of God. Math. 27.42.I, but let him come downe, and we will beleeue in him, saith this people; and let vs enioy the pleasures and the vanities of the Earth, and we will serue him, saith the generation of this World. Luke 16.31.But as our Sauiour saith vnto them, in another case, If you will not beleeue Moses and the Prophets, neither will you beleeue though one should arise from the dead; So Saint Bernard saith in this case, If now you will not beleeue in him that raysed him∣selfe from the graue, you would neuer haue beleeued in him, if he had then descended from the Crosse.Greg. Hom. 21. in Euang. Quia plus erat de sepulchro surgere, quam de cruce descendere, & plus mortem resurgendo de∣struere,That it was a greater matter to rise from the dead, then to come downe from the Crosse. quam vitam descendendo seruare; Because it was a greater matter to raise himselfe from the graue, then to descend from the Crosse; and a farre more excellent argument of inuincible omnipotency, being dead, to destroy death, by rising againe from the dead, then being aliue, to saue his life by descending from the Crosse: And so I say to the base descending world∣lings, if they will not stay vpon the Crosse, to suffer with Christ here, they are not worthy to be exalted to raigne with Christ hereafter; and if they will not beleeue in him, and serue him for the hope of the ioyes of Heauen, they are not worthy to be re∣ceiued into the number of his seruants; because such men loue the World more then God, and will not loue God but for the Worlds sake:August. de ver. Dom. Serm. Like vnto the Woman, Quae non maritum amat, sed aurum mariti; Which loues her Husbands wealth more then her Husband; or not her Husband, but for his wealths sake. Secondly, They say he raysed not himselfe from the graue, but his Disciples came by night and stole him away: and if this be true, he could not be the true Messias. Whether the Disciples stole away Christ from his graue or not.But what? his Disciples that forsooke him, and forsware him while he was yet aliue, and could, if he had would, haue rescued himselfe out of the hands of all his enemies: Alas, poore men, durst they now, silly Fishermen, thrust themselues among
the pikes of armed Souldiers, to steale away a dead carkasse, that could neither helpe himselfe, nor them? No, no, they were rea∣dier to hide themselues in graues, then to aduenture to take him out of the graue: And therefore Mary Magdalen, that knew his Disciples did not, nor durst not take him away, thought rather, (when shee found him not in his Tombe) that they which left him no rest in his life, did also take him and tosse him now out of his graue. — Sic multum terris iactatus & alto. And so left him not, neither in life nor death: Dementia in∣sanabilis; So implacable was their rage against him. But though shee was in the right, that his Disciples did not meddle with him, yet herein shee was deceiued;Ambros. in hunc locum lucae. Putando Chri∣stum sublatum esse de monumento, When shee thought that the Souldiers had remoued him, (saith Saint Ambrose;) because this victorious Lyon; did Sampson-like, carrie away the gates of Gaza,Iudg. 16.3. and burst open the doores of his Sepulcher, that his glorious Body might come forth; yet the Womans weakenesse may be excused, Quia cum pietate societus est; Because her error procee∣ded of ignorance, and was accompanied with an vpright consci∣ence: but who can extenuate, or who will not aggrauate that ex∣treame folly, and horrible impiety of this wretched and malicious people?How the High Priests did what possibly they could to hinder the Re∣surrection of Christ. For they not onely refused to receiue him for their Sa∣uiour, and said; Nolumus hunc regnare super nos, Wee will haue none of this man, we will haue none other man but Caesar to be our King: But they did also persecute him, as a seducer, and cru∣cified him as a false vsurper, and then buried him without honor; There were no Widowes to make lamentation, nor any of his friends that durst shew it, and being buried, they locked fast his Sepul∣cher; Molem{que} & montes insuper altos imposuere, They prest him downe with a mighty stone, and they hired a band of armed Souldiers to watch him, that he should neither rise himselfe, nor his Disciples come and take him away: And therefore his Disci∣ples that were so lately amazed at his passion, were now so stupi∣fied at this obsignation, this sealing, and watching and warding of him, that they durst not once passe out of doores to looke after his Resurrection, vntill these three Women, (which esteemed themselues more free from violence, and thereupon presumed
first to see the Sepulcher) had informed them, that this one had chaste a thousand, and had put all that band of men to flight. Or if their hearts had serued them, to aduenture so great a danger, and that they had recollected more courage now after his death, then euer Peter the boldest of them had, during his life, (which all men will say, is most vnprobable, because a liuing Dogge is better then a dead Lyon;Eccles. 9.4. and therefore Christ being a∣liue, might animate the vilest coward-like Thirsites, to be more valiant and aduenturous for his defence, then now being dead he could doe to the most heroicke Achilles;) yet is it any wayes likely, or could it possibly be, that his Disciples should come thi∣ther, breake vp the Monument, tumble away that great stone, take vp his body, bestrip him of his winding sheete, lay all his linnen cloathes, wherewith he was wrapped, so orderly by them∣selues, (a signe they had leisure enough, and were in no danger at all, or else they were very fooles, that they did not suddenly snatch him away, and take some other time and place to bestrip him,) and then carrie him away, neuer after to be seene or found, without the espyall of some one or other, among so many that at∣tended there? Ideo mentita est iniquitas sibi: But the Iewes an∣swere, that as the foolish Virgins, (whereof our Sauiour speaketh) so these foolish and sottish Souldiers, they all slumbered and slept; and then while their Argos eyes were sleeping, his Disciples came, those poore fresh-water Souldiers, and their committed charge was stollen away. The absurdi∣ties following the High Priests saying.But then I replie, first, with Rhemigius out of Saint Augu∣stine, If they all slept, Quomodo furtum viderunt? How can they tell his Disciples, and not others, tooke him away? Might not God take him as he did Enoch, or the Angels burie him and hide him, as they did the bodie of Moses? or how can they tell who tooke him away? for they slept; and therefore surely no credit to be giuen vnto them: If they had said; We slept, and therfore we cannot tell what became of him, this might haue some likelihood of truth: but to say, We slept, and his Disciples stole him away; this must needes be apparantly false. Secondly, If they slept, why did the High Priests giue them money, large money (saith the Text) for their negligence, and not rather punish them for their slothfulnesse? must men be so
largely rewarded for euill doing? especially in so weighty a cause, as, not the losse of a Citie, or a Kingdome, but the losse of sal∣uation to the whole race of mankinde; all depended vpon this one point; for if he rose againe, he was the Sauiour of the World; if not, he was but an impostor: Why then would they not watch? or if not, why not seuerely punished? and no punishment too great for so great a negligence? Thirdly, If they were awake, why did they hire them to say they were asleepe? This may be answered: They knew money deliuered him into their hands, and therefore they thought that money would conceale the truth from the people; for as the Poet saith; —Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames? — What wickednesse is not done for money?How the loue of money ma∣keth many men to doe any thing. These Souldiers had beene Preachers to publish this truth vnto the World, had not their mouthes beene stopt with siluer; for as this opens the mouthes of many, to bruite forth and to testifie many lies; so it shuts the mouthes of as many, to conceale and keepe secret many truthes; and therefore the high Priests did giue large mo∣ney to these Souldiers, to conceale this truth, and to belie them∣selues, to say that they were asleepe. Well then, if they were asleepe, how can they tell, what be∣came of him, and why did the chiefe Priests giue them such large summes of monies for their negligence? or if they were awake, why did they hire them so dearely to say they were asleepe? To all this they must answere now to vs, as they did heretofore in another case to Christ; Wee cannot tell:Math. 21.27. But then O foolish Iewes, if you cannot tell, why will you not beleeue that your Messias is alreadie come, and that God hath raysed him from the dead? Saint Paul tels vs why,Rom. 11.25. Because partly obstinacy is come vpon them, vntill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in. O Lord if it be thy will, doe thou open their eyes, that they may see the truth.
CHAP. VI. Of the testimony of the Angell, and the manifold appa∣ritions of Christ after his Resurrection, to proue the truth and certainety of his Resurrection. YOV see then, how the Iewes are blinded, to de∣stroy themselues; but on the other side, we doe know, and beleeue, and teach this Iesus the Sonne of Mary, whom the Iewes haue crucified, to be the true Messias and the Sauiour of the World, not onely because hee liued without sinne, and died without cause, (on his owne behalfe;) but especially because that he being dead, and laide in his graue, did declare himselfe mightily to be the Sonne of God,Rom. 1.4. by his Resurrection from the dead: And this Resurrection of him, we doe most faithfully beleeue, and as constantly teach, for these three especiall reasons and respects; and a three-fold cord is not easily broken. That we be∣leeue the Re∣surrection of Christ, fr three speciall respects.1. In respect of this Angelicall assertion. 2. In respect of his personall apparitions. 3. In respect of many other circumstantiall demonstrations First, the Angell said vnto the women, why seeke yee the li∣uing among the dead? he is not here but he is risen, Et si non cre∣dideritis oraculo credite oculo, and if you will not beleeue vs, beleeue your owne eyes,Math. 28.1. Luke 24.4. for you may see the place where hee lay. And this was spoken vnto two women, as Saint Mat∣thew sheweth, and by two Angels, as Saint Luke saith; and therefore if Diues thought that the words of one man com∣ming from the dead would bee sufficient to make all his bre∣thren to beleeue the torments of hell,First, The An∣gels testifie the Resurrection of Christ. why should not the words of these heauenly Angels bee alonely sufficient to make vs to beleeue this diuine truth of the resurrection of the Sonne of God? for the Angels though they be mutabiles natura, mu∣table in respect of their nature, yet are they now, confirmati per gratiam ne à veritate voluntatem auerterent, so confirmed by
grace, that they shall neuer euert themselues from the truth,Isidorus de summo bono. saith Isidorus. Secondly, as the Angels had testified, that he was not there in the graue among the dead, but was risen and aliue among the liuing: so truth it selfe confirmes this truth vnto vs, by those manifold apparitions that he made after his resurrection,That Christ appeared twelue seuerall times after his resurrection. du∣ring the space of forty dayes, that before he ascended into hea∣uen, he walked here on earth. And these (if I be not far de∣ceiued in my reckoning) were at least twelue times, according to the number of his twelue Apostles. First, he appeared vnto Mary Magdalen apart;Marke 16.9. First, to Mary Magdalen and why. where wee must obserue, that he appeared first vnto a woman, that no wo∣man should thenceforth be any wayes reproached by any man, for their first transgression, and seduction of man; quia vt culpam vire transfudit, transfudit etiam & gratiam,Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. 24. Beda in cap. vlt. Luc veteris{que} lapsus aerumnam resurrectionis indicio compensauit, because that as a wo∣man was the first instrument of death, so she was the first messenger of life, and brought the first tidings of the resurrection of Christ, which is the surest argument of the saluation of man. And hee appeared to this woman, first,August meditat. cap. 35. quia Dominum prae caeteris dilexit, ideo prae caeteris videre meruit, because she loued him aboue all, therefore she obtained to see him before all: She loued much, saith our Sauiour, and she saw him first saith the Euan∣gelist: and therefore no doubt, but he shewed himselfe to her first, because shee loued him most: whereby wee see that with God there is no respect of persons, no difference of sects, but whosoeuer loueth him, man or woman, young or old, that person shall be respected of him; for I will loue them that loue me, saith the Lord, and therefore whosoeuer feareth God and wor∣keth righteousnesse, whosoeuer loues him most, and seekes him first, he may be sure he shall be first found of him. And second∣ly, he appeared to this woman, first, because this woman was most memorious and mindfull of him, and of all those mercies and benefits wherewith Christ had inriched her soule,Hieron. ep de quest. hedibiae. and therefore he was most mindfull of her. But who this Mary Magdalen was, it is easier questioned then answered; for Theophylact, Stapulensis, and others,Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. 24. Albertus in Luc. 7. doe a∣uouch that there were three Mary Magdalens; Saint Ambrose saith there were two: Albertus, Aquinas, in Iohn 12. and Rof∣fensis,
de tribus Magdalenis,Whether there were more Mary Magda∣lens then one. do constantly affirme there was but one: and shee they say, was a Noble woman, one of the bloud-royall of the Tribe of Iuda, the daughter of one Syrus and Eu∣charia, a sister vnto Lazarus and Martha, which diuided the inheritance of their father betwixt them three; Lazarus had all the possessions that were in Ierusalem; Martha had Bethany; and Mary had Magdalum Castrum, the Castle of Magdala, from whence she was called Mary Magdalen. For my part, I confesse curiositie is to be auoided; yet the truth is to be imbraced, and Maries face is not like Moses face, so vailed with mysteries, but that wee may without danger in∣quire who she is; and therefore to say what I thinke, I am of St. Ambrose minde, that (at least) there were two (if there were no more) Mary Magdalens: for Saint Iohn saith, that Mary Magdalen stood at the Sepulcher weeping,Ioh. 20.1.11.18. and that Iesus appea∣red vnto her, and said touch mee not: here is a Mary Magdalen all alone: and Saint Matthew saith, that Mary Magdalen and the other Mary came vnto the Sepulcher, and were instructed by the Angels that Christ was risen, and therefore they depar∣ted and went away with ioy;Matth. 28.1.9. and it is not said that Mary Mag∣dalen staied behinde, but that both went (for he names but two) and as they went to tell his Disciples, Iesus met them, and they came and held him by the feete, and worshipped him: and there∣fore no doubt, but there must be two distinct Mary Magdalens, for shee whereof Saint Iohn speaketh, was alone, and staide by the Sepulcher weeping, and was denied to touch Christ, because (as Saint Ambrose saith) she doubted,Why Mary Magdalen was not suffered to touch Christ. and did not as yet ful∣ly beleeue the truth of his resurrection; but shee whereof Saint Matthew speaketh, was accompanied with the other Mary, and returned with the other Mary, and met him in the way, and held him by the feet, and worshipped him, Christ suffe∣ring her to doe this, because she beleeued him to be risen from the dead. Now which of these Mary Magdalens was the woman to whom Christ first appeared,Marke 16.9. Saint Marke plainly sheweth, that it was she out of whom he had cast seuen deuils: a great sinner, and a great louer of our Sauiour Christ, the chiefest sinner of all these women, and the first seeker of our blessed Sauiour; for
she came alone, while it was yet darke, before the day light,Iohn 20.1. by the light of grace; but the other Mary Magdalen came with Mary the mother of Iames and Salome, at the rising of the Sun,Marke 16.2. long after her. A great comfort and a rae patterne for all sin∣ners; her sinnes repented of, and relinquished, were no hinde∣rance of her to see our Sauiour first: but because her sinnes were great, we see her repentance was very great,The great care and diligence of this Mary Magdalen. her care was great, her loue was great; for shee wept and washed our Sa∣uiours feet with her teares, and wiped them with the haires of her head, a true token of inward sorrow; she powred a boxe-full of precious ointment vpon his head as hee sat at meate, an apparant argument of her outward works; shee rose earely, shee sought him carefully, and she wept bitterly, not with those vndiscreet women for Thammyse which was a brazen image with leaden eies, that being molten with heate, did seeme to weepe,Ezech. 8.14. and so caused the women to sympathize in teares, and to weepe (as is thought) for Adonis: but shee weepes for Adonai, for her Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, a rare example of great pietie; and therefore though shee had offended much, yet because shee sorrowed much, she loued much, she had much forgiuen her, and much loue shewed vnto her; for he which is first and last, did shew himselfe first vnto her: O that they which walke in her sinnes, would tread in the same steps of her repentance. Secondly, he appeared to all the women together,Secondly, to the three wo∣men returning homeward. as they re∣turned homewards from the Sepulcher; to teach vs, that ne∣uer any truly sought for Christ, but with these women, they should be sure to find him. Thirdly, he appeared to Simon Peter alone,Thirdly, to Si∣mon Peter a∣lone. Chrysost. 1 Cor. 15.5. the first among the men saith Chrysostome: for when the women told the Disci∣ples, that Iesus was risen, Peter and Iohn ranne both vnto the Sepulcher, and though Iohn came there first, yet Peter entred first; to note vnto vs, not onely that mysticall truth, which di∣uers of the Fathers haue obserued, viz. that the Synagogue of the Iewes, like Iohn that came first to the monument, but would not enter, had the first meanes to come to Christ, and yet re∣fused to come vnto him; for it commanded the precepts of the Law, and it heard the Prophecies of the Gospell concerning the incarnation and the passion of the Messias, and yet quem
longe late{que} prophetauit, praesentem vidit & recipere renuit, whom they long expected and much desired, and ranne fast to see him, when they come vnto him, or rather when hee came to them, they quite reiected him, and would not beleeue in him; and the Church of the Gentiles, like Saint Peter that came last, yet entred first into the Sepulcher; though they had the last and the least meanes to come to Christ, yet would they first beleeue in Christ crucified, according as it was prophecied of them, as soone as they shall heare of me they shall obey mee; but also that historicall truth, (which Chrysostome obserueth) that as Saint Peter first entred into the graue, so he should first see him that was laid and raised out of that graue, and that for these three especiall reasons. Why of all the Apostles he appeared first to Saint Peter.First, lest that if hee had appeared first to others, Peter should thinke Christ had reiected him, as hee worthily deserued, because hee had so vniustly denied Christ, Ideo Petro apparuit primum, therefore hee appeared first to Peter, lest otherwise he should giue offence to Peter, and seeme still to be mindfull of his offence,Idem hom 38. in 1 Cor. 15. saith Theophylact, and Saint Chrysostome. Secondly, because Saint Peter was a most faithfull, and a most worthy witnesse, such a one as would so willingly and so manfully as he did in all places testifie and lay downe his life for the testimony of Iesus Christ. Thirdly, because Saint Peter was the first and the chiefest Apostle whom he called first, and who confest him first to be the Sonne of God: and therefore he doth appeare first vnto him, and biddeth the women tell his Disciples and Peter, i. e. and Peter especially, that he was risen, and went before them into Galilee. But when or where, or after what manner hee appeared thus first vnto Peter, because the Scripture doth not expresse it, we can no wayes determine it,Theoph. in Mar. cap. 16. as both Theophylact and Gregory doe obserue: and therefore it being a question, plus subtilitatis quam vtilitatis habens,Fourthly, to the Disciples trauelling to Emaus. Luc. 24.13. Theoph. sup. Luc. that hath more subtile scrupulositie then any comfortable vtility, I will peaceably passe it ouer. Fourthly, hee appeared to the two Disciples iourneying to∣wards Emaus; the name of the one was Cleophas, and many thinke the other to bee Saint Luke himselfe, who out of his
modesty concealeth his owne name, saith Theophylact: It is cer∣taine that they were none of the Apostles but some of the seuen∣ty two Disciples (as Nicholaus de Gorham well obserueth;) for they came to Ierusalem, and found the eleuen Apostles gathered together: and therefore these two could not be any of the twelue; because they found eleuen together, and Iudas was hanged, and Matthias not elected: and the manner how he appeared vnto them, is largely and plainly set downe by the Euangelist, and how he was knowne of them in breaking the bread: whereup∣on Saint Gregory hath left these two excellent morall notes and obseruations. First, that these two,To flie the world is the next way to finde God. fugentes ciuitatem sanguinolentam statim inueniunt Christum, flying this bloudy city, did presently finde their Sauiour; to shew vnto vs, that while we liue among the wicked, we shall liue separate from God; but as Elias when hee left Iesabell was presently accompanied by the Angell, so these two, and all those that forsake the world, or shun the wicked, shall presently finde their God. Secondly,That we shall sooner know God, by doing his will, then by the lear∣ning of his word. That they which knew him not by the expoun∣ding of the Scriptures, doe know him by the breaking of the bread; to teach vs, that we shall be more illuminated by him, for the doing of his will, then for the hearing of his Word: It is true, that the hearing of his Word, did inflame their hearts within them, and moued them, no doubt, exceedingly to loue him, and to perswade him earnestly to stay with them; but their eyes were opened, and their vnderstanding inlightened by the breaking of the bread: for it is most certaine, that the practicke knowledge is the surest knowledge in the World; and to practice any thing, is the chiefest way to attaine vnto the knowledge of that thing: And therefore Dauid saith, He was wiser then his Teachers,Psal. 119. because he kept the Commandements of God. It may be his Teachers knew them as well, if not better then he, else how could they be his Teachers? yet herein hee was wiser then they, because they perhaps knew them, and taught them, like the Pharises, and did them not, but he learnt them, and kept them;The keeping of Gods Law made Dauid wiser then his teachers. and therefore he was wiser then his Teachers, because hee kept the Commandements. And as it is the chiefest way for vs to get the knowledge of any thing, by the pra∣ctising of the same; so are they the onely men which God chiefly
doth illuminate, which doe giue themselues to the practising and performing of hi will:Psal. 50.23. For, To him that ordereth his conuersation right, will I shew the saluation of God; saith the Prophet. So here Christ, though he would not let these Disciples know him, while they talked with him, yet Dignatus est cognosci dum pascitur; He vouchsafed to open their eyes, and to make himselfe knowne vnto them, when they fed him. And therefore, if wee would know God, and be knowne of God, let vs not onely heare his Word, and talke of his will, but let vs also performe his will, and keepe his Commandements; let vs feede him in his members, and he will feede our Soules with that foode which perisheth not. Fiftly, To the eleuen Apo∣stles together.Fiftly, He appeared vnto the eleuen Apostles, and all the rest of the Disciples that were with them, when the doores were shut, and standing in the middest of them, he said, Peace be vnto you: to shew, that he was The Prince of Peace, which had now purchased their peace indeede; and he demanded, why thoughts should arise in their hearts, to shew vnto vs, that he was a God, because he knew the very secrets of their hearts; and then to shew that it was himselfe, and none other, he sheweth them his hands and his feete; and he did feede with them, and fedde them also with the Word of God, opening to them the Scriptures concerning him, and opening their vnderstanding, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures. Sixtly, To the same company, when Thomas was with them. Joh. 20.24.26.Sixtly, Because Thomas was not with them, when he appea∣red vnto them before, therefore he appeared to the same com∣pany againe within eight dayes after when Thomas was with them, (saith Saint Iohn;) and then hee suffered his body to be handled, and hee shewed vnto them the wounds of his body, which he kept (saith Saint Augustine) Non necessitate, sed pote∣state; Not for any weakenesse in himselfe, that he could not heale them, and whole vp those wounds that he receiued, but through his power he reserued them. Why Christ reserued still his wounds.First, to shew the greatnesse of his loue, that would suffer so much of wretched, and for wretched men. Secondly, to shew the greatnesse of mans malice, that would, Diomedes-like, so cruelly deale with so mercifull a God. Thirdly, to strengthen the weake faith of his wauering ser∣uants, Ʋt vulneribus corporis sanaret vulnera incredulitatis; That
they seeing the wounds of his body, might thereby haue the wounds of their vnbeleeuing soules healed. Fourthly, to shew the certainty of his Resurrection, when they saw he had the same Body, which was crucified and pierced by his enemies. But against this it may be obiected,Ob. that Thomas was with the rest of his Apostles the very first time that hee appeared vnto them; for so S. Luke saith,Whether Tho∣mas was with the eleuen, the first time Christ appeared to them. that the two Disciples returning to Ie∣rusalem, found the eleuen gathered together, and as they spake, Iesus himselfe stood in the middest of them: Therefore it see∣meth strange, that Saint Iohn speaking of this very selfe-same apparition, which was the first immediate night after his Resur∣rection, (as both Saint Luke and Saint Iohn doe accord) should notwithstanding say, that Thomas was not with them; for Saint Luke saith, eleuen were there, and as yet there were but eleuen in all; because as I told you, Iudas was hanged, and Matthias was not elected. I answer,Sol. that Saint Luke putteth downe eleuen in a certaine number, for all of them that were there; because there were ele∣uen of them in all: And so he putteth all that were there, for all that were of them; As if in a Court where there be foure ap∣pointed Iudges, I should say, I brought my cause before the foure Iudges, though but three of them should sit when my cause was heard: Or else I say, that Saint Luke and Saint Iohn may very well thus be reconciled; that when the two Disciples came, Thomas might be with them, and all the eleuen might be toge∣ther, and when Iesus came, Thomas might be absent: for Saint Luke doth not say, that Iesus found the eleuen together, but that the two Disciples found the eleuen together, and so they might be; and yet Saint Iohn might say true, that Thomas was not with them, when Iesus stood amongst them; because he might depart after they came, before Iesus appeared vnto them: for the Euan∣gelist doth not say, how soone or how late Christ came, after the arriuall of the two Disciples, but that he came that night;Thomas was there when the two Disciples came, but was gone before Christ came. as they were talking of him; and it is very probable, it was a good while after the comming of the two Disciples; for, before Iesus is said to stand amongst them, it is said, that those two Disciples had tolde their fellowes what things were done in the way, and how
he was knowne of them in breaking of the Bread; all which declara∣tion could not be deliuered without some length of time, in which time Thomas, and others perhaps too, might take his leaue for that night, and depart: And so I say, Thomas was there when the two Disciples came, but was not there when our Sa∣uiour came. Seauenthly, To Men toge∣ther. Iohn 21.2.Seauenthly, He appeared to Peter, and Iohn and Iames, Na∣thaniel and Didymus, and two other Disciples, when they were a fishing at the Sea of Tyberias: And there he proued vnto them the verity of his Deity by that miracle of prouiding Fishes for them for to eate; and the truth of his humanity by eating meate with them. Ob.But here it may be obiected, that Saint Iohn saith, this was the third time that hee shewed himselfe to his Disciples,C. 21. Ʋ. 14. after his resurrection: Therefore how should it be the seuenth time? I answere briefly, that Saint Iohn speaketh of his publike ap∣paritions, to his Apostles and Disciples, and not of any of his ap∣paritions to the Women, nor of any priuate apparition vnto any particular persons; for so the words are, This was the third time that he shewed himselfe to his Disciples; i. e. Solemnely and pub∣likely, making himselfe knowne vnto them, which he did not vnto the two Disciples going to Emaus: And so we finde, that this was the third time that he publikely appeared vnto all, or the most part of his Apostles. Eightly, To S. Iames.Eightly, He appeared vnto Iames, the brother of the Lord; i. e. the Cosen-Germane of Christ, according to the Flesh; be∣ing the Sonne of Mary, that was sister vnto the Virgin Mary, (as Saint Hierome saith,Hieron. in Ca∣tal.) and not the Sonne of Ioseph by ano∣ther Wife, (as some would haue it;) and hee was called Iames the iust, in regard of his vpright and innocent life: Saint Paul particularizeth this apparition vnto Iames,1 Cor. 5.7. as a most speciall appearance, saying that hee was seene of Iames: but when this apparition was, wee finde not expressed; yet Saint Hierome saith, it was within a very short time after his resurrection; be∣cause (as he saith) this Iames at the receiuing of the Passeouer, vowed that he would neither eate nor drinke vntill he saw Christ risen from the dead: And therefore, when Christ came vnto his Disciples,Luke 24.41. he called for meate, and did eate before them, and gaue
it likewise vnto Iames, that he might now eate, as Saint Hierome saith. Ninthly,Ninthly, to the eleuen Disci∣ples on Mount Tabor. Math. 28.10. Tenthly, To more then 500 brethren at once. 1 Cor. 15.6. Eleuenthly, To all his Disci∣ples on Mount Oliuet. Math. 28.16. Twelfthly, To S. Paul going to Damascus. He appeared to the eleuen Disciples at one time vp∣on Mount Thabor in Galilee; and this Saint Mathew intima∣teth, when hee saith, that Iesus bade the Women tell his bre∣thren that hee was risen, and that they should goe into Galilee, and there they should see him. Tenthly, He appeared to more then fiue hundred brethren at once. Eleuenthly, He appeared to all his Apostles and Disciples vpon Mount Oliuet by Ierusalem, when in the presence of them all he ascended vp into Heauen. Twelftly, He appeared vnto Saint Paul trauelling to Damas∣cus, as vnto one borne out of due time, as himselfe confesseth. Thus hee did appeare vnto his Apostles and Disciples, and faithfull Seruants, which were appointed afore of God, to be wit∣nesses of his resurrection; and thus they haue testified vnto all men, those things which they haue heard with their eares, which they haue seene with their eyes, and which their hands haue handled, of the Word of life: And if there were nothing else in the World,Two speciall things should make all men beleeue the te∣stimonies of the Apostles. to moue and perswade men, to giue credit vnto their testimony; yet me thinkes the plainenesse of their declaration, and the smal∣nesse of their expectation of any manner of profit or reward in the World, for the testifying of these things, should be sufficient to make all men beleeue them: For, First, All the World may see,First, Their plainenesse. they sought not with any tricks of wit, to set a faire die vpon a bad cloth; nor with any glozing speeches, fine sentences, subtile arguments, or any such like sophi∣sticall wayes, to procure credit vnto themselues, and to draw men to beleeue fabulous inuentions; but their proceeding is plaine, carrying nothing with it, but a declaration of simple truth, nakedly reported, without any manner of humane subtilty, to confirme it. And, Secondly, All the World may see,Secondly, their desire, what they aimed at by their testi∣mony. they looked for no gaine in the World, but the gaine of Soules, no credit by their writing, no profit by their preaching, but onely that men would beleeue the truth, to saue their owne soules: If the man whom they had af∣firmed to be dead, and to haue risen againe to life, had still con∣tinued
with them, and had beene in expectation to be some great Monarch of the world; it might be said, they auouched his rising from the dead, in hope to be raised by him to some eminent place in the world; but you see they looke for no such thing, neither by their testimony to raise him to any humane honour, nor by him to be raised, or to be any wayes rewarded in this life themselues, vnlesse it be to be afflicted and persecuted vnto death, for this testimony of Iesus Christ. This was the best that they could expect: and therefore the testimony of these men must needs be faithfull and true, to proue more then abun∣dantly sufficient, that Iesus is the true Messias, and that being dead, he raised himselfe to life againe the third day. And yet, CHAP. VII. Of many other circumstances that doe infallibly prooue the Re∣surrection of Christ, and so consequently this Iesus Christ to be the true Messias and Sauiour of the world. The circum∣stantiall proofes of the Resurre∣ction of Christ.THirdly, Besides all this, there be many other circumstantiall proofes and declarations of this same truth: God not desirous to make men beleeue so great a matter, as is the eternall saluation of all the world, with∣out more then abundantly sufficient wit∣nesse. And therefore, First, the great earth-quake.First, At the very instance of his Resurrection, and descen∣ding of the Angels, (as Caietan saith) there was a very great earth-quake,Caietan. in Math. 28. the earth either dancing for ioy that Christ was risen, or trembling for feare that men would not beleeue this Resurre∣ction of Christ. Secondly, the sudden cou∣rage of the A∣postles.Secondly, The Apostles and Disciples hearts were presently changed; for whereas a little before they durst not peepe out of doores, because they did but waueringly thinke that this was hee, which should haue redeemed Israel, they doe now couragiously compasse the whole world, and confidently teach and auouch,
there is no other name giuen vnder heauen, whereby men may be sa∣ued, but the name of Iesus. Thirdly, Many that were dead, rose from their graues,Thirdly, the apparitions of the raised bo∣dies. and appeared vnto many of their acquantance in Ierusalem, to testi∣fie vnto them, and to assure them of the Resurrection of Christ. Diues thought if one was sent from the dead, his brethren would beleeue him; and behold here are many sent, and yet the Iewes, the brethren of Christ, will not beleeue them. Fourthly, Pilate himselfe that condemned him to death,Fourthly, the testimony of Pilate. did testifie of his Resurrection vnto life, in a letter that he wrote vn∣to Tiberius Caesar: and therefore Tiberius desired the Senate, to admit Christ into the number of their gods, for it was their custome (saith Tertullian) Vt nisi homini deus placeret,Tertull. l. cont. gentes c. 5. deus non esset; That God should be no God, vnlesse he were approued of men; and because they refused to receiue him, (God not suf∣fering the Arke and Dagon to stand together vpon the same Al∣tar, nor Christ and Beliall to be worshipped together in the same Temple,) Tiberius was incensed against the Romans, (God working all things together for the best for them that loue him) that he gaue free leaue and liberty vnto all Christians, to beleeue and professe the Name of Iesus Christ. Fiftly, Iosephus, the most learned among the latter Iewes saith,Fiftly, the te∣stimony of Io∣sephus. Iosephus antiq. l. 8 c. 9. Sixtly, the suf∣ferings of the Martyres. that cum Pilatus eum in crucem agendum decreuisset, &c. After Pi∣late had crucified him, he appeared vnto his followers the third day, according as the Prophets had fore-shewed. Sixtly, All Martyres haue most boldly confessed this truth, and haue most constantly suffered in defence of this truth: Tertullian doth most excellently shew the difference betwixt the Martyres and Malefactors, saying; Mali apparere deuitant, de∣prehensi trepidant, accusati negant, condemnati maerent; Euill do∣ers are loth to be seene, being taken they tremble, being accused they deny it, being condemned they deplore themselues: but with the Martyres there is no such matter; for they are neither asha∣med of their profession, neither doe they grieue at their appre∣hension; but if they be noted for Christians, they reioyce at it; if they be accused, they confesse it, if adiudged to die, they deeme it better then life: and therefore (saith he) Quid hoc mali est, cuius reus gaudet, cuius accusatio votum est, & cuius paena felicitas?
What euill is this, when the guiltie of the fact reioyceth in his accusation, and is made happy in his condemnation? Zephan. 2.11. Seauenthly, the confession of Christ his enemies.Seauenthly, The very enemies of Christ, yea, and his greatest aduersaries did confesse and iustifie this truth of Christ; for as the Prophet said, that the Messias should famish all the gods of the earth; so Christ did spoyle them all, and stopped the mouthes of all infernall spirits, that by their lying oracles, they could speake no more, but against their wils to confesse that hee was the Holy One of God, and that this Galilean had ouercome them all, as Iu∣lian that great Apostata, to his great cost at last, confessed, saith Ni∣cephorus. Eightly, the heauy punish∣ments of Christs per∣secutors.Eightly, The great plagues and punishments that were pre∣sently inflicted, and haue still to this very day continued vpon all the persecuters and denyers of Christ, doe sufficiently proue the Resurrection of Christ, and that Christ to be the true Messias; for Pilate, being accused by the Iewes, was inforced to appeale from Vitellius the chiefe Gouernour of Syria,Ioseph. antiq. l. 18. c. 11. and to goe to Rome, to defend himselfe before Caesar, who before Pilate came there, was dead; and therefore he had none other remedy, but to wander as a Pilgrime and a forlorne creature, till hee ended his dayes in extreame miseries: so Agrippa suffered intollerable calamities:Cap. 17. so Herod the Tetrarch, was spoiled of his goods, de∣priued of his Kingdome, and banished from his Countrey: So Herod that killed Iames,Cap. 18. was miserably eaten vp of loathsome wormes, and to the Iewes was measured the same measure, as they had measured vnto Christ before; for as they had sold him for thirty pence, so thirty of them were sold for one peny; and fiue hundred of them were nayled to Crosses in one day, in so much that nec locus sufficeret crucibus, nec cruces corporibus: there was not place sufficient for the Crosses, nor Crosses enough to nayle them on: It were too too lamentable to relate more of those dolefull Tragedies, which Iosephus, Eusebius, Euagrius, and others, haue written of them, and what they suffered at the finall ruine and destruction of Ierusalem, and what heauy bon∣dage (farre worse then that Egyptian slauery) they haue endu∣red to this very day:In aureo tracta∣tu Rabbi Sam. de miserimo statu Iudaeorum. Hence it is that Rabbi Samuel, about sixe hundred yeares agone, writ a tractate in forme of an Epistle, vn∣to Rabbi Isaac, Master of the Synagogue of the Iewes, in Subiul∣meta,
a Citie of Morocco, wherein he doth excellently discusse the cause of their long captiuity, their great blindnesse, and ex∣treame misery: and after that hee had proued tat this punish∣ment was inflicted vpon them, for some great and grieuous sinne, he sheweth that sinne to be the same whereof the Prophet Amos speaketh; For three transgressions of Israel, and for foure,Amos 2.6. non transferam eo: I will not turne away the punishment thereof, be∣cause they sold the righteous for siluer. And though he saith that their Rabbies doe vnderstand this righteous to be Ioseph that was sold by his brethren vnto Egypt;What Rabbi Samuel saith concerning Iesus Christ. yet because the Prophet put∣teth this for the fourth sinne, and the greatest sinne of Israel; and because he cannot finde any three sinnes of the sonnes of Israel before the selling of Ioseph: therefore he maketh the sel∣ling of Ioseph, to be the first sinne of Israel, the worshipping of the Calfe in Horeb to be the second, the abusing & the killing of Gods Prophets to be the third, and the fourth to be the selling of Iesus Christ: For the first, they serued foure hundred yeares; for the second, they wandred forty yeares in the Wildernesse, vntill they that came out of Egypt were all consumed and brought to no∣thing, excepting onely Caleb and Iosuah; for the third, they were held Captiues seauenty yeares in Babylon; and for the fourth, the said Rabbi Samuel confesseth that they were held in most pittifull Captiuity to this very day: because hee was most vniustly sold, and most shamefully deliuered to death, as he shew∣eth in the seauenth Chapter of the said Tractate. Much and many more circumstantiall proofes and demon∣strations of his Resurrection, to shew him to be the true Messias,Why the Au∣thor did so prosecute the proofes of Christs Resur∣rection. might be produced; but I hope these will serue, I say not to make vs to beleeue this truth, (for to that end, I hope we neede not bring any proofe at all, because we doe fully and vndoubted∣ly beleeue the same already) but to shew that our fore-fathers haue not, or we doe not beleeue these things without more then abundant and vnanswerable proofes thereof; and to conuince that malicious obstinacy and infidelity of all those, whether pro∣fessed Iewes, or seeming Christians, which notwithstanding such an Army of arguments, and such a cloud of witnesses, will still continue blinded and hardened in vnbeleefe. It were strange there should be any Athiests amongst vs; yet I thinke it was not
without cause, that Dr. Fotherby writ his large and learned dis∣course against Atheisme; and questionlesse they that deny God, will neuer beleeue in Christ; and therefore as that booke shall be a witnesse against all Atheists in the latter day, to condemne them; so shall this which I haue written, be an accuser of all those that will not beleeue in Iesus Christ. CHAP. VIII. Of the place from whence our Sauiour rose, both in respect of his body and soule. NOw hauing seene that the Messias when hee should come, was to rise againe the third day, and that our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ is that true Messias, because he did rise againe vpon the third day, I must yet intreate you to consider (that so you may haue the full knowledge of this point) these two especiall things. Arsatius in po∣stilla ser. de resurrect. fol. 122.1. The place from whence he rose. 2. The manner how he rose. First, We must vnderstand that as Christ in respect of his humane nature, consisted both of body and soule; so his Resurre∣ction must needs be considered, both in respect of his body and soule. First, The Resurrection of the Body, was that, whereby hee raised the same from the graue, a dead carkasse, to be a liuing and a most glorious body, neuer to die againe. The place from whence Christ raised his soule.Secondly, The Resurrection of his Soule, must be from some infernall place, or else it must be a descention, and not a Resurre∣ction of his soule: and therefore, as in our Creede we professe to beleeue that he descended into Hell; so we must likewise confesse that he raised himselfe from Hell: but here vnawares, I am fal∣len into an Ocean of contention. For, First, Some say this Article of our Creede, crept in by negli∣gence, and therefore would haue raced it out againe: but, that would proue a want of Gods prouidence, that would suffer his
whole Church, to erre so grossely in the chiefe summe of her Christian faith: and if such things might creepe into our Creede, which is but the abstract of our faith, then much more might easily creepe into our Scriptures, which is so large an expresser both of faith and manners; but the Spirit of Christ is alwayes with his Church, to guide it into all truth, and the Church of Christ is the Pillar of truth, and a most faithfull preseruer of all truth: and therefore this opinion is most absurde. Secondly, Others still retayning the words,Foure expo∣sitions of that article of Christs discen∣tion into Hell. cannot agree vp∣on the meaning of the sentence; and of these I finde foure se∣uerall expositions. The first is, that the soule of Christ suffered the paines of Hell vpon the Crosse. But this cannot stand: first, because we must bring in such a sense as will agree with the words after his buriall; for that be∣ing dead and buried, he descended into Hell: and secondly,That Christ suffered not the torments of the dam∣ned. Iohn 9. be∣cause (as that worthy Bishop of Winchester hath most excel∣lently shewed) there bee eight speciall things in Hell paines, which the soule of Christ could not possibly suffer. As, First, An outward and inward darkenesse, for, Christ was Light, and in him was no darkenesse at all: saith the Euangelist. Secondly, Destruction of body and soule. Thirdly, The Lake burning with fire and brimstone,Matth. 10. Apoc. 20. Aug de ciuit. l. 13. c. 2. which is the second death, Et qua sicut nullorum est bonorum, ita nulli bona est; And which, as it is the place of none that is good, so it is good to none: and therefore either Christ was not good, or hee tasted not of this second death: or if he did, then not vpon the Crosse; because the first death, must precede the second. Fourthly, The Worme of conscience, continually afflicting them for their sinnes; but, in Christ there was no sinne; and there∣fore in him, there could not be any touch of conscience accu∣sing him for sinne. Fiftly, Reiection from the presence of God. Sixtly, Malediction. Seauenthly, Vengeance of fire. Eightly, Continuance for euer; All set downe in this one sentence, Depart from me yee cursed into euerlasting fire.Matth. 25. And neither of these can be laid vpon Christ without great blasphe∣mie;
and therefore he cannot be said to suffer the paines of Hell vpon the Crosse, without great Heresie. That Hell in this article signifieth not the graue.The second exposition is, that he descended into Hell, signi∣fies Christ his buriall; because Sheol commonly signifieth the graue: but this cannot stand; first, because it were an absurd thing, in a briefe rehersall of the summe of faith, to haue one Arti∣cle twice repeated; and to haue the plainest one, hee was buried, expounded by a darke and enigmaticall exposition, he descended into Hell,: secondly, because it is not said, that hee was laid in Sheol, but he descended into Hell; which signifieth a voluntary motion, and therefore cannot signifie his buriall. That this ar∣ticle signifieth not the state of the dead.The third exposition is, that it signifieth the state of the dead: but this likewise cannot stand; first, because this exposition can∣not auoide Lymbus Patrum: for if Hell signifie the state of the dead, the place of the dead can neither be Heauen nor Para∣dise:Iob 11. secondly, because wheresoeuer Hell is named, as an oppo∣sition to Heauen,Psal. 139. & 8.9. it signifieth the place of the damned, euen in the Old Testament, and in the New Testament; but descending, is a plaine opposition to ascending;Matth. 11.23. as it is said, that Lazarus was caried vp to Abrahams bosome: and therefore if Sheol should signifie the state of the dead, it should haue beene said, that hee ascended vp into Sheol, which is most ridiculous. That the soule of Christ after the seperati∣on from the body, des∣cended into the place of the damned.The fourth exposition is, that hee descended into the place of the damned; for the words of the Creede, He descended into hell, must neither be allegorized nor confounded with the former words, but they must be vnderstood as they are spoken: Hee descended into hell: And that for three speciall reasons. 1. Necessity requireth it, 2. The Scripture prooueth it. 3. All antiquity confirmeth it. First, Necessity required, that he should descend into Hell: for man being inuironed with three dreadfull enemies, viz. Three dread∣full enemies of man.1. Sinne during life. 2. Death shortning life. 3. Hell tormenting after death. And the Resurrection of Christ, being the full conquest of all
our enemies, he must ouerthrow Sinne, Death, and Hell, or else we doe but vainely boast of releasing vs from sinne, or despising death, if the right and power of Hell doe still remaine ouer vs: and therefore Christ must ouercome Satan, and destroy his Pal∣lace, before we can be freed from his prison. And this Christ hath done three wayes; 1. By subduing Satan,Christ destroy∣ed Hell three wayes. Matth. 12. 2. By tying Satan, 3. By spoyling Satan, For our Sauiour testifieth; saying, When a strong man, armed, keepeth his pallace, the things that he possesseth are in peace,Luc. 2.29. but when a stronger then he commeth, he taketh his armour from him, he bindeth him and then he spoyleth his house: And therefore Christ entred into Hll, the pallace of Satan, as a conqueror, he tyed him as the stronger,The conquest of Christ was not only by suffering, but also by tram∣pling Satan vnder feet. and he spoyled him as the right owner of that which hee vniustly detained from him: and this is shewed by the Apostle, where he saith, that Christ spoyled powers and principallities, and made a shew of them openly, triumphing ouer them in his owne per∣son: for this triumphing cannot be vpon the Crosse (though there it was obtained) because the conquest ouer Satan, was not to bee by resisting, much lesse by suffering the paines of Hell; but by treading his aduersaries vnder his feete, that so he might be true∣ly called a conqueror: And therefore we must not thinke, that all his conquest was, at length to repell them, and with mighty feare, and strong cries to escape them; when the Apostle saith, He spoyled them and made an open shew of them: but it was a bin∣ding of them, and a trampling of them vnder feet; and the same was manifested to be thus fully accomplished at his Resurrecti∣on. And this necessity, not onely of suffering vpon the Crosse,Irenaeus l 3. c. 20 but also of conquering Satan in his owne house, Irenaeus sheweth, saying, Si homo non vicisset inimicum hominis, non iuste victus esset inimicus; If man had not ouercome the enemy of man,That the Scripture pro∣ueth the soule of Christ, to haue descen∣ded into the place of the damned. the enemy of man had not beene iustly conquered. Secondly, The Scripture proueth the same thing; for the Prophet Dauid, speaking in the person of Christ, saith, My flesh shall rest in hope, because thou wilt not forsake my soule in Hell, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption; but here to take the soule for the body, or hell for the graue, (as some doe,) I see no reason;
Quia cum Scriptura diuidit species,Tertul. de car∣ne Christi. c. 13. carnem & animam, duo ostendit; For when the Scripture speaketh of soule and body it must needs signifie both, saith Tertullian: and therefore Dauid in his predi∣ction, and S int Peter in his exposition, speaking both of the soule and body, two names, and two natures, and naming a distinct place for either of them, they must needes signifie two distinct and diuers things, and most cleerely shew vnto vs, that when his body was laid in his graue, his soule descended into Hell. That all anti∣quity teach∣eth the same truth. Luc. 10. Euseb. l. 1. c. 23. Ignatius ad Trall.Thirdly, The whole classie of antiquitie confirmes the same: for Thaddaeus, one of the seauenty Disciples, taught the Citizens of Edessa, how Christ was crucified, and descended downe into Hell, and broke downe that wall that was neuer battered down before. Ignatius confessed, how he suffered , and descended alone into Hell, and brake downe that Rampier wall, which had stood from the beginning of the world: Athanasius in that Creede which wee doe professe, saith, that Christ suffered for our saluation, descended into Hell, and rose againe the third day from the dead; this is the Catholicke faith, which except a man beleeue faithfully he cannot be saued. Saint Augustine saith,Aug. ep. 99. that Christ in soule was in Hell, the Scripture doth sufficiētly declare; so prophesied by the Prophet, so vnderstood by the Apostle, and so expounded vnto vs: and therefore, Quis nisi Infidelis ngauerit fuisse apud infros Christum? Who (saith hee) but an Infidell will deny Christ to haue beene in Hell? Saint Hillary saith,Hilarius de trinit l. 2 & in Psal. 138. that because the Law of humane necessity was such, that when our bodies were buried, our soules were to descend to Hell; Ideo istam descentionem dominus ad consummati∣onem veri hominis non recusauit; Christ himselfe did not refuse to descend into the same place; Pope Leo saith as much; and Fulgentius is as plaine as any of them all.Fulgent. ad Tras. l. 3. e re∣surrect. dom. I might reckon ma∣ny more, but my purpose is not to say what I could in this point: onely I say that he descended into Hell, not to suffer, for that was finished on the Crosse, but for the subiection of Satan, and the deliuerance of men; not of those that were in Hell, but of vs, that we should not goe to Hell; for how can we be deliuered if Satan be not destroyed? how is he destroyed, if hell be not van∣quished?Zach. 9.11. for that is the Pallace of his pleasure, and the horrour of our soules, the pit wherein there is no water: but for as much as
this is the condemnation of man, and the Law of humane neces∣sity, that the body should to the graue, and the soule to hell for sinne, it remained for the full effecting of our Redemption, that Christ should thither descend, whither man fell by desart of sinne; that is, into Hell, where the soule of the sinner was wont to be tormented, and to the graue where the flesh was wont to be corrupted, that by the death of the iust, temporally dying,Fulgen. quo su∣pra. Athanas. de incar. hath the like saying. eter∣nall life might be giuen to our flesh; and by the soule of the lust descending into Hell, the torments of Hell might be abolished, saith Fulgentius. And so I beleeue this for mine exceeding comfort, that now I need not feare any enemy; because Christ suffered for my sins, destroyed all mine enemies, descended into Hell, vanquished the Diuels, and rose againe the third day: to make an open shew of this his most victorious conquest, and blessed bee his name for the same. CHAP. IX. Of the manner how Christ rose, and of the particular appli∣cation thereof vnto our selues. SEcondly, we are to consider the manner how our Sauiour rose, and many other particulars concer∣ning his resurrection, but chiefly we should obserue that his resurrection, was 1. in respect of the place: from the dead 2. in respect of the time: earely 3. in respect of his person: it was 1. true 2. perfect 3. glorious I will not stand vpon these particulars:The applicati∣on of the resur∣rection vnto our selues. Rom. 10.9. but to apply all vn∣to our selues, that we may reape some fruit by all, I must in∣treat you to remember what the Apostle saith, If thou shalt con∣fsse with thy mouth the Lord Iesus, and shalt beleeue in thine heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saued; for as I told you before, that the resurrection of Christ is the only maine,
vnanswerable argument to proue Christ to be the true Messias, and the Sauiour of the world; so heere you see the Apostle putteth the true beliefe in our Sauiours resurrection, as the onely chiefest point that is necessary and sufficient for our saluation: and therefore it is not without cause, that the doctrine of the re∣surrection should be insisted vpon, to be preached and manifested by vs, and to be learned and beleeued by you. That it is not the Theo∣ricke, but the applicatiue knowledge of Christs resur∣rection that will helpe vs.But here wee must know, that it is not the bare Theoricke, and intellectuall knowledge, that Christ is raised from the dead, at that time, from that place, and in that manner, as I haue shewed vnto you before, is sufficient for our saluation; for so the deuils know it, and beleeue it too; and yet they re∣ceiue no fruit nor benefit thereby; but it is the practicke, expe∣rimentall and applicatiue knowledge and beliefe in the resurre∣ction of the sonne of God, that is effectuall for the saluation of man.Philip. 3.10, 11 And therefore Saint Paul prayes, that Hee may know Christ, and finde in himselfe the vertue and power of the resurre∣ction of Christ; for as the rising of the head doth euer cause the rising of all the parts of the body, which is vnited vnto the the head; so the resurrection of Christ doth euer worke a resur∣rection of all the members of Christ; for so the Apostle teach∣eth vs;Rom. 8 11. If the spirit of him that raised vp Iesus dwell in you, he that raised vp Christ from the dead shall also quicken, and so raise vp, your mortall bodies, by that spirit which dwelleth in you. That the resur∣rection of Christians is twofold.And we finde this resurrection of vs that are his members to be two fold, 1. from sinne, and from all the vanities of this world. 2. from death, and from the corruption of the graue. First, if wee be the members of Christ, then certainely wee are risen with Christ; risen I say, from the death of sinne, vnto the life of righteousnesse; and if wee bee risen with Christ, then doth our hearts wish and desire those things that are aboue, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God,Coloss. 3. saith the Apostle; and therefore whosoeuer walloweth in sinne, and delighteth in the things of this world, it is certaine that hee hath not as yet any part or portion in the resurrection of Iesus Christ; for if wee bee the members of Christ, wee must also rise with Christ, and wee
must rise as Christ hath risen; for otherwise we would all rise,That the resur∣rection of Christ is a pat∣terne to teach vs how we should rise from sinne and from the com∣pany of sinners and many doe rise, but not as Christ rose, and therefore such risers, —tolluntur in altum vt lapsu grauiore ruant.— the higher they rise the greater is their fall. But we must rise as Christ hath risen, and that is, as I told you before: First, in respect of the place, from the dead;First, from the society of the wicked. so must we rise from the dead workes of sinne, and from all those that are dead in sinne: Christ left the dead in their graues, and walked among the liuing, and I would to God wee could leaue the company and society of those that doe still lie wallowing and stink∣ing in the graues of sinne, and ioyne our selues vnto those that liue the life of grace: for, as hee was a mad man possessed of a deuill, that had his abiding among the tombes; so are all they no better then mad men, and possest of deuils, that haue their conuersation with those that are dead in sinnes: and therefore I aduise all that would liue with Christ, to follow the councell of the Apostle, not to bee companions of them that are dead in sinne, but as Christ rose and left the dead, so doe you rise and leaue these dead and deadly sinners. Secondly, in respect of the time;Secondly, to rise quickly from sinne. Eccles. 12.1. Christ rose speedily with∣out delay, he rose earely before the morning watch; so should we rise from sinne, and as Solomon saith, Remember our Crea∣tor in the dayes of our youth, before the euill dayes come, when wee shall say wee haue no pleasure in them. And yet it is a fearefull thing to consider how many men do put off and delay their re∣pentance, and amendment of life vntill our latest dayes: for we serue the world, and follow after the lusts of our owne flesh while we are young, and we put all the burthen of seruing God, vpon our weake and feeble and decrepit age: wee sacrifice the flowers of our yeeres to sinne and Satan, the finest, the fairest,That God will hardly accept late seruices tendered vnto him. and the fattest beasts; but to God wee thinke it is enough to giue the blinde, the halt, and the lame, the withered and wrinck∣led, and barrennest times of our life: but God will haue none such, for hee refuseth such sacrifices in his Law; and therefore surely he will not easily receiue such in the time of the Gospell;
for as there were three paiments of first fruits among the Iewes; the first was primitiae spicarum, the first fruits of their eares of corne, and this was paid earely about Easter; the second was primitiae panum, the first fruits of their loaues, when their corne was conuerted into bread, and this was somewhat earely too, about Whitsuntide; and the third was primitiae frugum, the first fruits of all their latter fruits in generall, and this was ve∣ry late, about the fall of the leafe in September; and in the two first paiments, which were offered earely, God accepted a part for himselfe; but in the third paiment, which came late, God would haue no part at all; euen so, if we offer the first fruits of our young yeeres, earely vnto God, he will accept it for him∣selfe; but if we giue our best yeeres vnto Satan, and offer the last yeeres vnto God; I say no more, but he will not easily re∣ceiue them: and no maruell, quia labore fracta instrumenta, &c. for to what end, and with what face can any man bring those instruments to worke in Gods vineyard, which are blunted and broken in the seruice of the world? or with what honesty can we offer that vnto God, which we would be ashamed to offer vnto a man? for who would offer a lame horse, a disordered clocke, or a torne booke vnto his King? and yet our flesh is our beast, the course of our life is our clocke, and the history of our actions, is our booke; and shall wee offer our flesh vnto God, when it is lame and tired with excesse of wantonnesse? shall wee commend our liues vnto him, when as the whole course of the same is out of order? or shall wee present the story of our actions vnto him, when as a thousand sinnes of our owne (for which wee should bee sorrowfull) and a thousand blessings of God (for which we should be thankefull) are quite defaced, and torne out of our memory? or if we should offer such vnto God, why should we thinke it strange, that he should reiect them?Because late seruice is sel∣dome true ser∣uice. quia temperantia in senectute non est temperantia, sed impotentia intemperantiae: for continency, abstinency, tempe∣rancy, and such like in old age, are no vertues, but a disability to be vitious; so to leaue good fellowship when thou art sicke, and many other sinnes when thou art old, is not a leauing and forsaking of thy sinnes, but thy sinnes haue lft thee, like pa∣rasites in aduersity; Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes. If thou
couldest haue cherished them any longer, longer they would haue continued with thee. And therefore, seeing it is good for a man to beare his yoke in his youth. (as Ieremy saith) because age is vnfit for burthens; let vs not be like the persecuters of the Iewes, which laid the heauiest yokes vpon the ancientest men; let vs not reserue the weight and burthen of our repentance, vntill our latter age; but if we would haue God not to remember the sinnes of our youth, let vs remember God in the dayes of our youth; and specially seeing we know not whether God will heare vs in our age or not, because we would not amend our liues in our youth; and because indeede whatsoe∣uer is done then, is commonly done amisse; let vs herein imi∣tate our Sauiour Christ, to rise early from the bed of sinne, and to say with that Princely Prophet, O God, thou art my God,Psal. 63.1. early will I seeke thee. And there be two maine reasons,Two speciall reasons to moue vs spee∣dily to forsake all sinne. that should moue vs to rise hastily and speedily from sinne; 1. The nature of sinne. For, 2. The vncertainty of our life. For, First, Sinne in the Soule, is like a staine in a garment; the lon∣ger it remaines in it, the harder it is taken out of it. Vidi ego quod fuerat primum medicabile vulnus, Desertum longae damna tulisse morae: For as in the diseases of the body, the longer they be vncured, the more the body is in dangered; or as we see in a fire, Flamma recens, parua sparsa recedit aqua, A little water quenches a sparke, but much water will hardly quench great flames: Euen so it is in the maladies of the Soule,Ecclus. 5.7. the longer wee continue in sinne, the harder we can leaue sinne; And therefore, let vs make no tarrying to turne to the Lord our God,Math. 2.16. but as Herod dealt with the Infants, so let vs deale with sinne, kill it while it is young. It is recorded of Roffensis, that when Henry the eight sent to him for his consent and approbation to suppresse some super∣fluous Abbies, he told him, that on a time the Axe sent vnto the Trees of the Forrest, onely for so much wood as would make it but a handle, and in requitall, it would pre and prune off all rotten and fruitlesse branchs that did nothing else but
cumber the Trees, and hinder the liuelier branches to beare forth better fruit; the request seeming reasonable, was vnque∣stionably imbraced, and most willingly granted vnto the Axe: but the successe answered not the expectation of the Trees; for instead of pruining the corrupted branches, it soone wasted stocke and roote, vntill it made way for the Plow, vncontrola∣bly to passe through the middest of the Forrest: And so I feare (saith Roffensis) your Maiesty will proceede with the pos∣sessions of the Church: So he did; and so doth sinne deale with euery Man; it demands but little, but it still incroacheth, vntill it destroyeth our soules: And therefore we should withstand sinne at the first, and neuer suffer it so much as to enter into our soules. And we should follow the councell of the Bride∣groome,Cant. 2.10. Arise my Loue, my Doue, my faire one; Make haste, as the Angell said vnto Lot,Gen. 19.22. to saue thy selfe, and come away. O come, come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, with me from Lebanon,Cant. 4.8. looke from the top of Amana, from the top of Sheir, and Hermon, from the Lyons dennes, and from the Mountaines of the Leopards. Secondly, We ought to make haste to rise from sinne, and to beginne betimes to serue the Lord, by reason of the shortnesse and vncertainty of our life; for as Hugo Cardinalis saith, The way that we are to passe, is long; the place that we are to goe vnto farre, and our time short; and wee know not how soone God will call for vs: And therefore, we ought to worke the worke of God while it is day;Iohn 9.4. For the night commeth, when no man can worke. That we should striue to be first in Gods seruice.And here we must further obserue, that as he rose early, so he rose first of all; for, He is the first fruits of them that sleepe: To teach vs, that we should also striue to be the first in all goodnesse: but we are loath to doe this; we will doe as others doe, we cannot a∣bide to be singular: such is our Nature; we striue with the Pha∣risees to be first in honors, Nec quenquam iam fere potest Caesarue priorem Pompeius ve parem. — We would faine be the first in reputation, but we neuer striue to be the first in performing the duties of Religion: It was other∣wise with Iosua, who called all Israel together, and perswaded
them all to serue their God, or if they would not, he told them plainely, That he and his House would serue the Lord:Iosua 24.15. And I would it were so with vs; for it is our greatest honour to be the first in Gods seruice. Thirdly, In respect of his owne person, Christ rose. First, Truly, without hypocrisie, not fainedly, but certainly: So should we; for woe be vnto you hypocrites,Matth. 23.13. and woe to him that goeth two manner of wayes; that holds vp his hands, and lifts vp his eyes to Heauen, and yet hath his heart full of all vnrighteousnesse: for though with men things are iudged as they seeme, yet God seeth our hearts, and we deceiue our selues, if we thinke to deceiue him. It is obserued in Nature, that the Foxe nips the necke, the Mastiue the throate, the Ferret the liuer, but God careth onely for the heart: for he saith, Sonne giue me thy heart;Ecclus 2.12. That we shold raise our selues truely, and not hypocri∣tically from sinne. and he is said to be a searcher and a tryer of the hearts: And therefore, we must not make Saint Pauls shew of godlinesse, to be Saint Peters cloake of wickednesse, to rise from sinne in shew, and not in truth; for these rise like Samuel, fainedly, not truly, by a Witch, not by God: It is that Witch hypocrisie, worse then the Witches of Thessalie, that rai∣seth them vp a little to deceiue the World, and to make vs be∣leeue they are true Samuels, whereas indeede they be very Di∣uels. Our Sauiour bids vs to beware of such,2 Tim. 3.5. that haue Iacobs voyce and Esaues hands, the words of Saints, and the workes of Iewes; And I bid them beware of Satan,1 Pet. 2.16. for being raised vp by him, and not by the power of Christ, he will at last vnmaske their hypocriticall faces, and then he will cast them downe, and destroy them; for though it is reported, that in a certaine battell some lost their liuings for running away, which notwithstanding were be∣stowed vpon others, that fled ten leagues further; yet it is not so with God: for,2 Cor. 5.10. He will render vnto euery man according to his worke. Secondly, Christ rose totally without partition;That we shold raise our selues from all sinnes. for he left no part behind him: So should we rise from all sinnes, or else all is but in vaine: for we reade that Herod at the preaching of Iohn Bap∣tist, did raise himselfe from many sinnes, but from his deerely be∣loued Herodias, he would not rise; so many men can be per∣swaded by the Preachers to forsake many sinnes▪ but from their bosome, darling, vsuall, customary sinnes, they will not rise. And
urely euery man is naturally inclined to some sinnes, more then to others; as some men to good-fellowship and drunkennesse, some to wantonnesse, and these could willingly be contented to re∣fraine (as they doe sometimes) from all, or most other sinnes; but from these, their naturally beloued or vsually practised sinnes, they cannot, they will not abstaine: It is their infirmity, and they cannot leaue them: and therefore as Naaman the Syrian said vnto Elizeus,2 Reg 5.18. onely in this thing the Lord pardon thy seruant; so say these men, but in a worse manner, onely in this sinne the Lord be mercifull vnto me, and I will striue to raise my selfe from all other sinnes whatsoeuer. Aulus Gellius. attic. noct. l. 12. c. 1.It is reported by Gellius that Phauorinus, seeing a mother sha∣ring her duties betwixt her selfe and her nurse, said; Quodnam est hoc contra naturam imperfectum, & dimidiatum matrum genus? What a strange halfe-kinde of mother against nature is this, to bring forth, and presently to cast forth from her the fruit of her owne wombe? such halfe-kinde of Christians haue wee now a dayes, that will scarce performe halfe their duties: it were well, if they were like Naaman,Act. 26.28. or like Agrippa, almost Christians; if they were so, and could goe in sincere practice, as the young man in the Gospell went in proud profession, all these things haue I done from my youth vp;Matth. 19.20. yet because with that young man they want one thing, all the other things will auaile them nothing; for to be behinde in no gift, as Saint Paul speaketh, is the generall description of euery truly renued Christian: and we know that as on what part soeuer of a man a Lion catcheth hold, he will hold it fast, and draw vs by that part vnto himselfe, or we must suffer that part to be torne off, from our selues; and what gate so∣euer the enemy findeth open, hee can through that one gate leade in all his Army into our Citie: euen so Satan, cares not where he may haue hold of thee, so he may haue hold of thee; and he cares not by what doore he may enter into thy soule, so he may enter in by any doore; for as one leake may sinke a ship, one wound may kill a man, so one sinne especially practised may slay the soule: and what auaileth it whether couetous∣nesse or prodigality, precisenesse, or prophanesse doe raigne in vs? whether on the right hand, or on the left hand, by ouer-going or vnder-going, wee be depriued of saluation? for though the
by-pathes of iniquity, which doe misleade a Christian, be very many, yet they all meete in one place: for the issues of them all,Prou. 16.25. are the issues of death, saith Saloman. And therefore if this roaring Lion hath catcht hold of thine eye, that by wanton lookes, lookes full of adulteries (as Saint Peter speaketh) it maketh thee to offend, pull it out and cast it off,2 Pet. 2.14. that thou mayest free the rest of thy selfe, from eternall destructi∣on; and so of all other parts, doe as our Sauiour bids thee, free thy selfe from Satan; Et redime te captum quam queas minimo, and free thy selfe as soone as thou canst, and as well as thou canst; for thou wert better shake off that one sinne, then that Satan by that one sinne, should take thee into Hell fire: and as they vse to doe in besieged Cities, where the assault is sorest, there they place the stoutest men; so doe thou against sinne and Satan, striue most to hinder him, where he striueth most to en∣ter: for so Dauid saith, that he refrained from his owne wickednesse, i. e. euen from that sinne, that he was most of all inclined vnto; and so let vs wholly and perfectly rise from all sinnes. Thirdly, Christ rose constantly without apostacy,That we shold so rise from sinne, as neuer to fall to sinne againe. Reuel. 1.18. i. e. hee rose gloriously, neuer to die againe, for Christ being raised from the dead, dyeth no more, death hath no more power ouer him: and so his epethite is, he that was dead, & is aliue, and liueth for euermore: So should we rise from sinne, neuer to sinne againe, not like Laza∣rus that rose from his graue and dyed againe, rise now from sinne and immediatly fall into the same or the like sinnes againe: but as we must obey Christ his voyce, saying, Come vnto me,Matth. 11.28. so wee must obey his voyce, saying, abide in me;John. 15.4. and as William the Con∣querer is said to haue sunke all his ships, when he arriued here in England, because he would take away all hope of flying backe; so must we sinke all sinnes, that we may neuer swimme or ride on sinne againe, drowne them in the seas, dash them against the wals, and so shake hands with all sinnes, that we neuer returne to any sinne againe; for,Why Nouatus thought sinnes of recidiuation should not be pardoned. though it was an errour in Nouatus to denie remission vnto sinnes of recidiuation; that is, when a man relapseth and falleth againe into the same sin, because the Apostle saith, It is vnpossible that they which were once inlightened, (& so raised from sin) if they fall away, should be renued by repentance; and Saint Peter saith,Heb. 6. It had beene better for them neuer to haue
knowne the wayes of righteousnesse,2. Pet. 2.21. then after they haue knowne it, to turne away from the holy Commandemrnts; and because we neuer read that either Christ raised the same men twice, no not the widdowes sonne, whom he pittied, nor yet Lazarus whom hee loued, nor that the Saints euer fell into the same sins againe, after they had them once remitted, as Dauid neuer committed adul∣tery againe, Peter neuer denied his Master againe, Paul neuer persecuted the Church againe, after they had these sinnes once remitted; though I say this was an error in the Nouatians, because the Apostles speake of falling away from Christ, by a fi∣nall apostacie, and not of falling againe into sinne through our carnall infirmity; and because the comparison of Christ raising the dead, with the raising of vs from sin, doth not (as no other comparison doth) in all things hold aequipage; and because the other mens not falling into the same sinnes againe, doth but shew that they had a great measure of grace to preserue them from falling, and not proue a deniall of renuing grace vnto vs, if we should fall againe; and they are set downe for our imitati∣on, that wee should striue to stand, and neuer to fall, and not for our desperation, if we doe fall into the same sinnes againe; yet I say,That relapsing into sinne is very dange∣rous. that this relapsing into sinne, this returning with the dog vnto his vomit, and with the swine to her wallowing in the mire, is exceeding fearefull and dangerous: for as vulnus iteratum, &c. nature is tired with the continuall assault of the same diseases, and at last is forced to yeeld vnto them, if it cannot by some meanes expell them, and as the same sore often wounded, is very hardly cured; so the same sinnes still assaulting our soules, will without doubt (if they be not extinguished by grace) make our last end, worse then our beginning. And therefore, it were well for vs, if (when we haue risen from sinne) we would euer pray to God for grace, that wee might neuer fall into sinne againe: for otherwise, as the old Prouerbe is, Conteritur an∣nulus vsu.Gutta cauat lapidem, non vi, sed sape cadendo, Sic homo fit Daemon, non vi sed saepe cadendo; scilicet in peccatum: often sinning, makes the greatest sinners. But if the relapsing into any particular sinne bee so dange∣rous, O then what a fearefull thing is the falling back from our
most holy profession? surely,What a feare∣full sinne Apo∣stacie is. it is the most remarkable thing in the description of the sinne against the holy Ghost, and the most apparant signe, of eternall destruction: behold the punishments of Apostates that are left for our examples: Lots wife was tur∣ned into a pillar of salt, and the children of Israell, that in their hearts were turned back againe into Aegypt, had their carkasses left in the wildernesse: and no maruell, for this is a transcendent sinne; and I know no sinne so great as this; Herods blou∣dy murders, euen of infants, and Neros sauage crueltie, euen a∣gainst the Saints, and the most barbarous acts of the most in∣humane heathen Tyrants, did neuer sound so odious in mine eares, as that horrid name of Iulian the Apostata: for that must stand as a rule infallible,2. Pet. 2 21. that they are farre better which neuer knew the way of righteousnes, then they which once knew it, and then turned aside from the holy commandement. Beloued, It hath pleased God to bring vs out of Aegypt, and to vs that walked in darknesse, and in the shadow of death,Esay 9.2. hath the glorious light of the Gospell shined, and the truth of Christ is amongst vs; O let vs not loue darknesse more then light, let vs not returne from light to darknesse. I know there is a continuall opposition, and a mightie warre, betwixt truth and falshood, farre greater then that betwixt the house of Saul and the house of Dauid, and each one of them seeketh to preuaile against the other; and I hope I need not vse any argument to prooue that we are in the truth: It was the Corinthians fault, after they were baptized, beleeued Christ, and professed Christ a long while, all on a sudden (like the men that sailed into the midst of the Ocean, and awaking out of a dreame, made a great question whether they were in any ship or no) they beganne to doubt whether there was any resur∣rection or not: and I hope wee will not bee like any of these heerein; after wee haue it so deerely purchased with the blood of Martyrs, so truely preached by the painfull seruants of Christ, and so long preserued amongst vs by the free grace of Christ, now to question, whether we be in the truth or not; for that is beyond all question: God hath brought it to vs, we haue preached it to you, and you haue beleeued it, and profest it glo∣riously and christianly before the face of the whole world: and
therefore I will onely shew you two speciall poynts to be our helpe and furtherance in our warfare against errour.Two speciall points to be considered. The First, shall be to preserue vs in the truth. The Second, shall be to suppresse falshood, that it preuaile not against the truth. For the first, I desire all men to consider. 1. Who we be that teach you. 2. What they are that seeke to seduce you. First, we are plaine men, that compasse not sea and land to inlarge our Monarchie:Who we are that teach the people. wee labour not so much to get your wealth, as to saue your soules: for as the Apostle saith, we seeke not yours, but you: and I hope most of vs (if occasion serued, you should see it) would seale our words with our bloud: for as there were 7000. men in Israel, that bowed not their knees to Baal; so I assure my selfe there are many thousands in England, that would lay downe their neckes, and leese their liues, rather then they would depart a nayles bredth from the truth of that doctrine which we haue taught: And I boldly say it, if Satan should be let loose, to persecute the Saints of God, I doe vnfai∣nedly wish, my deerest bones might first burne to giue light, vnto all them that desire to walk in this truth. Who they bee that seeke to seduce our people.Secondly, consider what they be that seeke to seduce you; and I doubt not but you shall finde most of them, to be either such as were nuzled in errors a cunabulis, euen from their cra∣dles, by their seduced friends, popish children, of popish parents, sent and bred in the mysteries of iniquity; and should we look for these to bee otherwise then they bee? or else to bee such as through discontent to see some hoysted vp vnto Moses chayre, which are scarce worthy to sit at Gamaliels feet, and themselues that haue good parts in them,Acts 22.3. through want of friends, or meanes, to be quite neglected, haue gone from vs, either because they hoped for better fortunes in other soyles, or because they were lothe to indure their meane fortunes among their owne friends; because noble spirits had rather begge where they are not knowne, then any waies be base where their worth is seene: I confesse a fault in neglecting them; and it is too common amongst vs; but will you be contented to hazard your soules vpon their perswasions that hazarded their owne through dis∣content?
I hope better things of you, and I assure my selfe, that as you are in the truth, so you will continue in the truth vnto your death. For the second, how we shall suppresse falshood,Vide, The Mi∣sery of man. page. 109. that it preuaile not against truth. I refer you to my first treatise of the Misery of man, p. 109. where I haue set down my best adice in this case. But heere it may be, some will say, Quorsum haec? to what end is all this spoken, to insinuate feare into the hearts of men, where there is no feare? I answer, that his gratious Maiesty not only by his Royall authority in maintayning true Religion, but also by his Diuine pen, by his owne paines, defending the truth of our Religion, and his wise Councellers, whose Councells are like the great deepe, too great for me to diue into them, too high for you to attaine vnto them, doe not onely free vs from all feare of idolatry and superstition; but doe also assure vs of a most happy continuance of our most true Religion, in a farre more glorious manner then our meane capacities can perceiue: and yet there is one great, powerfull, and politicke one, vnder whose wings many are sheltered, and he intrudeth himselfe in∣to all places, Country and City, Court and Councell-chamber, and laboureth by all meanes to put out our light, and to darken the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and to bring in idolatry and supersti∣tion into our land againe; and that is the prince of darknesse, the diuell and Satanas, that entred into Paradise,That Satan al∣waies laboreth to bring men into idolatry & superstition. to deceiue our fore-fathers, that ventured vpon the Sonne of God, and sayd, mitte te deorsum, if thou be the Sonne of God, cast thy selfe down∣ward, and will suggest it into euery man, if thou would'st bee the childe of God, mitte te retrorsum; then must thou returne backward, and bee as thy fore-fthers were: There is no doubt of this; if he could send none from Rome hitherto corrupt vs; yet while hee hath rome for any in hell, hee will neuer leaue to labour by his wicked suggestions, to corrupt vs himselfe; hee will enter into our chamber, hee will creepe into our bosomes, and he will seeke by all meanes for to deceiue vs; wee are not ignorant of his deuices: And therefore I say, let him that standeth take heed lest hee falleth: and let vs pray to God for grace,1. Cor. 10.12. that as he hath raised vs from sinne, and superstition; so he would preserue vs from relapsing or falling back into any of
these sinnes againe. And thus you see how Christ raised him∣selfe from death, and how we should raise our selues from sinne. And heere wee must further note, that as the consideration of Christs resurrection should make vs conformable vnto him,That the re∣surrection of Christ is a cause of great ioy vnto vs. by our resurrection from all sinne; so it should bee most com∣fortable vnto vs, both in respect of Christ and our selues, quia resurgens Christus tantum attulit letitiae, quantum morions attulit do∣loris, because Christ at his resurrection brought vs more ioy and comfort,Bernard. de pas∣sione domini c. 46. p. 1236. k. then hee did sorrow and griefe at his passion, saith Saint Bernard: and therefore we should all of vs, plus gaude∣re propter resurrectionem gloriosam, quam dolere propter passionem ignominiosam, now say with the Psalmist, sing we merily vnto the Lord our God, that hath turned our sorrow into ioy, that we might sing one of the songs of Sion: and woe to that man that doth it not,Gregor. hom. 21. in Euangel. quia indignum valde est si in eo die laudes debitas tacuerit lingua carnis, quo videlicet caro resurrexit autoris, because it is a great indignitie that our tongues should bee silent, from giuing praise to God on that day whereon our Sauiour rose from his death, saith Saint Gregory. And as we should reioyce at the consideration of the resurrection of Christ from the dead; so we should likewise reioyce for the resurrection of our owne soules from sinne; for as Tobias said, what ioy can I haue, so long as I sit here in darknesse? so may wee say of euery sinner, what comfort can he haue whiles he liues in sinne? or what fruit can he haue of those things,Rom. 6. whereof hee must bee ashamed, as the Apostle saith? And so much for our resurrection from sinne. That the re∣surrection of Christ is an assurance of our resurrecti∣on to eternall life.Secondly, if wee bee the members of Christ, wee shall assu∣redly rise from our graues, and from death, vnto the resurrection of euerlasting life: quia vt Redemptor noster suscepit mortem, ne mori timeremus, ita ostendit resurrectionem, vt nos resurgere posse confideremus; for as our redeemer died, that we might not bee affraid of death, so he rose againe, that we might bee sure of our resurrection vnto life; for if the head bee risen, then surely the members, in their due time, must rise, and follow after; but Christ our head is risen from the dead (as I haue abundantly shewed vnto you before,) and therefore it must be that wee which are his members, shall also rise and follow after. And lest any man should say, sperare de se non debet homo, quod in carne
sua exhibuit Deus homo, that man should not hope for that to himselfe, which that God and man performed in himselfe. S. Gregory answereth, that solus in illo tempore mortuus est, & tamen solus minime resurrexit, although hee died and was laid in his graue all alone, yet he did not rise againe alone, but hee was ac∣companied with many others; to shew vnto vs, that as he died not for himselfe, so he rose not for himself, but for vs that are his members. And therefore, though heere we suffer all the miseries of this world, though our bodies be but semen terrae, & esca vermium, the dust of the earth, and the foode of wormes, and though these bodies of ours should be cast into the seas, and bee eaten of fishes, and those fishes should be caught, and should be eaten of men, and those men should be burnt to ashes, and those ashes cast into the seas, yet we my assure our selues, to our continuall comfort, and to our refreshment in all miseries, that God will collect vs and raise vs vp at the last day, and giue vnto euery soule his owne body, and then make vs like vnto the glorious bo∣dy of Iesus Christ. And so much for the first lesson,1. Cor. 15. the lesson of Theorie, which these women, (and so likewise all men and women) must learne, and know: That Christ is risen from the dead, and therefore that we should rise from sinne, and shall rise from our graues to eternall life. CHAP. X. What the women are commanded to doe, and why: and what speciall lessons we may learne for our instruction. FOR the second, i. e. the lesson of practise,How the An∣gell teacheth the women what they should doe. this Angell sheweth vnto these women what they should doe, saying, ite, goe your wayes; why stand you heere? and goe quickly, without de∣lay, for it is the Lords businesse,Why the wo∣men were to tell the Disci∣ples that Christ was ri∣sen. and cursed be they that doe the worke of the Lord negligently; & dicite discipulis, and tell his Disciples that Christ is risen from the dead: Tell his Disciples, first, quia vos ad praedicandum in∣ferior sexus, ad exigendum infirmior; because your sex is lesse able
to preach,Ambros. in loc. lesse constant to perseuere, saith Saint Ambrose: se∣condly, because women must not teach; for to teach, is a note of superiority, and women are bound to obey, and to learne at home of their husbands; and therfore I permit not a woman to teach saith the Apostle; thirdly, that as man did rashly beleeue the woman for his destruction, so he might now happily beleeue these womē, for his saluation; et ecce & behold, he goeth before you into Galilee, Galilee of the Gentiles; because now the partition wall that was betwixt the Iewes and the Gentiles is broken downe; and the calling of the Gentiles approacheth neere: & quia transmigra∣uerat à morte ad vitam, and because now hee had passed from death to life, and was to passe from this vaine and momentary life vnto that ioyfull and eternall happinesse, he saith, behold he go∣eth before you into Galilee, because Galilee signifieth transmi∣gration,What we shold learne from the Angells in∣struction to the women. or a passage ouer from one place vnto another. And so you see the summe of the Angels iniunction vnto the wo∣men, what they must doe: and from hence we may learne these speciall lessons for our instruction. First, to prac∣tise what we know.First, that we must ioyne practise vnto our profession, if wee would be happie, for these two must neuer be separated: these things if you know, blessed are you if you doe them, saith our Sauiour: And yet it hath beene euer the practise of Satan, to seuer those whom God hath ioyned together: and therefore in former times, he put out the light of the Word preached, that men might not know what to do; & now when he seeth he can hide the light no longer, he giues you leaue to know as much as you will, as much as Berengarius, who is said to know as much as was know-able; but he laboureth that you shall doe nothing at all, but shew your selues iust like the Grecians,Plutar. in La∣coon. which knew what was honest, but did it not; or like the Scribes and Pharisees, which said and did not, saith our Sauiour. But we should consider, first, that this is one of the chiefest ends why God gaue his Lawes and his Commandements vnto vs; that we should doe them: for had hee giuen them onely to bee preserued, hee might haue lockt them vp in iron coffers;God gaue his Lawes not to be talked of, but to be kept. or had he giuen them to be talked of, he might haue giuen them vnto Iayes and Parrats. Secondly, we should know that the practise of Christianity is the onely argument to prooue vs true Christians: by this,
Christ proued himselfe to be the Messias:Practise onely proueth vs Christians. for it is most true which Iouinian said of the Arrians and Orthodoxall Bishops, I cannot iudge of your knowledge & disputations, but I can easily discerne your lines and conuersations. Thirdly, wee should remember that our actions are the best arguments,Sozom. l. 7. A good life conuerteth others. Basil. l. de 40. Mart. and the most vnanswerable Syllogismes to conuert infidels: Sozomenus tells vs, that the godly life of a poore cap∣tiue woman moued a King and many others to become Chri∣stians: and Iulian writing to Arsatius, saith, that Christiana religio propter Christianorum erga omnes cuiusuis religionis benefi∣centiam propagata est; the piety and the charity of Christians did wonderfully cause the Christan Religion to increase;Euseb. l. 9. c. . and Maximinus said, hee could not choose but wonder to see how sedulous the Christians were in doing good.The bitter fruites of a bad life. Whereas on the other side, the lewd life of those that professe Christ, doth bring forth many sower and bitter fruits: First, It dishonoureth God more then any other thing;First, it disho∣noureth God. his name is blasphemed through them among the Gentiles, which beleeue not God; and therefore God saith, why takest thou my Lawes in thy mouth, whereas thou hatest to be reformed? Secondly, It proueth them to be no Christians,Secondly, it proueth such liuers no chri∣stians. because the profession of Christianity, is a profession of works, & not of words. Thirdly, It hindereth the vnsetled mindes, to imbrace Chri∣stianity: for when they see men, like Tusser that wrote well of husbandrie, but was himselfe the worst husband that liued,Thirdly, It hin∣dereth others to become Christians. or like Erasmus Ruffian, that carried by the one side a good bottle of sack, and by the other side a faire guilded Testament; such as will heare much and talke more of Religion, and doe none of the works of God; how shall not this diswade the vnstable hearts from euer imbracing of Christianitie? It is reported that Lynacrus reading the Sermon of Christ in the Mount, and considering the conuersation of men in the world, said, either this is not Gods Gospell, or wee are not Gods people; and I pray God, that the faire-seeming-shewes of hypocritical professors, and their most vile and abhominable actions, bee not the cause to kindle Gods fearefull indignation against vs all. And therefore beloued brethren; let vs consider the Author of our profession, Iesus Christ, who went about doing goood:
let vs consider his holy Apostles,Act. 10.38. and all our blessed Ancestors, how sedulous they were in the practise of Religion, wherby they haue gained a good report, & became glorious in the sight of God and men, and let vs imitate them herein, to doe good as they haue done, and in all things to ioyne practise vnto our knowledge. All men not sit for all pur∣poses.Secondly, We may obserue from hence, that as these wo∣men were fit messengers, to tell the Disciples that Christ was ri∣sen, but not to preach the same vnto the world; so many men are sufficient for inferiour places, and to preach the shallower points of Diuinity, points of morality, and popular exhortati∣ons, but are not fit, Ducere in altum, to lanch foorth into the deepe, and to treat of the higher mysticall points of Diuinity; for as it is said of Dauids Worthies,2 Sam. 23.19. that they reached not vnto the first three, so it may be said of vs all, that many men may receiue a measure of Gods graces, and yet not attaine vnto the measure of many others;God giueth not the like measure of graces vnto all men. because God doth not giue the same measure of graces vnto all; but as in humane gifts, wee finde that some had their memory so good, that to their last times they could repeat whole orations, & some that in their yonger yeares had their iudgement so profound, that they could determine the har∣dest questions;Matth. 25.15. so in the deliuery of the Diuine talents, whereby Theophilact vnderstandeth , spirituall graces, some haue fiue,2. King. 2.9. some haue two, some but one: to note vnto vs that God granteth, not only a superiority vnto some aboue their brethren, in an higher kinde of a different grace, but also in a greater measure of the same grace; as the Spirit was doubled on Elisha, if not in respect of his Master Eliah, (as some think not) yet surely in respect of the other succeeding Prophets;Dan. 1.20. & in the Schoole of Nebuchadnezzars in chanters, though they were all no doubt exceeding great Clerkes,1 Cor. 14.18. yet Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego were found to be ten times better then the rest; and among these, Daniel sleeping was found wiser then his fel∣lowes waking: so in the New Testament, Iohn Baptist was a Pro∣phet, and more then a Prophet, and Saint Paul spake languages more then all the rest of the Apostles:God expe∣cteth not the like fruits from all men. and therefore God doth not require all his seruants, nay he will not haue them all to ad∣uenture, or seeke to bring forth the like measure of fruit: for hee was not angry with the slothfull seruant, because that one talent
had not gained ten talents, but because he hid his masters mo∣ney, and had gained nothing at all. Thirdly, We may obserue from hence,That we ought to follow Christ, and not to goe before him. that as Christ went before these Women and his Disciples into Galilee, and they all followed after him; So we should suffer Christ to goe before vs in all our wayes, and not to runne our selues before him, where perhaps he neuer went, nor will goe: for it is the property of a Disciple to follow after, and not precede or goe before his master: and therefore we must not goe into those places where Christ went not; nor dispute of those points which Christ taught not; for this is to goe before him, and not to follow him. Fourthly, We may obserue from hence,That we must passe from all worldly vani∣ties, before we can inioy spirituall bles∣sings. that as Christ passed from death to life, and from this world into Heauen; so must we, before we come to Christ, passe from our deadnesse in sin, vnto the life of grace, and from the vanities of this worldly life, vnto a spirituall and a heauenly conuersation; for as there was no pos∣session of the Land of Canaan, vntill there was a transmigration of the red Sea, out of the land of Egypt; so we can haue no fruiti∣on of Gods presence, vntill we haue relinquished and passed o∣uer all the Egyptian vanities of this life, in our desires and affecti∣ons, at the least. And thus you haue heard the office of this Angell here expres∣sed, to serue Christ, to affright the souldiers, and to delight these women, to teach them, to direct them,Reuel. 4.8. and to preserue them in all their wayes; for as they neuer cease to serue the Lord, so they neuer cease to preserue the Saints, vntill they cease to serue their God: and therefore to vse Saints Bernards exhortation, Quantum debet hoc verbum inferre reuerentiam, afferre deuotionem, conferre fiduciam? How ought this doctrine to moue vs, and worke in vs reuerence for their presence, confidence for their cu∣stody, and obedience vnto God for so great an argument of his beneuolence vnto man, as to giue his Angels charge ouer vs; Et quam cauté ambulandum, and how warily ought we to walke seeing the Angels of God are euer present with vs, when all the men of the world are absent from vs? It is reported of a godly Virgin, that being often sollicited by a gallant vnto vnlawfull lust; at last she yeelded that if hee met her at such a place he should haue leaue to worke his pleasure
with her; both came to the place appointed; and the place was full of people; then the mayden told him, that now if he plea∣sed he might vse her as he would: he answered that now for shame he durst not doe it in the sight of so many men and wo∣men; then she replyed, and thinkest thou that I dare doe that in the presence of God, and his holy Angels, which thou darest not doe in the sight of mortall men? and I wish euery one of vs did so; that is, to be ashamed to doe those things in the sight of God and his holy Angels,Psal. 139.2. Velleius pater∣culus. which we are afraid to doe in the presence of men: for they alwayes see vs, though wee see not them; they are about our beds, and about our pathes, and spie out all our wayes: and therefore as Marcus Drusus, when one told him he could build him an house of such a forme, as that no man might see what he did therein, answered; that hee liked better of such an Architector as could build his house so, as that euery one passing by might plainely see what was done therein; so I wish to God that euery one of vs would striue and labour so to liue, as it becommeth vs to doe in the sight of God and of his blessed Angels. And so we see the Resurrection of Christ fully and plainely shewed vs, to the eternall praise and glory of God, and to the endlesse ioy and happinesse of all Christians, through the said Ie∣sus Christ: To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be as∣cribed, all power and dominion, both now and for euer. Amen. A Prayer. O Blessed God, which gauest thine onely Sonne Iesus Christ to suffer death for our sinnes, to descend into Hell to de∣stroy our enemies, and to rise againe for our iustification, and so to declare himselfe mightily to be the Sonne of God, and the true Sauiour of all men; We most humbly beseech thee to raise vs from the death of sinne, from all our sinnes, and to giue vs grace to beleeue in thee, to be thankfull vnto thee, and to serue thee in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life; that when we shall be laid to rest in our graues, we may rest in assured hope to be raised vp by Christ, to liue with him for euermore; through the same Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Sixt Golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The Sixt greatest Light of Christian RELIGION. Of the Ascention of our SAVIOVR, and of the Donation of the HOLY GHOST. EPHES. 4.8. . Wherefore he saith, when hee ascended vp on high, heeled captiuity captiue, and gaue gifts vnto men. AFter that the blessed Apostle Saint Paul had by many arguments proued vnto the Ephesians that they should earnestly studie,The coherence of this verse with what go∣eth before. and most carefully labour to pre∣serue the vnity of the Church of Christ, he seemeth in the seuenth verse to answer a certaine obiection that might bee made, viz. seeing the graces, the gifts, and the offices which God hath bestowed vpon his Church, are so many and so manifold, so diuers and so vnequall, some hauing many graces, some but few, some one gift, and some another, how
can it be that this vnity can be so faithfully preserued? therefore the Apostle sheweth that the diuersity and inequality of gifts, is not onely no hinderance, but is indeed a great furtherance to cherish and preserue the same. First▪ Because all these gifts do flow from the same fountaine, Iesus Christ. Secondly, Because they are all giuen and imparted for the same end and purpose; that is, to gather together the Church of Christ into the vnity of faith. The first reason he proueth out of this Prophesie of Dauid, who speaking of the Messias triumphing ouer his enemies, saith, Thou art gone vp on high, thou hast led captiuity captiue, and receiued gifts for men. And, The second reason he confirmeth at large in the verses fol∣lowing, where he sheweth, that Christ gaue some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, and all to this end; that is, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the worke of the Ministery, for the edifying of the boy of Christ, till wee all come into the vnity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God. Two things contained in this verse.And therefore we finde contained in this verse, two speciall points. First, A confirmation of the Apostles alledged reason: that all graces doe flow from Christ in these words, , Where∣fore he saith. Secondly, A Propheticall prediction of the Messias; in these words, When he ascended vp on high, he led captiuitie captiue, and gaue gifts vnto men. That the Scripture is the best war∣rant for all Preachers.For the first, I meane not to stand long vpon it; I will onely note this one thing; that all we the Teachers of Gods people, ac∣cording to the example of this Apostle, nay of Christ himselfe, and of all Christs true Schollers, should not teach any positiue point of doctrine, vnlesse we can either directly, or by necessary consequence proue and confirme the same out of the Sacred Scriptures; for whatsoeuer hath not authority from the word of God, Eadem facilitate refellitur qua probatur; may as well be reiected as receiued,Hieron. in Matth. c. 23. saith Saint Hierom; and whatsoeuer is there∣in contained, it requires absolute faith without doubting, be∣cause,
as Hugo Cardinalis saith, Quicquid in sacris literis docetur veritas est sine fallacia; quicquid praecipitur bonitas est sine malicia; quicquid promittitur faelicitas est sine miseria; Whatsoeuer is caught in the Scripture, it is truth it selfe without fallacy, what∣soeuer is commanded it is purely good, without the commixtion of any euill; and whatsoeuer is promised, it is perfect felicitie without the least iot of misery; and therefore Saint Augustine saith very well, that, Sicut contra rationem nemo sobrius, & contra ecclesiam nemo Catholicus, ita contra Scripturas nemo Christianus; as no man that is sober will speake against reason, no man that is a Catholike will kicke against the Church, so no man that is a Christian will contradict any thing that is said in Scrip∣tures. For the second, that is, the Prophesie of Dauid, we may ob∣serue these three things. 1. The Glory. 2. The Victory. 3. The Bounty. of the Messias, and the Sauiour of the world, Iesus Christ. Or else, 1. The Ascention of Christ. 2. The Subiection of our Enemies.The whole Treatise diui∣ded into three parts. 3. The Donation of the Holy Ghost. First, The Glory of Christ, or his Ascention is set downe in these words, When he ascended vp on high. Secondly, The Victory of Christ, or the subduing of our ene∣mies is set downe in these words, He led captiuity captiue. Thirdly, The Bounty of Christ, or the sending downe of the Holy Ghost, is set downe in these words, He gaue gifts vnto men.
The first part hath two Bran∣ches. Branch. 1.BRANCH. I. CHAP. I. Of foure sorts of ascenders, and how each one of them ascendeth. TOuching the first, that is, the Ascention of Christ, I will by Gods helpe handle it two wayes: First, by way of explication of the words; Secondly, by way of application of the same vnto our selues. And in the first respect we must consider these three points. Three points to be conside∣red, touching the ascention of Christ.1. The person Ascending, who he is. 2. The Action or Motion of the person, going vp. 3. The Place, where he is gone, on high. Thou art gone vp on high. First, the per∣son ascending.First, For the person ascending, the Psalmist saith in the se∣cond person, ascendisti in altum, caepisti captiuitatem, accepi∣sti dona Be-Adam; Thou art gone vp on high, thou hast taken capti∣uity, and thou hast receiued gifts for the sonnes of Adam; And the Apostle here in the 3. person, saith, When he ascended vp on high he led captiuity captiue, et dedit dona, and he gaue gifts vnto men. Who is that thou, or this he? who is this King of glory, that hath ascended vp on high? and what a strange thing is this, to find such difference in the Scriptures?Iohn 3. he receiued gifts, saith the Prophet; he gaue gifts, saith the Apostle. Haud bene conueniunt. We may say with Nicodemus, How can these things be? for the difference betwixt the Prophets saying, he receiued gifts, and the Apostles saying, he gaue gifts, I shall reconcile it hereafter, when I shall come to speake of the 3. point, i. e. the bounty of the Mes∣sias: and therefore it resteth now that we should discusse onely of the person, who he is that is here meant to haue ascended; for Bonauenture saith, that there be foure sorts of ascenders.
1. Angels.That there be foure sorts of ascenders. 2. Diuels. 3. Men, both good and bad. 4. The God and Man Christ Iesus. First,Gen. 28.12. To what end the good An∣gels doe as∣cend. Iacob saw the Angels ascending and descending vpon a ladder, whose foot was on earth, and the toppe thereof reached vnto heauen, carrying vp our prayers and supplications, and pre∣senting them vnto God, as Raphael did the prayers of Tobias, and bringing vnto vs the gifts and graces of God, as Gabriel did the Message of saluation vnto the blessed Virgin; not in respect of any office of Mediatorship, that they should execute betwixt God and Man, but in respect of that seruice which they are to doe vnto man, at the command of God; and therefore they are said to ascend and descend along the ladder; that is, through Iesus Christ, for he is that ladder by whom we ascend and clime vp to God, and through whom we receiue all blessings from God: He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life;Iohn 14.6. the two sides of this ladder are his two natures, the staues are the proprieties of each nature, and the knitting of them together is that indissoluble vni∣on of these two natures in the vnity of his Person. Now when Iacob saw this vision of Angels ascending and descending vpon this ladder, dormiuit supra lapidem;Who they be that shall see the Angels descending, for their com∣fort. it is not said that he laid his hard head vpon a soft pillow, but that hee laid his tender head (for he was but a young man, and as yet ne∣uer vsed to any hardnesse) vpon a hard stone; to signifie vn∣to vs, that not those which lay their hard hearts, and stiffe neckes vpon beds of downe, and lie wallowing in all the plea∣sures of this world; but those rather which sleepe in sorrow and griefe for their sinnes, and lie vpon the hard and rough stone of true repentance, spending their time with Iohn Baptist in austere conuersation, shall see the Angels of God descending downe to comfort them, and ascending vp to carry their soules like Lazarus into Abrahams bosome. Secondly, Satan said in his heart,Esay 14.13. I will exalt my selfe aboue the skies, and I will be like vnto the most highest: and of this fastidious and proud ascender, Rupertus Tuicensis writeth excellently and largely in his bookes De victoria verbi Dei,Bern in Psal. qui habitat. Ser. 12. and Saint Bernard saith, that this wicked spirit doth emulate and imitate those
heauenly Angels, but most lewdly: quia ascendit studio vanita∣tis,How wickedly Satan doth as∣cend. descendit liuore malignitatis, because he ascendeth in a vaine desire of dignity to bee equall with God, and hee descendeth with an odious heart full of wrath and malignity to destroy sil∣ly men: & sic mendax ascentio, & crudelis descentio est, and so his ascending is but a lying vanity, and his descending a cruell indignity:Gregor. in lib. 1. reg. c. 17. pag. 279. c. or else as Saint Gregory saith, they are said to as∣cend and descend, quia ad expugnanda ala, per caeleste deside∣rium corda subuenire, & de innocentis vitae sublimitate nos deponere appetunt, because they seeke to ouertop the Saints of God, and to deiect their desires from the sublimity of heauenly things, and to bring downe their hearts and affections to bee fixed on the things of this base and wretched world: and therefore, pro inani suo ascensu tam immane praecipitium sortitus est, for such vaine ascending he hath obtained a most fearefull tumbling of himselfe into the bottomlesse pit of hell; Such is the reward of pride. But seeing their ascending and descending is to sub∣uert vs, and to cast vs downe to hell, wee ought to bee very thankfull vnto him (i. e. Iesus Christ) at whose command the good Angels doe ascend and descend, and continually attend vpon vs,Bernar. de ascen. ser. 4. p. 199. to defend vs from them, (as Saint Bernard saith,) and to preserue vs in all our wayes, that we hurt not our foot against a stone. Thirdly, men are said to ascend, and that both the good and the bad. How wicked men doe as∣cend.First, ascendere malos, est de malo ad peius proficere, the wic∣ked are said to ascend when they grow worse and worse, and goe on from one wickednesse to another, vntill they come to the height of all impiety:Greg in l. 1. reg. c. 15. p. 444. f. to. 1. so the children of the first age after the flood, swelling vp with pride, did lift vp their hearts on high, and would build them a tower, whose top might reach to heauen;Gen. 11 4. Esay 14.13. Ezech. 28. so the King of Babell said, I will ascend into heauen, and exalt my throne aboue the starres of God; so the King of Tirus said, I am a God, and sit in the seat of God in the midst of the sea; so will that man of sinne, that child of perdition (whensoe∣uer he commeth) sit in the Temple of God as God, and shew him∣selfe that he is God, if not directly by verball profession, yet apparantly by reall vsurpation, when hee shall vndertake to
forgiue all sinnes, to binde all consciences, to dispence with all lawes, to dispose of all kingdomes, to command all Angels, and solely to open and shut heauen and hell at his pleasure; and so doe all the children of pride, ascend vp on high to the very height of all sinne; and this sinne makes them like vnto Lu∣cifer the King of pride: and as the Poet saith, Matrona incedit census induta nepotum.How pride spoyleth many one. It makes many a father and mother to weare their childrens portions vpon their backes; it makes many a woman not with Eue to hide their shame, but with Iesabell to hide their faces, which should be their glory, vnder shamefull complexions of their owne composure, so that God himselfe, if hee did not know their hearts, might hardly know those vailed faces. Nec tamen admiror, si vobis cura placendi, Cum videant comptos secula nostra viros; And it makes not onely women to deny themselues and their age to please men, but it maketh men also to deny their sexe almost, to please women, and to spend more time in pow∣dering their haires and perfuming themselues, then they doe in the seruice of God, or of the Common-wealth, and German-like to goe in all attires, vnlike to men: yea this sinne, as it made the inhabitants of heauen, to become the citizens of hell; so it maketh many a Saint to become a Deuill, and of the sons of God to become sonnes of Beliall: for as the Poet saith of beautifull persons, Fastus inest pulchris sequitur{que} superbia formam. You shall hardly finde a faire man or woman that is not proud; so I may as truly say, Fastus inest iustis sequitur{que} superbia sanctos. There be not many Saints, but we may feare they are a little proud of their sanctitie; for in our best goodnesse, if we be not carefully watchfull ouer our owne soules, Satan will seeke to make vs doat in admiration of our owne worth, and then presently he will stirre vs vp to proceed to the extenuation of o∣thers, and to say with the Pharisee,To be proud of goodnesse is the worst pride in the world. I thanke God I am not as o∣ther men, or as this Publicane. And of all ascenders and lifters vp of themselues, there is none so bad as these; for as no deuill to
the holy deuill, when he transformeth himselfe into an Angell of light; so no pride like this, to be proud of grace; and the deuill reioyceth as much to make a Saint proud, as to make a prophane man wicked. Matth. 24 15.And therefore as our Sauiour saith vnto the Iewes, When you see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, then flie to the mountaines; euen so, when you perceiue in your selues the least conceit of your owne worth and goodnesse, then doe you presently feare this lifting vp, and flie to the moun∣taine of heauen for grace, to escape the desolation of such high conceits: for as Orpheus had his wife Euridice granted him out of hell, vpon condition that he should not looke vpon her vn∣till he had passed out of the confines of hell. But, Flexit amans oculos, & protinus illae relapsa est; He was so farre in loue with her, that he could nt containe from looking backe, and so she was presently taken backe a∣gaine: euen so, if we, Narcissus-like, stand gazing vpon our owne worthinesse, wee shall finde our best deedes but like the apples of Sodom, externally splendide and faire to the eyes, but being handled by God, or throughly tried by the touch∣stone of Gods Law, we should finde them hollowly defectiue, and euery way impure in his sight. Indeed it is Satans vsuall course, either to hinder vs to doe well, and to cause vs not to fast, not to pray, not to giue almes, not to doe good, or else if wee doe them, to doe them that we may be seene of men, and to be proud of them; hee will be sure to thrust at euery side, and to thrust sore at vs, that we may fall: but we must carefully watch him in all his assayes, and especially in this,Optatus in pa∣rab. pharis. & public. because as Optatus saith, Meliora inuenta sunt peccata cum humilitate, quam innocentia cum superbia; it is better for a man to sinne and be humbled, then to be voyd of sinne, i. e. of all the vsuall sinnes of the world, and to be proud of his innocency. And thus you see how the wicked doe ascend in pride, and as Claudian saith, Satan lifteth vp wicked men to throw them downe.— tolluntur in altum vt lapsu grauiore ruant.— They are lifted vp on high, to haue the greater fall: and
therefore, perniciosa haec ascentio, imo magis descentio est, à Ieru∣salem in Iericho, this is a most dangerous ascention, nay rather descention from Ierusalem to Iericho, to fall among theeues, and to be robbed and spoyled of all that we haue; for these haue not the siluer wings of a Doue, but the waxen wings of Ica∣rus to helpe them to ascend, and they are not exalted vp by God, because they are not humble and meeke; but they are lifted vp by the deuill, because they grow great without good∣nesse; and therefore as Icarus, (Icaria nomine fecit aquas) fell downe and was drowned, so will the deuill bring downe the high lookes of the proud: for as the Iacke-daw takes vp a nut in her bill, and flying on high, lets it fall on a rocke for to breake it, or as the Eagle deales with the Oister and Tortoise in like mannr, (by which meanes Aescilus died,Valerius Maxi∣mus l. 9. c. 12. as Ʋalerius Maxi∣mus saith, because the Eagle seeing his bald head, while in an open place he made his oration vnto his auditors, thought it was a stone, and therfore letting fall the Tortoise out of her bill, that so falling vpon a stone the shell might be broken, it fell vpon his head and killed him;) so the deuill deales with these men, he lifts them vp as hee did Simon Magus, to make them flie in the aire and then, as he did to the said Magus, he throwes them downe to breake their neckes; and therefore it had beene good for many they had neuer beene thus lifted vp. It is reported of one Gaufredus Monachus Clarevallensis,Bosqier, de mo∣nomachia. that hauing refused a Bishopricke in his life time, he appeared after his death vnto his chamber-fellow, and said that hee did well in refusing that Bishopricke which his friends would haue had him to accept: quia si in numero Episcoporum fuisset, in nu∣mero damnatorum esset, because that if he had been of the num∣ber of the Bishops, he should now haue beene of the number of the damned, not that all Bishops must be damned, God for∣bid, there haue beene and there are many of them exceeding good, learned, painefull, and vpright men, (though I must vnfainedly confesse, I haue seene some, not as I would wish;) but that if hee had aspired to that dignity, by that vnlawfull meanes as (it is most likely) it was offered him; for otherwise it had beene most lawfull for him, both to desire it, and to ac∣cept it; for hee that desireth the office of a Bishop, desireth a
good worke, saith the Apostle: or though he might lawfully haue attained vnto it, yet if hee finding himselfe, though fit enough to be a Monke, yet vnfit to be a Bishop, had accepted the same, then certainely it must needes haue followed, that if more mercy were not shewed then hee deserued, hee must needes bee in the number of the damned: and it would bee well for many, if they did not rise to fall; for of such ascen∣ders,Bonauen. de as∣cen. ser. 4. p 199. Bonauenture saith, that quantum ascenderunt per ambitio∣nem in mundo, tantum descendent per damnationem in inferno; by how much the higher they haue ascenbed by their ambiti∣on in the world, by so much the greater shall be their damna∣tion in hell: and so of these the Prophet Dauid saith, in a my∣sticall sense, though literally I confesse it spoken of sea-faring men, quod ascendunt vs{que} ad Coelum, & descendunt vs{que} ad Abyssos; that they are lifted vp to the Heauens, and downe againe they fall into the bottomelesse pit: but they doe not descend in the same manner as they ascend, for they doe ascend most willing∣ly, but they shall bee cast downe most violently into that place of vtter darkenesse;Luke 12. Thou foole, this night they shall take away thy soule from thee; euen as a Sergeant doth a prisoner into his goale against his will: and they doe ascend by degrees, by lit∣tle and little, and by the space of forty, fifty, or sixty yeeres, but they shall suddenly fall away, like the lightening whereof our Sauiour speaketh, I saw Satan as a lightening falling downe from heauen; i. e. suddenly and fearefully they shall fall to ruine: Diabolus ita{que} & homo,Bernard. in flor. p. 2090. c. & homo, vter{que} ascendere voluit, sed praepostere, hic ad scientiam, ille ad potentiam, ambo ad superbiam, and so both the Deuill and wicked men would each of them ascend, but preposterously; men to bee wise, the deuill to bee great, and both to be proud saith Saint Bernard; for which they shall both fall downe to hell. How the god∣ly doe ascend.Secondly, good men doe ascend aswell as the euill and wic∣ked; and though they doe not ascend after the same manner, yet they doe it the same way, (saith Saint Bernard) as the wic∣ked doe;Idem de gradi∣bus humilit. p. 972. because as the same way leadeth vnto the city, as go∣eth from the city, and by the same doore wee enter into the house, as we goe out of the house; so if we would returne vn∣to the truth, and ascend vp into heauen, wee neede not seeke
any other new way, but by which we haue descended and fallen downe from heauen, we must ascend and climbe vp into hea∣uen; and as Cacus dragged his cattell backewards into his caue, so we, vestigia retrorsum, must retire backe by the same steps as we haue proceeded forward; but you know wee fell by pride, we would be like God,Gen. 3.5. and therefore we must ascend by humility, wee must know our selues to bee nothing, and worth nothing, this is the way, and there is none other but this; qui aliter vadit, cadit potius quam ascendit, and hee that would by any other way ascend vp to heauen, hee doth surely fall from heauen; because it was enacted by the eternall Law of the God of heauen, that euery one which exalteth himselfe, shall be humbled,The way to heauen is hu∣mility. and hee that humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted: And therefore Christ, hauing not as he was God, any way whereby he might ascend, because nothing is higher then God, and God cannot be higher then he is, by his humiliation and descention he found how to ascend; for comming to bee incarnate, and to suffer death, that we should not suffer eternall death; therefore God exalted him, and gaue him a name aboue all other names; to teach vs, that by humility onely wee may ascend to eternall felicity: Goe thou and doe thou likewise, humble thy selfe, if thou woul∣dest bee exalted into heauen, and because thine humility is full of pride, lay hold vpon the humility of Iesus Christ, for that is onely perfect; and therefore it is that only that can bring thee to perfection. Fourthly, we reade, that Christ ascended and was lifted vp;Christ ascen∣ded three spe∣ciall times. and that as we finde three speciall times: 1. vpon the Crosse, when the Iewes insulted ouer him. 2. from his Graue, when the Deuils trembled at it. 3. into Heauen, when all the hoste of heauen reioyced at it, and said; Lift vp your heads, O yee gates, and bee yee lifted vp yee euerlasting doores, that the King of glory may come in; for this is hee that hath troden the wine-fat alone, and is worthy of all glory and honour for euermore. And so you see how many sorts there be of ascenders; and you see, I thinke, how fearefull is the ascention of Satan and of wicked men:Bernard. de ascen. ser. 4. pag. 199. and how glorious is the ascention of the Saints. And we finde that as S. Bernard saith, omnes cupidi sumus
ascentionis, exaltationem concupiscimus omnes; we all desire to be exalted, wee all would faine bee lifted vp to heauen; but who shall teach vs the way thither, lest wee should bee seduced by him that fell from thence, and so seeking to ascend vp into hea∣uen, we should fearefully fall downe into hell? Who (saith Saint Bernard) but he,Iohn 3.13. of whom it is written that he ascended vp on high, that ascended vp aboue all heauens? we must learne the way of him if wee would ascend to heauen; for hee came downe from heauen, and he is gone vp into heauen, and now he sitteth in heauen vpon the right hand of God. CHAP. II. That Iesus Christ the Sonne of God, is hee that is meant by the Prophet Dauid and Saint Paul, to haue ascended vpon high. BVt who is he, of whom it is written, that hee ascended vp on high? for many ascend as you heare, but which is he that is here meant? I confesse the 68. Psalme,Resp. Psalme 68. wherein these words are first written, is literally to be vnderstood, not of any triumph for the slaughter of the hoste of Senacherib, which was done in the time of King Hezekias (as the Iewes doe most fabulously dreame) when the very Title of this Psalme, that ascribeth it vnto Dauid, doth sufficiently confute this vanity; nor yet for any of the victories of Dauid, which he obtained against his bordering enemies, the Ammonites,Literally these words were spoken of the Arke of the Couenant. the Moabites, the Idumeans, and the Phili∣stines, (as some would haue it;) but of that great and glorious pompe, which was then done and shewed, when King Da∣uid with great ioy and triumph did bring the Arke of the Co∣uenant into the hill of Sion; and therefore these words, thou art gone vpon high,Mollerus in Psalme 68. doe signifie that the Arke which formerly had layne in an obscure place, & was transported from one place to another, was now ascended and seated in a most illustrious and conspicuous place, euen in the Kingly pallace; and these
words, thou hast led captiuitie captiue, to signifie those enemies which formerly had spoiled and wasted diuers Countreyes; but now being vanquished by King Dauid, were led captiue in this triumph, (for so it was the manner of those times, as Plutarch doth excellently declare in the life of Paulus Aemili∣us;) and the other words, thou hast receiued gifts for men,Plutarch. in vita Pauli Aemilij. doe signifie those spoyles that were freely offered for conditions of peace, and were triumphantly carried about in this pompous showe, for the greater solemnitie of the same; and then, (as the manner was among the chiefftaines, when they triumphed, Bellica laudatis dona dedisse viris, to bestow warlike gifts vpon worthie men) were bestowed on seuerall men, in seuerall manner, as Sigonius sheweth;Sigon. l. 2. de antiquo iure pro. Yet I say that mystically this Psalme is an , or a tryumphall song, penned by King Dauid, vpon the foresight of Iesus Christ arising from the dead, and with great ioy and triumph ascending vp into Heauen;Mystically these words were first spo∣ken of Christ ascending vp into Heauen. and thence sending his holy spirit vnto his Apostles, and Disciples; and, hauing ouercome all his enimies, collecting by the ministerie of his Preachers, his Church and chosen seruants together, and so guiding and defending them heere in this life, vntill he doth receaue them into eternall glorie: for so the authoritie of Saint Paul interpreting them, and all other Diuines with one con∣sent doth compell vs to vnderstand them, and to know that that pompous shew and tryumph of King Dauid, was but the praeludium and type of this triumph of our Sauiour Christ, whereof the Apostle speaketh in this place; and it was an vsuall thing for the Prophet Dauid, in all his chiefest and most glori∣ous acts, so to behold the Proto-type, that is, the Messias, whose type he knew he was, and so to accommodate all his actions vnto what the Messias should doe, that all men might perceiue these things to be done, not through any humane inuention,All the chiefest acts of Dauid were types of Christ. but as he was moued and guided by the inward inspiration of Gods spirit, and that for the instruction and edification of the whole Church, when by these outward perspicuous acts of Dauid, as by certaine visible lectures, all men might see, and reade those things that should be done by Iesus Christ: And therfore I say, that the person prophesied of, by King Dauid, and here spoken of, by Saint Paul to haue ascended vp on high, is our
Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, who hauing vanquished and ouercome sinne, death, Hell, and all our enemies, did most gloriously ascend vp to Heauen in the presence of all his Apostles and Disciples, and thence sent the holy Ghost to reple∣nish and fill their hearts with all spirituall gifts and graces: and this will more fully appeare vnto vs out of the second point, which is the action or the motion of this person, set downe in the word ascendit, when hee ascended vp on high. CHAP. II. A fuller declaration of the person ascending, and of the time, place, and manner of his ascention. Saint Paul collecteth two things out of the word he ascended.YOV haue heard of the person ascending, who he is, Iesus Christ: we are now to consider of his ascention, out of this word ascendit, when hee ascended vp on high: but first we must obserue, that our Apostle out of this Word, he ascended, doth collect both the humiliation and the exal∣tation of Christ. First, the hu∣miliation of Christ.First, his humiliation in the 9. v for that he saith, he ascended, what is it but that hee descended first into the lower parts of the earth? wherein the Apostle would haue Dauid, when hee fore∣spake of the glorification and the ascention of Christ into Heauen, to haue foreseene his humiliation and descention from Heauen to bee incarnate and made man. Secondly, the exaltation of Christ.Secondly, his exaltation in the tenth verse, hee that descended is the same also that ascended farre aboue all heauens: for these two verses are read by a parenthesis, and are added by the Apo∣stle, for the fuller explication of those hidden mysteries, that are included in the word he ascended. First, touching the descention, the Apostle setteth downe two things, 1. The descent it selfe, that he descended. 2. The extent of his descent, into the lower parts of the earth.
The first sheweth vs that hee was first in Heauen,Christ first de∣scended, i. e. was incarnate, before he could ascend. i. e. accor∣ding to his God-head, or else he could neuer haue descended out of Heauen, and that he descended to be incarnate and mde man before the man Christ could ascend vp into Heauen; and there∣fore the Prophet Dauid fore-seeing the ascention of the man Christ, must needs foresee the humiliation of the Sonne of God to be made man. The second is a point more controuerted: for first, some doe expound the lower parts of the earth, to signifie his mothers wombe, because the descent of the Sonne of God, is nothing else but his incarnation, and that was done in his mothers wombe; and because the Prophet Dauid vseth the like saying of himself, I was formed beneath in the earth, i. e. in my mothers wombe;In inferioribus terra. se∣condly, others will haue this phrase to signifie his abode & con∣uersation here among men; thirdly, others will haue it to sig∣nifie the state and condition of the dead, as if the comparison were made betwixt those parts of the earth, wherein the liuing doe inhabit, and that place wherein the dead are buried; and so they doe expound that place of Esayas, that hee was cut off from the land of the liuing, and so cast into the land of the dead,Esay 53.8. which they say, the Apostle vnderstandeth by the lower parts of the earth: and, fourthly, others say, that he descended into the place of the damned, not to suffer,Iohn 19.30. because that was finished on the Crosse, nor to fetch any Fathers out of Lymbe, but to signifie and to shew, not onely by words, but also by presence, that seing by his death and Passion, the wrath of God was appeased, Satan was to haue no more power ouer the Elect, which hee held captiue, that he was now made Lord of all, and that all power was giuen vnto him, and a name aboue all other names;Collos. 2.15. and not onely to declare the same vnto them, but also to subdue them, and to spoyle principalities and powers; and as my Text saith, to leade captiuitie captiue: And this is the exposition of most of the anci∣ent Fathers; for mine owne part I am of Zanchius minde,Lach. in Ephes. c. 4. that in the word descendit, all these foure expositions may bee com∣prehended because he descended, into his mothers wombe, to be conuersant here among men, into his graue, and into Hell; and our very Creede expresseth all these foure; he was conceaued by the holy Ghost, i. e. in his mothers wombe, there is the first; hee
was borne of the Virgin Marie, and hee suffered vnder Pontius Pilate, there is the second; he was dead & buried, there is the third; and he descended into Hell, there is the fourth; and these be the foure degrees of his humiliation:That Christ descended into Hell. and this the Apostle seemeth plainely to vnderstand by the antithesis, by the coherence, and by the scope of the words; because hee saith, that hee ascended to the highest part of Heauen, and therefore this also that he descen∣ded into the lower parts of the earth, is literally to bee vnderstood, that he descended into Hell; because no place of the earth, is lower then Hell. Secondly, Touching the exaltation of Christ, Saint Paul set∣teth downe two things, 1. He describeth the Person ascending, he which descended. 2. He expresseth the action, he ascended. He which as∣cended is the very same per∣son which de∣scended.First, he saith, that it is he which descended that hath ascended, i. e. he which was made man, which suffered & was buried, he as∣cended; and who is he, but God the Sonne, the second Person of the Trinitie? for so our Sauiour saith, I went forth from the Fa∣ther, and I came into the world, and againe, I leaue the world, and I goe to the Father; and therfore it is the very self same Son of God, and none other, which both descended and ascended. And so by these few words, we finde two great heresies quite ouerthrowne; first, of them which say, hee brought his body from Heauen, because the Apostle doth not say, he which as∣cended descended (though this be true, being truely vnderstood) for he ascended God and Man, which so, did not descend, but as God alone; therefore he saith, he which descended, he ascended; secondly, hereby is ouerthrowne the heresie of Nestorius, which said, our Sauiour consisteth of two persons; for, if he which des∣cended is the very same that ascended, then it is apparant that by his descention,That in Christ there cannot be two per∣sons. i. e. by the assumption of our nature, hee is no other person then he was before; but still remaineth one and the selfe same person, and that the humane nature doth adde no∣thing vnto the Sonne of God, for the constituting or perfecting of his person; for otherwise he that ascended had bin another, and not the same which descended; for hee had descended a simple person, and ascended compounded, hee had descended an imper∣fect person, and ascended perfect, which is most hereticall either
to say or think: And this is the cause, why we affirme that the person of Christ cannot be said to bee compounded of two na∣tures, tanquam ex partibus, as of two parts,Christ still re∣maineth a most simple person, i. e not compounded. but as hee was before the assuming of our nature, so also now hee is still a most sim∣ple and a most perfect person, bearing our nature, as on areth on his garment, but neuer to put it off againe, because it is assu∣med into the vnitie of his person: and so Saint Augustine saith, that Christ descended like a naked man, and when he ascended, he ascended the same person, but clothed with our flesh: and therefore, as he is not another man that taketh on a garment, so the Sonne of God is not another person, because he tooke vpon him the garment of our flesh: and if the humane nature assumed, did neither change, nor perfect, nor compound the person of the Sonne of God, because he which descended, is the very same that ascended and none other, then by the same reason it cannot be said, that Christ tooke man vpon him, i. e. a humane person, as Nestorius taught. But therefore he vnderstood not the same,How Nestorius was deceiued about the per∣son of Christ. because on the one side hee held that true philosophicall principle, that the actions are of the persons, and not of the natures; and on the other side, he held another principle (which is also true, if it be truely vnderstood) that of contrary effects there must bee contrary effici∣ent causes: and hee saw that in Christ there were diuers and contrary actions; and therefore he did thence conclude, that in Christ there must needs be diuers persons, whereof the one should be passible and the other impassible; and so he made that hee which descended was not the same, but another that ascended; for he considered not, quod idem , potest diuersa & pug∣nantia oprari secundam diuersas in eo naturas, that the same sub∣sistent or person may worke diuers and contrarie acts, in respect of the diuers natures that are in it; as a man according to his soule doth vnderstand, and according to his body hee doth not vnderstand, in respect of his soule he is immortall, and in respect of his body hee is mortall; and so through his ignorance hee hath abused these true philosophicall principles (being truely vn∣derstood) to denie the truth of the Scriptures, and to wrong the person of the Sonne of God; but the Fathers truely explai∣ning the sayd principles, did confute his error and confirme this
truth, that he which descended, is the very same that ascended, and none other. But from hence it is apparant, that the word descendit, is not to be taken in the same sence, as the word ascendit; for hee des∣cended as God, and God filleth all places; and therefore it is not phisically to be vnderstood, of any locall descent; but for his ex∣inination and the assumption of our flesh: but hee ascended as God and Man; and therefore must phisically be vnderstood of a locall ascent; and whole Christ is said to ascend, by reason of the communication of the properties and the vnion of both natures into one person. Secondly, the action or as∣cending of Christ.Secondly, Saint Paul hauing thus fully described, and shewed the person ascending, i. e. he that descended, expresseth the verie acte or motion, in this word ascendit, hee ascended vp on high: touching which, wee must consider these three especiall points, 1. The time of his ascention: 2. The place of his ascention: 3. The manner of his ascention: All which are fully shewed by Saint Luke in the first of the Acts. Acts 1.3.First, he saith, that hee shewed himselfe aliue after his Passion, by many infallible proofes, for the space of forty dayes: touching which number,The time when Christ ascended. why he remained on earth iust forty dayes, ma∣ny men haue collected many mysteries: Moses was in the Mount with God forty dayes; the children of Israel wande∣red in the wildernesse forty yeeres; Elias fasted forty dayes; Ni∣niue had time of repentance forty dayes; our Sauiour fasted forty dayes; and many other like examples might bee found of this iust period of forty dayes:Bosquierus de monomachia Christi. and I will not here search into the reason of these things; he that will, let him looke into Bosquie∣rus, but I will onely note those two reasons, why he continu∣ed so long on earth after his resurrection, which Saint Luke set∣teth downe vnto vs: First, to prooue the certanity of his resurrection; therefore he saith, tht hee appeared vnto them. Secondly, to instruct his Apostles, in faith, hope, charitie, and all other points concerning the Kingdome of God, as
Eusebius noteth; and the Euangelist plainely expresseth, saying,Eusebius l. 4. de praeparat. Euang. that he was seene of his Apostles forty dayes speaking of the things per∣tayning to the Kingdome of God. But here we must obserue, that for this space of forty dayes, he was not with his Apostles and Disciples, after the same man∣ner as he was with them before his Passion; for that now hee was not continually conuersant with them, but did onely at some times appeare vnto them. If then you demaund where he was for that space, while hee was not with his Disciples, whetherin the Wildernesse, as some doe thinke, or in the terrestriall Paradise, which Bellarmine af∣firmeth to remaine still though Pererius saith, it was quite abo∣lished by the deluge, or in what place he secluded himselfe, I will no wayes venter to determine: for I will alwayes hold that excellent rule of Prosper; Quae deus occulta esse voluit,Prosper de vo∣cat. gentium. non sunt scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit, non sunt negligenda, ne & in illis illicite curiosi & in his damnabiliter inueniamur ingrati; What God hath concealed, they are not to be searched, and what hee hath declared, they are not to be neglected; lest that in the former we shall be found to be vnlawfully curious, and in the latter most damnably carelesse. Secondly, For the place from whence he ascended, it is said,The place from whence he as∣cended. that he went from Galilee to Bethanie, from Bethanie to Mount Oliuet, and from Mount Oliuet, vnto Heauen: Galilee signi∣fieth transmigration, and Bethanie is interpreted the House of obdience, to shew that as he descended by reason of our disobedi∣ence, to suffer for our sins, and to giue vs an example of obedi∣ence, thereby parare nos mansioni, to prepare vs for Heauen, so by reason of his most perfect obedience, in fulfilling all righte∣ousnesse, He ascended into Heauen; Parare mansionem nobis;Act. 14.12. to prepare a place for vs: or else Bethanie may signifie the House of affliction, to shew that by many afflictions and tribulati∣ons we must enter into the Kingdome of God. And he ascended from Mount Oliuet, because he would vse no miracle, while the strength of nature serued; and whosoeuer doth otherwise,The manner of Christ his ascending. Luke 24.51. tempteth God, rather then trust in God. Thirdly, For the Manner, Bonauenture obserueth, that hee as∣cended.
First, Blessing his Apostles, as the Euangelist saith, While he bles∣sed them, he was parted from them; which is an exceeding com∣fort vnto vs the poore distressed Ministers of Iesus Christ; for though the world hate vs, and curse vs, and say all manner of euill against vs, yet behold Christ parting, left his blessing with vs, to defend vs against all their malice: And he blessed them with his hands lifted vp; to teach vs, that in our prayers we doe with Moses fight with God, we hold his hands, and suffer him not to strike vs with the sword of vengeance; and this is the Victo∣ry which ouercomes our God, euen our prayers; and to teach vs that when our mouth prayeth to God, we should likewise moue our hands to doe the workes of God; and further to teach vs that by this manner of praying with our hands spread and lifted vp,Prudentius hymno. 6. we should professe Christ crucified, as Prudentius saith. Secondly, He was not suddenly snatcht from them, as Elias, nor secretly taken away, as Enoch was; Sed videntibus illis; but in the presence of them all, his Apostles and Disciples, he ascen∣ded vp to Heauen. Act. 1.9.Thirdly, That as he ascended, the cloudes receiued him out of their sight: to shew that he was the Lord of al his creatures; he had already trampled vpon the earth, walked vpon the Sea, vanquished Hell,Bern. Ser. 2. de ascent. p. 192. and subdued all infernall things vnder his feet; and therefore now the cloudes receiued him, and the Hea∣uens are opened to make way for this King of glory to en∣ter in. Fourthly, He ascended, in voce tubae, in the sound of a Trumpet, not on earth sounding Hosanna, but in Heauen crying Halelu∣iah: for God is gone vp with a merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of a trumpet,Psal. 46.5. saith the Psalmist. So, You haue heard how he went, and you shall see him comming after the same manner, saith the Angell. First, With the sound of a trumpet, that shall raise the dead: and this great trumpet of God is the voyce of the Angels, a voyce fearefully crying, Surgite mortui, & venite ad iudicium; Arise ye dead and come vnto iudgement; a voyce that alwayes made Saint Hierome to quake and tremble, whatsoeuer ee was a doing. Secondly, He shall come in the cloudes, and we shall be taken
vp into the cloudes;1 Thes. 4.14. that as we see the cloudes protect vs from the heate of the Sunne; so we may be ouershadowed from the heate of the wrath of God, by that true cloude Iesus Christ. Thirdly, He shall come, though vnlookt-for by the wicked, as a theefe in the night, yet so apparantly, that he shall be seene of all the world, and with a great company of Angels;2 Pet. 3.10. Et cum mi∣libus sanctorum; and with thousands of his Saints, as the Apo∣stle saith, for the chariots of God are twenty thousands,Psal. 68.17. euen thou∣sands of Angels, and the Lord shall be among them, as in the holy place of Siny. Fourthly, he shall come with a blessing to reioyce the hearts of his Elect, when he shall say vnto them,Matth. 25. Come ye blessed of my Father, receiue the Kingdome that was prepared for you, before the beginning of the world. And so much for the motion, or his ascen∣ding vp. CHAP. IIII. The place into which Christ ascended. THirdly, We are to consider, terminus ad quem, the place whether he ascended; Quò (inquit Au∣gustinus) nisi quô scimus,Aug. in Psal. 46. p. 174. b. 2. quô eum Iudaej non sunt secut? Where is hee gone, but where wee know, and where the Iewes shall not be able to follow after? Quia in cruce exaltatum irrise∣runt, ideo in coelum ascendentem non viderunt; Because they moc∣ked him being nailed on the Crosse, therefore they saw him not when hee ascended vp to Heauen: and where is he gone, saith the Prophet Dauid, but on high? for, thou art gone vp on high, that is, aboue all Heauens, saith the Apostle. And therefore by this one little sentence, we find three dam∣nable Heresies brought to death. First, Of them which said his body vanished in the aire,Three here∣sies confuted. be∣fore he ascended into Heauen: for he ascended aboue all heauens. Secondly, Of them that said he ascended into the Orbe and Circle of the Sunne, because it is said, in solem posuit tabernacu∣lum
suum:Psal. 19.5. He hath set his Tabernacle in the Sunne; which was the opinion of the Hermians, and the Passionists, as both Nazi∣anzen and Saint Augustine doe affirme; for here wee see, hee is gone aboue all Heauens: and therefore aboue the Orbe of the Sunne, and they mistake that place of the Psalmist, which is, in them hath he set a Tabernacle for the Sunne, and not, he hath set his Tabernacle in the Sunne. Thirdly, Of them which teach an vbiquitary Heauen, be∣cause he is ascended aboue such Heauens. Ob.But then it may be obiected, that if he be ascended aboue all Heauens, then is he in no certaine place, because (as Aristotle saith) Beyond Heauen,Arist. l. 1. de coelo. there is no place. Sol.I answere, that the Scripture maketh mention of three Hea∣uens: That there be three Hea∣uens.First, Of the Ayre, as the Foules of Heauen. Secondly, Of the Coelestiall Orbes, as the Starres of Heauen. Thirdly, Of the Receptacle of the blessed soules, which is called the Kingdome of Heauen. And this we must vnderstand to be either 1. Materiall. 2. Spirituall. 3. Supersubstantiall. Christ ascen∣ded aboue the materiall Heauens.First, For the Materiall Heauen: he is said to ascend aboue the same. First, In respect of Glory; because the Body of Christ is more glorious then any Materiall Heauen. Secondly, In respect of the Continency, because in nature, it is infallible, that contentū superius est continente, the thing contained must be higher then the place contayning. Thirdly, In respect of his blessed soule; because the soule of Christ is more blessed then all things else whatsoeuer. Christ ascen∣ded aboue the spirituall Heauens.Secondly, For the spirituall heauens, i. e. all Angelicall or Heauenly perfections, he is said to ascend aboue them all. First, In respect of perfection; because the body of Christ is more noble, and more excellent then any creature, not in regard of his corporall substance, but in regard of the hypostaticall vni∣on, because it is vnited vnto the Godhead. Secondly, In respect of his humiliation; because he hath vili∣fied himselfe below all things; therefore he is worthily exalted a∣boue all things.
Thirdly, For the supersubstantiall Heauen, i. e. God himselfe, & the place of God; he is said, in respect of his person, to ascend into the same; not that the humane nature is ascended to the e∣quality of the Godhead; for he is still inferiour to the Father, and shall be still subiect to the Father, as touching his Manhood; but that the person of Christ, God and Man, sitteth on the right hand of God; that is, doth rest and raigne, exalted aboue all things, Vs{que} ad aequalitatem Maiestatis dei; To be in all things equall vn∣to the Maiesty of God, as Saint Augustine expoundeth it: Des∣cendit enim quo inferius non decuit, ideo ascendit quo altius non po∣tuit; For he descended so low, as it was not fit for him to goe lower; and therefore he ascended so high, as it was not possible for him to goe higher, saith Saint Bernard. And therefore Christ is ascended higher then all created things whatsoeuer.Christ higher then all crea∣ted things. First, In respect of the place; because aboue all Heauens. Secondly, In respect of power;Psal. .6. because God the Father hath subiected all things vnder his feete, i. e. as well things in Heauen, as things in Earth. Thirdly, In respect of Dignity;Heb. 1. because he is made more ex∣cellent then the Angels. Fourthly, In respect of this equality, euen with God him∣selfe. And so we see how Christ in respect of his person,That Christ in respect of his manhood, is in the high∣est part of the emperiall hea∣uens. is aboue all Heauens; because he is an immeasurable and infinite person, which the Heauen of Heauens cannot containe: and therefore must needs be euery where; but in respect of his humane nature assumed, hee is in the highest part or place of the Emperiall Heauen, which is the seate of the blessed soules; for if he were in no place, then much lesse should he be in the Earth, in the Sunne, or in euery place; but Saint Augustine doth most excellently shew,Aug. in ep. ad Dardan. that Vbi corpus ibi locum esse necesse est; that wheresoeuer a body is, there must needs be place; because, if we take away dimensions and places from bodies, they shall be no where; Et sinusquam erunt, non erunt; and if they be no where, they shall not be at all: and Saint Peter doth as plainely shew this truth, when he saith, that the Heauens shall and must containe him,Act. 3.21. (i. e. In respect of his Manhood, for in respect of his Godhead it cannot) vntill the
restitution of all things: and so we professe in our Creede, that he sitteth on the right hand of God, from whence he shall come, (i. e. in respect of his humanity; for his Deity being euery where, cannot be said to goe or to come any where) to iudge both the quicke and the dead. And therefore it is most certaine that the Body of Christ is in a place; that is, in the highest part of Heauen; which Oecumenius calleth , The receptacle of him that is sent;Aug. l de fide & symbolo. c. 6. Cyril. in Leuit. l. 9. Vigilius contra Eutych. l. 4. and this the Fathers, Saint Augustine, Cyrillus Alex∣andrinus, Vigilius, Theodoret, and others, haue most fully shewed and proued vnto vs: and that for these three speciall ends. First, That we might be assured, our Sauiour Christ remai∣neth still a true and a perfect man in glory. Secondly, That we might know where to seeke, and where to finde our Sauiour Christ: Nam pontifex noster non vti{que} in terrà quaerendus,Orig. in leuit. sed in coelo: For our high Priest Iesus Christ is not to be sought for in Earth, but in Heauen, saith Origen: & therefore, as S. Augustine said of Mary Magdalen;Aug. de tem∣pore Ser. 133. Quid quaeris in tumulo quem adorare debes in coelo? Why seekest thou him in the graue below, whom thou shouldest adore in the Heauens aboue? so much better might I now say vnto many men; Alas, why seeke you Christ here on Earth in Bread and Wine, and I know not where; when as he is no where to be found in respect of his Manhood, but in Heauen? there is the place where he sitteth on the right hand of the Maiesty of God. Thirdly, That we might know, where we shall be; for so our Sauiour saith,Iohn 17.24. Father I will that they also whom thou hast giuen mee, be with me where I am. Ob.But against this it may be obiected, that Christ himselfe saith, No man ascendeth vnto Heauen, but hee that descended from Hea∣uen,Iohn 3.13. the Sonne of man which is in Heauen: And therefore how shall we haue any hope, to ascend vp vnto Heauen? Sol.Saint Augustine answereth, that we are not therefore to de∣spaire, because he ascendeth alone, i. e. by his proper strength and power; for we shall be eleuated and taken vp by the power of Christ, who came therefore downe from Heauen, that he might carry vs vp into Heauen, that were falling downe into Hell: or as the same Saint Augustine saith, We ought therefore to be
vnited vnto him,That we must be vnited to Christ, if we will ascend where Christ is. that so it might be but one Christ which des∣cended and ascended; he descended as the head of his Church, and he ascendeth with his whole body, which is his Church; hee descended naked, and he ascendeth clothed with our flesh; and he descended as a husband without a wife, but he ascendeth mar∣ried vnto his Church: and so he and vs is but one; one body, one flesh; Ʋnitas nos compaginat vni;Aug. in Psal. 122. p. 591. Our vnity with him makes vs one with him: and therefore they onely shall not as∣cend, which are not, nor will not be made one with him: but our conuersation is in Heauen, and our life is hid with Christ in God: and therefore he might well say, No man ascendeth, but he that descendeth, if you vnderstand it of Christ mystically; that is, of him wholly, of him and all his members, because none but his members shall ascend into Heauen. And so you see the place where Christ ascended, into heauen:Rupertus de offic. diuin. c. 8. Quomodo autem sit in coelo corpus domini, curiosissimum est quaerere; But to inquire how the body of Christ is in Heauen, whether sitting or standing, whether naked or clothed,Aug. l. de fide & sym. which Clemens A∣lexandrinus denyeth, because the Saints in Heauen shall haue no need of clothing; or how he ascended into Heauen, whether in a purple robe, as Fredernus Nausea supposeth out of Esay,Esay 63.2. whose meaning is far otherwise then Nausea thinketh; and ma∣ny other curious questions, they are farre fitter to be buried in si∣lence, then to be once determined by any modest Christian; because as Saint Augustine saith,Curious que∣stions ought not to be dis∣cussed. Non est nostrae fragilitatis secre∣ta coelorum discutere; sed est fidei nostra de dominici corporis digni∣tate sublimia & honesta sapere: It is not possible for our weake∣nesse to vnderstand the secrets of Heauen; it is inough that by faith we beleeue and conceiue worthy things,Idem quo sup. de fide & symb. and that holily and modestly concerning Christ. And so much for the explication of the first part, which is, of the Ascention of our Sauiour Christ.
Branch. 2.BRANCH. II. CHAP. V. Of the application of this Doctrine of the Ascention of Christ vnto our selues, both in respect of con∣solation and imitation. The Doctrine of Christs Ascention may serue for a double end.SEcondly, For the application of this Do∣ctrine vnto our selues, you must note that it may serue for a double end. 1. Of Consolation. 2. Of Imitation. First, Our Consolation is likewise two∣fold. 1. That he is gone to Heauen. For, 2. That he is not vnmindfull of vs on earth. For, Aug. in Act.First, Dum naturam humanam syderibus Christus importauit, credentibus coelum patere posse monstrauit; Whereas Christ hath caried our humane nature vnto heauen, he hath thereby shew∣ed, that now Heauen is open for all beleeuers, saith Saint Au∣gustine; O then how much should we reioyce hereat! because now onely we see indeed, which before we onely saw in hope, the Chyrography and hand-writing of our damnation blotted out, and the sentence of our corruption quite changed: for now we see that nature,Gen. 3.19. to whom it was said, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt returne; to haue gone to Heauen, and there to raigne without end. Neither are wee onely made possessors of Heauen, but we doe receiue more ample, and more excellent things, by this most ineffable glory of Christ, then we haue lost by that inueterate enuy of the Deuill: Nam quos diabolus de Pa∣radiso eiecit,Leo in Ser. de Ascent. hos dei filius in coelo collocauit; For whom Satan hath cast out of Paradise, Christ hath brought them vnto euerla∣sting happinesse. Secondly, As it is our comfort, that he hath giuen vs posses∣sion
of heauen, so it is as great a comfort vnto vs,That Christ in Heauen for∣getteth not his seruants here on earth. that he being in Heauen, is not vnmindfull of vs, that are here on earth: In∣deed Pharaoh's butler forgat Ioseph, when he ascended vnto his masters fauour, and so it is an vsuall thing in the world, for all great men, that haue beene raised vp of nothing, to be most vn∣mindefull of their poore friends and acquaintance; they hold it a point of pollicie to know them not, or at least to looke strangley and sternely vpon them: whereupon it is most truely sayd, Asperius nihil est humili, cum surgit in altum: None so disdainfull, none so proud, as they that haue ascen∣ded vp on high, from meane estate; but it is not so with Christ; for though he be gone vp on high from the meanest among men to be equall with God; yet there he is not vnmindfull of vs; but sitting on the right hand of God, he maketh continuall inter∣cession for vs, and sendeth his spirit to comfort vs; for though corpus intulit Coelo, he hath placed his body in Heauen, yet maie∣statem non abstulit mundo, hee leaues his spirit, which filleth all places heere on earth:Mat. 28. vlt. for loe (saith he) I am with you vntill the end of the world, that is, to deliuer vs from all miseries, and to giue vs all those good things, that hee seeth good for vs: And therefore, though Abraham should forget vs, or Israell be ignorant of vs, or as Mardoceus sayd vnto Queene Hester, if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time,Hester 4.14. and doest nothing in the world for vs, yet shall there inlargement and deliuerance arise vnto the Iewes from another place: euen so, though we should feare men will forsake vs and forget vs, and do nothing for vs, either to deliuer vs from any troubles feared, or to helpe vs vn∣to any good desired; yet this our good God, which neither slumbereth nor sleepeth, though he be ascended to heauen, yet he will defend vs on earth, and hee will lift vs vp out of the mire, if we put our trust in him, hee will send vs comfort out of some other place: Feare you not, but stand still,Exod. 14 13. and see the salua∣tion of God which he will shew vnto you. Secondly, the resurrection of Christ is our hope, but his ascen∣tion is our glorification; Si ergo rectè, si fideliter, si deuotè ascentio∣nem domini celebramus, ascendere debemus cum illo; and there∣fore if we doe rightly, if we doe faithfully and deuoutly celebrate and make a right vse of the ascention of Christ, then must we
labour and striue to ascend with him:That in heart and affection we should alwayes ascend to Heauen. and if, by reason of the infirmitie of our flesh, we are so detained and kept backe, that we cannot ascend as we would to be where he is; yet let vs indeauour to follow after, passibus amoris, et affectu cordis, with the best paces of loue, and the most earnest desires of our hearts: And indeede it is not the lifting vp of our eyes, nor the holding vp of our hands, that is the right ascending into Heauen; for this may bee, as it is many times meere hypocrisie, euen as the witch of Endor lifted vp Samuell to deceiue Saule, so doth this witch hypocrisie cause many a one, to lift vp their hands and eyes to Heauen, to deceiue the world, and to make vs beleeue they are true Saints, whereas in deede they be very Diuells; but we must haue sursum corda, our hearts lifted vp; for this is that chieffest place of man, which both God and the Diuell laboreth most of all to attaine;Prouerb 23.26. for God saith, Sonne giue mee thy heart, and lift vp the same to Heauen; and so the Diuell seekes but the heart, if riches increase, set your hearts vpon them, and there∣fore the heart of man is called by Macarius , the Throne of God, or els  the Throne of Satan; for if we lift vp the same to God and set our affections on the things that are aboue, then is our hearts the Throne of God; but if our loue and affections bee on the things of this world, then is our hearts the seat of the scornefull and the habitation of Diuells.Psal. 1.1. And therefore, that we may the better learne how to ascend, and to lift vp our hearts to God, I will desire you to consider these three things; first, terminum; secondly, modum, thirdly, signum. Three things to be conside∣red touching our spirituall ascention vnto Heauen.1. The place from whence, and vnto what we must ascend. 2. By what meanes we shall raise vp our selues vnto God. 3. The signe whereby wee may know, whether wee haue ascended any way towards Heauen or not. First, the place from whence we must ascend, is this world, be∣hold saith Christ, I leaue the world, and I goe to the Father; so if we would goe to Christ, we must leaue the world, and neuer enuie at the prosperity of them, quorum tectorum gloria attenditur, labes autem animorum non attenditur, whose outward glorie we doe see, but whos inward miseries wee doe not see. And the
place where we must ascend is, in altum, vnto the Kingdome of Heauen, where the eye hath not seene,1 Cor. 2.9. and the eare hath not heard the things which God hath prepared for them that loue him. Secondly, the meanes how to raise our selues from this val∣ley of miseries vnto the height of Heauen, is by casting from vs, all the things that may presse vs downe, and assuming the things that may helpe vs vp: And you knowe that whatsoeuer is heauie presseth downe,Nothing is so heauie as sin. and we know that there is nothing so heauie vpon the soule as sinne, this is like a Talent of lead: it makes the whole world to reele to and fro like a drunken man; At∣las en ipse laborat; and it was so heauie vpon Christ his shoulders,Mat. 27.46. that in the Garden it made him to sweate the drops of blood, and vpon the Crosse it made him to crie out, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? and therefore, if wee would ascend to Heauen, then as Elias did throwe downe his mantle,2. Kings 2.13. and as the blinde man in the Gospell did cast offe his beggars cloake when hee would runne to Christ, so must we cast offe the mantle of hypocrisie and disrobe our selues of all the beggarly ragges of sinne, or els they will presse vs downe to Hell. And as wee know, sinne is that weight which keepes vs downe, so we knowe wings are the best meanes to helpe vs vp; and therefore Dauid prayes that hee had wings like a doue,Psal. 55.6: that hee might flie away and be at rest; and Christ himselfe is said to haue fledde, super pennas ventorum, vpon the wings of the winde; so must wee; wee must get vs wings, if wee will ascend to Heauen. But what are those wings that will carrie vs thither?Bern. in Ser. de asc. they must not bee (like Icarus his waxen wings,) the wings of pride and ambition, but as Saint Bernard sayth, they must bee,What are the wings whereby we ascend to Heauen. 1. Meditatio Consideration. 2. Oratio Prayer. for, Meditatio quid desit docet, & oratio ne desit obtinet; Meditati∣on sheweth vs what wee want, and prayer obtayneth whatsoe∣uer we want: but we neuer knowe our estate, because wee neuer consider in what estate wee are, and wee haue not grace, nor goodnesse, because we aske not. Saint Augustine saith, these wings must be, 1. The loue of God. 2. The loue of our neighbours.
And it is not vnlikely that loue should carry vs vp vnto God, because God is loue, and loue brought downe God vnto men. Huc me syderio descendere fecit olympo, Hic me crudeli vulnere fixit amor. And therefore, no maruell that loue should carry vs vp into Heauen,Aug. in Psal. 83. p. 376. d. 1. wherefore Saint Augustine sayth, that by loue we doe either ascend to Heauen, or descend to Hell; quia amando Deum as∣cendis in Coelum, amando seculum descendis vsque ad abyssum, be∣cause by louing God wee ascend to Heauen, and by louing the world we descend downe to Hell. Saint Gregory saith, these wings are, 1. The contempt of worldly things. 2. The desire of heauenly things. And this may well stand with Saint Augustines saying, be∣cause (as the same Saint Gregorie saith) tanto ab inferioribus disiungimur, quanto superioribus delectamur, by how much the more earnestly we loue heauenly things, by so much we are as∣cended and sequestred from earthly things. And therefore if you would ascend,1. Iohn 2.15. Colos. 3.2. then loue not the world, nor the things of this world, but set your affections on those things that are aboue: and because our life is iust like a clocke, that vnlesse his waight be al∣wayes wynded vp will soone stand, therefore wee must be euer winding vp our affections, and weaning them from these worldly things, and with Noahs doue neuer suffer the soales of our feete to rest, vntill our hearts and soules returne to him that gaue them vs. Thirdly, for the signes whereby wee may know, whether we haue ascended or doe ascend towards Heauen or not, I might shew you many;How we may know whether our hearts ascendeth to Heauen or not. but now take this for all: if things aboue our heads shew greater vnto vs then they did before, and things beneath vs lesser; that is an apparant argument, that we ascend and grow higher and higher, for so Saint Gregorie saith, if a man were aloft in the cloudes, it would appeare vnto him, quam abiecta sunt quae iam alta videntur, how base are the things of this earth, which to a man on earth doe seeme so great; for then hee should see mountaines no bigger then Mole-hills; and the Sunne which before, while hee was on earth, did seeme but instar pilae pedalis, like a footeball, hee should now finde it to be a great and immens glorious body; all bodies aboue him
would seeme greater, and all below him would seeme lesser: euen so, if our hearts and affections be ascended vp to Heauen, then surely the things of this world doe seeme vnto vs, but as they are indeede damnum & stercora, Dung and drosse,Phil. 3.8. or as nothing, and worth nothing, as Nazianzen saith; and the things of Heauen are the onely desires of our hearts, and the delights of our soules: but if folia venti & lilia agri, the vanities and the pleasures of this world, the Titles of Honour, and the confluence of wealth, be the desires and delights of our hearts, then cer∣tainely wee are fast bound in misery and iron, wee are fastened and fettered here on earth, and it may bee with Golden chaynes, but fast inough from ascending vp to Hea∣uen. I will not iudge of any: by this rule, you may all iudge your selues, if you doe highly esteeme of the preaching and Preachers of Gods Word; If you make much of them that feare the Lord, and loue good men, and a good conscience, and make none account of this world, nor of the things of this world, then is your heart ascended vp to Heauen; but if not, Nudus humi iaces: Thou lyest poore and miserable, fettered here in earth, a flaue and captiue of the Deuill, and hast neede to cry and call for Christ to lead captiuitie captiue: which is the second part of my Text. And so much for the Ascention of our Sauiour Christ.
PART. II. CHAP. Of the victory and triumph of Christ ouer our enemies, of our deliuerance from them, and of our restoring into the seruice of God againe. SEcondly, Touching the victory and tri∣umph of Christ, set downe in these words, Thou hast led captiuity captiue; we must vnderstand that this is taken two wayes. 1. Passiuely. 2. Actiuely. And I say first Passiuely, because our enemies must be vanquished before we can be deliuered: and therefore, How Christ ouercame death, Hell, sinne, and Sa∣tan.First, This phrase may be taken Passiuely, for the World, Death, and Hell, and all other enemies of Mankinde, which Christ hath conquered and led captiue, that they should not raigne and rule ouer his seruants any more. And thus Saint Augustine doth expound it, saying; Quid est captiuauit captiuitatem? vicit mortem; mortem procurauit diabo∣lus, & ipse diabolus de morte Christi est captiuatus; What is he led captiuity captiue? but he ouercame death: for the Diuell had procured death for sinne, and now the Diuell himselfe is capti∣uated by the death of Christ. For, as Victors were wont to doe, to leade in triumph those Tyrants that opprest their subiects, or those enemies that they had vanquished, being fast bound with chaines, with their heads and feet bare, for their greater shame and reproach; so the Psalmist alludeth vnto the same, when he saith,Coloss. 2.15. Thou hast led captiuity captiue; and the Apostle doth more cleerely expresse it, when hee saith, that Christ hauing spoyled Principalities and Powers, hath made a shew of them openly, tryum∣phing ouer them in it. But here it may be demaunded, how are they captiuated,
when as the Diuell compasseth the earth, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may deuoure; And so doth the world still oppresse vs;1 Pet. 5.8. our flesh lusteth against the spirit, and Death still raigneth ouer vs all? I answere, that Christ hath destroyed their Power,Resp. hee hath taken away their strength, and hee hath quite subuerted the Kingdome of sinne and Satan, and taken away the sting of death: and yet they compasse about, not as hauing any power ouer vs but as a Lyon tyed will teare vs in pieces, if he can catch vs within his clawes; so will sinne and Satan, if wee yeeld vnto them; for though Christ ouercame all our enemies, yet hee hath not quite taken them out of our wayes, but left them as it were aliue, though bound, that we might still beware to come within their reach, if we would escape their teeth; and therefore wee say that sinne is so taken away, that it doth not raigne ouer the Saints, though perhaps through their negligence, it doth often wound them; so Satan is bound, though like a bridled horse, he of∣ten fumes against vs, and sometimes bites vs too,1 Cor. 15.54. if we beware not of him; and so death is swallowed vp into victory, and the sting thereof is taken away, so that it can neuer hurt the Saints of God, though it layes them stil into a sleepe; because they shall all awake at the last day. But if sinne and Satan and the lust of the flesh haue such pow∣er ouer vs, as that the sinne is no sooner suggested,How the wic∣ked are still in their ene∣mies hands. but wee are presently delighted with it, and are led by the same, as an oxe vnto the slaughter, carried as it were by a silken thred, very easi∣ly to commit the same, without resistance; then certainely our enemies are not captiuated, but doe still rule and raigne ouer vs. It is a fearefull and a dolefull case, to liue vnder the gouernment and subiection of a Tyrant, who Dionysius-like will giue men to be meate vnto his horses,That it is a most lamentable thing to liue vnder the ty∣ranny of sinne. or Nero-like will cause his seruants to commit immane cruelties; and yet sinne is worse then these; be∣cause it causeth vs to doe fearefull and most odious Acts, and then it giues vs as meate, like fagots to be eaten and deuoured of Hell-fire: And yet behold the wofull state of a sinnefull man, for he is the slaue of sinne, bound for Hell, and subiect to the Di∣uell; and yet for all this, he reioyceth as a foole that goeth to the execution place, and hee cannot indure the man that speaketh
against his Master the Diuell, but his desire is, to liue still in his captiuity. And this sheweth, that his enemies are not captiuated; for if the world were subdued vnto vs, then could it not so easily com∣mand vs, if sinne were captiuated, then could it not so often ouercome vs, and if Satan were bound, then could he not so easily preuaile against vs and therfore, though these enemies are so cap∣tiuated, that they can no wayes hurt the godly; because they haue no power ouer them, to make them either to delight in sinne, or to desire the vanities of this world; yet they are still loose, and they doe still rule ouer the children of disobedience. And the beholding of the liues both of the Saints and sinners, will suffici∣ently shew this truth vnto vs; that they are captiuated, as that they are not able to touch the one, and yet so free and so power∣full,The Saints are freed from all their enemies. as that they doe raigne and rule as Tyrants ouer the other. Behold an Vsurer and a Drunkard, a Whoremonger, and such like, how Satan leads them as his slaues, and transformeth them from men to be very beasts; but if you look into the liues of the Saints; you shal see that neither the pleasures of sinne, nor the vanities of the world, nor yet all the power of darknes can once moue them, or at least remoue thē from their most holy purposes, because Christ hath ouercome all their enemies, and hath led captiuity captiue. Secondly, This phrase may be taken actiuely for them that were held captiue by Satan, and were deliuered out of his hands by Iesus Christ, and so freed from the bondage and the sla∣uish seruice of sinne, and reduced into the glorious liberty of the Sonnes of God:Rom. 8. and thus Saint Augustine expounds it, saying: Ipsos homines qui captiui tenebantur appellauit captiuitatem;Christ deliue∣reth vs from Satan, and placeth vs in his owne ser∣uice. That by captiuity he vnderstandeth those men that were Captiues to the Diuell; and so their captiuity is happy, because they are taken for their good, euen as Christ said vnto Saint Peter, from hence∣forth thou shalt catch men; Captiuati ergo quia capti, they are therefore captiuated because they are catched, and put vnder the sweet and easie yoke of Christ: and so they are deliuered and made free from the seruice of sinne, whose slaues and captiues they were before, and they are made the seruants of Righteous∣nesse: and therefore in this captiuity, in this seruice, and vnder this yoke; Non sunt milia plorantium, sed milia laetantium, There
is none that weepeth, there is none that mourneth, but we doe all reioyce and sing the songs of Sion:Psal. 68.17. Because the Lord is amongst vs as in the holy place of Sinai. But they that are still so held by sinne, and such slaues vnto their lusts as that they doe no workes of Righteousnesse, they are not as yet freed by Christ, nor taken away from Satan; for they that are catcht by Christ and deliuered from the bondage of the Diuell, haue taken vpon them the yoke of Christ, and they doe finde that easie and light, that as a man is able to runne, which is vnloosed from his bands wherewith he was tyed, and vnburthe∣ned from that waight wherewith he was pressed downe, so they are able to runne the way of Gods commandements,Psal. 119. when God hath set their hearts at liberty. And therefore they that finde them∣selues vnwilling or vnable to doe the seruice of Christ, surely they are not yet rescued from Satan, nor put vnder the yoke of Christ;We are not so freed from Satan, that wee may doe what we list. for here you must note that they are not so deliuered from the captiuity of Satan, as that being freed from him, they may freely goe, and doe what they list; but as the very phrase sheweth, Thou hast led captiuity captiue; they are taken away from the captiuity of Satan, and from the seruice of sinne, and put vnder the yoke of Christ, to doe seruice vnto God, i. e. they are captiuated and taken for the seruice of Christ: because this is the rule of warre; Preserue thou me and I will serue thee; saue mee from the tyrant, and I will be thy seruant. And therefore if they bee not captiues vnto Christ, i. e. if they doe no seruice vnto God, they are still captiues vnto Satan, and Christ as yet, hath not led this captiuity captiue. And so all men may know hereby, whether they be captiua∣ted vnto Christ or not: for if their vnderstanding be captiuated to yeeld vnto the diuine truth, many times contrary vnto the rules of humane reason;He that ser∣ueth not Christ, is not freed from Satan. and if their desires and affections bee onely placed on heauenly things, to doe what pleaseth God, and not what is pleasant vnto flesh and bloud, then are they ta∣ken into the seruice of Christ; but as that man can be hardly saide to be taken into the seruice of any one, if he doth no ser∣uice vnto his Master, nor any thing that is pleasing or accepta∣ble vnto him; euen so they cannot be said to be taken into the seruice of Christ, that apply no time to doe the will of Christ.
And thus you see how Christ hath vanquished and triumphed ouer all our enemies: he ouercame the world, he bound the De∣uill, he spoyled Hell, he weakened Sinne, hee destroyed Death, hee walked vpon the Seas, he rose out of his graue, he contemned all honours, he ascended into Paradise, he opened the gates of Hea∣uen, and he sitteth on the right hand of God, ruling and raigning vntill he hath put all his enemies vnder his feet.1 Cor. 15.25. And so much for the Victory or Triumph of Christ. PART. III. CHAP. I. Of the speciall ends why Christ ascended into heauen, and of the gifts which he giueth to edifie the Church. THirdly, touching the bounty of Christ, set downe in these words, and he gaue gifts vnto men, we must first reconcile the dif∣ference betwixt the Prophet and the A∣postle about the same; for Dauid saith, thou hast receiued gifts for men, and Saint Paul saith, he giueth gifts to men: and I answer that if we vnderstand it literally, Dauid receiued gifts, which for feare of his power were freely offered vnto him: and if we vnderstand it mystically of Christ, we finde the saying of both to be true; for the Apostle spea∣keth of the things which Christ doth, as God, sending forth the holy Ghost, and bestowing gifts on men; and the Psalmist speaketh of him according to that which the same Christ doth in his body,August. in Psal. 67. p. 289. a. i. which is his Church. Thus no doubt (saith Saint Au∣gustine) but as he is persecuted in his Church, so accepit in mem∣bris qua dona membra eius accipiunt, he receiued, and recei∣ueth gifts in men; for whatsoeuer is done to them that beleeue in him, the same is done to him: or else we may say, that the Son of God as he was man, receiued those gifts from his Father,
which hee was afterwards to distribute, and to giue vnto his Church: for so we reade, that he being exalted, and hauing receiued of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost,Act. 2.33. hee hath shed foorth this which we now see and heare; and so the originall word which the Psalmist vseth, signifieth to receiue that which wee must presently distribute, saith Mollerus:Mollerus in Psal. 68. and therefore the dif∣ference is soone ended, and the matter in both is true, he re∣ceiued gifts, and he gaue those gifts to men: for wee finde (as Bonauenture tels vs) that our Sauiour ascended for foure speciall ends.Christ ascen∣ded for foure speciall ends. First, to receiue his kingdome, as himselfe intimateth vnto vs in the nineteenth of Luke and the twelfth verse. Secondly, to make vs the more earnestly to long for him; Quia abijt & occultat se Deus, vt ardentius quaeratur à nobis, because God doth therefore hide himselfe from vs, that he may be the more earnestly sought of vs, saith Saint Bernard.Bernard. in cant. Thirdly, to prepare a place for vs; for though in respect of Gods purpose, it was prepared for vs before the beginning of the world; yet in respect of the effecting and bringing to passe the said purpose, it was specially prepared for vs by Christ; be∣cause he remoued all hinderances, and made way for vs to enter into glory, 1. by appeasing his fathers wrath; 2. by cleansing our consciences from dead workes; 3. by opening vnto vs the gates of heauen; and, 4. by making continuall intercession for vs; As Bonauenture speaketh. Fourthly, to send downe his holy Spirit vnto vs;Ioh. 16.17. for so our Sauiour saith, It is expedient for you that I goe away; Quia ni∣si dederitis quod amatis, non habebitis quod desideratis; for vnlesse I goe away, the comforter will not come vnto you; but if I depart, I will send him vnto you:Tertul. l. de car∣ne Christi. for now (saith Tertullian) Graetum quoddam commercium inter coelum & terram existit celebratum, a most gratefull exchange, and a friendly louing bargaine was made betwixt heauen and earth, that to the inhabitants of hea∣uen should be giuen the flesh of Christ, and to vs on earth should be bestowed the comforts of Gods holy Spirit: and so the Spirit of God should remaine with vs on earth, and our,
flesh should dwell with them for euer in heauen; and then all things to be common betwixt vs eternally: and therefore he did not send his Spirit vnto vs before he had ascended into hea∣uen,Why Christ would not be∣stow his gifts on men before his ascention. non propter impotentiam, sed quia habuerunt corporalem pra∣sentiam, not in respect of any impotency that he could not doe it, but because we had his corporall presence; and because as the raine doth not descend vntill the mist and dew doe first as∣cend; so the gratious raine of Gods Spirit, did not fall vpon Gods inheritance to refresh it when it was weary, vntill this fruit of the wombe, which was as the dew of the morning had first ascended into heauen: but as when that little cloud like a mans hand,1 Kings 11. did rise out of the sea, there was a sound of much raine, so when that humble flesh of Christ was ascended out of this world into heauen, then he gaue gifts vnto men. Aug. de verbis domini p. 63. b. 1. to. 10.But what are these gifts which he giueth, Saint Augustine saith, it is his holy Spirit: Tale donum qualis ipse est, such a gift as himselfe is: for he gaue himselfe, and he giues a gift equall to himselfe, because the gift of Christ is the Spirit of Christ; but heare the Apostle saith, hee gaue gifts, and not a gift: and therefore though I doe confesse, that this holy and blessed Spirit is the author and fountaine of all gifts, by whom wee haue remission of sinnes, subiection of our enemies, and all other gifts of grace and glory sealed vnto vs; yet I say that the Apo∣stle herein meaneth not so much the spirit himselfe, as the gifts and graces of his Spirit. And therefore that wee may the better vnderstand the fulnesse of this point, of the bounty of Christ, we must consider these foure speciall things. Foure points to be conside∣red.1. What manner of gifts they are. 2. What gifts are here meant. 3. How he doth bestow them. 4. On whom he doth bestow them. First, that the gifts of God are free gifts.For the first, wee must know that they were gratuita, free gifts; so the words, dedit, & dona, he gaue them, and he gaue them as gifts, doe sufficiently declare: or otherwise, si praeme∣meruisti tum emisti, & non gratis accepisti, if thou hadst done any thing to deserue these gifts, then hadst thou bought them, and not freely receiued them; and God had sold them, and not
giuen them: and so they had beene praemia, non dona, rewards for thy good deedes, and not gifts of his meere grace: but this point is so cleere that I neede not stand on it:Matth. 10.8. Freely you haue receiued, saith our Sauiour, freely giue; for euery one may take of these waters of life freely, and may haue these gifts,Esay. 51.1. like Esayas milke, without money or moneyes worth. For the second wee must note that the gifts of God are either 1. Temporall.Secondly, the the gifts of God are of two sorts. 2. Spirituall. First, The temporall gifts he gaue vnto all sorts of men, aswell before as after his ascention; for wee must note that euery thing which we haue is a gift that we haue receiued from God,All that wee haue is from God. be∣cause (as Saint Iames saith) Euery good thing, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of lights. Secondly, the Spirituall gifts of God are of two sorts, 1. To edifie the Church. 2. To sanctifie our soules. First, Those gifts which he gaue to edifie the Church,Ephes. 4.11. the A∣postle setteth downe in the eleuenth verse, saying, Hee gaue some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists,The gifts that Christ bestow∣eth to edifie his Church. and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the same, for the worke of the Ministery, for the edifying of the body of Christ: wherein we see that by the gifts whereof the Apostle speaketh in these words, are vnderstood either, 1. The Ministers of the Church: or, 2. The gifts wherewith the Ministers are indued: or rather as I take it, 3. Ministers indued and qualified with such gifts as are necessary for the gathering together of his Church: which are specially, The gifts 1. Of Tongues.Gifts requisite for Preachers. 2. Of Knowledge. 3. Of Charitie. 4. Of Constancy and Perseuerance. 5. Of Contempt of all worldly vanities. 6. Of perfect power. First, The gift of tongues,First langua∣ges and readi∣nesse of speech. i. e. that as by the confusion of tongues the world was diuided at the building of Babell; so
by the helpe of the Preachers tongues the world might bee re∣vnited and made one sheepe-fold in the building of Gods Church. Secondly, that these men might not offend in their tongues. Thirdly, that they might be the better able to teach profound and heauenly doctrine, which they that want the tongues or languages cannot so easily attaine vnto. And fourth∣ly, that none might bee able to resist the words of their mouthes,Luke 12.11. as our Sauiour saith, I will giue vnto you a mouth, or tongue, which your aduersaries shall not be able to withstand. Secondly, Knowledge. Iohn 16.13. Perfecta virtus non est sine cog∣nitione veritatis. Bernard.Secondly, the gift of Knowledge, whereby they might know all truth, not of politicke and state matters, but of all truth ne∣cessary for this office; to edifie the Church, which is the chie∣fest knowledge that wee should aime at: or else all truth euery way, because they should know him which is all truth, i. e. Ie∣sus Christ, and I desire to know nothing else: I will bee con∣tented to be accounted a foole in all things else, so he will giue me this gift only, to know him alone. Thirdly, Cha∣rity. 1 Cor. 8.1. Hugo de S. Vict. misc. l. 1. tit 73.Thirdly, the gift of Charity, Quia quaerentes verum & non bo∣num, non inuenient summum bonum; because knowledge without charity puffeth vp, and the seeking to know the truth, and not labouring to be good, will neuer bring vs to the chiefest good: and because of all men wee are most hated and standered, and haue all occasions offered vs to make vs hate all wicked men; therefore God diffuseth this gift of loue and charity into our hearts, that notwithstanding all our indignity, we doe still loue them better then they doe loue themselues, and doe spend our whole time to doe them good, and are ready to lay downe our liues for the brethren. Fourthly, Con∣stancy.Fourthly, the gift of constancy and perseuerance; because as knowledge and euery other gift without charity is nothing worth, so charity and all other workes without perseuerance will auaile vs nothing;Reuel. 2.10. because wee must bee faithfull vnto death, if wee would haue the crowne of life: and therefore God doth giue vs this gift of Constancy, to continue so in our voca∣tion that neither want,Rom. 8.39. nor contempt, nor life, nor death, nor any other thing shall separate vs from the loue of God which is in Christ Iesus. Fiftly, con∣tempt of vani∣ties.Fiftly, the gift of contemning worldly vanities, for seeing it
is the property of the world to esteeme of vs no better then of the scumme and off-scouring of the world: euery one of vs (ex∣cept hee be great in wealth and honours) is contemned of his owne kinred, of his owne people, in his owne house where hee dwelleth, and of those very men whom he teacheth, and for whom, as a burning light, he consumeth himselfe, that they should not bee consumed with sinne; therefore the Lord giueth vs this gift and spirit, contemnere contemni, to despise all contempts, and to regard none of the vaine and variable things of this wic∣ked world. Sixtly, the gift of perfect power,Sixtly, Perfect power. that to the penitent and deiected, to the humble and contrite hearts, they might open the gates of heauen, and let them in, in despight of all the de∣uils of hell: and that against the obstinate and rebellious sinners,Matth. 16.19. they might close and shut the same, that notwithstanding all their wealth and wit, their strength and power, they may be exclu∣ded out of the ioyes of heauen. And so these are the gifts, Ministers indued with these gifts which God giueth vnto his Church, for the gathering toge∣ther of his Saints: And indeed,What a great gift it is to be∣stow able mini∣sters vpon this Church. howsoeuer the world vili∣pendeth them and (as the Prophet saith) doth make but a iest∣ing song of them, yet if we truly obserue it, wee shall easily finde it, that among all the gifts of God, which he now giueth vn∣to men from heauen, the sending of faithfull and able Mini∣sters indued with these gifts, to discharge their duties, is the chie∣fest gift, and doth obtaine the chiefest place: for alas, without them, what were we? vnbaptized, still wallowing in our sins and filthinesse; vntaught, still inuolued in ignorance; vnvni∣ted to Christ, still chained in the hands of Satan, without pro∣fession, without religion, without God. And therefore it was not without cause,Matth. 9.38. that our Sauiour exhorteth vs to pray vnto God, that he would send forth labourers into his vineyard, for o∣therwise hee knew that in a very short time it would grow wilde, and in stead of grapes, to bring forth wilde grapes, in stead of mercy and iudgement, to bring forth cruelty and oppession, and in stead of piety and religion, to bring forth nothing else but idolatry and superstition. It is reported of Phillip King of Macedon, that he sent vnto
the Athenians to send him all their Orators of Athens, and he would euer liue in league and peace with them; and the wise Senators being ready to deliuer those learned men into the hands of their mortall enemy, Demosthenes said vnto them, that on a time the Wolues said vnto the Sheepe, that they conceiued no ill thought against them, but only for retaining those dogs which were their deadly enemies, and oftentimes barked a∣gainst themselues, which were their feeders; and therefore if they would deliuer vp their dogs into their hands, they should free themselues from their barking, and they would become their patrones and defenders: whereupon the sheepe being glad to be rid of their dogges, and deeming themselues happy to be at peace with the wolues, they presently deliuered vp all their dogs vnto the mercies of their enemies, and they were incon∣tinently consumed; but within a very little while after, the wolues began to picke quarrels against the silly sheepe, and in a short space deuoured the whole flocke: euen so saith Demo∣sthenes, if you deliuer vp your Orators, for the fauour of King Phillip, you shall speedily finde, that he will deale with you as the wolues dealt with the simple sheepe; whereupon they resol∣ued to keepe their Orators. Now Satan deales with our people, as King Philip did with the Athenians;The cruelty of Satan to de∣stroy the prea∣chers, and his subtilty to de∣ceiue the peo∣ple. hee tels them that the Preachers bee the onely dogs that he hates, the onely men that barke (and often bite) against them, which by their tithes and offerings they doe maintaine; and therefore he perswadeth them to betray their Preachers into his hands, and to persecute them with their fu∣ries; and if they doe so, hee promiseth all peace and content vnto them; but when hee hath once preuailed to destroy our bodies, he will soone destroy their soules and bring them into hell fire: and therefore it were well for them, if with the Athe∣nians they would beware of their subtill and cruell enemy, and make much of them which with the hazard of their owne liues doe continually watch for their soules.
CHAP. II. Of those speciall gifts which God giueth vnto his children, for the sanctifying of their soules, and principally of Faith, Hope, and Charitie SEcondly, those gifts which hee giueth to sanctifie our soules are of diuers sorts;Gregor. Hom. 8. in Ezech. for as S. Gregorie aith of Gods presence, gradus praesentiae diuinae constituendi sunt, there are certaine degrees of the same, quia licet omnia tangit; non tamen aequaliter omnia tangit; so wee must conceiue of the giuing of Gods graces, that although he giueth the same vnto many men, yet he giueth them not ater the same manner vnto all men: and therefore, we say that Gods gifts are either, 1. Common,The graces that Christ giueth to san∣ctifie our soules are two-fold. 2. Speciall, or that God giueth these gifts two manner of waies, either, 1. After a generall 2. After a speciall manner. First, the common graces and gifts of God,First common. or those graces which hee giueth out of his generall respect and loue vnto man, are giuen many times aswell vnto the wicked as vnto the godly: and therefore in that respect, all those that professe Christ Iesus, & which haue these generall gifts, are promiscuously called and taken for the Saints of God herein this life, and can∣not indeed bee discerned or distinguished by any man, from those that are the true elected Saints: for God onely knowes who are his, and wee may not so much as guesse who they are; for wee are prohibited to iudge of them, because wee cannot possibly know them. Secondly, the speciall graces and gifts of God,Secondly spe∣ciall. or those gra∣ces which he giueth out of a speciall respect and loue to some men more then others, (for I can finde no specificall difference betwixt the gifts that he giueth vnto the elect, and those graces that he giueth vnto many of the reprobates, but the same gra∣ces
in a more perfect, & after a more speciall manner) are only giuen vnto the elect, whereby they are preserued and kept in the fauour of God, vntill their last breath. We cannot tell who are indued with the speciall graces of Gods spirit.But to nominate which are those common graces and gifts which Christ after a generall manner giueth vnto all, or most of the professors of his name, and which are those speciall gifts which out of his speciall loue he giueth onely vnto his elect; or directly to set downe the specificall notes and differences, how to discerne and know the one from the other, and to distinguish in whom each of these sorts may bee found (as some haue venterously attempted to doe) seemeth vnto m to bee none other thing then to shew who are elected, and who are not: for whosoeuer hath but the common gifts cannot bee saued, and whosoeuer hath the speciall gifts of God shall not be damned. Yet I denie not, but by the diligent search into the nature and extent of these graces and gifts of God, and by the fruits and effects of the same, euery particular man may know, whe∣ther he hath them yet or not: for the spirit of man (if man would search out his spirit) may know what is in man: and therefore, not that we should iudge one of another, who hath these speciall gifts of God, and who hath them not, but that euery man by searching his owne heart, may know if hee hath them,Euery one ought diligent∣ly to examine what graces he hath. to his comfort; or, if hee hath them not, that hee may earnestly labour, by prayer to God, to attaine them; I will a little speake of these speciall gifts and graces of saluation, and shew how farre they doe exceede those common graces of the on∣ly outward professors. The Schoolemen, all as it were with one consent, doe distri∣bute the gifts of the holy Ghost into these seauen speciall graces; viz. 1. Wisdome. 2. Vnderstanding. 3. Councell. 4. Fortitude, 5. Knowledge. 6. Pietie. 7. The feare of God. I neede not, (and my purpose is not) to stand vpon each of these. Aquinas and his followers, haue excellently and largely inough handled each one of these excellent graces; but I meane to contract all into a fewer summe, and as Saint Paul saith, to shew you a more excellent way: for though it be most
true, that Saint Hierome and Saint Bernard say,Hieron. in Epist. Ber. de pass. dom. 42. Bellarm. de grat. & lib. arb. l. 5. c 3. that as vices goe by troupes; so the graces of God doe so assemble themselues and cohere together, that he which hath one hath all, and hee that wants one, wants all, i. e. he that hath one in any measure of perfection hath the seeds of all the rest, (as Bellarmine saith) whereby as occasion serueth, he can put them, being but stir∣red vp by grace, into execution.Forma est non omnibus vna, nec diuer∣sa tamen, qua∣lem decet esse sororum. They are not onely like those diuine sisters, like one another, but they are also linked and chayned together like the indissoluble linkes of a golden chayne; yet I say that the chiefest graces which I finde, and the surest gifts to bring vs vnto life, are those three where∣of the Apostle speaketh, Faith, Hope, and Charitie,1. Cor. 13. vlt. for as the Psalmist saith, hee that doth these things shall neuer fall; so I may be bold to say, he that hath these gifts shall neuer faile. First, Faith is distinguished by the schooles to be foure-folde, 1. Hystoricall. 2. Of miracles. 3. Temporarie. 4. Iustifying. The first is common to the diuels aswell as to men: for the word  hath diuers significations,First, of Faith. as , I know to whom I haue trusted. , relie not vpon the people; but commonly in Scriptures it signifi∣eth to assent, as, , with the heart we be∣leeue vnto righteousnesse; , Abraham belee∣ued God. , and I partly beleeue it,Iames 2 19. saith the Apo∣stle: and in this respect the Apostle saith, the diuels beleeue; for wee beleeue what wee know; & daemones Deum & pagani cre∣dunt, and the very diuells doe know God, saith Saint Augustine,Aug. de cognit. verae vit. c. 37. and they know Christ, Acts 19.14. Mat. 8.29. and they know the Scriptures; for they alleadged the same to Christ; and they know the Gospell, and haue called it , the way of sal∣uation; and therfore they must needs beleeue, quia fides est cogni∣tio eadēque certissima, in quantū intellectus determinatur ad aliquod cognoscibile, because faith is the most surest knowledge of things, and wee cannot choose but beleeue what wee doe certainely know: And Saint Augustine comparing the confession of Saint Peter, thou art the Christ the Sonne of the liuing God,Mat. 16 Mar. c. 1. Aug. de vnico bap. c. 10. and the con∣fession of the diuell, I knowe who thou art, euen that holy one of God, saith; that although Saint Peter was commended, and the
diuell rebuked,Idem. tract. 10. in Ep. Iohn. yet in vtrisque non falsa sed vera, non detestanda sed approbanda est; the confession was true in both; and there∣fore the faith of the diuels in respect of the obiect must needs be a right and a true faith. A doctrine to confound wicked liuers, who as Saint Augustine saith, peiores et tardiores sunt quam daemones, are farre worse then the diuells, for he beleeues and trembles, but the wicked euen as Nero when Seneca diswaded him from his villanies, and per∣swaded him so to carie himselfe, vt facta superi semper comprobent sua, as that the Gods might alwayes approue his actions, an∣swered like a dogged Athiest, stulte verebor esse, cum faciam, deos? thou foole, dost thou thinke, that I feare or beleeue, when I doe these things, that there are any gods? so doe they scarse beleeue there is any God; for if they did, I wonder that with the diuells they doe not tremble.Mat. 7.22. Tit. 1.1. 1. Iohn 5.4. Iohn 3.15.The second and third kinde of faith; that is, the faith of mi∣racles, and the temporarie faith, which beleeueth for a time, and then falleth away, they are likewise common vnto the wicked, aswell as vnto the godly; for they doe not onely beleeue the Law and the Gospell, with an hystoricall faith, but they may also doe many miracles, as our Sauiour testifieth. The fourth is onely proper vnto the true Saints of God, and it is called, fides electorum, the faith of Gods elect: a faith that ouercommeth the world: and a faith which cannot perish. If any man would know whether hee hath this faith or not; hee must looke into these two things, 1. His workes. 2. Perseuerance. Greg. l. 2. ho. 22. in c. 40. Ezech.For first this is called, fides operans, a faith that worketh, and that worketh by charitie; and therefore Saint Gregory saith, Quantum credimus tantum amamus, & tantum quisque operatur, quantum credit, that a true beleeuer loues as he belee∣ueth, and worketh as he loueth; and Saint Augustine excellently saith, that credere in deum est credendo amare, & amando in eum ire; to beleeue in God is by beleeuing to loue him, and by louing him to bee vnited and made one with God; so that, to haue this true faith in God, is to loue God, and to doe the will and Commaundements of God.
And secondly, this faith is a continuing and perseuering faith, such as will continue vnto the end. These are the two mayne properties of the true sauing faith. Secondly,Secondly, of Hope. Luther. in gal. de . 5. Exod. 25.20. Hope is a patient expectation of the thing that we beleeue, and it is not onely inseperably ioyned vnto faith, each one hauing respect to other as the two Cherubims looking on the Mercie Seat, but it hath such great affinitie with faith, as that the one can hardly be discerned from the other. Yet I finde they differ in three respects, 1. Of order. 2. Of obiect. 3. Of office. for,How Hope dif∣fereth from Faith. First, though as the fire and the light in respect of time doe appeare together, so all graces are infused together; yet as the fire is before the light, because the light is caused by the fire, so Faith, saith Alexander de Hales, in respect of causality,Alexan. de Hal. p. L. 12. M. 3. ar. 2. because all graces flow from it, is the mother grace, and the root of all the rest; and therefore faith is the ground of hope, and doth alwayes precede the same; in which respect Saint Augustine saith, Sicut in radice arboris nullae apparent pulchritudinis spe∣cies, &c. As in the root of a tree there appeareth no shew of beauty, and yet what beauty or goodnes soeuer is in the whole tree, the same proceedeth from the root; euen so (saith he) what vertue or goodnesse soeuer sheweth it selfe in any man, it doth all spring from the root of faith. Secondly,Alsted. syst. theo∣log. l. 3. loc. 17. Obiectum fidei adaequatum est omne verbum Dei in genere, the obiect of faith is the word of God, the obiect of hope, is res verbi, the promise of God, and the goodnesse of God; faith beleeues there is a Heauen and a Hell, hope onely lookes for good things, and faith is of things past, things present, and things to come, but hope is onely of things to come. Thirdly, the office of faith is to tell vs what we must beleeue, but the office of hope is to tell vs how we must patiently abide, and looke for what we doe beleeue. And wee finde hope to bee either 1. Humane.Hope two fold. 2. Diuine. The first is many times fallible,Plaut. rud. Nam multa praeter spem scio multis bona euenisse, & ego etiam qui sperauerint,First, Humane hope. spem decipisse multos; for as many things doe happen to many one beyond
their hope, so their hopes doe deceiue many one, and as the Poet saith, Fallitur augurio spes bona saepe suo. They doe deceiue themselues by their owne hope: and yet this is an exceeding great helpe vnto men in all their actions; Spes seruat afflictos, and this is the chiefest stay vnto afflicted mindes: Nam Fortuna innocentem deserit saepe, spes nunquam: for when fortune forsaketh many times an innocent man, yet his hope will neuer leaue him: but as the Poet saith, Iam mala finissem Letho, sed credula vitam Spes fouet, & melius cras fore semper ait; Hope still doth promise better fortunes vnto him; and there∣fore this is a most excellent vertue; though like other humane vertues it is defectiue in many points; as first, in respect of the things that they hope for, wealth, honours, and such like; So Alexander hauing giuen away almost all that hee had in Greece, and being demanded what hee left for himselfe, said hope; i. e. of more honours and kingdomes: and secondly, in respect of the cause from whence they doe expect these things, from themselues or such like, but not from God; whereas in∣deed, that man is accursed which putteth his hope in man, quia de Creatore desperare est,Ierem. 17.5. spem in creatura ponere, because that to hope in man is to forsake our God. But, Secondly, di∣uine Hope.The second, i. e. the diuine hope which is wrought in vs by the Spirit of God, is infallible: for whosoeuer hopeth in him, shall neuer be confounded;Psal. 22.4, 5, 6. Prou. 14.32. The wicked (saith Salomon) shall be cast away for his malice, but the righteous hath hope in his death; and what can be more then this? for many things doe discourage vs in death; for the dying man seeth his body is weake, his friends weeping, his Phisicians despayring, and his conscience shewing him the Catalogue of his sinnes: O wretched man that he is! who shall comfort him? yet hee whose hope is in the Lord his God, doth euen then see the heauens open, and the Angels ready to receiue him; and though he knoweth his body is to be laide in the graue, yet doth his flesh rest in hope: and therefore what can be sweeter then hope? O dearely beloued, remember what the Psalmist saith, blessed is the man whose hope is in the Lord his God.
But here you must know, that all kindes of hope in God,Euery hope maketh not happy. makes not all men happy; for there is a bold and a presumptuous hope, a hope of wicked hypocrites that liue in sinne, and yet doe hope for heauen. And therefore wee must distinguish that there is a two-fold hope in God, 1. , an opinionatiue hope. 2. , a true infallible hope. The first is the hope of wicked men,Iob 8. Prou. 10. Wisd. 5. and this shall melt away like a winter snow, for the hope of the wicked shall perish; they may looke for much, but they shall haue nothing. The second is the hope of the righteous, and this shall neuer perish, because it is grounded vpon a good foundation;True hope springeth from the true feare of God. that is, the promise of God to them that feare him; for so the Psal∣mist saith, qui timetis Dominum sperate in illum, you that feare the Lord hope in him: And therefore if you would be sure to haue the true hope in God, then feare the Lord; because the te∣stimony of a good conscience must be the ground of hope; for so Saint Paul sheweth, euen by his owne example, saying, I haue fought a good fight, and I haue kept the faith, there is the ground, and therefore is laid vp for me the crowne of righteous∣nesse, and there is the Anchor of his hope cast vpon that sure foundation; and hee that thus hopeth in God is truely happy. Thirdly, Charity is rectissima animi affectio,Thirdly, of Charity. the rightest af∣fection of the minde, whereby wee loue God for his owne sake, and our neighbours for Gods sake;Aug. de doct. Christ. and as Saint Au∣gustine doth obserue, it is proper onely vnto the Saints of God, because as Saint Chrysostome saith,Chris. hom. de char. charity is optimum amoris ge∣nus, the best kinde of loue; and therefore Saint Augustine saith, that habere omnia sacramenta & malus esse potest, habere autem charitatem & malus esse non potest, a man may be partaker of all Sacraments, and be wicked, but to haue charity and to be wic∣ked is vnpossible: and Saint Paul saith enough in the praise of this most excellent grace: to write Iliads after Homer, were to commend it after him, and therefore ile say no more but what Saint Augustine saith, charitas est quae vincit omnia, & sine qua
non valent omnia, charity is that which ouercommeth all things, and without which all things will auaile vs nothing; because as the Christian Poet saith, Christicolas veros exprimit vnus amor. It is loue and charity alone that proues vs to bee true Chri∣stians. Well then, wouldest thou know thy state? whether thou beest in the state of grace or not? thou needest not to ascend to heauen and search into the secret councell of God, to see whether thy name be written in the booke of life, but descend into thine owne heart, and see whether thou hast perfect cha∣rity, both towards God and man: for if thou louest God with all thy heart,The surest signe that wee shall be saued. and thy neighbour as thy selfe, I dare assure thee that in all the booke of God; I could neuer finde yet a surer note, or a more infallible signe of our eternall saluation then the same; For hereby we know (saith the Apostle) that we are passed from death to life, because we loue the brethren; and, hereby shall all men know that you are my Disciples,1 Iohn 3. (saith our Sauiour) if you loue one another: but if thou louest not God, or if thou louest not all men, say what thou wilt, doe what you will, lift vp thine eyes, hold vp thy hands, and pray in euery corner, yet I know no signe thou hast of sauing grace. But here you must obserue, that all kinde of loue towards God and men, will not serue our turne; for there is a generall kinde of loue to God, which all wicked men in respect of their being, and that manifold good which they receiue from him, doe beare towards God; and there is a speciall loue to God, in a most vehement, and a most excellent manner; and there is an inordinate loue of men, either too much or too little, or not after the right manner; and there is a true, discreet, and a fruit∣full loue to be shewed towards them: and this is properly cal∣led charity; and therefore if we would be sure of Gods fauour, we must vse no mediocrity in louing God, we must vse no mea∣sure; Quia modus diligendi Deum est sine modo, because hee is to bee loued beyond measure, with all our hearts, with all our soules, and with all our strength, so as if we were rauished with the loue of God; euen as the Church saith in the Canticles, Stay me with flagons,Cantic. 2.5. and comfort me with apples, for I am sicke of
loue. And so much for these three diuine graces which Christ giueth vs to sanctifie our soules. Now after the holy Ghost bestoweth vpon the Saints faith to beleeue in him, hope to expect all happinesse from him, and charity most feruently to loue him, and all men for his sake, then hee worketh many other graces in the hearts of his E∣lect, to preserue them blamelesse in the sight of God, and to defend them from the malice of that roaring Lion; as, a fili∣all feare, neuer to offend him, and a speciall care alwaies to please him; and beside and aboue all the rest he infuseth into their soules these two excellent gifts; viz. 1. Prouidence to fore-see 2. Patience to indure all things. First, Moses in his last speech, and best song that hee made vnto the children of Israel, saith, O that they were wise,Deut. 31. that they vnderstood this, that they would consider their latter end; that is, that they would remember things past, vnderstand things present, and consider things to come; for this is the onely dif∣ference betwixt man and beast, the one craues for the present time, the other fore-seeth and prouideth for the times to come: and the want or neglect of this consideratiue fore-sight is the cause of many miseries; for as hee that fore-seeth euill, either preuenteth it, or prepareth himselfe for it, and so it is more easily borne of him, because it doth not suddenly apprehend him; so he that neuer seeth it till it strikes him, is the more amazed with it, because hee feeleth that which hee neuer feared: and therefore as Iob saith, that he was surprised with that which he feared; so the Saints of God haue this grace giuen them by God, to expect and fore see miseries before they come, that they may be the more tollerable vnto them if they come. And as they haue one eye open to feare and fore-see euill be∣fore it commeth, so they haue the other eye open to fore-see and to hope for good, that when it comes, it may be the more welcome to them; and that vsing all lawfull meanes to compasse it, they may the sooner attaine vnto it. But here it may be some wil obiect & say as it was said of old,Ob. , .
Scire si liceret, quae debes subire, & non subire; pulchrum sit scire: Sed si subire oportet, quae licet scire, quorsum scire? nam debes subire: That is,Doctor Euerard in his Arere han p. 76. as Doctor Euerard doth as wittily translate them as they were prettily composed. If a man might know the ill that hee must vndergoe, and shunne it so, then were it good to know: But if he vndergoe it, though he know it, what bootes him know it? he must vndergoe it. And so of good things, if he might the sooner obtaine them by fore-seeing them, it were worth our paines to looke after them; but seeing no care, no prouidence can either helpe vs vnto the good we desire, or preuent the euill we feare, because as one truly saith, What shall be, shall be, sure there is no chance, For the eye eterne all things fore-sees, And all must come to passe as he decrees: And therefore to what end should wee trouble our selues in vaine, to fore-see that which we cannot forbid? Sol.To this I answere briefly, that although God worketh all things according to his will; yet it is his wil ordinarily to work by ordinary meanes and secondary causes, as we may see in the second of Osee 21.Osee 2.21. I will heare the Heauens, and they shall heare the Earth, and the Earth shall heare the Corne, and the Wine and the Oyle, and they shall heare Israel: And therefore whom God hath decreed shall escape euill, or attaine vnto any good,God decreeth the meanes as well as the end of any thing. he hath also decreed that they should by their care and diligence, the one to preuent it, and the other to vse all lawfull meanes to procure it: and they that will not vse all possible care to obtaine these ends, doe most apparantly shew an infallible ar∣gument against themselues, they shall neuer attaine vnto their desired end; because it is a sure rule, that whatsoeuer end God hath decreed, hee hath also decreed the meanes to bring to passe that end. And therefore as he hath decreed the salua∣tion of his Saints, so he hath decreed to giue them his grace to fore-see all things that are necessary for them to know; that they may the better vse all diligence to eschew the euill, and to obtaine the good,
Secondly, seeing our estate in this life is a state full of mise∣ries; and that we are long expecting good, before we can inioy it; therefore wee haue neede of patience,Heb. 10.36. that after wee haue done the will of God, wee might receiue the promise: and therefore God seeing how needfull patience is for his seruants, hee giueth this gift vnto vs, (and it is indeed a most excellent gift, with∣out which I know not how the Saints could well subsist,) that we might patiently and contentedly suffer whatsoeuer hap∣peneth vnto vs, and as Iob saith, quietly to waite all our dayes,Iob. vn∣till our change shall come. It is recorded in the books of the Gentiles that in the Olympi∣an combates, that Champion wan the Garland, that bestowed most blowes vpon his Antagonist; but in the warres of the Lord, where God himselfe is our rewarder, wee finde that hee beares away the Crowne which beareth patiently the most blowes from his aduersaries, and in lieu thereof returneth no∣thing, but good words. But here we must vnderstand patience is vsed either,Patience is ta∣ken two waies. 1. , abusiuely and improperly. 2. , rightly and properly, and, In the first sence, wee finde the word vsed foure manner of wayes. First, for a sinnefull carelesnesse when men, per patientiam asini∣nam, will suffer themselues, like lazie asses, to bee drawne and compelled by lewd companie, to drinking, swaggering, or any other sinne whatsoeuer. Secondly, for a stoicall apathie, when men will locke vp all naturall passions, and striue to bee insensible of any thing that shall befall them. Thirdly, for a customarie induring of all stormes; when like children in the Schoole, which doe so much the lesse care for whipping, the oftner they are whipped, we grow in∣sensible of all crosses, by a continuall custome of bearing crosses. Fourthly, for a naturall fortitude, when, through the strength of nature and the courage of a heroick minde, men will vnder∣goe whatsoeuer aduersities shall betide them, and will seeme to beare the same, as if their strength were the strength of stones,Iob. 6.12. and their flesh of brasse, as Iob speaketh.
In the second sence we doe likewise finde the word vsed many wayes; as, Rom. 2.4.First, for a contayning of our selues from the reuenging of any iniuries done vnto vs. Secondly, for a contented waiting, and a most quiet expe∣cting of what we desire,Rom. 2.7. Heb. 10.36. Psal. 9.18. without muttering. Thirdly, for a sensible and a well-pleasing suffering of all afflictions, wants, pouertie, losses, persecutions, malice, contempt, contumelies, pouertie, death it selfe; and that not for any game of worldly good, for so worldings suffer much, losse of sleepe, labour, and toyle, to get a little wealth; the drunkard many a fall, and some hurts for the loue of his pleasant wine; and the enuious man many a blow, and some wounds perhaps, to wreak his malice vpon his aduersarie; and yet in these men which doe thus suffer much, that they may doe euill, nec miranda, nec laudanda est patientia, quae nulla est; admirand duritia, ne∣ganda patientia,Aug in l. de pa∣tientia▪ c. 5. their patience is neither to be admired, nor to bee commended; because it is a suffering for ill ends; but our suffering must be, for to shew vnto the world, that rather then we will in the least degree dishonor God, or make shipwrack of our faith and good conscience, we are most willing to indure what∣soeuer shall be imposed vpon vs. All these kindes of diuine patience, the holy spirit of God worketh in the hearts of the godly; to make them patiently to waite for good,Iob. 1.22. and quietly to suffer all euill; and all this with∣out grumbling, or charging God foolishly.
CHAP. III. Of the formes wherein the holy Ghost appeared: and why; and how the Apostles are said to be filled with the holy Ghost. FOr the third; that is,The gifts of edifying the Church how giuen. how God bestoweth these gifts vnto men, we must vnderstand that as his gifts be diuers, so he doth diuersly bestow them: for, First, those gifts which are giuen for the edi∣fying of his Church he gaue them, after two spe∣ciall manner of waies, 1. Abundantly and visibly in the infancie of his Church. 2. Sufficiently and inuisibly euer since. First, the Scripture tells vs,Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. that when the day of Pentecost was come, they were with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heauen, as of a mightie rushing winde, and it fil∣led all the house where they were sitting, and there appeared vnto them, clouen tongues like as of fire, and it sate vpon each of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and beganne to speake with other tongues as the spirit gaue them vtteranee. Out of all which, we may chiefely obserue these three speciall poynts, 1. Who were filled. 2. With what they were filled. 3. The effects of their filling. First, Saint Chrysostome saith, that all the companie both of men and women, were filled with these graces;Cyprian ser. de spiritu sancto. Saint Cyprian saith, the whole multitude of the beleeuers, that were gathered together, were replenished with this spirit; Saint Augustine, Saint Gregorie, and Lorinus saith▪ that all the Apostles and Dis∣ciples were filled with the holy Ghost;Hieron. in epitaph. Paulae. but Saint Hierome and Theod. Beza, and others do affirme, that none but the Apostles onely were replenished with these gifts: howsoeuer, the mat∣ter is not great, it deserues not contention, though it may afford discussion; for mine owne part, I thinke all that were
there,Who were fil∣led with the holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. were not replenished; because it is said, many of the be∣holders wondered, and others derided at this there sudden alte∣ration; which certainely they would neuer haue donne (be∣cause there had beene none to doe it) if they had bin all filled, and I cannot easily yeeld that the Disciples were filled with these gifts; because the promise of sending downe the holy Ghost, was onely made vnto the Apostles (as we may easily collect out of the fift verse of the first Chapter,) and because Saint Peter with the other Eleuen, doe onely stand vp to answer for them∣selues; (as we may plainely see in the fourth verse of the second Chapter,) and especially because some antient copies haue bin found, which doe expressely say, that all the Apostles were filled with the holy Ghost. And, 1 Cor. 13.32. God can blesse or preserue his seruants in the midst of the wicked.This sheweth how the spirit of the Prophets are subiect to the Prophets; and that as God can powre downe his plagues vpon multitudes of men, and yet preserue one free in the midst of thou∣sands, (as the Prophet Dauid sheweth) so, he can powre down his spirit vpon one in the midst of millions of men, and hee can bedewe that one with his grace, like Gedeons fleece while all the rest are drie,Iudges 61.38. and destitute of the same; which doth excee∣dingly commend the wise dispensation of almighty God, and affoord a great comfort vnto the Saints of Christ; that although they liue in the midst of a most crooked and peruers generati∣on; yet they may see how God can preserue them as the lilie in the midst of the thornes, and indue them with his grace, when all the rest of the world flowes with sinne. Secondly, they are sayd to bee filled with the holy Ghost, where we must obserue these two things, 1. The thing, wherewith they are sayd to be filled. 2. The filling of them with that thing. First, they are said to bee filled with the holy Ghost, and we finde that the name of the holy Ghost is taken two wayes, 1. For the essence of the holy Ghost. 2. For the effects and gifts of the holy Ghost. First, it is taken for the essence of the holy Ghost, as, by the spirit of the Lord were the heauens made:That the holy Ghost is a true God by na∣ture. and in this sence all creatures are filled with the holy Ghost; because they liue and moue in him; for the spirit of the Lord filleth the world, and containeth all things, saith the wise man
And yet some haue bin so bolde, as most impiously to affirme that the holy Ghost was but a created qualitie, or a godly motion in the hearts and mindes of righteous men. But the very works of the holy Ghost, as, creating all things, as Iob sheweth, the spirit of the Lord hath made me,Iob. 33. and the breath of the Almighty hath giuen me life; and as the Prophet Dauid more expressely affirmeth, saying, that by the spirit of the Lord, were the Heauens made, and all the Host thereof by the breath of his mouth;Psal. 33. and here, assuming on him visible formes, and sitting vpon each one of the Apostles onely, and none els; (which no created qualitie could possibly doe;) and especially the comparing of Esayas words, with the words of Saint Paul, will sufficiently confute this damnable error, and most manifestly shew vnto vs, this holy spirit to be the true and eternall God:Esay 6.9. for whom Esayas calleth the Lord of Hosts, which said vnto him, Goe tell this peo∣ple; heare yee indeede, but vnderstand not, and see yee indeed but per∣ceiue not, Saint Paul calleth the holy Ghost, saying, well spake the holy Ghost, by Esayas the Prophet; saying, Goe vnto this people and say, hearing yee shall heare, and shall not vnderstand; and seeing yee shall see, and not perceiue:Acts 28.25, 26. and therefore our Sauiour biddeth vs to goe, and teach all nations, baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. But it is obiected (as Nazianzen saith) that he is no where cal∣led God, but the holy Ghost, or the spirit of God;Nazian. orat. 5. de Theol. and there∣fore he is not God. I answer briefely, that this is false; for, Saint Peter said vn∣to Ananias; why hath Satan filled thy heart,Acts 5.3.4. to lye to the ho∣ly Ghost? thou hast not lied vnto men, but vnto God: And there∣fore, seing the spirit of God created all things; and being crea∣ted, preserued them, as Moses sheweth;Gen. 1.2. the spirit of God moued vpon the waters, i. e. to cherish and to retayne them to∣gether; and now in like manner, hee sanctifieth and pre∣serueth vs, as Melancthon sheweth, in that godly wish which he maketh, Spiritus vt Domini nascentia corpora fouit, cum manus artificis couderat ipsa Dei; Sic foueat caetus, qui Christi oracula discunt, accendatque igni pectora nostra suo.
And especially seeing that the holy Scripture doth more plainely testifie the same almost in euery place; wee say that the name of the Holy Ghost is first taken for the Essence of God. Secondly, The name of the Holy Ghost is taken for the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost; as where the Prophet saith, Take not thy holy spirit from me:Psal. 51.11. 2 Cor. 13.5. and where the Apostle saith, Know you not that Iesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates? And a∣gaine,Rom. 8.9. you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you; and so when it is said, that they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, we must vnderstand it of the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost. And these gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, are excellently de∣ciphered and set downe vnto vs vnder the properties and conditi∣ons of those formes and figures wherein the Holy Ghost did ap∣peare vnto vs, and that is (if I doe rightly collect them,) three speciall times; The Spirit of God appeared in the likenesse of fiue speciall things.First, vnto the Israelites, 1. In a pillar of cloud by day. 2. In a pillar of fire by night. Secondly, at the Baptisme of Christ, he descended vpon him like a Doue. Thirdly, At the day of Pentecost, he appeared, 1. Like the rushing of a mighty winde. 2. Like clouen tongues of fire. First, like a cloud.First, He appeared in a pillar of cloud, to shew vnto vs, that as the cloud betokeneth, 1. A shadowing from heate; 2. A sending downe of raine; As,1 King. 18.45. the Heauens were blacke with cloudes and windes, and there was a great raine; so the Spirit of God, doth ouershadow vs from the heate of the wrath of God; it cooleth and refresheth our scorched soules; and as the raine maketh the barren earth fer∣tile and fruitfull;In what r∣spect the holy Ghost is like vnto waters. so doth the graces of Gods spirit make our bar∣ren hearts plentifull in all good workes; for the Holy Ghost in many places is compared vnto water, because that as water, 1. Mollifieth the hard earth, 2. Fructifieth the barren ground, 3. Quencheth the greatest heate, 4. Cleanseth the foulest things, and so forth.
So doth the Spirit of God:In what res∣pect the Holy Ghost is like vnto water. 1. Soften our hard hearts. 2. Fructifie our barren soules. 3. Quench the heate of lust. 4. Clense vs from all our sinnes. And so make vs to be∣come fit temples for himselfe to remaine in vs. Secondly, He appeared in a pillar of fire,Secondly, like fire. to shew his consub∣stantiality with the Father and the Sonne, saith Nazianzen; be∣cause God is fire, and so appeared in the fiery bush; from whence it may be, came that custome among the Chaldeans, which af∣terward spread it selfe among many other Nations of the Gen∣tiles; to worship the fire for their God; whereas indeed they should haue worshipped that God which is fire and did ap∣peare like fire, to teach vs, that as the fire hath in it (saith Oecu∣menius) 1. Calorem. 2. Splendorem. 3. Motionem. 1. Heate, to warme, mollifie, and purifie.In what res∣pects the Holy Ghost is like vnto fire. 2. Splendor, to giue light, and to illuminate. 3. Motion, to be alwayes working. Euen so the Spirit of God; First, Warmeth and heateth the hearts of the godly, with a feruent and a fiery zeale of all godli∣nesse; he mollifieth their hard and stony hearts, and it consumeth all the drossie substance of sinne, and so purifieth their soules from all wickednesse. Secondly,Iohn 6.13. He illuminateth their hearts with the knowledge of God, for, he bringeth them into all truth, and he maketh their light to shine before men, that they seeing their good workes,Mat. 5.16. doe glori∣fie their Father which is in Heauen. Thirdly, He maketh them alwayes to be in action, and neuer idle, but as it is said of Christ, euer going about doing good. Thirdly, He appeared like a Doue,Thirdly, like a Doue. when he descended vpon our Sauiour Christ at his Baptisme; first, because (as Bonauenture saith) he came not then to strike our sinnes, by the zeale of his fury, but to beare them, and to take them away, through the meekenesse of his Passion; but on the other side,Greg. hom. 30. in Euang. hee descended vpon the Apostles like fire, because in these which were simply men, and therefore sinners, he would kindle a spirituall feruency against themselues, and cause them to punish those sinnes in themselues, by repentance, which God had pardoned vnto them, through his mercy; and secondly, he descended on Christ, like a
harmelesse Doue, and not like vnto tongues of fire; because Christ was not to be taught,Cyrillus hierosol. Catech. 7. which is signified by the tongues; for his lippes were full of grace; nor to be sorrowfull for his sinnes, which is signified by the fire; because in him there was no sinne; but his Doue-like properties were to be shewed; that hee was innocent,Iohn 1.29. meeke, and lowly in heart; for as of all the beasts of the field, the little silly Lambe is in most respects best qualified, and therefore is Christ called the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinne of the world;In what re∣spect the Ho∣ly Ghost is like a Doue. so of all the fowles of Heauen, the Doue in most respects is most excellent: for she is annunciator pacis, the messenger and proclaimer of peace; shee brought the Oliue branch vnto Noah; she wanteth gall; she hath no bitternesse in her; she neuer hurts with her bill nor clawes; she is full of loue, and yet she neuer sings any wanton tune; but woo, woo, is her ma∣tutinus & vespertinus cantus; her mournfull morning and eue∣ning song: and therefore the Holy Ghost descended on Christ like a Doue,Matth. 3.16. to shew these Doue-like qualities of this Lambe of God; and to teach that we must be thus qualified like Doues, if we would haue this heauenly Doue, this Holy Spirit of God to remaine within vs, for on them that are otherwise, this Doue hath not yet descended. Fourthly, like a mighty winde.Fourthly, He appeared like the rushng of a mighty winde; for a true winde it was not, (saith Oecumenius,) but the Spirit of God; Qui à spirando & flando dicitur; which from blowing or breathing is called spirit, is said to appeare. First, Like the winde; and that, for these fiue reasons. Iohn 9..First, As the winde bloweth where it listeth; so the graces and gifts of Gods Spirit are giuen to whomsoeuer it pleaseth him; for he will haue mercy on whom he will haue mercy.Exod. 33.19. In what res∣pect the Holy Ghost is like vnto winde.Secondly, As the winde scattereth the dust, and driueth away the chaffe from the corne; so the graces of Gods Spirit doth winnow the consciences of the Saints, and driue away all wicked thoughts and cogitations from their hearts. Thirdly, As the winde carrieth away the ship against the maine streame; so will the grace of Gods Spirit carry a man against the current of his naturall inclination; for if Socrates by the sole helpe of morall instructions was able to bridle his loose disposition, how much more shall those men bee restrained
from all lewdnesse, which are led by diuine inspiration? Fourthly, As the winde cooleth and recreateth all those that are scorched with the heate of the Sunne; so doth the grace of Gods Spirit, recreate all those distressed people that are scorched with the heate of afflictions, or burned with the concupiscence of their sinnes. Fiftly, As the winde will passe vnresistably; so will the grace of Gods Spirit worke it owne ffect; and all the power of dark∣nesse is not able to resist it: and therefore; Secondly, It is said,1 Kings 10.11. that he appeared like the rushing of a mighty winde, because, that as the mighty winde in the first booke of Kings, the 10. and the 11. did rend the mountaines, and brake the rockes before the Lord; so the grace of Gods Spirit, and the Word of God is mighty in operation,Why the Ho∣ly Ghost is compared to a mighty winde. able to shake the stoutest and the prou∣dest man, and to breake in pieces the stoniest heart: Indeed our people do esteeme our words none otherwise then winde, which makes vs spend so much winde to little purpose, to weary our selues, and scarce to waken them: but here, let them know that the Spirit of God (like Aeolus) which shutteth vp the windes in his bagges, can when he pleases, let out the same in a mighty manner, to amaze the consciences of the stoutest Peeres; and either to driue away their sinnes,Exod 10.19. Psal. 1.5. as it droue away the Grashop∣pers and Locusts that ouerspread the land of Egypt, or else to driue them away like the Chaffe, from off the face of earth. Fiftly, He appeared like clouen tongues of fire. First, Like tongues: for though the tongue,Fiftly, like clouen tongues of fire. i. e. such a tongue as is set on fire from Hell, (as Saint Iames saith) is many times the instrument of the Diuell, to doe much mischiefe to blaspheme God, and to abuse men; yet, Vt non debent oues odere pelles suas quia induunt eas lupi; As the sheepe should not hate their skins, because the Wolues doe many times put them on; so ought none that is wise, reiect that which is good, because it is often abused by the bad; therefore seeing (as Pittacus saith) the tongue as it is the worst member in a wicked man, so it is one of the best members in a godly man;Iames 5.6. Why the Holy Ghost appea∣red like tongues. the Holy Ghost did appeare like tongues. First, Because (as a Father saith) Symbolum est lingua spiritus sancti, à patris verbo procedentis; The tongue is a symbole of the
Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Word of the Father; for as the tongue hath the greatest cognation, and the neerest affinity with the Word, and is moued by the Word of the heart, to expresse the same by the sound of the voyce (saith Saint Gregory,Iohn 16.14.) so the Holy Ghost hath the neerest affinity that may be with the word God, and is the expressor of his voyce, and the speaker of his will, that receiueth of him, and reueileth all vnto vs. Secondly, Because, as the tongues are the sole instruments of knowledge, which conuayes the same from man to man; for though the soule be the fountaine from whence all wisedome springeth, yet the tongue is the channell and the conduite pipe, whereby this wisedome, this knowledge is communicated and transferred from man to man; so the Holy Ghost is the sole Au∣thor and Teacher of all truth; Christ is the wisedome of God, but the Holy Ghost is the Teacher of this wisedome vnto men;1 Cor. 1.21. and it pleased him by this onely way to conuay this wisedome of God vnto men; for seeing the world by their wisedome knew not God in the wisedome of God, it pleased God through the foolishnesse of Preaching, to saue those that beleeue. Why he ap∣peared like clouen tongues.Secondly, He appeared like clouen tongues, because all tongues and all languages are alike knowne and vnderstood of God, and because this Spirit can teach all men all languages, and the gift of tongues is a gift of God. Why he ap∣peared like clouen tongues.Thirdly, He appeared like clouen tongues of fire, they were ig∣nitae non politae; fiery tongues, and not fine polished tongues; be∣cause the Spirit of God, delighteth rather in the zealous and the feruent tongues of Saint Paul and Apollos that warme the heart, then in those eloquent tongues of Cicero and Demost∣henes that delight the eares; for this is the desire of Gods Spirit to kindle the hearts of men, and to set them on fire, with the loue of God, and our brethren: So when our Sauiour preached vn∣to the two Disciples that trauelled towards Emaus, they said, Did not our hearts burne within vs,Luke 24. while hee talked with vs by the way? This is the effect of the tongue of the Holy Ghost, to worke zeale and feruency in the hearers. And so you see the thing wherewith they were said to be filled, that is, the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.
CHAP. IIII. Of the filling of the Apostles with those gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the signes of their fulnesse. SEcondly, They are said to be filled with these gifts: and Dydimus saith, that wee cannot be filled with any creature; Quia deus solus im∣plet creaturas; Because nothing but God can replenish and satisfie his creatures, Vnus pellaeo Iu∣ueni non sufficit orbis; The whole world is not able to content vs: so large is the capacitie of mans desire: And yet we finde, that in some sense, euery man may be truely said to be full; for nature it selfe abhorres vacuity;Rom. 1.29. and there∣fore the wicked are said to be full of all vnrighteousnesse, full of sinnes, full of worldly cares: and being full of these things, they must bee voide of grace, and empty of goodnesse; their braines empty, that they vnderstand nothing, their memory empty, that they remember nothing, and their hearts empty, that they pra∣ctise nothing that is good.All men are either full of sinnes or of grace. But as the vessell that is full of water must be emptyed of that water, before it can be filled with Wine; or as thy hand full of Counters (saith Saint Chrysostome) must be emptied of the Counters before thou canst fill the same with gold; so must wee empty our selues of sin before we can be filled with grace; & we must cast away the cares of this world, before wee can be satis∣fied with the ioyes of Heauen: and therefore the Apostles did forsake the world and left all things to follow Christ, and then hauing emptyed themselues of all worldly vanities, to follow Christ; they were presently filled with these heauenly graces of Christ,Hugo de Prato apud Discip. Now (as Hugo de Prato saith) there be foure speciall signes of fulnesse. 1. Not to murmure. 2. Firmely to stand. 3. To receiue no more. 4. To flow ouer.
And wee finde this to be true in each sort of them that are full. For, First, The wicked, which are full of all vnrighteousnesse. First, They are dumbe, and open not their mouthes to giue thankes to God for any thing; and if God knocketh on these vessels with the fingers of his blessings; yet we shall not heare the least sound of any thankefulnesse; they are full of sinnes, and therefore they cannot speake of grace. Secondly, They are so constant in their wickednesse, (Mens immota manet) that as a full vessell cannot easily be remo∣ued; so all the preaching in the world cannot make them to alter their lewde and wicked courses. Thirdly, They are so full of sinnes, that there is no roome in them for grace, because nothing can receiue but his fulnesse. Fourthly, They corrupt others, and speake of wicked blasphemy, and their talking is against the most highest; and so their sinnes doe flow and ouerflow the whole Countrey; to shew indeed that they are full and more then full of sinnes. Secondly, The Apostles and Disciples and all good Christians, being replenished with Gods Spirit, they haue the same proper∣ties, but in a farre different sense: For, First, If God should knocke on these vessels, with the fingers of afflictions, with any plagues or troubles, yet they murmure not at any thing, they open not their mouthes whatsoeuer they suf∣fer; but they reioyce in tribulation, that they are counted worthy to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ.Act. 5.41. Secondly, They stand constant in their profession, that nei∣ther life nor death can remoue them from their most holy Faith.Rom. 8.35. And yet here you must not thinke, that the constancy of stan∣ding, while a man is full of Gods Spirit, doth imply a necessity of continuing full with the said graces; for though the Holy Ghost sate vpon the Apostles, and they stood firme while hee sate on them or remained in them; yet for their sinnes, if they take not heede,1 Sam. 16.15. this Spirit may be taken from them, (as he was from Saul) and their Candlestickes may be remoued, as they were from the seauen Churches of Asia; and he that standeth, may soone fall, if he doth not warily looke vnto his wayes; for though the gifts
and graces of God be , without repentance; i. e.The sauing graces once giuen, are nei∣ther finally, nor totally taken away, but the com∣mon graces are oftentimes taken away from the wic∣ked, by reason of their wic∣kednesse. though the sauing grace of God, being once receiued by the E∣lect, can neuer after totally be extinguished; yet those gifts and graces which are commonly giuen, (as we see) many times to the bad, as well as to the good, or else for the edifying of the Church, may wholly cease, and be extinguished; as we reade of Nicholas the Deacon, on whom the Spirit sate, and was one of them that were filled with the Holy Ghost, if Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory, Lorinus, and others iudgement be to be followed, and yet fell from the faith, as Bonauenture collecteth against Saint Chrysostome. But from hence it is well concluded, that as all or most of the Apostles and Disciples that were here filled did continue vnto the end, as our Sauiour requireth; so it shew∣eth that we should be all, not like the Aegyptian dogges at Ni∣lus; Qui bibunt & fugiunt; Which for feare of Crocodiles, doe take a snatch of the Riuer, and then slinke away, but very carefull to giue attendance euery man in his calling, Donec venerit, vn∣till our Master commeth and neuer to slinke away. Thirdly, They forsooke all and followed Christ;Matth. 19.27. There was no roome in their hearts for worldly vanities, and they deemed them but as dung and drosse, as the Apostle calleth them. Fourthly,Hest. 10.6. in Apocryph. As the little Well in Hester grew into a great Ri∣uer, and flowed ouer with great waters; so now the Apostles be∣ing filled with the Holy Ghost, they powre out the graces of God ouer all the face of the earth to renue it, as the waters of Noah preuailed to destroy it; for now, they speake with other tongues, as the spirit giues them vtterance. And yet here we must obserue, that although they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and that from them all, the graces of Gods Spirit did flow and ouerflow the earth; yet they had not all the same measure of grace;That the Apo∣stles receiued not all, the like measure of grace. and therefore that grace could not flow in the same measure from them all; for as Richardus de sancto Victore doth well obserue, there is infusio, defusio, & effusio gratiae; A giuing of a quantity of some grace; and there is a filling with a fulnesse of grace; and there is a superabundancy of grace; or there is a small, and a middle, and a superordinary measure of grace: and so we finde it both in the Preachings and in the Pennings of these Apostles: for Iames staide onely in Ierusalem,
and the maior part of the rest preached ouer all the world; Iude writ but one Epistle, and that one a very short one; and most of them writ nothing at all; but Saint Iohn and Saint Paul writ very much:That we must not expect the same measure of fruites from all men. and therefore of those (as well Preachers as others) which haue receiued grace, not onely to sanctifie them∣selues, but also to edifie the Church, we must not expect the same measure of fruits from all: For young men, and the meaner Schollers cannot doe so profoundly as the grauer Diuines can doe; and the older men cannot doe it so often as the yonger sort can doe; and yet neither must be contemned; for if the young men had had the time of the aged, no doubt but they would doe as well as the aged:Aristotle. Et si senex haberet oculum in∣uenis, videret vt iuuenis; And if the ancient men had the strength & bodies of yong men, it is not vnlikely but that they would still take paines as young men. Neither doe I say this to vphold sloath or negligence in any Age, for to our vttermost ability (as I said before) we must all continue constant vnto death; but to reproue our partiall Age that adoreth the Sunne rising in the East, and applaudeth the quicke wits, and many Sermons of youth; but make none account of aged Paul, and the best labours of declining age,Philemon v. 9. vnlesse with the Israelites, they can make vp the same tale of Brickes as they did in youth, though they haue neither Straw nor Stubble, neither sight of eyes, nor strength of bodies to performe it; and to shew how euery man, should doe his best; Iuxta mensuram Donationis Christi; according to that measure of grace, which he hath receiued from Christ. And so much for the filling of the Apostles with the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.
CHAP. V. Of the effects and fruits of their filling with the Holy Ghost, and how this Spirit sealeth them, and sheweth them to be the true seruants of Iesus Chist. THirdly, For the effects of their filling it is said,The fruits and effects of the holy Ghost. that they began to speake with other tongues, as the Spi∣rit gaue them vtterance. First, They began to speake, because the Spirit of God is neuer idle, but, where it sees cause, will speake, though it should cost the speakers life. Secondly, They spake with other tongues, i. e. not as carnall men, talking of fleshly or worldly matters; nor as wicked pro∣phane wretches, belching forth, Blasphemia in deum; Blasphe∣mies against God, but as regenerate and sanctified men, they shew forth, magnalia dei; the wonderfull workes of God. And hereby all men might know whether they were the seruants of Christ by this Spirit of Christ; for as our Sauiour saith of the false Apostles, the same is true of all Apostles,Matth. 7.16. by their fruits you shall know them: for as in whomsoeuer the spirit of Satan is, you shall see that he will reueale them by their lewd words, and by their wicked works, which are the workes of darkenesse: so in whomsoeuer the Spirit of God is, hee will seale them, and marke them with a foure-fold marke, saith Bo∣nauenture; that is, signo, 1. Ʋeritatis credendorum. 2. Honestatatis morum. 3. Contemptus mundanorum. 4. Charitatis Dei et proximorū 1. With true Religion.The holy Ghost sealeth vs with a four-fold seale. 2. With an vpright conuersa∣tion. 3. With contempt of vanity. 4. With perfect charity. First, It worketh Faith in their hearts, for this is the fundamen∣tall root of all other graces: and therfore the Apostle well obser∣ueth out of the Prophet, that a man first beleeueth,Faith is the root of all gra∣ces. and then speaketh; for we haue beleeued (saith he) and therefore haue wee
spoken; whereas if they had not beleeued, they would neuer haue spoken of the wonderfull workes of God: and therefore the holy Ghost did first worke faith in their hearts, and then it caused the same to speake and to expresse it selfe, by this preaching of the works of God. And, Secondly, of good workes which are,Secondly, because the verity of our faith is euer knowne by the sinceritie of our life, therefore these signes shall follow them that beleeue, Gregor. de 7. pec. Magdal. First, to sup∣presse sinneFirst, They shall cast out Deuils, i. e. vitia voluptatis; they shall suppresse all sinnes, as Saint Gregory expounds it; because euery sinne is as bad as the Deuill. Secondly, They shall speake with new tongues, i. e. vtter forth verba vtilitatis,Secondly, to praise God. holy and heauenly words; and because our naturall tongues were like the poison of Aspes, these may well be called new tongues, when they doe sing a new song. Thirdly, to bri∣dle their lusts.Thirdly, They shall take vp serpents, i. e. concupiscentias sen∣sualitatis; the biting and poisonous concupiscences of our sensu∣all flesh shall be, though not quite taken away from them, yet they shall bee taken vp in their hands, (as Hercules is said to haue held the two serpents which Iuno sent to deuoure him, in both his hands, while hee was but a childe in his cra∣dle) and they shall be so restrayned and held fast, that they shall not be able to doe them violence. Fourthly, to beare all in∣iuries.Fourthly, If they drinke any deadly poison it shall not hurt them, i. e. iniurias aduersitatis; if they must swallow downe lies and slanders, yet for all the malice and the mischiefe of the wicked, non inflammantur per superbiam, non suffocantur per ma∣liciam, non disrumpuntur per inuidiam; they shall neither swell with enuy, nor burst with malice, nor any wayes perish through their indignity,Luke 21.19. but in their patience they shall possesse their soules. And, Fiftly, to doe good vnto all men.Fiftly, They shall lay hands on the sicke, and they shall recouer them, i. e. adiutoria charitatis, & remedia iniquitatis; they shall exercise such deeds of charity, that by their good counsels and admonitions, they shall recouer many a languishing dying soule,Thirdly, of contempt of vanities. and bring them backe againe to sauing health. And, Thirdly, because these things cannot be practised, vnlesse
the pompe and pride of worldly vanities, be quite contemned and troden vnder feet; therefore the Spirit of God worketh in them a minde to forsake all worldly things. And, Fourthly,Fourthly, of charity. Rom. 5.5. because no worke is good vnlesse it proceedeth from the root of charity; therefore the Spirit of God dif∣fuseth this loue into the hearts of his seruants, that they wish no euill to any man, but are ready to doe good, euen to them that hate them. And these foure seales and signes of Gods Spirit, are expres∣sed in the twelfth chapter of the Reuelation where Saint Iohn saw a woman clothed with the Sunne,Apoc. 12.1. and the Moone vnder her feet, and vpon her head a crowne of twelue Starres, and she being with childe, cryed, trauelling in birth and paine, to be deliuered: For this woman signifieth the Church of Christ, or euery faithfull Christian soule; And first her Sun-like shining, is the brightnesse of her good workes and heauenly conuersation, which doth so shine before men,Matth. 5.16. that they glorifie God which is in heauen. Secondly, the Moone vnder her feet signifieth her con∣temning and trampling vnder feet all the vaine and variable things of this sublunary world. Thirdly, her crowne of twelue Starres, is the Symbole of her faith, containing twelue articles of her beleife. And fourthly, her paine to be deliuered, is that earnest desire and loue which euery Christian soule hath to in∣crease and multiply the number of Gods children. And so the holy Ghost hauing descended vpon the Apostles, and remaining in their hearts, it caused them first to beleeue, and to compose that crowne of twelue Starres, (which is the glory of euery Christian soule) i. e. the twelue Articles of our faith, as the Church receiueth it. Secondly, to forsake all the world, and to follow Christ, as S. Peter sheweth. Thirdly,Matth. 19.27. to lead a most vpright and a godly life, as Saint Paul auoucheth.Heb. 13.18. And fourth∣ly, to labour incessantly night and day, to send out their voyces into all lands, and their words vnto the ends of the world, as now the whole world testifieth. And so you see how in the first be∣ginning of the Church, the gifts of the holy Ghost were visibly and abundantly giuen vnto these seruants of Iesus Christ, accor∣ding as it was prophecied long before,Ioel 2.28. that he would powre out his Spirit vpon all flesh, and so their sonnes and their daughters should prophesie. But,
CHAP. VI. How the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit are now giuen vnto vs, and how wee may know whether wee haue the same or not. SEcondly, Christ doth now giue his Spirit other∣wise vnto the Pastors of his Church,How God be∣stoweth his graces vpon vs sufficiently for the edifying of the same, but through great paines, and diligent searching after knowledge; for now we must not looke for Exthusiasmes, nor thinke to attaine vnto learning and knowledge by reuelati∣ons; but orando, & quaerendo, & bene viuendo; by earnest praiers by continuall watching, and tumbling, and tossing of many bookes, and by wearing and wearying out our selues in reading, musing, and writing of many lines, we must seeke to attaine to a little learning: and when wee haue done all we can, wee can get nothing but what this blessed Spirit please to giue vs; for except the Lord build the house the builder laboureth but in vaine; so except he doth blesse our studies,Psal. 127.1. all our paines and industry will proue no better, then Aethiopum lauare, to wash a blacke Moore; a breaking of our braines, but an attaining to no true knowledge. But we may be certaine, that if we do our duties, in all humility to seeke and search for grace, our God will most surely giue vs grace, yea, and the same graces, (though not in the same manner, or according to the same measure) which hee did giue vnto his Apostles. And as here it was apparantly seene that these Apostles had the gifts of this Spirit, by these signes and effects of this Spirit; so wee may most certainely know, (if we will diligently search) whether we haue these gifts and graces of Gods Spirit or not, by the works that we doe, and by the things that we finde in our selues: for Si iniurias dimitti∣mus,The signes whereby we may know whether we haue the Spi∣rit of God or not. quod denotat columba, si paenitentiae lachrymis irrigamur, quod nubes, si desiderium habemus rerum aeternarum, quod ignis, si magnalia Dei annuntiamus, quod lingua, tum habemus signum prae∣sentiae Spiritus sancti; If we water our couch with our teares, and bee truly sorry for our sinnes, which is signified by the cloud: if we be purged from all the drosse of sinne, and be eleuated
to desire and loue heauenly things, which is noted in the fire; if wee bee carried against the naturall streame and current of our owne corruptions, which is shewed by the winde; if we re∣mit and forgiue all wrongs done vnto vs, and bee meeke and gentle vnto all men, harsh and sullen vnto none, which are the properties of the Doue; and if we zealously preach and pray, and talke of God, and of his will, his grace and goodnesse to∣wards vs, and render thankes and praise vnto him for the same, which is the office of a fiery tongue; then we doe with the A∣postles shew the effects of Gods Spirit; and we may to our end∣lesse comforts assure our selues that the Spirit of God is in vs.1 Cor. 3.85. But if we finde none of these things, no hatred of sinne, no loue of vertue, no loathing of the vanities of this world, no lifting vp of our hearts to heauen, no meekenesse with men, no praising of God, but rather finde our selues cleane contrary, defiled with sinne, deboist in our liues, iniuring men, offending God, blaspheming his name with wicked oathes, and breaking his Sabboths with great contempt; then wee should not onely wonder to see the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit in others, as the people did when they saw what had happened vnto the Apostles vpon the day of Pentecost; but we should rather be∣waile and lament the want of the same in our selues; for it is vnpossible that they should haue any part or portion of Gods Spirit, that doe shew no signe nor fruit of Gods grace. And therefore euery man should try and examine himselfe, whether he finde in himselfe the fruits and effects of Gods Spi∣rit or not. For, First, the holy Ghost, being like water, if he be in you,That we should diligently exa∣mine whether we haue Gods Spirit or not. Psalme 1.3. then you are washed and cleansed from all filthinesse; and you are like the trees that are planted by the waters side, and doe bring forth their fruits in due season: but if you bee like a barren and drie ground where no water is, or like fruitlesse trees that beare no∣thing but leaues, then certainely the Spirit of God is not in you, and you are fit for nothing but to be hewne downe,Matth. 3.10. and to be cast into the fire. Secondly, the holy Ghost being like fire, if he be in vs, hee illuminateth the eyes of our vnderstanding, and hee giueth light to them that sit in darkenesse and in the shadow of death, that
they may walke without stumbling, in the way of peace; but if our vnderstanding bee so darkened, that wee neither know God nor the will of God, then certainely the Spirit of God is not in vs;2 Cor. 4.3. for if our Gospell be hid, (saith the Apostle) it is hid to them that are lost, that being depriued and void of Gods Spi∣rit, are filled with the spirit of darknesse. A most fearefull say∣ing against them that vnderstand not the great mystery of god∣linesse, that they haue the marke of lost ones; and if hee be in vs, then we must needes be feruent and zealous to doe all good seruice vnto God, as Apollo was, who is said to be hot in spirit, or as the twelue tribes were, who serued God night and day; in∣stantly,Act. 18.28. c. 26.7. saith the Apostle: but if we be cold and carelesse to serue the Lord, then surely we are destitute of this Spirit of God; for how can a man carry fire in his bosome,Prou. 6.27. and not be burnt? so how can we haue the fire of Gods Spirit in our hearts, and not bee feruent to all good works? Thirdly, the holy Ghost being like a Doue, if hee bee in vs, then we are meeke and lowly in heart; for this heauenly Doue re∣maineth in none but those that are Doues: but if with the Ducke (that flying aloft among the wilde Duckes, did presently alight, and so brought them all with her into her owners net, whereof Alciat saith,Alciat. de Anate. Perfida cognato se sanguine polluit ales Officiosa alijs, exitiosa suis. They doubting not her trayterous heart at all, Did flie with her, and downe with her did fall,) We doe deceiue our friends, and wrong our neighbours; then surely this Doue-like spirit of God is not in vs; for this holy spi∣rit of discipline flieth from deceit;Wisdome 1. Gal. 5.22. and the fruit of this spirit is all meekenesse, gentlenesse, and goodnesse. Fourthly, the holy Ghost being like winde, if hee bee in vs, then all the dust of vanitie is scattered from our hearts; and our soules are carried against the streame of naturall desires, to wish and long for heauenly things. And, Fiftly, the holy Ghost being like tongues; if he be in vs, then our tongues will be like the pen of a ready writer,Psal. 45.2. Matth. 12.14. and our talking will be of the most highest; Quia ex abundantia cordis os loquitur; &
loquela tua te manifestum facit; because a religious heart will e∣uer expresse it selfe by a godly and a religious tongue;Rom. 10.10. for as with the heart man beleeueth vnto righteousnesse, so with the tongue confession is made vnto saluation; but if wee talke laciuiously, and speake all words that may doe hurt; if the poyson of aspes be vnder our lippes, and the holy name of God, or the good fame of men be euill spoken of through vs, then surely, surely,If we haue not the spirit, we ought to seeke him. this holy spirit of God is not in vs. And if he be not in thee, then I aduise thee to seeke him while he may be found; for the time will come, when he cannot be found,Bern. ser. 75. in cant. i. e. cum optauerimus salutem in medio gehennae, quae facta est et praedicata est in medio ter∣rae; when wee shall wish for saluation in the midst of Hell, which was wrought, and is preached in the midst of the earth: and therefore now while it is to day, we ought to seeke vnto him, and to pray with the Prophet Dauid, yea and to pray earnestly, that God would renue his spirit within vs,Psal. 51.10. and stablish vs with his free spirit; for, whosoeuer hath not the spirit of Christ,Rom. 8.9. the same is none of his, the same hath no comfort in the world, no assurance of his saluation, no Faith, no Hope, no God, no good. But if by these infallible rules thou findest that thou hast the spirit,If we haue the spirit of God we ought not to grieue him. and canst say with that worthie Martyr of our Church, I haue it, I haue it, as hee went vnto the stake to be burned, then remember what the Apostle speaketh, grieue not the spirit, quench not the spirit; spill not this water, lest that spil∣ling this oyle thy lamp goeth out: and then,1 Thes. 5.19. thy last end will be farre worse then thy beginning; and it had bin better for thee,Luc. 11.26. 2 Pet. 2.21. neuer to haue knowne it, then to turne aside from the holy Commandement: for as Sampson and Saul hauing the spirit of God, liued honora∣bly and did performe most worthie exploits;A fearefull thing to be depriued of Gods spirit. Iud. 16.10. 1 Sam. but hauing lost the same by their sinnes, they became in their liues most mise∣rable, and in their deaths most lamentable; euen so it will hap∣pen from the Lord, vnto all backe-sliders, vnto all them that quench the spirit: therefore (I say) grieue him not, quench him not.How Prea∣chers may know whether they haue the gifts to edifie the Church. But because the chiefest of these gifts for the collecting and the edifying of the Church, is the gift of tongues, whereby the Ministers are inabled for the preaching of Gods Word; there∣fore,
we that are Preachers should here chiefely looke whether we haue this gift of tongues or not; for, Psal. 45.2.First, if our tongues be the pens of a readie writer, that wee can readily speake of the things that we haue made vnto the King, and Preach the Word of Truth in season, and out of season; Secondly, if these our tongues be not double tongues, but clouen tongues, i. e. able to diuide the Word of God aright, and to giue vnto euery man his owne portion in due season;Luke 12.42. that is, mer∣cie and comforts vnto the repentant soule, and woes and iudgement vnto the obstinate transgressors, and to teach Faith and workes, loue to God and man; Thirdly, if these our clouen tongues be of fire; that is, vsed rather to gaine soules, then to get applause, or to gather wealth; to draw men to glorifie God,Numb. 12.21.30. 1 Sam. 25.36. and not to magnifie our selues; then we may be assured, we haue receiued a part and portion of these gifts and graces of Gods spirit. But if we be like those great clarks, which they say are rare Schollers, but neuer man was heard to be the better for their learning; they haue it in them, like the fire in the flint-stone, but it neuer comes out of them; they are lothe to preach, they are lothe to write, for then perhaps they should not be deemed so learned as now they are iudged to be; for a foole holding his peace may be thought to be wise: or if we be like Baalams Asse, that neuer spake but twice in all her life; or vse to preach as Naball feasted, once a yeere, when they receiue their rents; or if wee would preach, and cannot, but it were better for vs not to preach at all, then to preach so idly, and so foolishly as we doe; or if we preach more for profit, or the praise of men, then for the glorie of God; then assuredly we doe proclayme vnto the world, that we haue not yet receiued these gifts of fierie clouen tongues from God. Vsher de Christ. ecccles.Vrbanus writes vnto Baldwin Arch-Bishop of Canterburie, Monacho feruentissimo, Abbati calido, episcopo lepido, Archi-episcopo remisso; and so it was sayd of Alexander the sixt, De vitio in vitium, de flamma transit in ignem: They grew worse and worse, as they did grow greater and greater; and I pray God it be not true among vs; that high
preferment spoyle not many a Preacher. I say no more: but so you see, how the gifts which are giuen for the edifying of Gods Church, were giuen vnto the Apostles, and how euer since, they are giuen vnto all other Preachers. CHAP. VII. How the gifts and graces that are giuen for the sanctifying of our soules are conferred and bestowed vpon men. SEcondly,By what meanes we receiue the grace of God. for the other gifts and graces that are giuen for the sanctifying of our soules, they were, and are giuen euer after the same man∣ner, that is, First, by those outward meanes which God hath appointed; and, Secondly, by the inward working of his blessed spirit; for, though I confesse with Saint Augustine and others, that God can speake by his spirit, in occulto, and teach our spirits in silen∣tio to crie Abba Father;All graces come by hea∣ring Gods Word, and by receiuing of his Sacra∣ments. yet we find that ordinarily all the gifts and graces of God, as Faith, Hope, Charitie, Patience and all other graces whatsoeuer, are wrought in vs by those meanes which God hath appointed for this purpose; and they are two, 1. The hearing of Gods Word. 2. The receiuing of the blessed Sacraments. First we finde that the best way to attaine vnto any gift of grace, is to heare the Preaching of Gods Word; because pray∣er, by which all graces are obtained, is the fruit of Faith,Rom. 10.17. and Faith commeth by hearing, saith the Apostle. Neither is it euery kinde of hearing,That all kinde of hearing, profiteth not the hearers. that will suffice to ob∣taine grace; for as there be many that can receiue no grace, because like the deaffe Adders, they will not heare at all; so there be as many that can receiue but very little grace; because they heare amisse. I haue read it in Erasmus; that Demosthenes on a time, discoursing seriously of necessarie considerations of
State-businesse, all his Auditors fell asleepe; the Orator to awa∣ken them, said he had a prettie storie to relate vnto them, viz. that a young man hyred an Asse from Athens to Megara, and in the heate of the day, he couched vnder the Asse, to take the benefit of her shadow; the owner denied him the vse of the Asses shadow, saying, he hyred the Asse and not her shadow: and therefore he should not haue it, vnlesse he would anew compound for it; the young man said, he would haue the ad∣uantage of his bargaine; with that they fell from words to blowes; and so Demosthenes staid his speech; whereupon, all his Auditors desired him to goe on, that they might heare the issue of that Tragedy: the Orator replied, I discoursed of the safetie of your Common-wealth, and you fell asleepe; and now I told you a Tale of an Asse, and see how attentiue you are to it; and so he reprooued the madnesse of his people;Foolish hea∣rers. euen so, wee haue many hearers that are more attentiue vnto trifling words, and more delighted with the forme and phrases, then they are with the substance of the matter, like vnto little children, that loue the guilded out-side of the book, better then all the wisdome that is therein contained; or the laces of there coate, better then the coate it selfe: And some we haue like the Egyptians about the fall of Nilus, that at the first, were much affrighted at the hideous noyse thereof,Acts 26.28. but within a little while after they were accustomed with the same, they were no waies moued thereat; so they, like Agrippa, at the first hearing of the Word Preached, are something touched with the sence of their sinnes, but within a very little while,Customarie hearers. they grow carelesse of all good∣nesse: others like the Auditors in Strabo, that attentiuely heard the Philosopher, vntill the market-bell of their profit did ring, and then they left him all alone; or rather like the hearers of Saint Paul,Worldly hea∣rers. which gaue him audience, vntill hee touched their hearts with their vnbeliefe; so our men will heare vs, if it be not against their worldly profit, & they wil heare placentia, such things as are pleasing for them: others heare so much, that in very deed,Onely hearers and no doers. they doe nothing els but heare; for they neuer practice any thing at all, but the practice of iniquitie; they will heare a Sermon euery day, two for fayling, three sometimes, but they will not forsake one sinne for a whole yeeres Sermons:
they heare them to be wiser, not to be better: Ah wretched men that you are! —procul hinc, procul ite profani; Why will you heare Gods Lawes, and yet hate to be reformed? for this will turne to your further condemnation; not because you doe heare Gods Word, which is good; but because you do not doe that which you heare to be good: and so we haue many other sorts of hearers, that by their hearing doe receiue no grace, because they heare amisse. And therefore not all hearers, but all those that take heede how they heare; that doe heare that they may vnderstand, and vnderstand that they may practise, and practise that they may please their God; those doe receiue the gifts and graces of God. Secondly,The receiuing of the Sacra∣ments, a most excellent meanes to be∣get all graces. we know that the blessed Sacraments are most excellent meanes to beget Faith, and Loue, & all other graces in the worthie receiuers of the same; for they be verba visibilia euangelij; such things as doe visibly shew vnto our eyes all that the Word of God doth teach and speake vnto our eares; for what is the sum of Gods Word and of all the Preaching in the world, but, that Iesus Christ suffered, and died for our sinnes, that we through him might haue eternall life? and what can shew this more plainely then the blessed Sacraments doe? for in Baptisme we see, how the childe is regenerate, and borne anew, and in∣grafted into Christ; and as the water cooleth all the scorching heat of the flesh, and washeth away all filthines from our bo∣dies, and maketh euery thing fruitfull, so the gifts and graces of Gods spirit doth coole in vs the heat of our fleshly concupi∣scence, and clenseth vs from all sins,How the Sa∣craments shew vs all that the Scripture tea∣cheth. and maketh vs to abound in all good workes: and in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we doe most apparantly see, that, as the Bread which is broken and then giuen vs to be eaten for to strengthen our heart, and to sustaine our life; and the Wine is powred out, and giuen vs to drinke it for to comfort our hearts; so Christ was broken in pie∣ces (as I shewed in my Treatise of his Passion) for our sinnes; and his blood was powred out to make satisfaction for our trans∣gressions; and so he is giuen vnto vs, as the foode of our soules, and the onely ioy of our heart to sustaine vs, to refresh vs, and
to be our onely comforter in all distresse. And the considerati∣on of these visible things, should as effectually work in vs, Faith to beleeue in him, Hope to expect all good from him, and Charity for all receiued graces, most intirely to loue him, and to be truely thankfull vnto him for the same, and so to worke in vs, patience to suffer, as he hath suffered, loue one towards ano∣ther, as he hath loued vs, and so all other graces whatsoeuer, as the audible declaration of them, expressed by the Preacher, doth vnto our eares; for as it was the manner in old time, not onely verbally to declare,The custome of antient time to expresse their minds by visible signes. 1 Kings 22.11. but also by certaine visible signes to expresse memorable things; that so it might make the more impression in their mindes; as the Aegyptians by their hyeroglyphicks; and Zedechia the sonne of Cenaanah made him hornes of iron, and said vnto Achab, thus saith the Lord, with these shalt thou push the Syrians, vntill thou hast consumed them; and Agabus tooke the Girdle of Saint Paul,Acts 21.11. and bound his owne hands and feete, and said, thus saith the holy Ghost; So shall the Iewes at Ie∣rusalem, binde the man that oweth this Girdle, and shall deliuer him into the hands of the Gentiles; so the Lord vseth all meanes, Preaching vnto our eares, by the best intelligible voices, and shewing vnto our eyes by most plaine significant signes what Christ hath done for vs; thereby to make vs all to vnderstand, and to beleeue the same. But as all kinde of hearing, so all kinde of receiuing these blessed Sacraments is not sufficient to beget faith and other gra∣ces in the receiuers; for we read that there be foure kindes of receiuers of the blessed Sacraments.Foure sorts of receiuers of the Sacra∣ments. First some receiue them spiritually onely; that is, the matter of the Sacraments; which are, the gifts and graces of Iesus Christ,Wee may re∣ceiue Christ though we wāt the Sacra∣ments. but not the Sacraments themselues; so Theodosius was baptized and ingrafted into Christ by grace, though he wan∣ted the outward meanes, as Saint Ambrose saith: and so all the elected children that die before they can be pertakers of the Lords Supper, non manducantes manducunt; not eating the Sa∣cramentall Bread,Aug. tract. 17. & 27. de verb. Apostoli. doe notwithstanding eate Iesus Christ: Quia manducare illam escam & illum bibere potum, est in Christo mane∣re, & Christum in se manentem habere; because that to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drinke his bloud, is to be ingrafted into
Christ, to be vnited and made one with Christ; and so to haue Christ dwelling in vs, and vs in him;To beleeue in Christ is to eate and drink Christ. and therefore wee finde that Christ doth not onely say, he that commeth to me, i. e. to eate me, shall not hunger, and he that beleeueth in me shall neuer thirst, to shew that there is no difference betwixt beleeuing in him, and drinking of him; but also the verie same things are promised as well to the beleeuers in him, as to the eaters of his flesh, and the drinkers of his blood;Iohn 6. v. 47. v. 51. for in the 47. v. of the 6. Chap. of Iohn, he saith, he that beleeueth in me hath euerlasting life, and in the 51. v. of the same Chapter, he saith; if any man eat of this bread, he shall liue for euer; and so the very same things are threat∣ned aswell against the not beleeuers in him, as the not eaters of his flesh; for in the 53. v. he saith,v. 53. v. 64. except ye eat the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drink his bloud, you haue no life in you; and in 64. v. he saith, there are some of you that beleeue not; to teach vs, that, as Saint Augustine saith, credere in Christum est manducare panem vinum, to beleeue truely in Christ, is to eate the flesh of Christ. Secondly, some doe receiue them Sacramentally onely;To receiue outward Sa∣craments, and not the grace signified; will auaile vs no∣thing. 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4. that is, the outward signes and elements onely; but not the gifts and graces thereby taught and signified: so the Fathers that came out of Aegypt, were all baptized vnto Moses in the cloud, and did all eate of the same spirituall meat, and did all drink of the same spirituall drink, that is, as we doe, though in other signes; for they drank of that spirituall Rocke which followed them, and that Rocke was Christ, that is, signified and taught them Christ; and yet many of them perished in the wildernesse, Quia manducantes non manducabant; because they were wicked and did onely receiue the outward signes, and did not receiue the inward grace that was signified and offered vnto them, vnder those Sacramentall signes; so the Pharisees had the Sacrament of Circumcision; yet our Sauiour tells them that being wicked, they were the sonnes of Hell,Iohn 8.44. and the children of their Father the Diuell: and in the time of the New Testament they had the Sacrament of Baptisme, for Iohn Baptist baptized many of them, and Simon Magus was baptized by an Apostle, and Iudas receiued the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and yet wee see they reaped no fruit thereby, because
they receiued them onely Sacramentally, outwardly, and did not beleeue; and therefore receiued not those blessings and gra∣ces which these Sacraments taught and pointed at. Hereticks doe neither re∣ceiue Christ nor the Sacra∣ments of Christ.Thirdly, some receiue neither the Sacraments, nor the gra∣ces signified by the Sacraments; so all Hereticks that neither rightly beleeue in Christ, nor yet truly receiue the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ, doe neither receiue grace, nor yet any signe of grace. The worthie receiuers of the Sacra∣ments, doe hereby receiue Christ and all his graces.Fourthly, some receiue the true Sacraments; because they re∣ceiue them, as they are deliuered by Christ himselfe; and they receiue the true graces, that is, all the benefits of Iesus Christ, taught, manifested, and exhibited vnto vs by those Sacraments; such are all the faithfull and the worthie receiuers of the same; Quia manducantes manducunt; because that receiuing these, they feede by faith on Iesus Christ, and doe most truly applie vnto their owne soules, what grace or vertue soeuer is signified and shewed by these outward signes and Schoole-Masters of all true Christians. Three sorts of men excluded from the pas∣chall Lambe.And therefore if we would obtaine the graces and blessings of God, by the meanes of the blessed Sacraments, let vs examine our selues, that we may be worthie receiuers of the same. Wee finde in the Lawe, that three sorts of men were excluded from the paschall Lambe, Exod. 12.43.48.1. The vncircumcised. 2. The strangers. 3. Those that were vncleane. Indigne sumis si sumis non reue∣renter, vel non catholice vel habens mortale scienter.To teach vs, that the vnreuerent, the vnbeleeuers, and the vn∣godly, great and grieuous sinners, should not presume to meddle with these blessed Sacraments: for as the couenant of Gods grace, so these signes of the couenant belongeth not to any wicked man, so long as he remaineth wicked: and therefore, lest (as the men of Bethshemesh were slaine, fiftie thousand and threescore and ten men in one day,1 Sam. 6.19. because they looked into the arke, which belonged onely vnto the Priests;) wee be found guiltie of the body and bloud of Christ, and so pull vpon our selues swift damnation, if we snatch the childrens bread, that belon∣geth not to vs, or receiue these blessed Sacraments vn∣worthily, let vs with blinde Bartimaeus, cast off our mantles, the
old raggs of Adam, the lusts of the flesh, and let vs put on our wedding garment, the new man, which chiefely con∣sisteth of Faith towards God, and loue towards men, if,Mark. 10.50. when we come to receiue these Sacraments, wee would receiue the grace of Christ. But,Mat. 22.11. Secondly, though such a hearing of the Word, as I haue a∣boue shewed, be a speciall meanes to obtaine grace; yet we must know, that this meanes is not sufficient, vnlesse, as God opened the heart of Lydia, when Saint Paul Preached vnto her eares, so he doth worke faith in your hearts, when we doe Preach & ex∣pound the Word vnto your eares; Quia inanis est sermo docentis nisi spiritus adsit cordi audientis; because, as the Preaching of the Word is the gift of God in vs; so the beleeuing of the same is the operation of the same God in you; And so likewise, though the receiuing of the blessed Sacraments, be a singular meanes, to worke Faith and all other graces in the right receiuers of the same; yet wee must vnderstand, that it is not opus operatum; the doing of the worke that begetteth grace in any man, but the spirit of God onely conuayeth grace, through the conduit pipes of these outward meanes: and therefore wee should alwayes pray to God, not onely for the graces of attention vn∣to our eares, and illumination vnto our eyes, but also of sanctification vnto our hearts, that what wee doe atten∣tiuely heare with our eares, and doe most perfectly see with our eyes. Wee may most faithfully beleeue with our hearts, and so attaine vnto these gifts and graces of Gods spirit.
CHAP. VIII. On whom God bestoweth these gifts and graces of his spirit. FOr the third, i e, To whom God bestoweth these gifts; we must know that he bestoweth, nei∣ther the graces of edifiying the Church, nor the other graces, to sanctifie and to saue our soules, vpon all men, but onely vpon those whom it pleaseth him; for as when he was to choose his Apostles, it is said, that he chose whom he pleased; so of the graces of preseruation, sanctification, and such like, he giueth them to whom he pleaseth;Mar. 3.13. and though hee giueth liberally vnto all men,Iames 1.51 yet he giueth not all of these, nor any of them all, inconside∣rately, vnto any man, for he lets not his graces drop through his fingers (as if he cared not what became of them) and so suffer all men to gather them,Mat. 10.29. who will; but as a sparrow lights not vpon the ground without his prouidence, so not one grace falls to any man, without his speciall guidance and direction. And this the Apostle sheweth when he saith,Rom. 9.16. non est currentis neque volen∣tis, sed miserentis Dei; it is not in him that runneth, nor in him that willeth; but in God that sheweth mercie, and this Christ him∣selfe declareth, when he saith, no man commeth vnto me, except the Father draw him;Iohn. so no man can receiue these gifts and graces, but they to whom they are giuen; and as we finde a gra∣dation of the loue and fauour of God; As, First, he loueth all the things that he hath made; and, That there is a gradation in Gods loue.Secondly, he loueth man in a more speciall manner, aboue all the things that he made; And, Thirdly, among men, he loueth some better then others; yea, Fourthly, among those that he loueth best, hee loueth some better then the rest; As, wee see hee loued Noah and Abraham among the Patriarks, Moses among the Prophets, and Iohn among the Apostles;Why God lo∣ueth some men better then others. so hee loues these best, not be∣cause these were in themselues, better then any others; but be∣cause it pleased him to loue them better then others; for, as
if he had made a toad a man, and the man a toad, the toad had bin the better of the twaine; so if hee had bestowed more grace vpon the wicked, and with-held the same from the now best men in all respects, then no doubt but the wicked had bin the best; but he loueth them best, because it pleaseth him so to doe, and therfore, he bestoweth more graces and tokens of his loue vpon them, to make them better then all others whatsoe∣uer; for the gifts of God make vs good, and our goodnesse maketh not him to bestow his gifts on vs. And this I say,What this doctrine tea∣cheth vs. not to accuse God of any niggardlinesse or close-handednesse, because he giueth not these gifts vnto all: God forbid; for he is a debter to no man, but may freely, with∣out censure, doe with his owne what he list; But I say this, First, to shew his exceeding great bountie, and fauour,First, to behold the great goodnesse of God to his elect. to∣wards vs; that deseruing no more good at Gods hands then all the rest of the race of mankind, should notwithstanding when we iustly deserued so much euill (it may be as much, or more then the rest of men) receiue so many great gifts and gra∣ces, aboue and before all the rest of the world. Secondly,Secondly, to be truely thankfull vnto God. and specially to moue vs to all thankefulnesse to this our good and gratious God, that with-holding his graces from many thousand others, he would notwithstanding so graciou∣sly bestow them vpon vs; for had not he giuen vs the grace to beleeue in Christ, to hate our sinnes, and to loue all righte∣ousnesse; I see not how the best of vs could doe any of these, no more then the wickedest men in the world: and therefore I would to God, that we would euer praise the Lord for his good∣nesse, and declare the wonders that hee doth, as generally for all men, so specially, for these chosen children of men. Thirdly, and lastly, to teach vs,Thirdly, to pray for what we want, and to praise our God for euer∣more. that when wee feele our owne wants, wee should pray to him for helpe, to supply our need: and when we see any of our neighbours voyd of grace, we should rather piously pittie them, and pray for them, then proudly to contemne them, and to spurne against them; for as, if God would, hee might haue made thee a beast, and the beast a man; so, if it had pleased him, hee might haue filled them with that grace which he bestowed on thee, and he might haue iustly left thee in that fullnesse of sinne, wherein they doe
wallow: and therefore beholding the goodnesse and seueritie of God, on them, to whom hee giues no grace, seueritie; but towards thee to whom he bestoweth his gifts, goodnesse, if thou continue in this goodnesse; doe thou praise thy God, and pray for them; that for his sake that is ascended vp on high, and hath led captiuitie captiue, God would be pleased, to bestow his gifts and graces vnto men; that so all men may ascribe and giue all praise and glory vnto him, which was, and is, and shall be, through him which was dead, and is aliue, and liueth for euermore, Amen. A Prayer. O Most gracious God, which hast giuen thine only Sonne Iesus Christ, to die for our sinnes, to rise againe from the dead, to ascend vnto Heauen, to prepare a place for vs, and to send vs thy holy spirit to fill our hearts with all heauenly gra∣ces, which are necessarie for the gathering of thy Church and the sanctifying of our soules, to prepare vs vnto eternall life; we most humbly beseech thee, to giue vs that grace to be truly thankfull vnto thee for all thy graces; Increase our faith, stirre vp our hope, and kindle our loue both towards thee and to∣wards all men for thy sake; and because all graces are begot∣ten, increased and preserued by the hearing of thy Word, and receiuing of thy blessed Sacraments, we pray thee O Lord, to giue vs grace to heare thy Word attentiuely, to beleeue it faithfully and to receiue thy Sacraments worthily, that so be∣ing filled with thy spirit, we may despise all worldly vanities, and haue our conuersations in Heauen while we liue on earth, and at last bee receiued into that Kingdome which thou hast prepared for them that loue thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
The Seuenth Golden Candlesticke, HOLDING The Seuenth greatest Light of Christian REIGION. Of the duty of CHRISTIANS. 1 THESSAL. 5.2 . Brethren, pray for vs. I Haue shewed thee, O man,The coherence of this Treatise with all the o∣ther Treatises. how man behaued himselfe towards God, offen∣ding his Maiesty with hainous sinnes; and I haue shewed thee what God hath done for sinfull man, how hee sent his onely begotten Sonne, to be made man, to suffer paine and sorrow, and to die a cursed death for man, thereby to ouercome all our enemies, sinne, death and hell; to arise from the dead, to assure vs of our deliuerance, to ascend into heauen, to prepare a place for vs, and to send his holy and blessed Spirit into the hearts of men to fit them with the gifts and graces of the same, to prepare them for heauen; that the poore man might bathe himselfe in the poole of Bethesda, and
be made perfectly whole; that the wandering sheepe might bee reduced and brought home vpon this mans shoulders; and that sinfull man might be reconciled and revnited vnto God a∣gaine. And therefore now, Quid nisi vota supersunt? what remaineth sauing onely prayers? to render thankes vnto God for this great kindnesse, and to aske those things that hee re∣quisite for vs? and to teach vs how to doe the same, I haue chosen to treate of this short Text, Brethren, pray for vs. It is a Text independent either of precedent or subsequent matter; and it containeth points of piety, points fit to bee preached, and fitter to bee practised, by your sacred Maiesty, by the worthiest Nobles, by vs Priests, by all men: and there∣fore da veniam Imperatr; I humbly craue attention but a short time, to dilate vpon this short Text, Brethren, pray for vs. I may say of it, as Saint Hierome said to Paulinus of the Catho∣like Epistles of Saint Peter, Saint Iohn, Saint Iames, and S. Iude, Eas breues esse pariter, & longas, that they were short in words, but full of matter; for herein our blessed Apostle, (as was said of that famous Hystorian) Verborum numero sententiarum nu∣merum comprehendit) in this paucity of words hath couched plenty of matter; the parts are two. The diuision of the Text.1. A most friendly compellation; Brethren, 2. A most Christian request or exhortation, pray for vs. Out of the first I note two things, 1. His affection, whereby we are taught to liue in vnity; 2. His discretion, whereby wee may obserue a Christian pollicy, not such as is abusiuely, though commonly so termed in the world; but such as is ioyned with true piety. And in the second I obserue likewise two things, 1. The action, pray, which is a worke of piety, 2. The extention, for vs, which is an act of charity. And so you see that from this short Text, we may learne 1. Vnity. 2. Pollicy. 3. Piety. 4. Charity. Brethren, pray for vs.
CHAP. I. Of the diuers sorts of Brethren, and how this teacheth vnitie. FIrst, Brethren is verbum amoris, a word full of loue,Of the vnity of brethren. but it is diuersly taken in the Scripture. For, First,Aug. ser. 61. de tempore. sometimes Omnem hominem per fratrem de∣bemus accipere; saith Saint Augustine; we ought to vnderstand euery man by the name of brother; as he that ha∣teth his brother, i. e. he that hateth any man, is a man-slayer. Secondly, Sometimes it signifieth those of the same nation, as Moses went out vnto his brethren,Exod. 2.11. and saw an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren. Thirdly, Sometimes cognatos Scriptura dicit fratres;Aug. l. 1. locut. de Gen. Math. 12.4.7. Mar. 3.32. the Scrip∣tures calleth our kinred by the name of brethren; as, behold thy brethren stand without desiring to speake with thee. Fourthly, Sometimes it is put for the sonnes of the same pa∣rents, as Heua bare againe his brother Abell; and Caine said, Am I my brothers keeper?Gen. 4.2.8.9. v. Fiftly,1 Cor. 1.26. Sometimes we vnderstand those of the same religion and profession, as you see your calling brethren: Et sic fratres di∣cti Christiani; and so all Christians are called brethren, saith Saint Augustine; and so Saint Paul meaneth in this place, Bre∣thren, pray for vs; for otherwise he was an Hebrew, of the seed of Israel, of the Tribe of Beniamin,2 Pet. 1.10. and they were Grecians of Thessalonica, the Metrapolitane City of Macedonia, built by Philip king of Macedon, and so called ,Aug. ser. dom. in monte, fol. 343. of his victories obtained in Thessaly, in which respect also he cal∣led his owne daughter Thessalonica, (as Suidas saith) but they were all Christians, and therefore brethren, and therefore the deerer one to another because Christian brethren: Quia maior est fraternitas spiritus quam sanguinis; because the fraternity or bro∣ther-hood of Christians, which is in respect of the Spirit that begetteth vs with the same immortal seed, in the wombe of the same mother, the Church, to bee brought forth and brought vp as children to the same Father which is in heauen, is a great deale more excellent, then the brotherhood of flesh and bloud:
Nam haec similitudinem corporis refert, illa cordis vnanimitatem demonstrat,Aug. in apend. de diuersis. Ser. 10. Psal. 647. to 10. haec interdum sibi inimica, illa sine intermissione pacifi∣ca est; for that sheweth onely the likenesse and similitude of the body, and the sympathy of naturall dispositions; but this sheweth the vnanimity of the heart, and a concurrent desire in all holy affections; those are sometimes contrary vnto them∣selues, but these haue alwayes cor vnum, & animam vnam; one heart, and one minde, to loue the same things, and to agree in the same points: and therefore of all brethren, the loue of Christian brethren should excell and exceed all other loue of brethren;1 Iohn 3.16. and these of all others should be ready to lay downe their liues for the Brethren. How gentile brethren loued one another.And yet in former times the loue of naturall brethren was such, that when a souldier which was in the army of Pompey had vnawares vnto himselfe, slaine his brother that was in the company of Sertorius,Ʋal. Max. l. 5. & Aug. de ciuit l. 5. & Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 2. c. 25. Idem de ciuit. l. 8. c 5. and knew the same when he bestript his body, seipsum ibi perimens fraterno corpori adiunxit, he slew him∣selfe for very griefe, and left his owne body vpon his brothers carkeise: and Saint Augustine reports of the sonnes of Tyn∣darus, that when Castor was slaine by Idas, Pollux besought Iupiter that hee might impart halfe his owne life vnto his bro∣ther, Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit. And so we reade of these signes Castor and Pollux, that vter{que} alternis diebus lucet; each one of them appeareth euery se∣cond day; and so the Poet saith of Pylades and Orestes, Extitit hoc vnū quod non con∣uenerat illis; caetera par con∣cors, & sine lite fuit.Ire iubet Pylades charus periturus Orestem, Hic negat, inque vicem pugnat vter{que} mori. They neuer disagreed but onely in this, which of them should first lay downe his life for the other. And now amongst Christian brethren, we finde Ouids say∣ing to be true, — Fratrum quo{que} gratia rara est— They doe shew lesse loue among themselues then the heathen did; the loue of most is waxen cold, all are become louers of themselues,Bern. de aduent. dominiser. 3. p. . and no man remembreth the afflictions of Ioseph: for although (as Saint Bernard saith) Iure fraternitatis consilij sumus,
& auxilij fratribus debitores, consilij quo erudiatur ignorantia, auxilij quo iuuetur infirmitas; in respect of our brotherhood we doe owe vnto our brethren both aid and aduice, aid to helpe his infir∣mity, and aduice to direct his simplicity: yet al fe,Of the great want of vnity among Chri∣stian brethren. the whole world seeth how we doe insult ouer the weake, and lay stum∣bling blockes before the blinde, what wrongs and oppressions in the Common-wealth; what more hostility then among Christian Princes? where now more bloudy warres then among the Christians, that doe imbrew their swords in the bloud of each other, which should rather ioyne their strength against the ene∣mies of the Lord? and what bitter contentions doe we like∣wise see in the very Church of Christ? Oh, how many bitter lines haue ambitious spirits so contentiously scattered in euery place, to obscure the cleare light of verity?Idem ser. in ad in Pasto. Synod. O poore Church and distressed Spouse of Christ, Pax ab extranijs, pax à paganis, sed filij nequam filij scelerati scauiunt in eam; Shee hath peace from strangers, peace from pagans, peace from all but her owne children; her owne wicked children doe raile and rage against her, they struggle in her wombe like Rebeccaes twinnes, they sharpen their tongues, and blunt their pens in writing either a∣gainst the other; and so they make the Church of Christ,Iohn 19.23. 1 Reg. 11.30. 1 Reg. 16.21. which should be like the coat of Christ, without a seame; to be torne in pieces, like Iereboams garment: for as in Israel one halfe followed Tibni, and the other halfe followed Omry; or as in Rome the wiser followed Pompey, the middle sort tooke part with Caesar, and the rest followed Crassus; or in Attica the peo∣ple of the mountaines ranne after Pysistratus,Plut. in vit. Crass. those of the valley chose Lycurgus, and those of the Sea-coast Megacles: euen so in the Church of God, one is of Paul,1 Cor. 1.3, 4. another is of Apollo; one is of this minde, and another is of that minde; and as the Poet said of the vulgar sort, Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. We may now say of the better sort, Scinditur incertus studia in contraria clerus. They are full of all oppositions, each one inuenteth some new points, each one dissenteth from the rest, and so by this their dissentions and multiplicity of opinions, they make grieuous contentions in euery place, and cause many men with the ef∣fusion
of a little inke, haue inuented in their Cells; for I doe as∣sure my selfe, if there were more charity and vnanimity among the Clergy, there would be lesse controuersie, and more vnity a∣mong the Laytie. But it was enough for Abraham to disswade from all con∣tention betwixt him and Lot, to say, wee bee brethren; and I wish that it were enough for vs, for we be brethren; and there be enough against vs, we neede not be against our selues; and therefore,Ignat. ep. 9. ad Philadel. Fugite vt filij lucis sectionem vnitatis; we should by all meanes shunne dissentions, because there bee many Wolues abroad in sheepes clothing; but if we keepe vnity and brotherly loue among vs, they shall neuer preuaile against vs: but other∣wise,Salust. coniurat. Catel. vt concordia crescunt minutissima, ita discordia dilabuntur ma∣xima; as in the time of peace, through vnity, the smallest things doe grow happy, so in the time of discord, the greatest things doe come to ruine: and therefore we say, that peace and vnity are the best of all earthly blessings that God bestoweth on men during their pilgrimage in the state of mortality:Pax optima rerum quas ho∣mini nouisse da∣tum est, pax vna triumphis innu∣meris potior. Sylius Ital. Aug. in Psal 29. and so Brun∣felsius saith, that a Christians life is nothing else but mutuall charity, or a continuall louing of God and of our neighbours, Quia omnis homo est vnus homo; because all men in Christ Iesus should be as one man; like Hypocrates twinnes, which willed and nilled the same things; for the whole Church of Christ is no∣thing else, but Ecclesia multorum fratrum; an vnited company of louing brethren: and therefore they should euer owe this duty of loue and charity one towards another; for though the Apostle biddeth vs to owe nothing vnto any man, yet he excep∣teth this, to loue one another, because all Christians being bre∣thren, they must needes owe this mutuall duty of loue and charity,Idem ep. 93. ad Caelestin. Quae sola etiam reddita semper detinet debitores; which though it be neuer so much paid, yet it is euer owing vnto our brethren, saith Saint Augustine. And so you see the loue of the Apostle to his brethren; which should teach these brethren to loue our Apostle againe, Quia amor amoris magnes, & durus est qui amorem non rependit; because loue is a loadstone to draw loue againe, and he is vnworthy of loue that requiteth not his louer with the same measure of loue as he receiueth; for he should loue much, to whom much is forgi∣uen,
saith our Sauiour; and ; hee that desires much loue, saith Isidor,Isidor. Pelus. l. 2. ep. 148. Pelus. must shew much loue: and therefore as the people doe require loue from the ministers, so the ministers should receiue loue from the people, for wee giue them panem sanctuarij, the spirituall bread of life: and therefore we should haue from them, panem promptuarij, bread enough to sustaine our life. But alas, such is our case, they are ready enough to demand what is due to them, but they are backward enough to pay what they owe to vs;Loue is shewed foure wayes. for whereas true loue is shewed foure manner of wayes. First, In words, when wee speake friendly vnto our neigh∣bours, and beseech them to be reconciled vnto God.2 Cor. 5.20. Secondly, In workes, Quia probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis; when by our outward workes,Gregor. hom. 30. in Euang. Mat. 20.28. we testifie our inward af∣fection vnto our brethren. Thirdly, by our seruice one to another, when wee desire not so much to be ministred vnto, as to minister; as our Sa∣uiour saith. Fourthly, In being ready to lay downe our liues for the bre∣thren, which is the greatest signe of loue, and the highest de∣gree of affection, for greater loue then this hath no man, that a man should lay downe his life for his friend:Iohn 15.13. and therefore our Sa∣uiour Christ tooke vpon him, non solum formam serui vt subesset,Bernard. ter. quart. hebd. poenos. sed quasi mali serui vt vapularet; not onely the forme of a ser∣uant, that he might minister, but also was contented to be ac∣counted as an euill seruant, that he might suffer for vs; and all this to shew his loue vnto vs euery manner of way: Whereas I say, loue is thus shewed, let vs say, and doe, and die for our people, as we daily doe, weare and consume our selues like Iohn Baptist, that was a burning and a shining light; like the candle that consumeth it selfe in giuing light to others: yet are we sure to haue loue little enough from them, good words is almost all we haue, and alwayes we haue not that from all; for our soules are filled with the scornefull reproofe of the wealthy, and with the despightfulnesse of the proud: but this much shall serue touching the Apostles affection, and that vnity which should be amongst vs all; because we are brethren.
PART. II. CHAP. II. Of the Apostles wisdome and godly pollicy in seeking for to winne the Thessalonians to performe this duty: and of three sorts of Preachers, whereof two sorts are de∣fectiue in this point. That a gentle louing intrea∣tie, is the best way to perswade men to doe any thing.SEcondly, Saint Paul herein sheweth his discretion, by this manner of speech that he vseth vnto them; hee tels the Corinthians, that he caught them with a guile, not to beguile them, but to saue them; and so here and in all places, he vseth all his wit, all his pollicy, and all the wisedome that hee hath to winne men vnto Christ;2 Cor. 12.16. and being wonne, to make them to serue Christ; for being desirous of their Prayers, hee comes vnto them, in spiritu mansuetudinis; in the spirit of meekenesse, he creepes into their hearts with termes of loue, and seekes to lead them, tanquam oues, leni spiritu, non dura manu; rather as sheepe by an inward sweet influence, then as goats to be driuen by an outward extreame violence; so God himselfe dealt with our forefathers, and all their posterity; he heaped vpon them, beneficia nimis copiosa, multa & magna, priuata & positiua; wonderous great benefits and blessings, to see if he could so draw them vnto himselfe in the chaines of loue, and to allure them by all faire meanes, and all the allectiues vnder heauen, vnto his blessed seruice;Hos. 11.4. hee spake them faire, hee vsed them kindly, he promised them much, he gaue them more, and all to perswade them to their owne happinesse: so Christ the Sonne of God alleadgeth this for a reason, why all men should bee willing to come vnto him,Matth. 11.29. because hee is meeke and lowly of heart; and Moses the man of God, was mitissimus super ter∣ram,Numb. 12.3. the meekest and the mildest man that was vpon the face
of the earth, and so the fittest man to guide the people of God: and Titus Ʋespasian for his curtesie and affability was called, deliciae generis humani; the delight of mankinde; hee was so curteous vnto all, that he was wont to say, Non opertet quen∣quam à Caesaris colloquio, tristem discedere; it was not fit for a∣ny man to depart sad from Caesar, for hee knew this was the way to winne them: Mollis responsio frangit iram, a soft answere appeaseth wrath, & a gentle intreaty will soone perswade men: Syluestres homines sacer interpres{que} Deorum,Horarius de arte poetica. Caedibus, & faedo victu deterruit Orpheus: Dictus ab hoc, lenire Tygres rapidos{que} Leones. The faire spoken Orpheus and Amphion by their sweet perswa∣sions are said to haue mollified the most sauage natures,Dictus & Am∣phion Thebanae conditor vrbis, saxa mouere sono testudinis, & prece blan∣do, ducere quo vellet. and to haue brought vnto ciuility the rudest and the wildest men: and therefore Saint Paul here doth so louingly intreat them, and so friendly beseech them with this sweetest name of Brethren, to pray for them; Brethren, pray for vs. To teach vs, that as we be Pascendo Pastores, the Teachers of our people, so we should be diligendo Patres,1 Cor. 2.4. aswel fathers for affection, as teachers for instruction; and that wee should intreat and beseech our people, in the bowels of Christ Iesus, when we might command them in the Name of the great Ieho∣ua: for it is most certaine, that when bitter reprehensions doth harden men in iniquity, a gentle intreaty will often win them vnto piety; for it was but the alluring speech of Apollo, that made many to affect him rather then Saint Paul: and it is dayly seene, that a golden mouthed Chrysostome, with his sweet perswasions, will winne more men to Christ then any one can doe with his bitter reprehensions;Seneca in The∣baid: act. 4. because as Seneca saith in another case, qui vult amari languida regnet manu; inuisa nun∣quam imperia retinuit diu;Peragit tran∣quilla tempe∣stas quod vio∣lenta nequit. Obsequium ti∣gres{que} doma tumidos{que} leones. hee that would bee loued in his raigne, let him rule with a gentle hand; so he that would bee loued of his flocke, must feede them with the words of loue. And yet for all this I denie not, but as Saint Bernard saith, qui non vult duci, debet trahi; he that will not be perswaded should be compelled; for if men will not turne, God will whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold of vengeance: and therefore wee read, that in the Arke of Moses, there was
Aarons Rod for correction,The iudge∣ments of God must be threat∣ned, when his mercies can∣not allure vs to serue him. Reuel. 14. as well as Manna for refection: and in the Church of Christ, there is discipline for the stubborne, as well as doctrine for the simple; and from the Seate of God, there proceeded lightnings and thunders, as well as the sound of harpers harping with their Harpes. To teach vs, that (as Saint Hierome saith) debet amor laesus irasci; loue too much prouoked will waxe angry: and therefore; whosoeuer despiseth the riches of Gods goodnesse,Rom. 2.4.6. and forbearance, and long-suffering, hee treasureth vp vnto himselfe wrath a∣gainst the day of wrath; for this is iust with God, (saith the Apostle) to render vnto eury man according to his deeds: and therefore, we must aswell thunder out Gods iudgements against irrepentant sinners, as to distill Gods mercies to the tender-hearted Christians; we must aswell crie, woe to the sinneful nation, to the people laden with iniquitie,Esay 1.4. as promise ease vnto them, that are wearied vnder the waight of their sinnes. Mat. 11.And yet still herein, in our greatest indignation against sinne, we must not forget Saint Bernard's rule, dum das verbera osten∣de vbera; to doe as louing nurces, while they shake the rod, to shew the dugge, or as the good Samaritan, to powre wine and oyle into the wounds of the distressed traueller;Luke 10.34. i. e. so to mixe the bitter threatnings of the Law, with the sweete promises of the Gospell, as that wee neither driue them to despaire by the one, nor yet make them presumptuous by the other: and therfore herein wee neede discretion,How needfull a thing is, dis∣cretion for the Preachers of Gods Word. Mat. 24, 24. which is one of the two essen∣tiall parts of a true Preacher, who is that wise and faithfull steward. First, he must be faithfull to doe his dutie; And, Secondly, he must be wise and discreete, to know how to doe it; to giue vnto euery one his owne portion, and that in du season; to preach mercie, to whom mercie, and vengeance, to whom vengeance belongeth; to know before whom we speake, and what we speake; to doe bonum benè, and to waigh our words in the ballance of discretion, before wee vtter them vnto our Auditors, and surely in my iudgement, it is a true saying, that an ounce of discretion is worth a pound of learning; be∣cause learning puffeth vp, saith the Apostle; and it is but as Achilles sword in the hand of him that knoweth not how to vse it. postulat vt capiat, quae non intelligit arma;
But discretion is the keeper and guider of all vertues; Dis∣cretion guideth, Learning teacheth, and Charitie edifieth; and thus these three graces march in order, that must lead, and these must follow; and therefore,Isidor. de summo bone. whatsoeuer is done without this, is ill done, quia virtus indiscreta pro vitio reputatur; be∣cause zeale it selfe, Charitie it selfe, and Vertue it selfe, being vndiscreet is no better then a discreete vice, nor yet many times so good; for that it groweth often vnto many vices, and produceth many inconueniences, as most wofull experience dai∣ly sheweth; for, I finde two sorts of men tainted with this fault, First, the too popular Preachers, when they come to preach before their gouernours. Secondly, the parasites of Princes,That there be three sorts of Preachers. when they come to preach before the people, for I diuide the whole classie of Prea∣chers into these three ranks. The First are those that are descreet and faithfull Preachers,First, discreete and godly Preachers. either before Prince or people, , such as would willing∣ly discharge their duties towards all men, and hould the mid∣dle way, inter adulationem et litigium; betwixt pleasing and pro∣uoking. The Second are those that vse too much flatterie before Princes, and too much harshnesse before the people;Secondly, pa∣rasites of Prin∣ces and great men. Aug. in Psal. 9. and these neither way can doe good; for commonly the people will not be compelled, and flatterie not onely blindes the eyes, that they cannot see, but also perswadeth the doer to delight in sinne: de∣lectat enim facere, in quibus non solum non metuitur reprehensor, sed etiam laudatur operator; for a man delighteth to doe those things for which he is not onely free from reprehension, but also sure of commendation; and therefore, bene cum principibus agere∣tur, si scirent inter adulationem & laudem distinguere; it were well for Princes and great men, if they could tell how to distinguish and to discerne true desart from base flatterie, and that blinde ambition, and desire of praise, should not make them to swal∣low both without distinction, and to giue credence vnto others rather then vnto themselues. The Third are those that are too popular,Thirdly, the too popular Preachers. the parasites and pleasers of the people, yet somewhat too bold to speake against
authoritie, and these are too blame in many things; for, as in∣stabile vulgus, the headlesse and heedlesse multitude are vnable to conceiue,To what the vulgar people are naturally inclined. and vnwilling to be taught, vnworthie to rule, and vnpatient to be ruled; so the pleasers of these men must needs displease all wise men, ; For, wise men please not the people, neither can the people please wise men; for you shall euer see the mul∣titude, alwayes desirous of these two things, First, To draw their heads out of the collar of gouernment, & to bring all rule into their owne hands, dirumpamus vincula,Let vs breake the bonds. is their song; no terme pleaseth them better then the free estate, no man to please them, but of their owne election, no longer rule, but while hee please them. O miserable state to serue such people! Secondly, If this they cannot doe, then must they haue a hand in euerie point of state, yea euen in those of greatest waight, nothing is good, that they doe not, nothing to be done, that they allow not, they haue an interest (they say) in all, and therefore they must haue a hand in all; and so in very deede those that neuer learned to obey, would guide and gouerne their chiefest gouernors. And therefore I say that those Preachers, whose rising hath bin by the people, and who giue themselues to popular applause are either halting in their honestie, or defectiue in their discreti∣on; and so most vnfit, either to teach the wise, or to gouerne the foolish; for in the first, they teach factious and dangerous positions; and in the second, they must either yeeld to popu∣lar desires, or dissent from themselues, and so leese the applause of the people, which is one of the mainest things they ho∣ped for and gaped after. And so experience daily sheweth vs, that either want of ho∣nestie to doe what they know, or els want of wisdome and dis∣cretion to know what to doe, hath moued the blinde and wilde zeale of many factious men, so friuolously to intermeddle with extrauagant and needlesse discourses, both of State and Com∣mon-wealth, and so furiously to precipitate themselues to most dangerous contention in the Church of God, and many times being hoysted vp to the sterne of dignitie, to make way for the
vulgar, to spurne against authoritie: And therefore as I would wish no more wealth of God, then I had grace to vse it; so would I wish no more learning, nor any other grace, then I had discretion to guide them; for this is that salt, whereof our Sauiour speaketh; haue salt in your selues: and therefore all learning and all knowledge without this, will soone putrifie, and proue fit for nothing, but to be cast into the dung-hill; as our Sauiour saith; And so much for my two obseruations out of the word Brethren, now followeth the request, or the exhortati∣on, Pray for vs, PART. III. CHAP. I. Of the diuers kindes of Prayers, both in respect of the matter and forme. SEcondly, In the request or exhortation, I noted 2 things, 1. The action, Pray. 2. The extention, for vs. First, for the action, i. e. Pray, lest I should wander, or ride at randome in this wide ocean of matter, I will diuide all that I meane to speake of this point, into these fiue heads, 1. Of the diuers kindes of Prayer.Fiue things considered concerning Prayer. 2. Of the partie to whom we should Pray. 3. Of the place where we are to Pray. 4. Of the time when we must Pray. 5. Of the manner how we ought to Pray. First, for the diuers kindes of Prayer, wee must know that Prayer is distinguished in respect, 1. Of the matter. 2. Of the forme.
First in respect of the matter, prayer is said to be foure-fold, 1 Tim. 2.1.1. Supplications. 2. Prayers. 3. Intercession. 4. Giuing of thankes. First, Supplications are for the remouall of euils. Secondly, Prayers for the obtaining of good.Danaeus tract. de orat. dom. p. 47. Thirdly, intercession in the behalfe of others, And fourthly, thankesgiuing for the good receiued.That there are two kindes of prayer. But we may more briefly say that prayer is either 1. , An inuocation or petition. 2. . A gratulation or thankesgiuing. First,First, Inuoca∣tion. Inuocation or petition is either 1. To remoue euill. 2. To obtaine good. First, euill is said to bee either of sinne, or of punishment; and we should pray against both: first, Saint Paul, buffetted of the messenger of Satan, prayed: to teach vs, that when we are inticed to sinne, we should pray, that God would not lead vs into temptation. Secondly, the euill of punishment, is either temporall, spirituall, or eternall, First, all afflictions, iudgements, plagues, warres, and all other miseries whatsoeuer, they are punishments for sinne: and therefore we should pray that God would either take them away from vs, or sanctifie them vnto vs; that they might worke together for the best. Secondly, spi∣rituall punishment is when for our former sinnes we are deliue∣red vp to a reprobate sense, to doe those things that are not conueni∣ent: and therefore wee should most heartily pray that God would forgiue vs our former sinnes, and not punish the same with this spirituall fearefull punishment. Thirdly, the eternall punishment is that euerlasting death which is prepared for the De∣uill and his Angels, from which we should continually pray to be deliuered. All good com∣prehended vn∣der Grace and Peace.Secondly, The good that we should pray for, is euery where comprehended vnder these two names, 1. Grace. 2. Peace. 1. Grace, whereby we may truly serue our God. 2. Peace, whereby we may quietly liue among men. And these two Saint Paul doth alwaies ioyne together, to shew
(it may be) that he deserues no grace, which desires no peace; for howsoeuer disordered spirits say, Non pacem petimus superi date gentibus iras, Nunc vrbes excite feras, coniuret in arma mundus; Wee seeke not peace, we long for warres; yet all well-affected Christians that doe loathe to bathe their swords and to make them drunke with the bloud of men, will say with Drances, Nulla salus bello, pacem nos poscimus omnes. No good can come from warre, because as Lucan saith, Nulla fides pietas{que} viris qui castra sequntur;Lucan. l. 10. There is neither piety nor fidelity among the rabble rout of them that follow the Campe for loue of spoiles, but as Saint Augustine saith, Nocendi cupiditas, vlciscendi crudelitas,Aug cont. Faust. l. 22. c. 74. impla∣catus & implacabilis animus, feritas rebellandi, libido Dominandi, & similia sunt in arma sequentibus; violence, cruelties, rapes, prophannesse and all lewdnesse are commonly to be found a∣mong them: and therefore all good Christians will pray for the peace of Ierusalem, they shall prosper that loue it: because, Omnia pace vigent, & pacis tempore florent; All things doe flourish in the time of peace, and all men may liue without feare, and the more earnestly pray for grace. But now me thinkes, I heare men crying for peace in Christ, and warres with men; a sweet distinction, to loue God and hate thy neighbour; the deuill laughes at this, to see thee such a subtill Sophister, that, when we pray giue peace in our time, O Lord, and at euery meale we eate, we say, God send vs peace through Iesus Christ our Lord, thou canst presently distinguish that this is meant with God, but not with men; for thou canst b at peace with God, when thou makest thy sword drunke with the bloud of men; and thou canst then praise thy God best, when thou inrichest thy selfe with the spoiles of the slaughte∣red: for is not our life a warfare, and are we not all souldiers,Iob 7.1. to fight against the enemies of Iesus Christ? Yea, doth not Christ himselfe say, He came not to send peace, but the sword,1 Tim. 1.18. and to set the father against the sonne, and the daughter against the mother? Alas beloued, it is true, that we are all souldiers, and must make continuall warre with Satan, sinne, and sinfull men; but the weapons of our warfare are spirituall, and not carnall,Matth. 10.34. saith
the Apostle: I will pray yet against their wickednesse saith the Psal∣mist; and when they curse, I will blesse them, as the Apostle teacheth me,Rom. 12.20. and so I shall kindle the coales of fire vpon their head: and if this will not ouercome them, I will suffer vnto death, and in my patience I will possesse my soule, as my Sa∣uiour aduiseth me; for I see not how faith can bee wrought with the sword,Luke 21.19. or heresies consumed with faggots: Indeed when the Samaritanes would not receiue Christ into their village, his Disciples would faine command fire to come downe from Heauen and to consume them; but our Sauiour told them, They knew not of what spirit they were of;Luke 9.55. for they might haue knowne, that he could suddenly turne all the world into hell, and consume all his enemies in a moment; but hee vseth his pati∣ence and long-sufferance, to lead sinners to repentance, and he suffereth heresies and wicked men to be amongst vs, that they which be approued may be made manifest:1 Cor. 11.29. and therefore I say, that all true Christians that desire grace, will most faithfully pray for peace; and not onely with God, but also with all men; because the onely signe of louing God, is to be in loue and cha∣rity with all men. Bonum necessa∣rium extra ter∣minos necessita∣tis non est bo∣num.And yet I say not this with the Anabaptists, to condemne lawfull warres: for though health is euer to be prayed for, as in it selfe simply good; yet Phisicke oftentimes is good and necessa∣ry to recouer and to preserue our health, and so to preuent many ill diseases that otherwise would soone inuade our bo∣dies; and so may warres be iust and lawfull, yea many times most needfull, when the causes thereof doe appeare iust and vr∣ent; but I say this to commend a blessed peace, to disswade all men from loathing Manna, from growing weary of their owne happinesse, and to shew how happy are those nations, si sua norint agricolae; which haue a King of peace, Qui facit eos in gentem vnam, which laboureth for peace amongst all na∣tions. And vnder these two things, grace and peace, are compre∣hended all kindes of blessings, both spirituall and temporall: for, though some men doe make a question, whether wee ought to pray,Caietan. in Mat. 6.33. or seeke for temporall things; because our Sauiour saith, that if we seeke for Gods Kingdome,
: all these things shall be cast vnto you; yet Saint Augustine saith,Mat. 6.33. that, cum dicit primum, when he saith, seeke first the Kingdome of God, he meaneth that these things in the second place are to be sought and prayed for, illud tanquam bonum nostrum,Aug. l. 2. de ser. Domini. haec tan∣quam necessaria nostra; the Kingdome of God as our onely good, and these things as needfull and necessarie for vs: and our Sa∣uiour sheweth as much, when he teacheth vs to pray,Haud vllas por∣tabis opes Acherontis ad vndas, nudus ad infernas stulte veheris aquas. Martial. l. 4. giue vs this day our daily bread: but we must take heede, that wee be not too remisse in seeking after spirituall gits, and too eager in the pursuite after these temporall goods; for we came naked into the world, and we shall returne naked out of the same againe: and therefore, if we haue foode and rayment, we should be therewith contented. It is obserued by Roffensis,Roffen. l. 1. c. 12. that in the Manna of the Israelites there were twelue seuerall wonders. First, the children of Israel were fed with it fortie yeeres.Twelue seue∣rall wonders in the Manna. Secondly, to the godly it tasted according to euery mans desire. Thirdly, to the vngodly, it was loathsome. Fourthly, a gomer of it sufficed all stomackes. Fiftly, whether men gathered more or lesse, they had full mea∣sure, i. e. a gomer full. Sixtly, they had two gomars full the day before the Sabbath, and on other daies they had but one gomer full. Seuenthly, It fell euery day, excepting the Sabbath day. Eightly, It melted in the sunne, and was hardened in the fire. Ninthly, It was kept many yeeres in the Arke vnputri∣fied. Tenthly, being preserued but till the morrow, it putrified, ex∣cept on the Sabbath day. Eleuenthly, he that gathered least had his gomer full. Twelfthly, hee that gathered most, had but his gomer full. Out of all which obseruations, though I might note many excellent things, worth your meditation; yet for this purpose, I desire you to consider but these two points. First, he that gathered least had inough, and he that gathered most had but inough.
Deut. 17.16.17.Secondly, he that gathered no more then was sufficient plea∣sed God, and hee that was couetous in gathering more then would suffice him for that day, the Manna putrified be∣fore the next morning, and God was highly displeased with him. To teach vs, God careth to prouide suffici∣ent for euerie man.First, that God which created all men, will giue vnto euerie man, so much as he seeth sufficient for him, during his pilgri∣mage in the wildernesse of this world; and the greatest men, the richest men, shall haue (doe what they can) but sufficient, but foode and rayment, during their life; for they shall carrie no∣thing with them. Secondly, that if we be contented with what he seeth suffici∣ent for vs, wee shall doe that which is acceptable in his sight; but if we grudge, through discontent, and labour by vnlawfull meanes to gather any forbidden fruit, and to inrich our selues with the treasures of this world, we shall finde that our riches will be soone cankered,Iames 5.1. and our garments will be moth-eaten, and the wrath of God will be kindled against vs to consume vs from off the earth. That we shold take heede of couetousnesse.And therefore, though it be not onely lawfull, but also ne∣cessarie that we should pray for temporall things; yet let vs take heed and beware of couetousnesse; and desire of God, but as our Sauiour taught vs, to giue vs this day our daily bread, i. e. meere∣ly so much, as he seeth conuenient for vs, food and rayment, in that manner as he seeth good, and not as we would desire, du∣ring the whole terme of our frayle and miserable life. And in very deed, howsoeuer our nature is euer ambitious of great matters; yet the meane estate is the safest state for euerie man; not onely because, Saepius ventis agitatur ingens Horat. carm: l. 2. od. 10.Pinus, & celsae grauiore casu Decidunt turres, feriunque summos fulmina montes, To stormie tempests subiects are, the Pine and Cedar tall, The turrets high, as mountaines by, are subiect to a fall; But especially because (as the Apostle saith) they that will be rich,1 Tim. 6.9. doe fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many hurtfull and foolish lusts that drowne men in destruction and perdition.
Secondly, gratulation or thankesgiuing is the other kinde,Secondly, Thanksgiuing. and the chiefest kinde of prayer. First, because to make request concernes our selues, and sheweth our loue to our selues; but to render thankes sheweth our loue to God. Secondly, because the other is a taking, this is a giuing; and our Sauiour saith,Act. 29.35. it is a more blessed thing to giue then to receiue. Thirdly, because to make request shall cease, when wee come to the place where there is no want; but the Saints in heauen doe ascribe glory, and wisedome, and thankes,Reuel. 7.12. and ho∣nor, and power, and might vnto our God for euermore. Fourthly, because the Angels that feele no want doe alwaies praise the Lord; saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts,Esay. 6.3. Luke 20. the earth is full of thy glory; and therefore we that shall be , like vnto the Angels of God, should not alwayes speake with the tongues of men, to beg, but sometimes with the tongues of Angels, to praise the Lord for his goodnesse: for this is the only thing that God requireth, or that we can render vnto God for all the blessings that he hath bestowed vpon vs. And there bee three speciall reasons (saith Antoninus) that should moue vs vnto this duty of thankefulnesse.Antonin. p. 4. t. 5. c. 12. §. 1. Three speciall reasons to per∣swade men to be thankefull. First, the practise of all the Saints, Moses and all Israel after their passage through the red Sea, Iosua after his victory, Da∣uid after his deliuerance out of the hands of Saul, hee compo∣sed songs of thankfulnesse vnto God; and the manifold precepts of holy Scripture that doe command the same;Psal. 113.1. for Dauid bid∣deth all the seruants of the Lord to prayse the Name of the Lord; and he saith, that it becommeth well the iust to be thankefull; and the Apostle biddeth vs, in all things to giue thankes vnto God.1 Thess. 5. Secondly, the consideration of all creatures, which doe all of them teach men to be thankefull; because euery creature (saith Saint Augustine) Est quoddam beneficium homini collatum;A three-fold voice of euery creature. is a gift bestowed on man, for which man oweth thankes vn∣to God: and therefore Hugo de S. vict. saith, that euery crea∣ture speakes these three words to euery man; accipe, redde, fuge: take, restore, flee: The first is vox famulantis, the voice of a seruant bidding vs to receiue the gifts of God; the second is vox
admonentis,Hugo de S. Vict. l. 2. c 3. de Arca. the voice of a teacher, bidding vs to render thanks vnto God; the third is comminantis, the voice of a threatner, bidding vs flie the vengeance of God if wee bee not thankefull vnto God for these blessings. And so many creatures by their owne examples doe teach man to be thanke∣full; for the very dogge, saith Saint Ambrose, is so thankefull for a piece of bread, vt pro Domino mori velit; that he will die for his Master;Geminianus de exempl. l. 5. c. 56. and Geminian tels vs of a Leopard that was so thankefull vnto one that deliuered her whelpes out of a ditch, that shee accompanied him through the forrest, and deliuered him from the danger of all other sauage beasts:C. Agrippa de de vanit. scient. c. 102. and C. Agrippa saith, that a Serpent called Aspis, vsed to eate at a mans table, seeing a dogge killing his childe, did, to shew her thankeful∣nesse vnto the man, kill the dogge immediatly after: What should I say more? but as Salomon saith, vade ad Formicam, & disce sapientiam; goe to any creature, and he will teach thee to be thankefull to thy Creator. Thirdly, the manifold gifts and graces that wee haue re∣ceiued, i. e. the grace of God which bringeth saluation to all men, doth teach all men, not to receiue the grace of God in vaine, but to be truly thankefull vnto God for the same. And as these three reasons should perswade thee to be thanke∣full,Anton. p. 2 t. 3. c 9 § 1. Three things that should driue away in∣gratitude from vs. so there be three other reasons (saith Antoninus) which should dispell from vs all ingratitude. First, because as Saint Augustine and Saint Bernard say, Quod dederat Deus gratis abstulit ingratis; God will in iustice take away from the vngratefull, what hee hath freely bestowed vpon them: for so our Sauiour sheweth in the parable of the vineyard, which hee would take away from the vngratefull husband-men, and giue it vnto them that would yeelde him fruits in due season. Secondly, because ingratitude doth not only abstract from vs that good which we receiued, but doth also inflict vpon vs the euils that we feared:Ioseph. antiq. for Iosephus saith, that Hezekiah sicke∣ned vnto death, because he did not shew himselfe sufficiently thankefull for his wonderfull deliuerance out of the hands of Sennacherib: and the Apostle saith of the Gentiles, that because when they knew God,Rom. 1. they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankefull, therefore God gaue them uer to vile affections. Thirdly, because ingratitude for blessings receiued, detaineth and keepeth from vs those blessings that are promised; Nam ille non dignus est dandis, qui ingratus est de datis; for he is vn∣worthy of more, that gaue no thankes for what hee had; where∣upon Saint Bernard saith, that ingratitude is a winde that drieth vp the fountaine of Gods grace; and Antoninus saith, that by the ciuill Law, the father may depriue his sonne of his inheri∣tance if his sonne proue vnthankefull vnto him, which other∣wise hee cannot doe; and so our heauenly Father may iustly depriue vs of the kingdome of heauen if we be vnthankefull vn∣to him for his blessings: And therefore when we pray to God and make request for what wee neede, let vs not forget to bee truely thankefull for what we haue: but let vs remember that there bee three degrees of thankefulnesse; the first is recognoscere,Three degrees of thankfulnes. to acknowledge his goodnesse with our hearts; the second is laudare, to praise him for his goodnesse with our mouthes; and the third is retribuere, to expresse the same in our liues and conuersations; Nam si maledicitur Deus & negatur malis factis, tum bonis benedicitur & confitetur; for if wee deny God and curse him by our euill deedes, then certainely wee doe praise him and blesse him by our good and godly deedes, saith Saint Augustine. Secondly,Prayer in re∣spect of the forme is mani∣fold. First, Mentall. prayer in respect of the forme is said to be foure∣fold. As, First mentall, so Moses Exod 14.15. and Anna 1 Sam. 1.13. prayed vnto God when they said neuer a word; and thus an afflicted soule may pray to God in the midst of company, and when no man heareth him, God which knoweth his heart, doth heare his prayer. Secondly, Vocall, as Salomon prayed, 1 Kings 8.23.Secondly, Vo∣call. because words are to be added when we may and can vse the same. Thirdly, Suddenly, which we call eiaculations,Thirdly, sud∣den. or a lifting vp of our hearts and mindes vnto God vpon any sudden oc∣casion that presenteth it selfe vnto vs. Fourthly, Composed prayers,Fourthly, com∣posed. and made with our best wise∣domes; so Daniel prayed, and so all men should doe, if they considered into whose presence they goe to speake; for if wee
muse what to say before a mighty man, why should wee not premeditate what to say before wee come to God? and there∣fore the wise Salomon saith,Eccles. 5.2. bee not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be too hasty to vtter any thing before God. Fiftly, Concei∣ued.Fiftly, Conceiued prayers, i. e. vpon all new occasions to frame new forme of words to expresse our mindes, as the oc∣sion requireth. Sixtly, Prescri∣bed.Sixtly, Prescribed prayers▪ i. e. prayers made by others for to helpe them that are not so well able to compose prayers them∣selues: thus the 136. Psalme, that was made by Dauid, was sung after Dauids time, as we may see in 2 Chron. 20.21.29.30. Seuenthly, Priuate.Seuenthly, Priuate praier, when a houshold onely prayes together, and so a Christians house is made Gods Church, and bringeth a blessing vpon the whole house, as the presence of Gods Arke did vpon the house of Obed-Edom;Rom. 16.5. Philemon 2. 2 Sam. 6.12. or else when one man prayeth alone, according as our Sauiour biddeth, when thou prayest, i. e. when thou meanest to pray priuately, enter into thy closet, and shut the doore, and thy Father which seeth in secret will reward thee openly. And thus euery man should of∣ten pray, because thus alone wee may powre out the very se∣crets of our soules before God, which we are lothe to doe be∣fore the Congregation; and because this is the truest triall of a man, whether he feareth God or not; because hypocrites will do it to be seene of men, but the true Christian doth it to be heard of God alone. Ob.But you will say, that you can haue no conuenient time nor place thus priuately to pray vnto God. Sol.I answer, that thou canst neuer misse time and place to sin, and that priuately and secretly too; thy sins doth witnesse this: and therefore why canst thou not aswell finde time and place to pray? Eightly, Pub∣like.Eightly, Publike prayers, when we ioyne our selues with the as∣semblies of Gods people; thus the Corinthians had one place to wor∣ship in; and thus we ought all of vs to doe; because this publike praier doth more honour God, when we shew vnto the world that we are not ashamed to professe his Name; and it is more power∣full to obtaine for our selues, quia impossibile est multorum preces non exaudiri;1 Cor. 11.20. Ioel 2.16. Ion. 3.8. and therefore the Prophet biddeth vs, to gather the people together to pray to God; and so the King of Niniue did, when Ionas threatened the destruction of his people.
And besides, this publike praying is a signe of vnity, and a most effectuall meanes to stirre vp one another to serue the Lord. Ninthly, Ordinary prayer,Ninthly, Or∣dinary. when wee obserue our accusto∣med times and manner of praying; for there is no man that hath any care to serue his God, or saue his owne soule, but as for all other things, so specially for this duty of prayer he hath set and appointed times, as, some morning and euening, some at noone-day, and so forth, to make his prayers and supplica∣tions vnto almighty God. Tenthly, Extraordinary prayer,Tenthly, extra∣ordinary. both in respect of time and manner, as when an extraordinary occasion shall moue vs thereunto; as either when God bestoweth vpon vs an extra∣ordinary blessing, or threatneth some grieuous punishment, or when we would obtaine some speciall fauour, or expresse some speciall sorrow for some speciall sinnes that wee haue committed; then ought we more especially to pray or to praise the Lord: so the King of Niniue did when he heard the preaching of Ionas;Ion. 3.8. so Dauid after his fall, saith,Psal. 38.8. Vide Psal. 32. I haue roared for the very disquietnesse of my heart, and my sighing is not hid from thee; so Peter when he denied his Master, he went out and wept bitterly; so Christ a lit∣tle before his passion did more earnestly pray then euer hee did before, with loud cries and teares, saith the Apostle; and so the Saints doe often pray with sighes that cannot be expressed.Rom. 8.26. And so you see how prayer is diuersly distinguished, both in respect of the matter and forme of praying.
CHAP. II. Of the party to whom we should pray, and of the place where we ought to pray. SEcondly, For the party to whom wee should pray;To whom we ought to pray. God himselfe sheweth vnto vs, when he saith, Call vpon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will heare thee,Psal. 50.15. so shalt thou praise me: And so Christ himselfe, when he teacheth vs to say, Our Father which art in Heauen; and so doth the Holy Ghost, when hee moueth our hearts to cry Abba, Fa∣ther. And there be three vnanswerable reasons, why wee should onely pray to God. As, Ier. 17.10.First, because he onely knowes the secrets of our hearts. Ier. 23.23.Secondly, because hee onely is omniscient, i. e. such a one as knoweth all things. Luk 1.37.Thirdly, because hee onely is omnipotent, which can onely helpe vs. That we should pray to none but God. Ecclus. 49.1:And therefore concerning the blessed Virgin, we honour her name, we reuerence her memoriall, and with all generations, we call her blessed; and of the blessed Saints we say, that their remem∣brance is like the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecary; It is sweet as honey in all mouthes, and as Musicke at a banquet of wine; but to pray to any of them, wee haue neither precept from God, nor practise in the ancient Church, nor promise in Gods Word to be heard; and them∣selues neither doe desire it, nor can deserue it: and therefore to seeke to God, by the helpe of them, as to the King by his Fauo∣rites; we leaue it to be vsed in Kings Courts, and not in Gods Church,Ambros. in Rom. c. 1. v. 22. as Saint Ambrose speaketh; and we will onely pray to him, in whom we onely beleeue, i. e. to the onely God, who doth at all times heare vs and can at any time helpe vs; and if any o∣ther dare offer prayers vnto any,Origen. l. 5. con∣tra Celsum. Con. Laod. Can. 35. Nisi soli domino Deo; But one∣ly to the Lord God, as Origen speaketh; we doe with the Coun∣cell of Laodicea anathamatize all such, for praying vnto the crea∣tures,
and relinquishing their Creator, which is blessed for euermore. Thirdly, touching the place where wee are to pray; I say,Matth. 6. That we shold pray euery where. Act. 10.30. the precept of Christ, the practise of Christians, & our manifold necessities teach vs to pray in euery place, with Moses vpon the mountaine, with Elias vnder a Iuniper tree, with Cornelius in our Chambers, with Dauid in our beds, with Daniel in the Lions denne, and with all Christians in all places: yet for publique prayer, the chiefest seruice of Almighty God, I say the Church is the fittest place,Chrysost in act. 3. hom. 9. and the onely place ap∣pointed by GOD and MAN; for this is, doctrinae sedes, & domus sancta, (saith Saint Chrysostome) the schoole of Diuini∣ty, the seate of Doctrine, an holy house, a house of God, and the gate of Heauen: it is domus orationis; the house of prayer,The Church is the fittest place for pub∣lique prayers. saith our Sauiour; here were the Arke of the Couenant, the Tables of the Testimonies, the Cherubims, the Mercy seate, and all the visible signes and tokens of the presence of God; and therefore Christ himselfe frequented the Temple; the Disciples were there daily, lauding and praising God;Luke 24. and all the Christians of the Primitiue Church did vse to pray and preach in the Church;Act. 2.46. and this they ought to doe for these speciall reasons: First,Gualterus in Act. That out of many people they might gaine the more vnto Christ; for as it is good fishing in the Sea, where there are fishes innumerable, so it is good preaching where we see a good company of people; there is hope of gayning some where we see so many: and therefore it is good for all men to frequent the Church. Secondly,Lucas Lossius in Act. postill. that they might make a publique confession of their faith before the people, to shew that they were not asha∣med of the Gospell and profession of Iesus Christ; they were not like vnto Nicodemus that came to Christ by night,Iohn 3. but durst not come by day, for feare he should be seene of the people; they would not serue him in corners; but they would professe him openly, that he likewise might receiue them openly before his Father which is in Heauen. Thirdly,Bulling. that we might learne and know how vnbeseeming priuate conuenticles be, and how vnfitting it is for Christians to haue such secret meetings, (except onely in time of perse∣cution:)
and on the other side to shew how commendable, yea, and how honourable it is for vs, to ioyne our selues vnto Gods publique Congregation. Fourthly, That they may shew their charity and their vnity one with another, by their meeting in the same place, with the same affection, and for the same purpose. Ioel. 2.16.17.Fiftly, that they might the sooner and the easier obtaine their requests at the hands of God; to haue their sinnes forgiuen, the iudgements of God auerted, and their necessities relieued; for so we finde that publique prayers made in the Church of God, doth best and soonest obtaine these things in a double respect;Publique prayers will soonest ob∣taine our re∣quests in a double re∣pect. 1. Of the place. 2. Of the Company. For, First, though Enter, praesenter deus est vbi{que} potenter; God in respect of his Essence and omnipotency is present euery where; yet he is said to be more especially present in some places rather then others, in some speciall respects; as he is said to be in Hea∣uen more properly then in any other place; not in respect of his Essence, which the Heauen of heauens cannot containe; but in re∣spect of that glorious manifestation of his excellency, and that frui∣tion of his presence, which is there more cleerely shewed, then in any other place; so he is euer ready to heare v, and to grant our desires in the Church rather then in any other place; not be∣cause he cannot, or will not heare vs in all other places; but because there is a blessing annexed by his promise, to the publique place of the deuotion; not in regard of the dignity of the place, but because it pleased God to promise to heare the prayers that are made in that place, in a more speciall manner then hee doth the prayers that are made in any other place whatsoeuer, as you may see most plainely in the 1 Kings 8.1 Kings 8. Secondly, in respect of the company which doe gather them∣selues together, into this place, wee may more easily obtaine our requests in the Church, then in any other place; Nam si duo magna possunt, quanto magis plures? For if the prayer of one righte∣ous man auaileth much, or the prayer of two or three, when they are gathered together in his Name, as our Sauiour saith; then how much more shall the prayers of a multitude of Gods ser∣uants doe? And therefore we should neuer excommunicate our
selues vpon any occasion, from this publique place of deuotion; but we should euer frequent the house of God;Psal. 122.1. and weare out the thresholds of his doores: remember what the Prophet saith, I was glad when they said, come; let vs goe vp into the house of the Lord: and be ashamed of them;Chrys. hom. 2. in 2 Cor. 1. Qui toto anno vix semel in Ec∣clesia conspiciuntur; which are scarce seene in the Church once a yeare: such as are our Recusant Papists, that despise our Church, and refuse our Congregations; and our proude Professors, that thinke the Ministers more bound to come to them vnto their owne houses then themselues are to come to the house of God; and so all idle and lazy Christians, that a short little way, or a shower of raine, or some such like, the least impediment, will easily detaine them from the Church of God, and specially if there be no Sermon, they can reade, and they can pray at home. But alas, haue they such a promise to be heard at home, as in the Church?Ambros. Ser. 19. in Psal. 119. Esay 29.39. or shall they not rather be condemned for staying at home, and neglecting the Church? for such are worse then the very Iewes, because they drew neere vnto GOD with their lippes, and honoured him with their mouthes; but these giue him neither speech nor presence in his house of seruice; they may say, they pray and they beleeue; but they giue no good ex∣ample vnto others, neither doe they shew their faith by their good workes, as we are exhorted to doe: and therefore they may well feare the wrath of God to fall vpon them for this contempt; for to be out of the Church vpon the appointed day and time of prayer; (without exceeding vrgent extraordi∣nary occasion) is in my iudgement, like Saint Peters being out of the ship; or Shemies being out of Ierusalem; the one may sinke for his rashnesse, the other die for his forgetfulnesse; and so may these perish for their negligence, if the Sonne of God bee not more mercifull vnto them, then the sonne of Dauid was to Shemei; and therefore visite not your friends in the time of publique prayer, lest God should visite you with some mortall sicknesse; cast not your accounts on the Sabbaoth day, lest God should then call you to giue your last account in a fearefull iudgement; and aboue all, play not then in your houses, when you should be at prayer in the house of God, lest God should then smite you in earnest, and your play would proue to be
like the play of Abners seruants, nothing else but death and destruction:2 Sam. 2.16. but all excuses set a part, let vs all frequent the Church, and there pray to God for grace, if we would haue God to be mercifull vnto our soules. CHAP. III. Of the time when we must pray, and of the manner how wee ought to pray. FOr the time when we must pray, Saint Paul bids vs to pray continually,Colloss. 4.2. and in the Epistle to the Collossians, and so in that to the Ephesians, we are aduised to be instant in prayer, & quidem omni tempore,Ephes. 6.18. and that at all times: But this is not so to be vnderstood, as that we should doe nothing but pray (as the Heretickes called Euchytae professed to doe;) for prayer is considered two manner of wayes. First, as it respecteth the cause, which is a certaine vehement desire of charity; and so in minde and spirit it is perpetuall; Quia in fide, spe, & charitate, continuato desiderio, semper oramus; Because in Faith, Hope, and Charity, with a continuall desire, we doe alwayes pray, saith Saint Augustine; and the spirit helpeth our infirmities,Rom. 8.26. and maketh intercession for vs with gronings that cannot be expressed: and thus euery Christian man may say with the Church in the Canticles, Though I sleepe, yet mine heart waketh; or, though I doe not alwayes pray with my tongue; yet my desires doe alwayes speake vnto God. Secondly, as it respects its owne proper reason and manner to be done, and so it ought to endure so long, as without tedi∣ousnes or wearines, it may be stirred vp by the zeale and feruor of the inward desire of the heart: and therefore we say that, 1. Aliud est sermo multus 2. Aliud est diuturnus affectus. It is one thing to speake alwayes; and another thing to desire continually: and that it is one thing to pray with the voyce and
tongue; and another thing to pray in minde and spirit: Now you must vnderstand that in heart and affection we should alwayes thinke of God;We should euer pray in heart and affe∣ction. and commend our selues by our desires vnto him continually; and whether we eate or drinke, worke or play, sleepe or wake, or whatsoeuer we doe else, wee should desire all to be according to his will, for the glory of his Name; that he see∣ing our desires, may grant our requests, to giue vs grace and glo∣ry; that so both mentalis & manualis oratio (as the old Postil∣lers terme them) our outward actions and our inward affections may be as continuall prayers, crying alwayes in the eares of God: but in voyce and tongue, wee are not inioyned alwayes to pray, but to keepe our appointed times both in our priuate and in our publique prayers; and as often as occasion shall be offered, ei∣ther extraordinary afflictions befall vs, or some blessings be∣stowed on vs; we should, ouer and besides our vsuall times, be∣take our selues to our extraordinary prayers, either for our de∣liuerance from our troubles, or of thankefulnesse for our bles∣sings receiued. First, for priuate prayers, although in respect of the efficacy, and powerfull mouing of God, to obtaine our requests, or the honour that we shew vnto God, I cannot equalize it with pub∣lique prayers; yet (as I said before) this argueth more familia∣rity with God, and is the truest triall of a Christian man, and in some respects yeeldeth better fruit of honour vnto God, and more profit vnto our selues, then the publike prayers vsually doth, or conueniently can doe; because that in a priuate prayer, a man may both aske those things, and confesse those sinnes which in the face of the Church he would be loath to doe; and therefore the practise of Gods seruants, the Counsell of Gods Church, and the precept of Christ himselfe, should exceedingly moue vs to the practise of this excellent exercise;Gen. 24.63. for Isaac eue∣ry euening would walke abroad to talke with God;Dan. 6.12. Daniel would neuer misse to pray to God three times euery day; and the Prophet Dauid saith, Seauen times a day will I praise thee,Psal. 119.164. be∣cause of thy righteous iudgements; and I haue read it decreed in one of the Councels, that euery Christian man should pray vn∣to God twice at least euery day; that is, at morning when hee riseth, and at night when he goeth to bed: and especially be∣fore
he goeth to bed; for as Seneca saith most truly of men rising in the morning; Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem: Many a man rose well in the morning, and hath beene seene dead before the euening. So may I say of men going into their beds, many haue been seene going liuely into the same, and neuer seene aliue come out againe: and therefore euery man should so prepare himselfe when he goeth into his bed, as if he went into his graue; for as Menander saith; ; Sleepe is no∣thing else but a short kinde of death, and so the Poet saith, Stulte quid est somnus gelidae nisi mortis imago? Sleepe is the image of death: And so, Somnus vt est mortis, sic lectus imago sepulchri; As sleepe is the image of death; so our beds are the very pi∣ctures of our graues. And our Sauiour Christ doth most earnestly exhort euery man to priuate prayer, saying, When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut the doore, and pray vnto thy Father in priuate, and he that seeth thee in secret, will reward thee openly; and therefore eue∣ry man should appoint certaine times vnto himselfe, for his pri∣uate prayer to God. That we shold neuer misse the appointed time for pub∣lique prayers.Secondly, as we should not misse our appointed times of pri∣uate prayers; so much lesse, should we omit the inioyned times for Gods publique seruice; for God himselfe hath appointed vs a day in the weeke to serue him, and to pray vnto him: hee might haue inioyned sixe for himselfe, and haue left but one for thee; but he did in a manner make himselfe poore to inrich vs; leauing sixe for vs to do our owne affaires, and requiring but one for himselfe to be serued by vs. And our Church hath appoin∣ted an houre or two of that day, to pray & to praise our God. And yet we see many times on that day, yea, sometimes in that houre of prayers, the Tauernes full, and the Churches emp∣tie; and as those men in the Gospell had each one his seuerall excuse, for not comming vnto the supper; so haue these their exceptions for not comming vnto the Sermon; some like not the Preacher, others haue not leisure; some visit their friends,
which is a deede of Charity; others cast their accounts, which is a poynt of Pollicy, to see how the world goes with them; others wearied with cares, it may be with gaming all night be∣fore, doe rest and sleepe, which is an act of necessitie; others playing at dice, or at cards, or at bowles, or some other game, and all but for their recreation, which is a thing allowed; and they will all say, God forgiue vs, and they thinke that is enough.What a danger it is to neglect publike prai∣ers But alas beloued, what if God should dislike thee, for disliking him, whom he hath appointed to teach thee, or should visit these visiters with some mortall sicknesse, and send their soules presently to hell, because their bodies were then absent from the Church? or what if he should then call the accounters of their wealth, vn∣to an account for their deeds, or smite in his indignation those drousie sleepers with some deadly appoplexie, and those impious players with some fearefull vengeance? I trow they would vn∣fainedly wish to haue bin rather praying in the Church with the congregation, then either visiting, or counting, or sleeping, or play∣ing for gaine or recreation. But you will say, that you hope God is mercifull,Ob. and you trust in him, and therefore he will not be so seuer against you, as we are to preach vnto you. I answer, that you may trust in Gods mercie,Sol. but I know no ground that you haue for it; for they that call on him shall be sa∣ued; and the righteous shall be preserued; and hee will be mer∣cifull to them that feare him; there is no question of it:To hope for Gods mercie, and to neglect Gods seruice is vaine pre∣sumption. but then they which neglect Gods seruice, should haue any part in Gods mercies, they may thinke to haue it, but I know no pro∣mise in the world they haue for it; and therefore if we desire God to heare vs, and doe looke for the blessing of saluation, let vs goe into his Church to heare his voice, and to pray vn∣to him in this appointed time of Deuotion; and seeing the Lord requireth vs, to watch with him but one houre, to doe him seruice, yea for our owne happinesse; let vs take great heede vnto our selues, that wee robbe him not of that one houre, and so commit such fearefull wickednesse, so offensiue to God, and so dangerous to our owne soules. Fiftly, for the manner how wee ought to pray, the Apostle saith, we know not how to pray as we ought; Quia nihil tam longe
distat a nobis, quam orare vt decet; because nothing is harder for vs to doe, then to pray as we should: and therefore our Sauiour was most carefull to teach vs how to pray, both in the matter and in the manner of Prayer. Christ did set vs downe a perfect pattern of prayer.First, In matter; when you pray, say thus, Our Father which art in Heauen, &c. to make them ashamed of their impious conceits which reiect this heauenly prayer, and affect those monstrous prayers of their owne begettings, whose birth prae∣cedeth their conceptions; for in this Prayer, nothing is wan∣ting that should be desired, nothing is more then ought to be required. I might here inlarge this Treatise into a Volume, to expresse the excellencies, and to explaine the misteries, and so comment vpon this Prayer, and vpon euerie particular petition of the same, but that I see my booke swelled already into a bigger Volume then at the first I did suppose it would, and I know many famous and worthie men haue most worthily and learned∣ly left many excellent expositions vpon the same, which you may finde obuiously in euery place. Secondly, In manner hee left his owne example when hee Prayed; for in the Garden of Gethsemane. 1. He kneeled downe, in all humilitie. Delights of the Saints. 334.2. He said, Father, in the assurance of Faith. 3. He said, O my Father, to shew his zeale. 4. He prayed three times to shew his constancie. 5. Vpon the Crosse he said Father forgiue them, to shew his charitie; And, 6. Throughout all his life he was a true seruer of God, and delighted only in doing the will of God, to shew his pietie. And all this he did to teach vs to pray, first, in humilitie; secondly, in faith; thirdly, in zeale; fourthly, in constancie; fiftly, in charitie; sixtly, in pietie. That we ought to pray in all humilitie.First, In humilitie, because the prayer of him that humbleth himselfe pierceth the skies, and will not depart vntill God he∣reth it, saith the Sonne of Syrach. Now there be 2. things that should teach vs to be humbled. First, the consideration of our owne miseries, what poore and miserable creatures wee bee, wormes and no men, dust
and ashes; and therefore why art thou proud thou dust and ashes. Secondly, the consideration of Gods greatnesse, to whom thousand thousands of Angells doe administer: Varus Ger∣minus was wont to say to Caesar, Qui apud te, O Caesar, audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant, qui non audent, humanitatem tuam nesciunt; they that dare speake to thee, doe not know thy greatnesse, they that dare not, are ignorant of thy humanity and meekenesse; I may say farre better, our God is meeke and lowly in heart, that wee may speake vnto him, but hee is so great in Maiestie and Power; that one ought to speake in all humilitie, and that, not with the Gentiles, whose heathenish fashion was adorare sigillaria sua residendo, to worship their Gods as they sate, but meekely kneeling vpon our knees,That we ought to pray in faith. that we may shew both inward and outward humilitie; for, this was the practise not onely of great sinners, or men of meane estate in the world, but also of the holyest Saints,Cyprian. 2. ad Don. and of the greatest men of greatest ac∣count in the world, Kings, Princes and Monarches, Apostles, Prophets, and Priests, Moses, Aaron, Dauid, Salomon, Samuell, and Christ himselfe, the Sonne of God did often vse to fall downe, to kneele and prostrate himselfe vpon the ground when he prayed vnto his Father; & prostratus in terra orat medicus, & non inclinatur aegrotus; and shall this heauenly Physitian kneele, and we thinke much to stoope? O then beloued, seeing thousand of thousands of heauenly Angells doe administer vnto the Lord our God, consider with thy selfe saith Saint Bernard, Quanta cum humilitate debet rana paupercula odorare eum; with what great humilitie ought wee poore wormes of the earth to adore him? And therefore, as Eusebius reporteth of that most christian Constantine, that it was his vsuall custome, euery day to shut vp himself close into some secret place of his Pallace, and there vpon his bended knees and with a most submisse humble voice to make his deuout prayers and soliloquies vnto Almightie God; so let vs worship God, not onely in our inward mindes, but also outwardly with our bodies, and, as I said before, meekely kneeling vpon our knees. Secondly, In faith; Quia iuxta mensuram fidei erit mensura
impetrandi; because the more faith we haue, the more grace we shall receiue; and this is proued vnto vs, out of the exam∣ples of them that came to Christ; for, the ruler of the Synagogue beleeued, that if Christ came and layd his hands vpon his daughter shee should be healed; the woman with the bloodie fluxe beleeued that if she might but touch the hemme of his garments she should bee healed, but the Centurion said, dic ver∣bum, doe but speake the word and my seruant shall be whole; and so we finde that euery one of them receiued according as hee beleeued: and therefore euery man that prayes to God should be like the Leper in the 8. of Mat. who though hee was weake in body, yet was he strong in Faith; for in regard of the Law hee ought not to haue come, and in regard of his sicknesse hee was scarce able to come; and yet venit, hee came vnto Christ though non tam passibus corporis quam fide cordis; not so much with the feete of his body as by the faith of his heart; for had his heart bin no better then his legges,Aug. hom. 23. and his faith no better then his feete, he would neuer haue troubled himselfe to come vnto Christ: so ought euery man, to draw neere vnto God, in the assurance of faith, quia irrisio dei est, si quid illum ores quod exoraturum te non certe confidas; because it is a mocking of God,Pellic. in Math. saith Pellican, to pray vnto him, and to doubt that we shall not haue our requests; therefore Christ teacheth vs, to say Our Father, to make vs confident of obtaining, and concludeth with Amen, significare indubitanter à domino conferri quod petitur; to signifie that we shall vndoubtedly receiue what wee faithfully desire,Aug. de temp. ser. 182. saith S. Augustine: And therefore when we pray to God, let vs draw neere vnto him with a true heart, in assurance of Faith, that we shall be sure to haue, either what we desire of him, or what he seeth good for vs. Thirdly, In zeale and affection; because the Lord respecteth not much babling, sed ad cordis potius vocem quam ad corporis, aures eius apertae sunt; because he lookes rather into the desire of the heart, then he doth to the voice of the tongue, saith Saint Bernard; for he heareth the desire of the poore, when he stoppeth his cares against the prayers of the hypocrite; and therefore we finde that the outward voice without the inward attention and deuotion of the heart will auaile vs nothing at all; God
neuer regarding the voice of the tongue talking with him, when the thoughts of the heart are wandring in the world; where-as many times wee finde that an earnest seeking with the heart,That we ought to pray in zeal. hath preuailed without any words vttered by the tongue, as Moses when hee cried to God with his heart,Exod. 14.15. and yet opened not his mouth; for that is most true which Saint Gregorie saith, tanto minus quis clamat, quanto minus desiderat, & tanto fortius coelos penetrat quanto fortius desiderat; the more earnestly we desire any thing the more loudly we doe crie vnto God, and the colder is our desire the flower is our calling on him, and the harder to obtaine it of him: and therefore when wee pray to God, O let vs not be like the Iewes,Esay 29.14. who drew neere vnto him with their mouthes and their hearts were farre from him; but as the Apostle saith, that he will pray with his mouth,1 Cor. 14.15. and hee will pray with his vnderstanding, so let vs pray with our hearts and affections, and not suffer our wandring thoughts to walke about worldly vanities, when our tongues are talking about heauenly things. Fourthly, with perseuerance, because that good is done in vaine, which is not continued vnto the end;Resolution of Pilate, page 145, &c. and so I shewed at large in my Treatise of the resolution of Pilate: and therefore our zeale herein should be like the fire that the Vestall Vir∣gins kept in Rome,Leuit. 6.13. or rather like the Sacrificing fire vpon the Altar, that euer burnt, and neuer went out. Fiftly, In charitie; because God will not forgiue vs,That we should pray in cha∣ritie. nor giue vs any thing, except we forgiue one another. Sixtly, In piety, because God heareth not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doth his will, him hee heareth,Iohn 9.31. and so Saint Iohn saith, if our hearts condemne vs not,That when we pray we should clense our selues from all sinne. Gregor. in mo∣ral. then haue wee confidence towards God, and whatsoeuer we aske we receiue of him because we keepe his Commandements, and doe those things that are pleasing in his sight: et tum cor nostrum fiduciam in oratione accepit, cum sibi vitae prauitas nulla contradicit; and our hearts haue then onely confidence towards God, when there is no prauitie of our life, nor any wickednesse of our conuersation to contradict it, saith Saint Gregory: and therefore Saint Basil saith; that a prayer should be filled vp, non tam syllabis quam ope∣ribus; not so much with words as with workes; because it is the
prayer of a righteous man, as the Apostle saith, which auaileth much with God, and not the prayer of sinners, which (as the Prophet saith) shall be turned into sinne,Psal. 109.6. because hee taketh the name of God in vaine, when hee vseth the same in his mouth, and yet hateth to be reformed. And therefore, seeing the Lord himselfe saith,Esay. 1.15. that although wee should multiply our prayers vnto him, at all times, and in euery corner, yet he will not heare vs, if our hands be full of bloud, or our hearts full of malice, and enuie towards our neighbours, let vs pray euery where,1 Tim. 2.8. lifting vp pure hands, as the Apostle saith, and let vs wash our selues from all sinnes, and be readie to doe all good, if we would obtaine any thing at the hands of God. And so you see to whom, when, how, and for what, wee ought to pray. CHAP. IIII. Of the motiues that should perswade and moue euery man to pray. Psal. 27.8.NOw there be many reasons that should moue vs to pray continually, but especially the charge of God, seeke yee my face, and that in a double respect, 1. Of God. 2. Of our selues. Prayer an essentiall part of Gods wor∣ship.First, because it is an essentiall part of Gods worship, where∣by we doe most chiefely honour God, by acknowledging and professing him, first, to be euery where, secondly, to be the gi∣uer of all goodnesse, thirdly, to be full of pittie, fourthly, to be almighty, fiftly, to be bountifull, sixtly, to be faithfull and true in all his promises, and so forth. Secondly, In respect of our selues we ought to seeke vnto God by prayer, because of the necessity and vtilitie of prayer: for,Mat. 7.7. this is the onely way to obtaine good things; aske and
you shall haue, seeke and you shall finde, saith our Sauiour, and you haue not, because you aske not, saith the Apostle.Iames 4.3. Prayer how auaileable it is for men. And if we aske and pray, we shall finde the same profitable. First, to obtaine whatsoeuer we aske, more then we aske, and better then we aske; For, First, hee will giue vs whatsoeuer wee aske, as our Sauiour sheweth; Hetheto you haue asked nothing, but now,Ioh. 16.23. Whatsoeuer you aske the Father in my name, he will giue it you; For, though there be many semblances betwixt vs and Lazarus, he being a beg∣gar full of sores, and we beggers full of sinnes,Luke 16.21. and he desiring to be refreshed with the crummes of bread which fell from the rich mans boord,Prayer obtai∣neth whatsoe∣uer we aske. and wee hauing neede to be relieued with the crummes of mercy that fall from our masters Table; yet herein we are in a farre better case then Lazarus was, it was his hard hap to knocke at the doore of a cruell and a miserable Caityffe, that would at no time open vnto him, nor yet giue him any thing, the least thing, the crummes of bread that hee desired, to saue his life; but we knocke at the doore of a most kinde and mercifull Father; who saith, Aske,Matth. 7.7. and you shall haue, Seeke, and you shall find, Knocke, and it shall be opened vnto you, that you may enter into eternall life: And so we finde the Publican did but aske for mercy, and hee had it, and went home more iustified then the Pharisee,Luke 18.14. and Stephen did but knocke at the doore of Heauen, and presently the heauenly gates were opened vnto him,Act. 7.56. and he saw Iesus standing at the right hand of God: and so whosoeuer truely and humbly be∣sought Christ for any thing, we neuer reade in all the Gospell that he was denyed it. But it may be some will say I haue often called vpon God,Ob. and he heareth not; I haue asked and he granteth not; and therefore how doth hee performe his promise to giue vnto vs whatsoeuer we aske? I answere,Sol. that God sometimes makes as though he heareth not, not because hee resolueth to deny vs,Why God de∣ferreth to giue vs what we de∣sire. but he deferreth to grant our requests; either, First, to let vs further know our owne wants and miseries, which if he would helpe at the first, wee should neuer perceiue it to the full.
Secondly, to trie our faith and patience, whether we will con∣tinue constant in relying on him, though he kill vs, as Iob spea∣keth; or, if he presently relieue vs not, whether we be ready to kill our selues, as desperate Saul hath done. Thirdly, to kindle in vs the feruor of greater deuotion and desire to obtaine the things that we perceiue wee want:Et quod a nobis auidius deside∣ratur, eo de no∣bis suauius laeta∣tur. Greg in Moral. Quia desideria dilatione crescunt; because delayes doe increase desires, Et diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur; and the more earnestly we desire any thing, the more ioyous it is being obtained; and there∣fore as Laban kept Iacob a long while from his yongest daugh∣ter, whom he loued best, that his loue might be the more increa∣sed continually towards her; so God oftentimes holdeth vs for a time in suspence, that so he may the more sharpen our appe∣tite, and inflame our desire more and more to the thing that we doe desire. And this the Prophet Dauid knew, when he said, I cry vnto thee in the day time, and thou hearest not, and in the night season; and yet this is not to be thought folly in me, as the Septuagint reades it; For, though the world perhaps might deeme it a point of great simplicity, to call and cry to him that makes as though he heareth not, by regarding not our prayers, as it seemeth, by not granting our requests; yet he knew this folly of the faithfull to be farre wiser then all the wisedome of the world; because, as the same Prophet Dauid speaketh, The Lord is a sure refuge in due time of trouble;God knoweth best when to relieue vs. he is a sure refuge in trou∣ble, but especially in due time of trouble; because, as we know our troubles, so the Lord knowes the due time to helpe vs out of our troubles, when we our selues doe not well know the same. And therefore if we call vpon God, and God maketh as though he heareth not, yet let vs not say; Deus meus quare me dereliquisti? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? but let vs still call and cry to God, and say vnto our soules Quare dereliquisti deum? Why hast thou forsaken God, and giuen ouer to pray vnto him, when it is an infallible rule, that nunquam de∣us deserit hominem, quovs{que} homo deserat deum; that God neuer denies to heare man, vntill man giues ouer and ceaseth to pray to God. Or else, I answere as Saint Iames saith, that you aske and receiue not,
because you aske amisse, Aut propter verbum, aut non propter ver∣bum; either not for Christ his sake, or not according to the word of Christ, not as I shewed thee before, in humility,Why God de∣nieth what we aske. in faith, in charitie, in piety; but, as the Church in the Canticles sought him, whom her soule loued, and found him not, because she sought him in her bed, that is carelesly and negligently; shee sought him where he was not; Christ being not so easily found, especially vpon beds of Downe, but rather in the Temple where his Father found him, or vpon the Crosse where the thiefe did finde him, or in the bramble bush where Moses saw him; so many men doe seeke many times and finde not, be∣cause they seeke amisse, it may be for worldly things, where as they should first seeke for the Kingdome of Heauen, as our Sauiour teacheth, and then all other things should be giuen vnto them; and they knocke, and it is not opened vnto them, because they knock amisse, it may be too late, when the doore of grace and of mercy is shut; for otherwise it is most certaine, that neuer man asked any thing at the hands of God, but hee had his request granted, vnlesse he fainted and grew weary of asking, because the words of Christ must hold infallible, Whatsoeuer you aske the Father in my Name, he will giue it you. Yea, Secondly, if we pray vnto him, he will giue vs more then we aske; for the Centurion besought Christ onely to speake a word, that his seruant might be whole; but he had not onely the word wherby his seruant was healed, but also many other words to his neuer-dying-praise, for that faith wherwith he beleeued, & wher∣by he should be saued; and the thiefe vpon the Crosse desired onely to be remembred when Christ came vnto his Kingdome;That God gi∣ueth more then we pray for. but Christ granted him that day to be with him in Paradise; and those blinde men which besought Christ onely to restore their naturall sight, whereby they might see the light of the Sunne, had also the spirituall eyes of their soules opened, whereby they did beleeue in the Sonne of God; and so that man in the Gos∣pell, whereby we may vnderstand euery sinfull man, desired but 3. loaues only to entertain his guest, but his friend, that is, God,Luke 11.8. did giue him as many as he needed; to shew vnto vs, that Christ is such a bountifull Master, that if we pray vnto him, he will not onely giue vs what meane things we aske, but also many more
excellent heauenly things, which hee knoweth to bee needfull for vs, Yea, Thirdly, he doth not onely giue vs what we aske, and more then we aske, but he giueth vs also farre better things then wee aske;Act. 3.5. for as Saint Peter gaue the lame Creeple the health of his body, when he desired but a little almes to releeue his want; So God giueth vs the health of our soules,That God gi∣ueth vs better things then we desire. when we desire the wealth of the world; & he inricheth vs with Heauenly treasures, when we craue worldly vanities; because it is the property of God, saith Saint Bernard, Dare prius quod potius; to giue vs first, what is best for vs: And therefore whensoeuer we pray to God for any thing, we may be sure our prayer will neuer bee fruitlesse, but will certainly bring vs, either those things that we aske, or things far better for vs then the things we aske; for God seeth that we desire many times such things, as wee our selues afterwards should finde they had beene hurtfull to vs,We know not what is good for our selues. if we had obtained them; euen as many times we giue great thankes vnto God that many things were denyed vnto vs, which we desi∣red of him: and therfore God doth well, and he doth good vnto vs, in denying what we desire, when we desire things hurtfull for our selues. And yet, because our prayers shall neuer returne emptie away from God,Quid prosit vel obsit, nouit me∣dicus non aegro∣tus. Christ giueth vs those things that are healthfull for vs when we aske for things hurtfull, if we aske them as we ought to doe; for a man may pray rightly, and yet for things hurtfull; because we know not what is good for our selues: And there∣fore Saint Augustine saith excellently well, Quod multis propiti∣us deus non tribuit quod volunt vt tribuat quod vtile est; that God denieth many times his Saints, with whom he is well pleased, what they would haue, that he may bestow vpon them, what they should haue;Aag. serm. 54. Quia audit deus suos ad necessitatem non ad voluntatem; Because God heareth his seruants to giue them what they neede, and not what they craue. God sheweth his loue many times in deny∣ing vs.And so it is apparant, that as quaedam concedit iratus, God granteth some things vnto the wicked, when he is most angry with them, as he did the Quailes vnto the Israelites, of whom the Psalmist saith, that while the meat was in their mouth, the wrath of the Lord came vpon them, and consumed the wealthiest in Israel,
Ita quaedam negat propitius; so he denyeth many things to whom he loueth, as he denied Elias when he desired to die,1. Reg. 13.4. and the sonnes of Zebedee when they desired to sit,Mark 10.35. the one on his right hand, and the other on his left hand in his Kingdome, that is, in a temporall Monarchie which they dreamed of: And hee doth this, vt meliora tribuat, that he may bestow farre better things vpon them then they desired for themselues; for so we finde he denied Elias to die so meanely; that hee might carrie him vp in a fierie Chariot most gloriously, and so hee denied the sonnes of Zebedee that temporall honour which they desired, that they might both sit on his right hand in eternall fe∣licitie. Secondly,Many other excellent fruits of prayer. as prayer is most profitable to obtaine what is de∣sired, so it is most auaileable to preuent iudgements threatned against vs, as we may see in the examples of the Niniuites, and so likewise to remoue iudgements inflicted on vs,Ier. 26.19. as we may see in Iames 5.18. and in Reg. 8.53. Thirdly, prayer is most auaileable to preserue and to nou∣rish all spirituall graces;Luke 23.32. Colloss. 1.9. for by this Saint Peters Faith was pre∣serued, and the Collossians knowledge was increased, as the Apo∣stle sheweth. Fourthly, prayer is the chiefest meanes to weaken sinne in vs, and to procure our sinnes remitted vnto vs, as our Sauiour himselfe sheweth, when he teacheth vs to pray vnto God, to forgiue vs our trespasses as wee forgiue them that trespasse against vs. Fiftly, prayer Sanctifieth the creatures for our vse, and ma∣keth them to become vsefull and healthfull,1. Tim. 4.5. which otherwise might proue pernitious and hurtfull vnto vs. Sixtly, prayer ouercommeth all creatures; it diuided the red sea, it stopped the heauens, it opened the same againe,Prayer ouer∣commeth all things. it brought Ionas from the Whales bellie, Daniel from the Lions den, and Saint Peter from the dungeon: it ouercomes all men, quia plus valet vnus sanctus orando quam innumeri peccatores praeliando; one man praying will auaile more then many men figh∣ting saith the Glosse, vpon the prayer of Moses, when Iosuah fought with Amalech; and it ouercomes the verie diuels, which goe not out, but by prayer and fasting; for, as Christ made a scourge of smalle cords to driue the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple; so the prayers of a christian, consisting of many petitions, is like that scourge of small cords, able to driue out all diuells, all sins from the soule of a christian, which is the Temple of the holy Ghost. Gen. 32.26. Prayer only preuaileth with God.Seuenthly, prayer preuaileth against God himselfe; for I pray thee let me goe, saith God vnto Iacob, for the day approa∣cheth; not so saith Iacob, I will not let thee goe except thou blesse me: O Iacob wilt not thou let God go? no saith he, except he blesse me: I but will God take this well at thy hands, that thou wilt not let him goe? O yes; for he saith, my delight is to be with the sonnes of men; and so Iacob preuailed with God, and his name was called Israell: And I would to God that wee would also wrastle with God by prayer, as neuer to let him go vntill he blesse vs, for then we shall be sure hee will not goe at all; because the blessed shall be called to him, come ye blessed, and the cursed onely shall be taken away from the presence of the Lord. But, Moses preuailed further; for Iacob prayed for himselfe, Moses for others; Iacob for a friend of God, that ser∣ued him, Moses for the enemies of God, that dishonored him, by making a Calfe in Horeb, and worshipping the molten image; and therefore Iacob preuailed when God was well-plea∣sed,Prayer appea∣seth the wrath of God. Exod 32.10. but Moses preuailed when God was angrie, and his wrath did burne like fire, and he said in the fiercenesse of his wrath, suffer me now that I may destroy them all at once; yet Moses would not, but he fell vpon his face and prayed, and so standing in the gappe, he preuailed with God, and turned away his wrathfull indignation from them: so prayer ouercomes him at all times, when he is pleased, when he is angrie; for our prayer is like a cord wherewith we binde the hands of God, that when hee is readie to smite vs for our sinnes, he is fast bound by our prayers that he cannot punish vs: and therefore when the Iewes des∣pised and neglected this dutie of prayer, and the Lord powred out his wrath vpon them for their wickednesse, the Prophet Esay complaineth, that there was none that called vpon God, that rose vp to take hold vpon him, i. e. by calling vpon his name, to binde his hands with the cord of prayer. O powerfull prayer, that art able to binde, to binde the hands of God, with bands more indissoluble then those seuen greene
withs that bound the hands of Sampson!Iudg. 16.8, 9. what shall I say of thee? I might say as much, as Saint Paul saith of faith.Heb. 11. By prayer, the families of Seth did serue the Lord, for then they be∣gan to call vpon the name of the Lord, saith the Text; by prayer, Abraham obtained,Gen. 4.26. that if ten righteous men should be found in fiue Cities, the wicked should bee all spared for those tenne mens sake; by prayer, Moses deuided the red sea; by prayer, Iosua stayed the course of the heauenly Orbes; by prayer, Phi∣nees stayed the wrath of God, that it consumed not all the Israe∣lites; for when Phinees stood vp and prayed, then the plague cea∣sed saith the Psalmist; by prayer, Ionas ouercame the great Leuiathan, and made him, which otherwise would haue bin a grieuous gulfe to destroy him, when he had swallowed him vp quick, to become as a shippe to saue him, & to bring him to the hauen where he would be; and what shall I say more? for the time would be too short for me to tel of Dauid, Samuell and the Prophets, of the Apostles & Martyrs, and all the Saints of God, who through prayer subdued their enemies, wrought wonders, obtained the promises, stopped the mouthes of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, of weake were made strong, waxed valiant in battell, turned to flight the armies of the aliens, and in the end, all of them whom the world was not worthie of, through prayer, obtained eternall life; for, whosoeuer calleth vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued, and these all called vpon his name, and he heard them. And besides all this,Lactant. de vero cultu. l. 6. c. 25. f. 399. it is worth the obseruing that (as Lac∣tantius doth most truely say) summus colendi dei ritus est, ex ore iusti hominis ad Deum directa laudatio; the chiefest part of Gods worship is an humble faithfull prayer, and praises out of the mouth of a righteous man: and therefore Saint Paul setting downe the whole armour of a Christian, putteth prayer as the chiefest part of all: and so Zanchius saith, that this is;Zanch. in c. 6. ep. ad Ephes. optimum genus, ideoque vltimò ab Apostolo, armaturae explicatum; the best part of all our christian weapons, and therefore last expressed by the Apostle; because that vnlesse Gods help be craued by prayer, reliqua arma parum prosunt;Prayer the chiefest part of Gods ser∣uice. all the other armour will auaile vs nothing; and therefore though wee be wholy armed with all the rest of Gods armour, yet ought we most humbly
to acknowledge our owne imbecilitie, and most earnestly to sue for the helpe and assistance of God by harty prayer. Ob.But here perhaps some will say, it cannot be more excellent then faith, because the Apostle saith, aboue all, take the shield of Faith. Sol.I answer, that this armour of a Christian, is of two kindes; 1. Ad defendendum, to defend our selues. The armour of a Christian of two kindes.1. Ad feriendum, to smite our foes. Of the first kinde the Apostle nameth these fiue, First, Truth; secondly, Righteousnes; thirdly, readinesse to imbrace the Gospell of Christ; fourthly, Faith; Fiftly, Hope. And of these indeed, Faith and Hope are the chiefest; but they are not more excellent then the other of the other kinde; for then they should be more excellent then the Word of God, which is the sword of the spirit: and therefore I say that pray∣er is armatura armaturae, that armour which preserueth all our armour vnbattered and vnbroken; for though Faith and Hope and the other graces be most excellent, yea of inualuable and vnconceiueable worth, yet seeing there is a difference betwixt Gods graces, and that as one Starre differeth from another in glo∣rie, so one grace may differ from another in excellencie, both in regard of the qualitie and efficacie of the same, and so bring a greater waight of glorie to the receiuers and well vsers of the same,That the gift of prayer is the chiefest of all Gods graces I say of prayer, as Salomon saith of the vertuous woman, that this surmounteth them all; for, it is a rule in logick, the end is euer better then the meanes that bring vs to the end, but preaching, hearing, vnderstanding and beleeuing are media, the meanes whereby we are brought to pray; and therefore the Apostle taketh this for his Text, and maketh it to be the basis and ground-worke of all his subsequent discourse, he that calleth vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued; but then saith he,Ioel. 2.32. how, or by what meanes shal this be done? How shall they call vpon him in whom they haue not beleeued?Rom. 10.14. How shall they beleeue in him of whom they haue not heard? How shall they heare without a Preacher? and so he maketh preaching, hearing, and belee∣uing, to be the meanes whereby wee come to call vpon the name of the Lord, that we may be saued: And it is a rule in
all sciences that the practice is better then the theorie of any thing: and therefore prayer which is the practice of all pietie, must be better then all other theoricall graces whatsoeuer: And it is an axime of our Sauiour Christ, that beatius est dare quam accipere; it is a more blessed thing to giue then to receiue, and therefore prayer, which is the onely grace whereby wee render vnto God that praise and glorie which is due vnto his name, must needs be more excellent then all the other graces, whereby we receiue blessings from god. And is prayer so superexcellent a grace, super alias caput ex∣tulit omnes; that it surpasseth all other graces? then surely I cannot choose but commend that great deuotion of our aun∣cestors and fore-fathers, that were so zealous, so instant, and so constant in continuall praying: Indeede I bewaile their igno∣rance and their blindnesse, that knew not well for what, or to whom, or how to pray: but I know God will not breake the brui∣sed reed, and the smoking flaxe he will not quench; and therefore,How our fore∣fathers excee∣ded vs in de∣uotion. though their prayers wanted the true light of knowledge, which no doubt would haue made them more acceptable vnto God & more comfortable to themselues, yet I doe assure my self God despised not the smoake of their deuotion, nor reiected the desire of their hearts; yea seeing that (as Saint Augustine saith,) melior est fidelis ignorantia quam temeraria scientia; an humble zealous ig∣norance, is better then a rash proud and disdaineful knowledge, I doubt not but they pleased God farre better with their deuout ignorant praying, then many of vs doe with our negligent and neuer praying knowledge; for they ascended to the highest steppe of all deuotion and pietie, which is prayer, and many of vs neuer goe beyond the lowest steppe, which is hearing; they did what was commanded, and knew it not, many of vs know it and doe it not; they spent most of their time in praying, and most of vs spend our time in hearing; and so placing all religion, almost in hearing, wee are like those foolish women, which are euer learning and neuer able to come to the knowledge, nor willing to come to the practise, of the truth. But, though the hearing of Gods Word bee the chiefest out∣ward ordinarie meanes, to beget Faith and Hope and all other graces in the hearts of Gods elect, and therefore
must not by any meanes be neglected if we would bee saued, yet seeing that (as the Apostle saith) not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law shall bee iustified, and that prayer is the chiefest part of Gods seruice, yea, and that it is, First, the onely request that Christ made vnto his Church, when he tooke his last farewell of her on earth, saying, O let me heare thy voice,Cantic. vlt. the companions hearken to thy voice, O cause me to heare it: that is, by thy continuall praiers and supplications vnto me; Secondly, the greatest comfort of a Christian man; for we are all so full of miseries while we liue in this wretched world, that there is no man liuing, but if hee could haue knowne be∣fore he was borne what miseries must befall him in this life, he would haue heartily prayed that the wombe of his birth might be the tombe of his buriall: & yet in all the calamities that man must vndergoe, he can haue no greater comfort then he hath by praying to God; for by this alone wee walke with Angels, we talke with God, we relate our griefe, wee bewaile our sor∣rowes, and being alone, we haue the best and sweetest conference in the world; O then beloued brethren, as Nazianzen saith of Gorgonia, that shee was giuen to pray, Ʋt genua terra contreuerint; that her knees seemed alwayes to stoope and grow to the ground, by reason of her continuall kneeling in hearty prayers; and as Eusebius saith of Iames the brother of the Lord, that his knees by reason of his continuall kneeling in prayers, became as hard Camels knees, i. e. benummed and bereaued of all sense and feeling: so let vs vse continually to pray; and if wee would ob∣taine any thing at the hands of God, or if we would ouercome the malice of men, let vs pray, and pray continually saith the Apostle; or if wee be so full that wee want nothing, yet wee haue need to pray; for Christ prayed not only in deserto, which was a place of distresse,That wee haue as great neede to pray in pro∣sperity as in aduersity. Iohn 18.2. Iohn 6. but also in horto, in the garden which was a place of pleasure, not only in his agony, but also in his digni∣ty, when he should be made a King; to teach vs that we haue as much need to pray in prosperity, as in aduersity; to pray for help, that we enter not into temptation, and to pray for grace that we may rightly vse the grace of God: and therefore in all estates,
and at all times pray; and in your prayers, pray for vs. And so I come to the last part, which is the large extent of prayer. PART. IIII. CHAP. I. For whom we ought to pray, generally for all men, more espe∣cially for the Magistrates, and most especially for the Ministers of Gods word. SEcondly, Hauing heard of the first part of the Apostles request, the act that you should doe, pray; we are now to consider of the second part, which is the extention, for whom you should pray, for vs, pray for vs. You must therefore pray first for your selues; it is of necessity included, for nulli sapit, qui sibi non sapit; it is certaine, that hee which seldome prayeth for himselfe, will neuer pray for others: nei∣ther is it enough for vs to pray for our selues, but we must pray one for another; for though the wicked, fibi nati, sibi vinunt, sibi damnati; are good for nothing; and therefore will pray nei∣ther for themselues, nor others; yet the godly will pray for them∣selues, and for all others. First, Propter vniuersalem vocationem;That we ought to pray for all men. because we outwardly call all men, and preach to all men, euery one that thirsteth, come to the waters, and therefore we must pray for all men. Secondly, Propter efficaciam gratiae, because of the vnspeake∣able efficacy of this grace of prayer, which is able to obtaine of God, of these stones and stony hearted sinners, to raise vp children vnto Abraham; for if the words of men be so power∣full to moue the affection, as that the Poet saith, —quid facundia posset, Repatuit, fortis{que} viri tulit arma disertus.
then how much more powerfull is the word of God, which is the power of God vnto saluation to all that beleeue,Christus vim verbis, vim gē∣mis vim dedit herbis, Verbis maiorem, gemmis herbis{que} minorem. and is able to diuide the soule and the spirit? and if the word preached bee so powerfull, how much more powerfull is the word of prayer? and therefore seeing we preach to all, why should we not pray for all? Thirdly, Propter nostram ignorantiam, because God onely knoweth who are his, and we are none of his priuie Counsellers, we know not whose names are written in the booke of life; nor when God will call any man vnto his mercy; whether at the sixt houre, or at the ninth houre, or at the last houre; for as hee that now goeth on his way weeping, may returne with ioy, carrying his sheaues with him, so he that now goeth on in sinne, may with the prodigall childe, returne and finde grace: and we daily see, that one man, de quo desperamus conuertitur, & fit optimus, & alter de quo multum praesumseramus, deficit & fit pessimus; of whom we despaired, is conuerted to be a good man, as Saul, to be a Saint Paul, and another of whom we conceiued great hope, hath relapsed and became most wicked, as Iudas, Magus, and others, so that nec timor noster certus est, nec amor; nei∣ther our hope nor feare is sure; and therefore seeing we know not who are Gods people, wee are to hope well of all people, and therefore to pray for all; saying, alwayes with our Liturgy, That it may please thee to haue mercy vpon all men. More particularly the Apostle willeth vs, that first of all prai∣ers and supplications should be made for Kings and all in authority, because that not onely mans saluation, and the knowledge of the truth, but also the quietnesse of kingdomes, and whatsoeuer else tendeth to the benefit of the publike weale, commeth by the power of prayer, as Saint Augustine saith; their place is high, their charge is great, and to bee a King is to bee a man full of cares, —cui mixta dolori Gaudia nulla ferunt spes semper mixta timore. Their sollicitous thoughts can haue but little ioy, and that ioy is alwaies mixt with cares; yea, their very crownes containeth no∣thing else but weighty affaires, the seruice of God, the safety
of men, and so the whole charge both of Church and Com∣mon-wealth, — Quantum sit onus regnare probarunt. And this sheweth how hard a thing it is to gouerne; and therefore it is our duties most heartily to pray for our Kings, but not peremptorily to pry into the authorities or prerogatiues of our Kings, for tolle regalia, tolle regem, if you take away the royalties, you leaue no King; for Christ was a King, sed quia rex sine regno; but because he seemed without his royalties, they would haue no King but Caesar; and therefore I say, that whosoeuer limiteth the prerogatiues of an absolute King, hee may leaue him to bee a man, but he scarce leaues him to bee a King; aske Abishag, and aske the kingdome saith Salomon,1 Kings 2.22. take the one and leaue no other; but as the Iesuiticall Priests would haue all Kings to be ruled by their Popes, so our purita∣nicall, Anabaptisticall people, would rule all Kings themselues by the rules of their clanculary Parliaments, and Parliamentall conuenticles; and to that end they are euer limiting their au∣thorities, and euer nibling at the prerogatiues of free Monarchs; still affecting that gouernment wherin themselues would haue a large interest: But the Diuine verity teacheth otherwise, in the 1 Sam. 8. where the extent of the authority of free Mo∣narchs is fully expressed,1 Sam. 8. as I could if I had time easily proue it; and Iustinian saith, Beneplacitum regis, vigorem legis habet; the Kings good will hath the vigor and strength of a Law, i. e. where there is no law to the contrary, and Budaeus saith as much in the pandects. But then you will say,Ob. this is to make way for tyranny and not to maintaine their true authority. I answere, their authority or what they may doe,Sol. is one thing, and their duty or what they ought to doe, is another thing; the one they may exercise ouer men, and none can controll them, and for the other, if they doe ill they must render an account though they be Kings, but to God not to men; for tibi soli peccaui, against God onely haue they sin∣ned, as the Prophet Dauid saith; and therefore when we speake of the authority or prerogatiues of Kings, we doe it not to make them bold to doe what they list without feare, for with God
there is no respect of persons, but if Coniah though hee were as the signet on Gods right hand offend, he will cut him off; & therefore be wise, O ye Kings, and see what you doe, aswell as what you may doe; but we speake this to keepe the people in obedience, that are alwaies naturally inclined to kicke against authority, that they should euer obey and suffer, and neuer resist whatso∣euer betides them; for you must euer note a difference betwixt those actions of Kings and Princes, which are sine offensa, vn∣blameable, and those which ought to be sine resistentia, vnre∣sistable; the first are those which are according to Gods Law; the second are those which are not onely good, for which they shall be rewarded, but also those that are euill, according to their owne will, and contrary to the will of God, for which they shall be punished; for we finde by the example of Dauid towards Saul, and by the precept of Saint Paul vnto all Christians, that whatsoeuer they doe wee may not resist, wee may not touch Gods annointed, neither with hand, word, nor thought; and they shall finde it to their cost, that for all those things they doe amisse, they shall render a strict account to God; for though I say that we are to suffer all things, sine re∣sistentia, without resistance; yet I say not that wee must doe it, sine querela, without complaint to God, to be relieued; and you know what he saith, I will heare their cry and will helpe them: and I hold this to bee the rule of true Christian obedience: And therefore we should leaue to pry into those things which are forbidden, and giue our selues to pray for our Kings, which is commanded; for that is most pleasing to God, not displeasing vnto them, necessary for the good, and profitable vnto vs all; for quo sublimior gloria est, eo maior & cura est; the more emi∣nent in place, the more need of grace: and therefore Kings should not despise the prayers of the poorest, nor the poorest neglect to pray for their Kings; for though this is the best good that they can doe, to pray for them, yet this good they can doe vnto the best; and wee finde that Hezekias the great and good King of Iuda,2 Reg. 19.4. desired the prayers of Esayas; Daniel, that beloued Prophet of God, desired the prayers of Shadrach, Mesaach,Dan. 2.18. and Abednego; and God commanded Iobs friends to desire the prayers of Iob;Iob 42.8. and so Saint Paul the great Apostle
of Iesus Christ, though he abounded in reuelations and excee∣ded in the graces of Gods spirit,2 Reg. 19.4. yet doth hee in many places desire the prayers of all: and therefore let vs pray for our Kings, and all such as are in authoritie,Dan. 2.18. euen for the good of our selues;Iob 42.8. because God many times sends euill Kings vnto wicked people, and sets an vngodly man to rule ouer them, as a iust punishment of their iniquitie; yea sometimes hee makes good Kings to become burthensome vnto a land, as hee did Dauid when hee numbered Israel, for the sinnes and wickednesse of them that dwell therein; and on the other side, hee makes euill men good Kings and gouernours, for the loue that hee beareth vnto all faithfull people; or, if still they continue euill, hee will soone take them off, if the people truly and faithfully serue him, and pray vnto him for their Kings continually as they ought to doe; because God hath promised to heare the prayers of the faithfull, and to graunt vnto them their requests. And as we are inioyned to pray for our Magistrates, so here the Apostle sheweth that we ought also to pray for our Ministers; for himselfe and the rest of the Apostles, and all other Preachers of Gods Word, pray for vs; and this is, praeceptum breue, leue, & vtile; a short request, but one word, pray, you cannot forget it; and it is easie, for the poore may doe it as well as the rich; and as the distich saith, Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque, Aeque neglectum pueris, senibusque nocebit; It is as good for you that doe it, as it is for vs for whom you doe it; and the neglecting of it will preiudice you, as much as vs: and therefore pray for vs.Heb. 13. And I find the Apostle reque∣steth this diuers times, therefore no doubt but for diuers reasons. First, you should pray for vs, because we pray for you, yea,Three speciall reasons to moue vs to pray for our Ministers. oftentimes when you doe not, and sometimes when you can∣not pray for your selues, as Pharaoh sheweth, when hee sent to Moses and Aaron that they should pray for him; and it is pec∣catum non orandi; a sinne of not praying in vs,Exod. 9.28. when we neglect it, as Samuel sheweth, God forbid that I should cease to pray for you, and so sinne against God: and therefore, lege talionis,1 Sam. 13.23. you are bound to pray for vs. Secondly, you should pray for vs for the good of your selues;
for weake Ministers are the destruction of the people: Iereboam made all Israell to sin, because he made Priests of the meanest of the people; for if they fall and perish, many perish; because as Saint Peter saith,2 Pet. 2.12. many shall follow their damnable waies. And if you looke vpon all sorts of men, you shall finde that they should be the most absolute of all men in all good parts; for euery eye is vpon them, therefore the Law requireth they should be men without blemish, and euery man is to be taught by them, and therefore the Priests lippes should preserue knowledge. Or if you consider all degrees of men, they haue all neede of them, and they are necessarie vnto all, to correct the bad, to confirme the good, to teach the people, and to assist the princes; for who should speake in Sermons, Parliaments, or any other Assemblies, to preserue pietie, to increase charitie, and to iustifie the rights of Princes, and to vindicate the same against the gaine-saying of Corah, but we that are to teach euery soule to feare God, to loue their neighbours, and to be subiect vnto the higher powers? And yet wee see regale Sacerdotium that royall Priest-hood, which should be vpheld by Kings to be assistants vnto Kings, to go∣uerne Gods people in all piety and honestie, to become almost vulgare Sacerdotium, a laicke presbyterie of a strange concreti∣on, or a popular Priest-hood full of all prying curiositie & con∣tradiction: but I hope this will serue to shew how behouefull it is, to haue wise, discreet, and faithfull Ministers, euen for the good of all the people; for like Priests, like people: if we be ill, we make many ill; because, as the people of themselues haue not any grace to doe good, they know not how to doe it vnlesse we teach them, so they haue not much wit (though it be al∣waies propense to euill) to doe many euils; quia non nisi ex magnis ingenijs magni errores; because strange plots can neuer proceede from meane wits; but you see what cruell combusti∣ons the bloodie wittie Iesuites doe make in all the world, to erect their Popish Monarchie, and what foolish factions our own gid∣die wittie Puritan-Priests haue made amongst our selues to bring all things to an anarchie: and therefore for your owne sake, you should pray for vs that are your teachers, that wee may be such as may be good for you; to teach you in all ho∣nestie and godlinesse.
Thirdly, you should pray for vs, that by your prayers wee may be helped to discharge that great charge, which is laid vpon vs; for we are bound to beare one anothers burthen, and to helpe one another in all necessities; But of all the men in the world, we are in the strangest state, and therefore haue most need of all assistance; For, 1. Our worke is the greatest, which we are to doe. 2. Our danger is greatest, whatsoeuer we doe. First, our worke is not collectio pecuniarum,The great charge of preachers. a trading in the world to get wealth, or a hunting after our owne preferment; but it is cura animarum, a charge of soules, the greatest charge in the world: a burthen saith Moses, yea such a burthen, Angeli∣cis humeris formidandum; as would make Angels shoulders to shrinke saith Erasmus: and therefore Saint Paul cries out, ? Who is sufficient for these things? for wee are not onely to Preach in season and out of season, that is, volentibus et nolentibus; to them that are willing, and to them that are vn∣willing, as Saint Augustine expounds it; because that to the wil∣ling, it comes in season, whensoeuer it comes; and to the vn∣willing it comes out of season, come when it will; but we are al∣so to be an example of good life vnto all others, and to liue like Gregorie Nazianzen, qui fecit ea quae docuit,Ruff. in vita Nazian. & seipsum minime condemnauit contraria agendo quam docebat; which did the things that he taught,How vprightly we should liue. and did not condemne himselfe by liuing contrarie to his teaching: The life of Preachers should be a most vpright and a sincere life, without all offence; quia inter seculares nugae nugae, in ore sacerdotis sunt blasphemiae;Bernard. l. 2. de considerat ad Eugen. because those things which are but trifles or small sinnes among se∣cular men, they are great, and horrible, vntolerable sins among the Preachers of Gods Word; nam ibi criminosior culpa est, vbi honestior status; for the more honourable is our calling, the more odious is our offending; and the Lord saith, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me: and therefore what care and what diligence ought we to haue to looke to our selues, vt nihil faedi∣tatis in nobis appareat;Leuit. 10. that we might abstaine from all appearance of euill, and fashon not our selues in any thing like vnto the courses of this present world.
In what a dan∣gerous state the Ministers doe liue.Secondly, as our taske is great which we are to doe, (thus vprightly to liue, & most faithfully to preach the Word of God) so our danger is great whatsoeuer we doe; for wee are betwixt the barke and the tree, betwixt the fire and the water, betwixt the anger of God and the malice of the diuell, and as the Poet saith, incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare charib dim, we shall fall into one, doe what we can; For, The fearefull state of those Ministers that neglect their dutie.First, If we neglect our duties, either in not preaching, or in ill-liuing, the bloud of the people, besides liuing in our sinnes, shall be required at our hands: and therefore, woe is mee if I preach not the Gospell, saith the Apostle; & vae miseris qui sunt catholici praedicando, & heretici operando, vae qui tenent in memoria quae non agunt in vita; and woe to those miserable men which preach well, but liue ill, which haue Christ in their Sermons, but not in their actions, which know and teach others what to doe, but will not doe it themselues; woe, woe, to those miserable men, saith Saint Bernard; Quia satius est sustinere paenam Caiphae, Pilati & Herodis, quam paenam sacerdotis indigne Ministrantis; because it were better to suffer the punishment of Caiphas, Pilate and He∣rod, then the punishment that is due to an vnworthie Minister. Secondly, If we truely preach the Word of God, and liue as vprightly as the Saints of God, yet wee shall be sure neuer to escape the censures of men, nor the malice of the diuell; for though in olde time there were counted but seauen wise men (that had that name) among the Greekes, yet now there are not, (in their owne iudgements) so many fooles amongst vs; and therefore, et garrula anus et delirus senex, as Saint Hierome saith to Paulinus; Coblers and Tinkers in their shoppes will iudge what we shall say in our Pulpits: But if this were all, we could well indure it, but it is not; for as wee seeke to destroy the Kingdome of darknesse, so doth the Prince of darknesse seeke by all meanes to destroy vs; and therefore he shooteth all his poysoned darts at vs, he stirreth vp the hearts of wicked men to trample vs vnder feete,Tincta licambaeo sanguine tela dabit. Ouidius in Ibin. as the mire in the streete, to doe vs all the mischiefe that lieth in them, and to deale with vs as their Fathers vsed the Prophets, and as wee read of them in the second of Wisdome 10, &c. saying, come, Let vs lie in waite for the righteous, let vs see if their words be true, let vs examine them
with despitefulnesse and torture, that we may know their meekenesse, and proue their patience; for they be not for our turne,Wisd. 2.10.12. we haue no benefit by them, but they vpbraid vs with our offending of the Law, and obiect to our infamie the transgressing of our education, yea, they reproue our thoughts, and their life is not like other men, but their waies are of another fashion, esteeming vs as counterfeits, and abstai∣ning from our waies as from filthinesse, and therefore, seeing they are so grieuous vnto vs, euen to behold, let vs see if their words bee true, and let vs ioyne our selues against them; as against our mortall enemies: thus doe they consult, thus doe they combine themselues as against all righteous men, so specially against the Preachers of Gods Word, and the reprouers of their faults: O then, beloued brethren, what created power is able to vndoe this couenant of hell it selfe, when subtilty & cruelty, the world, and the diuell, like Simeon and Leui, that were brethren in euill, haue combined together to ouerthrow vs? surely God who is , Deus in oportunitatibus; a God in the needefull time of trouble (as Simplicius calls him) must be our helper and defender, or els we shall be soone consumed and brought to nothing; for we are weake to resist, and our enemies strong to oppresse, and all our hearers, our owne people, of whom we should receiue most comfort, are either mockers and scoffers of vs, or at least iudges of vs, who, and when wee doe ill and when we doe well, rather then helpers of vs by their pray∣ers, that we may doe well; and therefore we see how many of vs are: one man learned without discretion; another worldly wise but cannot preach, a third preacheth well, but liueth ill; and in briefe, most of vs defectiue of what wee should be: and all this turneth to the hurt of all men. And therefore that we may be as we ought to be, good for our selues, good for you all, you see how necessarie it is that you should pray for vs, and especially, First, that euil & licentious Ministers might haue grace, for their amendment, or the censure of eiectment out of the Church, as Adam was out of Paradise: some indeed had rather couer their faults then cure them, lest the reuealing of their vices might be a cause of reuiling their fellowes; but alas had it beene more credit for the Apostles to haue had Iudas still retayned or exclu∣ded?
I trow excluded: and therefore he lost his dignity; to teach vs that all such false stewards should heare the same sen∣tence, Episcopatum tuum accipiet alter; let another take this place, for a litle leauen will leauen the whole lumpe; and one lewd man may doe much mischiefe; and therefore as our Sauiour droue the buyers and sellers out of the Temple; so should all buyers and sellers of the Church of Christ, all factious and contenti∣ous Preachers, and all loose and lewd liuers, be deliuered vnto Sa∣tan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saued in the day of the Lord Iesus; and that all the leauen of iniquity may bee purged from the Ministery. And, Secondly, that God would not suffer the world to condemne the righteous with the wicked, nor to accuse all for the offence of some, but as the Poet saith in another kinde, Parcite paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes Spectetur meritis quae{que} puella suis; So in this; that they onely should be blamed which are blame-worthy; or if they will still persecute vs, that neither Satan with all his cruelties, nor yet the world with all his subtilties may de∣iect the mindes of worthy and godly Ministers, but that in all afflictions and contempts, they may say with the Prophet Da∣uid, Why art thou so heauy, O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within me? yet put thy trust in the Lord, for he is thy helper and de∣fender; and that they may goe on in the course of godlinesse like the two Cowes which carried the Arke, which went on straight forward without turning to either hand:Pyndarus. and like King The∣rons Coursers, that were neuer weary of running; that so they may escape all the fiery darts of Satan, and finish their course with ioy, when they shall receiue that Crowne of righteousnesse which the Lord hath prepared for them that loue him. And thus dearely beloued, you see that although man for his sinne, was eiected out of Paradise, and subiected to all mise∣ries, yet through the mercy of God, in sending his Sonne to be made man to suffer for man, to ouercome the diuell, sinne, and death, to raise himselfe from death, to ascend to Heauen, to send his holy Spirit to fill our hearts with his heauenly graces, wee shall, (if we beleeue in him, and serue him, praise his Name for all his blessings, loue one another, and pray one for another,) at∣taine
vnto euerlasting happinesse: Vnto the which happinesse, the Lord of his goodnesse bring vs all, through Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be as∣cribed, as is most due, all Glory and Honour, and Praise, and Thankes, and Power, and Maiesty, and Dominion, both now and for euermore. Amen. A Prayer. O Eternall God, and our most gratious Father, wee most humbly beseech thee for Iesus Christ his sake, to forgiue vs all our sinnes, which we acknowledge and confesse to be more in number then the sands of the Sea, which cannot bee numbred; cleanse vs O Lord with the bloud of Christ, and plant in vs those heauenly gifts and graces whereby wee may be inabled to serue thee as we ought to doe, in holinesse and righteousnesse all the dayes of our life; increase our faith, stirre vp our hope, and kindle our loue, and our charity both towards thy selfe and all men for thy sake; giue vs patience to vndergo, without offending thee, whatsoeuer miseries this wic∣ked world shall any wayes heape vpon vs: blesse our gracious King, the Prince, and all the royall issue; blesse all the Mini∣sters of thy Church, and all the Magistrates of this Common∣wealth: Grant O Lord, thy grace vnto thy Ministers, that they may faithfully preach the Word of truth, and sincerely liue a most vpright, and a godly life; grant to the Magistrates thy grace O God, to defend right without remissenesse, and to pu∣nish vice without maliciousnesse; and because we are all thy creatures, the workes of thy hands, made by thee, preserued by thee, and inioying all we haue, life and liuelihood, from thee; O Lord be mercifull vnto vs all, and remember that we are but dust; consider, O consider that we are but as grasse, not able to doe what we would, not able to doe any thing that is good, vnlesse thou dost it in vs: O then let our soules liue, and wee will praise thy Name, we will magnifie thee for euer and euer, for all the blessings that we haue receiued from thee, our Crea∣tion, Redemption, Sanctification, Preseruation, and our assu∣red
hope of Glorification, and all other graces whatsoeuer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. A Soliloquie of the Author. O Eternall God, thou hast created me, and I haue offended thee; thou hast redeemed me, and I still continued vn∣thankefull vnto thee; and yet thou hast heaped many bles∣sings vpon me, and giuen me grace to be desirous to serue thee, and according to my poore and weake ability, to shew forth these lights vnto thy Church; I confesse, O Lord, whatsoeuer is ill herein is onely mine, and whatsoeuer is good is truely thine; and therefore I desire thee to pardon mine euill, and to make me thankefull for thy good, and so to accept that worke done by thy grace, that it may be crowned with thy glory. I doe not long for any worldly thing, the whole world lyeth in wickednesse, but I desire my soule may be married vnto thee, to liue with thee for euermore: and therefore O blessed God, seeing that as I haue none in heauen, so, I haue none in earth but onely thou to be my helper, I beseech thee to be my re∣deeming kinsman, to preserue my wearied body from the ma∣lice of this world, and to preferre my disconsolate soule vnto euerlasting ioyes, through Iesus Christ mine onely Sauiour. Amen. IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FINIS.
THE TABLE, AB. ABstaine from sinne is from God. 205 God neuer absolueth vnrepentant sinners. 242 Absurdities, God shunneth in all things. 324 Absurdities of the Lutheran doctrine, touching the communication of properties. 377. &c. Absurdities following the high-Priest, saying that the Disciples stole Christ away. 564 Nature not able to shew the reason how the world should be made. 138 God able to doe what he will. 147 To hinder what he will not haue done. ibid. To doe more then he did, or doth, or will doe. 148. 149. &c. Phrases of being able or not able how to be vnderstood. 158 God able to produce any thing of nothing. 163 God able to forgiue all sinnes. 164 God not able to doe contrary to what hee decreed. 165 Not able to doe things contrary to his Na∣ture. 165 Gods ability to helpe vs, a great comfort to the godly. 177 Absurdities of the doctrine of transubstantia∣tion. 174 God able to saue men, without the Incar∣nation of his Sonne. 320 None able to know God as hee is in him∣selfe. 120 Abstract names of all excellencies most pro∣per vnto God, 122 Goodnesse of God abused by the wicked. 225 Abuse of Christ not paralelled in any age. 474 AC. To be an Accepter of persons, what it is. 210 We should acknowledge whence wee haue all our goodnesse. 211 Inward actions of God, euer in doing, neces∣sary, incommunicable. 275 Christ how falsly accused by his enemies. 471 Whereof accused before Pilate, and how false those accusations were. 472 Acts meerely voluntary, no sinnes. 15. & 32 Actuall sinne, what it is. 10 All actions adiudged according to the dis∣position of the will. 55 Act of punishment, least agreeable to Gods nature. 195 No act can exceed the power of the agent. 209 Actors in the Tragedy of Christ his Passion who they were. 421 Gods free actions not curiously to be sear∣ched into. 555 Chiefest Acts of Dauid, types of Christ. 617 AD Adam sinning we all sinned. 3 Adams fall brought on vs a two-fold euill. 3 What God commanded Adam, how small a thing it was. 98 Adamant, how mollified. 56 Aduersity makes the Saints more resplendent then prosperity. 207 Aduersity and affliction not simply good. ibid. AE. Aescilus how he came by his death. 613 AF. Affirmatiue precepts, how many, viz. 248. 230 Christ why afflicted by God. 496 Affections of Christ, how they differ from ours in three respects. 444 AG. Agony of Christ what was the cause thereof. 443 The seuerall ages of the world. 402. 403 Agents, that there be three sorts. 162
Christ borne in the six age of the world, and why. 403 Age of man diuided into foure parts. 68 AL. How all we haue is from God. 129 All men taste of Gods goodnesse. 201 How all men may be said to hate the Prea∣chers. 435 Alcestes how deerely she loued her Husband. 425 AN. Anabaptists heresie, what it is. 344 Angels, for three things most excellent. 535 Angels appeared like men but were neuer made men. 534 Alwayes serued Christ. 535 How they punish the wicked. 536 How they comfort the women. 537 Testifie of the resurrection of Christ. 566 The birth of Christ. 411. 411 Angell, a name of office, and Christ often cal∣led an Angell. 330 Angels, how they are said to ascend. 609 Anger, what euill it doth. 229 That it is two-fold. 355 Angell cannot beget another. 4 Anselmus what he said. 66 Christ, why hee would not answere Pilate. 477 AP. Approbation of sinne, how euill it is. 15 Apuleius his Asse what she said. 92 Appearance and shew of truth, how vaine it is 213 Apollinaris and some Arrians heresie. 348, & 343 Apostles words, He is the first borne of euery crea∣ture, how vnderstood. 290 Apelles his heresie. 343 Application of Christs Resurrection, is that onely thing which helpeth vs. 586 Apostacy, what a fearefull sinne. 595 Apostles onely filled with the holy Ghost, on the day of Pentecost. 658 To approue sinne in others, what a great sinne. 25 Appollodorus what he dreamed. 55 Christ appeared ofen in the shape of man, before he was made man. 329 Christ appeared like a man, vnto Adam. 329 To Abraham. 330. to Iacob, and Ioshua. 322 Christ appeared to the Patriarches in a true body. 345 Chrst appeared like a sinnefull man, but without sinne 346 Christ how he appeared to Saint Paul going to Damascus. 388 Apparitions of Christ after his Resurrection, twelue times at least. 505 Why he appeared first to Mary Magdalene. 565 Why he appeared first to Saint Peter, among the men. 570 Why he appeared to Saint Iames. 574 AR. Arrius his heresie, and obiections answered 248, &c. 299 Arrians, whether they corrupted the Text of Salomon, God created, &c. 287 Armour of a Christian of two kindes. 730 Arrogancy of Iudas seene. 461 To argue from Gods power without testi∣mony of his will, not good. 172 AS. God made man to ascend. 561 Christ ascended three times. 615 Time, place, and manner of Christ his ascen∣tion. 620. 621 Christ ascended aboue all heauens. 624 Our ascention to Heauen depends vpon our vnion with Christ. 626 Doctrine of Christs Ascention to what end it serueth. 618 That we should alwayes ascend to heauen. 630 Our wings to ascend what they be. 631 Christ ascended for foure speciall ends. 639 Christ before his ascention would not be∣stow the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and why. 640 That there be foure sorts of ascenders. 609 Angels how said to ascend. 609 Christ whether wholly destitute of all assistance from the Godhead. 447 That Christ assumed our flesh. 369 AT. Athiests deny the power of God. 136
AV First Author of our conuersion to God, is God. 529 Saint Augustine reading the death of Dido, what he said. 51 Christ borne in the raigne of Augustus, and why. 494 Desparagement to Augustus his worth to ioyne any other with him. 504 What the Author thinketh of transubstanti∣ation. 549 BA. BAcke-parts of God, what it signifieth. 117 Balaam prophesied of Christ. 412 BE. Being of God not safe to search too farre into it. 124 God giueth being to all creatures. 125 Wee beleeue not the assertions of the Ie∣suites, not because we know not how they may be done, but because wee know they cannot be done. 177 Beauty of God incomprehensible. 191 We are begotten to God by the truth. 215 Saint Bernards preaching two kindes of Sermons. 266 The father alwaies begetteth the sonne. 275 Christ made the beginning of our wayes. 288 Benefits of Christs Incarnation. 359 Benefits of the vnion of the two natures of Christ in respect of Christ. 382 In respect of vs. 390 Gods benefits recommended to our memo∣ries. 60 Benefits how many Christ bestowed on Iudas. 458 Euery benefit requires a dutie. 542 To beleeue in Christ, is to eate and drinke him. 681 Best men most hated in the world. 435 Bethelem, the place where Christ was borne. 407 &c. Christ, why betrayed by Iudas. 459 BJ. Birds flying hardly catched. 13 Birth of Christ, how meane it was, & why. 409 Why first reueiled to the Shepheards. 412 BL. How blinde sinners be. 58 Our blindnesse seene and confessed by the Philosophers. 59 A fable of a blinde widdow. 58 Bloud of Christ shed fixe speciall times. 164 Bloud of Christ, the price that paid for all men. 501 Blasphemy against the truth, what a heauy sin, 240 Shedding of mans bloud, what a fearefull sinne. 240 BO. Bodies cannot beget soules. 4 That Christ had a true body, proued. 341. 342 &c. All the obiections to the contrary answe∣red. 344. 345. &c. A naturall body must be locall. 155 Body of Christ cannot be euery where. 157 How it may be said to be euery where 169 To be a true body, and to be euery where is meerely contradictory. 170 Bodies glorified haue their dimensions. 170, &c. Body of Christ glorified from the first moment of his conception. 171 Still a physicall body. 172 For a body to be in one place, and in many places at the same time is vnpossible. 175 We may not referre that to the body, which is truely spoken of the whole person of Christ. 344 Christ appeared to the Patriarches in a true body. 345 Body of Christ how said to doe diuine operati∣ons. 38 Body of Christ how it may be truely said to bee in the Sacraments. 549 Bodies raised at the resurrection of Christ, te∣stified of the resurection of Christ. 579 Bodies in heauen shall be still quantatiue. 171 What a bondage it is to serue sinne. 99 Christ why borne in the raigne of Augustus and Herod. 404 Why borne in December. 405 Why vpon the Sabbath day. ibid. And why presently after midnight. 406. Why borne of a woman. 334 And why of a Virgin. ibid. A bountifull man is gracious. 190
God most bountifull vnto all people. 192 God not bound to giue power to the wic∣ked to serue him. 210 BR. Brethren, how variously taken. 689 Brotherhood in respect of the Spirit, greater then that in respect of flesh and bloud. 689 Gentile brethren how they loued one ano∣ther. 690 CA. GIuing Canaan to the Israelites, a type of gi∣uing heauen to vs. 127 God calleth effectually none but the elect. 203 God not the cause why the wicked serue not God. 210 Causes of Christs sufferings. 493 Instrumentally manifold. 494, &c. Efficient, God himselfe, and why. 496 Finall. 590 CE. Cerinthus his heresie. 374 CH. Substance changed cannot be what it was and what it is both at once. 173 God can change any substance into ano∣ther. 173 Charity most requisite for Preachers. 642 Charity, what it is. 652 The surest signe of saluation. ibid. Children liable to death. 9 Tainted with sinne before they are borne. 9 Childhood & the miseries therof described. 69 Our children to be married to the godliest men. 109 The wicked shall bee punished in their children. 245 How it stands with Gods iustice to punish the fathers sinnes vpon the children. 245 Childrē very apt to imitate their Parents. 246 All children of the wicked not punished for their fathers sinnes. 247 A childe how conceiued in the wombe. 337 God chooseth no man in respect of any thing that is in man 211 Christ the word, the summe of all things. 258 Signified by all the most memorable things of the old Testament. 258 Christ would not reueale himselfe to the world all at once. 59 To know him is the onely thing that makes vs happy. ibid. Christ despised all vanities. 260 Suffered all miseries. ibid. Christ the most perfect patterne of all vertue. 260 Christ knowne suppresseth all vices. 261 He alone is all sufficient to supply all our neede. 262 Without Christ the whole world will auaile vs nothing. 263 Christ onely should be preached by all Prea∣chers. 266 The Name of Christ should be alwayes in our mouthes to be honored, not to be blas∣phemed. 267 Christ in the Father, not as we are in the Fa∣ther. 270 Christ a true God proued. 278. 279. &c. Christ is truely rich 281 Christ created all things, and gouerneth all things. 283 Christ prayed vnto. 283 Christ began to be a God existing in the man∣hood, when he was made flesh. 248 Christ no accidental, but an essential word. 285 Christ how he may be said to be created and begotten. 289 Christ made the beginning of our wayes. 288 Christ demaunds the earth as man, and giueth heauen as God. 290 Christ how the first begotten, and how the onely begotten Sonne of God. 291 Christ, how God of himselfe. 293 How said to be with God and in God. 298 Christ equall to the Father. 299 Christ after what manner conceiued. 335. Not of the Essence, but by the vertue of the Holy Ghost. ibid. Christ conceiued a perfect man in the first moment of his conception. 337 How wonderfully he was made man. ibid. Christ why conceiued of a Virgin. 338 How he commeth from Adam. ibid. Christ made a perfect man. 340 That he had a true body. 341, &c.
Christ made subiect to all humane frailties. 351 Christ how hee hath performed all things for vs. 360 Christ an infallible patterne for all men to imi∣tate. 360 Christ brought vs more good then we lost in Adam. 361 Christ how made inuisible vnto the Iewes. 387 Christ how he came in, the dores being shut. ibid. How he walked vpon the seas. 388 How he appeared to S. Paul. 388. 389. &c. Christ came from Nathan, and not from Salo∣mon, 38 Christ why born in the raigne of Augustus. 404 Why in the sixt age of the world. 403 Why in December. 405 Christ what manner of person he was. 429 That he was a man. ibid. A iust man. ibid. A good man. 430 A King, a Priest, a Prophet. 431 A true and eternall God. 432 Christ his sufferings expressed. 436. &c. His whole life a continuall suffering. 437 Christs sufferings chiefly in three places, 437 Christ suffered in soule. ibid. Christs first degree of suffering, in being made passible. 438 Christs sufferings most admirable, 439 Christ why he went out to be taken. 439 Why out of the citie. 440 Why into the garden. 441 Christ whether wholly destitute of all diuine assistance. 447 How lightly he esteemed of death. 446 Christ how by his death he ouercame death 84 Christ deliuered from what he feared. 448 Christ to vndergoe the punishment of all o∣thers. ibid. Christ how he sought to reclaime Iudas. 461. &c. Christ how handled presently after he was ta∣ken. 464 Christ why he chose Iudas to be his Apostle. 459 Christ how crowned with thornes. 475 Christ why he came not down from the Crosse 481 Christ dead, is still persecuted & raged at. 482 Christ how said to be euery where. 540 Christ no where to be found but in the Church. 545 Church, the fittest place for publique prayers 711 Church how to rule her children. 520 Church how subiect to afflictions. 520 CL. Clytoria Well what it effecteth. 528 Cloathing Christ in white, what it signified. 473 CO. Comforts that we haue from Christ his being subiect to infirmities. 361. 362 Whatsoeuer God commandeth is no sinne. 166 God compelleth not his seruants to doe good 530 To compell others to sinne, the practise of most wicked sinners. 25 Manner of Christ his comming to iudge∣ment. 622, 623 Gods commandements, few, short, light, and profitable. 99 The least comfort denied in hell. 87 What communicates most goodnesse vnto o∣thers, is euer best. 197 That we should confesse our sinnes. 113 Conuersion to God not to be deferred. 24 That we should confesse our sinnes the di∣uell cannot abide. 28 An excellent consideration of Saint Augu∣stine. 51 Consciences of the wicked opened before they die. 80 We can conceiue but the least part of Gods excellencie. 118 What are contrari to the nature of God. 152 How contradictories destroy each other. 153 God cannot doe contradictories, proued. 154 That we should not contest about trifles. 265 Consultation in heauen about the restitution of man. 319 God worketh one contrarie out of another. 351
Contentednesse requisite in any state. 410 Conception of Christ ineffable. 336 Consideration of Christs sufferings most admi∣rable. 439 Condemnation of all the infidels that would not beleeue in Christ, grieued Christ. 454 That we should condole the sufferings of Christ. 506 Conuersion of a sinner first wrought by God. 529 Conuersion of any man not to be despaired of. 533 Contempt of vanities most requisite for Prea∣chers. 642 Constancie most requisite for Preachers. 642, 643 Conquest of Christ ouer Satan, not onely by suffering, but also trampling him vnder feete. 583 Couetousnesse what a horrible sinne. 460 To be auoided. 704 Couenant with hell should be broken. 26 Colours vsed by the ancients to expresse diuers things. 474 The great courage of the Apostles present∣ly after the resurrection of Christ. 576 Corporall presence of Christ no where now but in heauen. 545 Christ not corporally present in any secrets. 546, 547 Correction how burthensome to children. 69 No cost to be spared to get truth. 217 CR. All creatures heape miseries on man. 74 All creatures haue their being from God. 125 The creatures haue many impressions of Gods goodnesse infixed in them. 256 All creatures how inriched with good. 201 Foure crying sinnes. 41 No creature can be capable of infinitenesse, or of infinite perfections. 156 Crueltie of Satan against the Preachers. 644 CV. Custome of ancient times, to expresse our mindes by visible signes. 680 Cup that Christ was to drinke of, what it was. 444 Cup which dranke vp, killed Christ, but ouer∣ceme not Christ. 449 Curiositie to be shunned in searching out the manner of diuine mysteries. 277 Curiositie to be auoided in searching what God is. 122, 124 Custome of sinning, makes the sinner bold to sinne. 20 It makes the greatest sinnes seeme no sins. 21 It bindeth vs in sinne. 22 It indammageth the soule. 23 And makes the sinners almost incurable. 65 DA. DAmage receiued by Adam, two-fold. 3 What a danger it is to neglect publique prayers. 717 Dauids words, This day haue I begotten thee, how to be vnderstood. 290 Dangerous to reproue great men. 233 Who most subiect to dangers. 433 Daughters of sinne are two. 82 In the day of Christs natiuitie, three things obseruable. 435 DE. Death the fruit of sinne. 2 Seauen deadly sinnes. 40 By death is contained all that is vnder the curse of God. 47, 67 Death, three-fold. 49 Death of the soule, three-fold. 53 Death what it is. 67 How largely it extendeth it selfe. 75 How vnresistable it is. ibid. How expressed by the Egyptians. 76 How it shortens life diuers wayes. 77 How it taketh men of all ages. 78 How it smiteth in euery place. 79 How comfortable it is to the godly. 79 How terrible to the wicked. 80 How it equalizeth the bodies of all men 81 Death of Christ the sole cause that maketh our death happy vnto vs. 84 Death eternall, what it is. 86 Death of Christ a sufficient satisfaction for the greatest sinnes. 164
Death how little Christ respected it. 446 Saints at their death supported by God. 447 Death of the crosse, grieuous in foure respects. 479 480 Death of Christ maketh the wicked without excuse. 504 Certainty of Christs death shewed in that her rose not til the third day. 556 Deceit of sinne how great. 44 Deceits, no deceits, vnlesse cunningly carried. 461 Deformitie of sinne greater then we can com∣prehend. 107 Deferring of Christs suffering grieued Christ. 451 Wicked men, how they deceiue them∣selues. 517 God a debter to no man. 531 To defend the truth, with the hazard of all that we haue. 217 Why God deferreth to giue vs what we de∣sire. 723 Delight in sinne, maketh vs exceeding sinfull. 15 Our deliuerances from punishments to be ascribed to Gods goodnesse. 203 God deliuereth not alwaies his deerest Saints from afflictions. 206 Christ deliuered from what he feared. 448 To derogate from Gods power, how great a sinne. 161 God denieth his grace vnto the children for their Fathers sinnes. 251. Why. 252 Why God denieth what we aske. 725 To descend from the crosse easier then to rise from the graue. 562 Descention of Christ into hell, handled 580. 581, &c. proued by Scripture, and by the stimonie of antiquitie. 484. 618 That Christ descended before hee could as∣cend. 609 Why Christ descended not from the crosse. 481 We ought to despaire of no mans conuersi∣on. 533 Descending of Christ, signifieth the assuming of our flesh. 301 Description of God by way of negation, affir∣mation, and super eminencie. 121 Desire to sinne, is an act done. 96 Desperate men thinke God cannot forgiue them. 139 We ought neuer to despaire of mercie. 226 To despaire, what a haynous sinne. 228 Saints desired nothihg but Christ. 264 Demosthenes his Parable vnto the Athenians of the wolues request vnto the sheepe. 644 Of the young man that hired an Asse to Megara. 678 DI. Christ, whether hee died for all men and how. 505 To die to sinne, what it is. 50 a punishment for sinne. ibid. To die in sinne what it is. 51 Difference betwixt spirituall and eternall pu∣nishment. 250 How the word God differeth from our Word. 309 A great difference betwixt appearing in the forme of man, and to be made man. 329 Difference betwixt assuming flesh, and to bee made flesh. 345 Difference betwixt the two-fold generations of Christ and of the Saints. 364 Difference betwixt Law and Gospell. 34 Difference betwixt the sinnes of the godly, and the wicked three-folde. 35 Difference betwixt feare and sorrow. 449 Philosophers most diligent to attaine to all kinde of knowledge. 315 How diligent we ought to be to know Christ. 393 Dirt nothing so foule as sinne. 52 Diseases of the soule, what they be. 63 Discontent with God, what a heauie sinne. 239 Disobedience to God, what a haynous sinne. 293 Disobedience to parents, what a fearefull sinne. 240 To distinguish of Gods power reconcileth diuers Authors. 150
Dispertion of the Apostles grieued Christ. 453 In distresse how wee ought to seeke vnto God. 488 Disciples whether they stole Christ from the graue or not. 562 Discretion how needfull for Preachers. 696 Diuels know God, and Christ, and the my∣sterie of the Trinitie. 314 Confest Gods power. 162 DO. Doctrine touching the person of Christ, how alwaies opposed by Satan. 304 Doctrine of diuinitie how deepe and difficult. 392 Whatsoeuer God doth, is no sinne. 166 Doores being shut, how Christ came in. 387 Doubting of Gods goodnesse, what a fearefull sinne. 239 That we should neuer doubt of Gods pro∣mises. 130 DR. To draw neere to vs, how God is said. 165 M. Drusus desired all men might see what he did. 604 EA. EArth accursed for the sinne of man. 48 EF. The effects that Christs sufferings should worke in vs. 505 EG. Egyptians how they expressed death. 76 EL. Electionis of some men, not of all. 203 The elect onely are effectually called. 203 Elizabeth, the wife of Zacharias, of what Tribe she was. 397 EN. Enemies that besot the godly, 177 Enuie of Satan against Christ. 493 and why he enuied him. 434 Enemies of Christ ascribe to him in mockery, what he was in deed. 432 433 Enemies of Christ, what they testified of him. 578 Enemies of man especially three. 582 EP. Epicurus confest the world had beginning and shall haue ending. 137 EQ. Equalitie of sinnes confuted. 37 Equitie of eternall punishment for a tempora∣rie sinne, shewed in two respects. 97 Christ equall with the Father. 299 ER. Error of the Philosophers, touching the eter∣tie of the world. 136 Error of the Vbiquitaries, touching the pow∣er of God. 141 Error of the Iesuites about the power of God. 141 Error of Pellagius about the abilitie of mans nature. 63▪ 64 Error of Nouatus, about sins after Baptisme. 112 Errors of the vulgar, about the absolute pow∣er of God. 151 Errors expelled by truth. 215 Errors boulstered with lies. 175 Error of Saint Gregorie, and Saint Bernard con∣futed. 94. 95 Error of Lactantius and Pellagius confuted. 63 Error of the Philosophers, Stoicks, Arist. Seleu∣cus, Hermias & Hermog▪ confuted. 136, 137, &c. Error of the Vbiquitaries shewed. 141 Confuted, 155. Their Obiect. anws. 165 Error of Bellarmine, and the Iesuites shewed. 141. Their Obiections answered. 172, &c. Error of Saint Hierom. 330 ES. Essence of God in heauen, cannot bee seene but in the face of Iesus Christ. 118 Essence of God not safe to search too farre in∣to it. 124 Essence of God distinguished into three per∣sons. 272 The word essence deriued our of Scripture, and vsed in Scripture, 294 Christ of the same essence with his Father. 292. Vnpossible to escape out of the hands of the Angels. 337
ET. Eternity of Christ proued, and the obie∣ctions against the same answered. 278 279, 280, &c. Eternall punishment how inflicted for a tem∣porary sinne. 94 EV. Eua beleeueth the Deuill. 3 The euill that oppresseth euery sinner two-fold. 321 Euangelist, why hee saith the Word was made flesh, rather then man. 349 Eutichian heresie, what it was. 367, &c. EX. Excuses of sinners to iustifie themselues. 24 Excuses of sinners to lessen sinne. 110 Examples of wilfull and spitefull sinners. 33 Excellency of God cannot be conceiued of vs. 118 All the excellencies of Christs man-hood were created excellencies. 146 God expressed to Moses what he is, three manner of wayes. 121 Examples of Gods mercy in seeking after sin∣ners. 181 We should carefully examine whether we loue God or not. 189 Examples of Gods slownesse to punish sin. 194 Good examples a great meanes to further godlinesse. 360 Three sorts of men excluded from the Pas∣chall Lambe. 682 Excellency of diuine truth. 215 EK. The word , whether rightly transla∣ted, created, or not. 287 FA. THree faculties of the soule of man. 53 Euery faculty of the soule defiled by sinne. ibid. Fathers how they extoll the power of God. ibid. Faith seeth what reason perceiueth not. 176 God called Father of mercies, neuer cal∣led Father of vengeance, and why. 195 Faults of some not to be ascribed vnto all. 221 God the Father alwayes begetteth the Sonne. 275 The name of Father taken two wayes. 278 God the Father of Christ, not as he is our Father. 291 The Father, how greater then Christ. 300 Father sent not Christ by way of command. 301 Christ the fairest among the sons of men. 353 Family from whence Christ descended, 396, &c. Faults of the Disciples Christ would not re∣ueale. 466 Faith foure-fold. 647 Iustifying faith the properties of it. 648 FE. That we should feare our Lord. 131 That we should aswell feare Gods iustice, as hope for his mercy. 244 Feare is two-fold. 355 Feare and sorrow how they differ. 449 What Christ feared. 450. 455, &c. Whom we neede not feare. 538 God in what sence to be feared. 539 Magistrates and parents in what sence to be feared. 538 Feare brought into the world by sinne. 540 God how he ought to be feared. 541 That we ought to feare in euery state of grace, lapse, and recouerie. 441 FI. Fire and sinne cannot be concealed. 20 Fire and sinne not resisted will necessarily increase. 22 Christ in what respect sayd to be the first begotten Sonne of God. 291 That we should striue to be the first in Gods seruice. 590 Apostles onely filled with the holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. 658 Fiue kindes of kisses. 460 FL. Flesh apt to conceiue sin. 14 Flesh taken for the corrupted qualitie of man. 8 Flesh of Christ made by all the three persons of the Trinity. 325 Flesh diuers kindes. 339 Our flesh assumed by Christ. 369
Flesh of Christ, how said to be Deified. 369 How said to doe diuine operations. 389 Christ how flouted by all men. 481, 482 Flesh the tenderer, the more sensible of paine. 483 FO. Forgetfulnesse an infernall Fiend. 60 To forbeare to punish sinne, increaseth the number of sinners. 90 Fore-sight of good and euill is not the cause of punishment, or reward of either. 95 Heathens flsly ascribed to Fortune, what is true of God. 139 To forgiue sinne, the greatest worke of Gods power. 140 God able to forgiue sinnes. ibid. In the forgiuing of sinnes, many particulars to be considered. 183 God forgiuth all sinnes, or no sinne. 184 God cannot forget to be mercifull. ibid. Fogiuensse of sinnes our chiefest comfort. 224 That wee ought to forgiue one another. 236 And to foget all iniuries. ibid. Our foe fathers how they exceeded vs in deuotion. 731 To be in the forme of God, is to be very G . 280 To lay a good foundation, the best way to teach. 392 Fortitude of the women seeking Christ. 521 Christ in heauen forgetteth not his seruants on earth. 629 Foure points handled touching the power of God. 13 Foure sorts of men erre about the doctrine of Gods power 135 Foure speciall graces bestowed vpon the elect. 204 Foure kindes of redemption. 500 Foure sorts of ascenders. 609 Foure-fold end of Christs ascention. 639 Foure points considered about the gifts of God. 640 Foure signes of fulnesse. 665 Foure-fold feales or signes wherewith Saints are sealed. 669 Foure sorts or receiuers of the Sacraments. 680 FR. Christ assumed all our humane frailties. 351 Friends of Christ how dearly he loued them. 488 God expecteth not the like fruits from all men. 602 The Saints are freed from all their ene∣mies. 636 Christ freeth vs from Satan to place vs in his owne seruice. ibid. We are not freed from Satan, to doe what we list. 637 FV. Fury of the wicked restrained. 178 All men are full of somethings. 665 GA. WHy Christ went to the garden of Gethse∣mane to bee taken, and what befell him there. 441 Gaufredus Clareuallensis what he said. 613 GI. Gifts of God of two sorts. 192, & 641 Hee giueth spirituall gifts to the godly. ibid. And temporall gifts to the wicked. ibid. Gifts of God are free gifts. 640 Diuersly bestowed. 523 Euery man should be contented with the gifts God giueth him. 523 Diuersity of gifts among the Apostles and Fathers. ibid. Gifts requisite for Preachers. 641 Gifts to edifie the Church, how giuen. 657 Speciall gifts of God, whereby the elect are saued, vnpossibly to be knowne. 646 Gifts of prayer the chiefest of all Gods graces. 730 Gifts of the Magi, what they shewed Christ to be. 413. GE. Generation of Christ two-fold. 288. Gentiles were not altogether ignorant of the word . 311 What they writ of this name of Christ. 312, 313
Gentiles how they might come to the know∣ledge of this word. 313, 34 Gentiles expected the comming of the Messias. 316, 412 Generality of Christ his suffering. 483 GO. God how said to bee the Father of Spirits. 6 Goly mens sinning differ in three things from the wicked. 35, 36 Godly life maketh a happy death. 82 God loueth righteousnesse. 90 No respect of persons. 91 Most iust. ibid. Iudgeth euery man according to his de∣sert. 92 How great and how mighty he is. 102 How ineffable. 125 A most faithfull performer of all his promi∣ses. 127 How he guideth and gouerneth all things. 138 Of his owne nature most intelligible. 120 To vs incomprehensible. 120, 121 That there is but one God, proued many wayes. 269, 270 God onely to be prayed vnto. 710 Christ no titular, but a true God by nature proued. 278, 279, 280, &c. To deny the God-head of Christ what a hai∣nous sinne. 305 God-head of Christ suffered not, but sustained the man-hood to suffer. 438, 485 The godly how they doe ascend. 614 Loue of goodnesse should make vs hate sin. 66 Goodnesse of God to man, how incomprehensi∣ble. 101, 103 Good and godly men ought to be cherished and promoted. 110 Goodnesse what it is. 196 Goodnesse of things two-fold. 197 God good to all things. 197 Perfectly, absolutely, and vniuersally good. 198 Nothing absolutely good but God. ibid. Goodnesse of God two-fold. 198 Generall goodnesse of God seene in two things. 198 All things made good in their kinde. 199 Good for some vse, yet not vniuersally good ibid. Goodnesse of God withholdeth the wicked from many sinnes, suspendeth our iust de∣serued punishments. 200 How it extendeth it selfe to all men. 201 Yet not alike good to all men. 202 Gods speciall goodnesse seene in two things. 203 It preserueth the Saints from sinning. 204 From punishments. 205 Goodnesse of God most of all seene in our af∣flictions. 206 All our goodnesse to bee ascribed to God 208 To the glory of Christ. 264 We can doe no good of ourselues. 209 The boundlesse goodnesse of Gods proui∣dence. 257 Many impressions of Gods goodnesse infix∣ed in the creatures. 26 Best good we can doe vnto our children, is to serue God. 251 Not to doe good, a sinne. 230 Gods goodnesse, how abused by the wicked. 225 Ill-gotten-goods neuer thriueth. 253 No good in the Saints but what God wor∣keth in them. 2741 Why goodnesse is ascribed to the holy Ghost 273 Gospell biddeth and forbiddeth many things which the Law doth not. 12 Gospell in the Law, and Law in the Gospell. 224 GL. Glorification of a body, taketh not away the essentiall properties of a body. 170 Glory of Christ should be chiefly aimed at by all Preachers. 266 GR. Grace not raduced from the best parents. 8 Word gracious, what it signifieth. 190 Three speciall things. ibid. God is gracious in all respects. 191
Graces especially bestowed vpon the elect. 24 Grace of iustification what it is. 208 Grace of sanctification what it is. ibid. Grace of glorification what it is. ibid. Graces of God denied vnto the children for the fathers sinnes, 251. and why. 252. Graces of God not giuen in the like measure to all men. 602 We ought to examine what graces we haue. 646 Chiefest graces of God, Faith, Hope, Chari∣tie. 647 Graces of Christ to sanctifie our soules, are two-fold. 645 Grace of Christ ought in all things to be ex∣tolled, and our selues extenuated. 265 Great sinnes must haue great repentance 23 Great mens sinnes, are great sinnes. 37 Great men haue no excuses for their sinnes. 38 Great men haue no priuiledge to sinne. 39 Their state very dangerous. 39. 40 How subiect to dangers. 704 Father how greater then Christ. 300 Great sinnes punished with great punishments. 92 Great men how they vse to deale with the poore. 235 What Christ grieued at in the garden. 540 541. &c. Griefe of Christ on the Crosse▪ aggrauated by all circumstances 41 Growth of sinne how to be hindred. 108 A gradation in the loue of God. 202 HA. HAbituall sinnes hardly repelled. 23 Harlots how they deceiue men. 45 Haynousnesse of sinne seene in three respects. 97 To hazard all in defence of truth. 217 HE. Heart to be carefully watched. 14. Hell paines how intollerable. 86 Heathens how they extolled the power of God. 161 Hebrewes often vse the present tense, for the future tense. 288 The head alwaies chiefly opposed. 304 Christ borne in the raigne of Herod, and why. 404 Heretickes how wicked to deny the God-head of Christ 305 Herod what he did to Christ. 473 Hell in the Article of our Creede, signifieth not the graue. 582 Hell destroyed by Christ three waies. 583 That there be three heauens. 624 The man Christ in the highest part of hea∣uen. 623 And why. 626 Nothing so heauie as sinne. 631. Hearing of Gods Word a speciall meanes to get grace. 677 Diuers sorts of hearers. 678 Heresie of Nonatus. 112, 593 Of Pellagius. ibid. Of Arrius, and his obiections answered. 284, 285. &c. 293, &c. 299. &c. Heresie of Apelles and Apolinaris. 343 Of the Anabaptists. 344 Of Samosatenus. 363 Of Eutychos. 367, 368 Of Cerinthus, and of Nestorius, concerning the person of Christ, and their obiections answered. 374 Heresies to be shewed, and why. 392 HI. Euery one laboureth to hide his sinnes, 19 None can hide his sinnes from God. 19 HO. No sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224 Honorius his childishnesse. 267, 268 Word Homousius not first inuented by the orthodox fathers. 29 Iustified as it is vsed. ibid. Holy Ghost, whether tearmed the word or not. 323 Our hope supported by the meditation of Christ his passion, 426 Holy Ghost a true God proued. 659 Holy Ghost appeared in the likenesse of fiue speciall things. 660 And why. 661, &c.
Holy Ghost, how we may know whether wee haue it or not. 672 Christ, why he went out of the house to be taken. 439 Hope what it is, and how it differeth from faith. 649 Hope two-fold. ibid. Humane hope what it doth, and diuine hope what it doth. 650 Euery hope in God maketh not happie. 651 To want the Holy Ghost, is marke of a lost one. 674 HV. Humanitie of Christ onely suffered. 438 Humanitie of Christ not capable of infinite excellencies. 146 Humane acts how said to be done by God, 165. 166 Humilitie of Christ. 349 Seene in the incarnation of Christ. 358 JA. IAmes most like vnto Christ. 461 JD. Idlenesse a furtherance to sinne. 13 Idolatrie a great master-sinne. 41 How horrible it is. 238 IE. Iewes, why they beleeue not Iesus the Sonne of Mary to be the true Messias. 561 Iehouah the essentiall and most proper name of God. 122, 123 It signifieth an eternall being. 123 In hebrew, containeth nothing but conso∣nants, in latine nothing but vowels, and why. 125 Knowne to Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. 126 Why translated Lord. 130, 131 Christ true Iehouah. 278. &c. Iesuites what they say to proue transubstanti∣ation. 172 Iewes rightly vnderstood Christ teaching him∣selfe to be equall to the father. 300 Reiection of the Iewes grieued Christ. 454 Iewes how cunningly they sought to incense Pilat against Christ. 472 IG. Ignorance two-fold. 26, 355 Simple Ignorance doth extenuate a sinne. 27 Affected ignorance trebleth the sinne. 28 Wilfull ignorance what a fearefull sinne. ibid. Christ was ignorant of some things, and how he may be said to be ignorant of any thing 356 Ignorance of Gods power the cause of many heresies. 134, 135 How ignorant many men are of the chiefest points of christianitie. 395 IM. Immortalitie how to be attained. 128 Impossible things for God to doe, of two sorts. 185 Impossible for God to make the things which are, not to haue beene. 167 Image of God could be repayred by none but by God. 321 We are apt to imitate our Parents. 247 252 Wherein we ought to imitate God. 228 To imitate Christ the safest way to walke. 360 IN. How ineffable God is 125 Sinnes of infirmitie what they are. 30 No man free from them. ibid. Knowne by foure speciall notes, 31 Infirmities of Christ proue the manhood of Christ. 347 Our infirmities why Christ did vndertake them 352 Infirmities of how many sorts. 352 Infirmities not sinfull, two-fold. 353 What infirmities Christ tooke on him. ibid. Incarnation of the Word why decreed for our saluation. 318 Incarnation of Christ what benefit it bringeth. 359 The greatest argument of Gods loue. 257 That wee are not in God, as Christ is in God 298 Christ as man, for euer inferiour to his Fa∣ther. 302 Condemnation of all infidels grieued Christ 454
Infamie described, and the miseries thereof shewed. 68 Three things should expell ingratitude from vs 706 God looketh into the intention of the heart. 54 Inuocation for two things. 700 IO. Iosephus what he writ of Christ. 577 Iohannes Alexandrinus what he did. 265 IR. Sinne called irremissible three wayes. 227 IƲ. Iudas what benefits he receiued from Christ 458 Why chosen to be an Apostle. 459 Why made the Purse-bearer. ibid. Why he betraied Christ. ibid. Why he gaue them a signe. 461 How sought to be reclaymed by Christ. 461, 462 What his treason should teach vs. 461 His arrogancie and iniquitie how great. 461 Why he kissed Christ. 461 That it is a iust thing to punish sinne. 90 Iustice is often peruerted with men. 91 God iudgeth all men according to what they haue actually done. 95 Euery one according to his desert. 92 God most iust, proued 91 God in the strictnes of his iustice might in∣flict more punishmēt vpon the damned 187 Whatsoeuer he doth, is iust. 237 Iustice of God taken diuers waies. 237 Iustice of God requireth a day of iudgement. 245 How it stands with God iustice to punish the fathers sinnes vpon the children. 245 Iustice and truth how they pleaded against man. 319 That we should as well feare Gods iustice, as hope for mercie. 244 Iudgements of God must be threatned, when his mercies doe not allure vs. 696 Iustification what it is. 208 Christ Iustified by his enemies. 429 KI. KIngdome of heauen could be giuen by none but by God. 321 Kisses, that there be fiue kindes. 460 Kings and Magistrates to be prayed for, and why. 734 KN. God knoweth best when to helpe vs. 724 Knowledge most necessary for Preachers 642 Adams desire of knowledge brought igno∣rance vpon vs all. 58 Sinnes of knowledge, most fearefull inexcu∣sable sinnes. 29 And yet we doe what we know to be feare∣full sinnes. 29 The excellencie of our knowledge makes our sinnes the more horrible. 30 All knowledge of God extinguished by sin. 64 Three wayes of knowing God. 120 We are not able to know him as hee is in himselfe. 120 Knowledge of Gods power, the foundation of our faith. 134 We know many things negatiuely, as, what God is not, which we know not positiuely. 176 We know what God cannot doe, though we know not what he can doe. 176 To know Christ, the onely thing that makes vs happy. 259 It suppresseth all vices. 261 The Gentiles had a measure of the know∣ledge of God. 311 The diuels know God, and the mysterie of the Trinitie. 314 Knowledge of Christ, two-fold. 356 Knowledge of Iesus Christ, the chiefest know∣ledge in the world. 391 The diuell chiefly laboureth to corrupt it. 391 We know not what is good for our selues. 726 LA. LAbour vndertaken vpon hope of reward. 1 Labourer presently to haue his pay. ibid.
Law of nature and of all nations teacheth to punish sinne. 90 Lawes of men like a spiders web. 91 Law of God like an yron net. ibid. Lawes must bee made according to rules of mens abilitie to keepe them. 210 Law in the Gospell. 224 That the law was not created. 286 To keepe Gods lawes made Dauid wiser then his teachers. 571 Law of God giuen to be kept, not to be talked of. 600 Languages and readie speech requisite for preachers. 641 LE. Letters how vsed by the ancient to signifie di∣uers things. 473 LI. God the verie life of all things. 125 Life of Christ a continuall suffering. 437 A good life what it effecteth. 601 Bad life what euill it doth. 601 The wicked are lifted vp to bee throwne downe. 612 Life of Christ a continuall suffering. 437 LO. Loaues of bread how multiplied by Christ. 174 God onely absolute Lord. 131 Lord and Iehoua equiualent. ibid. Lord taken two waies. ibid. Men may be called Lords. 131 Our Lord should bee feared and serued, for three speciall reasons. 132 Christ most properly called Lord. 132 Logos what it signifieth. 306 Why, vsed by the Euangelist. 310 The best knowne name of Christ among the Iewes. 311 God loueth not the wicked. 189 Loue of God, in giuing Christ to be incarnate, how great it was. 303 To loue God is not to offend him. 305 Loue of the Father seene in giuing Christ to be incarnate. 357 Loue of Christ seene in his incarnation. 359 Our loue to God increased by the meditati∣on of Christ his Passion. 424 Loue of God to mankinde moued him to giue his Sonne to die for man. 498 How great his loue was to man. ibid. Loue of Christ to man, how vnspeakable. 499 How deerely we ought to loue Christ. 508 To loue one another, how wee are bound vnto it. 511 Want of loue the cause of all mischiefe in the world. 511 We ought to loue all men. ibid. Loue of money what it doth. 565 Loue shewed foure wayes. 693 That there is a gradation in the loue of God. 684 Man lost a two-fold good. 321 LƲ. Vntamed lusts what an odious sinne. 240 Saint Lukes words, he shall be called the Sonne of God, how vnderstood. 248 Lutherans what they teach concerning the vnion of the two natures of Christ. 377 Lutheran doctrine what absurdities it brings foorth. 377 MA. MAn following his vocation is the safer from Satan. 13 Man receiued power to beget man like him∣selfe. 7 Manner how euerie sinne is committed foure∣fold. 26 Sinnes of malice haue two violent proper∣ties. 32 Malice of Satan restrayned. 178 Man, what a poore and a miserable thing. 104 Manhood described, and the miseries therof. 70 Manner how the Father begetteth the Sonne, or the Holy Ghost proceedeth, is ineffable. 227 Manner of diuine mysteries not curiously to be searched into. ibid No man truly rich 281 Malice of Hereticks seene in denying the God-head of Christ. 305 Not to marrie with wicked sinners. 109 Mankinde produced three waies before Christ his time. 333 Manner how Christ was conceiued. 335
It is ineffable. 336 Christ made a perfect man. 340 Marcion his heresie. 343 Macedonius his heresie. ibid. Manichaeus his heresie. ibid. Manhood of Christ seene by the sufferings of Christ. 343 Word made flesh, why the Euangelist saith. 369 How one thing may be made another thing three waies. 37 Manhood of Christ how adored. 383 Mary rightly called  the mother of God. 385 Mary of what Tribe she was. 397. 398 Mathew and Michoa, how reconciled, touch∣ing the place of Christ his birth. 407 Magi what they beleeued Christ to be. 43 Man, of al creatures most subiect to sufferings. 434 Malice of Satan, Christ prayed against. 456 Malchus how he vsed Christ. 467 Masters that are ill, make ill seruants. 467 Malice of the Iewes against Christ. 495 517 Manner of Christs suffering incomprehensible. 52 Mary Magdalen a sinnefull woman. 529 How shee liued after her conuersion. 533 Mary Magdalens, how many there were. 568 Why not suffered to touch Christ. 568 Magistrates in what sence to be feared. 538 Manhood of Christ, how said to bee euerie where. 54 Martyrs how constantly they professed Christ 577 Manna had twelue wonders in it. 703 ME. Memorie what an excellent facultie it is. 60 Wherein it excelleth all other faculties. ibid. God recommendeth all his benefits vnto it. ibid. How defiled by sinne. 61 How faithfull to record vaine and vile things. ibid. How faithlesse to retaine good things. 61 What we should alwaies remember. 62 Meditation of our death what it doth. 82 Mediators two sorts. 296 Mediator betwixt God and man, to bee like God and like man. 320 Christ a perfect mediator. 341 Theesame measure of effectuall grace, must worke the same effect in all men. 209 Our meaning is accepted, where meanes are wanting. 232 Meditation of Christs Passion what it effec∣teth. 421. 422, &c. Most acceptable vnto Christ. 421 Expelleth sinne. 423 Kindleth our loue to God. 424 Supporteth our hope. 426 The same measure of grace not giuen to all men. 602 Meanes to bring vs to our end, decreed as well as our end. 654 The Apostles receiued not the same measure of grace. 667 The same measure of fruits God expecteth not from all men. 668 Melchisedech who he was. 330 No inhabitant of Canaan. 330. 331 That he was Iesus Christ the Son of God, in the shape of man proued. 331, &c. Memnons heresie. 343 Merit of Christs suffering how to bee conside∣red. 502 All men of note vnder the old Testament, types of Christ. 258 To hope for mercie and to neglect Gods seruice vaine presumption. 717. Mercie and peace how they pleaded for man 319 Mercie in God what it signifieth. 180 Mercie of God how it sought Adam, and ma∣ny more when they sinned. 180, &c. Mercie of God magnified. 182 It consisteth chiefly in three things. 182 It is euerlasting two waies. 184 The best stay to relie vpon. 185 How it qualifieth punishments. 186 Found in all places, and in all creatures 188 Mercie of God two-fold. 188 How God is onely mercifull to them that loue him. ibid.
It proceedeth naturally from God. 195 How it pleadeth for sinners. ibid. How largely it extendeth it selfe. 223 Mercies of God innumerable and immesura∣ble. 223 Lasting for euer and euer. ibid. Mercie of God teacheth vs to bee affrayd to sinne. 225 God more mercifull then we are sinnefull. 226 We ought to imitate God in the workes of mercie. 228 Mercy how scarce among men. ibid. Workes of mercie of two sorts. 232 Motiues to perswade vs to be mercifull. 223 Mercie makes vs like to God. ibid. Scarce amongst vs. ibid. That it is no mercie to spare wicked men. 235 Messias expected by the Gentiles. 316 MI. Able ministers what a great gift. 643 We ought to pray for our ministers. 737 Ministers subiect to the greatest miseries. 74 The manifold miseries of all Ages. 68 Of infancie 68. Of child-hood. 68. 69. Of youth 69. Of man-hood 70. Of old age 70 71 The miseries of al estates. 71. Of the poore. 72. Of the rich 72. Of meane men 73. Of the nobilitie, ibid. Of the common people, ibid. Of the Magistrates, ibid. Of the Mini∣sters. 74 How Christ suffered all miseries. 260 MO. Christ how mocked vpon the Crosse. 481 MV. How Christ multiplied the loaues of bread. 174 To murmure against God, what a haynous sinne. 139 MY. Mysterie of clothing Christ in white, explai∣ned. 473 Mysterie of the Trinitie, why not fully reuea∣led at first. 272 Misteries of faith how farre past the reach of a naturall man. 59 NA. NAture is wholy defiled. 4 Nature can neuer procure the gifts of grace. 64 Nature teacheth vs to punish sinne. 90 Nature notable to shew the reason how the world should be made. 138 The nature of all things good. 197 Nature relieueth the part most distressed. 451 To the nature of God what things are re∣pugnant. 152 Two natures in our Sauiour Christ. 363 Confirmed. 365. 366. By nature wee are alike indifferent to all sinnes. 204 Abstract names of all excellencies most pro∣per vnto God. 122. 294 Jehoua the essentiall name of God. 123 Name of God taken two waies. 296 All names of dignitie in the old Testament types of Christ. 258 Christ came from Nathan, and not from Salomon. 398 NE. Negatiue precepts. 365. 230 Necssitie three-fold. 491 How it was necessarie for Christ to suffer. 493 Nestorius his heresie. 374 Wherein he affirmed the vnion of the two natures of Christ to subsist. 375 His heresie confuted. 376 How he was deceiued about the person of Christ. 619 NI. Christ borne in the night time, and why. 406 NO. Nominall relation of the three Persons of the Trinitie maketh a true distinction of the persons. 278 Nouatus his heresie 112 Why hee thought sinnes of recidiuation should not be pardoned. 593
OB. MAny obseruations about the manner of his crucifying. 489 Obstinate sinners how hardly reclaimed. 463 Obedience of Christ seene in the incarnation of Christ. 358 Obiections of the Arrians against the eternall God-head of Christ answered. 284. &c. OF. We offend God for trifles. 105 Officers not to be made, but of the best and godliest men. 109 Office of the Word to declare the minde of God. 312 What we should offer vnto Christ. 415 OL. Old age described, and the miseries thereof. 71 ON. One sinne brings death. 3 OM. Omnisciencie cannot be communicated to any creature, 156 OP. Oppressing the poore what a fearefull sin. 240 To oppose the knowne truth what a horri∣ble sinne. 240 The euill that oppresseth man is two-fold. 321 OR. Originall corruption how traduced. 4 Hard to be expressed 5 Order obserued by God in all things. 324 PA. HOw painefull to walke in the wayes to hell. 100 Christ made passible, the first degree of his passion. 438 Patience and mercy of God shewed by two pas∣sages of Scripture. 196 Patience necessary to retayne the truth. 218 No sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224 Good Parents leaue the best patrimonie vnto their children. 224 Christ the perfect patterne of all vertue. 260 Meditation of Christs passion what it effe∣cteth. 421, 422. &c. Cause of passions two fold. 443 Passions of man how they inuade him, will he, nill he, but not Christ. 444 Passions of man how they blinde and distract him, but not Christ. 445 Our Parents neuer to be forgotten. 488 All the particulars of Christ his passions vn∣possible to be expressed. Patience in suffering, more respected of God then our suffering. 520 Patience what an excellent gift. 655 Patience two-fold. 655 Christ set vs downe a perfect patterne of prayer. 718 PE. Chiefest perfection of man consisteth in the will of man. 53 Perplexities of the wicked at their death-time. 80 A most earnest perswasion to forsake sinne. 87 God a faithfull performer of all his promi∣ses. 227, & 358 Each person of the Trinity a true Iehoua. 123, 124 Three persons in the one essence of God 272 The three persons of the Trinity distingui∣shed two waies 274 Person of Christ, how alwaies abused by Satan and all heretickes. 304 What is true of the person of Christ, is not alwaies true being restrayned to the body of Christ. 344 Christ conceiued a perfect man in the first moment of his conception. 337 Christ was in all respects a perfect man 340 Peters infirmities manifold. 467 Why suffered to fall. 468 How restored by Christ. ibid. Persecutors of Christ how plagued. 558 Petition of the theefe on the crosse how soone granted. 487 People how they desired the death of Christ. 495 Person of Christ how excellent he was. 502
The women how peaceably they came to the graue. 522 Peace, the badge of Gods children. ibid. Person of Christ still one, and most simple. 618, 619 Men easier wonne by perswasion then by compulsion. 694 People to what naturally inclined. 698 Peace what an excellent thing it is. 701 PH. Philosophers saw and confessed the blindnesse and ignorance of men. 59 Philosophers wonderfull diligent to seeke out all knowledge. 315 Philip King of Macedon what he required of the Athenians. 644 Phrases of being able and not able how vnder∣stood. 158 Phrases true of vs not true in the same sence of Christ. 364 PI. Pilates wife how she iustified Christ. 475 Pilate how in censed against Christ. 472 How cruelly he handleth him. 475 How vrged by a three-fold argument to crucifie him. 476, 477 Why he condemned him. 478 Sinners chiefly to be pittied. 232 Pilate what he writ to Tiberius of Christ his resurrection. 577 PL. Place where Christ was borne, Bethelem, and why. 407 A placable man is gratious. 190 Mercie how it pleadeth for sinners. 195 Plato and his followers what they thought of the word Christ. 313 Fittest place to pray, is the Church. 711 Place whence Christ raysed himselfe, both in respect of his body and soule. 550, &c. Place from whence and into which Christ as∣cended. 623, 691, &c. Place whence and into which we must ascend. 630 PO. Pouertie an intollerable burthen. 72 Knowledge of Gods power the foundation of our faith. 134 How needfull it is. 135 Power and authority not the same. 143 Power two-fold. 143 Passiue power what it is. ibid. Actiue power of God what it is, and how manifold. ibid. Atheists deny the power of God. 136 Denied by Philosophers. 136 Power of God proued. 137 By the creation of the world, 137 By the gouernment of the world. 138 By Scripture. 159 By the workes of God. ibid How it appeared at all times. 160 How extolled by the Fathers. 161 By the Heathens. 161 Confest by the diuels. 162 Power why ascribed to the Father. 273 Power of God chiefly seene in forgiuing sins. 140 Power of euery creature is a receiued power, and limited. 144 Power of God considered two waies. 144 The proper power of each person. 145 The common power of God. ibid. Power of God so proper to God, that it can∣not be communicated to any creature. 145 Power of God absolute in three respects. 147 Ordinarie power of God guided by the de∣cree and will of God. 148 Gods absolute power proued. 149 How farre it extendeth. 151 Diuersly answered. 152, &c. Power of God a great comfort to the god∣ly. 177 Preserueth the Saints from sinne. 178 It should terrifie the wicked. 179 Power of seruing God not taken away from vs by God. 210 Perfect Power most requisite for Prea∣chers. 643 Our posteritie perpetuated by our seruing of God. 399 PR. Prayer of Christ on the Crosse, how effectuall. 487 What Christ prayed against. 456, 457 Prayers made vnto Christ. 283
Prayer of two kindes. 700 Prayer in respect of the forme manifold. 707 That we should pray to none but God. 707 Euery where. 711 Prayer two-fold. 714 We should alwaies pray in heart. 715 How we ought to pray, in humilitie, in faith, 718, &c. When we pray, we should cleanse our selues from all sinne. 721 Prayer an essntiall part of Gods worship 722 The chiefest part of Gods seruice. 729 How auaileable for men. 723 To obtaine whatsoeuer we aske, more then we aske, better then we aske. 723, 725, &c. How powerfull it is 727 This onely preuaileth with God, and ap∣peaseth his wrath. 728 The chiefest of all Gods gifts and graces. 703 We ought to pray in prosperity as well as in aduersity. 732 We ought to pray for all men. 733 That we should practise what we know to be good. 600 Practise onely proueth vs christians. 601 Preachers charge how great it is. 739 Their state how dangerous. 740 Preachers why hated of all men. 435 Preachers, three sorts of them. 697 How wickedly many of them doe liue. 220 And how zealously many of them doe liue 220, 221 Predictions concerning the Messias, all accom∣plished in Christ. 512 Presence of the Angels should preserue vs from sinne. 603 No personall presence of Christ to be ex∣pected before the day of iudgement. 547 God can preserue his seruants in the midst of the wicked. 658 Prerogatiues of the blessed Virgin, in bearing Christ. 336 Preseruation from plagues not to be ascribed to chance. 206 Preseruation from sinne, from God. 204 Pride how it spoileth many one. 614 How euery house is full of it. 358 Priests to be made of the best men. 109 High-Priests did what they could to hinder the resurrection of Christ. 563 Euery Priest should be perfect in all parts. 341 Priests either the best or the worst men. 460 Price of our ransome, is the bloud of Christ. 501 Prouidence of God how admirable. 408, 409 Prouidence of God disposeth all things. 138, 139 Gods promises should neuer be doubted. 130 Gods promise touching the incarnation of the word. 257 To be proud of goodnesse, the worst pride in the world. 614 Prouidence to foresee things, what an excel∣lent gift. 653 The boundlesse goodnesse of Gods proui∣dence. 257 Prouidence of God, prouiding afore-hand to preserue vs from heretickes. 350 Properties cannot passe their owne subiects. 157 Properties of each nature of Christ, how indif∣ferently predicated of the whole person of Christ. 384 Properties of the manhood, how ascribed to the God head; So properties of the God∣head, how ascribed to the man-hood. 385 & 386 PV. Publique sinnes are doubly sinnes. 21 Publique sinners are publiquely to testifie their repentance 65 Publiquely to be punished. 37 Publique prayers how dangerous to neglect it. 77 They should neuer be missed. 716 To punish sinne a most iust thing. 89 God punisheth onely sinnes done. 97. and no man for the sinnes hee neuer did, 95 Punishment should be answerable to the of∣fence. 107 Punishment of sinne should make vs to forsake sinne. 66 Christ vndertooke the punishment of all o∣thers. 448
Punishment, how qualified by Gods mercies. 186 Punishment of the damned qualified by Gods mercies. 187 Once inflicted, neuer mitigated. ibid. How slow God is to punish sinne. 194 Acte of punishment least agreeable to Gods nature. 195 God is compelled to punish. 195 Our punishment often suspended by the goodnesse of God. 200 God will punish sinners. 244 Wicked men shall be punished in their chil∣dren, 245 How this punishment may stand with Gods iustice. ibid. Punishment either corporall or spirituall. 249 Godly often punished in the corporall pu∣nishment of the wicked. 250 Humane lawes doe often pun sh the chil∣dren for the parents faults. 250 Punishment spirituall and eternall differ. ibid. The punishment of Christ was imposed on him by God, and why. 496 All men not fit for all purposes. 602 Iudas, why made purse-bearer. 359 Not the purity of the Virgine, but the wor∣king of the holy Ghost caused Christ to be conceiued without sinne. 339 QV. The quality of sinne according to the qua∣lity of the offender. 37 Curious questions not to be discussed. 627 RA. RAge of the Iewes against the dead corps of Christ. 482 Christ onely raised himselfe from the dead 552 RE. Regenerate men haue a double being. 6 Repentance the best meanes to reuiue our dy∣ing soules. 51, 52 Repentance killeth sinne. 82 God no respecter of persons. 91 God easie to be reconciled. 191 Men cannot repent when they will. 242 Christ would not reueale himselfe vnto the world all at once. 259 Certaine resemblances of the Trinity seene in the creatures. 273 Christ, how he reconcileth vs to himselfe. 297 How the word God resembleth our outward and inward word. 308 God reuealed many things concerning him∣selfe to the Gentiles. 313 The Deuils reuealed many things concer∣ning God to the Gentiles, & why. 313, 315 Christ would not reueale his seruants shame 466 Reiection of the Iewes grieued Christ. 454 Regeneration not needfull vnto Christ. 364 To receiue the outward Sacraments, and not the grace of the Sacraments, is no∣thing worth. 681 Heretickes receiue neither Christ nor the Sacraments of Christ. 682 Worthy receiuers of the Sacraments receiue Christ, and all his graces. 682 We may receiue Christ without the Sacra∣ments. 680 Request of the thiefe, how soone granted. 487 What small things God requireth of vs. 99 To relye on God in afflictions, how safe. 489 Redemption foure-fold. 500 To redeeme vs, how dearely it cost. 50 Our redemption paraleleth our creation. 557 Resurrection of Christ shewed by the Angell 543 Resurrection of Christ manifesteth the con∣quest of Satan, deliuerance of men, and Christ to haue ouercome all his enemies. 551 Resurrection of Christ the third day fore∣shewed. 553 How ascribed to each person of the Trini∣ty. ibid. Resurrection of Christ the third day, confir∣meth our faith in foure respects. 556 Certainty of Christs Resurrection, shewed in his rising the third day. 557 Resurrection of Christ the third day, is a pat∣terne of our condition. 544 Resurrection of Christ sought to be hindered by the high Priests. 563
Resurrection of Christ beleeued of vs for three respects 566 Proued many wayes. 567, &c. Resurrection of Christ, a patterne to teach vs how to rise from sinne. 587 A cause of great ioy. 598 An assurance of our resurrection to eternall life. 598 Resurrection of Christians twofold. 586 Relapsing or often falling into the same sinnes, how dangerous. 549 RI. Riches haue destroyed many men, and what e∣uill they doe. 73 Riches or pouerty, whether best. ibid. No man truly Rich. 81 Christ truly rich. ibid. God loueth righteousnesse. 90 The more righteous we be, the more subiect to be afflicted. 434 Christ to rise againe for three reasons 550 Typicall Testimonies that Christ should rise the third day. 554 Christ himselfe shewed that he should rise the third day. ibid. To rise from the dead, greater then to de∣scend from the Crosse. 562 We should rise truly from sinne, and from all sinnes. 591, 592 Ro. Rossensis his parable to Henery the eight, of the axe that came to the trees for a handle. 589 SA. SAcraments a most excellent meanes to be∣get grace. 679 They shew all that the Scriptures teach. ibid. Euery sacrifice should be perfect. 341 Sacriledge, what a fearefull sinne. 241 Saints preserued from sinne by the power of God. 178 More glorious in aduersity then prosperity 207 They alwayes prayed to Christ. 283 Saints at their death supported by God. 447 Salomon speaketh of a two-fold generation of Christ. 288 His words, the Lord created me, how vnder∣stood. 286 Salomons posterity for his sinnes, were finished in Iechonias. 399 Saluation, how we ought to thirst after it. 488 Saluation by none but by Christ. 501 Rabbi Samuel, what he saith concerning Christ. 579 Sanctification, what it is. 208 Samosatenian heresie. 363 Satan, how said to ascend. 910 He lifteth vp the wicked to destroy them. 612 His subtilty to deceiue the people. 644 He ought to be spied before he comes too neere vs 13 He is the Father of sinne. 14 He suggesteth sinne diuers wayes. 12 He laboureth to conceale the light either of preaching or of applying Gods word. 18 How he handleth the wicked at the time of their death. 80 He cannot doe what he would. 178 How he alwayes laboureth to vilifie the person of Christ. 304 His insolency against Christ. 322 His enuy against Christ, and why. 493, 494 Without satisfaction no sinne can be pardo∣ned. 163 SC. Holy Scripture wholly true. 215. 216 The best warrant for all Preachers. 606 Scourging of Christ how grieuous it was. 475 Christ how scoffed vpon the Crosse. 481 SE. To search too farre into Gods essence is not safe. 124 Seede of the parents, the substance of the whole man. 340 Seed of the man whether it falleth into the substance of the childe. 340 God seeking after vs should make vs to seeke for him. 181 God not to seene with any materiall eyes 117 Wee shall not see Gods essence in heauen but in the face of Iesus Christ. 118
All men are euer seeking something. 524 Godly men seeke onely for God. 25 Many seeke him amisse. 526 Many seeke Christ amisse. ibid. How we ought to seeke for Christ. 526 521, &c. That we cannot seeke for God, vntill God doth seeke for vs. 529 Why the wicked seeke not God. 531 Sensitiue facultie soone defileth the reasona∣ble soule. 17 Christ not sent by way of command. 301 Seneca what he said. 66 Sentence of Christ his condemnation. 478 Senate of Rome lothe to derogate from the worth of Augustus. 504 To serue sinne a most grieuous slauerie. 22 Seruetus his heresie. 343 To serue God, the greatest good that wee can doe vnto our children. 253 It procureth all blessings to vs. 132 Not to serue God, heapeth all plagues vpon vs. 133 We were redeemed and preserued that we might serue him. 132 It is the onely way to perpetuate our po∣sterities. 399 Late seruice God will hardly accept, and why. 587. 588 The seauen words of Christ vpon the Crosse. 486 SH. Shamefull handling of Christ how it grieued him. 450 Shame of sinne cast off, wee are almost past hope of goodnesse. 20 Shedding of mans blood, what a heauie sinne. 240 Shepherds why first informed of the birth of Christ. 412 SI. Sight of sinne is no sinne. 15 Sicknesse of the soule, how worse then the sick∣nesse of the body. 63 A signe why giuen by Judas. 461 Signes how we may know whether wee bee as∣cended any thing towards heauen or not. 632 Signes of a faithfull teacher. 466 Similies expressing how the word alone assu∣med our flesh. 327 A simile of Damascus and Theodorus, shewing how the two natures of Christ though vni∣ted, doe remaine inconfused. 388 Sinne is so vgly that at the first the sinner him∣selfe would faine conceale it. 18 To be resisted at the first, 23 It blindeth vs, that we cannot perceiue it's vglinesse. 42 At last it tormenteth the consciences of all sinners. 42 How vgly and loathsome it is. 47 Euerie sinne payeth the same wages. 46 Sinnes the diseases of the soule. 63 It extinguished all knowledge of God. 64 Sin of man in many things more haynous then the sinne of Satan. 106 The cause of all our miseries. 111 What it is. 166 In euery sinne two things to be conside∣red. ibid. Sinne and death indissolubly linked together. 2 Sinne the roote of death. ibid. How farre it spread it selfe. 3 Sinne originall or actuall. 3 Sinne to haue any thoughts of sinne. 13 Actuall sinne what it is. 10 Not a meere priuation. ibid. An erring from Gods will. 11. How it creepeth secretly and insensibly, like a Serpent. 12, 18. How it increaseth inwardly & outwardly. 12 Not resisted, how it will necessarily increase more and more. 22 Sinne is inwardly increased three waies. 12 Sinne some way voluntarie, or no sinne. 15 Sinne outwardly increaseth foure waies. 17 It is compared vnto a witch. 46 It brought on man a treble death. 49 Sinne against the Holy Ghost, what it is. 227 Sinne irremissible three waies. ibid. No sinne so great but God can forgiue it. ibid. Sinnes not traduced from the parents vnto the children. 246
Our sinnes drew Christ to bee incarnate. 318 Sinne expelled by the meditation of Christ his Passion. 422 Our sinnes crucified Iesus Christ. 497 Sinne brought feare into the world. 540 The more sinfull we are, the more we ought to feare. ibid. Sinne ought speedily to bee forsaken for two reasons. 589 Sinners how they condemne God to iustifie themselues. 24 Sinners all, excepting Christ. 2 No sinner excluded from hope of pardon. 224 Three sisters of the destinie signifie God. 312 SL. God how slowe to reuenge. 193, 194 SM. Small things suffered, doe grow great and doe much hurt. 42 Small sinnes ought to be resisted. 43 What a small matter it was that God commanded Adam. 98 What a small matter it is that God requi∣reth of vs. 99 SO. Christ the Sonne of God, not as we are the Sonnes of God. 291 The Sonne why made flesh rather then the Father or the Holy Ghost. 322 Sorrowes and sufferings of Christ, exceeded all other sorrowes. 486 Sorrow is two-fold. 354 Soule whether traduced from the parents. 4 Not created from the beginning. 6 Not created as God infuseth them. 6 Soule the seate of sinne. 7 Soule immortall yet hath a kinde of death. 51 Soules diseases what they be. 63 That Christ had a true humane reasonable soule. 348 Soule of Christ after it parted from the body descended into the place of the damned. 582. 619. 620 SP. God spareth none for his greatnesse if they offend him. 40 He spareth the wicked for good mens sake. 187 We ought to spare no cost to get the truth. 217 To spare wicked men is not good. 222 That we should speak nothing but truth. 221 Examples of spitefull sinners. 33, 34 How fearefull is their state. ibid. Spirituall and eternall punishment how they differ. 250 ST. Our state in Christ better then that which we lost in Adam. 361 Starre of Christ spoken of by the Gentiles. 412 What time it appeared. 414 What effects it wrought in the Magi. 415 Christ why hee stayed so long before hee came. 401 Why he would not stay any longer. 402 Iudas why made steward. 459 SV. Christ of the same substance with his Father. 292 Made of the substance of his mother. 342 How subtilly Satan deales with men to make them bold to sinne, then to despaire. 41 Christ suffered all miseries. 260 Who most subiect to sufferings. 435 Christ suffered both in soule and body. 437 His first degree of suffering was to be made passible. 438 Consideration of Christ his sufferings most admirable. 439 The sufferings of Christ before his Iudges. 465 The grieuous sufferings after hee was con∣demned by the high Priest. 471 Sufferings of Christ how alone sufficient to sa∣tisfie for all sinnes. 502 Sufferings of the Saints how they doe profit the Church. 503 Sufferings how they doe comfort and con∣firme all Christians. 504 Sufferings of Christ teach vs how to suffer. 509
That we ought to suffer two waies. 509 To suffer with Christ, and for Christ, how readie and willing we ought to be. 510 Sufferings of Christ were voluntarie. 491. 492 How generall they were. 483 How vnspeakable, farre more then are ex∣pressed by the Euangelists. 484 Sufferings of Christ not imaginarie, but true reall sufferings. 484 God prouideth sufficient for euerie man. 704 Suggestions vnto sinnes are sinnes. 12 How they are to be auoided. 13 The surest signe of saluation. 652 Why Christ became our suretie. 497 SW. Continuall swearing, what a dangerous sin. 241 SY. That we sympathize in the sufferings of our brethren. 510 TE. TEares are speciall meanes to preuaile with God. 52 Best way to teach is to lay a good foundati∣on. 392 A perfideous tempting of God, what a hor∣rible sinne. 239 The temporall things of this life to be pray∣ed for. 703 The testimonies that proue Christ to be the true Messias. 411, 412, &c. Testimone of the Apostles to be beleeued for two speciall reasons. 572 Text of Salomon, Pro. 8.22. whether corrupted by the Arrians. 287 TH. That we ought to be thankfull vnto God for all we haue. 129 How we ought to be thankfull to God for giuing the Word to be incarnate. 305 For the sufferngs of Christ. 506 Thankfulnesse to be expressed by workes. 507 Theator where the Tragedy of Christ his Passi∣on was acted, was Ierusalem, and why. 421 Third day, why the appointed day of Christ his Resurrection. 555 The fittest day for Christ to rise in respect of his person. 556 Christ rising the third day did paralel our creation, and left a patterne of our condi∣tion. 558 What we ought to thirst after. 488 Thomas, whether he was with the Eleuē, when Christ appeared to them the first time. 573 Thoughts that are wicked, bring forth wic∣ked works. 14 Three persons in one essence of God. 272 Three things handled touching the person of the sonne. 277 Three sisters of the destinie what they signifie 312 Three wonderfull things obseruable in ma¦king the Word flesh. 328 Three things measure all durations. 400 Three things obseruable in the day of Christ his natiuitie. 405 Three things that moue attention. 420 Three things effected in vs by the meditation of Christ his Passion. 422 Three things moue vs to loue any one. 425 Three things happened to Christ in Gethse∣mane after his bloudy swea. 458 Threefold argument vrged by the Iewes to moue Pilate to crucifie Christ. 476 That there is a three-fold necessitie. 491 The three women seeking Christ, signifie three properties of the Church. 521 Three things required to make an action good. 524 Three things excellent in the Angels. 535 Christ, how he remained three dayes in his graue. 559, 560 Three dreadfull enemies of man. 582 Three things considered about our spirituall ascention. 630 Three sorts of men excluded from the Pas∣chall Lambe. 682 Three sorts of Preachers. 697 Three reasons to moue vs to thankefulnesse. 705 A three-fold voice of the creature. ibid. Three reasons to driue away ingratitude from vs. 706 Three degrees of thankfulnesse. 707
Three reasons to moue vs to pray for our Mi∣nisters. 737 TI. No time mispent, that is spent to know the person of Christ. 305 Christ, how made in time. 400 Of the time when Christ was borne. ibid. How time hath his fulnesse. 401 The particular time of the words incarna∣tion. 402. Titillation, and thoughts of sinne, is sinne. 14 TO. Torments of Hell, how intollerable. 86 Not equall to all the damned. 93 Not suffered by Christ. 581 TR. That we doe not traduce sinnes from our parents. 246 Transubstantiation hath a double contradiction 173 How full of absurdities. ibid. Defenders of Transubstantiation how agree∣able to the false prophets, whereof our Sa∣uiour biddeth vs to beware. 548 What the Author thinketh of Transubstan∣tiation. 549 Treason of Iudas, what it should teach vs. 463 Mysterie of the Trinity▪ why not fully reuea∣led at the first. 272 How darkly shewed in the creatures. 273 Trismegistus, what he said of the word. 312 Morall truth, what it is. 312 Truth in vs not as it is in God. ibid. Physicall truth, what it is. ibid. God is truth two wayes. 213 All truths, how they doe proceed▪ 213 Truth of things, of vnderstanding of words. 213, 214 Diuine truth measureth all things. 214 Expressed truth is two-fold. 215 Truth, how excellent it is. ibid. How like the light. 215 How it expelleth errors. ibid. Sheweth what euery thing is. ibid. How it begets vs to God. 216 God true in himselfe, in his workes, and in his words. 216 The primarie expressed truth, contained in the holy Scriptures. 215 Truth to be sought whatsoeuer it cost. 217 To be defended with the losse of all that we haue. 217 How alwayes handled on earth. ibid. How at last it will preuaile. 218 How euery truth proceedes from God. 222 How God loueth it. ibid. How it should be alwayes spoken. 222, 231 How hardly found in these dayes. 222, 231 Truth makes vs like to God. 231 Truth and iustice, how they pleaded against man. 319 TV. To turne from sinne, turnes away all the wrath of God. 195 TW. Twelue apparitions of Christ after his resur∣rection. 565 Twelue wonders in the Manna of the Israelites 703 Two things further the sinnes of the parents to continue in the children. 246 Two-fold will in Christ. 296 Two sorts of Mediators. 296 Two reasons shewing why Christ was made flesh. 320 Two things to be done for man before he could be saued. 321 Two things to be considered touching the conception of Christ. 333 Two signes of a true Teacher. 466 Two reasons moued Pilate to condemne Christ. 478 That there is a two fold hope. 649 Two kindes of prayer. 700 TY. Giuing of Canaan to the Israelites, a type of giuing heauen to vs. 127 The three women seeking Christ, a type of the Church. 519, 520 Typicall testimonies that Christ should rise the third day. 554 To liue vnder the tyrannie of sinne, how la∣mentable it is. 635
VA. VAnities of the world, how soone they passe away. 129 Christ despised all vanities. 260 Vaine-glory, how it tainteth many of the Clergy. 525 Ʋalentinus his heresie. 343 VB. Ʋbiquity cannot be communicated to any creature. 156 Vbiquitie of Christ his body, ouerthrowne by the assertion of the Angell. 543 Obiections of the Vbiquitaries answered. 168, 388 VE. Ʋeniall sinnes, or the least sinnes bring death. 41 Ʋertue is of an admirable beauty. 47 Christ a patterne of all vertue. 260 VJ. Ʋictory of Christ ouer Hell, Death, Sinne, and Satan. 634 Ʋillanies of Satan to be shewed, and why 392 Villanies done to Christ, not paralelled since the world began. 474 Vineger, how giuen to Christ to drinke. 482 Christ why borne of a Ʋirgin. 334 The blessed Ʋirgin still continued a Ʋir∣gin to her death. 336 Visitation of God two-fold. 243 To visite, what it signifieth. 243 God visiteth the afflicted. ibid. God visiteth the wicked 244 VN. Vnderstanding of Adam in Paradise, how ex∣cellent. 57, 58. Our Vnderstanding now, how darkened through sinne. 58 How quicke and sharpe in naturall things. 59 How blockish in all Diuine mysteries. ibid. Our vnderstanding of God very small. 121 Vnion of Christ his natures expressed by a si∣mily of Iustin Martyr. 371 Wherin the Nestorian heretickes auouched the same to consist. 375 Wherein the Lutherans affirmed it to con∣sist. 377 Wherein it doth truely consist. 378 Vnion of the two natures, inconuertible, in∣diuisible, &c. 379 Ʋnion of things three wayes made. 380 Vnion of Christ his natures substantiall. 381 Ineffable. ibid. What benefits it bringeth. 282, 283, &c. We must be vnited to Christ if we will as∣cend to Heauen. 627 Vnity of brethren. 689 Want of vnity amongst vs. 691 Ʋnrepentant sinners shall neuer be absolued. 242 ƲO. Voice of the creature three-fold. 705 WA. WAight of sinne feared by Christ. 545 Christ how he walked vpon the waters. 388 Warre how lawfull. 702 All wants supplied by Christ. 262 Way to Heauen, how said to be hard. 98 And how easie. 99 Three wayes of knowing God. 120 Three wayes of expressing what God is. Wayes of wickednes, how hard and difficult. 99 121 Best way to teach is to lay a good foundati∣on. 392 Way to saue man could neuer haue beene found but onely by the wisdome of God. 393 WE. Wealth, what discommoditie it bringerh. 524 WH. White clothing of Christ, what it signified. 473 White, an argument of innocency. 478 WI. Wicked men delight in committing sinne. 36 They are greedy to doe it. ibid. And they haue their full content when they haue done it. ibid. How they should be afraid to offend Gods power. 179 They haue no part in the speciall mercy of God. 188
Wicked men not loued of God. 189 They are with held from many sinnes by the goodnesse of God. 200 To giue vnto the wicked power to serue God, God is no waies to doe it. 210 The wickednesse of professors of the truth, ought no waies to disparage the truth of God. 219, 220 The wicked how they abuse Gods good∣nesse. 22 How punished in their children. 245 That they shall be punished. 244 Not euery sinne of the wicked is visited vp∣on their children. 247 The wicked how they doe deceiue them∣selues. 517 How it hapneth that they seeke not God. 51 How they are terrified and punished by the Angels. 536 How they are said to ascend. 60 How still captiues vnto Satan. 635 Wife of Pilate, how she iustified Christ. 475 Will of God reuealed in our consciences, and in the scriptures. 11 Wilfull sinners. 33 How fearefull is their state? ibid. They can pleade no excuse. ibid. The will commandeth all the faculties of the soule. 53 Will to sinne, deserueth the punishment of sinne. 55 Our will cannot be compelled by Sathan, nor by any other outward enemie. 55, 57 Our owne will is the cause of all our woe. 55 How our will to doe good, is quite killed by sinne. 56 It is drawne to sinne by our owne corrup∣tion. 57 How it is guided by the iudgement. 57 How we may be said to haue free-will. 57 To will to sinne, euer is a temporarie act. 97 God cannot will things contrarie to his nature. 153 To will a thing, we may be said two waies. 167 In what sence God willeth sinne. 167 Will of Christ two fold. 296, 301 To doe the will of God, will sooner bring vs to know God, then to heare his word 571 Wings wherewith we flie to heauen, what they be. 631 Wine how deceitfull it is 45 Why wisedome is ascribed to the Sonne. 273 By the wisedome whereof Salomon speaketh, Prou. 8, 22. what is meant. 285 How hard for the wisedome of God to please foolish man. 30 Christ how said to be with God. 297 Not as we are said to be with God, ibid. To be with God, and in God, how the same. 298 Witnesses of the birth of the Messias. 411 WO. Woe trebled to the inhabitants of the earth. 46 Christ why borne of a Woman. 334 Women, why three went together vnto the Se∣pulchre. 519 Why they were all three called by the same name. ibid. They were a type of the Church, and of euery christian soule. 520 How sorrowfull they were. ibid. How distinguished and knowne one from the other. 521 How they signifie three properties of the Church.  521 How fearelesse they were in seeking Christ. 521 How they laboured to increase the num∣bers of beleeuers. 522 How peaceably they came to the graue. 522 Many women were made instruments of great goodnesse. 532 Word of God diuided into two parts. 12 That the word was, before he was made flesh. 278 The word GOD, no accidentall, but an essentiall word. 285 The word, how he may be said to be crea∣ted
and begotten. 289 Words of Dauid, this day haue J begotten thee, how vnderstood. 290 Words of the Apostle, he is the first borne of eue∣ry creature, how vnderstood. 290 Words of Saint Luke, be shall be called the Sonne of God, how vnderstood. 248 Words of Salomon, the Lord created me, how vn∣derstood. 286 Words of Christ, my Father is greater then I, how vnderstood. 300 Words of Christ, I came not to doe mine owne will, how vnderstood. 301 Words of Saint Paul, then the Sonne shall be sub∣iect to the Father, how vnderstood. 301 Words of Christ, I came from aboue, how vnder∣stood. 344, 345 Words of the Apostle, God sent his sonne in the similitude of sinfull flesh, how vnderstood. 346 Words of our Creede, he descended into hell, how vnderstood. 580, 581, &c. The seauen gratious words that Christ spake vpon the Crosse. 486 Christ called the Word, because he decla∣reth his father vnto vs. 322 How God can expresse himselfe with one word. 307 Why Christ is tearmed the word. ibid. How the word GOD resembleth our out∣ward word. 308 How it resembleth our inward word. ibid. How it differeth from our word. 309 Whether it be a name of Christ his person or h office. 310 Why Saint Iohn vseth the Word, , the word 310 The word why made flesh. 317, 318 Why the Word, rather then the Father, or the Holy Ghost. 322 The word onely assumed our flesh. 326 How said to be made flesh. 368, &c. All the world without Christ, will auaile vs nothing. 263 Philosophers striue to proue the world to be eternall. 136 World made by God, proued. 137 World diuided into his seuerall ages. 402 To flie the world, the next way to finde Christ. 571 Workes of our vocation to be followed. 13 Outward workes of God, common to each person of the God-head. 145, 274 They are transient and voluntarie. ibid. Inward works of God are euerin doing. 275 They are necessary and incommunicable, i. e. proper to each person. 275 Worke of the incarnation, how common to the three persons, and how proper to Christ the Word. 326 God worketh one contrary out of another. 351 Workes of Christ testifie him to bee the true Messias. 417 Workes of any man testifie what he is. ibid. Workes requisite to expresse thankfulnes. 507 God worketh all the good that is in the Saints, and how God worketh our willing∣nesse to doe good. 530 Good workes, what they be. 670 God worketh foure wayes, with meanes, without meanes, with weake meanes, con∣trary to meanes. 147 Workes of God proue the power of God. 159 Our best workes haue need of mercy. 185 Workes of mercy of two sorts. 232 Outward workes of mercy chiefly sixe 232 God worketh diuers wayes. 237 Wormewood, wherefore good 527 Worth of the sufferings of Christ, how to bee considered. 502 Wounds of Christ, why reserued by him. 572 WR. Wrath of God feared by Christ. 545 Wrath of God quite turned away by our re∣pentance. 195 YO. YOuth described, and the miseries thereof shewed. 69 ZE. ZEno, what he said of the Word. 312 IEHOVAE LIBERATORI. FJNJS.
