300 99854356 19773
¶ The seconde part of the Secretes of Ma∣ster Alexis of Piemont, by hym col∣lected out of diuers excellent aucthours, and newely transla∣ted out of Frenche into Englishe, with a generall Ta∣ble, of all the matters conteined in the saied Boke. By Willyam Ward. ¶Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston: for Nicholas Englande. Anno domini. M.D.lx.
The translatour to the Readers. IN the ediciō of the first parte of the worthie se∣cretes, of the reuerend Senior Alexis of Pie∣mont, it was promised you (gentill readers) e∣uen of hym self in his Epistle, that he would labour in the collecciō of others, tried and experimented, for the vtilitie, profite, and pleasure of all soche, as either delited in theim, or would by theim be eased, of soche infirmities, as thei might casually haue been greeued withall. You heard also the cause, why he would communicate those secretes with the worlde, whiche vndoub∣tedly sprong of a godlie zeale, towarde the common cace of all menne. I therefore (bi∣cause he hath kept touche, performing his promes, in collectyng a seconde part) could no lesse dooe herein, then I did in the firste parte, that is to saie, no more to spare my labour in translatyng it, into our natiue toungue, nor hide the commoditie of so ex∣cellente thinges, from those that haue not the vnderstandyng of the Frenche tongue, then I did before. And bicause you should
not haue onely, the hed without the taile, that is, the biginnyng without the ende, you shall haue here, no lesse good and profitable matters (althoughe not so many) then was pre∣sented you in the o∣ther, as by your iudgement in rea∣dyng, you shall ease∣ly perceiue.
THE Second parte of the Secretes of Master Alexis of Piemont, by him colle∣cted out of diuers and ex∣cellent Authors. To make whey as clere as well water. TAke wheie and heate it on the fier, but lette it not boile: then sprinkle it with a Sponge weate in strong vinaigre, or vergeous, or els the iuice or licour of Orenges, and so strain it in a piece of clothe made like a little bagge, doeyng so diuers times, vntill it be clere. But note, that the bagge must not be made cleaue at euery time: but you must powre it alwaies vpon the skomme of it, and it will become as clere as Amber. To make very good Aqua vite. TAke Wine that is not to olde, that is to safe of a yeare or somwhat more or lesse, and let it be very good, hauing a good odour: and distille it in a vessel of glasse hauing a long necke about sixe foote long, with a very small and slowe fier, and take it vp togither whiles it commeth furth fast, that is to saye, whan one droppe tarrieth not for another, and it shalbe very good and pleasant, for there shalbe nothing els but onely the parte of the Wine very sub∣tile and fine, true it is that it shal not be very hote, nor burne so muche as other Aqua vites doe. To make Armes or tables of Pictures al∣waies bright shining.
TAke verie stronge Vinaiger and Alome and beate the Alome into pouder and mingle it with the Vinaigre: and than rubbe therwith the armes or tables and they will be alwaies bright, or els anoint thē with the marow of a Deere. To make blacke Ynk very good. TAke a pound and a halfe of raine water, with three vnces of the waighttest Galles you can finde, bruse them into small peeces and poore them into the said water and let it stande two daies in the sunne. Then put to it two vnces of Ro∣maine vitriolle wel colored and beatē small, and mixe all well togither with a sticke of a Figge tree, & leaue it againe two daies more in the Sunne. Finally put to it an vnce of Gomme Arabicke that is eleere and bright and beaten into pouder, and an vnce of the pill of Pomegranades, and than boile it a little with a slowe fier: that doen straine it, and kepe it in a vessell of Leade or Glasse, and it will be very blacke and per∣fite good. To make Greene Ynke. TAke Verdegris elect & fayer, and make it into past with a little strong Vinagre and distilled water of Grene galle, and let it drie, and whan you will write with it tēper it with the same water of greene gall putting to it a little gomme Arabike. For Oxen that pisse Bloode. TAke three vnces of Phasioli that be redde, and sixe drammes of Pepper, & the seede of brome, and make thereof  poulder, and giue him drinke of it euery daie with white wine vntill he be hole, putting three vnces of the said poulder to two quarte of the said wine, and giue it him euerie daie three times.
To make Oile of Vitriol. TAke the Vitriol and make it into Lime, than put into Aqua vite, and let the water couer it, than distille it, first with a very small fier, au∣gmenting it by little and little vntil al become out. Then take out the Aqua vite by Balneum mariae with the water that is skant warme. This doen distil againe the Oile, and if at the beginning there come any water, put the said Oile into some vessell and set it in the Sunne: but it were muche better to set two vessels well closed togither one vpon another, and the water beyng in the Sunne will come and cleaue vnto the vessell that is vppermost, and therfore you shall take awaie the said vessell and set to another, and by this meane you shall purge awaie all the said water, and the Oile shall remaine not onely pure & nete, but also more delicat, than the comon Oile of Vitriol. To make white Teeth. TAke Limons, and make distilled water of thē, and washe your Teeth with it, for it is a soue∣raine thing, or if you will not make the water, take the licour of them which is also good for the same purpose, but the water is moche better, bicause it is fi∣ner, so that in distilling, it lose not his force. For the same. TAke lees of wine called Tararum, and put it in a vessell of Marble, and stop it surely, then burie it in the ground, and let it remaine there vntill it become water, and then take it out, and rubbe your teeth with it, and thei will waxe very faire. Take also the water that falleth at the beginning of the distilla∣cion of salte Peter and Alome, and rubbe your teethe therwith. If you take also the roote of Mallowes, and rub your teeth with it euery daie, thei will be bright, white, and faire without hurting the gommes. Or if
you take a cruste of wheaten bread, and burne it euen to coales, and then hauing made it to pouder, sko∣wer your teeth withall, and washe them afterwarde with cleane and faire water, either of the Welle or of the Conduite, thei will bee white, for it is a thing ex∣perimented. To take awaie spottes from the face. TAke twoo vnces of the licour of Limons, and twoo vnces of Rose water, twoo drammes of siluer sublimed, and as moche of Ceruse, put al togither, and make it like an ointmente, and anointe your face therwith at night, when ye go to bedde, and in the morning whan you are vp, anoint it with but∣ter. This is proued. For the same. TAke the white of an Egge, and sturre it with some thing, vntill it bee taurned to water, then take an vnce of the same water, and halfe an vnce of ceruse, and two drammes of quicke siluer, and a dramme of camfire, and mengle it all together and so annoint your face with it. For the same. TAke iiij. vnces of vitriol, and thre vnces of Salt peter, & an vnce of the rubbish or skale of steele, and distille all togither putting to it halfe an vnce of Camfire, and washe your face with it euery daie. For the same. TAke halfe a pounde of the roote of Serpentin called in latine Dracuntium or comonly Serpenta∣ria, whiche hath certaine great red graines ioy∣ned togither in a lompe, or els a stalke of a reede, and half a pound of a Lily roote, and asmuche of with Ma∣lowes, and seeth thē all togither in raine water, then beate them in a morter of Marbel, and put to it fower
vnces and a halfe of oile of Tartre, and the marowe of a Deere, and sixe drammes of Camfire, and so mixe all togither, and annoint your face therwith. To take away little red Pimples from a mans face. TAke fiuetene newe laied Egges, and put them whole into strōg Vinaigre, then take them out and breake them euen with the same Vinaigre in putting to it an vnce of Senuey, then distille them with some vessell of Glasse, and washe your face with the water at night when you go to bed, and againe in the morning wash it with sodden water wherin must be Bren and Mallowes. This is experimented. To make a water that taketh awaye the spottes of the face and maketh it faier and bright, and kepeth the handes and mouth that they chappe not or waxe full of chinkes. TAke a white Pigeon, and plucke of his fethers,Fraxinella, is called also Corrigiola, an herbe vvhich ren∣neth on the ground like grasse, Mai∣nardus saith it hathe lea∣ues like an Ashe and therfore is called Frax∣inella. then pluck out the guttes and garbage of him, and cut of his head and feete, then take three good handfuls of Fraxinella, and two pounde of Milke, and three vnces of Creame, and sixe vnces of oile of sweete Almondes, and let it be newe and fresh, and put all this togither and distille it in a vessell of Glasse, and washe your face and handes euery daie with the same water, and they wilbe alwaies white, softe, and with out any spottes or pimples, as in the middes of Somer. To make the face faire. TAke Fraxinella, and make water thereof in a Lembick, and washe your face well with the∣same euery daie. A water to make the face faire. TAke the white of an Egge, and make water therof in a Lembick, and washe your face with it asmuch and as often as you li.
To make a water that maketh the face white and shinyng. TAke the milke of an Asse, and Egge shelles, and make thereof distilled water, and washe your face with it, & it will be white faire & glistring. A water to make the face redde. TAke the legge of an Oxe or Calfe, that is to say from the knee douneward, and take of the skin and the hoofe frō it, and then breake all the rest in pieces, that is to saie the bones, the senewes and the marowe, and distill it, and so washe your face with the water that cometh of it euery morning. To make a kinde of white to make the face faire, called in Frenche Blanchet. TAke twoo vnces of Dragantum, and dissolue it with the white of an Egge well beaten: than put to it halfe an vnce of Borace, with asmoche of Ceruse, and asmoche Camfire, and mingle all togi∣ther, and make thereof little flatte balles, and when you occupie of it, tempere it in some Rose water, and anoint your face with it at night when you go to bed, and in the morning washe your face, with water of the flowers of Beanes, or els seeth Bren in well wa∣ter, and washe your face with all. To make an other better, whiche maketh the face white and glisteryng. TAke twoo vnces of the skimme of siluer, and a pound of white vineigre very strong, and boile them togither vntill thei be diminished of twoo thirdendels: Then take twoo drammes of Camfire, twoo of alome, twoo of Boras, and as moche oile of Tartre, and seeth them in Rose water. Then take of these twoo licours, that is to saie, of the said vineigre, and of the other, as moche of one as of the other, and mingle them togither, and rubbe your face with it as
moche as you will, and besides that it maketh the face white and glistring, it taketh awaie all maner of spot∣tes and pimples from it. A water to make the face redde and glisteryng. TAke an vnce of fishe glue, and an vnce of Rock alome, and twoo vnces of Verzine, and put thē into a quarte of water, that is to saie. xxviij. vn∣ces, and let them remaine in infusion three daies, and then seeth them, and strain out the water, and kepe it in a vessell of glasse as you will. To make an other maner of the same, whiche the Frenche men call Blanchet. TAke twoo drammes of siluer sublimed, and put it into a violle of water that holdeth a quarte, and seeth it vntil it decreaseth of the tenth part. Then put to it halfe an vnce of Ceruse, and a dramme of Camfire and of Boras, and the licour or iuice of a whole Limon, and mingle all togither, and let it seeth with a slowe fire, the space of seuen howers. But you must note, that this, bicause of the siluer sublimed ma∣keth by long vsing it, the teeth somewhat blacke, and at the last to fall out, it maketh also a stinking breath, and hurteth the senewes and the brain. To make an other Blanchet that maketh the face white, and of a ruddie colour, and hurteth not as the other aforesaied doeth. TAke two vnces of Boras, fower vnces of Ciche Peason brused, that is to saie, without the hus∣kes, and fower vnces of Phasiols, and asmoche of Beanes, and make theim all into pouder, and the galle of a Bulle, and the yelkes of fiftene egges, and a quarte of white wine, and put all togither to distille, and washe your face with the water in the morning. To make an other Blanchet, whiche is called roiall that is the best, and the excellentest of all other.
TAke a good handfull of the flowers of an Oliue tree, and a handfull of the flowers of an Eldern tree, a handfull of white roses, a handfull of the flowers of Orenges, and an other of Gelsemines, and twelue newe laied Egges, twelue grene Figges and freshe gathered, and twelue Snailes, one dramme of Camfire, an other of Alumen desquamatum, twoo dram∣mes of Boras, halfe a dramme of Alome, fower penie weight of Alumen plumae, otherwise called in Latin Tri∣cbiti, eight penie weight of siluer sublimed, an vnce of redde waxe, a good handefull of white Lilies, and di∣stille all the flowers when thei bee grene in their sea∣son, and also the Figges, Snailes, and the egges, and mingle all these waters togither, and put a parte half of the same water, and kepe the other halfe, and put it into a vessell of glasse, and mingle into it all the other thinges, and let them bee firste made into pouder, and put to also the waxe, then set it in the sunne, and leaue it there vntill all become like vnto waxe, then take it out with a white linen clothe, and take fiftene Egges and stille theim in the same water, and powre all this cōposicion into the saied water distilled, with a pound of rawe Honie, and set it again in the Sunne, and let it remaine there vntill the water bee dried vp, and it will bee parfite good. And afterward when you will occupie it, take asmoche of it as a Wheate corne, and anointe your face with the water that you did sette a∣parte, that is to saie, that of the flowers: and it will proue a merueilous thing. To take out the wrinkles of the face. TAke a little of the wood of a white Vine, or els a little of Brionie, and stampe it with a drie Fig that is fate, that is to saie pastie, and anointe your face with it, and then go walke till you sweate: for if you should not sweate, the Vine would take of the skin, and the Brionie make you blacke.
To make beare slacke in comming forthe, or growing in yong men, as well on their beard as in other partes. TAke a rasour that is made of copper, mixt with Auripigmentum, otherwise called Arsnic or Or∣pine, in the melting of it, so that it bee incorpo∣rated togither, and shaue the bearde or heare withall, and it shall neuer growe again, or if you heate the said rasour of copper in the fire, and quenche it in the blod of a Salamander, or els in the milke of Sowthistles. If also you rubbe the place where you will not that heare shall growe, with the bloode of a fishe called a Tony, it will done the like. Also if you take Beanes and seeth theim in water, and washe the place euery daie with that water, the heare will not growe, or at the least long or thei came forthe. To make heare growe in euery place of the body where you will. TAke greate greene Lisardes, or sea Frogges, and cutte of their heddes and their tailes, and drie the reste in an Ouen, and make pouder of it. Then take the yelke of an Egge, and make Oile thereof, and mengle all togither diligently, that is to saie, the pouder and the oile, and anoint the place with it, where you will heare shall growe, and thei will come for the shortly. To make heares blacke. TAke a Combe of Leade, and kembe your hedde with it alwaies, and the heares will be blacke. Take also Crowes egges and make oile of thē and laie a combe of horne in it, and let it remain there till it hath dronke vp all the oile, then take it out, and kembe your hedde with it, and by continuall vsing of it, your heare will be blacke. To make a water that will make the face redde and glisteryng.
TAke a pound of Aqua vite of three seethinges, an vnce of Brasill that is good, ten Cloues orien∣tall, and ten graines of Nasturtium, otherwise called Carda, in English Cresses or toune Kerse, and fiue graines of Cubies, and stampe all togither verie small, then put it into a vessell of glasse with the Aqua vite, and stoppe it sure, and boile it a little, and then distill it in Balneo Marie, or with a verie small fire, and it shall be in his perfection. To die or colour heere. TAke half an vnce of Aqua fortis, sixe penie weight of good lur, and sixe vnces of Rose water, and washe your hedde with it. Take also Li∣targe, and of the ashes of Nettles and mingle them to¦gither, and rubbe your heere with it. To take awaie the euill sauour of the breath. TAke Cheruile, Mirre and Cyperus, called of the Apoticaries Iūus odoratus, as moche of one as of the other, and make theim into pouder, then take Rosen, and of all this pilles, and drinke theim in your wine. To get awaie the heares from the iye browes. TAke the galle of a he Gote or of a she Gote, but the he Gote is better, and dooeth it soner, and rub your iye browes, and the heare will ∣ly fall awaie. To die or to colour all kinde of metall or stone, into the colour of golde without golde. TAke salte Armoniac, white Vitrioll, stone salt, and Verdegris, and make all into a verie fine pouder, and ae of this pouder vpon the metal, or stone that you die or colour, vntill it hee couered o∣uer with it: then put your stone or metall into the fire, and leaue it there a good ho, then take it out and quenche it in vrine or pisse newly made.
For to make Iron or Steele softe. YE shal take the iuyce of Hemlocke, and put the yrō or steele beynge redde hoate into it three or foure tymes, and let it remayne in it, vntyll it be tho∣rowe colde. Take also oile and put into it seuen times some molten Leade, and then quenche the yron in it at the ende of foure or fiue times. To harden Yron or Steele. TAKE the iuice of Melanthiū otherwise called Nigella romana, or the herbe called Mouse eare, and quench your Iron hote therin three or foure times. To make Figges ripe quickly. LET the Fygges come to theyr parfyte greatnes than pryke theym with a pinne, and rubbe thyem wyth a lytle Oyle oliue, then bynde theym about wyth Greene Olyue leaues, so that they maye be co∣uered round about with them, and so let them ripe in what place you will. To make Hennes laie Egges all the winter. TAKE the toppes of Netles when they beginne to haue seede, and drye theym, and gyue the Hennes a litle of it with Bren and Hempe seede and they shal laie euery day an Egge. To make a Glue or paste that holdeth as fast as a naile. TAKE Pixe Greca, and Rosen, & the pouder of bur∣ned Brycke whyche is called Ceruse, and mengle al togither, and heate it when you wil occupie it, and whan it is cold it will hold as fast as a naile. To take avvaye all maner of spottes. TAKe a Tenche and seeth him muche vntill he be dissolued into water almost, and wash the spot∣ted clothe therewyth oftentymes. Than take Bren, and boile it likewise in the same water, & wash the cloth againe therwith.
To cause that a womans Brestes waxe not great of swellinge. TAKE a Fishe that is called Squatina, in Englishe a Soale and cleaue hym in the myddle, and laye hym vppon the womans Breastes, and they shall not encrease bygger. And yf they be greate and bygge they shall aswage and waxe lesse. To purge Honnie with out fier. TAKE the rawe Honie and put in a veessel of stone well leaded wythin and large, and couer it well with a Paper and let it so stande, and euery thirde or fourth daye vncouer it, and take oute the skim that is vpon it, and by this meanes it purgeth better then with fier. To stenche the menstrual blood of women. TAKE a Toode and binde him with a lytle bande, and bange it aboute the womans necke that hath that infyrmyte, and in fewe dayes she shalbe clee∣red of it. To keepe Roses freshe all the yeare. TAKE the Roses whan they be halfe open, and gather theym in the eueninge wyth a knife, and in the nyght folowing set them in the aier abrod, and in the morning put theym in a vessel of earth well leaded wythin, and stoppe it well, and couer it wyth drie sande. For the same. TAKE the buddes of Roses whan they beginne to open, and take a reede that is yet growinge, and cleane it a lytle that you maye put in the buddes, and let them remaine so, and whan you wil take them out cut the reede, and put the buddes in luke warme water, and they shalbe as faire as in Maye. To take awaye or dissolue a boile or Kernell in the grine, or the wresting of a senewe.
TAke a Tode and binde vpon the boile and it will dissolue it in short space. To dresse and trim Oliues in one daie. TAke the Oliues whan they be greene, and cut them a little on the side, than put them in wa∣ter with Lime and Ashes: but note that you muste haue twise asmuche Ashes as Lime, as if you take halfe a pound of Lime, you must haue a pound of Ashes, and let them lie a stiepe in it the space of xxiij houres, than take them out, and washe them fiue or sixe times in luke warme water, than put thē in some vessell of stone or Glasse as you wil with salte water and so kepe them as long as you list, and they will be very good. To preserue and keepe Peches or other Fruite. TAke Peches or other Fruites that you will kepe, in the faire and drie wether, and open them in the middes, & take out the stone, and laie them a daie to drie in the sunne: than take sodden sugar well purged and rubbe theim ouer with it, and the nexte daie set them in the Sunne againe, and rubbe them with the said sugar as oft as thei drie vntill they haue gathered a crust vpō them, than kepe them at your pleasure, and it will be an excellent and parfite thing. To cause meruelous Dreames. TAke the bloode of a Lampwink or black plouer, and rubbe your temples, with it and so goe to bedde, and you shall see merueilous thinges in your sleepe, or els if you eate at nighte a little of the herbe Solan, or Vesicaria, or some Mandragora, or elles of the herbe called in Greeke Hyoscyamos, in Latine it hath these names Alercum, Appollinaris, and Symphonia∣ea, in the Frenche Iusquiame, and in the Englishe some call it Henban, and you shall se in the nighte goodly thinges in your dreame.
To make a woman beare Children. TAke Ceruse and Frankensens, and waie as muche of the one as of the other, and after you haue companied with her, put the same into her matrice. Also if you geue her drinke of Mares milke, or to eate the lower parte of the belly of a Hare, or the Genitories or stones of a hee Goate, after her men∣struall purgation is come vnto her, it shall profite her muche vnto conception. To heale and cure Horses of the Skabbe. FIrst you must let him blood, then take Brim∣stone, Quicksiluer, Hony, liquide Pitch, Salt, the iuice of Hemlocke, Vinaigre, Alome, Heles¦bore, softe Sope, Oile, Sutt of a Chimney, Hogges dong, and Lime, and mingle al togither, and anoint the place with it where the Skabbe is, and within fewe daies he shal be healed and cleane. To heale the Kinges euill, a disease called in la∣tine Siruma. TAke a great Tode a liue, and whan the Moon draweth towarde the comunction of the sunne, cutte of all the legges from him, and put him about the necke of the patiēt, and it wil do him muche good. Take also the hoofe of an Asse and burne it, and saie it vpon the sore, for it is very good and profitable for suche a sicknes. To make one that is poisoned to vomite the poison. TAke two graines of Pazar, whiche is a stone tha commeth out of Portugal, and is grene  tawnie somewhat obscure glistering and light and  breaking it, it is within of the colour of ashes, and giue it him to drinke with a little milke, and inconti∣nent he shall vomite by the poison, if there be any. To make a Candell that cannot be pu ou.
TAke Virgine waxe, and Brimstone well pur∣ged, asmuch of the one as of the other, and melt it togither and make therof a Cādel, the which will neuer be put out vntill it be burned and consu∣med to the ende. To make a Candell of Yre to burne. TAke a Candel of Ware made as is afore said, and take some Brimstone and coles, and stampe them very small, and fifte them thorow a linen cloth, then heate the candell, and rubbe it ouer wel with the same pouder vntill it waxe vnto & crust rounde about it as thicke as the backe of a knife and couer it with a pa∣per, then  it at the ende of a guttour of your house, and let it remaine there till the yee be rounde about it a finger thicke whiche will be within two or three daies, than take it of and it will burne as though it were of waxe onely, this is a thinge tried and experi∣mented. To make that fruite shall take what forme or facion you will. TAke a piece of woode and cutte it after the forme and facion that you will your fruite shal haue, but let it be as bigge as the fruite is whan it is ripe, then take some plaster tempered with water, and put it a∣bout the wood a finger thicke, and lette it drie, and it will incontinent waxe drie, than take it of, and whan the fruite is not yet comen to his full greatnes, binde it faste about this same forme, and leaue it so remai∣ning vntill it be ripe, and it will be after that forme and facion. If you will also write vpon it, dresse the letters after this maner and forme made of plaster, and they shalbe legible. To make that rootes shall haue what forme you will. TAke greene rootes, but let thē be great and thicke like radishe rootes, or the roote of Bryonix, and such
like, and trim them with a knife as you shall thinke the best facion. Then set them in the ground againe, vntill they haue gathered vpon them a skinne  in this maner maie a man make conterfete Mandragora, in trimming them with a knife into the shape of a man, and than putting them againe into the grounde with the head dounward, and with a little barley or mill vnder them whiche will cleaue and sticke faste to the hed of the roote and seeme like heare: but you must note that to make these Mandragora, you must take the rootes of Bryonia. For to write letters vpon a mans body or face that shall neuer be rubbed out. YOu muste go into the stooues or hote houses whiche be very hote, and when you are in a sweate write vpō your bodie with what inke you will, then cut the skin with a sharpe ra∣sour, and fill the cuttes with earth of what colour you will, and leaue them so and incontinent by reason of the greate heate the skin will close & shut vp togither and the letters or figures that you haue made vpon your fleshe will remaine for euer. For the same, but somwhat easier. TAke Aqua fortis of Golde, and the beastes that e called Cantharides, and putte them toither xxiiij. houres, then with a penne very small write what you will vpon the skinne, and leaue it so, and by and by ther will rise certaine little white bladders or pushes where you touched with the water, and that will re∣maine and abide for euer. To make one haue a good memorie. TAke a Tooth or the lefte legge of a Badger or Brock as some call it, and as other some name it a Grey, and binde it about your righte arme nexte vnto the flesh. Take also the gall of a Partri,
and rubbe your temples with it that it maie soke into the skin and fleshe, ones in a moneth, and it will make you haue a good memorie. To make that no Dogge shall barke at you. TAke a blacke Dogge and plucke out one at his eies and holde it in your lefte hande, and by rea∣son of the sauour and smell thereof the Dogges will not barke at you. To make all thinges seme Blacke and Greene in the night. TAke the blacke inck of a Fishe called a skuttle, called Atramentum Sepiae, & take also Verdegrice, and mingle bothe togither, and put them in a lampe with the wieke, and set it a fier in a chā∣bre, where there is no other light but that, and al that is in the said chambre walles and all shal seeme part∣ly Greene, and partly Blacke, whiche is a meruelous thing to see. To die Heare into a Greene colour. TAke freshe Capers, and distill them, and washe your heare with the water of thē in the sunne, and they will become greene. To dresse or to kepe fleshe in Somer. TAke the fleshe and seeth it, but let it not be to muche soddē, than take it of from the fire, and streine out the water, and set it in the shadow the space of an houre for to drie, in a place where the winde commeth, then take an earthen pot with white Vinaigre that is stronge, and take some Geniper seede well stamped, and Salt, and cast it vpō the fleshe: and than put it into the Vinaigre, and sette the pot in some colde place, as a cane or ollex, and re∣moue euery daie the fleshe within the pot, & let it stād and remaine so as longe as if pleaseth you, and whan you will eate of it, seeth it a little, as if you will
maie eate it so, for it is a thing very sweete & delicate. To make an instrument called Cauterium wher∣with sores are burned, whiche shall raise the skin without any greefe or paine. TAke softe sope, and vnslekt Lime that hath not ben wet asmuche of the one as of the other, and mingle them togither: and whan you will vse of it, if the skin be not broken, laie a little piece of le∣ther vpon it with some ointment and leaue a hole in the middes of the greatnesse that you will the wound shal be, and put in the same hole asmuch of the instru∣ment as a whete corne & let it remaine so, and within three or fower houres it wil make a hole without any paine. But if the skin be rotten, as of a felon or cattes heare, it shall suffise to washe the place before you laie to the Cauterium, with strong Vinaigre, and within an houre it will raise the skinne without anie griefe or paine. To make Steele cut Yron as it were Lead. TAke the Steele and purge it well, than take of these wormes that breede in the grounde, and make of them some distilled water in a Lem∣beck, than take the iuice of Radishe rootes, asmuch of the one as of the other and quenche the steele in it beyng red hote, fower or fiue times, than make kniues, Swordes, or daggers of it, and they shall cut Yron, as it were leade. To make red Ynke. TAke stronglie boiling hote, and put it in the rie or barke of Brasill, and lette it coole, than take eight vnces of the saide lie, and an vnce of Brasill skraped with a piece of glasse, & put it to also a little Alome. Than put it in a dishe vpon the hote ashes, and let it boile well the space of an houre, and occupie it at your pleasure and the incke shalbe very
good: but note that it is not good, but whan it is fresh and recent, that is to saie, made of a daie or two, at the most. For the same, and easier. TAke an vnce of the same wood skraped with a piece of glasse, and take ten vnces of water, and powre the skraped Brasill into it, and let it re∣maine so the space of seuen houres, than seeth it, and let it diminish of the fower partes three, and it will be redde hauing a good lustre. And if you let it deminish of more then three partes, it will be red and sanguine. To make Bones softe. TAke bones that be holowe in the middes, as of the legges of beastes, and take the iuice of A∣lexanders, of milfoile, of radishe rootes, of hore∣hounde, and Vinaigre, asmuche of the one as of the other, and fill the bones with these iuices, and stoppe them wel yt nothing goe out; than buried it in Horse donge as long as you wil, and the longer they be in it the softer will they waxe. To kepe Grapes freshe all the winter. YOu muste gather the Grapes whan it is faier and cleere wether, and that it hath not rained a good while before, than muste you make them cleane, that is to saie, take out the rotten graines that be in them: than take pitch, and set it vpon the fire vn∣till it boile, than take the grape, and put the ende that it hangeth by into it, & let it remaine so a while, and then let it drie in the sunne the space of two daies. Fi∣nally laie theim vpon wheate stray that one touche not another, and they will kepe so good and freshe all the yeare. To make Melons or Coucombers ripe before their season.
FOr to haue Melons, Coucombers, or other like fruite ripe before their season, you must plante or set them in pottes or other vessels, and euery thirde or fourth daie water thē at the roote with hote water, and whan the wether is cloudy or colde sette them before the fire, and whan the sunne shineth and is faire wether, set them in the Sunne: Thus doynge you shal haue Melons, and many other like fruitos ripe before their season. To take awaie the holes or markes of the small Pockes. TAke very stronge Vinaigre, and make thereof some distilled water, and washe your face with it one daie, and the nexte daie folowinge, take Bren, Mallowes, and water and boile all togither vntill it be diminished of the halfe, and washe your face with it that same daie, and the next daie washe it againe with the water of the distilled Vinaigre, and the nexte daie with the other water made with the Bren and Mallowes, and cōtinue so vntil the markes or holes begon, whiche will be very shortly. Also if you take Egge shelles, & distill them, and washe your face with the water at night whan you go to bed, and in the morning with the other of Bren and Malowes as is aboue rehersed. To make the handes white. TAke an Oxe gall, and take halfe a sponefull of it in the ingning with wel water, and washe your handes with this little of the gall, and they will become moist, softe, and very white. Take also Sope, and purge it wel, than take of the roote of Iris, and dry it in an ouen and make pouder of it, the whiche you shall mixe with the Sope well purged and so washe your handes withal, and they wil be softe and white. Take also Sope well purged, and take the Ashes of a , and mixe them well togither, vntill they be well
incorporated the one with the other: and washe your handes with it in the morning, and thei wil be moist, softe & white as snowe, which thing is experimented. To make an odoriferous and sweete smelling grese that kepeth the lippes and handes from thinkes and chappes, and kepeth them moist, and softe. TAke a pounde, that is to saie, twelue vnces of Calues grease, or the Deere suet that is yong, and the suet fresh. Than take sixe vnces of Ma∣ioram, and stampe them all well togither, and make thereof little halles, and sprinkle them with a little good White or Claret wine, that hath a good odour. Than put them in some vessell, and couer them well, that the good odour of the Maioram go not out, and so set them in the shadow the space of fower and twenty houres somwhat more or lesse, than put them in wa∣ter and seeth thē leisurely: and than draine it againe. Take also nine vnces of Maioram, and stampe it with the same grease, and make litle balles of it, which you shall sprinkle ouer with Wine, and put it in another vessell cleane, the which you shal also set it in the sha∣dowe the space of xxiiij. houres, and than put water to it againe, and seeth it, and straine it. And do so fower or fiue times, adding to it alwaies nine vnces of Ma∣ioram, and sprinklinge it with good Wine, you maie also put to it a little muske, or ciuette, thus doyng you shall haue a very excellent thing, to keepe the lippes and handes from chappes or chinckes and from all great colde. For to make a sweete Suet called in Frenche and Italian Pommade in latin Pomatum. TAke a pounde of Deeres suet, or if you can not get of that, the grease of a kidde, three vnces of barrous greas, and . vnces of the marowe of a bucke, and purge it cleane of all filthe, and take out the little skinnes, veines, and grie that are
then washe it with good white Wine so often vntill the wine remaine cleere, and the grease white, than straine out al the Wine, and let it ronne abrode vpon a table. This don take eight Appian apples or as ma∣ny Pepins, and pare them well bothe with out and within, and stampe them. Than take halfe an vnce of Cloues, two drammes of Nutmegges, sixe graines of spike of india, and foure pound of Rose water, and mingle all togither with the grease, and set it to seeth in a couered pot, with a slowe fire and let it seeth vn∣till the Rose water be almost consumed. Then straine it and put it into another vessell washed three or foure times with Rose water, then adde to it foure vnces of white waxe well purified and purged, and sixe vnces of sweete Almondes. Then sette it on the fire againe ely vntil it be molten, and then take it from the fire and straine it, and put it into another vessell washed ith Rose water. Finally after it is congeled and axen harde, take asmuche muske as you will with  Rose water, and other odoriferous waters, and mingle them togither with a pesell of woode, and and keepe it in a vessell of Glasse, and set it in the sha∣dowe toward the Northe, and if you put to it a little orax liquida, it wil be as good for the skurfe or skabbe, as to keepe the handes faire. To make that flies shall not tourment or trouble Horses in Somer. TAke the leaues of Gourdes, and stampe them, and so rubbe the Horses with it euery morning and at nighe whan it is hote, or els take leese of wine, and rubbe them with it, and the flies shall not tourment r oxe them no more than in the middes of winter. To keepe Figges greene all the yeare. YOu muste gather them whan they are ripe in the faire wether and at none daies, to the intēt that they maie be drie from all dewe, and putte
them in a faire vessell of stone or earth the mater or substance whereof must be very fine, and that the fig∣ges touche not one another, then couer them diligēt∣ly, that they haue no maner of ayer, and put them so in wine, and they will be greene as long as the wine is good, whiche thing hath bene proued. For to make that Pommegranates shal not open. TAke three great flint stones whiche are in the bo∣tom of riuers, vncouer the earth from the roote of the tree and laie the stones vpon the roote, and couer it with the earth againe as it was before. Also if you plant nighe vnto the tree Squilla, the Pomgranates will not open. For to keepe wine sweete all the yeare. TAke a vessel wel pitched within and without, and put the wine into it before it boile in the fat, and stoppe the saide vessell well, that it take no ayer, and then laie it in a riuer as deepe as you can that the ves∣sel maie be couered with water, and let it remaine so a moneth without remouing it, then take it out, and set it where you wil. Thus doynge the Wine shall be sweete and good all the yeare, and thicke like must. For wine that will not keepe longe. TAke two or three egges, and if it be claret wine take onely the yelke of it, & if it be white wine, take onely the white of an Egge, and take thre vnces of flint stone of a riuer that runneth swift, and make it into pouder, and two vnces of Salt made into very small pouder, and mingle all togither. Then put the Wine into another clene vessell that hath no o∣our or sauour: this done cast into it all this composi∣tion, and mengle it with the wine fiue or sixe times a daie, during the space of three or fower daies. But note that you muste make this prouision before it be vtterly corrupt & putrified: for if it were wholly cor∣rupt
and spilled, this would auaile nothing but were ime and labour lost. To cause that wine shall not be to stronge. TAke a piece of Salt lard, and tie it with a greate threed at the Bung hole within, and let the lard touche onely the vpper parte of the vessell. Thus doyng the Wine will neuer be stronge bicause of the ard and salt which letteth and hindereth the separa∣tion and attenuation which giueth force & strength to the wine. To make Vinaigre. TAke the fruite of the tree called in latine Cornus, in frenche Corneillier, there be none of them in England and therefore it lacketh an Englishe name, the saide fruite is like vnto Oliues but they be redde, and somwhat longer, take of them whan they be redde, take also Blackberies before they be ripe, and drie them, and make them into pouder, and with  little strong Vinaigre, make of them litle balles, the which you shal drie in the sunne. Then take the wine and heate it, and whan it is hote but into it this com∣position, and it wil turne incontinent into strong Vi∣naigre, whiche thing is experimented. To make Vinaigre with water. TAke xxx. or xl. pounde of wilde peares, and lette them lie three daies on a heape in some vessell, and then sprinkle or water thē euery daye with a little water the space of xxx. daies, and it shal be as good Vinaigre and as strong as if it were of Wine▪ lso if you take grapes, and wring out the wine with your handes, and put the cell into some vessell and put water vpon it, it will be igre and sharpe. To make Vinaigre with perished wine or wine that is marred.
TAke corrupt and rotten wine, andbole or seeth it, and take of al the froth or skimme that it ma∣keth in boiling, and let it remaine on the fire til it be diminishe of the third parte. Then put it in a ves∣sell, wherin strong Vinaigre hath bene, and put to it some serfoile, and couer the vessell well that it take no aier at all, and in short time it will be good and strong Vinaiger. To take awaie the sauour of the mouldines or pu∣trefaction of the wine. TAke Medlers well made ripe in strawe, and opē them in four partes & binde them with a threde, and hange them within the bunge of the vessel that they maie be all couered with the wine, and let them remaine so a moneth, than take them out, and you shall take awaie also the euil odour of the wine. To make wine haue a good odour. TAke an orenge, or a citron that is not to great, and take Cloues orientall and sette them in the orenge or citron vntill it be almoste full, and so put it into the vessell of wine, but let it not touche the wine: then stoppe vp your vessell sure that the odour goe not out. To make that Leekes shall be great. TAke many seedes togither and set them in Goates donge and let them growe and ripe, and you shall see a meruelous thing. To make tadstooles or musheroms growe. CUt a Popler tree harde to the ground, and then take hote water with leuain in it, and cast it vp∣on the roote and within three or foure daies the tadstooles wil growe about the foote of the Po∣pler tree where you did cast the water, and they shall be good to eate. To make that all maner of Codware shal seeth quickly.
TAke the seedes that you will sowe, as Peason, Phasiols, Lintelles, and suche like, and before you sowe them, sprinkle them with salte peter and than sowe them whan you will, and those that rowe of that seede, will seeth soner, and easelier then  her will do. To haue greene Flowres all the yeare. TAke yonge plantes of floures in Somer and set them in some place very hote, as in stoues or hote houses, & leaue them so, for by the meanes of the greate heate, they will growe to their parfite bignes, & in the middes of winter beare their floures, whiche thing is tried and proued. To make Corne, and podware to growe greater than they are wont to doe. TO make Corne and podware, as Wheate, Rie, Mille, Ciche peason, and all other like to growe greater than ordinarily they do, you must sowe hem in a fielde where Squilla is planted, bicause that this Squilla is hote, and consequently giueth heate vn∣o the seedes, and so maketh them growe greater then they comonly doe. To make that fruites shall not rotte vpon the tree. TAke a Naile, and heate it glowing hote in the fire, and drie it into the foote of the tree, or if you wil not do so, make a hole in the same place with a Percer, and leaue it so, for at that hole all the superfluous sucke or iuyce wil come out, which is the  that the fruites rotte vpon the tree. To make letters than can not be reade onles the Paper be put in water. TAke Rochealome, and make it into pouder thā put it into a little water, and write what you will with it vpon white Paper, and let the let∣er drie of thēselues, and whan you will reade them▪
put the Paper into cleere water, and the letters vp∣ward, and you shall reade them as if thei were writen with incke, bicause the water maketh the Paper som∣what blacke, or rather grey, and the Alome shineth, by reason of the whitenesse of it, whiche is a merue∣lous thing and proued. To make letters that can not be reade but at the fire. TAke salt Armoniack, and make thereof pouder very smal, and put it in water, than write what you will with it vpon Paper, and lette it drie. And whan you will reade it, holde it before the fire, and you shall reade very wel. Also if you take the suck or iuice of a Limon or Dinyon, and write withall, a man can not reade it but at the fire. To make that Aqua vite shall receiue all the ver∣tues and strength of Medecines. TAke foure vnces of Aqua vite, and putte it in a vessell of Glasse with a streight and narrowe mouth, but yet great and thicke of Glasse, then take Medicamētes elect well dried and cut very small, & put thē in the same glasse vnto the Aqua vite & stoppe well and surely the mouth of the Glasse with the stop∣ple, and than with white waxe vpon it: finally take what vessell or pot you will and fill it with hote ashes so that there be n fire in it, and burie this vessell of Aqua vite in the same Ashes. To make that a woman shall eate of nothing that is set vpon the table. TAke a little greene Basil, and whan men bring the dishes to the table put it vnderneth them, that the woman perceiue it not: for menne saye that she will eate of none of that whiche is in the dishe wher vnder the Basill lieth. To make Oile of Roses, or other Odoriferous Herbes.
TAke a violle of Glasse very thinne, and of thre partes, fill two with oile oliue very good and cleane, & fill the rest with Roses, or the herbe wherwith you will make the oile. Than sette the violl or glasse in the sunne, and couer it well first, and let it so rest three or foure daies, than take it out of the sunne, and take out al the roses, and al the oile, and wring them well, that all the oile maie come out of them, then cast them awaie and put the oile againe into the violl, and fill it a newe with freshe roses, and set it in the sunne other foure daies. Than take them awaie, and wring out the oile, and put in other freshe roses, doyng thus foure or fiue times you shall haue an oile as odoriferous as the roses them selues. To make that the Mothes and Vermine shall not eate nor destroie clothes and apparell. TAke Wormwoode, or Southernwoode, the leaues of a Cedar tree, and valerian, and laie them in your coffers or presses where your clo∣thes be, or in the pleytes of your garmentes, and you shall see that they will not hurt them, bicause these leaues and herbes are bitter of taste, and the sa∣uour or smell is very strong, whiche the vermine do abhorre, and can not abide. For to make that wilde beastes shall not hurt you. FOr to be assured and safe from wilde Beastes, as Wolues, Beares, and such other like, take the grease of a Lion, and annointe your selfe therwith ouer and ouer, and go hardely wher you will and no beast shall hurte you, but as sone as they smell the sauour of the grease, they will runne awaie. And if by chaunce you meete with a wolfe, or other wilde beast, ronne not awaie but with a good corage go euen to him that he may smel the grese that you are anointed with all; and he will flie. For to be assured and safe from Serpentes.
TAke the suck or iuice of a radish roote, and anoint your handes with it, then take the Serpentes in your handes, and they will not bite nor sting you, bi∣cause of the subtilite and finesse of this iuice, but will die almost in smelling onely the sauour. To take awaie the paine and greefe of the Goute. TAke a greate foule called a Vultour, in latine Vultur, and take the skinne of her righte beele and laie vpon the right foote of the patiēt, then take the skinne of the lefte heele, and laie it vpon his lefte foote, and incontinent you shall see that in halfe an houre the paine will goe awaie. Whiche is a mer∣uelous thing. For to see wilde Beastes in a Dreame. TAke the hart of an Ape, and laie it vnder your heade, whā you go to bed so that it touche your head, and you shall see meruelous thinges, and all kindes of beastes, as Liōs, Beares, Wolfes, Apes, Tigres, and other suche like. For to make Silke white. TAke Brimstone and burne it, & holde the Silke ouer the smoke of it, & it will incontinent waxe white. Also if you wil haue a Rose of diuers co∣lours, holde him ouer the smoke of Brimstone bur∣ning, and it will be red, white, and Cremsine, and wil be faire, but it shall lose his sweete sauour. To make an herbe growe that shal haue many and diuers odours and sauours. TAke one graine of lettise seede, one of succorie, one of alexanders, one of basille, one of a leeke, and another of persely, and plant them all to∣gither in one hole, so that one touche not another and you must plante them in horse donge; or Oxe donge, or of any other beaste, so that there be no earth at all, & there will growe an herbe that shall haue the smell,
of Lettuse, Alexāders, of Succorie, of Basil, of leekes, and of Perslie, and this is a thing proued. To make an Apple or ball that prouoketh sleepe. TAke wild Poppy, the iuice of Mandragora, and leese of wine asmuch of the one as of the other, and a little ciuet, and of all this make a rounde ball, and hold it in your hande, and smell to it, and it will make you sleepe wonderfully. To make a barraine woman beare children. TAke of these little seafishes with many feete cal∣led in Latine Polipi or Polypodes, and roste them vp∣on the embers without oile, and let the woman eate of them, and it shall profite and helpe her very muche, hauing in the meane time the company of a man. To make heares growe vpon a bald hed. TAke oile of Tartre, and warme it, and rubbe your hed with it, or other places wher you will heare shall growe, and within viij. or ten daies the heares wil come furth as thicke as before, and not onely make those heares to grow which be fallen: but also maketh other to encrease more then there was a∣fore, and whiche is more, if you rubbe the paulme of your hande with it, heares will growe there as well as in any other place. To make a water that dieth or coloreth copper into the colour of Golde. TAke the gall of a male gote, and another of a female gote, and a little Arsenick asmuch vn∣till you se there is inough, and distille al togi∣ther, and wete and temper your copper in this water, but let the copper be first well skoored, and in∣continent it will turne into the colour of Gold. To make oile of Brimstone.
TAke ten egges and seeth them till they be hard, then take of the shels and caste the white and them awaie, so that there remaine nothing but the yelke, whiche you shall stampe, and take asmuche brimstone by weight, and make thereof pouder, and mengle all well togither: and so distill it with a slowe fire, and it wil be very good. For to make salt Armoniac. TAke a pounde of mans bloode, and two pounde of the bloode of an Oxe or other beaste, and sixe pound of well water, and mingle all togither: than streine it with a linen cloth very harde & straigte and set it on the fire where you shall leaue it vntill the water be consumed, and that which shall remaine wil be good salt Armoniac. For to make Borase. TAke two vnces of Alome, and temper it with two vnces of salt Alcall whiche menne vse to make glasse withall, then put it into some vessel of tinne, and seeth it with a sougth fire the space of halfe an houre, and than take out the wa∣ter, and take two vnces of salt Gemma beaten in pou∣der, and asmuche of salt Alcall, and two pound of vir∣gin Honny, and a pound of Cowe milke, amd mingle all togither with water, and set it three daies in the sunne, and it will be made. For to make Corall. TAke the Hornes of a white male Goate, and make thē very cleane, then take a good sharpe knife, and skrape them finely that the skra∣pinges maie be like pouder, then take pieces of Ashe, and burne them, and of there ashes you shall make lie which you shal straine three times in a linen clothe, and put the skrapinges of the horne into it and mixe it well togither, and let it so remaine in infusion
fiuetene daies. Then take some Vermillion made in pouder, and a little water and mengle it togither with the said pouder, then you shall make the Corall with your handes, or as you will and let it drie: then pollish it with the wheele or turne, and it will be like natu∣rall Corall. To die Yron in the colour of Gold. Melancie, is an Ilande called melos one of the iclades.TAke Alome of Melancie, and beate it into pou∣der, then take a little sea water, and mingle it togither: then heate your yron hote and steepe it in the same water, and set it a daie in the sunne, and it will haue the colour of Gold. For to make Yron strong and faire as siluer. TAke salt armoniac, and make it into pouder, and mingle it with vnsleckt lime, than put it in colde water, and mixe all well togither, this don heate your yron redhote, and deepe it in the said water, and it wil become as white as Siluer. For to make a water that will take out incontinent letters from the Paper. TAke a pound of blewe vitrioll, three pound of salt peter, and foure vnces of vermillion & fiue pound of Alome, and stampe them all togither, and make thereof a poudre, and stille it in some ves∣sell of glasse with a small fire, and there will come out two maner of waters the firste white, and the second greene. If you take a little of the firste and laie it vpon the lefe of Paper writen, rubbing it with a greene clothe some what course or roughe, it will take awaie the letters from the paper, and leaue it as white, as if there had neuer ben incke vpon it. Also if you take of the said water and heate it, and holde a sheete of paper writen ouer the smoke of it, it wil become incontinent like as it had ben writen ten yeare before. To take a spotte of Oile out of Clothe.
TAke oile of Tartre, and laie it vpon the spot, and take it of by and by againe, then washe it well with luke warme water, and three or four times with colde water, and the cloth will be as nete and as cleane as whan it was newe, and before the oile fell vpon it. To stanche the Bleeding at the nose. TAke great Ciche peason, and laie them vpon a Tile in the fire vntill they be drie, and then make pouder of thē very fine, and put of it in his nose, and the bleeding will cease. To breake botches, impostumes, cartarres, or sores, comming in the throte. TAke the drie dong of an Asse, and of swallowes, and make therof pouder, and put of it in water, or in wine hote, and gargel or wash your throte oftentimes with it and you shal be deliuered. To take an Yron or arrowe hed out of a wounde. TAke the leaues of Palma Christi, and stampe thē, and at night laie of the iuice or sucke of it vpon the wounde, and in the morning you shall finde the wounde so wide and large, and the yron or arrow hed so discouered that you maie take it out with your fingers. To make that yong Children shall haue no paine or greefe in their teeth. TAke an olde Cocke and cut of his combe, and take of the blood that commeth of it and rubbe their gommes with it, & they shall neuer feele paine. For to make a cleere voice. TAke the floures of an Elder tree, and drie them in the sunne, but take heede they take no mois∣ture or wette, then make pouder of theim, and drinke of it with white wine euery morning fasting.
For to fasten lose teeth. TAke Frankensens, Mastick, and the pilles of Pomegranates, asmuch of one as of the other, and make thereof a pouder: and whan you goe to bed, washe your teeth with a little good wine, then take of the saide pouder, and laie it vpon your Teeth, and they will waxe fast and sure in short space. For the Emorawdes. TAke a Tortese, and put him in a pot well stopt vpon the fire, and let him alone vntill he be all burnt, then take the pot from the fire and take out the Tortese, and make him into pouder: then first washe the Emorawdes with white wine ve∣ry hote, then laie vpon them some of the saide pouder and in two or three times he shalbe healed. For one that hath his Sight troubled. TAke the lunges or lightes of a Barrow hogge with all the appurtenances, and seeth it in wa∣ter, and whan it is soden let him holde his eies ouer the smoke of it, and in three or foure times doyng he shal be cured of that trouble. For one that is abroke or brusten. TAke of the roote of Symphiton petreon, in English Bugle or Camfrey, and put of it into the bread that he eateth euery daie, and let him eate eue∣ry day of the said roote either rawe or roste, and it shal be a very healthfull thing for his disease. For one that hath his Coddes swollen. TAke Rue, and stampe it, and laie it vpon his Coddes, and immediatly thei will aswage their swelling, whiche thing is sufficiently proued. To make a woman that is wont to haue daughters to beare Sonnes also.
KNow you that it is a hadde thing for a barraine woman to beare Children, and a greate gifte and grace of God to obtaine it, bicause the causes of sterilite and barainesse be diuers, and with∣out nomber: but to make a woman that beareth al∣waies Doughters to beare also Sonnes, it is a thing very easy, and hath good succes, and hath ben diuers times proued. Wherefore if you will that your wise shall haue male children, eate an herbe called in En∣glish Mercurie, in Italie Mercorella, in French Mercuriale or Ferolle, whiche hath onely two seedes like vnto the genitories of a manne, and make her also eate of it be∣fore you company with her, and eate both of you the right stones of some beastes and of the skraping of an Elephantes toth. To make that the handes shall not chinke nor cleaue. TAke a Radishe roote, & make him hollow with∣in vnto the bottom then take thre vnces of oile of Roses, and an vnce of Turpentine or more, according to the greatnesse of the Radishe, and then couer the said radishe and leaue it in the hote ashes or embers, vntill it be halfe consumed, than take it out, and anoint your handes with it. For to make a mans Berde blacke. TAke Aqua fortis, and a peny weight of fine Sil∣uer, and melte it in the saide water by the fire, and whā you wil occupie of it anoint the beard at the rootes of the heare with oile of Roses, and with a spong wete your beard, so that you touche not the fleshe, and lette it drie, than washe it with lie, wherein there hath be mirabolans and Pommegra∣nades sodden. To make a woman beare Childrē although it be not alwaies assured, yet it is the best remedy that can be founde.
FIrste cause the woman to be purged well and giue her some water of the baines of Aquario, or other mine of Brimstone, then lette her eate of the fleshe of a hare, and the man also as muche as is possible, that is to saie, leauing all other kinde of flesh, thē take ye kinde of that Mercurie, that hath curled or wrinkled leaues, mugwort or mother wort, valerian, and make therof long, or round morsels without past, with grease, spices, cheese, and egges, and let her eate nothing els in the morning with breade three times a weeke continually, and let her drinke good wine, and parfume her selfe three daies togither with Franken∣sens, Bay leaues, Nutmegges, Bengwine, & a little Muske, and let the husbād also take three morninges some of this poudre folowing. Take the small skra∣ping of Cipres, a dramme & a halfe of toune Cresses, called in latine Nasturtium, long Pepper, Nutmegges, fine wood of Aloe, of eche of them half a peny weight, and the kidney and stones of a hedgehogge, dried and not burned, and make therof a pouder the which you shall take at three times with Malmesey, and remaine viij.This stone is called in greke Acti∣es, and hath many good¦ly vertues, as you maie reade in Hermolaus barbarus in corollario. daies without the companie of her, and after ha∣uing companied with her, let her sleape, and carry vp∣on her lefte arme an Egle stone, not of the comō sorte but of those that be as hard as steele, and lette her also keepe euery daie vpon the reines of her backe a newe laide egge beaten with fiue or sixe droppes of strong blacke Vinaigre, and remoue it euery daie. To make a woman laboring, to bring forth her Child that can not be deliuered. TAke of the said Egle stone, called in latine La∣pis Aquilinus, and binde it vpon the lefte thigh of the woman, then giue her to drinke three vnces of white Lilies, and she shall be deliue∣red incontinent in adding to it a little Safran and sugar, and make her to vomite and neese. And if she
be not deliuered for all this, or if the childe be dead in her body long afore, you must make this composition followyng, which is a thing experimēted. Take three handefuls of greene Maioram, and asmuche of greene ysope, and stampe them togither, and presse them vn∣till you gette out three vnces of iuice, the whiche you shall straine, and giue it her warme to drinke fasting, and let her eate nothing in fiue houres after, & she shal be deliuered of her Childe without doubt, and if she be not she shall die, bicause she is to weake, or els you must cut the Child out, bicause it may lie ouerthwart, and except these two cases, she shal not faile but be de∣liuered. For to make teeth that doe ake to fall out. TAke the roote of Crowe foote, called in latine Ranunculus, gathered in Maie, and drie it a little in an ouen, and keepe it all the yeare. Then take a litle of it beyng beaten or stamped, also take a little pitche made with clammy Turpentine, and put the said roote in the hole of the saide toth that aketh, and if it haue no hole, put it vpon the toppe of the said tooth, and laie the saide pitch vpon it, so that it be fast to it, and let it remaine so three houres, and in two or three times doyng it at the most, the tooth wil fall in pieces within eight daies. A remedy for the falling sicknes. TAke wheate slower, and kneath it with dewe ga∣therid in the morning on midiomer daie, & make therof a cake, the whiche you shall bake, and giue the patient to eate of it, and he shalbe healed. Against the Plage. TAke three vnces of the licour of the innar rin of an Ashe tree and sill it with three vnces of white wine, & giue the pacient drinke of it eue∣ry iij. houres, & within xxiiij. houres he shalbe cured.
For the same. TAke three vnces of Walnuttes that be not yet full ripe, prepared and distilled, at midsomer, and let him that hath the plage drinke of it, and he shall be hole: but it shall be better to take the out∣ward pilles of the Walnuttes in September whan thei be blacke, so that thei be not rotten, and distille them, and giue the pacient a glasse full of it to drinke, and let it be luke warme before he be lette blood, and this shall help him muche. For the putrefaction of the teeth. TAke the rootes of an herbe called in latine Pes Alexandrinus, and cut them very smal, and distill them with the best wine you can get, and holde a spone full of the water in your mouth, and you shall finde ease and remedy in shorte space: for this healeth sore and currupt teeth, and maketh them cleane: And besides that, it helpeth much in purging and clensing awaie of al maner of filth of the mouth. For the stinking of the breath, and to make the teeth white. TAke a pounde of skimmed Hony, halfe a pound of Aqua vite, three vnces of Lignum aloe, two vn∣ces of gomme Arabick, Nuttemegges, Galin∣gale, Cububes, Cinamome, Mastick, Cloues, Spic, and Lauander newe, anna three drammes, two dram¦mes of Amber beaten, mixe all this togither, and still water of it in a limbeck, & this water will take awaie the stinking of the breath, whiten the teeth and main∣taine helth long. A water to make cleane teeth. TAke salt Armoniac, and salt Gemma, three vnces of eche one, an vnce and a halfe of Alumen Such∣num, and distil it, or temper it in two pounde of water, the space of eight daies, and with this licour
distilled, or so tempered, you shal rubbe your teeth and they will be white. Another water to whiten teeth. TAke a pounde of salt well purged, and beaten, an vnce of Alumen Glaciale, and distill it in a lim∣beck, and mingle an vnce of the water, with an vnce of Plantaine water, and rubbe your teeth with the composition, and with cotten, and they will bee white and cleane. To take awaie the smell of Garlike, Leekes, or Onyons. AFter that you haue eaten Garlike, Leekes, or Onions, take the rote of Beete, and rost it vnder embers, and eate it, and you shall see the effect: or els eate a piece of the roote of Zeduaria, and you shall not smell at all, and this is easier to be don than with the roote of Beete. A principall remedie for the flixe or laxe. TAke Panike beaten and stamped, and giue the patiēt drinke of it with claret wine, and he shall be cured. The saide Panike beyng also sodden with Goates milke, and eatē twise a daie, at morning and night before meales, it worketh the like operatiō. For to make that heares shall not growe. TAke the skinnes or huskes of greene Beanes, and make a plaister of them, and laie vpon the places where you wil that heare shal not grow, and if there be any they will fal of and grow no more. A very profitable remedie for the hardenesse of we∣mens breast after they be brought a bed. YOu must take wheate Bran, and seeth it with the iuice of Rue, and laie it vppon her breastes that be hardened after her liyng doun, and thei will waxe softe and supple. The like remedy is also
very good against the biting of Venimous beastes. For Apostumes, Botches, Cankers, or other swel∣linges. TAke Barley and Bran, and seeth them vntill they be like vnto a plaister very thicke, and laie it vpon the sore and it shall help muche. To make wemens milke encrease. TAke Fenell seede, and seeth it in barley water, and giue the woman drinke of it, and her milke shall encrease abondantly. Also the broth or wa∣ter that Ciche peason be sodden in, is verie good for the like thing. To know whether there be any water in the wine or no. TAke rawe Peares, and pare theim and make them cleane, and cut them in the middes, or els take Mulberies, and cast them into the wine: and if they swimme vpon the wine, it is pure & cleane without water, but if they sinke to the bottom, theris water mixte with wine. To make Vinaigre. MEn make Vinaigre putting the wine in some vessell, wherin Vinaigre hath ben before, and setting it in the sunne, or by the fire, or putting into it newe and cleane tiles or brickes heate or made hote in the fire. To make drie Vinaigre, whiche maie be caried wher a man will. TAke wilde Cherries, whan they begin to waxe ripe, but the fruite of the tree called Cornus in latine, is better, and Mulberies or Blackberies whan they be redde, or the great greene Grape, & the wilde Acorne before it be ripe, and stampe all this o∣gither, then take the best Vinaigre you can gette, and
incorporate all the said thinges togither, and make of the past little loues, whiche you shal drie in the sunne, and whan you will make Vinaigre, stiepe of the saide past in wine, and it will be good Vinaigre. Another composition for the same. TAke greene Grapes & stampe them, putting to thē some vinaigre, & a make paste or dowe ther∣of, whereof you shall make little loues and drie them in the sunne: And whan you will make Vinai∣ger, stiepe these loues in as moche wine, as you shall see will suffise, and you shall haue strong vinaigre. To make Rose Vinaigre very sweete and odoriferous. TAke good white Vinaigre, and put into it fresh and newe redde Roses, or els drie, keping al to∣gither in a vessell well leaded within the space of fourty daies, than take out the roses, and but them into another vessell, and keepe them in a colde place. To make Vinaigre of Graine. TAke an vnce of poudre of Graine, wherewith menne die fine clothe and put it into a suffici∣ent quantite of Vinaigre, and keepe it in the sunne certaine daies in a vessell leaded, and well couered, than keepe also togither, without sepa∣rating the Vinaigre from the Graine, and it will be the excellentest vinaigre of al, bicause the graine is ve∣ry sweete of sauour and odoriferous, hartie, and hote, and for this cause it tempereth and moderateth the great colde of the Vinaigre. A preseruatiue in time of Pestilence or plage, and against all Venm or poison, and biting of a madde Dogge. IF you eate before your meales, a Walnutte or two, two drie Figges, and some leaues of Gar∣dine Rue, with a corne of salt, it will be a good preseruatiue in the ime of a plage, and againste all
poison that a man eateth it. And the same beyng stam∣ped and laied to the biting of a madde dogge it hea∣leth it, so do Nutmegges also worke the like effect. Against stinking vermine called Pinneses. They that haue trauai∣led in Frāce owe what pinneses be.YOu must anoint well the place wher you doubt this vermine will breede, with oile oliue mixte with the iuice of wormewoode, and there will breede none. To purge Coler and Fleame. TAke some little nosegaies of Colewortes, and put them in seething water, and leaue them in it after it hath begon to boile, while a man wil goe fiue or sixe pse, then take them out of the water, and stampe them, and take the iuice of thi, and straine it thorow a linen clothe, and kepe it in an earthen vessell the space of a night in the aire abrode, then put to it some cornes of Salt, and a littel Com∣mine cut small or minsed. Nowe, he that will purge him selfe, and take this medecine, muste goe to bedde supperlesse, and washe well his legges, handes, and armes with hote water, and drinke the saide iuice so made, in the morning, and walke vpon it three or foure houres, and whan he hath lust to vomite, lette him vomite and he shall caste vp so muche Coler and Flegme that it shalbe a meruelous thing to se. And besides this, this iuice will purge also his head. A remedie to keepe flies from fleshe. IF you laie an Onion vpon the fleshe, there will neuer flie come neere the fleshe as farre as the sauour of the onion extendeth. To keepe Flesh all the somer without corrupting. COuer the Fleshe in Meale, Flower, or Bran, and it shall not marre in a longe time. The like shalbe done if you cast vpon the fleshe Coriander seede beaten and mingled with Vinaigre.
To knowe if a Melon be good. MEn saie comonly that a Melon is good whan the taile is bitter, and the head of him harde, and is very heuie. To kill and destroie Flees. TAke Penniriall whan it is in blossome, and burne it where the flees be, and the smell of that will kil and destroie them. To ripe a botch, impostume, felon or cattes heare, or any swelling sore. TAke Hogges suet or grease, or els Larde, and laie it vpon the sore or Botche, and it will ripe incontinent. Also be that hath many life or nittes in his hedde, anointing and rubbing it well with the said suet or lard they will die. Also the oile of Laurell or baies will do the like. An excellent washing for the teeth. TAke the floures of Pōmegranades, and seeth them in Wine, and take of this wine in your mouth for it hath the vertue of restraining & fastening the gommes swollen, and to make the fleshe fine. To make abaite for riuer fishe. TAke the blood and the fleshe of a calfe and minse it togither, and put it in a vessell, and let it remaine so the space of ten daies, and then occupie it. A remedie that no kinde of herbes shal be hurt or corrupted by flees or lise. WIth the Herbes that you will sowe you must sowe also roket, or els washe the seedes of the Herbes that you will sowe in the iuice of Singreene, and whan the herbes be come by they shal neuer be hurt nor corrupted by lise nor flees.
To driue awaie the stinking Vermin called Puneses. If you steepe Rue in water, and sprinkle your house or place where this vermine is you shall driue them all awaie. Also yf you laie in your bedde steede a braūche of hempe, you shall not be molested with Pinaises. Also rubbing your bedde steede with liquid or softe pitch whiche some thinke to be tarre, and the iuice of wilde Cowcombers, and the Pinneses that be there will die. Likewise if you rubbe your bedstead with Squilla, stamped with Vinaigre or with the leaues of a Cedar tree sodden in oile, you shal neuer feele Pinnese. The like shalbe don if you rubbe your bedsteed, with fishe glue sodden. Also if you sette vnder the bedde a paile full of water, the Pinneses will not trouble you at all. For to Kill and destroie Flies. TAke white Elebore, and steepe it in milke or sodden wine, than put to it some Auripigmentum otherwise called Arsenick or orpine, & sprinkle your house with it, and you shall destroie all the flies. Also the decoction of Eldern cast about the house wor∣keth the like effect. Another waie to Kill and destroie Flees. WOrmwoode, or wild Cowcomber rootes stie∣ped in sea water, destroieth flees: so doth the water wherein Mlanthium otherwise called Nigella Romana hath ben stieped, casting it a∣bout your house. Also if you boile or seeth the water with Rose cakes, or with hempe seeds, and casting it about your house it will do the like. For one that hath eaten venimous tadstooles or Musheroms. THere is no presenter remedy for him that hath eaten venimous Musheroms or Tadstooles, than to make him vomite as sone as maie bee
possible in giuing him drinke the rootes of the leaues of Rue well stampt, and of Organy, and Hony, and after that, the vse of Triacle which shal be very good, and Mithridatum with strōg vinaigre,Oximellū scylliticum, is hony and vinaigre soden togi∣ther, hauing the rootes of Scylla stieped in it. or with Oximel∣lum scylliticum, or els with Aqua vite. Also to eate raw Garlike helpeth muche in such a cace, which the most parte of the peisantes of the countrey doe, vsing it in steede of Triacle. For to confite Musheroms or tadstooles, so well that a man maie eate them without any danger. SEyng that Musheroms or Tadstooles are so pleasant in taste that menne can not abstaine from them, lette them learne at the lest waye the meane to assure thēselues from the dan∣ger that maie ensue, doyng as foloweth. Firste of all seeth them with wild peares, or with the leaues of the tree that beareth the said peares. And if you can finde no wild peares, you maie do it with garden peares, so that they be naturally sower and sharpe, and sucke as can not well be eaten but thei must be rosted, and you maie take them either drie or greene, and they will take awaie all the danger of the venime or poison. A remedy against the stinging of waspes, or Bees. TAke Oxe dung sprinkled ouer with Vinaigre, or els take Mallowe leaues so vsed with Vinai∣gre, or in touching the stinging with an yron, it is done also with the milke of Figges. To make wemen haue a quicke and speedy deliuery of their Children, and without paine, or at the lste very little. TAke leaues of Dittany, and stampe thē, or els make pouder of them, and giue the womā that laboreth drinke of it with a little water, and she shalbe deliuered incontinent, and without any great paine or greefe,
To take of wartes from the handes. TAke as many Ciche peason as there be wartes, and tutche eche of them with one of the Ciche peason, so that euery pease tutch his wart, then wrappe vp the saide peason in a little clout, and case them behinde you, and al the wartes will drie vp. For the dissenterie or flixe of the Stomacke. TAke greene beanes, poddes and al, and seede them with water and Vinaigre, & eate theim so poddes and all, and that shall stoppe you. To fasten the Gommes, and lose teeth. TAke a little Mirre, and temper it with Wine and oile, and washe your mouth with all, & you shall see a wonderfull experience. The Mirre also killeth the wormes in a mans body, and beyng chewed in the mouth maketh a sweete breath. To take awaie the toth ache. TAke Ysope, and make thereof a decoction with Vinaigre, and it being hote washe your mouth withall, & the paine of the teeth shall go awaie. The Ysope also beyng stampt, and incorporated with Honie, and a little Nitrum, killeth the wormes in a mans body. Another remedy for to heale the tooth ache. BOile frogges with water and vinaigre, & wash your mouth with the decoction, and it will be very profitable for the paine of the teeth. To make Heare growe. TAke three quicke Frogges, & burne them aliue in a pot, and mingle the ashes that you make of them with hony or with tarre, whiche is farre better, and rubbe the place with it where you se there groweth no heare, and in shorte space it will growe abondantly.
To make Heare blacke. TAke leches or blood suckers, and let them rott the space of three skore daies in red wine or vinaigre in some vessell of leade, and anoint the heares with it in the sunne, and thei will become black. To kill the wormes in the teeth, and to take awaie the stinking of the teeth. TAke a hundred frogges, and drie them al night in an ouen, so that they maie be made into a pouder: and put to it asmuche salt beaten into pouder, & rubbe your teeth with it, & it will kill the wormes, and take awaie the euill sauour of the teeth. To heale pussiue and broken winded Horses. TAke molin or longwort, and make therof a pou∣der, and giue it the horse to drinke with his wa∣ter, and it shal not onely take awaie the cough: but also heale him if he be altogither pussife and bro∣ken winded. Also Gencian will doe the like, whiche thing is sufficiently proued and tried. To preserue a man from vomiting on the sea. YOu must drinke the iuice of Wormewood, and you shalbe quite from such paine, and vexation of vomiting. A remedy against the biting or stinging of Ser∣pentes. TAke Ashe leaues, and stampe them, and laie them vpō the place that is stonge, or els get out the iuice of them, and giue him drinke of it, and you shall see a meruelous effect, bicause that the Serpent is so great enemie vnto the Ashe tree, that he would rather goe thorow the fire, then to passe by an Ashe. For them that spitte Bloode. TAke fine Rie flower, and make thereof a cake, and whan it is bake giue it the pacient to eate,
as hote as he maye endure it, and it shal do him great ease. A remedy against the wormes in yong Children. Lupines, is a kinde of ulse corne.TAke drie Lupines, and make flower of them, and kneath it with Hony and laie it vpon the stomacke of the Childeland it will heale him. A remedy for the flixe or Laxe. TAke greene Acornes and stampe them a little with the skinne and all, and with the endes of the yong and tender leaues, and make thereof distilled water in a limbeck, and giue the paciēt drink of it, and it shalbe a very good remedy. For the running of the vrine that is to saie for one that can not holde his water. TAke the small endes of Oken leaues, and seeth them in Claret wine, and then stampe theim, and make a plaister of them, and laie it hote vp∣on the yarde of the pacient, & shortly he shalbe cured. For those that can not keepe their meate but vomite it vp againe continually. TAke the tender leaues of an ashe tree, and seeth them in strong Vinaigre, and then stampe thē, and make therof a plaister, whiche you shal laie vpon the stomack of the pacient, or vpon his belly and he shalbe greatly eased of his disease. To make that Antes, or Emettes shall not eate the figges vpon the tree. TAke a kinde of Onyons, called in latine Cepa Scylliticae, & stampe them with Barrowes grease or lard, and anoint the foote of the plant a hād∣full or two of height, and the Antes will not goe vp into the tree, and this must you do in Marche. To make Hore heares blacke.
TAke mulberie leaues, vine leaues, & the leaues of a redde figge tree, and boile them with raine water, and washe your head with it, and the heares wilbe blacke. For the tooth ache. TAke the rootes and leaues of Chickwood, and boile them in water, with the whiche you shall washe your mouth, and hold it in your mouth a certaine space, and it will take awaie your paine. To destroie Lise and other small beastes, that do wast and marre the herbes in gardins. LEt a woman that hath her flowers walke three or foure times in the allees, and all the vermine will fall doune deade. A remedie for Deafnesse. IF a man be Deffe by some accident and not by nature, take the iuice of Colewortes mixte with warme water, and droppe it into his eares, and he shal finde a meruelous ease and remedy. Against the stinging of Scorpions. TAke Penniriall either drie or greene, and stampe it with good wine, and make thereof a plaister, which you shal laie vpon the wounde or stin∣ging of the Scorpion, and he shal be safe, and healed. A remedy that the Sunne shall not hurt you shi∣ning vpon your head, whan you go any Iornaie. IF you put a little branche of Penniriall in eche eare, the Sunne shall neuer make your head ake whan it shineth vpon it. A remedie for the Horsnesse of the voice. IF by colde you be Horse, take Penniriall, and seeth it in water, and take of it at night whan you go to bed, a dishefull somewhat hote, with a
little sugar molten in it, and doing this three or foure times, you shalbe ridde of your Horesnesse, and haue a clere voice. A remedie for them that can not pisse. TAke fiue or sixe leekes, and frie thē in the oile of Scorpiōs, and then stampe them and make of them a plaister and laie it vpon their coddes as hote as they maie endure it. Also the beard or heare of Leekes will doe the like, if ther bee dried, and made in pouder, and giuen thē to drinke in white Wine, and will make the grauell, and small stones to come out. To make a baite to ketch wilde Geese and wilde Duckes, and all other sort of foule. TAke the seede of Belenge and the rootes also, and steepe theim in water the space of a daye and a night with the seedes: than seeth the said thinges with the water that thei were steeped in, so that the seede maie well drinke and soke vp the saide water: than laie the said seede or graine in the places where wilde Duckes and wild Geese are wont to rest, and they will eate this graine or seede thus prepared and therupon will sleepe as they were drunke and in the meane time you maie take them with your hādes▪ but there must be a great quātite of this Belenge spe∣cially for wilde Geese. This maie also serue to take al other maner of foule that go togither in sholes or cō∣panies. Men vse to seeth this graine with brimstone and laie it in the places where birdes and foule are wont to feede and al that eate of it, wil fall doune and die: but to kepe them that they die not, you must giue them to drinke oile oliue, and shortly after they will reuiue againe. To make that Dogges shall neuer be madde, and a remedie for them if they be madde, beyng bitten of wilde Dogges or wolues.
IF you cut of the Dogges taile within thirty or fourty daies after he is whelpt, he shall neuer be madde, onles he be bittē of some madde dogge or wolfe: for if he be bittē, you must giue him to eate the space of thirty daie continually Hennes dunge with breade or other meate, laiyng vpō the place so bitten, a plaister, of the rootes of wild Roses, and put a colla of it about his necke, and in the wound some Garlike or Onyons stampt, and if you be nighe vnto the sea, caste him into it euery daie twise or thrise, so that he maie thorowly washe, and continue so the space of twenty daies, bicause the sea water hath a vertue a∣gainst the madnesse of Dogges. To make that flies shall not vexe or trouble Dogges. TAke the greene outward shale of Walnuttes, and stampe them, and anoint the dogge with it where the flies vexe him, and specially in the eares, and the flies shall not tutche him. A remedy to keepe Dogges from Flees. RUbbe the Dogges ouer with oile oliue, and they will die incontinent, or els take the roote of Belenge and seeth it water, with the which you shall washe the Dogges, and if there be any flees they will die, or if you take the iuice of the leaues of it, and rubbe them with it twise or thrise. The like effect will the water of Toruisque worke, if you washe the Dogges well with it, but true it is that thei muste be washed afterward with cleane water, for if the dogge should tutche that water with his tonge, it wold hurt him, bicause it is very venimous. To purge Dogges whan they be sicke. IF dogges haue any wounde, you must heale thē with molten pitche mixte with oile oliue, and rubbe the wounde euery daie with it. If thei be otherwise sicke you must purge them, in giing them
drink whey of goates milke. This don seeth a shewes head, skin, and heare and all, and put a little Giger in it, and make them eate it hote with the broth and al togither. To heale mangy Dogges. IF you kill a calf, take the blood of him hote, and smre it vpon the dogge where he hath the di∣sease, and whan that is drie plaster him ouer a∣gaine with calues blood warme as it is whan it com∣meth from the calfe, & this must be done diuers times. And thē washe him well with lie made with the ashes of the shrubbes or twigges of Vines. It shall be also good to caste him some time into the fattes or tubbes wher they die cheuerell, and there washe him well, for that clenseth meruelously, some washe Dogges in the water that mirre hath bene stioped in. It shalbe good also to take a little good plaster of Paris with asmuche of the seede of Alegre, and stampe them wet togither, and mingle them with molten pitche, and anoint the Dogge with that, whiche is also good for menne. To ake wartes from the handes. TAke earth and kneth it with Dogges pisse, and laie it vpon the Wartes, and they will drie vp and consume awaie. To make the Teeth white. TAke Goates horne and burne it, and make ther∣of pouder, and rubbe your teeth with it, and they will be white, and will also fasten and confirme the Gommes. To take awaie the paine of the eyes. TAke the Langes or Lightes of a idde hote as they be taken out of his belly, and laie them vp∣on the eies of the paient, and it shall take his paine fr him.
For him that is stong with a Salamander. TAke Rosen prepared and compounde with Ho∣nie in maner of an electuarie, and let him drink it with the decoction of Nettle leaues: But he that by fortune hath eaten of a Salamander must vo∣mite, in giuing him drinke diuers times oile, and ma∣king him sharpe glisteres, for to drawe the venim out, and to comfort his harte after, in giuinge him good triacle and mithridate, and that his meate be fat fleshe of yong beastes. For one that hath dronke Leches or bloodsuckers. GIue him drinke of some brine, and the iuice of Beetes with Vinaigre, and you shall kill the beast, that hurteth so that it choketh the pacient sticking fast at the mouth of his stomacke. For one that is stonge with the beast called in latine Psalanx which is a kinde of Lisard called Stellio. YOu muste singe and plaie vpon diuers instru∣mentes, and make the pacient to daunce conti∣nually vntill he be healed. For one that is bitten with a madde Dogge. YOu muste vse all diligence to get immediat∣ly the Liuar of the same madde dogge, and let the pacient eate it hote rosted,Cucurbitu∣lae, be cer∣taine cup∣pes that sur∣geons doe vse to drae out bloode with by ska∣rissyng the skin called cupping. and aboue all thinges you must enlarge the wounde with a rasour, and cut away al the torne and perished flesh, and cause the blood to issue out abondantly because it bringeth the venime with it: And to drawe out blood also with little cuppes wel flamed, called Cucurbitulae, & to giue him garlike, onyons and other like thinges to eate, and to drinke Milke, and good, sweete wine. A remedy for him that is stonge with some Veni∣mous Beast. TO get the Venim out of the fleshe & the blood of him that is stong venemously in any maner
of sorte, the beste and the chiefest remedy that can be founde, is to sucke out the Venim with a mās mouth: but you must note that he that shall sucke it out maie not be fasting, but must haue eaten some thing, speci∣ally fatte and greasie thinges his belly full. Then ha∣uing washed his mouth with good wine, let him take into his mouth some oile oliue, and let him beginne to suck: Then to enlarge the place that was stong, with a rasour, that the venim may come the better out, and set these cuppes called Cucurbitulae, vnder with muche stame for to drawe it out. This done make him a plai∣ster vpon it with Garlike and Onyons stampt small, and washe the place with hote vinaigre, The diet of the paciēt must be the blades or leaues of leekes, gar∣like and Onions, with Pepper and salte inough, and muche bread, good wine with organy, and the seedes of Nettles, Baie berries, and Genuper berries, the fleshe of Hedge hogges of the lande, and citrous with their seede. To preserue a man from Poison. TAke drie Figges, and eate them with Wal∣nuttes, or rawe Citrōs, the seedes of nauewes which is a kinde of rape drunke with wine, or els the leaues of Calamint, and Terra sigillata, and ruddle or red chalke, in taking of al these thinges a dramme at a time, and like wise the leaues of Rue eaten with a walnut, two drie figges, and a corne of salte, vsing daily these simples you shall be preserued from poison. As concerninge compoundes, the prin∣cipall of all Antidotes or conterpoisons is mithridate and triacle, for in taking euery daie the quantite of a Hasill nut of Triacle there shall neuer Poison hurte you. To driue awaie all venimous beastes from your house. TAke Iuniper, the seede of Agnus castus, the shelles of riuer creuices, Hartes horne, the grease or suet
of a Bucke, Kerse or toune Cresses, Organy, and Dittany, and make of all these droges a dowe or past, and whan you will vse it occupie it, burne it, for where as the smoke thereof goeth the beastes will voide awaie. Against all poison, eaten or drunke. HAuing knowledge that any man is poisoned, the chiefe remedie is to make him vomite the poison, in giuing him oile oliue luke warme to drinke, alone, or mixte with water, & if you haue no Oile, giue him Butter with hote water, or with the decoction of line seede, or the seede of nettles, or of Scinigrecum, and all these thinges purge the ve∣nim as well dounewarde as vpward after hauinge made him vomite diuers times, you muste purge him with sharpe glisters douneward: then giue him wa∣ter mixte with Honie, and also olde Wine ynough to drinke. But if you can get good Triacle or Mitri∣date, they are the principall against poysons with Terra sigillata, Acorne shels, and giue him of it in good wine. Let his meate be the fatte fleshe of olde beastes, and fatte brothes, specially of Hennes and fatte fishe, and lette him not sleepe, & in continuyng this meanes he shall be deliuerid, by the helpe of God. Against all Venim or Poison. TAke a quantite of Flies, and drie theim, and make pouder of them, and giue it him that is poisoned to drinke in wine, and immediatly he shalbe cured. A remedy whiche king Nicomedes vsed that no poison should hurt him. TAke Iuniper Berries, Terra sigillata or ruddle, of eche of them two drammes, and make it in to pouder very small, the whiche you shall mixe
with hony, or oile oliue, and so kepe it. And whan you will occupie it, take the biggenesse of a hasell nut of it at a time, with water mixt with hony, and you shalbe assured not to bee poisoned, for in eatinge poisoned meate after it, as sone as it is in your stomacke, there will come vpon you a vomiting, so that you shalbe constrained to cast vp the meate and the poison togi∣ther: but if there be none in your meate, the said pre∣paratiue will not hurt you at all. A secret or remedy, not to be stonge of Scorpions. CArry about you of the roote of Polimonia, or Poli∣monium, and you shall neuer be stong of Scorpi∣ons, and if you be stong with them they shall do you no hurt. A remedy not to be stong of wespes or Bees. TAke Mallowes & stampe them with oile oliue, and where as you anointe your selfe with the vnction, neuer flies, Wespes, nor Bees will tutche you. To make what quantite of strong Vinaigre you will. TAke Squilla, which is a kinde of an Onyon, and take the leaues of from it, & tie it vpon a threde, and leaue it fiue or sixe daies in the aier. Tha plonge it into the vessell of wine that you will make Vinaigre of, and there muste be so muche voide space in the vessell that the Squilla, maie not tutche the wine beyng tied by the bong, and let it hange so fiue or sixe daies, and the Wine wil become stronge and sharpe, and will turne into good Vinaigre. For one that hath eaten venemous musheroms or Tadstooles. THe cheefest thing is, that he be made to vomite in giuing him drinke oile oliue, and lie made of the Ashes of the shrubbes of vines, or of the brā∣ches of a wilde peare tree, with salt and vinaigre tem∣pred
with water. Hennes Egges also be good beyng drunke with Vinaigre tempered with water. And these remedies be good for any man that hath drunke Plaster, or eaten any thinge that choketh, or him to whome some manne hath giuen menstruall blood to drinke, as wicked wemen some time doe. To be assured and safe from all Sorcerie and En∣chantement. TAke Squilla, and tie it vpon the principall gate or doore of your house, and you shall assure all the inhabitantes in it from all sorcerie and enchantmentes. Also this Squilla, assureth and kepeth al plantes and trees that are about the house, where it is planted or set, from all noisomnesse and in¦fection of the ayer. Against lightning and tempest. IN the place where there is tied the skinne of a beast called in latine Hyena, or of a Cocodrille,Hyppopo∣tamus, is a beast liuing in the riuer of Nile ha∣uing feete like an oxe his back and mane like a horse, a win∣ding tayle and tusked like a Bore, and neyeth like a horse. or of a Hyppopotame, or of a sea Calfe or seale the lightening tempest and thonder will ne∣uer fall there, nor likewise vpon a haye tree nor figge tree. To keepe that fruites shall not fall before they be ripe. IF you tie wilde Figges vpon the trees in your Garden from the whiche your fruite falleth, it shall not onely not fall doune, but also these fig∣ges will keepe them safe. To keepe that wesels and other like beastes shall not eate nor destroy Poultrie. RUbbe your Pultrie with the iuice of Rue or herbe grace, and the Wesels shall do them no hurt, also if they eate the Lunges or lightes of a Foxe, the Foxes will not eate them.
To make Flaxe as softe as Silke. TAke what quantite of Flaxe you will that is good and faire, & kembe it as ready to be sponne: Then take freshe and recent Calues dunge as muche as will suffise to paste ouer the saide flaxe, and lette it be well washed after it hath remained fiue or sixe houres so soked and couered with the dunge, and it will be as softe as silke, & maie be sponne as fine as a man will. To heale the paine of the Head. TAke Maioram, and presse out the iuice of it, and let the pacient take of it into his Nose. To heale lippes that be clefte and full of chinkes by meanes of colde or winde. TAke gomme Arabike, and Dragant, asmuch of the one as of the other and make pouder of it, and incorporate it with Oile of Violettes, and anoint your lippes therwith. To heale handes that be full of Chappes by colde or winde. TAke mastike, frankences, newe waxe, and oile of roses, & make of all this an vnguent or oint∣mēt, and anoint the chappes or chinkes of your handes, and they will immediatly be hole. To grinde Golde and Siluer. TAke the cutting or paringe of beaten Golde the value of halfe a croune, than take some gomme Arabick asmuche as two beanes, and stiepe it in so little water that it skant becoue∣red ouer, and leaue it so a night: than braie it a little vpon a marble stone, and put to it the Golde by litlle and little, and incorporate it well with the gomme. Then braie it slightly the space of two houres, in ga∣thering it vp vnder the stone that grindeth it: for in spreading it abrode much of it is lost, and with a pen∣sill weate the Golde rounde about, for seare lesse it
should drie: for you should lose it bicause of the gomme that maketh it to drie vp: Then you shall take half an vnce of salt peter, whiche you shall put in a little cfer or casket of yron, and put to it so muche water that it maie be scant couered, and boile it on the fire skim∣ming it well, then straine it with a double linen cloth and thicke, and let it coole, and it will congele and be white: Then braie it with the Golde the space of an houre and a halfe, and than it is grounde. This don take it vp with a fine pensill, and putte it in a cuppe or goblet of glasse, and resolue all into water. Than must you haue ready three or foure cuppes of Glasse for to empty the water in from hand to hand: then put the water vpon the Golde, and with the ende of your finger washe it well with the Gomme and salt peter, and you shall empty the water from hand to hand into the cuppes of glasse. Also you muste haue ready some shelles cleane and drie for to put it in: and the Golde beyng well washed in the cuppe or goblet, let there be a little water in it, and sturre the Golde with a pinne, and you shall empty by little and little in the dishe all that quantite whiche you thinke you will cut of, and make thereof suche measure that you maie haue your money againe. And you must knowe that there is al∣waies half in half gotten vpon it. And in emptiyng it mixe it well togither, to the ende that the course maie goe to the bottom and mingle it not with the fine, for you should do hurte vnto your worke and your selfe wronge: but keepe it, for you maie grinde it ones a∣gaine, and whan it is in the dishe, you shall holde it ouer a flambing cole, not letting it rest still but remo∣uing it faire and softly and it will waxe drie, & seeme fayrer to the eye. And thā kepe it from all filth, & dust. To make faire Verdegrise after the newe facion. TAke strong Vinaigre, and viij. vnces of the si∣ling or skales of Copper well made cleane from all dust, foure vnces of Baye salt, two vnces of
it, and than facion what bede stones you will, & make the hole of them little, and lette them drie well in the sunne, and if you bake them in an ouen, they wil dure longer, and will be stronger. Than giue them a light colour with hole armenick, & the white of an egge, & laie siluer foile very fine vpon them, but weate it first with water: and then polish thē with a dogges tooth, and make them glister and shine. Then take the shea∣ringes or paringes of parchement that be white and not colored or painted, and washe them with luke warme water, and boile them in a newe potte, vntill they be well sodden, and somewhat ingrossed & waxen to a substance or body, then straine them finely, and whan you will occupie them about your worke, lette them be luke warme: Than take your Perle and put it vpon the ende of a needle, or some other fine or smal yron, to the intent the hole be not stopt, and so plonge it into the said parchemēt glue, & take it out quickly againe, and turne it round that the glue maie not rest in one place of it, but that it maie be of like thicknesse rounde about the Perle, and if it appeare not thicke inough vnto you, dippe it in againe, and it will shewe better, that is to faie the whitnesse will shine vnder the glue, & will make a certaine obscure marke with in, and glistering without, so that it shall seeme a na∣turall colour of a Perle. And whan you shall compare him with a naturall Perle, this shal appeare alwaies fairer to the eye, bicause it hath more glosse and lustre and shalbe roūder. And for to make these your Perles to be more esteemed keepe them in little boxes, and shewe but a fewe of them at ones, and if you will win muche you must make many of them. To imprent medalles in bost with Dragagant. TAke sixe vnces of Dragagant, and stiepe if in strong Vinaigre the space of three daies. Then stampe or beate it well, and ingrosse it into a
bodie or substance with plater ground very smal, and if you will make them of other colours, put into it what pouder you will, be it white or Orpimēt, so that the past maie be somewhat harde, and all well incor∣porated togither. Then take your hollow formes or mouldes, and annoint them a little, and fil them with the saide paste, and presse it well doune, and let it drie in the sunne, & you shall haue the printe of your molde neete and fine. And of this past you maie make also o∣ther workes as you will as bedes stones or other. To make a past meete and good to make all maner of medalles or pictures in moulde. TAke the bones of the legges of all sorte of bea∣stes, and put them in a pot after they be broken: and couer them well, and se them in a bricke makers fournese. And whan they be cold again stampe them and braie them very small. This done take the floure or offall of yron that is beaten from it whan it is hote and washe it well & cleane, and whan it is drie againe, stampe it and braie it very small vp∣on a marble stone, and weate it much with strong vi∣naigre vntill it bee like as it were an ointment, then put it in a pot well couered, and set it in the said four∣naise: and whan it is cold braie it againe vpō the mar∣ble, arrowsing & watring it with a little Aqua vite, and let it drie, and it is made. This don, you shal take a dishe full of the said floure or offall of yron, and two dishes full of the first pouder, and incorporate thē well togither, and when you wil make the past for to make your medalles in the moulde, weate the saide pouder with salt water, Vinaigre, Pisse, or Lie, and mingle and incorporate wel all togither, and then frame your medalles in the moulde, and let them drie. This done cast in your mettall, or what you will make, and your medalles shalbe very faire and nete. To make medalles, and figures chaced and im∣bossed,
with Fishe glue. Fishe glue is that whi∣che Ioyners do vse co∣monly.TAke a slise of fishe glue or more or lesse, & beate it well with a hammer vpon a flint stone, than washe it well in freshe water, and finally with luke warme water, and than put it in a newe pot, and put some cleere water vpō it, and let it stiepe a night, then put a little fire or embers in a chafing dishe, and boile all in this little pot faire and softly the space of an houre and more, vntill you maie perceiue that it is incorporated, or els proue it otherwise in puttinge a droppe vpō your naile, & if it bide firme, fast & cleane, take it from the fire, and caste it vpon your medalles that you haue made ready, and let them be in this ma∣ner following. Take your chaced and imbossed me∣dalles, and laie rounde about theim a little waxe can∣dell, to the intent that the glue fall not by, and anoint it: with hony, and laie on the glue so thicke that all the imbossing maie be couered: than set it in the sunne, and let it be equall, and so let it drie, and whan it is dried inough, it wil lense it self from the medalle, and will be as thinne and as fine as paper and all the li∣niamentes very well seene and perceaued be thei ne∣uer so subtile and small, and will haue a good glosse or lustre, and folde them, & bowe them which waie you will and they wil not breake, and if you will alter the colour of them, colour the water with Saffran or ver∣degrise, so that it be skant colored, and vse this water to seeth the glue in, so that it be not to thicke: for than your worke would be to grosse, and not faire to looke to, and you maie also giue it a colour within side or paynt it without, and it wilbe a very faire thing. To make a Greene, Yellow, Redde and Blewe co∣lour without thicknesse, for to write with vpon Paper. TAke Verdegrise grosly beaten, and put it in a violl with Vinaigre very strong, and put to it
also a little Gomme arabike and a little iuice of Rue, & the violl beinge so full, stoppe it, & set it in the sunne the space of xv. or xx. daies, or els boile it vpon the fire, and than straine it, and let the verdegrise be well mol∣ten: this done put it into the violle againe, and keepe it well from dust, and whan you will occupie any of it, sturre it wel togither that it maie be thicke and trou∣bled, and write or paint with it, and it will be a faire greene. For to make the redde take hedde lie, and put into it some verzine cut in smal pieces, and let it steepe therin a night: then put to it a little alome, and boile it vntill it decrease of the thirde parte: then straine it, and keepe it against you will occupie it. And whan you will put it in effecte, take asmuche as shall serue you, and boile it againe, and put to it some Gomme Arabick, and the more you put in the redder and clee∣rer it wil be, but let it be hote, and if you will haue it cleere, pot into it a little Alome beaten, but very little at ones, & you shal make what colour you will, redde, darke, or bright. For to make the yellowe, take little apples of Spinceruin, not fully ripe, and stampe theim grossely in a morter: then stiepe them in hed lie, and seeth them vntill they decrease and diminishe of the third part, and straine them finely: and then set again on the said broth, and put into it a little Alom beaten, and whā you see it begin to boile take it from the fire, for els it would all go out, and straine it ones againe, and so keepe it against ye haue neede of it, and whan you will occupie it, sturre it and trouble it, and laie it on any thing you will very thinne, and you shal make a faire yellow whiche shall continew a long time, and if you adde to it a little Saffran, it will be liuelier and brighter. For to make the Blewe, take Palma Christi, that commeth out of Germanie whiche is like the flower of woad, and stiepe it a nighte in pisse, and in the morning braie it vpon a marble stone, and put a∣monge it a little vnsicked lime asmuche as you shall
thinke good, according as you shal see the colour come cleere or dimme, and temper or stiepe it with nothing els but with pisse, and it wil continue a yeare or more alwaies of one colour, and whan you will put it in ef∣fect, sturre and trouble it well within the violle: and take a pen or a pensill and weate it, and you shall see a faire Blewe: and if you will giue it a glosse or lustre, stiepe it with the saide pisse, and some Gomme ara∣hicke. To make a piece of violet cloth to write or paint vpon. TAke of these litle apples of walwort tree which comonly groweth on dike sides, and stampe thē in a morter, and after they be well stāped, leaue them in some warme place, vntil thei rotte and putri∣fie, then stampe them again, and get asmuch iuice out of them as you cā by pressing them in a presse, hauing first made ready your peeces of cloth cleane and fine, and old, and take half a dishe full of quicke lime, and weate it in a basen, so that whā it is wel weate, there maie be two or three dishes full of water aboue the lime, and no more, and poure it out handsomely that it maie be cleere, and stiepe therin your peeces of cloth well, then take them out and drie them in the shadow. This done, take some cleere water, and putte some Alome into it, and boile it, and seeth your peeces in it the space of a Credo: then take them out, and let them drie in the shadow, and whan they be drie, stiepe them in the said iuice two or three times, and at euery time let them drie in the shadowe, and in the winde vpon a net, and let them be flatte to the intent that the colour ronne not at one side, and they shalbe made and well colored, and so keepe them well from dust, and from the aier that the colour go not of. And this is the per∣fite and true secrete to trimme and dresse peeces that men make to paint vpon, and to take all maner of co∣lour, and is the meane, that the excellēt painter Iohn the Euangelist did vse. For to make another colour of
violet, take little apples of a mirtle tree very ripe, and stampe them, and presse them vnder a presse, and get out the iuice of them, and stiepe your said peeces in it, and drie them in the shadow. For to make a greene piece, and of diuers colours for to paint on, take Ver∣degrise ground smal, and some saffron, and temper it with strong vinaigre, and put to it asmuch more iuice of Rue, then stiepe againe the saide pieces in pisse and drie theim, this done plonge theim three or iiij. times in the said colour, and drie them in the shadow. Take also half a quarter of orpiment, & two vnces of strong lie, and a little brasse of the foulest you can get, half an vnce of Verdegrise, an vnce of Geniper berries well stamped, & put all togither, and seeth it vntill it be a quarter diminished. Thē stiepe your pieces in the said compositions, and drie them in the shadow as before, and you shall make a faire changeable colour. If you wil make also a faire grene, take the leues of the herbe called in latine Raphanitis, whiche is a kinde of lilly or flower deluce, called of the Frenchmen Lis celests: stāp them well, and get out the iuice of them, and put into it a little Alome stamped, and it wil be the cleerer, and stiepe your pieces therin oftētimes, & they will receiue the colours, and then drie them as before. But if you wil make thē of a sanguine colour, you shal make this fore saide colour with graine, wherin you shall stiepe your pieces. If you will make them Blewe, take the floures of Line, or of the fore named Raphanitis, & do as before. And whan you wil take of the colour frō euery piece, you shall haue a little gommed water, and weat the piece a little with it, and wring it well, and you shall haue asmuche colour as you will, and so vse of it with a Pensill whan you will. To get oile out of Talchum artificially, and of his owne strength. TAke sixe pound of Talchum, and beate it smal, & put it in a pot not baked nor leadid within, but thick
and greate of earth, and put of the said Talchum into it vntill the pot be ful: then set the couer vpō it and binde it well with wier, and stoppe the saide pot well with Lutum sapientiae, and lette it well drie and so put it in a furneise of bricke, or lime keele neere vnto the mouth where the fire reuerberateth, and whan you will take it out, beware that it breake not. This don braie it small vpon the marble vntill it be like vnto flower, and do it quickly, to the intent it take not muche aier, and put it in a little sacke pointed at the bottome like a gelley bagge, and laie vpon it a cuppe of glasse or some other well leaded and glased within, which may be meete to receiue the saide oile. Then lette it doune into a wel with a corde about a two pardes, or a yarde and a halfe from the water, and very nighe vnto the wall, but that it tutche it not, and remoue it not in xx. or xxv. daies. Then if you se that it hath begon to cast some oile you maie take it out of the well, and sette it in some moiste place, that is to saie in the corner of a sellar, for feare lest the aier or the winde or any kinde of best should hurt it. And leaue it so longe in the said place vntill all the licour become out of i: Then take the lees that remaineth, and distil it thorow a lembick with a small fire augmenting it little and little vntill by the force of the fire all come out that maie comme, and it is called of the Alkemistes the fire of Talchum. Nowe the first that is gotten out by the humidite and moistnes, is called the earth, and is very medicinable. The second is the very richesse of the Alkemistes: And I will saie vnto you that many whiche professe Alk∣ni haue sought this secrete, and haue done in all thinges as is here writen, and yet coulde neuer finde this meanes to giue it this great humidite, and of such abondance and with so long time: And for asmuche as the mater in it self is very stiffe and drie, so wil it haue great moistnesse and in abondāce. And bicause it hath had great and it must needes haue muche moistnesse,
and hauinge had these partes there is made of it two Clementes, separated as you see. Then take this last lees, and stampe it in a morter, and put it in a pot or cawdron pouring vpon it some well water, and let it boile a certaine space, and then straine it, and washe your body with it, and you shall se your skinne wil be very white, and will heale a manne of all maner of skabbes and skurt, and swelling of the legges. And in vsing the saide water for to washe your handes with, you shall haue them softe and cleane from all spottes or frackles. This is the parfite waie & meale to make oile of Talchum, whiche hath many properties of the whiche the Dutchesse of Sauoye did vse and occupie. And who so euer vseth this licour, it will take awaie Freckles, Spottes, Wartes, skarres of woundes, or cuttes, and other markes, and in short space you shall see a meruelous experiēce of it. It maketh white teeth, and taketh oute the wrinkles of the face: And t you drinke of it two or three droppes with Wine or pot∣tage, it will make you haue a sweete breath, if it cone bicause of the stomack. It comforteth the mother and causeth a good appetite, and restoreth into his nature euery euill stomacke that is marred by some accident or occasion of ckenes. And finally muche desired of the Alkemistes: for in putting into the saide oile some Mercurie well purified it congeleth incontinent and will endure the hammer, and this is very true. To make that all mettall shall seeme like Siluer. TAke of Aqua fortis separatiua, and put into it the value of viij. pence or siluer well beaten thinne with a hamer, and so cut it in small pieces, and set the violle vpon the coles for to heate it a little, and it will incontinent melte in the water: Then take it from the fire, and put into it some Tartare or lees of white wine beaten into pouder smal, and put so much into it that it maie suite and drinke by the said water,
and you shal make a dowe or past, wher with you shal rubbe all maner of metall what you will, and it shall seeme white as it were fine siluer. For to take muche Fishe, and to make a light in the night. TAke a certaine quantite of these little wormes that shine and flie in the night, and distil them in a Lembick of glasse with a slowe fire, and put the water that commeth of them in a violl of glasse, or some round apple of glasse that is cleere & bright, and put into it foure vnces of quick siluer pur∣ged, that is to saie, passed thorowe leather or kiddes skinnes, and sloppe wel the glasse that no water come into it. Then place it handsomely in the middle of the nett, so that nothing breake, and than cast your nette into the water, and it will make a goodly and cleere light and shining, and all the fishes that see this light will runne in a shole togither, and will fall into the net: for all fishe naturally taketh pleasure to runne to∣warde the light. And carriyng also the said round ap∣ple of glasse in the night it will giue a great light. It will do the like also in a chamber. To make a mixte stone whiche beyng weated with spettle, maketh fire. TAke quicke lime, & salt peter fined diuers times, utia alexandrina not prepared, calamint, asmuch of the one as of the other, quicke brimstone, and Camfire, of eche of them two partes. And let all these thinges be beaten or stamped small & sifted thorow a sarce or seeue. Then put the said pouders in a newe linen cloth and binde them hard. This done take two greate goldsmithes crosettes or melting pottes, & put the said pouders in them, & set the one vpon the other mouth to mouth, and binde them faste with wier, and Lutum sapientiae so that it maie sake no maner of ayer & drie them in the sunne, and whan the saide pouder is
dry, it will be yelow. This done set the croset in a fur∣neise of bricke or lime, & whan it is cold againe take it out, and you shall finde your substance of the colour of bricke, and it shal be parfite and good. And whan you vse of it for to make a fire or light a candell, weate it with a droppe of water, or with a little spettle, & incon∣tinent put to it your matche, & it wil light and burne. And whan you will quench it againe, blowe it as you blowe out a candell and you shall blow it out. To make a Vernish of Mastick, to lay vpon pain∣tinges made with oile. TAke two vnces of harde Masticke, and an vnce of the oile of a firre tree. Thā take a little new pot, & put the mastick into it beaten or stampt; and so melte it with a little fire. This done put into it the oile, and let it boile a little, and stirre it still togither, and let it boile almoste nothing, bicause the Vernishe would be to clammie: and to knowe if it bee sodde inough, put into it a Hennes fether, & if it burne by and by, it is a signe that it is made, keepe it wel frō dust. And whan you will occupie it, let it remaine in the sunne vntill it be hote, and whan it is drie againe it will giue a very faire glosse or lustre. To make that a white skinne shall haue blacke spottes of the colour of a leopard or panther and also to make grey heare blacke. TAke Litarge of siluer one vnce, ij. vnces of quick lime, and three basins ful of water, and seeth al this in a newe little pot wit a small fire, vntill it waxe warme. Then take it from the fire, mixyng it alwaies with a sticke, and it will be made. Then take a Pensill of Hogges bristels, and marke your white skinne with spottes as you shall thinke good, one spotte here and another there, one nighe vnto an other, and some what great according to your skinne. Then drie them in the sunne, & whan the skin is drie,
beate it with a wande and you shall see the spottes dimme of the colour of Taunie. And if it be not well colored to your minde you maie doe it ones againe touching the same places you did before, & the colour will be liuelier, this doyng you shal come to your pur∣pose. And this colour keepeth alwaies, and giueth a good odour. Also laiyng the saide matter vpon the heares of a mans head or berde that is grey, it will make them blacke. To make good oile of Nutmegges. TAke two or three pounde of Nutmegges, and cut them small, and stampe them well, then put them in a pan and heate them mixyng, them al∣waies togither. This done, you shall put them into a canuesse or strōg linen cloth, and put them in a presse, and presse theim well, and gette out all the licour of them, whiche wilbe like Mana. And then skrape it from the Canues bagge asmuche as you can with a knife, then put it in some vessell of glasse and stoppe it well, but set it not in the sunne although it seeme euil fauored: for it will waxe cleere and faire of it self with in ten or xv. daies, and is worth thrise as much as the Nutmegge it selfe. And this oile hath great vertue for to chafe and heate, and in annointing the stomacke warme, it swageth the paine of the mother, and Scia∣tikes. To make parfite oile of Spike. TAke the floures of spicke nete and parfite, and in quantite asmuche as you maie get, and stāpe them well, then put them in a little canues bagge strong, and presse them vnder a presse as harde as you can, and take it vp togither diligētly although it seeme iuell fauored, and put it in a strong vessell of glasse: but set it not in the sunne, for it will be cleere of it self, and waxe faire and bright, and wil haue a very sharpe odour of Spike. And by like meane maie you
make oile of Lauander, and serue your turne with it in many thinges, bicause it is very hote sharpe, and conforteth the stomake, and if a man put some of it in well water, it wil smell al of it whan a man washeth his handes with it. And of this water menne vse fo sweete Balles and many other thinges. To make odoriferous oile of Storax. TAke a bottell of double glasse, and put into it a pounde of oile of sweete Almondes, and foure vnces of Storax, grossely broken and cleane, and put it into it, stopping it well. Then sette it vpon the hote embers vntill the Storax be molten, then take it from the fire, & beyng so hote as it is put into it halfe an vnce of Mastick made into pouder, and whan it is colde, straine it diligently pressing and wringing well the bottom. And if you will make it more odoriferous you shal adde to it some Bengewine, and two vnces of cloues, and it will be perfite. To make an odoriferous oile of Bengewine. TAke a pounde of good Bengewine, and beate it small, and put it in a limbecke well glewed and closed with past, or els into some violl of glasse, so that you maie put in your hande, and let it bee sha∣lowe and not very depe, bicause the oile maie mounte vp with ease. And put therevpon twoo pounde of rose water, and incorporate it well togither: this doen, set on the couer of the Limbecke, and trimme it so well that it maie not breath out. Then giue it a slowe fire, in soche wise that ye maie gette out some water, and augmente your fire little and little, vntill the oile be∣gin to come forthe, and by and by chaunge the recipi∣ent or receptorie, pouring out the  water into som violle, and then giue it a good and quicke fire, vntill you thinke you haue drawē out three vnces and a half of oile, and kepe it in some violle of glasse well stopte, and leaue it in the Sunne the space of. viij. daies, and
it will be parfite and good. And thus maie you make oile of Storax, and if you putte to it fower vnces of Sto∣rax, it will be the better. To make good oile of Ladanum. Take a pounde of good Ladanum, and cut it as small as you can, and put it in a pot of Copper, and put into it sixe vnces of Rose water, fower vnces of Oile of sweete Al∣mondes, this doen seeth it faire and softly the space of twoo howers, and straine it so often vntil the oile waxe clere, and it wil be perfite and good oile of Ladanum. And first of al in taking awaie the yearth, if you knewe that it were not cleane, take the said La∣danum, and cut it small, and put it in Rose water vpon the fire for to melte it, then take it of againe, and let it stand and rest, the space of halfe an hower, and gather togither that is vpermoste with a spone, and putte it again into Rose water, vntill it be thorowe colde, and than make and compounde it as before. ¶To make oile of Orenge flowers, and other swete flowers. TAke freshe and cleane flowers of Orenges one pounde, and put them in a great violl of glasse at the fire, and put to them a pound and a half of swete Almonde oile, and a little burned A∣lome, & three graines of Ambergrise, sixe graines of Muske, sixe scruples of Camfere, and braie them after the accustomed maner. First of all the Muske, then the Amber, with fine Suger as moche as a Beane, tem∣pered with a little Rose water, and braie the Cam∣fire alone with Sugar, and put it in laste, but lette there not bee to moche of it, bicause that the sauour of it is to sharpe, and put in but a little at ones, for you maie alwaie adde to, but you can not diminish it, whē it is ones in. And let not the violl be to full, to the en∣tent you maie mixe and tourne vp and doune the com∣posicions,
for to incorporate them, and leaue theim in the Sunne, eightene or twentie daies, vntil a moneth bee paste, and it will bee parfite, and that the flowers maie seeth the more in the oile, then strain theim, and wring them well, and put theim again into the violle in the Sunne, the space of twoo or three daies, vntill it purifie. This dooing you shall haue a merueilous oile, and of a very good odour, and if the flowers seme vnto you but a fewe, you maie put other vpon theim, and thei will augmente the odour: by this meane you maie take of all sortes of swete flowers, and haue oile of diuers sortes, vsing the meanes aforesaied. To make a parfume sodainly in a chamber, where a sicke man lieth. TAke a little yearthen potte, and putte into it a Nutmegge, twoo scruples of the sticke of Clo∣ues, twoo scruples of the sticke of Sinamome, fower scruples of Storax calamitae, Rose water, or water of Spike, or some other sweete water, and seeth it. Then put it in a pot sharde, with a fewe hote asshes and coales vnder it, and set it in the cham∣ber, and the smoke thereof shall giue a very sweete a∣miable and hartie sauour. To make long and rounde parfumes, to burn in a chamber. TAke sixe vnces of Timiama, twoo vnces of Ladanum, three vnces of Storax solidae fiue vnces of Frankencens, an vnce of Bengewine, a pounde of swete coales, eight vnces of Dragant. And of al this make a very small poulder: but you shal put the coales, and the Dragant to stepe in Rose wa∣ter, or some other swete water, and leaue theim so the space of three daies. Then stampe theim in a morter, and put into them all the poulders, and stampe theim so that thei maie be well incorporated togither. Then
put in the coles stamping alwaies, and incorporating it, and put so moche in of it, that the paste waxe some∣what harde. And then make your parfumes long and round as you will, and drie them well in the shadow. And if you will not bestowe so moche cost vpon them, take the lees and bottome that remaineth, of some sweete odoriferous waters, and make thereof a poul∣der, and thei shall be good, putting to them a little Ti∣miama, the whiche will multiplie your woorke, and make a good odoure, and if you put to it a little Cam∣fire, thei will make a noise in burning, as it were cracking. To make a fine and swete pouder of Cipres. TAke foure vnces of Cardamomum or toun Kerse, two vnces of Storax solida, two vnces of Fran∣kensence, thre vnces of drie red Roses, an vnce of Sandalum citrinum, three vnces of Bengewine, two vnces of Cloues, a pounde and a half of cleane Egge shels, eight graines of muske, sixe scruples of Cāfire, and of al these drogges make pouder, eche of them by it selfe, and let the pouder of the Egge shelles be very fine, than put the Cāfire molten into the said pouder, and the Muske braied small with a little fine Sugar, and let all be wel incorporated togither in the morter, and sifted small, and so all made into fine pouder, and keepe it in some vessell of glasse that it take no aier, for it wold lose some of his odour. You maie make also of it another sort no lesse good & of another colour. Take redde oxe dung in the moneth of Maie, and drie it wel, and make thereof very small pouder sifted, and not that of it selfe it will giue a very good sauour alone without any other thing with it: for in that season of Maie all maner of flowres smell pleasantly. And he that knews not what it were would iudge it to be a pouder made of a thousand herbes: notwithstanding put into it some of the foresaid pouders suche as yo
shall thinke good, and also put to it some Muske, Am∣bergrise, and Camfire, after as you wil make it good. To grinde Ambergrise for to put with other drog∣ges, to giue them a good odour, and to make little markes and spottes vpon beades. TAke asmuche Ambergrise as you will, at the least a graine, & take a droppe of oile of sweete Almondes, or of Gelsemines, or of the or of the oile of Ben, whiche the parfumers do comonly vse in all their parfumes and odours, for of it selfe it hath no sauour at all, but giueth an odour vnto all thinges where it cōmeth, and neuer waxeth euill at any time, and if peraduēture you had neither one nor the other, take two Almondes, and stampe them, and take the iuyce of them, and braie the Amber with it, and if you will get out muche of it, lette the said Amber stiope a night in the oile: then braie it very small: for the more you bray it, the more it worketh his effect in mingling it with muske, and other sweete drooges. And if you will make sweete and odoriferous markes upon a paier of beades, take fiue vnces of dragant, and reye it in rose water the space of three daies with asmuche water as will be aboue it foure fingars, then brse it vpō a morter, and put to it two vnces of Ladanum, two Nutmegges, & an vnce and a halfe of Storax solida, and asmuche of fine Cinamome, half an vnce of Spicknard. And let al these thinges be made in pouder very final, and sifted thorowe a seeue or sarce, and incorporated with the dragant. And whan they be well incorpora∣ted, you shal put to them some good muske of Leuant, that is to say eight graines, and sixe graines of Amber∣grise, three graines of Ciuet, two scruples of Cāfer, & braie al wel in the maner aforesaid with the said oile, & wel let it be incorporated with the said past or dowe. And if it be not hard to your minde, for to cast it into a facion and to make the whole in it, let it remaine so
a daie or two vntill you maie well handle it. Than facion your beades for to make markes vpon them with it, in making two little roses of siluer vpon the corners of the holes for so keepe them from the heate or sweating of the handes, and so drie them in the sha∣dowe, and whan you hold the beades in your handes, it will giue a meruelous odour and sweete smell, and shalbe a pece of worke for Ladies, gentill wemen, and personages of greate estate: for in keping them amōg their clothes, they shall take the odour of it. To make fine Muscardines, white and Redde. TAke what quantite you will of white Dra∣gant, and sliepe it in Rose water, that it be well couered with it the space of two daies: Then stampe it well in a morter, and make it into a body or masse with flower of Amilum or barley that is fine and cleane, and a little fine Sugar, and as muche pouder of Mastick as will lie vpon a penny, and a little Muske well broken a sonder, and make hereof paste or dowe, the whiche you shall remoue and stirre vp and doune betwixte your handes beyng faire and cleane, vntill all be well incorporated togi∣ther: And if you put to it a little Irios, and white San∣ders the white ones shall be the best, & if you put to it redde Sanders they wilbe redde, or els some dragons blood. This done cut them very small, and drie them i the shadow, and make them so fine that they maie be like sande, and than they shall be made so that you maie vse them as you will. To make counterfete Camfire. TAke foure vnces of white Vernishe, two vnces of Mastick, and asmuche of white Encens, two dragmes of true Camfire, and lette all be made into fine pouder: then take the whites of foure egges, and a little Aqua vite, and so beate it well togither that it become in a fome, then incorporate wel the said
thinges togither, & facion your little balles or loues, and sette them in the sunne during the signe of Leo, the space of fiuetene or twentie daies, as long as you shall thinke good, and it will come into suche per∣fection, as that whiche is conterfeted in Constanti∣noble. To make the berde growe, and to keepe that the heares fall not of. TAke as many Bees as you shall thinke good, whan menne do emptie the Hiues, and burne them in a fire pan, and make a very fine pouder of them, and incorporate them togither. Thē you shal make some oile of greene Lisardes that be drouned in comon oile colde, and shall put it in a bottle of glasse before the fire, and make it boile vntill the Lizardes brast, than take it of and set it in the sunne the space of xv. or xx. daies, and keepe it so with the beastes in it and it will be an oile as cleere as fine Gold, and will keepe wel. Incorporate the said pouder with this oile, and anoint morning and euening the bare place wher you will that the beare shall not fall of, and they will not fall awaie, but growe aboundantly. But first you must make some lie with the ashes of vines, and boile in it these three herbes, that is to saie, Capillus veneris, Agrimonie, and Edera arborea, of eche of them fiue hand∣fuls, and whan it is sodden, straine it, and keepe it from dust, and washe your head with it twise of thrise a weke, and whan it is drie anoint your self with this ointment, & by the meanes of this washing the heares will growe thicke and longe: for it augmenteth the length of them, and kepeth them from falling. This hath bene experimented and proued of diuers menne, that haue bene very pild and balde. To get away the heare, from what place you will. TAke foure vnces of fresh quick lime, an vnce of or∣pimēt in pouder, a pottle of strong lie, & put al this
into a pot, and put to it the saide pouders, and boile it so long vnill it waxe thicke, or els deepe a Duckes fe∣ther into it, and if it pill or fall of, than it is sodden, and mixe it oftentimes, and in seething it will waxe into a body or masse, then keepe it in a potte leaded within, and whan you will, spreade it abrode hand∣somely, and laie it with measure vpon the place wher you will the heare shall fall of. But anoint firste the place with oile of sweete Almondes, then laie vpon it the saide composition, and you shal not feele the heate at all, or els very little. But if in cace you hae a fine or tender skin, that causeth you to feele the hate that you can not suffer it, but if you can endure it, it will the soner worke his effect. Otherwise, take two vnces of rose water, an vnce of Plantaine water, halfe an vnce of fine sugar, and put them togither, and weate your face with it, and incontinent the heate wil cease. And you maie make this medecine euery second daie vntill you haue your intent and purpose. And if you feare to do that whiche hath bene experimented, make these others, that is to saie, take salt Armoniack, and the gall of a he Goate, and braie them togither, and anoint the place frō whence you will take the heares, and thei will fall awaie. You shall take also the iuice or sucke of the roote of Celidonia, and a little orpiment, the iuice of Iuie, and Antes, or Emettes egges with a little Vinaigre, and incorporate all togither, and anoint the place with it and tho heares will fal away, & if it greeue you, weate it with the aforesaid water, and you shal a laie the heate of it. To make hore beares blacke. TAke fiue flagons full of raine water, and seeth it with strong Ashes, & put into it some Litarge of Gold the quantite of sixe vnces, with a hand∣full of a blacke figge tree leaues, and as much of sage, and let it seeth vntil it be diminished of a quarter, and
than it is done and made, washe your heade with this composition twise a weeke, and whan your head is drie againe, take the iuice of sage, and put into it an vnce of tartre or leese of redde wine, and half an vnce of the litarge of gold, and haue ready a combe of leade whiche you shall anoint with the saide iuice and so kembe your head and your bearde well with it, and they will become incontinent blacke, vsing the saide combe with the said iuice and pouder, whiche thinge hath ben proued. For the like effect you shall take oile of tartre, and heate it, & whan you haue washed your head and dried it againe, you shall anoint your combe with the saide oile, and so kembe your heade in the Sunne a good while, or els anoint your selfe with a sponge for to make your heares black, and do it twise or thrise a day, & in a weke you shall haue your heares as blacke as euer they were, and the like maie you do to your beard, and if you will haue it sauour swetely vse at the ende some oile of Bengewine for to anoint the cōbe withal, for it helpeth likewise to the blacking of the heares, and is of good sauour. This is an excel∣lent secret. For the like also, take white Hony, and distill it in a Limbeck of glasse, with a sharpe fire, and keepe that licour that commeth of it, and washe your head with it, and what it is drie againe, anoint your self with it & the heare will be blacke. Take also good Saffran, & incorporate it well with yolkes of Egges osted, and a little Honny, and you shall make of it, as it were a maner of ointment, with the which you shal anoint your head or berd morning and euening, and continuyng so a moneth at the least in washing your selfe often, the heares will  of the colour of Gold: but first anoint the kōbe with oile of bitter Almondes, and do that while ye are in the sunne, and the heares will be bright and faire as Gold. Take also the roote of succorie, and seeth it with lie, and in continuyng of it, it will make your heares white, and drie your selfe
in the Sunne, and washe your selfe twise a weeke, and boile also in the lie some commune lickerous, and whan your heare is drie againe, parfume theim with quicke brimstone, and they will become of the colour of Gold. To make also hore heares blacke, take black Sope, and quicke lime, and some litarge of Golde, and make thereof as it were an ointment, and rubbe your heares with it, and continue so a while accor∣ding as you shall see neede, and whan they be become blacke, leaue theim so, and if they returne to be white againe, doe as before. Also for to make them Redde, beyng hore and white, take three handfuls of Wal∣nutte leaues, and a handfull of the pilles of Pome∣granades, and distill them in a limbeck of glasse: then washe onely your white heares and not your face, for you should than make it blacke, and doyng thus the space of fiuetene daies, it will continue a moneth, and you shall haue your heare Redde. Take also grounde wormes burned, and make thereof pouder, also the leaues of a blacke Figge tree, and make thereof a fine pouder, and temper it with oile of almondes, and they will be Blacke. Now to make them growe a pase and quickly, take a certaine quātite of Hennes egges, and seeth them whole in water: than take out the yelkes, and frie thē in a friyng pan without any other thing, vntill there come furthe of theim some humidite and moisture: then take them of and putte them in a little bagge, and presse them in a presse, and get out all the substance that maye come out of them: then burne an oxe horne, and make thereof pouder, and incorporate it with the said licour, and put to it also goates turdes urned: and so anoint the are place with the saide cō∣position diuers times, and the heares will growe in∣continent after. To make white heare in the shadowe: without the sunne, and shall become white and shining like siluer.
TAke of the roote of the greater centory three vnces with two vnces of gomme Arabick and asmuche of Dragant and Alome, a pound of Venitien Sope, a pound of Alumen fecis albae, and haue ready first xxv. pounde of riuer water, and put into it of this roote of Centorie cut with a fewe of his leaues whiche you shall boile vntill the water diminishe of the thirde parte, then lette it stand in the sunne the space of fiuetene daies, and boile in it all the saide thinges, and than it is called of the Frenche menne and Italians Blonde a la venitiane. And in the morning whan you please wash your heare wel with it, and wrappe or binde theim vp in a Naptkin or ker∣chief, and whan nighte cometh you shall washe theim ordinarily, and putte into it this your lie of the herbe called vitriol, & then wipe them drie where you thinke good, be it in the sunne or by the fire, and do this twise or thrise a weeke, and your heares will be white and shine as it were siluer. A sofee dowe or paste as it were Pomatum, to washe the handes, and whan the mouth, Nose, Lippes, or Handes do chincke or chappe, and it keepeth the fleshe softe and sweete. TAke white Almondes, Alumen fecis, flower of Amilum of eche of them sixe vnces, white Pine apple kernels, cleane seedes of Gourdes, and Bene flower, of eche of theim foure vnces, pouder of Cloues, Storax solida in pouder, and Maca∣leb in pouder of eche of them three vnces, with twoo vnces of white Salte beaten, a pound of white Hon∣nie, and asmuche of venise Sope, a scruple of Muske and as muche of Ciuet, the whites of tenne Egges. Firste take the Almondes, and Pine apple kernels, with the seedes of Gourdes or Melons that be very white and neat, and stampe thē well in a morter. And note that all the importance is that they bee all well
stamped very small: then put in the Alumen fecis, and stampe them well, than put in the Honie and incorpo∣rate it well togither with the pestle, And after this, you shall put in the sope cutt in small pieces, and in∣corporate them diligently, this don, put in two pound and a half of the herbe called Brionia, & temper all well. Put all this into a newe pot, and leaue it so couered a daie, then set it on a fire of coles with out smoke, and lette it seeth the space of a quarter of an houre, and sturre it alwaies in the pot with a wodden spone, that it cleaue not to the bottome, and so take some euill sa∣uour, then take it from the fire, and poure it out into a greate earthen pan. Then put into it the foresaide slower, and that beyng well incorporated, put in the pouder of Cloues, and all the other pouders togither and all beyng well incorporated, couer it close that it maie take no aier, and lette it remaine so the space of ten daies. Then put into it the Macaleb, the muske and the ciuet braid and beaten very small, and incorporate all well togither with a slise, this done put in the eg∣ges beaten, so that they become as it were a skim or frothe, and then put in the salt, and mixe al well togi∣ther, in suche wise that the whole maie be well incor∣porated. And then the paste or dowe wilbe of a Graie colour, and odoriferous, and is called Imperiall oint∣ment, bicause it is a thing noble and full of vertu, and a man maie vse alwaies of this precious odour which conforteth the memorie, and if you vse it to wash your handes and face with, it will giue a sweete sauour to them, and maketh the fleshe delicate and softe, white and well saudring, and closeth vp quickly al maner of cleftes, chinkes or chappes of the mouth, handes and lippes. And if you will not washe your selfe with it, anoint yourself morning and euening, and you shall incontinent b healed, for this hath bene many times proued by experience. White Pomatum, fine and sweete for great lordes.
TAke thirty or twenty Appiane apples, or other tendre and mellowe Apples and diuide them in to foure partes, and make them cleane within nd without. Then take Cloues, and Sinamome, & flicke the apples full of it as they were larded, & so laie thē in rose water, that thei maie be couered ouer with the said water, and put into it sixe Nutmegges, with two drammes of Mace, and lette them thus lie a stiepe the space of sixe daies, and lette them he well couered. Then take Hogges grease, & take of from it the little sknne that is vpon it, and cut it very small, and put it to purge in fresh and cleere water three or foure daies and change the water twise a daie, and put it the last time to stepe in Rosewater, or some other sweete wa∣ter, and by this meanes it shal be wel purged and pu∣rified, and shal not haue but a good sauour and odour, then take three or foure pound of the said grease, and put it in a pot or other vessell that is not greasie, nor sauoreth euill, and put the apples cut in peces as they are into the said pot or vessell, and adde therto an vnce of the oile of Orenges, and of the water whiche the Frenche men call Eau de afe, whereof we haue spoken in the firste parte of this worke, or some other sweete and odoriferous water, so that all maie be vnder the water, and boile them an houre or more with a slowe fire, vntill the Apples be well sodden, and then breake theim well with a woodden slise, that they maie bee turned as it were into a broth, this done passe theim through a strainer, and then straine them hote againe thorow another finer and close strainer: and whiles it is thus hote, put into it three vnces and a half of white waxe cut very small, and two vnces of white Sandalum made in pouder very fine and mixt togither vntill it be all well incorporated: and whan it is colde, washe it with rose water vntill it be very cleere, and this Poma∣tum wil be as white as snowe. And after it is washed, you shall put to it eight graines of Muske, and foure
graines of Ambergrise that bee very smally ground, and so incorporate well al togither, and leaue it in the aier abrode the space of fiue or sixe nightes, and the Pomatum wilbe parfite good and odoriferous, And if you will not haue it thus perfite, you maie put lesse drogges to it as Muske and Amber: but here note and vnderstand that we haue made of it diuers times, and neuer lefte of this order aforesaid, and it hath been ex∣cellent parfite and good. There is also another sorte of it whiche serueth for euery hote disease, and for to anoint the handes, the mouthe, and nose, as is afore said. Take two vnces of sheepe suet, and an vnce of Goates suet, and choppe it smal, and melt it, and then straine it thorow a strainer, and put into it three vn∣ces of newe waxe, and two vnces of the oile of sweete Almondes: And melte all this on a slowe fire, mixyng and sturring it alwaies: than take it of, and adde to it foure scruples of Camfire broken, and mingle it still togither vntill it be colde, and so keepe it, and anoint your selfe withall diligently. There is another better than this and well allowed & proued, whiche is made as followeth. Take newe waxe, the suet of a he goate, and the marowe of an Oxe, of eche of them an vnce and a halfe, an vnce of the oile of Saint Iohns wuit, and asmuche of oile of Roses, and asmuche salt bea∣ten very small: but cut the suet and marowe and melt them, and straine them, this don set them vpon a slow fire, so that they maie not be skant warme: and putte the waxe beyng cut in peces, with the saide oile and salt, and mingle them well togither with your slise of woode. Then take it from the fire, and put into it sixe scrupules of Camfere, somewhat beaten, and mixe it alwaies vntill it bee colde. Then keepe it in yearthen cuppes leaded within. And the older it is, the better it is. Menne vse of it for all maner of hote disease, for chappes or chinckes of the Nose, Mouth, Lippes, or handes, and for kibes on Childrens heeles, and also
for a felon or cattes heare, for in anointinge theim with this, they will goe awaie, and also taketh awaie the paine, as it hath bene well proued many a time. For those that haue a stinking breath, bicause of the stomacke. TAke an vnce of Sage, and make there∣of pouder, three vnces of Rosemarie sloures, halfe an vnce of Cloues, two drammes of fine Sinamom, two Nut∣megges, two graines of Muske, and make them all into pouder: Then take asmuche purified Honnie as shall bee sufficient to knethe the saide pouders, or to incorporate theim well togither, this done, put it in a boxe of earth and lette it remaine in the Sunne foure or fiue daies, and it will be parfite. Then take of it in the morning fa∣sting halfe an vnce, and as muche at night, to the in∣tent it may confort the meate, that it corrupt not nor putrifie in the stomacke, and in vsing it oftentimes you shall be cured, and deliuerid from the euill smel of the breath. To make one haue a good stomacke, that hath a naughty one. TAke Abrotonum, Rue, Penniriall, fine Minte of eche of them a handfull, and two pintes of white Wine, halfe a pounde of white Honny, and boile it vntill it be sod∣den inough, and putte therevnto some pouder of Sinamom and Cloues, of eche halfe an vnce. This done straine it, and keepe it in some ves∣sell of glasse, against you haue neede of it, and tak thereof in the morning the height of two or three fin∣gers in a glasse, and lette it be somwhat luke warme, and it will confort your stomacke, but vse it not to muche.
A remedy for him that can not keepe his meate in his stomake, without vomiting. TAke Quinces, and make theim cleane within and without, and seeth them in strōg vinaigre, then stampe them in a morter, and put into thē a little mustard seede beaten into poudre, & so incorpo∣rate well all togither, & lay it hote vpon a linen cloth putting vpon it some pouder of Cloues, & lay it vpon his breast, and in doyng this three or foure times, he shall keepe his meate without vomiting. To make a naturall white Skinne. TAke a poūde of distilled vinaigre, with as much water of Gourdes, and put them into two vi∣olles, then put into the violl with the Vinaigre an vnce of Litarge beaten very small, and into the vi∣oll with the water of Gourdes, an vnce of salt Gemma, and set these two violles vpō a tile nigh vnto the fire, and let them boile an houre: then plucke the tile back, and let them coole: this done set them in the sunne the space of eight daies, & than keepe thē vntill you haue neede of them. And whan you will vse of them, take a dishe or goblet, and put as muche of the one as of the other into the saide dishe or cuppe, and it will become as white as milke, and so wash your face with it with a sponge, rubbing well the fleshe, and it will waxe as white and as soft as cotton, and delicate to tutche, and of meruelous effect. But if you will make it redde and shining, take a poūd of white vinaigre distilled twise: for it shall be the better, and put it into a little violle, and put into it an vnce of redde Sanders, cut and bea∣ten, and so made into a very fine pouder. This done seeth it on the fire the space of half an houre, and put into it a little Alome beaten, for it will augment the glosse of it, and if you will haue it of a good odour or sauour for any great Lord or prince, you maie put to it two grains of Muske or Ciuette, than sprinkle or
weate it a little with a sponge, and if perchaunce it be to redde, you maie put into it a little Alome, and it wil ware cleere, and so you shall make a faire shining redde of it, whiche will make a sweete fleshe or skin. To make the fleshe or skin faire and bright. TAke a pound of white tartre, half a pound of Tal∣cum, & asmuche salt, and put al into a pot not bake or aneled, & couer it. This don binde it with wier, and set it to calcine in a keell of lime or of bricke, thā take it out, and braie it small vpon a marble stone. After this put it into a little bagge pointed at the ende like an Ipocras bagge, and hange it in a moist place that it tutch nothing, and that to much enter not into it, & set vnder it some cup of glasse to receiue the oile that shall come out of it the space of fiuetene or xx. daies & more or lesse occording as it shalbe in a moist place: and keepe this oile as a treasure. And first washe your self with lie or water and whan you are drie againe, weate a sponge or a linen cloth in the saide oile, and rubbe your skinne finely with it, and you shal see that euery spot wil go of, be it sunne burning or any other impediment, and wil make your fleshe white, soft and clere. And in continuing this you shal attaine to your purpose in fewe daies. And if you will make an other sorte of it, whiche men vse newly in Venise, take two long white Gourdes, and thre dishes full of Fasils the blacke spottes or eies at the ende, as thei call them: be∣yng taken awaie, with the cromme of three white loues, and stepe thē in milke one night, and then take a dishefull of the seedes of Melons, with half a dishful of peche kernels made cleane of their skinne or pille, and a pound of white Pine apple kernels, and let all be well stampt in a morter eche one a parte, and two great pigeons, the which you shal cut in pieces a liue, taking out onely the bowels, and so set all to distil to∣gither in a limbeck of glasse, and vse of the same water
that cometh thereof and it will make your skinne and flesh faire & soft, as it hath diuers times bene proued. To cleere and mske cleene the face from all maner of spottes. TAke two pounde of turpentine of Venise, and twelue newe laide egges of the which you shal onely take out the white, and distill all togither in a limbeck o glasse twise, then put into the said wa∣ter ten scruples of Camfere beaten, and dissolue it wel in water, than take an vnce of the said water, and as∣muche of the water of a torteise, and put all togither, and washe well your face with it diuers times and it will waxe cleane and cleere from spottes. To take awaie a ringworme tetter, or spottes and other markes, or els a priuie marke in the body by birth. TAke a pound of Salnitrum, and asmuche tartre of white wine, and stāpe eche of them be it selfe very small, and then incorporate thē togither, and sifte them in a fine sarce so that all maie bee well mixte togither, then putte the saide pouder in a potte of yearth, made pointed like a Sugre lofe, and so close and straight togither, then sette a hote cole vpon the toppe of it, vntill it burne and consume of it selfe, and it shal be the salt nitrum bicause that the most subtill and moist partes, and the grosse parte whiche is the tartre, will calcine of it, and wilbe like a cake, the whiche you shall breake in small peces in a dishe, and put some warme water vpon it, so that all maie turne into water, and for to make the thing neter, you shall distill the said water in a guttur of felt, and then the water wilbe cleere. This done you shall put the water into a newe potte, setting it vpon the hote coles or ashes that it maie skant seeth, vntill almost all the water be dronke vp: Then you shall take the pouder whiche remaineth in the bottome, for it is the bontie and best of al your work, then take a viall of Sirope, & put in to it foure vnces of distilled vinaigre, with an vnce of Aqua vite of three distillinges: This done put
into it of the said pouder, incorporating it well togi∣ther, & leaue it three daies in the sunne well stopt: and in the morning whan you rise, and at night like wise washe the spottes of your body and they wil go awaie shortly and neuer growe again, and it wil make your skin white and faire where you wash it with this wa∣ter. Also for the same effect, take white wine es, and set it in some corner of your house vpō the pauement, and let it there drie well: then burne it in a pot shard or fire pan, vntill you maie make pouder of it. This done put it into a bagge of the fashiō of a gelley bagge in some moist place that it tutche no wall, & set vnder∣neth it a cup of glasse to receiue the oile that wil come out of it within xx. or xxx. daies, and keepe it in some vessell of glasse as a precious thing, and anoint your face therwith, and the markes or spottes will vanishe awaie in short space, so that your flesh & skin shall be∣come softe. And if you will haue it odoriferous or well sauoring, put into it some Cloues. And to take awaie lentilles from your face, and that quickly, take fiue or sixe oxe galles, and two pound of Alome, sixe vnces of fine sugre, and eight limons cut very small, distill all this in a limbeck of glasse, and put into the said water an vnce of sublime beaten into smal pouder & so put it in a vessel of glasse, & let it stand in the sunne the space of ten daies and than it will be parfite, than maie you wash the lentilles with it, with a little fast spōge rub∣bing hard the fleshe, and they will go of in short time, and so your face shal remaine white & faire. You maie also take the fire pan, and hete it hote, and laie vpō it a dish full of wheate to rost, then stāpe it hote as it is, and straine it and so get out the licour of it, and rubbe the lentilles with it and they will shortly go of. To take awaie red rubies that growe in the face by reason of the heate of the Liuer. TAke hogges suet wel purified & brimstone asmuch of thone as of thother w thother water distilled of
a Peche tree and ferne, and incorporate all togither with a slowe fire, and make therof an ointment wher∣with you shall annoint your selfe diuers times, and they will go awaie. In the meane time abstain from wine and all hote thinges: and to take awaie a ringe∣worme, take celydoine early in the morning, and stampe it betwene two stones, and laie it vpon the place, and in vsing this oftentimes you shal shortly be healid. To take of from the handes or feete the hardnesse of the fleshe gotten by labour. TAke newe waxe, Verdegrise, and Blanc rasil, of eche of them an vnce, & half an vnce of sublime, two drammes of burned Alome, two vnces of oile of roses, and all this beyng braid very smal, make therof an ointmēt with a slow fire: This done weate the wart or hard fleshe in water, or hote lie, and pare it handsomely with a rasor, and so laie of this ointmēt vpon it with a plaster, and continuyng this same, it will go awaie. You shall take also the flowre of line seede, and with strong Vinaigre you shal make a past or dowe somewhat hard, and vse to laie it vpon the hard flesh and it wil shortly drie vp. You shall take al∣so greene waxe, and spreade it vpon a plaister, and lay it vpon the place, beyng first weated with water, then cut the hard flesh as finely as you can, & in vsing this, it will kill the roote, so that it shall growe no more. Another secret to take away wartes or hard flesh that growe betwene mens toes. TAke the greatest Singreene of Walles, & take of the little outward thin skin that is vpon it, and laie the saide herb vpon the wart or harde flesh betwene the toes that it maie lie right vpon it & do this fiue or sixe times in the morning and euening, and they will go awaie all though they were neuer so old, weate them well and pare them asmuche as you
can, and take of the saide herbe and make iuice of it, and put into it a little burned Alome, and incorporate it togither, and laie vpō it a little burned Alome, & in∣corporate it togither, & laie little weate pieces vpon the place that it maie bee alwaies freshe, and within ten or twelue daies, the wart or hard flesh wilbe gone so that you shall feele it no more. A man maie make yet another meanes, take the staulkes of Brionia or wilde Gourdes, and burne them, and make fine ashes of theim. Then take the leaues of the saide Brionia or wilde Gourdes, and of the leaues of Molin or Long∣wort, and of his floures and stampe theim, and so get out the iuice. This don, take of the said ashes, and put asmuche of it into the said iuice, as will make it like vnto anoyntment: and therwith anoint your wartes and hard fleshe, and they will goe awaie and neuer growe againe. If you take also the floures of Molin or Longwort and distill them in a Limbeck of glasse, and weate them often with the water, and than ta∣king the said floures and breaking them betwene two stones, and laie them vpō the place of the wartes bin∣ding them with some linen cloth, and doyng it often∣times they will consume awaie. To make letters of Gold and Siluer embossed. TAke two or three garlike heades and pille them and make them cleane and stampe them, and get out asmuche iuice of them as you can, and put a little inck into it vntill it be black, or els a little Saffran in pouder without inck, and write with the same iuice great letters, or other: and lette them drie, then go ouer them againe ones more, for to make thē of the greatnes that you will haue them, this done let it drie, and whan you will-laie the Golde vpon theim, heate it againe with your breath and so laie it on: but the Golde muste be in leaues. Then couer the letter lightly with cotton and rubbing them a little you shal
take of all that cleaueth not vpō the letters. And thus doyng your worke will remaine of Golde and embos∣sed, whiche wilbe a very faire thing to see. To make a deuise or armes or other thinges, vpon a violett or a rose. TAke salte Armoniac, and braie it in a morter with vinaigre, and a little Sugre candy, and keepe it in a boxe, then take the rose, or Violet, or gelly floure, and dresse the little leaues fastened to∣gither with red waxe, in suche wise that they maie be equall. Then with a pensill very fine, make what de∣uise or armes you will, & let it drie an houre or more, and than laie gold or siluer vpon it in foile, and presse it doune a little with cotton, so that whiche cleaueth not on, will goe awaie and your worke shall remaine faire. Sope to get out all spottes of cloth. TAke a pound of Alome and burne it, sixe vnces of pouder of Ireos, and lette all be well beaten in pouder togither. Then take two pounde and a half of white sope, and half an oxe gall, and the white of an Egge or two, and incorporate them well togi∣ther: Then take the Alome and the pouder of Ireos, and incorporate them all togither, and putte into theim a little Salnitrum or salt peter: This done put into it as∣muche of the said incorporated Sope, as will make it haue a substance or bodie: to the intent that ye may fa∣cion and make rounde balles in a good ferme and fast paste or dowe, and so drie theim in the shadow and not in the sunne, bicause the sunne is contrary to it. And if you make them for to sell, make them by measure, and by weight, and whan you wil take out your spot, weate are the clothe vp and doune: then rubbe it well with the sope, and cloth against cloth: This don you shall washe it with colde water vntill the water were cleere: and if you think it be not out al togither,
lette the clothe drie, and do ones againe as you did be∣fore, and the spottes will go out. Another like secret. TAke a pounde of white Sope of Venise, the yelkes of sixe Egges, and halfe a sponefull of beaten Salt, and asmuche iuice of Beetes as will suffise to incorporate the saide Sope, and make thereof a cleauing past, whereof you shall forme and make your balles, and let them drie in the shadowe, and whan they be drie weate your clothe vp and doune with cleere water, and then rubbe it with sope, and washe it as is a fore declared, and the spottes will goe awaie. Another like. TAke a pounde of white Sope cutte very small, the Gall of an Oxe, or he Goate Alumen cati∣num, of eche of them an vnce, the yelkes of two Egges, and a fewe ashes very fine, and incor∣porate well al togither with the sope in a morter, and so make thereof paste, whereof you shall make balles and doe as before is said. Another meane. TAke the Gall of an olde Oxe, and a pounde of Fenigreke made in pouder, a pounde and a half of white sope, three flagōs of strong lie, & put al togither and seeth it on a slowe fire vn∣till it diminishe of the halfe. Then washe what spotte you will with it refreshing it diuers times with colde water and it will take it awaie. Another meanes for spottes, of fatte or Oile. TAke a pounde of rocke Alome, and as muche freshe vnsleck lime, sixe vnces of Alumen fecis, three pounde of white Sope cutte small, foure
pound of cleere water, and let it boile a certaine space in some vessell that is not fatty, and than straine it, and whan you will occupie of it, let it be luke warme, and weate the spottes with the saide water on bothe sides of the cloth, and the cloth togither: then washe it with cleere water, and the spottes will be gon, then washe it againe with a little Sope and freshe water, and at the second or third time, they will without all peraduenture go out. Also for spottes you maie take two pintes of renning water, the Gall of an oxe, four vnces of Alom De fece burnt, and three vnces of Alumen fecis broiled, and two scruples of Camfer, and put all togither, and seeth it, vntill half be diminished: Then straine it, and washe what spottes you will with it, and within twise or thrise washing, they will go out. To take spottes out of Skarlate or Veluet, without burting the colour. TAke the herbe called Lauaria, of the Apoticaries Condisi, and get out the iuice of it, and laie it vp∣on the spot the space of two or three houres, thē washe it well with warme water, and if you thinke the spot not well taken awaie, do it ones more, and if the clothe be not died in graine, put to it a little sope, with another little quantite of the saide iuice, and in∣corporate it well, and so washe the spot with it, and it will go out. To take spottes out of white silke or Veluet in griene or Crimsen Veluet. TAke stronge Aqua vite of three stillinges, and weate the spot with it vp and doune: then take the white of a newe laide Egge, and spreade it vpon the spot, and so set it in the sunne to drie. This done wash it trimly with freshe and cleere water, and so wring well the spotte betweee your handes, and it will go out, and do this twise at the lest: for the colour will not perishe nor decaie. Also for a cloth in graine,
take Alome water, and washe well the spotte with it, rubbing it harde clothe againste clothe, this dooen, washe it againe with clere water, and in twise doing it, it will goe out. Also for the like effecte, take roche Alome, Tartre of tonnes, and white Sope, of eche of them three vnces, and make theim into very fine pou∣der: this doen, take twoo Oxe galles, and an yearthen pot that is not in any wise fattie or greasie, and putte into it hādsomely at your discrecion, and so sette it on the fire, and when it beginneth to seeth, cast in by and by the oxe gall, and the pouder, and let it so boile vn∣till it be diminished of the third or fourth part. Then washe the spot with this water three or foure times and at euery time drie the cloth. And finally renewe it with freshe water, and you shall see the effect. To take out a spot of inke or wine of a wollen or linen clothe. TAke the iuice of Limons, Orenges, or citrons, and wete the spot with it diuers times, letting it drie at euery time, this done washe it with hote water, and it will go out. Vse also white Sope with white Vinaigre, and the spot of inck will easely goe out. To restore the colour to a cloth, that hath lost it in taking out a spotte. TAke a pound of Tartre of white wine, and cal∣cine it in a fornaise of bricke, vntil it be white, and take an vnce of it, than take a pint of strōg Vinaigre and cleere, and put the said pouder into it, & so set it on the fire. And whan it beginneth to boile, take it by and by of, and it is made: Then weate by little and little, the place that hath lose his colour ∣ners times, and the colour will come againe. A water to take all maner of spottes out of clo of any colour.
TAke two olde oxe galles, and two scrupules of rocke Alome, and asmuche of Alumen fecis, foure vnces of Tartre of white wine, one scruple of Camfire, and stampe all togither very smal: This don take two flagons of cleere water, and put al togither, and so seeth it with a slowe fire vntil it make no more froth or skim. Then putte into it three vnces of Aqua vite of three distillinges, and so keepe it in some vessel of glasse vntill you will occupie it. And if the spotte be in skarlate, take a corner of the same cloth, and weate it in the said water, and rubbe well twise or thrise the spotte, and than washe it againe with cleere water, and it will goe out. The like maie you doe in al sortes of colored clothe, in taking a little of the like colored clothe, or other that is nighe vnto the colour weating it and rubbing as is afore saide, and it shalbe done. To driue awaie Flies, Spiders, Scorpions, and other Vermine from your house. TAke what quantite of Lapwinkes feathers you will, and burn them in your Chamber, and whan suche Vermine shall smell this sauour they will not abide. Against Gnattes whiche stinge men in the night. TAke Comine, and chewe it well, and anoint your handes, your face and al your body if it be possible with ye iuice that shalbe in your moth and the flie feeling this sauour whiche is troublesome vnto him, will not molest you at all. And if you will driue them out of your house, and that thei comme not into your chamber, take Commine, and make therof pouder very fine, the whiche you shall incorporate with good white wine, and take a burgeon of a vine, or other branche hauing greene leaues vpon it, and steepe it in the saide wine, and so sprinkle your win∣dowes and doores of your chamber, or the place wher
you will not haue them come in. And also sprinkle of it a long vpon the walles: for in smelling this sauour they can not abide. If you will also driue awaie flies, take Santonicum or Lauander cotton, and the leaues of Eldern trees, with some Comine, and seeth it with water, and sprinkle your house with it or your cham∣bre, and they shall not trouble you, for the sauour of the water is very contrary vnto theim, but beware you laie no baite for them to giue them occasion to en∣ter in boldely, for afterward thei will not greatly care for the sauour of it. A very excellent Secret, for to take out spottes or hard fleshe gotten by labour. TAke salte peter, Blewe vitrioll and Ver∣degrise, of eche of them two vnces, two vnces of Alumen Sucharinum, and halfe an vnce of vnsleckt Lime, and lette all be made into pouder, then distill it in a lim∣beck of Glasse. True it is, that the firste water is not verie good: but the seconde will bee excellent good to washe theim withall often times, and they will drie vp by lttle and little, so that you shall not perceiue it. You maie take also some pouder of Euphorbium or Eu∣phorbius, tempered with lie, and oile of Tartre, and incorporate it well, and so soke the spottes or harde fleshe with it, and cutte it as neere as you can, and lai∣yng this medicine vpon it you shalbe hole. Take also the water that falleth from the vignes after they bee cutte, and washe the Wartes oftentimes with it, and they will were awaie leauing the skinne cleane with out any blacke spottes. You maie make also pouder of Cantharides, and incorporate it with Rosen & Pitche, and make therof a plaister whiche you shall laie vpon your Wartes and hard fleshe, and you shall kill their roote, so that thei wil drie vp of themselues, and will go awaie without any paine. Take also glasse heaten
small, and washe it, and take the finest of it, and mixt it with a little womans milke and some leuaine of wheate, and make thereof a plaister, first cutting the wart or hard fleshe & paring of the head of the warte, and so laie it vpon it at night, and in oftentimes vsing this, they will go awaie. To take oile or grease out of a cloth of what colour so euer it be, without any droppe of water. TAke some sheepes feete, and make them verie cleane: then seeth them and eate theim, & keepe the right bones, the which you shall burne, and make therof a cleane and fine pouder. This don heate the said pouder and laie it vpon the spot, and let it re∣maine in the sunne, and whan you see that the pouder beginneth to waxe black, take it by and by of, and put other freshe vpon it, and doe this so often that you see the pouder no more blacke, and than the spotte wil be gone, and the colour of the cloth not perished. Balles of Sope for Barbers of diuers sortes and sauours. FIrste you muste note that the Sope is purged and purified two maner of waies. The first is the venitian Sope beyng3 cut small muste be put in a pot that is not fatty, nor hauing any euill sauour, and put into it some rose water or other sweete waters, or els in this maner folowing: Take well water and put into it cheuers of cipers, and seeth it a good while, than straine it, & it wil be very odori∣ferous and sweete: or els putte in the floures of mirtle tree, of Orenge tree, Cedar tree, Spicke, Lauander, Agnus castus, Sticados, beyond sea Violettes, Sage, and suche other odoriferous floures or herbes, as Ced, Baie, our ladies glooues, Minte, Maioram, Time, and other sweete herbes, and make of all this a com∣position, & so make a sweete water of diuers sauours, and so seeth it a little: This done take of the sope that
swimmeth aboue with a Spoone, and laie it vpon a newe Tile, and it wil incontinent be drie and shal re∣maine neate and cleane, bicause the water hath taken awaie al the filth and vnctuosite of the sope, and ther∣fore will be faire and white without any euil sauour, hauing augmented the good smell of it. And this maie you keepe against you haue neede of it: And this is the very true purging and purifiyng of it, mary it dimi∣nisheth it of an vnce or a little more in the pounde. Al∣so another maner is, that you muste cut the sope very small or els grate it, and drie it in the sunne or in an ouen, and make thereof pouder passing it thorowe a fine sarce. This don weate it with Rose water or wa∣ter of Spicke, and lette it drie in the shadow or in the winde, or els for to make it soner, cutte your sope and stampe it, and nothing els, and put vnto it some pou∣der of Irios, Storax, and a little Camfire, and beate it all togither, and then make your Bals, and so you maie incontinent after distribute them. True it is that thei be not of any great value. But for to incorporate the odours in the sope for Barbers balles, you must take sixe vnces of the said sope, and stampe it wel in a mor∣ter, and put into it all these thinges folowing made into fine pouder, for in this lieth the honour and per∣fection of your worke. An vnce of Labdanum, foure vn∣ces of Macaleb, an vnce of Anise, three Nutmegges, Maioram, drie Roses, Cipres pouder, of eche of them halfe an vnce, three vnces of cloues, sixe vnces of Irios, eight vnces of the flower of Amylum, with asmuche of Storax liquida, as will lie vpon a peny, three graines of Muske, or foure at the moste, sixe scruples of Camfire, with a little of the finest Sugre that you can get. And lette all these thinges be well stamped, and incorpora∣ted with in the Sope, & you shall make a past or dowe some what fast or ferme, of the whiche you shal forme and make greate or small balles as you shall thinke best, and let them drie in the shadowe and they will be
parfite. For to make also of another sorte, take two pound of the foresaid sope, and stampe it wel, then put into it the iuice of Macaleb about two vnces, and for to knowe it, note that it is like a corne of whete, and of the same colour, but somewhat round & a little grea∣ter. And for to get out the iuice of it, stiepe it in Rose water, or other sweete water, & let it remaine in it vn∣till it swell. Then stampe it and put it in a linen cloth, and straine it hard, and the white iuice that commeth out of it, is the iuice of Macaleb, and of the sauour of Macaleb, and the rest that remaineth you shal drie and make of it pouder, the which you maie also occupie bi∣cause it hath the like vertue & the sauour of violettes: with that you shall take two vnces of Cloues, three vnces of Irios, an vnce and a halfe of Ladanum, an vnce of Storax, & all this beyng made into very fine pouder, let it be incorporated into the Sope, & you shal make a past or dowe ferme & fast, whereof you shall forme and facion your balles setting them to drie in the shadow. To make also balles of white sope, take fiue pound of the saide sope, and put into it foure vnces of Irios, two vnces of white Sandale, three vnces of the floure of Amylum, an vnce of Storax, & make al this into pouder; and stampe well altogither, & stiepe it a little in Rose water, or muskt water, and you shal make of it a good past, wherof you shal forme & make your balles euē as you will. Also for to make thē simple & good, take iiij. pound of the said white sope▪ with v. vnces of the pou∣der of Irios, two vnces of cloues, iij. vnces of the pouder of Macaleb, & incorporate them well togither in a mor∣ter with the water of Trefle or of spike, and you shall make a forme and fast dowe, whereof you maie make your balles, and they will be very soone drie. To counterfeite all maner of greene leaues which shall seeme naturall. TAke greene leaues of what sort you will, and skrape or bruse the biggest strekes that be like
ribbes vpon the leafe the cōtrarie waie, with a knife. Then make this colour folowing. Take comon oile or the oile of line, or other licours that make smoke, and burne them in a lampe, and sette ouer them a pot for all the smoke will stick and cleaue round about it: This done gather togither the same smoke, and tem∣per it in a dishe with a little oile or Vernishe, and in∣corporate it well togither. Then with the saide colour you shall blacke the leafe on the side where you haue brused and skraped the great ribbes with a linē clothe or cotton, and turne the leafe vpon the Paper double and with your hande or with a piece of Clothe presse doune somewhat lightly the saide leafe, vntill you be assured that it hath leaft the colour vpon the Paper. Then take it of handsomely, and you shall finde all the print and deuise of the saide leafe to bee as it were naturall, yea, euē vnto the least vaine or ribbe, so that you shall thinke it faire, and with all the naturall sig∣nes and markes, and if you will make it greene ac∣cording to his nature: take Vinaigre very strong, ver∣degrise, gomme arabick, bladder past, called in Frēch paste de vessre, and put all togither and seeth it, and it will be greene as we haue before saide, and with the said water you maie make al these leaues greene, and it will bee faire to see, for to make a painting frysed or rough about your chamber, ye specially in winter time. To make a Paper burde of beaten and stampt Paper for mouldes and hollow thinges. TAke the shearinges of white paper, and see that it be nete and cleane and specially with parchemēt, and stiepe it in cleere water the space of sixe or eight daies. Then putte theim againe into a pot that is not greasie with other cleere water, & seeth them the space of two houres. This done take thē out of the pot with as little moysture as you cā possible, & so stampe thē i
a morter as small as you can, for they will make your worke so muche the finer. Then putte them in a little bagge whiche you shall steepe in cleere water, and if you should leaue them there a yeare, they would con∣tinue stil, in changing the water ones a weake: This done haue ready mouldes of leade or earth, for they be both good, so that thei be cleane with in, then you shal take this chopt paper and in wringing it a little and casting out the water, you shall put it on the moulde and presse it doune diligētly hauing a sponge in your hande for to presse it the better aboue, and to drinke or soke vp the water. Then sette it in the Sunne or in a hote house, and whan they be drie, they will come of easely of them selues from the moulde. And by this meanes you shall make your picture faire and nete, and liuely as is your moulde. And if the paper be bea∣ten small inough, they will be like plastre, & as white as paper: and if you will paint theim or giue theim a lustre, giue thē first one couer ouer with strong glut, that is to saie, of that that painters occupie in their worke, and whan it is drie, laie suche colours vpon it as you shall see to bee moste meetest, and it will bee a goodly thing to see theim with some liniamentes of Gold, as frier Cherubin did. To giue a faire glosse vnto Pictures or figures painted. TAke a pounde of white and fatte rosen, with two vnces of Plomme tree gomme, twoo vn∣ces of Turpentine of Venise, two vnces of oile of line. And take first the Rosen, and melt it, & straine it hote as it is, and steepe the gomme in Cōmune oile vntill it be molten: then straine it, and putte the oile and the Turpentine togither in a little pot of earth that is not greasie, & set it on a slowe fire: and mingle it alwaies in the pot vntill it be all well incorporated togither, and take it from the fire and keepe it, and
whan you will occupie it, let your pictures or Images be nete and cleane, and let this vernishe be some what hote, and so laie it vpon your saide pictures euen as menne do other Vernishe, and it will be a very faire pece of worke and haue a good glosse. And for to make another Vernish whiche shalbe incontinent drie after you haue laide it on: take Frankensens of the male-kinde called Olibanum, and writing vernishe, that is to saie, Sandracha, whiche is Genuper gomme, according to your discretion, and make therof a pouder the finest that you can, and incorporate it togither. Then take Turpentine of venise, and put it in a little pot that is not fatty, and melt it, then put it into the saide pou∣ders by little and little incorporating them well togi∣ther, but lette it not be to softe, and so straine it hote through a strainer. And whan you will occupie of it let it be hote, and spreade it abrode thinly, and your worke shalbe very shining, and will bee drie inconti∣nent. Also for to make a licour whiche menne vse for to vernish vpon pictures, take oile of line, and distill it in a limbeck of glasse. Thē take three vnces of vernish of Amber that is faire, and an vnce of the said oile, and incorporate it well togither vpon a slowe fire, & whan you will occupie it, let it be hote as vernish is, and you shall haue a good successe and issue of your worke as well in wood as in linen clothe, and other worke, do∣yng it handsomely. To make another maner of greene water cleere. TAke the little Apples of Nerpru whan they be ripe and blacke, and breake them, and put them in a pot that is not fatty, and put to them a lit∣tell Alome beaten, and set it in a hote place the space of sixe or eight daies, and it will boile and worke as wine dothe in the fat. This done straine it into a can∣nals vnder a presse, & so get out the substance of it, and put into it a little Almaine blewe: and it will make
you a faire greene, and if it seeme vnto you to darke, you maie put to it a little Alome, and so put the saide composition in a bladder, and drie it in the shadowe, and you shall haue a very faire paste or dowe, not so ferme or fast as that wherof we haue spokē afore▪ but yet bothe be good. To take out a deuise made in a mould, with blacke Sope. TAke a pounde of blacke washinge Sope, with strong lie, and seeth it vntill it be diminished of two thirdendeales, and keepe it so, but whan you will drawe out the deuise from the naturall, and that you haue not leiser to do it, do thus. Take of the saide Sope soden, and Sope ouer your Paper hand∣somely, then laie it vpō the deuise or picture that you will drawe out, and presse it softly with your hande, and holde it faste, & the moulde wil take all the deuise: so that you maie drawe it at your pleasure and ease in another maner: or els make a case of woode, and past a pece of Paper vpon it: then binde the deuise vnto it laiyng the mould vpon the Paper, and holding it in the ayer you shall see all the deuise, and doe what you will with it, and so shall you come to the ende of your purpose. But if you will make the Paper shine for to drawe out the left thing that is, take very fine Paper, and anoint it with the oile of line, and rubbe it well, doyng so diuers times, and the oile will goe of, and so let it drie in the shadow: for a man maie write vpon it with inck and with other colours. To make cleaue the heares, and to drie vp the sweate vnder the arme holes. TAke litarge of gold made into pouder very fine, and whan you haue sweate in somer time, or at any time els, take a little of the saide pouder betwene your fingars, and rubbe your arme holes,
breast, and other partes with it, and specially where you haue sweate, or where you smell an euill sauour, for incontinent after by the vertue of this pouder, all the sweate will drie vp, and in shorte time will make cleaue the heare whiche is knotted with the sweate, and will keepe it nete and cleane, so that it shall no more sauour iuell but wel, and in vsing ofte this pou∣der, causeth that you shall not sweate so muche in that place, neither doth it hurte you, nor staineth neither your fleshe nor shorte. This secreate is very excellent and guesen. To make Roses, Floures, Gillefloures, and of all other sortes, white, redde, greene, yellowe, and incarnate in short space. TAke fatte yearth or claie asmuche as you will, and drie it so well in the Sunne that you may make a fine pouder of i. Then putte it into the vessell wherin you will plante your Vio∣lettes, Roses, or white naturall floures, for to make theim growe of an other colour. Then plante in the said pouder those that you will haue not suffring thē to feele any other moisture than this that followeth. If you will haue them redde, take water, and seeth in it some Brasile cut very small, and lette it seeth vntill it be diminished of the thirde or fourth part, and wa∣ter by little and little morning and euening the earth with this redde water beyng colde, and giue it no o∣ther water then this, vntill you thinke it hath taken effect and wrought as you would haue it. And if you will make theim Greene, take litt Apples of Ner∣prum whan they bee thorowe ripe, and if you will haue them Yelowe take them whan they be not ripe, and breake thē a little, & seeth theim in water, and the firste will be Greene, and the other that bee not ripe will be Yellow. And with the said water, water your earth, and the floure will growe of the same colour,
and water it vntill the plant or roote be thorouly wa∣tered, whiche wil be, in continuyng it the space of xv. or xx. daies. And if you will make them black, you shal make the water with gall and vitrioll, as menne doe make incke, and if you doe water the earth with it as you doe the other, the white floure will growe black, but leaue it not abrode in the night time, for feare of the dewe. True it is that all the whole floure will not be of that colour: but partly, so that it will take parte of twoo colours. If you will make them of three co∣lours, water them in the morning with one colour on one side, and at night with the same colour on the o∣ther side: then in the morning on one side with ano∣ther colour, and at night with the same colour on the other side, so that it be watred in the morning and e∣uening with two maner of colours, in changing the sides: for there as you haue watred in the morninge with one colour put nothing at night but on the other side, and in doyng thus you shall haue your floure of three colours, and of this plante you maie make as many as you will, for this hath bene proued. To make trees of all sortes to growe whiche shall bring furthe fruite; farre greatter then comonly they doe. TAke the halfe of a plate of yron that is olde and rustie, and specially thinne: for if it were thick, you could do no good with it, and trimme the said iron plate after the maner of a cornet, and weate it within with brine, to the intent it maie soone rust, and let it haue a little hole on the pointed side. This done put into it your seede or kernell that you wil set, be it Peche, Apple, Pere, Plumme, or other fruite, and laie them all with the yong spring turned toward the point of the cornet. Then put to his bottome made of the same plate of iron, and let it be well closed and sodred without and within, so that it maie haue no
aier but at the side of the point wher by you shall wa∣ter and sprinkle it with brine: And so plant it in the grounde the point vpward in the moneth of Septem∣ber or Octobre, to the intent that the grounde maye rott the cornet: for whan the seedes or kernels so en∣closed in do feele the moisture, and be swollen inough, thei begin to cast out the yong springes and the roote, and wreeth and turne somuche a boyt the said plate of iron that they perce it thorow vnderneth, bicause that the rootes are sharpe pointed and harde, and turne so muche about, that with the helpe of the earth whiche rotteth the iron, thei make little holes, and so enlarge thē selues by little and little, & the buddes or springes turne also and taketh the sauour of this brine and co∣lour of the yron, and whan the saide spring or budde will come furth, it is by force, and so they come all out at one time, and waxe great incomming out, & cleaue faste and ioyne all togither: so that all thei make but one plant, and growe great meruelously, whiche will be faire to see. To soften and mollifie Oliues with lie, in lesse then eight houres. TAke greene Oliues and lately gathered, and that thei be not brused in any wise, bicause thā they will perish shortly after, and will not con∣tinue aboue eight or ten daies, but the soter you put them in the lie, the better they will bee in fast and sa∣uour, and the softer also. Wherfore do it quickly and make the lie out of hand. And for to make a bushell of it, take a bushell of the ashes of Oke very strong, and the third parte of a bushell of freshe vnsleckt lime, and incorporate them bothe well togither, sprinkling it with a little fresh water, so that there may rise no dust of the ashes or lime, and that it be well closed together and be hote and chafed the space of two houres. This done putte it into some vessell of earth or woode that
hath a hole vnderneth, and sturre it as muche as you maie. Then caste vpon it three or foure pailes full of hote water, and lette it droppe out by little and little, and whan you haue gotte out of it about twoo pailes full, you shal cast vpon it two other pailes full of colde water. And so vse the matter that you maie haue two pailes full of the saide lie, and so putte your Oliues into it, and leaue them in it vntill you see that they go to the bottome, where you shall proue them after this maner. Take one of them, and breake him with your Teeth, and if you see that he come from the kernell, and that he bee somewhat yellow. Then take theim by and by out of the water, and putte them into fresh water, and chaunge it three or foure times one after another, and straight waie pille them, and take them out of one water to putte them in another, and leaue theim not vncouered with water, bicause then they will be soone blacke, and lose the faire colour that gi∣ueth them so goodly a shewe beside the good sauour that thei haue, whiche seemeth a thing almost against nature, to see an Oliue with the leafe to be of the same colour that it was vpon the tree. Leaue them in freshe water three or foure daies changing the water twise a daie, and if you change it foure or fiue times in the daie, they wil bee softe and sweete in two daies, and you maie eate of them with Salt and Vinaigre, and after you haue made the brine and is colde, put them into it, and within two daies you maie eate of them, for they wil be good. But note, that if the Oliue haue tutched no water, it will haue alwaies a tendre skin, and wilbe softe to eate, but if it haue tutched the wa∣ter, it must be stieped the more, and would neuer be so delicate to eate, bicause he would haue the rine tough and harde, although it be faire and greene. You maie also dresse them another maie, take theim drie, and that they haue tutched no water, and stiepe them in brine the space of a moneth then change them into an∣other
kewe brine, the space of fiueten or twētie daies: then make vnto them a thirde brine good and strong, and they wilbe softe: but of this men vse not. To make a water that will die or colour althinges be it bone or woode. TAke strong white Vinaigre, and put it into a vessell of Glasse, and put into it of the filing of Copper, with some blewe vitrioll, rock Alom, and Verdegrise, and leaue it seauen daies in infusion: then boile it in some vessell, and boile what thing you will in it, as wood or bone, and it shall take what colour you will But note that in steade of Ver∣degrise you maie putte in what colour you will, that is to saie, redde, yellowe, or other, with a little rocke Alome. A water to make Teeth white. TAke a pounde of comon Salte, eight vnces of rocke Alome, halfe an vnce of salt peter. And all this beyng made in∣to a fine pouder with a hādfull of sage, and asmuche of Lentiscus cut very small and halfe a dishfull of blacke Berries, and so distill all this in a limbeck of glasse, and whan the water is come out, change the recipient, and sette vnder another giuing it a sharper fire, and the finer parte of it will come out. And if you thinke good to mingle it, at your discretion bee it, but it shalbe the stronger. Then keppe it in some vessel of thicke glasse, and welstopt: & whan you wil make your teeth while, make them firste cleane from meate or other thinges that maie sticke in them, and specially the white filthe that is about them, with a point of a knife. Then you shall haue a tooth piko of the wood called Lentiscs, or of some other little sticke, and weate i in the saide water, and so rubbe your Teeth with it, and they
will incontinent be as white as Iuorie, and will con∣tinue so a long time without hurting them at all, but rather will make you haue good gommes, and fasten the teeth in the saide gommes. If you will also make another sorte for to make cleane your teeth, take the sharpe huske of a chestnut whan it is ripe, and drie it, and make therof a pouder then take asmuche more of the seede of nettles made also into a fine pouder, and incorporate them well togither. And whan you will make your teeth cleane, rubbe theim with the saide pouder, and that will sette suche a beate in the gom∣mes, that skant you shal be able to shut your mouthe, by reason of so greate abondance of water that will come out of your mouth, but it will doe you n hurt: for in taking a little Rose water into your mouthe, and a little Sugre candy, & so refreshing it ther with, the paine will passe awaie incontinent. The true secret and maner howe to ma beyond sea Azure, or els for all tutches or paragon. Also for to make strong paste, for to incorporate the Azure stone in it called Lapis lasuli, and to take it out againe in his time, and whan you thinke good. HAue first some cleere & nete Turpentine foure vnces with sixe vnces of faire Rosine, and as∣much of faire Pix greca, three vnces of faire Ma∣stick, and asmuch of cleere newe ware, an vnce and a half of Line seede purified, or an vnce of oile of bitter Almondes. But you shall take firste a newe pot of earth well leaded, and wette, and putte into it the Turpentine vpon a fire of embers somewhat slowe, vntil it be molten, sturring it alwaies with a wooden spoone made after the facion of an Apoticaries slise, and whan it is well molten, putte into it by little and little the Rosine cut as small as is possible: then putte into it by the same meanes the Pix greca, & the mastick
beaten and stampt three or foure times: and then the waxe beyng cut very small, mingle it well with the said slise or spoone vntill all be well incorporated to∣gither, and aboue all thinges see that there bee but a little fire, for otherwise it would burne, and the fire would take it bicause they be all hote thinges, & ready and apt to be kindlid. This done put the oile into it: true it is that the oile of line seede, is muche better thā the oile of Almondes, not withstanding you maie put in of that whiche is most comodious, and let your pot so stande on the fire, that the saide composition maie wawme and bubble a litle the space of a quarter of an houre, or more if neede be: and whan the saide past is sodden, you shall knowe it by this experience. Take a spoone of woode and sturre it wel about with it, then take it out, and make two or three droppes of it into a dishe of freshe water, and if the droppe ren a brode in the water, it is a signe that it is not sodden inoughe, and therefore seeth it more vntill the droppe keepe to¦gither in the water. Also you maie proue it this waie, weate your fingars in the water, and wring the saide droppe, & if it stretche out a long in drawing it out, & vnlouse it self, thā it is a signe that it is soddē inough, and than take it from the fire, & empty it so hote as it is, into a bagge sharpe pointed at the bottome like a gelley bagge beyng first weate in hote water, and let the past droppe into a basin beyng sette in a paile full of freshe water, and do it diligently and circumspectly to the intent that all maie come out, and wringe the bagge betwene two stickes, and it wil the soner come out. And whan it's cold againe, take it out of the wa∣ter, and tosse it vp and downe betwene your handes, vntill you be sure there is no more water in it. And if by reason of the heate it did cleaue to your handes, anoint your handes with oile of line seede, well puri∣fied as we will declare after in the chapter of purified oile. After that you haue well rubbed it betwene your
handes, and well cleansed from the water, than keepe it alwaies in freshe water, and note, that if it bee in somer you must change the water euery day, or euery two daies ones. And in thus doyng it will keepe viij. yeare, beyng alwaies good and strong. To make the second paste, softer for beyond sea Azure. TAke foure vnces of faire Turpentine, sixe vn∣ces of faire Rosin, sixe vnces of clere Pix greca, an vnce of faire Waxe, three quarters of oile of line seede, and seeth it like as the other was in the chapter before: true it is, that it is soner sodden, bicause it is softer, that is to saie, it will make you so∣ner Azure than the firste, whiche is muche stronger, but if you woulde labour for Azure with bothe these pastes, lette the softer bee alwaies the firste, and if the stone be not of perfitest hauing veine of Gold, giue it neuer bothe the pastes: But note, that in these two pastes consisteth the true arte to knowe well the par∣fite beyond sea Azure, for therein lieth the gaine and the losse, and therefore do it diligently and wisely. To purifie the oile of line seede for the Azure. TAke what quantite of oile of line seede you shall thinke good, so that it bee faire and cleere of a yellowe colour like Gold, and put it in a horne of Glasse, or in an Oxe horne that hath a hole in the bottome, and putte vpon it some freshe water, and sturre it well with a sticke, than ette it stande still a little while, and open the hole vnderneth, and lette out the water, doyng so seauen or eight times, or vn∣till the water come out as cleere as whan you did put it in: and in this maner men purifie the said oile, then keepe it in some vessell of Glasse, againste you haue neede of it. And if paraduenture you can not gette of of the saide Oile, take the oile of bitter Almondes, for
you maie vse and occupie it without and more purifi∣yng: true it is that it costeth more, and yet is not so good as the other, but for a shifte. And note well that whan you heare speake of oile, it is of this purified oile. Lie for to washe beyond sea Azure. TAke eight or ten handfuls of the ashes of vines well sifted, and put it into some vessell that hol∣deth at the least a paile full and a halfe of water and thath hath a hole in the bottome, and so order it that the water maie rēne out, and that the ashes kepe in, and stoppe the hole without side. Then put in the said ashes and presse it doune asmuche as is possible, this done powre vpon a paile full of hote water by little and little, and open it not vnderneth vntill the water begon to the bottom: And than let it out as fast as it will, & keepe this first water in a vessell of glasse, and distill it thorowe a felt, that is to a bande of olde white cloth, then distill it againe with a piece of felt, or white cloth, and than it wil be nete, cleane and pu∣rified, and keepe it well from dust in some vessel leade within. Then put another pailefull of hote water in to it, and lette it out as before you did the other, and keepe alwaies of these twoo sortes against you haue neede. This done do it the thirde time in the like ma∣ner, and put eche of these waters or lie by them selues, the first is strong, the second weaker, the third is wea∣kest of all and sweete, of the whiche lies menne do vse for to washe the fore saide paste with all whan the A∣zure will not come out, as you haue learned before. Nowe whan you will occupie of this lie, take of all three sortes asmuche as you shall thinke good. A man maie make yet another maner of lie, to washe the paste with, and to purge it from his vnctuosite and fatnes. Take asmuche calcined Tartre as you will, and boile it in cleane water the space of a quarter
of an houre or more, then lette it go doune to the bot∣tome & keepe it so cleere: for you maie occupie it whan the past is vnctuous or fatty, and also for to washe the beyonde sea azure, for asmuch as it augmēteth lighte∣neth the colour of it. It is also good for to heale the skabbe, skurfe, and lasarie, if a man vse to washe him self with it, and maketh all the body cleane and white. How the Vessell ought to be, wherin all the wa∣ters are put that the azure is washed with. THe vessell muste be of earth bake and anelled, and well leaded, and polished in the bottome, and if it be not of earth, it maie be of Copper or Laton well polished at the bottome, and lette it haue three pipes or conduites, one in the middle, another somwhat lower, and the thirde within two fingars of the bottome. And if you thinke that it is not yet a∣zure, let it stande eight or tenne daies vntill it be well settled, and you shalt see at the bottome a little azure. Then washe it with fresh water as you did the other, and so put it with the other, or els kepe it a part, for it is faire and good. The first parte howe to knowe the vertues, good∣ and signes of Lapis lasuli, and to make true yonde sea Azure most perfectly and expertly. Wate first the saide stone with spettle or wa∣ter, and sette a piece of white cloth before it, and you shall see it giue in it a faire lustre of a Violet colour, whiche shall comforte your ight. And if you will make the proofe to know if it be fine, take a little of it, and laie it vpon hote embers and make it flame, thē take it out, & if you see that it is not altered, it is a signe that it is good, and if it chāge not at all, it is of the finest, bicause it feareth not the fire, but rather augmēteth his true and parfite colour. If you will make another proofe, laie it vpon a fire panne, or vpon some other yron, and so heate it on a
flambe and then quenche it with white vinaigre very strong, and take it of, & if you see that it hath not loste nor changed the colour, it is of the best, and if it take colour againe it is of the finest and moste parfite. And if a manne could get of this seconde, which encreaseth his colour, he might sell it for three or foure crounes the vnce, but very little of it is to be had that wil kepe his natural colour, but will change some thing in the triyng. And you must note, that in making these tri∣als with fire, if the stone do not keepe wholly his na∣turall bate, the azure shall not be of the fairest, but of the meane sort. To know whan it is pouder, whether it be good or no, take a Goldsmithes melting pot, and put a little of it, into the said pot at your discretiō, and set it on the fire and let it flame & heate, and then let it coole againe. And if it bee not good it will melte like glasse, but if it be good it wil remaine vnmoltē in his owne substance and essence, & although it bee in pou∣der, it will yet be good, and if incace it were but halfe good, and halfe badde, the badde will melte, and be∣come like a cake, and the stone will remaine in his state and colour still. And this fraude and deceit is co∣monly wrought of them that sell it, and therfore lette euery manne beware of it. And of all the three sortes of Azure, you shall get out for euery pound of stone, I meane of that which endureth ye cimentes aboue said, about a fiue vnces and a halfe of Azure, and the firste which shalbe the finest will be solde for xij. or xiij. du∣ates an vnce, the second for iij. or iiij. crownes, and the third a crowne. Than shall you take out the laste whiche is called cinders whiche is of no great value, & yet neuertheles it wil beare the cost & charge of your past, and by this meanes you maie giue iudgement of the gaine and profits of your worke. But if it were of those stones whiche in triyng of them do decrease and lose their colour, a manne can not make so muche no so fine: but if you will take paine for to fine theim the
more, you must giue them the past, as it shalbe decla∣red afterward. True it is that it diminisheth much in weight. But that is good, true, and parfite, whiche is full of veines of Gold, and shining: and that is it that sustaineth and abideth liuely all cimentes of fire, of Vinaigre and also all other triall. The maner howe to prepare the stone Lapis la∣suli, and to calcine it whan you will grinde it. TAke the said stone, that is to saie, that whiche hath the veines of Gold, and whiche hath ben in cimentes and fore saide profes, and breake him into pieces as bigge as Hasel nuttes, and washe theim in hote water, then putte theim into a Goldsmithes melting pot and sette it on the embers, and make theim redde hote and flaming, then take them out one after another, & quenche them in white Vinaigre distilled thorow a felt three or foure times, or els quēche them in the vrine or pisse of a yong child that is in health: And then distilled in the maner afore¦said: but note that Vinaigre is better, and make this calcination sixe or seuen times, for in stamping it, it will breake the better, and bee the easier to grinde: whereas if it were not well calcined a manne could skant stampe it, bicause it casteth it selfe within the Copper. But the other which can not endure the fire, and remaineth not in his proper colour beyng putte in cimentes, ye needs not so calcine thus, bicause it would lose all the meanes of his vertue and colour, and so shoulde you lose bothe your labour and your time. To gette out the Gold of Lapis lasuli, after it is grounde. TAke of the saide stone prepared, and broken in a morter of Copper, and braie it verie small vpon a Porphire, and let there not be lesse then a pound of it: and putte an vnce of purified Mercurie
in the said pouder, and put this pouder in a linen cloth and wring or straine it hard, and the siluer will leape out bringing the Golde with it. This done putte the saide matter into a Golsmithes melting pot, and sette it on the fire, and the Mercurie will flie out and turne into smoke, and the Gold will remaine at the bottom of the pot, and make of this little quantite of Golde, what you will, for it is fine in all parfection: but truly there is no greate gaine or profite to get out the Gold after this sorte: but neuerthelesse I thought it good to giue you the knowledge of it, bicause the waie and meane is easy ynough. Yet I will tell you that this Gold whiche is within the said stone,VVhat be∣yonde sea Azure is. is the very true beyond sea Azure: For it augmenteth his glosse or lustre, and the trimnesse, and in painting it is very softe vnder the Pensill, and spreadeth abrode verie softely. For to stampe the stone afterward beyng cal∣cined or not calcined, take it and stampe it in a morter of Copper couered, then passe it thorowe a siue verie fine, and couer it ouer: for this is the finesse, beautie, and goodnesse of it. The maner howe to make the licour wherwith menne braie the Lapis lasuli, for to make be∣yond sea Azure of. TAke three or foure glasses full of well water, and distill it thorow a felte that there may not be, not past three glasses ful of it in al, and put it in a little newe potte, and put as muche as an Egge of rawe Honny to it, so that the wa∣ter maie bee as it were yellowe, and lette it seeth so muche vntill there ise no more skomme or frothe: for than it is sodden, and you maie take it frome the fire and keepe it in a Violle. This done, take fine Dragons blood asmuche as a Nutmegge, and braie it vpō a Porphire stone, with a little of the said honnied
water, and kepe it in another violl or glasse, and adde vnto it asmuche of the saide water that it come of a Violet colour, and that is the licour that menne vse, but keepe it well from dust. But if the stone, out of the whiche you will get your Azure haue a violet colour liuely and parfite, put to it the said licour that it maie make a Pecockes colour, that it be not of to hie a co∣lour, and that it be rather cleere then redde. And if the stone haue to much colour, let your licour be of a dark and cleere colour, and if the said stone haue a cleere co∣lour, let your licour be of more high colour. But note that you must applie al these sortes of colours to your fantasie and minde, in adding to the matter or substāce little or inough according as you shall see the colours. Take also of that Dragons blood whiche the Gold∣smithes doe vse: true it is that comonly they vse that whiche they call Lachrima: but take of that that is in pouder. There be some that grind & braie it with two partes of the foresaid lie, and one part of Dragāt: other make it with Bdellium, tempered with a little water, and then it is good. The maner howe to braie or grinde the Lapis lasuli vpon a porphire stone, and the signes of the same. TAke of the saide pouder beaten and sifted, and begin to braie or grinde it, sprinkling it by little and little with the same licour, and that it bee well closed, and kepte togither as streight as possible for beyng at large you should lose muche of it, and be∣yng close it will braie the better. Nowe, you muste braie and grinde a pounde of the saide stone, at twise or thrise, and no lesse, and you maie not be lesse than ij. houres about it at euery time, if you wil haue your monie out of it, and so sprinkle it rounde aboute with the saide licour to the intent it maie not cleaue to the stone in grinding it. And note, that you maie bestowe a hole glasse full of the said licour about one pound of
the stone. And whan you haue ground one part of it take it awaie, and grinde the rest in the same place if it be possible, and take heede that you put none other water to it than the said licour. And if you will know whan it is ground inough, put a little of it betwene your teeth before, and if you feele it cracke as it were pouder, than it is well grounde. But in the meane time beware also that it be not grounde so small that it lose his colour, but let it be indifferently wel groūd. And to drie the saide stone after all is grounde, laie it vpon a cleene stone, & drie it in the shadowe out of the sunne for the sunne is hurtful vnto it. And whan you think that it is drie, tutche it with your fingars, & if it turne into pouder like yearth or drie claie you muste take it awaie, and in not taking it away, it would not hurt it. But if it be drie and turne easely into pouder: than take it awaie, and so it is a signe that the pouder is fatty with Honny, and therefore muste you purge and purifie it, to the intent it maie come in due time out of the paste. And to washe afterward this saide A∣zure, take a Barbers basen or a litle basen of earth, made for the purpose, whiche muste be well polished with in euerie where and in the bottome, and so putte the Azure into it, than putte into it some sweete lie whiche we haue spoken of before, and let it be aboue it about the height of foure fingars, and washe it wel with your hande, and than lette it sinke doune to the bottome vntill it be well settled: than poure out faire and softly the saide water into the vessell before men∣tioned, and lette it drie a little in the shadowe in the saide Basen. This done take it out circumspectly and diligently, and spreade it abrode vpon the Porphire stone, and lette it so drie thorowly: Then putte it a∣mong the paste for to incorporate it in this maner fol∣lowing. To incorporate Lapis lasuli in the strong past, or other soft, after that it is grounde.
TAke a pound of Lapis lasuli whan it is ground, & or¦dered as is aforesaid, and take also a pound of the strong past which is the first, & wash it wel with your handes on the out side, than cut it in smal peces, & put them into a little pot wel leaded within & so stiepe it, then set it vpō the hote embers, & ye shall melt the said past: but take good heede that it frie not, & if paraduē∣ture it should frie, put into it a droppe of the fore said oile, & by and by it wil leaue friyng. And whā the past is well moltē take the little sticke or sklise that you did occupy whan you made the past, & annoint it with the said oile, & whan the past is turned mixe it wel, and in the meane time another shal put in by little & little the foresaid pouder prepared, as men do oile vpon salades & neuer leaue turning of it so lōg as there is any, but yet a little at ones, & with the sklise incorporate it to∣gither a long time vntil you se that the pouder be wel mixed with al, that nothing may be seene out of ye past, but al wel fastened & perced in. And whā you see this, by & by take the pot so boiling, & poure it into a basen of cold water, and euē furth with make the said pot as cleane as you can with the sklise, that there remaine nothing in it, & whan the said past is colde so that you may handle it with your hande, annoint your handes with the fore said oile, & if you see that the past is well died & colored it is a good signe, & with your handes so anointed tosse the past vp & doun the space of an houre & a half, drawing it out alwaies in lēgth & ouerthwart again, to thintēt that if it had made any hollow blad∣ders within it might be al the better brought into one massiue body or substance. And note, the more you re∣moue it vp & doun in your handes, so muche the more shall you get out of it in washing it. This done make it into the forme of a long or round lofe, as you shall thinke good, than put this past into a bacin well pol∣lished, & cleane with cleane & fresh water that is cleere inough, & let it so soke ye space of x. or xv. daies or more
for the more it soketh the fairer shall it be & the parfi∣ter, and wil easeliar and soner come out of the paste. To get beyond sea Azure out of the paste. TAke the past prepared, & washe it handsomely and wel without with your handes in the saide colde water, than put it into a basen, the botome whereof you must anoint with the afore said oile, & that the said base be at the bottom very fine & wel leaded: this don, poure vpon it some luke warme water that is skant warm, & let it be two fingars aboue ye past, & if the said water were distilled thorow a felt, it would be muche better, & for to be assured, you shall waie the past after it is washed, to the intent you may know what to do, & how much you ought to take out of it, in cōsidering with your iudgement the oile that maie paraduēture be entred in in hādling it, & so leaue it in the said wa∣ter luke warme the space of a quarter of an houre if it be in sommer, but if it be in winter, lesse. Then remē∣ber to empty out al these waters into the foresaid ves∣sell, hauing three gutters or pipes, & whan you voide out the first water, put in other luke warme water, to the intent that the past may be the softer, & so by little & little the good will come out. For if you would haue it out al at ones, you shuld do your thinges euill. Re∣moue & sturre faire & softly the paste with the foresaid stick or sklise. And if in cace the past shuld cleaue to the bottom, annoint your handes, & turne it handsomly & so often vntill the water begin to waxe blew, & whan you see the water coloed & died, empty it out vpō the other, holding & sustaining vp the past with the little stickes or sklises, to thintent that it cleaue no more to the botom of the basin, & knowe, that very little of the first Azure that cōmeth out wil staine & colour a great deale of water. And whan ye past is in the way to rēder & giue out the Azure, it wil cast out as it were certain blew beames of ye sunne. And thā you shall empty out ye said water vpō the other, & whā you empty ye water
that is in the basen, straine it thorow a strainer for to saue certaine little peces of past, if in cace there should come any among the Azure, and so will it come the cleaner and purer. This done put from hand to hand some luke warme water vpon the past and turne pre∣ily the saide past with your fore said stickes, leisourly and handsomely, specially at this beginning for feare lest the paste should lose and vndoe it selfe and so ren∣der and giue out all the Azure at ones: whiche thing would be to no purpose, neither could you afterward sort it, or order it. After you haue thus turned it foure or fiue times, take vp togither your past, and you shal see howe muche there is come out, for of the first there should come furth foure or fiue vnces & a half, & that is to be vnderstand if the Lapis lasuli, be of the finest, and there should no lesse come out. And bicause it is the first, set it a part by it selfe: for it is the true beyond sea Azure. By this same maner and waie continue to get out the self like azure which shal be the second, and set it also a part, and you shall get out of it three or foure vnces. Keepe this same order and meane in getting out the thirde with this same water alwaies luke warme, and that the cold water be skant out, & sturre it with your foresaide stickes. After, it shall be at your discretion to get out the fourth whiche is called Cen∣ders or Cinerarius of the colour of ashes, and if you wil haue it out, the water muste bee somewhat hoter, and than it will bee of greye or ashe colour. And herein you must wring and presse hard the paste with the stickes, and if it wil not come out with the water, giue it a little of the fore said lie: This done put al the Azures seuerally y themselues for the one wil marre another els, and specially the last. And heere you must vnderstand that before all these Azures be gotten out you muste bestowe about it eight houres, and before they will strike to the bottome, it will be no lesse than ten or twelue houres, for therin lieth your gaine, and
so empty the water diligently. And if in giuing it the lukewarme water, the Azures will not come out but in a small quantite, giue it twoo partes of water and one parte of sweete lie, & if yet it come neuer the more giue it a greater quantite of lie: And yet if therfore it will not come out, giue it cold lie, but if not withstan∣ding all this it will not come out as you would haue it, take a pot, and put into it some ashes of vines, and cleere freshe water, and seeth it the eight parte of an houre: then pore it out and let it stand to cleere it self, but let it be somewhat sharpe in taste vpon the tonge. And shall you make for the last remedie, specially for to get out the last Azure. You maie also take of it hote for to washe the paste with, and than cast it awaie for it is no more worth any thing, and note, that in get∣ting oute these Azures consisteth either your losse or your gaine. Now the stickes or instrumetes of woode that menne vse in the paste muste be of bore or other fine woode, and about the breadth of twoo handes or more, and a fingar thicke or a little more, and greater at the vpper ende and flat like a Amande. Of what colour the Azures are whan they come out of the paste, and what signe or token they shewe. THe manifest signe and token of the first Azure whan it commeth out, is, that it seemeth som∣what courser & thicker thā the other, which is bicause of the veines of Golde that are in the saide stone. The second shalbe finer and thinner but you shall not see so good a colour in it. The thirde shall seeme vnto you more fine and thinne, but it shall be paler of colour, and cleerer and open, and that is to be vnderstād whan the Lapis lasuli is good and parfite. The price of the colours hath bene before spoken of. The stone costeth ordinarily sixe or eight crounes the pounde, according to the places. And if the stone bee
good and fine (as it ought to be) a man shall get out of it at the least all compted ten vnces and a half, and the stone be not so fine, you shall get out at the least eight vnces. Yet neuertheles y• slone maie be so euill that ye shal gaine nothing at al, but rather be a great loser. The maner how to washe, and purifie the Azures as soone as they are gotten out of the paste. WHan you haue gotten them out of the paste, and haue taken out the water, put vpon thē some sweete lie that is cleere, and washe thē handsomely with your handes. And so shall you do to euery sorte of the Azures, eche one by him self, and empty out eche of the waters a part, and let the said waters settle before you put them into their basens, and washe thē so often vntill they be cleansed from al maner of grease or fat of the past. Than rense them three or foure times with freshe & cold water to the intēt they may be the more purified & made cleane. To purifie parfitely the Azures with the yelkes of Hennes egges. TAke the yelkes of fiue or sixe egges of hennes that haue ben nurrissed and fedde with corne, & not with grasse, and perce the yelke with some sharp pointed thing, and sprinkle it heere and there, as men do oile vpon salades, vpon the Azures a little vpon eche sort, and do so in euery basen, and incorpo∣rate well togither with your hande the egge with the Azure, than washe it again with strōg sweete lie, and washe it so long vntill you see it come out as cleere as you did put it in: thā rinse it three or foure times with fresh water, and this is the true washing & the parfite purifiyng which giueth a glosse vnto al azures, & this secret doe all the excellent masters vse, and aboue all thinges let the water alwaies settle before you empty it out into the other basins, for you should diminish to muche the great masse of Azure. There is yet another goodly secret for to giue a glosse vnto the said azures,
which is vnknowen to many men, and that is whan the Azure is wel washed and purified, as is before mē∣tioned. Take the gall of a bull, and breake it vpon the Azures, as you did the yelke of the Egge according as the Azure is, vpon euery sort. Then rubbe them wel with your hand and washe them as before. And note, that all these maners of purifiynges are made one after another, whan the Azures bee out of the paste▪ and you shall make all the said purifiynges diligently handsomely and leysourly in the basen. And this is a very excellent secret. The maner howe to straine the Azures, after they be purified, made cleane and washed. IT is necessarie to straine beyond sea Azure, & o∣ther also, if happely there be any grease or filt or any peces of the past remaining in it: for these A∣zures must be meruelous well ordered and trimmed, as we haue heere before mentioned. And therfore you shall do thus. The last water that you shal giue them after they be purified, you shall passe it thorow a sarse or siue: then thorow another that is finer, and the last time thorowe a strainour, and whan you will make this washinges, alwaies let the water stand vntill it bee cleere, or els you shall take vp the water by little and little with a sponge, but take heede that the A∣zure entre not into the sponge, After that you haue taken al the waters thus vp, let the Azures be in their basins, and let them drie in the shadow and not in the sunne, for it is not good for it. And specially keepe all your worke from dust & al other immundicites & filth: and whan they be drie take them vp diligētly eche one by him selfe, & so put them in bagges of leather in the smoothest side, & whan it is bosid vp rubbe it wel with your handes, for it is made fine by that meanes. And ye longer it remaineth made, the better colour it getteth whan you hold it in the aier, and if you wil fine again your azures for to make thē of a greater price & vaine,
you must put them ones again to incorporate into the strong past, following the maner and order before de∣clarid, and let them remaine so three daies: then take them out in like sorte as we haue shewed you before: And the oftener you do thus, the finer it will waxe. It is true that it will diminishe alwaies in the weight: but yet for to put it in worke, one vnce wil go as farre as three vnces of the other, and therfore you must bee diligent in all thinges, & specially in the washinges, least you shold lose your labour. And also be ware and vigilant to knowe the stone, to make your cimentes, and to compound your pastes. To make black Sope for clothes, with all the signes and tokens that it giueth and maketh in beiling. TAke thirty pounde of vnsleckt white lime, if you can get it, and that is in greate hole peces and not in pouder, and foure skore and tenne pounde of the strongest ashes you can finde. Then order & dresse the ashes rounde about the lime, in forme and maner of Morter, and sprinkle with a broome weate in water the small peces of lime a little at ones and often, to the intent that the fire maie en∣ter into it, and whan it is well mollified and augmen∣ted by reason of the heate whiche is in it, let there bee two of you, the one to incorporate well with a spade or shouell the lime with the ashes, and the other to sprinkle water with the broome well vpon it & round about it, to the intent there rise no pouder or dust of it. And lette all so well be mixed, that a man may not knowe or discerne the lime from the dust or ashes, and water it so much round about, that in taking a hand∣full of the same matier, and in wringing it, it cleaue togither. And whan you see that it raiseth no more pouder or dust, giue it no more water. This done close vp togither all this morter with your spade, and lette it so remaine in a heape twoo or three houres, for it
heateth and boileth beyng in a heape, and whā it ma∣keth chinkes or cleftes about it, it is a signe that it is risen. And if it be in cold weather you maie couer it, for feare that it take no colde and so lose his heate, for than it would make no good magistrale. Whan all this is done, straine the said mater in a vessell of earth hauing a hole in the bottome, beyng couerid with a little strawe, and a dishe ouer it, to the intent that the mater maie runne in time: and whan you putte it in presse egally euery where as muche as you can, and lette it be alwaies euen aboue: then poure vpō it some hote water, or els do as followeth, as I my selfe doe. Make ready sixe or eight pailes full of the strained lie, and poure it on the vessell I meane of the first whiche is good, and at the first put in two or three pailes full, the whiche beyng sunke doune, put in as much more, and open not the hole in the bottome, vntil al the ma∣ter be drunke vp: then let it runne out by little & little, and bicause you maie the better knowe the firste, the seconde and the third, take an Egge newe laide, and binde it rounde about with a threede and as the ma∣gistrale lie commeth out, put the Egge into it, and whiles the egge remaineth aboue, put it al into a ves∣sell, for it is the first whiche you ought to make muche of. And whan the egge sinketh in the lie, put that se∣cond by it selfe: and if you can gette of the first forty pounde, you shall get of the seconde thirtie, and of the thirde twentie, and of the fourth asmuch as you will: And let all these be put by them selues: & if you couer them well that they do not euaporate nor breath out, they will continue alwaies a yeare beyng still good, whan you haue done take xxx. pound of the first, and ten of the secōd, and put them togither and looke well if the egge remaine aboue, & if it appeare not muche, weaken it no more, for it shalbe wel so. And note, that vnto three pound of the saide lie, you muste haue one pound of oile, and in pouring it in sturre and mixe it
well with a stick, for feare that the oile be not hurt by the violence of the saide lie: And make this composi∣tion at night, to the intent that it maie remaine in in∣fusion all the night: then in the morning seeth it the space of seuen or eight houres or more, according as the quantite is great or little: for whan it is aboue a hundreth pound, it must seeth ten houres or more: and whan it beginneth to seeth and swell much, take it by and by from the fire, and sturre it alwaies aboue vn∣till it beginne to boile softly. And in the meane time cease not to sturre it, for feare it burne to the bottom. And whan you make the composition in a caudron, let it neuer be full by a hand breadth, bicause it riseth and swelleth alwaies in seething, and the oile would bee loste: and mixyng it oftentimes the oile incor∣porateth with the lie, and seedeth the sooner. And whan it hath sodden about eight or nine houres, you maie beginne to assaie and proue it, and see that you keepe alwaies a little of the firste and of the seconde for all occasitions that maie chaunce. And whan it hath boiled vnto the saide houre, you shall see it waxe thicke, and make the bubbles in seething long and thicke. Than maie you beginne to make your profe and assaie. That is to saie, in taking a little of it with a spoone, and putting it into a little earthen dishe, and lette it coole, then cut it with a little sticke, and if it close togither againe, it is a signe that it is sodden inough: and if it doe not close togither againe, it is not, and therefore finishe the seething of it. And make many of these proofes and assaies. And whan it is sod∣den, take the fire from vnder it, and so take it of, and sette it in some coole place, and whan it is colde you maie occupie of it, and it will be good and parfite. And if you make it with cleere oile although it bee strong, it is all one: but if you make it with oile parcht or thicke, it will not bee verie cleere. One of the beste signes that you maie see in it whan it beginneth to
waxe into a thicke substance, is that in taking of it vp with a spoone, the thredes or little strekes doe breake without shrinking vp again, & this is a signe that it is sodden inough. And whan you haue taken vp a lit∣tel, and haue lette it coole and so cut it, and than if it be ferme and faste on the sides, and in setting it vp it tarry vpright, than it is sodden. And if after an houre it were not sodden, that is to saie, that it had not the sinewe, put vpō it a little of the first magistrall a little at ones, and so lette it boile an houre or a halfe. And than you shall make againe the like assay or proofe as before, and if it shewe you not good signes, you shall put yet a little more to it vntil you make it haue a fast and solide bodie, & let it be not to soft nor to hard. And he that hath experience of this knoweth what is to be done in seeyng it boile onely. And whan you see that it is well take it from the fire. The signes that Sope giueth in seething, if it be to harde, or to softe, whether it be liquide or white. IF whan the the Sope is sodden you would take it out, and that you see it white, and in making the proofe or assaie it waxe harde, note, that than it is verie good, & if you will haue it strong take it of, for beyng made it returneth to his colour againe, but it remaineth still strong. But if it bee to strong, it is not to be commmendid, for it waxeth hard, and so goeth in pieces whan you would occupie it, so that you shall be faine to seeth it againe, and to make it returne into a good and measurable sorte, for beyng so stronge or hard it fretteth to muche the clothes and consumeth theim. And by my Counsell you shall sette it on the fire againe, but putting firste into the caudron a little of the third or fourth magistrale lie, togither with a little oile, & so boile it, This don put in the strōg sope, & al wil incorporate togither, & let it so seeth an houre, and you shall see that it will not be so strong or hard.
And indeede it is better whan it is somewhat softer. It is a thing of greate importance to know with the tong what there lacketh in the boiling. Take your ladle and sturre it well about: and then take a little vpon your fingar, and putte it vpon the ende of your ng, and you shall Iudge of your self what there lac∣keth, for if it be stronge beyonde measure, you shall thinke that a cole of fire had tutched your tonge: but if it be not to strong, it will not seeme vnto you so bur∣ning sharp in tutching it with your tonge. And whan it is so strong it hath neede of the fourth magistrale lie with a little oile. And if it were to soft (which thing you shall also knowe by your tonge) it hath neede of the first magistrale lie, & giue it these mixtures a little t ones, to the intent that it be not let or hindred from seething, & mingle it in faire & softly. It is also a great signe and token that the sope is strong, whan it brea∣keth in little pieces, and leaueth muche magistrale lie in the bottom of the vessell, where it remaineth long: but whan it is softe and euill sodden, it maketh as it were a certaine gelley: than you shall putte into it a little of the firste magistrale, and boile it vntill it bee well sodden, and waxe hard and firme, but whan it is ynough it will drawe towarde the colour of greene waxe some what darke and obscure, and that shalbe whan the sope is somewhat softe, and not muche sod∣den. The signe and token that strong sope ought to haue whan it is well sodden and indifferētly inough, is, that it will haue the colour of Marmelade, & drawe somewhat toward a Violet, and shall be obscurely glistering, and haue a faire floure vpō it, and shalbe good and parfite. But whan the black sope is become somewhat white and strong giue it a little oile, or els some of the third magistrale lie, & that a little at ones, least you weaken it to muche, and so it should lose his strength: for than you should giue it more oile, and more of the first lie, and so there should bee great dan∣ger
in it. And therfore beware and see that you bestow and distribute wel your lies. But in this cace you shal giue it a little oile, and in boiling it, it will be whiter, and softer. After this, continue with the first lie, and lot it be hote and a little at ones, and prouing it often times as we haue saide afore, you shall by & by know that it will be well trimmed and ordered. And whan it shalbe to muche sodden, or burnt, the signe or token shalbe whan it is so strong and white out of measure, that it is burned. Than must you giue it some water onely, or some of the fourth lie hote, not boiling it any more, or at the least very little, & by this meanes you maie parfitely atchiue and come to an ende of your worke. And alwaies whan you will adde or put to it any mater vpō the caudron, boile it euermore a little, bicause it wil incorporate the sooner: And make often times your profes and essaies. And if your worke go well, do no more in it, but be diligent and circumspect in taking it from the fire, and take it so hote as it is out of the caudron. For to make afterward the Magis∣trale, you shall do thus: whan you haue gotten out the first, which kepeth or beareth the Egge aboue, which wilbe about nine pintes, and of the seconde that bea∣reth not the Egge, a thirdendeale, whiche is three pintes, and of the thirde the halfe whiche wilbe three half pintes, and of the fourth asmuche as you will: for of that menne vse not muche, and as nighe as you can kepe them all by themselues and couered, bicause they will so keepe well inough. True it is that some men are wont to put them all togither, that is to saie one measure of the first, one of the second, and half a mea∣sure of the third, and somewhat lesse, & one measure of oile, whiche are in all three measures and a halfe, and by this meanes you maie multiplie asmuche of it as you will. After you haue thus ordered and dressed it, in the caudron, make fire vnder it, so that it may be but skant luke warme, and sturre it alwaies in the
caudron with your ladle, to the intēt that the oile maie incorporate, & perse thorow the magistrale: then leaue it al the night in infusion, and giue it fire again in the morning, and whan it is hote sturre it well that it may incorporate togither. And note, that it must boile ten or twelue houres, and wil not make any lie at the bottome, and in boiling lift vp your ladle a high, and it will make long strekes like threede the space of sixe houres, and then will beginne to fasten and close vp it self, and will make strekes whiche beyng broken will returne vpward againe, & that is a signe that it is not yet sodden inough: but whan they breake not neither returne backward but remaine fast and whole than it is sodden, and therfore you shall take it from the fire, for this is the true signe & token of it. The other signe is, whan it is cold cut it in little rolles, and if they stād vpright and not fall, it is a signe that it is made. Laie of it oftentimes vpon your tonge before it be sodden, and if you feele it to strong giue it a little of the third or of the last magistrale, according as you shal perceiue it to be strong, or els little or inough after as you shal see it hath nede. If you see it to white and strong, giue it a little oile at ones, and it will alter & turne. Whan it is almost sodden and that it make a gelley, giue it a little of the second or of the third, according as it shall haue neede by your Iudgement. If it passe his ordi∣narie time or houres in seething, and that it fasten not neither close it selfe, giue it a little of the first: but lette not the sope be to strong, therefore assaie it first: for that were no small fault. But if it be not to strong nor to white, and yet doe not fasten and close it selfe, you maie giue it of the first, as we haue saide, and if it be somewhat strong, you maie giue it of the seconde after the accustomed maner. Whan it is almost sod∣den and maketh as it were a gelley, and is strong, and not beyng white, giue it a little of the fourth, but yet very little at ones, to thintent you take not awaie
to muche of his force. But whan it is almost sodden and is very white, giue it a little oile, and it will bee well. Whan it should be sodden and that the houre or time of his seething is paste, and is neither strong nor white, giue it a little of the firste or of the second, or of the other, after as you see it stronge more or lesse, and it will returne into a good state, and muste boile fayre and softly, for feare it sticke not to the bottome, and burne by the reason of to muche fire: for suche a fire is of great importance. The fourth lie, is not set a worke but whan it maketh as it were a gelley, and is strong and to rawe. There bee some good Maisters & worke men, that put in the second magistrale with the oile, to the intent that the oile mighte not bee so muche hurt by his strength, and then they putte in a little of the third, and then a little of the fourth, and after that a little of the firste: but there is no hurte in that, for there bee measures in it, and these mixtions are made in the presence of other menne, whan the maister will not suffer it to bee knowen, for feare leaste that other should easely learns it. The good and parfite magistrale lie will beare alwaies an egge ouerthwart, and wayeth euer more twise as muche as water doeth, and contrarie wise whan it is lesse strong it wayeth lesse, and the oile waieth as muche as the fourth. If you order and appoint the saide lie by measure, giue euer the aduantage to the oile foure or sixe for the hundred, if you will haue it fatte and faire: for he that is well experimented in it knoweth well in boiling what is needefull to it, be it oile, lie, or any other thing. Whan you will make white Sope, keepe and vse the same meane and waie, & whan it is more than half sodden, put into it some salt, according to the measure & quantite of it, and let it boile a little: then take it out of that caudron, & put it into another, & whan it beginneth to boile put in againe more salt,
and let it seeth to his parfite measure. This done, set it to drie in a plaine and euē place, and cut it in peces, for it will be parfite good. Menne make the like with Soda, as they do vse at venise, the salt must be grossely beaten, and ten pound of it for the hundreth, and mixe it with it all about, and put in but a little at ones. To heale the Skurfe. TAke the roote of the herbe callid in latin Panis porcinus, and skrape or grate it, and putte it in a little pot, and put to it sixe vnces of oile of roses and let it seeth well, and whan it beginneth to boile put in sixe vnces of litarge of Gold, and a dragme of Precipitatum prepared, and lette it remaine a little on the fire, mixyng & sturring it still, and also afterward vntill it be cold: then anoint the skuruy head with it and strowe vpō it like spice a little floure of the graine called Lupines, and some beane floure mixt togither, and so put a coife vpon his head, and that shall suffice ones a daie in doyng it three daies togither. And if the heares fall not of them selues, pull theim out by little and little, and within twelue or thirtene daies he shall be cured. Also another waie, take Sage, Ro∣semarie, our Ladies glooues, Camomille, and Panis Porcinus, cut this very smal, of eche of them a handful, boile them vntill they be sodden inough and that the vertue and strength bee remained in the wine, than straine it and presse well the herbes, and washe the skabby head with the saide wine and drie it well, this done make a fine pouder of a piece of fleshe of a yong Bulle, and strowe it vpon the head like spices, and binde the coife vpon his head, doyng this ones a daie, and plucke euerie daie some of the heares awaie, for they will die awaie by little and little of themselues. And do thus so often vntill you see his head nete and leane, and than shall he be thorowly whole. There is yet another secreat wherof menne make little or none
accompt, and yet neuertheles if you proue it you shall finde a meruelous effect of it. Take three pound of old larde of a barrow hogge, and laie it to stepe two daies in strong Vinaigre, and lette it be couered ouer with the said vinaigre: this don wrappe it in three or foure sheetes of paper, and vpon that two or three leaues of Cabbedge, and laie it vnder the hote embers or ashes whan you couer your fire, & there let it lie two houres or more or lesse, according as the fire was great, or as long vntill you thinke it be roste inough: then take it out of the fire, and make it cleane, and straine out the grease of it, passing it thorow a linē cloth, and by and by put into it a quarter of an vnce or more or lesse of Verdegrise braied very small, according as the infir∣mite shal be great or small, and incorporate it well togither with a sticke the space of an houre, vntill it beginneth to waxe colde, to the intent that the Ver∣degrise descende not al to the bottome, and keepe this grease as a precious thing: and the older it is, the bet∣ter operation it maketh. And annoint the head of the patient with it, euery second night, and wash also his head twise or thrise a weeke with sweete lie, with a handfull of leane bran boiled and drie it well againe, and anoint his head againe, putting the coife vpō his head and none other, and whan you haue annointed it three or four times, the roote of the heare wilbe ripe, and you maie plucke alwaies some out in washing, and they will come of easely and without paine. And if in cace they would not come of easely neither with force, care not for that: for the disease hath not perced thither and therfore let them alone: for some time thei bee not dangerous: but if they were infected or hurt with the disease they woulde be lose and fall of or els asy to bee pluckt of, bicause that the ointment doth ipe the roote, and whan the head is all bare, without heare and made cleane, feare not: for all the heare wil ome againe fairer than euer they were, and he shall
be cured and sound. This hath bene oftentimes pro∣ued, and hath wrought well almost in all menne: for you must know that there are foure kindes of skurfes, the one is more grosse and fleshy than the other, and therfore marueile not, if you finde so many diuers re∣ceiptes: for there be many menne that heale the skurfe whiche know it not: but if it be the skurfe looke vpon his naile, & if there be a blacke circle about the white at the roote of the naile, and the greater the circle is, the worse kinde of skurfe it is, and therefore you shall vse the remedies aforesaid, and lette him not eate any hogges fleshe nor eigre or sharpe thinges, and with the helpe of God he shalbe healed. Take also a great lisard or two, and drowne theim in comon oile, and than seeth them vntill they cōsume, and with this oile anoint his head oftentimes, and the heare will come so faste and suche great quantite, that he shall not tell what to do with theim. There is also another remedy for to heale the simple skurfe. Take of the grease of a male hogge as muche as you will, and some stronge vinaigre for a third part, and half an vnce of salt bea∣ten and stampt, and boile it with a small fire vntill all the vinaigre be consumed: then take it from the fire, and put into it all these pouders folowing: verdegris, alome of the rocke burned, of eche of them two dram∣mes, brimstone and suet of eche one a dramme, and pi∣geons dong, and let al be well incorporated togither, and anoint his head with it ones a daie, and washe it twise or thrise a weeke, and boile in the lie the roote of Lapathum or Rumex, in english Sorrell, and straine it, and then washe him with it, and whan it is drie a∣gain, anoint him a fresh. Of the foure kindes of skurfe the firste is called Porrig farinosa, flowery or white skurfe, the other Furfurea or Furfurosa, bicause it hath the colour of bran and skales like vnto bran, the third Viscosa, clāmy or cleauing like bird lime, and the fourth Lupinosa, bicause it is like the graine called lupins.
And in the forme and matter the one is drie, the other moist, the one vlcerous, & the other without vlcers, & here of it followeth that the one is more sharpe and smarting than the other, for the causes of the skurfe are grosse humors corrupt & clammy, whiche somtime is brought with vs euen from our mothers wombe, & some by euill gouerning of our selues in our life, the moist skurfe is with brode sores, & the drie wt crustes. An excellent and a tried water for the skabbe. TAke a violl full of wel water or Rose water, or els of other sweete water, as though you wold make it for some noble man, & put into it an vnce and a half of siluer sublimed that is beatē very smal, half an vnce of salt. This done, sette it before the fire vpon a tile, to the intent that the violl take no hurt in boiling, and let it boile vntill all the length of the necke of the viol be decreased. Then take it of, & whan it is cold, put in∣to it the whites of three newe laide egges well beaten that they haue no more viscosite or clammynesse in them, and put also into it the iuice of foure Limons, and of two soure Orenges, & let al be well incorpora∣ted togither in the said violl, and sturre it well, whan you haue thus done leaue it in the sunne two or three daies & it will be made. And in this maner is the said water made, & thus men vse it. At night whan you go to bedde washe your selfe onely about the iontes with a sponge weate in the saide water, and then wryng & pressed harde, washe your selfe ligthly ouer with the said sponge. This said water wilbe as white as milke and odoriferous, and where as you washe your selfe with it there it will make the skinne white, & do thus euery second night, and where there is any skurfe or crust, weate it with this water rosid about not touch∣yng the crust, for that would greeue you. You maie make another water simpler, & without dāger. Take a glasse or violl as before, and fill it with water, & put into it two vnces of rocke alome, half an vnce of siluer
sublimed, and asmuch salte, and all beyng beaten into pouder very small, boile it as the other before was, vntill it be decreased beneth the necke of the viol: then straine it handsomely, and occupie it as before the o∣ther was: for by this meanes the skabbes will come out at the iointes, and will incontinent drie vp, lea∣uing your fleshe and skin nete and faire, as it hath ben oftentimes proued. A remedie for any burning or skalding, either by fire or by hote water, or any other casuall chaūce what so euer it be. TAke vnsleckt lime asmuch as you will, & slecke it in comon oile, and take it out as drie as you can possible, and incorporate it with oile of Ro∣ses, and it will be as it were an ointment, wherwith you shall anoint the place that is burned or skalded, and it wil shortly ease the paine and greefe, and heale within sixe or eight daies, not leauing any marke or skarre vpon the skin. Also for the same effect. Take an vnce of litarge of gold, and seeth it in white wine and a little Vinaigre, than take it of, and make thereof a very fine pouder. Take also an vnce of butter, and as∣muche oile of Roses, and washe it foure or fiue times in freshe water: than take halfe an vnce of Blanc rasill burned, and the yelke of a new laid Egge, and a little fine sugar, and incorporate all togither with a little Rose water, and spread this ointment vpon a linen cloth, and it will profite you very muche. Another for the same. Take some strong white Vinaigre, and the white of a newe laide egge, with the iuice of the rine or bark of an eldern tree, and mingle al togither, and we some peces of linen cloth in it, and laie them vp∣on the burned place one after another, and you shall be hole, and whan you will heale vp the wound, take a little of the second rine or barke of an eldern tree, and get out the iuice of it, and a little pouder of an∣kensens,
a little oile of roses, and a little newe waxe, and make therof as it were an ointment, and spreade it vpon the peeces of linen cloth, and laie them vpon the burned place, and you shal see that thei wil conso∣lidate and heale vp in short time. For to make after∣warde an ointment to the intent that the consolida∣tion and closing vp maie be faire: take tenne vnces of oile of Roses, two vnces of newe Waxe, and set them on a slowe fire, and whan these thinges be moltē, put into it two vnces of Minium, in englishe Sinople, red lead, or Vermillion, and foure vnces of Litarge, and let all be made into a very fine pouder, and make it to come into a substance or body, and laie it vpō the sore, and you shall see a meruelous effect. There is yet an∣other meane & remedy for any burning that is, take old larde of a male hogge, and choppe it well, thē take a flagon of white vinaigre that is very strong, and let the lard seeth in it the space of two houres: then take it from the fire, and let it coole, and take of the grease that is vpō it, and wring it hard with your hand, that all the vinaigre maie go out and none remaine in it: This done keepe it in an earthen pot leaded, and the older it is the better it will be, bicause it doth his ope∣ration sooner. And whan any man burneth him selfe, let him take of the saide grease, and annoint the place with it and the paine will cease. In the meane time you must haue made ready the heare of a hare chopped or cut as small as is possible, and whan you haue a∣nointed it, strowe of the saide heare vpon it as it were spice, and let it remaine so. And whan you anoint it again at night, and in the morning anoint it vpon the other ointment, whiche you vsed before, and then cast on more heare as before, and take it neuer of vntill it come of, of it selfe, whiche wil be within sixe or eight daies, and the thing healed perfitly without any mark or skarre. And note heere that at the beginning of the euill, he oftener you anoint it, the more the paine
will decline awaie, and the patient shall feele greate allegement and ease, and shal be mery. And for to take awaie the paine out of the hand, and to doe a merue∣lous cure, as soone as the incōuenient shall haue hap∣pened skrape a little larde of a barrowe hogge vppon it, and doe it quickly, for in doyng it with speede you shall perceiue it frie, as though it were in a friyng panne, and the pacient shall feele greate ease, and the paine will cease. Laie to it of this at the beginning three or foure times in an houre, and the patient shall receiue greate consolation and comforth. This secret is good, and ought not to be contempned, al though it be no great matter. To make pilles of Turpentine. TAke an vnce of turpentine of venise, and washe it well with borage water, or with some other cordiall waters, eight or ten times as you shall thinke good. Then take three vnces of fine sugar bea∣ten small, and incorporate it well togither by little and little: for that taketh away the viscosite and clam∣minesse of it, in suche sorte that it cleaneth not togi∣ther: and at the ende you shall leaue a little of it with∣out incorporating it, in the paste: for it shalbe alwaies good to take at any time, & neuer perisheth: and whan you will take of it, you maie do with it at your plea∣sure. And this past hath one excellencie in it, that is, that it cleaueth not to a mans fingars, but maie also be chewed so that it will not sticke nor cleaue to the palate or rofe of a mans mouth. And whan you haue made them, take a little sinamome mixte with sugar, and rolle them in it: then hardely take thē at all times and houres, for they will worke maruelously in fleg∣matike, and colerike stomackes, and ridde men from many inward passions, and will cause a good appe∣tite, and the vrine of the man shall giue an odour as it wre marche violettes.
An electuarie of Nerprum, that is to saie, a so∣lutiue Iulep meruelous good for the Gout. TAke these little fruites of Nerprū about the ende of September, whan they be thorowe ripe, and haue had a white froste, and gather them early in the morning, and stampe them a little in a morter, so that they be skant broken, and put theim in a pot or some other vessell leaded within, that hath no sauour of any thing, and couer them well, and sette them in a hote place to confite the space of eight or tenne daies, then presse out the iuice and substance of theim the moste that you can: and for euery pounde of the saide iuice you shall putte in a pounde of purified honnie. This don, set them on the fire, and boile them slowly vntill they be sodden, and assaie vpon a peece of Pa∣per, if the droppe remaine faste togither it is sodden i∣nough, if it runne abrode it is not sodden inoughe: Than take it from the fire, and putte into it an vnce of Sinamome, and two vnces of Ginger both well braied and beaten, and incorporate it well togither so hote as it is, and so keepe it in boxes wel couered, and the older it is, the better. Take of this before your meales a sponeful as wel in the morning as at night, and keepe your selfe specially out of the ayer, and so it will do muche good to them that haue the gout more than to any other, bicause it easeth the paines verie much, and doth good thorow out all the body likewise by reason of the euacuation. To make giltinges vpon leather whiche shal seeme like Gold, and laiyng theim vpon Siluer or glasse, they shall appeare to be Gold in dede. TAke a newe potte well leaded of the same big∣nesse that you will make your worke, make al∣so a fourneise of the height of the pot, for feare that the fire gette not into it, bicause it is al∣most like vnto artificiall fire, and therefore you must
take heede. This done, take three pound and foure vnces of line seede and seeth it slouly in the said pottes vntill it bee sodden, and if you will know whan it is sodden,  into it a hennes fether, and take it out a∣gain incontinent, if the fethers go of in it, it is sodden inough, otherwise lette it seeth, and whan it is sodden inough, putte into it eight vnces of Rosen, and San∣drac, that is to saie, Vermix suche as scriuenats vse, foure vnces of Aloe epaticum: and all this beyng well beaten and stamped very small, put it in sturring and mixing it with a sticke and if all come togither in a masse, be not therfore abashed, but augment the fire, and neuer leaue sturring it: for in feeling the greate heate, these thinges will melte, and become liquide. And then let theim boile slowly a good while: hauing so done take an assaie of it vpon a pece of paper, or vp∣on your naile, as menne comonly do, whan they will know if the Iulep be well sodden: or els betwene your fingars to see if it bee thicke inough or no, and if you thinke it be to cleere you shall put to it, for two daies, an vnce and a halfe of Aloe sucotrinum, whiche giueth it a colour somewhat darker, and the worke shall not be so bright or cleere: but putte to it also so muche the lesse of Sandrac as you shall that it is sodden. This don pluck backe the pot by and by from the fire, and let it stande where any flābe is, bicause it draweth vnto it self the heate, & so the fire wold burne it all: thē empty it out hādsomely before it be cold, into a coople of little bagges pointed at the ende, one within another like Ipocras bagges. And the mater that is not molten will remaine in the bagges, whiche wil be more then the halfe, and that will no more bee any thing worth for that purpose, and by this meanes you shall haue made your vernishe for to gilte with all, whiche will keepe very well and long, and the older it is, the bet∣ter operation it hath, keepe it therefore well from all maner of duste, and lette it not droppe or runne out.
And note, that the Aloe is it that giueth the yellow co∣lour to it and maketh it looke like Gold, and the other thinges make it thicke. And if you will make it exce∣ding firme and fast, whan the oile is soddē, beyng put in by measure, you shall take out of it as much as you thinke good, then go foreward in your worke, and whan it is sodden, there will not be of it aboue three or foure pound, and that is the leste you can make at a time: and yet neuertheles those that medle with the making of it, make xl. or lx. pound at a time, and kepe it for their necessitie. And if you wil laie it vpon glasse or tinne, either the matter must be hote or els the glas or tinne, and it muste be laide abrode vpon it with a pensill, and so shal you haue a faire pece of worke. An experimented oile against poison. TAke three pound of old oile oliue, and deuide it into three sondry vessels, and to one pound put three handfulles of Hypericon, in englishe saint Iohns wort, and leaue it in the sunne eight daies, thē boile it in Balneo mariae the space of twelue houres, which is made as we wil shewe you afterward. This don you shall straine it hard, in pouring vpon it some good wine, as Maluoisie, and after that put also to it three handfuls of the saide herbe, and a pound of the said oile, and so set it viij. daies in the sunne as before, in boiling it afterward twelue houres in Balnea mariae, and wring and straine it harde again as before, wher∣unto you shal put three handfuls of the seed of the said herbe, and a pound of the saide oile. This done do as before, with straining it in the sunne, and in Balneo mariae, you shal also after this put into it these drogges following, as gentian Crocodilium, an herbe (after Pli∣ny) like the thistle called Camaelion niger. Ruellius sup∣poseth it to be that whiche is called comonly Carlina or Cardina, Zeduaria, Aristolochiarotunda, Tormētill, white Dittany, Sandall of all sortes, boile Armenik, prepa∣red,
of eche of them two vnces, and putte all the saide thinges in a great glasse, the space of ten daies in the sunne. Hauing thus done, you shal seeth thē thirtene houres in Balneo mariae, & straine them afterward very hard: then shall you adde to it saffran, Aloe, Spicinardi, Reubarbari electi, of eche of them sixe drammes, and set them in the sunne again the space of sixe daies, & boile them a new in Balneo mariae, foure & twenty houres, & make the same expression & straining that you did be∣fore, whereunto you shall put an vnce & a half of good Mitridatum, & than it is made: and beyng thus made, kepe it for your necessite & neede, for it is a very soue∣raine thing against poison taken at the mouth, & hath a secret property against the plage, & for wormes. Mn vse it also in anointing al the poulses, & the hart, that is to saie the left side, then couer all his body and lette him alone with the hote linen clothes vntil he fal into a greate sweate. And this hath bene proued diuers times. Now Balneum mariae is thus made, you must set a caudron full of water on the fire, & in the same wa∣ter a great glasse suche as men still with all, wherin to you must put all your thinges to boile. And make your caudron of water so boile that the thinges in the glasse maie also boile, and bicause that water in the caudron cōsumeth, you must fill it vp again alwaies, and lo heere is Balneum mariae. For the heate or burning of the vrine. TAke the seede of purselane, of wilde succory, and garden succory of eche of them two drammes, the floures of Nenuphar, and of Violettes, of eche of theim a dramme, an vnce of the seede of white Prpa∣dol, two vnces of the seede of Sebest, half a dramme of Iusquiama alba, a dramme of saffran, fiue drammes of Lignum dulce, ten drāmes of the berrie of a pine apple tree, and boile all this in sixe pound of water, vntill it be decreased of the third part, then straine it, and take sixe vnces of this straining with an vnce of Iulep of
violettes, and drinke it luke warme euery morning at the breake of the daie, and you shall see a merue∣lous effect, within foure daies. A water of a maruelous and excellent vertue to bring againe the sighte of the eies, to him that hath lost it, or is diminished by sickenes or any other accident or chaunce. TAke three drammes Tutia, made in pouder very smal, and asmuche Aloe Epaticum in pouder, two drāmes of fine sugar, sixe vnces of rose water, sixe vnces of good white wine, rather sweete than o∣ther wine: but true it is y• to swete is not cōmendable. Mixe al this togither, & put it in some cleane vessel of glasse, & beyng wel closed and stopt, set it in the sunne a moneth togither continually, mixyng & stirring to∣gither all the saide thinges at the leste ones a daie, to the intent they maie incorporate well togither. This don take of the same water, & put certaine droppes of it vpon your eies morning and euening, & in continu∣yng so a certaine space, it will cause the sight to come again as clere, and as pure as it was before. And this was made and ordained by a consultation and coun∣sell assembled of the wisest & best phisitions of all Ita∣lie, to bring the Emperour of Constantinoples sight again the yeare 1438. whan he was at the sinode and concile of Ferrare with pope Eugene the fourth, and his sight came againe vnto him, as faire as euer it was, by the meane of this water. To remedy or help bloodshotten eyes comming by any Reume, fluxion, or suche other like cause. TAke the toppes or endes of Wormewood, whiche is an herbe well inough knowen, and stampe it, mixyng it with the white of an egge, and rose water, & make thereof as it were a plaister, and spreading it vpon a linen cloth whiche you shall laie vpon the eye where the blood is, or els vpon bothe. And doe this at night whan you go to bedde, and the nexte morning
take it of, and you shall see that this plaister shal haue drawen to it self all the blood and all the rednesse that was in your eyes, and so you shall be quite of it. To take awaie the yellow Iaundise from the face of euery man to whome it is happened be reason of the gall runne and shedde about the body. TAke a greate white Onyon and make a hole wher he buddeth out, casting awaie the greene of it, and putte into this hole as muche good triakle as the quantite of a chestnutte, but lette this triakle bee incorporated with halfe an vnce of saffron beaten, and let him rost by little and little nighe vnto the fire, for feare that he burne not or rost to muche, or els take some filth of the ashes. And whan he is rosted inough, laie him in a white linen clothe and wringe him hard that the iuice maie come out. And let the pa∣cient drinke of the same iuice in the morning fasting, three daies togither, and the Iaundise will go awaie. Also for the like effect. Giue him to drinke a dramme and a half of Scolo pendria in english hartes tong, well made in pouder, with white wine luke warme euery morning fasting, the space of twenty daies togither and all the yellownes and palenesse will goe awaie. The like effect worketh Lapatium acatum, sodden with his rote. And likewise the wine wherin valerian hath ben sodden, beyng dronken in the morning fasting, healeth the splene and the liuar, whiche many time are the cause that maketh the gall to renne and spread abrode, as we haue afore said. To make come out of the eares any thing that i by chaunce fallen into them, or hath purposely bone put in. TAke the herbe Marmorella, and stampe it, and put of the iuice into the eares of the pacient, for it hath the vertue and strēgth to drawe out any thing that is in them.
For the tooth ache. TAke the little graines or seedes that come of the herbe or shrubbe called in latin Fusaria, or E∣uonimos, or Anonymos, some there be that saie it is the tree called Anagyris, whiche is an herbe or shrubbe very pleasant to see to, and hath a faire yellow floure, but a very horrible and stinking sauour, looke Diosco∣rides, in his third booke the. 142. chapiter. Take of the seedes hereof if you can get them, if not, take some of the roote, and make of it a pouder: This done, take a little drie or greene organie, and boile al this in strōg vinaigre vnto the third part of it. Then washe your mouth with this vinaigre as hote as you may endure it, and incōtinent you shalbe healed. Also for the same greefe, take Cloues, honny rosat, & aqua vite asmuch of the one as of the other, then put it al togither into a little pot, and take of the saide composition in your mouth on the side where the tooth greeueth you, and hold it so a certaine space of time, and the paine will cease. To make an a king tooth to fall out of him self, with¦out any instrumentes or yron tooles. TAke wheate floure, and mixe it with the milke of the herbe called in latine Herbalactaria, in french Tintimall: or herbe a laite in English Spurge that hath milke in it, in greeke Tithymalos, whiche is an herbe well inough knowen, and thereof make as it were a past or dowe, with the whiche you shal fill the hole of the tooth, and leaue it in it a certain time, and the tooth will fall out of it self. Also if you wash your mouth euery moneth ons with wine wher in the roote of the saide herbe hath bene sodden, you shall neuer haue paine in your teeth. Also the decocti∣on or pouder of the floures of a Pomegranate tree, beyng put in your mouth and betwene your gommes fasteneth the teeth.
An electuarie for the head, which conserueth the me∣morie, cleereth the sight, and conforteth the stomack. TAke the floures of Buglosse, of Borage, & of Ro∣semarie, of eche of them a pound, take also fenell seede, annise seede, the seede of sea fenell, and Siler of the hils of eche of them sixe vnces, with an vnce of fine cinamome. Beate & stampe al that ought to be beaten and stamped, and sift al those thinges that must be sifted. This done mingle them togither & make thereof an electuarie, of the whiche you shall take in the mor∣ning the bignesse of a chestnutte, and you shall see a meruelous operation, for this is come from a great personage. Against the pildnesse or baldnesse of the head, and to lette that the heares either of the head or berd, shall not fall of. TAke the rotes of bramble or blackbery bush cal∣led in latin Rubus or Sentis, of the kinde that bea∣reth floures at the first, & the rootes of nettles. Then take pigeōs dung, and burne it into very ashes, haue also some ashes of Vines, with the whiche you shall boile the saide rootes, and make therof some lie, and washe your hedde with it and also your berd, and the heares wil not fall of. Also for the same effect, take honny, fenigreeke, and the eyes clipt or shoren of from a bramble or blackberie bushe, asmuche of the one as of the other, and incorporate them well togither, and distille them in a lembick, & kepe the water of thē, and if you will distill a fewe broome floures withal it will make you aberne heares, weate and moiste your head and berde the daie time in the sunne, & at night when you go to bedde, and the heares will not fall awaie. Also for the like matter distill in a lembick the herbe called in latin Sisymbrium aquaticum, in english water cresses. And of the water that you gette of it, you shall make yet another distillatiō with agrimonie, Capillus veneris, rosemary, sage, and cloues, of eche a handfull,
and let the distillation be made in Balneo mariae, and in oftentimes washing your self with suche water your heare shall fal no more away, as many men haue pro∣ued and tried. An ointment to cure the skurfe. TAke good old lard, at your discretion, and enter∣lard it roūd about with rosemary, like a pece of rost meate, & let there be a good quātite of rose∣mary, then putte it to rost on the fire turning it faire & softly. This done you shall take and saue the grease that droppeth frō it, in a driping pan, & cast it hote as it is into a dishe full of cold water in washing it very well, and whan you haue well washed it, putte it into another cleane dishe, and so shall you the grease thus taken vp faire and neate. Hauinge thus done, waie the grease, and if there be a pound of it, you shal put to it two vnces of fine sugar well beaten, & vpon that asmuche verdegrise puluerised as the quantite of a hasell nutte, and foure demes of quick siluer, with asmuche soote of an ouen of the hardest▪ as the quātite of a hasell nutte: but let it be well puluerised & made in pouder. This ended, incorporate all togither, it will be a very good ointment, wherwith you shall a∣noint the firste morning the head of the pacient, and leaue it so anointed vntill the nexte morning: thn wash his hedde with lie that is not to strong but som∣what temperate, then anoint it againe, & let i alone so vntill the third morning, & do thus nine morninges in washing and anointing it, and it will be as neete as a perle. Also bitter almondes blanched and stāped, and laid as it were a plaister vpon the head of the pa∣tient, it will easely heale the scurfe, changyng and re∣newyng the plaister certaine daies. To kill lise, and nittes in the head. TAke the pouder or scraping of Hads horne, and make the pacient to drinke of it, and there will no lise nor nittes breede in his head, but  you
the saide pouder vpon his head, all the lise and nittes will die. For one that can take nothing at the mouth, or els to make him goe to the stoole, and to sweate well. FIrst the pacient must be well rubbed with hote linen clothes, from the head to the foote, and must be very warme kept in his bedde, thē giue him this ointment following. Take asmuche pepper as will lie vpon a grote, and put it into halfe a glasse full of vinaigre and oile, asmuche of the one as of the other, and let it be very warme, and anoint all his bo∣dy ouer with it, & let him be well couerid in his bedde: and than shall he sweate, and go well to the stoole. To heale those that haue the disease of the Splene. TAke Lignum aloe, and make therof a pouder, and put it in some maner of brothe, or wine, asmuch as wil lie vpon a grote, and lette him take of it three morninges togither. Also the seede of an Ashe tree doth the like, and the roote of Palma christi, if it be eaten nine morninges fasting. For the paine of the side, or colike. BOile a hādfull of Rosemary with water, wher∣with you shall temper the wine of the pacient, and let him drinke none other water. Also for the like. Take a dogge, and keepe him xv. daies in a chambre, and giue him onely lambes or motton bones to gnawe, then take of his excremendes, and drie it in the sunne, and make therof a pouder, and giue the pa∣tient to drinke of it euery morning halfe an vnce in white wine hote, and doyng this three morninges, he shall be deliuerid of the paine, as it hath bene often∣times tried. Also for the like effect, take the dung of a blacke asse as hote as you maie finde it whan it com∣meth from him, and seeth it in white wine that is not
sweete, wringing well the dunge into the wine. Of this make warme glisters for the pacient: for it is the best, and the aptest remedy, that can be found for such a disease: as many notable menne, worthy of credite, haue affirmed. Likewise for the same disease, it shall profite muche if he eate euery daie, or foure times in the weeke foure peche kernels eche daie. Thus doing he shall neuer feele paine of the colike. This secrete was had first of a Iewe. There is yet another remedy easier then al the rest, and that is, you must take foure Garlike heades, and boile them in a little pot with a pint of good white wine, and lette it seeth well. Then take a glasse full of this wine, asmuche as you maie endure to drinke, and so goe to bedde, couering your selfe well, and you shall feele incontinent great ease. If you take also an vnce of the rote of Imperatoria made in pouder, with white wine hote, fasting, the paine will incontinent go awaie. For him that can not pisse. TAke the stones and kernels of Peches and med∣dlers, asmuche of the one as of the other, and make them into pouder very fine, and sift it in a sarce: this done take fine Sugar the weight of all this, and mengle all togither, and the pacient drinke of it in good white Wine, and incontinent he shall make water. For one that is broke by reason of any trauaile, either riding poste, or by any other accident or chaunce. TAke salt Armoniak and Rosen, of eche of them two vnces, and stiepe it in Vinaigre the space of xxiiij. houres, and dissolue it by the fire, so that it burne not: Then mixe with it halfe an vnce of pouder of Cipres, and halfe an vnce of Gall, and make thereof as it were a Ciraene. True it is, that these gommes ought not to be thorowly molten. And
if it be in winter so that the Ciraene be to hard, put into it a droppe of mastic, and then spreede it abrode vpon the rupture or the place a broke, and chaunge it ones in foure daies, and you shall see a meruelous opera∣tion. To take away the paine, and to heale the Goate. TAke a little whelp of a brake, that hath a while begon to see, and the fattest that you can finde, and skalde him like a Pigge, and take out the guttes and garbage at one of his sides: This done, take Nettles stamped, with two vnces of Brimstone, foure yelkes of egges, & four vnces of turpentine, and incorporate all togither, and put it into the whelpes belly sowyng vp surely the hole for feare lest the com∣position should runne out: then rost him with a tem∣perate fire, and receiue the grease that cōmeth of him and anoint the place of the Goute with it: for it will bring great ease, and cease all maner of conuulsions of the sinewes or muskles, and paine of crampe that maie be felt in a manne with this remedie many haue not onely eased the paine of the Gout, but haue also healed it & put it cleane awaie. Also for the like effect. Take a newe pot, and fill it half full with oile, & the other half with good white wine, & put some Nettles into it the which you shall seeth, and laie them as hote vpon the place as the pacient can endure, & in twise or thrise vsing this, the goute shalbe cleane driuē away. Against the hote Goute. FOr asmuche as there is two maner of goutes, the one hote and the other cold, you shal make this medicine following for the cold one, take the iuice of great reisins, & sugar rosat of eche of thē an vnce, with sugar made with Buglose, fiue vnces of Diapruni solutii, an vnce of Reubarbari electi, and mingle al these thinges togither with a Iulep of Violettes, & make therof a composition, of the whiche
you shall take halfe an vnce euery morning an houre before daie, and in short space you shalbe healed. A meruelous and very good water for diuers in∣firmities and diseases. TAke an vnce of Frankensens of the male kinde called in latin Olibanum, & asmuch of Sarcocolla, sixe vnces of Aloe epaticum, good and cleere hōny, the iuice of Plantain, white Rosen, of eche of these three vnces, & stampe them al wel togither, & mingle them. This don, put them into a great vessel of glasse meete to distil in, well closed & luted about, and distill these thinges in a lēbeck as we haue before declared, holding the recipient close vnderneth wel luted roūde about the mouth, to thintent there may no breath go out, & giue it a slowe fire, that the matter mount not vpward: for it would marre, if you made it not descēd incontinent, in weating the mouth with riuer, well, or conduite water. And this water that commeth out is a wonderfull water for all the infirmities & weak∣nesse of the members: for I haue seene the experience of it vpō a yong maide that had brokē her arme: whe∣ther it were that it was not wel drest, or by any other occasion, I know not, but with in four daies it began to putrifie and to rot, in suche wise that the phisitions and surgeons would haue cut it of: But by the coūsell of maister Seraphin, this water was laid to it (which is made in foure or fiue houres,) & after they had well washed and rubbed her arme, and the bandes that she was bound with al, in laiyng it vpō the broken place and wounde, she was cured within fewe daies after. In distilling this water you must vnderstand that at the ende it chāgeth colour, and than you must chaūce the recipient, bicause the laste would marre the first which is very good, & hauing ended your distillation, you shall take vp the lies, or the gomme whiche hath no lesse vertue thē the water. And if you make pouder of it, it will be good for putrified woundes.
For one that can not slepe nor take his rest either for paine in the head or other like cause. TAke oile of violettes with the yelke of an egge, & womans milke, as much of the one, as of the other, and hauing mengled all togither, make thereof a plaister, and laie it either vpon his forehed or vpon his eyes, and the paine shall cease, and desire of sleepe shall come vpon him. To consolidate and close vp the chappes or chinkes of the mouth. TAke Honny and the drie marrow of a Hogge, and mingle it togither heating it a little at the fire in a little potte, and so anoint your lippes with it. A water to keepe the handes delicate and soft. TAke small Limons, drie Figges, and the roote of Enula campana, asmuche of the one as of the o∣ther, and make them very fine and small: then put to it a handfull of sodden wheate, & seeth it with a slowe fire in one parte of vinaigre, and two partes of riuer or fountaine water, and lette it seeth a little, and then take it of, and keepe it couered that no duste come into it. Washe your face with this water often∣times, and you shall se a meruelous triall of it. An excellent water, and of small cost, for to wash a mans face, and to keepe it in one state alwaies. TAke the floures of Orenges, incarnation Ro∣ses, the floures of thornes as muche of one as of the other, except of the thornes whiche must be lesse in quantite. And beyng all distilled togither: keepe the water of them, which is very precious. To take out the wrinkles of the face. TAke an olde Capon, and plucke of his fethers, and cut him a long the backe, and dresse it as it were to eate. Then fill him full of little yellow
Limons cut very small, and the fenell seede, and put all this togither in a limbeck with a moderate fire. And than washe your face with the water that com∣meth out of it, and the wrinkles will go awaie. To mantaine and keepe the face without wrinkles. TAke a newe fire pan of iron, and sette it on the fire, and whan it is very hote, sprinkle it with good white wine, and so parfume your face o∣uer the smoke of it, and than wipe it with fine white linen clothes: this done, set the pan vpō the fire again and a little Mirrhe vpon it, and so perfume your face again ouer it, and in the meane time keepe your selfe couered so that the smoke may not go away from you. This done binde vp your face in some linen clothes and so goe to bedde and sleepe. And this you must doe ones in fiuetene daies. To heale a swollen face, and that is hurt or mar∣red by reason of some strange skorching, which onely chaunceth whan the subline is not good. TAke the iuice of Barba Iouis, in English Sin∣greone, and rubbe your face with it twise or thrise a daie, you maie doe the like with the iuice of Purcelane, but if your face were to muche marred or hurt, take xl. or l. yelkes of egges, and put them in a friyng pan vpon a great fire, and get some oile out of them, wherwith you shall anoint your face. To know whether the sublime be good or no, or whether it be made with arsenick. I Haue shewde you in the first chapiter of the sixt ooke in the first part of my secretes, the maner of subliming quick siluer as it ought to be subli∣med. Now for asmuch as many menne haue not this maner to make sublime: thei must buy it ready made: and therfore I thought it good to shew you the meane
and waie howe to know whether it bee good or no, or whether it bee made with Arsenick: for all the sub∣limes that are made with Arsenick, destroie comonly the face, and make it swell. Take therfore of sublime the quantite of a beane, and cast it vpon the hote coa∣les, and if it be good it will burne, and will make a blewe flame: but if it make any other colour, it is not good. To take letters out of Paper. TAke Salnitrum, and blewe Vitrioll, a pound of eche one, and distill them, then take a sponge, and weate the letters with the same water, and they will easely go of. Also for the like effect, take pou∣der of white bones, and two vnces of plastre, & stampe it very small, and mingle theim bothe togither, and temper it with the yelke of an egge, and anoint the letters with it, and let it so drie, and then scrape them with a pen knife, and the Paper wil remaine white. To renewe olde and worne Letters. TAke Galles, and stampe them a little: then laie thē a stiepe one daie in good white wine. This done distil them, and with the water that com∣meth of them, you shall weate handsomely the letters with a little cotton, & they wilbe freshe & newe again, in such wise that you may easely read them. To mollifie or to make softe Iuorie and bones to worke what thing on them or with them. TAke strong vinaigre, and Sage, and boile the Iuorie and the bones, in it and thei wil be soft. Also for the like effect, take blewe Vitrioll and salt prepared, and all beyng made into a pouder verie fine, distill it, and keepe the water of it, and than laie your Iuorie and bones in it, and leaue theim so half a daie, and they will be soft: Then put them three daies in the iuice of Beetes, and thei will be tender, so that
you maie make of theim what you will. And whan you wil harden them againe, laie thē in strong white Vinaigre. To take out the markes that are comonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to knowe them, and also suche as many men carrie vpon their bodies, for diuers causes. FOr to make suche caracters or markes, thei first drawe the forme or figure of them vpō the flesh: then with a sharpe rasour, thei lance the fleshe vpon the saide marke, muche like vnto cupping that Surgeons do vse, & whan the blood is come out, they take of the pouder of the smoke that Printers do vse, or els of coales beatē very fine, & so rubbe the cut well with it, and then are thei wel & surely marked. Nowe for to take out these markes, you muste cut open the flesh again & in steede of the foresaid pouder or coales, you shal put into the place some Blanc rasil well pulue∣rised, or els some floure of wheate well bluted or sif∣ted, and let it so drie, & by this meanes all the markes well go awaie, be the blewe or black, and the place al nete and as faire as euer it was. For one that is stong with a Scorpion. IF you can get the Scorpion that did stinge you, in cutting of his feete and his taile, and letting him die vpon the place where he prickt you, he will drawe all the venim vnto him. Any other Scor∣piō wil do the same being brused betwene two stones, and putting to it a little Sage and salt. Also for the like, let three or foure droppes of a greene figge fal in or vpon the wounde and the venim will not abide. For one that is stong with waspes, or Bees. STampe Mallowes, and laie theim vpon the place where he is stong, or els take flies stam∣ped with a little durt. VVhan a man is tutched or poisoned of a spider.
TAke the Ashes of the woode of a figge tree with salt stamped, and laie it vpō the place. Also take Mallowes, and seeth it and with the decoction of them weate the place, or els with sea water. For one that hath eaten toodes or the spetile that commeth from them, whiche is a deadly thing. MAke the patiēt vomite, in giuing him to drink some oile oliue with vinaigre tempered with water. This done, giue him to drinke often times after his vomiting the best claret wine that can be gotten, and two drammes of the rootes of reedes, causing him to runne excessiuely, for to take away the heauines or vnlustines that the venim causeth him to haue. To heale cleft or kibed heeles. TAke Dragant, and Galban, asmuch of the one as of the other, and make therof a pouder, then take newe Waxe, oile of Violettes, and a little Goates suet, or Oxe tallowe, and melt it on the fire: then put in the saide pouders and make of all this an ointment, wherewith you shall anoint your heeles, and the will be hole incontinent. To heale the cankre that happeneth vpon the yard of a man, or in the nature of women. TAke an vnce of rocke alome, and halfe an vnce of verdegrise with smithes water: and put it in some vessell of glasse, and seeth it two houres, then straine the said water, and kepe it in some kinde of vessell for to occupie at your neede. To heale a foundred Horse. TAke an Onion and stampe him: then stiepe him a good while in strong Vinaigre, then take the said Onion thus stampt and imbibed with the Vinaigre, and make the Horse swallowe it do this done, cast the Vinaigre, wherin the said Onion
laied into the nosetrels of the horse, and e shall forth∣with be cured. To kill the bottes in horses. TAke a good handfull of Agrimonie, and make the horse eate it earely in the mornyng, and then let hym tarie fastyng, and without meat vntill noone, doe this fower or fiue daies, and he shall be healed. For a horse that cannot stale. GIue hym to drinke hote water, that is more then luke warm, and he shall stale. For a horse that is cloied or prickte with an naile. TAke out the naile, and when his foote is well made cleane, make a little hole euen vnto the quicke fleshe, where the naile touched, then fill it vp againe with Rosen: and with a hotte yron, melte some Pitche vpon it: This doen, laie some Cotten vpon it, and shooe hym well, and then feare not to ride hym after where you will. To make a horse to haue a good hoofe. TAke Oxe dung, and temper it with Vingre, and at night laie it hotte vpon his feete, and wrappe them vp in some cloutes, to the intent that the heate maie kepe in, whiles it maketh his operacion, and by and by it will be a good hoofe. FINIS.
The Table. TO make wheie as clere as well water. Folio. 1. TO make verie good Aqua vite. Idem. To make armes or Tables of pictures alwaies bright shinyng. Idem. To make blacke ynke verie good. Idem pag. 2. To make grene ynke. Idem pag. 2. For Oxen that pisse blood. Idem pag. 2. To make oile of Vitrioll. Fol. 3. To make white tethe. Idem. For the same, idem. To take awaie spottes from the face. idem pag. 2. For the same. idem. For the same. idem. For the same. idem. To take awaie little redde pimples from a mannes face. Fol. 5. To make a water, that teketh awaie the spottes of the face, and maketh it faire and brighte, and kee∣peth the handes and mouthe, that thei chappe not or waxe full of chinkes. Idem. To make the face faire. Idem. A water to make the face faire. Idem. To make a water that maketh the face white and shinyng. Idem pag. 2. A water to make the face redde. idem. To make a kinde of white to make the face faire, cal∣led in Frenche Blanchet. idem. To make an other better, whiche maketh the face white and glisteryng. idem. A water to make the face redde and glisteryng▪ Fo. 7. To make an other maner of the same, whiche the Frenche men call Blanchet. idem. To make an other Blanchet, that maketh the face white, and of a ruddie colour, and hurteth not as the other aforesaied doeth. idem. To make an other Blanchet, whiche is called roiall, that is the best and the excellentest of al other. idem
To take out the wrinkles of the face. idem pag. 2. To make heare flacke in commyng foorthe, or grow∣yng in a yong manne, as well on their beard as in other partes. Fol. 9. To make heare grows in euery place of ye body, wher you will. idem To make heares blacke. idem. To make a water that will make the face redde and glisteryng. idem. To die or colour heare. idem pag. 2. To take awaie the euill sauour of the breath. idem. To get awaie the heares from the iye browes. idem. To die or colour all kinde of metall or ston, into the colour of golde, without golde. idem. For to make yron or steele soft. Fol. 11. To harden yron or steele. idem. To make figges ripe quickly idem. To make Hennes laie egges all the winter. idem. To make a glewe or paste, that howeth as faste as a naile. idem. To take awaie all maner of spottes. idem. To cause that a womannes breastes waxe not great or swellyng. idem pag. 2. To pourge honie without fire. idem. To stenche the menstruall blood of women. idem. To kepe roses freshe all the yere. idem. For the same. idem. To take or dissolue a boile or kernell in the griue, or the wrestyng of a sinewe. idem. To dresse and trimme Oliues in one daie. Fol. 13. To preserue and kepe Peches or other fruict. idem. To cause merueilous dreames. idem. To make a woman beare children. idem pag. 2. To heale and cure horses of the scabbe. idem. To heale the kynges euill, a desease called in Latine Struma. idem. To make one that is poisoned, to vomite the poison.
To make a candell that cannot be put out. idem. To make a candell of ice to burne Fol. 15. To make that fruicte shall take what forme or facion you will. idem. To make that rootes shall haue what forme you will. idem. For to write letters vpon a mannes body or face▪ that shall neuer be rubbed out. idem. pag. 2. For the same, but somewhat easier. idem. To make one haue a good memorie. idem. To make that no dogge shall barke at you. Fol. 17. To make all thynges seme blacke and greene in the night. idem. To die hear into a grene colour. idem. To dresse or to kepe freshe in Somer. idem. To make an instrument called Cauterium, wherewith sores are burned, whiche shall raise the skin with∣out any grief or pain. idem. pagi. 2. To make steele cut yron as it were leade. idem. To make redde ynke. idem. For the same, and easier. Fol. 19. To make bones soft. idem. To kepe Grapes freshe all the Winter. idem. To make Melons or Conconibers ripe before their season. idem. To take awaie the holes or markes of the small Poc∣kes. idem. pag. 2. To make he handes white. idem. To make an odoriferous and swete smellyng grease, that kepeth the lippes and handes, from chinkes and chappes, and kepeth them moiste, & soft. Fo. 21. For a swete suete called in Frenche and Italien, Po∣made, in Latine. Pomatu. idem. To make that flies shal not tourment or trouble hou∣ses in Somer. idem. To kepe Figges grene all the yere. idem. For to make that Pomegranates shall not pe. fo. 23.
For to kepe wine swete all the yere. idem. For wine that will not kepe long. idem. To cause that wine shall not be to strong. idem. pa. 2. To make vineigre idem. To make vinaiger with water. idem. To make vinaiger with perished wine, or wine that is marred. idem. To take awaie the sauour of the mouldines, or putre faccion of the wine. Fol. 25. To make wine haue a good odour. idem. To make that Lekes shall be greate. idem. To make tadstooles or Musheroms growe in a. idem. To make that all maner of codware shall seeth quic∣kly. idem. To haue grene flowers all the yere. idem. pag. 2. To make corne to growe greater, then thei are wont to doe. idem. To make that fruictes shall not rot vpon the tre. idem To make letters that cannot be read, vnlesse the Pa∣per be put in water idem. To make letters that cannot be read, but at the. fo. 27 To make that Aqua vite shall receiue all the vertues and strength of medicines. idem. To make that a woman shall eate of nothyng, that is set vpon the table. idem. To make oile of roses, or other odoriferous her. idem To make that the Mothes and vermine shall not eate nor destroie clothes and apparell. idem. pag. 2. To make that wilde beastes shal not hurt you. idem. For to be assured and safe from serpentes. idem. To take awaie the pain and grief of the goute. fo. 29. For to see wilde beastes in a dreame. idem. For to make silke white. idem. To make an herbe growe, that shall haue many and diuers odours and sauours. idem. To make an apple or ball that prouoketh. idem. pa. . To make a barrain woman beare children. idem.
To make heares growe vpon a balde hedde. idem. To make a water that dieth or coloureth Copper, in∣to the colour of golde. idem. To make oile of Brimstone. idem. For to make salt Armoniac Fol. 31. For to make Borace. idem. For to make Corall. idem. To die yron into the colour of golde. idem. pag. 2. For to make yron strong, and as faire as siluer. idem. For to make a water, that will take out incontinent letters from the paper idem. To take a spot of oile out of clothe idem. To stanche the bleedyng at the nose. Fol. 33. To breake botches, impostumes, Cartarres, or sores commyng in the throte. idem. To take an yron or arrowe hed out of a wound. idem To make that young children, shall haue no paine or grief in their teeth. idem. For to make a clere voice. idem. For to fasten lose teeth. idem. pag. 2. For the Emeraudes. idem. For one that hath his sight troubled. idem. For one that is abroke or brusted idem. For one that hath his coddes swollen. idem. To make a woman that is wont to haue daughters, to beare sonnes also. idem. To make that ye hands shall not chink or cleaue. fo. 35. For to make a mannes beard blacke. idem. To make a woman beare children, although it be not alwaies assured, yet it is the beste remedie that can be founde. idem. To make a woman labouryng, to bryng foorthe  childe, that cannot be deliuered. idem. pag. 2. For to make teeth that one ake, to fall out. Fol. 37. A remedie for the fallyng sicknesse. idem. Against the plague. idem. For the same. idem. pag. 2.
For the putrefaccion of the teeth. idem. For the stinkyng of the breath, and to make the teeth white. idem. A water to make cleane teeth. idem. An other water to whiten teeth. Fol. 39. To take awaie the smell of Garlike, Leekes, or. idem A principall remedie for the flixe or laxe. idem. For to make that heares shall not growe. idem. A verie profitable reamedie for the hardnesse of wo∣mennes breastes, after thei be brought a bed. idem. For Apostumes, Botches, Cankers, or other Swel∣lynges. idem. pag. 2. To make womennes milke encrease. idem. To knowe whether there bee any water in the wine or no. idem. To make vinaiger. idem. To make drie vinaiger, whiche maie be carried wher a man will. idem. An other composicion for the same. fol. 41. To make rose vinaiger very swete and odorife. idem. To make vinaigre of graine. idem. A preseruacion in tyme of Pestilence or plague, and against all venime or poison, and bityng of a madd Dogge. idem. Against stinkyng vermin called Puneises. idem pa. 2 To pourge coler and fleame. idem. A remedie to kepe flies from fleshe. idem. To kepe fleshe all the sommer without corrup. idem. To knowe if a Melon be good. fol. 43. To kill and destroie flees. idem. To ripe a botche, impostum, felon, or cattes heare, or any swellyng sore. idem. An excellent washyng for the teeth idem. To make a baite for riuer fishe. idem. A remedie that no kinde of herbes shall bee hurte, or corrupted by flees or lice. idem. To driue awaie the stinkyng vermine called pu. idē.
For to kill and destroie flies idem. pag. 2. An other waie to kill and destroie flees. idem. For one that hath eaten venemous tadstooles, or mu∣sheromes idem. For to confite Musheromes or tadstooles, so well that a man maie eate thē without any daunger. fol. 45. A remedy against the stinging of waspes or bees. idē. To make women haue a quicke and speadie deliuerie of their children, and without pain, or at the leaste verie little. idem. To take of wartes from the handes idem pag. 2. For the dissenterie or flixe of the stomacke idem. To fasten the gommes; and lose teeth idem. To take awaie the tothe ache idem. An other remedy for to heale the tothe ache idem. To make heare growe idem. To make heare blacke fol. 47. To kill the Wormes in the teeth, and to take awaie the stinkyng of the teeth idem. To heale pussiue and broken winded horses idem. To preserue a man from vomityng on the sea idem. A remedy against the bityng or stinging of serp. idem. For them that spit blood. idem. A remedy against the wormes of yong chlid. idē. pa. 2. A remedy for the flixe or laxe. idem. For the runnyng of the vrine, that is to saie, for one that cannot holde his water. idem. For those that cannot kepe their meate, but vomite it vp again continually. idem. To make that Antes, or Emettes shal not eat the fig∣ges vpon the tree. idem. To make hore heares blacke idem. For the toth ache Fol. 49. To destroie lise and other small beastes, that doe wa and destroie the herbes in gardens idem. A remedy for deafnesse idem. Against the stinging Scorpions idem.
A remedy that the Sunne shall not hurt you, shinyng vpon your hedde, when you go any iourney. idem. A remedy for the hoarsnesse of the voice. idem. A remedy for them that cannot pisse idem. pag. 2. To make a baite to catche wilde Geese, and wilde Duckes, and all other sort of foule. idem. To make that Dogges shall neuer bee madde, and a remedie for them if thei bee madde, beyng bitten of madde Dogges or Wolues idem. To make that flies shall not vexe or trouble do. fo. 51. A remedie to kepe Dogges from flees idem. To pourge Dogges when thei be sicke idem. To heale mangie Dogges. idem. pag. 2. To take wartes from the handes. idem. To make the teeth white idem. To take awaie the paine of the iyes idem. For hym that is stong with a Salamander Fol. 53. For one that hath drunke leches or blood suckers. idē. For one that is stong with the beast, called in Latine Psalanx, whiche is a kind of Lizard called Stellio idē. For one that is bitten with a madde Dogge idem. A remedy for hym that is stong with some venemous beast idem. To preserue a man from poison. Idem. pag. 2. To driue awaie all venemous beastes frō your. idem. Against all poison, either eaten or drunke. Fol. 55. Against all veneme or poison idem. A remedy which Nicomedes vsed, that no poison should hurte hym idem. A secrete or remedy, not to be stong of Scorpi. idē pa. 2 A remedy not to be stong of waspes or Bees. idē. To make what quantitie of ong vinaigre you. idē. For one that hath eaten venemous Musheromes, or Tadstooles idem. To be assured and saffe from all Sorcerie and en∣chauntement Fol. 57. Against lightnyng and tempest idem.
To kepe that fruictes shall not fal before the be ri. idē. To keepe that Weselles and other like beastes, shall not eate nor destroie Poultrie. idem. To make flaxe as soft as silke. idem. pa. 2. To heale the paine of the hedde idem. To heale lippes that bee clefte and full of chinkes, by meanes of colde or winde. idem. To heale handes that be ful of chappes, by cold. idem. To grinde golde and siluer idem. To make faire verde grise after the newe faciō. fol. 59 An other waie briefer for to haue Verdegrise. idem. To make a past or dowe of Amber, for beades. fol. 61. To counterfete perles that shall seme naturall. idem. To imprent medalles imbossed with draga. idē. pa. 2. To make a paste mete and good, to make all maner of medalles or pictures in moulde. Fol. 63. To make medalles, and figures chaced and imbossed, with fishe glewe. idem. To make a Greene, Yellowe, Redde, and Blewe co∣lour without thicknes, to write with vpō. idē. pa. 2. To make a pece of violet clothe to write or paint. idē. To get oile out of Talcum artificially, and of his owne strength. Fol. 67. To make that all mettall shall seme like siluer. fol. 69 For to take moche fishe, and to make a light in the night. Idem. pag. 2. To make a Mixte stone, whiche beeyng weated with spettle maketh fire. idem. To make vernishe with Masticke, to laie vpon pain∣tynges made with oile. Fol. 71. To make that a white skin shall haue blacke spottes of the colour of a Leoparde or Panther, and also to make graie heare blacke. idem. To make good oile of Nutmegges. idem. pag. 2. To make parfecte oile of Spike. idem. To make odoriferous oile of Storax Fol. 73. To make an odoriferous oile of Bengewine. idem.
To make good oile of Ladanum Idem. pag. 2. To make oile of Orenge flowers idem. To make a parfume sodainly in a chamber where a sicke man lieth Fol. 75. To make longe and rounde parfumes to burne in a chamber idem. To make a fine & swete pouder of Cipres. idem. pa. 2. To grinde ambergrise for to putte with other Drog∣ges, to giue them a good odour, and to make little markes and spottes vpon beades. Fol. 77. To make fine muscardines, white and redde. idē. pa. 2 To make counterfaicte Camphire idem. To make the bearde growe, and to kepe that the hea∣res fall not of Fol. 79. To get awaie the heare from what place you wil. idē. To make hore heares blacke Idem. pag. 2. To make white heare in the shadowe: without the Sunne, and shall bee come white and shinyng, like Siluer. fol. 81. A softe dowe or paste as it wer Pomatum, to washe the handes, and when the mouthe, nose, lippes, or han∣des dooe chincke or chappe, and it kepeth the fleshe softe and swete. fol. 83. White Pomatum, fine & swete for great. idem. pa. 2. For those that haue a stinkyng breath, bicause of the stomacke. fol. 87. To make one haue a good stomack, that hath a naugh¦tie one. Idem. A remedy for hym that cannot keepe his meate in his stomacke, without vomityng. idem. pa. 2. To make a naturall white skin idem. To make the fleshe or skin faire and bright Fol. 89. To cleare and make cleane the face from all maner of spottes. Idem. pag. 2. To take awaie a ryngworme, tetter, or spottes and other markes, or els a priuie marke in the honie by birthe. idem.
To take awaie redde rubies that grow in the face, by reason of the heate of the liuar. Fol. 91. To take of from the handes or feete, the hardnesse of the fleshe, gotten by labour Idem. pag. 2. An other secrete to take awaie wartes or hard fleshe, that growe betwene mennes toes Idem. To make letters of gold and siluer embossed. Fol. 93. To make a deuise or armes, or other thynges, vpon a Violet, or a Rose Idem. pag. 2. Sope to get out all spottes of clothe Idem An other like secrete Fol. 95. An other like Idem. An other meanes Idem. An other meanes for spottes, of fatte, or oile Idem. To take spottes out of of Skarlate or Veluet, with∣out hurtyng the colour Idem. pag. 2. To take spottes out of white silke or Veluet in grain, or Crimsen Veluet Idem. To take out a spotte of Ynke or Wine, of a Wollen or Linen clothe Fol. 97. To restore the colour to a cloth, that hath lost it in ta∣kyng out a spotte Idem. A water to take all maner of spottes out of clothe of any colour Idem. To driue awaie Flies, Spiders, Scorpiōs, and other vermine from your house Idem. pag. 2. Against gnattes, whiche sting men in the night. idem A verie excellent secrete for to take out spottes or hard fleshe by labour, called in Latine Callum Fol. 99. To take oile or grease out of a clothe, of what colour so euer it be, without any droppe of water. idē. pa. 2. Balles of Sope for Barbers, of diuers sortes and sa∣uoure Idem. To counterfaicte all maner of greene leaues, whiche shall seme naturall. Fol. 101. To make Paper borde of beaten Paper, and stampte Paper for mouldes and hollewe thynges. Fol. 103.
To giue a faire glosse vnto Pictures or Figures painted Idem. pa. 2. To make an other maner of grene water cleare. 105. To take out a deuise made in a moulde, with Blacke Sope. Idem. pag. 2. To make cleane the heares, and to drie vp the sweate vnder the arme holes Idem. To make Roses, flowers, Gilliflowers, and of all o∣ther sortes, white, redde, grene, yellowe, and incar∣nate, in short space Fol. 107. To make Trees of all sortes to growe, whiche shall bryng foorthe fruicte, farre greater then common∣ly thei doe Idem. pag. 2. To soften and mollifie Oliues with Lye, in lesse then eight houres Fol. 109. To make a water that will Die or colour all thinges be it bone or woo Fol. 111. A water to make teeth white Idem. The true secrete and maner how to make beyond sea Azure, or els for all tutches or Paragon. Also for to make strong paste, for to incorporate the Azure stone in it, called Lapis Lasuli, and to take it out a∣ain in his tyme, & when you thinke good. idē. pa. 2. To make the paste, softer for beyonde sea azure. 113. To purifie the oile of Lineseede for the azure. idē. pa. 2 Lye for to washe beyonde sea azure Fol. 115. How the vessell ought to bee, wherein all the waters are put that the azure is washed with. Idem. pa. 2. The firste parte howe to knowe the vertuous, good∣nesse, and signes of Lapis Lazuli, and to make true beyonde Sea Azure mooste parfectly and ex∣pertly. Idem. The maner howe to prepare the stone Lapis Lasuli, and to calcine it when you will grinde it. Fol. 117. To get out the gold of lapis Lazuli, after it. idē. pa. 2. The maner how to make the licour wherewith men braie the lapis Lasuli, for to make beyond sea. 119.
To knowe whether the sublime bee good or , or whether it be made with Arsenick Idem. To take letters out of Paper. Idem. pag. 2. To renewe old and worne letters Idem. To mollifie or make soft Iuerie and bones, to worke what thyng you will on them, or with them. Idem To take out the markes that are commonly made in the faces of Sclaues, for to knowe theim, and also soche as many men carrie vpon their bodies, for di∣uers causes Fol. 159. For one that is stong with a Scorpion. Idem. For one that is stong with Waspes or Bees. Idem. When a man is touched or poisoned of a spider. idem For one that hath eaten Todes, or the spettle that tō∣meth frō thē, which is a dedly thyng. Idem. pag. 2. To heale cleft or kibed heeles Idem. To heale the Canker, that happeneth vpon the yarde of a man, or in the nature of a woman. Idem. To heale a foundred horse Idem. To kill the wormes in horses Fol. 161. For a horse that cannot stale Idem. For a horse that is lied with a neile in shoyng. idem To make a horse to haue a good hoofe. Idem. Finis tabulae. ¶Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston: for Nicholas Englande.
