5693 99850811 16039
THE BLESSING OF JAPHETH, Prouing THE GATHERING in of the Gentiles, AND Finall Conuersion of the Iewes. Expressed in diuers profitable Sermons. BY Thomas Cooper. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Richard Redmer, and are to be solde at the West ende of Pauls. 1615.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, SYR THOMAS HAYES, LORD MAYOR OF THE Citie of London. The Right Worshipfull, the Al∣dermen his Brethren; and the Sheriffes of the saide Citie; Together, with the worthie Commissioners, for the plantations in Ireland and Virginia: Grace and peace from God the Father, through our Lord IESVS CHRIST, be multiplied. Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, And dearely beloued in our Lord Iesus. IT is the holy commandement of our blessed Sa∣uiour Christ Iesus, vnto his seruant the Apostle Peter, that hee beeing conuerted, should strengthen Luk. 22. 33 his brethren And it is the dutie of euery faithfull Seruant vnto his heauenly Maister; Hereby doth hee approue himselfe a liuing mem∣ber of Iesus Christ, euen to teach the ways of God vnto the wicked; that sinners may bee conuerted Psal. 23. 8. &c. vnto him, that the wayes of God may be knowne vpon earth, his sauing Ps. 51. 15. 16. health emong all Nations; Accordingly heerevnto, it was, that the blessed Apostles after the glorious Resurrection of the Sonne of GOD, when they had receiued theyr Commission, and were furnished with gifts accordingly: First tendred the Gospell vnto their Brethren in the flesh, the Nation of the Iewes, as beeing sent vnto the lost sheepe of Math. 28 the house of Israell; And when they had put it from them, and did account themselues unworthy of eternall life, Loe they turned to the Acts, 2. 3. 4 Acts, 3. 4. Gentiles: and so the barren & desolate became fruitfull, & hath had moe children then the married Wife. Thus by the ministerie of Apo∣stolike Acts. 13 Esay. 54. 1 men, was the Gospell first published to this Nation. And after
manie fearfull and yet most righteous iudgements iustscted therevpon, for the contempt of the sme, together with the outward setling of the State, in the revniting of those Royall houses of Lancaster and Yorke, The glorious Gospell also of Iesus Christ was restored vnto vs: that so wee might be constantly setled in the favour of God. And propagate the sme, to our posteritie and brethren, the Nations farre  utill the great day of the glorious appearāce of Iesus Christ. To this ende was it, that the Lorde of the Haruest did not onely water this precious seede, with the blood of the Mtirs aboundantly, that so it might take rote downeward, but very gratiously also cherished the samewith a most glorious sun-shine of long peace & prosperitie: that so it might bring  fruit vpward to amendment of life. And notwith∣standing our continued vnthankfulnes for so great saluation: for which we had deserued, that when the light of our eyes was taken from vs, the lit also of the Gospell should haue bene remoued: Yet still hath it plea∣sed our graciou. God to visite vs from on high, with his sauing health: and by the ministery of our gracious Soueraigne, lames (whom the Lord in mercie proster in this holy worke, that he may enlarge the bounds of this glorious Kingdom farre and neere:) By this blessed nursing Father are we not only now vnited into one gouernment, and so the great occa∣sions of Inward hostilitie mercefully quenched; but further also, by his gratious Authority it hath bene, that the barbarous and desolate places of the Land are now replenished, with the power-of the Gospell. Yea, the rude & sauadge nations farre & neer, in Ireland and Virginia, haue had this blessed light conuayed and enlarged vnto them. And who are they that haue bene forward to help the Lord against the mighty? Who haue enlarged themselues for the enlarging of the glorious Gospell of Christ: Surely, as the Lord hath enlarged himselfe aboundantly, vn∣to this honourable Citie, aboue all the places of the Land, both in the fitnes of the earth, & the deaw of heauen, euen in all outward benefits, and spirituall blessings, in heauenly things: So blessed bee the name of his Maiestie for euer, that hath hereby sanctified these portios vnto you (Right Honorable, worshipful, & my deare Countreymen) that your hearts and purses are enlarged plentifully, to the furtherance of this great and glorious work of the gathering in of the Gentiles: that the plantations in Ireland & Virginia, are much furthered by your indu∣strie. And haue you not already receiued the first fruits of your labours in Virginia? Is not a Virgine lately married vnto Iesus Christ, and
become one with you in the Houshold of faith? Hath not the Prince of our peace hereby established an inuiolable league betweene those Nati∣ons, and our Colonies; that so we may not doubt of good successe, in those enterprises? In the name of God, therefore (Right Honour: Right wor:) goe on in this glorious worke: Can you doe God better seruice, then in promoting his Kingdom, and demolishing daily the power of Sa∣than? Can you doe better seruice vnto your selues, then not only to ease the Land of that ranke blood, which threatens some great sicknes: but especially, to prouide some retiring place for your selues, of so be the Lord, for our vnthankefulnes should spue vs out? And if that the Lord shall hereby translate his Gospell from one nation to and here or rather, as we hope, shall prouoke vs by such Foolish for lorne Nations, to a greater zeale vnto the Gospell, to hold fast that which we haue, least no man take away our crowne from vs; shall wee be any loosers hereby▪ if wee exchange some of our transitorie Blessings which wee haue forfeited by our abuse, for the establishing and recouery of durable riches, that they may not be taken from vs. Surely, if my poore endeuour can auaile ought herevnto: As I haue heretofore, and nowe in this Blessing of Iapheth) done my endeuour to approue vnto your wisedomes, the iust vndertaking, & performing of so holy a worke; So by the grace of God, neither shall my poore prayers, nor any future industrie bee wanting; that so I may strengthen the things that are readie to die at home, and nourish the things, that are newe-borne abroade. And thus I hum∣bly intreat your Honor, and your worships, to conceiue of mee, and to accept graciously these Meditations, as a true pledge of my loue vn∣to this honorable Citie, wherein I was borne, and bred vp: and a seale of my labours for the furthering of what soeuer may tende to the aduancement of the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ. To whose blessed protection, I doe most heartily commend you all: and doe rest in him. Your Honours, and worships, euer bounden: Tho: Cooper.
THE GENERALL CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE. FIRST, it discouereth the maruellous and gratious worke, of the Conuersion of a Sinner: both by the Authour, Nature, Meanes, whereby; and the Markes and effects thereof. Secondly, It declareth the true estate and condition of the CHVRCH of GOD; both that which is Invisible, and the Visible also: Together, with it seuerall Qualities and Markes in this life. Thirdly, It prooueth the Calling of the Gentiles. Fourthly, It auoucheth the Conuersion of the Iewes. Lastly, it confirmeth, that Iewe and Gentile, shall be vnited together in one Visible CHVRCH. Together, with many particular Obseruations, incident to these: as appeareth by these particular Doctrines, and Instructions following.
Obseruations in these Meditations are, 1 GODS Decree, ordereth second causes. 2 Prayer, the most effectuall meanes to accomplish Gods will, for our good. 3 God onely the authour of the Conuersion of a Sinner. 4 The Conuersion of a Sinner, is by perswasion of the sweet promises of the Gospell. 5 The Faithfull haue onely right in Gods blessings. 6 The Gentiles to be conuerted. 7 The Posteritie of the Church, to be respected and prouided for. 8 Good Parents may haue a wicked Generation. 9 The faithfull shall be recouered out of their greatest falles. 10 The Iewish Religion, True. 11 The Church a little Flocke. 12 The Church obscure and invisible in the world. 13 The true Invisible Church consists onely of the Elect. 14 The Church of God moueable, not tyed to any place. 15 The Church weake and corruptible, subiect to infirmities. 16 The Church Militant in this life. 17 The Church is the resting place, and safe-gard of the Elect. 18 The Church a stranger and Pilgrime in this life. 19 Constancie and Perseuerance a note of a true member. 20 The Saints shall abide, and dwell for euer. 21 The Iew to be conuerted, and finally gathered in. 22 The Churches Vnitie, and so perpetuitie and perfection. 23 There is a Malignant church as well as a True. 24 The Malignant church mingled with the true beleeuers. 25 The wicked and Malignant shalbe in subiection to the true.
THE BLESSING OF IAPHETH; God perswade Iaphet that hee may dwell in the Tents of Shem. Genes: 9. THAT these words may the better tend to our edification, wee are to consider; First, the Occasion and Coherence of them. Secondly, the words themselues. The Occasion is layd downe in the 7. for∣mer verses: Namely, 1. Noah his first sinne of Drunkennesse, with the Occasion of it. vers: 20. 21. And therevpon, his other sinne of Inciuilitie, he lyes naked & vncouered; euē briutishly in the Tent. Secondly, Cham his sinnes, 1. Of beholding his Fathers Na∣kednes; Not with griefe, as hee should haue done: but with a kinde of delight and derision thereof. 2. His malice and crueltie, in acquainting his brethren with this infirmitie of his Father: Thereby both to make his aged and reuerend Father despised in the eyes of his Children, and also to make them partakers with him in this sinne, of reioycing at, and deriding the corruption of the Ancient. 3. The pietic of the other two Sonnes of Noah: Shem; and Iapheth, discouered. 1. In their courage and constancie, that would not be drawne by his example, to fellowship in euill. 2. In their modestie, that they would not so much as looke vpon their fathers nakednes: as also 3. In their wisedome, that by a strange gate of go∣ing backwards, and putting a garment vppon their shoulders; by this meanes, without offence, they performed a Christian and ciuill dutie, of couering their Fathers nakednes. Vers: 23.
Herevpon it followeth, that Noah, being thus fitted to sobrie∣tie, partly, in that his Distemperature is well qualified by rest; partly also, his nakednes being couered as a figure, no doubt, al∣so, of his sinne couered, and pardoned by the LORD; Is saide to Awake from his wine, (that is) frō his sinne, that was caused there∣by: as appeareth plainely by that which followeth: Namely, be∣cause, he not onely knewe what his younger Sonne had done vnto him: wherevnto, because hee was enabled by the spirite of Prophecie, therfore his sin had not depriued him of the vse of that gift, which not being repented of, it must needs haue done for the present: But further also, as the Father of the Familie, yea, as the Prince and Iudge of the worlde, euen in Gods stead, he both executeth his Authoritie ouer his Sonnes, and that in cursing this wicked Cham: as also, in Blessing the other two gracious Children, or∣derlie. First. Shem, as the eldest, both in age and religion. Blessed be the God of Shem, and let Canaan be his Seruant: there∣in bestowing a double blessing vpon Shem; One vpon his soule, that he might continue in the worship of IESƲS CHRIST, (his GOD) and Sauiour: That the God of Shem, being blessed of Shem, constantly; might continue to blesse Shem, the father Rom. 11. 26. 27. Esay: 5. 20. Esay: 27. 9. Ierem: 31. of the Iewes: performing his faithfull promises vnto them, euen to their last conuersion, and restoring in the last dayes, when All Israel shalbe saued: as it is writtē, The delieuerer shall come out of Sion, and shall turne away the vngodlines from Iacob; And this is my euerla∣sting Couenant with them, when I shall take away theyr Sinnes. 2. Shem is also blessed, in his outward estate, in that hee shall be Let Canaan be his seruāt. Lord ouer his cursed brother, & his posteritie. The true Church of God shall preuaile: and ouercome all the enimies of the same. Thus Noah hauing blessed his eldest sonne Shem, partly, in re∣compence of his present well-doing, but especially, as in Gods steed, discouering the free loue of God, in confirming an infinite reward, farre beyond all proportion, of an imperfect and finite o∣bedience; Proceedeth yet farther, to blesse his other sonne Ia∣pheth; as being partner in the good action, and therefore in e∣quitie, to be partaker of the recompence thereof. And this blessing vpon Iapheth, is not so much personall vnto himselfe, that as he had begunne, so he would dwell in the Tents of
Shem: that is, continue in the true worship of God. But because the holy Patriarke by the spirit of prophecie, did foresee, that the posteritie of Iapheth, as fell out within few hundreth yeares after, should fall from God to Idols: Therefore hee not onely prayeth vnto God, for the restoring of the Gentiles, which were the po∣steritie of Iapheth, to the sincere worship of GOD, in IESƲS CHRIST; but prophetically, also declareth therein the will of God, that Iapheths seede should belieue in the Promised-seede; and withall, addeth the Ioynture of this new-married Bride vnto her Sauiour. Namely, that the belieuing Gentiles shall also be enlar∣ged Esay 2. The calling of the Gentiles. farre and neere vpon the face of the earth, as rulers and con∣querors of the world, and all the enemies of the Church. And let Canaan, (that is) the posteritie of the wicked, for euer, be subiect vnto the seruants of Iesus Christ. Thus is Iapheth also blessed, God enlarge Iapheth. by his father Noah, being the mouth of God himselfe, both de∣claring what was to come to passe, concerning the posteritie of Iapheth; euen the Gentiles, confined especially in this parte of the world which wee inhabite, called Europe; and extending to all those nations, in all partes of the world, that are not, eyther pro∣perly Iewes, or of that cursed race of Cham; scattered towards the South in Affrica, &c. As also auouching the certaintie there∣of: as by the riches of Gods mercie, hath bene alreadie for this sixe hundred yeares accomplished: and is daily persiting, vntill the comming of the Lord Iesus. So that these words do properly containe the Decree of God, 2: cor: 4. 6. Rom: 8. 29. concerning the Calling, and bringing-in of the Gentiles, to the Faith of Iesus Christ, occasioned by the sinne of Noah: So is 1. God able to bring light out of darknes, 2. so doth hee turne the euils of his Children to theyr good, as all things else. 3. So haue Parents Authoritie, to blesse or curse their children, as oc∣casion serueth. So ought Magistrates: 4. Yea, euen Parents also, to haue an holie care, for a Religious posteritie, Deuteron: 6. 7. Genes: 1▪ But my purpose is not to stand vpon these points, I come rather to the words themselues. Which are to be considered, eyther as, 1. A prayer for Iapheth: 2. as Prophecie, what God had decreed to performe vnto Iapheth and his posteritie hereafter. 3. As Prophecie in part accomplished: and further yet to be finished, concerning the calling of, & brin∣ging
in the fulnes of the Gentiles. And first, In that they are a Prayer, for the accomplishment of that, which they with all, doe auouch Gods decree for it certaine performance: We learne; That seeing the Decree of God is subordinate vnto meanes; or rather doth subordinate meanes vnto it: So wee are not to presume or builde thereon, without vsing the ordinary meanes I. Doctr: Gods decree ordereth se∣cond causes. therevnto. Howsoeuer likely, or vnlikely, in our Iudgement, we must not hope for saluation, vnlesse we climbe the ladder of Sanc∣tification, as being the likely meanes thereto. Nay, though it be vnlikely, that Abrahams offering vp of his sonne, should bee a meanes to haue him restored, and in him, the Ro: 829. 30. accomplishment of the promise: though it be vnlikely, that wa∣shing in Iordan, should heale Naaman of his leaprosie: yet where Genes: 22. God commands, there the vnlikeliest shall preuaile: 1. for the ex∣ercise of our Faith, and triall of our Obedience: as, 1. both ma∣king 2. Reg: 5. that which is otherwise sinne, to be warrantable, 2. and ad∣uancing Gods power and glorie, in working so farre aboue, and contrarie to the meanes. And though it bee foolishnes to the Grecian, and a stumbling-blocke to the Iewe, that the hearing of an earthen vessell, should raise vp Earth and hell to Heauen, de∣liuering 1. Cor: 1. 21. 22. 23. a slaue of Sathan, to be the Sonne of God, yet what God ordayneth, that hee also blesseth. That the glorie may bee Acts 26. 11. vnto him, and not vnto man. Not that the Lorde is not able to worke without meanes, but that hee is to deale with men: that cannot conceiue him but by meanes. Math: 3. Exod: 20. 21. 2. Cor. 4. 7. 8. And therefore seeing the Lorde hath decreed and ordained some to saluation, others to perdition: Euen so hath he ordered his workes in a different varietie, for the more holy, and righte∣ous Reasons, 1. Difference of meanes, and their reasons, in the Elect, Reprobate accomplishment of his will, concerning those contrary ends of the Elect and Reprobate. Whereof, some he hath ordained to be likely, and easie: 1. there∣by to encourage his Children, the rather to entertaine them: 2. and to make the wicked more inexcusable, that will neuertheles despise them, being so readie, and profitable. Other meanes the Lord of wisedome hath also disposed, hard, 1. and vnlikely, thereby to trie the Faith of his Children: and 2. ex∣ercising theyr Patience, in wayting on God, for the issues of them: 3. and to teach them Humilitie, to giue God only the glory of his
mercies, notwithstanding their best endeauours, tried by the dif∣ficultie of them. 4. As also by this prouidence, the Reprobate are iustly hard∣ned and confounded; Who, as they would not embrace the o∣ther Math: 13. 13. 560. Ioh: 6. 66. meanes, (as being easie) and so in their eyes contemptible: So they shall not conceiue and digest these, as being harde, and vnlikely, passing the reach of reason and carnall wisedome. And so not submitting to anie, which the Lorde hath appoynted for good, they shall stumble vpon such, that lie in their way for euill: being iustly giuen vp to their owne councels, because they haue forsaken God; that so being satiate with theyr owne wayes, they Psal: 82. 12. Prou: 14. 14. Rom: 8. 2. Thess: 1. 6. 71. might reape the fruite thereof: euen the ripening of sinne in this life, and the full measure of vengeance in the life to come. 1. And do not they then iustly exclude themselues from hea∣uen, that builde vpon Gods Decree, concerning their saluation, without conscience of holines: presuming that Gods decree shal stand, howsoeuer they daylie growe worse and worse? shall not Ʋses. the issues of this way, (howsoeuer seeming good) to these decey∣ued men, be the issues of death? doe they not by this desperate tempting of God; runne headlong to destruction? 2. Tim: 3. 13 2. And doe not they also iustly exclude themselues of the comforts of the earth, that say; A Lyon is in the way, the meanes are difficult, or God will prouide: What neede wee vse any? Is it not a Decree, that as, Hee that soweth shall haue plentie; So he Pro. 11. 2. Thess 3. 12 that laboureth not, shall not eate? Doe not these men dreame of a Feast, but when they awake, they are an hungrie? 3. Haue we any further warrant of the protection of the Al∣mighty, then, that we walke in our wayes? Psal: 91. Can Beggars and Gentlemen looke for a blessing, that vsually walke in no calling? Can Players and Gamesters, Ʋsurers, and such like, expect other Esa: 29. 8. 3. then a curse, that walke only in an vnlawfull calling? And shall Op∣pressors and Cheaters thinke to prosper? shall not ouer-reaching buy∣ers, and deceytfull-Sellers, that abuse a Lawfull calling, put all theyr gaines into a broken bagge, and to winne the world, loose theyr owne soules? 4. And whereas there is difference of meanes, and therefore to be vsed in their order, the spirituall first, Matth: 6. 33. and then those for this life; Do not they renounce Heauen, that make sure
Luke 10. 4first for this life? Oh that we were wise with Marie, to choose 5 the better part. As not to refuse the vnlikelyest, where God 6 com∣mands: yea, not to distrust our God, where no meanes are offered, 7 so to choose the fayrest, as they lye in our wayes, and yet not to rest 8 vpon them, lest we robbe God of his glorie, and our selues of the 9 comfort of them. Abac: 1. Psalm: 62. 10. 10. Oh what comfort is here stored vp vnto vs, that the Lord sub∣mits to our infirmitie, in offering meanes, to leade on our weake Faith. Matth. 13. 11. What Wisedome is heere taught vs, to become all vnto all? that we may winne some vnto Iesus Christ? 1. Cor: 9. 12. How gra∣cious is our God vnto vs, that seeing we cannot heare him spea∣king vnto vs and liue? Exod: 20. 21. therefore he tenders saluati∣on vnto vs by such instruments, as beeing subiect to our infirmi∣ties, might with better experience teach vs, and with more com∣passion waite on vs, 2. Tim: 2. 23. that at length we may be saued. 13. Lastly, heere is sound comfort vnto the Saints, that bee the meanes neuer so vnlikely, all shall turne to their good; they are Rom: 8. 29. subordinate to Gods will, hee will surely giue a blessing. Thus doth Noah vse the meanes; thus God gaue, and daylie giues a blessing therevnto. But what meanes is it that Noah vseth? Surely, most excellent and effectuall, Euen Prayer vnto God, that he would hasten his worke, in the blessing of Iapheth, in the calling of the Gentiles. 1. So must the Saints pray, for the accomplishment of Gods will: 2. Doctr: Prayer, the most effectuall meanes for accomplish∣ment of Gods will for our good. 2. Chron: 6. 21. 22. 23. Prayer is the most effectuall meanes to preuaile with God: So doth the Sonne of God teach vs to pray: That the will of God may bee done: 2. So haue the Saints practized vsually to obtaine Gods mercies. 1. Sam: 2. Iam: 5. Ioh: 14. Math: 12. Math: 6. 3. So haue they preuailed for the remoueall of his iudgements. Ion: 3. Esay: 8. 37. Psalm: 105. 4. And so hath God promised by this meanes, euer to be found of vs; both to deliuer vs out of euill: Psal: 50. 15. And to heape blessings vpon vs. And no maruell, For 1. Is not Prayer that life of our Faith, wherein we renue our right in Christ Iesus, and so in him preuaile with God? Ephes: 6. 18. 19. for all things that make for our good. Psal: 34. 1. Cor: 3.
2. And doth not Prayer sanctifie the blessing vnto vs, that as we haue it in loue, so wee may vse it to Gods glorie, and therein laye vp a good foundation against the day of Christ? 1. Tim: 4. 5. 1. Timoth: 6. 17. 3. Nay, doth not our prayer comfort vs; that though wee obtaine not what we desire, yet we haue done Gods will, and so shall haue better then we desire, euen the grace of sweete Commu∣nion, with our blessed God? yea, the grace of patience, to waite his leysure; yea, the grace of Contentment in him aboue all things; yea, the grace of Supplie, of that which shall enable vs in our wants; 2 Cor: 12. 8 yea, the grace of aboundant recompence of our stay: a dou∣ble Restitution of whatsoeuer wee haue wanted; yea, an hundreth folde in this life, & an infinit recompence in heauen. 2. cor: 4. 17. 18 Iob. 41. Matth: 19. 4. And shall not Israel that preuailes with God, preuaile also with men? Osee: 11. 2. 3. Genes: 32. Exod: 16. Ʋse 1. Surely, so we pray in Faith. 1. 6. without doubting, and Ignorance. In Patience, without wearysomnes, submitting to the will of God. Math: 27. Galath: 6. so our prayer be in loue to our God, respecting his glory: in loue to our selues, desiring the best for Iacob: vs: and in loue to our neighbour, without wrath or enuie: so we pray in hope: So contenting our hearts with the enioying of the pre∣sent, as that still we waite and begge for the things to come; for∣getting Reasons why we must both pray, though God knowe what wee haue neede of. whats behinde, in respect of thats before. Phil: 3. How∣soeuer the Lord neede not to be put in minde what hee will giue, yet we must pray, to put our selues in minde, of what we haue need: as also to approue our right, for the supplie thereof: Assuring our selues that the Lord will fulfill the desires of them that feare him. Psal: 25. 21. Psal: 14. 5. And hee will certainely fill the hungrie with good things, so they witnesse vnfainedly theyr wants, by theyr earnestnes in begging, and labour to bee found of GOD, not hauing theyr owne righteousnes, but cloathed with the righteous∣nes of IESƲS CHRIST; as well Praysing God for what they Phil: 3. haue, as begging what they want: and submitting to Gods will, for the manner of the supplie, though being otherwise confident on God, that he will certainly prouide. Genes: 22. If we be denied, either wisely faulting our selues that we haue asked amisse, or not faulting God howsoeuer: who giueth, how, and when i pleaseth Iacob: 4. 3 him, sufficient to our Faith, though happily crossing ence & rea∣son.
Comforting our selues, that the crossing of nature will be the triall, and encrease of grace, so that we doe still vse our spirituall weapon of Prayer; thereby preuayle wee shall still with God, howsoeuer we decrease in the flesh, and who would not weaken such a treacherous and noysome enemie: Can we better disgrace and abuse the same, then when wee haue done our best therein: yet not onely we craue a blessing from God thereon, therein sig∣nifying it vtter inabilitie in it selfe to good: but further also, in∣treate Note. the Lorde to pardon the best endeuouts, and not to enter into iudgement with vs, for our best seruices: Psal: 143. Oh how doth this vtterly condemne and crucifie the flesh? Nay, doth Psal. 143. not heere a gracious hart wholly abase and denie himselfe; that so hee may fully and whollie be interessed in the free mercies of God in Iesus Christ. So doth Noah by prayer, interesse his sonne Iapheth and his po∣steritie, in the Couenant of grace: and so by Faith doth hee pro∣phesie of the Calling of the Gentiles. And so from these words, as a Prayer, we come now to consider them as a Prophesie. God perswade Iapheth, to dwell in the Tents of Shem; That is, The Lord shall in the acceptable time, by the Ministerie of his Gospell, through the mighty operation of his holy spirite, en∣cline, and allure the heart of the Gentiles, to returne vnto him by kissing the Lord Iesus; and for their saluation, relye onely on the merites of the promised Messiah. For the better opening of which Prophecie, consider wee briefly these particulars therein; 1. The Author that must accomplish this great worke of the couersion of the Gentiles: Namely, the Lord our God. God perswade. 2. The manner and meanes, whereby this conuersion is accom∣plished, namely, by perswasion, and alluring the reasonable part. God perswade Iapheth. 3. The Parties to be conuerted, or rather returned to the em∣bracing of Iesus Christ: namely, Iapheths posterity, euē the Gētils. 4. The Religion and Faith, to which they are to be conuerted, Namely, the Religion of Shem, and this is amplified: First, by the subiect of this Religion, namely Shem: signifying therein diuers especiall markes of true Religion, As, First, in that heere the true worship of God is noted, by the
Tents of Shem, as hauing it Agnomination from him, who was the eldest in his Fathers house, the father of the Iewes, which were the first borne: first in the Loue of God. First in the simplicitie Icrem: 2. and puritie of diuine worship; First, in the outward endowment of the Mariage bed. First, in the priuiledges, and loue tokens of Rom: 3. 1. 2. 3. the Bridegroome: doth not this make to the confirmation of that excellent truth, that Truth is most Ancient: and so therein leades The first Church the truest. vs to an excellent mark of the true Church▪ namely, whose foun∣dation is that first and most ancient Truth. Secondly, In that the Church of God is heere confined to the Tents of Shem, who though he were the Father of that posteritie, which afterward, (as a figure of the inward beautie of the true belieuers) was enlarged in outward pompe, multitude, and beau∣tie; yet now, in the greatest puritie, and simplicitie of godlinesse, which shee was to recouer and practise vnder Iesus Christ, was neyther for multitude so populous, nor for outward glorie and beauty? so conspicuous: Doth not this also leade vs to two other Church, a little flocke. Cantic: Church inui∣sible. marks of the true Church of Iesus Christ, namely, that it is a little flocke in respect of those which are without: And 2. that it is blacke, and many times Inuisible to the carnall eye, at least wise subiect to contempt in the world, as wanting the outward com∣plement, and ornament of the strumpet. Lastly, In that the Church is heere confined to the Tents of Shem, who beeing the first borne, and the portion of God, and therein a figure, of that true and onely portion, which the Lorde from all Eternitie, hath set apart to saluation; to shewe forth the riches of his glorious grace, Namely, the Elect: Doth not this plainly teach vs, that the Elect only, are properly the true Church The Elect onely the true Church. of God, but the Hypocrite onely in shew: and as we say, () by representation, &c. abusiuely. Thus are wee led by this consideration, to discerne the substance and true members of the Church of Iesus Christ. And Secondly, In that this Religion of Shem, is amplified by the qualitie and condition therof, when it is called the Tents of Shem: heerein the holy Ghost doth expresse vnto vs a six-folde condi∣tion of the Church of God in this life. 1. That it is a place of abiding, and shelter for rest and pro∣tection, &c. as is a Tent, which in those dayes was the best, and
most conuenient meanes for the comfort and protection of man∣kinde: 6. Conditions of the church; 1. That it is the place of refreshing & safetie. therein deciphering vnto vs the benefites of the Church of God: Namely, that it is the place both of refreshing, and pro∣tection, that wherein wee receiue ease to our mindes, and supplie to our wants, and protection from danger, and iniuries. Secondly, howsoeuer the cursed posteritie of Cham and Cana∣an, are saide to builde Citties, and dwell in them, thereby expres∣sing their affection to this life, & desire of constant enioying the happines thereof, most deceitfull and transitorie: yet the Saints of God are commended vnto vs, to remaine in Tents, which being Hebr: 11. Habitations not onely weake, and sleight in comparison, but moueable also vpon euery sudden occasion, and especially vsed in military affayres: Doth therein shadowe out vnto vs three o∣ther conditions of the Church of God in this life. Namely, 1. That it is Imperfect: 2. And subiect to manie infirmities: 3. 2. Imperfect. That it is Militant heere on Earth, as beeing to fight the fight of Faith. 3. Militant. 4. That it is also a Stranger, and soiourner in this wretched worlde, hauing heere no abiding Citie, but looking for a Citie 4. Stranger. Hebr. 11. which is aboue, not made with hands, but eternall in the heauēs. 5. Lastly, In that the Church is heere saide to lye in Tents: which being to be remoued from one part to another: and there∣by to be pitched in whatsoeuer place conuenient. Doth not this also poynt out vnto vs two other conditions of the Church mili∣tant in this life? Namely, that shee is not tyed locally to any cer∣taine 5. Not ted to any place. Math: 21. place, but remooueable, for the contempt of the Gospell, from one Nation to another: and 6. that by this meanes shee is dispearsed ouer the face of the Earth: So that in euery Nation, whosoeuer feare God, shall be accepted of him. Thus by this 6. Dispersed euery where. Act. 10. 34. 35 Coll: 1. 6. Metaphore of Tents, are wee led to the consideration of the true conditions of the visible Church in this life. Lastly, That wee may also know who are the true members of this Church; the holy Ghost pointeth out these vnto vs, when he saith, that he may dwell in the Tents of Shem: signifying by this The true mē∣ber abides & dwells in the Church. phrase of dwelling, that hee is a true member, that dwelleth and aby∣deth constantly in the Church of God: not making it his Inne for a Night. Much lesse, vsing it as his Theatre for delight: but v∣sing it as his dwelling and mansion continually. Yet so, as hee
remembers it to be but his Summer-parlor; or rather his moue∣able Tent: And therefore so resoluing constancie of abode here, as that still he be preparing to that durable house in Heauen: so keeping residence in this his moueable Tent, as that hee be rea∣die, 2. Cor: 5. 2. yea, desirous to remoue to that Citie of God, the new Ieru∣salem, which shall neuer be remoued. And, These are the particulars that are contained in this prophecie: Of which by Gods grace, I will entreat briefly & plainly, in their order. And first, of the first Author, and meanes of true conuer∣sion: 3. Doctr: God onely the Author of the cōuersion of a sinner. This is heere auouched to be the Lord onely. God perswade Iapheth; God is the onely Author of the conuer∣sion of a sinner. This is that prerogatiue that he chalengeth proper to himselfe, Prou: 31. Ezech: 11. Zechiel. 36. Hebr: 7. 9. 2. Tim: 2. 23. This doe the Saints willingly and thankfully attribute vnto him. Ierem: 10. Ierem: 30. 1. Lament: 5. Psal: 80. Ps: 49. And surely, First, Who is able to bring light out of darknes, but God one∣ly? Reasons. 2. Who able to dissolue the works of the diuell, but the Al∣mightie God? Hebr: 2. Luke 11. 3. Who able to forgiue an infi∣nite 2. Cor: 4. 6. debt, but an infinite power? 4. Who was able to satisfie an 1. From the power of God 1. Rom: 3. 4. infinite wrath, but an infinite Deitie? 5. Who would haue sent God to dye, but God alone? 6. Who could haue raised vp man from the dead, but onely God? 7. Who giues the blessing to the Word, the ordinary meanes of conuersion, but the mighty God? 1. Cor: 3. 8. Ierem: 10. 23 14. 2. His free loue. 1. Pet: 15. 11. 12. 8. Who searcheth and moueth the heart, without which there can be no true conuersion, but onely God? Ierem: 17. o. 9. How could our conuersion be free, if God were not the Author of it? 10. How could it be constant, if the mightie God did not keepe vs? 1. How could we know the truth thereof, but by the spirit of God? Rom: 8. 1. Cor: 2. 12. Who can doe more then create a thing of nothing, but onely God? Ephes: 2. 4. 5. &c. Let then mans free will keepe silence, that Gods Free-loue Ʋse. 2. Phil: may bee aduanced: And let mans power bee confounded, that Gods power may be exalted. Let none dispaire in his greatest Impotencie: seeing it is God that conuerteth. Neyther let the greatest gifts presume, seeing God conuerteth of nothing. If the poore receiue the Gospell, Blessed is hee that is not offended: And if heauen suffers violence, by the ignorant and contēptible, 1 Cor: 1. 27.
Let the many Noble and mightie acknowledge theyr destructi∣on to bee of themselues. Seeke we vnto God in his Word, the ordinarie meanes of our conuersion. And pray wee that God Matth: 11. will set vp his King vppon his holy hill of Syon: that hee would thrust foorth labourers into his Vineyarde, that the Haruest may come in: and Iapheths posteritie may dwell in the Tents of Shem. Maruell wee not that the Word hardens many, seeing God must giue the blessing thereto: and therefore adioyne we to the out∣ward Ioh: 5. 39. Ministerie thereof, conscionable preparation before, and examination after the meanes, by prayer and Meditation with our God, that hee may giue the increase to what hath bene sowne. Abuse wee not the patience of GOD, in not hearing when hee calls? least after when wee crie, hee will not heare vs: but to day, let vs heare his voyce, and not harden our hearts. Heb: 3. Psal: 95. Neither let vs stumble at the infirmities of the vessell, seeing the Lord giues the blessing: but rather giue the glorie vnto God, and for his sake honouring the instrument. Comforting our selues that hell shall not preuaile, seeing God is the stronger. Math: 16. Luke: 11. 22. 23. And no lesse then Heauen is the reward, seeing 2. Thess: 1. 6. 7. God is Recompencer. Thus is God the Authour of our conuersion. But by what meanes doth he occomplish the same? Doth he vse miracles, to amaze, or tortures to compell? Doth hee vse Euthasiasmes, to in∣spire, or Dreames, to reueale a worke vnto vs? Surely no: The holie Ghost (saith) God perswade Iapheth: That is, God incline the heart, & allure the minde of the Gentiles, by convincing their consciēces, with the power of the truth, & framing their will; and affections to embrace the same, subduing their whole man to the obediēce thereof. As if the spirit of God had plainely taught vs, That; The Conuersion of a sinner, is a perswasion of the minde to beleeue; and inclining of the will & affections to embrace the Lord IESƲS. And this shall appeare vnto vs by these circumstances. 2. Doctrine: The Conuer∣sion of a sinner by perswasion 1. First, by the Subiect of Conuersion, Man. 2. By the Matter and meanes of Conuersion; Namely, the word of GOD, applyed and made essectuall, by the operation of the spirit of God. 3. By the Manner and order of a true Conuersion. 4. And lastly, by the Substance and Markes of true Conuersion.
Concerning the Subiect of conuersion, Man and woman, these consist of two parts: 1. Of a corruptible bodie. 2. Of a reasonable and immortall soule. Of which Two, the Bodie serues onely as an instrument, to conuey the meanes of conuersion to the soule, and to execute outwardly the effects of true conuersion, and therefore is not properly the sub∣iect of conuersion: As being a spirituall work, effected by a spi∣rituall meanes, and therefore fastning and working on a spirituall substance. And this is the soule of Man, which being Spirituall and eternall, is therefore capable of this worke of the spirite, and meanes of happie eternitie. Notwithstanding, because the bo∣die shall bee partaker with the soule of the fruite of Conuersion: Namely, conformitie, and subiection to the spirite, and eternall glorie: Therefore, as it cannot be separated from the soule in the worke of conuersion: So it must be ordered by such meanes, as it is subiect vnto, thereby to further our conuersion: And so to Obser: The bodie how far subiect to force in con∣uersion. be as an instrument in the worke of Sanctification; So also a par∣taker of the benefite thereof. Hence is it, that howsoeuer the minde cannot, neyther ought to be forced by man, as being be∣yond his reach, and power, yet the bodie, being therefore sub∣iected to the power of Man, that by man, it may further the con∣uersion of the soule, is thereby also subiect to some compulsion from man; Who in Gods stead, is both to tender the meanes of Conuersion, by the care vnto the Heart; by the bodie vnto the minde; which is the dutie of the Minister; as also, (if neede re∣quire, Dutie of Minister. when the refractorie minde will detaine the body from the vse of the meanes, is further, euen to force the bodie, by bringing it, euen against the mindes will to heare the Word: That so, by the power therof, eyther the rebellious minde may be reclaimed, or at leastwise made inexcusable: especially, that in performing this dutie, he may be free from the blood of his people: or rather become a true nursing Father vnto them, And this is properly the office of the Magistrate, who though hee haue power euer life, Of Magi∣strate. Deutro: 13. in the case of refractorie & obstinate blaspheming of the Truth, and desperate continuance in Atheisme, and Heresie, and there∣fore ought not to suffer cyther Idolater, or Blasphemer, either A∣theist, or damnable seducer of the people to a false worship, any lon∣ger
to breathe, to the infection of others, yet in the case of con∣uersion, and bringing men to God, hee is no rther to force e bodie, then that still it may be seruiceable to the soule▪ Leig conuerted; and also further the minde to be subdued, by these spirituall weayons; By which the Reason beeing captiuated, and conscience perswaded and convinced: and so the ill en∣clined and allured to embrace the Truth, when once the hrt 2. Cor: 9. 14 Psalm: 18. shall endite a good matter, and  with the loue of God, then shall the tongue become the pen of a ready writer, the outward man shall put cheerfully in execution, what the ward man desireth and purposeth: That (so glorifying our GOD) n Psal: 45. bodie and soule, which hee hath thus renued, in this reasonable Sacrifice of the New-byrth; we may in due season be crowned both bodies and Soules, with that glorie in the newe Ierusalem, 1. Cor: 6. Rom: 12. 1. 2 which is aboue. And therfore, as this condemneth all Antichristian Tyrannie, whereby all hope of sound Conuersion is vtterly cut off, whilest Ʋse. by extremitie of torture the bodily life is depriued: so also the negligence of the Christian Magistrate is iustly reproued, in lea∣uing the papist to his libertie, or winking at him, shewing ex∣treame crueltie to his soule, while hee pretends clemencie to his bodie. And if the refractorie must bee compelled from a false worship to the meanes of a true: Oh then! faire be it frō the heart of the godly Magistrate, to tolerate a false religion; Is not this the way to prouoke the wrath of God? that so hee may diuide vs in Iacob, and so destroy vs in Israel. And seeing the iust man must be a lawe to himselfe, If then the bodie must be the meanes to conuey grace to the soule, If it may further our entertainment of true conuersion: Oh then, let vs learne to subdue this enemie, and beat downe this corruption. 1. Let vs humble it by fasting. The bodie how to be fit∣ted to be ser∣uiceable to the soule, to the worke of Conuersion. 2. And not aduise with it in spirituall worship. 3. Feare we the complement thereof: 4. and rest wee at no hand in any ceremo∣niall deuotion of the same. 5. Take we no care for the Flesh, to satisfie the lusts thereof. Rom. 18. And auoyde we all affectation in gesture, &c. with an intent to be obserued of men; so shall we offer holie violence to the bodie, in preuenting it ministerie, to satisfie the lusts of the minde, and thereby make it seruiceable to the soule: as furthering the same in the worke of holines. And
thus is the outward man subiect to a kinde of violence, not one∣ly from others, but euen from our selues. Perswaded it cannot bee, and therefore it must be forced. Now for the soule of man; The case hereof is otherwise: Spi∣rituall The soule not to be forced, but perswa∣ded. it is, and therefore not subiect to outward violence. And reasonable: & therefore only lyable to such a violence, which ra∣ther ouercoms by perswasion, thē forceth by persecution, as recti∣fying the reasonable part, not destroying the nature thereof: as delighting the vnderstanding with the light that ouershadoweth it; So convincing the conscience, that it giues peace vnto it: So reclayming the will, and captiuating the Affections, that it restores them to a most gracious libertie, to performe a reasona∣ble seruice vnto God. This shall further appeare most euidently vnto vs, if we consi∣der in the second place, the meanes of true Connersion: Namely, 2. From the meanes of Conuersion. Rom: 7. the Word of God, assisted by the blessed Spirit; which in that it con∣sists of two partes, to wit, the Lawe, and the Gospell: Howsoeuer by the Law we are brought to a sight of sinne, and so thereby prepared to Conuersion, and as it were entred therein, as beeing cast out of our selues, and cast vpon IESƲS CHRIST, yet by the sweete promises of the Gospell, wee are allured and perswa∣ded to beleeue in the Lord IESƲS; which is the very worke and perfection of our true Conuersion. So are our hearts more Rom: 5. 5. and more suppled, and broken, through the loue of CHRIST, shead abroad in our hearts: So are we bound vnto our GOD, with the cords of loue, as that we attaine a most glorious libertie Rom: 7. of the sonnes of God: So are wee led captiue vnder sinne, that in the inward man, we delight in the law of God: So are we sub∣iect to Afflictions, as that wee are more then Conquerours ouer them: So is Death the end of our sinne, and entrance to our glo∣rious libertie. Thus doth the Word discouer the estate of our conuersion: thus doth it allure and satisfie vs in the whole pro∣cesse and consummation thereof. And doth not the manner of our Conuersion auouch as much: Rom: 8. From the manner of Conuersion. that it is by perswading, and mollifying of our hearts? Doth not the Lorde himselfe allure and inuite vs to embrace these meanes, proffering vs wares with money; wooing of vs, to open vnto him, by testimonie of his patience, and pledges of his
loue, stretching out his hands vnto vs all the day long. And those not emptie, but dropping downe myrthe, and tendering most in∣valuable riches, the rather to allure vnto him. Doth not wise∣dome invite vs to a Feast and allure vs with her delicates? Doth not the Lord preuent vs with his grace, that we may be plentifull in good works? Doth he not allure vs to holinesse, when he im∣putes the righteousnesse of his Sonne vnto vs, and not onely ac∣counts that ours, which hee freely giues, but accepts that to be his, which by our corruption is defiled? Doth not the Lord of∣fer parley? Come, let vs reason together; Hath hee bene a wilder∣nes Esa 1. vnto vs? Nay, what could hee haue done vnto vs, which he hath not done? Thus doth the Lord perswade and allure our Conuersion: And are not his Ministers led by the same spirit? Doe they come vnto vs with a rod? or not rather with the spirite of meekenes? Are they not his Embassadors to treat with vs; Nay, his Orators to beseech vs to be reconciled vnto God? Are they not ready so to wooe vs, that they not only are contented to deliuer the Gospell vnto vs but euen theyr owne soules, so deare are we vnto them: so little deare is their life vnto them, in regarde of preaching the Gospell, that we may be saued? Are they not our fathers, to be∣get vs in all loue and compassion to be the children of God? Are they not our Noursing-mothers, to dandle and suckle vs, as new∣borne babes, with the milke of the Gospell, that wee may growe vp thereby? Are they not our shepheards, to leade vs into the greene pastures, to dresse, and tenderly looke to vs, as the tender lambes of Iesus Christ? Are they not Gods fisher men, to allure vs as with a bayte: thereby, not to constraine vs by force, but to catch vs with a wile. And doe they not in all this perswade vs rea∣sonable men, by most reasonable and tractable meanes, to a mat∣ter most reasonable, euen to returne vnto God? For to proceede now to the substance of our conuersion: and thence to proue this manner of our Calling, by Alluring; as also 4. From the substance of conuersion. Rom: 1. the equitie thereof? Is our Conuersion any other, then a resto∣ring vs to that estate which heretofore we enioyed in Adam, and lost by the malice of Sathan? And ought there to bee any thing more acceptable vnto vs, then to come foorth of Darknes into a maruellous light, to be deliuered from bondage? yea, from bon∣dage
of Sathan: vnto the glorious libertie of the Sonnes of God, to be pluckt out of the horrible pit, and aduanced to the highest Heauens, to be made Lords of all, who before were vassalls vnto all; To be at peace with all, who before had all against vs. Such is our conuersion. Is there any thing more reasonable? Is it not most reasonable and equall, that God should haue his will, who hath decreed our conuersion? that he should enioy the seruice of his creature, which is obtained by conuersion? that he should be loued of his children, that are so made by conuersion? Is it not meet & conuenient, that we should be holie, as our God is holie: that to eternall happines, wee should be made meete by perfect holines? Ought not members of the body to haue the like ? Ought not citizens of the same heauenly Ierusalem, to be of one minde? Nay, ought not fellow-heirs of the same kingdom, be of the same nature, of the like beautie, and glorie? Such are we with Iesus Christ: and such are wee made by conuersion. And is it not most equall that the Lord Iesus should haue what hee hath purchased at so deere a rate? 1. Pet: 1. 1. Cor: 6. Lastly, what true marke is there of our cōuersion, which doth not owne this truth, that we were not compelled, but perswaded & allured therunto? Haue wee peace of conscience, and so are at peace with God? 5. From the marks of con∣uersion. who could haue procured this, vnles God had giuē it? how could wee haue receiued this, vnlesse the minde had bene allured, and nourished with the loue of God? no entertainment of Gods loue, but by ouercomming the heart with loue; No true euidence of Gods loue vnto vs, but by out loue vnto him againe. No sound euidence of our loue vnto our God, but by our readinesse to for∣sake all for his sake, but by our delight in the excellent, & inlar∣ged heart towards them, not by constraint, but of a ready minde: 1, Pet: 5. 3. 4. So much we loue our God, as we desire his continu∣all presence, and perpetuall fruition of his blessed society: By this do we know that we are of God, that we come boldly to begge, or rather chalenge his promise, that we will not be saide nay, but are answered in our chiefe desires. Thus God freely promiseth, Rom: 8. Math: 15. and offereth meanes to vs not deseruing it, that so we may not be discouraged, but rather inuited to embrace the same. And be∣cause Gods loue is free, therefore it preuailes vpon the most vn∣likely: deliuering the captiue, & giuing sight to the blinde: swal∣lowing
vp dispaire in mercie, and crowning corruption in glorie. And because he maketh vs partakers of ye diuine nature, therfore also he enables vs freely to loue him, and cheerfully to obey him: 2. Pet: 1. 3 Psa: 119. 46 to runne the way of his Commandements, after hee hath set our hearts at libertie: yea, he maketh our feet like Harts feet, so that by the helpe of our God we leape ouer a wall: yea, hee giueth vs wings, as to auoyd vnnecessary and desperate extremities, so to flie speedily in the execution of the will of God. That by this willing minde, we might not onely be comforted, in respect of our outward Ʋse, Two-fold. failing, seeing the Lord hath promised Not to quench the smoaking Flaxe, nor breake the bruised Reede: but encouraged also, and ena∣bled to constancie, and perseuerance, that so continuing to the 2. Cor: 8. 12. ende, the Crowne may not be taken from vs. Thus by the marks of conuersion, is the manner thereof confirmed vnto vs; Thus by Esay: 42. 3. this manner thereof, are we assured of the continuance of the same. And is our Conuersion then a worke of grace, and free com∣passion Reuela: 3. from the Lorde? Is it accomplished by the word of peace? and sweet promises of the Gospell, applyed to the fainting soule, Vse. by the Spirite of grace and Compassion? Is it conueyed vnto vs by vessels of Infirmitie? which might better haue compassion on vs, and allure vs to mercie, as being subiect to it: and therefore ha∣uing experience of our miserie. Is it effected by melting the heart, Zach: 13. with the apprehension of the loue of God? Is is perfited by enlar∣ging the heart, to the obedience of our God? Well then may fire 2: Tim: 2. 23. and fagot confound both bodie and soule: well may Antichrist enlarge an earthly monarchy, with sword and outward violence: Ps: 119. 32. 0. Sweeter then hony, and the hony-combe. Ps: 19. Ioel: 2. 14. 1. Cor: 14. but the milde voyce of the Gospell must conuert the soule: The meanes to fill Heauen, must be the alluring of the spirit. Oh why dispaire we to conuert, though now miracles are cea∣sed? seeing by the power of the Word, the secrets of the heart are made so manifest, that God wil be acknowledged to be in vs, that so we may conuert vnto God. If they will not belieue Moses and the prophets, neither will they belieue though one come from the dead; and yet to cōuert a sinner is more wonderfull, thē to raise frō the death. How vainely do they bragge of a Church, that exclude the word of God? how can we hope for the continuāce of a Church, where the sound therof doth not cōtinne? what hope is there of cōuersi∣on, where doctrine is not deliuered, by which the mind is perswa∣ded?
what feare of further peruersion, where lawes are not execu∣ted, to cōpell men to perswasion? where deceiuers are permitted to poyson with corrupt perswasion? Who so is wise, let him consi∣der Ʋses of In∣struction. Pro: 1. 3. 1. Col: this, Let him see the plague, and hide himselfe: Let him trie his conuersion, by the perswasion of his Iudgement, that he is rooted in knowledge, & not wauering in opinion: Let him examine his effectuall calling, by the readinesse of his minde, and cheerfulnes in obedience, euen to all the will of God: not a part thereof: & that con∣stantly and continually; not being weary of well-doing, being more ready to doe well, then for the present he is able: and so enabled to well doing, that at length he may attaine his desire; as of per∣fect Markes of constant obe∣dience, and meanes ther∣to: Gal: 6. 2. Thes: 3. Ierem: 23. 1. Ioh: 4. 1. Thess. 4. 1. Ioh: 2. Ephes: 4. Esay: 30. 24 25. obedience, which he shall attaine: so of perfect happinesse, the recompence of his labours, & full contentment of his vtmost desires. And therfore let him pray, for the continuance of the gos∣pell, to quickē his desires. Let him earnestly desire the confusion of Antichrist, that sonne of darknes, & enemy to this glorious light. Let him be wise, to discerne betweene the chaffe & the wheate: to trie the Spirits, and hold what is good. Let him especially make much of the Annoynting, and hearken to the voyce behinde him, not grie∣uing the Spirit, nor quenching the motions thereof: that still there may be light in the Land of Goshen, in the dayes of Famine, hee may haue enough. Exod: 8. Iob: 5. Comforting himselfe, that seeing his conuersion is from Gods alluring of free loue, and perswading by a power vnresistable, not desired by him: therefore being conuerted, he shall surely hold, Ʋses of Com∣fort. when Heauen and earth shall passe: though thousands fall daylie at his right hand, and ten thousands at his left hand, yet shall not this plague of Apostasie seaze on him, who is kept by the mightie Ioh: 17. 12. power of God, vnto that great day, that hee may be presented blamelesse vnto the Lorde Iesus. And therefore not being dis∣couraged 1. Pet: 1. 5. for theyr going out from vs, that were neuer truely of vs, but rather enlarged with continuall praise vnto his God, that 1. Thess: 5. 13 leaues not him also to himselfe, to fall away with this present euill worlde, but still humbles his flesh, to keepe life in his soule, and 1. Phil: 29. counts him worthie to suffer with his Christ: that so the life of Christ might daily appeare, for his approching to glory. Thus doth God perswade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Thus is a Chri∣stian conuerted by perswasion. And thus doth God giue him a
Dowrie with his marriage. Iapheth being perswaded, is also en∣laged. The kingdome of heauen being bestowed, interesses also God enlarge Iapheth. Math: 6. 22. 5. Doctr: The faithfull onely haue right in the blessings of this life. Reasons. the Faithfull, in the possessions of the earth. The true belieuer a∣lone is the right owner of all Gods blessings. He that first seekes the kingdom of heauē, shall haue these things also cast vpon him. Matth: 16. 33. So profitable is godlines, aswell for this life, as that which is to come. 1. Tim. 4. 8. 9. So Christ being ours, who is Lord of all in heauen & earth, Math: 28. all with him is ours, both in heauen and earth. 1. Cor. 3. Rom 8. So haue wee onely grace to vse those well, and therefore are only fit for them. So are those one∣ly fit for vs, as being sanctified by vs, vnto vs. Oh how vaine then is theyr boasting, and labour, that toyle Ʋses. Psal: 127 1. 1. Tit: 1. 13. Psal: 37. 1. Tim: 6. Matt: 6. 33, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Psal: 62. 10. Math: 16. 8 Eccl: 11. 1. for these things without grace? how fearfull is their account that possesse them without Christ? What comfort haue we in the least, seeing it is vnto vs as all? what hope of that which shalbe sufficiēt for vs? What wisedome ought wee to vse, to make first sure of the best? what conscience in approuing our right, by our holy vsing of these things? What Faith in a better right, by renouncing Confi∣dence in these? by our williingnes, vpon iust occasion to part with them, either to the good of our brother, though we cast our bread vppon the waters, or to the glorie of God, though wee euen cast our liues after them? Shall not hee which thus leaueth House or lands haue recom∣pence an hundred-folde? shall not hee finde his life, that thus is Matth: 19. willing to loose it? Oh how can we better shewe our free power ouer these things, thē by keeping them short, that they may haue no power ouer vs: neither ouer our hearts, by Couetousnes, which is Idolatrie; nor ouer our bodies, by pinching and niggardlines, Ps: 62. 10. 1. Tim: 4. 2. 1. Cor. 8. 10. nor ouer our Cosnce, by making difference, where God hath made all good: nor ouer our libertie, by abiectnes, and scrupulositie? Oh that we would learne to renew and increase our soueraign∣tie ouer the Creature, by our daily subiection vnto God, in ac∣knowledgment of our unworthines of the least, in crauing his blessing, euen vpon the greatest. As by the sense of our vnworthines, renu∣ing our right in Christ, and disavowing confidence in the grea∣test by submitting the blessing thereof vnto our God, that so gi∣uing Genes: 2. God the glory of his mercies, hee may enlarge himselfe vnto vs, to the making of vs meete to be vessels of glorie: And thus are the Saints Lords of the earth.
And thus is the Church of IESƲS CHRIST spread farre and Iosh. 4. 22. neere ouer the face thereof. That not onely the God of them may be blessed by one Nation, at Ierusalem, but that Iapheth also may be enlarged and diffused, to dwell in the Tents of Shem; that the Gentiles being dispersed farre and neere, might receiue the Gospel; and also being Conuerted, might Conuert their Brethrem, euen all the Nations vpon the face of the earth. GOD enlarge IAPHETH. So then Iapheth must bee perswaded and enlarged, aswell as 6. Doctrine. The Gentiles to be conuer∣ted. Reasons. Ruth. 1: Iob. 1. Rahab. Iudg. 2. Rom. 11. Shem. The Gentiles must bee conuerted, aswell as the Iewes. And why? Surely God hath so decreed it from all Eternitie; and reuealeth the same by his eternall Word, long before the ac∣complishment thereof. Hee accomplisheth it in particulars, as pledges of a more plentifull Haruest: and he permitteth obstina∣cie to come vpon the Iew, that the wilde Oliue might be engraffed. So in the fulnesse of time was this harnest brought in; in part by the Husbandmen of the Lord IESVS, and in the fulnesse of time, shall the fulnesse of the Gentiles be brought in, that the rem∣nant of the cast-away Israel, may be reaped in with glory. And are not the wayes of God most equall herein.? Shall not the Acts 10. 34. 35. Heb. 11: Reuel. 12. 1. Col. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 2. Cant. 8. Esay. winde blow where it pleaseth? Hath God any respect of persons? Is not God the Lord of all the earth? Was not the blood of Christ auaileable, to saue euen a thousand worlds? Must not the Church to this end be a Traueller vpon the face of the earth? shall not the sound of the Word, goe to the ends of the world? Must we not pray for all sorts, because God will haue some among all sorts to be saued? Is not this our little sister that hath no breasts, & yet shall giue sucke? Is not this the barren, that shall bring foorth, and haue more children then the married wife? Are not these the infinite number which none could reckon, which should stand before the Throne, and the Lambe with long white robes, and Palmes in Reuel. 7. their hands? Thus shall the Gentiles imbrace the Gospel. 1. And is not the word of God, Yea, and Amen? Is not Ia∣pheth Ʋse. 1. Cor. 1. perswaded, and the Kingdome of Christ enlarged among vs? Hath it not a long time rested in the tabernacles of Iapheth? 2. And was it remooued from the tents of Shem; that so it bee planted in the inhabitants of Iapheth? Oh, then let let vs consi∣der, that Shem is to be replanted. 3. Let vs desire the restoring
and reclaiming of the first born. 4. Let vs feare the casting off, of the Little sister, seeing the elder was cast off, and is to be recalled 5. And let vs looke for the remoueall of the Gospel from one na∣tion to Note. another, where it is not retained with conscience & pro∣fit. And if God will not forsake vs, till wee forsake him; take heede 1. Chro: 15. 2. Act: 13. 48. then we put not from vs the word of life. And what if we be pre∣paring a place in Virginea, or Ireland; to receiue the same? 6. These must haue a calling, and we a cooling, for the time: that we may be prouoked to zeale, euen by foolish and forlorne nations; and recouer our first loue, by extending it to our brethren. That as Note. the falling of one Nation may bee the raising of another; so this revniting of the Gospel may bring in the number of the Elect: that so our war-fare being finished, our glory may begin, neuer to haue an end. Thus shall Iapheth bee perswaded to dwell in the moueable tents of Shem; that Shem and Iapheth, may dwell for euer in full and constant happinesse. But some will say, what neede Iapheth to bee perswaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem; who already was a member with A. Question. Shem, of the true Church, as performing the duties of pietie, to God and men? Wee answere; that the holy Ghost, not onely entendeth the person of Iapheth, as desiring his continuance particularly in the Answere. true worship of God; but especially hath reference to Iapheths posteritie, as foreseeing their declination from true Religion, to Idolatrie, which fell out not long after: and therefore directing the Spirit of holy Noah; not onely as a Father, to desire the re∣turne of his posteritie to the Church of Christ, but especially, as the mouth of God, to pronounce their restitution in the ages to come. Whence wee learne many notable Lessons. As first, that godly parents and beleeuers, ought not onely to haue care for the present, but also for the future estate of their 7. Doctrine: Saints must haue care for the posteritie of the Church. Reasons. posteritie: the true Church of God, that so it may abide in the Faith of IESVS CHRIST. So do they imitate GOD, who prouides for Eternitie: so doe they approoue their Faith, when they see a far off: so do they testifie their loue, which abides for euer. 1. Cor. 13. So doe they manifest their hope in the full accom∣plishment of the Elect: So do they further the propagation of the Church to her perfect consummation, & Communion in heauen.
To this end, are they commanded to declare the will of GOD, Deut: 6. 7. Iosh. 4. vnto their children. To this end, did they set vp Monuments of Gods speciall loue, and memorials of his will and fauour, not on∣ly to testifie their thankefulnesse for the present, but to teach the Generations to come, that the people which were to bee Psal. 132. 8. 1. Tim. 5. created should prayse the Lord. And if they were worse then Infidels, that prouided not for the outward estate of their posteritie: where is then their Faith, that neglect the soules of their successors? Oh, what a curse then is Barrennesse, and depriuation of poste∣ritie? Vse. How much greater a plague to make wicked our poste∣ritie, by preposterous worldly prouision, and neglect of Spiritu∣all Legacies? How happy those parents, that sendssuch wicked seed before thē? But thirce vnhappy they, that reioyce in their wickednesse; prouoking them by euill example, to imitation of euill: and applauding euill imitation, vnder pretence of ligiti∣mation; as if to differ from them in sinne, were to bee degenerate and bastards. How can they call GOD their Father, that neglect to bee nursing fathers to his Church? either caring for their owne, as if the time to builde Gods house were not yet come, and therefore they neglect the restoring of it: or else lay it further desolate, as eclipsing their glorie, and confounding their pleasures. Oh, where shall such Iulians appeare, that seeke to repaire Babylon againe, and deriding the poore mem∣bers of CHRIST, that they must suffer affliction, doe there∣fore adde affliction to affliction, and cry, downe with it, downe with Psal. 131. it, euen to the ground. Surely, though Abraham know vs not, and Israel hath forgotten Esay 69. 15. vs, yet the Keeper of Israel doth neither slumber nor sleepe. He is our Father, and will haue compassion on vs: and when hee seeth that we are confounded throughly in our carnal confidence, and take vnto vs words, and say vnto him: Take away all our iniquitie, Ose. 14. 3. 4. and receiue vs graciously, so will wee render the calues of our lips, Ash shall not saue, neither wil we ride vpon horses; neither will we say any more vnto the worke of our hands, ye are our Gods: then will the Lord heale Zeph: 3. Esay 59. 16. our rebelion, and loue vs freely: then shal his owne right hand sustaine him, when all help frō men faileth. Then shal he take away out of the midst of vs, them that reioyce in our pride, & we soal no more be proud of his holy
mountaine. Then will he leaue in the midst of vs, an humble & poore people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord: & in those shal it appear, Zoph. 3. 11. 12. he hath care of the posteritie of the Church. Forthere shall be of these, that shall build the olde waste places; they shall raise vp the foun∣dations, for many generations, They shall bee called the repairers of the breach, and the resteres of the paths to dwell in. And this shall be writ∣ten Esay. 58. 12. Psal. 102. 18. for the generations to come, that the people which shall be created and conuerted in Virginea, Irelan, or elsewhere, may praise the Lord. Oh, prosper the workes of our handes, ò Lord, fo the accom∣plishment of thy will, in bringing in the fulnesse of the Gentiles: Oh, prosper thou againe, and againe, our handy workes, and ho∣ly desires; that thy King may bee set vpon the holy Hill of Sion; and Psal. 2. 6. our King, and his happie issue, may continue the Gospel to the generations to come; that so hee hauing care for the aduance∣ment of thine earthly Tabernacle, thou maist continue and so ad∣uance his corruptible crown, as to make it an vndoubted pledge vnto him and his, of an vncorruptible crowne to all eternitie. Thus may there be care for the posterity of Sion. And is there not great reason it should be so? Haue not the best fallen, where this care hath bin neglecte? ddid not Iapheths posterity falaway to the worship of Idoles? May not good Parents haue a wicked generation? 1. Is God tyed to nature? 2. Or, shall nature necessarily 8. Doctrine. Good parents may haue a wicked Ge∣neration. enforce grace? 3 Are there not vsually euill seede of an holy stocke? 1. To confound nature, and 2. aduance the free election of Grace? 3. yea, to chastise gracious Parents, for presuming onthe present, and so neglecting holy discipline, to humble nature to grace. 4. Can it otherwise be, where only nature, and not grace, is the seeds-man to posteritie? 5. And must it not bee so, that grace onely may be magnified, and God onely glorified? 6. Are not Gods wayes vnsearchable? 7. Is not his Wisedome infinite? 8. Is not his will as absolute, and 9. his Iustice a great deepe? Rom. 11. Vse. Iohn 8. Matth. 16. 1. In vaine therefore doth the Pharisie boast of Abraham, and Antichrist; and very foolishly doe parents abuse, the prouidence of God, either in neglecting Discipline; either vpon feare that it is bootlesse, as if it must needs fall out that their children wil proue gracelesse; or in pampering the flesh, in hope that their issue will not abuse it. They are holy, and so is their seed, and therefore why should they not vse their libertie, though it bee an occasion to the Cal. 5. 13.
flesh. And are not they as much faultie, that punish the infants for Gal. 5. 15. Eccl. 18. 2. their fathers offence, making a necessarie conclusion, that grapes cannot come of thornes: And therefore condemning peremp∣torily the children of wicked parents, vpbraiding the poore in∣fants, with their parents vices; denying them meanes of saluati∣on, as Baptisme, &c. Because their parents happily haue abused it. Is not this to restraine God to man? Is not this for man to in∣trude into Gods prerogatiue, who is the onely discerner of the Ierem. 17. 10. 2. Tim. 2. 19. heart; who onely knoweth who are his? Oh, how much better were it to leaue the secret things to God. Deut. 29 29. and make trial of the meanes which are reuealed, and obuious vnto vs: not ma∣king the sinne of the parents a barre of Gods mercie to the chil∣dren, Who will haue mercie vpon whom he will haue mercie: but ra∣ther Rom. 9. admitting the childe to the meanes of mercy, where the pa∣rents obstinacy and contempt is no present barre thereto, and so watching ouer thē more tenderly, the more their estate is to be feared; that so by holy education they may be fitted to that grace, whereunto in such case vsually they are appointed, for the ad∣uancement Note. of Gods free mercie. Surely, howsoeuer it fall out, yet here is our comfort, that when wee haue done our part, our labour shall not returne in vaine: either our care shall be a meanes to maintaine an holy po∣steritie, or keepe vs from being partakers in the iudgement of a wicked posteritie. Well, they may be a griese vnto vs, to make vs hunger after our happinesse, and so happily, they may bee meanes to hasten vs thither: how soeuer, our labour shall returne into our own bosome, to make vs more holy though they proue more wicked. And though the world shall vpbrayd vs, with that, wherein they should pitie, & rather keepe silence, seeing it is Gods doing; yet shall this also turne to our good. God shalbe iustified by the world, while it reproacheth vs: as hauing done herein his good will and pleasure: and we shall be comforted, in regard of their reproaches: so wee haue this testimonie, that ha∣uing done our best, we submit to Gods will, as giuing him leaue to doe with his owne what pleaseth him, yet not neglecting to doe his reuealed will in displeasing our flesh; and so in Gods stead, executing his wrath, where otherwise wee must loue; and hating the sinne, though we reuerence his worke. Thus, though
good parents may haue a wicked posteritie, yet may they either by this meanes reclaime them, or at least auoid fellowship in their plagues: And doeth not the Lord here, giue good hope of their reclaiming? Did hee not prouide a Sauiour, before man had sin∣ned? doth he not here foretell of it, & so assure the returne of the Gentiles, before yet they were; much lesse were fallen away? Did he not prouide an Hester to deliuer his Church, before euer Hamans plot was dreamed of to endanger the same. Oh, the faith∣fulnesse of our God! how certane is his loue, how certainly shall we returne, though we fall for a time. Can the truely Righteous, possibly fall away finally? 1. Is there any 9. Doctrine. The faithfull shall be reco∣uered out of their greatest fall. 1. Iob. 3. Rom. 7. Rom. . 4. 1. Cor. 11. 31. Psal. 89. end of Gods mercies? 2. Was there any beginning of his loue? 3. Haue not all the Saints returned? 4. Doeth not our Sauiour liue for euer, to quicken his eternally? 5. Shall not thy Spirita∣bide with vs for euer? 6. Shall our iniquitie cancell what our righteousnesse did not confirme? can the Lord deny his word? 7. Wl he giue his glorie to another? 8. Doth he which is born of God sin at all, either in the regenerate part, whereby hee still pleaseth God, or finally in the vnregenerate; which finally, shall be perfectly cleansed, or abelished? 9. Shall not all things work together, for the good of the elect? & shall their sin then, other∣wise prouoke God against them, as to iudge them in this life, that they may not bee condemned in the life to come: so to chastise them with the roddes of men, that his mercy bee not taken from them? A way then with that hellish doctrine, that robbes God of the glory of his faithfulnesse, and power; and man of the sound com∣fort Vse. of his saluation, by evacuating Christs death, and auouching the vncertaintie and inconstancie of saluation. And auoyd we, presumption to fall, though we shall rise againe, seeing God will not be mercifull to presumptious sinners: and the least fall of the Saints, though it cannot finally exclude from saluation, yet may it grieuoufly deface the beauty of sanctification; and so make this present life very bitter and vncomfortable vnto vs: howso∣euer it cannot vtterly depriue vs, of the comfort of the life to A Christian how preser∣ued from falling. come. Rather learne wee in Gods feare, To keepe our selues from falling: by, 1. Fearing our selues: 2. and walking alwayes in Gods presence: 3. rest we wholly on the word, 4. and renounce carnall
wisdom, 5. auoyding all occasion & appearance of euill, 6. learne we to vse aright our Christian libertie, 7. and commune we dayly with our hearts to preuent securitie. 8. Walke we in our calling to preuent idlenesse & curiositie, 9. and call we earnest∣ly on our God that hee suffer vs not to bee led into tentation. 10. Keepe thy iudgement sound that we cannot bee too holy, 11. and conscience tender, by racking it dayly by the Law: 12. reprooue wee sinne boldly in others, to keepe vs from the like. 13. Meditate we on the punishments of sinne, to keepe vs from presumption, 14. and remember we how the dearest Saints haue smarted, to preuent singularitie; 15. Especially looke we vp vn∣to Iesus, and what he hath done for vs: that the consideration of his infinite loue may keepe vs from dishonouring him, that the meditation of his intollerable plagues, may preserue vs frō cru∣cisying him againe. 16. Consider wee the difficultie of being saued, and therefore let vs doe our best: and lastly, remem∣ber we our end and reckoning wee must giue vp, the one so vn∣certaine, the other so sure, and vnauoydable, that so at no time we be found vnready. Thns may we be kept from falling into sinne: And thus also How recoue∣red and rai∣sed vp a∣gaine. Ezech. 18. Ierem. 18. Ose 6. 2. 1. Iosh. 1. 7. 8. may wee learne to arise out of the same. As, by meditation of Gods commandement to haue vs returne: and pondring of his pro∣mises that he will heale and renue vs. To this end, looke we vp vnto IESVS, that triumphes ouer sinne, and makes dayly in∣tercession for pardon thereof, and see wee our inquitie through the glasse of his mercy, that so dispaire being preuented, we may finde our sinne pardonable. Then presse we to the Throne of grace, with a broken and humble spirt, and testifie wee our iust hatred and indignation against our sinne, by iustifying our God, and imposing some Spirtuall humiliation on our selues. Oh, let our soules refuse all other comfort; till the conscience bee quieted in 1. Cor. 7. the blood of the Lambe: and giue wee the Lord no rest, till hee returne to his rest, and restore vnto vs, the ioy of his saluation? Psal. 5. 12. 13. Psal. 32. 5. Nowe let sinne bee confessed in particular; the more to breake the heart, and that against our selues, to the iustifying of our GOD. Nowe let Vowes bee renued; not onely to auoyde the like sinne, but to bee more wary of all occasions, and appea∣rance of euill: Redeeme wee the time more conscionably, and
watch we more narrowly ouer our own hearts, & outward man; withdrawing them from the loue of the world, & arresting them in the presence of God: perswading our selues that wee are not throughly returned, till at least wee haue had some glimpse of Gods fauour renued in IESƲS CHRIST, though not discer∣ned in that glorious obiect which dwelleth in the light that none can attaine vnto; yet apprehended by the beames thereof reflected on our hearts, by our peace with God, & contentment in his wil: who though he happily restore vs not presently to that full measure of feeling and ioy, we heretofore enioyed, yet re∣member Vse of com∣fort. 2. Cor: 5. 7. we, that we liue by Faith, and not by sence: and that our whole life is no other then renued repentance. And therefore comfort we our selues, that what we feele not, we must and shal beleeue; as by Faith seeing a farre off: so contenting our selues 2. Pet. 1. 8. 9. with what is presently restored to be sufficient: as that still wee liue by faith, hungring after the best graces: not onely the resti∣tution of such measure, which heretofore we enioyed: but euen the inioying of that fulnesse of ioy and pleasures which is at the right hand of GOD for euermore. Wisely discerning the proui∣dence Reassons. Why God de∣nies vnto his childe that measure of comfort which here∣tofore he enioyed. of our God, in not resting so much on feeling, as heretofore we haue had. Not onely for the tryall of our Faith, if now we can rest on our God without feeling, but also for the preuenting, and subduing of spiritual pride; to which, seeing extraordinary feeling of Gods fauor, is a great occasion, through the malice of Satan, rai∣sing hence singularity, & so security and remissenes in wel doing: if not robbing God of his glory: Therefore it pleaseth our good God, though he restore peace vnto vs, yet to with-hold from vs wisely, such draughts of ioy, that so we might forget what is be∣hind, & hasten to that which is before, as both taking lesse de∣light in any worldly contentment which before was sweetned vnto vs, by that ouerflowing of Spirituall ioy: and fainting the more earnestly, after that full and constant measure thereof in heauen, that so our ioy may no more be taken from vs. And there∣fore striuing more diligently, to make vs meet partakers of that glorious inheritance, that so in due time, as a ricke of corne, we may be caryed into the barne, and receiued into our Fathers e∣ternall ioy. Thus may we recouer out of our most desperate falles; thus
may we be comforted in the measure of our recouery: as being that which is fittest to hasten vs to glory. And thus shall Iapheth be brought againe to the Tents of Shem; the Gentiles shall be restored to the true worship of God, as a true and liuely figure vnto vs, of the constancie of Gods loue, in re∣storing his childrē, & recouering them out of theyr greatest falls. And these are the lessons wee may learne from this, that Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. And is it a small thing, that the Gentiles, which were originally without God; yea, who had forsaken God, shall once be restored againe to the knowledge and worship of Iehouah: Surely meruel∣lous things are spoken of thee thou Citie of God? Wonderfull are the mercies that hereby the Gentiles haue bene inuested with. Shall wee wade a little further into the particular consideration of them? Follow wee then the spirite of God in the vnfoulding of them: What is the generall summe of the Blessings, that Ia∣pheth shall enioy? It followeth, That Iapheth may dwell in the Tents of Shem This is the summe of the Blessing, to dwell in the Tents of Shem. 1. That is, to be ioyned vnto the Iewes, both in the true worship of God, as also in the priuiledges thereof. 2. What is the true worship of God? This is described vnto vs, 1. by the subiect, Shem: who was the Father of the Iewes, fignify∣ing thereby vnto vs, that the religion of the Iewes for substance, is the true worship. How shall this appeare? Surely by these circumstances. 10. Obseru: Thereligion of the Iewe, Why the true religion and thence the marks of true religion. Ierem: 6. 11. It was not so from the beginning saith our Sa∣uiour Christ. First, Shem was the eldest Sonne; not onely by Nature, but by Grace; Hee first in his Fathers house, called on the Name of God; The Iewes of him, were also the first-borne; First, in the temporall E∣lection, first, in the set worship of God, and so also, in the spiritu∣all election. And therefore seeing the truth is most Ancient, the olde way is the true way: Therefore the religion of the Iewes is the true worship of God. Secondly, That which was commanded of God, and performed, both for the substance and manner, is the true Religion; Such was the reli∣gion of the Iew; wholly commaunded of God, both for matter and manner; enformed from Gods owne mouth. Exod: 20. Di∣rected by his owne finger, euen to the square and building of the Tabernacle. And therefore the Religion of the Iewe, was the
true Religion. And so all will worship is a false religion; that which God onely commaunds, is the truth onely. Pet: 2. 1. 19. Colloss: 2. 23. Thirdly, That which procures saluation to the performer is the truth; Such is the religion of the Iewe: As not onely pointing at Christ to come; But applyg Christ as come aleady, though not in the Flesh, yet in power and efficacie; as being a Lamb, slaine from the beginning of the world. Fourthly, True godlines is not onely available for the life to come, but euen for this life also: Such was the religion of the Iewe; so long as they walked after this rule, so long the Lord blessed them, and aduanced theyr temporall estate maruellously, as hee promised: Deutron: 2. Leuit: 6. and accordingly abased them, as they failed therein. Fifthly. And is not that the truth, to which all must yeeld? by which all must be directed? Must not they returne vnto vs, and not we vnto them? Ierem: 15. 12. Shall not all nations take hold of the skirt of a Iewe and say, we will goe with you, because the Lord is with you? Zach: 8. Must not Iapheth dwell in the Tents of Shem, not Shem in the Tents of Iapheth? Sixthly. And shall not the Truth abide for euer? Shall not the remnant of Israel be saued? Shall not the Iewes (though for a time Ierem: 31. Ezech: 11. cast off) yet bee brought in againe? And so the promise of God certaine, Gods couenant with the Iewe euerlasting. And so the originall truth, the euerlasting truth. The Iewes religion, as most ancient, so most permanent, and perpetuall. Seuenthly, Was not the Iewe an abomination to the Aegip∣tian? Hated of the world. Is not that the truth, which is hated of the world? Vse. Behold then, the true notes of the true Church, and worship of God, and 1. Trye we our selues by these, whether we be in the faith or no? Knowe wee not that Iesus Christ dwelleth in vs, except we be reprobates? 2. Cor: 13. 5. 2. Discerne we wisely our estate by these, that it is not so well with vs, as happily wee may flatter our selues: Ioh: 8. Hee is not a Iewe, which is a Iewe outward onely, Rom: 2. It is not the cir∣cumcision of the Flesh, but the circumcision▪ of the heart, which Ioel: 2. God accepteth. Rent wee therefore our hearts, and not our gar∣ments,
and turne to the Lord our God, whose mercies are euer∣lasting: who loueth Truth in the inward parts. And though he correct vs with the roddes of men, yet will not take his sure mer∣cies from vs: Iapheah shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. And is the Church of God the Tents of Shem: Howsoeuer af∣terward glorious in Shems posteritie, both for number, and out∣ward magnificence; yet now meane, and contemptible, as aby∣ding in Tents. Now little, and almost invisible, as confined to one Familie, and not containing all thereof, consisting onely of eight persons, whereof the one was a Cast-away. Beholde wee heere then the condition of the Church of God, and therein consider wee further these necessarie Adiuncts thereof. First, It is a little Flocke; Luk. 22. 32. for whom it pleaseth our heauenly Father to prouide a Kingdome, though many are cal∣led, The Church a little flocke. yet fewe are chosen, Matth: 22. though without number in it scife, yet in comparison of the reprobate, but a little flocke: e∣uen as the gleaning of grapes after the Vintage. Matth. 7. 1. Yea, Reuel: 7. Isay: 5. 19. Matth: 11. Reasons. Matth: 17. as signes and wonders, so are they in the worlde. 1. So is the good pleasure of our God: who will haue mercie on whom hee will haue mercie. 2. So narrow is the gate, that fewe enter therein. 3. So hard a saying it is to Flesh, to hate it selfe; to be borne againe; to take vp the Crosse; to become Fooles; that we may be wise, that no maruell if the wisedome of our Flesh be Enmi∣tie against God, that the most forsake Christ, it will necessa∣rily 1. Cor. 3. Rom: 8. 7. Esay. 53. 1. Cor: 1. 27. Luke: 10. Ʋse, followe, Ioh 6. Who will belieue our report, which is so vn∣likely, so distastfull, to corrupt reason? And if not many Mightie, many Noble, &c: are chosen, It is no wonder; Because they will not with Marie, choose the bet∣ter part, which shall not be taken away from them. First, Oh how vaine then is theyr conceit, that dreame all shall be saued? How fearfull is their course that so liue, as vnlesse all bee saued, it is impossible, but that they must bee condem∣ned? Is it safe following the multitude, seeing fewe shall be saued? Psal: 44. 1. Pet: 1. Will the example of great ones deliuer from Hell, howsoeuer they may shelter vs from bodilie punishment?
Why then doe we make them our warrants, to runne the broade way? Why then doe wee aduance them aboue all that is called God? as if theyr Lawes were absolute, theyr authoritie vncon∣troulable? Is it not better to obey God then man? Must wee needes runne to Hell for companie? Is it not enough to yeelde our bodies and goods, which they gaue vs not? Who so is wise, Ʋse of Instr: Matth: 10. Psal: 37. Math: 22. Psal: 131. 2. Tim: 3. 12. 13. Heb. 12. 8. 9. 2: Cer: 44. 15. 16. 17. 2. Nehem: Ioh: 14. Ʋse of com∣forts. let him consider these things. First, Let him feare him that can kill both body and soule. 2. Let him not freat at the prosperitie of the wicked; and yet giue vnto Caesar the thing which are Cae∣sare. 3. Let him be little in his owne eyes, that so he may be con∣tented with his portion, though it be the Crppe of Affliction: So it bee a proseruatiue from sinne, a Badge of his Maister Christ, a Pledge of his louing Father, a spurre to perfection, a procurer of an vncorruptible crowne. 4. Let it not grieue him to be salsely charged with singularitie, that hee is an odde-Fellow: that he walkes alone, that he is more nyce then needes; that he is no good-Fellow; No Friend to Caesar; seditious, pestilent: This was the portion of the Saints. This they had because they were contrary to the world, because they were of this little flocke. And, Let this comfort the Saintes, that wisedome is iustified of her children; Nay, it shall be iustified of the enemies thereof. When Ioseph is tried, and his Math: 27. Psalm: 105. 16. 17. cause is knowne, the Princes shall deliuer him, and doe homage vnto him. Balaam shall desire to die the death of the righteous: Pilates Wife shall wish him to haue nothing to doe with that iust man: Nay, Iudas shall confesse hee hath sinned, in betraying of Num: 23. Innocent blood; And shall not the Saints iudge the world? Is not this the victorie of our faith, that it ouercometh the world? Matth: 27. 1. Cor: 6. 2. 13. 1. Pet: 5. 4. 5 Ioh: 17. Luk: 22. 32. 1. Tim: 2. Rom: 16. 1. Cor. 15. Ps: 112. 8. 9. Rom: 5. 3 Ro. 8. 36. 37 Shall not this little flocke be preserued blameles vnto the day of Christ? Will the great shepheard of our soules loose any, that he hath washed with his blood? And is the seruant aboue the Mai∣ster? Is it not our honour to be entertained as Christ Iesus was? If we suffer with him, shall we not raigne with him? Shall wee not treadsathan vnder our feete? Shall not death be swallowed vp in victory? Shall we not see our desire vpon our enemies? Shall we not laugh at destruction, and reioyce in tribulation, because wee are more then Connquerours through Iesus Christ? Meane while, least the hope that is deferred should proue the fainting of the soule, Are not the Saints Lordes of all the earth? Haue they not right to all?
Haue they not grace to vse all well? Haue the wicked any thing but for their sakes, though they can beteeme the Saints nothing? Is not the small thing that the righteous hath, better then great riches of the vngodly? Psal: 37. Shall not the righteous put on the Rayment which the wicked haue made? Iob: 27. Doe the wicked heape vp siluer as the dust, and shal not the Saints diuide it? If they bee in Affliction, must not the Saintes pray for them? Genes: 20. If any trust be to be committed, who then faithfull but the Saints? If any desperate Iudgement come, who then deliue∣red, but the Saints? Ebedmelech shall haue his life for a prey, because hee spake kindely for the seruant of God: and Ieremie shall be deliuered, and possessed with the Reuenues and commodities of his ene∣mies. He shall haue his liberty to serue God in the land of Iudea, Ierem. 39. when the great ones shall be carried captiues into Babilon, and there loose theyr honours and liues. Loe thus shall this little flocke preuaile in this life; and shall it not also be crowned in the life to come? Shall not God wipe all teares from our eyes, and crowne vs with eternall happines? Reuel 27: Meanes to discouer the power hereof. 2. Cor: 3. 7. 2. Pet: 1. 8. Psal: 73. 3. Ps: 91. Psal: 37. 1. Oh that wee were wise, to knowe our owne strength, to vse it to our best behoofe, to liue by faith, that sence deceyue vs not. To see farre off, that present things distract vs not. To enter in∣to Gods Sanctuarie, that we may be kept sound in iudgement, to discerne aright of Gods prouidence; and to walke in our waies, that, so wee may not fret at the prosperity of the wicked, nor desire to eate of such things as please them; That we may not tempt our God, by not keeping in our wayes: and thereby exceeding the bounds of his prouidence, exclude our selues his protection. 1. That wee could learne true Contentation in our God, in whome we shall be aboundantly satisfied, in recompence of a∣ny worldly disaster whatsoeuer; will not hee be better vnto vs Phil: 4. 12. then tenne Sonnes? Is not his fauour more worth, then all the deceitfull sauours of Princes? Are not his riches durable? Is there any vexation in his wayes? Oh that by prayer and medita∣tton wee would grow familiar with this glorious God, that hee may open his treasures vnto vs, and reueale his sweetnes vnto our 2 Cor: 12. 1. Cor: 15. soules; Should wee not be rauished, and taken vp into the thyrd Heauens? should we know any man after the flesh? should wee
not discerne all things, and yet be iudged of none? Should wee not possesse all things, euen when in a sort wee haue nothing? Should we esteeme to be iudged of men, or of mans iudgement? 1. Cor: 2. 2: Cor: 4. 6. 1. Cor: 4. 4: Should we be afraide of men? Should wee not walke constantly with our God? Should not Ʋirginia receiue vs? Shall not Ireland bee our sanctuarie, to call on the name of the Lorde? seeing there it shall be well with vs? Nay, if wee passe through fire and water, will not the Lord be with vs? Esay: 4. Who so is wise, let him againe consider of these things: This little flocke is as deare vnto the Lord, as the apple of his eye. It is his glorie, his delight, heere will he dwell for euer. And if hee be with vs, who can be against vs? Could the gūpouder treason take effect? shall not Antichrist be confounded? shall not Ierusalem be a cup of poyson to all the enemies thereof? shall not the Church be a stumbling stone, that whosoeuer seeke to remoue it, shall be broken in pieces therewith? Hath the Lord begun to enlarge vs Zach: 12. farre and neere to Ʋirginia, and Ireland, and are not their hopes in vaine, that seek to roote Gods church out of Englād? Are not their chalenges vnnaturall, and wicked, that denievs to haue a Church of God in Englād? hath not God wonderfully preserued this lit∣tle Iland, this Angle of the worlde? that in former Ages was not knowne, or accounted to be any part of the world? Hath it not bene the Sanctuarie of all the Christian world? Haue not all the neighbor-nations taken hold of the skirt of an Englishman? haue Et penitus to∣to deuisos or∣be Britannos. Zach: 8. they not ioyned themselues to vs, because the Lorde is with vs? Are they not happily sheltred vnder our gracious gouernment? Are they not one with vs, in this late renewing, and encrease of our blessed ƲNION. So may the Lorde still more vnite vs in the vnitie of the spirit, that the bonds of our peace may be more holy and inviolable. So may the desire of all Nations be vnto vs, that our desires may be enlarged to all nations, for their comfort and conuersion. So may the Lord blesse all our holie designes farre and neere, for the establishing of peace, and setting vp the Kingdome of his Christ, both abroad and at home. So may all the deuices of Anti∣christ and his Locusts be still confounded: So may their eyes rot in their heads, in looking for the day to builde vp Babell againe.
So blesse thou oh Lord the holy meetings of the State, that in the continuance and encrease of the libertie of the Gospell, wee may secure our libertie, and aduance thy glorie, we may prouide for the libertie of our posteritie, in conueying thy worship vnto them, more glorious then wee found it. That so, in the increase of thy glorie, thy Church may be continued, and propagated, in the happie issue of our annointed, thy seruant, Iames our gracious King and Gouernour, & his posteritie, euen till it haue accompli∣shed it warfare, and be takē vp to glorie. Thus is the true Church of God a little flocke. Thus shall this little flock be preserued, and presented glorious vnto her bridegroome Iesus Christ: And shall not this little flock haue a certaine euidence thereof, euen in her condition in this life? May she not assuredly perswade her heart, that the Lorde will make good his word; as aduancing his free loue, & giuing him the glorie of all his mercies? 1. And doth not the Lord reserue the glory intirely to himselfe, when hee brings light out of darknes, and shewes his power in weaknes, working by none, or most vnlikely meanes? Consider wee (I pray you) to this purpose, the Condition of the Church of Christ militant heere on earth; yet further shadowed out vnto vs in these Tents of Shem. What great outward beautie was there here, when the house of God was in Tents? what pompe and visibilitie, in this simplicitie and meeknes? Behold then another marke and cognisance of the true Church of God in this life. The glorie that she hath, is especially within: Her Psal: 45. Ezech: 16. Obs: 12. The Church obscure and inuisible in the world. Reason. 1. Pet: 2. 11. 2. Tim: 2. Ps. 73. 23. Cantic: 5. Psal: 130. beautie, is that which God hath imparted vnto her? Shee is faire by my beautie, which I haue put on her Spirituall beautie, frō an inui∣sible God. As for her shewe in the world, she is blacke and con∣temptible, 1. euen as her head Christ Iesus; that had no forme nor beautie in him, and other she cannot be, so long as she is a Stran∣ger, a Souldier in this worlde: She must needes haue blowes, and falls too. How can shee choose but be soyled, being to trauell in such slippery & myrie places? 1. And is it not good she should be thus blacke, to preuent spiriruall pride? Doth not this manifest the carnall desposition of the wicked; who stumble at this out∣ward basenesse? Are not the Saints hereby purged of corrupti∣on, and so prepared to glorie? Is not the Lord glorified in accepting such blacknes? doth not his
free mercie triumph in sauing such deformitie. Is not Christs sa∣crifice auaileable to heale such infirmitie? Can a true member be discerned by sence? Is not our greatest part in Heauen? 1. How Ʋse 1 deceitfull then is that Church which is alwayes glorious, and 2 visible: How doth the pompe and brauerie of the strumpet, 3 de∣forme & defile the chaste spouse of Iesus Christ? Is not the word Ioh: 6. of God truely glorious in the spirite, doth not the outside kill? Is it not the spirite that quickeneth? doth not the Authoritie of man, abase and annihilate the power thereof? Are not the Pro∣phets Malach: 2. 4. 5. iustly vile before the people, because they are partiall in the law? adulterating the same by the intentions of men? obscu∣ring & deprauing the simplicitie and inward beautie of the gos∣pell Matth: 15. by theyr outward vernish, and carnall pollishing? And shall not Dagon fall before the Ark of the Lord? Is it not enough that 1. Sam: 5: Esay: 8. 19. 1. Cor: 4 18. 19. the foūdation of God stands sure? the Lord knoweth who are his. Though wee bee as Wonders, yea, as the Off-scowring, in the re∣putation of the world: Are wee lesse dearer vnto God, then the apple of his eye? Are wee not all faire in his sight, and no spotte to bee found in vs? Is not the Church euen then the glorie of Zach: 2. Cantic: 1. Esay: 4: 5. God, when shee is most inglorious in the world? Is it not because wee are accepted with God, that wee are despised of men? And are wee not despised of men, that so wee may hate the worlde, and cleaue more firmely to our God, that Ioh: 14. so wee might be more and more cleansed, to bee made fitte for our glorious God? Doth not our inglorious estate in this life, prepare vs to the glorie of the life to come? Let it therfore content vs that we are knowne vnto our God; and let it be our comfort, that our life is hid with Christ in God: Coll: 3. 3. that so, when Christ which is our life shall appeare, wee may also appeare with him in glorie. Let them begge Honour of the people, that are cast out of Gods fauour. And let such build vp resting places and mansiōs 1. Sam. 15. Genes: 4. in the earth, that are runnagates from God, castawayes from his fauour, hauing no hope nor right in the heauēly māsions. If God cast these things vppon vs, wee haue a right in them, and so haue Gene: 42. 43 grace to vse them. The Church obtains honor in Aegipt & Babilon, euen in the lād of her captiuity, she prospers, & is renowned. On∣ly let vs not ambitiously seeke this worldly greatnes. It must not Matth: 19.
be so with vs. The seruant is not aboue his master; and the Ma∣ster (though Lord of all) yet was seruant vnto all: that so wee might learne of him to bee humble and meeke; that wee might learne to be abased, as well as to abound; that we might become all vnto all, to win some vnto CHRSIT IESƲS. Let vs not therefore, much lesse, stand peremptorily vpon this outward pompe, as if the Church were but in her infancie, when she was in her natiue puritie, and simplicitie; but the more outward glo∣ry she hath gained, the more she growes to perfection: and ther∣fore as the times are, cannot be without worldly dignitie. All things are lawfull, but all things to all sorts not expedient. Great∣nesse 1. Cor. 10. breeds enuie, not loue vsually: and how shall wee winne them if they doe not loue vs? Fulnesse breeds securitie, and se∣curitie idlenesse; how then shall we plucke them out of the fire, Iude 23. if wee will take no paines? How shall wee giue vp our account with ioy, if we bury our talent in a napkin? How shall we make 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 4. our Ministerie fully knowne, without suffering afflictions? The Lord giue the Church more and more fauour with Prin∣ces, that as it hath begun, so it may increase, euen in outward peace and prosperitie, and a florishing estate, which may serue as a good meanes for the propagation of the Gospel; that Iapheth may dwell for euer with Shem in his fathers house. Thus, though Iapheth dwell herein tents, meanely and obscure, yet shall both Shem and Iapheth shine gloriously for euer, in most durable man∣sions, euen in the Kingdome of heauen, which shal not fade nor be diminished. Shall we consider yet further the ground thereof. Must not Iapheth dwell in the tents of Shem, the first borne of his father, the sonne of the inheritance, the stocke of the promised seede? Acts 13. The true invisible Church, con∣sists onely of the Elect. And are any then of the true Church of CHRIST, but they a∣lone, that haue the priuiledge of the first borne, who are of the election of God, for whom the father hath ordained a kingdom? And will the Sonne loose any that the Father hath committed vnto him? Did he die for any but for his Church, who is the Sa∣uiour of his body, which is his Church? Is he the Sauiour of a∣ny especially, but those that doe beleeue? 1. Tim. 4. 8. And doe any beleeue, but those that are ordained to euerlasting life? Acts 13.
Behold, here the true members of the Church of Iesus Christ; euen they alone, whose hearts are purified by Faith; onely such are they, that are dead vnto the world, and know no man af∣ter Acts 11. 13. the flesh: that haue their conuersion in heauen, whose names are written in heauen, whose head CHRIST IESVS, is as∣cended, to draw them vp into heauen after him. Oh, that we were wise to try our selues, that we did not con∣tent our selues to be branches; vnlesse we bring forth fruit, see∣ing Ʋse. Iohn 15. Zach. 13. 8. 9. 1. Iohn 2. 19. then the fruitlesse shal be cut off: and yet the fruitfull shalbe cut and lopped, yea passe through the fire; though it be not con∣sumed thereof. Doeth the hypocrite make a shewe? his candle shall be put out. Is he gone out from vs? he was neuer with vs, yet must be stil be with vs, that he may purge out our coruption, and be cast out from vs, when his iniquitie is ripe, and sinne be∣ing made out of measure sinfull, becomes inexcusable and despe∣rate. Yea, which is the wonderfull prouidence of God, & power of the word, he cannot choose but be with vs. The sweetnesse of the Word allures and inticeth him, hee is Luke 8. Marke 20: Psal. 149. 7. Acts 24. 6. Acts 26. 28. 1. Cor. 8. 2. Matth. 9. Cant. 5. Exod. 5. Iohn 7. 46. caught thereby, to giue consent vnto the same, to receiue it with ioy, yea, to doe many things galdly, yea the power of the Word binds kings in chaines. It makes Felex tremble; and brings Ahab to his sack-cloth: yet for all this, Agrippa will be (at the best) but almost a Christian: Knowledge puffes vs, and so not accompanied with grace, hardens the heart against grace. What is this Car∣penters sonne? What is thy Beloued, more then other beloueds? Who is the Lord, that I should let Israel goe? that I should part with my sinne, for a dreame, or a report? Doe any of the Ru∣lers beleeue in him? Are not Abanah and Pharphar, Riuers of Da∣masco, better then Iorden? must I be taught by an earthen vessel? See how Dauid is become as a foole, that vncouereth himselfe 2. King: 5. 3. Sam. 6. in the eyes of carnall Micholl. The Iew now seekes a signe: and the Rich man despiseth Moses and the Prophets; none will serue his turne but a messenger raised from the dead. This base Mi∣cheah, prophecieth no good vnto him: hee will not giue him leaue to burie his father; and therefore you must pardon him: heare you happily he will, for his credite, and aduantage: but the trueth is, his heart is taken vp with his couetousnesse; plea∣sure, Ezech: 33. Matth: 22. &c. Hee hath bought a Farme; or marryed a Wife; hee
hath knowledge enough: hee must liue, and hee may bee too holy; hee may runne madde, or seditious; and therefore hee cannot come: Or, if yet hee come, hee wanteth his wedding garment: & therfore the issue is, he must receiue his sentence, and comes onely to bee cast out. Thus is the wisedome of GOD, 1. Cor. 1. 21. 22. 23. Rom. 8. 7. 8. 1. Cor. 3. 18. Deut. 4. 6. foolishnesse to the flesh, and therefore the wisedom of the flesh, is enmitie against GOD: the more it heareth, the more it is hardened, and ripened thereby vnto the day of vengeance. Onely the true Beleeuer becommeth a foole, that hee may be wise; his wisedom appeares in obeying the Word: his wise∣dome shines in conuerting and confirming others. It is his true wisedome to abide in the Church, his abiding in the Church makes the Church eternall, and the Church crownes his con∣stancie, with eternall glory in heauen. Shall wee proceede yet further, to the confirmation hereof. Consider wee then the prouidence of our GOD, in the gouern∣ment of his Church; how doth hee guide her by his counsell that hee Psal. 37. 26. 1. Cor: 12. 8. may bring her vnto glory? how doth hee aduance his power in her weaknesse? how doth he perfect his power by her weakenesse? Behold, Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, hee shall dwel for euer, and that in tents that are to be remoued: And shal the Church endure for euer, and yet dwell in moueable Tents. Oh, consider, and wonder at the wisedome and power of God. Obser. 14. The Church in this life dwelleth in tents. It is not tyed to any place, least Gods power should not bee infinite, and his mercies The Church of God moue∣able. 2. Cor. 5. not free, and euerlasting to his people: nay, it is not tyed to a∣ny time, it is so permanent on earth, that it is moueable to hea∣uen: because, while it is in the body it is absent from the Lord, and therefore it is moueable to the attaining of hit full desires, euen for euer to be vnited vnto her head IESVS CHRIST, for euer to enioy the fellowshippe of her GOD, the fruit of her labours. Why then doe wee flatter our selues in vaine, with the conti∣nuall Vse. mercie of our GOD? why doe wee boast of his glory and habitation among vs, seeing wee driue him from vs, by our vn∣thankefulnesse: and cast his words behinde our backes? Shal not the Kingdome of heauen be taken away from vs, and giuen to a nation that will bring foorth better fruit? Shall not the Lord
giue vs vp to our owne councells, and saciate vs with our owne wayes? Let the man of God heare the rodde, and who hath ap∣pointed it: let him see the plague, and hide himselfe: let it com∣fort Ioseph that Egipt shall receiue him, when Canaan casteth him out: let it comfort Israel; that when Egipt is renounced, Canaan shall be ready for him. Our God is the God of all the earth; his Church is moueable, that it may bee spread ouer the face of the earth. This trauelling of his Church, is for the gathering of the Saints; when the Saints are gathered, the Churches warre-fare hath an end. When her warre-fare is ended, her present glorie beginneth: and now she hath an immoueable and durable house, for to enioy for euer her constant and euerlasting glorie. Shall we yet further wade into the consideration hereof, that Obser. 15. The Church of God weake and corrupti∣ble, subiect to infirmities. Rom. 7. 24. she may be fully satisfied with the reason of the same? Behold then; the Church of God in this life dwelleth in Tents; she is not onely mooueable, that shee may bee enlarged to per∣fection, but she is also weake, and subiect to infirmitie; her best abiding here, is a transitorie Tent, a very fit, yet fraile habitation, euen a body of sinne, and lumpe of corruption, though finding some shelter, and refuge thereby: yet in great weakenesse, and not ex∣empted from stormes, so exposed to weather, as thereby greater Reasons. stormes are preuented; so subiect to infirmities, that infirmities may be healed, and corruption abolished: a very earthen vessel, fraile, and contemptible, that the glory might be of God and not 2. Cor. 4. 7. 2. Cor. 12. 8. 9. of vs: hauing a stubbe remaining in the flesh, notwithstanding all earnest desire to be eased of it, that Gods power might bee seene in weaknesse, and his mercie perfited by infirmities, that while we wrestle with these infirmities, we may haue experience of the sufficiencie of his grace, & may sigh to be deliuered from Rom. 7. 2. Cor. 5. this burden of corruption, that we may be clothed with suffici∣encie of glorie: that out of the sense of our weakenesse, wee may haue more compassion of our brethren, and so labouring their Heb. 2. 4. conuersion, may make sure, and enlarge our Crowne: and being daily couered with Christ his righteousnesse, to couer her infirmi∣ties, Heb. 10. might haue free, and dayly accesse (with comfort) vnto the Throne of grace, to bee accepted in her seruice, and supplyed in her wants: being alwayes gracious in the eyes of her Husband, and fitted by his grace, to her full and finall Communion with
him for euer in Heauen. And is the Church of God in this life subiect to infirmities? Is she not perfect, and intire; but labouring to perfection? Is shee Vse. growing in grace, and following hard after the marke, that shee may dayly deny her selfe, & take vp her crosse, that being con∣formable Phil. 3. 3. to her head, she may be crowned with him in glory? What life then is in that member, that is not dayly quickned by Christ? What trueth in that Church, that boasts of perfection? what hope of that Church which growes worse and worse? shal corruption discourage from, of not rather diue vnto Christ? shall infirmitie cast off, or not rather interesse in our Sauiour: let not darknesse stumble thee, where Christ doth couer with his beautie: neither forsake thou the societie, that is accompained with corruption, least thou forsake thy Sauiour that healeth cor∣ruption; and came not to call the righteous, but sinners to re∣pentance. As thou shalt finde him sildome in the house of the Pharisie, so by this thou shalt there finde him, that the Pharisie is abased and consounded in his righteousnesse: and therefore so comfort thy selfe in corruption, as to haue it abolished, not nourished in thee: so approue thy selfe, a liuely member of Iesus Christ, as that thou dayly dyest vnto sinne, in submitting to the will of thy God, and dayly killest sinne, in doing Gods will against thy selfe: For what? Doth not the Church of God abide in Tents? Hath she not pitched Obser. 16. The Church militant in this life. 1. Tim. 2. Reasons. 1. Tim. 4. Rom. 34. 35. her field to fight the battels of the Lord? Doth shee so dwell in Tents, as not to remooue from them? is shee otherwise subiect to corruption, then daily to fight with, and conquer the same? Is she not a pressed souldier vnder her Captaine Christ Iesus, that so in him she may bee more then conquerour, not onely ouer all affliction, but euen ouer all sinne, and the wages thereof what∣soeuer? And is there not a necessitie layd vpon her, as shee will maintaine her peace with God, to exercise continuall waree a∣gainst her selfe: can she otherwise conquer sin, than not to suffer it to raigne ouer her? Can shee otherwise sigh earnestly for her 2. Cor. 7. 1. 2 Rom. 7. 24. 2. Tim. 4. deliuery from that bondage, then to striue against that tyranny, and daily to cast off the yoke thereof. Can she expect the crown, before she haue sought the good fight of Faith? except she striue
as shee ought to doe? Doe not many seeke to enter in, and 2. Tim. 4. shall not bee able? Doe not many runne in a race and yet one obtaineth? And ought not then the Church to striue euen for the best, with the best? Must she not so runne that she may obtaine? Can shee choose but fight continually, that carrieth a liuing enemie Rom. 9. 24. 25. Flesh. World. continually within her; that hath the world, that deceitfull and importunate enemie, dayly to assault her without? That hath that olde aduersarie so subtill, so violent, so mightie, so vn∣wearied, dayly plotting her destruction on euery side. Now casting in his firie darts of fearefull tentations, then casting out Satan. whole floods of persecution to swallow her vp: sometimes as∣saulting on the right hand, with pride and presumption; eftsoones oppugning on the left hand, with horrors and dispaire? Can shee bee like vnto her Master, if shee doe not suffer with him? Can shee raigne with her Sauiour, if shee doe not conquer with him? What peace then can there bee, since the whoredomes of our nature are so rife, and corruptions so rebellious continually? Vse. Is there any way to procure our peace, but by maintaining con∣tinuall warre against our corruptions? Are not they deceiued in Luke 2. the estate of grace, when the strong man armed keeping the house, all is quiet? Doe they not in vayne boast of perfection, who necessarily must fight dayly, if they will proceed in grace? Doe not they in vaine plot for ease to the flesh, whose true peace is procured, by dayly curbing and subduing thereof. And seeing many begin in the Spirit, that ende in the flesh: How to fight that we my conquer. Oh, that we were wise; to sit downe before we enter into Chri∣stianitie, to cast vp our reckoning, what our Religion will cost vs, that wee must haue blowes at the least, if not resist vnto blood. Oh, that wee would learne to striue lawfully, that so wee may stand fast, and finish our course. Surely, if our cause bee good, and we lawfully called thereto: if our weapons be spiritual against our spirituall enemies, if wee strike with the word, and beare of blowes by Faith and patience. If wee are alwayes fea∣full of our selues, and watchfull ouer our priuie corruptions. If we dayly renue our strength in CHRIST, by continuall and
feruent prayer. If we fence our head with the brest-pate of hope, and arme our hearts with dayly repentance, and examination of our wayes. If wee prepare continually for newe assaults, and haue our eyes fixed vpon the recompence of the reward. If wee assist our weake brethren by counsell and correption: And mul∣tiply our thanksgiuings vnto our GOD, as hee crowneth our combates, keeping speciall Records of our speciall combates, and erecting Trophyes of them to the glory of our GOD. If we take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lustes thereof: but dayly put on the LORD IESVS, by a renued, and quickning Faith. And so committing our selues in wel-doing, into the handes of our faithfull Creator, wee suffer afflictions, and bring foorth fruite with patience, not casting away our confidence, which hath so great recompence of reward; but continue to the ende, and stand fast hauing finished all things: there is layde vp for vs, vndoubtedly a crowne of righteousnesse, which the LORD IESƲS, will bestow vpon vs in due time, as those that haue fought the good fight of Faith, and finished their course with ioy. And may wee not hence reape assured comfort in all our com∣bates, that seeing our Captaine is CHRIST IESƲS, our cause the Lord, our ende Saluation, our enemies such, as are both necessarie, and yet spoyled and conquered to our handes. Therefore, as our quarell will bee glorious, vnder such a Captaine, against such enemies: so our conquest will bee cer∣taine, euen as our Head is Conquerour. Oh, how may this establish vs, against the reproches and con∣tradictions of the World, that wee are contentious persons, and Ierem. 15. Luke. 12. 45. striue with the whole Earth, that wee bring a sword, and set variance in our owne flesh? Did wee desire this day of affliction; or rather, are wee not called: yea, thrust out thereto? Doe wee not labour peace, Matth. 10. 2. Cor. 5. and is it not the world that spurnes against it? Is our warre to any other ende, then to procure peace with GOD? Is it not by most sweet and peaceable meanes: euen by Prayers, and Teares: by enreaties, perswasions, humblings of the flesh? Is 2. Cor. 15. not this Yoke exceeding sweete, and this burthen passing
light? Is it not most reasonable to offer vp this sacrifice vnto Rom. 12. 1. God? Is it not most acceptable, to be offered vp in Iesus Christ? Is 2. Cor. 1. 6. it not most comfortable, that as our troubles doe abound, so our consolations doe much more abound in CHRIST IESVS, to vpholde vs for the present: that so many combats, so many conquests, so many conquests, so many crownes to establish vs for the time to come. Oh, what a comfort is here vnto the Saints of GOD! that though they haue pitched their Tents, yet still they dwell in Tents, the place of their war-fare, is the place of their safetie. The Church exposeth to the combate, and prouideth means for the conquest, being their retyring place in their falles, & resting place for their refreshing: Their Armorie to serue them with weapons; and their forge also, to whet and sharpen them to the battell. Shee that presseth them to the warre-fare, teacheth their hands to fight, and bindeth vp their wounds, and giueth rest vn∣to their soules. The Church is the safegard, and shelter of the Elect. Obser. 17. The Church is the Tents: A place of re∣pose and shel∣ter for the Elect. Iohn 16. No saluation without it, though no carnall rest within: no true happinesse but from it, though to bee of it, is of all men, (if our hope were onely in this life) most wretched and misera∣ble. Here is no rest to corruption, that incorruption may bee obtained. Heere is all peace in CHRST IESƲS, though in the world wee must looke for nothing but afflictions from the world: yet the Church is in the world; and therefore shall haue Kings and Queenes to bee her Nursing Fathers, and Fo∣ster Mothers, that the Elect may be gathered, and the reprobate conuinced. Heere shee sleepes with her beloued, and findes his Cant. 2. yoke easie: here shee is refreshed with his Flaggons, and raui∣shed with his perfumes: heere shee delights in his presence, and is Loue-sicke with his beauty. What shall I say; the Church is Gods House, yea the gate of Heauen: and can there bee greater safetie, where GOD is the Owner? Can there be happier securitie, where heauen is the purchase?
The Church is Christs spouse, his beloued, his vndefiled. And can there be danger, where sinne is not imputed? Is there any lacke or losse in Loue? shall not all the worlde be forsaken, to cleaue to the wife of our bosome, to giue her rest and content∣ment, to delight in her beautie, to giue her honour, as the weaker vessell, to prouide aboundantly for her, to spread the wing of the garment ouer her, for protection, to dwell for euer with her; to reioyce in her loue continually? Is not the Church the Lordes portion, and inheritance giuen by God the Father, to his sonne Iesus Christ, by him to be preserued vnto perfection and glory? Psal: 2. Ioh: 17. Is it not the bed of Salomon, wherein the Christian soule takes his sweete and sure repose, as being garded with the Lord wor∣thies, his blessed Angells; to put off all daungers, and preuent disquietnes? 3. Cant: 7. Psal: 34. Is it not the mountaine of the Lorde, euen as Mount Syon, the place of his Holines, that shall neuer be remoued? Psal: 125, 1. 2. Is it not the pillar of truth? 1. Tim: 3. 57. contenting and establishing it followers there∣in? Psal 2. 6. & 3. 5. Is it not as a cup of poyson, and as coales of fire, to confound and deuoure all the enemies thereof? Zach: 12. Is it not as an heape of stones, to breake in pieces whom∣soeuer shall oppose thereto? 1. Pet: 3. Is it not the Arke, to pre∣serue the true belieuer in, amidst all the Tempests and ouerslow∣ings of sinne and sorrowes? Is it not the Market-place, that af∣fords the childrens food, euen milke for babes, and strong meate Esay: 55. 1. for men? Hebr 5. Is it not the priuie Chamber of Iesus Christ, wherein he communicates that ioy vnto his Elect, that the world hnowes not of; which is vnspeakable and glorious, passing all vnderstanding? Cantic: 1. 3. 1. Pet: 1. 8. Is the Church other∣wise blacke, but that shee is also comely and acceptable in the eyes of our Sauiour? Doth shee remaine in the Tents of Kedar, any otherwise, but that still there is light, & all safety in the land of Goshen, though all Aegipt be filled and consumed with the Ar∣rows of Gods vengance? Is not Peter a sleep sweetly, euen in the prison, laden with bolts? Act: 12. Do not the Apostles reioyce in Tribulation? Doe they not gaine and thriue in theyr greatest troubles? Act: 5. Doe they not liue, though they die daily? Pos∣sesse they not all things, though they haue nothing in compa∣rison?
Doe not the weake gaine, by theyr sufferings to speake more boldly? Are not the wicked confounded by their meruel∣lous protections and deliuerances? Is not Heauen sealed vp vnto 1. Phil: 10. Psal: 107. them, by theyr Heauenly and gracious conuersation, by theyr mighty preseruation, in, and out of all ther troubles? And is not the Church the bodie of Christ? Is not hee our head, and wee his members? And did euer any hate his owne flesh? Will not Christ preserue, and cherish this mysticall bodie, that to redeeme and purge the same, spared not his naturall bodie, but gaue it 2. Tim: 4. 18. 89. Gal. 3. Eph: 5. euen to the death, euen the cursed death of the Crosse, that hee might sanctifie and wash vs, to present vs as a pure Virgine vnto himselfe, to make vs glorious, & perfect without spot or wrinkle? 1. Why are wee then fearfull, Oh wee of little Faith: why a∣wake wee this beloued with our contentions and outcryes? see∣ing our Husband hath deeepely charged his beloued should not Ʋse be awaked? Why seeke we not our peace, in the peace of Syon? why hasten wee not the confusion of Antichrist? why doe wee not labour the peace of Iesusalem, and well-fare of Syon? Why dream we of carnall peace, seeing our beauty is within? why plot we for the flesh, which is an enemie to our peace, whose peace is perdition, & contentmēt confusion? Shuld we not ioyn together against the common enemie? Oh let our vnitie bee in the spirit, to maintaine the true bond of peace. Surely, if wee could pray vnfainedly for the peace of Ierusalem, and take these little Foxes How to pro∣cure the quiet & welfare of the Church. that destroy the vineyards: If we shall cast out those whippes of scorpions that haue made the breach, & giue way vnto the pow∣er of the word: which is the onely procurer of this peace. Setting 1 vp the Lord and his ordinance onely to raigne ouer vs; and 2 sub∣iecting and compelling man by holy discipline, to the obedience 3 therof, maintaining continuall warre against sinne & corruption, 4 and making glad the hart that God hath cōforted: If wee would 6 ease the Church of all vnnecessary eye-soares, and pray for such 7 Nursing-fathers as God hath raised vp for the maintenance of it 8 peace. If the messengers of this peace be had in due estimation, 9 for theyr workes sake. And the friends of the Church be 10 nouri∣shed & aduāced. This is the way to procure peace to the Church, thus shall the prosperitie of Sion be maintained. And then if we we liue by faith, we shall delight in these Tents, howsoeuer moue∣able 1. Tim. 5.
& fraile to a carnall eye. It shall be our comfort that Gods power shalbe seene in weaknes, & his wisdome in humane infir∣mitie, that God may haue the glorie: and we further informed, so to rest in these Tents, as still to look for a Citie which is aboue: As remēbring that our greatest safetie in this life, is but to dwell in Tents, euen as strangers and Pilgrimes in this vale of miserie. The Church a Strran∣ger on earth, 2. Cor: 5. The Church is a Soiourner and dweller in Tents, Shee hath here no abyding Citie: She is absent from the Lord; And there∣fore, Is as A Stranger and Pilgrime in the World. So were the fathers of our faith of olde, they dwelled in Tents, and wandered vp and downe, seeking for a Citie to dwell in. So hath the Church trauelled from Citie to Citie, from one Nation Genes: 14. Hebr: 11. Psalm: 119. to another: By this meanes, the sound of the Gospell is gone through the world: All nations haue bene conuinced; the Saints haue bene gathered, the elect meruellously protected, their faith increased, and preserued to things not seen; their flesh hath bene humbled, and their sanctification perfited. And can they looke for better of the worlde, then to be handeled as Strangers? Can 1. Coll: 6. they desire better, then to be vsed as Strangers? That so, they may vse the world as a stranger, and hunger after their Countrey 2 which is aboue. That so, beeing changed from Ʋessell to Ʋessell, 3 they might graciously decline the sinnes of the wicked; And 4 thereby also be deliuered from theyr iudgements. 5 Whence we may learne; 1. As what to iudge of those that set Ioh: 4. vp their rest in this life, promising and plotting here for perpetu∣all 6 residēce. 2. So to trie our right in heauē, by our account of and 7 entertainmēt vpon earth. Namely, that we vse the world as stran∣gers, 1. Pet: 2.11. and are vsed therein as strangers. Surely, If wee set not our 8 harts vpon these things, but are contented with the portion that Ierem: 4.8. our God doth allot vs: If wee can learne to want, as well as to a∣boūd, Psal: 55. How we must knowe our selues to be strangers. & are willing to part with all, rather thē to part with Hea∣uē; esteeming each in it true worth, as the blessing of God, & so vsing it holily, & soberly, to the glorie of the Giuer: & our owne fitting to grace, & yet esteeming the best as dung, in respect of Iesus Chr: If we can impart plētifully, to the necessity of our brother, & for∣go cheerfully for the aduancement of Gods worship; If we do not en∣uie the prosperitie of the wicked; & yet reioice in the prosperitie of the Saints; If we are enuyed & minted, euē in the least portion in this
life: So that the least is thought too much, that goes beside the worldes mouth. If wee bee accounted Signes and wonders in Esay: 5. 19. 14. 1. Cor: 4. 15. the worlde; and are made spectacles to Men and Angels. If wee be esteemed singular, and like no bodie: Men, not fit for societie, not worthie to liue. If as the world would faine be rid of vs, so we are desirous to be rid of it: groaning daily vnder the burden of our sinne, and yet bearing patiently such afflicti∣ons as serue to purge our corruption: yet so, that wee see by faith our finall deliuerāce, & earnestly sigh to put off this body, of sinne. By these marks we shall know that we are Strangers in the world. By these wee may be sure that we are Citizens with the Saints. And so shall we dwell in the Tents of Shem, not only con∣tinue constant in the sinceritie of religion, but also dwell in the house of God for euer; euen in that house which is not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens. So it followeth. God perswade Iapheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem. 1. Though wee are strangers in the world, and to the same, yet we are not strangers and passengers in the Church: Here we dwell, if we be liuely mēbers: if they went out from vs, they were . Ioh: 2. 19. Obs: 19. A note of a true member to be constant in holines. Psal: 92. 13. Hebr: 6. Galat: 3. 3. Luk: 8. 13. Ioh. 5. 35. Ose: 6. & 4. 1. Pet: 1. 18. Ose: 2. 14 Ioh: 15. 1. Pet: 1. Reuel: . Ʋse. none of vs; The true member of Christ Iesus dwelleth in the Church: not Inneth for a day, and so is gone, but abideth and continueth constant vnto the ende. He that is planted in the house of God, abideth in the Courts of the house of God. It is not enough to haue a taste of the heauenly gift. It is not sufficient to begin in the spirite: for such may ende in the flesh, and fall away with∣out recouery. To reioyce in Gods word for a season, and to bring forth righteousnes as the morning deaw: this is the pro∣prietie of Pharisies, and the iust chalenge of hypocrites, and Apo∣stataes. And is there not great reason why wee should be con∣stant in the worship of the Almightie? Is not our God eternall, and therefore will haue continuall seruice? Doth he not binde vs hereto, with euerlasting bonds of loue? Doth he not further, and enable vs by continuall means? giuing vs his Spirit, to abide with vs for euer, prouiding a Mediator, to make continuall in∣tercession for vs, promising a crowne, if we continue to the ende. 1. Oh how vaine then is their confidence, that thinke they may be too holie? how fearfull theyr condition, that esteeme it great wisedome to abate in sinceritie: as if theyr former zeale
courage were follie and rashnes? How ought the Saints to trye their sincerity, by their abiding in Gods house? How ought they to labour constancie, and perseuerance to the ende? Surely, 1. if Meanes and Notes of abi∣ding in the Church, and continuāce in Religion. they shall be setled in iudgement, that they can neuer be suffici∣ently holy, because the greatest measure in this life is too short, If the Lorde measure it by his iustice. If they shall be faithfull in the practise and power of godlines, proposing Iesus Christ to be the patterne, and reward of weldoing, leuelling it by the word, not by examples or custome. If they shall haue respectly to all Gods Commandements, not claiming immunity frō the least, nor dis∣pairing to attaine the greatest. As desiring and purposing more then possibly they can doe, and yet doing more then the ordina∣ry seruice, though it be of the most righteous and vain-glorious Matth: 5. 20 Pharisie? If they shall bee watchfull ouer theyr wayes, redeeming the time, and neglecting no occasions, to make sure theyr electi∣on. If they doe labour vnfainedly, the conuersion of theyr bre∣thren: and be thankfull vnto God, as he renues his mercies, gi∣uing him onely the glorie of all his gifts, as finding themselues vnprofitable Seruants. And so quickening theyr Faith in the merites of of theyr Sauiour? shall encrease in knowledge, and a∣bound in practize, renuing their obedience, by daily repentāce; and purging out corruption, by suffering afflictions willingly? If they can wayt with patience, the recompence of the tewarde, howsoeuer by Faith they see and lay holde thereof. If they are prepared to theyr ende, and haue theyr Accounts ready: fearing themselues most, when they haue greatest graces, and resting most on God: when all sence doth faile them. If they can vse the world as a Stranger, not entangling them∣selues therewith; and yet by theyr Christian libertie, enioy a right therein. If they can forget what is behinde, and followe hard to what is before, not thinking they haue attained, or comprehended, but as they are comprehended of CHRIST IESƲS, vntill the Lord in them be all in all. Thus, if they shall behaue themselues, If these markes bee found vpon them: Oh blessed is that Seruant, whome his Mai∣ster findeth so doing; Shall he not giue him a crowne of righte∣ousnes,
that hath thus happily finished his course? And shall not the glorious Lorde make good his word: Will he not giue vs constancie, that requires it at our hands? Will he not perfite the worke that hee hath begunne in vs? Yea surely, Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem; The Elect shall abide for 2. Tim. 4. 8. euer in the sinceritie of Religion: Hee cannot fall finally, though hee fall grieuously for a time: Hee cannot fall whollie, for hee deligh∣teth 1. Phil: 6. Obseruat 20. The elect shal continue to the ende. Rom: 7. 22. Rom. 8. 33. 34. Ioh: 12. 32. Ro. 8. 28. Esay. 1. 27. Rom: 8. 34. Iob: 13. 15. in the Law of God, in the inward man; the euill which he doeth, hee would not doe: and therefore it is not hee, but sinne that dwelleth in him. It is God that iustifieth, who then shall condemne? CHRIST IESƲS hath died for him; nay, hee's risen againe: and seeing he is gone vp, shall he not draw all after him? And what then shall separate vs frō the loue of God? What may hinder the constancie of the Belieuer? Doe not all things, yea, his very sinnes, turne to his good? Doe not his Afflictions plucke out corruption, and so prepare him to glorie? Is hee not more then conquerour through CHRIST, that loueth him? Al∣though the Lord shuld kill him, yet, doth not he still trustin him? Reioyce not then against mee, oh mine enemie; For though I fall, I shall rise againe. And why art thou in heauinesse, oh my soule, why art thou cast downe, and disquieted within me? See∣ing, Miche: 7. 9. Psal: 44. 30 Cause of the fall of Gods childrē. if thou trust in God which raiseth from the dead, Though thou art dead in sinne, yet shalt thou be raised vp againe? If sinne doe not raigne in thee, it shall neuer Triumph ouer thee. Onely be wise in the feare of God, to discerne the causes of these thy falls, that so thou mayest comfortablie recouer againe. 1. Hast thou bene exalted aboue measure, and pufft vp with Spirituall Pride. spirituall pride, of those graces that thy God hath bestowed on thee? Securitie. and hast thou hence growne secure and carelesse of welldo∣ing, and yet presumptuous of Gods mercies, spending on th former stocke, as if thou haddest no further neede of Christ Ie∣sus, Presump∣tion. or wert so full of him, that thy cuppe runnes ouer, not with sound ioy in the heart, proceeding from the fulnes of thy SA∣ƲIOVR, but with a froathie and carnall ioy in the face, pro∣ceeding from the sence of thine owne worthines. No maruell now, if the Lorde confound this thy vaine confi∣dence, by withdrawing the light of his countenance from thee, whereby now walking only by thine own light, thou findest no∣thing
but darknes; either inwardly, in thy conscience, speaking fearful things against thee, or outwardly in thy life, being tainted with some grosse sinne, occasioned through thy vaine presump∣tion, & carnall securitie, which increasing inwardly the horror of thy soule, & charging it afresh, with the guilt of renued actuall sinne; If now the lawes of Hell beginne to gape vpon thee; If thou art ouerwhelmed with the terrours of the deepe, obserue herein thy iust desert, that hast thus tempted thy God; and mag∣nifie the mercies of thy God, that will not tempt thee aboue thy strength. For behold heere Light, more gloriously shining out Exod: 4. Hobs: 3. 5. Mich: 4. 6. 7. Zeph: 3. 10▪ Zah: 8. 13▪ Matth: 11▪ 20. Psal. 38. 7. Psal: 130. Ion: 2. Esay: 26. 19▪ of Darknesse: when thou art throughly abased, and emptied of carnall confidence. Then shalt thou most feruently desire to be easied of thy Sauiour, the more thou feelest thy sinnes a burthen which thou canst not beare. And if thou lookest vp vnto thy God, when all helpe on earth doth faile, thy God will heare thee, though crying out of the deepe; yea, out of the bellie of Hell. Thy dead heart shall arise, and thou which dwellest in the dust shalt awake, and sing when the Lord shall returne with his coun∣tenance vpon thee, and restore vnto thee, the ioy of his saluation. Hast thou bene carelesse of the meanes which should haue vp∣held thee in the power of holines. Namely, the powerfull prea∣ching of the word, and conscionable administration of the Sacra∣ments? Hast thou neglected thy ordinarie spirituall sword, and 4 Neglect  the meanes  preseruation so growne fainte in thy calling. Hast thou growne indifferent, in the vse of the meanes, admitting any so it vphold a forme of godlines, and so neglecting to trie the spirites, thou hast grieued Gods spirit in thee, whereby thou hast bin humbled, through the withdrawing of it assistance. Hast thou hereby bene lest to thy selfe, & so fallen into some apparant and grosse wickednes to the reproach of thy profession, and wounding of thy conscience? Hast thou lyen herein without repentance, for want of conscio∣nable 5. Grosse si vnrepēted o dealing. No Nathan hath reproued thee; yea, let no man reproue: because the Priests are like vnto the people, the blinde would leade the blinde in securitie to destruction. Oh remember the wisedome of thy GOD herein, who would haue thee certain of thy state, euē in this thy fall, because it came by such a meanes as must necessarily befall thee; seeing it hath befal∣len the most excellent, no tētation otherwise hath here ouertaken
thee, then what hath, or may befall the deerest childe of God. Haddest thou fallen in thy calling, and thy conscionable vse of the meanes: hadst thou growne fainte, when there was foode a∣boundantly, and vnprofitable in the wholsome word of life, thy case had beene more singular, and so then the more doubtfull. But if Dauid being without meanes of preseruation, giue way to tentation, and so is ensnared therewith: Though he fall grie∣uously, Rule. yet he shall rise againe; and his rising being effected by the true and liuely meanes, Namely, the reproofe o Nathan, and his obedience therevnto, shall both giue euidence that his Fall was recouerable; as being through neglect of the meanes, and that his recouerie is sound and effectuall, as being wrought Rule. by the true meanes. Indeede I confesse, the Lorde may worke extraordinarilie, in some particulars; As that Iob may fall, for his tryall, and yet vse the meanes conscionably: stand faithfully in his calling: yet Note of Iobs triall, seeing the end of Gods triall was so to iustifie the soundnes of his standing: as yet to discouer some imperfection therein; that so by this triall he might be led forward to perfection, may wee not chalenge Iob of imperfection, and so of failing in the measure of his calling, which though the Lord did not principally intend to chastise, in this his gracious triall, but rather to trie the soundnes and truth thereof. Yet did he by this exercise, both preuent A∣postasie, and also most happily further to perfection. And might not Iob be subiect to spiruall wickednes, as spiri∣tuall pride? discouered by his Impatiencie, censurings, &c: how∣soeuer he could not be charged with grosse open crimes? Which being farre more dangerous, then any outward euill: was there∣fore more necessarily (though not to be punished of God, as an e∣nemie) yet to be purged out of the Lorde, as a gracious Father, and that with a sharpe medicicine answerable to such a disease? Iob: 19. 28. Iob: 29. 10. Surely though the holy man reached at an higher matter, yet did he not vnwillingly acknowledge Gods purpose, in this refining and purging of him: not iustifying his friends, who charged him wrongfully to be onely plagued for his sinnes. Yet iustifying his God, who not onely might thus deale with him, as being his crea∣ture, but ought so to deale with him in mercie, to make him more conformable to his Creator.
And had not the Lord his end herein? Did not iust Iob come forth of the furnace, more purely and gloriously? shalt not thou also being purged, be graciously deliuered? And shall not thy greatest falles further thee thereunto; as making thee more hum∣ble, more hunger after Christ? And what then can separate thee srō the loue of God, in IESVS CHRSIT? Who is more rea∣dy to receiue thee, then thou to run vnto him; who inuites thee to him; who will keepe thee in him, that so thy falles shall make thee more wise, not to relie on thy selfe, nor any other broken reed, but to roote thy selfe more firmely on the Rocke, and so grow more constantly in grace; that still walking in feare of thy selfe, thon mayst walke in the faith of thy Sauiour, and so trusting Psal. 125. in the Lord; thou shalt neuer be remooued? And that thou mayst haue an vndoubted euidence hereof: Behold what followeth. Iapheth shall dwellin the Tents of Shem. Though Shem for a time be reiected, that Iapheth may be gathe∣red in: though the Iewes be cast off, that the Gentiles may come in; yet when the fulnes of the Gentiles shalbe accomplished, then shall Shem returne againe to the true worship of God: and how∣soeuer the Iew hath stumbled a long time at the Crosse of Christ, yet shall hee at length, so embrace the Lord IESƲS, that the glory and zeale of his profession, shall allure and receiue the scat∣terings of the Gentiles, who after the fulnesse is come in, shall either remaine to bee called, or being called, and yet dispoyled of the outward beautie of their profession, shall now take holde of the skirt of him that is a Iew, and bee prouoked by his zeale, to ioyne with him in the power of Religion, that so there may be one shepheard, and one sheepfold, prepared to meet the Bride∣groome, when he shall appeare in glory. So then, If Iapheth shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, the Iewes shall then haue a full and glorious conuersion, before the second Doctrine 21. The Iewes to be restored. comming of the Lord IESƲS: And why not principally at Ie∣rusalem, the old place of their worship, though not in the pride of the holy mountaine, which is destroyed, yet in the power of the Spirit, raigning in the midst of his enemies; and in that pure language seruing the Lord with one consent. Shall not the Lord be as able to plant in the Iew againe, as he was able in his roome to plant in the Gentile for a time? Must not the Iewe bee pro∣uoked
by the Gentile to embrace the Messiah; euen as the Gen∣tile was prouoked by the falling of the Iew. And haue wee not dayly experience of the Iewes comming in againe? Doth not the Lord euery day giue pledges hereby, of a fuller haruest? Are not these Haruengers and Fore-runners of the great Armies of the Lord? And can the day of the Lord IESVS be accom∣plished, till this Word bee fulfilled? Doe not all the Prophets beare witnesse hereunto? Shall not the Lord be glorified in the saluation of the first borne? must not Iew and Gentile, make vp one bodie of CHRIST, and worshippe the Lord IESVS, in one Spirit? Shall not the restoring of the Iewes prepare the Gen∣tiles to meete the Lord IESVS in the cloudes? Is not this that Reuel. 21. 1. 2. 3. new Ierusalem, that holy Citie, which comes downe from God out of Heauen prepared as a Bride trimmed for her Husband? Which though for a time, in regard of her present state of Apo∣stasie, se turne an enemie for the Gentiles sake, to occasion their calling: yet seing shee is eternally beloued for the Father sake? Can her imquitie make the election and Faith of God of none effect? Nay, rather shal it not make for the further reuelation of Gods free loue towards his children, in receiuing them againe into mercie; euen as the prodigall sonne, when in regard of their present state, they appear most vnworthy therof? And is this ob∣stinacie any other but in part till the fulnes of the Gentiles be come in, so that the remnant of the election shall certainely be gathered in? Shall not this restoring of the Gentiles be the reui∣uing of the world, restoring newe glory and beautie vnto the the same: when as the Iew and Gentile shall ioyne together, in the pure worship of God? Thus shall the Redeemer come vnto Sion, and vnto them that turne from iniquitie in Iacob, saith the Lord. Esay 59. 20. Thus Ia∣cob shall hereafter take roote, and Israel shall florish, and grow and the world shal be filled with fruit. Esay 27. 6. In those dayes will the Lord make a new couenant, with the house of Israel, and with the house of Iuda; he wil put his law into their inward parts, & write it in their hearts; and he will be their God, and they shal be his people: Yea, he will forgiue that iniquitie, and remember their sins no more. Though he haue forsaken them for a season, Ierem. 51. 33. 34. 35. yet in euerlasting compassions will hee gather them againe.
Esay 54. 8. Doth not the Lord gloriously figure out their returne, Ezech. 36. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. &c. by their deliuerance out af Egipt, and returne out of the captiui∣of Babylon? So that though Israel shall remaine many dayes without a King, and without a Prince, and without an offering, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without a Seraphin: Yet afterward shall the children of Israel come out and seeke the Lord their God, and Dauid their King; and shall feare the Lord and his goodnesse in the latter dayes. Hosea 3. 4. 5. Loe, this hath the Lord promised, and shall he not make it good? shall not this receiuing of the Iewes, confirme, and fore∣runne the most comfortable doctrine of the resurrection? As be∣ing shadowed out most liuely hereby. Reuel. 21. 2. Ezech 37. Esay 29. 18. 19. Which as it iustly condemneth our base and odious account Vse. of that holy Nation; and also reprooueth our cruell dealing to∣wards them: so it teacheth vs, to pray heartily for their Conuer∣sion, and to vse all holy meanes for the effecting thereof; pray∣sing God, for the labours of our holy Countreymen, (and others) to this end, and reioycing in those gracious pledges of this vn∣doubted blessing. Tremellius, and many others, Comforting our Tremellius, and others. selues; that our posteritie shall enioy more glorious times of the Gospel, when Iew and Gentile shall ioyne together, and wor∣ship the Lord with one shoulder: assuring our selues that this great comming in of the Iew cannot bee farre off, seeing the ful∣nesse of the Gentiles, is well-neere come in. And preparing our selues in this fulnesse of the Gentiles to greater troubles, which doeth and will certainely arise by this Apostasie of the Gentile. And yet in patience possessing our soules, seeing the end wil not yet be; the Iew must come in, and Antichrist must be destroyed. And then let vs lift vp our heads, Because our saluation draweth nigh. Euen so, hasten thy Worke; O God: for the glory of thy great Name. Thus shall the Iew bee gathered to the Gentile; and so they shall bee one sheepe-fold, and one Shepheard? Thus shall Shem be restored that Iapheth may dwell in his Tents: so though the Church consists of Iew & Gentile, yet shal both dwel in the same tents: contentions shal cease. & the partition wall, shal now surely downe, that both Iew and Gentile, may serue God in one Mich. 4. Zeph. 3. pure language and worship their God with one shoulder.
Behold now the Churches VNITIE, and consent: though Doctr. 2. The Church his Vnitie, and so per∣petuitie and perfection. Ephes. 4. differing in the fleh, yet still agreeing in Spirit, though diuided for a time, yet at length againe so compact and knit together, as that as one man, it shall be ready to meet their Sauiour, and for euer to be with him. This the God of Vnitie, in his good time shall accomplish, and that by one Baptisme to vnite them, by one Word to engaffe them againe, by one spirit to incline them, by one faith to con∣firme them, that so they may bee one body, though consisting of many members; seruing one God and Father of al, through the 1. Cor. 12. gift of IESVS CHRIST their alone, and all sufficient Sa∣uiour. And threfore, though outward Vnitie can be no certaine note, Ʋse. of a true visible Church, where in there must be heresies, that the faithfull may be tryed; wherein there must be hypocrites, to pro∣uoke to soundnesse and sinceritie; especially, where veritie is ex∣cluded, or miserably corrupted. As it falleth out in the Romish Synagogue, which must necessarily therefore fayle, as wanting this pillar of Trueth: as being a kingdome fearefully diuided against it selfe; Yet when the Lord in mercy, shall ioyne both Iew and Gentile together, by one bond of Truth; euen to kisse Zach. 8. the blessed Sonne of righteousnesse: then shall they bee also of one minde and heart, consenting happily together, in the pure worship of the Lord, and so waiting (very wisely) their Masters second comming to Iudgement, euen as they sweetly continued together in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer; to confirme their holy entertainement of Acts 2. 42. the Lord IESVS, first comming in mercie. So faithfull is the Lord to performe hereby his promise, that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against this little flocke: so wise to confirme our Faith, in the accomplishment of this pro∣mise, to waite vpon the Lord, for the performance of all the pro∣mises, that are reuealed in the word; that so we might bee made meete for the inioying of them, and by the power of Faith, lay hold of eternall life.
THE SECOND PART. THE SVBIECTION OF CANAAN. And let Canaan be his seruant. WELL, thus haue wee heard, the nature and properties of the True visible and militant Church. Thus haue wee also discerned the Priuiledges thereof. Now let vs consider further, of the Church malignant: It followeth. And let Canaan be his seruant: That is, See∣ing Canaan is the sonne of the bond-woman, and therefore must haue no inheritance with the sonne of the free woman; howso∣euer he may for a time abide in the familie, and enjoy both out∣ward communion, and priuiledges with the sons of Adoption: Yet, let Canaan bee seruant to Iapheth, and to his posteritie, the malignant Church shall be in subiection to the true; though for a time the hypocrite may prouoke and insult ouer the true mem∣ber, yet shall this both serue for the good of his Saints, to purge out their drosse, and prouoke them to perfection: and when their war-fare is accomplished, all their enemies shalbe brought in subiection. Psal. 72. So then, first, it appeareth that there is as well, a Cham to mocke and curse, that he may be accursed; as a Shem to blesse, that he may be blessed: as well a Cain to murther, that hee may
heape vp damnation to himselfe: as there is an Abel to offer vp an acceptable sacrifice, and so bee made a sacrifice, that he may be freed from corruption; that he may be so crowned with incor∣ruption and eternall glorie: not the Familie of our Sauiour CHRIST himselfe shalbe free from a Iudas, tray or to betray his master, that he may offer vp his soule a sacrifice for sinne: and performe a plentifull redemption for his mysticall body. A malignant Church there hath bene, and must be to the worlds end. It is the decree of the mightie God, that some shall be on the There is a malignant Church. 3. Doctr. Reasons. Matth. 25. Ʋse. left hand, euerlastingly appointed to bee vessels of wrath. And therefore, the fall of man is also determined and so disposed, that the malignant Church may bee left in that estate, which it hath willingly chosen, and may be ripened thereunto, by refusing or abusing the meanes of saluation. And therefore, vaine is that dreame, that al shalbe saued & vainer their conceit, that though in their daily practises, they are hastening to destruction: yet still they are confident, their estate is as good as any: their hearts are good, they meane well: they are but flesh and blood: the Lord is mercifull. And will the Lord be mercifull to presumptuous sin∣ners? If the heart be good, will not the fruit be according? can we gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thistles? Surely no: They are of their father the deuil, because they doe his works: they are led captiue at his will, into all maner of wickednes. And there∣fore his seruants they are, to whom they obey; he will pay them Iohn 8. their wages, euen the wages of sin, the second death. And therefore if thou wilt know that thou art not of this accur∣sed race, diue not into the secrets of God, & say; If thou art dam∣ned, thou canst not do withal. It is in vaine to striue against Gods will: in vaine to wash thy hands in innocency. But in the Name of God, goe to the reuealed word: and therein discerning what thou art by nature, labour by the power thereof to feele this thy How to ap∣roue our elues not to ee of the malignant Church. woull condition; yea, to feele it a burden that thou canst no way endure: and so hunger thou after Iesus Christ, to be eased thereof: apply him by faith, for the acceptance of thy person into the fa∣uour of thy God: and put him on by faith, that so thou mayst be renued in the spirit of thy minde, towalke worthy of so great sal∣uation, & yet stil labor how to be found in him, not hauing thine owne righteousnesse, that so renuing thy repentance dayly for
former failings, thou mayst receiue continuall vertue from this fonntain, to the daily cleansing of thy polluted nature, & to ena∣ble thee daily to more constant obedience; that so thou mayst grow vp in him (which is the head) into all holines, in the feare of God: when thou hast finished all things, yet standing fast in him, that thou mayst with patience expect the recompence of the reward, & patience may bring forth the perfect worke in the tryal of thy Faith, that so thou maist receiue the end of thy Faith, which is, the saluation of thy soule. Thus must thou assure thy selfe, that thou art not a reprobate. 1. Cor. 1. 5. 6. But where is this Malignant Church to be found? Surely, re∣probate Cam suckes of the same breasts with chosen Abel: both Shem, and Cham are nourished in the same Familie, and preserued in the same Arke. The Lord is the Sauiour of all men, but espe∣cially of those that doe beleeue. 1. Tim. 4. The malignant Church is sorted euen with the Elect, and chosen Ge∣neration. 24. Doctr. Militant Church a mixt com∣pany. Matth. 13. 1. Ioh. 2. 19. Iohn 15. 22. Luke 12. 47 The hypocrite and true beleeuer, make one Militant Church. The Tares must grow vp with the wheat, vntill the time of haruest; least in plucking vp the tares we plucke vp the wheat also: and there must be deceiuers, to try, and purge the Elect: Yea, to assure the Saints, that the house doth of right appertaine to them, when those that are in the Church shall willingly goe out thereof, howsoeuer for a time they haue roosted therein: that it may appeare, they were neuer truely of vs. Shall not the hypo∣crite hereby be made inexcusable? Must he not be beat with ma∣ny stripes, because he knowes his masters wil & doth it not? Doth not the admirable power & wisdom of God appeare, in ordering these two contraries in the same fold, that ech may further other, to their contary end? Shall not the iustice of God be made glori∣ous, in seuering the Sheep frō the Goats, at that great day? That vnto the Lord alone, may be ascribed the glory of all his works. And therefore, as this serueth to reprooue such, as dreame of Ʋse. such a Church in this life, which may be free from this mixture, because it is onely proper to the Church tryumphant, to haue all her vessels holy vnto the Lord, to haue euery member truely sanctified. So it also condemneth those which shroude them∣selues vnder pretence of this mixture, assuming therefore their state to be good, because they are onely members of the visible
Church: They are Professors: They will come to the Church: They are Christians, they heare the Word, partake of the Sa∣craments, &c. Haue not those which haue boasted of greater matters, & bene truly interressed in more glorious outward pri∣uiledges: Matt. 7. 23. yet not withstanding, heard that fearefull voyce; I know you not, depart from mee, ye workers of iniquitie. Hath not the court which is without the Temple bene cast out, and gi∣uen to the Gentiles? Haue they not troden vnder-foot the holy Reuel 11. 2. Esay 33. 4. Citie? Haue sinners in Sion liued afraid? Hath not shame come vpon the Hypocrites? could they bee able to dwell with the de∣uouring fire? could they indure the euerlasting burning, because the common priuiledges be abused? Surely, as we may not leaue a Church because of this mixture, lest we also depriue our selues of the true & speciall priuiledges thereof: So we must not content our selues onely with the out∣ward euidence, lest in the day of reckning, we be foūd too light. And therefore labour wee so in the Church, that we may bee also true and liuing starres, euen liuely members, and true bran∣ches of the Vine, CHRIST IESVS. And that we shall doe, if not despising and reiecting the out∣ward meanes; as the word, Sacraments, because the hypocrite abuseth them vpon pretence of reuelation, or a more Spirituall How to ap∣proue our selues not to be hypocrites. worship. Wee doe not yet rest, and content our selues heere∣with, but rather try all things by the blessed Spirit; praying in the Spirit, and vnderstanding by the Spirit, what the Letter de∣liuereth; and by the grace of the Spirit, abiding in the Spirit: and not onely in the outward man, still hungring in the spirit, after the best graces, and walking by Faith, and not by sinne: ayming aboue all at the glory of our GOD; and endeuouring that our whole spirits, and soules, & bodyes, may be kept blame∣lesse, vnto the comming of out Lord IESVS. Thus may wee approue our selues, to haue chosen the better part. Thus may wee discerne our selues, to be chosen to the bet∣ter part, not to loue the world, though wee must needs be in it. Not to be of the hypocrites, though in the same Church wee are conuersant with them. Comforting our selues, that as there is a time, that the sonne of the bondwoman shall be cast out; so while yet it is our Lot to
abide in the flocke, to be troubled and tryed with this viperous generation. Yet shall Canaan be but a seruant to Iapheth. The Hypocrite, so long as he abides in the Church, is subiect to the true Beleeuer. All his gifts shall serue onely for the good of the Elect, Prou: 25. The hypo∣crite a seruāt to the Elect. Iob: 27. though for his owne further condemnation. Though hee should heape vp siluer as the dust, and prepare Rayment as the clay: He may prepare it, but the iust shall put it on, and the innocent shall diuide the siluer. Hath he knowledge for any other end but to confound others, though himselfe be a cast away? Doe his gifts abused, serue to any other end then for a touch-stone, whereby to trie and compare the gifts of the elect, that they may not rest in any outward gifts, but onely vpon IESƲS CHRIST? Is he not the purse-bearer for the good of the Church, doing good for vaine-glorie, or by respects, that so hauing his reward already, he may be excluded the reward to come. Is he any other then a stoole, to dresse foode for the children? well may hee licke his Fingers, hee may haue a taste and glimpse Hebr: 6. 4. 5 thereof, but his Stomacke is ouer-cloyed with the loue of the worlde. It is enough to taste, and it will be too much that hee hath tasted. And is hee not in the day of trouble, a seruant to the Elect? Doth hee not prooue a ransome for the iust? Is hee not for his Ʋse. prosperitie and vaine-glorie, the obiect of the enemies malice? Him they enuie, for the pride of his holie Mountaine. Him they thirst after, for his pompe and riches. And while they are rifling him, doe not the righteous escape? Is not that desire of the wicked satisfied? Is not Gods purpose accomplished for the pur∣ging of his Church, for the preseruation of his chosen? Lo thus Canaan is a seruant vnto Iapheth. And therefore, 1. let this serue to humble the Hypocrite in his greatest pompe, hee is no better then a slaue for the Churches good; So that the more hee enioyeth, the greater shall be his condemnation. And let this comfort the Elect in theyr greatest abasing, their greatest Enemies shall serue theyr turne: And can the LORD
then faile them, or forsake them? Onely be wee wise, not to loose our right, let vs not despise the Hypocrites gifts, because hee abuseth them; Neither let vs How to make vse of an hy∣pocrite. 1. Cor: 10. Galat: 6. 12. 2. Cor:: 15. Galat: 5. 1. Cor: 7. cloase with him in his shewes, and yeelde our selues to be measu∣red by his line, least now hee insult, and reioyce in our flesh, and so bring vs into bondage. But in the Name of GOD, stand wee fast', in the libertie which CHRIST hath purchased for vs, and bee wee not Ser∣uants vnto men, but to winne them to Christ, So shall Ca∣naan still bee a seruant to Iapheth, vntill the Bond-wo∣man be cast out with all her Children; that Ia∣pheth may enioy alone the Heauenly Canaan. FINIS.
CASES OF CONSCIENCE resolued in this Treatise. 1 HOw the Prouidence of GOD subordinates meanes. pagin: 4. & 5. 2. How we must pray, with the speciall marks thereof. pag: 7. 3. Of true Conesion, together with the Causes, Manner, and seue∣rall Markes thereof. pag: 11. 12. 13. 14. 4. How to approue our right in all outward Blessings. pag. 20. 5. Information to Parents how to behaue themselues, in regarde of their posteritie, whether they be good or euill. pag: 24. 25. 6. How to be preserued from falling into sinne. pag. 26. 7. How to be raised from sinne. pag: 27. 8. Why the Saints ofttimes misse of such Comforts, which heeretofore they haue enioyed. pag: 28. 9. Markes of true Religion. pag: 28. 10. How we may knowe our selues to be of the little flocke. pag: 32. 11. Howe to discerne the woorth and Excellencie of our Estate in grace. pag: 33. 12. Of the Estate of the Church in this life, subiect to infirmities; the vse and benefite thereof. pag. 40. 13. Howe to performe the Christian War-fare, that wee may con∣quere. pag: 4. 14. The securitie of the Church, and howe to procure the peace and welfare thereof. pag: 46. 15. How wee may know our selues to be strangers in the world. p 47. 16. How wee may procure and assure our constancie in holines. p. 49. 17. Causes of the falls of Gods children. 50. 51. 52. 18. Proofes of the generall Calling of the Iewes. pag: 54. 10. How to knowe that wee are not Reprobates nor Hypocrites. pagin. 56. 57. 20. How to make vse of an hypocrite.
