6809.5 22293056 25342
A MOST EXCEL∣LENT AND PROFI∣table Dialogue, of the power∣full iustifying Faith: Shewing what it is to beleeue in God, and what wonders are wrought by the power of Be∣liefe, be it worldly or Diuine; and what things do hinder Beliefe. Also how a man may hate himselfe, and by Faith forsake himselfe, and kill the deeds of the flesh. The effect of the talke is this: That he which beleeueth in God, and in his Son Iesus Christ, is able by the power of that Beliefe, to mortifie his flesh, with the lusts thereof, through the holy Ghost, and to serue God in spirit and truth. Translated out of Latine by Arthur Golding. LONDON Printed by N.O. for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his shop on Holburne bridge. 1610.
TO THE CHRI∣stian Reader. GOod Reader, amongst the multitude of books both written and prin∣ted, that be at this day spread abroade in the world, I lighted vpon this little Treatise of Faith: wherein perceiuing a matter handled, so necessary & needfull to be read and knowne of all men, especially in these dangerous (if not desperate) daies, wherin iniquity haue got∣ten the vpper hand: and men are growne so blinde, that they striue more about the chaffe,
then for the pure wheate corne it selfe, and content themselues to feede rather on the leaues then on the fruit of the fig tree; that is, more to talke of an imagined faith, then to know, haue, and enioy in themselues, the true, po∣werfull, and liuing faith,2 Thes. 1.11. Rom. 6.2.4. Prou. 15. which is a daily dying to sin, & rising to righteousnesse. Seeing the same, I say, a worke so necessary to bee knowne of all men, I thought it good, being also perswaded thereto by many that haue found great benefite by it, to be a means for the printing of it; that who∣soeuer haue any zeale or desire to know the true faith, and to haue it with the fruites thereof effectually in himselfe, as is said
he may view himselfe in this lit∣tle pithy Treatise of the power∣ful faith. The title with the Au∣thors name was torne out before it came to my hands: but whoso∣uer was the Writer, the matter will shew from whence it came. And so the almighty God which liueth euerlastingly, plant his true feare and faith in our hearts,Rom. 5.1. Gal. 5.6. that being iustified by this pow∣erful faith that worketh through loue, we may haue peace with God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A MOST EXCEL∣LENT AND PROFITA∣ble little Booke, concerning the true Christian Faith. The persons that talke together are Lewis and Frederike. Lewis. GLadly in good sooth, friend Frederick, haue I heard your talke both yesterday and to¦day, and thereby I haue lear∣ned many things which I knew not before; and this is one thing which hath chiefly moued mee, that you haue shewed that our Lord commandeth not any thing which is vnpossible to bée done.He begin∣neth at the difficulties of obeying GODS healthful comman∣dements. For I was of beliefe before, that (as it is commonly heard & taught) Gods commandements are vnpossible to be o∣beyed. Which perswasion (to tell you the truth) hath made me slow to obey, so as
I neuer strained my selfe to obey with my whole power. Fred. The like hath befalne vnto mee also, and I could neuer yeeld my selfe tru∣ly and earnestly to obeying, before I be∣leeued that it was possible to obey: And truly hereby I haue learned the force of Beliefe, which Beliefe maketh a man de∣sirous and willing to obey:The effe∣ctuall po∣wer & force of beliefe. And desire be∣ing afterward matched with power giuen of God, bringeth to passe that a man doth the things which he hath beleeued him∣selfe to be able to do, and so he is saued by obeying, as he was earst vndone by diso∣beying. And so being led by the spirit of Christ, he fulfilleth the righteousnes of the law, not walking after the flesh, but liuing after the spirit: which righteousnesse is therfore called the righteousnesse of the law,The righ∣teousnesse of the law, and why it beareth that name. not for that it maketh the beleeuer righteous, but because the law requireth it. For the whole performance thereof is Christs, because it is brought to passe by his power and spirit, liuing & working in those that are his. The law thē cōmandeth, & Christ fulfilleth, & so the praise is due, not to the commander, but to the perfor∣mer. Neuerthelesse it were to smal purpose
to beleeue that it is possible to obey God, vnlesse a mā do also know the way how God may be obeied, without the which o∣bedience faith is dead, & without faith no man can be saued.Beliefe without o∣bedience is dead: But this I would haue you to be perswaded of my Lewis, that the discourses both of vs and of all others are (to say no worse of them) vnprofitable, if they traine vs not to obedience, and to the renewing of the man. Lew. These things are true Frederike. Therefore that I may fare somewhat the better by your cōmunication, I pray you shew me by what meane I may attaine to obey God. For inasmuch as you haue shewed me by your talke, that it is pos∣sible to be done, I haue conceiued a desire of obeying. Fred. O my Lewis,A godly & Christian wish con∣cerning o∣bedience. would God that I my selfe were rightly obedient, to the in∣tent I might leade thee by the hand, to obedience. As now it is impossible for me to leade you further then I my selfe haue attained vnto. Lew. Yet notwithstāding I beléeue you haue procéeded further forward then I haue done, & therfore I beséech you shew me but as far as you your selfe are gone.
Fred. Willingly will I do that, Lewis: but I am afraid the hardnesse and rough∣nesse of the way will scare you from it. Lew. Feare not: I hope I am ready to al things, be they neuer so hard, so I may attaine to the end that I desire. Fred. I pray God to establish this wil∣lingnesse of yours, & to bring it through∣out to the end. And therefore to goe in hand with the matter, you know how the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes hath written, that without saith it is vnpossible to please God. Lew. I know it well. Fred. Beliefe in God is most ne∣cessary to the obtai∣ning of sal¦uation.First of all then you must beleeue in God if you will be saued. Lew. Procéede on then to the other things my Fredericke. For as concerning beliefe, I haue euer from my child-hood beléeued in God: and truly I am of opini∣on, that there be very few (if there be any at all) which beleeue not in God. Fred. Many things are easie to bee said which are hard to bee done.Indeed it is very easie to be said, and so are men commonly perswaded. But I feare me it is said rather rashly, and of custome, then of truth. For the time hath bene, that euen I also haue beleeued the same, both of my selfe, and of others;
but when it came to the tryall, then I saw how farre of I was. Lew. Thinke you then that I haue no faith? Fred. I am not of opinion that you haue no faith Lewis, but I thinke you haue so slender a faith, as it cannot rightly bee said to be faith, or saue you. And I pray you bee not offended with mee, for in as much as you haue said that you are ready to all things, be they neuer so hard, it is meet afore all things that you shold suffer to haue it shewed, that you want the thing which you weene you haue aboundantly: & soothly,The first way to the knowledge of the truth the first entrance to the know∣ledge of truth, is to vnlearne the vntruth, or else there will be no roome for seede, where all is ouergrowne with weeds. Come on therefore: let vs examine your beliefe. I pray you Lewis, when you were a child did you beleeue in your father?What it is to beleeue in the Fa∣ther, is she∣wed by the gathering together of certaine circumstā∣ces. Lew. What meane you by beléeuing in my father? Fred. That you tooke him for your fa∣ther, and depended wholly vpon him. Lew. Yea that I did. Fred. Then if you wanted any thing, as shooes, apparell, or meate, you resorted
to none but him, neither doubted you a∣ny whit his good will towards you. Lew. Surely no more then of mine owne. Fred. Againe, if any mis-hap befel you, you had your eye vpon him onely. Lew. Yea verily. Fred. Also if he promised you any thing, you doubted not of his performance. Lew. No more then if I had had the thing already in my hand. Fred. Then tooke you no thought for his behauiour towards you, but onely of your owne towards him. Lew. You say truly. Fred. Moreouer, if he either comman∣ded you any thing,How need∣ful obedi∣ence to the Father is, is shewed by examples. or did any thing him∣selfe, whereof you being a child knew not the reason, or which seemed to you against reason: yet notwithstanding you did it, and stood not skanning doubtfully vpon his doings. Le. So is it. For vpon a time, whē new grapes were broght in, & he bad me tread vpon thē with my féet, surely me thought it was a fond thing to treade vpon so good and faire grapes, which I had rather should haue bene saued to eate. But be∣cause
he was my father, I thought he cō∣manded me not without a cause, & there∣fore I obeied him. Also at another time, whē he shredded his vines, & grafted trées to my séeming it was against reasō to cut off ye boughs which nature had brought forth, & which were likely to haue broght forth fruit. But yet this thought ran al∣waies in my minde, Unlesse this were good, my father would not do it. Fred. Now let vs come vnto God. You say you beleeue in God the Father, & by that name you call vpon him, saying: Our Father which art in heauen, and so forth. Surely it is meete therefore that you should depend vpon him no lesse then you depended vpon your father when you were a child. Lew. Yea. Fred. Then if you want any thing, you fly vnto God alone, and you doubt not at all but that hee will giue you all things bountifully. What? Doubt yee? why an∣swer you not my Lewis?Fleshly feare, . Confesse the truth, and let not fleshly feare restraine you, which is wont to with-hold men frō being aknown of their vices, because they are afraid, lest hee to whom they be to be
vttered, should mislike of them as of sinful folk, or make the lesse account of thē. But there is no such perrill toward you at my hand: for I cannot finde in my heart to mislike of any man for those things which I both see & bewaile in my selfe not long agoe; and I doubt not, but are in others al∣so, vnlesse they bee come already to their wayes end, which certesse we two (that is to say, you and I) haue not yet attained vnto; neither will I make the lesse account of you for confessing the things with your mouth to your friend, which I am sure you acknowledge already in your heart. Lew. O my Frederike I am ashamed to be acknowne of it. Uerily I am (yea euen very sore) afraid lest I should want bread and drinke, and such other things, specially when I sée I haue but a little money left, and no likely meane at hand whereby to get new money. Fred. What if you haue your purse full, or some meane in a readinesse whereby to come by money? thē you take no thought at all, or at least-wise, your thought is the lesse. Lew. It is so. Fred. Ergo, you trust to your money,
or to your owne policy,How belife in God is neglected, by trusting too much to these trāsitory & flightfull things. more then to God. Lew. Truly it is euen so. Fred. But when you were a child, you trusted onely to your father. Lew. Yea. Fred. Now then you see how you be∣leeue not in God, but in your mony, and in your owne policy. Verily I beleeue these things seeme boysterous vnto you, in that you be not able to deny them, and yet are either doubtful or ashamed to con∣fesse them so soone. But enforce your selfe Lewis. Many things are to bee sifted out which lye lurking in our hearts, and the very root must be gone vnto, without the plucking vp whereof we cannot bee saued. Let vs go on. What say you to aduersitie Lewis? Is your minde nothing troubled at it? Lew. Yes very sore. I can very ill a∣way with it; and besides that, I séeke all the corners of my wit for worldly helpe. Fred. What do you concerning Gods promises?That Gods promises deceiue not the belee∣uers. Hee hath promised to giue all things needfull for your life, if you first seeke his kingdome and righteousnesse. Do you certainly beleeue that promise, so
as you doubt no more of his faithfulnesse then you did of your fathers when you were a child. Lew. Alas, I am farre from it. Fred. But if your neigbour Henry Rot∣tenfield, a rich man, and (in account of the world) a man of good credit, had promi∣sed you three hundred crownes, I am of o∣pinion you were ridde of that care for a good sort of yeares. Lew. Yea that I were. Fred. Now God hath promised not 300. crownes, but all things that you haue need of, and yet you distrust him. Lew. O how truly you say? Fred. Lesse therefore doe you beleeue in God, I say not than in your owne fa∣ther, but than in Henry Rottenfield. Lew. I am compelled to confesse the truth. Fred. And yet men may start from their promises,Two things may let mē frō perfor∣ming their promises▪ either through vntrustinesse, or for want: wherof none of both can befall vnto God. You therefore by this distrust of yours, doe falsly accuse God, either of vntrustinesse, or of want. Lew. I do so indéed. Fred. Now if you doe thus distrust of
God in the sustenance of your body, which notwithstanding you haue neuer wanted to this houre, can you trust to him for the blessed & endlesse life which you neuer yet tasted of? For consider the mat∣ter after this sort with your selfe: If a king should now send an Embassadour vnto you to adopt you for his son, and you be∣leeued him, how would you behaue your selfe? Lew. Truly what substance soeuer I haue, I would make no reckoning at all of it; & being here as a Way farer in body, I should haue my minde running vpon the Court: for a much like thing happe∣ned to me when I was a stripling. For whereas I liued in very slender state, I was called into the houshold of a certaine Gentleman of great worship and wealth,Honors change ma¦ners, as the common prouerbe saith. wherupon I felt my mind so altered, yt I thought of none of the things which I had thought of before, neither was I pincht with any further care. Insomuch that when my father & my mother were about to haue sent me a little money, I sent them word againe, that thenceforth I should néed no money. What néed ma∣ny words? I imagined aforehand in
my minde, a kinde of fashion of the buil∣dings, and of the place, and of the persons among whom I was to dwell, and yet had I neuer seene them. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis. For I my selfe haue had experience of the like. But what if you had not beleeued that mes∣sage? Lew. Surely I had continued in mine old state still. Fred. And what if a man had seene you abiding in your former state? might he not well haue auowed, that you beleeued not the message? Lew. Yes, very well. Fred. Now let vs come to the matter. To them that loue God,How boū∣tifull God is to them that loue him. God hath promi∣sed such good things, as neither eye hath seene, nor eare heard, nor heart of man conceiued. Let vs confesse the truth here also my Lewis. If we beleeued this pro∣mise throughly, should not our mindes be rauished vp into heauen, so as no earthly care might touch vs, & much lesse trouble vs? Lew. Proofes or tokens of mistrust in God.Yes verily. Fred. But now when wee bee glad of gaine, sory for losse, greatly grieued and
cast downe with reproch, hoysed vp with honour, and ouerioyed with pleasure; all which things are earthly: is it not an ap∣parant proofe, that we beleeue not Gods promises, but sticke still to the earthly in∣heritance? Lew. Yes that it is. Fred. What if God should promise vs some thing that might seeme vnpossible, as when he promised old Abraham a son by Sara, being old and barren too? Or what if hee should command vs a thing that might seeme vnreasonable? as when he willed the said Abraham to offer vp his sonne in sacrifice, by which sonne he had promised him an off-spring without number. Lew. Surely I am afraid wee would not beleeue him. Fred. And yet was Abraham the father of the faithfull;Abrahams faith is of necessity to saluation. so, as if we will bee saued, we must haue the faith of Abraham. And thus much concerning beliefe in the Fa∣ther.This (as I take it) is that which they call the histori∣call faith. Now if we come to the Sonne, I feare me, we much lesse beleeue in him. For I take not faith (as a number thinke it) to be a beleeuing that Christ hath done and
suffered the things which are written of him: for as for that faith or beliefe, the very diuels haue it. But I speake of the true, liuely, & mightfull faith, which is a∣ble euen to remoue mountaines; whereof the Lord speaketh thus.The signes that are peculiar to the belee∣uers. The signes that shal follow those which beleeue, are these: In my name they shall cast out Diuels, speake with new tongues, and driue away serpents: if they drinke any deadly thing it shal not hurt them. When they lay their hands vpon sicke folkes, the sicke folkes shall recouer. Doe these tokens follow your faith, Lewis? Lew. No verily, Fred. Then you haue not faith. Lew. Why? They deny that there is now any néede of myracles. Fred. Neither do I now require any such, neither were they at that time wrought by all beleeuers. For Paul writeth: Do all worke myracles? Haue all the gifts of healing? Doe all speake with tongues? The thing that I require, is the same that Peter requireth: Get you strength to your faith, (saith he.) For needs must the faith of any man or of any time haue strength, if it bee matched with loue.
Which thing, that you may the better vn∣derstand, consider the force of worldly beliefe.The force of worldly faith, and how won∣derfully it moueth men. A man beleeues that riches are good, and that it is possible for him to at∣taine to it by merchandise. Hereupon, leauing oftentimes a very faire and deare-beloued wife, and yong children at home, hee vndertakes the vnmeasurable perils of robbers, of waies, and of seas, and en∣dureth intollerable pains to feth the riches whereon hee hath set his beliefe and loue, euen from Taprobane, and the Isles of Canarie, which are the vttermost parts of the world: and it is his beliefe that pur∣chaseth him this stoutnesse. For vnlesse he beleeued, he would not do it. And there∣fore it may bee said that this man is enri∣ched by beliefe. What shall wee say of Learning, Le∣wis? The child beleeueth that learning and humane arts are a very goodly thing, and to bee sought with all his power. And thereupon applying himselfe to them day and night, hee endureth pouertie, cold, and whatsoeuer else, in seking them with all his might, to the intent hee may at∣taine to the thing which hee beleeueth to bee good.
He procee∣deth in shewing the strēgth of the worldly beleefe.Also what do souldiers? What kind of calamity is there which they vndertake not, to obtaine either victory or reward▪ How often watch they all the night long How often are they pinched with hun∣ger, insomuch that sometimes they eate Mice, Rats, Horses, yea & euen their own shooes, and afterward make their boast thereof? Whence haue they so great strength? Whence, but of beliefe? For they beleeue the thing which they couet, to be good. Againe, what do hunters doe? do they not spend oftentimes the whole winter nights abroad, when the cold is so great that it giueth euen the flints? Yea and what do louers? what inconue∣niences do they not most gladly endure to the intent to please the partie whom they be in loue withall? And still they deeme themselues happy that they haue suffered those things for her sake. And this force of beliefe is seene, no onely in seuerall persons,How great force worldly be∣leefe hath euen amōg some whole Nations. but also euen in whole nations. For whereof comes it, that our Italians doe so easily absteine from drunkennesse? or that the Swissers are so resolute in battell, that they will rather be
slaine then flye? Euen of this, that they are perswaded in themselues, that so they ought to doe. And surely if they perswa∣ded themselues alike in all other vertues, they should excell alike in all other ver∣tues. Many other things of the same sort may be gathered: so great is the power of the beliefe that worketh in thē. There∣fore let vs examine our faith, that we may seee whether Christs spirit do dwell in vs or no. Christ telleth vs that they bee blessed which doe hunger and thirst after righte∣ousnesse: and hee commandeth vs to hoord vp treasure in heauen. Come on. Doe you feele as great thirst of righte∣ousnesse,A triall of Christian faith most worthy to be obser∣ued. as euer you haue selt at any time of water? or as great desire of Gods kingdome, as the couetous man feeleth desire of money? Doe you watch day and night to please God? Haue you euer spent a whole yeare or twaine in the study of godlinesse? Lew. Nothing lesse. Fred. Well: What strength haue you in suffering of wrongs? If a mā strike you on the right cheeke, can you turne to him the left? Can you blesse him that curseth you?
Can you wish well to him that reuileth you? Can you pray for him that raileth vpon you? Can you seeke his welfare which practiseth your death? Lew. Soothly, I am very farre off from these things. Fred. Where o∣bedience is not, there is not faithThen doe you not beleeue in Christ. For if you did, you would obey his commandements. Lew. But I neuer referred beléefe to this obedience. Fred. What manner of thing then did you take faith to be? Lew. I tooke it to be a trust of Gods frée-bestowed mercy, offered vnto vs in Christ. Fred. To what purpose then deeme you Christs commandements to serue? Lew. To put vs in minde of our infir∣mitie, in that we be not able to performe the things which we ought to doe, and so to make vs hang wholly vpon Christ, who hath performed them for vs, and im∣parteth them vnto vs. Fred. Euen the Apostles themselues trusted to Gods free-bestowed mercy, & yet they obeyed Christs commandemēts. Neither doe I set saluation in our owne
obedience,The mark whereat mans sal∣uatiō shoo∣teth. but in Gods free mercy. But this I say, that whosoeuer beleeueth Gods free mercy aright, obeyeth Christs com∣mandements. And if a man doe beleeue but Gods free mercy onely, and not also his commandements, threatnings, promi∣ses, and sayings whatsoeuer:What things our forefathers attained to by their faith. I say, his saith is maimed, and vnauaileable. For the full & mighty faith or beliefe, is that where∣by the Saints haue subdued kingdomes, wrought righteousnes, obtained the pro∣mises, and done such other things as any man may wonder to think of thē. For that man doth not rightly beleeue in God, which vpon a rashnesse doth but onely beheight himselfe sauation by his free mercy,The fond & idle be∣liefe of the Iewes. (after which manner the Iewes do beleeue stil yet to this day:) but he which doth so flatly yeeld credit and assent, not to some one peece of Gods sayings and doings, but to all of them: as you haue reported your selfe to haue beleeued your father when you were a child: or as wee spake of the couetous and lecherous per∣sons, which haue such a faith or beliefe, as is not dead and idle, but effectuall and workfull, counterfeiting the spirit of Christ, and neuer resting till it haue ob∣tained
the thing that it desired. Such a one is the true Christian faith,The work fulnesse of Christi∣an faith ap∣peareth in charity. which wor∣keth through loue: and whosoeuer hath not such an one, doth falsly boast himself of saith. Therefore whereas men doe commonly challenge faith to themselues, and yet liue in all kinde of wickednesse, they lye, and haue not the true faith, but a dead one, which is no more worthy of the name of faith then a dead man is worthy of the name of a man. That this is not faith indeede, Christ himselfe sheweth suffici∣ently when he saith, that at his comming hee shall not finde faith vpon the earth. And also when vnto these which say, Lord, Lord, haue we not cast out Diuels in thy name? Haue we not wrought won∣ders in thy name? and hast thou not taught in our streetes? hee shall say, I know you not, get you hence yee workers of wickednesse.Who they bee which haue the true Chri∣stian faith Ye see he wil admit none for faithfull, but only the weldoers and the o∣beyers. For they be the only persōs which haue the true faith, of whom it is written thus: These are they which haue maintai∣ned Gods commandements, and the faith of Iesus. Now if you haue not the faith which may make you righteous,
(that is to say, chaste, lowly, gentle, libe∣ral, and indued with such other of the ver∣tues:) see how far you be off from being a∣ble to worke the myracles which Christ hath told vs should be the signes of faith. I require not here bodily myracles, which were appoynted to the first trayning of the Church vnto faith:To what purpose bodily my∣racles are wrought. But the thing that I require, is, that he which beleeueth in Christ should breed the same vertues in other men, which God hath bred in him: that is to say, that of drunkards, he should make them sober: of lecherous, chaste: of irefull, milde: and at a word, of vnrigh∣teous, righteous,The diuels that lurk within vs, and what is meant by speaking with new tongues. For, to cast out Diuels, is to cast out the vices of lecherie, coue∣tousnesse, wrathfulnesse, & such other. Al∣so to speake with new tongs, is to speake with fiery & burning speech, such as no man can withstand; of which sort theirs is, which speake the things, not which they haue heard, but which they haue seen with their eies, heard with their eares, and felt with their hands: that is to say, which they haue printed throughly in their hearts, & which they do as verily beleeue, as you do verily beleeue that it is now day, or
that anone it shall bee night.The works of such as speak with new tongs. With such tongues they be able, truly and effectual∣ly to comfort the afflicted, to hearten the weake minded, to releeue them that are in despaire, to strengthen the feeble, to coun∣sell the fearefull, and to performe such o∣ther things, which I make farre greater ac∣count of, then of the working of outward myracles, and of such as belong but onely to the body. If a man haue not these things himselfe, he can conuey them into others: I see not by what right he cā claime faith, vnlesse it bee the faith which the Diuels haue, who do beleeue that there is a God, and do quake at him. But I speake of the true and iustifying faith, which maketh a man partaker of the nature of God, and causeth all things to bee possible to him.Of the true & iustify∣ing faith, & how migh∣ty it is in working. I haue shewed afore, how great force be∣liefe hath in matters of this world: and the same is to be seene euen in religion, be it false or true. The Turkes beleeue that wine is not to be drunke, & therefore they cannot forbeare wine. The Iewes beleeue that a man ought to absteine from the things which the law forbiddeth: & ther∣fore they absteine. There are to be found which do pine themselues to death with
long ouer-fasting: some whip themselues, I say not grieuously, but euen cruelly, till the bloud follow: other some for religion sake doe take vpon them long pilgrima∣ges,No man doubts but that all these things are spoken of the wic∣ked belee∣uers. wherein they endure beggery and many other inconueniences and perils. What shall I say of those which haue gel∣ded themselues? What shall I say of the Circumcellions, who (as the report goeth of them) to the intent to become Martyrs themselues, and to make otherfolks Mar∣tirs with them, destroied thēselues by sun∣dry sorts of death, as drowning, burning, and leaping from high places; and per∣swaded other men to do the like: al which they did throughly beleeue. For vnlesse they had beleeued that those things were to bee done, they would not haue done them.By an ar∣gument frō the lesser to the greater, he sheweth the force of true faith. To be short, whatsoeuer thing men beleeue is to be done, they cā (endeuor to) do it. Now if their beliefe being false, and not only not grounded vpon Gods com∣mādement, but alse cleane cōtrary there∣unto, haue notwithstāding such strength: I pray you what is not that faith or beliefe able to do, which is both commanded, & also procured and strengthened by him? Shal Gods spirit haue lesse power in man
then the spirit of Sathan? Shall light bee of lesse force then darknesse? Ye see what force Paules faith had:Paules faith war∣ranted by his owne record. Vnto this howre, (saith hee) we be hungry and thirsty, na∣ked, and buffeted; we bee tossed and tur∣moyled, we labour and worke with our owne hands. Being rayled at, wee wish well: being vexed, we suffer it: being re∣uiled, wee take comfort at it. If they be ministers of Christ, much more am I: In labour I exceede them: In taking stripes I goe beyond them: In being imprisoned I passe them: In death I haue often bene: Of the Iewes I haue fiue times recei∣ued fortie stripes saue one. Thrice haue I bene whipped. Once haue I bene stoned: thrice haue I suffered shipwracke: day & night haue I spent in the deepe seas. Of∣ten haue I iourneyed. Often haue I bene in danger of Riuers, of Robbers, of mine owne Countrymen, & of strangers; in the Citie, in the Wildernesse, on the sea, and amongst false brethren: Often haue I bin tired with trauelling and with wat∣ching: often haue I fainted for hunger and thirst in fasting: often haue I bene a cold for want of cloathes. And besides, all the other things which daily distresse
me,What thing held Paul occu∣pied chief∣ly & aboue all other things. verily the care of all Churches lyeth vpon me. Who is weakened and I am not the worse at ease for it? who is offended and I am not grieued at it? This is the al∣mightie strength of faith Lewis, where∣with he being armed, was enabled to do al things by him which strēgthned him: and if we haue the same strength, then surely there is cause for vs to thinke our selues to haue the same faith: if not, thē let vs not beare our selues in hand that wee haue the thing which we wāt; lest it befal vnto vs as it doth to that man which dreameth that he hath found a treasure, and when he awaketh, he hath not an halfepeny? Lew. O my Fredericke, my imagina∣tion that I abounded in faith,The true faith hath scarce any place in the world. is but a dreame: but now being wakened by your words, I sée plainly, that I am quite and cleane without it, as the rest of the world is. For as for this effectuall power of faith, I neither finde it in my selfe, nor perceiue it in the world. Fred. That you be faithlesse Lewis, it is to be lamented: but that being so, you see your self to be so, that is not only not to be lamēted, but also to be reioyced at: like as a sicknesse is it selfe to be misliked, but
the knowledge of the sicknesse is to bee well liked. Lew. By what meane then, or by what medicine may this my disease of vnbe∣liefe be cured? Fred. By taking away the impedimēts of vnbeliefe. Lew. Which are those? Fred. You haue heard them of me al∣ready in my former talke. Howbeit for as∣much as you haue scantly cōceiued them, as things that your eares haue not heard of: for our maner is not to bee ouerhasty in bearing words or things away which we haue not heard of afore, I will tell you thē more plainly. Giue good heed. What thinke you to bee the cause why no man in matters of iustice,The impe∣diments of faith shew∣ed by an argument taken from the Court barre, or from a case in Law. is admitted to bee a witnesse in his owne case? Lew. Because all men doe loue them∣selues, and therefore will euer speake for themselues, or at least wise, neuer against themselues. Fred. You say rightly. And if they bee not willing to speake against themselues, neither are they willing to heare any thing against themselues. For the truth that is a∣gainst them, misliketh them lesse out of a∣nother
mans mouth, then out of their owne. Lew. It doth so. Fred. And if they be vnwilling to heare those things, truly they be not willing to beleeue thē. For no mā wil willingly be∣leeue the things which he is loath to heare of: but al men do easily beleeue the things which they like of.An exam∣ple by the vse of things in common. As for example. If a man should say, that the goods of Christi∣ans ought to be common among them, whether sort would easiliest beleeue it, the rich or the poore? Lew. The poore. Fred. Why so? Lew. Because that by that match they should not lose, but rather win. Fred. What would the rich folke doe? Lew. Hardly, or not at al rather, would they beleeue it; because they should there∣by become the poorer, which thing they mislike of. Fred. What if a man should deny that mens soules are deliuered out of Pur∣gatory by Masses?Another example by the deli∣uering of soules, &c. whether would the Clergie or the Laytie soonest beleeue it? Lew. Not the Clergie because that opinion would bee a diminishing of
their reuenewes. Lewis. What if it should bee said that vsurie were vnlawful for Christians: were it possible to make those beleeue it which liue vpon vsurie, and become rich by it? Lew. Scarcely. Fr. The last example by the per∣secution for religiōs sake.What if one should teach, that men ought not to bee put to death for religi∣on: whether would they soonest beleeue it which are in credit with the Magistrats, and are Diuines themselues, and yet are persecuters of other men, or at the least∣wise willing to persecute them; or the contrary sort? Lew. The contrary sort. For I know some Diuines, who as long as they wan∣ted that authority, and were troubled for religiōs sake, taught that men ought not to be molested for religion. And yet the selfe same persons hauing gotten wealth and authority, haue both taught & done the contrary. Fred. You see then how faith is hinde∣red by selfe-loue,Selfe-loue is the hin∣derer of faith. so as men do not easily beleeue the things that are contrary to their liking. Lew. I sée it plainly.
Fred. Let vs consider then whether the same cause bee not an impediment to our beliefe in Christ. In the doctrine of Christ are histories, promises, and commande∣ments. As for the histories, and promises, almost all men beleeue them, because that in them no duty on mans behalfe is re∣quired. Neither is there any controuersie among Christians,There is no boubt among Christians cōcerning the doings of Christ: whether Christ haue done the things which are reported of him in the holy Scriptures, or whether he haue promised the things that are contey∣ned there. But what is the cause that so few beleeue his commandements? Lew. Do fewer folke beléeue his com∣mandements, then do beléeue his doings and promises? Fred. Doubt you of that? First, as tou∣ching Gods commandements, whereas our maisters vniuersally be wont to teach, that they be not set downe to the intent we should obey them, but to make vs ac∣knowledge our infirmities: what else is it then a discrediting of Gods commande∣ments. For seeing our Lord hath said, that all things are possible to him that belee∣ueth: and Paul saith, he is able to doe all things through him that strgēthneth him:
surely that man which not onely obey∣eth not Gods commandements,What is the cause that so few beleeue Gods com∣mande∣ments. but also beleeueth that it is vnpossible to obey them, doth not beleeue the commande∣ments aright. Whereupon it followeth, that looke how few folke obey the com∣mandements, so few do beleeue them. Lew. But this saying which you al∣ledge, namely, that all things are possible to the beléeuer, séemeth to bee spoken of myracles, and not obedience. Fred. It is spoken generally of all the workes of faith which I spake of in al∣ledging that place of the Epistle to the Hebrewes. Through faith the Saints con∣quered kingdomes, wrought righteous∣nesse, &c. For surely, to worke righteous∣nes is a deed of faith. Besides this, if Gods wil be, that mē should through faith be a∣ble to work myracles,Not myra∣cles, but beliefe is needfull to saluation. which notwithstā∣ding are not of the necessity of their salua∣tion: much more is it his will that they shold by the same faith be able to obey his commandements; seeing that without o∣bedience a man cannot be saued: and that to obey is not a harder matter then to work myracles; and yet that to obey be∣longeth to all beleeuers: whereas to work
myracles belongeth not to all, as I haue shewed afore. Lew. Indeede these things are true Fredericke, but yet there remaineth one thing which I would faine haue opened vnto me. You said euen now, that all men beleeue Christs histories, but not his cō∣mandements likewise.The belee∣uing of Christs re∣surrection maketh all the rest of his sayings & doings credible. But if they be∣leeued ye whole story of Christ, & special∣ly his resurrection, in my opinion they should beleeue all the other things also. For no doubt but if they beleeued that Iesus Christ is risen from the dead, in so doing they should both beleeue that he is the very sonne of God indeed, and more∣ouer giue credit to all his sayings. In which respect Iohn said: These things are written to the intent yee might be∣léeue that Iesus is the annoynted sonne of God; and that through beleeuing it, yée should obtaine life by his name. Fred. Whereas I deny that they beleeue his commandements, I would not haue it so taken, as though they beleeued not that his commanding of those things was well, and as became the sonne of God to doe: but that forasmuch as they beleeue not that the things which he commanded
to be done,What is meant by not be∣leeuing of Christs commāde∣ments, and who they be that of∣fēd in that behalfe. are either possible or needfull to be done, misconstruing them after their own fancy, & not according to his mind: I say they beleeue them not aright. For your better vnderstanding whereof, I will giue you an example. When God hauing brought the children of Israel out of Ae∣gypt, commanded them to enter into the land of Canaan, did they beleeue that God commanded it? Lew. Yea verily. Or else they would neuer haue sent spies into the land of Ca∣naan. Fred. Why then did they not obey him? Lew. Because they were of opinion that the Canaanites could not bee ouer∣come; and that God had brought them out of Egypt,How the Israelites beleeued not God in that they beleeued not his cō∣mādemēts not to conquer Canaan, but to perish wretchedly in the wilder∣nesse. Fred. Then did they not beleeue Gods commandement according to Gods mea∣ning; forasmuch as his meaning was that they should haue inuaded Canaan, & sub∣dued the Canaanites. Lew. You say the truth. Fred. Thē did they not beleeue aright
Lew. No, not aright. Fred. Whether then are they to be cal∣led beleeuers, or vnbeleeuers? Lew. Truly by this reason they should be called vnbeléeuers. Fred. And soothly so they be (Lewis) in very deede. For in the very same place God calleth them vnbeleeuers in these words: How long will this people spite me? How long will it be ere they will be∣leeue me, for all the miracles which I haue wrought among thē? Now if these be iust∣ly called vnbeleeuers, the same reason lea∣deth vs to call the others vnbeleeuers, and distrusters of Christs commande∣ments, forasmuch as they do no lesse mis∣construe the precepts of Christ, thā the Is∣raelites did the commandements of God. For Christ hath not wrought fewer mi∣racles to vs, then Moses did to them. Neither did Christ command vs lesse ear∣nestly to subdue sin, then God comman∣ded them to subdue the Canaanites. Nei∣ther are we lesse spiteful & distrustful to∣wards him, if we deny that sin may be sub∣dued, when as hee both commandeth vs, and promiseth vs strength; then they were spitefull and distrustfull towards
God, in denying it to be possible to ouer∣come the Canaanites. Neither do we of∣fend lesse against the meaning of Christ, when we deny that it is either possible for vs, or meant by Christ, that wee should do the things which he hath commanded vs to doe, then the Israelites offended a∣gainst the meaning of God, when they wrested it another way then his open words imported. And therefore in de∣nying them to beleeue Christs comman∣dements, I do them no wrong. As touch∣ing the place of Iohn by you alledged,How the place taken out of Iohn is to be vn∣derstood. it is to be taken as if a man should haue said at that time to the Israelites, GOD hath wrought these miracles for your sakes in Aegypt, to the intent you should beleeue, and by beleeuing, enter into the resting place of Canaan. But the cause why all of them came not there, was not Gods purpose, but their owne hardening of their hearts against him: which thing would God were not done in Christ also. But we see it is so: howbeit the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews warneth vs not to do it, citing this saying out of a certaine Psalme:Psalm. 95.8 To day if ye heare his voyce, harden not your hearts, as your forefathers did harden
theirs.Selfe loue dazeleth mens eyes that they cannot see to beleeue the truth. Therefore to returne againe to the matter: Whereas these men are wont so diligently to picke out the things to be∣leeue, which belong to the office of God, & to refuse the things that pertaine to the duty of man, I pray you what a dealing is it? Gods gracious goodnesse hath yeelded saluation to all men: O how gladly is this admitted? But as for that which follow∣eth, namely, to teach vs to forsake vngod∣linesse and worldly lusts, & to liue sober∣ly, righteously, & godlily in this world, that is a seede which fewe men receiue. Many beleeue that Christ hath so perfor∣med that poynt, as that wee neede not to performe the same. Againe, that the man is blessed to whom the Lord imputeth no sinne, is easily beleeued of all men: but as for that which is annexed to it, namely, and in whose heart there is no guile, that they beleeue to be impossible. Likewise, it is commonly vaunted with full mouth, that they which are in Christ Iesus, are not subiect to any condemnati∣on: for it is a very sweete saying indeed: but as for this, Which walke not after the flesh, but after the spirit, it is bitter, and of very fewe beleued. And (to make fewe
words) men doe easily beleeue that they shall reape with ioy: but if you tell them that they must sow with teares, they put that sentence ouer vnto Christ.What is the cause why false Pro∣phets do easily finde credit. Hereupon it cometh to passe, that the false prophets, because they teach delectable things, and blaze abroad Gods pleasāt promises with open mouth, do easily finde credit: where∣as the true Prophets, because they vrge men, & make them afraid with threats, & teach the truth seuerely, do beare sway a∣mong very few; according as Esay crieth out: Lord who hath beleeued our prea∣ching? Hereby it appeareth plainly (my Lewis) that selfe-loue is the lot that men beleeue not the truth. And if self-loue were done away, they would beleeue no∣thing so easily as the truth, as who are born vnto truth, and doe by and by fall in ac∣quaintance with it, as a thing of their owne kinne, if there bee no impediment to let it. Therefore if you will rightly be∣leeue the truth, (that is to say, God,) you must needes put away selfe-loue, or ra∣ther conceiue a hatred towards your selfe. Lew. We must  hate our selues, and not loue our selues.Truly Frederike▪ you win me to be of your mind in these things: but it is
no smal matter for a man to hate himself. Neither do I sée how I may attaine vnto it, or yet perceiue whether it bee possible for me to attaine thereto, I am so farre in loue with my selfe. Fred. I know Lewis, that it is a very hard thing, and passing the strength of a mā but in this case we must beare in mind, how that when Sara beleeued not that she might breed child,All things, be they else neuer so impossible are possi∣ble to the power of God. our Lord said of her: Is there any thing which God cannot do? The things that are vnpossible to man, are possible to God, and where God is our guide, nothing is to be despaired of. Lew. I beseech you then shew me the way to attaine thereunto. Fred. By Gods leaue I will do it: giue eare vnto me.How per∣nicious selfe-loue is, is shew∣ed by cer∣taine fami∣liar exāplesIf I had a seruant in whom I very much delighted, faire-spoken, and seruiceable, which should prepare mee some meates that best liked mine appe∣tite, & with the same meats should mingle poyson to bereaue me of my life; and you, who loue mee, should haue knowledge thereof, what would you do? Lew. Surely I would spéedily and earnestly giue you warning, that you should not taste of those meates, nor loue
that seruant; for that hée lay in waite for your life. Fred. What if I should say, that I am delighted with the seruiceable behauiour of that seruant, and with the sweetnesse of his cooquery? Lew. I would counsell you that you should not make so great account of your present pleasure, as to lose your life for it. Fred. What if some friend of yours were in loue with a flattering and painted harlot, which were diseased with the French pockes▪ and you knew of it: what would you doe? Lew. I would make him priuy to her disease, and (to the vttermost that I could) I would disswade him from her company. Fred. What if hee said he were deligh∣ted with her? Lew. Men are aught with pleasure as shes are  an angle & a bat  their vn¦doing.I would tell him that fishes also are delighted with baites: but yet that it were folly to purchase so small plea∣sure with so great sorrows, or rather with death. Fred. What if hee should say, that hee cannot but like well of the pleasure?
Lew I would counsell him, that if hée could not yet restraine the desire of his mind, he should at least-wise resist it, and not yéeld to obey it. Fred. But what if hee obeyed it for all that? Lew. Then would I thinke him foolish∣er then the brute beasts, and worthy of a∣ny mischiefe. For fishes, wolues, foxes, puttockes▪ and such other, bee they neuer so hungry, will neuerthelesse forbeare the baite, if they spye or mistrust any snare, or any thing wherewith they may bee caught. Fred. You say truth Lewis.Euery mās own flesh is a harlot, of whom he warneth men to take very good heede. Thus then standeth the case. Euery mans owne flesh is as a harlot (as Iudas termeth it in his E∣pistle,) yea and a painted harlot, which with her enticements and faire faw∣nings, doth allure, delight, and egge the man to sinne, and hold him downe in sin, and at length throwe him downe into death of the soule. And man being igno∣rant of the poyson, embraceth the plea∣sures, and yeeldes himselfe ouer to them. Now commeth in truth as a friend vnto him, and warneth him that the wages of sinne is death, declaring vnto him that
his flesh whom he tooke to haue bene his friend,Most wholsome counsel, & worthy to be follow∣ed. is his deadly enemy. Therefore if thou desire to be saued, thou must beleeue that thou hast not a more noysome enemy to thee then thy selfe, that is to say, then thy flesh, or thy lustfulnes; & that as thou hast hitherto loued it, thou must hēceforth hate it & resist it, because it is noysome & deadly. And although thou canst not rid away her allurements out of hand, as in∣deede thou canst not, for they sticke fast to thee: the truth will say vnto thee, as it said in old time vnto Moses; Goe thy way into Aegypt (for it lyeth in thee to doe that) and I will bee with thy mouth, and I will enable thee to doe that which thou canst not do. Euen so Lewis, the truth saith vnto thee as now: Do thou what thou art able, and God will ena∣ble thee to doe that which thou canst not do. As for examples sake. Thou sittest at a well furnished table, and hast eaten i∣nough already to refresh thy powers, and to staunch hunger. Now there is brought in some delicate dishe, made to prouoke gluttony withall. By and by thy flesh is tempted with it, and putteth such an ima∣gination as this in thy head: This is a
fine dish, if I eate of it, I shall receiue plea∣sure by it. But the spirit striueth against the flesh, and warneth thee thus: Be∣ware Lewis, that thou yeeld not vnto vo∣luptuousnesse, for voluptuousnesse is a poysoner.The incō∣parable harmes that come of pleasure. For first, it calleth away thy mind from God, than the which there can be no greater mischiefe: for seeing that no man can serue two maisters, thou canst not serue both voluptuousnes & God; because voluptuousnesse ouerwhelmeth the mind, beareth it downe to the ground, and sepa∣rateth it from God. Besides this, it also hurteth the body with surfetting, inso∣much that although thou hadst no soule, yet oughtest thou to abstaine from super∣fluity, euen for thy bodies sake. I require not now that you should not be tempted with the inticements of the flesh, but that you should not obey them. And whereas you alledge that you cannot but obey thē, you be easily disproued. For if a man would giue you a floren to abstein frō the said dish, would you not absteine? (Yes.) And will you not absteine by reason of the truth? Do you not hereby bewray, that the truth beareth lesse sway with you then one floren? Or if some man should
threaten that he would giue you a blow on the eare if you refrained not: surely you would refraine. Behold God threatneth a blow vnto your soule, and yet you re∣fraine not. The like I say of all other things. You be minded to haue to do with a whore, but because a boy is by, you doe it not. Behold God is present, and yet you be not ashamed to do it.The pre∣posterous reerrig  the feare  worldl unishnēt fore the are of GODS rath & engeāce. Do you not now make lesse account of Gods presence then of the presence of a boy? Or if you forbeare for feare of punishment at mans hand, and not as well for feare of Gods punishment: doe you not preferre man before God? You are angry with a man, and would faine cudgel him, but you for∣beare for feare of the magistrate: Why forbeare you not as well for feare of God? I pray you make as great reckoning of God, as you doe of men; why doth the feare of God beare lesse sway with you then the feare of men? You slaunder your neighbour: God seeth the slaunder, and yet you do it neuerthelesse. But if men saw it,The cōclu∣ō gathe∣ed of the ings go∣g afore. you would not do it. Run through all things after the same sort Lewis, & you shall see that whosoeuer doth more for the loue or feare of men, then of God, doth
beleeue in men rather then in God. Lew. O my Fredericke, my conscience beareth me witnesse, that ye things which you say, be true and rightfull: but thereof springeth a griefe in my heart. Lew. Why so? did you feele any such griefe when we treated of Predestination, or of Free-will? Lew. No, none at all. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis.The know∣ing of ma∣ny, yea or of al things is no let  that  may serue the Diuell. For know∣ledge bringeth no griefe, but rather glad∣nesse, as which leaueth the old man vn∣minished. For although you could skill of all maner of mysteries, yet might you serue the Diuell euer stil. But now when we deale with the forsaking of our selues, the flesh perceiuing that she must goe to wracke for it▪ playeth as harlots are wont to doe when young men giue them ouer. They vexe them with the desire of them, and try all meanes to hold them still. E∣uen so that harlot the flesh, which bewit∣cheth al men with the cup of her vnclean∣nesse, as soone as shee perceiueth that a man mindeth to giue her the slippe, doth vexe him with the desire of her still, and leaueth nothing vnattempted, that shee may hold him still. Hereof breedeth great
griefe, according to the greatnesse of the loue towards the flesh; like as if you were to forsake your country, looke how much you were in loue with your country, being  natiue ountry, annot bee orsaken without griefe to vs. so much would it grieue you to forgo it. And surely sin is our country, (for in sin haue our mothers conceiued vs) which cannot bee forsaken without griefe. Here is that crosse of Christ, wherof he himselfe saith, If any man be minded to come after mee, let him take vp his crosse and follow me. And if any man come vnto me, & hate not father & mother, wife & children, brethrē and sisters, yea and euen his owne life, so as he be contented to beare his crosse and to follow me, he cannot bee my Disciple. And to the intent you may vnderstand what the hating of a mans selfe is, & what crosse it bringeth with it, consider it throughly by the hating of another man. If you hated a man deadly, how would you bee minded towards him? or what would you do to him? Lew. I would wish him all euill euen from my heart, & likewise enuy him any good: I would be sorry for his welfare, and glad of his aduersity. If a man brought me word of any mischāce of his. I would
reioyce at it, & gētly entertain him, & libe∣rally reward the messēger with some gift. To be short, I would loue mine enemies foes, and do them good; & I would hate his friends, and do them harme if I could. All his sayings and doings would I prye at, and take aduantage of them, and by all meanes possible (yea many times euen to mine own harme) would I hurt him. Fi∣nally I would kill him if I could, and that not by any common maner, but with the grieuousest death that could be: and I would doe what I could to wipe the very remembrance of him out of the world. Fred. Now turne this your hatred Lewis, towards your selfe:Euery mā is a deadly enemy to himselfe, & how such an enemy is to bee dealt with. for you are a deadly e∣nemy to your selfe, & ought to hate your selfe deadly, & not other men, who cānot kill you, that is to say, your soule. And therefore you must take pains to wish all maner of euill, yea & euen death to your selfe, that is to say, to your flesh; and to enuy her all good things, and to bee so∣ry for her prosperity, and to be glad of her aduersity. And that if any man tel you any thing amisse of your selfe, you may reioice thereat in spirit, & liberally reward the repor∣ter
thereof: and (to bee short) that you may deuise and do all things against your selfe, as men are wont to do against those with whō they be at deadly hate, & that you neuer rest till you haue killed your selfe. And forasmuch as no man hath euer yet hated his owne flesh, (as saith S. Paul) you must first and formost bee diuorced from your flesh,The flesh & the spi∣rit are cleane cō∣traries, and fightful▪ but one a∣gainst ano∣ther. that shee may no longer be your flesh, but strange flesh: and in her steed you must place the spirit, betweene whom and the flesh there can neuer be any more concord or agreement then be∣tweene fire and water. Lew. O my Fredericke, to tell you the truth, mee thinkes the things that you speake of, are as hard as stone. Fred. I beleeue you Lewis, and so must it needs be. But bee of good cheere, and begin euen now to loue me in spirit, be∣cause I am an aduersarie to your flesh. For it is for your benefite, and you cannot bee saued so long as your flesh is aliue. Wherefore if you will be saued, see that ye hate your selfe, and forsake your selfe.A familiar example, And I will tell you an example of this forsa∣king. If a seruant giue ouer himselfe in bondage to you, he abandoneth himselfe,
that is to say,wha by  goet a∣bout to teach a man how to forsake himselfe. his owne libertie and will, thenceforth to follow your will and not his owne. Oftentimes when hee would sleepe, he must watch if his maister com∣mand him: when he would goe abroade, hee must tarry at home: when hee would play he must worke: and (at a word) he so forgoeth his owne freedome, that if he be asked what he will do, or what he min∣deth to do, he must answer, what his mai∣ster listeth, at whose appointment hee is. So we (if wee belong to Christ, who hath bought vs at a great price,) are not at our owne disposition or appoyntment, but at Christs: and therefore wee must doe, not what we list, but what he listeth; and wor∣thily. For if hee, being the way and the truth, did notwithstanding so submit his will to the will of his Father, that he said, Not my will be done, but thine: what be∣cometh it vs to do, which are ouer coue∣red with errours and leasings? Therefore when you be about to bee angry without cause, you must restraine your anger at the appoyntment of Christ. When you would giue your selfe to voluptuousnesse, you must absteine, and giue your selfe to sorrowing. When you would bee auen∣ged
of any body, you must forgiue him. When you would doe a man harme, you must doe him good. When you would laugh, you must weep. When you would sue for honour, you must endure shame. When you would seeke riches, you must suffer pouerty. And (to be short) you must in such wise depart from your own wil, as if you be asked what you would,That to the belee∣uer all things, seeme they neuer so high, hard, or aboue power, are notwith∣standing easie to bee done. you may answer, nothing but what Christ listeth. And all these things shal you do through faith: for vnlesse you beleued, you would not do thē. But it is necessary to be vnder∣stood, what is meant by this saying of S. Paules, that we must proceede from faith to faith. There is a certaine first and vn∣perfect beliefe, whereby a man is moued to renounce himselfe. This being once kindled, becommeth daily greater by a mans holding on, vntill at length hee be∣come so farre, that he doth as certainly be∣leeue all Gods sayings, commandements, promises, and threatnings: as you beleeue that the day shal succeed the night. Hence springeth that almightie power of faith, wherethrough it is able to remoue moun∣taines: so as there is no pride, no couetous∣nesse, no lecherie, nor (to be short) no vice
so huge and great, which that faith is not able to put away, and to plucke vp by the roote. Howbeit ere euer a man attaine to that strength, hee is to endure many hard things in the way of his forsaking of him∣selfe; and without such hardnesse there is no accesse to be had to that strength; like as a figge or a grape cannot become sweet except it be first sowre. And because I my selfe haue not yet attained the victory, but do yet still sweate in the incounter of for∣saking my selfe, and as yet am farre off from the garland: I will say no more con∣cerning the victory, that is to say, concer∣ning the thing which is vnknowne to me: but yet as much as I can, I will helpe you (by Gods grace) in the incounter, if you wil be my companion. Lew. Truly for my part, although my selfe do shudder & start backe at it, yet am I carried with my spirit and mind, to fol∣low you.There is but onely one right way to the attainment of saluatiō. For I sée no other way for a man to be saued, but by departing out of his owne nature, that hee may put vpon him the nature of Christ; and by caring, studying, striuing, and taking paines, to repaire the image, whereafter we were created. And therefore beséeching God yt
it may be to his glory,  mine owne sal∣uation, henceforth I yeeld my selfe into this way, as a follower of Christ, taking God for my guide. Fred. And I thanke God for this wil∣lingnesse which he hath giuen you, besee∣ching him to finish his worke which hee hath begun in you; and to bring you to that poynt, that yee may at length serue righteousnesse, as ye haue serued vnrigh∣teousnesse; which thing hee will vndoub∣tedly do, except you grieue his spirit, and cast it out through your disobedience.Men must not con∣ceiue spa∣ingly, and niggardly, but largely  aboun∣antly of  gra∣dnesse. Fi∣nally, of this I will warne you, that you must haue a rich faith, because you be∣leeue in him that is rich in doing good. For men haue euer sinned in beleeuing vnto wardly, and more niggardly of Gods gracious goodnesse, then they ought to do. Abraham and Sara were rebuked for laughing, as though it had bene a matter to be laughed at, that God promised them issue when they were both old, and Sara moreouer barraine. Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptist, was striken dumbe for a time, because hee beleeued not the Angels
words. We be commonly more forward in following the weake beleefe (or if I may so terme it) the vnbeleefe of the god∣ly, then in following their full and rich beliefe. Why doe wee not rather follow those which durst beleeue all things? Eli∣zeus durst craue double the spirit of Eli∣as, (which soothly was a great thing euen by the record of Elias himselfe) and yet he obtained it:We cannot aske so largely at Gods hand but that his bounty wi surmoun it. so vnpossible is it for any faith to be so great, but that Gods graci∣ous goodnesse and power doe surmount the same. All things (saith he) are possible to the beleeuer. Againe, Whatsoeuer you aske, beleeue that you shall obteine it, and yee shall haue it in deede. Remember (I say) the saying of Elizeus, speaking after this maner to the poore woman: Borrow oyle vessels of thy neighbours, yea bor∣row a great sort, and the Lord will fill them all full. Euen so Lewis, let vs do our endeuour, that wee may haue such a faith, as may be able to receue the greatest good things, and let vs be bold to beleeue that God both can and wil bring to passe, that wee shall loue him alone with our whole heart, soule, power, and strength. And hee
of his owne gracious goodnesse,God will grant vs all good things for Christs ke. will be∣stowe all thinges vpon vs, much more largely then we can euen thinke, for his Sonne, our Lord Iesus Christs sake, to whom be honour, glory and dominion for euer. Amen. FINIS.
