A4032 12499695 62655
A DISCOURSE Concerning a Death-bed Repentance. By WILLIAM ASSHETON, D.D. Rector of Beckenham in Kent, and Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of ORMOND. LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCVI.
TO THE KING's MOST Excellent MAJESTY. May it please Your Majesty, TO accept of this Treatise, part of which was preached in Your Royal Chappel be∣fore the late Queen, Your Majesty's Dearest Consort of blessed Memory. That I did not then Present it to the Hands of that Excellent Princess, was the Imperfe∣ction
of the Work, (I having designed some further en∣largement upon that Subject) otherwise I should most chearfully have complied with some approving Inti∣mation then given, in order to a Command for the Pub∣lishing of it. The whole being now finished, is most humbly submitted to Your Majesty's Censure, by Your MAJESTY's Most humble and Obedient Subject and Servant, William Assheton.
THE PREFACE. HAVING made my self a Debtor to the Publick, for A Plain Method of Devotion for Sick and Dying Per∣sons: And one chief part of that Devotion being the Exercise of a true Repentance, (for the Minister who visits the Sick Person, is di∣rected by the Church of England to examine, Whether he repent him truly of his Sins?) lest Men should from hence be encouraged to defer their Repentance to a Sick and Dying Bed, (as if they might safe∣ly enjoy their Sins in their Health, because they are admonished to Re∣pent
when they come to Dye) I have therefore very faithfully exa∣mined that matter: And have en∣deavoured in the following Treatise to convince them, That though Re∣pentance, as all other Graces, must be exercised and improved upon the approach of Death (for our Lamps must be trimmed when the Bride∣groom comes) yet A Death-bed Repentance is neither comforta∣ble nor safe.
THE CONTENTS. THE Soul is Immortal, and shall be Eternally either Happy or Mise∣rable. Page 1. This Life the only time to fit and prepare us for our Future Eternal State. Page 2. The Vicious, Sensual, and Impenitent, shall be miserable. Ibid. But such as are Obedient to the Laws of the Gospel shall be happy. Page 3. Hence it is both our Interest and Duty, to take care of our Souls, and provide for Eternity. Ibid. But this generally neglected, and why. Ibid. The Case of a Death-bed Repentance strict∣ly examined, and in what method. Page 5. What is meant by a Death-bed Repen∣tance. Page 6. What by true Repentance. Page 7.
The Vulgar Notion of Repentance. Ibid. Which yet, as is shewed, is no Gospel Re∣pentance. Ibid. What Repentance is saving. Page 11. How far, and in what manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be able to Repent. Page 13. Wicked Men, when they come to Dye, may remember their Sins. Page 16. They may also be very sorry for their Sins. Ibid. They may earnestly beg Pardon for their Sins. Page 18. They may make very serious Resolutions of Amendment. Page 19. They may make Restitution. Page 20. Whether all this will amount to true Re∣pentance. Page 21. Of the Labourers in the Vineyard. Page 43. The Case of the Thief upon the Cross. Page 49. The Close. Page 61.
A DISCOURSE Concerning a Death-bed Repentance. 'TIS the faint Dictate even of Natural Reason, but the more clear and full Discovery of Revelation, That when we dye, when our Souls shall be separated from our Bodies, when we leave this World, we shall not then perish like the Brutes, and cease to be; but shall subsist and con∣tinue in another State and Capacity, either of Happiness or Misery, to all Eternity. And we are further in∣structed from Divine Revelation in
the Holy Scriptures, That this present Life, this short and uncertain time of continuance in this World, is the on∣ly space of Probation and Trial, to fit and prepare us for our future Eter∣nal State. As the Tree falls, so it lies. There is no Work nor Repentance in the Grave. But as Death shall seize us, in the same Capacity we shall appear before the Throne of God, and shall then be disposed of in an irreversible unalterable State, either of Happiness or Misery. Those who make their own Will their Law, and who are guided and acted by their own vicious sensual Inclinations, they shall be eternally miserable. Or according to our blunt way of expressing it in our English Language, They shall be Damned, that is, they shall be condemned to that state of Misery, which the Justice of God hath prepared to be the sad Lot and Portion of all impenitent Sin∣ners. But on the other hand; Those who follow the Divine Conduct, and are
obedient to the Laws of the Gospel; such Persons, through the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Jesus Christ, shall be saved and preserved from the Wrath to come. And shall be placed in that happy State and Capacity, where they shall not only be freed from Misery, but shall further be se∣cured in the unalterable enjoyment of an unexpressible Happiness and Satisfaction. From these Considerations you are fully convinced, that it is both your Interest and Duty to take care of your Souls, and provide for Eternity. But the sad mistake is this, (and it is the ruin of thousands) you fancy it is time enough hereafter to entertain such Thoughts. You have so much Diversion and Employment in the World, that you have little or no time for the Duties of Religion. But when you have settled your Affairs, and dispatched this or that: When you have improved or cleared your Estates: When you have taken in this Mortgage, finished that Pur∣chase,
&c. When the hurry of these things is over, and that you can call your Thoughts your own, then you promise your selves to be very Reli∣gious; that is, when you have done with this World, you will provide for the next. When your Bodies be∣gin to be crazy, and your strength to decay; When you are laid upon a Sick-bed, and have lost the relish of sensual Pleasures, then you fancy you shall have both leisure and in∣clination to repent of your Sins, and to beg Pardon for them. And whenever you do Repent, (tho' it be but upon your Death-bed) God, who is very merciful, hath promi∣sed to accept you. I appeal now to your own Consci∣ences if this is not the very Language of your hearts: But know, that your hearts are deceitful, and take heed lest they be further hardned through the deceitfulness of Sin. That I may therefore awaken your Consideration, and convince you of your danger in trusting to a broken
Reed: That I may make you sensible how unsafe it is to depend upon a Death-bed Repentance, I shall very di∣stinctly examine that matter. By shewing, 1. What is meant by true Repentance? 2. I shall enquire, How far, and in what manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be able to Repent? 3. I shall desire such Persons sadly to consider, What small hope there is, that such kind of Repentance should find acceptance with God. 4. I shall examine those Two noted Scripture-instances commonly menti∣oned in favour of a Death bed Repen∣tance, viz. The Labourers in the Vine∣yard, who came in at the eleventh hour. And, The Thief upon the Cross. But as Preparatory to my enlarge∣ment on these Particulars, whereby it will be more distinct and instructive; I must first premise, what is meant by a Death-bed Repentance.
Now a Death-bed Repentance de∣notes Two things. 1. A finishing that great Work of Repentance which we begun in our Healths, and took some care to carry on amidst the Business and Diversions of this World; But do now more so∣lemnly compleat at our Deaths, by re∣viewing the State of our Souls, and perfecting our Accounts with God. This kind of Death-bed Repentance is so far from being a mistake, that it is a necessary Duty, and is the com∣mendable practice of good and pious Men. But, 2. There is a Vulgar Notion of a Death-bed Repentance, viz. When a Man then begins to Re∣pent when he comes to dye. When a Man hath spent all his Life in the gratifying of his Lusts, and hath fol∣lowed his own vicious Inclinations. When he hath denied himself no carnal Satisfactions, but hath taken his fill of sensual Pleasures: And yet such a Man, when his Body is disa∣bled, and Death approacheth, so
that he hath neither time nor incli∣nation to Sin any longer, will pretend to be sorry for his Sin, and Repent. This we call a Death-bed Repentance. Now how unsafe and uncomfortable such a Death-bed Repentance is, I shall endeavour to convince you, by examining the formentioned Particu∣lars. I. What is meant by true Repentance. The vulgar and common Notion of Repentance, is evidently this: When a Man hath committed a fault, and hath done something amiss, and is then sorry for it; is grieved and troubled that he hath done it, and doth heartily wish it had not been done. Such a Man, we usually say, doth Repent of such an Action. But this is not the full adequate No∣tion of a Gospel-Repentance; of such a Repentance as shall find acceptance with God. This is but the Repentance of Male∣factors at the Gallows; nay, it is no other than the Repentance of Cain and Judas.
It is observed, That the most pro∣fligate condemned Wretch when he comes to dye, will be very sorry for what he hath done. He will be much ashamed, and will have great Indigna∣tion against himself, to think he should be such a fool to part with his precious Life, and all the Comforts and Satisfa∣ctions of this World, in such a vile ig∣nominious manner, to be tied up like a Dog, perhaps for the taking of a few Sheep. How will such a Fellow fawn upon, and flatter the Judge, That if he will but spare him, O what an honest Man he will then be! And yet do but procure his Pardon, and let him loose, and he is quickly at the old Trade. Nay, 'tis great odds but you have him again by the next Assizes. Now will any one pretend that in such a Case as this, there is true Re∣pentance? Which yet is more evident from those Scripture-Instances of Cain and Judas. It seems very probable, from the cir∣cumstances of his Story, that Cain did
repent of the Murther of his Brother. My punishment, saith he, is greater than I can bear, Gen. 4.13. But because in the Judgment of some Learned Men, this is rather an instance of Despair than Repenting-Sorrow; I shall not much insist upon this of Cain. But as to the other instance of Judas, 'tis express and undeniable. You read his Story, Matth. 27.3, 4, 5. Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was comdemned, re∣pented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests and El∣ders, saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent Blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. Here are as signal Instances that Ju∣das did sincerely repent of what he had done, as can possibly be given. For besides the express Testimony of the Holy Ghost, which in plain terms tells us he did Repent, and that he himself declared, He had sinned in betraying the
innocent Blood: He further gives this evidence, that he was in earnest, he not only restores the thirty pieces, but in horror and consternation of Mind, he went and hanged himself. Here is, I say, in this instance as much Grief, and Trouble, and Vexati∣on for the Commission of a Sin, and as noted evidence that he was heartily sorry for it, as can possibly be supposed. And yet 'tis as plain, that this Repen∣tance of Judas was not an Evangelical Repentance, such a Repentance as was accepted by Almighty God. Our Blessed Saviour, who is Truth it self, having passed this Decree upon him: Wo unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that man, if he had not been born, Matth. 26.24. It appears from these premises, that there is more required to a saving Go∣spel-Repentance than trouble of Mind. When a Man hath committed a sault, he may be sorry for it, he may grieve and mourn that he hath done it; he may hear∣tily wish it had not been done; he may
make Restitution of his ill-gotten Goods. All this may be done; thus far he may proceed, and yet his Repentance is but imperfect, and shall never find accep∣tance with a pure and holy God. But here you will say; If Men may proceed thus far, and yet their Repentance is not true and saving; How shall we know that we have true Repentance; and wherein doth the nature of it consist? To this I answer, God only can instruct us what is true Repentance. That is, it is very agree∣ble to the Majesty and Sovereignty of God to prescribe the Terms and Con∣ditions of Salvation, and to appoint his Creatures what they must do; how they must behave themselves to be ac∣cepted by him. Now there is no other way to be informed in this matter, but to con∣sult the Holy Scriptures. In those Sacred Writings, the Divine Wisdom hath sufficiently revealed his Will, and hath plainly told us, What it is that he required of us; and what we are
to do, that we may inherit Eternal Life. We are expresly admonished, That without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. That the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Rom. 8.13. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he shall reward every man ac∣cording to his works, Matth. 16.27. And the Son of God being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation un∣to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And St. Paul doth plainly admonish
us, That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thes. 1.7, 8. From these places of Scripture (to omit many others) it evidently ap∣pears, That actual Holiness, and actual Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel is the indispensible Condition of Salvation. And consequently to be only Sorry for our Sins; to be troubled that we have done amiss; unless this Sorrow do bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; that is, unless it be attended with actual Reformation and Amendment, it is not a true and Evangelical Repentance, such a Repentance as God hath pro∣mised to accept. 2. I am to examine, How far, and in what manner a Sick and Dying Sinner can be able to Repent? And this I shall best perform by a plain representation of matter of Fact. Whilst I faithfully remind you, how,
or in what manner you may happen to dye. 1. You may dye suddenly. This hath been many a Man's case, and you have no assurance to the con∣trary, but it may be yours. If some hidden Distemper do not thus extin∣guish the Lamp of Life, your own Sin and Folly may then puff it out. You may happen in some private Quarrel, unexpectedly to dye at the point of a Sword, and so may fall a Sacrifice to your Lust, to your Malice, or Re∣venge. But whatever may occasion your Death; if it be sudden, it is then impossible for you to Repent upon your Death-beds. And if you have not taken care in your life-time to perform that great Work, then ac∣cording to the Laws of the Gospel, you are utterly lost and undone for ever. For except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. 2. You may dye raving Mad, or stu∣pidly Sensless. There is a sufficient Mass of vicious corrupted Humours, or (as Physicians
phrase it) of Morbisick Matter in any of your Bodies, as may occasion these sad Symptoms and dismal Effects. And if this be your case, where then is your Death-bed Repentance? It is necessary to Repentance (even in the vulgar Notion of it) that you should not only remember your Sins, but should also be sorry for them. But now supposing your Distemper is ei∣ther a Frenzy or a Lethargy, or in any other instance of such a nature, as shall wholly deprive you of your Me∣mory and Understanding, your Re∣pentance is then impossible. But, 3. Supposing it is neither thus nor thus with you; but that God in his Mercy gives you a slow and easy pas∣sage out of this World. Suppose your Distemper is so gentle, that it neither distracts you with Pain, nor disor∣ders your Faculties; but that, as we phrase it, You have your Senses to the last. In such a case as this (which is the most favourable that can be sup∣posed) I will now examine, how far any Man who hath spent the time of
his Health in Sin and Vanity, can be able to Repent. 1. Wicked men, when they come to die, may remember their Sins, which they sel∣dom think on in the time of their Healths. The generality of men are so whol∣ly taken up with the Designs of This World, that they have neither leisure nor inclination to think of the Next. In what a hurry such men do spend the Day, is very obvious to observe; and at Night, being loaden with Wine and Business, they sleep over their Cares and their Sins together. But when some lingring Disease shall confine them to their Chambers, or nail them to their Beds; when their Sleep is departed from them, and that they lie rowling and tumbling, and wishing for the Day: Then they are at leisure to consider their Ways, and to remember what they have done, and to recollect the former Pas∣sages of their Lives. 2. Wicked men, when they come to die, may not only remember, but also may be very sorry, and much troubled for their
Sins; and may likewise make a penitent Confession of them. This evidently appears from the former Instance of Judas, who was not a little troubled for betraying his Master; and as freely makes confes∣sion of his Fault: I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent Blood. And this is undeniable even from daily observation: Those who vi∣sit Sick-Beds, and hear the dying Groans of departing Sinners, are best able to tell you how they will lament their former Lives, and what wretched Sinners they have been. And at such a time they will be very free and in∣genuous in their Confession, with a thus, and thus have I done; and withal they may mightily judge and condemn themselves for it. If ever you have been laid upon a Sick-Bed, with the Terrors and Ap∣prehensions of another World before you, then I appeal to your own expe∣rience for the truth of what I have now said.
3. Wicked men, upon their Death-Beds, may not only make a sorrowful Confession of their Sins, but also they may earnestly beg Pardon for them. There is a Principle of Self-preser∣vation in the most vicious carnal man, which prompts him to be solicitous for deliverance from an imminent Danger. A noted Instance of this you have in Seamen; such men (es∣pecially the common Sailers) are not usually over-zealous in Religion, and yet in a dangerous Storm, or in a leaky sinking Ship, those who seldom named God, unless in Oaths and Ex∣ecrations, will now fall to their Prayers. And thus the most graceless, sensual, worldly Person, when he comes to die, and hath the prospect of another World immediately before him; when he sees the Infernal Pit open to receive him, O with what earnestness will he deprecate the Divine Vengeance! How passionately will he pray unto God to spare him, to be gracious to him, to pardon and forgive him!
Nay, even those who have been so careless and unconcerned, that they could never in their whole life-time be persuaded to remember our Blessed Sa∣viour's Passion in the way of his own Institution in the Holy Sacrament; yet these very Persons on their Death-bed will pretend to remember it. They will then plead his Merits and Satis∣faction, and will beg God's Pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ. This likewise, as to matter of Fact, is undeniably evident. 4. Wicked Men, when they come to dye, may further make very serious Resolutions of amendment of Life. And in such cases this is the noted Language of a Death-bed. O what a wicked Wretch have I been? I have done thus and thus. But if God will now please to spare my Life, and restore me to my Health, I'll become a new Man. I'll no more be guilty of such Intemperance. I'll be wanton and lascivious no more. I'll take heed of lying and slandering. And I'll refrain from this cursing and
swearing. I'll be more careful to san∣ctify the Sabbath. I'll not only fre∣quent the Church, but for the fu∣ture I'll no more be guilty of vain Sports and Pastimes on the Lord's-day. And on the Week-day, tho' I must follow my worldly Business, yet I'll do it in dependance upon God's Providence, I will never more neg∣lect to pray unto God; but do now resolve Morning and Evening to bend my Knees to my Creator and Redeemer. Lastly, As an evidence that he is sin∣cere, He may make Restitution and Sa∣tisfaction in several instances. He may declare that he bears no Malice, but doth freely forgive all the World. He may likewise restore his ill-gotten Goods; and may give satis∣faction to those he remembers to have wronged. And not only so, but for the close of all, he may be large in his Charity in Reversion; and by his last Will and Testament may bequeath a bountiful Legacy to the Poor.
All this may be done, and it is the utmost that can be done upon a Death-bed. 3. Let us now impartially examine, Whether all this will amount to true Re∣pentance? Such a Repentance as shall find acceptance with a Pure and Holy God. 1. Wicked Men when they come to Dye may remember their Sins. But such remembrance being no other than the exercise of a natural Faculty, is neither Repentance, nor any part of that Saving-work. The vilest Wretches do but too much re∣member their Sins, and please them∣selves in that Carnal Satisfaction they had in the enjoyment of them. But, you will say, this is not the Case. For such a dying Sinner doth not barely remember his Sins, but he remembers them with Shame and Sor∣row, and is much troubled for the committing of them. And this Trouble, and Sorrow, and Compunction of Mind, we hope will be accepted as true Repen∣tance.
To this I answer. Such a dying Sinner is indeed very much troubled, and is under great an∣guish and perplexity of Mind. But let us now strictly examine what's the occasion of all this Consternation? Is he sorry that he hath offended God, that he hath transgressed the Laws of so gracious a Majesty? This pretence is not probable, when we reflect up∣on his former Conversation. He who made his own Will his Law, and ne∣ver denied himself in any Carnal En∣joyment; but tho' God himself in his holy World hath expresly delared, That such and such things ought not to be done; yet because of some present Pleasure and Profit he is resolved to commit them. He who was not only pleased with his Sin, but gloried in his Sin, and boasted in his Sin; 'tis very unaccountable, that such a Man all on the sudden should be thus sorry for his Sin. 'Tis strange that his Judgment and Appehension of things should be thus changed in a mo∣ment.
For his Conviction, I'll suppose him to be restored to his former Health and Vigour, and that the former Passages of his Life, in any instance, could be repeated. Being under such pleasing Circumstances, can he then honestly and conscientiously make this Expo∣stulation of Joseph, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? 'Tis true, the Man is now troubled; but for what? 'Tis not for his Sin, (which he never had any Quarrel a∣gainst) but in plain terms, it is for the punishment of his Sin. He is indeed thus far troubled for his Sin. He is very much out of Hu∣mour that he can Sin no longer; that he hath lost his relish and inclination to it. It makes him heavy and lum∣pish, that all his pleasant Days are pass'd and gone; and that nothing now re∣mains but a sad Reckoning and Ac∣count. Rejoyce, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment. 'Tis this Judgment, this Reckoning and Ac∣count that makes him quake and trem∣ble. When a poor dying Wretch, who hath neglected God and his Duty all his life long, shall be now convinced by the decays of Nature, that his Soul must immediately be torn from his Body: When he looks upward, and there beholds a just Judge ready to pronounce a sad Sentence upon him: When he casts his Eye downward, and there observes that place of Hor∣ror, that flaming Furnace just ready to receive him: When he now sees and considers these things, which for∣merly in the days of his Vanity he had no leisure to think on; and further reflects, that all this Misery is now brought upon him by his own folly, and that with a very little care and forecast it might have been prevented. Being under such sad Circumstances as these, 'tis but a natural Love of a Man's self; 'tis no other than an in∣stance of Self-preservation to be trou∣bled
and perplexed. In plain terms, This anguish of Mind for the Happi∣ness that is lost, and the Torments that shall be endured, is the very Worm of the Damned that dieth not. And if such Sorrow and Vexation as this is true Repentance, then those miserable Creatures shall sadly repent to all Eter∣nity. But, 2. The dying Person is not only sorry for his Sin, but also makes Confession of it, and very humbly begs Pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ. And will not this be ac∣cepted as true Repentance? I answer. We are indeed assured by St. John, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. But what kind of Confession shall be accepted, the Holy Scriptures must in∣form us. In these Sacred Writings we are of∣ten admonished, that it is not an Hi∣storical Confession; 'tis not a bare-ac∣knowledgment that we have done thus or thus; but it is a Penitential Confession shall find acceptance. Who∣so
confesseth and forsaketh his sin shall find mercy, Prov. 28.13. A sick dying Man may indeed confess his Sins; but how far he can be able to forsake his Sin, that is, to amend and reform, shall be considered in its proper place. But you will say, He not only con∣fesseth, but he begs pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ; and we have a gracious promise that at such a time we shall be heard, Call upon me in the day of trou∣ble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glo∣rify me, Psalm 50.15. And our Bles∣sed Saviour hath assured us, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you, John 16.23. Now here is a poor languishing Creature in great distress and trouble, and will not God accept him for the sake of Jesus Christ? I answer; All the Promises of God in Jesus Christ are Yea and Amen, that is, most sure and certain. But then you must also know, these Promises are condi∣tional, and the performance of them on Gods part, doth suppose certain Qualifications and Conditions on our
part. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfect∣ing holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. intimating, that unless we cleanse our selves from all filthiness, and do thus perfect Holiness, we have no title to these Promises. Indeed Jesus Christ hath promised, those that come unto him, he will in no wise cast them out, but will kindly re∣ceive them, and treat them as Friends. But upon what terms he will receive them, and own them as Friends; he himself hath told us in these words. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15.14. And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. I have now shewed you, that actual Holiness, or actual Obedience (which are one and the same thing) is the Gospel-condition of Salvation. And if you can make it appear, that a Man who in the time of his Health was so far from the practice of Religion,
that he contemned and despised it, nay, perhaps ridiculed and burlesqu'd it: If, I say, such a Man when he is laid upon a Sick-bed, and is able to do nothing else, can obey the Laws of the Gospel, and walk in the ways of God's Commandments, then in∣deed you say something; otherwise here is, as yet, but very slender en∣couragement for a Death-bed Repen∣tance But, 3. We suppose further, That the dy∣ing Person makes very serious and passio∣nate Resolutions of amendment of Life. And will not the Mercy of God accept these Resolutions? In such a Case will not he take the Will for the Deed? To this I answer; That when Men are in a great fright, and are under the apprehensi∣ons of some eminent Danger, 'tis then the most common thing in the World to make Resolutions. What will not such Men promise, if they may but escape such and such a Danger! The Vows of Mariners and Seamen in a violent Storm, are a noted instance of such Resolutions.
Let us now strictly examine, Whe∣ther, or how far, God will accept such dying Resolutions? To state this Matter truly, you must observe, That Religion is represented in the Gospel as our reasonable or ra∣tional Service, and consequently that the exercise of it must proceed from Judgment and Deliberation, not from sadden Heats and Passion. We are admonished by the wise man, Not to offer to God the sacrifice of fools; but when we make a vow or promise to him, deliberately to consider how far, or in what manner we can be able to perform it. Now there are Two Things to be consider'd in a dying Sinner's Resolu∣tion, Sincerity and Ability. Sincerity in his Intentions, and Ability in his Ex∣ecutions. And first, it is not likely that a dy∣ing Sinner's Intention should be sincere; but that he may promise what he ne∣ver intends to perform. Such a Wretch who hath so far corrupted his Morals, may by the just Judgment of God be
depraved in his understanding and may vainly imagine that God is such a one as himself. And because he observes that frail Men have been often cheat∣ed by him, and have really believed him, whilst he made Promises and Protestations of what he never intend∣ed; he is so foolish as to fancy, that an Omniscient God may be likewise thus imposed on. And therefore he will be as large and as passionate in his Promises of Reformation, as the most notorious Malefactor ever was in hopes of Pardon. Whereas should God restore him to his former Health and Vigour, he would then be as loose and profane, as Lustful and Intemperate, as Envious and Malicious, as Covetous and Worldly, as ever he was before. We should then quickly have him at his old Cant: The charms of beauty and good Company are not to be resisted. God forgive me, I am so used to this swearing, I rap out an Oath before I think on't. And I am naturally so passionate, I see I cannot help it. But be not deceived; God is not mocked: for what∣soever a man soweth, that shall he also reap, Gal. 6.7.
But suppose the dying Sinner were sincere, and did really intend that Re∣formation which is now so solemnly promised; let him sadly consider, how unlikely it is he should be able to per∣form all this. For his Conviction, I must remind him; There are Two things necessary to all great Undertakings. Ability and Opportunity. 1. As to Ability; How difficult, if not impossible, it is for a sick and dying Sinner to reform his Nature, if ever it hath been your own case, you your selves will be easily convinced. When a man is oppressed with pain, disturb'd with Visits, distracted with the Cla∣mours of his dissatisfied Relations: Amidst all this noise and diversion, What can possibly be done? what Du∣ties can be performed? Do but seri∣ously think upon it, and your own Apprehensions will excuse my en∣largement. But supposing he had the greatest Capacity, pray, what time is now left
him to perfect so vast a Work? Evil Habits which have been long in con∣tracting, are not suddenly rooted out. When Lusts and Passions (by being often indulged) are grown rampant, they are not easily mortified. A tho∣rough Reformation is a work of time, and must be done successively, and by degrees. This is fully intimated whilst we are admonished to go on to perfection. And to grow in grace. But what can that man do who is now a dying? When the Sentence of Death is passed upon him, and his Phy∣sician hath given him over? To talk then of reforming his Life, when he now finds he can live no longer, is such an intolerable piece of weakness, as in any other instance would scarce be heard with patience. Suppose a dying Father, who had ruined his Family by his Extravagant Courses, should thus comfort his de∣jected, impoverished Children; Be of good chear, I am now resolved to be very frugal. I'll provide for you, and get you a good Estate.
Pray, what could be replied in such a Case? Alas, Sir, you're a dying. You cannot lift your head off the Pillow. You cannot live till the morning. And how should you get us an Estate? To tell them further, Ay, but I resolve it, and I hope you be∣lieve me: Such Resolution would be but mean Satisfaction; and a very slender sup∣ply of all their Wants. The Application is easy, and pray make it effectually to your selves. In short; Promises and Resolutions are not Performances. Nor were ever so accepted by God or Man. But you will say; 4. He actually, thus far, performs his Promises and Resolutions, that he makes Restitution, and that in several Instances. Will not this be accepted as true Repentance? To this I Answer, That as Restitution is a most necessa∣ry Duty, to which all injurious Of∣fenders are strictly obliged; so it is the surest Expedient to satisfy the Conscience, and to convince both our selves
and others of the truth and sincerity of our Repentance. But upon a strict inquiry it will ap∣pear, how difficult it is for a dying Person to make such Restitution. For his Conviction I must remind him: That the word Restitution, in its Latitude, denotes Two Things. 1. The being reconciled to the Person whom we have offended. 2. The giving him Satisfaction and Re∣paration for the Damage hath been done him. To explain this further, we are to observe; That in Sins against the Se∣cond Table, there is not only an Act of Disobedience towards God, but al∣so of affront and injury against our Brother. And he who truly repents, in both these Instances will cancel and undo, and take away his Sin as far as possible. Let us now examine, how far both these can be done by a dying Person.
1. The dying Sinner pretends to be reconciled to those whom he hath of∣fended. He declares, He is very sor∣ry for the envy and hatred, the ran∣cour and malice he hath been guilty of; And assures his Neighbour he is now very real, and desires that what is past, may be forgiven and forgotten mutually on both sides. He is heartily troubled that he hath ever done him any wrong, and desires him to forgive him; and withal assures him, that he himself doth now forgive him and all the World, as he expects to be for∣given for Christ's sake. All this is plausible and seemingly pious. But let me thus expostulate with this dying Sinner. You say, you are now sorry for the Wrongs and Injuries you have done to such and such Persons. Let me ask you this short Question: Are you now able to affront them any longer? Is it in your power to do them further mischief? Is not your Malice now bridled, is not your Ran∣cour limited and restrained?
For your Conviction pray resolve me; You say, you do now forgive. But were you thus ready to forgive in the days of your Health and Vigour? Did not you then, on all occasions, express your resentments to the utmost? Did not you then gratify your Spleen, and take the pleasure of Revenge when it lay in your power? What reason is there now to believe you, whilst you protest you do forgive him? You say, you forgive him, because you do not hurt him. You do not hurt him, because you cannot. Again, You say, you forgive him. But what hypocrisy is this, to pretend to forgive, when you have had your Revenge already, and that to the ut∣most, at least as far, as your own safety, and respect to the Laws would permit you to take it. I'll explain this further to you, in this following Case. An insulting Mahometan confines his poor innocent Christian Slave in a noy∣some Dungeon, where with bad Air,
and worse usage, the poor Man's heart is broke. And being told, that he is dying, he pretends to be merci∣ful, and gives order for his release. But what a cheat is this, to say he doth re∣lease him, when he can keep him no longer? God hath released him. For in the Grave, the weary be at rest. There the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor, Job 3.17, 18. By the light of this Example you will easily understand the value and acceptance of a Death bed forgiveness. And just at the same rate, 2. The dying Sinner makes Repa∣ration and Satisfaction. He is convinced that he hath inju∣red such a Man, having wronged him in his Dealings to such a value; And is now not only sorry for the injury, but is also ready to make him satisfa∣ction. And is not this sufficient evidence of the sincerity of his Repentance? Answer; It is indeed very pleasing to God, that those who have been wronged by you, should receive satisfaction for the
Wrongs you have done them. And if this Reparation is not made by you in Person, it must then be made by your Heirs in Reversion. But withal you must be reminded; that tho' what is paid and satisfied by your Heirs, may in the sense of the Law be called your payment; yet I much question, whe∣ther in the sight of God it will be so accepted. For to state the Case fairly. You are now ready to part with your Estate, and to distribute it in pro∣portion to those you have wronged. But, pray, who thanks you for this, To bequeath your Estate when you can keep it no longer? Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou hast provided? Luke 12.20. that is, they are then none of thine. So that Satisfaction in Reversion is not thine, but thy Heirs. And he who thus makes Restitution, he only pays his old Scores, by drawing a Bill upon his Executors.
I have now distinctly examin'd what it is that a dying Sinner can be able to perform in order to Repentance. As also, what small hope there is, that such kind of Repentance should be ac∣cepted by a pure and holy God. A man may remember his Sins; He may be sorry for his Sins; He may confess his Sins; He may beg Pardon for his Sins, with firm Resolutions of Amendment; nay, He may make actual Restitution to those he hath wrong'd, and yet may be re∣jected. But you will say, This is very harsh and uncomforta∣ble Doctrine; and we can scarce think that you your self will be so severe and ill-natur'd, as to practise accordingly. When you visit Sick-Beds, and hear a poor Dying Creature to lament his Sins with Tears, and most earnestly beg Pardon for the sake of Jesus Christ: When you observe how pas∣sionately he resolves, That if God will but spare him, he'll become a new man, and never more be guilty of such extra∣vagance:
What do you say or do in such a Case? Nay, what must such a wicked man do, who having lived a vicious Life, shall thus happen to be surpri∣zed by Death? Dare you be so uncharitable as to pass the Decree upon him, and say, That he is past hope: There's no remedy, but he is certainly damned? Answer; I dare not presume to limit the Holy One, whose Mercies are Infinite. In such a Case I will not censure, but admonish and instruct. I will exhort the dying Sinner to remember his Sins; to bewail his Sins; to beg Par∣don for his Sins; to make firm Re∣solutions of Amendment; and where there is occasion, to make Restitution. And having prayed earnestly for him, and commended him to God's Mercy, Do I then say, Such a one shall be damned? No; I dare not. But do I say he shall be saved? No; I cannot. What then do I resolve? What do I determine in this matter? I will be silent, and de∣termine nothing. For as I dare not
flatter him into a false and groundless Presumption, so neither would I sink him into the horror of Despair. I say, I will determine nothing; I will judge nothing before the time. All that I can do, in this dark, intricate Case, is to commend him to the Extraordinary Mer∣cy of God, to which we must leave some great Cases, not knowing what to judge of them our selves. Possibly, God, who will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, may please to let this Dying Sinner be a signal Example of his Unlimited Power and Prerogative, to save beyond all ordinary Rules. Whether it may be thus, or thus, I dare not determine. What God can do, ex plenitudine Potestatis, or by his Prerogative, is not for us to dispute. However, I must be so faithful to my Office, as to admonish this dying Sinner, That the Gospel, by the Laws of which we must be judged, doth expresly declare, That actual Holiness, and actual Obedience, are the necessary Conditions of Salvation. When there∣fore a man hath been vicious and ex∣travagant
all his Life long, if God doth accept his Dying Resolutions, 'tis more than he hath Promised: And 'tis more than he hath given us Au∣thority to Preach and Declare. But are we not told in the Gospel, That the Labourers were rewarded who came into the Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour? And that the Thief upon the Cross was received into Paradise? And are not these Two Examples sufficient for a Death-bed Repentance? I Answer: 'Tis very deplorable, what slight, trifling Pretences, what thin, fig-leaf Excuses some men will make for the neglect of their Duty. As, in parti∣cular, may appear by a strict Exami∣nation of these Two Instances.
I. Of the Labourers in the Vineyard. THIS being a Parable, is to be interpreted as all other Parables ought to be. 'Tis a Rule among the Schoolmen, Theologia Symbolica non est Argumenta∣tiva; that is, Arguments are not to be drawn from the particular Circum∣stances of Parables, but only from the chief Scope and Design of them. Now when you have observed the Scope and Design of this Parable, (which you read, Matth. 20.) you will then easily be convinced, what slender encouragement it gives for a Death-bed Repentance. The Story is this: A Master of a Family hires a Com∣pany of Workmen to dig in his Vine∣yard. Some he hires early in the Morning, and bargains to give them a Penny a day for their Labour. About the Third hour, (which answers to our Nine in the Morning) as also at the Sixth hour, (which is our Twelve
at Noon) and at the Ninth hour, (which is our Three in the Afternoon) he hires more Labourers with this condition, Whatsoever is right, I will give you, that is, I will not bind my self to give you the Wages of a whole Day for working part of it; but ac∣cording as you behave your selves, I will reward you. At the Eleventh hour (which is about our Five in the Evening) he takes in more Workmen upon the same terms. And at Night he gives them their Wages, and pays them all alike. And tho' some of them were discon∣tented at this sort of Distribution, and thought it unequal, that those who had workt but one single hour, should be paid as largely as they, who had sweat for it all the Day; yet they were quickly silenced by being told, Friend, I do thee no wrong, that is, they had their Bargain. And what reason had they to envy and murmur, if either to encourage Industry, or to express his own Bounty, he had given to these last, as unto them who were first?
This is the Parable. The Interpre∣tation of which, the meanest Capacity will thus easily comprehend. Almighty God, the great Houshol∣der, calls several Labourers, both Jews and Gentiles, into his Vineyard, the Church. At several hours of the Day, that is, in different Ages of the World, and at several times of mens Lives. Those who came in at the Eleventh hour, that is, in the declining part of their Lives, they had their reward of Glory, as well as those who came in at the first. From which Parable some Persons have made this Inference. That tho' a Man may have loiter'd all the Day, and wasted the time of his Life in Sin and Vanity, yet if he comes in at the Eleventh hour, that is, if he Repents, and is sorry for his Sin at his Death, God will then both ac∣cept and reward him. But this is a very gross and fatal mistake, and it is the greatest Charity to make Men sensible of it.
Now in order to such Mens Con∣viction, I shall desire them to con∣sider, 1. They who came in at the Ele∣venth hour, they came in and work'd as soon as they were called. Had they been called sooner, they would have work'd sooner. Had they been called at the Ninth hour, they would have work'd from the Ninth hour. Had they been called at the Sixth hour, they would have work'd from the Sixth hour. Had they been called early in the Morning, they would have work'd from that time. This being the very reason they gave for their Idleness, viz. No man hath hired us. But what is this to the Case of a dying Sinner now under the Gospel? Who was called upon, and invited to work, not only at the Eleventh hour, or at the Ninth hour, or at the Sixth hour, but early in the Morning, even in the very beginning of his Life; from his Childhood, in the dawning of the Day, he was called to this State of Salvation. But he obstinately
refused to work, and resisted the ma∣ny Calls and Invitations of God, and slighted the Warnings and Admoniti∣ons of his Ministers. He wasted his Time, and squander'd his Days in Idleness and Luxury; and being now come to the period of his Life, he only begs pardon for not working. I say, What pretence of comfort can he frame from this Parable, that God will reward him only for Wish∣ings and Wouldings at the last Gasp? But, 2. Those Labourers who came in∣to the Vineyard at the Eleventh hour, tho' indeed they came in late, yet they work'd one hour, and they con∣tinued labouring to the close of the Day. But had they staid to the Twelfth hour, when working was over, and should thus make their Confession to the Steward: Sir, 'tis true, you hired us in the Morning, and we promised you to come and work. But so it happens, we have been idling, and loitering, and diver∣ting our selves all the Day. However we are now sorry for it, and hope you will
pass it by, and give us our Wages amongst the rest. Pray, what answer would he make to such Men as these? This is the very Case of a Death-bed Repentance. For the dying Sin∣ner doth not so much as come in at the Eleventh hour, but stays till the Twelfth; till Night cometh, when no man can work. He hath been trifling and loitering, revelling and caressing all the time of his Life; and now ex∣pects at his Death that God should re∣ward him, because the Labourers in the Vineyard, who came not in till the Eleventh hour, did receive their Wages equal with the first. But, I say, how great a cheat he puts upon himself in this comparison, will easily appear from these premises to any considering Person. 'Tis true, Those who came in at the Eleventh hour they had their Wages, for they did work one hour. But what then? Therefore those shall be reward∣ed who did not work at all. This is indeed the noted Logick of a dying
Sinner. But the Inference is too tri∣fling to deserve a Confutation. The Second Instance commonly ur∣ged in favour of a Death-bed Repen∣tance, is The Thief upon the Cross. YOU read his Story, Luke 23. from Verse 39. Our Blessed Sa∣viour being crucified between two Thieves, One of them railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. As if he had said, If thou art what thou pretendest to be, a Christ, a Saviour, if thou art not a Cheat and Impostor, save thy self and us. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same Condemnati∣on? And we indeed justly, that is, we were justly condemned, and we just∣ly now suffer the Sentence of our Condemnation. For we receive the due reward of our Deeds; but this Man hath done nothing amiss, that is, he is an Innocent Person whom the Jews
and Romans do thus barbarously Mur∣ther. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. As if he had said, Tho' these contemn and revile thee as mean and despicable, yet I acknow∣ledge thee to be a Great Lord, and that thou hast a Kingdom to dis∣pose on. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise; that is, immediately after thy Death thou shalt go to a place of Happiness, and there abide with me, as a Mem∣ber of that my Kingdom which thou ow askest for. This is the Story of the Thief upon the Cross. From whose Example, Carnal, Li∣centious Persons do thus encourage themselves in their extravagant Pra∣ctices. We are fully convinced of the ne∣cessity of Repentance. And we do as fully resolve, some time or other, to Repent. But why should we be so forward to disturb our Pleasures,
and neglect our Business as to do it now, since we may Repent hereafter at better leisure? And tho' we should be so far diverted, as not to Repent till our Death, yet we have here an encouraging Example, we shall then be accepted. This Thief had been very notorious and extravagant, an Offender of the first Rate; and yet when he calls for Mercy, tho' it was with his last Breath, his, Lord, re∣member me when thou comest into thy Kingdom, was comfortably answered with a This day thou shalt be with me in paradise. And therefore, tho' the greatest part of our Lives, like this Thief's, may have been spent in Sin and Vanity, yet if we can but say, Lord have mercy upon us, with our last Breath, we shall likewise be ac∣cepted. To this I Answer: 'TIS a dangerous thing to pre∣sume on God's Mercy. And so provoking is such Presumption, that if the bare saying of these words, Lord
have mercy upon me, would save thy Soul; it may so happen, through the just Judgment of God, thou mayst not be able to do it. Thou mayst dye suddenly, or thou mayst dye Stupid, or raving-mad. But suppose thou hast both Breath, and the use of thy Reason to say these words, here is very slender encourage∣ment from the Example of this Thief, that a dying Sinner, who never re∣pented till his Death, shall then find Mercy. For to prove the Validity of a Death-bed Repentance, from the Example of this Thief, Two things are supposed. 1. That this Thief was a very wicked Man. 2. That he continued in his Sin, and did not repent till the time of his Death. Now, if neither of these Two can be proved, then the Case of this Thief is not parallel, nor a firm foundation for the Validity of a Death-bed Repen∣tance.
1. It doth not appear, That this Thief was a very wicked Man. He is called indeed a Thief, and dies as a Malefactor. But now, a good Man, and who is so in the general Course of his Life, may by surprise, and the violence of a Temptation, be guilty of a very bad Action, of which he afterwards doth sincerely Repent. The very Case of David and Peter. But further, he is called indeed a Thief in our Translation;  in the Greek, Latro in the Latin. But what these words do properly signify, we must further examine. It was the Character of Barabbas, that he was , a Robber. So we Translate it, John 18.40. But what kind of Person he was, may be infer'd from other places of Scripture. It is said of this Barabbas, That for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murther, he was cast into prison, Luke 23.19. And St. Mark tells us, Chap. 15. Ver. . There was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them, who had made insurrection with him, that is, at his In∣stigation
and Procurement. He was, it's probable, the Ringleader and Captain of the Rebels. The which conjecture is further confirm'd by the story of this Barabbas in St. Matth. 27.16. They (that is, the Jews) had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas; . Now the word , sig∣fies an Eminent Person, a Man of Note and Quality. This Barabbas then was the Head of the Party. Who as Zealots for their Nation and Religion, had made a ri∣sing against the Romans; in which at∣tempt being unsuccessful, they were punished as Malefactors. And yet this Barabbas, tho' the Captain-General of a Party, is called, , Latro, a Thief. And in Confirmation of this, I must further observe to you, That the word Latro, which is now a term of Ignominy and Reproach, and is usually translated, a Thief, or a Rob∣ber; did anciently signify no more, as the best Authors inform us, than a hired Souldier. And Latrocinari pro
Militare, is noted Language in Plau∣tus. So that this penitent Thief, as great a Malefactor as he is usually supposed, was no worse (for ought we know to the contrary) than a Souldier, who hapning to be on the wrong side, was punished as a Malefactor. But now supposing, 2. That this Thief had been a very wicked Man; (which is more than was ever yet proved against him) yet, How do we know that he did not Repent, even long before he died? And if so, if he had formerly repented, then his Case is nothing to the purpose, nor can his Example, with any shew of reason be urged in favour of a Death-bed Repentance. But supposing, 3. That this Thief was, 1. A very wicked Man, not a Souldier, as the word may be render'd, but a Thief, and a Robber, in the strictest Sense. And supposing, 2. That he did not Repent till his Death. Yet I shall shew, ex abun∣danti, that his Example ought not to
be urged in favour of a Death-bed Re∣pentance. As will more fully appear by examining the Circumstances of this Thief's Conversion. 1. 'Tis possible he never heard of Christ till his Crucifixion. If he was a Gentile, and not a Jew, 'tis highly probable he never did. For Christ, at first, was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And the Commission, Go, teach all Nations, was not enlarged till the day of his Ascention. If this was his Case, How could he believe on him, of whom he had not heard? So that on this Supposition, no other than a Death-Repentance was possible to this Thief. 2. Supposing he had heard of Christ, and that he was informed by common Fame, that there was a Man called Jesus, who had done great Miracles: And that several had this opinion of him, That he was the Messias, whom God had promised to send into the World: Yet all this was but general and confused knowledge.
He had indeed heard of Christ, and the several Passages concerning him. But such was the Course of Life this Thief is supposed to have led, that he had no great curiosity to inquire over-strictly into such matters. But when it so hapned that he was ap∣prehended for Robbery, and condem∣ned to dye at the same time with Christ; this in all probability made him curious to inquire after him, and to learn all the Circumstances of his Apprehension, Tryal, and Be∣haviour. From whence he observed so much as convinced him, that he was the true Messias. And so he be∣lieved on him, and had Salvation by him. But what encouragement is this to thee, O presuming Christian! who was baptized into Christ, and di∣stinctly instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, even from thy Child∣hood? Had this Thief, as thou art, been early admitted into the Church; had he then been instructed in his Duty,
and constantly admonished to conti∣nue in it: And if after such Admis∣sion, such Instructions and Exhorta∣tions, had he still lived upon the Pad, and spent his time in Roving and Robbing, in Luxury and Injustice; and had rejected the Warnings and Admonitions of his Teachers. Had this been his Case, we have then the justest reason to pronounce, That a short Ejaculation at his Death would not have been accepted; and his Lord remember me, would have been rejected with a Depart from me, I know thee not, thou worker of Iniquity. But, 3. The Case of this Thief was miracu∣lous and extraordinary. And that whe∣ther we consider the Penitent, or the Grace of God in pardoning. 1. As to the Thief; probably he had lived in great Ignorance, and ne∣ver had the means of Grace till now. And therefore to profess his Faith in Christ, when he saw him hanging up∣on
the Cross, was very signal and ex∣traordinary. He confessed Christ when his own Disciples fled from him, and when Peter himself denied him. Nay, so great was the Scandal of the Cross, that all Men then forsook him, and lost their Faith in him, and had no further hope of Help and Salvation from him. Now to confess and own him at such a time as this, was so pleasing and acceptable to our Saviour, that he makes him a signal Instance of his Grace and Favour. 2. It was very agreeable to the Di∣vine Wisdom and Goodness, to do something extraordinary on such a solemn Occasion as this. Thereby to signalize the Efficacy of our Saviour's Mediatorship, and that at such a time, when the Dignity and Glory of his Person was most clouded and ob∣scured. From these Premises it appears, That this Instance of the Thief upon the Cross, was miraculous and extra∣ordinary.
And we have a known Rule, Extraordinaria non debent esse Ex∣empla, Extraordinary Cases are no Rule for practice. The Israelites had Manna showred down from Heaven. Will you there∣fore leave your Husbandry, and ex∣pect your Bread from the Clouds? Will you adventure to leap into the Sea, because you read that Jonah was saved from thence? Look up∣on this Thief as a Jonah in the Sea; A Miracle of Grace; a Prodigy of Providence. A King in his Progress passing by the Place of Execution, as an In∣stance of his Royal Favour, pardons a Thief with the Rope about his Neck; Dare you therefore be encou∣raged to play the Thief, in hopes of such a strange and unusual Par∣don? And if you dare not thus venture your Life, your Temporal Concern; dare you hazard your Soul, your Eter∣nal Concern?
To conclude.Our Blessed Saviour in pardoning this Thief, in such an extraordinary manner, hath shewed us what he can do, that none may Despair. But he hath likewise declared in his Holy Word what he ordinarily will do, that none may presume. He hath plainly told us, That without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. And that every one shall receive the things done in his Body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. The CLOSE. I Have now faithfully represented the Uncertainty and Danger of a Death-bed Repentance. And have plain∣ly admonished you, That if you neg∣lect to Repent now, and defer this necessary Work to you know not when hereafter, you have just Cause
to fear you will never Repent. For, either you may be prevented by a sudden stroke, and so your Repen∣tance is impossible; or else disturbed with the Pains and Tortures of a lan∣guishing Bed. Which indeed may distract you with Remorse and An∣guish, with Horror and Despair; but it is much to be feared without true Repentance. I do much hope (and do earnestly pray) that what I have now said on this Subject, may make its due Im∣pression upon you. But the more ef∣fectually to persuade you, give me leave to enforce my Admonitions, with the noted words of a truly Great and Good Man, now with God. LET no Man deceive you with vain Words, or with false No∣tions of a slight and sudden Repen∣tance. Do not delude your selves with vain hopes, that this Work may be done at any time, and in an in∣stant; and that if you can but fashi∣on your last breath into Lord have
mercy upon me, this will prevail with God, and make Atonement for the long Course of a wicked and sinful Life. What strange thoughts have Men of God and Heaven? As if Heaven were an Hospital, founded on pur∣pose to receive all sick and maimed Persons; that when they can live no longer to the Lusts of the Flesh, and sinful Pleasures of this World, can but put up a cold and formal Petition to be admitted there. No, no, as sure as God is true, they shall never see the Kingdom of God, who instead of seeking it in the first place, make it their last Re∣fuge and Retreat. And when they find themselves under the Sentence of Death and Damnation, only to avoid present Execution, and since there is no other remedy, do at last bethink themselves of getting to Heaven, and fall upon their Knees, to Petition the Great Judge of the World, that they may be transported thither.
Can any Man in reason expect that such a Petition will be granted? I tell you nay; but except you repent sooner, and at a fitter time, and after a better fashion, you shall certainly pe∣rish. As much as God desires the Sal∣vation of Men, he will not prosti∣tute Heaven, and set the Gates of it wide open to those, who only fly to it in extremity, but never sought it in good earnest, nor indeed do now care for it, or desire it for any other reason, but to excuse them from going to Hell. They have no value for Heaven, because they are in no wise fit for it. But yet they think Hell to be the worse place of the two. I am afraid this is the true Inter∣pretation of many a Man's Repen∣tance, who hath deferr'd it till he comes to dye. I do not speak this to discourage Repentance even at that, time. I deny not the possibility of the thing. But to speak the best of it, it is a very dangerous Remedy. For, alas, how unfit are most Men
at such a time for so great and seri∣ous a Work as Repentance is, when they are unfit for the smallest matter, and how hard is it for any Man then to be assured of the truth and reality of his Repentance, when there is no sufficient opportunity to make trial of the sincerity of it? I desire to have as large apprehensions of the Mercy of God as any man. But withal, I am very sure that he is the hardest to be imposed upon, of any one in the World. And no Man that hath any worthy apprehensions of the Deity, can imagine him to be so easy, as to forgive Men upon the last Word and Intimation of their Minds; and to have such a fondness for Offenders, as would reflect upon the Prudence of any Magistrate and Governor up∣on Earth. God grant that I may sincerely endea∣vour to live a Holy and Virtuous Life; and may have the comfort of that when I come to die. And that I may never be
so unwise, as to venture all my hopes of a blessed Eternity upon a Death-bed Re∣pentance. Vid. Archbishop Tillotson's Ser. on Eccles. 12.1. and Ser. on Heb. 3.13. FINIS.
Advertisement. A Conference with an Anabaptist. Price 1 s. A Theological Discourse of Last Wills. Price 1 s. Several small Books against Debauchery, Prophaneness, Blasphemy, Cursing and Swear∣ing, &c. Price Two pence each, and some∣thing cheaper to such as are so Charitable to give away Numbers. All by (the Author of this) Dr. Assheton. Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End. And the Danger and Mis∣chief of delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow. In Octavo. Price 18 d. The four Last Things, viz. Death, Judg∣ment, Heaven, and Hell; practically Consi∣der'd and Applied. By W. Bates, D. D. In Twelves. Price 2 s. The Advice of a Father: Or Counsel to a Child, directing him how to demean himself in the most important Passages of this Life. By E. C. Gent. In Twelves. Price 1 s. All Printed for B. Aylmer in Cornhill.
