B3752 11872823 50157
THE PROPOSITIONS Of their Excellencies THE AMBASSADOVRS OF The High and Mighty States Generall of the united Provinces, in the NETHERLANDS. Delivered by them, by word of mouth, in both Houses of the Parliament of England, the 22/12. of July, 1644 The Translation in English, delivered to both Houses, was subscribed. W. Borell. Iohn Reede de Renswoude. Alb. Ioachimi. LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, 1644.
RIGHT HONOVRABLE LORDS, AND COMMONS. FRom the very beginning of the restauration of the Liberty of the Republique of the Vnited Provinces of the Netherlands, The High and Mighty Lords, our Lords, the States Generall, their chiefest wishes and desires have ever beene to see, that the Kings of great Brittaine, and these King∣domes might be perpetually maintained,
and preserved in a good concord, Peace and Vnion, by which nothing could be∣fall them but all safety, and advantage, and that for three principall reasons. First, that these Kingdomes, being the greatest & the strongest Body, which ha∣ving received and maintained the Profes∣sion of the true Christian Protestant Reli∣gion, and concerving it selfe so well, it might also contribute much, yea by Fame and reputation it selfe, to the conservation of States, Confederates and Friends, and of all the other Protestant Churches, esta∣blished and spread through whole Eu∣rope. Secondly, that these Kingdomes, by their situation, commodities, traffique, and Navigation, and their Republique, be∣ing so nearely combined by their com∣mon Interest of State, and Religion, our Lords might rest assured, that the Interest of the King, and these Kingdomes, being so mightily advanced, and conserved by the same meanes, those of the Netherlands
could not be but well conserved. And thirdly, that this intestiue Peace, Vnion and Concord, (which Prosperity and Weale ordinarily accompanieth) con∣tinuing here, that not onely the Kings and Kingdomes should be able to maintaine, and preserve themselves; but that the States Confederate, and Friends, or the good Cause of the Protestant Religion, in other parts unjustly suffering; (as formerly it hath beene, and yet this day is too much perceived) they might ever find their refuge & azile, their Succours & their ayd against all those, who on the contrary part of other States and Churches, should undertake to undermine the true Foun∣dation of the happinesse of these flou∣rishing Kingdomes. For your situation being well consider∣ed, you are in your selves as a World a part, separated from many inconveniences of the other. You have your Commodities at home, not onely which are necessary, and for
your pleasure and delight, but also in such plenty that you are able to communicate them to other Nations your Neighbours. The Sea doth serve you for a ditch and Bulwarke, and your Power by Sea is a∣ble to maintaine you in your filicity, and to exempt and free you from all forraigne injuries. So that the good of your owne con∣servation, and the cause of your evill and ruine, could not be suscitated, nor found elsewhere but at home, and within your selves. And certainely the Kings and Queenes formerly have done notable asistances for the maintenance and conservation of the true Religion, and of many States which had need thereof, amongst which Our LORDS doe professe themselves as much obliged and bound, as any other. And the King and these Kingdomes shall yet in time be able to doe the like as∣sistance, as well for the present, (now there is so great a necessity) as for the fu∣ture,
provided you conserve your selves in that Concord and Vnion, which here∣tofore hath made, and shall ever make you mighty and redoubted. From hence it is, that the common Enemies of the Peace of Christendome, and their Agents, who (long since) have framed and forged the Designe of an uni∣versall Monarchy of whole Europe, yea of the whole World, seeing and percei∣ving with an envious and malicious eye your former happinesse, your flourishing State, and your power, and that there was nothing so contrary and dreadfull to their vast conceptions, as your oppo∣sitions. To hurt and weaken, yea to ruine you, if they had beene able, they have hereto∣fore used all violence, and the strength of great Fleets and Armies, but in vaine and without successe. They have at last not beene able to act a better play, then that which is most fa∣miliar to them, and which often hath
helpt them, to the ruine of many great States, which have not bin so circumspect and prudent as you are: Right Honourable, It is so, that quitting violence in a pro∣found peace, which they have with you, and during the time of the same, they have sowne amongst you the seedes and weedes of Discord and dissention, as well in politique as Church businesses, and shall ever foment them: whence they could assure themselves of a certaine profit, what end soever the said dissenti∣ons might take. And by these means and their accusto∣med craft, they have proposed to obtain by intestine troubles, you should weaken your selves, and making you lesse mighty, and lesse dreadfull, and no wayes conside∣rable, you might serve at last, (which God avert) to the inglutting of their insatiable ambition, to the destruction of the true Religion, and of all that which may be
deare and recommendable to you. As VVe see already brought to passe in Ireland where the cruelties, murthers, horrible and unheard of slaughters have been perpetrated, with effusion of so much innocent bloud, to the totall destru∣ction of the true Protestant religion there, and to the great danger of the State it selfe. Our Lords seeing these mis-understan∣dings, troubles, and miseries here already growne to so great an extreamity: and being so highly interessed in your well being, have esteemed fit and timely to send Vs their Ambassadors to this King∣dome, to offer to the King and to his Parliament Our Service and mediati∣on. To help (if acceptale) to remove and take away the jealousies which are and might be, and to compose the dissentions by the milde wayes for an amiable Con∣ference. And our said Lords declare, that they
have not been moved hereunto by any presumption, or to intrude themselves in the busines of a great King, and of these mighty Kingdomes: But onely to acquit themselves of the Office and Duty of a good friend, and also to acknowledge in this occasion the grat obligation which the King, and these Kingdomes have up∣on our Republique. Our Lords further doe perswade them∣selves that no other State in the world, but theirs shall be found more fit and ac∣ceptable, (in then opinion) to interpose it selfe in the meditation of an accommo∣dation, and re-union between his Maje∣sty and his Parliament, and to whose in∣terposition more credit might bee given without all susption: For the honour, greatnesse and prosperity of the King and these Kingdomes, is by reflection the same for our Republique; and on the contrary your evill is to Vs a very great affliction, and a most sensible evill. From thence may be taken this firm as∣surance,
that the ayme of our mediation shall not be to recommend an accommo∣dation, and reconciliation feigned and painted without, not prejudiciall, and not assured within. But to procure a true re-union, sincere and perfect, founded upon the Basis of the true Religion and Iustice, which shall re-establish respectively the good correspondence, confidence, love, and the respects between the King and his Parliament, and between all the good subjects of these great Kingdomes. The King hath so much approved of the reasons and proffers of our said Lords, that his Majesty hath accepted on his part Our Interposition, and hath consented to a Conference between Commissioners to be sent from both parties, (if you find it good) and that you shall chuse the place, the time, and the number of the persons who shall be imployed in this action. Right Honourable, Now Wee come unto you by com∣mand
of Our Superiours to make the same proffer of mediation, and to under∣stand whether also it may bee agree∣able and acceptable unto you. VVe have alwayes observed that your good inclinations have been carryed to peace, if you receive satisfaction to your just and reasonable demands. Your wisedomes also may well judge, that the wayes of Armes are no alwayes the surest, their successes being very uncer∣taine, and which changeth face in a mo∣ment. The good Cause which is proposed, doth not alwayes promise an assured and certain successe, for we are all men, and God sometimes permits the good Cause to suffer for our sins. All warre is an affliction and punish∣ment of God, in which we are not to take delght, when we can be freed of it, upon honest and sure termes and conditions, that the wrath of God be not longer pro∣voked against us.
It is to be considered also, if no reason∣able accommodation be found that the decision of your differences by Armes is not to be expected so soon; but rather on the contrary, that it shall bee the cause of perpetuating the warres in these King∣domes, because the King shall ever live in his Royall Posterity, and the Parliament never dyes to suscitate always the former evill successes by new warres, which at length shall cause the totall ruine and de∣struction of State and Religion, onely to the great advantage of the common ene∣my of our Faith. Right Honourable, If it please you to make use of our in∣tercession, unto which the King consented at our first Proposition and offer, VVe promise you to proceed and labour in it with all sincerity and fidelity, as Ambas∣sadors sent by your best friends and allies, making profession of one and the same Religion.
And we shall spare no endeavour, tra∣vaile, nor paine (by the good will which his Majesty hath declared to us, and by your good intention) to make the af∣fections of our Lords succeed to such perfection, that the King and his Parlia∣ment, and all good and loyall Subjects of the King, and lovers of their Country, shall finde their desired contentment and tranquility with all assurance. Right Honourable, We must yet adde these few words, that your troubles and warres, trouble and indanger us also: for many Mer∣chants and Masters of Ships dayly present themselves to Our Lords the States Gene∣nerall, and to us here, with their com∣plaints, that your men and ships of war trouble their course of trading and traf∣fique, and take their ships and goods without any just cause, and without rea∣son, and any right at all, as may be seen by a Memorandum hereunto anneed,
which you are desired to take notice of, and to give order for restitution and re∣paration of the dammages sustained for the present, and to take such course that in the future the like excesses may be pre∣vented. And if any doubts be found in the said Memorandum, that it may please you to appoynt us some Commissioners to settle the poynts of which wee are com∣plaining, as shall be found to agree with reason. FINIS.
