B4837 13572377 100382
Sr St. JOHN BRODRICK's VINDICATION OF HIMSELF, FROM The Aspersions Cast on HIM, In a PAMPHLET Written BY Sir Rich. Buckley, ENTITULED, The Proposal for sending back the Nobi∣lity and Gentry of Ireland. TOGETHER With a Vindication of the same. Printed for the Author, Anno Dom. 1690.
Sir St. JOHN BRODRICK's VINDICATION OF HIMSELF, &c. I AM very sorry for the Occasion that is given me of appearing in Print at this time: I know Myself so unqualified for the Writing what must undergo every Man's Censure, that I should rather have ventured to rely on the Reputation I have with those to whom I am known, and the Charity of Strangers, against All the Aspersions that are or can be cast on me by Sir R. B. then have undertaken the Task of a Publick Vindication, did not the Title-page of his Book carry the Sacred Name of Authority in it, under which he would shelter himself, in the publishing as severe a Charge against me, as was ever laid on Man. The unusualness of Licensing Personal Reflections of one private Man upon another, may, 'tis to be feared, possess indifferent Men with a belief, that there is something more in the Accusation than or∣dinary
Railing; and therefore to be silent upon such an Occasion, could not be interpreted less than an owning myself guilty of what I am charged with: This has put me under a necessity of making the fol∣lowing short Defence. To the doing my self Justice in this Affair, it will be necessary in the first place, to give the Rea∣der some Account of my Proposal, the occasion of it, and what steps I made in it; and then shortly answer what is personal, and reflects upon myself onely. I must confess, that in the former of these I shall have some difficulty to struggle with; for if as mo∣dest a Proceeding as ever Man made, shall, by Li∣cense, be called Insolence beyond imagination, I know not what a Defence of myself in that Proceeding, tho' never so modest, may be interpreted into. How∣ever, since my Reputation (as Sir R. says very truly of his, at least since the Publishing of this Pamphlet, whatever it did before) lies at stake; and since my Proposal, which was at first put into better hands, is now fallen so low as Sir R. B's. and is by him sent abroad, mangled, and with the harshest Reflections his Malice could suggest to him; I hope it cannot be looked upon as a breach of the Rules of Decency in me, to set it in its true light, and wipe off those A∣spersions he has endeavoured to cast on it, and Me upon the Account of it. But I must acquaint the Reader, that, not having yet received any Answer to it, I shall avoid the say∣ing any thing about it, further then what Sir R's. Reflections have made absolutely necessary; in
hopes that I may yet be called upon, in a proper place, to justifie my self and it; which I must use my utmost Endeavours to have an Opportunity of doing. About the middle of last June, being in the Court of Requests, several Gentlemen of Ireland came to me, and enquired, whether I designed to return to that Country? Upon my asking the reason of the Question, I was answered, That a GentlemanH. S. Esq had just then given an Intimation, that all the Protestants of Ireland were to be formed into Regi∣ments: And that the Lords Commites for the Af∣fairs of Ireland, had desired, that those who were willing to enter into that Service, would represent to them such Persons as they looked upon to be fittest for Commands; And said, They (being of Munster) with my leave, would name me for one. I told them, I should be very ready to undertake it, if His Majesty thought fit to Employ me. This was the first Notice I had of any thing of this kind, and not one word farther passed between us. With∣in four or five days after, they delivered unto me the following Petition, Signed by above two hun∣dred and fifty Persons, many of them Gentlemen of very good Estates in that Kingdom, desiring me to pursue it in such Methods as I thought most pro∣per.
The PETITION. TO THE Right Honourable, the LORDS and Others of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy-Council, appoint∣ed Committees for the Affairs of IRELAND. The Humble PETITION of several Distressed Protestants of that Kingdom, some of whom have formerly served in Field, and all of them are now driven out of that Kingdom. Sheweth, THAT the Condition of your Petitio∣ners here is very Distressed and De∣plorable; And your Lordships being appointed by His Majesty to have a particular care of all Matters relating to the Affairs of Ireland,
they humbly take leave to apply themselves to your Lordships with a tender of their Lives to be employed in His Majesty's Service, in Order to the Reducing of that Kingdom. A Service which they shall be most hearty in, All that they have in the World lying there, of which they are now disposessed by the Papists; and for which they think they may say they are the more fit, in regard they are used to the Air of the Country, and are perfectly acquainted with all the Fastnesses and places of Retreat, with which that Country abounds▪ And an Intimation being given unto them, that it might be proper for them to recommend some Persons, who, they judge, may with most Ad∣vantage to His Majesty's Affairs, be employed in that Service, they humbly take leave to name Sir St. John Brodrick, as a Person fit to Command and Lead a Regiment there, he having been a Field-Officer both of Horse and Foot in the Wars there, above Forty Years since, and one who has at all times since been a Zealous Assertor (to his own great Hazard) of the Protestant Interest there, on all Occa∣sions; Ʋnder whose Command every one of us, whose Names are hereunto Subscribed,
and many more, would very gladly venture our Lives, and all that is dear to us, as be∣ing satisfied as well in his Experience and Knowledge of the Country, as his firmness to Their Majesties Service, and the Interest of that Kingdom. And Your Petitioners, &c. I took all imaginable care to prevent the Ob∣jection Sir R. has fallen upon, of setting the Feet above the Head; and therefore, tho' it were dire∣cted to the Lords of the Committee for Irish Af∣fairs, who had a Power to receive all Proposals re∣lating to that Kingdom, I would not offer it, even to them, till I first knew His Majesty's Pleasure, and had his leave to do so: For the obtaining of which I applied my self to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, who was pleased to undertake the shewing it to the King, and that I should know his Answer from him. After some little time his Grace told me, that he had acquainted His Majesty with the Effect of the Petition, upon which His Majesty was pleased to say, That he did not intend to raise any new Forces yet, but that whenever he did, this should be taken into Consideration. His Grace was pleased further to promise me, That, whenever he heard His Majesty designed to add to his Forces, he would put him in mind of this Petition: And to that pur∣pose it was left with his Grace, and rested in his hands for about four Months, till the time that Ma∣jor-General Trelawney went for Plymouth.
The general Discourse of the Town being, that the Forces with him were to make a De∣scent in Munster, and it being apprehended, that he would very much want Horse or Dragoons; I thought that those of that Province might do Their Majesties more than ordinary Service, in an Action of that Nature; and therefore I did immediately upon my hearing of it, (and more in hast than I should, had I suspected that they would have been the Subject of an Angry Man's Observations) draw up the following Proposals, and delivered them to my Lord President, and several other Lords of Their Majesties Privy Council, intreating them to represent them to the King: And I let their Lordships know, That I doubted not, but that if they were soon accepted, the whole Regiment might be raised timely enough to overtake the Major-General. Every one of their Lordships to whom I deliver∣ed them were pleased to declare, That they thought them the most reasonable Proposals that ever were made: And indeed Sir R. B. is the onely man that I ever yet heard was of a contrary Opinion: Whe∣ther he be in the right or not, the Reader, when he sees the Proposals themselves will best judge. They were these:
To His Most Excellent Majesty, AND The Honourable the LORDS Committees for the Affairs of Ireland, The Humble PROPOSALS of Sir St. John Brodrick, Kt. IF it may be agreeable to His Majesty's Inclinations, he offereth his Service, forthwith to raise a Regiment towards the Reducing of Ireland, to be made up of Per∣sons, for each of whose Fidelity he will be answerable, they being of the distressed Pro∣testants of that Kingdom, and most of them of the County of Cork, now in and about London; all of them dispoiled of their Sub∣stance by the Irish, and many Attainted for High-Treason by Name (for quitting the Kingdom, rather than take part with the Irish) by the late pretended Parliament there.
That by long Experience they have con∣tracted so mean an Opinion of the Natives of Ireland, that no disproportion of Num∣ber will make them turn their backs on the Irish. That besides their willingness to hasten the Reduction of that Kingdom, to which their Interest obliges them, they will be better capable of doing His Majesty Service there, than others, being inured to the Cli∣mate, acquainted with the Sea-Coasts, as well as with the Passes and Fast-places of that Country, formidable to the Natives; and who have yet remaining in that King∣dom many Tenants and Dependants, who, as soon as opportunity offers, will joyn the Forces; besides the Advantages they may reasonably make, by Intelligence of the E∣nemies Motions and Designs. It is humbly tendred to His Majesty's Consideration, That many of these Men who must be common Soldiers, are either Gentlemen of good Estates, or the
Sons of such; and therefore fitter (if it comport with His Majesty's Affairs) for Horse or Dragoon Service, than for Foot, of which former there seems at pre∣sent the greatest need in that Kingdom Nevertheless, such is their Inclination to that Service, that they will rather under∣take the meanest Employments, than con∣tinue not only idle and useless, but bur∣thensome to this Kingdom. If His Majesty shall think fit to employ them as Horse or Dragoons, they will ac∣cept the least Sum for Mounting Money that hitherto hath been given; or even a∣bate of that, if His Majesty think fit. If this be not thought proper, they are ready to embrace the Foot-Service on the following Terms: I. That the Commission-Officers be Persons of that Country, known to the Men whom they are to Command, and who may have an Influence on the Country where they go.m
Such Officers to give sufficient Proof, or Se∣curity of their Fidelity to His Majesty; and to be answerabe for the Men by them Inli∣sted. II. That they be furnished by His Majesty with proper and Serviceable Arms, at His Majesty's Charge. III. That they may receive His Majesty's usual Pay from the time they are Inlisted, till they shall Land in Ireland; and from thence∣forth half Pay in Money, and they are wil∣ling to accept the other half in Debentures, to be satisfied in the first Place preferable to all other Charges or Pretences whatsoever, out of the forfeited Lands in the County of Cork; or if the forfeited Lands shall fall short there, either in the Counties of Limerick or Tippera∣ry, according to the Rates of the late Act or Acts for Adventurers. I think I need not put the Reader in mind that these were Proposals onely; and therefore if any thing, against which there was a reasonable Obje∣ction, were mentioned in them, that might easily
be Corrected or Altered, as His Majesty should think fit. But these being the onely Ones of the kind that ever I heard of, and seeming to obviate the great Objection (viz. want of present Money) by maintaining double the number of Forces at single Pay; (not to mention the Pledge which the Reward of the Souldiers depending on the Success of their Arms, gave, of their hearty Service) I hoped, if re∣jected, they might have met with a better Usage than Sir R. has given them. But whatever the Fate of the Proposals may be, I suppose the fore-go∣ing Account will fully clear me of the Insolence I am charged with, Of providing myself Souldiers, be∣fore the King's Pleasure was known; and setting the Heels above the Head. (An Insolence indeed, and such an one, as I must have owned Sir R. a very modest Man, for giving it no worse a Name, if it had been true). And I cannot believe that it will be looked upon to be unreasonable, that the Deben∣tures of those who run the Risque of taking half their Pay in conquered Lands, should have preference to Acts of meer Bounty, and voluntary Grants: And nothing else was, or could be intended by me (for more the King could not grant); and so I have often explained myself. I will add in the last place, That, whatever this considering Man thinks to the contrary, I do not doubt, in a very short time, if His Majesty shall so think fit, yet to raise a Regi∣ment of the English of Ireland, who will carry Mu∣skets: (Tho 'tis most plain my Proposals for them, aim at Horse or Dragoons, and I have not confined myself to such onely, in the Foot-Service): But I must
not be tyed up now to those in and about London, (for that most of those of the middle Rank, finding it too chargeable to remain hereabouts, have remo∣ved into cheaper Countries). And tho' it will be a matter of much more difficulty to do now, than when I undertook for it; if Sir R. B. doubts it, he, who has shewn the vehement bent of his Incli∣nation to expose me, can't take a more effectual way of doing it, than by using that great Interest, which his Paper would possess the World with a be∣lief he has, to put me upon making the Experi∣ment. That he may be the more hearty in it, I will undertake to remove, to the satisfaction of all reasonable Men, the Objections, (which in a way so becoming a Gentleman, so peculiarly his own) he has made against my Person and Behaviour. He has charged me with tacitely providing myself with Souldiers, before the King's Pleasure known, p. 20. And keeping those Souldiers in Pay for Five Months, p. 19. This is an Accusation indeed; and put me immediately upon turning to the 25 E. 3. where I found myself directly within the words of the Sta∣tute; but I took comfort when I considered that the Charge must be proved by Two Witnesses, and those Fide digni & exceptione majores. I was sure Sir R. B's. Pamphlet could not be one of them. But tho' 'twould not amount to Treason, I had heard of a way, of turning that Offence into a Mis∣demeanour: And that was laid very thick upon me; for I had not onely levied War, but did it with o∣ther Mens Money, to the cheating of poor Widows
and Children: And by this Knavery of mine, lusty young Men that might, and probably would have gone over with the Army, were kept here. I should be ve∣ry sorry to hear any Man in England, but Sir R. B. reflect upon the part which I have acted, in the Di∣stribution of the Brief-Money. I am sure, that if those excellent Persons, who gave so bountifully to that Collection, intended, that the Money should be distributed to those whose Wants called for it most, without distinction of Age or Sex; I shall never receive a Reproof from them, for breach of Trust in that Affair. I Appeal to all the poor Wi∣dows and Children, whose Distresses have driven them to seek Relief out of that Fund, whether I have not espoused their Cause, more heartily than ever I did my own, in any instance whatsoever: I appeal to all the Commissioners who acted with me, whether I have not constantly attended there, to my Charge, and loss of time; whether ever any Person came thither for Relief, with my Re∣commendation, who has, upon the strictest scruti∣ny, from that time to this, proved an unfit Object of Charity. That some lusty young Men, of all Provinces indifferently, have partaken of that Boun∣ty, is undoubtedly true; and that they ought to do so, will be always my Opinion, till Sir R. B. makes it out, that 'tis fitting, that Gentlemen ve∣ry well descended, and whose Education has been too honest to suffer them to entertain a thought of living by Villany or Violence, must starve here, or in a Camp, for want of means of supporting them∣selves. But that ever any regard was had by me
in the Distribution of that Money, to my Propo∣sals (made no longer ago than two Months since) or that I ever prevented any man's going over with the Army, upon that or any other Account, is a Calumny so black, that were it not senseless enough to expose its Author to all mankind, I should scarce be able to contain my self in the Temper which I resolve to carry through this Paper. I am, I confess, verily perswaded, that several Per∣sons did wait in and about London, in hopes of be∣ing employed, upon the general belief that it would be so in time (it being looked upon to be so very much His Majesty's Interest to do it) tho' the Charge of raising them could not be well born then, which, it is probable, they expected, the rather be∣cause several of the Committee of the Honourable House of Commons did frequently to those of the Country express their wonder that they were not employed. And 'twas commonly discoursed, that that Honourable House would Address to His Majesty, that they might be formed into a Body. And I believe that many of those Persons, if there had been a publick Intimation given, that they must expect no Employments, would have betaken them∣selves to some other way of living, and thereby the Brief have been eased: But how come I to have any share in the blame of this? Especially when I have it to say for my self, and can prove it by the Testimony of Thousands, that before the Army went, I spent my whole time in London, using my Interest with those of my Acquaintance, and taking a Confidence (which I could have starved sooner,
than have done for my self, or any one of my own Children) to sollicit Persons of Quality, to whom I had not the Honour of being known, in behalf of Gentlemen of that Country, to get them into the Army. I Appeal to my Lord Lumley (and heartily beg his Pardon for my Presumption in do∣ing so, as well as the doing what gives me the Oc∣casion of this Appeal) how many Recommenda∣tions he had under my Hand of Persons, several of whom returned to me with Thanks for it, full of Acknowledgments to my Lord, not only for his Employing them, but for his Obliging way of do∣ing it, and the Generous Concern and Compassion he expressed for their Condition, which stopt not at bare words, but shewed it self in large and boun∣tiful Contributions towards the mounting of them. I made it my business to place others under some of the French Officers, whom (and many others of that Nation setled in the Town where I live) I had formerly Opportunities of obliging, tho' some of these men were afterwards turned out again, for Reasons not necessary to be here expressed. But these Instances, and many others that I could give, being some time since, I will add further, that, as lately as last September, I sent away several Young Men, Sons of Tenants of mine, from my own House, fitted out with all things, as far as my Con∣dition, or any Interest I could make, would supply them; to be ready at the Water-side to go off with the first Forces: And took care when Major-Gene∣ral Trelawney was at Plymouth, to give them, and others of my Relations in the West Country, no∣tice
of it, that they might take that Opportunity of joyning them, which they did; and one of them was, at the return of the Major-General, sick of the Small-Pox (but carefully supplied and looked after by the Charity of Captain Luttrel) at Ply∣mouth. This surely may be allowed an instance, that I do not keep Men to serve my own turn, to the hindrance of His Majesty's Service: These I might have pretended to have a Power over; and the Reader will, I suppose, observe the use I made of that Power. And here, having this occasion, I cannot but take notice, that it is very hard, that the small Fortune which I have in England, should be looked upon with an Evil Eye; and Endeavours be used to prevent, my sharing with my Fellow-sufferers of Ireland, in His Majesty's Bounty upon the Ac∣count of that; when I have, not onely a very nu∣merous Family of my own, and the Additional load of Children and their Families that were Mar∣ried, and good Estates setled on them by me in Ireland, to maintain out of it, (besides my being incumbred with Debts, which must encrease daily) but have always some of those, who lie under the same Calamity, upon me; Whose wants being more pressing than my own, I will not, I cannot deny their sharing my Bread with me, while I have any to put into my own head.
I am charged with the Cheating the young Men, (as Sir R is pleased familiarly to call them) and the hindring the payment of the 15000 l. I will account to the young Men for the first, and the Gentry of Ireland for the second; And not trouble the Reader with a Justification as to them, who are so far from accusing me, that they know I want no Defence. But however, for fear of inju∣ring my lesser Proposal, by grasping at the Power of a General, I will tell the Reader all that ever I heard or know concerning the matter of Cadets. And 'tis this; At the time that I delivered my Proposals to my Lord President, in which I offered in the name of several Gentlemen of Munster, to accept of the Foot-service, rather than be unemploy∣ed; I mentioned to his Lordship, That if His Majesty seemed enclined to entertain the Proposal, but should make it his choice, that the Regiment should be Foot; He would give me leave to desire, in order to the carrying over most of the Munster Men together, where there were so many Gentle∣men of very good Quality, all of whom could not be Officers, and some would be unwilling to carry Muskets; That there might be a few added to each Company with double Pay, (which for One hundred would have amounted but to Twenty∣five Shillings a day at the Pay we were to serve for) who, as the Cadets in France, might be ready to fill up any Vacancies by the loss of Officers, in the same Regiment: That I would endeavour to pro∣cure
this; and I hoped it would be granted, if the Proposal were accepted, was the utmost that I ever promised on this occasion. And for the truth of this, I refer my self to those Gentlemen; not to mention the sencelesness of my promising there should be Cadets, when I could pretend to no assu∣rance of having a Regiment. I never said that I had a better Pretence to a Re∣gimentF. 20. than others of Ireland here; But if I had not thought, that I might probably have been ca∣pable of doing Their Majesties Service with it, I should not in the Sixty-fourth Year of my Age, when the Reports of the Posture of Affairs in Ire∣land were very unpromising, have offered my self to a Winter-Campaign, and upon Terms so much more easie than others serve for. 'Twould be an Objection indeed to be beaten byF. 21. a Clergy-man, if true; not altogether upon the Account of the Cowardice of it (for I think I need not mind the Reader, that a worthy Gentleman of that Character, has very lately given such proofs, that Courage is not peculiar to the Laity, as may make it neither a Reproach, or matter of wonder, to be out-done in Soldiery by one of that Coat) but that I should have done any thing to deserve it. Sir R. B. is no Clergy-man, so, I am sure, 'twas none of he that did or will  undertake it. How∣ever, the matter of fact being absolutely false, I must desire Sir R. to take the Scurrilous that goes before it, to himself.
But now I come to a very considerable Objection,F. 20. My being a Justice of the Peace and Deputy-Lieu∣tenant in the time of King James the Second, nay at the time of His present Majesty's Arrival at Windsor. Of which I will give the following short Account, referring the Reader to the Letter from his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, printed at the end of this Paper, for further satisfaction. During the life of my Brother Sir Alan Brodrick, my Name was in∣serted in the Commission of the Peace, but I never would act, we both living in the same Town, so that there was no need of it, and thereupon my Name was for some time omitted. He dying some years before the Death of the late King Charles the Second, upon the Application of all the Gentlemen then upon the Bench, without my Privity; I was not onely put again into Commission, but the Oath of a Justice was tendred me, before I knew of my being so. So I continued, with Company that I am very proud of, till the time that the Que∣stions went about; Immediately after which, I, with that Company, was left out. My Answers to those Questions will justifie me, That I neither was a Tool to serve a Turn in those times, nor courted my Interest to the Prostitution of my Con∣science. To have made a general Answer of No Toleration, had been easily passed over, and such an one as would have humoured the Interest then carrying on, by making the Repeal of All Penal Laws the common concern of All Dissenters.
But at that time to distinguish between the Prote∣stant and Popish ones, as I did; to say, That I should endeavour the Allowance of Ease to the for∣mer, which I thought the doing to the other, would be inconsistent with the Safety of the Govern∣ment, will, I believe, with unprejudiced Men, clear me so much from the imputation of a Knavish Com∣pliance, that I rather fear it will be censured as a Fool-hardiness, and a needless provoking a Prince whose Resentments were known to run very high; Especially in me, whose Concerns in Ireland subje∣cted me to more sensible effects of his Displeasure, than others, who had the good Fortune to have their Lots fall in England. From that time till the dreadful News of His Ma∣jesty's Expedition, I was out of Commission; then, when Mis-managements were publickly acknow∣ledged, and all things promised to be restored to their former state, Orders were given for renewing all Commissions, and restoring the Gentlemen lately put out; which was done accordingly, and I amongst them. Yet even then, at a Meeting of those Gen∣tlemen, long before His Majesty landed, we una∣nimously agreed, not to act, while one Man, whose compliance with the Questions had qualified him for the New Commission; or who had asserted or a∣cted under the Dispensing Power, was left in the Commission. Affairs of greater importance, it seems, took up their time, so that the Commission was not altered; nor did one of us act. This is the
true state of this matter, and I defie the Malice of the worst of Mankind, to charge me in the whole time of my being employed, with one dis∣honest Action, or the doing any thing unbefitting a Gentleman. And now I will leave the Reader to judge, between Sir R. B. and me, as to this part. There is nothing else positively affirmed of me, but that I had no Plantations in Ireland to lose; which I would not have taken Notice of, but to let the Reader see, that one word of truth is not to be expected from him, with relation to me. How positive soever he is in it, 'tis a thing which he could no ways know, for I dare say, he will never pretend to have been upon the place: But I can pro∣duce as many Witnesses as ever have seen that part of the Kingdom, that there is not in the whole Province of Munster, a better planted and improv'd Estate than mine. Besides the visible ones, I will tell Sir R. B. that I made other Improvements of it, that were really valuable: 'Twas let out to English Tenants, near thirty Years since, upon such Terms, that they all thrived, and most of them lived much better than I can at present. 'Twas a Condition of their Leases, of which I have the Counterparts to produce, not to let in a Papist amongst them, as Assignee of any part of their Lands (which was lately made an Accusa∣tion against me, and resented as a great Fault): And they were bound at all times, when the Crown
of England required it, to attend me, or my Heirs, in person, with serviceable Horse, Arms, and Fur∣niture; and I hope there are many of them yet in Ireland, that may be soon put into a Condition to perform this last part of their Covenant, when they have an opportunity of doing it: Which may be easily believ'd, it being notoriously known, that my Son in the Year 1680, (when the Militia of the County of Cork was raised) did Petition the Government to have leave to raise an entire Troop of Horse, to be made up out of his and my Te∣nants onely; which he undertook should be the best Militia Troop in the whole County. I come now to the comparison he makes between us; I know no-body else in the World that would do it, and therefore will leave him to make the most of it. Only where he talks of his Estate be∣ing setled for Four Generations last past in his Fa∣mily, and that I had no Plantations to lose; least he should insinuate something further, then that my Estate there is new purchased, (which I agree) I beg the Reader's Excuse for my Vanity, (I confess 'tis a Folly, yet I cann't forbear it) when I tell him, that my Father left an Estate of double the Value that ever Sir R. B's. was at the highest purchase: And that he derived his Title to a good Real E∣state, enjoyed by his Ancestors for twenty Lineal Discents, from the time of King William the Se∣cond; at which time his Ancestors came out of France, of the same Quality that Sir R. B. now is,
unless his Title be Barronet; which I think not worth my while, to inform my self certainly in. But what does Sir R. B. mean by these words▪F. 21. I got none of my Estate by Perjuring myself, or other Men, nor by any other indirect course, I thank God: No Reader can judge that they carry less in them, than an hint that I did. What can I, or any Man in the World, say to so villanous, yet so general an Accusation? 'Twill be of no use that all the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, Clergy and Laity, will declare, that they never heard so much as a surmise of a thing of that nature: That they know me too well, not to be sure that it is impossible to be true. 'Twill do me no Service to vouch Sir Richard Reynel, and Sir John Temple, now in Lon∣don, or near it, who were my Councel in every Cause, that ever I had relating to my Estate, and by whose Advice I was governed in all that I did in it; who will bear me witness that my constant Instructions to them were, to quit all pretences to every thing, which good Conscience would not give me as well as Law. What can be done then in such a Case? I will onely say, that whenever Sir R. B. or any body else, makes the least ground for such an Imputation upon me, to appear, I do hereby undertake to prove, That he murder∣ed his Father, is a Rebel and Traytor.
I do expect a Vindication and Satisfaction from him, (in this particular especially) as publick as the Affront is; and till he has done me right, either justified the Words, or given me an opportunity of taking satisfaction for them, by quitting his place of Refuge; I may, I think, reasonably expect, that no Gentleman will see him, without spitting in his Face. This is a Reflection beyond all bearing; a private Stab to the Heart had been Mercy to it: And to see a Published by Authority to this, will hardly let a Man stop at a common degree of Ra∣ving: But I will be temperate, expecting, that if he has abused the World by those words, right will be done Me, and care taken to call him to an Ac∣count for his doing so; if not, at least, that he may be required to justifie his Charge; and upon his failing to do it, that the same Authority will encou∣rage his being prosecuted as the worst of Libellers. This is the hardest word I have given him, (the o∣thers are conditional onely). And if I have made every part of his Pamphlet, which affirms or inti∣mates any thing really to my disadvantage, appear to be false, as I think I have sufficiently; I believe all Mankind, who have read that Paper, will allow me to be very much Master of my Passions, when I give him no worse a Name. St. John Brodrick.
POSTSCRIPT. PErhaps the Reader might have expected to have some Accounts of what Sir R. tells the World was the Occasion of the Anger he has expressed against me; viz. That I called his Proposal Dishonest and Knavish. He tells not when, where, in what Company, or upon what Occasion I said so: I will nei∣ther affirm, nor deny the words, till I know certainly whether he charge me truly with them or not; but onely declare, that if I did say any such words, and had been taxed with them in a manner becoming a Gentleman, I would either have made him a Submission as Publick as my Fault was, or have justified what I had said, and given him an Opportu∣nity of taking what Satisfaction he expected: But as he has now used me, I think myself in no sort obliged to take further Notice of them. This I shall farther observe, that tho' Sir R. B. hath thought fit to single me out, to vilifie by Name, his Ma∣lice hath not stopt there, but in the same Pamphlet he reviles and traduces as worthy Persons as belong to the Kingdom of Ireland, with Terms unbefitting a Gentle∣man to give or receive.
My LETTER To His GRACE THE Duke of Norfolk. May it please your Grace, I Humbly beg your Grace's Pardon for the Confidence of this Address, which the Vindication of myself has made neces∣sary; and I am too well acquainted with your Grace's Honour and Temper to sus∣pect, that you will let any Man's Reputa∣tion suffer unjustly, when 'tis in your pow∣er to do him right. If your Grace will please to turn over a late Pamphlet, writ∣ten by Sir Richard Buckley, called, The Proposals for sending back the Nobility and
Gentry of Ireland, Vindicated. (Which I herewith send to your Grace); in the Twentieth Page of it, you will find, a∣monst other things, this Objection against my being employed by Their Majesties: I will not say, that he will carry in his Re∣giment to his Old Master; but this I will say, that when His Majesty came up from the West to London, in our March, I found this Gen∣tleman at Windsor, then a Justice of the Peace, (and I have heard several say, he was a Deputy-Lieutenant) under the late King, at a time when few honest Men in the Kingdom would accept of it. The Re∣flection which the latter words carry, seems so large, that I cannot but believe, they were inserted without the Allowance of the Authority, by which the Title-page says his Book is Published: But for me to insist only on the generality of the Accu∣sation, when I am particularly charged, might reasonably be interpreted a shifting off what I could not defend myself against. Your Grace (being then Lord Lieutenant of Surrey) is best able to say, what ground
the Gentleman has to charge me with any thing, that may be an Imputation upon me upon that Account: And to your Grace I appeal in it. I intreat your Grace to give me leave to make Publick Use of your Answer to this Letter, which shall al∣ways be owned by me, as the greatest Favour, tho' nothing can oblige me more than I am already obliged to be, Decemb. 23. 1689. Your Grace's most Obedient and Faithful Servant, St. JOHN BRODRICK.
His GRACE's ANSWER. SIR, IN Answer to what you write me word, That you are aspersed as one that con∣tinued to act as a Justice of Peace, and De∣puty-Lieutenant in Surrey, at a time when every one was turned out of Commission, that did not promise to Repeal the Penal Laws and Tests, I will always do you that Justice as to bear you witness, that I first made you a Deputy-Lieutenant in the time of King Charles the Second, and so you continued (as well as in the Commission of the Peace) until King James the Se∣cond caused the Questions concerning the Tests, to be put to every one that was in Commission; and that upon your refusing to comply with them, you were immedi∣ately put out of the Commission of the Peace; and I had Orders to remove you, and all the rest that would not comply,
from being Deputy-Lieutenants; but I (chusing rather to run the hazard of being turned out with so many honest Gentle∣men, then to remain in, with such as they would put in their rooms) refused to Obey that Order; so that it was not onely you in particular that continued; for I did not turn out one Deputy-Lieutenant in either of the Counties of Norfolk, Surrey, or Berks, where I was Lord-Lieutenant. I am Your Servant, NORFOLK and MARSHAL. Decemb. 24. 1689. For Sir St. John Brodrick. FINIS.
