B5100 12020916 52608
Arthur Browne A Seminary Priest, His Confession after he was Con∣demned to be hanged, at the As∣sizes holden at Dorchester the sixteenth day of August. After which sentence of death pronounced he fell upon his knees, as∣king God forgivenesse, rayling upon the Ie∣suit, for said he, they, and none but they are the Plotters of mischiefes, and seducers of His Majesties Subjects, and have brought Him to this confusion. Humbly praying this Honourable Bench to pardon him, and he would un∣fold a great part of their villany which in secret he hath bin sworne unto. August 25. Printed at London for George Tomlinson. 1642.
Arthur Browne a Seminary Priest his Confession, after he was con∣demned to be Hanged at the Assizes hol∣den at Dorchester the 12. day of August, after which Sentence of death pronounced, &c. MY Lord, and this honourable Bench, I am here condemned to dye for a seducer of his Maje∣sties Subjects. True it is, my actions deserve no lesse, for I have bin carried, and have misled others contrary to my conscience for lucre of respect and service far beyond my deserts. Now my Lord, and the rest of this Honourable Bench, I have bin in those Westerne parts ever since the Rebel∣lion in Ireland first sprung up, and privately hid in Ca∣tholick houses, being sent by command from the whole company of Iesuites in the University of St. Thomas in Flaunders, for my owne part I never affected the Romish Religion, but having bin sworne to secresie, and so ma∣ny watches over my carriage, I could not invent without great danger or hazard of my life to leave those Popish projects, which God hath since brought to light. May it please this Honourable Bench, there is not such
diligent search in this Kingdome as ought to be, nay there is not one County in this Kingdome according to the number of Papists in that County, but they have of all Orders to serve them according to their abilities; lesuits, Friars and Seminaries, two sometimes in one Pa∣pists house by turne to read Masse. There is too too many in all Shires more like Knights in habit, and swaggerers in their carriage to avoyd suspi∣tion, than bald-pated Priests and Iesuits, and these are the onely Cavaliers of the times, and the causers of these present distempers, and divisions in the Kingdome; and if you shall find the thoughts of these Popish Projectors, full of horrid conspiracies and treacheries, their mouthes of falshoods and lyes, their hands defiled with bloud, and all their pates tracked with Rebellion: wonder not at it, for 'tis no new thing, and he must needs be a stran∣ger in the world that cannot produce multitudes of the like presidents before, nay they are so barbarous as all Heathen Turkish story is to seek for. Here is a great motive that stir them to be paineful in their callings, for could they bring the Kingdome under subjection of the Pope, as in Queen Maries dayes, they would be in the way of being a Cardinall, if not a Pope, and if a man should aske them the reason of their conspi∣racie, they will tell you they hope to see the King and Q. have the same priviledges & prerogatives as their prede∣cessors before them, a false suggestion of the divell, it is rather to root out the Protestant Religion and bring in popery, and great reason they have to seeke it, they have for these many yeares laid dormant, and as I may com∣pare them to a hive of Bees, which if a man trouble they will fly about to sting him, it is so with them, the Parlia∣ment
doth daily search out their habitations, and fellows them so close too and fro, that they have not a place to rest in, but wander up and down like pilgrimes every where, and now is their time of prey in seeking to set his Maje∣stie and Kingdome at variance. There is another motive which moves them to sow se∣dition amongst us, for in Queen Maries days the govern∣ment of the Kingdome was wholie in their hands, disar∣med the Protestants, and made them uncapable of any Office or place of trust or profit to the great and extraor∣dinary decay of the Protestants in their estates, education and learning, and in the said Queenes Reigne, the Prote∣stants were not allowed to have any armes or ammuniti∣on as papists, but stood like dead men not able to defnd themselves in such desperate dangers. But God whose u∣suall time is then to helpe, when all other help and hope faileth, releeved us with the safe comming of a vertuous Princesse Queene Elizabeth whose courage and valour the world adores, whose vertue and piety her Subjects honoured and at her last dayes governed her people in a most happy and peaceable union one to another. The impudency of the Papists & their religion is to be wondred at, yea their bold assertions and presumptuous hopes in matters of religion is unsufferable which I will not now run so farre out of the way as to relate it but in briefe thus. First they weare the picture of our Saviour about their necks, and the measure of the wound of the side of our Lord Jesus (and say they) it hath such a vertue that no fire water, knife or sword can destroy them, nay the divell cannot hurt them.
Secondly, if they carry this picture or measure of the wound about them, it hath an especiall power against the divel, for they are forced to fly out of the bodies of men, and whosoever carrieth this grain about him, needes not to feare any evil & it hath a most powerful verue against wilde fire (fit to be used in these times) against the tem∣pest of the Sea, and against all manner of infirmities inci∣dent to the soule and body of man, and especially against the feaver, pestilence, the temptation of the divell, and of heresies, and they have the vertue of the Agnus Dei. Thirdly, Pope Adrian the 3d did give such vertue unto this grain, that when you shall say your Pater-Noster, you shall redeem a soule out of purgatory, and when you con∣fesse and repent your fins on the Sunday, you obtaine for∣givenesse of all your unperformed oathes, and if upon Wednesday, Friday and Satterday, that then you get re∣mission of all your sins, or the sins of any other you pray for. This graine yee see is good for all diseases, preserves us from all manner of evill, especially from the temptati∣on of the Divell, but yet not their feet from being so swift to shed innocent blood, their hands from theft, their tongues from lying and such like, which are neer e∣nough a kin to the Divell. Thus you may see this graine is the next dore to Hell, absolves you from perjury, and if you have any part or parcell of those graines about you, you cannot miscary divers other wicked practises, as whoring, committing of rapes, and such other laciviousnes, wch I omit to relate, being unfit for any chaste eare to be defiled with, and yet all their designs forsooth pretends under the cloak of ho∣linesse and religion, which God grant in his goodnesse to
prosper all his Majesties and Parliaments designes, for the reducing of this and other his Majesties Kingdomes to due obedience refining and enlarging of our Church and the returning to a more setled peace to this Kingdome of England, for which to him onely be raised a monument of everlasting prayse, and thanksgiving from us and ours, from one generation to another. The Iudge after his Confession asked what Papists house he most frequented in this Countie or other, who answered and nominated about 15. or 16. Mr. Gouge. Mr. Winter Mr. Ford. Mr. Wray, &c. Sir. Saintleger. The Iudge gave order for his repreeve till the next Goale delivery. FINIS.
