B5901 13677514 101265
PRINTED, By Her Majesties Special Command.
A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE-HALL, On the 29th. of May, 1694. BEING The Anniversary of KING CHARLES II. his Birth and Restauration. By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard, MDCXCIV.
THE Bishop of SARUM'S Sermon Before THE QUEEN, ON The 29th. of May, 1694.
A SERMON Preached Before the QUEEN. PSALM CV. 5. Remember his Marvellous Works that he hath done his Wonders, and the Judgments of his Mouth. THE chief design of the Anniversaries, as well as of the Rituals instituted by Moses, was to oblige the Jewish Nation frequently to reflect upon the wonderful Characters of Gods love and care of them, and the Signal Miracles wrought for their Preservation and Deli∣verance. Upon the returns of those Days, and upon the performance of many Rites, which had no clear signi∣fication in themselves, it was natural for the younger,
and the more ignorant among them, to ask what the meaning of those things was? And then the Fathers and Masters of Families made them long and particular Recitals of their Deliverance out of Egypt, on the days of their Paschal Festivity, of their Station at Mount Sinai; and the Promulgation of the Law, at their Pentecost; and of their march through the Wilderness, on the Feast of Tabernacles; and with the Commemoration of those Signal Transactions, they were to mix Reflections on their Religion and Laws, their Obligations to adhere to the one, and to conform themselves to the o∣ther. This was the provision that God made for keeping that People always in mind of his Goodness to them, and of their Duty to him, besides the Weekly returns of their Sabbaths, and the Monthly returns of their New-Moons. Those Festivities were of Seven or Eight days a piece: And all the People of the Land assembled then at Ierusalem, and spent that time in Discoursing over those Memorable Transactions. The Rituals of their Worship at the Temple on these days, were likewise suited to the ends of those Instituti∣ons, and several of Davids Psalms were probably inten∣ded, as Hymns to be Sung at those times for heightning the Solemnities of the Feast, and for infusing those mat∣ters deeper, both into the Memories and the Affections of the People. In the daily Worship of the Iews, they made use only of a small number of the Psalms, the greatest part of them being composed upon some of the eminent turns of Davids own Life: But others relate to remoter and more general Matters. This and the fol∣lowing
Psalms, seem to have been penned for the Passeover: This carries on the Thread of Gods Providences towards their Fathers, till they came out of Egypt: The next be∣gins at the Wonders wrought in the Red-Sea, to which he adds a lively Recital of their Ingratitude, Disobedi∣ence, and frequent Murmurings: The one Psalm tending as much to humble that Nation, with a Representation of the Sins of their Fore fathers, as the other exalted them with Reflections on Gods care and love to their Ancestors, that had appeared in such Surprising-Instances. Both these Psalms are introduced and ended with such e∣levating Expressions, that could not but very much affect the Israelites, as oft as they repeated them, or heard them Sung in the Temple. In the words of my Text, we have, in short, the chief Duty of those and all other Festivities: They tend to raise our Minds towards God, to acknowledge and adore his Providence, Remember his Marvellous Works that he hath done▪ his Wonders: Some have thought that one of these words belongs to the Miracles that were wrought for that People, and that the other belongs to those Hap∣py Providences that had watched over them, and con∣ducted them; but there may perhaps be too much nice∣ty in this, for as both the Words seem to relate to Mira∣cles, the History here related to being one continued Scene of Miracles, so it is an ordinary piece of Beauty in Poetry, especially when it is designed for Musick, to ex∣press the same thing by different words; and therefore I shall not strain these too nicely: But while they re∣membred the Miracles that God had wrought, in order to the bringing them out of Egypt, they were not to for∣get the Iudgments of his Mouth or Face, that is, the Laws
which were delivered on Mount Sinai; first to Moses Face to Face, and to the whole Nation in that Majestick ap∣pearance, which rested on the top of the Mountain, and in that dreadful Promulgation, which did not only terrifie the Israelites, but Moses himself, who though more accustomed to Divine Manifestations did Fear and Tremble exceedingly. Iudgments being one of those words that are used promiscuously with Laws, Sta∣tutes, and Commandments, as appears through the whole 129 Psalm. These words thus opened, do plainly lead us to con∣sider the right end, and true use of Anniversaries, which is to have the Impressions of Gods govern∣ing the World infixed deeply upon us; by consider∣ing the more eminent steps of his Providence, that from thence we may be brought under a deeper Sence of our Obligations and Duty to him. The re∣passing frequently in our minds, the Blessings that have descended either upon that Church and Nation to which we belong, and in whose prosperity every in∣dividual has a share; or more particularly upon our selves, is a Duty of Religion which is sounded upon the common Principles of Gratitude and Justice. If the favours that we receive from one another, ought to be frequently thought on by us, to beget in us due acknowledgments, and to oblige us to suitable returns, then by a higher Parity of Reason, we ought to raise our minds to a very frequent revol∣ving of those great and unvaluable Blessings, that have in so distinguisht a manner, been now for ma∣ny years the happy Lot of this Church and Nation. An as every Man will find in the Series of his own small
concerns, much matter of Reflection and Praise, when he considers that watchful Providence that has hovered over him, that has by an indiscerna∣ble conduct, carried him by many Dangers, which he seemed to be courting, and into which he had precipitated himself, if that good Hand had not diverted the danger from him, or him from it: Often dangers being past before we were so much as aware of them. The good things that we re∣ceive, come to us often very unexpectedly, by unpro∣mising means, and by a Conjuncture that we had neither laid, nor so much as ever looked for: In short, every Man, who does attentively and grate∣fully observe the Methods of Providence towards him, will be soon able to furnish himself with much matter of Meditation here: But I am now upon a more general Subject, of considering the Reflections that we ought to make on those Bles∣sings, that come down upon greater Bodies in com∣mon; which Anniversaries are designed to per∣petrate. Here is an exercise of Religion which is beyond no mans compass of thought or capacity. A little memory to lay things together, and a small measure of judg∣ment to observe the visible causes and consequences of them, will serve turn here; some may descend to more particulars than others, and may reason more exactly; but every man is capable of thought enough upon this head, to beget in him a sense of the power and wis∣dom, the justice and goodness of God, in the Govern∣ment of the World. A man needs no great stock of knowledge, nor much fineness of thought to go far
here; and as this sort of exercise is within every mans reach, so it has not in it that irksomness that hangs often upon other duties, such as publick or private wor∣ship, the sorrowings of repentance, or earnestness in prayer: this goes more with the grain, there is no pain but a very considerable pleasure in it. All History, espe∣cially what is secret and instructing, is pleasant, but most of all are such Remarks from History as repre∣sent the Church and Kingdom to which we belong as the special Subjects of a favourable Providence. Par∣tiality and self-love may carry us too far on this head, and make us construe things too advantageously of our own side, and stretch them too much; imagining per∣haps, that to be the indication of a more particular care, which was only the effect of a general Provi∣dence: but even this bias upon us, to carry our Ob∣servations further then things will bear, makes it out, that such Meditations are exercises that give much more pleasure than pain. Sometimes I confess a black prospect and a gloomy face of things, may be on the other hand as unreasonably aggravated by men of melancholly tempers: yet even in that case, the remembring past deliverances gives livelier and more promising hopes, so that this may be well reckoned the easiest and pleasantest exercise of Religion, nor is there any one more useful: nothing shews the folly of Man, and the wisdom of God more eminently, then when we set them together: nothing shews the corruptions of the Human Nature, and mercies of the Divine more conspicuously, nothing mitigates the sharpness of our afflictions, nor tempers our mind in prosperity so much as our depending upon Providence and ascribing the good things that happen to its influence, and not claiming too great a
share in them to our selves; nothing tempers the mind so equally in every turn and sta of life, as the Belief of God's goerning the World, and the turning our thoughts frequently to serious reflections upon it. I will not enter here upon that deep, but mysterious, and often abused Argument of Providence. I suppose you do all believe it; for indeed if you believe it not, you believe nothing in Religion, to any purpose: with∣out this, our Prayers and Praises would come within a very small compass: our faith and hope would be much narrower; and our love to God would be much blunted, if we brought our selves once to think, that all things go in a chain, that there are no special directions in the conduct of this World; but that Chance or Fate dispence every thing; either with inexorable sullenness or in a tumultuary levity; We must in consequence to such perswasions let our selves loose from all the restraints and all the seriousness of Religion: but instead of these, how ungrateful soever they may be to undis∣ciplined minds, we should have nothing to ballance, to fix or to govern us, but should be toss'd from wave to wave. We should either have the black Cloud of hard fate hang over us, or be in the constant fears of the next bad chance, which might in a minute throw down all that former good ones had built up. A man that does not believe a Providence has no support from a better prospect in his ill circumstances, nor are his good ones secured to him by any hope of their continuance: whereas he who believes that all things are directed by infinite wisdom and goodness, receives the good things that fall to him with a par∣ticular tenderness; because they seem to be the
indications of the love of his heavenly Father to∣wards him; and he expects that they shall be con∣tinued to him, as long as it is fit that he should hold them, that is, as long as they are real blessing to him; and he desires to keep them no longer, and on no o∣ther terms: he does not sink under calamities; he con∣siders them as medicinal things sent to reform him or to try his vertues, and to make some publick Essay of the force and firmness of his faith and pati∣ence. To all this, that demonstrates how much a happier thing it is for Mankind to be under the belief of Pro∣vidence then otherwise, I will only add one conside∣ration that wise men have observed in many different Ages and Climates of the World; and which they have thought no small confirmation of this great Article of Religion; that at some times a strange Spi∣rit seems to run through whole Nations an Com∣munities, which can hardly be either resisted or re∣pressed. A great Impetus and Fermentation works powerfully for a while, and then goes off, without any visible cause that appears, either for its begin∣ning or for its ending. The same occasions that pro∣duced such a temper at one time, will not have the same effect at another; an irresistible courage does sometimes rise in great Bodies, as unaccountably as it falls. The servour with which the Reformation began was not more extraordinary, than the flatness under which it has fallen in this Age, and the extraordi∣nary heat and giddiness that spread it self over these Nations in the beginning of the wars, was not more amazing than the calm conclusion in which they
ended at last, which is the blessing that we do now commemorate, and on which I do now enter. But as the Iews did at the Paschal Solemnity carry back the recapitulation of their deliverance out of Egypt, to God's first calling Abraham out of the Land of the Caldeans, so that we may make fuller and clearer reflections on the bles∣sings of God to this Church and Nation, in the protection and prosperity of the Royal Family, and that in the same view, we may observe those extraordinary steps of Providence, that have ap∣peared both towards the Crown and the Reforma∣tion, and at once, both consider his Wonders, and the Iudgments of his Mouth, suffer me to begin my Recital of some more Signal Providences, as high as the first beginnings of the Reformation. Before that time, our Princes were but half Kings, a Forreign Power ruled over the Conscien∣ces of their People: The Immunities of Places and Persons were great checks to their Authority. The best part of the Soil, and much of the Wealth and Treasure of the Kingdom, were at the disposal of a Body that claimed to be Independent on the Crown; and were subject to a severe Master, at whose Mercy our Kings Reigned, and governed their Sub∣jects; and were frequently put into great Convulsi∣ons, when they seemed to break in upon an Au∣thority that pretended to be Sacred, and on that score justified its being so tender of all its Usurpa∣tions. A High-spirited King arose, who together with his People, were resolved to bear no longer
with that Diminution of the Security and Dignity of this Imperial Crown: The Importance of that Word, as it is used in our Laws, having no Relati∣on to our Constitution at home, as some have vain∣ly imagined, it signifying only, that this was a compleat Government within it self, having no de∣pendance on any Forreign Authority whatsoever. That King though often threatned with Invasion and Rebellion, and though he had drawn upon himself the Fury and Revenges of a vast multitude of Im∣placable Wasps, whom he had stirred out of their Nests, yet escaped all dangers, and carried on his designs as far as his Principles could go: He remov∣ed the Rubbish, and so made way for that which he could not have promoed himself, being still deeply tinctured with his first Impressions and En∣gagements. It was much for one Man, to do so much as he did: He restored the Crown to a geat part of its Lustre, as well as its Authority, and recovered that which was weakly parted with, in a course of many dark and Superstitious Ages. Be∣fore him our Princes were to make their Applica∣tions elsewhere, and to take their measures from thence, how their own People were to be govern∣ed: but now the Government is entire, all is done at home, no Vassalage is to be paid to a Tyran∣ny, which was as cruel in its Administration, as it was unjust in its pretentions; and had in a more particular manner oppressed this Kingdom, Trium∣phing too Imperiously over the easiness of our Princes, and the Superstition of their Subjects. As the first part of that great Work was so far
advanced by a King, whom nature had fitted for a performance that required a Man of no ordinary Genius: So a young Prince succeeded, who had e∣very thing in him that was Great and Promising, far beyond his years. In his Reign our Reforma∣tion was perfected, but while some went into that good design upon True and Noble Princi∣ples, there was a mixed multitude that came in for a share of the Spoil, and were a Reproach to that which they seemed to promote: One bad Man in particular, who at his Death professed that he had all the while adhered to his old per∣swasions, even when he seemed to act most dif∣ferently from them. The good Men of that time, did look for a terrible Catastraphe: They did not think that God would suffer his House to be built up by such defiled Hands, or bless such a corrupted Scene, with the continuance of so good a King, the Iosias of this Church. All was quickly laid in the Dust, and turned not only into Rubbish but to Ashes, and a severe storm was set over this Church; but when it was like to have spread it self over the rest of Europe, and that the two Crowns being under the Ministry of two Cardi∣nals, both designing to extirpate the Reformation, were coming into a Peace, that so they might be at leasure for such bloody work at home; it plea∣sed God to deliver this Church, to raise up again that light which seemed almost quite extinguisht, and to bless us with that ever renowned Queen, who did not only restore and repair what had been ruined at Home; but became the Support and Strength of all Abroad. They found not only Sanctuary among us, but carried from us both
Force and Treasure, to preserve and secure themselves. Things lookt often so cloudy, whilst the greatest pow∣er, and the vastest Treasure of Europe, was engaged with an unrelenting fury on the other side, that for about twenty years together, the wise Mi∣nistry of that Reign were every year looking for a fatal Revolution: At last God by blasting all their designs, both open and secret, and chiefly the last and greatest Attempt of the boasted Invincible Ar∣mada, did secure that Queen, and Establish this Church; and by her Protection and Influence, se∣veral Forreign Churches were also Formed and Established, and the Correspondence we main∣tained with those beyond Sea, made us the safer, and the more united at home. The Crown was fortified with Alliances and Dependencies abroad, the Nation was spread by many Colonies into remote parts. Trade flourished, and Wealth from all parts flowed in upon us: The blessings both of Heaven and Earth meeting together in that Celebrated Reign. What was wanting to Com∣pleat the Happiness of this Nation was brought about in the next, in which the whole Island was brought under the same Head: And the Northern parts which had been formerly Scenes of War and Desolation, un∣cultivated and ill peopled, became the quiet Seats of Tillage and Industry; so that Nature, that seemed to have laid this Island, and designed it for one Monarchy, was now answered by this happy Union. And the many Disorders in Ireland, forced the Reduction of that Kingdom to Civility and Industry, to the same Laws and Language, and for the greater part to be of the same Stock and Race with our selves.
These are some of the more signal felicities, which have happened to us, and to the Crown that protects and governs us, since that happy light first visited us: And the Land had rest fourscore years:Judges 3. 30. The longest period that we find marked in the old Testament, of the quiet of the people of Israel. Nor can we easily assign the like period in any History, of such an entire and long continued peace: for in all that time, tho we had Wars abroad, they never broke in upon us, to di∣sturb us at home. The short and soon supprest Insur∣rection of some Earls in the North, scarce being to be reckoned as an interruption of our quiet. But while God protected us from our Enemies, yet when we had corrupted our ways before him, he delivered us up to our selves, to be plagued by our own Follies, and they proved severe punishments. I will not open that black and dismal Scene: I will not suffer any thing that looks like anger or satyre, to darken the chearfulness of this day, or to sowr those thoughts that should be now soft∣ned to joy; but a joy in God, decent and modest, and suitable to the occasion. I will not repeat History or Gazettes: I will only lay before you some reflections that are not the less impor∣tant, because how obvious soever they may be, yet they are not so generally commented on, as they well deserve to be. Our Confusion lasted long, and the Scenes shifted so oft, that at last men found no known Constitution, no Precedent either at home or abroad, that could fit us: so that Assemblies of a new nature were formed, in which men gave scope to their imagi∣nation; to invent a Scheme of Government that could secure us: Bu all in vain, the Ancient Landmarks stood still in all mens eyes, and thoughts, and the Nation grew so weary of its tossings, and so wise af∣ter
so many practices, that had been made upon it, as to return to its first Basis, and to its immemoral Con∣stitution: The Confusions of that time will still be preserved in our History, as the best and most de∣monstrative Arguments, to recommend our Constitu∣tion to us: since we see that nothing could bring the Nation to Quiet and Order, till it settled again on its old Foundation, and returned to that frame un∣der which it had subsisted, and flourished for many Ages; and without which it could not be supported a few years, even tho a resolute and victorious Army, that was deeply engaged both by Principle and Inte∣rest, endeavoured to fix it upon another bottom. The Tide turned, and how strangely soever mens Passi∣ons and Humours wrought against it, yet nothing could withstand the united desires of the whole Nation, that called aloud for bringing back the King. This no doubt has been, and will still be a powerful Curb to restrain the violence of some mens tempers; and to make all to consider, how hard it is even by Force and with Success, to work a Nation off from its antient and known Government, to new Models and airey Speculations. The great and free range that Enthusiam then had, the multiplicity as well as the extravagance of the Sects that sprung up among us, in those day of Confusion and Violence, the wild Notions as well as the ungo∣verned practices of the several parties, their mutual animosities, and the gross hypocrisie that run too vi∣sibly through the greatest numbers of them, did con∣tribute not a little to bring the Nation back to love Decency and Order in sacred matters: and many, who perhaps formerly disliked our publick Establishment, having exceptions that seemed plausible to some parti∣culars
in it, came afterwards to see how mischievous it was to bring men once off from rule and order, and to give such scope to humour and fancy: and so, they grew more in love with settled methods, and have adhered more firmly to them: and thus we may conclude that the Essay, which was made then to new model both Church and State, how fatal soever it proved to those who were run down in the struggle, yet has since that time, had this good effect, to esta∣blish both, upon a firmer foundation in the hearts of the people. Two things were also very eminently remarkable in the whole course of our disorders, the one was, that the very Party which of all others was the most con∣cerned to new cast the Nation into the old model, and to set up that Government, on how bad a title soever, which was that only, that our Law could acknowledge, since they of all others needed a pardon most to cover them from Sacred and Royal Blood, besides many other lesser crimes, which lay upon them, they had also divided among themselves the spoils of the Crown, and of the Church, to which they could have no title founded in Law, without an authority, with which our Constitu∣tion did agree: for so sacred is our frame, that the very shadow of it, has a great operation in Law, and had they agreed to have set up their Idol King, this would have gone so far▪ both to have indemnified their persons, and to have secured their Estates, that even the happy Restoration that followed, could not easily have set that matter right: both the Crown and the Church had been put to wrestle with great difficul∣ties; all which was happily prevented, by the un∣managable stiffness of those, who of all others were the most concerned to have promoted it: and thus
without any considerable difficulty, every thing did easily fall into its old Channel again: and when it was too late, those who proved the Instruments of their own Ruin, saw their Errer: but could not then rectifie it: they expiated their crimes with their own Blood, and so the Land was purged: and what had been unjustly acquired, was most justly restored back to the true owners again. But the most eminent character of God's merciful Providence towards these Nations, in the blessing of this day, was the manner of it. It made our miseries both the less sensible to us, and the less out of our pow∣er to overcome, that Strangers got no footing among us, all the while: and that the depressed side, was not cast on demanding assistance from those who might in conclusion have proved cruel friends, and the worst of Enemies. All Europe was so deeply en∣gaged in a long and cruel War, that it was not in the power of our neighbours to take advantage ei∣ther from the feebleness that our distractions threw us into, or from the necessities of the weak and unfor∣tunate side, and so to come in for a share of the spoil, which is commonly all, that Auxiliary forces design on such occasions. While the Nation was left to its self, and all was in its own hands, as well as its Substance and Stock was kept entire, it was in their own pow∣er to return again to their old Foundations. The time in which this happned, was also Critical, for it was when our destemper was at its height: when an En∣thusiastical and Cruel Spirit was in the Ascendant, which probably if it had not then been effectually mastred, had burst forth into very dismal extravagancies. En∣thusiasm armed with power, being like a Sword in a mad mans hand: but as our distractions at home were
in their heighest Fermentation, the state of affairs abroad changed so considerably, by the Peace that was made between the two Crowns, that then it was highly probable, Foreigners might have thrust them∣selves into our affairs: and that both out of Political and Religious considerations. It appears to have been the settled opinion of a great Cardinal, and a Chief Minister at that time, that when the War was quite ended, both Crowns should have concurred to the re∣establiment of the Royal family; tho from those rem∣nants of his, it also appears that he neither meant well to the King nor to the Nation in it. However it is most likely, that upon the lessening of the Forces on both sides, that followed upon the Peace, the late King might have received such a powerful assistance of men of fortune, that he might have invaded, or rather come into his Kingdom with a foreign force. If he had succeeded in it, as he would have been un∣der great obligations to those who had assisted him, so he would have been much in their power, and might have come under the odious name of a Conque∣ror, which might have rendred his Government both severe and hateful; and must have ended, either in the total subversion of Publick Liberty, or in new and dreadful Convulsions, which must have endangered the whole, and exposed us to be a prey to some vio∣lent Invader. It was therefore no inconsiderable part of the deli∣verance of this day, that it was brought about in such a manner, that the King owed it entirely under God, to the duty and affections of his own Subjects, with∣out any others pretending to have the least share in it; so that the whole frame of our Constitution rever∣ted to its former state, and nothing was put, or left
out of joint. The late King had no reason to depart from our Constitution with relation to his People; be∣cause they had so chearfully returned to it with relation to the Crown: and of all others he had the least obigati∣on on him, to his next neighbours, tho they were like∣wise his most immediate Kimed; and that the chief oc∣casion of our miseries, came from Councils that were inspired from thence. As this blessing was procured to us immediately, by a management at home, so the calm and the unani∣mity, with which it was brought about, had such a stamp of the goodness and mercy of Providence in it, as is perhaps without example in History. Those who know the transactions of that time, cannot reflect with∣out amazement, on the unaccountable change of the dispositions of the Nation towards the Royal Family, that happened from the year 1640, to the year 1660. And all this was brought about by a turn over the whole Nation. Arguments or Speculations seldom have such effects. If the greater part had brought in the less, the event had been still great and amazing, but it was all over wonderful when the whole chang∣ed so entirely, that the few who were engaged by their Interests and Fears, as well as by their Notions, to oppose it, were brought under such a consternati∣on, broken into such divisions, which the Ambiti∣on and Heat of some, and the the Mistrust and Jea∣lousie of others had sowed among them, that none of those men of might found their hands, but seemed to be cast into a dead sleep. So great an Army, so long train∣ed, so well Disciplined, and so oft Victorious, might have raised such an opposition as could not have been easily resisted, if at all. It had appeared in the year 1648, what feeble things popular and tumultuary Insur∣rections were, when in almost all the quarters of Eng∣land
the people rise and desired to be rid of the Army, to have that Blessed King, set at Liberty, and on his Throne, and to have the Nation again settled: but so little Concert and Union, so little Method and Order, appeared in all those motions, that they only served to promote that which they were affraid of: the Ar∣my was flushed with Victory and Success, and car∣ried every thing before it: Which brought on the black and fatal 30th of Ianuary. But now when the time was come, in which God was to restrain their force, as he does the Seas, hither shalt thou come and no further: here shall thy proud waves he stopt: when God arose to judgment, the earth feared and was still. It appeared by the violence in which a small num∣ber of them studied to overturn this happy change after it was wrought, what greater numbers of them, if united might have done to have hindred it. So that the giddiness with which they were struck, and their want of Council and Spirit, upon so great an oc∣casion, was a greater indication of an over-ruling Providence, than if they with the rest of the Nation, had really changed their minds, and gone into the Stream. They both meant to oppose it, and might have done it to a great degree; had not God taken from them at once, both Head, Heart, and Hand: and thus when we observe all the Methods of the Pro∣vidence of God, in bringing this about, we must adore the Wisdom, but most particularly the Goodness of them, both towards the Royal Family and towards the whole Nation. From what confusions were we then freed, and what a Scene of Blood and Misery had this Nation pro∣bably been, if the turn had not been so entire as it was: And how little soever, many may either appre∣hend
or value the blessing of a legal Government, tempered between the extreams of lawless Tyranny on the one hand, and of wild and Enthusiastical Frensies, on the other, yet they must conclude that in this re∣spect we were restored at that time to a Government that is much the happiest of any now in the World, and is so particularly fitted for us, that nothing else could make us either safe or happy. But all the blessings of that time did not terminate in that day, or in the Restoration of the Royal Fami∣ly at that time: what was done then, made way to what we enjoy at present: Without that we could not have expected the happiness we do now live under, and look for. I will not reflect on the Gloom that has come between: the unhappy things which have come since: but whatever we have been, or whatever we were like to have been, we do now see a better prospect, not only the Crowns flourshing at home, but the Laws and Liberties of the people happily revived; not only our Religion secured, and our Church protected, but that from us other Churches are in hope to receive Pro∣tection and Strength, and the rest of Europe a just bal∣lance, and a quiet security: that now England is not only recovering the interest and share that naturally be∣longs to her, but is at present the great Instrument of giving all Europe a happy escape from a vast danger, that had threatned it all over. In this Audience, I shall not enlarge further on this Subject. I need say the less, because we do all feel and hope so much from it. The Subject indeed speaks so much, that I may be well allowed to say the less. This is the compleating of that happy change, which is now to be reflected on, with so much the more joy, because we have reason to hope that we are near, very near,
all that a Nation can wish for, to make it both Great and Happy, Prosperous and Safe. But as we have thus let our thoughts run out upon the wonderful works, that God on this day did for us, so we ought not to forget the Iudgments of his mouth, his Laws and his Gospel: that are the much greatest of all his blessing, that render all other things to be bles∣sings indeed to us; they being chiefly intended to se∣cure this to us, and to engage us to improve it to the best purposes. For as the Psalm ends, all Gods mercies to the Jewish Nation, were given them, on this design that they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws; so what answers to this among us, but is indeed a great many sizes beyond it, is the purity of the Chri∣stian Religion, which we have now enjoyed above an Age and a half, with advantages beyond any Church under Heaven, and in a course of temporal blessings beyond any that we ever knew since we were a peo∣ple: England is more encreased at home and abroad, in the Soil cultivated at home, and in the Colonies sent abroad, in the numbers of the people, in Force and Shipping, in Wealth at home, and Trade all the World over, and in the resinings of solid Learning, or use∣ful Arts, in this period, since the Reformation, than for ought appears to us, it ever was before, since we were a Nation: and it now possesses all this under a Civil Government, that is the wonder as well as the envy of the World: for while other Nations have either foolishly thrown up and abandoned their Liber∣ties, or have been forcibly deprived of them, and see no remedy; we have ours not only preserved, but se∣cured by fresh explanations and provisions: All this put together ought to make us consider the great value of that unspeakable blessing which God is so signally
recommending to us, by those happy Providences which accompany it. If we could examin it in it self, without those bles∣sed consequences, we should see cause enough to value it highly, or if we could compare our own condition with either the Heathen Nations that are utter strangers to it, or those degenerated Christians that have corrupt∣ed it, so as to be but little better than Heathenism it self, then we might be able to form a truer judgment of that happiness, which we enjoy in it. I confess, as the far greater part use it, there is no great account to be had of it: if it is only a set of Notions, how true soever they may be, and a circle of some forms, in which we go always round, without making any pro∣gress, then tho our Religion may be less burdensome and imposing than some others, yet after all, it can be no great matter it self: but if this Gospel, and these Laws of God are means intended by him for the great∣est ends, fitted for them, and capable of procuring them to us, if they by their own efficiency are capable of making us not only happy in another world, but even happy in this life, happy in our selves, and hap∣py in another, if they tend to make a Nation great in general, and every individual of it, both great in himself, and great in his usefulness to mankind, then we may justly Glory in our Religion and in those judgments of his mouth, with which God hath blessed us: and whatever advantages the Iews had reason to reckon themselves under, by their Laws, beyond the Nations round about them, these will appear to be∣long much more eminently to us, when we compare our selves with the corrupted state of Christianity, that prevails in so many Kingdoms not far from us.
The Iews were by the Laws of Moses, delivered from all that Idolatry and Magick, those superstitious and barbarous rites that had over-run Heathenism: from the cruelty of offering up humane Sacrifices, nay, and their own Children too, to those false Gods, whom they served: They worshipped the host of Heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars, high Hills, great Stones, ancient Oaks, the founders of Nations, and inventers of Arts: they had Images and Statues to resemble the Divinity, and believed, that a company of extravagant rites, had in them, by the Charms they used with them, strange and sublime vertues. Those Deities they ap∣peased with a variety of oblations, which they be∣lieved were acceptable to them: these were ma∣naged with much Pomp, and at a vast charge: an ex∣actness in them they thought pleased the Deity, as much as a failure therein provoked it: and they had a variety of Gods for several Countries and Professions; a special Deity belonged to every occasion: How hap∣py then might the Iews reckon themselves, who saw through all those vain imaginations, and knew that there was but one only God, the supream Lord of all things; a pure mind, and therefore capable of no bo∣dily representation, and so sublime a Being, that what Sacrifices▪ and Rites soever he appointed, yet admit∣ted of no humane Sacrifices, and had limited his ap∣pointments within such bounds, that all Superstition was cut off. Now if these Characters of the Heathen∣ish and Jewish Religion are applied to the present State of Christendom, it will appear that we have the same reason to value our Religion, that the Iews had to value theirs.
There is a Communion of Christians, whose Churches are full of Corporeal representations, of that which they adore: those Statues have all such Ornaments about them, and such adorations paid them as the Heathens were accustomed to: Many created beings have all the acts of worship, such as Prayers, Praises, Incence burnt, bodily adoration, Churches built, Sacraments used for their honour; and even that Sacrament which is no less than the immediate object of the highest degrees of worship among them. Thus if ever there was, or if there can be Idolatry in the world, they are guilty of it. All those pretended vertues, that by their bene∣dictions they give out, that they put on holy water, Agnus Dei's, with all the train of those consecrated things, with which they entertain the credulity and the misled Devotion of their People, is either Impo∣sture, or Charm. In the cost of these, and of the other invented parts of worship, particularly their Processions, another rite of heathenism, there is no measure put to the Pomp and Magnificence with which they study to adorn them. It is true they have no humane Sacrifices in the strictest sense: but no Re∣ligion ever taught the shedding so much human blood, nor made that so main a piece of Religion, of such merit, so certainly and so highly rewarded, as they have done: of which both the last and the present Age have received too sensible and too demonstrative a conviction. What reason then have we to value our Religion, which has so entirely freed us from such ex∣cesses and corruptions: since Idolatry does vitiate Re∣ligion in its Source and Fountain: it debasing the Idea of God, and bringing us to fancy him to be something like our selves. We own him to be a pure mind; that can be represented by no bodily figure: We
worship him in a spritual manner: in acts and forms suitable to his nature. We worship him only, and pay no adorations to Angels or Saints: nor have we invented any parts of worship, besides those of his own appointment: We teach and practice Charity to Enemies▪ even to those who hate us, and who we knw would persecute us, if it were in their power. Another Consideration, on which the Iews had just reason to value their Religion, was because it was fixed and stated, in the Books of Moses: no additions could b made to it, unless God had sent a Prophet on a spe∣cial Commission, with particular Credentials: their Priests had not, as the Heathens, Books in their hands, that were kept as secrets, which the people might not see, and which they might vouch for any additions, with which they loaded them, as oft as it served their ends. A written Law which every man might read as well as the Priests, was a vast security against fraud and Impositions. Upon the same account, we have just reason to set a high value upon our Religion, since it can be neither more nor less than what is contained in the Scriptures; we have no Article in reserve, for which, as oft as we please Tradition may be vouched: We have no infallible tribunal, to coin new Arti∣cles, or impose new Doctrines upon the pain of Ana∣themas and Extirpation: How great that Tyranny is and how unbounded is easily enough imagined; when a man must believe a blank, and the Church has the filling up that blank: and when the more implicit and blind men are in their Faith, they are thereby esteemed the truer Sons of the Church, which will have none enquire into what she dictates. nor dispute her commands: Whereas in ours, the Officers of the Church are only considered as men appointed to minister in holy things,
to serve and instruct the people, in the things of God, without being the Masters of their Faith and Consci∣ence, we pretend to no other authority: and leave to the people entire, all the liberties of humane nature. A 3d. Consideration that did very particularly re∣commend the Mosaical Religion to the Iewes, was its purity: the justice and probity, the freedom from luxury, simplicity of Life, the restraint of appetite and passion, and the modesty of deportment, that it en∣joyned: these were great and noble Characters of a Religion that came from God, and that tended to make men in a good degree to resemble him: for tho that was an imperfect Religion, yet the Law of the Lord was pure, and his commandments were clean. But all this in a much higher degree concurs to re∣commend to us, the Religion that by the blessing of God is received among us. We own the Gospel in the same simplicity in which Christ and his Apostles deli∣vered it: we teach that men must deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously and godly, and that without holiness no man shall see the Lord: we offer no other conditions, or means of salvation, but Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience: we oblige all persons to the highest degrees of purity, and warn them to a∣void every sin, the wages of which is death. In a word, the main part of our Doctrine is, to convince the world of the indispensible necessity of an universal holiness, which must first possess a mans thoughts, and rectifie his intentions, and then run through his whole life, and govern all his Actions. We flatter no men with hopes of the after-game of a Purgatory, and a redempti∣on out of it by Masses: we make no sin to be slight or venial, nor do we teach that any duty is only a council of perfection; much less do we flatter Pride and Vanity
by the Doctrines of Supererrogation: we do not pretend to supersede the obligation of loving God, or of being truly contrite for sin; nor do we teach any methods of supplying imperfect acts of Contrition, by the Sacra∣ments, as if acts of sorrow, which of their own nature could not be accepted of God, could be supplied by the Sacraments, and so become the means of justifying those who are still in the habits of sin: we pretend to no other power of Absolution but the absolving from the censures of the Church, and the declaring men absolved according to the truth of their Repentance. Thus it appears, that we have much juster grounds for setting a high value on the purity of the Christian Religion, among us, than the Iews had for esteeming their Law far beyond the Idolatry of the Heathens. If these are the most valuable things, as indeed what can be valuable, if they are not, then how particular a reason have we, to rejoyce in them, now when we have so fair and likely a prospect of their being setled and se∣cured to us, of their being no more undermined among us, by the practices of disguised Enemies, by the en∣gaging us into animosities, and by subdividing us into parties, and so weakening us by our own follies, that we may become an easier prey to our Enemies: and while all these things grow to be safer and firmer at home, by the Protection that the Crown gives to those who profess the same faith abroad. While we at home, are feeling the tender hand of such a nursing Father and such a nursing Mother, and while those abroad, are not hoping to feel, but actually feeling, the happy effects of their Favour and Protection; then it is that we may with peculiar accents of joy, commemorate the blessing of this day.
When our almost withered Roses begin to look fresh, and to open again, while the Lillies grow pale and fade: When England begins not only to recover the figure it once made, but puts on a new lustre, and has an interest in Europe beyond what former times can boast; while our Church checks the pride of her, that has so long made the earth drunk with her Sorceries, and while she animates those other bodies that were either in their last Agonies, or very near them; then we have just reason, according to the words with which this Psalm begins, to say, O give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his deeds among the peo∣ple: sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works: Glory ye in his holy name, and let the heart of them rejoyce that seek the Lord. Let us conclude all with our most earnest praises to God for those who do now fill the Throne, with so pe∣culiar a grace. May they live and prosper: ay their Reign be long and Glorious, that we may still have more and more reason to remember the marvellous works that God has wrought for us, by their means: his wonders in them, and the judgments of his mouth, secured to us by them. May we live so worthy of them, that we may long, long enjoy them, with all the accessions of Plenty and Peace. Amen, Amen. FINIS. Books lately Published by the Lord Bishop of Sarum. A Discourse of the Pastoral Care. 8o. A Lent Sermon before the Queen, March 11th 1693/4;. On 1 Cor. 1. 16. Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocess of Sarum. I. Con∣cerning the Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death of Christ. III. The Infallibility and authority of the Church. IV. Obligati∣ons to continue in the Communion of the Church. 8o.
