c2888 12331862 59699
C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. An Additional PROCLAMATION Concerning COFFEE-HOUSES. CHARLES R. WHereas His Majesty by His Royal Proclamation bearing date the 29th day of December last, upon the Reasons therein contained, did Command and Require all manner of persons, from and after the Tenth day of this instant January, to forbear to Sell or Vtter by Retail (to be spent within their respective Houses) any Coffee, Chocolate, Tea or Sherbett, and did give Directions to His Iustices of the Peace, and the Chief Magistrates (within their respective Counties, Cities and Towns Corporate) not to grant any new Licences to that purpose, and to revoke Licences formerly granted. And whereas since the issuing forth of the said Proclamation, several Retailers of the said Liquors, by their humble Petition on the behalf of them∣selves and other Retaylers, did humbly Represent to His Majesty, That there are great quantities of Coffee and Tea at present in their hands, for which the Duties are already paid; besides what are already Shipped in parts beyond the Seas for England, and cannot be Remanded without great loss to the Owners thereof. And further, thereby, (confessing the former Miscarriages and Abuses committed in such Coffee-Houses, and expressing their true Sorrow for the same, and promising their utmost Care and Endeavour to prevent the like, for such time as they shall be permitted to Retail the said Liquors in their respective Houses) did humbly Beseech His Majesty, That He would be Graciously pleased to give them some further time for the Vending of the said Commodities, which would otherwise lie upon their hands. And did further Offer, That if they might be permitted to continue to Retail the said Liquors (within their respective Houses) they would not onely take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, but also enter into Recognizances to His Majesty respectively, at the Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the respective Counties, Cities and Liberties
where their Houses are to be; Conditioned in the Form hereunder expressed: His Majesty taking the Premis∣ses into His Princely Consideration, out of His Royal Compassion, and to prevent the Loss and Prejudice which might accrue to the said Retailers, so far forth as may consist with the Peace and Security of the Govern∣ment, Doth by this His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice of His Privy Council) Declare His Royal Pleasure to be, That all and every the Retailers of the Liquors aforesaid, which at the time of the Date of His said former Proclamation, did Sell by Retail the Liquors aforesaid, or any of them, shall have Permis∣sion to Vtter and Sell by Retail the said respective Liquors, in their respective Houses, until the Four and twentieth day of June next; They and every of them respectively entring into a Recognizance of the Penalty of Five hundred pounds to His Majesty, before the Iustices of the Peace, or Chief Magistrates, at their respective Sessions of the Peace, Conditioned in the Form hereunder written, and then and there taking the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. And His Majesty doth hereby Order and Declare, That His re∣spective Iustices of the Peace, and others having Authority by the Statute in that behalf, to grant Licen∣ces, do not (upon the account onely of the said former Proclamation) before that time, Recall the Licences formerly Granted: And where any Licences now are, or before that time shall be expired, they do according to the Rules mentioned in the said Act of Parliament; and upon performance of what is hereby Required, Grant Licences to the said respective Retailers, which may continue in Force until the said Twenty fourth of June next, and no longer. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eighth day of January, in the Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign, 1675/6. GOD SAVE THE KING. The Form of the CONDITION. THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above-bound A. B. shall at all times hereafter, so long as he shall be Permitted or Licensed to Sell and Retail Coffee, Chocolate and Tea, use his utmost endeavour to prevent and hinder all Scandalous Papers, Books or Libels concerning the Government, or the Publick Mi∣nisters thereof, from being brought into his House, or to be there Read, Perus'd or Divulg'd; And to pre∣vent and hinder all and every person and persons from declaring, uttering and divulging in his said House, all manner of False and Scandalour Reports of the Government, or any the Ministers thereof: And in case any such Papers, Books or Libels, shall be brought into his said House, and there openly Read, Perus'd or divulg'd, or in case any such False or Scandalous Reports shall be there openly declared, utter'd or divulg'd, if the said A. B. shall within Two days respectively next ensuing, give Information thereof to one of His Majesties Principal Secretaries of State, or to some one of His Maje∣sties Justices of the Peace, then this Recognizance to be void, &c. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1675/6.
