C3786 12756412 93437
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. A View of the Fanatick Faction of England; As also the Ends and Reasons of publishing these Papers in these Times. Pag. 1. CHAP. II. A Brief of the divers Ends in desiring to have this Parliament called Of the true Cause of the Contempt and Hatred of the Clergy among the People, and what makes the Churches differences irreconcile∣able. p. 3. CHAP. III. What use the Fanaticks have made of Parliaments, and the ways whereby that Faction in this Parliament and Kingdom have endeavoured to make the Clergy contemptible and odious to the people. p. 8. CHAP. IV. The Fanaticks Arts of framing Accusations to the Parliament against the Clergy, and their manner of proving their Charges. p. 12. CHAP. V. A View of the New Judges of the thus accused Clergy; Their condition, and their judging of Doctrines in their Committees for Religion, De facto & de jure. p. 17. CHAP. VI. The Censures of these Judges against the Clergy, and the true Reason thereof. p. 21. CHAP. VII. Of Parliamentary changes in Religion. Of the Policy and ways for the destruction of Religion by this Parliament, wrought by the long conspi∣racy and combination of the Fanaticks of England, here laid open. p. 26. CHAP. VIII. A concluding Parallel between the Popish Persecution in Q. Mary's time, and this Fanatical Persecution. p. 35.
PERSECƲTIO ƲNDECIMA: Or, The CHURCHES Eleventh Persecution. Being a Brief of the Fanatick Persecution OF THE PROTESTANT CLERGY OF THE Church of England: More particularly within the City of LONDON. Begun in Parliament, Anno Dom. 1641. And Printed in the Year, 1648. But they mocked the messengers of God, and misused his Prophets, till the wrath of God arose against his people, and there was no remedy. II. Chron. chap. 36. vers. 16. Re-Printed in the Year, 1681. And are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner near Pater-Noster-Row.
CHAP. I. A View of the Fanatick Faction of England; As also the End and Rea∣sons of publishing these Papers in these Times. WHat miseries the Fanatick Faction (so long lying like the Canaanites, as Thorns in the sides of our Israel) would bring upon this Nation, Eng∣land wanted not Ezechiels Watchmen to foretel? and the Story of these Times hath proved their Prophesies wanted no Truth; but, Quos per∣dere vult Jupiter, eos dementat prius: Otherwise it were strange to think, that of two Factions, viz. Papists and Fanaticks, mortally hating each other, distinctly incor∣porated from the Church of England, and both of them destructive to it; the one like cunning Pick-pockets, should set the Eyes of the people so busily to look after the Religion of the other, and in the mean time rob them of their own; and by the same Principles (like Firebrands in the Tails of Sampsons Foxes, looking divers ways) alike endanger the Established Religion. The one Faction was made most odious to the people, the other seemed most Religious; and the due execution of Penal Laws against Popish Recusants hath been accounted Zeal and Justice: but any legal Penalties inflicted on Fanatick Recusants, was cryed down for Cruelty and Ty∣ranny, and made the Judges reproach; nor would the people endure to hear the name of Fanatick Dissenters mentioned in a Pulpit; which now to drown, together with their own folly in countenancing or non-conceiving the Fanaticks designs, the more Loyal Party have invented the new name of Round-head) the Nobility, Gen∣try, and generally all sorts of people accounting the Fanatick Faction a simple incon∣siderate Party, well meaning People, tender Conscienced Christians, such as deser∣ved pity rather than punishment; little remembring our Saviours Caveat against Wolves in Sheeps clothing: which in Demosthenes Fable, laying all the breach of publick Peace between them and the Sheep, upon the Dogs which were set to watch the Sheep-folds; till the seduced Sheep (for quietness sake) delivering up their Keepers for a Sacrifice to the Wolves, too late found their own Folds exposed to such danger as Wisdom might have easilier prevented, than it could afterward remedy. What else have the causeless clamours of the Fanaticks meant for this many years against the Bishops and the Clergy of England? who in our Saviours phrase of Pasce oves, watched over the Flock of Christ; but to smite the Shepherd, that so the Sheep might be scattered: Like that of Tully, Civium perditorum scelere pulsus à De∣lubris is qui illa servarat, Religionum Jura polluta, & in Larium sedibus edificatum est Templum licentiae.De Legib. lib. 2 And what havock hath been made among the Sheep, since the City-Fanatick-Tumults cryed out, No Bishops, and armed Fury hath forced thousands of the Clergy from their Flocks; the almost Ruines of the Church, and of three Kingdoms sufficiently witnesses; a just Judgement of God upon a People long con∣tending with their Priests, and mocking, and mis-using the Prophets and Messengers of God, till like the Jews,Hosea 4. 4. 2 Chron. 36. 16. the wrath of God fell upon them, and there was no re∣medy: and all this vengeance executed by a generation of Vipers, eating out the Bowels of their Mother Church and Country, wherein they have long lurked; sti∣ling themselves (for above twenty years last past, I can witness) the only people of God, the Meek of the Earth, Christs little Flock, Weak Brethren; crying out a∣gainst Bloud-thirsty Papists for taking up Arms against Kings and Princes; and who but those Fanaticks, the devout observers of the Fifth of November (their only Holy∣day) in hatred of the Gunpowder Treason? (though that Gunpowder was never car∣ried in Bandaliers, and fired in the Face of the King, for the safety of his Person) and their daily Sermons were against Persecution; yet now themselves (weak Chri∣stians
till so well Arm'd) are become the only and most bloody Persecutors, having slain more thousands of Protestants in England, under colour for fighting for the Protestant Religion, than Queen Mary condemned Scores within the like compass of years. The truth is, the Fanaticks of England have long conceited themselves to be the only people of God, like the Jews, (and a man might swear by their Acti∣ons they are Jews indeed, and not Christians) and all other men not of their Tribe, to be the wicked of the World, and Gods Enemies, Egyptians and Amalekites: That so whatever favour was done to any of their Faction, they thought themselves no∣thing beholden to any man for it; but they would say God Decreed them to do it, so that they could do no otherwise; and what ever Justice was done to any of their Tribe, was accounted cruelty and persecution of Gods people. But whatever Injustice or Cruelty they acted upon their Neighbours, (better Christians in good sooth than themselves) they called it Justice and Zeal for Gods Glory, fulfilling Gods Decree; and can in their Canting Language (the Language of Canaan, as they stiled their abusing of Scripture phrase) flatter themselves, that they must wash their Feet in the Blood of the ungodly, and binding Kings in Chains and their Nobles with Links of Iron, sit smiting their fellow Servants and fellow Sub∣jects against the Law, while they pretended to Judge according to the Law: (this being the Old Character of A Fanatick, a Strangers Angel, a Neighbours Plague, a Saint Abroad, a Devil at Home) but his Children ye are (saith our Saviour) whose works ye do: The Devil was a Lyar from the beginning, and the Accuser of the Brethren; and who have done the works of such a Father you may here know, by a taste of the First Fruits (Sower Grapes of their long promised Canaan, a glimpse of their Clergy-hating, the Foundation of Fanatick-Babel-Reformation: and what an Harvest of misery to this Nation hath followed such beginnings (when Judge∣ment begins at Gods House) may be gathered into Volumes by better Pens. It's enough from a private Hand (in such Times as these) if any short Copy can be set forth for others to follow; and to shew the Fanaticks that all men do not sleep, but some stand watching still to give the World warning of such Hypocrites; especially considering that is no Records of the particulars of the Tyranny of these Times hath been extant to the World, though all honest Protestants have much desired it; Time indeed not bearing Truth from a Protestant hand. As also considering the multitude of Scandalous Pamphlets, Parliament Speeches, Centuries, Declara∣tions published all and faced with Authority of Parliament, the Supreme Court of Justice in England; Title enough to charm the World, especially Posterity, into a belief of such Authentick Records; should no particular Counter-work of Truth be left to oppose such slanders. For as yet there is none; and probably if either an Act of Oblivion should happen, or time waste away the present Clergy (who by reason of the fury of this Age, dare not write their own Sufferings, nor by rea∣son of their being so scatter'd can bring them to a general Collection) never any may come forth: whereby the Fanatick lyes, and shameful slanders of the Clergy of this Generation would pass for currant Truths; when as the Faction themselves know, and cannot but acknowledge (as I have heard some of them say) that they could never have taken a worse time against the Bishops of England, whose perso∣nal honest Lives, Learning, and Piety was so eminent, that indeed it made clamours against them the more violent (like that against our Saviour, Away with him, away with him, when the Question was asked, what evil hath he done?) that so they might remove them by Tumults, against whom they could not work their De∣signs by Law. And for the persecuted Clergy of the Church of England, I am con∣fident it is their hearty desire, and I dare in their Names make this solemn Ap∣peal to Posterity, (if ever God send times for Justice in England) that (after so cruel and barbarous sufferings by banishments, and manifold imprisonments, some in noysome and foreign Jayles among Thieves and Mr. Stone of Saint Clements Eastcheap sent Prisoner to Ply∣mouth by Shipping. Mr. Chislen of St. Mathews Friday-street sent Prisoner to Colchester Castle. Doctor Griffith commit∣ted to Newgate: and divers others. Felons: Some in Ships un∣der
Decks neer Dr. Martin and Dr. Stern, Masters of Col∣ledges in Cam∣bridge. Doctor Fairfax of St. Peters Cornhil. smothered: Some starved and dead in Divers star∣ved to Death in Winchester-House. Prison; others mur∣dered in Dr. Raugh∣leigh Dean of Wells, murder∣ed by his Jay∣lor. Dr. Antil wounded, and died of his wounds in Taunton Castle. The sury of these Times have forced the concealing of some Persons and Circumstances, for theirs, and the Authors security. Prison. All of them sequestered, spoiled of their Goods, and Estates, and Houses, to the ruine of their Wives and Children also) that they might obtain a legal Tryal, to know what evil they have done; that it may appear whether scandalous Accusers, and scandalous Judges have not made a scanda∣lous Clergy, and not found them such. This being left them their only com∣fort in their Miseries, that they suffer as Christians, not as Evil Doers, but for Righteousness sake, as God and their own Consciences bear them Witness, and these ensuing Lines (though rude, yet true) may not a little prove to any im∣partial Reader, to the satisfying also of that newly started Objection by the House of Commons against a Personal Treaty with the King, viz. the bringing in again of Scandalous Ministers. CHAP. II. A Brief of the divers Ends in desiring to have this Parliament called. Of the true Cause of the Contempt and Hatred of the Clergy among the People, and what makes the Church differences irreconcileable. PRivate Interests and Advantages are ever the grounds of usurped Power, and why Lay-men in this Parliament have presumed to intermeddle with matters of Religion, and to monopolize all executive and judiciary Power in Doctrine and Discipline of the Church (which God knoweth they never understood) under pretence of Reformation of Religion, Mr. Hampden (one of the prime Gran∣dees of the Fanatick Faction) hath satisfied the World, in his Answer to a Pri∣vate Friend, asking him why they so much pretended Religion, when indeed Li∣berty and Property, and Temporal Matters were by them chiefly intended? Should we not (said he) use the pretence of Religion, the people would not be drawn to assist us. And truly it were pity that Posterity should be left without some me∣mento of the private Interests and Designs of all sorts of people in this Kingdom, in themselves different, yet all concentring in this one word Reformation, to build the Babel of this Generation: Not much unlike the hatching of the Belglek Troubles, Nobilitas cum Plebe conspirant, & rem suam curant, dum publicam cura∣re videntur.Strada de Bello Belg. Hist. of the Council of Trent. Such desires in calling the Council of Trent have been translated in∣to an English madness and superstition in longing for this Parliament, which all men fansied such a  medicamentum to each private Malady, that not any Humour in the Body Politick, or itch in the Breech of the Kingdom, but was kept clawed by Mr. Speakers Thanks, and large Promises of Redress of their Grievances: Even the London Porters Petition received much Thanks from the Parliament, and proffers of easing them of their Burdens. A fair opportunity had the Great Ones to work their ends over other mens Shoulders. 1. The Court emulation (for even the Kings House and his Council were poysoned with Fanaticism) thought by a Parliament to remove the Favourites, that so upon their Ruines, themselves (next in place) might be advanced. What also was the sin of the Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford? (against whom this Parliament was set on fire with heat of Envy) but they being greatly loved of their King for their faithful Service to his Majesty, the Church and their Country. 2. The Country Nobility long discontented with their Court-Banishment, (as it were) hoped by a Parliament to new model the Court, and exchange places. To this end the Propositions continually clamour, that all the Privie Council, and all Officers of State may be in the disposal of Parliament, that is, of Lord Say and his Faction.
3. The Gentry of England by a Parliament (into which the Gentry used to be called, till of late) besides their private Preferment and Revenge, thought (as did the Free-holders and all sorts of people) to be eased of Monopolies & Taxes (never remembring that they paid no Subsidies) and especially of an intended Tyranny, which the Fanatick Faction, with continual Alarums, so drummed into the Peoples Ears, even to a Frensie of ridiculous Fears and Jealousies. 4. The Lecturing House-creeping-Ministers, prayed zealously for a Parliament; thereby hoping to set up their new-fangled Doctrines and Disciples: Indeed, to divide the Church-lands amongst their Tribe (as the pretence was of taking away the Bishops Lands, to maintain preaching Ministers) and to invade other Mens Livings, and to have the sole Government of the Church in their Hands, (this is that which they call setting up of Jesus Christ in his Throne) the World now see what their aim was at first in calling this the Parliament of their Prayers. 5. All sorts of Sectaries in England, were earnest for this Parliament, because they had conspired to pack it for their Designs against the King and the Church▪ as hereafter will be shown. 6. The Common Lawyers pleaded for a Parliament, that themselves might snatch an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction into their Courts, to advance their Law a∣bove the Gospel (as they have done) crying up their Idol-Law to be above the King (a Creature above his Creator:) then what are the Lawyers, who have the Law in their own Hands, the Breast of the Judge, or the Breast of the Court (as they phrase it) is the supreme Power? And truly for these many years last past, have the Lawyers enslaved both King and People by the Charm of Law, Law. 7. The Country People generally fancied, that a Parliament would free them from paying of Tythes, which produced several Petitions to that purpose, from several Counties. 8. All sorts of Trades and Companies in London, hoped for Iome encrease of their Trading, if a Parliament were called, and yet who more crying out against Monopolies and Patents, than these Citizens? Who are the greatest Monopoli∣lizers in this Kingdom, and scarce any Incorporation in London, but had some Petition ready for this Parliament, with confidence that nothing must be denied for the advance of Trade. And all sorts of People dreamed of an Ʋtopia, and Infinite Liberty, especially in Matters of Religion; nay, scarce any man but had some Design of Private Interest, excep the Ancient, Orthodox Clergy, who foresaw what a Misery the heighth of a Faction would bring on the Church, by a Parliament. And yet after 5 years Sitting in this so Idolized Parliament, no sorts of men but have missed their Ends; their Ministers especially verifying that Prophesie of Dr. Bancroft:Survey ch. 20. For all the Outcries that Church-Livings might be employed to the Maintenance of Eldership, well may they procure in some other Age, the further impoverishing of the Church; but they shall be sure to be little the bet∣ter for it: And generally instead of being eased of their Grievances, they have been plagued by this Parliament, as by the Flagellum Dei, a Rod of their own making, to scourge this Land for their murmuring against Moses and Aaron, their Contempt of the King and the Priest; into which Crying Sin, an Hypo∣critical Faction hath been long drawing this People, Arch-bishop Laud's Speech In the Star Chamber.by wounding the King through the sides of the Church, as knowing well, that if they could destroy Monarchy in the Church (Episcopal Government in England, being indeed the King's Spiri∣tual Militia, and that most povverful, as commanding the Consciences of Sub∣jects) by planting in Rebellion for Religion, they should soon vveaken the Povver of the King's Temporal Militia, as vvoful Experience hath taught us; this made the Masters of the Faction alvvays set up the Church as the Butt, and the Bishops Sleeves as the White, chiefly aimed at by all sorts of People, to shoot their Bolts against, that to have the Bovv ready bent, and the Quiver full of sharp Arrovvs, even bitter vvords against the Church, grevv to be the only Wisdom and Religion in fashion: O ye scandalous Clergy, and O ye bringers
in of Popery! was the belching of every open mouth, when the greater sort had deeply swallowed other manner of Gall, for which they took up the common cry against the Clergy, only to colour their deadly Spleen, bred upon Temporal Distempers, which the world takes no publick notice of as yet; but were the true causes of the Contempt and hatred of the Clergy among this Generation, whereby the Fanatick Faction very inconsiderable for Number, drew multitudes (who ha∣ted their by-ways in Religion) to their assistance. The first and main Engine buz∣zed into the people long before this Parliament was, That the Bishops and the Clergy were the Instruments for the Kings intended Tyranny, the common say∣ing in Terminis was, that the Clergy are all for the King, that is, the Clergy seeing your Fanatick Spirit of Darkness, working in the Children of Disobedience, would by their Preaching to fear God and the King, according to the Scriptures, have prevented the ruines, which they foresaw this Faction would, and now have brought upon this Kingdom; to this purpose what a fiery pair of multiplying Spectacles, did the Faction put on the Noses of the people, furiously looking on Dr. Manwarings Sermon, till the Face of the Body Politick began to fire, in a for∣mer Parliament, not quenched even to the beginning of this, but continually kind∣led against him, and some others (not above three more Divines) who preached the Kings Prerogative like Divines, if Scripture (which they so cry up, for their own ends) in 1 Sam. 8. or the practice of the Kings of Judah may be Judge, more than the Supremacy of the Lawyers would brook, or the jealous Worship∣pers of Meum and Tuum in England, could endure should be true. This was the kindle-coal that the Faction bellowsed to that flame, that must consume not only those particular men, but even the whole Clergy, Root and Branch; as in Scot∣land, the Feud of some discontented Lords, against some particular Bishops, vowed revenge on the whole Church: this fire of malice, was the Bishop Ross's Scottish Decla∣ration, 1648.fire from Heaven, which confirmed their Covenant, and made it the pattern in the Mount, for Englishmen to fol∣low. This added to the name Baals Priests, and such other reproaches of the Cler∣gy among the Fanaticks, the new Scoff of Cesans Friends. This made the popular Earl of Essex say in this Parliament, that he never knew but one Bishop in Parlia∣ment, stand up for the good of the Commonwealth, the old phrase of Rebellion; and when Unparallel'd Reasons by Nat. Fiens.Nat. Fiennes made Speeches in Parliament, and printed them, with the Ti∣tle of unparallel'd Reasons, to shew that Episcopacy was an Enemy to Monarchy, the Lord Say his Father, (and Godfather to the Fanatick Faction) printed a Speech, Lord Say's second Speech.That the Bishops were too much for the King, and therefore were to be thrown out of the Parliament; the most applauded Speech amongst the Commonvvealth party, vvhose sense it spoke out to the full, and vvas the Core of the Canker bred in them against the Church; and unto this score do the Clergy ovve their eight years persecution, and their continued Banishment from their Livings, for fear they should preach the people (novv undeceived) into obedience to their King. A second Cause vvas the sacrilegious thirsting after the Church-lands, by some in this Land, vvhose Grandfathers having svvallovved long Leases, or perhaps some forged Deeds of Church-lands; the Wax sticks still on the Childrens Sto∣machs, that no vvonder if they cannot be vvell, till like the Vine-dressers in the Gospel, they hate and mis-use the Lords Servants; nay desire to kill the Heir, that the Inheritance may be theirs, vvhose blasted Posterity hath no little hopes of recruiting their scattered Estates out of the old Reserve of the Church. Pub∣lick hatred being the ready vvay to make the Church-Lands their private prey: For this purpose have the Lay-brethren continued the practice of their Faction in Q. Elizabeth's days, Survey of Dis∣cipline. cap. 11.in clapping silenced Ministers, and Non-conformists, and Lecturers on the back, and follovving their Sermons, setting them at the upper end of the Tables, and seeking by all means, to prvcure them Credit and Favor vvith the People; not that they cared for them, or for Religion, or for Christ himself; but hoping, that by the violent Course vvhich they savv these men run into, the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy vvould grovv so odious, that it vvould in time be a small matter to dispossess them of all their Livings, vvhereof
some portion might come to their shares: Which publick hatred of the Clergy was not a little increased upon a Jealousie, occasioned by the Activeness of some Bishops, and others of the Clergy, in seeking by Law to recover some Church-revenue out of the Usurpers clutches, (otherwise mentioned in this Book) that they began to argue, if the Clergy should advance in the Favour of the King, and the People their preaching against Sacriledge, may prevail to the touching of their Copyholds; and it's the unhappiness of the Clergy, that most of their Lands are occupied by Men, grown too great by their Leases, to be ac∣counted Farmers, and as much regreating the name of Tenants to such Land∣lords, whom they think they may command: And this bred the like hatred in London, and other Incorporations, and Nests of the Faction against the City-Clergy, upon their suit for increase of Tithes in City-Livings (which are gene∣rally of very small value, and depend upon peoples Benevolence, a thing of dan∣gerous consequence in a Kingdom) upon the Statute of Hen. 8. allowing two shil∣ling nine pence per pound of the Rent of houses (which Statute to evade, the Law∣yers and Scriveners have invented a plain Cheat, by a Lease and a Lease, that Houses of 50 l. Rent per Annum, shall scarce pay 5 or 10 s. Tithe per Annum) which so netled the Purse-proud Londoners, accounting Tithes but as Gift, or Alms, that they would rather spend at Law, or give a Lecturer of their own choice twice as much as their full Tithe came to, than pay their Dues to the Parson (a Word made their Scoff) that Two shillings nine pence was an usual Nick name for any Divine, as he walked through the Streets, though the Clergy in their moderate Rates demanded not above twelve pence per pound, and this seeking by Law to recover their due, was call'd (by the covetous World) T covetousness of the Clergy. 3. There was another sin of the Clergy as much talked of, that was, forsooth, The Pride of the Clergy, what was that? Why! Time having spent the old Stock of Sir John's, planted into Churches in the hurly-burly days of Queen Elizabeth, Bishop Jewel in his Sermon to the Queen. Illiterate Mechanicks, and such who could but Write and Read, and gather in Tithes for the Patron's use, with Curchees for some Wages for their Journey∣work, hereby Bancrofts Survey of Dis∣cipline. villifying the Sacred Function, as in these our Times, and men of Worth and Learning sprung into their places; Peace of the Church bringing Religion into request and Credit, so that some Noblemen, Gentlemen, and men of Estates, began to spend on their Children as much as would make them rich in another Calling, only to fit them for the Priesthood (besides Lands of Inheritance, or money left as their Portions.) These were not like to betray the honour of the Church, and of the Sacred Function, to become the continual servants of men, who (especially in London) thought Stipends of 40 l. per annum, enough for any Clergy-man, though he had Wife and Children. Sir N. R. a Rich Alderman be∣ing desired to encrease his contribution to a Minister, because he was a man of much Merit; answered, if the Minister were an Angel from Heaven, he should have of him but ten shillings per Quarter. And that any of the Clergy should be made Ju∣stice of the Peace, or Officer of State (as indeed, who so fit to keep Love and Peace among Neighbours? And I have heard the Officers, and Retainers to the Treasury confess, that they were never so well used, as when a Bishop was Lard Treasurer) was made such an Eye-sore in the Peoples Sight, by the Facti∣on, especially the swarm of Lawyers, not taken notice of, though put into Com∣missions; men of a meer Mercinary profession, raising great Fortunes upon the Sins and Ruines of their Country, unlike to prove Justices of Peace, who live by aking Contention and Strife among Neighbours; and from that small (happy) number of Lawyers in England, Anno Domini 1555. which John Stow mention∣ed, but two men of Law at the Kings Bench Bar, and at the Common Pleas but one Serjeant; yet had they nothing to do all that Michaelmas Term, and yet no tempus belli, have increased into an Incorporation of many thousands of rich and po∣tent Leading men in all Corners of the Kingdom; many advanced in the esteem of the People, by their opposing the King's Prerogative, under pretence of Law,
That not the King, but their Law kept every man in his Right, though since the King hath been eclipsed these seven years, whom hath their Law kept in their Right? Therefore when Judge Cook told King James, that the Law kept the Crown up∣on his Head, the King well replied, Thou lyest Traytor, it is I that maintain the Law. And as malicious Enemies have too many Lawyers been to the Church, knowing well, that if the Clergy should grow into esteem and power, to be Ju∣stices of the Peace, they would plant in Charity, and so spoil the Trade of Law∣yers, whose private gain hath been stiled the flourishing of the Law; that not a Lawyer in a Parish, but commonly was the Parson's busie Enemy; and it is still in the Lawyers hearts and mouths, that the Archbishop would have hinder∣ed their Law: Did not such Interests facilitate belief, he that had seen the habit of the Clergy in our days, would wonder wherein lay the pride of the Clergy; for who wore plainest Garments were most maligned; but I forget the pride of the Wives of the Clergy in their Apparrel: Those that were guilty I excuse not, yet I must profess, I knew very few thus justly taxed; but such was the pride of English Women (especially the Gentry) that with much scorn and en∣vy, they would look at a Clergy-man's Wife, if cloathed as well as themselves, though their Birth and Portions, and their Husband's temporal Estate were known able to maintain it, sometimes better than the other; and in London, every Wo∣man, whose Husband perhaps paid but twelve pence Tyth per Quarter, thought the Minister's Wife proud, if clad better than her self; and as for habit, so for place and precedency, every Gossip could prattle, that a Ministers Wife had no place, though the Law is, that all Wives shall take place according to their Hus∣bands. These Petticoat Quarrels bred much envy to the Clergy, but majorcum superbia with far greater pride: And besides that, Laici Clericis oppido sunt infesti. 4. So generally peevish and fanaticiz'd were the people, that not any particu∣lar discontent, or personal Quarrel with any private Clergy-man, but these Bi∣shops-! these Parsons-! (the whole Coat) began their furious threats of Re∣venge; and for these many years, hath the opposing the Bishops, or regular Cler∣gy, been made the sign of a Babe of Grace, and a professor of pure Religion, and (since this Parliament) been the ready way to preferment, as the sure Cha∣racter of a fast Friend to the Parliament, that divers have not only been afraid to show their wonted Neighbourhood to their Parsons, but have grown active against them, only to secure themselves from suspicion of Malignancy, by being known to converse with a Malignant, or sequestred Minister. These, and such like matters have thickened the mists of scandalous Clergy and bringing in Popery, cast before the Peoples eyes, to widen the Breach into an impossibility of Reconciliation: These seven years sad experience persuading me, that the great Controversies of Christendome (as of latter days) so in elder Ages about the Arrian Heresie under Constantius, Synod against Synod, to revoke the Nicene Decrees,Socr. schol. lib. 2. and that other Division about the Celebration of Easter under Commodus, were but some State Stalking-horses,Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 21. or at least maintained with such Vehemency, for politick ends, whereof Church History hath taken no Cog∣nizance; like the two Golden Calves of Presbytery and Independency, set up in our days, to cover Jeroboams policy for a new Government; Presbytery being thought at first a Cloak large enough to serve all turns, till new designs started up Independency, both equally destructive to the old way, which though wo∣ful experience hath proved the best way, and most men at the bottom desire; yet because it consisteth not with their rash temporal Ingagements they furiously oppose: could we else think, that Christians and Countrymen should engage in a Bloody Civil War, to demolish a Cross, or put down an innocent Cere∣mony, to deshoy a Bishop of a Diocess, and set a Pope in every Parish? A meer Book-man of this Generation can find little difference above-board, all sides professing they fight for the same things, which surely made Dury and Dr. Mose∣ly, and Dr. Gibbons take so much pains and travel, to seek Reconcilement in Religion; but alas! G. Cassander, H. Grotius, may write Votum pro pace Eccle∣siastica:
Romish Priests may hazard their lives to reconcile Protestants, and Pro∣testants hope to convert Papists; Church men may fast, and pray, and write, and preach for Peace, but all to no purpose: Can they reconcile the King and the Pope's Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical? Can they secure a Rebell against a King in Power? Can they make Agreement between Publick-Faith Debts, and Bishops Lands, and Delinquents Estates? Take away Temporal Differences, and Church Controversies among Christians might soon be ended; for what have the engaged men of this Generation long whispered, and now speak out to the Citizens desirous of a Treaty for Peace, while the pretence is Religion, should the King be restored to his Throne; what security can they (Traytors) have for their Necks and Estates? What shall become of their Ordinance-Law? Should Bishops come in again, what shall become of our Moneys for the purchase of their Land? The City Publick-Faith-Mongers tremble to think that their Debts will be desperate; Souldiers say, if peace come, their Triumphs will be spoiled; should the Kingdom be setled, and every man enjoy his own, the Fanatick Ministers cry out, what shall they do, who have intruded into other mens Livings? These thoughts fright the Presbyterian Lecturers, and the Assembly of Divines (who these Twelve Months have been preaching against this Army) into a zealous Union with this In∣dependent Army, yea, with Turks or Jews, or any Religion in the World (consisting with their usurped possessions) would they joyn, rather than suffer the old Reli∣gion to be restored. These, these are the true Reasons that continue the differences of our Church to such a difficulty, if not impossibility of reconcilement, and when for such ends men have employed Conscience, no wonder in presecution thereof, what cruelty, injustice and Tyranny is used as mediums, for obtaining such wick∣ed purposes, whereof you have a small view in this following Discourse. CHAP. III. What use the Fanaticks have made of Parliaments, and the ways whereby that Faction in this Parliament and Kingdom have endeavoured to make the Clergy contemptible and odious to the people. HOW old the Fanatick grudge is against the Church of England, the Discourse of the Troubles of Frankford can tell the World; and truly since Sacriledge hath been cryed up for Reformation, hath that same Spirit of Darkness been tam∣pering in Parliaments, to make them their Engine for the work of destroying the Church, under colour of Reformation, that Archbishop Whitgift (that holy meek man) in Queen Elizabeth's days, lying very sick, and being told of a Parliament cal∣led, (out of his pious care for the Church) prayed God, that he might not live to see that Parliament, as near as it was, and God heard his Prayer; and although (as Lord Verulam confesseth) the Parliament of England oweth some satisfaction for the many injuries, and unjust oppressions formerly done by them to the Church; yet since the first breach (so thirsty were the Members after the remnant of the Church Lands) few Parliaments, but have rather sought to increase that debt, till the Church be quite undone; to this purpose, how have the Fanaticks (who for these many years have had the vogue of the people, opening their mouths wide after any Game, to which one of their Beagles should lead the trace) superstitiously longed for Parlia∣ments, because their Plots and hopes were to pack them for their design against the King and Church, as now they have done, which made the Presbyterian Se∣ctaries, and all other sorts of Fanaticks, so idolize this Parliament, calling it Mr. Calamy. Dr. Temple. the Perliament of their Prayers, and a frequent Pulpit Title for the House of Commons was, the House of Gods, and the House of mortal Gods, and truly they were an House of Gods, like the Heathenish Roman , an House of Gods of all Countries, the Images of English Sectaries; for they do but represent, and it's but fitting that new Gods should have new Priests,  Tim: 4. 3.heaping up to themselves Teachers after their own
hearts lusts; no marvel then if the Ministers of Christ grow out of request, and all the malice, and slanders, and cruelty of these new Gods be racked on those, who would teach the people to serve the true God, rather than men: But God for∣bid, but that the vvorld should knovv, vvhat arts of lying, and slandering, and false accusing, to make the King and the faithful Clergy of England odious to the people, has been raised as the Scaffolds to build this second Babel, vvhich though no longer looked upon, than vvhile in present use, yet (if faithfully recorded) vvill be as precious Monuments in the Eyes of vvise men, vvhen they shall see (if God hath not given up this Nation to make Lyes their Religion) Truth triumph∣ing in the ruines of such ill founded Structures: hovv this Fanatick Faction blas∣phemed their King, I leave to better Pens, though they used the same means therein, as their experience had found serviceable for their vvicked ends against the Church, vvhich devices I have collected out of their Printed Papers, or mine ovvn Observations at Committees, and elsevvhere. The Foundation of the Fanatick Babel being laid, by packing their Agents into this their forced Parliament (as shall be hereafter declared) and their long preparing of the people for their Work, by setting the People a madding after this Parliament, the whole Kingdom's Ruine, as I heard a London Divine, in June, 1642. accused at a full Committee, to have prophesied (as since it hath appeared) That the Counties had chosen a Company of Hot-headed Men into the House of Commons, who would prove the Ruine of this Kingdom: The Foundation being thus laid, the first Scaffold to the Building was made by railing Speeches, with∣in the Houses (by Priviledge of Liberty of Speech to abuse any persons, their King have not they spared) by some particular Members, stuffed full of malici∣ous and bloody Eloquence (Let the Sword reach from the North to the South, quoth Sir Edward Deering) rather than his phantastical new Church-Government should be hindered, reviling the established Form of God's Service, under which they were bred and born, blasting the sacred Function of the Ministry of Christ, by which they were made Christians, and publishing those Speeches in Print, on purpose to infect the People, and fire their minds, ready enough to catch any such Sparks; and this railing against the Clergy, was the only way to be made a Chairman of a Committee, or to be designed for some great Preferment, and to be the worshipful Golden Calves of the People, the on∣ly Ambition of those popular Speech-makers, who little dreaming of the Fana∣tick Plots (as wise Statesmen as they pretended to be) to which themselves open∣ed the Gap, kindled the fire which others of meaner condition (but of different intentions) blew up to such Flames, as since hath burned the Kindler's own Nests. The Lord Digby proclaimed Traytor, banished, and made the publick hatred of the Fanaticks: The Lord Faulkland killed at Newberry Fight: Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes condemned to die by Martial Law, for the good service he had done the Parliament his Masters: Sir Edward Deering, who made this motion in the House of Commons with great applause, to burn the late Canons, (made in the Convo∣cation, and stamped with the King's Authority) by the Canon-makers own Hands; not long after had those same his Speeches burned by the publick Hangman, himself expelled the House, and forced to flie the Fury of the People under a Priest's Coat, and read Prayers in a Church for a disguise, and became an ear∣nest Suitor for a Deanery, viz. of Canterbury, when he had so railed against Deans and Chapters, upon no other ground but report (as himself confessed:) but missing this Preferment, turned Apostate from the King (to whom he had fled) to those whom himself had called Rebells and Traytors; yet rejected by them also for his labor; and soon ended his days with grief and scorn. Mr. Pym, and John White, the Libelling Centurist, who died distracted, crying out, how many Clergy-men, their Wives, and Children he had undone; and others have been cut off in the midst of their rage against God's Ministers: Fair warnings to other such like Rabshekahs, who yet have time to repent. But these Speeches so applaud∣ed, and other men imitating them, made a fair way for a second Story of the
same Scaffolding for this new Building, by Remonstrances and Declarations publish∣ed in the name of the House of Commons, which usually ranked the Papists and the Clergy together, as Enemies to the Kingdom, and in that mid-night Remonstrance, in the name of the House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, was it in terminis laid down, That none of the Clergy were preferred, but those who preached wickedness and profaneness; yet was no particular person named, nor truly could be named guilty of so heavy a charge; but Audacter Calumniari, haerebit aliquid was their Plot, and all the miseries and Grivances of the Kingdom were laid on the Bishops and the Prelatical Party (as the new phrase was) when the Authors of that Black Remon∣strance knew that the Clergy of the Church of England had not, nor could have any Vote or hand in those matters, they being such of which the Clergy did equally complain; which (besides the House of Commons voting the Clergy in Convocation) guilty of a Praemunire, accusing also twelve Bishops of High Treason, committed to the Tower, on purpose only to stop their Mouths from claiming their Priviledges, which as part of the Parliament belong unto them) was enough to have raised hatred to a second , considering the Religious Faith the people then had of the Reports of their new Gods, as Pulpits call'd the House of Commons, which so far possessed a Gentlewoman used to their Lectures, that she durst In Lyme-street, in London.not in Consci∣ence take Phystek-without an Order of Parliament from the House of Commons; such a Brother we read of in Dodona's Grove, who would not believe his Creed, because there was no Act of Parliament for it: And at the beginning of this blessed Parlia∣ment, did the Fanatick Faction in the House of Commons, Print and publish a foisted Order, (carefully dispersing the Copies throughout the Kingdom) in the Name of the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, to stir up, indeed to in∣vite all active men, (as they phrased the men of their Tribe) to accuse Mi∣nisters, making this one crime and scandal to be complained of, That a Clergy∣man had two Livings, though according to the Laws of the Land: Which Order (though disclaimed within the Walls of the House of Commons, yet not counter∣manded by any publick Act of the House, so willing were all sorts of men in the House to see the Clergy abused, notwithstanding that high affront and dishonour of their House) so wrought abroad in all parts of the Kingdom, that not any Knave or Fool in a Parish whom reproof for sins had made the Ministers Enemy, but now thought himself commanded (yes, and bound in Conscience to obey) to fly in the Face of Gods Minister, and his Spiritual Father, that within a short space above two thousand Petitions were brought in against the Clergy (so readily had they pack'd their business) two or three of the Fanatick avowed Instruments in a Parish presenting Petitions constantly, styled The Petition of the whole Parish, though the major part of the Parish; yea, (I have known it) three parts of four in a Parish have never seen any such Petition, but disclaimed it under their hands: And the basest Mechanicks hand to a Petition, how false soever, so it were against a Clergy-man, was received with favour, and with Mr. Speakers Thanks for their love to the Parlia∣ment, and could bring upon any Minister of Christ more chargeable and vexatious Summons and attendance on the Parliament or Committees, and oftentimes longer Imprisonment, than the Report or Testimonials of all the other better Parishioners could free him from; nor were there any honest Orthodox Clergy (for all else were accounted the Parliaments Friends) who groaned not under the Insolency of this proud domineering Faction, daily threatning them with Petitioning against them in Parliament, which was then thought a most dreadful business, though the peo∣ple had never so long known their Parsons Learning and Honesty; but as Sir H. S.Mr. Sel∣den (a Member of the House) then told a Person of Honour, Learning and Honesty were sins enough in a Clergy-man in these days. 3. Having thus sent into Countrys for ugly shapes and skins of Beasts to dress the Clergy in for the peoples sight, no marvel if (as the Heathens served the Chri∣stians) they now set Dogs to bait them, countenancing all those who opposed the established Worship of God, and suspending the due Administration of the same, by an imperious Order of the House of Commons only, in defiance to the Kings
Proclamation then set forth for the due celebration thereof, and also of an Order of the House of Peers for the same purpose; and in many Churches have some Mem∣bers of their private Authority forbid the Priests to read Divine Service,St. Michael Cornhil. others in con∣tempt thereof, put on their Hats during the Reading of Prayers,St. Giles Crip∣plegate. which gave such encouragement to the Rabble-Rout of that Faction in the City, that in divers Churches unheard of Violences were offered to Ministers officiating in full Con∣gregations by a few Sectaries, yet scarce durst any man either rescue the Minister, or defend their own Religion; and it's too well known how a few (called Zea∣lous) young Fellows with their Wenches rushing into any Church in London could have set up a Psalm, and thereby sing a whole Parish out of their Relegion, Vide vitam Jacobi Andre.(a Trick they had from the Dutch Rebels and Anabaptists) into such a lukewarm∣ness vvere most men grovvn towards Gods Service; but as this vvas made the Shiboleth to try the Fanatick Friends, so vvas the contemning of the Established Religion a ready vvay to make all the constant Professors of that Religion contemn∣ned also, and who should be constant in Religion if not the Clergy. 4. A Fourth way to make the Clergy odious to tht People, was their abetting all Outrages and Affronts done to the Persons and Functions of the Clergy, insomuch, that upon their sending for Burton, and Pryn, and Bastwick, (Three Champions, or Fanatick Beautifews) and the audacious Riots and Tumults, attend∣in their return to London without controul, the Faction took such Encourage∣ment (having found their Strength in the House of Commons) in their contempt of the Priest, that a Divine in his Habit, could not walk the Streets of London, without being reproached in every corner, by the name of Baal's Priest, Popish Priest, Caesar's Friend, and the like Scoffings; nor durst Parishoners shew their wonted love toward their Spiritual Father; nay, scarce durst they come to hear him preach, without hazard of being accounted a Malignant, if he were so con∣scientious as not to change his Religion (as these Sectaries would have him,) and now New England so vomited up her Factious Spirits, that Merchants in London began to complain, that all Commodities in New England were fallen to half their former price, and each Damm and Sink of Religion pumped into our wholesome Streams, those who (as Witches do their Baptism) had renounced their former sacred calling to the Priesthood, yet now returned the only admired Church-men, and were by Orders of the House of Commons, either forced into other Mens Chur∣ches, as Lecturers, or thrust into sequestred Parsonages (their Fellow Subjects Free-hold) which before themselves had cried down for Antichristian. 5. A fair Introduction to the reproachful Usage of the Clergy at Committees, in the face of their own Parishioners; for having found the forwardness of the people (by their first foisted Order aforesaid) to serve them in their Designs, the Faction in the House procured a large Committee for Religion (as they called it) the Fanaticks main Engine against the Church, dividing it into many Sub-Com∣mittees, as Mr. White's Committee, Mr. Corbet's Committee, Sir Robert Harlows Committee, Sir Edward Deering's Committee, and divers others, upon pretence of hearing the multitudes of Petitions daily brought in against scandalous Ministers (as the term was) which Committees were made as several Stages for continual Clergy-baitings; mine Ears still tingle at the loud Clamors and Shoutings there made (especially at the Committee which sate at the Court of Wards) in derision of grave and reverend Divines, by that rabble of Sectaries which dai∣ly flocked thither, to see this new pastime, where the Committee-members, out of their vast Priviledge to abuse any man (though their Betters, some Members of the Convocation, whose priviledges are, and by Law, ought to be as large as those of the House of Commons) without controul, have been pleased to call the Mini∣sters of Christ brought before them, (by Jaylors and Pursevants, and placed like hainous Malefactors, without their Bar (bare-headed forsooth) sausie Jacks, base Fellows, brazen fac'd Fellows, and in great scorn, hath the Cap of a known Or∣thodox Dr. Halsy. Doctor been called to be pulled off, to see if he were not a shaven Po∣pish Priest; and upon a Parson's Evidence for one of his Parishoners, That he
was no Papist, (whose Evidence in such cases, is, and ought to be Authentical) it was replied by a Committee, Have you no Witness but a base Priest? And to some Eminent Doctors in Divinity of the City of London, viz. Dr. Baker, Dr. Brough, Dr. Walton, giving Testimony in a cause then before them, it was said by a Citizen, Member of that Committee, Isaac Pennington, what shall we believe these Doctors for? And Sir Robert Harlow going to his Committee-Chair (the Chair of the Scorner) bragged to his Friend Dr. Fell.How he would bait the Dean of Christ-Church; and after such like Usage, with chargeable and long Attendance, de die in diem, on these Committees, as many Clergy-men as were brought to the Stake to be voted (right or wrong) were sure to be outed of their Livings, else their good and godly People were not pleased; that the Souls of many honest and faithful Ministers of Christ, were so filled with the scorn of the proud, who thus had them in Derision, that they died for very grief, as did Dr. Halsy, and Dr. Clarke, and divers others. CHAP. IV. The Fanaticks Arts of framing Accusations to the Parliament against the Clergy, and their manner of proving their Charges. THe Reports of these new Spanish-English Inquisitions being spread abroad in City and Country, so fleshed these Hounds in their Parson-hunting (as their own phrase was) and so terrified the rest of the Clergy, that by this suc∣cess, the Masters of the Game began to heighten on their Designs of planting in a new Ministry, not only as foisted Lecturers, but as endowed Church-men, the more strongly to make them Servants for their work, especially in London, (whose Clergy bore the heat of the day in this persecution; for not six Parsons or Vi∣cars in all that City, but abhorred these ungodly courses) that two or three Re∣formers in a Parish, usually demanded no smaller matter of their Parson, than that he should resign up his whole Livelyhood at once, viz. his Living, other∣wise they would threaten to fetch him up to the Parliament; which Threats so far prevailed with many of blameless Lives and Conversation, that to avoid the trouble and charges, and the infinite Scorn and Vexation at Committees, and the Shame (as then it was accounted) of being ranked among scandalous Mini∣sters, gave up their Churches, viz. Mr. Mason, Dr. Howel, Mr. Ward, Dr. Pierce, Dr. Hill, Mr. Paggit, Mr. Hanslow, &c. And all others sought to change their Livings for some more quiet place: And I have heard some of these malicious Londoners, not ashamed openly in the face of a Committee, to profess, (and without controul) That they would never give over vexing their Parson, till they had worried him out of his Living. And so much have these Factions prevailed, that scarce any Parsons or Vicars in that City are left unsequestred; what Justice can any expect from such Committees, who have taken upon them to be Judges of the Clergy, against whom they have so openly declared themselves Parties and Adversaries: For scarce any of the persecuted Clergy, but can name some particular Members of this Faction in the House of Commons, and so by consequence of these Committees also, who have been active, not only as Representatives, but as chief Promoters and Authors of their Troubles, some by giving Instructions, what to lay in Petitions against them, others have drawn up Articles and Peti∣tions, Miles Corbet Chairman a∣gainst Mr. Brooks. and have sent them to Parishes to be subscribed, and to seek out Witnes∣ses (if they could) to prove them; nor scarce durst any Parishoner deny his hand, though he knew nothing of the Charge, for fear of being accounted a Malignant; and to some Parishoners refusing to subscribe, because they could prove nothing of the Accusations, it hath been replied, Sir Henry Mildway, and Mr. Ash, a∣gainst Dr. Wal∣ton.Set you your Hands, leave us to prove the Charge; till two or three Presidents in this kind, from these new Legislative hands, had made a Case for some Lawyers Table-book, that the known way of
petitioning against a Clergy-man, was to go to such a Lawyer, or such a Solici∣tor, who for his Fee could furnish any Clyent with Accusations against any Clergy-man whatsoever; but perhaps some will say, those Articles were not true against their Minister, they could not prove them. That is no matter, the Lawyers can warrant those Clyents harmless; for, say they, the Parliament, (that is the House of Commons) put not men to their Oaths, not allow any Costs or Dammages upon default of Proof, though their Accusa∣tion or Charge against their Minister be never so foul, never so false, and the Mi∣nisters Charges never so great: to name but one instance in this kind, Dr. Cousins Dr. John Cou∣sins. the Reverend Dean of Peterborough, and Master of Peter House in Cambridge, upon a motion made in the House of Commons by the Lord Fairfax, that the Doctor had enticed a young Scholar to Popery, vvas committed to the Sergeant at Arms to attend daily till the House should call him to a hearing; after Fifty Days Impri∣sonment, and Charges of Twenty shillings per diem, (besides being exposed to the scorn and houtings of the City Sectaries, vvho daily flocked to the Doors of the Parliament, to shew their readiness to serve them) upon hearing, the said Doctor made it appear (some Members also bearing him vvitness) that the Doctor being then Vice-Chancellor of the Ʋniversity, had most severely punished the Mr. Nicols. Party (whom upon Examination he had found guilty) by Recantation, and by expel∣ling him the University, yet no Cost or Dammage by way of Reparation was al∣lowed to the Doctor by the House of Commons. This is the Justice of the Supreme Court of Judicature in England; and a great shew of Justice had these Accusations, if (like a Chancery Bill) any one particular laid were proved, though it vvere but malignancy against the Parliament; a Crime never heard of till the Fanatick Fa∣ction in Parliament voted, That to obey the King was High Treason: this new Priviledge of Parliament so agreeable to Gods Lavv, (Thou shalt not bear false wit∣ness against thy Neighbour) advised some Parishioners to put in some odious Crimes against their Parson amongst the smaller matters they had laid; othervvise (said he) Mr. Edwards against Dr. W. before the Fana∣ticks had dri∣ven out the more moderate Party from the House of Com∣mons.the House will not regard your Petition, no matter whether ye can prove them or not, and vvhen some of the honester party (not then crowded from the House of Com∣mons) upon often experience of such slanders uncontrolled, moved that according to Reason and Common Justice, vvhosoever brought a false Accusation against any man should Lege talionis, be punished as the Accused should have been, if guilty; the Faction in the House rejected that just Motion, pretending that such an Order would discourage Petitioners: and a Chair-man being told by Dr. Sterne, Master of Jesus Colledge in Cambridge upon the like occasion, that the Committee vvere bound by Gods Lavv not to countenance a false Witness according to the Ninth Commandment, replyed to the Doctor, that he should not teach them whot to do: yet every week as soon as some wicked Design ripeneth, for a colour do these men Vote and Ordain mightily for keeping the Sabbath-day, when lying and false wit∣nessing will no longer advance their Cause, they will Vote it may be as much for this Commandment also; nay, in stead of reproving false witness, the Faction in Com∣mittees have found out shifts to help out a Reforming Lyar, or else to salve up the business with further proof to be produced hereafter, or making consequences and inferences upon a false or doubtful Testimony, lest their good people (as they cal∣led their Agents) should be discouraged; but for sureness sake Orders were often pasted on the Doors of the Committee, forbidding entrance to any but those of their own Faction, witness the Committee in the Exchequer Chamber about the Smectym∣nuan Libel, or the Grand Petition against Episcopacy, where all other Divines were turned out for Spies, as their phrase was; but some stayed long enough to hear heavy Charges weakly proved, viz. That Episcopacy was an Enemy to Parliaments, and to the Laws of the Land: How proved think you? Why a single Witness is produced, saying, that he heard a Doctor in DivinityDr. D. of Sussex speak some words against the Parliament, Ergo, and the latter part was proved, because a Bishop said that he would hinder Mr. Burton's Prohibition, (but did not hinder it, as Burton there confessed) these were the only Proofs of such high Charges there alledged
to make Episcopacy and the Bishops odious; and as if all these ways were not now to make the Clergy of England stink in the Nostrils of a seduced people; let the world consider what scandalous Libels have been written by the Fanaticks against the Clergy, and those Authorized by the Parliament: among multitudes to name but one though in that hundred, I mean the first Century, written by Mr. John White a Lawyer, and a great Chair-man for Religion, with an EpistleIn the Margin of that Epi∣stle, Quorum esse & videre est esse & bibere. canting in Scripture phrase, applying the words of the Holy Ghost to the proper works of the Devil, who is called the envious man, and the accuser of the Brethren: hear this John White generally charging the Clergy of England to be dumb Dogs, men swal∣lowed up with Wine and strong Drink, whose Tables are full of Vomit, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Buggerers, that change the natural use into that which is against Nature, Priests of Ball, Bacchus, Priapus, &c.Jer. 5. Rom. 26. Isaiah 28. 7. Horrid Crimes, or horrid Slanders! Did ever any Popish Jesuite so revile the Clergy of England? I need not pray the Lord re∣buke him, for God hath long since cut him off in the midst of his rage against the Church, such ungodly practices raving rnd condemning himself at his dying hour, for his undoing so many guiltless Ministers: and let any man judge if that first and only Example of Buggery prove not John White and his Abettors, the true Sons of the Father of Lyes, who was a Lyar from the beginning; for either the party was found not guilty, why then sequestred? Or guilty, why then not punished by death according to Law. It is not to be imagined that the Fanaticks would conceal the shame of any Clergy-man, when they so raked each Dunghill and corner to discover it; but that such an instance (if proved) should have been triumphantly stretched, to further their glorious Reformation; and whether the party so accused, was not some years before this Parliament, cleared by the Justices of the Peace for Sussex, who sifted out that Fanatick Plot against him (as one of those Justices told me) I refer the Reader to the then Justices of that County; but for a general Answer to that scandalous Libel, this Truth without question may be said, That not any one person in that Century, hath had any legal Tryal at all; but condemnati quoniam ac∣cusati; and the Justice of these times is, satis est accusare, otherwise what man in his Wits could believe, that Adulteries, Fornications, and such deeds of Darkness could be proved (as this John White affirmeth in the Margin of his Epistle) by sel∣dom less than six or seven Witnesses? unless so many saw what this vvorthy Mem∣ber did with his Neighbours Wife in White Fryars, which made his ovvn Wife so jealous of this Mr. White her Husband: But why suspition of incontinency on∣ly from looks, as in that Century Example 49. or from leading vvomen into dark places, as Example 18. by one vvhose house standeth in a dark Alley in London, or vvhy to be seen in company vvith Papists (vvhich the Lavv requires of Clergy∣men) as in Example 75. and 88. should be such Charges and Crimes as to ruine a man and his vvhole Family, or used as an Argument to make the whole Cler∣gy odious, let any Christian judge. I have been present, vvhen a grave and lear∣ned Divine hath been accused at a Committee for an Adulterer and a Drunkard, the proof of the former was only kissing a Woman in the presence of Company, and the other, was the drinking of only one half Pint of Wine; and so unchristian a scruti∣ny hath been made for accusations, and pretended proofs of Crimes against the persons of the Clergy, that (besides Accusers, and those known Schismaticks, and Adversaries allow'd to be both Parties, and Judges, and Witnesses also.) Agents in Parishes have baen employed in going from house to house with Parliament Warrants, summoning and terrifying all Men and Women, nay Servants, (I have knovvn it) vvhom they could hear vvere acquainted vvith such Ministers; and at Committees the Neighbours and familiar Friends so summoned, have been urged ex officio, to speak not only to Articles laid in Petitions, but also have had their Consciences sifted, to make them confess some Crime or Report, or suspition of a Crime. If the Parish afforded no Evidence, nor their old Acquaintance, down they sent (in some mens Causes) to the University to hunt out some Scandal, in the time of their Ministers abode there: nor have some Clergy mens Lives and
Conversation from their Cradle been left unsearched (I could name particulars) to get something, vvhereof to accuse a Clergy-man at the Parliament: So that any Report of a Crime committed tvventy years before this Parliament, (as in that Century Example 58.) or before taking of Holy Orders, or being possessed of a Church, or any Crime which Justice had long since taken cognizance of, and cen∣sured, as Example 72. or any rash vvords never so privately spoken, have been novv reaped up to make a Ministers scandal, and the whole Ministery scan∣dalous. Another trick of false Accusing accounted a just way of charging Clergy∣men, vvas a fallacious vvresting of Words, quite contrary to the sense of the Prea∣cher: A Reverend Doctor (whom I could name) vvas accused in Parliament, that he had Preached about fourteen years before this Parliament, that the Bishops when they took away the Mass, took away all Religion; upon hearing, the Doctor produced the Sermon, and made it appear, that he Preached at that time, (it be∣ing the publick Assizes at York) that men must not think that the Bishops, when they took away the Mass took away all Religion. Another Divine was accused of Popery, viz. that he had Preached, that the intention of the Priest, was of the Es∣sence of the Sacrament; when he Preached it only Historicè, and confuted the Opi∣nion at the same time. But if no proofs could be found of Crimes and Vitious Conversation in a Clergy man, then came in the politick Counsel of the Heathenish Presidents against Daniel,  Daniel 6. 5. We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God, under the (made odious) crimes of Innovati∣ons, Superstition, Popery, a Sin (not ) without transgression of any Law, Statute, Act of Parliament, Order, or Ordinance of both, or either Houses; nor would the Faction publish any Rule, to measure what should be accounted In∣novations, Superstition or Popery, and what not; but with these false Traces, they cunningly kept up the loud Cries of their People against the Clergy, making thereby so large a Snare, that not the most zealous Protestant Divines, who had been all their Life times preaching against Popery and Superstition, could possi∣bly escape, if but accused: Good God! can Posterity (if they may be suffered to be Christian) have so much Faith as to believe, that in the face of a Christi∣an Nation (nay, nay a pure Reforming Religious Christian Parliament) the Mini∣sters of Jesus Christ should be doomed to ruine, for saying in effect, Christianus suum: See here a Catalogue of Crimes charged upon the Clergy, collected out of the first Century, authorized to be Published in Print by the Parliament. Bowing at the name of Jesus, Examples, 33. 43. Setting up the name Jesus in the Church, Ex. 72. 83. Preaching against Sacriledge, Ex. 22. Bowing the Body in Gods House, Ex. 7. Assisting the King, and exhorting Subjects so to do, Ex. 33. 43. Reading the Kings Proclamation in Churches, according to the Kings Command, Ex.—28. 34. 52. Appointing the 43. Psalm to be sung, Ex. 29. Preaching against not coming to their own Parish Church, Ex. 21. 35. 38. Reading, and having Popish Books, Ex. 88. 55. Seen in Company with Papists, Ex. 88. It were endless to reckon particulars in this kind of Accusations, as wearing the Surplice, using Ceremonies, praying for Bishops, all now cryed down for Superstition and Popery: But in every Petiton, Malignancy against the Par∣liament, was the Burden of the Song (this indeed made any Doctrines to be censured Superstition and Popery) a Crime would puzzle all the Divines and Lawyers in Christendom to expound, were they Strangers to the Proceedings of this Faction; this Malignancy being nothing else but for Subjects to be sus∣pected of being constant in Religion towards God, and Loyalty towards their
King, this is the unquestionable definition of Malignancy against the Parliament and what Christian (much more a Clergy-man) would plead not guilty to these objected Crimes, or be ashamed of these condemned Popish Doctrines? And when by these tricks, they had cruelly committed many of the Clergy into noysome Pri∣sons, forcing others to fly the like cruelty, by forsaking their Habitations and Estates, their Wives and Children, they sequestred them for non Residence, first force them to fly, and then to punish them for flying: It's pity to omit their pretty fashion of sequesting Mr. Freeman of London; It is this day ordered by the Committee for plundered Ministers, that all the Profit of James Garlick-hithe, be se∣qustred into the Hands of, &c. from Mr. Freeman, the present Incumbent, till cause be shewn to the contrary. O the excellent Justiceof the new Saints! of the Re∣forming People of God! executed by Club-law, and by the Sword of War, which these weak Christians, by the help of a mis-guided Commonwealth-Party, have raised to empower themselves to force the Consciences of all men (now themselves are grown so strong) to a new Covenant, the Fanaticks last Engine to ruine the Church, and to destroy the Clergy, Root and Branch: A Solemn League and Covenant, the Fanatick, Antichristian Idol, set up in the Temple of God, hung up in all the Churches of London; a Covenant, like that in Isaiah, with Death, and an Agreement with Hell: A Covenant made by the Fanaticks of two Nations, in defiance to God and the King, to the Destruction of the Reli∣gion of their own Mother Church, and of all Loyalty to their King, the Father of their Country: A scandalous Covenant, maliciously studied, and laid for a meer Snare, and Rock of Offence to the Estates and Consciences of the Clergy, and People of God, that Scandal in the Abstract, Scandalum datum, praebens proximo occasionem ruinae, the proper work of the Devil, insomuch, that at a ge∣neral Summons of the Gentry, and remnant of the Clergy of the County of Sur∣rey, for the taking this Covenant, some chief Actors of the Faction, when they saw, that with several Salvo's, and Liberty to take it in any sence, with mental Reservations, and considerations, that it was but a forced Oath (and such like mincings) many men (and some of the Clergy, loving this present World, took the same) said, they were sorry to see some take it, whose Estates they hoped to have caught by this Hook: And although the Authors of the Covenant, knew the Clergies greater Obligations than other men, by Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to the King, and by Oaths of Canonical Obedience, and by several Subscriptions upon Record to the present Church, and by their stricter Tie of Conscience, and greater knowledge of the Function of Episcopacy (from whence themselves received their own Holy Order) which from our Saviours, and the Apostles days, was without Interruption for 1500 years, and still is continued in all Christian Churches, where Rebellion started not the Scruple, and the Sword ever since maintains the Heresie; yet none were so much pressed, and urged to take this Covenant, in Terminis, to destroy Bishops, as were the Clergy, and the refusal thereof was ipso facto, loss of any Clergy-man's Livings and Live∣lyhood; nay, so barbarous were this Faction, that their Committee for Com∣position at Goldsmiths Hall, would not admit the Lord Bishop of Winchester, late∣ly deceased, to compound for his sequestred Temporal Estate (for no compound∣ing for Spirituals is allowed: but Sequestration is indeed Deprivation with these men) unless he would take the Covenant, and swear to destroy himself, and his own sacred Function; yet these were the men, who have so cried out against Oaths ex officio, and against forcing the Consciences of men, and give this reason, why the Li∣turgy must be taken away, because it gave Offence to some mens Consciences; and these are the men who cried down the Clergy for Innovations, and now punish them because they will not move; Preface to the Directory.but as these Fanaticks have rigidly practised all those things, which themselves so much abhorred, teaching the World a new Art, how to commit any villany securely, by first railing against that Sin which they in∣tend to commit; so may they be a warning to all Christian Princes, how they suf∣fer the Church or State-Goverment to be spoken against, be the pretence never so pious, or seemingly Religious.
CHAP. V. A view of the New Judges of the thus accused Clergy; their condition and their judging of Doctrines in their Committees for Religion, de facto & de jure. HAving given the world a short view (by which the rest may be guessed) of the Fanaticks arts and tricks of making the Clergy their adversaries, and inventing accusations against them, whom as hainous Malefactors, they have ta∣ken upon them to judge (as they pretend) by Law, and by the Justice and Wis∣dom of the High Court of Parliament, for Reformation of Religion; it's not un∣seasonable to shew the world a true Character of these great Judges in their personal Relations, as well as their political capacity of judging de facto, & de jure. And surely men (who were strangers to the designs of this Faction) would think (by the high strains of publick Acts pretending Reformation of Re∣ligion) there were some Oecumenical Counsel now sitting, or at least some great Convocation of Grave and Learned Bishops and Clergy of England (who were wont to have the judiciary power in Church-matters, long before any Parlia∣ments were in England) famous for their honest Lives, and by their great know∣ledge able to judge, not vote Religion up or down: but O Tempora! O Mores! the Grave Bishops of the Church are by tumults driven from the Parliament; the Convocation by subtelty of a pretended praemunire, and by fury are cryed down; hereby all the Clergy of England are silenced at one; not any one Church-man admitted to consult, or act in matters Ecclesiastical; the Keys are snatched by violence from the Apostles hands (to whom Christ gave them) and are hung at the girdles of meer Lay-men; most of them illiterate men assem∣bled in Parliament, a mixed multitude of all professions, wherein as Sir Robert Naunton hath observed in King James's Raign, since the Fanaticks began their Plot, were 40, who never saw Twenty years of age, and many such were chosen into the House of Commons; yet upon any one of these Votes (as Votes go now adays) the peace and Religion of a Nation may depend. But to give a just account, casting out the most of the Nobility, and about two hundred of the House of Commons (men of greatest Estates, therefore more like to seek the welfare of their Countrey, than their own private interests, which were driven from the House, where they sate but as Cyphers) and counting the multitudes of Tradesmen, and Merchants of London and other Incorporations packed in∣to this Parliament to carry a Vote; besides the many Lawyers, Mercenary men, and most of them Recorders, and so servants to Incorporations (making Laws for themselves to get Money by) together with a few engaged Knights and Gentlemen, famous for hauking and for hunting after Lectures and Whore∣houses, (many of them having sold off their Houses in the Countrey, and took others at London, to follow the Fanatical Plot more diligently) and the sum of these make up the Fanatical Faction in the Parliament, stiling themselves the Parliament of England. And now the Souldiers by a counterfeit Seal have re∣cruited the House with no small number of Colonels and Officers; when indeed they have turned the Parliament out of doors, and turned themselves Apostates in Religion, and have shared the Lands of the Church to make themselves a fortune; not to mention their vicious Lives, which might make up truer Cen∣turies; nor their Hypocrisie, Lyes, and breaking of Oaths of Allegiance and Su∣premacy; yet these are the men usurping all power both of Church and State; who are become the supream Heads of the Church, and of all Church-matters, which none of them ever understood, yet these (also parties) have made them∣selves Judges of the Religion, Doctrine, Function, and Estates of all the Clergy of England. Miles Corbet the Recorder of Yarmouth, who Indicted a man for a Conjurer, and was urgent upon the Jury to condemn the party upon no proof but a Book of Circles found in his Study, which Miles said was a Book of Con∣juring, had not a Learned Clergy-man told the Jury, that the Book was but an
old Almanack. I have been present at a Committee for Religion, consisting of five or six Tradesmen and Merchants of London, and an ignorant Lawyer in the Chair; yet these have judged Doctrines by whole sale, executing Eccle∣siastical jurisdiction in an high act, viz. Absolving Ecclesiastical persons (sus∣pended by their Diocesan Bishop) as it were in a parenthesis, with an O yes! Ye that will have these three Ministers of Wales (I confess I have forgot their names) to have Liberty and Licence to preach, say I! Ye that will not, say no! Which being thrice repeated, and answered I! I! these three suspended Ministers were by this Vote perfectly absolved no doubt! In the mean time, at this wor∣shipful, (nay honourable) Bar, was a heavy complaint against a Grave Mr. Brookes of Yarmouth. Divine of Blasphemy, which he had preached, viz. That the Virgin Mary was the Mo∣ther of God; and at a day appointed for Voting, had not a Divine whispered some of these Committee-men, had this Doctrine been Voted Blasphemy; so easily might the sacred Ephesine Counsel have been condemned by this learned Committee for , and condemning Nestorius for Heresie; and Elizabeth in the first of St. Luke, should have been as guilty of Blasphemy, for calling the Blessed Virgin the Mother of her Lord. And when a Reverend Doctor, and Dr. Sterne. Master of Jesus Colledge in Cambridge, who was charged with Blasphemy at Sir Robert Harlows Committee, for writing Honour God with thy substance, on the Bason for Alms; made answer, by asking whether it was not rather Blas∣phemy in them to call a sentence of Scripture Blasphemy? it was replyed by a boy-Member of that Committee, Will ye suffer him (meaning the Doctor) to answer by questions? At another time I heard one of these Committees cry out, what a miserable condition these people were in, who lived under such a Mini∣ster, who (as the Article was) had preached, that Original sin was washed away in Bap∣tism? which was there derided at as Popery. In brief, to never so true Doctrines, the Mr. Rous. Chair-man saith, they sit not there to dispute. Up started Captain Ven, (a Tradesman of London) and asked a Mr. Che∣slen of St. Matthew Friday∣street. Divine (justifying at their Bar his Doctrine to be true and Orthodox) did you preach these Doctrines? answer I or no! whe∣ther they be true or false, leave that to us to judge. So the case standeth with the Divines of England; let any ignorant hearer (suppose an Apprentice Boy, I have known it) accuse any Clergy-man (the gravest Doctor in Divinity) of preaching Doctrines which the Boy thinks are false, or Popish Doctrines, to the House of Commons, or Committees, shall the Divine be sent for, perhaps by a Pursivant: justifie his Doctrine he must not, though never so true, the House supposeth it to be false, erroneous, Popish, or scandalous, because complained of; answer he must, did he preach it, I, or no? Whether it be true or false, they will not dispute, hit or miss, they will vote, and that's enough to make any Doctrine true or false, Popish or scandalous, and thereby to imprison the person of Christs Minister, and to seize on his Estate, to out him of all his Freehold and Livelihood, and to spoil him of his goods: Cicero de∣legibus, lib. 1. O si tanta potestas sit stultorum sen∣tentiis, ac jussis, ut eorum suffragiis rerum natura vertatur, cur non sanciunt, ut quae mala sunt pro bonis habeantur? yea so senslesly conceited have this Lay-Parlia∣ment (Parliamentum indoctorum) been of themselves, that some of them have said, since they had read the Scriptures (in English) why should they not be able to judge of Divinity, as well as the best Doctors? And to have desired, that Doctrines complained of in Petitions to these Lay-Committees, might be referred to the Judgment of Learned Divines about London, would have been taken for an high contempt of their Committee for Religion, and of the power of Parliament; (as a Mr. Vaughan. Member of that Committee told one, who made the Motion in private to him) where such are become Judges of Divinity. When Lawyers perk into a Chair for Religion, and Coblers preach (both alike lawful) no marvail if Religion be voted illegal, and the Priests be thought to go so awry; and in these times, to the Lawyer must the Divine go, if he will preach without fear of being made a scandalous Minister, or imprisoned for every Ser∣mon. I have known some twenty shillings Fees given to a Lawyer to plead at the Committee for Religion, in the behalf of some Doctrines preached in a Sermon, for which the Preacher never got twenty pence, no defence being
left for the Priests Doctrine, or officiating in sacris, unless allowed by an Act of Parliament, or some common Law-trick; insomuch, that a Learned Doctor of Divinity being accused of Popery, for calling the Communion-Table an Altar, alledging the Scripture in the Dr. Cosin. Hebrews, Habemus Altare, we have an Altar, of which they may not eat, meant of the Christian Eucharist, could not hereby be acquitted of the Popery; but producing the words of an Act of Parliament of Edward the Sixth, yet unrepealed, calling the Eucharist the Sacrament of the Altar, the Committee for Religion were fully answered. And several Actions at common Law of Assault and Battery were brought against a Mr. A∣dams. Divine in Essex, who out of zeal to Gods house, (as the Priests did with Ʋzziah) thrust some people out of his Church, who sending for Cakes and Ale from an Ale∣house, were prophanely carousing on the Lords Table in the Church; yet could not this Crime be admitted a lawful plea in the Common Law, to save the Minister harmless from being overthrown in the Action; but consulting with a Lawyer, he was advised to plead his institution and induction into the said Church, where the fact was done, and so by a Rule in the Law, that any man may thrust another out of his House, if he behave himself uncivilly therein, the Minister was secured from the Actions of Assault and Battery; so that would our Saviour now beat out the buyers and sellers from the Temple, the Lawyers would afford an Action against him of Assault and Battery. And not long before this Parliament, did the Lawyers find out ways of Indicting Clergy-men at the publick Assizes, for standing up at the Creed;In Dur∣ham. or for denying to give the Sacrament to people obstinately refusing to kneel at the receiving thereof, and to come up to the Rails about the Holy Table; that I have known some Secta∣ries in London, command their servants to go to the Sacrament, and to sit in the lower places of the Church, to try whether the Minister would bring the Sacrament to them in their seats, that so they might have an Action of Law against the Minister, or else complain against him to the Parliament: nor will it be too long a digression to remember a former vent of the Fanaticks ma∣lice in a Parliament at the beginning of King Charles his Reign; urging strong∣ly, a motion of making Adultery death in a Clergy-man, but not in any other person, purposely to throw scorn on that profession; and how safe any Clergy mans life should have been, may the conspiracy of the Lady Laurence witness against a grave Divine, which the justice of the Star-chamber found out, and censured: righteous judgment no doubt is to be expected, when such a mali∣tious Faction shall get power to make themselves Judges of the Clergy, as now they have done. Good God! have our Preachers been these Eighty years confuting the su∣perstition of the Papists, to be made the stalking horses to a Sacrilegious, Su∣perstitious, and Rebellious Faction? by whom themselves are at last crowed down for Papists, under the same pretence of Reformation, having been taught to hate Popery without discretion; no marvail if such people now que∣stion their Teachers, and think they have forfeited their power and know∣ledge to them, whom they have taught no better; and what use these men have made of this pretended power, let their own actions testifie. But that they may seem to be no usurpers of any power, at first they derided at Epis∣copacy (or Monarchy, but that is not the subject of this discourse) to be Jure Divino, though never so plain, in the 10. of St. Luke, by Christs Election of 12 Apostles, and 72 Disciples of an inferiour order, out of which Mathias was in the first of the Acts preferred to be numbred with the 11 in the room of Judas; and were there any scruple, who more fitting to resolve the doubt, than those who lived in the Apostles time? as did Ignatius, whose works, as also the con∣tinued succession of Bishops in all Christian Churches for 1500 years together, were argument enough to those who have not denyed their Faith, forgetting their Creed, I believe the holy Catholick Church: And against such men a Chri∣stian ought not to dispute: But now began new principles of Divinity to be broached, by the new State-Chaplains, vid. That the Law of nature bade the Parliament (that is, the House of Commons, the peoples Representatives) to re∣assume
all power into their hands, it being so universally complained of, that the King and the Bishops had abused their trust, intending to ruine the King∣dom, and destroy Religion (the two great bugbears wherewith the Fanatical Faction (who felt the pulses of the people beating strongly after property, or Religion) kept the people continually affrighted; and it being as generally be∣lieved, (for qua volumus facile credimus) that all power in Church and Com∣mon-wealth was derived from the people, and their Representatives, and not from God immediately:The Ob∣servator. Aristotles Politicks is made Scripture for this new Di∣vinity; and surely an excellent Religion will nature teach Christians, to justi∣fie what they have, or shall do so manifestly against the Law of God and man. If this argument be not strong enough, their Lecturers, who were wont in former Parliaments also to attend the House of Commons door, making Legs to the Members in transitu, praying their Worships to remember the Gospel, by which they meant their Presbytery: these preach to them, that their power to Reform Religion, is Jure Divino, why? forsooth because the people called them thereunto; and vox Populi est vox Dei, was their beloved unquestionable Oracle; indeed vox populi cried up Rebellious Absalom against his King and Father! Vox populi cryed against our Saviour, Crucifie him, Crucifie him! Vox populi called for the Golden Calf! from whence to the silver-Smiths of Diana, Scripture may teach us that Argumentum pessimi turba, and that in Reli∣gion vox populi is rather vox Diaboli than Dei. Seneca de vitâ beat. Yet this vox populi must choose our Religion, and Religion-makers: but who gave the people power to choose? the Kings writ for Elections; then all power is not in the people, nor can any Electors invest their Elected with the jus Tertii, for nemo potest plus juris trans∣ferre in alium, quam ipse habet; the power of the Kings, and of the Church, be∣ing not in the peoples power to commit to their Trustees; Laws having made the distinction between the Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects propriety, be∣tween Church and Common-wealth; as well as between meum & tuum, a∣mong fellow-Subjects: and were the Kingdom Elective (as England was ne∣ver) yet well might that Roman Emperours Speech be applyed, Vestrûm quidem erat eligere, pòst autem meum est imperare, vestrum est obedire: But that all power of the Church in Doctrine and Discipline should be originally in the people (that is, the rude multitude) is a new opinion framed by affection, and made Religion by politick engagements, only to serve the present designs; for now the Fanatical Lecturers (having obtained their ends against the Bishops by vox populi, their own Doctrine) dispute the power with their Lay-masters in Parlia∣ment; who by their help getting the Sword, (and by that the strongest power) are not like to forego the same upon Vox populi: But did not violence so crowd up this Lay-Parliament, and Committee for Religion, that in their Chairs no room is left for Gods word to take place, they might know that the 2. Mala∣chi 7. Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and not the peoples lips, and that by tying up the lips of the Priests. Gods Law saith,Deut. 17. 8. Deut. 17. v. 8. That man which shall do presumptiously, and not hearken to the Priest, shall dye: Nor did the people teach the Apostles, but surely the Apostles taught the people, and Ruled over the people in Word and Doctrine; since to them Christ gave the Keys, Christus dedit, non populus: Otherways St. Pauls Rod was a meer brag, and so was his jurisdiction, 1 Cor. 11. the rest will I set in order when I come; which also he commen∣ded to Timothy and Titus, and the other Bishops and Deacons for governing the Church, whereof the first Synod at Jerusalem consisted; and to prevent the mistake of Lay-Elders in that Synod, it's said afterwards of Judas and Si∣las, that Acts 15. they also were Prophets; and of the Clergy were all general Coun∣sels of Christendome made up, to whom Constantine said, judiciary power (e∣specially in Doctrines) did belong: and this was the established Law of the Christian world; the benefit whereof St. Ambrose pleaded against Auxentius: and it's known, upon such grounds Luther refused the judgment of the Empe∣rours Court, appealing to a Counsel concerning his Doctrine. The word Presbyter almost Englishing itself Priest, as was the Ecclesiastical sense of the word, both in the New Testament, and Ancient Writers, both Christian and
Heathen, which Amianus Marcellinus, a meer Historian, describeth Christiani ritus Presbyter, never Englished in the Grammatical sense, till design translated it so in our English Testament; and by those Translators never intended to be wrested to Lay-Elders, as the non-Doctors of this Generation will have it to signifie. But I forget my self, that I dispute against a Sword, and such Adversaries who told their King, they sate not to be ruled by Presidents, but to make Presidents to the world; and truly they have been as good as their word: But I hope they will regard the judgment of a Protestant Martyr in this case, (for the shedding of whose Blood the Parliament made an Ordinance for repentance:) when the Papists in Queen Maries Raign urged Mr. John Rogers, that the Parliament had established the Ro∣mish Religion; of what force (said this godly Martyr) may Fox 3. pag. 127. old Edition. Lord Sayes Laws. we think these Parlia∣ments are, which establish contrary Laws, to condemn that for evil, which before they had decreed for good? it's better to obey God, rather than man; making Religion, which like Tullies Lex Naturae, nec tolli, nec abrogari potest, become Leges Seiae, & Apuleiae, quae unico Senatus versiculo puncto temporis sublatae sint. And should the House of Commons assume this power in Religion, Religion, like Englishmens clothes, would ever be cutting into some new fashion, as any Faction ariseth in the Kingdom; but that this Faction in Parliament may blind the eyes of the world, (indeed to strengthen and support themselves, till they should become absolute Masters of England) when they had been long tampering with Religion, at last they found (policy necessitating them) some need of using Clergy-men; yet in such a monstrous way, as the Christian world never heard the like, by a new thing called an Assembly of Divines, not summoned by the Kings Writ and Au∣thority, (expresly against the Statute of Hen. 1.) nor chosen by the Clergy, but plucked out of each Members pocket, and by vertue of Hocus pocus, jugled into a Conventicle-Synod, on purpose (for all forced Synods have ever more of private interest, than the publick good of the Church) to help out with some new Reli∣gion, as their Masters (which hired them with 4 s. per diem) shall appoint: Yet lest these Divines (such as they be, New-Englanders, Amsterdamians, Pedants, and Trencher Chaplains; (to whom were some ten learned Clergy-mens names joyned as Seals, who never came there in person) should take any authority to themselves, the Faction in Parliament have jusled in Thirty of their Lay-Members (another Vote can make them thirty more) as Members of this Linsy-woolsie Synod, to help up a side; but to make all sure, their Parliament Masters have ordered, that this Assembly (yoaked like an Oxe and an Ass to till the Holy-Land) must meddle only with what shall be propounded to them from the Houses of Parliament; and when all is done, their conclusions shall not bind, till the Parliament give leave and consent; and saith the Ordinance (not Law) whereby this Learned Synod is created and bridled, these Divines must tell them what is most agreeable to Gods word; and when the Parliament is thus certified what Gods Law is, the House of Commons will vote whether it shall be obeyed or no: Such an Omnipotency over Gods Law, over the Church and the King, hath this Faction usurped since this Parliament, to plant in Christs Kingdom, and the power of Religion and Reformation as their specious pretences at first were, turning the Spanish cloak of Religion into the English Proverb, of playing the Devil for Gods sake. CHAP. VI. The Censures of these Judges against the Clergy, and the true reason thereof. THese are the Grapes of this long-promised Fanatical Canaan, gathered from such pretended holy-Thistles; at whose growth while some labourers in Gods harvest (too late repenting) connived, doubting that they were some weak and tender Vine-branches, and others of more discerning spirits seeking to weed them out, pricked their own fingers; they grew like Jothams bramble;Judges 9. such Kings over the Trees, that they have banished the Vine, and the Olive, peace and
plenty; and to plant in the stinking Elder, have burned up the goodly Cedars of the Church, root and branch; and the field of Christs wheat choaked with the tares which the envious man hath been long sowing in this Land, now grown to their harvest, to whose sheaf (like Josephs dream) must every sheaf make obeisance, else the upstart bramble-King sends fire to devour them, as it hath already torn the whole coat of the Clergy, as many thousands of them can witness; the sad con∣clusion of the woful premises of this Book: yet this Tyranny and persecution of the Clergy is stiled the justice of Parliament, and the power of Reformation of Religion; whereof the Reader may here see a pattern, in the cruel sufferings of the Clergy of London, presented in a general Bill of Mortality, to which these pa∣pers may serve for a short Commentary, till God send better days of enlarging the story by a more full Collection; the very naming of the persons in that Bill (being generally men of known honest Lives, and constant painful preaching (that the Earl of Northumberland discoursing with Mr. Calamy (for so have the engaged Nobility prostituted their honour to the Courting of each Fanatical Lecturer and Pedant, of whom indeed they stand in awe) about the supplying of above fifty Churches in London void of Ministers, told Mr. Calamy, that they must restore some of the Sequestred Clergy of London; to which Mr. Calamy replying, God forbid; the Earl said, unless they did so, the Parliament could not find men of abilities to preach in London:) The naming (I say) of those men were enough to shame the Father of Lyes, and his Fanatical Sons (were not both past shame) and to vindi∣cate the rest of the abused Clergy of England, (as well sure as the Personal faults of some few (and those very few) be made the scandal of the whole Function) and yet who so cruelly persecuted as these London-Divines? will ye know the rea∣son thereof? The Fanatical design growing high, pitched upon three main en∣gines to compleat their work, vid. the setting up the Militia, the seising of the Navy, and the planting in of Lecturers, and it's hard to say which of these three have done their new Masters best service; this last being the ready way to obtain the two former; whereunto much conduced the feigned fears and jealousies rai∣sed by the Faction in the City; as also by several Votes and Declarations of Par∣liament of Forreign invasions from abroad, and secret dangers at home, no sooner bruited abroad than believed, by a people deceiving and willing to be deceived; whereby the Faction in Parliament desiring a Guard, refused the Trained Bands of Middlesex (profer'd by the King to satisfie their fears) confiding rather in the Citizens of London, purposely to engage that City to maintain them in whatso∣ever wickedness they should act; their chiefest care being to make sure of London, (the head and fountain of this proud and cruel blood-thirsty Faction:) therefore to keep and encrease this power in the City, they knew Jeroboams Calf-policy in altering Religion, and the Priesthood, would be necessary for their plot of a new Government: to which purpose they at first invented these tricks and formalities of Justice against the Clergy, till having got the power, their Sword should make good the Sequestring and Removal of those (especially in London) who were not like to Apostatize from Religion and Loyalty, in ceasing to preach to the people to fear God and the King, according to the Scriptures; hereby making way to plant in their own Creatures, and Ministers to deifie the Calves of their own setting up; this made the Faction in the House of Commons never to trans∣mit any Bills against any particular accused Clergy-man to the House of Peers (where indeed lay judiciary power) to a Legal hearing; but knowing well such foggy charges would soon vanish at the face of Justice, these evil spirits kept on their course of casting mists before the peoples eyes, to make them think that the lights of the Church burned so dimme, that it was necessary to snuff them, or quite put them out: This is the true reason of their cruelty towards the London-Clergy, and indeed to the whole Clergy of England; and this wicked policy drew on this sad story following.
A General Bill of the Mortality of the Clergy of London: or, a Brief Martyrology and Catalogue of the Learned, Grave, Religious, and Pain∣ful Ministers of the City of London, who have been Imprisoned, Plun∣dered, barbarously used, and deprived of all Livelihood for themselves and their Families in these last years, for their constancy in the Pro∣testant Religion establisht in this Kingdom, and their Loyalty to their Soveraign. THe Cathedral Church of Saint Pauls, the Dean, Residentiaries, and other Members of that Church, sequestered, plundered, and turned out. Alhallows Woodstreet, Dr. Wats, seque∣stred, plundred; his Wife and Children turned out of doors, himself forced to fly. Alhallows Barkin, Dr. Lafield pursuivan∣ted, imprisoned in Ely-house, and the ships, sequestred, and plundred, after∣wards forced to fly. Alhallows Breadstreet. Alhallows Great. Alhallows Hony-lane. Alhallows Less. Alhallows Lumbardstreet, Mr. Weston sequestered. Alhallows Staining. Alhallows the Wall. Alphage, Dr. Halsie shamefully abused, his Cap pulled off, to see if he were not a sha∣ven Priest; voted out, and dead with grief. Andrew Hubbard, Dr. Chambers seque∣stered. Andrew Undershaft; 1. Mr. Mason through vexation forced to resigne. 2. Mr. Prichard after that sequestered. Andrew Wardrobe, Dr. Isaacson seque∣stered. Anne Aldersgate, Dr. Clewet sequestered. Anne Black-friars. Antholins Parish. Austins Parish, Mr. Udal sequestred, his Bed∣rid Wife turned out of doors and left in the streets. Bartholmew Exchange, Dr. Grant se∣questered. Bennet Fynck, Mr. Warfield sequestered. Bennet Grace-Church, Mr. Quelch se∣questered. Bennet Pauls-wharfe, Mr. Adams seque∣stered. Bennet Sheerhog, Mr. Morgan dead with grief. Botolph Billingsgate, Mr. King sequester∣ed and forced to fly. Christ-Church, Mr.  turned out, and dead. Christophers, Mr. Hanslowe forced to re∣signe. Clement East-cheap, Mr. Stone shame∣fully abused, sequestred, sent Prisoner to Plymouth, and plundered. Dionys Back-Church, Mr. Humes seque∣stered, and abused. Dunstans East, Dr. Childerley reviled, a∣bused, and dead. Edmonds Lumberstreet, Mr. Paget mo∣lested, silenced, and dead. Ethelborough, Mr. Clark sequestered, im∣prisoned. Faiths, Dr. Browne sequestered, and dead. Fosters, Mr. Batty sequestered, plundered, forced to fly, and dead. Gabriel Fench-Church, Mr. Cooke se∣questered. Geo. Botolf-l.Dr. Stiles forct to resign. Greg. by St. P.Dr. Stiles forct to resign. Hellens, Mr. Miller turned out, and dead. James Dukes place, Mr.  sequestered. James Garlick-hythe, 1. Mr. Freeman plundered, and sequestered. 2. Mr. An∣thony his Curate turned out. John Baptist, Mr. Weemsly sequestered. John Evangelist. John Zachary, Mr. Edlyn sequestered, forced to fly, and plundered. Katherine Coleman. 1. Dr. Hill forced to resigne. 2. Mr. Kibbuts sequestered. Katherine Cree-church, Mr. Rush turned out. Laurence Jury, Mr. Crane sequestered. Laurence Pountney. Leonard Eastcheap, Mr. Calfe forced to give up to Mr. Roborow, Scribe to the Assembly. Leonard Foster-lane, Mr. Ward forced to fly, plundered, sequestered, and dead for want of necessaries. Margaret Lothbury, Mr. Tabor plunder∣ed, imprisoned in the Kings-Bench; his
Wife and Children turned out of doors at midnight, and he sequestered. Margaret Moses. Margaret New Fishstreet, Mr. Pory for∣ced to fly, plundered, and sequestered. Margaret Pattons, Mr. Meggs plundered, imprisoned in Ely-house, and seque∣stered. Mary Abchurch, Mr. Stone plundered, sent Prisoner by sea to Plymouth, and sequestered. Mary Aldermanbury. Mary Aldermary, Mr. Browne forced to forsake it. Mary le Bow, Mr. Leech sequestered, and dead with grief. Mary Bothaw, Mr. Proctour forced to fly, and sequestered. Mary Cole-church. Mary-Hill, 1. Dr. Baker sequestred, pur∣suivanted, and imprisoned. 2. Mr. Woodcock turned out, and forced to fly. Mary Mounthaw, Mr. Thrall sequestered, and shamefully abused. Mary Somerset, Mr. Cooke sequestered. Mary Stainings. Mary Woolchurch, Mr. Tireman forct to forsake it. Mary Woolnoth, Mr. Shute molested, and vext to death, and denied a Fune∣ral-sermon to be preached by Dr. Holds∣worth, as he desired. Martins Ironmonger-lane, Mr. Sparke sequestered and plundered. Martins Ludgate, Dr. Jermin sequestered. Martins Orgars, Dr. Walton assaulted, sequestered, plundered, forced to fly. Mr. Mosse, his Curate, turned out. Martins Outwitch, Dr. Pierce sequestered, and dead. Martins Vintry, Dr. Rives, sequestered, plundered, and forced to fly. Matthew Friday-street, Mr. Chestlin vi∣olently assaulted in his house; impriso∣ned in the Compter, thence sent to Col chester-Goale in Essex, sequestered and plundered. Maudlins Milkstreet, Mr. Jones seque∣stered. Maudlins Old-fishstreet, Dr. Griffith se∣questered, plundered, imprisoned in New∣gate; when being let out, he was for∣ced to fly; and since imprisoned again in Peter-house. Michael Bassishaw, Dr. Gifford sequestered. Michael Cornhil, 1. Dr. Brough seque∣stered, plundered, Wife and Children turned out of doors, his Wife dead with grief. 2. Mr. Weld his Curate assaulted, beaten in the Church, and turned out. Michael Crooked-lane. Michael Queenhithe, Mr. Hill sequester∣ed. Michael Querne, Mr. Launce sequestered. Michael Royal, Mr. Proctour sequestered, and forced to fly. Michael Woodstreet. Mildred Breadstreet, Mr. Bradshaw se∣questered. Mildred Poultry, Mr. Maden sequestered, and gone beyond-sea. Nicholas Acons, Mr. Bennet sequestered. Nicholas Cole-abby, Mr. Chibbald se∣questered. Nicholas Olaves, Dr. Cheshire molested, and forced to resigne. Olaves Hart-street, Mr. Haines seque∣stered. Olaves Jewry, Mr. Tuke sequestered, plun∣dered, and imprisoned. Olaves Silverstreet, Dr. Boosie abused, and dead with grief. Pancras Soper-lane, Mr. Eccop sequester∣ed, plundered, forced to fly; Wife and Children turned out of doors. Peters Cheap, Mr. Vochier sequestered, and dead with grief. Peters Cornhil, Dr. Fairfax sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House and the Ships; his Wife and Children tur∣ned out of doors. Peters Pauls-wharf, Mr. Marbury seque∣stered. Peters Poor, Dr. Holdsworth sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House, then in the Tower. Stephens Colemanstreet. Stephens Walbrook, Dr. Howel through vexation forced to forsake it, sequestered of all, and fled. Divers since turned out. Swithings, Mr. Owen sequestered. Thomas Apostle, Mr. Cooper sequestered, plundered, sent prisoner to Leeds-Castle in Kent, dead with grief. Trinity Parish, Mr. Harrison. In the 97 Parishes within the Walls, besides St. Pauls, Outed 85. Dead 16.
Parishes without the Walls. ANdrew Holborn, Dr. Hacket seque∣stred. Bartholmews Great, Dr. Westfield abused in the Streets, sequestred, forced to fly, and dead. Bartholomew Less. Brides Parish, Mr. Palmer sequestred. Bridwel Precinct, Mr. Brown turned out. Botolph Aldersgate, Mr. Booth sequestred and plundred. Botolph Algate, Dr. Swadlin sequestred, plundred, imprisoned at Gresham-Col∣ledge, and Newgate; his Wife and Children turned out of doors. Botolph Bishops-gate, Mr. Rogers se∣questred. Dunstans West, Dr. Marsh sequestred, and dead in remote parts. George Southwark, Mr. Rogers sequestred. Giles Cripplegate, 1. Dr. Fuller seque∣stred, plundred, imprisoned at Ely-house. 2. Mr. Hutton his Curate assaulted in the Church, and imprisoned. Olaves Southwark, Dr. Turner sequestred, plundred, fetcht up Prisoner with a Troop of Souldiers, and after forced to fly. Saviours Southwark. Sepulchres Parish, Mr. Pigot the Lectu∣rer turned out. Thomas Southwark, Mr. Spencer seque∣stred, and imprisoned. Trinity Minories. In the 16 Parishes without the Walls, Outed 14. Dead 1. In the 10 Out-Parishes. CLement Danes, Dr. Dukeson seque∣stred, plundred, and forced to fly. Covent Garden, Mr. Hall sequestred, and forced to fly. Giles in the Fields, Dr. Heywood seque∣stred, imprisoned in the Compter, Ely∣house, and the Ships, forced to fly, his Wife and Children turned out of doors. James Clarkenwel. Katherine Tower. Leonard Shoreditch, Mr. Squire seque∣stred, imprisoned in Gresham-Colledge, Newgate, and the King-bench, his Wife and Children plundred, and tur∣ned out of doors. Martins in the Fields, Dr. Bray seque∣stred, imprisoned, plundred, forced to fly, and dead in remote parts. Mary Whitechappel, Dr. Johnson seque∣stred. Magdalen Bermondsey, D. Paske sequestred. Savoy, 1. Dr. Balcanquel sequestred, plun∣dred, forced to fly, and dead in remote parts. 2. Mr. Fuller forced to fly. In the 10 Out-parishes, Outed 9. Dead 2. In the Adjacent Towns. THe Dean, and all the Prebends of the Abbey-church Westminster, (but on∣ly Mr. Lambert Osbaston) sequester∣ed. Margarets Westminster, Dr. Wimberly sequestred. Lambeth, Dr. Featly sequestred, plundred, imprisoned, and dead a Prisoner. Newington, Mr. Heath sequestred. Hackney, Mr. Moore sequestred. Reddriffe. Islington, divers Ministers turned out. Stepney, Dr. Stampe sequestred, plundred, and forced to fly. In the adjacent Towns, besides those of the Abbey-Church, and Islington, Outed 7. dead 1. The Total of the Ministers of London within the Bills of Mortality, (be∣sides Pauls and Westminster) turned out of their Livings by Sequestra∣tion, and otherwise. 115. Whereof Doctors in Divinity, above—40. And the most of them plundered of their Goods, and their Wives and Chil∣dren turned out of doors.
Imprisoned in London, and in the Sips, and in the several Goals and Castles in the Countrey. 20. Fled to prevent Imprisonment,—25. Dead in remote parts, and in Prisons, and with grief,—22. About 40 Churches vold, having no constant Minister in them. Ʋsque quo, Domine? Rev. 6. 10. CHAP. VII. Of Parliamentary changes in Religion. Of the Policy and ways for the destruction of Religion by this Parliament, wrought by the long conspi∣racy and combination of the Puritans of England, here laid open. BUt what safety can be to England, when Lay-Parliaments shall presume to med∣dle in Religion; hanging Reformation of Religion as a Curtain to the Parliament-windows, making it the Stalking-horse to their temporal ends and by respects, the ruines of Three Kingdoms in our days, can sufficiently witness; changes of Religion being ever the Laities punishment, as well as the Clergies affliction; as might be proved by the English story, ever since Parliaments have been but instrumental or active thereunto. Henry the 8th begat the policy, to whose Lust and Tyranny how soon did the Parliament turn Pander? covering many a foul fact under the fair face of Reformation; burning Papist and Prote∣stant both at one Stake, by Bill in Parliament without any Tryal. Edward the 6th (of Nine years old) his Parliaments twice altered Religion, according to the two Grandees Sommerset and Dudley.R. Barns. T. Gerrard. S. Jeroni∣mus. In the first of Queen Mary the Parliament pu∣nished the same Religion by Fire, which themselves had so lately established. Upon coming in of Queen Elizabeth the Parliament changed Religion again; and, within few years, made it death for a Priest to reconcile any man to that Religion; which Parliaments had so zealously restored, that in the space of twelve years, four changes of Religion were made by Parliaments in Englond, more than ever were made by any Christians throughout the world in 1500 years before. But what policy in the Laity drew on those contrary changes, and what miseries this Nation felt thereby, may afford more truth, than these times can bear, and therefore is omitted. Yet in all these Parliaments was the stamp of just, that is, Royal Authority, (though how justly executed I say not) and therefore ought to be obeyed active or passive; nor in any of these Parliaments (or ever since, till this Parliament) were the Clergy (one of the three Estates of the Realm, the best conservators of Religion) quite excluded with convo∣cations of the Clergy, though legally chosen by the Kings Writ, (not forced up out of a Renegado house-creeping Ministry by Lay-votes) who had the judi∣ciary cognizance of matters of Doctrines, as one hath observed in a discourse to answer the Popish Slander cast upon our Religion, that it is a meer Parlia∣mentary Religion: Though it cannot be denied but that fury against the present Clergy, because they would not comply with the prevailing party, to extol the present Change, and in later Parliaments, the Puritan-policy having influence e∣ven upon Court-counsels, have too much bound up the power of the Keys, and left the Clergy little liberty, but to grant Subsidies: But never did the Laity in Parliaments grasp at the power of the Keys, till the Puritans getting strength in the House of the Commons, nibled at the Church-power, under the name of a Lay-Committee for Religion, which King James connived at, little thinking whereto that ill example would grow in his Son's days, hanging St. Peters Keys at Lay-mens girdles, thereby (as we now see) locking up the Priests lips, and shut∣ting up Church-doors to the sequestring of Almighty God from his holy Ha∣bitations; and by an Army of Subjects in rebellion against their King, taking away the daily Sacrifice out of the Temple, for the Reformation of Religion, the old pretence to colour politick designes, thereby to take away the shame of what∣ever
cruelty shall be acted to advance the same; never remembring that of St. Paul, We must not do evil that good may come of it. What fit Judges of Religion Parliaments have been, and are like to be, let us hear again Mr. Rogers, that fa∣mous Protestant Martyr, when it was objected to him that he ought to be a Ca∣tholick, because the Parliament had established the Popish Religion: Of what force (saith he) are Parliaments, which establish contrary Decrees, condemning that for evil, which before they had established as good? and the Parliaments of later times have been ruled by the fancy of a few. Henry the 8th established what he pleased by Parliaments. In Edward the 6th, the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland bore all the stroke, and did not all things sincerely. And for the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, what by her politick moulding of the Parliament, and her infinite popularity, and her Armies, who durst Vote against her pleasure? Besides (as one observeth) her Parliaments consisting of grave men did do the Queens work, and in that, the Kingdomes business; no thoughts of opposing Prerogative under pretence of Property, or distinguishing between the service of the Crown, and of the Commonwealth, as two divers (yea con∣trary) things, till the Fanaticks began to make Parliaments as Cock-pits, and pitched fields for fighting against the King and the Church, under the notion of standing up for the Subjects Liberty; which made King James say that he could never find any joy in his Parliaments, calling them in scorn and anger, Five hundred Kings: And the wise Earl of Arundel (lately deceased) then prophesied, that Posterity would have cause to curse those Fanaticks in former Parliaments, who upon such undutifulness caused their breach;of which, as also of the Parliaments of King Charles, Sir Robert Naunton hath observed, That half a dozen of popular dis∣contented persons, such as (with the fellow that burned the Temple of Diana) would be talked of, have swayed all the Parliaments, as Lord Say, Mr. Pym, Ham∣bden, Stroud, and other Parliament-drivers, as the Army Declarations stiled the XI. Presbyterian Impeached Members, who have lived to sit in this Parliament, to see the flames of their own kindling almost consume the Church, and these three King∣doms, by their reviving Nadab and Abihu's strange Fire, by their presumption in medling with matters of the Church, to the subversion of Religion, under pre∣tence of Reformation; which how politickly wrought by the long combination of an hypocritical Faction, we come now to speak of, more particularly. The former Examples of alteration of Religion, and of compassing secular ends and designes, by pretence of Reforming Religion, having beaten out a ready way for any change; no sooner began the Fanatical Faction to appear, and by their furious pretence of Loyalty, and hatred of Popery, under Queen Elizabeths policy, (to ballance the Popish party, then not weakned enough in the Kingdom for her security)Martin Mar-pre∣late. suffered to take head, but presently they began to Libel the Bishops and the Church of England, and to poison the people in most corners of the Land, but chiefly in London, with Geneva Doctrines, and Pamphlets. Admoni∣tion to Par∣liament, an∣swered by Dr. Whit∣gift. Vorax written by Stub: a Lawyer, Brother-in-law to T. Cart∣wright. Suppli∣cations are made to the Queen, and to the Privy-Council, but especially to the Parliament; Petions pretended to be subscribed by 100000 hands put up against Bishops. Remonstrances and Admonitions are directed to the Parliament to advance the Presbytery, as the holy Discipline; but finding little countenance to such a phrensie, they fell into such Libelling and Menacing the Queen, the Coun∣cil, and the Parliament, that in their heat the fire of Sedition began to appear; so that to quench it in the spark, the Queen made severe Laws against them, and by hanging Penry, condemned with Ʋdall and Barow, (who were pardoned) brake the neck of their Plots, and turned their brags into preaching of preces & lachrymae, as the onely arms for Christian Subjects, and into Doctrines of hum∣ble obedience and patience, till indeed they could pack an House of Commons for their purpose, as some Dr. Chap. to Field. 1587. Everights horse, whom they had bor∣rowed for Faux. Pamphlets of those days advised the Brethren; their party in Parliament being then inconsiderable, or at least not able to carry on their work by their own strength: and probably those Laws had for ever purged this Kingdom of this new plague, had not an old sore unexpectedly broke out in the Gunpowder Treason, so apparently plotted by Papists, (though the A∣ctors intended to have laid the Saddle on the Fanatical Horse; but little sooner
than they deserved, as we now see) that to permit the other, was counted the best way to cure this; and as it sever hapneth, the common hatred of any Faction, gives great advantage to its contrary: So now the Fanaticks, full glad of such an occasion, began busily to revive their suspended hopes of their Re∣formation, strengthned also by their united brethren of Scotland, as that in all Parliaments since, through King James's too much love of peace, and Archbishop Abbots affected popularity, upon some Court-disfavour, and by other Courtiers emulation, by the subtelty and hypocrisie of the Faction; they have gained ground, till they have driven the Church and the King out of Three Kingdoms, by the Engine and name of Parliament, to cover their Fana∣tical Combination and Conspiracy, which they have been so long contriving, to raise to its height by these means following: By incorporating themselves into a Church as distinct from the Church of England, as the Papists have been; they have set up an upstart Ministery of Lecturers; they made publick collections of Monies for their silenced Ministers, under pretence of poor Ministers; they have had their Feoffees intrusted with great sums of Monies, raised among themselves for furtherance of their designs; witness the plot of buying out of Impropriati∣ons, to plant in men of their own Tribe; to whom St. Antholins in London was the Nursery: they had their mutual intelligence throughout the whole King∣dom, and ingrossed almost all the inland Trade to men of their Faction; they took up a canting language to themselves, which they called the Language of Ca∣naan, abusing phrase of Scripture, thereby to understand one another, to colour their seditious practises; they had their Emissaries (whereof simple Robin the Bible-Carrier was one) or Scouts to give notice where men of their Tribe preach∣ed; so that not any one of their Ministers could come to London from the farthest parts of England, but found entertainment in the City; for whose Randevouz a Widow (whom Alderman Pennington Marryed) kept an Ordinary in White-Friars, where many of them lodged in Doctor Prestons days; and when any of these preached in any place in London, or thereabouts, they wanted not a crowd of followers. And as these were busie in the Church, so their close Committe-Ma∣sters in those days were not idle in the State; much correspondency held with the Brethren of Scotland; and before any Wars began in either Nation, Mr. Ham∣den went yearly into Scotland, as I have heard some of his Neighbours in Buck∣inghamshire say; they had their Counsel Tables, sitting in several parts of the King∣dom, [Knightly's House in Northamptonshire, Lord Sayes House, wherein was a room and passage, which his servants were prohibited to come near, where great noises and talkings have been heard, to the admiration of some who lived in the House, yet could never discern their Lords Companions] that in King James's days a great Mistriss of the Faction (who afterwards changed her House to come to Black-Fryars to live under the Gospel, as they called their Lecturing Parishes, whose House was much frequented by Lord Say, and the Earl of War∣wick, Mr. Pym, &c.) could say, That their party was then strong enough to pull the Kings Crown from his head, but the Gospel would not suffer them; but not long af∣ter the Gospel was put into a posture of War, when so many Military yards in London, Westminster, and Southwarke, and other places, about sixteen years since grew into much request, [whither Lord Brooke much resorted, whom I have seen entertained there with whole Vollies of Muskets, that Fanatical Goliah armed cap à pe, yet shot in the eye, which himself bragg'd should see the Millenary fools Para∣dise begin in his life-time] and all Sectaries in London on a suddain entred them∣selves, and drew on others to be listed in those Artillery-Gardens, to exercise feates of Arms (for pastime, as some were drawn in) against a time of need, was the Reason given by some Brethren of those days, which it should seem onely them∣selves foresaw better than other men; and as their designes ripened, Captain For∣ster, a Vintner behind the Exchange, was employed by the City-Faction, to send over sea for Skippon, a confiding Brother to the Cause, to be Captain of the Lon∣don Artillery Garden (who was since this Parliament made Major General of the City Rebels) flamming the rest of the Londoners, that a Stranger was sent for, to prevent emulation among the City-Captains, upon an election; a fair preparato∣ry
for the invasion of the Scots, to force the King to call a Parliament, which all men were made so much to long for, because the Faction had plotted to pack it for their designs. This made the Earl of Warwick write from York, to his Friends in Essex, about the Election of Knights and Burgesses for this Parliament, al∣ledging, That the Game was well begun; Mr. Pym rode a Circuit into divers Coun∣ties, to promote Elections of men of the Faction; and Sectaries went from place to place, to cry down the nomination of any who belonged to the Kings Service, and to give Votes for men of the new Religion, and notorious opposers of the King, or the Clergy; whose names the Faction had privately before listed, whereby divers Citizers and Lawyers were chosen for Burgesses in Parliament, by those Incorporations which they never had any relation to, nor knowledge of, but by some rebellious opposing Moses and Aaaron, the King or the Priest; witness Mr. Bagshaw, and Mr. White, two Lawyers chosen for Southwarke, the one a Feoffee∣man, censured in the Star-Chamber; the other, a Seditious Law-Reader against Bishops not long before; like the four Burgesses of London, chosen upon four such grounds, Alderman Soame for his imprisonment in denying of Ship-money; Vas∣sall for his obstinacy against Customs; Craddock for the Cause of New-England; Alderman Pennington for his known zeal by his keeping a fasting Sabboth through∣out his Shrivalty. Lecturers also came thrusting into Elections of the Clergy (wherein they had nothing to do, as having not whence to pay Subsidies) for men into the Convocation, with whom came some Citizens to Christ-Church in London, to hear how the Plot took in the Election; but having no hopes to pack up a Convocation, they made a Rendevouz of many Scandalous and Schismatical Lecturers, and such as Doctor Burgesse, whom guilt made Parliament-Converts and Vassals, at Mr. Calamies House in Aldermanbury, (till strengthned in∣to a new Assembly at Westminster) as a Counter Convocation, or Conventicle, from whence the Faction in Parliament received informations concerning Religi∣on, and hereby did they communicate their intelligence and designs, with directi∣ons how these their Ministers might by degrees prepare the people for their work; that I have heard their Auditors say, that by the Sundays Sermon, or a Lecture, they could learn, not onely what was done the week before, but also what was to be done in Parliament the week following; besides the information which their Pulpits gave the people; for coming in tumults to the House for Justice, from a Juncto of these Ministers came that insolent order of directions, thrown into Church-wardens houses by unknown hands, how to take the first Protestation; from one of these Clubs came the Snectymnuan Libels, which got the Authors round sums of Money to make their Religion shine in the world, er tull. adversus Marcion. lib. 4.ut ipse MarcionT Evangelico aliquando credidit, cum pecuniam in primo calore fidei contulit: Reformers in Luthers time did not so, if Scoperus the Emperors Secretary said true at a Diet at Ausburgh. History of the Coun∣sel of Trent. Nor may we forget how the Faction in London packed up a new Common-Councel, removing ancient grave men, to foist in young and mean fel∣lows, but zealous for the Cause; not an Office in the City, though chargeable and troublesome; yet how ambitious were the Faction of those places, even to a Constableship? And for a Old Ju∣ry. Churchwardenship I have known motions made at the Kings-Bench-Bar, for a prohibition of a legal and usual choice, when the Faction found themselves not strong enough in Votes in their Parish: and above a year before any face of War appeared, or any Vote to raise Arms was heard of, it's well known scarce a Sectary in London but had stored himself with Arms, to furnish each Boy in his house; and many Porters loaded with Muskets, have been seen carried in the Evenings, into the Houses of men notoriously disaffected in Religion, who conveyed Arms and Traiterous Libels, and Observations, printed at a publick charge, to their Countrey Chapmen; nor durst the Lord Mayor make inquisition, for fear of being accounted an Enemy to the peace of the Kingdom, then full of fears of Papists trained under ground, and other (God knoweth what) Enemies; and before the bloody Votes to kill and slay, they sent Scouts in∣to all parts of the Kingdom, to sound the people how they stood affected to be∣gin a War; one Brumidge a Brasier in Gracious-street in London, and a Cook his Neighbour, were sent into Gloucestershire and Worcestershire, to muster their Forces, discovering how each Village stood affected or disaffected; Members also of the Faction came to the Elders of the Dutch Church in London, to know of the State
and Government of their Church, telling them that they would follow their pattern, though some of those Elders counselled them, not to pull down their House, till they knew where else to lye dry; adding also, that the English people were not like the Dutch, nor would ever endure their Government. These, and many other practices in the like kind, may shew the world, what a free Parliament this was from the beginning, and how God had infatuated this Nation, that they would not see this jugling, nor believe the Clergy, who fore∣told the miseries this Faction would bring to this Church and State; but to suf∣fer a small number (the little flock of Christ, they were wont to call themselves) to ride the whole Kingdom to destruction: for notwithstanding all this shuffling and packing, when this Parliament first met, the Fanaricks for number made not above the third part of the House of Commons; and I am confident, that in the City their Faction was not a fifth part, and those of the younger and meaner sort, but infinitely busie at an Election of a Common-Councel-man in Langborne-Ward, wherein are above three hundred Housholders (and from such meetings none of the Faction would be absent) yet could they not make up sixty in all that Ward: Some years after, above 14000 House-keepers in London, were listed in the design of Tompkins and Challoner, though they wanted ways to communicate their strength one to another. And therefore to gain the Vote of Parliament to themselves, they tryed the Fox skin to cover for a while their Lyons claw, seeking pretences plau∣sible to the Patriotical party also, to purge the House of Commons (as the phrase was) of all undue Elections upon Court-Letters, or of men engaged in the late Monopolies; whereby they wormed out of the House those whom they suspected of Loyalty, but kept in old Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Henry Mildmay, and others (greater Monopolists) whom they knew to be of their Faction; and to supply those vacancies, Mr. Pyms, or Mr. Speakers under-hand Letters, were enough to make Mr. Pyms Son, scarce out of his Nonage, be chosen for a Parliament-man: Kings De∣claration, 12 Aug. but if it chanced that such private Letters miscarried in their desires, the new elected Members have been sounded how they stood affected to Bishops, and so accordingly never admitted, or presently received. But this trick made the Facti∣on not yet absolute Masters of the Vote in the House of Commons; which put their Members to wonderful pains and trouble, by continual attendance, sitting in the House till midnight to watch to carry a Vote, when other Members wearied out, were departed the House, that so they might compass by diligence, what they could not obtain by their numbers of their persons: [The first Remonstrance of the House of Commons against the King, voted in the House at midnight,] this made divers of them let out their Houses in their Countries, (which upon the Act of continuance they afterwards sold) and take (sequestred) houses in London and Westminster, that they might be near their work, having their Emissa∣ries constantly attending the door of the House of Commons, to call in Members of this Faction to vote what they pleased, to advance their design, upon notice of a small appearance in the House; but if any appointed business caused a fuller House, their daily sitting had made them expert in discerning the face of the House, to know their own strength, how the Vote would be at that time; the Faction having made Mr. Speaker (a Lawyer) sure their own [by a Fee of 6000 l. voted to him, and made Master of the Rolls] would either by some pretended Forreign Letters, made by themselves in London, or by some new discovery of a Plot against the Parliament, or else by long Speech-makings, defer the business of the day, till the absence of the rest of the Members; some following their plea∣sures, others their private necessary affairs, little dreaming of making a Trade by sitting in Parliaments, as in their Shops or Counting-houses (whereas Parlia∣ments like Physick purge, if seldom used, but destroy, when continued as food) should make way for this vigilant Faction to carry the Vote, by the Major part present; having embodied themselves in the Parliament and Kingdom for their work, and especially in London, by daily Tavern-clubs in each Ward, commu∣nicating intelligence to and from their Table-Juncto's, or Sub-Committees sit∣ting in divers private houses in London,[Brownes house a Grocer neer Cheapside cross; also a Drapers house in Watling-street; as now the Saracens head in Friday-street, &c.] to prepare Results of each days passages in the City, to report to Mr. Pym and his close Committee; when they came from
the Parliament to be feasted at night in confiding Citizens houses; amongst whom Mr. Pym was so idolized, that mine eyes saw a Gentleman violently assaulted in the streets, and dragged to the Poultry-Compter, as a Sanctuary against the Tu∣mults, onely for speaking a neglectful word of this Mr. Pym; a forerunner of that fu∣rious rising in Arms of the whole City to defend Mr. Pym and the five Members from a legal. Tryal for High-Treason, of which the King had impeached them. By these and many other advantages, it's easie to conceive how a combined Faction may o∣vercome a far greater number, when single and hood-wink'd from perceiving plots of destroying Religion and the King, by those who by Votes, and Declarations, and Protestations, pretended to make the King a glorious King; and counted it a great scandal to them, that it should be reported they intended to take away the Liturgy, which they desired onely in some things should be reformed, employing some Bishops and others of the Clergy, to consider of what things might be altered for satisfying tender Consciences, that many of the Clergy also, as well as other Subjects well-willers to the King, were so possessed, that though they saw Arms raised against the King, and all his Forts, Ships, and Revenues seized on in defiance of his Majesty, yet would they not believe that the Parliament intended the King any hurt or evil at all; yea, divers were not dispossessed of this fond credulity, till the Votes of imprisoning and of no further addressing to the King were published: And now when they can nei∣ther help themselves, nor their King, cry out upon Hypocrites, and say, they will ne∣ver believe Parliaments any more; though it's not safe for them to say so, or what∣ere more they think, such is now the liberty of the Subject; and indeed so willing were the major part of the House of Commons to be lulled asleep into a pleasing dream of Reformation, by clipping the wings of Prerogative, and paring the Bishops nails, and taking down the pride of the Clergy (as the Fanatick buzzed pretences were) to which all parties were marvelously ready (like the Horse in the Fable, yielding his back to the Saddle to be rid of the Deer, that he might have all the pa∣sture) and by extolling the honour and authority of that House, whereof themselves were also Members, till the Faction by planting in their Instruments for Chair-men of Committees, and into all places of action, so rid the more moderate party of the House beyond their own stay; who now grown weary, and feeling the Spur in their own sides, began too late to take heed, and to think to shake off their hot-Spur-riders; but indeed threw themselves out of their so-longed-for Parliament: for upon any Speech or Motion contrary to the sence of the Faction, the parties moving were cal∣led presently to the Bar, or committed to the Tower, or expelled the House; and o∣thers were terrified hereby, or by the Tumults out of the City, led up by Dr. Burges and Capt. Ven to the Parliament-doors, to see that the Godly Party (for so their Fa∣ction was called) in the House might not be out-voted. [Dr. Burges said at the Parliament-doors, of the Multitudes and Tumults of the City-Rabble, These are my Band-dogs; I can set them on, and I can take them off again. Oh brave Cornelius!] That by these means above two hundred shortly after were forced out of the House, to leave the Faction absolute Masters of the Vote in the House of Commons, and House of Peers also; little thinking that the Clergies persecution (which themselves sate so long winking at) would prove their own just punishment, by suffring a Fa∣ction to grow so powerful, without so much as protesting against their injustice and oppression. But rather assisting the Faction, to imprison in the Tower twelve Bishops upon a false charge of High-Treason, onely because they did their duty, to their eternal ho∣nour, like Christian Bishops, and lovers of their Countries welfare, in solemnly pro∣testing (as pares Regni) against such violence and wickedness, though with apparent hazard of their persons and Estates. Nay, when these driven Members of Lords and Commons again assembled at Oxford by the Kings Proclamation (upon the se∣cond Invasion of the Scots) for number in both Houses exceeding those who were left at Westminster (almost 200 Commons before they had sitten five weeks) besides the Royal presence of the King, very probably might have recovered this Kingdom by calling themselves a Parliament, as the eyes of the Kingdom upon them did expect, (which drew over some Members from Westminster, and more would have followed to have joyned with them in Parliament) and as in all reason they might have, as well as they did demand and take upon them all priviledges of Parliament. But the Fa∣natick spirit (brought thither in Mr. Bagshawes Lawyers pouch, or maintained there
before at the Brethrens charge) was busie there also in fomenting fears and jealousies, that they must not set the King a precedent to break Laws, vid. the forced Act of con∣tinuance of this Parliament in it self void, for fear they should make the King too great: and such courses they took in imitation of the Faction at Westminster, that they complained to the King of a Divine who in a Sermon historicè related the Story of Charles Martel his inventing Rebellion, Sacriledge, and Parliaments; and Secre∣tary Windebank, lately come from France to the King, was forced suddenly to return into France, to prevent the odium which might have fallen on the King by protecting him whom they also intended to have questioned; that well might his Majesty call them his Oxford Mungrel-Parliament Mungrel-Parliament, whose negligence and wilful blindness hath twice un∣done the Kingdom. But to return to the Members at Westminster, whom we left Con∣querors of the Vote in the House of Commons, whose Agents were set on work throughout the Kingdom (especially in London) to muster up their Forces, without which they could neither long keep the Vote so gotten, nor could make their Votes of any power or authority (the House of Commons being of it self no Court of Ju∣dicature, having no power to give an Oath, nor to imprison any of the Kings Sub∣jects, except their own Members; but to consult and transmit their Proposals to the House of Peers, to whose joynt Results the Kings Royal Signature puts life and makes it Law, or an Act of Parliament.) The next work therefore (to which success height∣ned them) was to try their strength in the House of Peers, for concurrence to their designes; to which Lord Say had long tutored his Pulpit-Lords, and other discon∣tented popular Lords, were hoped easily to be drawn, seeing the people so extol the proceedings of this Faction in the House of Commons, though they intended to go on with their work without the Lords concurrence, if they could not have brought them to their Bow, as indeed they have made no other use of the House of Peers, than to cover and countenance the Fanatical practices with the Name and Title of both Houses of Parliament, and of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, setting the Lords in the first place, like Cyphers in Arithmetick, to advance the following numbers: for what meant the new phrase in Pulpits and Pamphlets, of the House of Gods, and of the Worthies of the Land, but onely the House of Commons? and what more frequently buzzed into peoples heads, than that the Lords sate but for them∣selves; the Commons sate for the good of all the people, and were therefore more to be regarded and maintained? But for a formality and shew of Legal proceedings in a Parliamentary way, Mr. Pym is sent into the City to make Speeches against Obstru∣ctions in the Body politick, that Reformation could not go on till they were remo∣ved; which soon raised the City-Tumults to petition the Parliament, that the Bi∣shops and Popish Lords might be thrown out of the House of Peers, as the onely hin∣derers of Reformation of Religion, thereby indeed to lessen the numbers of Votes likeliest to oppose the Fanatick Faction. These Tumults daily increasing (upon the countenance they found from the Parliament, where they were bid to come like men, that is, with Swords) by the Rabble of Porters and Apprentises daily sent by their Masters, but chiefly by their Mistresses, with Clubs and Swords, to cry for Reforma∣tion at the Parliament-doors: Jan. 1641. The Faction in London having also combined to shut up their Shops for many days together, and perswaded others to do the like, upon some pretended fears; but the truth was, to make the poor people in and about the City a pretence to mutiny for want of work, so heightned the Faction in the House of Commons, that they sent up Mr. Hollis to the House of Peers to demand the Names of the dissenting Lords, that so they might expose them to the peoples fury (as they posted the dissenting Members of the House of Commons in the case of the Earl of Strafford.) The Ring-leaders still to the Rout, were Dr. Burges, the onely scandal to his profession in all London, (as his Parishioners of Watford can tell, and the Spiritual Courts of London-Diocess also;) Capt. Ven, who sent Tickets by Porters and Emis∣saries to raise these Myrmidons; and Sir Richard Wiseman, who with this confused Army assaulting the Bishop of Lincoln's house in Westminster, had his brains dashed out with a stone from the wall, and was buried at the collected charges among the Apprentises. The House of Peers thus daily assaulted without, and wanting no false Brethren within, was not like to hold out any long Siege, the very doors, and Lobby, and entries, being so crowded with the Tumults, that none can pass in or out, with∣out a kind of leave from the Assailants; who upon the word given of the approach of any popish or disaffected Lord (as the phrase was) would in derision cry out Rome!
Rome! but when any whom they accounted well-affected was to pass by, they would cry, Make way! Make way! (a free Parliament all this while) insomuch, that some Lords had their Cloaks torn from their backs at the Parliament-doors: Nor could the Bishops (one of the three Estates in Parliament) or Popish Lords, as they called them, come to the House without apparent hazard of their persons: which made the Bishops (as Pares Regni) solemnly to protest against all Acts done in their absence, till the Parliament should be restored to liberty (as Mr. Speaker hath lately done; and the Members who lately fled to the Army, upon their return have nullified all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, made since their forced absence, by like City-Tumults in the year 1647.) Hereupon the faction in the House of Commons furiously impeach the protesting Bishops of High-Treason, and twelve Bishops were at once committed to the Tower, to gag their Mouths that they might be easilier robbed of their Votes and Purses, as afterwards they were, the Treason not yet proved. The Bishops and Popish Lords thus thrown out of the Parliament, and the rest of the Royal Nobility terrified, were forced to withdraw themselves from the Parliament, leaving the Vote of the House of Peers to the Faction galloping in its fury: yet for all those affronts done by the City-Tumults at the Parliament-doors (to shew how truely it hath been ever said of the Fanatick, That he will not Swear, but he will Lie) as also the assaulting of that Loyal Lord-Mayor's house, by the same Tumults in the midst of the City; Sir Rich. Gurny. and notwithstanding their furious marching through the City, in return from the Par∣liament-house (whose Guard they called themselves, and bragged how they were thanked by the Members for their love to the Parliament) with Links and loud Cla∣mours, timely alarming the Goldsmiths of Cheapside to shut up their Shops; and not∣withstanding the nightly Tumults about pulling down Cheapside-Cross, and the Trai∣ned-Bands marching day and night about the City to keep the peace, [A Coopers Apprentice on Breadstreet-hill, pulling off the Legs of our Saviour's Picture on the East-end of the Cross, in the act fell on the Iron-bars; but told his Master that some of the Watchmen hurt him with an Halbert, concealing the truth, till after ten days torture, seeing no hope of life, with horrour he confessed his fact, lamenting Gods judgment upon him, and died of the wound; whose death so terrified the Tumults from that action, that they never attempted the Cross any more, upon my own know∣ledge. And in the first of King Charles, when the same Cross was beautified, a Fa∣natick, who broke the Neck of the Babe in the lap of the blessed Virgin, within three nights after had his Neck broke, and left dead in the streets near the Cross, no man knowing how it came to pass. At Tukesbury in Gloucestershire, I have seen the Grave of a reforming Zealot, who demolished the Cross, and made the Cross∣stone (wherein was our Saviour's Picture) an Hog-trough: All the Piggs and the Sow which drank therein, died the first night, and the man drowned himself in a Well, over an Hog-trough, which stood by the Well, as the Spiritual Court of Glou∣cester can witness, and many yet living in Tukesbury can justifie this story.] Yet did the Faction in Parliament tell the King (and the world in print) in answer to the Kings complaining of those Tumults, That they saw no Tumults, but that the con∣course in Westminster-hall used to be as great in Term-time. By these means the Fa∣natical Faction in the Parliament having conquered the Vote of both Houses, and forced the King to fly, began soon to declare their Legislative power, in publishing their imperative Vote, That the Subjects of England were bound to obey the Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament as a Law, in case the King should deny his Royal Assent. But knowing such Votes were not like to find universal obedience, as their designes required, the next and last thing they entred upon, was power to execute those Votes, which their success (by the late Tumults ready for a War) heightned them to demand, under pretence of putting the Militia of the Kingdom into such hands as the Parliament, that is, the Fanatical Faction, should think fit; which to obtain, one would think it might spend the faith of a Christian to believe, what ridiculous fears and jealousies of Invasions from abroad, and secret dangers at home, were suddainly bruited by the Faction up and down the Kingdom; [Fears of Invasions by the Danes, by the French, by the Irish; fears of Papists in London, when the Faction knew they had scarce left one in the City but in Prisons: Mr. Pym's Plague-plaister; the discovering of a Plot by a Taylor in a Ditch; fears of blowing up the Thames with Gun-powder to drown the City and Parliament; the House of Commons fired by
Papists; an Army of Papists at Black-heath in Kent; an Army of Papists in Lanca∣shire; Horses trained under ground at Ragland; the Midnight Alarm in London, and parts adjacent, that the King was coming against the City with an Army of Horse, when his Majesty was lately forced to fly for the safety of his person: The Votes of Lord Digby raising an Army at Kingston upon Thames, when he had onely his Coach and six Horses: The Votes that the King had raised an Army at York, when some chief Actors said in my hearing, at that time the Houses of Parliament knew that the King was not able to raise one hundred men: The Earl of Warwick and Sir Thomas Barrington sent into Essex to raise the Country, told the people in publick mee∣tings, that the Queen was landed with an Army of 13000 Papists. It were endless to reckon up the multitudes of such Lyes and ridiculous Fears] As also to think how ready people were to frame themselves to a belief thereof, as given up to believe lies even with greediness, when indeed the designe onely was for this Faction, hereby to raise an Army, to execute whatsoever themselves should conceive would advance their Plots of subverting Religion and Government of this Church and State, under the specious colour of Reformation of all grievances whatsoever, whereby they drew in to their assistance the Patriotical party also, who were the far greater number through∣out the Kingdom; whose pulse beating wholly after Property (desiring destruction nei∣ther of King, nor Bishop, but onely reformation of conceived excess of power) was kept continually affrighted by alarms from the Faction, that the King would make his Sub∣jects all Slaves; which to prevent, they thought themselves necessitated to uphold this Parliament in any thing which they should act, though never so abominable and un∣just, for fear if this Parliament should be dissolved, they should never have any more Parliaments; and these men once unhappily engaged, especially the Londoners, by vast sums of money, which the Parliament had politickly drawn them to lend, were bound to follow the Fanaticks madness, onely to secure themselves and their publick-Faith debts; insomuch, that upon the burning down the Excise-house in Smithfield in the year 1647, by the rude Multitudes in the City, about the time of the King's coming to Holdenby, it's strange to think, how these moderate men (formerly de∣sirous to have the King come to London) were suddainly so affrighted with fears, that if the King came nearer London, surely the people would pay no Excise nor Taxes, then how should their Publick Faith-debts be paid? and gave advantage to the Fa∣ction, in the name of the City, to petition the Parliament, that his Majesty might not come nearer London, upon some pretences laid in that Petition; but Money was the bottom of the business; hoping by delay to make some surer bargain with their King: but now too late they see their folly. Thus by Hypocrisie, Fraud, and Violence, misguiding the Patriotical party, the Fa∣naticks of England grew so powerful, raising an Army, which of themselves they could never have done, now commanded by most confiding Sectaries, which the Ci∣tizens at first thought so inconsiderable; supposing, though they let them run on to do the work, (which they also desired, in reforming State-distempers) they could quell them at pleasure; perswaded also that the War should last but one Moneth, (as Mr. Hamden told some Citizens) but now they have lived to see the Banners six years displayed, to plant in what Religion soever the strongest party of Sectaries with their Sword shall make good, (upon hopes of gain, or fear of loss, not likely by Citizens to be opposed) and all other men in prosecution of their own (diffe∣rent) ends, are forced to serve for Stales and Blindes for the Fanatical Masters to de∣stroy the King and the Church, by the loss of the liberty and property of the Sub∣ject, on which all parties so doted: and no sooner had the Faction their desires of an Army raised for their service, but presently they began to execute their long dormient Votes of scquestring the Clergy from their Livings; and by an insolent thing, called an Ordinance of Parliament, (repealing five Acts of Parliament, made in several Kings Raigns) utterly abolished the sacred Liturgy, the whole service of God out of the Church, planting in room of it, a new nothing, a senseless Rubrical Directo∣ry, that will serve all sorts of Religion, but the true Religion, which to destroy this new Engine was purposely invented; meerly upon this wicked policy (though other frivolous pretences are alleadged in the Preface to that new-fangled Directory.) The poli∣cy in abo∣lishing Li∣turgy. First, because in the Liturgy were more Prayers for the King than would consist with their Traiterous ends. Secondly, the abolishing of the Liturgy took away the daily ser∣vice of God in Cathedrals, and made them of no use; a fair way to take away the
Land of Deans and Chapters. Thirdly, the Scots called in for their assistance in time of need, as also to engage all sorts of Sectaries to their aid against the King. Fourth∣ly, their new-erected Ministery, and Assembly of Divines and non-Divines at Westmin∣ster, by abolishing the Liturgy thought to extol their own fame and estimation, to the leading captive the people into ignorance, the mother of blind obedience to, what∣soever burden they should lay upon them, from Jesus Christs Throne of their Divine Presbytery. Thus (as the State-Affairs) in the Church came this change, or rather destruction of Christian Religion in England; like the great Beast in Daniel, to whom an Army was given, by reason of transgression, whereby it took away the daily Sacrifice, and threw the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospered; but what miseries have followed such policy, not onely the persecution of the Clergy, but the ruine of the Laity of our times can sufficiently witness, groaning under all sorts of calamities, that War and Rapine, and Tyranny can bring upon a Nation, when like the Israelites, there was no King in England, but a mysterious gunpowder-clouded King and Parliament, viz. the Fana∣tical Faction and Conspirators fighting against God and the King, under colour of King and Parliament, the Riddle of this Generation; three times altering (they call it purging) the House of Commons of Monopolists, Malignants, and Presbyterians, to obtain the Vote, and by a post-vote justifying three notorious Symptomes of a wicked Faction, viz. the publishing an Order of inviting accusations against the Clergy, in the name of the House of Commons, which the House had not cognizance of; the keeping the King out of Hull by Sir John Hotham, which the House knew not of; and the imprisoning the King in the Isle of Wight by Hammond, for which he had no public korder, but the sense of this Faction, or some private directions from the Army. CHAP. VIII. A concluding Parallel between the Popish Persecution in Queen Maries time, and this Fanatical persecution. THus hath this Faction filled up the measure of their iniquity, fulfilling the Pro∣phesies and Predictions of wise wen, who gave England warning of the mis∣chiefs which they foresaw the Fanaticks would in time bring upon this Nation; to name but two particulars: Dr. Bancroft wrote in the days of Queen Survey of Discipl. cap. 21. Elizabeth; Certain hypocritical brethren of the Laity, have clapped the Presbyterian or Puritan Mi∣nisters on the back, followed their Sermons, set them at the upper end of their Tables, and sought by all means to procure them credit and favour with the people, not that they cared for them, or for Religion, or for Christ himself, but hoping that by the violent course which they saw these men run into, the Bishops and the Clergy would grow so odious, that it would be in time a small matter to dispossess them of all their Livings, whereof some portion might come to their shares. Another as true I find written, Anno Dom. 1603. N. D. or 3 conver∣sions of England. 3 part. pag. 149. All wise men (even among Protestants) see that no Sect in the world can be more prejudi∣cial and pernicious to another than the Puritan Sect is, and would be to the Protestant, if they could get the upper hand: Yet these are the men who so fiercely have cryed out against persecution, and against the cruelty of Papists, making an Ordinance for Re∣pentance, for the Blood spilt in the days of Queen Mary (never remembring the per∣secution of the Church in the Raign of Henry the Eighth, which how this Gene∣ration have made their own sin, I say not) intitling their Faction onely to those Martyrs merits, as their undoubted Heirs; indeed cunningly to colour their pretence of fight∣ing for the Protestant Religion, and to enrage the people to a revenge on the Kings Party, whom they laboured to make the world believe, were the guilty off-spring of those Popish Persecutors; whereas like the Jews, while they build the Sepulchres of the Prophets, they shew themselves to be the Sons of those who persecuted the Prophets: And were those Martyrs now alive, they would be the greatest Malignants and De∣linquents of our days, fit to be Plundered, Sequestred, Banished, Imprisoned, or Slain by bloody Votes, because they would not obey the Parliament in changing Religion; as is plain in the story of Mr. John Rogers; and crime enough it is in these days to be constant to the Book of Common-prayer, which those Martyrs in Queen Mary's time sealed with their Blood, and hath ever since been continued in the Church of Eng∣land, till wholly abolished by an Fox Acts and Non. Ordinance of this Parliament; whose cruelty as it
hath slain more thousands of English Subjects, than Queen Mary condemned scores, so hath it far less shew of Justice, or Legal proceedings, all being now done coram non judice, by upstart Committees, and new-erected Judicatories, never heard of in England before; as also sine Lege, by meer Arbitrary Votes, and fancies of malitious Adversaries, and Judges in their own cause: nor were any in Queen Maries Raign condemned but by known Laws of the Land, and legal Tryal, with disputations and perswasions used to reclaim them from their supposed Errours; but the Fauatick per∣secution is to hunt after matters of accusation, not to reform Errours, but to torment the persons of men, & condemnati quoniam accusati is their Justice. And when the Faction had thus plundred and sequestred the Clergy of all their Estates for some years, another fit of persecution was raised against divers of them from Goldsmiths-hall and Habberdashers-hall, upon composition of their Temporal Estate, where the Clergy were ever most spitefully used by those cruel Committees; the Laity compoun∣ding for two years value, but the Clergy seldom came off without four or five years: purchase of their own Lands and Estate. And because I intend not to swell into too big a Volume, I'll give you but one instance of the proceedings of Habberdashers-hall-Committee towards To Dr. Martin they sent a Ticket in Prison at Ely-house, who desi∣red them to take the twentieth part, so that they would pro∣mise to send him the remai∣ning nine∣teen parts of that E∣state which they sup∣posed him to have. a Clergy-man, to whom a Ticket was sent for 240 l. as the twentieth part of his Estate; he coming within the ten days limited in their Tic∣kets to the Committee for Mitigation, proffering his Oath that all his Estate real and personal was not worth 200 l. could not be admitted to his protestation, but was re∣ferred to the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Moneys; whither applying himself, the Door-keeper told him, that he must not enter in till he was called. Thus attending de die in diem, the ten days were expired, without his being called, or his obtaining leave to pass the first or second doors, which were duly locked by their Officers: Hereupon, according to the great Justice of Committee-Orders, and Parliament-Ordinances, he fell by course into their Messengers hands as their prisoner (though at large) for not making an end within the ten days. After some weeks dancing attendance, and feeing a Lawyer, his Petition was read; to which was an∣nexed an Affidavit, that his whole Estate was not worth 100 l. The Answer of the Committee was, That until he should bring in the one moity of his Assessment, viz. 120 l. according to the custom of that Committee, he should not be heard; which he not able to perform, was sent for by their Pursuyvants, and upon his Petition was or∣dered to bring in 50 l. and then to be further heard. After some delay, he moved again, and was ordered to give present security to bring in 20 l. the next Committee∣day, or else to prison he must go presently; which to prevent, he was forced to bor∣row 20 l. and accordingly deposited it, petitioning to be admitted to his protestation: But the Committee told him, they must observe Rules, and ordered him to give secu∣rity for the other 30 l. to be brought the next sitting, or else he must go to prison, telling him, that if he were not worth so much, when he came to hearing the money should be returned to him again: whereupon he was again forced to borrow 30 l. more, which he brought in accordingly; but upon hearing was told, that though the Ordinance did admit all men, yet the custom of that Committee did not admit of Malignants to their protestation: and so took all the borrowed 50 l. as the twentieth part of his Estate, which he by Affidavit gave in to them, was not worth 100 l. ha∣ving been long sequestered, and plundered of his Goods, and by imprisonments and Egyptian years of Famine, forced to spend his long-provided Store. And just such a Cheat doth the Committee for plundered Ministers put upon the afflicted Wives and Children of the sequestered Clergy, in their suing for the fifth part of their Husbands Living, which an Ordinance of Parliament pretended to allow them: If their Hus∣band or Father hath two Livings, their first trick is to tell them, that they will allow them the fifth part of but one of them: The next is, that though the Ordinance run generally without any limitation, yet they have secret instructions whereby they grant Orders for a fifth part, with this proviso, That if the sequestrator (or Cutpurse) shew not good cause to the contrary. The Wife of Dr. P. hath been 3 years, to the ex∣pence of almost 100 l. to obtain her fifth part, but could not prevail This draweth on much travel, and charges on Lawyers, and Sollici∣tors, and Committee-Officers; and the Parliament-Minister upon hearing, pretending that the Living is of value little enough to maintain him, or any frivolous Plea, breeds a demur; and although they grant Order after Order, yet all is to no purpose: for, say the Committee, we must not displease our Friends; they mean their Masters, who under pretence of long prayers, can devour whole houses, and starve other mens Wives and Children, by invading their possessions kept from the right Owners by Club-law. And truely their Ordinance for the fifth part doth generally prove but a meer mockery to the Wives and Children of the Clergy in the midst of their heavy Persecution, and a Snare to draw them into expence of their last groat, in hopes to get their so-fairly-promised morsel; that as I have known very few obtain it effectually, so have many of them after some years of chargeable and vexa∣tious attendance been wearied out, buying at too dear a rate their Repentance of believing of hoping for any Justice or mercy from the Fanatical Faction: From whom may all Gods people pray, Good Lord deliver us. FINIS.
