C4530 12950715 95888
THE LIFE & DEATH OF Nebuchadnezzar THE GREAT, The first founder of the Babylonian Em∣pire; Represented by the Golden Head of that Image; Dan. 2. 32. and by the Lion with Eagles Wings; Dan. 7. 4. As also of CYRUS the GREAT, The first founder of the Empire of the Medes, and Persians; Represented by the Breast, and Arms of Silver in that Image; Dan. 2. 32. And by a Bear; Dan. 7. 5. And by a Ram with two Horns; Dan. 8. 3, 20. He was the deliverer of Gods Israel out of Babylon, the seventy years of their Captivity being Expired. By both of these, much light is given to many of the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy, Esekiel, and Daniel. By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. 1664.
Licensed to be Printed, Roger L'Estrange.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF Nebuchadnezzar THE GREAT, The first Emperor of the CHALDEANS, Who was represented by the Golden Head of that Image, Dan. 2. 32. and by the Lion with Eagles Wings, Dan. 7. 4. Whereby much light is given to ma∣ny of the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy, Esekiel, and Daniel. By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door, 1664.
THE LIFE, & DEATH OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR THE GREAT, First Emperor of the CHALDEANS. NEbuchadonazar,His Pa∣rentage. or Nebuchadnezzar, was the Son of Nebuchadonazar, or Nabopolaser of Ba∣bylon, who was made General of the Army by Saraco, King of Assyria, and Chaldea, af∣ter whose death Nabopolaser took into his hands the Kingdom of Chaldaea, which he held by the space of one and twenty years; At the same time Astyages was made Governour of Media by Cyaxares his Father; and the better to strengthen themselves, they entred into Affinity, by Astyages his giving his Daughter Amytis to Nebuchadnezzar, the Son of Nabopolaser, and thereupon joyning their Forces together,Ninive taken. they took Ni∣nive, together with Saraco, the King thereof, placing a Vice-Roy in his stead.
Shortly after, the Governour of Coelosyria, and Poenicia, revolting from Nabopolaser, he sent against him his Son Nebuchadnezzar (having first associated him with him∣self in the Kingdom of Babylon) with a great Army,Nebuchad∣nezzar made King. which was in the latter end of the third, and the beginning of the fourth year of Jehoiakim, King of Juda; as appears Dan. 1. 1. compared with Jer. 25. 1. Nebuchadnezzar was no sooner thus associated with his Father in the Kingdom, but the things which he was to act,Prophe∣sies of him. were presently revealed to the Prophet Jeremy; the first whereof was the overthrow of the Egyptians; First at the River Euphrates; then in their own Country, Jer. 46. The first of these came to pass presently, Pharao Neco's Forces, which he left at Carchemish, being cut off by Nebuchadnezzar in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, Jer. 46. 2. The second was not till after the taking of Tyre, in the se∣venteenth year of the Captivity of Jechonia. Ezek. 29. 17, 18, 19. In the third year of Jehoiakim,His first Action. He Con∣quers Jehoiakim. Nebuchadnezzar the se∣cond, his Father being yet alive, entred Judaea with a great Army, who, besieging, and forcing Jerusalem, made Jehoia∣kim his Vassal, in despight of Pharaoh Necho, who had made him King, and took with him to Babylon, for Pledges, Daniel, who was yet a child, with Ananias, Misael, and Azarias. He took also part of the Treasures belonging to the Temple; but stayed not to search thorowly for all. For Necho hasted with his Army to the relief of Jehoiakim, hoping to find Nebuchadnezzar in Judaea. But this great Babylonian had no mind to hazard himself and his Army against the Egyptian, Judaea being so ill affected towards him, and himself far from all succour; or sure place of retreat. If he had (as may be supposed) any great strength of Scythian Horsemen, it was wisely done of him to fall back out of that rough Mountanous, and hot Country, into places that were more even and temperate. And besides these reasons,His Fa∣thers death. the Death of his Father hap∣pening at the same time, gave him just occasion to re∣turn home, and take possession of his own Kingdom,
before he proceeded in the second care, of adding more unto it. And this he did at reasonable good leasure. For the Egyptian was not provided to follow him so far, and to bid him Battel, until the new year came in, which was the fourth of Jehoiakim, the first of Nebuchadnezzar and the last of Necho. In this year the Babylonian, lying upon the Banks of Euphrates (his own Territories bounding it on the North-side) attended the coming of Necho:He Con∣quers Pharaoh Necho. there, af∣ter a cruel Battel fought betwixt them, Necho was slain, and his Army forced to save it self by a violent retreat, where∣in it suffered great loss. This Victory was so well pursued by Nebuchadnezzar that he recovered all Syria,He Con∣quers Syria. and whatsoever the Egyptians held out of their proper Territories towards the North. The Egyptians being thus beaten, and altogether for the present discouraged, Jehoiakim held himself quiet, as being in heart a Friend to the Egyptians, yet having made his peace with the Chaldeans the year before, and Nebuchad∣nezzar was contented with such profit as he could there readily make: he had forborn to lay any Tribute upon the Jews. But this cool reservedness of Jehoiakim, was, on both sides, taken in ill part. Whereupon the Egyptian King Psamnis, who succeeded Necho, began to think of restoring Jehoahaz (who had been taken prisoner by his Father, and carried into Egypt) and of setting him up, as a Domesti∣cal enemy against his ungrateful Brother. But to antici∣pate all such accidents, the Judean had put in practice the usual remedy, which his Fore-fathers used: For he had made his own Son Jechonia,2 Chron. 36. 9. King with him long before; in the second year of his own Raign, when the Boy was but eight years old. As for this rumor of Jehoa∣haz his return, the Prophet Jeremy foretold, that it should prove a vain attempt, saying, He shall not return thither, But he shall die in the place whither they have led him Captive, and shall see this Land no more. Jer. 12. 11, 12.
The Egyptians,The weak estate of the Egyp∣tians. having lost all their Mercenary Forces, and received that heavy blow at Carchemish, had more Gold than sharp Steel remaining, which is of small force without the others help. Besides, the Valour of Necho was not in Psamnis Apries, who, raigning after Psamnis, did indeed once adventure to shew his face in Syria; but after a big look, he was glad to retire, without adventu∣ring the hazard of a Battel. Wherefore this declining Na∣tion, fought only with brave words, telling such frivolous tales, as men that mean to do nothing, use, boasting of their former glorious acts against Josias, and Jehoahaz. And truly in such a time and case, it was easie for Je∣hoiakim to give them satisfaction, by letting them under∣stand the sincerity of his affections towards them, which appeared in time following. But Nebuchadnezzar went more roundly to work:Nebuchad∣nezzar lays a Tri∣bute up∣on Jehoi∣akim. For he sent a peremptory message to Jehoiakim, requiring him not to stand upon any nice points, but presently to acknow∣ledge himself his Subject, and to pay him Tribute; Adding thereunto such terrible threatnings, as made the poor Judaean lay aside all thoughts of adhearing unto Pharaoh; and to yield to do, as the more powerful would have him. Thus he continued in Obedience to Nebuchadnezzar three years; During which time the Prophet Jeremia, cry∣ed out against the impiety of the Jews, puting them in mind that he had now for three and twenty years exhort∣ed them to repentance; But because they had stopped their ears against him,The Cap∣tivity fore∣told. and the rest of the Prophets, he now foretold that their Captivity was at hand, and that they should bear the yoak of Bondage for seventy years.Jer. 25. 15, &c. The same calamity he threatned to all the Neighbouring Nations,Jer. 27. to the Egyptians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumae∣ans, and the rest; foretelling that they should all drink out of the Babylonian Cup the Wine of his fury, whom they had forsaken; and that after the seventy years should be ex∣pired, the Babylonians themselves should tast of the same Cup, and be utterly subverted by the Medes and Persians,
by which means the Jews should be permitted to return into their own Country,Jer. 25. 12, &c. And their return. Jeremy imprison∣ed. and Cities. The first imprison∣ment of the Prophet Jeremy seems to have been in the fourth year of this Jehoiakim, at which time, Baruch the Scribe, wrote all his Prophesies from his mouth, whom he sent to read them unto the People, and afterwards to the Princes, who presented them to the King: But fearing the Kings fury, they had first set Jeremy at liberty, and advised him, and Baruch, to hide themselves, Jeremiah 36. 9, &c. Jehoiakim having heard part of it read to him,Jeheiakim burns the Roule. and per∣ceiving the ill news contained therein, he made no more ado, but cut the Book in pieces, and cast it into the fire. All which, Jeremy caused to be new written, with this ad∣dition, that the dead Body of Jehoiakim, should be cast out, being exposed in the Day to the heat, and in the night to the frost, and that there should be none of his seed to sit upon the Throne of David. Times thus runing on,Tyre re∣belleth a∣gainst Ne∣buchad∣nezzar. Jehoiakim thought himself secure from all danger, as being Tributary to the Babylonian, and yet withall, well thought on by the Egyptian: About which time the mighty City of Tyre, opposed it self against Nebuchadnezzar: and upon just confidence of her own strength, despised all preparations that could be made against her. Now for as much as the tearm of seventy years was prescribed for the desolation, as well of Tyre, as of Jerusalem, and other places, and Countries, its ap∣parent that they that refer the winning of this City to the ninteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, have good ground and warrant for it. For the Siege thereof began in the seventh year of his Raign, and lasted thirteen years. Here it will not be amiss to insert a brief note concern∣ing the beginning of this great Princes Rule; The third year of Jehoiakim, was the last of Nabulsser, who being freed from other cares, and businesses, took notice of such as had revolted from him to Pharaoh Necho, and sent this Noble Prince▪ his Son, with an Army into Syria to reclaim
them. In this expedition was Daniel carried to Babylon, who therefore makes mention of it, Dan. 1. 1. The year next following, being the fourth of Jehoiakim, was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, which Jeremy affirmeth in express words, Jer. 25. 1. And from this we must reckon all his time, and actions which follow to be spoken of. In his three and twentieth year he conquered Egypt, and then began his great Empire, there being none lest that durst offend, or oppose him. The second from this year it was wherein Daniel saw that vision of the Image consisting of sundry mettals, which prefigured the succession of great Kingdoms, that should Rule the World before the coming of Christ. But to return to the Siege of Tyre, which began in the seventh year of his Raign. The Stately City of Tyre covered all the ground of an Island,Tyre be∣sieged. that was divided from the Continent, by a deep, and broad Channel of the Sea. The Chaldaeans had no Fleet of Ships, neither were they Seamen: the Tyrians ex∣celled all other Nations in multitude of goodly Ships, and skill to use them: and every Wind, from one part or other, brought in all needfull provisions to the City: Wherefore neither force, nor Famine could greatly hurt the place; whereof nevertheless, the Judgements of God (denounced against it by Isay,Isay 23. Jeremy, and Ese∣kiel) had threatened the destruction;Jer. 25. and the obstinate resolution of Nebuchadnezzar had fully determined to ac∣complish it.Esek. 26. This haughty King, impatient of resistance, undertook a vast piece of Work,The dif∣ficulty of the work. which was, to fill up that part of the Sea which divided the Island from the continent. The City of old Tyre, that stood opposite to the New, upon the firm Land, and the Mountain of Libanus near adjoyning, that was loaden with stately Cedars, and abundance of other Trees, furnished him with materials to effect it. Thirteen years were spent in this difficult, and hopeless un∣dertaking, which need not seem strange, if we consider, that Alexander, working upon that foundation which was remaining of Nebuchadnezzars Peer, and being withall,
assisted with a strong Fleet, was yet seven moneths ere he could make way into the City. Wherefore, if the raging of the Sea was able to carry away that wherewith Alexander laboured to cover a Shelve, with much more violence could it overturn, and as it were, consume the work of Nebuchadnezzar: who laid his foundation in the bottom of the deep; Striving, as it were, to fill the empty Belly of this greedy Cormorant, whereas the Ma∣cedonian did only stop the throat of it. All may know that God could easily have accomplished his own threatnings against this place (though it had not pleased him to use, either a Miracle, or such of his more immediate Engins, as are Earthquakes, &c.) by making at least, the Seas calm, and adding the favourable concurrence of all se∣cond helps. But so it pleaseth him oft times, in chastising the Pride of man, to use the hand of man, even the hand of man, striving, as it may seem, against all resistance of nature, and providence. So that by this excessive la∣bour of the Chaldeans, that Scripture was fulfilled, that every Head should be made bald, and every Shoulder should be made bare, Esek. 29. 18. Yet would not Nebuchadnezzar give over till he was master of the Town. When he was entred upon this desperate undertaking, whether it were by some losses received, or some Mutany in his Army, or some glorious rumour of the Egyptians strength, his evil willers took courage to rebell against him; and amongst them, Jehoiakim, renounced his sub∣jection, and began to hope for the contrary which soon after fell out. For Nebuchadnezzar gave him no leasure to do much hurt: But with part of his Army, he marched strait into Judea;Jehoiakim rebels, and is taken, and slain. where the amazed King made so little resistance (the Egyptians having left him, as it were in a dream) that Nebuchadnezzar entred Jerusalem, laid hands on Jehoiakim,Jer. 22. 18, 19. & 36. 30. whom at first he bound, intending to send him to Babylon, but his mind changing, he caused him to be slain in that place, and gave him the Burial of an Ass, to be devoured by Beasts, and ravinous Birds, according to the former Prophesie; Leaving in his place his Son, Jehoia∣kim,
or Jeconia;Jeconias made King: and imprison∣ed. whom yet after three moneths, and ten days, he deposed, and sent him Pisoner to Babylon, to∣gether with Esekiel, Mordecay, and Josedech, the High Priest. The Mother of Jeconias,Jer. 29. 2. together with his Servants, Eunuches,2 Kin. 28. 8, 16. and all the ablest men, and best Artificers in the Land, were also then carried away Captives. This Je∣chonias,2 Chron. 36. 10. following the Counsel of the Prophet Jeremy, made no resistance,Jer. 24. 1. & 29. 1, 2. but submitted himself to the Kings will, wherein he both pleased God, and did that which was most profitable for himself,Esek. 17. 12. though at the present it might seem otherwise, to such as considered the evil that befell him, rather than the greater evill that he thereby avoided. This only particular act of his is recorded in Scri∣ture which was good: But it seems that he was at least a partaker in his Fathers sins, if not a provoker, which was ye cause, that though he submitted himself to Gods will, yet did he not preserve his estate: For so it is said, That he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father had done. In his stead, Nebuchadnezzar set up Mattania, his Uncle,Zedekiah is made King. making him King of Judea, and called him Zede∣chias. For like as Necho, King of Egypt, had formerly dis∣placed Jehoahaz, after he had slain his Father Josias, and set up Jehoiachim,Jer. 37. 1. the Son by another Mother: So Nebuchad∣nezzar slew Jehoiakim,2 King. 24. 17. who depended on the Egyptians, and, carrying his Son Jeconias Prisoner to Babylon, he gave the Kingdom to this Zedechias, who was whole Brother to that Jehoahaz, whom Necho took with him into Egypt, and from Zedechias he required an Oath for his loyalty, and faithfull subjection, which Zedechias gave him, and cal∣led the living God to witness in the same, that he would remain assured to the Kings of Chaldea, 2 Chron. 36. 13. Esek. 17. 13, 14, 18. In the first year of Zedechias,Jer. 24. 2. Jeremy saw, and expound∣ed the vision of the ripe, and rotten Figs, the one signifying those that were already carried away Captives, the other signifying those Jews that yet remained, and were after∣wards destroyed, Jer. 29. 17.
In the fourth year of Zedechias,Babylons destructi∣on fore∣told. Jeremy wrote in a Book all the evil which should fall upon Babylon, which Book, or Roul he gave to Seriah, when he went with King Ze∣dechias to Babylon, to visit Nebuchadnezzar, willing him first to read it to the Captive Jews, and then to binde a stone to it, and cast it into Euphrates, pronouncing these words;Sundry Prophe∣sies of Jeremy. Thus shall Babel be drowned, and shall not rise from the evil which I will bring upon her. This journey of Zede∣chias to Babylon is probably thought to be in way of a vi∣sit,Jer. 51. 59. and to carry some presents to Nebuchadnezzar; But yet its likely he had some suit to make, which his Lordly Master refused to grant, and sent him away discontented. For at his return, all the bordering Princes sent Messen∣gers to him, inciting him (as it seems) to those unquiet courses from which the Prophet Jeremy dehorted both him,Jer. 27. 8. and them. About which time the Prophet, by Gods appointment, made bonds, and yokes, one of which he wore about his own neck, others he sent unto the five Kings, of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, and Zidon, by those Messengers which came to visit Zedechias, making them know, that if they, and the King of Juda continued in sub∣jection, to Babylon, they should then possess, and enjoy their own Countries; If not, they should assuredly perish by the Sword, by Famine and by Pestilence. He also foretold them that those Vessels which yet remained in Jerusalem, should be carried after the o∣ther to Babylon, yet at length should be restored again. The same year Ananias,Ananias a false Pro∣phet. the false Prophet, took off the Woodden yoke which Jeremy did wear, as a sign of the Captivity of the Jews, and brake it: Vaunting, that in like manner after two years,Jer. 28. God would break the strength of Babel, and the yoke which he laid on all Nations: and that he would restore Jeconias and all the Jews, with the Vessels, and Riches of the Temple, and put an end to all these troubles. But Jeremy instead of his Woodden Yoke, wore a Coller of Iron; and in sign that Ananias had gi∣ven a false, and deceitfull hope to the People, he foretold the Death of this false Prophet,Jer. 28. 15. which accordingly came to pass in the seventh Moneth.
After this,Zedechias rebels. when Zedechias had wavered long between Faith, and Passion, in the eight year of his Raign, he pra∣cticed more seriously against Nebuchadnezzar with his Neighbours,Esek. 17. 15, 17. the Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Tyrians, and others who were promised great aides by the Egypti∣ans, in confidence of whose assistance he resolved to shake off the Babylonian Yoke; whereof when Nebuchadnezzar was informed, he marched with his Army in the dead of Winter,Jerusalem besieged. towards Jerusalem, and besieged it. Jeremy per∣swaded Zedekias to render the City, and himself to him: But Zedechias, being confident of help from Egypt, and be∣ing perswaded by his Princes, and false Prophets, that it was impossible that the Kingdom of Judah should be extirpated untill the coming of Shilo, according to Jacobs Prophesie, Gen. 49. 10. he dispised the counsell of Jeremy,Jer. 32. & 34. and impri∣soned him. For Jeremy had told the King that the City should be taken and burnt; that the King should not escape, but be taken Prisoner, and brought to the presence of Nebuchadnezzar: That he should not perish by the Sword, but being carried to Babel, should there die a naturall Death. The following year,Jer. 44. Jerusalem was surrounded, and more strictly besieged by Nebuchadnezzars Army;Egypt a broken staff. where∣upon the King of Egypt, Pharaoh Hophra, entred into Ju∣dea with his Army, to succour Zedekias, of whose revolt he had been the principall Authour.Jer. 37. 3, 10. But Jeremy gave the Jews faithfull counsel, willing them not to have any trust in the succours of Egypt: for he assured them that they should return back again, and in no sort relieve them. And it fell out accordingly. For when the Chaldeans re∣moved from Jerusalem to encounter the Egyptians, these bragging Patrones abandoned their enterprise, and taking Gaza, in their way homewards, returned into Egypt as if they had already done enough, leaving the poor People in Jerusalem to their destinied miseries, Jer. 34. 11, 22. In the mean while the Jews, who in the time of their extremity,Lev. 25. 39, 40, &c. had released their Hebrew Bondmen, and Bond∣women, according to the Law, in the year of Jubile, and
made them free, thereby to encourage them to fight, did now upon the breaking up of the Chaldean Army, repent of what they had done, and thinking that all danger had been past, they held them by force to their former slavery. But the Caldeans being returned to the Siege, the Prophet Jeremy,Jer. 34. when the State of Jerusalem began now to grow to extremity, counselled Zedekias, to render himself to the Babylonians,Jer. 39. assuring him of his own Life, and of the safe∣ty of the City if he would do so. But his obstinate heart led him on to that wretched end, which, his neglect of God, and his Infidelity, and Perjury had provided for him. Three and twenty Moneths the Chaldean Army lay be∣fore Jerusalem,Jer. 39. and held it exceeding straitly besieged; For they built Forts against it round about, 2 King. 25. 1. or, they surrounded the City with Woodden Towers, so as the Besieged could neither Sally out, nor receive into the City any supplies of men or Victuals.Jer. 39. 1. & 52. 4. Josephus saith, that they overtopped the Walls with their high Towers which they erected upon Mounts, from which, with their Engines they did so beat upon the Walls, that the desendants were forced to forsake their stations. And though the Besieged also raised Counter-Buildings, like unto these, yet the Great Nebuchadnezzar, who Commanded all the Regi∣ons thereabouts, & had the Woods, and Rivers at his com∣mand, found out means to disappoint & overthrow all the Citizens endeavours, and to beat down their Towers as fast as they raised them. For his own works were guarded by the Walls of Jerusalem, whereas theirs within lay open to his Batteries. Besides, both Famine, and Pestilence (which commonly accompany men straitly besieged) grew fast upon them, whereby, when the number, strength and courage of the Jews failed,Jerusalem taken. the Caldeans made a breach, and forcing an entry, their Princes did seat themselves as Lords of the Town, in the middle Gate, 2 King. 26. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 39. 2, 3. & 52. 5, &c. Zedechias,Zedechias flyes and is taken. beholding this uncomfortable sight, and find∣ing no other means to escape the present danger, lost both his Courage, and his Hope at once, and shifted himself, to∣gether
with his Wives, Children, Princes, and principall Servants, out of the City, by a way under-ground, leaving his amazed, and now headless Subjects to the merciless Swords of their enraged enemies. Thus he, who when the Prophet Jeremy perswaded him to render himself, dispi∣sed both the Counsel of God, and the Army and force of Nebuchadnezzar, used now the remedy which one calls, A wofull, shamefull, and unfortunate shift. By this secret subterranean Vault, Zedechias stole away, & by the help of the dark night, recovered the plains, or de∣sarts of Jericho. But by reason of the train that followed him and his (every one leading with him those whom he loved best) he was easily traced and pursued. How great soever the company was that attended him, yet certain it is, that they, on whose fidelity he most relied, no sooner be∣held the Caldeans to draw neer, but they all abandoned his defence, and shifted for themselves in the Desarts, as they could. For whom God had forsaken, no man regarded. And thus Zedechias was taken by the Ministers of Gods ven∣geance, and being made a Prisoner, together with his Chil∣dren, and Princes, he was carried to Riblah, in the Tribe of Nephthalim, where Nebuchadnezzar then lay, as a place in∣different between Jerusalem and Tyre, with both which pla∣ces he had at one time to do. Now when Nebuchadnezzar had laid before Zedechias the many Graces and Favours which he had conferred up∣on him,And car∣ried to Babylon. together with the notable falshood and perjury wherewith he had requited him,Jer. 34. 3, &c. he commanded his Chil∣dren,2 King. 25▪ 4, 7. Princes, and Friends to be slain before his face. This be∣ing done, to ye and yt so lamentable a spectacle should be the last,Jer. 39. 4, 7 & 52. 7, 11. that ever he should behold in this world, he caused his eyes to be put out, and so carried him like a Slave to Babylon, where he consumed the rest of his life in perpetual imprisonment. Herein was that marvellous Prophesie of Esekiel fulfilled: I will bring him to Babylon, and he shall not see it, Esek. 12. 13. Thus in the eleventh, and last year of Zedechias, which was the eighteenth of Nebuchadnezzar, the Chaldeans entred
Jerusalem by force, where sparing neither Sex nor Age, they put all to the Sword that they found therein. In the year next following,2 King. 25. 8. Nebuzaradan, the Generall of the Babylonish Army, burnt the Kings Pallace, and the whole City of Jerusalem,Jer. 52. 13. with 39. 8. and after the fire had lasted from the seventh to the tenth Day,The Tem∣ple, and City burnt he also burnt the Temple of God to the ground, the richest and most Magnificent place that ever the Sun saw, when it had stood four hundred thirty, and one years. After this upon a second search,2 King. 25. 18. Nebuzaradan (not yet satiated with blood) commanded seventy and two others to be slain,Jer. 39. 8, 9. & 52. 14, 23. which had hidden themselves from the first sury, to wit, the chief, and the second Priest, two Com∣manders of Zedechias his men of war,2 Chron. 36. 18, &c. five of his houshold Servants,Poor Peo∣ple left under Ge∣daliah. and some others, carrying away to Babylon the ablest of the People through all Judea, and leaving the poorest labouring people, with some that followed the par∣ty of Nebuchadnezzar, to till the Ground, over whom he placed Gedaliah,Jer. 39. 10. the Nephew of that Saphan, whom Josias had formerly imployed in the Reformation of Religion.Jer. 40. 16 This Gedaliah, a Jew by Nation, left Zedechias, as it seem∣eth, in the beginning of the War, and by Jeremies desire to live with him, its probable that had embraced the same advice, which the Prophet gave to Zedechias, which was, to submit himself to the Babylonian King, who being or∣dained of God for them, as an instrument of his Justice, was, therefore irresistable. The Prophet Jeremy being left to his own choise to live where he pleaced,Jeremy goes to them. made choise to go to Gedaliah, to whom he was commended by Nebuzaradan, and he, not onely in∣tertained him kindly,Jer. 40. 6. but comforted him, and all the other Jews that were left under his charge, promising them fa∣vour, and liberty, so long as they remained obedient Sub∣jects to Nebuchadnezzar by whom he was established Pro∣vinciall Governour over his own Nation. But ere the year was exspired, a Prince of the late Kings Family (who during the Siege of Jerusalem had sheltered himself from the storm, with Baalis, King of the Am∣monites)
being attended by ten other chosen men, whilst Gedaliah feasted them in Mitspah,Gedaliah slain. the City of his resi∣dence, they trayterously slew him, together with divers Chaldeans and Jews that accompanied him.Jer. 41. 2. This done, they escaped,2 King. 25. 25. and in their way, encountring with eighty persons, repairing toward Gedaliah with persents, they slew most of them, and onely spared some, who promised to discover to them some Treasures that were hidden in the Fields during the War. They took with them also a Daughter of Zedechias committed to the care of Gedaliah by Nebuchadnezzar: This treachery of Ismael had been formerly discovered to Gedaliah by Johanan, one of the Captains of the few remaining Jews, but he would not be∣lieve it. Judea being now without a Governour (for Ismael durst not take it upon him, but fled as fast as he could to the Ammonites) the residue of the Jews, fearing the revenge of the Chaldeans, resolved to fly into Egypt, and besought Jeremy to ask counsell of God for them,Jeremy's counsel rejected. who returned an∣swer, that if they remained in Judea, God would provide for them, and shew them mercy; but if they sought to save themselves in Egypt,Jer. 43. they should then undoubt∣edly perish. Notwithstanding which advice, the Jews held their determination, and despised the Oracle of God; and constraining Jeremy, and Baruch to accompany them, they went into Egypt,He is car∣ried into Egypt, and stoned. and by the permission of Pharao, they dwelt in Taphnes; where, when Jeremy often reproved them for their Idolatry, foretelling the destruction of themselves, and the Egyptians, he was, by these his own hard-hearted and ingratefull Country-men, stoned to Death, and by the Egyptians, who greatly reverenced him, buried neer the Sepulchre of their Kings, Jer. 42. & 43. The nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzars Raign it was, when destroying utterly the great and mighty City of Jerusalem, he exceedingly enriched himself with the spoils of it, and the Temple, and by that dreadfull Example terrified all those that should dare to resist him. From that
time forward, he, to his three and twentieth year, laboured in the Conquest of those adjoyning Countries,Nebuchad∣nezzar Conquers divers Nations. which God had exposed unto his Sword, and commanded to wear his Yoke, namely, the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, Tyrians, Sidonians, and Egyptians, though some of these were al∣ready become his followers, and served under him when Jerusalem was taken, and burnt. But the Tyrians, whose City was built upon an Island, and therefore secure from the invasion of any Land-Army, and whose Fleet was so strong, that they needed not to fear any enemy at Sea, were neither daunred with the fall of their neighbour City, nor with the obstinate resolution of this mighty King imploy∣ing all his wit, and power to work their subversion. That the City of Tyre was rather well pleased then any way discouraged with the destruction of Jerusalem, it ap∣peareth by the Words which Esekiel condemneth, as the common voyce of Tyrus, Esek. 26. 2. Aha! the Gate of the People is broken, it is turned unto me; For seeing she is desolate, I shall be replenished. Yet at length, that great work before mentioned, began to appear above Water, and so to threat∣en them with inevitable mischief. Nebuchadnezzar still follows his work hard, notwith∣standing all discouragments, and in the thirteenth year of the Siege, and the nineteenth of his Raign, he had brought it to such perfection, that now the Citizens despaired of holding out against him; whereupon all the chiefest of them imbarked themselves, their Families, and Treasures in their Fleet,Tyre is taken. and escaped to the Isle of Cyprus, but the poorer sort were left to the fury of the enemy; who being enraged for being put to so much pains, slew with the Sword, not only such people of Tyre as dwelt on the Con∣tinent (who are called her Daughters in the Field) but the like execution was done in the streets, into which with excessive labour, the Chaldeans made way for his Horses, and Chariots. Thus Nebuchadnezzar made his Army serve a great service, against Tyrus, wherein every head was made bald, and every shoulder was made bare, yet had he no wages, nor his Army, Esek. 29. 18. but was fain to rest contented with the
Honour of having destroyed that City, which in all mens Judgements had been held invincible. The destruction of these two Great, and powerfull Ci∣ties, having made the name of the Chaldeans dreadfull in the ears of all the Nations round about, Nebuchadnezzar used this advantage of that reputation which he had ob∣tained by his victories already gotten, to the getting of more, and more profitable, with less pains. The Kingdom of Egypt was the mark which he chiefly aimed at. A Country so abounding in Riches and pleasures, that it might well have tempted any Price, finding himself strong enough, to pick occasion of quarrell against it. Be∣sides, it was so far an enemy to the Crown of Babylon, that, had it been far poorer, yet it must have been subdued, or the Conquest of Syria could not have been secured. Yet was it needfull, that before he entred upon this busi∣ness, the Countries adjacent should be reduced into such tearms, that either they should wholly stand at his devo∣tion, or at least, be able not to work him any displeasure. And herein the Decree of God concurred (as in all prosperous enterprises) with reason of State. For the people of Moab, Ammon, Edom, Damascus, Kedar, Hazor, and other adjoyning Regions, whom God for their sins had condemned to fall under the Babylonian Yoke, were such, as regarding onely their own gain, had, some of them, like Ravens, followed the Chaldean Army, to feed upon the carcasses that fell by the cruelty thereof. Others taking advantage of their neighbours miseries, occupied the Countries, which, by his Victories, belonged to Nebu∣chadnezzar, all of them thinking, that when the Babylonian had satisfied his fury, he would be forced to forsake those desolated Countries, and leave the possession of them to those who could first seize upon them. Particularly, the Edomites,The Jews enemies threatned. and Philistines, had shewed much malice against the Jews when their City was taken, Esek. 25. 12, 15. Whe∣ther they had done any good service to the Chaldeans, it appears not; if they did any, its like to have been in refer∣ence to their own advantage, wherein yet they were de∣ceived.
The Ammonites were not contented to rejoyce onely at the fall of Jerusalem, but presently they entred up∣on the Country of God, and took possession of it, as if, not the Chaldeans, but they had subdued Israel, Esek. 25. 3. Jer. 49. 1. Neither can it be imagined what other design Baalis, King of the Ammonites had, when he sent Ismael, a Prince of the Blood of Judah, to murther Gedalia, whom the King of Babel had made Governour over those that re∣mained in Israel, and to carry Captive into the Ammonites Country, the People that abode in Mizpah, than a desire of entanglng Nebuchadnezzar with so many labours at once, as should force him to retire into his own Country, and abandon those wasted Lands, to himself, and others, for whom they lay conveniently. Such, or the like Policy, the Moabjtes also did exercise, whose Pride, and Wrath were made frustrate by God, and their dissimulation condemned, as not doing aright, Jer. 40. 14. & 41. 2. & 10. & 28, 27, &c. All these Nations had the Art of ravening,They are destroyed by Nebu∣chadnez∣zar. which is familiar to such as either live in, or that border upon De∣sarts; and now the time ministred occasion to them to shew the uttermost cunning of their Thievish wits. But Nebuchadnezzar made void all their devices by sharp, and sudden War upon them, overwhelming them with un∣expected ruine, as it were in one night, according to the Prophesies of Isay,Isa. 16. 14. Jeremy, and Esekiel, who all foretold, with little difference of Words, the greatness, and swiftness of the misery that should come upon them. It appears not with which of them he first began; but it seems that Moab was the last that felt his heavy hand: For so, many interpret that Prophesie of Isay, threatning Moab with de∣struction after three years, as having reference to the third year following the destruction of Jerusalem: the next year after it, being spent in the Egyptian expedition. This is evi∣dent that all the principal Towns in these Countries were burnt, and the people either slain, or made captives, few excepted, who saved themselves by flight, and had not the courage to return to their habitations too hastily, much
less to attempt any thing against Nebuchadnezzar: but lived as miserable out laws, untill the end of the seventy years which God had appointed for the desolation of their Coun∣tries, as well as of the Land of Judaea. When by a long course of Victory Nebuchadnezzar had brought into Subjection all the Nations of Syria,Egypt at∣tempted by Nebu∣chadnez∣zar. and the bordering Arabians in such wise, as that no enemy to him∣self, or Friend to the Egyptian, was left at his back, that might either impede his proceedings, or take advantage of any misfortune that might befall him; then did he forthwith apply himself to the Conquest of Egypt, upon which those other Nations had formerly been dependants. Of this expedition, and the Victorious issue thereof, the three great Prophets, Isay, Jeremy, and Esekiel have written so plainly, that its altogether needless to seek after any other authority to confirm the same. Long before it was prophesied by Isay, that the King of Assyria, or Babylon, should lead away the Egyptians Prisoners, and the Ethi∣opians Captives, young, and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt, Isa. 20. 4. But Esekiel, and Jeremy, as their prophesies were neerer to the time of execution, so they handled this Argu∣ment more plainly, and precisely. For Esekiel tells us cleerly, that Egypt should be given to Nebuchadnezzar as wages for his great service which he had done against Tyre, Esek. 29. 18, 19, 20. He recounteth also in particu∣lar all the chief Citys in Egypt, saying, that these by name should be destroyed, and go into Captivity: yea, and that Pharaoh, and all his Army should be slain by the Sword, Esek. 30. 4, 10, &c. Chap. 32, 2, &c. And the Prophet Je∣remy, saith thus, Behold I will visit the common people of Noe, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their Gods and their Kings, even Pharaoh and all that trust in him; and I will deliver them into the hands of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezar King of Babel, and into the hands of his Servants, Jer. 46. 25, 26. Josephus accordingly saith, that Nebuchadnezzar in the three and twentieth year of his
Raign, and in the fifteenth year after the destruction of Je∣rusalem,Egypt con∣quered. did Conquer Egypt, and kill the King thereof, ap∣pointing a Vice-Roy to Govern it. And it is evident that his Victories which followed his Conquest of Syria, were such as did more enlarge his Dominions, than all his for∣mer Wars had done. For Esekiel in his 30th Chapter rec∣koneth up (besides the whole Country of Egypt) Phut, and Lud, with other Nations that may seem to have reached as far as into Mauritania, which were conquered by him, and added to his Empire. And truly it is worth observation how Pharaoh, King of Egypt was infatuated by God, who thought himself most safe in his own Country by reason of the well-defenced situation thereof, and therefore very un∣wisely suffered his enemies to make a cleer way to his own doors by the Conquest of all his Friends, and Allyes in Sy∣ria. For as the labour of this business did more harden then weary the Chaldean Army,Carnall confiden∣ces. so the confidence, and vain se∣curity of the Egyptians, relying upon the difficulty of the passages which the enemy was to make through the Ara∣bian Desarts, and the great advantage which the River Ni∣lus afforded, did little avail them, when the War came on; Yea, it did much astonish them (as may justly be thought) in the time of execution. It being usually seen, that the hearts of men fail, when those helps deceive them, in which they bad re∣posed more confidence than in their own Virtue, and Valour. Untill this time the Kingdom of Egypt had flourished un∣der the Rule and Government of the Pharaohs for above the space of one thousand, four hundred, and eighty years. But from this time forward, it remained forty years with∣out a King under the subjection of the Babylonians; and then at length it began to recover by little and little the former greatness: Yet so, that it was never dreadfull unto others as it had been, God having said of that people; At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the People whi∣ther they were scattered;Egypt ne∣ver reco∣vered its strength again. and I will bring again the Captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation, and they shall be yet a base▪ King∣dom▪ It shall be the basest of the Kingdoms, neither shall it exalt
it self any more above the Nations; F I will diminish them that they shall no more rule over the Nations, and it shall be no more the confidence of the House of Israel, Esek. 29▪ 13, 14, 15, 16. For whereas it had been said of Pharaoh, I am the Son of the wise, the Son of ancient Kings, Isa. 19. 11. and whereas they had Vaunted, the River is mine, and I have made it, Esek. 29. 9. The Princes of Egypt, now became fools, the River failed them, the King himself was now taken and slain, and that anci∣ent Linage was quite extinguished. Of any Wars made by Nebuchadnezzar after such time as he returned from the Conquest of Egypt,Ninive de∣stroyed. See before we read not, except that against Ninive, the destruction whereof was forefold by the Prophet. Ninive indeed had been taken long before by Merodoch, and together with the rest of As∣syria, made subject to Babylon. Yet was it left under a pe∣culiar King, who rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, as Je∣hoiachim, and Zedechias, Tributary Kings of Judah, had done, was made partaker also of the same ruine. That the destruction of Ninive followed the Conquest of E∣gypt, is clear by the comparison which Nahum the Prophet made between this City that was to fall, and the City of Noe in Egypt which was fallen already; Nahum 3. 8, &c. Art thou better than populous Noe, that was situate amongst the Rivers, that had the waters round about it; whose Rampire was the Sea, and her wall was from the Sea. Ethiopia, and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite: Put, and Lubin were her helpers. Yet was she carried away, she went into Captivity; Her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets, and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains. Thou also shalt be drunken; thou shalt be hid; thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy, &c. This Great Monarch, having thus spent his younger days in inlarging his Dominions, he betook himself to rest, that he might reap the fruit of his former labours; and the first thing that he applyed himself to, was to beautifie his Imperiall City of Babylon,Babylon beautified adding a new City to the Old, which he compassed about with three
Walls, and made in them stately Gates. And neer the for∣mer Pallace he built a New one, more stately than it, wherein he raised stone-works, like unto Mountains, which he planted with all manner of Trees. He made also Pensile Gardens (one of the Worlds wonders) born upon Arches,Pensile Gardens. foursquare, each square being four hundred Foot long, filled above with Earth, where∣on grew all sorts of Trees, and Plants. The Arches were built one above another in a convenient▪ heigth, still increasing as they ascended. The highest, which did bear the Walls on the top, were fifty Cubits high, so that they equalized the highest Mountains. He made also Aquae∣ducts for the watering of this Garden, which seemed to hang in the air. This most sumptuous frame, which out∣lasted all the remainder of the Assyrian, and all the Persian Empire, is said to have been reared and finished in fifteen Days.Nebuchad∣nezzars Golden Image. He erected also an Image of Gold in the Plain of Dura, sixty Cubits high, and six broad, commanding all his Servants, and Subjects to fall down and Worship it, Dan. 3. 1, &c. But of all this, and other his Magnficence, we find little else recorded, save that which indeed is most profitable for us to consider, to wit, his overvalewing of his own greatness, which abased him to a condition inferior to the poorest of men. For whereas God had honoured him, not only with many great, and glorious Victories, and much happiness in his own life; but with a rare discovery of things that were to come after him; yea, and had manifest∣ed the certainty of his Dreams, by the miraculous reducing of it into his Memory, and given him the interpretation thereof by the Prophet Daniel:Dn. 2. 31, &c. He notwithstanding, be∣came so forgetfull of God whose wonderfull power he had seen,His Pride. and acknowledged, that he caused that Golden Image to be set u, and Worshipped, appointing a cruell Death for them that should dare to disobey him, which was utterly unlawfull, and repugnant to the Law of him that is King of Kings; And thus he who so lately had Worshipped Da∣niel, the servant of God, as if he had been God himself: now
commanded a Statue to be erected unto himself, wherein himself might be worshipped as God: From this impiety it pleased God to recall, and reclaim him, by the wonderful and miraculous delivery of those three blessed Saints,A Miracle. out of the fiery Furnace,Dan. 3. 26, &c. who being thrown bound into the midst of it, for refusing to commit that abominable Ido∣latry, were preserved from all hurt of the fire, loosned from their Bonds, accompanied by an Angel, and at last called out by the King, and restored to their former ho∣nour. Nebuchadnezzar being amazed at the Miracle,Dan. 3. 29. mad a Decre tending to the honour of God,He makes a Decree to Gods Honour. whom by the erecti∣on of his Image, he had dishonoured. Yet was not this de∣votion so rooted in him, that it could bring forth fruit an∣swerable to his hasty zeal: Therefore was he forewarned of God in a Dream,His dream interpre∣ted. of a terrible Judgement which hung over his Head, which Daniel expounding, withall counselled him to break off his sin by righteousness, and his iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor, that there might be a lengthening of his tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. whence it seems, that injustice, and cruelty were his faults, for which he was thus threatened: But neither did the Dream, nor advice of Daniel so pre∣vail. For probably he believed it not, but looked upon it as an idle Dream; for that it seemed altogether unlikely that so great a Monarch should be driven from amongst men,He dwels with the Beasts. yea, compelled to dwell with the Beasts of ye Field, and made to eat Grass as ye Oxen, this was altogether incredible in mans Judgement, and therefore giving so little heed to it, its no marvell that he had forgotten it by the years end. One whole year was given to this haughty Prince wherein to repent, which respiting of the execution may seem to have bred in him forgetfulness of Gods sentence. For at the end of twelve Moneths as he was walking in his Royall Pallace in Babel, he was so overjoyed, and tran∣sported with a vain contemplation of his own seeming happiness, that without all fear of Gods heavy Judgement pronounced against him, he uttered these proud words: Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the Honour of my Majesty? But his proud speeches were not fully ended, when a voice from Heaven told him, that his Kingdom was departed from him, &c. And the same hour the thing was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as Oxen, and his Body was wet with the dew of Hea∣ven, till his hair was grown like Eagles Feathers, and his hails like Birds Claws, Dan. 4. 33, &c. This his punishment was singular,His Bodi∣ly shape not chan∣ged. and unexpected. For he ran amongst beasts in the fields, and woods, where for se∣ven years he lived, not only as a salvage man, but as a sal∣vage Beast: for a Beast he thought himself to be, & therefore fed himself in the same manner, and with the same food that Beasts do. Not that he was changed in his externall shape from a man to a Beast. For as St Jerome well expounds it, when he saith, vers. 34. that his understanding was re∣stored unto him, he shewed that he had not lost his Humane shape, but his understanding, being stricken with a Fren∣zy, or deep Melancholly, which made him think himself a Beast. Seven years being expired,He is re∣stored to his King∣dom. Nebuchadnezzar was restored both to his understanding, & to his Kingdom: and (saith he) I blessed the most High, and I praised, & honoured him that liveth for ever, whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from Generation to Generation;And gives Glory to God. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, and he doth ac∣cording to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and amongst the In∣habitants of the Earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What dost thou? At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the Glory of my Kingdom, mine honour, and bright∣ness returned unto me, and my Counsellers, and my Lords sought unto me, and I was established in my Kingdom, and excellent Majesty was added unto me. Now therefore I Nebuchadnez∣zar praise, and extoll, and honour the King of Heaven, all whose works are truth, and his way is Judgement, and those that walk in Pride he is able to abase, Dan. 4. 34, 35, 36, 37. How long helived after this is uncertain, but all agree
that he raigned about twenty moneths copartner with his Father in the Kingdom, and about three and forty years by himself alone. Whilst Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon raged in Judea,Gods Ju¦stice God prepared a worm, which in due time, should eat out this spreading Tree; by reason of the cry of his poor People which entred into his ears: According to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 137. 8, 9. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: Happy shall he be that rewardeth thee, as thou hast served us. Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. For in this very year was Cyrus, the Perso-Median born; whose Father was a Persian, and his Mother a Mede; of whom this very Nebuchadnezzar at the hour of his Death,A Pro∣phesie. uttered this Prophesie. There shall come a Persian Mule, who shall make use of your Devils, as his fellow-Souldiers, to bring you into Bondage. He calls Cyrus a Mule, because he was to be born of a Father and Mother of two divers Nations. FINIS.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF CYRUS the Great, THE FIRST FOUNDER of the EMPIRE OF THE MEDES, & PERSIANS; Represented by the Breast, and Arms of Silver, in that Image, Dan. 2. 32. and by a Bear, Dan. 7. 5. and by a Ram with two Horns, Dan. 8. 3, 20. And the deliverer of the Israelites out of Babylon, the seventy years of their Captivity being Expired. Whereby much light is given to many of the Prophesies of Isay, Jeremy, Esekiel, and Daniel. By Sa. Clarke, sometime Minister in St Bennet Fink, London. LONDON, Printed for William Miller at the Gilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door▪ 1664.
THE LIFE, & DEATH OF CYRUS the Great, The first Founder of the PERSIAN EMPIRE. CYRVS was the Son of Cambyses,His Pa∣rentage. King of Persia, by Mandanes the daughter of Astyages, King of Media; He was so named by the Prophet Isay almost two hundred years before he was born, Isay 45. 1, 4. Thus saith the Lord unto Cyrus his annointed, &c. Cyrus his first Education was under his Father Cambyses,His Edu∣cation. with whom he lived till he was twelve years old, and somewhat more; at which time, he was sent for, together with his Mo∣ther Mandanes, by his Gandfather Astyages, into Media. In Media he served Astyages, first as one of his Hal∣berdiers, and then as one of his Armour-bearers till he
was called home into Persia by his Father Cambyses, when as yet he had one year to spend at School; and when he had spent seventeen years at School amongst Boys, he spent ten years more amongst youths. When Cyrus was now almost sixteen years old, Evil∣merodach the King of Assyria, being about to marry a wife called Nicotris,His first Action in War. made an in-rode, with a great Army of Horse and Foot, into the borders of Media, there to take his pleasure in hunting, and harrassing of the Country: against whom, Astyages, and Cyaxares his Son, and Cyrus his Grand child, who then first began to bear Arms, being but about fifteen or sixteen years old, marched out, met with him, and in a great Battel, overthrew him, and drave him out his borders. Indeed the Death of Nebuchadnez∣zar, the Father of Evilmerodach, gave courage to those that had found him a troublesome neighbour, to stand upon prouder tearms with the Babylonians, than in his flourish∣ing estate, they durst have used. But Evilmerodach, being too proud to digest this loss which he had received by the Medes, and their Allies, the Persians under Cyrus, he drew unto his party the Lydians, and all the People of the lesser Asia, with great gifts and strong perswasions, hoping by their assistance to over∣whelm his enemies with a strong invasion, whom in vain he had sought to weary out by a lingring War. The issue of these great preparations made by Evil∣mrach against the Medes, was such as opened the way to the fulfilling divers Prophesics which were many years be∣fore uttered against Babel, by Isay, and Jeremy. For the Ba∣bylonians and their Confederates, who, trusting in their numbers, thought to have buried the Medes and Persians under their thick showers of Arrow, and Darts, were en∣countered with an Army of stout and well trained men, weightily Armed for close fight, by whom they were bea∣ten in a great Battel,Evilmero∣dach is slain. wherein Evilmerodach was slain. Af∣ter which that great Empire that was raised and upheld by Nebuchadnezzar, was grievously shaken and enfeibled under his unprosperous Son, and left to be sustained by his
Grand-child Belshazzar: a man more like to have over∣thrown it when it was greatest and strongest, than to repair it when it was in a way of falling. Xenophon relates the matter thus, When the Babylonian had enlarged his Empire with many Victories, and was be∣come Lord of all Syria, and many other Countries, he be∣gan to hope that if the Medes could be brought under his Subjection,The strength of Media. there would not then be left any Nation ad∣joyning, able to make head against him. For the King of the Medes was able to bring into the Field sixty thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse, to which the Forces of Per∣sia being joyned, made an exceeding great Army. Considering therefore the strength of such a neighbour, he invited Craesus, King of Lydia, a Prince very mighty both in men and Treasure, and with him other Lords of Asia the less to his assistance, alleadging that those Eastern Nations, were very powerfull, and so firmly conjoyned by League, and many Alliances, that it would not be easie, no nor possible for any one Nation to resist them. With these suggestions, backed with rich Presents, he drew to himself so many adherents, as he compounded an Army of two hundred Thousand Foot, and sixty thousand Horse: Of which ten thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot were brought by Craesus, who had great cause of en∣mity against the Medes, for that they had made great Wars against his Father Allyattes.Cyrus made Ge∣nerall of the Army. Whereupon Cyrus was by his Father Cambyses, and the Council of the Kingdom, made Generall of the Persian Army, and sent away into Media with thirty Thousand Souldiers, and one Thousand Com∣manders, all of equall Authority under him; and when he came thither, he was also made by his Uncle Cyaxares, who had sent for him, Generall of the Median Forces, and the management of the War against the Babylonian was wholly comitted to him; With this Army he marched against Evilmerodach,He over∣throws the Baby∣lonians. and his associates, and in a very bloody Bartell, overthrew them. In which defeat, Evil∣merodach, King of Babylon, being slain, so many of his Sub∣jects revolted, that Babylon it self could no longer be secu∣red
but by the help of Mercenaties, waged with great sums of money out of Asia the less, Egypt, and other Countries, which new leavied Forces, were also defeated, and scat∣tered by Cyrus,Cyrus his great vi∣ctories. who following his advantage, possessed himself of a great part of the lesser Asia. Those Persians which followed Cyrus, and were by him levied, are rec∣koned to be thirty thousand Foot, of which one thousand were Armed Gentlemen; the rest of the common sort were Archers, and such as used the Dart, or Sling. Craesus, notwithstanding the men lost, and the Treasure spent in the quarrell of the Babylonians,Craesus his Victories. yet did he Con∣quer Aeolis, Doris, and Jonia, Provinces possessed by the Greeks in Asia the less, adjoyning to his Kingdom of Lydia. He gave Laws also to the Phrygians, Bithynians, Carians, Mysians, Paephlagonians, and other Nations. He also en∣forced the Ephesians to acknowledge him for their Lord; He also obtained a signall Victory against the Sacaeans, a Nation of the Scythians; All which he performed in four∣teen years. And being now confident by reason of his good successes, and withall, envious at Cyrus his Fame, and prosperity; doubting also that his great Victories might in the end grow perilous to himself, he consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, whom he presented with marvellous rich Gifts, what success he might hope for in his undertakings against Cyrus; from whom he received this ambiguous answer, Craesus Halym penetrans,The De∣vils sub∣tilty. magnam pervertes opum vim: Craesus passing over the River Halys, shall dissolve a great Domi∣nion: For the Devil being doubtfull of his success, gave him this Riddle, which might be construed either way, to the ruine of Persia, or of his own Lydia. Hereupon Craesus (interpreting it as he most desired) resolved to stop the course of Cyrus his progress, and therefore despised all the Arguments used by Sandanes to the contrary,Good Counsel neglected. who desired him to consider afore-hand, that he provoked a Nation inhabiting a barren, & Mountanous Region; a People not covered with the soft silk of Worms, but with the hard skins of Beasts; not fed with
meat to their Fansies, but content with what they found; Drinkers of Water, and not of Wine; and in a word, a Nation Warlike, Patient, Valiant, and Porsperous, over whom if he became Victorious, he could thereby enrich himself in nothing but Fame, in which he already excel∣led: and if by them he should be beaten, and subdued, so great would his loss appear of all things, which the world makes account of, that the same could neither be hastily recounted, nor easily conceived. Notwithstanding this solid,Craesus marches against Cyrus. and seasonable Counsel, Craesus having prepared a powerfull Army, advanced with the same toward Media: but in his passage he was retard∣ed at Pterium, a City in Cappadocia of great strength; which whilst he attempted both by power and policy to take, and Conquer, Cyrus came on, and found the Lydians encamped before it. Neither of these Champions were inferior to other, either in strength, or opinion. For out of doubt, Craesus, as he excelled any Prince of that age in Riches, and ability, so was he not inferior unto any in Territories and Fame, that then lived. But Kingdoms and Commonwealths have their increase, and Periods from Di∣vine Ordinance. This time was the Winter of Craesus his prosperity, the leaves of his flourishing estate being ready to fall; and that of Cyrus but in the first Spring and Flower; the God of all Power, had given a date to the one, and a beginning of Glory to the other. When these two Armies were in view each of other, after divers skirmishes had passed between them, the Per∣sians,A great Battel. and Lydians began to joyn together, and to encoun∣ter each other in grose Bodies; and as either of them be∣gan to retreat, fresh supplies were sent in from both their Kings. And as the Persians had somewhat the better of the Day, so when the dark vail of night had hidden each Army from the others view, Craesus doubting what suc∣cess the rising Sun might bring with it, quitted the Field to Cyrus,Craesus re∣treats. and withall speed possible, retreated towards his own Country, and taking the next way thither, he re∣covered Sardis, the first City of Lydia, and his Regal Seat,
without any pursuit made by Cyrus to retard him; where, being arrived, and nothing suspecting Cyrus his approach, or any other War for that Winter, he dismised his Army, and sent the Troops of his sundry Nations to their own Provinces, appointing them to re-assemble at the end of five Moneths, acquainting his Commanders with his intent of renewing the War at the time ap∣pointed. The morning being come, Cyrus finding that the Ly∣dians were departed, put his Army in order to pursue af∣ter them,Cyrus pur∣sues him. yet not so hastily, and at their heels, as to be discovered. But getting good intelligence of Craesus his proceedings, he so ordered the matter, that he presented not himself before Sardis, till such time as Craesus had dis∣posed of his Army, and sent them to their Winter Quar∣ters. His coming being altogether unlooked for, and un∣feared,And be∣seiges him in Sardis. he had opportunity enough to surround Sardis with his Army, wherein Craesus had no other Companies than the Citizens, and his ordinary Guards, insomuch as after fourteen days Seige,Sardis ta¦ken. Cyrus took the City by Storm, and put all to the Sword that made resistance. Craesus now having neither Arms to Fight, nor Wings to fly, in this common calamity, he throst himself into the heap, and multitude of his miserable Subjects, and had undergone the same lot with the rest of the vanquished persons, had not a Son of his, who had been dumb all his Life before (by the extremity of Passion and Fear) cryed out to a common Souldier,Craesus preserved who was with a drawn Sword pursuing his Father, that he should not kill Craesus. Here∣upon he was taken and imprisoned, and despoiled of all things, but onely the expectation of Death. Shortly after he was bound with Fetters, and Placed up∣on a large and high pile of Wood, to be burnt to ashes thereon.He should have been Burnt, but is saved. To which, when Fire was set, and kindled, Craesus remembring the discourse which long before he had with Solon, the Athenian Lawgiver, he thrice cryed out, O Solon, Solon, Solon, and being demanded what he meant by the invocation of Solon, he at first used silence:
But being urged again, he told them that now he found that true, which wise Solon had long since told him; That many men in the race and course of their lives might well be ac∣counted Fortunate, but no man could discern himself to be happy indeed till his end. Of this his answer, Cyrus being speedily informed, and thereby being put in mind of the mutability of Fortune, and of his own mortality, he commanded his Ministers of Justice, speedily to withdraw the Fire, and to save Crae∣sus, and bring him to his presence; which being done, Cyrus demanded of him, who it was that had perswaded him? or what reason had instigated him to invade his Territories, and to make him, of a Friend, an Enemy. To which Craesus thus answered: It was thy prosperous, and my unprosperous destiny (the Grecian Gods with all, flattering my Ambition) that were the inventers, and conducters of Craesus War against Cyrus. Cyrus being much affected wth this answer of Craesus,Cyrus makes him his friend. and bewailing his estate, though he was victorious over him, did not only spare his life, but intertained him ever after as a King, and his companion; Thus Heroditus relates it. But Xenophon saith, that Cyrus did entertain Craesus friend∣ly at the first sight, and makes no mention of any such cruell intent of burning him alive; and this may seem the more probable, because Craesus was his Grandmothers Brother, and its very likely that neerness of Alliance might withhold Cyrus (if he had been vicious, which he was not) from so cruell a purpose as to have burnt him alive. When Cyrus afterwards passed with his Army over Araves into Seythia,Cyrus in∣vades Scy∣thia. he left Craesus to be a companion, and counseller to his Son Cambyses, whom he made Gover∣nour over his Empire in his absence, with whom he lived all-the Reign of Cyrus, and did afterwards accompany Cambyses in his Expedition into Egypt, where he hardly escaped his Tyrannous hands. At this time the Races of three of the greatest Kings in that part of the World came to an end; to wit, of the Babylonians, Medians,
and Lydians, in Balthasar, Xiaxares, or Darius Medus, and Craesus. After this Lydian War ensued the great Conquest of Babylon, which gave unto Cyrus an Empire so large, and mighty, that he was justly reputed the greatest Monarch then living upon the Earth. How long time the prepa∣rations for this great action took up, is uncertain, one∣ly it seems that ten whole years did pass between his taking of those two Cities of Sardis and Babylon; which time was not wholly spent in providing for the Assyrian War, but much of it in setling the Estates which he had already purchased; Ctesias also tells us, that during this time Cyrus invaded Scythia, and being victorious over that Nation, he took Amorges their King Prisoner; But be∣ing in a second Battel overthrown by Sparetha, the Wife of Amorges, himself was taken Prisoner, and so one King was released for the other.His dan∣ger. Gobrias about this time (a Nobleman, whose onely Son, the King of Babylon, in his Fathers life time, had in a hunting match, villainously slain) together with his Friends, revolted to Cyrus. Its very probable also, that no small part of those troubles which sprang up in the lower Asia, grew soon after Cyrus his departure with his Victorious Army, be∣fore the Conquest was fully established. For after Cyrus was returned out of Asia the less, many Nations which were formerly Conquered by Craesus, and now by Cyrus, revolted from him; Against whom he imployed Pactias, and then Harpagus, who first reduced the Phocians un∣der their former Obedience; and then the rest of the Greeks that inhabited Asia the less, as the Jonians, Carians, Aeolians, and Lycians, who, very resolutely (according to the strength they had) defended them∣selyes; But in the attempt upon Babylon it self, its not to be questioned but Cyrus imployed all his Forces, having taken order beforehand, that nothing should be able to divert him, or to raise that Seige, or to frustrate that work upon which he did set all his rest.
And great reason there was,The strength of Babylon. that he should improve all his Policy and strength unto the taking of that City, which, besides the Fame and reputation that it held, as being the Head of an Empire, which depended thereupon, was so strongly fortified with a trebble Wall of great heigth, and surrounded with the waters of Eu∣phrates, that were unfordable, and so plentifully Vi∣ctualled for many years, that the Inhabitants were not only free from fear, and doubt of their estate, but through their Confidence, they derided, and despised all the Pro∣jects and power of their Besiegers. For not long before,Babylon fortified by Nico∣tris. Nicotris, the Mother of Belshaz∣zar, a witty, and active Woman, foreseeing the storm that was ready to fall upon Babylon from the Medes, to hinder their passing the River by Boats into Baby∣lon, She turned the River Euphrates, which before ran with a strait, and swift course, drawing it through many winding Channels, which she had cut for that purpose, whereby she made it to run more slowly than formerly it did: and then she raised a huge Dam upon each side of the River; and up the River from the City-ward, she digged a vast Pond, which was every way three or four hundred Furlongs wide, into which she turned the River, thereby leaving the old Channel of the River dry; which done, she fell to work, and fenced the Banks with∣in the City with Brick-walls, and raised the Water-Gates, answerable in every point to the rest of the Walls, which were made on the farther side of the Channel, round about the City. She built also a stately, and Magni∣ficent Bridge of Stone in the midst of the City, which joyn∣ed to the Kings Houses, that stood on each side the River: and having finished all her Works, and Fortifications, she turned the River out of the Pond into its right Channell again. And now came Cyrus to invade the Country of Baby∣lon,Cyrus in∣vades Ba∣bylon. and appeared before the Walls of the City, and there challenged the King to a Duell, or single Combat, but he refused it. At this time Gadatas, a Noble man of Babylon,
whom Belshazzar had gelt, upon a jealousie that he had of him with his Wife, fell over to Cyrus, in revenge where∣of the Babylonians sallied out, and fell upon his Lands; but Cyrus set upon them, and routed them; At which time the Cadusii whom Cyrus had appointed to bring up the rear of his Army, unknown to Cyrus, set upon a Country lying neer to the City; but the King of Babylon falling out upon them, cut them all off. Yet Cyrus, quickly re∣venged the Death of his men; and then came to an agreement with Belshazzar, to hold truce with the Plough∣men on both sides, and the War to go on between the Souldiers onely. After which, passing beyond the City, he took in three of their Forts, and so returned into the confines of Assyria, and Media; and thither, upon his in∣vitation, came his uncle Cyaxares, and was by him ho∣nourably received; and intertained in a Pavilion, that had been the King of Assyrias: and Winter now ap∣proaching, they entred into consulatation to provide things necessary to maintain the Siege. The only hope of Cyrus with his Medes,Cyrus be∣sieges it. and Persians (who despaired of carrying by assault a City so well, and strongly fortified, and manned) was in cuting off all supplies of victuals, and others necessaries; Whereof, though the Town was said to be stored sufficiently for more than twenty years, yet might it well be imagined, that amongst such a World of People as dwelt within those Walls, one great want or other would soon appear amongst them, and vanquish the resolution of that un∣warlike multitude. Yet in expecting that success of this course, the Besiegers were likely to endure much hardship, and travel, and that all in vain, if they did not keep strict watch, and sure guards upon all the Avenues, and Quar∣ters of it. Which that he might the better do, he caused present∣ly a vast trench, both for breadth and depth to be cast round about the Walls of the City, casting the earth ever towards his own Army, and made store of Bulworks all along upon it, for his Guards to be upon: and then, divi∣ding
his whole Army into twelve parts, he ordered that each of them should Watch his Moneth, by turn. And yet this was a very hard work,The Baby∣lonlans vain Hopes. considering the vast circuit of those Walls which they were to gird in, having neither men enough, nor yet sufficiently assured to their Commander; the consideration whereof Ministred un∣to the Babylonians matter of good Pastime, when they saw the Lydians, Phrygians, Cappadocians, and others, quartered about their City to keep them in, who, having been their Ancient Friends, and Allies, were more like to joyn with them, if occasion were offered, than to use much dili∣gence on the behalf of Cyrus, who had, as it were but ye∣sterday, laid upon their necks the galling Yoke of ser∣vitude. Whilst the Besieged were thus pleasing themselves with this foolish fansie, and vain mirth (the ordinary forerunners of sudden calamity) Cyrus, who by God that set him on work,Cyrus's stratagem. was made strong, valiant, constant, and inventive, devised, and by the labour of his men, digged so many Channels as were capable of receiving the Waters of Euphrates, and so to draw the same from the Walls of Babylon, that thereby he might make his ap∣proaches the more facile, and assured, which, when by the labour of many hands he had performed, he waited for a fi time wherein to put in execution, what he had de∣signed. For he had left in each of the Trenches towards the River, certain Banks, or Heads uncut till he saw his opportunity. Now Belshazzar finding neither any want or weakness within the City,Belshaz∣zars Feast. nor any possibility for his enemies with∣out, to approach the Walls by reason of the great River that surrounded them, he prepared an exceeding sump∣tuous Feast, Publick Plays, and other Pastimes, and thereto invited a Thousand of his Princes, or Nobles, besides his Wives, Courtezans, and others of that Trade. This he did, either to let the Besiegers know that his Provisions were sufficient, not onely for all needfull uses, but even for superfluity, and excess; Or
because he hoped that his enemies by this time were dis∣couraged, and even broken under their manifold disasters: Or else he made this Feast in Honour of Bell, his most adored Idol: or lastly, because it was his Birth, or Coronation Day: Or for many, or most of these re∣spects. Yea, he was not contented to use, and shew such Magnificence as no Prince else could Equall, but he listed up himself against the God of Heaven, Dan. 5. 23. For he, his Princes, his Wives, and his Concubines, made Carousing Cups of the Golden, and Silver Ves∣sels which his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple which was at Jerusalem;His Blas∣phemy. and in con∣tempt of the Lord of Heaven, he praised his own Puppets made of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, and Wood, and Stone; Whilst Belshazzar was thus tryumphing, and had his brains well filled with vapours, he beheld a hand, which by Divine power wrote upon the Wall that was opposite to him,The Writ∣ing on the Wall. cer∣tain Words which he understood not, wherewith, so great a fear, and amazement seized upon him, that the joynts of his loins were loosed,The Kings distraction and his knees smote one against another; Which Passion when he had in some measure recovered, he cryed aloud to bring in the Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the Southsayers, pro∣mising them great rewards, and the third place of Honour in his Kingdom, to him that could read, and expound the writing: But it exceeded their Art, and Skill. In this disturbance,The Queen comforts him. and astonishment, the Queen, hearing what had passed, came in, and observing what distraction the King was in, after Reverence done, She used this Speech; O King live for ever; Let not thy thoughts trouble thee, non let thy countenance be changed; there is a man in thy Kingdom in whom is the Spirit of the holy Gods, and in the Days of thy Father light, and un∣derstanding, and Wisdom like the Wisdom of the Gods was found in him, whom the King Nobuchadnezzar thy Fa∣ther, the King I say, thy Father made Master of the Magi∣cians,
the Astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the South∣sayers; For as much as an Excellent Spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, in interpreting Dreams, and shewing of hard Sentences, and dissolving of doubts were found in the same Daniel, whom the King named Belteshaz∣zar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the Interpretation. This Queen was either the Grandmother, or the Mother of Belshazzar; For it appears that She was not any of the Kings Wives, because She was absent from the Feast, and in regard of her age, past-banquetting, and dancing; Yet upon the report of the Miracle, She came in to comfort, and cheer up the King; and whereas Daniel was forgotten, and neglected by others, of younger years, and latter times, this old Queen remem∣bred well, what Daniel had done in the days of Nebuchad∣nezzar; Grandfather to this Belshazzar, and kept in mind, both his Religion, and Divine gifts. When Daniel was brought into the Kings presence,Daniel brought in. he said unto him: Art thou that Daniel, which art of the Children of the Captivity of Judah; whom the King my Father brought out of Jewry?The Kings Speech to him. I have heard of thee that the Spirit of the Gods is in thee, and that light, and understand∣ing, and excellent Wisdom is found in thee; and now the Wise men and the Astrologers have been brought in before me, that they should read, this writing, and make known to me the Interpretation thereof, but they could not do it: And I have heard of thee that thou canst make Interpretations, and dissolve doubts: Now if thou canst read the Writing, and make known to me the Interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with Scarlet, and have a chain of Godl aboue thy neck, and shalt be the third Ruler in the Kingdom. But Daniel made answer in a far differing stile from that which he had used to his Grandfather;Daniels answer. For the evill which he had foretold to Nebuchadnezzar he wished that it might befal his enemies: But to this King (whose contempt of God and vicious life he hated, he answered in these Words; Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy rewards
to another: Yet I will read the writing to the King, and make known to him the Interpretation: which yet before he did, he shewed him the cause of Gods judgements against him, and the reason of this terrible sentence, where∣of the King and all his Wise men were utterly Igno∣rant, the substance whereof is this, That Belshazzar forgetting Gods goodness to his Father, whom all Nations feared, and obeyed, and yet for his Pride, and neg∣lect of those benefits, as he had deprived him of his Estate, and understanding; so upon the acknowledge∣ment of Gods infinite power, he restored him to both again; And thou his Son (said he) O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thy heart, though thou knewest all this, But hast lifted up thy self against the Lord of Heaven, and they have brought the Vessels of his House before thee, and thou and thy Lords, thy Wives and thy Concubines have drunk Wine in them, and thou hast praised the gods of Silver, and Gold, &c. and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not Glorified: Then was the part of the hand sent from him, and this writing was written,He reads, and Inter∣prets the writing. Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin, Whereof this is the Interpretation: Mene, God hath numbred thy King∣dom, and finished it: Tekel, Thou art weighted in the bal∣lanees, and art found wanting: Peres, Thy Kingdom is divi∣ded, and given to the Medes, and Persians. The very evening or Night of this Day, where∣in Belshazzar thus Feasted, and wherein these things were done, Cyrus, either by his Espeials, or being in∣spired by God himself, whose Ensign he followed in these Wars, finding the time, and opportunity fit for him, even whilst the Kings Head,Cyrus drains Eu∣phrates. and the Heads of his Nobility, were no less distempered with the vapours of Wine, than their hearts were with the fear of Gods Judgements, he caused all the Banks, and Heads of his Trenches, to be opened, and cut down with all speed, and diligence, whereby that great River Eu∣phrates was quickly drawn dry, and himself with his Army passing through the Channell which was
now dry, without any opposition, they easily made their entrance into the City, finding none to di∣sturb them; Invadunt urbem somno, Vino{que} sepultam: All the Town lay buried in Wine and Sleep;Babylon taken. and such as came in the Persians way, were put to the Sword unless they saved themselves by flight, as some did, who ran away crying, and filled the Streets with an un∣certain tumult. Such of the Assyrian Lords as had formerly revolt∣ed from Belshazzar to Cyrus, did now conduct a Se∣lected company to the Kings Pallace, which being easily forced by them, they rushed strait into the Chamber where the King and his Princes were Ban∣quetting,Belshaz∣zar slain. and there slew both him and them with∣out mercy, who strove in vain to keep those lives, which God had newly threatened to take away. Now was that prophesie fulfilled, Jer. 51. 30, 31, 32. The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight;Prophe∣sies ful∣filled. they have remained in their Holds; their might hath failed; they became as women; they have burnt their dwelling places; Her barrs are broken. One Post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the King of Ba∣bylon that his City is taken at one end. And that the passages are stopped (viz. of the River Euphrates) and the Reeds they have burnt with fire, and the men of War are affrighted; The Prophet Isay also, two hundred years before this subversion of Babylon, in his forty seventh Chapter, and elsewhere, describeth this destruction so feelingly, and lively, as if he had been present, both at the terrible slaughter there committed, and had seen the great and unseared change, and calami∣ty of this great Empire; Yea, and had also heard the sorrows and bewallings of every surviving Soul, there∣unto subject; which Prophesie he begins with these words; Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin daugh∣ter of Babylon, sit on the Ground; there is no Throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: For thou shalt no more be cal∣led tender, and delicate, &c. And though it cannot be
doubted that God used Nebuchadnezzar, and the Chal∣deans as his Instruments to punish the Idolatry, and wickedness of the Jews, yet did he not forget that in the Execution of Gods Judgements, they had used much rigour, and extremity; as we see Isay 47. 6. I was wroth with my People; I have polluted mine Inhe∣ritance, and given them into thine hand; Thou didst shew them no mercy; Vpon the Ancient hast thou very heavily laid the Yoke; and again, I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of Hosts, and will cut off from Babel the Name, and the remnant, and the Son, and the Nephew: Meaning Evilmerodach, and Belshazzar. And again, Isay 13. 15, &c. Every one that is found shall be thrust thorow; and every one that is joyned to them shall be slain with the Sword; their Children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes, their Houses shall be spoiled, and their Wives ravished. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard Silver, and as for Gold, they shall not delight in it; their Bowes also shall dsh the young men to pieces, and they shall have no pitty on the fruit of the Womb; their eye shall not spare children. And Babylon, the Glory of Kingdoms, and beauty of the Chaldees excel∣lency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom, and Go∣morrah, &c. Read also Chapter fourteenth. No Histo∣rian that was either present at this Victory of Cyrus, or that received the report from others truly as it was, could better describe, and leave the same to posterity after it was acted, than Isay hath done in many parts of his Prophesie, which were written two hundred years before any of these things were attempted. The Greatness,The great∣ness of Babylon. and Magnificence of Babylon, were it not by divers grave Authours recorded, might seem altogether Fabulous; For it is reported for truth, that one part of the City knew not that the other was taken three days after; which is not impossible if we consider the vast Circumference of it. Diodorus Siculus saith, that it was in compass three hundred, and sixty Furlongs, which make forty five Miles. The Walls were so thick that
six Chariots might pass in front thereon, and they were three hundred sixty and five Foot high, and were adorn∣ed, and beautified with one hundred and fifty Towers. Strabo gives a greater circuit, adding twenty five For∣longs more to the former compass, reckoning it at three hundred eighty five Furlongs, which makes forty eight Miles and one Furlong. Herodotus finds the com∣pass yet to be greater, namely four hundred and eight∣ty Furlongs in circuit; the thickness of the Wall he measures at fifty Cubits, and the height at two hundred of the same Regall Cubits. For entrance, it had a hundred Gates of Brass, with Posts, and Hooks to hang them on of the same Mettall; and therefore did the Prophet Isay rightly intitle Babylon, The Princess, and Glory of Kingdoms, Isay 47. 5. & 13. 19. But when Cyrus had won her, he stript her out of her Princely Robes,Babylons miserable Captivity. and made her a slave, dividing, not onely her goodly Houses, and her whole Territory, with all the Riches therein contained, amongst his Soul∣diers; but also bestowed the Inhabitants themselves as Bondslaves, upon those that had taken possession of their goods. Cyrus having obtained this great, and Signall Victo∣ry, the glory of which was a reward for his service done for him who was the Authour of it, and of all good∣ness, and thereby translated the Empire of the Chaldeans to himself,Cyrus re∣leases the Jews. according to the Prophesies which went afore of him; in this first year of his Empire, he made a De∣cree that the Captive Jews should return again into their own Country of Judea, and that they should build a∣gain the House of God in Jerusalem, having now en∣dured, and finished the seventy years Captivity fore∣told by the Prophet Jeremy. The tenour of which Decree was thus, Thus saith Cyrus King of Persin;His De∣cree for it. The Lord God of Hea∣ven hath given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and hath charged me to build him an House at Jerusalem which is
in Judah, Who is there among you of all his People? Let his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the House of the Lord God of Israel (He is God) which is at Jerusalem: And who∣soever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with Silver, and with Gold, and with goods, and with Beasts, besides the free-will Offering for the House of God that is in Jerusalem, Ezra 1, 2, 3, 4. He also brought forth and restored the Vessels of the House of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of the Temple at Jerusalem, and had put them into the House of his gods; These were brought forth and num∣bred unto Sheshbazzar the Prince of Judah;Or Zoro∣babel. and this is the number of them; Thirty Charges of Gold, a thousand Chargers of Silver,He re∣stores the vessels of the Tem∣ple. nine and twenty Knives, thirty Basins of Gold, Silver Basins of a second sort four hundred and ten, and of other vessels a thousand; All the vessels of Gold and Silver were five thousand and four hundred. The number of Jews that then returned out of Chaldea,The Jews come to Jerusalem. under their Leader Zorobabel, the Son of Salathiel, and Nephew to King Jeconias, and Joshua the Son of Josedech, the High Priest, were about fifty thousand: And as soon as they arrived at Jerusalem, they built an Altar to the living God, and sacrificed thereon according to their Law, and afterwards bethought themselves how to prepare mate∣rials for the building of the Temple. Cyrus having set all things in order at Babylon, returned, through Media, into Persia, to his Father Cambyses, and his Mother Mandanes, who were yet living; and from thence returning again into Media,His Mar∣riage. he married the only Daugh∣ter and Heir of Cyaxares, and for Dowry, had the whole Kingdom of Media given him with her; And when the Marriage was finished, he presently went his way, and took her with him; and coming to Babylon, from thence he sent Governours into all his Dominions;His Go∣vernours. Into Arabia he sent Megabyzus; into Phrygia the greater, Artacaman; in∣to Lydia, and Jonia, Chrysantas; into Caria, Adusius; into
Phrygia Helle spontiaca, or the less, Pharmichas; But into Cili∣cia, & Cyprus, & Paphlagonia, he sent no Persians to Govern them, because they voluntarily, and of their own accord took his part against the King of Babylon; yet he caused, even them also to pay him Tribute. Cyrus having spent one whole year with his Wife in Babylon,His great Army, & Victories. gathered thither his whole Army, con∣sisting of one hundred and twenty Thousand Horse, and two Thousand Iron Chariots, and six hundred Thousand Footmen, and having furnished himself with all necessary provisions, he undertook that journey wherein he subdued all the Nations inhabiting from Syria to the Red Sea. The time that Cyrus enjoyed in rest and pleasure after these great Victories,Cyrus his Civil Go∣vernment. and the attainment of his Em∣pire, is generally agreed upon by all Chronologers to have lasted only seven years; In which time he made such Laws and Constitutions as differ little from the Or∣dinances of all wife Kings that are desirous to establish a Royal power to themselves and their Posterity, which are recorded by Xenophon. The last War,His last Wars. and the end of this Great King Cyrus is diversly written by Historians: Herodotus, and Justine say: That after these Conquests, Cyrus invaded the Massagets, a very Warlike Nation of the Scythians, Governed by Tomyris, their Queen: and that in an en∣counter between the Persians, and these Northern No∣mades, Tomyris lost her Army, together with her Son Spagapises that was the Generall of it. In revenge whereof this Queen making new levies of men of War, and prosecuting the War against Cyrus, in a second sore Battel, the Persians were beaten, and Cyrus was taken Prisoner, and that Tomyris cut off his Head from his Body, and threw it into a Bowle of blood, using these words, Thou that hast all thy time thirst∣ed for blood, now drink thy fill, and satiate thy self with it. This War which Metasthenes calls Tomyrique, lasted about six years.
But more probably this Scythian War was that which is mentioned before, which Cyrus made a∣gainst the Scythians after the Conquest of Lydia, ac∣cording to Ctesias, who calleth Tomyris, Sparetha, and makes the end of it otherwise, as you may see be∣fore. The same Ctesias also recordeth, that the last War which Cyrus made was against Amarhaus, King of the Derbitians, another Nation of the Scythians, whom, though he overcame in Battel, yet there he received a wound whereof he died three days after.His Death. Strabo also affirmeth, that he was buried in his own City of Pasagardes, which himself had built, and where his Epitaph was to be read in Strabo's time; which he saith was this, O,His Epi∣taph. vir, quicun{que} es, & undecun{que} advenis, ne{que} enim te adventurum ignoravi: Ego sum Cyrus, qui Persis Impe∣rium constitui; pusillum hoc Terrae, quo meum tegitur Cor∣pus, mihi ne invideas. O thou man, whosoever thou art, and whensoever thou comest, for I was not ignorant that thou shouldst come: I am Cyrus that founded the Persian Empire: Do not envy unto me this little Earth with which my Body is covered. When Alexander the Great returned from his Indian Conquests, he visited Pasagardes, and caused this Tomb of Cyrus to be opened,Alexander opens his Sepulchre And ho∣nours his Tomb. either upon hope of great Trea∣sure, supposed to have been buried with him, or upon a desire to honour his dead Body with certain Ceremo∣nies; when the Sepulchre was opened, there was found nothing in it, save an old rotten Target, two Scythian Bows, and a Sword. The Coffin wherein his Body lay, Alexander caused to be covered with his own Garment, and a Crown of Gold to be set upon it. Cyrus finding in himself that he could not long enjoy the World, he called unto him his Nobility, with his two Sons,Cyrus his last words. Cambyses, and Smerdis, and after a long Oration, wherein he assured himself, and taught o∣thers, about the immortality of the Soul, and of the
punishments and rewards following the ill, and good deservings of every man in this life; He exhorted his Sons, by the strongest Arguments he had, to a perpetu∣all Concord and agreement. Many other things he ut∣tered, which makes it probable, that he received the knowledge of the true God from Daniel, whilst he Go∣verned Susa in Persia; and that Cyrus himself had read the Prophesie of Isay, wherein he was expresly named, and by God preordained for the delivery of his People out of Captivity; which act of delivering the Jews, and of restoring of the holy Temple, and the City of Jerusalem, was in true consideration the Noblest-work that ever Cy∣rus performed. For in other actions he was an Instru∣ment of Gods Power, used for the chastising of many Nations, and the establishing of a Government in those parts of the world, which yet was not to continue long: But herein he had the favour to be an Instrument of Gods goodness, and a willing advancer of his Kingdom upon earth, which must last for ever. Cyrus had Issue two Sons,His Issue. Cambyses, and Smerdis, and three Daughters, Atossa, Meroe, and Artistoua. At his Death he bequeathed his Empire to his Eldest Son Cam∣byses, appointing Smerdis, his younger Son, to be Satrapa, or Leiutenant of Media, Armenia, and Ca∣dusia. He reigned about one and thirty years, and died aged. The Greek Historians wholly ascribe the Conquest of Babylon to Cyrus, because that he commanded the Army in Chief; yet the Scriptures attribute it to Darius, King of the Medes, whose General Cyrus was: For when Babylon was taken, and Belshazzar slain; Its said, Dan. 5. 31. that Darius the Median took the Kingdom, being about sixty two years old. It was Darius also that placed Officers over the severall Provinces there∣of, as we read, Dan. 6. 1, 2. It pleased Darius to set over the Kingdom a hundred and twenty Princes, which should be over the whole Kingdom, and over these, three Presidents, of whom Daniel was the first, &c. And thus
was it Prophesied by Isay long before; Behold! I will stir up the Medes against them, &c. and by the Prophet Jeremy; The Lord hath raised up the Spirit of the King of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, &c. Jer. 55. 11. And again, verse 28. Prepare against her the Nations, with the Kings of the Medes, the Cap∣tains thereof, and all the Rulers thereof, and all the Land of his Dominion. But certain it is that the Honour of that great Victo∣ry over Babylon was wholly given to Cyrus, who was the Instrument preordained, and forenamed by God himself: not onely for this Action; but also for the delivery of his Church: Yet Daniel makes it plain, that himself: not onely lived a great Officer under King Darius, but that he continued in that estate to the first year of Cyrus, which was not long after, which also was the year of Daniels Death. As for the age of Cyrus we are beholding to Tully for it; who in his first Book de Divinatione, Cites it out of one Dionysius, a Persian Writer, in this manner. The Sun (saith Dionysius) appeared unto Cyrus in his sleep, standing at his feet, which, when Cyrus thrice endeavoured to take in his hands, the Sun still turned aside, and went away: and the Magi, who were the most learned men a∣mongst the Persians, said that by his thrice offering to take hold of the Sun, was portended to him that he should raign thirty years;His Age. which came to pass accordingly: For he lived to the Age of seventy years, and began not to raign till he was forty. In the first year of Belshazzar,Some use∣full Obser∣vations. Daniel had the Vision shewed him of the four Beasts, signifying the four Monar∣chies; and of God delivering over all power, and Sove∣reignty to the Son of man, Dan. 7. In the third year of Belshazzar, the Vision of the Ram, and Goat, foreshewing the destruction of the Persian Monarchy by Alexander the Great, and the great misery which Antiochus should bring upon the People of God was shewed to Daniel, living then at
Susa, in the Province of Elam, upon the bank of the River Vlai, which environed the Castle of Susa, and parted the Provinces of Susa, and Elemais, Dan. 8. whence we may collect, that at that time the Pro∣vince of Susa was not in the hands of the Medes and Persians, but of the Babylonians, under whom Daniel then lived. Darius the Mede, son of Cyaxares, or Ahasuerus the Son of Adyages, took upon him the Kingdom, which was delivered over to him by Cyrus, the Con∣querer, Dan. 5. 31. & 9. 1. The Angel, in this first year of his Raign, is said to have confirmed, and strengthened him in his Kingdom, Dan. 11. 1. After which he raigned two years. Towards the end of the first year of Darius the Mede, the seventy years of the Babylonish Captivity expired, which began under Jehoiakim, in the first year of Nebuchadnezzar, at which time God promised that they should return into their own Country, Jer. 29. 10. Thus saith the Lord, that after seventy years be ac∣complished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good Word towards you, in causing you to return to this place. Upon consideration of which very time, now so neer approaching, it was, that Daniel powred out that most fervent Prayer for the Remission of his own sins, and of his Peoples; and for that promised deliverance out of their Captivity: Whereupon the Angel Gabriel brought him an answer, not onely con∣cerning this, but also for the spiritual deliverance of the Church to be wrought at last by the Death of the Messias, uttering that most famous, and memorable Prophesie of the seventy Weeks, Dan. 9. 12, &c. The Samaritans, by the means of some Courtiers a∣bout Cyrus, whom they had bribed for that purpose, distributed the Jews in their building of the Temple, Ezra 4. 5. Whence proceeded that three weeks mourning of the Prophet Daniel, which Fast he begun about the third Day of the first Moneth, in the third year of Cyrus,
Dan. 10. 1. 4. After which, upon the four and twen∣tieth Day of the first Moneth, that vision of the Kings of Persia; of Alexander the Great, and his Successours, and their Kingdoms, was shewed and revealed unto Da∣niel, as he stood upon the bank of Hiddikel, or Ty∣gris; All which is contained in the three last Chapters of Daniel; which (as may be collected out of the close thereof) was the last Vision that ever he had, and that but a little before his Death. FINIS. Courteous Reader, be pleased to take notice that these Books follow∣ing, are Printed for, and sold by William Miller, at the Gilded Acorn in St Pauls Church-yard, near the little North Door. Hicks Revelation, Revealed, Folio Clares Martyrology Compleat, with the Persecutions of England to the end of Queen Maries Reign, Folio. —Lives of ten Eminent Divines, some being as follow; Bishop Vsher, Dr Gouge, Dr Harris, Mr Gataker, Mr Whittaker, &c. and some other famous Christians. —Life of Christ, 4o —Life of Herod the Great, 4o A Prospect of Hungary, and Transylvania, together with an account of the qualities of the Inhabitants, the Commodities of the Countries, the Chiefest Cities, Towns, and Strong-holds, Rivers, and Mountains, with an Historycal Narration of the Wars amongst themselves, and with the Turks, continued to this year 1664. As also a Brief Description of Bohe∣mia, Austria, Bavaria, Steirirark, Croatia, Dalmatia, Moravia, and other Adjacent Countries, contained in a Map joyned therewith; by which Map you may know which Places are in the Power of the Turk, and which Christians have 4o Ctadocks KNOWLEDGE and PRACTICE; Or, a Plain Discourse of the Chief Things necessary to be KNOWN, BELIEVED, and PRA∣CTISED in Order to SALVATION; 4o Ford, of Baptism, 8o Cottn, on the Covenant of Grace, 8o Culverwell, of Assurance, 8o Records Urinal of Physick, 8o Ravius Oriental Grammar, 12o Peacocks Visitation, 12o Dr Tuckney's Good Day well Improved, 12o —Death Disarmed, 12o —Balm of Gilead, 12o Clamor Sanguinis, 12o King Charles's Works, 24o
