C6366 12121773 54443
THE LIFE OF LEWIS of BOVRBON, LATE Prince of Conde.
Imprimatur, Jan. 9 1092/3. EDMUND BOHUN. ADVERTISEMENT. MEMOIRS of Emeric Count Teckely, in Four Books: Wherein are Related all the most considerable Transactions in Hun∣gary and the Ottoman Empire; from his Birth, An. 1656, till after the Battel of Salankement, in the year 1691. Translated out of French. Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maiden-head against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street.
LOUIS DE BOURBON PRINCE DE CONDE.
THE LIFE OF LEWIS of BOVRBON, LATE Prince of Conde. Digested into ANNALS. With many Curious REMARKS on the Transactions of EVROPE for these last Sixty Years. Done out of French. LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maiden-Head against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet∣street. MDCXCIII.
TO The Right Honourable WILLIAM Earl of Devonshire, Lord Steward of Their MAIESTIES Houshold, Lord Lieutenant of the County of DERBY, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and One of Their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, &c. My Lord, BY Encouraging the Translating of useful Books, the French Na∣tion have made an Universal Con∣quest
upon Learning. They have by this Method possest themselves of the Wit, Wisdom, and Experience of all Ages and Climates. 'Tis no Scandal to take Example by an Enemy, in what is Commen∣dable; and our imitating them in this Practise is one way of making Reprizals. I confess, that Transla∣tions from French Originals, are on∣ly for the Advantage of common English Readers; but they being the Generality, the Benefit is Pub∣lick: For which Reason it is not below the Dignity of our Court and Nobility to Countenance such Endeavours. 'Twas upon this Account that I presum'd to Offer the following Translation to Your Lordship's Pro∣tection, in order to its Publick Re∣ception.
You are the English Va∣rus. Nec gratior ulla est Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit Pagina Nomen. This Piece may be thus Recom∣mended to our Countreymen, and find that welcome Entertainment which a Vseful History deserves. It likewise gave me an Opportunity (as Zeal is always Officious) of expres∣sing (in some measure) the Re∣spect I am oblig'd to Entertain for Your Lordship, as an Eminent Pa∣tron of the Muses. But if I were an utter Stranger to them, I have at least an Englishman's Right of Of∣fering my small Tribute of Ac∣knowledgments among the Crowd of Your Admirers. 'Tis impossible for Sublimest Wits to say what they
ought upon this Theme, and for the Meanest not to say something; since the ablest Panegyrist in At∣tempting Your Character can only speak the Sense of Nations. Even Foreign Courts are sufficiently Ac∣quainted with Your Worth; and if any are so little Civiliz'd as to be Strangers to Your Name, they may inform themselves where-ever Good Sense or Gallantry are in any Esteem. 'Tis both Your Happiness and Merit to be Admir'd Abroad, and Belov'd at Home. Your Lordship appears so much a Favourite of Heaven and Nature, that I can never think of You with∣out calling to Mind that Horatian Character of the Roman Tibullus; I know not how the Description squar'd with Him; but if it were then a Complimen, 'tis now prov'd a Prophecy.
Dii tibi Formam Dii tibi Divitias dederant Artemque fruendi. Quid vovest dulci Nutricula ajus Alumno Quam fapre & fari possit quid Senti∣at; & Cui Gratia, Fama, Valetudo, contingat abunde. Your Advantages of Fortune and Person might create Envy in some, if Your greater Accomplishments of Mind, and most obliging Nature, did not irresistably command the Affections of All. Your Noble Ance∣stry bequeathed You those Endow∣ments that were capable of being be∣queathed; and You have furnish'd Your self with such as are not to be transmitted by Descent, but ob∣tain'd by the particular Vertue of
the Successor. Courage, Con∣stancy, Magnificence, Justice and Liberality, are deriv'd to You with Your Blood, and, with relation to the Publick, true English Principles are Yours by Inheritance. You are happy in Examples of Your Ance∣stors, and more happy in Personally maintaining the Honour and Repu∣tation of so Illustrious a Family. You preserve with their Greatness, their Condescention and Affability. Generous Actions are Your de∣light; and when You dispense Your Favours, Your Judgment as well as Generosity is exerted. Want and Merit are ever the Objects of Your Compassion. You have the Art of supporting Grandeur without For∣mality; even Business it self by a peculiar Felicity, sits easie upon You. You manage the Hurry of Affairs with that Tranquility, that is scarce
to be found in the Cell or Cloyster. Your Method resembles that of Na∣ture, whose greatest Progresses are carry'd on with Serenity: The shal∣lowest Streams are always the most noisy; the deeper the Current, the greater the Silence. Your Retire∣ment again is never unactive; and he that follows You to your Retreat, shall find you, Tacitum Sylvas inter reptare Salubres Curantem Quid sit dignum Sapiente Bonoque. Your Lordship has shown the world that a States-man can be a Friend, and a Courtier an English-man; that Complaisance and Gallantry can con∣sist with Sincerity and good Sense. I will not pretend to enumerate all those Qualifications that endear You to Your Countrey, being sensible how
imperfectly I have touch'd what is obvious to every man's Eye; my comfort is, That the Readers Private Sentiments will do You Justice: I will only presume to join with them in hearty Wishes, That Your Lordship may long continue in your flourish∣ing Prosperity, an Ornament to the Court of Great Britain, an Assistant to Their Majesties, and the Nation's Affairs, belov'd by Your Country as much as You are a Lover of it. This is every true Englishman's Prayer, and particularly of My Lord, Your LORDSHIP'S Most Humble and Devoted Servant, N. TATE.
The PREFACE. THE Life of the Prince of Conde has been inquir'd af∣ter so long since, that consi∣dering my disability to answer the Publick Expectations, for want of all the Memoirs that I stood in need of (for it would require an Age to get 'em all) I design'd to have set forth a Collection of all the Printed Relations of the Cam∣paigns, wherein the Prince had commanded in chief, of the Battels he had won, the strong Holds of which he had made him∣self Master, and of such other Pieces which I had taken care to get together; to which purpose no diligence was omitted, though some of 'em were become very scarce. And there is no question to be made, but that such a Rude Collection alone would have been very grateful. For Peo∣ple would have been glad to see such a
Prospect of the Atchievements of so great a Hero as the Prince of Conde; and the greatest part of those Pieces, though printed long before, would have been No∣velties to many People. Nevertheless, considering that if those Pieces were read successively according to the Order of Time, and shap'd into a Methodical Form of Hi∣story, they would please much better, I determin'd to take that course. So that when you find entire the greatest part of those Relations which have already appear'd, and of which some begin already to be quite out of print, you will find an Abstract of the Life of that great Personage suffici∣ently guarded with the Circumstances of Relation, and the Principal Matters that compleat his History. We are to inform the Reader farther, That by the Assistance of Particular Memoirs which we receiv'd from several Officers who had serv'd un∣der the Prince, and Letters written by Persons who had free access to Chantilli, there are many Circumstances here men∣tioned which were never Printed, nor are any other where to be found. As to what
remains, we must acknowledge, That we have made use of the Memoirs of Roche∣foucault, Tavanes, Puysegur; the History of Marshal Gassion, the Thea∣trum Gallicum, M. de Leti, the History of the French Monarchy; The History of the Present Age; That of the Wars of Holland; That of Swe∣den by Puffendorf, Labardaeus de Rebus Gallicis, Prido, P. Rapin, P. Bergier, and the Principal Funeral Orations that have been preach'd in honour of the Prince's Memory.
THE HISTORY OF LEWIS de BOVRBON, Prince of Conde. First Book. THE World has no such reason to won∣der,The Design of the Work. that tho' the Prince of Conde has been dead for so many Years, yet no Body attempted any sooner to write his Life. He was a Prince whose Life was intermix'd with so many Varieties and Changes of Fortune,1621. who signaliz'd himself by so many great and glorious Actions, and whose retiring from Business had some∣thing so Heroick in it, that it must be thence con∣cluded, that such a History, delightful in the Ge∣neral Knowledge of it, could not choose but be acceptable, when inlarg'd into particulars. And
it would be so much the more kindly entertain'd, in regard the Publick is encourag'd to believe that some Body will undertake it. For my part I have neither Memoirs anow, nor Ability sufficient to Enterprise so great a Work; so that I shall not ad∣venture to presume so far. The Design which I propose to my self, is only to collect together such Relations, as have been made from time to time, of the most remarkable Actions of this Prince, and to tack these Pieces in such a manner, one to another, as to make an Epitome of his Life, from his Birth to the time of his Decease: to the end, the Reader may have a view of the Battels which he won, or wherein he signaliz'd his Courage; the Sieges of the Towns which he took, and of the Consequence of those great Victories, to which indeed the Monarchy of France is beholding for her Grandeur. The Birth of the Prince of Conde.Lewis of Bourbon, the II. of that Name, that is to say, the Hero of whom I am now to speak, was born at Paris, the 8th. of September, in the Year, 1621. Lewis the XIII. his God-Father, gave him his own Name, and while his Father liv'd, he bore the Title of Duke of Enguiens. This Young Prince was Grand-Son to Lewis the I. that famous Prince of Conde, who after the Death of Henry II. put himself at the Head of the Male-contents, in the Civil-Wars about Religion, for those Reasons which are known to all the World; and Son of Henry of Bourbon, and Margaret of Monmorenci. After the Death of Lewis I. Prince of Conde, who was slain after a most execrable manner, by a Captain of the Duke of Anjou's Guards, Hen. IV. who to preserve his Crown, found himself con∣strain'd to renounce his Religion, was desirous that the Young Henry should be bred up in the same Principles which he had embrac'd himself, and had begun both to practise and profess. To
which purpose, he was put into the Hands of those who were made choice of for his Education. And such extraordinary Care was tak'n to infuse into this Young Prince an early good Opinion and Af∣fection for the Catholick Religion, that never was any Prince more Zealous then He for the Roman Worship. Insomuch, that it may be said of him, that he was born for the Re-establishment of the Catholick Religion, which the Prince, his Father, would have rooted out of France; that he only li∣v'd to defend it; and that he was the Ornament and Glory of it. It may be readily conjectur'd by this Portrai∣cture,1629. that Prince Henry of Bourbon was no less desirous that his Son, the Duke of Enguien,His Studies. should be brought up betimes in the knowledge of a Reli∣gion of which himself was in some measure the Support and Column. And he had a Passion so ex∣traordinary for it, that so soon as he arriv'd to be 8 Years of Age, his Father sent him to Bourges, to the Colledge of Jesuits, where he was committed to the Tuition of two Persons of that Order, the most able and learned that could be found. Thus the Young Prince continu'd Three Years in that House, going regularly every day to his Form or Classis, as well as the Rest of the Inferiour Schollers. And in regard he had a quick and piercing Wit, a retentive Memory, and a great number of Natural Endowments, his Tutors understood so well to cultivate his Genius, that at Twelve Years of Age he was able to discourse of Religion after a very rational manner, and at Thirteen Years of Age, he had improv'd himself so perfectly in his course of Phylosophy, that he maintain'd several Thesis's and Arguments in publick, with that subtlety and solidity that he became the wonder of all that heard him.
Certain it is, that this Great Prince was a pro∣per Receptacle for all manner of Sciences and Learning, but his predominant Passion led him to a Martial Life. For that reason he was desirous to understand the Art of War, so soon as he found himself in a Condition to undergo the Fatigues and Hardships that attend it. And he no sooner set forward in that Illustrious Career, but he made surprizing Progresses. His most Early Years were remarkable and signaliz'd with all the happy Pre∣sages that usually accompany the Infancy of Extra∣ordinary Men; and the Accomplishment of 'em was so quick, that People had hardly time to di∣stinguish the Effects from the Hopes. The Marshalls de Chaunes, de Chatilln, & de la Meilleraye, besieg'd the City of Arras, in the Year, 1640.1640. And having repuls'd the Cardinal Infanta,He is pre∣sent at the Siege of Arras. who attempted to raise the Siege; they carri'd the Place two months after. The Duke of Enguien perform'd his first Campaign, under these Generals, as a Volunteer: and he signaliz'd himself, in this Siege, for his Bravery, all along, from the very first day that the Trenches were open'd; nor was it a little that he contributed to repair the Ig∣nominy of that ill Success which had some days before befall'n the French Army at the Sieges of Charlemont and Mariembourg, which they were con∣strain'd to raise. He was Marrid the Year following, and espou∣sed Clara Clementia de Maille-Breze,1641. who was Weal∣thy to abundance; for she was the Daughter of Marshal de Breze, who being Cardinal Richlie's Brother-in-law,Hs Mar∣riage. had been advanc'd to Places of great Dignity and Importance. 'Tis said, that the Duke of Enguien, who aspi∣r'd to a higher Alliance, shewed at first a Re∣luctancy to match himself into the Family of that Minister, and that he stood upon his Punctilioes,
like a Person of great Honour and Gallantry. But in regard that Cardinal Richlieu, to speak properly was then King; some there are who say, that Lewis XIII. gave him to understand, that 'twas his Pleasure to have the Match concluded, unless he had a mind to incur his Anger; and that the Car∣dinal, whose will was a Law, had layd a Contri∣vance to have him arrested under some specious pretence, if he should hesitate never so little upon the Proposal which was made him; nay, if he did not make the first steps of Courtship to the Lady. However it were, the Duke of Enguien went to visit the Cardinal, who at that time was at Ruel: So that the Match was concluded at that Visit; and the 11th. of February the Nuptial Ceremonies were perform'd with Royal Magnificene. War, as I have already said, being the prevail∣ing Passion that sway'd the Duke of Enguien,He is pre∣sent at the Siege of Aire. no sooner the French took the Field, in the Year, 1641. but he accompani'd Marshal de Meileray into Elan∣ders, and was at the Siege of Aire, which was a most remarkable Siege, and where he signaliz'd himself with no less Gallentry then in the Tren∣ches of Arras. Aire Surrender'd upon Composition; but the Spanish Garrison was hardly march'd out of the Town, before the Spaniards made themselves Ma∣sters of Lilers, and immediately after, were re∣solv'd to fall upon the French in their Lines, or to starve 'em in their Entrenchments, if they refus'd to fight. General Lamboy's Army, which the Spaniards had brought into Alsatia, puft up with the Victory which they had won at La Marfee, near Sedan,An occasion wherein the Prince of Conde signalizes himself. march'd just before the Van-guard, in the very Face of the French Army. Of which, so soon as Marshal Gassion had Intelligence, he Salli'd out of the Camp, with a part of his Regiment, to ob∣serve
the March of the Enemy, and to Charge 'em in the Rear, if they pass'd forward. But he was so surpriz'd to see so numerous an Army ma∣king towards him, that he retreated about a Mile, and made a stand, upon a Rising Ground, at the corner of a little Copse, where he stood secure. But that which stopt the Marshal de Gassion, could not stop the Duke of Enguien, who being mounted a Horseback, in Company with Marshal de la Me∣illeray, and about three or fourscore Lords, and some Volunteers, to view the Enemy, advanc'd so far, that all of a suddain they found themselves environ'd with two great Squadrons of Horse, from which they had much ado to free themselves; but at length they did get rid of 'em, in such a man∣ner as redounded highly to their Honour: For af∣ter a short, but very hot Conflict for the time, they regain'd their Lins, without much loss; and particular Commendations were bestow'd up∣on the Young Duke, for the Bravery and undaunt∣ed Courage which he had shew'd upon that Occa∣sion. 1642.In the Year 1642. Lewis XIII. being desirous to make himself Master of Perpignan, he order'd the Marshalls de Schombrg and Meilleray to besiege it; and that great Monarch was present, in Person, at the Siege,He is at the Sege of Perpignan, and om∣mands the Arrierbn of Langudc. for some time. Nor could the D. of Enguien, who follow'd the King, fail of Employment in an Enterprize of that Nature. He commanded the Gentry and Nobility of Languedoc, and behav'd himself with so much Honour, that the Town be∣ing constrain'd to yield, ater a Resistance of four Months, believ'd she could not make a more glori∣ous Surrender then by delivering the Keys of her Gates to the Young Prince. How many Lives would those Marks of Valour have suffis'd to Ho∣nour, which the Duke of Enguien gave in his first three Campaignes! He shew'd an Ability to Com∣mand
so extraordinary, moe especially at the Siege of the last Place, that Lewis XIII. who in part had been a Witness of his great Actions, thought he could not do France a greater piece of Service,He is made General of the King of France his Army. then to put him at the Head of his Armies. After the taking of Perpignan, which was atten∣ded with the Surrender of Salces, and the total Reduction of the whole Country of Roussillon. Cardinal Richlieu dy'd upon the 4th. of Decem∣ber, 1642.Death of Card. Rich∣lieu. All People imagin'd, that upon the Death of that Minister, the Face of Affairs would have strangely alter'd; and that Lewis the XIII. who had been as it were a Slave for twenty Years toge∣ther, would take that opportunity to break his Chains. But through a strange Fatality, not easie to be parallel'd, that Prince who had boasted, up∣on the News of the Crdinals Death, that now he should begin to be a King, had not however the Courage to shake off so base and ignominious a Yoke; and notwithstanding the aversion he had for the Memory of that Cardinal, he saw himself constrain'd, through his own Cowardliness, not only to dissemble one part of his Sentiments, but to authorize the Disposal, which that Minister had made by his last Will, of the Principal Employ∣ments, and most important Preferments in the Kingdom. In a word, the Kindred and Favou∣rites of Cardinal Richlieu enjoy'd all the Advanta∣ges which he had procur'd 'em, altogether as pea∣ceably after his Death, as they did in his Life-time. And Cardinal Mazarin, who was the only Person of all his Creatures, in whom he most confided, and who was most deeply engag'd in his Interests, was made choice of to Succeed him in the Government of Affairs. Bu according to all probability, there was some Prospect of a suddain Change. For Lewis
XIII. had so long labour'd under a decaying and languishing Distemper, that there was no hope of any Cure, and then all People believ'd that so soon as the Queen, or the Duke of Orleance cam to the Regency, that Richlieu's Party would be utterly discarded; but they flater'd themselves in vain. For Cardinal Mazarin, who fore-saw every thing that could happen, and who moreover had very powerful Reasons to side with the Queen, and pre∣serve his Authority by that means, made use of all his Power over the King, to infinuate into his mind, that it behov'd him of necessity to declare that Princess Regent. The King was no way dispo'd to follow the Cardinals Advice. For besides the little Kindness which he had for the Queen, he was so ill satisfi'd with her Conduct, in regard of the Tyes which he believ'd she had with the Spaniard, by the Mediati∣on of the Dutchess of Chevreuse, who was fled for Sanctuary to Brussels; and he was otherwise so pre∣posess'd, that out of the design which the Dutchess had to Marry the Duke of Orleans, she had had a hand in the Conspiracy of Chalaes, Grand Master of his Wardrobe, who would have assassinated him, that tho' he gave great Credit to the Cardinals Advice, yet he would not give him any positive Answer touching that Matter. And indeed the King was at a great loss which way to turn himself. There was no Body could pretend to the Regency, if the Queen were Excluded, or oblig'd to have a Partner; and both the Queen, and the Duke of Or∣leans, were equally hateful to him. But Cardinal Mazarin would not be so put off. For in regard he sooth'd the Queen with every thing that could flatter her Hopes, he lost no time either in sollici∣ting the King, or causing him to be importun'd in Favour of that Princess. And the better to bring about his Design, and that at the same time he
might have the greatest part himself in the Man∣agement of Affairs, he took a Resolution to pro∣pound Conditions, so little to the Queens Advan∣tage, that Lewis XIII. who saw himself just drop∣ping into his Grave, thankt him for having disin∣gag'd him out of that Irresolution, wherein he had hesitated so long. For in short, altho' he consent∣ed, at last, that the Queen should be declar'd Re∣gent; yet the Power which he gave her was ex∣treamly limited, that Princess not being able to undertake any thing of her self, without first im∣parting the Business to the Counsel, of which the Cardinal was to be the Chief, and where things were to be carrid by Plurality of Voices. But how disadvantageous soever these Conditi∣ons were to the Queen, the King however thought he had done enough, and the Queen, and the Car∣dinal, who had their Prospects, and their Ends, were highly satisfid that Things were brought to that point. Nevertheless, in regard the Business was not concluded, and for that the Kings mind might alter, the Cardinal left nothing omitted to keep the King steady in the Resolution he had ta∣ken, while the Queen,The Queen endeavur to draw the Prince of Conde to her Party & succeeds. on her side, labour'd to win to her Party all the considerable Persons in the Court; of which number was the Duke of Enguien: and it was a long time before she thought of him. But the Duke de la Roche Foucaut, who had always an Antipathy against Cardinal Richlieu, and sought all Opportunities to be serviceable to the Queen, having one day put it into her Head, that it would be of great Advantage to her to gain this Young Prince, she took it for good Advice. And the Duke of Enguien, who was glad of an opportuni∣ty to oppose the Authority of the Duke of Orleans, who aspir'd to the Regency, willingly accepted the Queens offer. The Queen promis'd to prefer him
before the Duke of Orleans, not only by the Mark of her Esteem and Confidence, but also in all Em∣ployments from whence it lay in her Power to Ex∣clude the Duke of Orleans, by such ways as they two should agree upon together, and which migh not provoke that Prince to a Rupture with her On the other side, the Duke of Enguien promis'd to be inseparably devoted to the Queens Interest, and to be beholding to her alone for all the Favours which he desir'd at Court. And now the Queen thought her self strong enough, when she saw her self assur'd of the support of this Young Prince; and therefore relying on the other side upon the Cardinal, she waited for the Kings Death with a great deal of Confidence. 1643.About that time the Duke of Enguien departed to Command the Army in Flanders, and lay the Foundations of those great Things which he per∣formed with so much Honour. Lewis the XIII. al∣so dy'd within a short time after,The Death of Lewis XIII. that is to say, the 14th. of May, in 1643. the very same day that he began his Reign. After the Death of this Monarch, there happen'd one thing which perhaps never happen'd before in France, where there is a greater regard had to the Kings Pleasure, then in any other Monarchy, that the Parliament of Paris,The Queen confirm'd Regent, by a Delaration of Parli∣ament. which according to the Institution of it, is the Trustee and Guardian of all the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and which derives its Jurisdiction only from the King, cancell'd the Declaration of Lewis XIII. by which, as has been already said, he order'd a Councel for the Regency, to the end, the Queen, whom he thought incapable to manage the Government, might be under a kind of Tutelage. For the Queen, Four days after the King's Death, went to the Parliament, and there did what she pleas'd her self, in a manner so Advantageous to her self, that
here could nothing more be done; the whole As∣embly testifying that they desir'd nothing with so uch fervency, as that her Authority should be bsolute. In short, the Queen was confirm'd Re∣ent by a Declaration of Parliament, bearing date he 18th. of May. This Digression was absolutely necessary, as you ill find by what ensues. Now therefore to return o the Duke of Enguien, while these things were hus transacted in France, and that they were pre∣aring to carry the King's Body to St. Denis, the paniards besieg'd Rocroy, and so vigorously press'd he City, that it was greatly to be fear'd it would all into the Enemies hands, unless it were speedily uccour'd. But the Duke of Enguien, who was al∣eady set forward to Command the Army in Flan∣ers, resolv'd to relieve the Place, and no less riskly to attack the Enemy, who seem'd as willing o come to a Battel; and he perform'd what he ndertook, as he had laid his Design. This Prince was then not above Two and Twenty Years of Age, and one of his Panegyrists has said, and that not without doing him Justice, that he had form'd  Design which was above the reach of the Old Experienc'd Hoary-headed Captains; but which Victory however justifi'd. The Enemies Army as much more numerous then that which he Com∣anded. It was compos'd of those Old Bands of Walloons, Italians and Spaniards, which never had een broken before; but all that could not make he Young Duke desist from his Enterprize. Don rancisco de Melos stay'd his coming, with a firm Resolution to engage him. He was a Captain for∣midable for his Consummate Experience, and for  great many Victories which he had won, and be∣ides all that, he lay entrench'd among Woods and oggs. All the Forces of the Kingdom, were ow to be ventur'd in one single Combat. Upon
that day depended the good or bad Fortune of the Regency. For in short, had the Duke lost that Battel, it would have been impossible for France to have stopp'd a Torrent, which would certainly have delug'dall Champaigne, Picardy, and the Neigh∣bourhood of Paris. The Consideration of so ma∣ny Dangers would have terrify'd any other Person but the Duke of Enguien. However, never did any General appear more Sedate, or more Un∣daunted. He lay the Night preceding that famous Battel, as if he had not thought of any such thing as fighting, and slept so soundly, that they were forc'd to wake him the next Morning. This Prince, who by that Battel open'd the way for so many others; upon that Occasion acted not only like a Man of his Birth, but like a Common Offi∣cer. He was in all places where danger appear'd. He receiv'd several Shot in his Cloaths, and in his Boots; he had a Horse wounded under him, with Two Musket Bullets; and he underwent all the Hazards and Fatigues of Combat, with so much gaiety, and a Look so chearfully unconcern'd, that he was the equal wonder as well of the Spaniards as the French. Toward the end of Lewis the XIII. Reign, the Spanish Army was Master of the Field.A Relation of what pass'd in the Cam∣paign of Ro∣croy, in 1643. by M. de i Chapelle. Don Fran∣cisco de Melos, Governour of the Low Countries, had re-taken Air, and La Bassee, and won the Battle of Hannecourt. The Designs which were laid were vast; nor was his Ambition satisfid with re-ta∣king only those Places which Spain had lost. He foresaw that the King's Death would occasion great Troubles in France, and the Physitians had all ad∣judg'd his Distemper incurable; and every body was studying to make their best Advantages of the ensuing Minority. The French also, who were wont to loose by their Dissentions all the Advanta∣ges which they us'd to get in their Foreign Wars,
were about to have furnish'd Melos with a favoura∣ble opportunity to extend his Conquests. Upon these Considerations he alters his design of Besieging Arras, the Preparations for which had taken him up all the Winter, and he resolvd to attacque Rocroy; as being a serviceable Post that gave him an Entrance into Champaigne, and there∣fore fit to make a Place of Arms, that lay conveni∣ent for all his Enterprizes. In a very short time after, Lewis the XIII. dyed, and his Death divided all the Court, as Melos well foresaw. The Cabals that were secretly held to get the Regency, threat∣ned France with a General Revolution. All the States of the Kingdom were unwilling to fall again under a Ministry like that of Cardinal Richlie. The great Lords and Peers could not be easily in∣duc'd to buckle before a Minister, who possess'd a Station, of which every one thought themselves more worthy then himself. The Magistrates were unwilling to depend upon any Person, but the King, in the Exercise of their Duties, and could not brook the receiving Laws from a private Sub∣ject. And as for the People, they never fail to charge upon the Counsels of the chief Minister, all the Taxes and Impositions which have been layd upon 'em; and generally all Men are inclin'd to envy the Fortune. and hate the Person of a Fa∣vourite. Thus the Remembrance of what was past be∣came Odious, and the future was to be fear'd; the Present was full of Trouble, and therefore great Care was to be taken of the Kingdom under so great a Change. All People wish'd for a Govern∣ment more Gentle and Free, but no Body agreed upon the means to bring it to pass. Nevertheless, the King, before his Death, had nominated and appointed the Persons that were to compose the Council of the Regency. He had
also, at the same time, given the Command of his Armies to the Duke of Enguien; but to curb and moderate the Early Flames and Heats of Youth, frequently transported with desire of Glory, he gave him the Marshal de l' Hospital for his Lieute∣nant General and Counsellour. But notwithstand∣ing this same Settlement of Affairs, and all the Intreagues at Court, the Queen was declar'd Sole Regent with Absolute Power. There was some likelyhood at first, that she would have call'd the Bishop of Beauvis to the Mi∣nistry; and she had also some thoughts of procu∣ring a Cardinals Cap for him upon the first Promo∣tion. But that Prelat, instead of managing himself prudently and cautiously in the dawn of Favour, went about to ruine all those that Richlieu had ad∣vanc'd, and by that means drew upon himself a great number of Enemies. Now while he was un∣seasonably endeavouring to overturn all which that Minister had done, Mazarin took his Advantage of the whole, and made his Leagues with the Per∣sons that were in most Credit with the Queen. They whom the Bishop sought to pull down had recourse to the Cardinal's Protection. The Q. there∣fore fearing least he should create her a great deal of Trouble, took distaste at his Services; finding the Cardinal, at length, much more fit to supply the Place of Chief Minister. And they in whom he most conided, perswaded her to make this choice so that she resolv'd to send the Bishop back to his Diocess, and openly to declare her Inclinations to the Cardinal. At first she met with great Obstacles; the very Name of Cardinal dreaded the minds of Men, re∣call'd past Mischiefs to their Memory, and caus'd 'em to fear worse for the future. Thus the Queens Creatures were divided, every one took his side, and Affairs were worse embroyl'd then before. Ne∣ertheless,
the Cardinals Policy, and good Fortune, he Services which he had done France, the Queens esolution and the respect which all People had or her appeas'd the Male-contents. Nor did the lot layd against him by the Dutchess of Cheuruse, nd the Duke of Beaufort serve to any other pur∣ose then to Settle and Confirm his Authority. And thus Melos was deceiv'd in his Prognosticks, as re all Foreigners that ground great hopes upon the Divisions of the French. For tho' their Natural Levity sometimes excites 'em to revolt; yet the in∣ate respect and affection which they have for heir King, reduces them always to their Obedi∣ence. In short, the Grandees, the Parliament, and the People, submitted to the Queens Choice, and all Authority bow'd under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarin, tho' he were a Foreigner, and that his Enemies publish'd him to be Originally a Subject of Spain, which was a Nation that had no Kindness for the French; and tho' but a little before he ap∣pear'd under an Eclipse far distant from so splendid an Elevation. The Duke had carry'd himself imprudently in the management of the Enterprize against the Car∣dinal, and the Dutchess believing her self more Crafty, and more in the Queens Favour, scorn'd his Submissions. So that at the same time that the Duke and she were consulting to destroy him, the Duke was arrested, the Dutchess disgrac'd, the rest of the Cabal dispierc'd themselves, and France en∣oy'd a more pleasing Calm then ever. While the Court was busi'd in these Intreagues,The Prince of Conde desirous to relieve Ro∣croy. the Duke of Enguien was preparing for the next Campaign. Amiens was the place appointed for the Rendezvouse of the Army, where the Prince rriv'd toward the end of April, 1643. and there et Gassion with part of the Forces: Espenan drew others together about Lon. Marshal de Grammen
had put himself into Arras at the beginning of the Winter, and had a considerable Body in that place. The Duke of Enguien stay'd Three Weeks in Amiens in expectation of the Forces that were to meet there, and to penetrate the Designs of the Spaniards: He had also sent Gassion to Dourlens, with Orders to observe 'em more narrowly. At length he understood that Melos had drawn all his Forces together about Dovay, and that he was upon his March toward Landrecies, with a great Train of Ar∣tillery. The Duke of Enguien muster'd as many men as possibly he could draw together near Amiens, and sent Orders to those that were more remote to join him in his March. The second day he lodg'd his Army near Peronne, whither La Ferte Seneterre brought him some Reinforcements of Infantry, and the Troops that had Winter'd in Arras, join'd him at the same place. And now the Prince began to be impatient of coming to a Battel, choosing rather to hazard all, then to bear the ignominy of seeing a Town lost at the beginning of his Command. But in regard the Marshal de l' Hospital was altogether averse to this Design, the Duke of Enguien thought it requi∣site to bring that about by Policy, which he was unwilling to over-rule by his Absolute Au∣thority. For this Reason he discover'd himself to no Bo∣dy but Gassion only; who being a Man that made slight of the most dangerous Attempts; he had soon brought the Business to the point which the Duke desir'd. For under pretence of putting Men into the Place, he had insensibly drill'd on the Marshal de l' Hespital so near the Enemy, that it was not in his Power to avoid a Battel.
The Army march'd forward to Guise, which was a place the most exposd of the Frontiers, and which might have been with ease reliev'd by the Spaniards. But the French Vanguard was hardly lodg'd in Fan∣some, when the Duke of Enguien was inform'd that the Spaniards were past by Landrecies, and Capelle, and that they made long marches toward the Meuse. This made the Prince believe they had some de∣sign upon the Garisons in Champaign; and he had rea∣son to fear that he should not be able to overtake Me∣los, till the intrenchments of his Camp were finish'd, and perhaps not till he had taken some one of those places, which he knew to be ill furnish'd with Men and Amunition. This foresight caus'd him to send Gassion before, with a Body of two thousand Horse, to observe the designs of the Spa∣niards; and to put the Dragoons and Fuzeliers in such places as had most need. All this while the Duke of Enguien contriv'd his March with all speed, and the Troops which E∣senan Command'd, met him at Ieigny: and there it was that he receivd certain intelligence that Mels had invested Rcoy, and that he had began the same night to open his Trenches. Upon which the Prince laid all thoughts aside, but those of speedily succouring that Place, when the news was brought him that Lewis the XIII. was Dead. Perhaps upon the same occasion, any other then the Duke of Enguien would have laid aside his Design of relieving Rocroy. His high Quality, his Affairs, the interest of his Family, the advice of his Friends recall'd him to the Court. Never∣theless, he preferr'd the General Good before his Private Advantages; nor would his eager per∣suit of Honour permit him to take a moments Consideration. Thereupon he conceal'd the news of the Kings Death, and march'd the next Morn∣ing
toward Rocroy; making Marshal de l' Hspital believe that his March so near that place, was only to supply it with a Reinforcement of Men and Ammunition, through the Woods that envi∣ron it. Gassion rejoyn'd him in his March at Rmigni, and gave him full information of all the Spaniards Proceedings; describ'd all their Posts, and shew'd him which way to come at 'em. For Gassion had march'd with that speed, that being arriv'd at the entrance into the Wood of Rocroy, in a very short time after they had posted themselves before the Place, he had put in a hundred and fifty men into it, and had observ'd by the situation of the Places, that the whole Success of the Enterprize consisted in passing the Lanes, and presenting the Army in Battel Array between the Wood and the Town. Rocroy is seated in the midst of a Plain environ'd with Woods so thick, and full of Boggs, that which way soever you go to it, 'tis impossible to avoid very long and incommodious Lanes, and nar∣row Passes. 'Tis true, that on that side next Cham∣pagne, there is not above a quarter of a League of Wood, and the Lane it self, which is very nar∣row of it self, grows broader and broader after∣wards; and the Plain is discover'd by degrees. But in regard the Country is full of heathy Ground, and very Boggy, there is no marching but in small Companies, till you come near Rocroy it self, where the Ground insensibly rising is much more dry then in the Wood; and affords a spacious Field sufficient for the drawing up two great Armies. Melos, being arriv'd the 10th of May before the place, had divided his Army into six Quarters, made his Entrenchments, and plac'd the principal of his Forces on that side next the Lanes and nar∣row Passes, contenting himself to secure the rest by the general disposal of his Men; to the end
he might spare that time which is usually employ'd in raising a Circumvallation. Besides these precauti∣ons, which he had observ'd in the Enemies Posts, he found that they had placd a great Body of a Guard upon the Road to Champagne: And his Sentinels, and his Scouts were so well laid, that nothing could enter into the Plain but they must have knowledge of it. His Army was compos`d of Eight thousand Horse, under the Leading of the Duke of Albuquerque, and Eighteen thousand Foot, Commanded by the Count of Fontaine, among which were the Select Spanish Infantry. The Duke of Enguien, being inform'd of all these things, call'd together all the Officers of his Army at Rumigni, and after he had lay'd before 'em all that Gassion had inform'd him, he declar'd that 'twas his resolution to do all that could be done for the relief of Rocroy, to which purpose he would pass the narrow Lanes with all the speed he could. That if the Spaniards undertook to defend 'em, they must be oblig'd to leave their Quarters ungarded, and consequently there would be a way left open for the Relief, which he intended to put into the Town; or if they suffer'd him to pass the Lanes without fighting, it would prove other∣wise to their advantage, so that the Army having room and space enough in the Plain, the Spaniards might be induc'd to come to a Battle; or at least that the French might be able to take Posts, and fortifie themselves, till they could amply provide for the Relief of the Besieged. At last, the Prince told 'em, that the King was dead, and that at such a Conjuncture of trouble and Confusion, it behov'd 'em to hazard all, ra∣ther then loose the Reputation of the Armes of France. That for his part, there was not any thing which he would not venture, to prevent the taking of Rocroy. Thereupon they all conclud∣ed
upon giving Battle, and the Marshal de ' Hospital made a shew of giving his consent. For he imagin'd it may be, that the Spaniards would dispute the narrow Pass,Th Battle of Rocroy. and so the Enterprise would end in a bickering within the Wood; that in the mean time relief might be put into the Town; and that the Army not being engagd beyond the Pass, it would be easie to make a re∣treat, without coming to a General Battle. Upon this a resolution was taken to march di∣rectly toward Rocroy: and the Duke of Enguien advanc'd the same day as far as Bossu, and dispos'd the Order of his Battle, to the end that every one might prepare himself for an Action, the success of which was of such importance to his Glory and the safety of France. His Army was compos'd of Fifteen Thousand Foot, and Seven Thousand Horse, and they were to fight upon two Lines, supported by a Body of a Reserve; the Command of which was given to Sicot. The Marshal de l' Hospital took care of the Let Wing, and La Ferte Seneterre servd under him as Camp-Marshal. Espenan commanded all the In∣fantry; Gassion was under the D. of Enguien, in the Right Wing; and because they were to fight in difficult places, there was a Devision of fifty Mus∣queteers put between every Interval of the Squa∣drons. The Carbines, the Dukes Guards, and those of the Marshal de L' Hospital, together with the remainder of the Dragoons and Fuzeliers were plac'd on the right and left side of the Wings. These Orders being given, the Duke sent away the Baggage to Aubenton, and whatever else was useless in a day design'd to fight, and march'd in Battle Array, to the entrance of the Wood.
Mel prest Rocroy so vigorously, that had it not been for the Scour which Gassion had put into it, the French would hardly have had time to raise the Seige. The Garrison was so weak and ill provided, that the Spaniards made no attempt but what succeeded. And indeed they had been rightly inform'd of the bad condition of the place, which made 'em believe that the Town could never hold out till the arrival of any Succour, in regard the Duke of Enguien was at such a distance from them. But the French Army was reinforcd by degrees with little Bodies of men which joynd them in their march, which was the reason that the Spaniards could not discover their Strength: besides that Intelligence was hard to come by, in regard the Country was all French. So that Mlos never knew the true number of the Duke of En∣guien's Army, till the very day that they enterd the Pass. The last intelligence that he had of it was, that they were not above Twelve Thousand men; but he understood when it was too late that they were three and Twenty Thousand fighting Souldiers, and that they were also marching into the Wood. Melos was constraind to a quick deliberation, whether he should defend the Pass, or whether he should stay in the Plain till they came to Attack him. 'Tis true there was nothing more easie for him to have done, then to have disputed the passage of the French Army, by planting his Infantry in the Wood, and supporting them with a good Body of Horse. It was also in his power, by a good management of the advantages which he had of the Woods and Boggs, to have found work enough for the French Army with one part of his men, and to have pusht forward the reducing of the Town with the other, which could not have held out above two days longer. This seem'd to be the most certain
Course, and every body thought that Melos would have taken it. But his Ambition was not be to limi∣ted by the taking of Rocroy. He imagin'd that the winning of a Battle would open him a way into the very Bowels of France; and the Victory which he had won at Honnecourt, put him in hopes of the same good Success before Rocroy. Besides that in hazar∣ding a Fight, he thought he could venture no more then the least part of his Army, and some Fron∣tier Towns. Whereas by the defeat of Enguien, he propos'd to himself infinite advantages, in the beginning of a Regency not well settl'd. Upon these considerations Melos, who according to the Spanish genius, let go the Present, out of an extraordinary greediness after the Future, resolv'd upon a General Battle. And to the end he might the more easily induce the D. of Enguien to it, he stay'd for him in the Plain, and made not the least Effort to dispute the Passage of the Narrow Lanes. Not but that Melos might have been constrain'd to have done that by Force, which he did of his own ac∣cord; in regard that while he stood consulting, the time was almost over for debate. For the formost Troops of the Dukes already appear'd, and the French Army had already past the Lanes, be∣fore Melos could draw all his Quarters together. Nevertheless, had he done in time what he ought to have done to oppose his passage, the Duke of Enguien would have been hard put to it to have orc'd him; in regard there is nothing so difficult as to get clear of long incumbrances of Woods and Marshes in the sight of a Potent Army drawn up in a Plain. However it were, we find that Melos had prepar'd himself for a General Battle, since he took all the care he could to get his Forces to∣gether; and had sent for Beck, who was gone oward the Palatinate, to joyn him with all speed.
The Duke march'd in Battalia, drawn up in two Columns, from Bossis to the entrance of the Pass; while Gassion rod before with a Party of Horse to observe the Enemy; and finding the Pass defended with no more then an ou Gaurd of Fifty Horse, he repuls'd 'em, and brought the Duke word how easily he had made himself Master of the Pass. In this place it was that the Duke thought it convenient to speak his mind more plainly to the Marshal de l' Hospital, because the Marshal saw, that if they advancd forward into the Plain, it would be impossible to avoid a Battle. Gassion also usd all his Rhetorick to engage him to it, but still the Marshl oppos'd him. But the Duke put an end to the Dispute, and told him in a Commanding tone, that he would take the event upon him∣self. Upon that the Marshl no longer contested, but put himself at the Head of the Saquadrons which he was to Command. He then causd the right Wing to advance through the narrow Passes, lodging the Infantry in the most difficult places, to secure the passage of the rest of the Army. At the same time also he advancd with a Party of Horse to a small rising ground, within half Canon shot of the Spaniards. So that if Melos had then Chargd the Duke he had certainly De∣feated him. But immediately the Duke so well cover'd that rising ground, with the Squadrons which he had about him, that the Spaniards could not discover what was done behind. Melos could not imagine that so great a Body of Horse, would have advanc'd so far without being seconded by Infantry; however; all he did was only to try by slight Skirmishes, whether he could open a way to see behind the Rear of the Squadrons: but not being able to break through, he began to think of nothing else but puting his men into Battalia.
Thus both Generals concurr'd in one and the same Design The Prince made it his whole business to pass the Woods, and Mlos labour'd only to unite his seperated Quarters together. The place which the Duke made choice of for the field of Battel was wide enough to range his whole Army in the same order as he had contriv'd before. The ground was there somewhat more raisd then in the parts adjoyning, and extended it self insensi∣bly into all the rest of the Plain. There was a great Bogg upon the lefthand, and the Wood not be∣ing very thick in that part was no hindrance to the Squadrons from drawing into Order. Just op∣posite to that Eminency which the Duke possessd, there was another rising Ground almost resembling it, where the Spaniards planted themselves, and made the same Front as the French, and between the two Battels a hollowness ran along in the na∣ture of a Valley. By the situation of this place 'tis easie to judge, that neither of the two Parties could attack each other without ascending. Nevertheless, the Spa∣niards had this advantage, that upon the declensi∣on of their rising ground and before their Left Wing, there grew a Cops of Underwood, which descended a good way into the Valley, where it was an easie thing for them to plant Musketeers to gall the Duke as he marchd toward 'em. The Two Generals labour'd with extraordinary Diligence to Marshal their Troops as they came se∣verally up, and instead of Skirmishing, as is usual when Two Armies meet, they spent their whole time in ordering their Men. All this while, the Spanish Canon annoy'd the Frnch much more then the French Canon did the Spaniards, because they had a greater number, more advantageously planted, and better ply'd. Threfore still as the Duke extended the Wings
of his Army, the Enemy play'd furiously with their Canon, that had it not been for their extra∣ordinary Resolution, the French could never have kept the Ground which they posess'd. There were above three Hundred Men that day slain and wound∣ded by the Canon Shot, among whom the Marquis of Persan, Camp-Master of a Regiment of Infan∣try, receiv'd a Shot in his Thigh. About Six a Clock in the Evening, the French Army had pass'd the Defile, and the Body of the Reserve being got clear of the Wood, advanc'd to the Ground which was assign'd it. The Duke also, unwilling to give the Spaniards any longer time to secure their Posts, prepar'd to begin the Fight; and the Order of March was given throughout the whole Army, when an unlucky Accident not to be foreseen had like to have put all into an ex∣tream Confusion, and given the Victory to Melos. La Ferte Seneterre alone commanded the left Wing in the Absence of the Marshal de l' Hospital, who was with the Duke. That Wing of the Ar∣my was defended by a Bogg on the one side, so that the Spaniards could not attack it; and therefore la Ferte had nothing to do but to keep irm in his Post, and expect the signal of Battel. The Duke had never quitted the right Wing, where while the Oficers were ranging the Squadrons in their pro∣per Places, he made it his chief Business to observe the Countenance of the Enemy, and in what pla∣ces it would be most to his Advantage to Charge 'em. But then it was that la Ferte, perhaps by some secret Order of the Marshal, or else out of Emulation and Envy to Gassion, to Signalize him∣self by some extraordinary Exploit, would needs be trying to put a considerable Reinforcement into the Town. And to that purpose order'd all the Cavalry to pass the Marsh, together with Five Bat∣talions
of Foot; by the sending away of which Detachment the Left Wing became naked of Horse and much weaknd by the want of a great Body o Foot. But so soon as the Duke had Intelligence of it he order'd both Horse and Foot to make a halt, and flew to the Place where the Confusion call'd him. At the same time also, the Spanish Army mov'd forward, their Trumpets sounding a Charge, as if Melos had design'd to take his Advantage of the Disorder. But the Prince having supply'd the void space of the first Line. with some Troops of the second, the Spaniards stopt; which shew'd that they had no other intent then to gain Ground to range their second Line. There are certain Critical Minuits in War, that flie away with the winged swiftness of Lightning, if a General has not a piercing Eye to watch 'em, and a presence of Mind to seize upon the Oppor∣tunity. Fortune never sends 'em again; nay, ma∣ny times she turns with Indignation against those that were so blind as not to lay hold of her Fa∣vours. The Duke of Enguien therefore sent to Command la Ferte back again, so that the Detach∣ment re-pass'd the Bogg, with all speed, and before Night, the whole Army was re-settl'd in their ap∣pointed Posts. Thus, this Accident did but only delay the Battel, and wrought no other Inconveni∣ence, only that it gave the Spaniards time to spread themselves more at large, and put themselves into somewhat better Order then they were be∣fore. The Night was very dark, but the Forest being near, the Souldiers kindl'd such a vast number of Fires, as enlightn'd all the Plain, and both Ar∣mies were surrounded with an Enclosure of Wood, as if they had been to ight in a Box. Their Corps du Guards were so near each other, that there was
no distinguishing the French Fires from the Spanish, and both Camps seem'd to be but one. So soon as it was Day, the Duke gave the signal to March; and the Duke himself, at the Head of his Cavalry, charg'd a Thousand Musqueteers, which the Count of Fontaines had lodg'd in the Wood; and tho' they fought in a place, as it were intrench'd by Nature, and advantageous for Foot, the Attack was so Vigorous, that they were all cut to pieces upon the Place. However, for fear the Squadrons should be Disorder'd, and Bro∣ken, by crossing the rest of the Wood, where that Infantry was Defeated, the Duke, with the second Line of the Cavalry, turn'd to the Left, and com∣manded Gassion to lead the first Line about the Wood upon the Right. Thereupon, Gassion ex∣tended his Squadrons, marching under the Covert of the Wood, and Charg'd the Enemies Cavalry in Flank, while the Duke attack'd 'em in Front. All this while, the Duke of Albuquerque, who commanded the Left Wing of the Spaniards, knew nothing as yet of the first Action, nor had he fore∣seen that he might be Attack'd in two places at once. For he rely'd upon the Musqueteers that were lodg'd in the Wood, and cover'd his first Line; to that finding himself in some Disorder upon this Attack, he thought it proper to oppose some Squadrons against Gassion, by whom he was ready to be surrounded. But there is nothing so dangerous for a General, as to make great Moti∣ons before a Potent Enemy just ready to assail him. For those Squadrons, already tottering, were bro∣ken at the first Charge, and all Albuquerques's Troops overturn'd one another. The Duke see∣ing 'em flie, commanded Gassion to pursue 'em, and turn'd short against the Foot.
Marshal de l' Hospital fought not with the same Success, for having gallopp'd his Horse upon the Enemy, they were out of Breath before they came to join. The Spaniards therefore stood firm to re∣ceive 'em, and broke the French upon the first En∣counter. The Marshal, after he had fought with an extraordinary Valour, had his Arm broken with a blow of a Pistol, and had the Misfortune to see all his Wing betake themselves to headlong flight. The Spaniards follow'd their Blow vigorously, cut some Battallions of Infantry to pieces, gain'd the Canon, and never stay'd till they came within sight of the Reserve, which put a stop to their Victory. While the two Wings fought with such unequal Success, the French Infantry march'd against the Spanish. And already some Battallions were enga∣ged. But Espenan, who commanded the Foot; understanding the Misfortune that had befallen the Left Wing, and seeing that all the Spanish Infantry stay'd for him in good Order, and with a more then ordinary fierceness in their Countenances, thought it convenient not to be too rash, but to hold the Enemy in play with light Skirmishes, till he saw which of the two Cavalries had the better. In the mean time, the Duke of Enguien had over∣thrown all the Walloon and German Foot, and the Italians had betaken themselves to flight, when he perceiv'd the Rout of the Marshal. Then the Prince clearly saw that the Victory depended wholly upon the Troops which he had with him; and therefore giving over the pursuits of the Foot, he march'd behind the Spanish Battallions, against their Caval∣ry, which gave Chase to the Left Wing of the French Army; and finding the Enemy Disorder'd by the pursuit, he easily put 'em to a total Rout.
La Ferte Seneterre, who was taken Prisoner in the Rout of the Left Wing, where he fought with an extraordinary Courage, was found wounded in several places, and rescu'd by the Duke. Thus the Right Wing of the Spaniards enjoy'd their Vi∣ctory but a short time. They that pursu'd were now forc'd to flie themselves; and Gassion meeting 'em in their flight, put the greatest part of 'em to the Sword. Of all Melos's Army, there now remain'd only the Spanish oot; and they were serrid in one Bo∣dy together near the Canon. More then that, the good Order which they kept, and their sower Looks, shew'd that they would sell their Lives at a dear Rate. They were commanded by the Count of Fontaines, who was one of the greatest Captains of his Time, and tho he were forc'd to be carry'd in a Chair, because of his Infirmities, yet he would be every where giving Orders. But the Duke understanding that Beck was Mar∣ching with Six Thousand Foot toward the Entrance of the Wood, never stood to consider whither he should Charge the Infantry or not, tho' he had but a small number of Horse with him. The Count of Fontaines also stood him with a brave Resolution, not suffering his Men to Fire till the Fernch were within Fifty Paces of him. But then his Battallion open'd, and of an Instant a Discharge of Sixteen Canon, laden with Cartouches, saluted the French Infantry, which was accompany'd with a showre of small Shot, as thick as Hail. This was such a terrible welcome that the French were not able to brook it, so that if the Spaniards had had but Horse to have follow'd their Blow, the French Foot could never have been rally'd. But having no Horse to disturb 'em, the Duke soon rallyd 'em again, and brought 'em on to a se∣cond attack; which had the same Success as the
former: and in short, he charg'd those Veterane Spani∣ards Three times without being able to break 'em. But then the Body of the Reserve came up, and several Squadrons returning from the pursuit of the Spanish Horse re-joyn'd the Princes Body. And then the Spanish Infantry being surrounded on every side, and overlayd with Multitude, was constraind to give way to Number. So that the Officers layd aside all Thoughts of any longer defending them∣selves, but by the motion of their Hats made a sign of calling for Quarter. Upon this the Prince advancing to receive their Parole, and give them his, the Spanish Foot thought that the Prince had been going to make another Attack upon 'em, and upon that mistake discharg'd a full Volly at him, which was the grea∣test danger he was in, during the whole bloody Work of the Day. Which his men perceiving, and attributing it to the Treachery of the Spani∣ards, chargd 'em on every side without expecting any Orders, and reveng'd the Risco which their General had escapd, with a most dreadful Slaugh∣ter of the Spaniards. The French pierc'd into the midst of the Spanish Battallion, killing all that stood in their way, and notwithstanding all that the Duke could do, gave Quarter to none, but more especially to the Swit∣zers, who are usually more Merciless then the French The Prince flew about every where, cal∣ling to the Souldiers to give Quarter: The Spanish Officers also, and likewise the Common Souldiers, crowded about him for shelter, and Don George de Castelui, Camp-Master, was taken by his own hand. In short, all that could escape the Fury of the Soul∣diers ran in heaps to beg their Lives of him, and beheld him with Admiration. So soon as the Prince had given Orders for se∣curing the Prisoners, he made it his Business to
ally his Men, and to put himself in a Condition o fight Beck, if he should happen to worst Gassion, r if he should adventure to engage him in the lain. But Gassion returning from the pursuit of he Fugitives, told the Duke, that Beck made no haste to come out of the Forest, only contented himself to pick up the shatterd Wrecks of the Defeat. That he had done it in so great Disorder, and with so little Knowledge of the Advantages he might have made of the narrow Passes of the Fo∣rest, that any one might plainly perceive that the Terrour of Melos's Men, had struck his Souldi∣ers with the same dismay. In a word, after he had savd some remnants of the Spanish Army, he retreated with an incredible precipitancy, leaving behind him two pieces of Canon. The Duke finding his Victory absolutely secure, fell upon his Knees in the midst of the Field of Battel, commanding all his Men to do the same, and gave God Thanks for his great Success. And certainly all France was no less obligd to pay her Thanksgivings to Heaven, and her Thanks to Him. For assuredly it may be said that for many Ages, France had never won a Battel more Glorious, nor of greater Importance. And indeed great Actions were perform'd on both Sides. The Valour of the Spanish Infantry can never be sufficiently applauded. For it is a thing but rarely heard of, that after the Rout of an Army, a Body of Foot deprivd of Cavalry, ever had the Resolution, in open Field, not only to stand One but Three Attacks, without being so much as stirr'd; and it may be truly said, that if the Reserve had not come up, the Prince as Victori∣ous as he was over the rest of the Army, could never have broken that stout and Courageous In∣fantry.
One extraordinary Action of the Regiment of Velandia was remarkable. In the first Onset which the Duke made on that Regiment, the Musketeers being cut in pieces, and the Body of Pikes being surrounded on every side by the French Horse, they made a low retreat, in a Body, to the Gross of the Spanish Infantry. When the Left Wing of the French was broken, Word was brought to Sirot that he should save the Body of the Reserve, and make his escape; that there was no other remedy, in regard the Battel was lost. To which he answer'd, without being mov'd in the least, 'Tis not yet lost, because Sirot and his Companions have not yet fought. In short, his Courage contributed very much to the Victory. But by the report of the Spaniards themselves, no∣thing appeard so worthy of Admiration as the Presence of Mind, and Sedateness of the Duke, in the hottest Fury of the Battel: particularly when the Enemies left Wing was broken; for in∣stead of greedily following the pursuit, he pre∣sently turnd upon their Infantry. By which reserv'd∣ness he kept his Men from breaking their Order, so that he was in a Condition to assail the Spanish Cavalry who thought themselves Victorious. Gas∣sion won Eternal Honour, and the Duke gave him great Marks of his Esteem. For upon the Field of Battel it self, he promisd to procure him a Mar∣shal of France's Battoon, which the King granted him some time after. Of Eighteen Thousand Foot, of which Melos's Army consisted, there were above Eight Thousand slain upon the Place, and near Seven Thousand Prisoners. The Count of Fountaines, Camp-Master General, was found dead near his Chair, at the Head of his Men. The Loss of him was a long time after bewaild by the Spaniards. The French applauded his Courage, and the Prince himself said,
That if he ould not have got the Victory, he wold ve dy'd as he did. Valandia, and Vlalva, under∣went the same Fate: All the Officers were either ta∣ken or slain. The Spaniards also lost Eighteen Pieces of Canon, and Six Battering Pieces, Two Hundred Colours of Foot, and Sixty of Horse. The Pillage was great; for that besides the Booty of the Baggage, there was the Money of a whole Mste, which the Army was to have receivd after the taking of Roroy. Of the French were kill'd in all about Two Thousand, but very few Officers or Persons of Quality. The D. lodgd his Army in the Enemies Camp, and after he had given Order for the wounded, ente'd a Victor into Rocroy. The next day, he understood that Melos retird out of the Battel, upon the rout of the right Wing of his Army, and never minded the rallying of the Fugitives till he was got under the Canon of Philipille. His Cavalry re-join'd him in the same Place, but the Foot were utterly ruind, and the following Campaigns made appear the Vastness of the Loss, which Spain could never yet repair. So true it is, that a good Army of Foot cannot be too carefully preservd, whether in War or Peace; seeing it is not in the power of the greatest Kings, in a long time to recover a lost Body of Old Officers and Souldiers, accustom'd to fight together and endure the Fatigues of War. The Duke, after he had stayd at Rocroy Two days, led his Army to Guise, the same way that he came. There he rested some days, during which the Prince prepard every thing ready to enter the Enemies Country. For in regard the Magazines had been only provided for the Defensive part, there was a necessity of Storing up Provisions and Ammunition, in the most advancd Places of the Frontiers.
Flanders lay open on every side; which way soe∣ver the Duke had a Design to Lead his Victorious Army, there was nothing to oppose his Passage. He might either attack Mets, or the Towns upon the Scheldt, or the Moselle. There was also great probability that all these Enterprizes might prove extreamly Beneficial. But the winning of the Sea-Towns seemd the most Advantageous, which would not only be an Assistance to the Hollanders, but deprive the Low-Countries, at the same time, of the most speedy Succours which they receiv'd from Spain. But the Duke of Enguien knew, that the Hollanders were afraid of nothing so much, as of having the French to be their Neighbours, and that they would ra∣ther make a Peace, and Confederate themselves with the Spaniards, tho their Natural Enemies, then endure that France should extend her Con∣quests over those Places, which serve as Barricades between the Spanish Territories, and those of the Vnited Provinces. Moreover it was impossible to take either Gravelin or Dunkirk, without a Fleet: Nor were the Kings Fleets in a Condition to keep the Sea. So that there wanted both Time, Money, and Negotiations, to vanquish the Mistrusts and Jealousies of the States-General, and engage em to lend their Ships; so that the Duke gave over that Design. There remaind Two other Places, the Scheldt and the Moselle. The first was very difficult, in regard the Remains of the shatter'd Spanish Army were got thither, besides that the French had no Magazines on that side. The last Design was of great Importance toward the Conquest of Flanders, because Thionville, and all the other places upon the Moselle opend an Entrance for the German Ar∣mies into Flanders. So that the Duke not being in a Condition to take Sea Towns, could not under∣take
any thing more Advantageous then the Siege of Thionville, to the end that by possessing himself of this Place, he might hinder the Enemies Commu∣nication between Germany and Flanders, and by this Conquest settle the posture of his Affairs, against the next Campaign, for greater Enterprizes. It was easie to furnish his Army with Subsistance on that side next Champaign. All Preparations ne∣cessary for a great Siege had been Stord up there during the Winter. The Deceasd King had caus'd Provision and Ammunition to be transported thither, with a Design to carry the War into Frnche Conte: and Marshal de Meilleray was to have undertaken that Enterprize. But the Kings Death having overturnd all those Projects, and the Army in Italy being too weak to keep the Field, Meilleray's Forces were parted into Two Bodies. One part pass'd the Alps under Viscount Turenne, and the other commanded by the Marquiss de Gesvres, servd under the Duke. Nevertheless, it requir'd time to fetch out of Burgundy and Cham∣paign, all the Ammunition and Train of Artillety. And therefore the Duke would not encline toward Thionville, for fear General Beck should reinforce it with Men. The Prince therefore Marchd into the middle of Flanders on purpose to alarum the Principal Cities, and to oblige the Enemy to streng∣then the Garisons, his Designs being to return the same way he came, and to sit down unexpected be∣fore Thionville. To this purpose he dispatchd away St. Martin, Lieutenant of the Artillery, with Order to bring Ammunition to the Frontiers of Champaign; and he wrote to the Intendant of that Province to provide great quantities of Corn and Provision for the Subsistance of the Army, and then marchd to∣ward Hanault, through Landrecies. Emery and Bar∣lemontThe taking of Emery, Barlemont and Mau∣berge. Surrender'd after some few Discharges of
the Great Guns, and Mauberge open'd her Gates without Resistance. He mov'd forward as far as Binch, which the Enemy had reinforc'd with some Men; and that he might still carry on his Counter∣feit show, he attackd that small Place, which Sur∣rende'd the same day at Discretion. There the Prince stay'd Fifteen days without undertaking any thing, till the Preparations for the Siege of Thion∣ville were all ready. On the other side, as the Prince foresaw, the Spaniards were retir'd, with their Cavalry, under the Guns of the fortifi'd Towns, and the remainder of their Infantry was disperc'd into the Cities adjoining to the French Army. So that 'twas easie for the Prince to get before 'em by wheeling of a suddain toward Thi∣onville. He sent strong Parties from Binch, to the Gates of Brussels, and struck a Terror into the Cities that lay most remote. But at length, word being brought him that every thing was ready in Cham∣paign for the Siege, and that the Marquiss of Gese∣res was arrivd with the Body under his Command; the Duke set forward from Binch, and return'd by the way of Barlemont and Mauberge, re-entring into the Plain of Roeroy, through the same Pass, thorough which the Spaniards retreated after the loss of the Battel. Upon his departure, he sent away d Aumont with Twelve Hundred Horse to join the Marquiss of Gesvres, and invest Thionville. Sicot was order'd to convoy the heavy Artillery by the way of Toul and Mets, while the Infantry, with some Field-pie∣ces, marchd toward Thionville. All these things were executed according to the Duke's Orders. Nevertheless d' Aumont, and de Gesvres did not arrive before Thionville, till Two days before the Prince. For, notwithstanding the great falls of Rain, and the Hardships which the
Foot suffer'd in their March, he was but Seven days marching between Binch and Thionville; choosing some of his way through the Country of France, the more to conceal his Design, and passing the Meuse at Sdan, he cross'd Luxemburgh, and sate down the Seventh day before Thionville. This Town is Seated upon the Banks of the Mo∣selle, on Luxemburgh side; not above Four Leagues below Metz. The Plain where it is Seated is very fertile; and Border'd on Two sides with little Hills cover'd with thick Woods. The Advantage of the Place, and Beauty of the Country, was the reason that great Expence and Art had been be∣stow'd upon the Fortifications of it. It had been all along in the Possession of the House of Austria, only when it was taken by the Duke of Guise, in the Reign of Henry the II. till the First Treaty of Vrvins, at what time it was restor'd to the Spani∣ards. The Misfortune that befel Fquieres in 1639. had render'd it Famous, during the last Wars, and every Body lookt upon it as a Conquest of Im∣portance, but which would cost dear. The Moselle secures it wholly on the one side; so that on that side there is only one Rampart termi∣nating in a right Line. The remaining Circuit is fortifi'd with Five great Bastions, lin'd with Free-Stone, and Two Demi-Bstions at the Two Ends that re-join the River. The Mote is large, deep and full of Water. The Counterscarp is very broad, and the Courtins cover'd with Five Half Moons; and before the Gate on that side next to Cirque, stands a great Horn-work. The Country round about it is so plain and level, that there is no approaching the Town without being expos'd to great and small Shot; and the adjoining Hills command the Plain in several Parts, which makes the raising a Circumvallation difficult. There were Eight Hundred Foot in the Town, and Store of
Ammunition and Provisions when the Duke sate down before it. So soon as the foremost Troops began to enter the Plain, he caus'd the Commander Grancy to pass the River, with the Cavalry, to hinder the En∣trance of any Relief, before the Quarters were as∣sign'd. This Grancy, had commanded at the First Siege in 1639. and was ully acquainted with the Situation of the Places and Passes, through which the Spaniards could steal in Relief. But many things happen in War which all the Prudence of a General, and his Principle Officers, cannot pre∣vent. While Grancy pass'd the River, the Prince stay'd in the Plain, and as his Forces came up, order'd 'em to be posted in all the Avenues which were most to be suspected; referring till the next day the Appointment of their several Quarters, and the Settlement of the Camp. The whole Army also stood to their Arms all that Night, without hearing the least News of the Spaniard. Yet by break of day word was brought to the Duke, that a Reinforcement of near Two Thousand Men was got into the Town, through the Count of Grany's Quarters. Nevertheless, the Count had plac'd his Corps du Guard with all the Care imaginable; besides that he visited all the Posts himself, with an extra∣ordinary Vigilance. Nor had he had any Alarum all the Night long. However, an Hour before day one of his Parties brought Two Country-Men to him, who affirm'd that some Spanish Troops had pss'd the River at Cirque, and that they march'd along the Bank of the River, and got into Thion∣vile; and they told their Story with so many Circumstances, and so much Probability, that Grancy believ'd 'em. At the same time therefore he chang'd the Order of his Guards, and leading
all his Forces to that Place which the Peasants had describ'd to him, he left but Two Regiments to Guard the Post toward Mets. In short, Two Thousand Men had pass'd the Ri∣ver at Cirque, but they took another way, then that which the Peasants Information mention'd. For, instead of keeping close to the River, they had ta∣ken a compass round about the Wood to enter into the Plain on that side next Metz. And indeed the Spantards perform'd their Business with extraordi∣nary Diligence and Courage, so that by peep of day they were discover'd, marching directly to the Half-Moon; so that the French Guards, astonish'd at this Alarum, Charg'd the Relief too late, and with some Disorder. And whether the Spaniards perform'd any Exploit more remarkable then usu∣al, or whether the Guards were remiss in their Duty, that Reinforcement enter'd Thonville with∣out any loss. The Duke was not a little displeas'd at the News; he saw it would much retard the taking of the Place, and by Consequence delay those other Con∣quests which depended upon this, if it did not quite put 'em off till the next Campaign. A place like Thionville well fortifi'd and defended by a nu∣merous Garison, could not be carry'd in a small time, nor without a great Loss of Men. But all these Inconveniencies did not hinder the Prince from continuing the Siege: On the contrary, he apply'd himself to it with so much the more Dili∣gence, as the peril and difficulties were the greater which he had to surmount. He foarded the River that he might be able to assign his Souldiers their Posts on that side, and he order'd Two Bridges of Boats to be made both above and below the Town. After he had Lodg'd his Men also in Two little Villages on that side next Lorraine, he appointed the Guards, and mark'd out the Place where he
would have the Line of Circumvallation drawn along; which done, he re-pass'd the River to give the same Orders on Luxemburgh side. Immediately he divided his Army into Five Quarters. The greatest Body of his Horse he en∣camp'd in a Meadow, along the River, on that side next Mets; where Gassion was also Quarter'd to Command 'em. The Head Quarters were taken up near Gassion's, in a small Village, almost a Mile from the Plain, upon the Bank of a Rivolet which crosses it, and which falls into the Moselle at the Foot of the Counterscarp of Thionville. There the Duke Lodg'd himself, with the Prin∣cipal Body of the Infantry, and extended his Camp into the Plain, as far as the Foot of the Mountains; and the Regiments of ambuzes, and the Swisses un∣der Molendin Posted themslves upon the rising Grounds, near the Woods, with which the Hills were cover'd. There was one much higher then the rest, which Commands not only all the Plain of Thionville, but all the Hills that lie round about it. The Impor∣tance of that place constrain'd the Duke to settle there a Powerful Quarter; for which the Camp was mark'd out in the middle of the Hill, and d' Aumomt had the Command of it. Dandt com∣manded the other Quarter. Gesres undertook with his little Army to Guard that side next to Cirque, from the River to the rising Grounds. Pal∣luau and Sicot had the Care of all that lay beyond the River, in regard Grancy was fallen Sick, and had left the Camp. So soon as the Quarters were dispos'd, the Duke order'd the Line of Circumvalation to be cast up, and large Forts to be trac'd out upon the rising Grounds, which commanded the greatest part of the Plain. At the same time he also secur'd his Line
with Redoubts, supplying the weakest parts with sharp pointed Piles of Wood; and Pallisadoes. All this while the Convoys arriv'd from all parts with Amunition and Provisions; and for twenty days together that the Circumvalation was fini∣shing, the Duke caus'd to be brought from Mets thirty battering Pieces, and order'd great provisi∣on to be made of Planks and Oken Timber, Sacks of Earth and Bavis to carry on the Trenches, and for the service of the Artillery. On the other side, the Besieged prepar'd all things necessary for their Defence; and while their Infantry was imploy'd in raising new Works, and repairing the Old, their Cavalry Sally'd out every day to annoy the Besiegers. The Sally which they made two days after the Division of the Besiegers Quarters, was so vigorous that they came on so far as the Duke of Engui's Camp; and the Count of Tavans had his Arm broken with a Pistol Shot The Plain was every day full of Skirmishes, and some of them happen'd to be such obstinate Conflicts, that as many men were lost on both sides as in many more remark∣ble Encounters. But the last was the most vi∣gorous of all. For at the time that the Duke was providing a great number of Gabions and Faggots near a Chappel in the midst of the Plain; the Besieg'd, resolving to see what he was doing, al∣l'd out wth the greatest part of their Horse, to view those preparations near at hand, which they could not so well discerne at a distance. The Afternoon was almost spent in skirmishing, when the Duke incens'd to see the Enemy keep the Plain so long, commanded Dandelot to drive 'em into the Town. Dandelot perform'd his Orders with extraordinary Courage, but with great precepitancy, for that he could not be fol∣low'd but by a small number of Volunteers: the
Skirmishers also gave way upon the first Charge that he made, and retreated under the Counterscarp of the Town, but then the Squadrons that were to s∣cond 'em advancing, Dandelot found himself sur∣rounded on every side, and he had been taken, but for a small Guard of thirty Troopers led by Mous∣saye, who rescu'd him out of the hands of the Enemy. However those Squadrons still prest upon Dande∣lott and Moussaye, with so much vigour, that they could never have made good their Retreat, had not the Duke ran to the main Guard, and brought it on himself in all hast to their relief. Gerze and Dandelot were wounded; and so the Spaniards re∣tir'd after an obstinate Combat. However all this could not prevent compleating the Circumvallation, nor fortifiing the Camp with all things requisite, the Duke being every where present, as well to encourage the Workmen, as to observe what places were most proper to make his Attacks. And after due consideration he re∣solv'd upon two; Both upon the Face of one of the two Bastions, that lookt toward the middle of the Plain, to the end that being near together, they might the more easily support each other. There was a wide space left between the two openings of the Trenches, and that space lessend, as the Trenches advanc'd toward the Town: One of these Trenches cover'd it self to the Right, and the other to the Left, and the Regiments of Pia∣dy and Navrre, were the first that Mounted the Guard. In the night time two Great Shouldrings of Gabions were rais'd, which cover'd two places of Arms, wide enought to contain each a hunderd Horse; for that they stood in need of Horse be∣hind the Trench, to support it against the terrible Sallies of the Enemy. The same Night the Duke order da long Line to be drawn, and two Redoubts to be begun, Spacious enough to lodge a hunderd
Men: and in all the returns of the Lines he or∣der'd large places of Arms to be made, and that that Trench should be carry'd on with all speed; so that maugre the continual firing of the Besieged it was advancd the fourth Night within two hundred Paces of the Counterscarp. In that part the Duke resolv'd to have a Com∣munication between the two Attacks, which were already in good forwardness. And instead of mak∣ing his Communications with the usual Line, he joyn'd 'em together with a large Battery of four and twenty Pieces of Cannon. The diligence of the Officers was so great, that the sixth Day after the Trenches were open'd, the Cannon began to play upon the Town. In the same place of Com∣munication also, the Two Batteries took a diffe∣rent way, and separated at some distance one from the other, to turn themselves toward the Face of the two Bastions which were opposite to 'em. On the right Hand of the Duke of Enguien's Trench, stood a Mill, upon the Rivolet already mention'd, which was fortifi'd with a good Pali∣sado, and wherein the Besieged had planted some Musketeers, who very much annoy'd the carrying on of the Trenches, in regard they had a view of 'em behind. Ther upon, the Duke resolving to clear that Post the same Night, which was the Seventh after the opening of the Trenches, order'd it to be Stormd, notwithstanding the obstinate Resist∣ance of the Besieged, and their continual Firing from the Rampart and Counterscarp. And before Day, this Lodgment was join'd to the Trench by a Line, and the Mill serv'd the Besiegers, instead of a Redoubt, against the Sallies out of Mets-Gate. At the other Attack, the Line was carry'd on with equal Diligence; but the EighthDay the Be∣sieged made a furious Sally upon Dandelot, who was
upon the Guard, with the Regiment of Harcour. And while all the Cavalry that belong'd to the Be∣sieged fought against the Horse that seconded the French, their Infantry powr'd upon the Head of the Works, and forc'd the Out-guard to retreat to the Battery. Thereupon, Dandelot who was in the other Attack near the Prince, marchd along the Counterscarp to Succour the Fench; so that the Besiegd, fearing to be intercepted, retreated in great haste. The Horse-Guard also being rein∣forcd with some Cavalry from the Camp, repell'd the Town-Cavalry to the very Barricados of the Gate, and the Infantry was forcd back by Dandelot to the Counterscarp. But the more the Duke labour'd to advance the Works, the more the Besieged re-doubl'd their Efforts. For before the Besiegers were got to the Counterscarp, they had cut in the Glacis a second Covert-way well Pallisado'd, and more difficult to take, then that of the Counterscarp; in regard the Defence it obtain'd from the Town was nearer, and had a greater power to cut off those that came to attack it. Nevertheless, the Ninth Night, this new Covert-way was carry'd on two sides. But it cost the Lives of a great many Men, and it was impossible it should be otherwise, when Men are to be Lodg'd at the Foot of a Glacis of a Counterscarp open on every side to the Enemies Defence. A∣mong the rest, Perseval, who had the Leading of the Duke's Atack was here mortally wounded. This Lodgment of great Importance being made, they labour'd in the next place to Lodg themselves upon the Counterscarp; to which purpose, upon the Tenth Night Musketeers were planted on the Right and Left to support the Enterprize, which was put in Execution the Eleventh Day. They who understand what belongs to War agree, that there is nothing more difficult in Sieges then Lodg∣ments
upon Counterscarps, when the Besiegers are resolv'd to carry it by the point of the Sword, in∣stead of making use of the longer delays of Sap∣ping and Mining. That of Thionville was very strong, by reason of the breadth of it, and the Traverses which the Besieged had made in it: Be∣sides, that it was not an easie thing to choose out a Place proper to make a Lodgement; for whether you made it opposite to the Face of the Half-Moon, or the Bastion, the Besiegers Works must lie open to one of those two Fortresses. But notwithstanding all these Difficulties, a Re∣solution was taken to force the Covert-way in those Parts which lookt toward the Face of the Bastion. For the Duke was of Opinion that while the two Trenches gave their Onsets both at a time, they that defended the Counterscarp would give way, for fear of being enclos'd betwee the two Attacks, and so the Lodgement might be made by Shouldrings, high-raisd, to cover 'em against the Defenses of the Bastions, and the Half-Moon. Upon the Night appointed for this Attack, E∣spenan commanded the Right, and Gesvres the Left; and so soon as the Signal was given, their Men marchd directly to the Palisado's; at what time the Granadeers, that were foremost, fir'd their Granadoes so furiously, that the Besieged could not make much Resistance; but observing in their Retreat, that they who oppos'd the Marquiss of Gefres had made a more stout Defence, they join'd with them, which occasiond such a desperate Con∣flict in that part, that the Marquiss lost abun∣dance of Men before he could drive the Besieged from the Covert-way. In the mean time, Espenan, who met with no other Opposition then that of the Half-Moon and Bastion, began his Lodgement; but La Plante, who perform'd the Duty of an Engineer in that
Action, was wounded, while he was tracing out the Work. This Accident put those that carry'd the Materials into Disorder; for the Line was but half drawn; no Body knew where to throw the Faggots, nor how to go about to begin the Lodg∣ment. And indeed, a good Ingeneer, is as one may say, the Soul of an Attack; nor can they be too much valu'd who have both Courage and Un∣derstanding to acquit themselves well of such an Employment. To this part therefore the Duke of Enguien flew, and set all the Tayl of the French at work to carry empty Barrels, Faggots, Sacks of Earth, while some of the Officers trac'd out the Lodgment as well as they could. In this Lodgment, such as the Disorder would permit 'em to make; Fifty Men secur'd themselves before Day-break, and after∣wards more strongly fortifi'd themselves with Blinds and Two pie∣ces of Wood five or six foot long, set up an end upon a Tra∣verse five or six foot one from the other, the Spaces being fill'd with Ba∣vins. Chandeleers, in such Places where they saw themselves expos'd. Thus the Duke became Master of the Covert-way; nor could the besieged any longer defend their Traverses between the two Attacks. The Nights following, they did nothing but ex∣tend their Lodgments; to the end they might em∣brace the point of the Half-Moon and the Bastions. But so soon as they had lodgd themselves before the Face of the Half-Moon, the D. gave Orders for making a Descent into the Mote: He also caus'd a vast number of Faggots to be thrown into it to fill it up, and at the same time the Miners went down. But the besieged had made a little Lodgment with Barrels of Earth upon the A way three foot broad, at the foot of the Rampart, between the Rampart & the Moate. Berme of the Half-Moon, which sometimes with Bombs, sometimes by stroak of Hand hindred the Miners from Lodging them∣selves. The Duke therefore seeing that unless he could destroy the Lodgment upon the Berme, with his Canon, it would be impossible to secure the Mi∣ners,
caus'd a Battery to be rais'd of Four Pieces of Canon, against the Face of the Half-Moon, which ruin'd the Lodgement upon the Berme in a short time. The Works of the other Attack were advanc'd very far, and the Lodgments were enlarg'd in such a manner to the Right and Left, that the Batteries design'd to ruine the Flanks were rais'd almost the same day. The Lodgments clos'd together at the head of the Half-Moon, and in less then Eight days the Counterscarp was secur'd. And then it was that they began their Descents into the Moat, just opposite to the Faces of the Bastions; and the Duke orderd the Materials to be got ready for building Galleries. This is a Work long and difficult, when the Moat is wide and deep, like that of Thionville. Be∣sides, the Impatience of the French will not permit 'em to use all the Precautions which the Art of War requires for the sparing the Lives of Men. Till the Siege of Hesdin, they contented them∣selves with only filling up the Moat, by throwing Faggets into it at hap-hazard, without covering themselves either above or in the Flanks. The Marshal de Meileray who commanded at that Siege, being assisted with all things necessary to procure his good Success, and having in vain attempted all the usual ways to Pass the Moat made use of a means till then unknown in France. For Courteilles found out the Invention of a Gallery of Bavins, so inge∣niously contriv'd, that it was fortifi'd with a Co∣vering, and Parapets like a Gallery of Earth. With such Galleries as these it was, that the Duke of Enguien past the Moat of Thionville. For he order'd a great number of Bavins to be brought to the Tayl of the French, where he had Men rea∣dy to carry 'em continually to the Head of the Works. So that as soon as the Descents were in a
little forwardness, he began his Work in this man∣ner. He order'd Bavins to be thrown into the Moat, till they came to be five or six foot high a∣bove the Water. When the Heap of Bavins was rais'd so high as he would have it, they finish'd the Sapping for entrance into the Moat. Six Men went into the Sapping, and secur'd themselves against the Face of the Bastion, behind the Heaps of Faggots and so soon as they were secure, they began to range the Bavins, to the Right and Left, in order to make the Parapets, enterlacing 'em sometimes long ways, sometimes a cross, and sometimes a the ends, to render the Work more Solid. Now as the foremost Workmen dispos'd the Bavins, o∣thers thrust 'em together with Forks; and the Men appointed to fetch 'em from the Tayl to the Head of the French, threw 'em without ceasing into the Moat. Afterwards they plac'd all the length of the Gallery, Blinds and Chandeleers, to the end that the Workmen might not be seen from the top of the Rampart. They also carry'd on their Works by degrees toward the Wall, at what time the besieged were amaz'd to see a heap of Faggots insensibly crossing the breadth of their Moat, and yet not to be able to discover the Persons that ad∣vanc'd the Work. Moreover, while these Galle∣ries were finishing, Batteries were rais'd against the Flanks of the Bastions. The Canons also were so well ply'd, that the Great Shot from the Town, no longer annoy'd the Works; besides, that the besieged were constraind to remove the greatest of the Guns to a Chandleer, from whence they might shoot into the Plain, and play upon the Tayl of the French. The Battery rais'd to break their Lodgement up∣on the Berme of the Half-Moon, had so shaken the Rampart, that it was an easie thing to make a Lodgment there without Springing a Mine. For
which reason the besieged despair'd of being able any longer to defend the Half-Moon, and there∣fore had made a Mine in that part where they fore∣aw the Besiegers would Lodge, and when they saw em preparing for an Assault, they gave  to it, but it Sprung before the Men Com∣manded were mounted the Half-Moon. So that the Effect was so fortunate for the Besiegers, that it open'd 'em a convenient space to fix their Lodg∣ment, and did that in an Instant, which the La∣bour of several Men could not have done in a day. So soon as that Post was secur'd, the Duke or∣der'd 'em to go on with other Lodgements upon the Gorge of the Half-Moon. Which done, a Battery was rais'd against the Curtis and the lanks; and while the Canon play'd to ruine all those Defences, the Duke order'd a Bridge to be lay'd like the rest, directly to the middle of the Curtin. At the same time that the Bridges were building, the Duke orderd holes to be made with Canon, which he planted at the bottom of the Covert-way, to fix the Miners in the midst of the Faces of the Bastions; and these holes being wide enough to lodge two Men, he orderd the Miners to be waed over in little Boats, to the end the Mines might be ready against the Bridges were finish'd. On the other side, the Besieged omitted nothing on their part to hinder the Progress of these Works; for besides their continual firing with their Small-sho from the Bastions, they ply'd without ceasing, the besiegers, with Bombs, Grana∣does, and other Artificial Fire-works, and from tme to time made such Resolute Sallies, that had it not been for the continual Vigilance and Dili∣gence of the Duke, the Souldiers would have been wearied out and repulsd.
In one of the Sallies, upon the Attack on the Right hand, the besieged beat the Guard from the Batteries upon the Counterscarp, made themselves Masters of the Canon, nail'd 'em, and retreat without any loss: And this Accidnt  the Duke to raise two good Redoubts to  defend the Batteries. However, the besieged wo not desist; but attempted one of the most exr∣ordinary Actions that were ever known in a Siege For while they kept the Guard of the French in Play with a numerous Sally, some Foot cross'd the Moat in Boats, threw themselves upon the Counterscarp, and enterd into the Battery through the Embra∣sures, kill'd or drave away the Guards, naild the Canon, and retir'd safe into the Town. Such dangerous Actions are not performd with∣out the Loss of many Officers and Souldiers. A∣mong the rest, the Marquiss of Lnon Court, Go∣vernour of Lorrain, being come from Nanci, to visit the Duke of Enguien, out of Curiosity would needs go view the Works, but he was hardly got to the First Battery, but he was shot through one of the Embrazures. At the same time a Canon Bullet fell upon a Sack of Earth, against which Dandelo was leaning, and threw all the Dirt in his Face, without doing him any other Harm, only that it caus'd a swelling, and pain in his Eyes. So soon as the Galleries were finishd, and the Mines had play'd, the Duke caus'd an Assault to be given, with an Intention to try whether they could make a Lodgement upon the top of the Ba∣stion. The Conflict was very sharp on both sides, but the Besiegers were repuls'd with Loss. The Duke therefore perceiving that the Mine had only beaten down the Lining of the Wall, which was not sufficient to Lodge themselves upon the Bastion, made a little Lodgement only at the Foot of the Rine which the Mine had made.
In the same place also he began another Mine to fetch down the Earth of the Bastion; but it was a difficult thing to carry on new Mines, in regard he Ground was so loosen'd, that they could not ke a Gallery there, but with Oaken Plants and Chandeleers, under-setting it by degrees; for that when they shoar'd up the Earth on the one side, it tell down on the other. However, the Miners finishd two little Mines, under each of the two Attacks, and the Besiegers prepar'd for a considerable Effort. So that after an obstinate Combat at the Attack on the Right Hand, notwithstanding the Bombs, Granadoes and Stones that flew from the besieged, the Besie∣gers made themselves Masters of the top of the Breach, but they were constrain'd to quit it a quarter of an hour after, not being able to stand the firing from an Intrenchmet which the Besie∣ged had thrown up upon the Gorge of the Bastion. Gassion, who commanded the Guard of the French, was there dangerously wounded in the Head, and Lescon, Lieutenant of the Dukes Guards was killd. The Chva d Chabot also, and several Oficers of the King's Guards were wounded. Nor was the Onset given at the other Attack any thing more Successful. For the two little Mines not springing at the same time, the Marshal of Gesvres went on at the noise of the first, so that as he was just going to fall on with several Officers, they were overwhelmd with the Ruines of the second Mine. The Loss of so brave a Commander cool'd the Courage of those that were under him. Thus the Attack on the Left hand was made with little Order, and less Vigour; and the Duke saw well that it behovd him to proceed with more caution, against Men that defended themselves with so much Stoutness and Resolution.
There was a necessity therefore to penetrate above the Intrenchment, and to level with the Ground those Bastions which they could not carry by Assault. La Pomme, Capti of th Pion undertook this Work, notwithstanding the coi∣nual Rains and difficulties whih he met with the Ground. The River had so overflowd her Banks, that the two Bridges for the Communition of Quarters were carryd away by the for of the stream; so that Pallua's, and Sicot's Qua∣ters were in great danger; for that if General Beck who lay at Luxemburgh with his Army, had attack'd 'em before the Bridges were repaird, the Duke could never have relievd 'em. In the mean time the Miners which the Duke had set to the middle of the Curtin, found only so much Earth behind as just sufizd to Lodge them∣selves; which shewd that the better way was to ruine it by a battery. In short Four Great Guns in three days made a considerable breach; and in less then Six days the Mines under the Bastions were finishd. Upon this, the Duke order'd the Enemy to be inform'd of the Condition they were in; to the end, that by a speedy Capitulation they might a∣void the Destruction of their Men, the Ruine of their Fortfications, and the Misfortunes and Cala∣mities which usually atend the Sack of Cities ta∣ken by Assault. Therepon, the besieged view'd the Mines, and seeing themselves assaild on every side, without hope of Relief, they desird to Ca∣pitulate. The Duke allowd em Honourable Con∣ditions, so that after a long and stout Resistance, the Garison march'd out the 22d. of August, and the 30th. day after the opening of the Trenches. Of two Thousand eight Hundred Men, of which the Garison consisted at the beginning of the Sige, the whole number was reduc'd to twelve Hundred.
he Governour was slain, and the greatest part of e Offiers that remain'd were either slain or ounded. The Duke order'd 'em to be conducted  Luxemburgh, where Beck had layn during the hole time of the Siege, with the Body which  commanded And now besides that the French fantry was very much impair'd, the Season was  spent and the Mines had ruin'd the Place to hat degree, that the Fortifications requir'd long ime to repair 'em. So that the Army did nothing more for three Weeks together then only labour to repair the Fortifications, and to level the Line of Circumvallation. The heavy Canon were sent back to Mets; the Place was furnish'd with Ammu∣nition and Provisions, and Maroes made Gover∣nour of the Town. But for the further security of this Conquest, and to render himself absolute Master of the Mo∣selle, the Prince spent the rest of the Campaign in taking Cirk, and some Castles between Treves and Thionville. Cirk is a small Village in Lorain,The taking of Cirk. seated upon the Banks of the Moselle, in that part where the Channel of it is very much streightned by the Hills on both sides. It has no Fortification, all the security of it depending upon a Castle which com∣mands the Town, and which is Flank'd with very large and thick Towers, and is accounted the strongest Cstle in all the Country; and the Duke of Lorrain kept a Garison in it of a Hundred Men The same Evening the Duke arriv'd before the Town he made himself Master of it, caus'd a Battery to be rais'd before the Castle, and fix'd his Miners to the Walls. Thereupon, the Governour terrifi'd with the Attack, and being hopeless of Succour, was unwilling to hazard the Loss of the Men which he commanded: So that after a defence of Four and twenty Hours, he Capitulated and March'd out upon an Honourabble Composition.
The Duke also sent to take in several other Ca∣stles that lay upon the River, which made no Re∣sistance. Which done, he led back his Army into France, where he put 'em into Quarters of Refresh∣ment; Espnan and Dandelot stay'd with the Army and the Prince order'd 'em to March toward Estai while he made an Incursion with two thousand Horse into the Heart of Luxemburgh. He advanc'd to the very Gates of the Capital City, where Beck with his Cavalry were constrain'd to keep them∣selves close, not daring to stir out. After that, he March'd into the Neighbourhood of Arlon, with∣out meeting any Enemy, in all which Places his Men having got considerable Booty, he re-joyn'd his Army at Villers La Montagne. This done, he gave the Command of the Army to the Duke of Angoulesme,The Prince of Cne arrives at Court, and leads a numerous Re∣inforcement into Ger∣many. who had been during the Campagne, with a small Force upon the Fron∣tiers of Picardy; and having left such other Or∣ders as he thought requisite, he return'd to Court, in hopes that he might have stay'd there for some time, and take his Repose; but he was no sooner arriv'd, when the Affairs of Germany enforc'd him to return to the Army. Mercy had cha'd Marshal de Guebriant on this side the Rhine; his Army being so enfeebl'd, that without a speedy and numerous Re-inforcement, he was no longer able to keep the Field. And there was a necessity for some Person of equal Quality to the Duke of Enguien to lead that Re-inforcement, for fear they should Mutiny and Disband of them∣selves, in regard the Souldiers were afraid of Mar∣ching into Germany. The Count of Ranzau therefore was made choice of to Head that Army, which was to join Marshal de Guebriant; nor did the Duke of Enguien stay above Fifteen days at Paris, being forc'd to Ride Post, that he might join Ranzau in Lorrai; where
he found him near Delme, which was the General Rendezvouse, and marching through Sarebourgh, at length he joyn'd the Marshal at Dackstem, near Strasrgh, with five thousand Men. After he had view'd the whole Army, and as∣sur'd the Marshal that he would return as soon as the season would permit to take the Field,H returns to Court. he went and visited the Places upon he Rhine, and by the way made himself Master of Sainte Marie aux Mines, where he assign'd the Army their Winter Quarters. At last he return'd to Court, having in one Summer gain'd a Famous Battl, won a Town of great Importance, and carry'd a considerable Reinforcement into Germany. The Battel of Rocroy was attended with several other Conquests, but chiefly with the taking of Tnville,The Advan∣tages of the taking of Thionville the reducing of which place was of ex∣traordinary Moment. For it was a place that se∣cur'd Mets and the Pays Messin from the Incursions of uxemburgh; it made the French Masters of the Moselle; it assrd a Communication between France and the Electorate of Treves, which it behov'd the French to be no less chary of, then of their own Country, by reason of the Elector, who with an extraordinary Zeal and incredible Resolution, had espous'd the Interests of France. And lastly, it was a Barricado for the French, between Luxemburgh and the Lower Palatinate, where the Spaniards were then powerful. Cardinal Mazarin had a long time had it in his Head to attempt this Siege,Why the Siege of this place was oposd. for the Reasons al∣ledg'd. He had caus'd it to be twice propos'd to Lewis the XIII. by Marshal de  Hospital, who was much in his Favour. But the Design would never take in his Life time. However, the King was no sooner Dead but the Cardinal proposd the same thing to the Queen, who seeing the Success of the Battel of Rocroy, surrender'd her self wholly to
the Cardinals Counsels, and withstood the open Opposition, and secret Thwartings which lay i her way in reference to the design of this Siege, which others would by no means have to go for∣ward, because most People believ'd that the Cardi∣nal was sway'd by a Spirit of Jealousie, and that because he began to suspect the growing Favour and Glory of the Duke of Engien, his main end was, that he should miscarry before Thionvil However it were, ever after this Campagne, the Duke was look upon as a great Captain, no less formidable in Sieges then in Battels. And here observe one thing in a Young Victorious Prince, no less great then the Victory it self. The Court which had prepar'd against his Arrival those Applauses which he deserv'd,The Prince refuses the Encomiums of the Court. was surpriz'd at his manner of receiving of 'em, as if he had been insensible of the Honour which they did him. He rejected their Encomiums as if they had been affronts, and as one indocible to Flattery, he gave them to un∣derstand that he was afraid even of the shadow of it. Such was the Niceness, or rather the Solidity of this Prince. In like manner, he observ'd this for a Maxim, that it was for a Person of Honour only o mind well-doing, and to let Glory follow Vertue. The Queen turns out some Mini∣sters kes Mazarine.While these things were transacting in Flanders, the Queen turns out of Favour those who had had the greatest share in the management of Affairs. The Bishop of Beauvoise, who had been in Credit, was enforc'd to retire to his Diocess. Desuyers and Chavigny were excluded, and Mazarine taken into the chief Ministry. The Queen, who was willing to shew that 'twas none of her fault that the War between France and Spain was not brought to a Conclusion,Negoiations o Peace Fruitls. by fair and moderate ways, gave ear to the Propositions of Peace that were made her; and to that Effect, the
Court appointed two lenipotentiaries,1644. the Counts l Av & de Serviers, with Orders forthwith to re∣pair to Munster, where the Peace was to be nego∣ed. But certain Broyles that happen'd between the Swedes and Danes prevented the good Success of that Assembly, which was the reason that nothing more was thought of but to make the best of the Advantages they had gaind upon the Spaniards. Flandes therefore was to be the Theatre of the War during the Campaigne of the next Year, 1644. and the Command of the Army was given to the Duke of Orleans, who designd to Pesiege Gravelin. Now in regard that Prince had no mind that his Enterprize should be known, he divided his Army into three Bodies. The Marshal de Meil∣leray, as Lieutenant General commandd one part, with Orders to enter Flanders on that Side next Amens; the Count of Ranzaw commanded another part, as Sub-Lieutenant General, with Instructions to enter on that Side next to Abbeville. And as or the Duke, he reserv'd a longer March for him∣self, and the most hazardous, that is to say, through Peronne and Bapaume, where the Marshal Gassion, who commanded a separate Body was to join him. And in regard there were several Forts that might obstruct the Siege of Gravelin, Gassion, after he had laid a Bridge over the River Aa, pos∣est himself of Bajette. Afterwards, the Forts of La Capelle, and St. Folquin, were taken in to facili∣ate the great Work. In a Word, Gravelin was besiegd; the Town was taken;The Prince of Conde acts in Germany, where he resolves to relieve Fri∣burgh, or fight the Enemy and the French made themselves Masters of Sas de Gand, and of all the Forts that could impede their Entrance into Flanders. Now, at the same time, the Duke of Orleance was acting in Flanders, the Duke of Enguien Signa∣liz'd himself in Germany, whether he was gone, to Succour Friburgh, which the Bavarians had besieg'd.
To which purpose he order'd his Forces to March with all the speed imaginable; but all his haste prov'd Fruitless. For that City was in so bad a Condition to hold out, that it was Surrender'd be∣fore he arriv'd. However, this Accident, which the Duke did never expect, no way disheartend him; for since he could not relieve the Town, he was now in hopes to join, and Fight the Enemy, and no less confident of Victory. He had no De∣sign however to retake the Place, nor to force the Imperialists; for that his Forces were not strong enough to undertake those Enterprizes: But he thought he might repair himself by a Battel, for the Loss of a Town which he had not time to re∣scue. The Design was great and hazardous, and there was something more formidable that present∣ed it self to his Eyes then at Rocroy. He had not only to Fight against Men, but inaccessible Moun∣tains, against Innundations and Precipices, on the one Side; on the other, against an impenetrable Wood, at the bottom of which was a large Bogg; against Rivers and Prodigious Entrenchments; a∣gainst Forts rais'd up and down in every Place; a∣gainst Timber, Trees cut down, and laid athwart most deep and dreadful Roads; and in a Word, a∣gainst one of the Greatest Captains of the Age. Nevertheless, not all these Obstacles together were sufficient to daunt this Youthful Hero. Nothing would content him but a Battel, wherein he prov'd Victorious; tho the Victory was not so considera∣ble for the Number of the Slain, as for the Impor∣tance of the Conquests that ensu'd. For the Field of Battel, as barren as it was, in appearance, was worth whole Provinces to France, through the Conduct of this General; so well he understood to make the best of his Advantages. Which is that we are going to make out, by the following Relation of the Campaign of Friburg.
The Battel of Rocroy, and the taking of Thion∣ville had restor'd the Reputation of the Arms of France, in the Low-Countries. The Spanish Infantry was quite Ruin'd;A Relation of the Cam∣paign of Friburgh, 1644. by M. La Chapelle. terrour and dread had seiz'd the Enemies Forces; the greatest part of the Cities of landers, were in no Condition to hold out long; and a General might do what ere he pleasd with good Success, and the Duke of Orleance had taken upon himself to manage the War in those Parts. In Germany, the Service was not so easie; for af∣ter the Duke of Enguien had led a Reinforcement thither, the Marshal de Guebriant was Slain before Rowil, and the Army had no other Chieftains, but Ranzan and Roze. Ranzan was a Person of great Courage and Wit; he was also end'd with a cer∣tain Natural Eloquence, which was very perswasive in Councils of War, and which drew others to be of his Opinion; but his Conduct did not always answer his Elegant Discourses; for Wine causd him to commit great Errors, and many times put him out of being in a Condition to Command. He had Quarter'd the Foot at Tutlinghen, without ta∣king any Care to prevent their being Surprizd, and he had embroyl'd himself with all the German Princes. So that the Bavarians, and Lorrainers, fell upon him before he had the least Intelligence of their March, and Iohn de Wert having enforc'd him to Surrender, with all his Men, all the Officers were Prisoners of War. The German Cavalry be∣ing dispiers'd into several Parts, retir'd toward Brisack, under the Command of Raze, and took up their Winter Quarters in Lorrain and Alsatia. As soon as the News of this arriv'd at Court, Turenne, had Orders to rally together the shatter'd Remnants of that Army, and take upon him the Command of it; and he spent all the Winter in bringing it into better Order; but notwithstand∣ing
all his Care, it was not in a Condition to op∣pose the Bavarians, whose Army was become more Numerous after Ranzan's Defeat. Mercy therefore who commanded it, seeing himself Master of the Field, invested Friburgh, which was not in a Con∣dition to hold out a long Siege. The Duke of Enguien had Intelligence of it at Amblemont, near Mouzon, and receiv'd Orders from the Court to joyn the German Army, and endeavour the Relief of the Town. To that purpose, he March'd the 20tith. of Iuly to Mets, where his Forces past the Moselle, and left their heavy Baggage. Which done, in thirteen Days he marchd threescore Leagues, and came to Brisack, with Six thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse. By the way, the Prince understood that Friburgh was Surrender'd to the Bavarians, that Turenne was Encamp'd not far from em, and that Mercy made no shew of having any design to change his Station. Upon this Advice, he March'd toward Trenne, with Marshal Grammont, and gave Orders to Martin to cross the Rhine, at Brisack, with the Army; which he did the 13th. of August. The Duke stayd no longer in Turenne's Camp then to observe the Post where the Bavarians lay, and to consider where to attack 'em. So that he returnd to his Army the same day that it crossd the Rhine, and the next day he March'd to put in Execution the Enterprize which he and Turnne had consulted and contriv'd together. Friburgh is Seated at the Fort of the Mountains of the Black Forest. They enlarge and open them∣selves in this part of the Country in the Form of a Crescent, and in the middle of this space you may discover, near to Friburg, a Plain bounded on the Right Hand, by very high Mountains, and sur∣rounded on the Left by a Boggy Wood. This
Plain is watered with a Rvolet, which glides a∣long by the Wood, and afterwards falls upon the Left of Friburgh, into the Hollow of a Narrow Valley internt with Woods and Marshes. They that Travel from Brisack cannot enter into this Plain, but through narrow Lanes and close Passes, at the Foot of a Mountain almost inaccessible, which commands it on every side, and the other ways that lead into it are much more difficult. Mery was Posted in a place thus Advantageous; and in regard he was one of the greatest Captains of his time, he had omitted nothing to make the best of the Situation. His Army consisted of Eight thousand Foot, and Six thousand Horse. He had extended his Camp all along the Rivolet; but be∣sides that Defence, and the Advantage of the Woods and Boggs, he had fortifi'd it, toward the Plain, with a large Entrenchment. Nor was there any way to get at him but by the road that leads from Brisack to Friburgh; and by consequence, there was a necessity of passing by the Foot of that Mountain which defended the best part of his men. And for that reason, this great General had em∣ploy'd all his Industry to secure that part of his Camp from being forc'd. Upon the sloping of the Mountain toward the Plain, he had rais'd a Fort with Pallisadoes, where∣in he had put Six hundred Men, together with his Artillery; by which means he assur'd himself of that part of the Mountain which was most easie of Access. From thence he carry'd on a Line, a long a Wood of Firr-Trees, still ascending to the top, where it was impossible to be past. This Line was defended by Redoubts, at the distance of two hun∣dred Paces one from the other; and to give those that design'd to molest him still more trouble, he had laid all the whole length of the Line, a great Number of Fir-Trees, the Branches of which
were half cut, and inter-twisted one within ano∣ther, and were as Effectual for the same use as Friesland Horses. Great Beams of Timber with Stakes driven into 'em, bearing their points outwards, resembling a Hedg-hog.Between this Mountain which the French Army met with upon the Right Hand, and another that lay nearer Friburgh, there was a Hollowness, which gave entrance into the Bavarian Camp, but to come at it, there was a necessity of going a great way about, and to pass through Places which had never been view'd. This part was naturally fortifi'd, by a large and deep Innundation of Water; and Mercy thought it sufficient to cut down a great number of Trees, and lay athwart that Inundati∣on. In short, never was an Army Encamp'd in a stronger Situation, and better Entrenchd. Nevertheless, the Duke of Enguien was resolv'd to drive Mercy out of it, and he prepar'd for his Attack in this manner. He march'd with all his Army against the Line, at the top of the Moun∣tain that ran along the Wood of Firr-Trees, lea∣ving the Fort upon the Left hand, and making it his sole business to carry the Redoubts that defend∣ed it; to the end, that having gain'd the top, which commanded all the rest, he might make him∣self Master of the Fort, and so descend in Battel Array into the Bavarian Camp. Turenne was to make his Onset where the Trees lay that defended the Vally, and provided that both Onsets were made at the same time, there was great Hopes, that the Enemy being busied in two Places at once, would be hard put to it to defend themselves; and that if they should happen to be forc'd on that side next the Water, the Duke co∣ming down from the High Grounds, and Turenne, at the same time, entring the Plain, Mercy would not be able to withstand 'em.
So soon as the Forces were all arriv'd, the Duke gave Order that they should prepare over Night to fight the next Morning: and Turenne having a great Compass to fetch, set forward before break of day; but the Difficulties which he met with in his March retarded the Onsets which both Armies should have made at the same time. The Duke dispos'd of his Men, in this manner. His Infantry was compos'd of Six Battallions, each consisting of Six hundred Men. Espenan, Camp-Marshal, was commanded to make the first Assault, with two Battallions of the Regiments of Persan and Enguien. The Count of Tournon, put himself at the Head of the Regiments of Conti, and Ma∣zarine, to Second Espenan. The Duke reserv'd two Regiments to himself, to be imploy'd as occa∣sion shall require, and Marshal Grammont, Martin, L' Eschelle, and Mauvily, remain'd about his Per∣son. Palluau Seconded the whole Attack, with the Regiment of Horse of Enguien, and the Gentlemen were posted at the Entrance into the Plain, in a very close Place, to hinder the Bavarians from flanking the Infantry. To come at the Enemy there was a necessity of clambring up a very steep side of a Place, cross a Vineyard, wherein were Walls, at such a distance, about four foot high, that serv'd the Bavarians, instead of Entrenchments. However, the com∣manded Men got up into this Vineyard, and drave the Bavarians into their Entrenchments of Firr-Trees, behind which they fir'd with more then ordinary fury. Nor could the French Infantry force those Trees, so entangl'd one within an∣other, as they were, without loosing a great ma∣ny Men, and breaking their Body.
The Duke therefore, who was advanc'd to  the Effect of the Onset, observ'd that the fir Line of his Men gave ground, and that they we got part within the Entrenchments of Firr-Tree and part without, neither flying, nor moving for∣ward. They began also to slide along the Bavarian Camp, toward the Right hand, and fall upon em at the top of the Mountain. But the Prince, who had observ'd before that that same part was not to be forc'd, rightly judg'd that the Success of his En∣terprise depended more upon carrying the Ene∣mies Line in the middle. For that reason, he resolv'd to renew the Assault with what remaind of the first Regiments, tho he had no more then two with him self, and those discourag'd by what they had seen then Fellow suffer. And indeed, at first it seem'd a piece of Rashness, with two thousand repuls'd Men, to at∣tempt the forcing of three thousand well En∣trench'd, and puft up with the Advantage the had got. But it was impossible otherwise to dis∣ingage and bring off those that had got beyond the Entrenchment of Fir-Trees. For in abandon∣ing them, the Duke must have been forc'd to have retreated with Vexation, to have fail'd in his Enterprise, and Sacrific'd in vain the best part of his Infantry: Besides that, all the Bavarian Army would have fallen upon Turenne, not having any other to oppose. The Prince consider'd all these things in an In∣stant; alights from his Horse, and putting himself at the Head of Conti's Regiment, march'd directly against the Enemy. Tournon, and Castelnau-Mavilliere, did the ame, with the Regiment of Ma∣zarine; Grammont, Martin, L' Eschelle, Mauvilly, La Moussaye, Ierze, the Chevaliers Chabot and Gramont, Isigny, Melles, La Baulme, Tourville, Barbantane, Disbrotteaux, Aspemont, Viange, toge∣ther
wih all the Officers and Volunteers alighted,  this Action gave new Life to the Souldiers,  the Duke being the first that pass'd the En∣enchment of Firr-Trees, all the rest following  Example throng'd over the Entrenchment,  they that defended the Line fed into the Wood, by the favour of approaching Night. After this first Advantage won, the Duke moun∣ed into a Redoubt which he found quitted but the Condition he was in, was no less dangerous hen the Action he had perform'd. One part of his Infantry was kill'd, the rest had broken their Order in pursuit of the Fugitives. The Enemy  held the Fort where they had planted their Ar∣tillery, and Mercy was in a Posture able to Charge the Prince in this Confusion; but it may be the Night which drew on a pace, hinder'd him from making the best of his Advantage. Therefore, while there remaind as yet some glimmerings of day, the Prince rally'd his ot fortifi'd the Redoubts which he had won, and notwithstanding the Diiculty of the way, caus'd his Cavalry to mount to the top of the Hill which he possess'd: And after he had got all his Men together he order'd all is Trumpets to sound, and all the Kettle-Drums to beat, that so he might give Turenne notice that he had gain'd the Top of the Hill; and then prepar'd every thing ready to renew the Conflict the next Morning. Tinne, on his side, had with great Vigour at∣tack'd the Trees that were layd in the Vally, be∣tween the Mountain which the Duke had carry'd, and that which lay near Friburgh. But Mercy, not dreaming they could force his Camp on that side next the Mountain, considering how it was forti∣fi'd, hd sent away his Principal Strength to defend the Vally; and this is that which usually happens in the attacking of Lines, that those parts which are
deem'd to be the strongest are soonest taken. The Place was wide enough behind his Entrenchment to draw up his Men in order of Battel; so that when Turenne's Men had driven back the Infantry which defended the Entrance into it, all the Bava∣rian Cavalry were ready, and in a Capacity to se∣cond their Foot, without breaking their Squadrons, which was the Reason that Turenne meeting with so vigorout a Resistance, could by no means force the Bavarians. Sometimes he gain'd some Posts, then he lost 'em again; so that Turnne's Attack was no∣thing but continual Skirmishing, without being a∣ble to break into the Enemies Entrenchments; th he did all that the Courage and Conduct of a Great Captain could do, to surmount the Disadvantages of Ground and Number. The Duke of Enguien had heard from the Top of the Mountain, the Noise of this Attack, and prepared for another Onset the next Morning. And his Design was to March over the High Grounds to the Bavarian Camp, on purpose to make the E∣nemy turn one part of their Frces against him to acilitate Turenne's Entrance into the Plain and every body prepar'd for this Enterpise, as it they had been assur'd of Victory; it being impos∣sible that Mercy should sustain Two Onsets, at the same time, one from aove, and in the Rear of his Army, while the other assail'd him every where else. Nevertheless, Mercy would not run such a dan∣gerous Risco, but got away as fast as he could To that purpose he drew off his Men from the Top of the Mountain next to riburgh, and before day sent away his Canon that was under the Dukes Arm ere the French Generals had notice of it. So that they were surpris'd the next Morning to see the Bavarian. Entrenching themselves upon the Moun∣tain next to Friburgh, the Camp deserted, and the Fort quitted.
The Duke seeing that Turenne's Men had spread hemselves over the Plain, came down with his Army; but no sooner had he a near view of the everal Places, but the thundring from the Bava∣ins new Camp, gave him to understand that they ad wholly possess'd themselves of the Mountain djoining to Friburgh. Thereupon, the D. not a little exed to have miss'd in his Enterprise, order'd his Army to be drawn up in Battalia, notwithstand∣ng it had Rained hard all that Night. But finding his Men wearyd with their hard Duty the day be∣fore, and the bad Weather, he deferr'd driving the Enemy from their new Entrechments till the next day: So that the Army had all that day and the next night to rest themselves. Upon the Right Hand of Friburgh, coming from isack, lies a Mountain, which is not so extreamly rugged, for above the third part of the Highth; but afterwards becomes very steep: Yet when you come to the Top, there is a wide space of level Ground, sufficient for the drawing up Three or Four Thosand Men, in good Order of Battel. At the end of this little Plain stood also certain Ruins of a Tower, at the Foot of which, the Highest Mountain of the Black Forest rises insensibly. But in regard that as it rises, it runs very far back∣ward, the Highest part of it commands but very little over the Plain. Mercy had posted the greatest part of his Infan∣try in the Parts adjoining to the Tower; the rest was Encamp'd behind a Wood approaching to Fri∣burgh. His Cavalry was planted all along from the Wood to the Walls of the City. In short, that General had as well managd the Advantages of his Ground, in that Place, as the former. He had also added for the Defence of it all the Inven∣tions which the Art of War, and the Conveni∣cies of the Wood could afford him in so little
time. The Lines which he had cast up during th Siege, serv'd him in part to enclose his new Cam so that he had no need of ortifying any more  that part which lookt toward the Vally, where  layd rows of Trees, with their Bows entangle one within another, and his choicest Infantry la behind this Entrenchment supported by his Cavalr the Squadrons of which possess'd all the Ground between the Row of Trees and the City. So soon as it was Day, the Duke advanc'd to th Foot of the Mountain, where Mercy lay entrench'd and in his March took in some Redoubts which were still guarded in the Vally by the Enemies Dra∣goons. Turenne's Army had the Vanguard that day and was to make the greatest Onset. D' , Lieutenant General, commanded the Infantry L' Eschele march'd at the Head of all the rest, with a Thousand Musketeers, drawn out of both Ar∣mies; and his Buiness it was to attack the entrance that cover'd the biggest Body of the Bavarian Foot next the ruin'd Tower; which was the place most easie of Access to get at 'em. For which reason Turenne caus'd all the Canon of the Weymarians to be drawn on that side. The Dukes Body of Infantry, commanded by Espenan, was commanded to force the Trees. Be∣tween these two Attacks also, there was a false As∣sault to be made, with a few Men only, to favour the real Onset. Marshal Grammont had likewise Orders to keep himself drawn up in Battel array in the Plain, with the Cavalry, to act as the Suc∣cess should direct him, The Bavarians Camp afforded 'em great Advan∣tages, whither it were to defend themselves, or attack the Enemy. One of their Wings was sup∣ported by the Canon and Small-Shot of the City the other was posted upon a Mountain, the Heighth of which alone was sufficient to secure the Forces
at posess'd it. But they had too large an ex∣nt of Entrenchment to defend, that the Infantry ch weakn'd by the Hardships of the Siege, and  preceding Combats, was not sufficient to guard  Camp. ' Eschelle began already to play with the Arti∣ of his Attack, never staying for the Arrival  the Rear-uard, or the Signal of Battel; tho  Duke had commanded that all the Attacks and nsets should be given together. Besides that, ' Eschelle had Orders not to March up to the Ene∣y, till he heard the noise of the Musquets toward e Tres, and toward the false Attack in the mid∣le. But an Accident, not to be fore-seen, as fre∣uently it happens in the best consulted Contri∣ances of War overturned all the Dukes Orders, nd sav'd the Bavarians from a Total Defeat. For while the Rear-guard was expected, which ould not come up so soon, by reason of the bad∣ess of the ways; the Duke attended by Turenne nd Gament, was got up to the top of the highest ountain, to discover the Rear of the Enemies rmy, and observe their Order of Battel. In his bsence, Espenan detach'd some men to make a alse Attack, upon a small Redoubt that lay in hs ay to the Enemy. And tho he sent but very few en at first, both sides were insensibly engag'd in a oody ight, while the Bavarians seconded those hat defended the Fort, and Espenan reliev'd those hat attack'd it; insomuch, that it came to a very  Cnflict in that part. Upon the noise of which, ' Eschelle thought it high time for him to begin his ssault, and his Errour ranvers'd all the Designs of he Day. The Duke beholding the Enemies firing from the op of the Mountain, rightly judgd that Espenan, nd L' Eschelle, had made a mistake, and that his rders had not been obey'd. So that he ran into
the very thickest of the Engagement, where  found L'Eschelle slain, and his men neither darin to fight nor retreat. or remedy of this Disorder he commanded Tournon to put himself at the  of the astonish'd Souldiers, and to assue em tha he himself would second 'em with a Powerf Succour. Thus the Preence of the Prince giving new Lif to the Souldiers, the Barian Infantry began  totter: two Battallions, and that which defende the Entrenchment, began to Face about with thei Colours, and gie all the marks of men that we just ready to beke themselves to their Heels. Bu they that were next the Line fir'd so furiosly; th the Frnch Infantry were quie dishearten'd they that were farhest off began to retreat, the  were in a terrible fright, and the Officers also be∣gan to give ground. In vain the Generals told 'em of the Disorder which they beheld in the Bavarian Camp, they press 'em, threaten 'em, and drag 'em back to the Fight. But when a panick dread has once seiz'd upon a Souldier, he neither see nor hears any longer either the Example, or the Orders of his General so that the Duke was forc'd to give over the Attack, and draw off his Men; and in this Action, the Prine, and all that attended him were in very great danger. For he was still  Horseback, not above Thirty Yards distance from the Enemies Entrenchments. So that of Twenty Men that were about his Person, there was not one that did not carry away some marks of the danger to which he was expos'd. The Duke himself had the Pommel of his Saddle taen off with a Canon Bullet, and the Scabbord of his Sword was broken with a Musket Shot; Gram∣mont had his Horse kill'd under him, and all the rest were wounded. Nevertheless, this Acciden
did no way dishearten the Prince; so that he only alter'd the design of this Attack, and instead of making his greatest Onse upon the Lines as he had resolvd in the Morning, he order'd the most furi∣ous Onset to be given upon the Entrenchment of Trees. To that purpose D' Aumont was comman∣ded to keep the Bavarians in Play with the Souldiers which had fought already, causing a Diversion thereby in the same place where the first Onset had ill succeeded. The Duke and Turenne, with the whole Body of the Infantry, lead by Mauvilli, sup∣pored by the Gensd'armes and Roze's Cavalry, march'd directly to the Entrenchment of Trees. Scarce were the foremost Ranks of this new At∣ack enter'd into the Wood, but the Bavarians fir'd with an extraordinary fury; nevertheless, the French advanc'd in very good Order, with a Reso∣lution to try whether they could force the En∣tenchments of Trees or no. And the fight was so obstinate that after they had been driven back se∣verl times, and several times had repuls'd the French, at length Gasper de Mercy, Major General of the Cavalry was forc'd to make his Horsemen alight, to second his Infantry that began to give Ground. Upon that, the Dispute grew hotter then before, and both Parties fird with so much Fury that the Noise and the Smok put all things into onfsion, so that they could not distinguish one another but by the Flashes of the Artillery and Small Shot. All the surrounding Woods and Fo∣rests bllow'd forth most dreadful Eccho's, and aug∣mented the Horrour of the Battel. The Souldiers were so bloodily eager, the one to force, the other to defend the Entrenchment, that if Night had not parted 'em, there had been one of the most deadly Slaughters tha had been in our days.
The French Gendreri perform'd a very noble Exploit at that time. They were commanded by Boulay, who led on the Squadrons to the very brink of the Entrenchmen and mage the Enemies furious firing, fought a long time within Pistol Shot. Never was so desperate a Combat, where without grappling Hand to Hand, so many fell up∣on the spot on both sides. The French in this Conflict lost Mavilly, and the Bavarians, Gaspa Mecy, their General's Brother. After this, the Duke having brought back his Army into the Camp, layd aside all other thoughts, but those of cutting off the Bavarians Provisions, to the end he might enforce 'em to quit so Advan∣tageous a Post. To that purpose, he gave his Men four days time to refresh themselves, and the wonded, of which there was a great number, wre sent away to risach, that there might be no∣thing left in the Camp which might retard the Design which the Duke had contriv'd in his Mind. The Mountains of the Black Forest derive their Original from the Mountains of Switzerland, and follow the Course of the Rhim, till they join with the Hills that lye upon the Banks of the Ne. These Mountains are very long, and more or less broad, according to the Countries where they x∣tend themselves; but their widest breadth is from Friburgh to Filinghen about ten or twelve Leges. There is no way of Communication between these two Cities, but through a Vally, which is very narrow, and very Incommodious for the marching of an Army. Nevertheless, this was the Part through which Mercy, in all probability, would make his Retreat. Which, nevertheless he would not presume to do in view of the French Army; o that the Duke of Enguien was of Opinion that  intercepting this way between Friburgh and Fi∣inghen,
he should cut him off from his Provision and Forge, and thereby cnstrain him to a Gene∣ral Battel, or to retret in Disorder. With this Resolution, the Ninth of August, the Prince caus'd his Army to march toward Langsde∣linghn, a Village eated in the most easie place of Aess in all those Mountains. This Place was very proper to annoy the Bavarians, or to fight 'em in their Retreat. For, as for the Duke, he could have Provisions from Brisack, in case he advanc'd any frther among the Mountains. But the Road which gave him entrance into this Valley was ex∣tremely difficult, by reason of the Boggs, of which the Woods are full. Besides, that the Front of the Army being once engagd in these Woods, and having pass'd the Rivolet that runs along by 'em, the Rear-guard would be expos'd to the Bavarians, without any possibility of being reliev'd by their own Men. The Dke therefore took all the Precaution which the Advantages of the Ground, and the Presence of a vigilant Enemy requir'd. To this purpose, in regard the Horse could not march but one and one, and for that many times the men were forc'd to alight and lead their Horses, the Prince order'd a great body of Infantry, at the Tayl of the Army, to support the Rear of his Cavalry; he also plac'd little Bodies of Musketeers, upon the Wings, to defend the Passes through which the Bavarians might come to charge 'em. By break of day, Turenne set forward with his Army, which compos'd the Vanguard that day. The D. took care to bring up the Rear, and kept himself in view of Mercy's Army till all his Men were past; and after he had in this manner cross'd the Woods and Boggs, rejoin'd his Vanguard at Langsdelinghen, the Bavarians not making the least attempt to dispute his Passage over the River, or his Entrance into the Wood.
Mercy observing the March of the French, rea∣dily apprehended their design, and as he was one of the most politick Generals in the World, he presently judg'd that his safety consisted in preven∣ting the Duke, and not in disputing the Incum∣brances of the Pass. Nor indeed had he more then just so much time to retreat before the fore∣most Troops of the French Vanguard could over∣take him; and doubtless, this was that which hin∣derd him from falling upon their Rr. There∣fore, so soon as he saw the French upon their March, he decampd his Army, keeping the top of th Mountains, and ordering his Baggage to be con∣ducted through St. Peter's Valley, which leads to∣ward Filinghen. Upon notice of Mercy's March, the Duke ha∣sten'd his own as much as it was possible. But he had Mountains almost inaccessible to cross that he might shorten his way, besides that his Men were extreamly tir'd. For which reason he was enforcd to deach Roze with all speed, only with eight hun∣dred Horse to amuse the Bavarians, and disturb 'em in their Retreat, while the rest of his Army pass'd the Defiles. Roze perform'd his Orders vigorously, and began to Skirmish with the Bavarians near St. Peter's Ab∣by and so soon as he had overtaken the Bavarians he gave notice to the Duke that he was at their Heels. In the mean while, the French Army passd File after File through a very narrow Valley, at the end of which they were to ascend to the top of a very high Mountain, and withal, so steep and cover'd with Wood, that there was no going for∣ward but for one single Man at a time. Neverthe∣less, the Duke surmounted all these difficulties, and his Vanguard was no sooner got to the top of the Mountain but he discover'd the Bavarians in Batta∣li, and Roze close at the Heels of their Rear.
Now to go from the Mountain where the Head of Egin's Army stopp'd, to the place where the Bavns were posted, there was a necessity of pas∣sing two Defiles, in the midst of which was a space wid enough to contain four Squadrons; but before ou could get at it, there was a Descent through a ery narrow Hollow way, and then an Ascent again more difficult then the former, which gave an En∣rance into the Plain where Roze skirmis'd with the Enemies Rereguard. Mercy no sooner discover'd the foremost Battal∣lion of the French Vanguard upon the top of the Mountain, but he rightly judg'd that the whole Army was behind. And in regard that Roze very much disturb'd the hindmost part of his Rear, he resolv'd to make a push for it, that he might rid himself of so great an Incumbrance, before the Duke got any nearer to him, and had Men now to second him; and that he might do his Business all at once, he whell'd about to the Right with his whole Army, and marchd directly against Roze's Cavalry. But Roze, instead of retiring speedily into the Defile, rally'd his Squadrons togeher, and daring∣ly stood the whole Bavarian Army in the Plain. He had the Enemies Army, and the Plain before him; on the Right Hand the Great High Road to lingen, crowded with the Bavarian Baggage; up∣on the Left a vast Precipie, and behind him the Defile through which he was to rejoyn the Duke. Presently, Roze detach'd one of his Squadrons to cut the Harness of the Horses that drew the Car∣rige Waggons, and with the rest he advanc'd to charge the foremost Squadrons of the Bavarian Army. But to preserve the Defile open and free to himself, he left four Squadrons to guard it, be∣hind the Rear of which he retreated, after he had made-three Chargs upon the Enemy. Those four
Squadrons sustain'd the shock of the Bavarians, till the rest of their Cavalry enter'd Pell Mell into the Defile. At length Roze left no more then two of the four Squadrons to defend the Pass, who after an incredible Resistance, seeing their Fellows out of danger, threw themselves into the Precipice upon the Left Hand, through Places that never had been pass'd before by Men nor Horses. This was a vigorous Action of Roze, and man∣ag'd with all the Art which it was possible to pu in practice in so great a danger. But it was im∣possible for him to have escap'd, if Mercy had no discover'd upon the Neighbouring Mountains the Bodies that drew into Order by degrees, and that the Duke was advancing to second Roze's Cavalry. For in regard he was afraid of nothing so much as of coming to a General Battel, he rather chose to let those Squadrons escape, then enter too far into the Defile. In a word, the Duke observing from the Top of the Hill this valiant Action of Roze, and what a Condition he was in, had rally'd as many Men as he could get together about his Person, with a Re∣solution to bring him off. He was already got within the space of enclos'd Ground between the two Defiles, at what time Roz rejoyn'd him. And thus the Resolution of the Duke, and the Prudence of Mercy, were in part the cause of that Honour which Roze acquir'd by his Retreat. Mercy at the same instant began to make his Re∣treat likewise, but withal that good Order which could be expected from a Great Captain, who would never be constrain'd to a Battel, and un∣derstood how to take his Advantages when oppor∣tunity offer'd 'em. Nevertheless, he quitted his Artillery and his Baggage, and leaving some Dra∣goons to dispute the Passage out of the Defile, h march'd with that speed throh the High Road
to Filinghen, that the French Army lost sight of him in a moment. While Mercy thought of nothing else but to ha∣sten and secure his Retreat, the Duke rally'd his Men together with a Resolution to follow him; but it prov'd a thing so difficult to do, that before he could get his Army in a Body together, the Bava∣rian had gai'd above a League of Ground before him. There is a Mountain between St. Peter's and Fi∣linghen, much higher then any of the rest; at the top of which there is a level sufficient to contain an Army drawn up in Battalia, and which com∣mands all the Hills round about. The Water, the Pastge, and the Fertilty of the Soyl, which is every wher manur'd under that place, both very Commodious and very Secure to Encamp in. They who were acquainted with the Country made no question but Mercy would have pitch'd his Tents there which made the Duke to hasten his March with all Dilligence. Nevertheless, when the Ad∣vanc'd Curriers of the French Vanguard were got to the top of Holgve (for so the place is call'd) they found that the Bavarians, after they had only broke Ground, in Order to Entrench; were ad∣vancd farther, with more haste then the French could follow 'em. Thereupon, the Duke being quite out of hopes to overtake 'em return'd the same way he came, and ncampd at St. Peter's Abby. His Men were so tird, that he was constraind to let 'em rest the next day, while they burnt the Bavarians Baggage, and brought away their Canon, and two Morters, which the Bavarians left behind 'em. The next day he took in a little Castle seated upon the Moun∣tais, and which might prove serviceable to his De∣signs, and sent the Count of Tournon to convey the Artillery to Brisack.
Thus the Retreat of Coll. Roze was the last re∣markable Action perform'd at the Battle of Fri∣burgh, which is more properly to be call'd a series of several bloody Conflicts, then a pitch'd Battel. On the one side was to be observ'd a Courage which not being to be daunted either with the badness of the Weather, nor the disadvantages of Ground, hazards all for Victory, and proves Victorious at length. On the other side, behold a Prudence which nothing could shake, that made the best of every thing for defence, yet still accompany'd with extraordinary Valour. It is a difficult thing to judge which of the two merited most Honour Whither he that attackt an Army entrench'd in places almost inaccessible, and forc'd em to quit their Holds; or He that preserv'd a resolute and undaunted Judgement in a long Retreat, in view of a Restless, Urging and Victorious Enemy, and at length, made choice of a Post, from whence he could never be forc'd. However, this may be truly said, that a General who quits his Artillery and Baggage may be said to be beaten, and that the Honour of the Retreat cannot be thought to be compleat, unless he saves all. It may be also said that all Mercy's Prudence could never have pre∣servd him from a Total Rout, had it not been for the Error which Espenan and L' Eschelle committed in the Execution of the Duke's Orders. In short, it so falls out for the most part that an Army which Vigorously Attacks an Enemy in his Trenches, has generally the Advantage of him that de∣fends 'em. After the Duke of Enguien had sent away the Count of Tournon, he return'd toward Landsdelin∣ghen, where his Cannon and Baggage stay'd for him. And then he thought of nothing more then of what Advantages he might make by Mercy's Retreat. 'Twas the opinion of the Principal Of∣ficers
that he should retake Friburgh; that their March into Germany was only to relieve that Place, and consequently it ought to be the first Fruits of their Victory. That the Bavarians had not been able to level their Lines, that they were already far remote, that there was but a slender Garrison in the Place, ill provided of all things, and terri∣fi'd with the ill Success of the Combats which they had beheld from their own Ramparts. But the Duke was of Opinion, that 'twas of greater Consequence to undertake the Siege of Philipsburgh,The Siege and Taking of Philips∣burgh. the other Design not appearing Great enough at the end of a Campaign, which it behov'd him to crown with some Exploit much more Illu∣strious Besides, that by bounding his Conquests with the taking of Friburgh, the Arms of France would be no farther advancd into the Country, and would be also constraind to repass the Rhine, to take up their Winter Quarters in Alsatia. Not but that the Siege of Philipsburgh was ex∣tremely difficult; in regard it requir'd a long March to lie down before it; because the Infantry was much lessend in number, and for that their Mony was spent, and Provisions were to be brought a great way; but the Duke contemning these Diffi∣culties, the Siege of Philipsburgh was resolvd upon. To that purpose he sent Champlastreux, the In∣tendant of his Army to Brisack, to bring away ten battering Pieces, in Boats, which would be also farther serviceable to lay a Bridge over the Rhine. Champlastreux, who was both Active and under∣stood his Business, soon dispatchd away those Pre∣parations; and the Prince set forward from Langs∣delinghen, the 16th. of August, with his whole Ar∣my, and March'd along by the Rhine, after he had sent Tual before, with one part of the Weymarian Cavalry, some Musqueteers and some Dragoons.
Roze followd Tubal with the remainder of the Weymarians; the Duke reserving to himself the lea∣ding of the Infantry of both Armies, and the French Cavalry. In this Order he march'd toward a Castle, seat∣ed five or six Miles from Strasburgh, fortifi'd with Towers after the ancient manner, and defended with a good Moat full of Water, which he took by the way, to secure himself of a Communication with Strasburgh. From thence he advanc'd to Ku∣penheim, which Roze had taken as he march'd along Tuball had also possess'd himself of Ethinguen, For∣sen, Bretten, Durlack, Baden, Pruessel and Willock, small Villages enclos'd with Moats, the most of which had Castles also belong'd to 'em. And Tu∣renne went on and invested Philipsburgh it elf, with three Thousand. Horse and seven Hundred Foot, and the Duke arriv'd before the Place in ten days March from Langsdelinghen. Philipsburgh is Seated near the Rhine, upon the Confines of the Dutchy of Wirtemberg, and in the lower Palatinate, three Leagus fom Spire. From Brisack to Hermestein there is not any strong Hold but Philipsburgh. It was formerly calld Vdenheim, and was the Seat belonging to the Bishops of Spire; and the Troubles of Germany insensibly constrain'd the Bishops to fortifie it. But when they had put it into a condition to defend it self, it remain'd no longer in their Hands. For the Imperialists, and afterwards the Swedes, made themselves masters of it: the French also possess'd it for some time but afterwards it returnd under the Emperors Dominion. To this Town belongs a Fort which commands the Rhine, and which Communicates with the City, by means of a Causey six foot broad, and eight hundred foot long. Over against Philipsburgh, the River forms a large Elbow, and causes a great
many Boggs round about half the Place. The Fortiication is only of Earth, but the Ramparts are very thick: It is surrounded with large and deep Moats, nor is there any more then one way to aroach it; and the Body of the Place is com∣posd of seven Bastions almost regular. The Berm is so large that it serves for a false Bray, and this B is secur'd by a Quick-set Hedge very thick. The Moat is full of Water, two hundred foot wide, and four fadom deep, with a Counterscarp well Pallisado'd. On that side next the Elbow, which the Rhine makes, there is only a Bogg co∣ver'd with Wood in some parts; on the other side the Ground is somewhat higher, and intermix'd with Heath, Wood and Ploughd Fields. When the Duke invested it, Bamberg was Gover∣nour the Garrison was compos'd of two hundred Horse, and five hundred Foot; there were a hun∣dred pieces of Canon mounted, and Ammunition sufficient for a long Siege. After the Duke had view'd the most Advantage∣ous Places to secure his Circumvallation, he spent the rest of the day in taking his Posts, and ap∣pointed the Night for attacking the Fort upon the Rhine. The French Army took up their Quarters from Kaudenheime to a River that Waters the Plain, half-way from Rheinhausen, and the German Army was posted from the River to Rheinhausen. Night being come, the Souldiers prepar'd to Storm the Fort. The Duke march'd thither through the Woods, while Tuennne approachd it over small Damms that are rais'd athwart the Mersh. But the Duke could not get thither till break of day, because the way he had chose was long and difficult.
Bamberg, not having Foot sufficient, sent for in∣to the Town both the Men and every thing else that was provided for the defence of the Fort; so that Turenne finding it quitted took Possession of it, and fortifid it with all things necessary against the Attacks of the City. After that, the Duke minded nothing but to se∣cure his Circumvallation. He caus'd Forts and Redoubts to be rais'd in all places where the Ground was proper, and cut down the Trees in the Boggs to stop up the High-ways. Turenne met not with so many Obstacles in the Fortifying his Quarters; for he made use of a great Flood of Water that ran along from one end of his Camp to the other, which he made a good defence by adding a Parapet to it. So that the Circumvallation was finish'd in four days, and the Camp enclosd on all sides from Knaudnheime to Rheinhausen. In the mean time, the Bridge of Boats arriv'd, laden with Canon, Ammunition and Provisions. In twenty four Hours it was laid over against Germe∣sheim and Knaudenheime. Germesheim is a small City of the lower Palatinate, seated upon the Banks of the Rhine, fortifi'd with Bastions of Earth and a drie Moat, on that side next Spire, but full of Wa∣ter on that side next Philipsburgh. The taking of it was necessary to command the upper part of the Rhine; for in regard there could be no Circm∣vallation made beyond the River, they could no be assurd of the River without taking in those pla∣ces which commanded it. Therefore, so soon as the Bridge was finishd, the Duke order'd d' Aumont to pass the River with six hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, and at∣tack Germensheim, which he did in two days after the Trenches were opend; and after that he marchd toward Spire. This City, tho it stands upon the Rhine is only considerable for being the
Seat of the Imperial Chamber; for it is only sur∣rounded with a Wall, garnishd with Towers, after the Ancient manner, and a nasty Moat. Thus, while D' Aumont made himself sure of the most necessary Posts upon the Rhine, the Duke began the Attack of Philipsburgh. And it has been already by us observ'd that there is but one way to approach the Town, where the Earth is Gravelly, all along to the very Counterscarp of the two Ba∣stions of the Place. In this part the Duke orderd two Attacks to be rais'd; o which Grammont undertook to carry on the Left, and Turenne took Care of that on the Right Hand. Both the one and the other made use of above fifteen hundred paces of the Course of a little Rivolet that waters the Plain, after they had turn'd the Water another way, in order to make their Approaches toward the two Bastions which they were to Attack. The Trench was open'd the first of September, and the same Night they made a Place of Arms common to both Attacks; each of which carry'd on their Approaches to the opposite Bastion. Espenan, with the Regiment of Persan, comman∣ded the Guard, the first Night in Grammont's Trench, and after he had carry'd on the Line near 200 Pa∣ces, he began to raise a great Redoubt, where he settl'd a Corps du Guard of a hundred Gendarms at the Head of the Workmen; and those Horsemen had Orders to retire, in the day time, behind the Ruines of an old Building, near the opening of the Trench. The Night was quiet enough; and the Besieged who knew not as yet where the Pioniers were at work, never gave any Interruption to the Besiegers. But so soon as day appear'd, and that they descry'd the Earth cast up, they resolv'd by a Salley to ruine the Work which had been carry'd on in the Night.
To that purpose they detach'd two Hundred Foot, and a Hundred Horse, who advanc'd toward the Line; and tho it were full of Pioniers Espenan prepar'd to receive 'em, commanding the Gendarms to oppose their Cavalry. But that Squadron marchd against the Enemy in so much Disorder, that they were utterly broken at the first Charge, and la Boulay was there slain upon the Place. However Espenan had put the Line in so good Order, that the Besieged durst not attack it; nor pursue this their irst Advantage any farther; in so much that the Gendarmes had time to rally and return to the Charge; and this second time they so well acquitted themselves, that notwithstanding all their firing from the Bastions, all that remaind of those that sally'd were driven to their Counterscarp. Thus the Besiegers continued their Work with∣out Opposition, but that their Infantry was lessen'd to that Degree, that the Dukes Army did not a∣mount to above three thousand Me, and the to∣ther was not above two thousand strong. With so few Men the Prince had an Incredible deal of Trouble to guard so spacious a Circumvallation, and to furnish Men sufficient to guard the Trenches, and other necessary Occasions. His Infantry consisted of Four Battallions; of which that which was relievd in the Trenches was order'd for the extraordinary Guard of the Camp. The other two wrought in the Approaches, and the last provided Faggots to fill up the Trenches. Palluau, with the Regiment of Enguien relievd, the second Night, Espenan and Persan, & carry'd on the Line and finishd the Redoubt. Tournon and Marsin, the two next Nights advanc'd the Works much farther, and made a Battery of six Canons.
Turenne had made n less haste on his side. The fifth Night the two Attacks made a Lodgement upon the Counterscarp; neither did Bamberg op∣pose these Works, but with his Canon and Small-Shot. Neither did the Duke hear any thing of the Bavarian Army; only he had Intelligence that Iohn de Wert was upon his March with a Thousand Horse and as many Musketeers, to try whether he could put any Relief into Philipsburgh; and this advice constraind the Duke to redouble his Guards, and to ride the Rounds every Night. So soon as the two Attacks had made their Lodgements upon the Counterscarp, the Work∣men began to pierce it, and raise Batteries to ru∣ine the Defences of the Place. As for the Descent into the Moat, it was not very difficult, but it would be very troublesome to secure it. For in regard the Water was almost even with the Coun∣terscarp, the Besiegers could not come at it under Ground, and it requird a great deal of time to make a Gallery coverd with Oaken Planks. So that the D. only drew a streight Line which butted upon the Moat, and which was coverd with Bavins upon Blinds and Chandeleers. Espenan and Palluau, during the two Nights that they kept Guard, brought their Works to so much Perfection as to be able to fill up the Moat. Tour∣non also had already thrown into it a great number of Bavins, bu as he passd along the piercd Line that led to the Work, he was slain with a Musket Bullet. La Pomme the Engeneer was expert at making Mines and passing Moats: but he met with a great many Difficulties by reason of the Canon that playd from the Town, which the Besiegers Ca∣non culd not Master, for that having so great a number as they had, no sooner was one Piece dismounted, but presently another was mounted
in the room; and beside those which they had in their Flanks with which they batter'd the Bridge side-ways, they had a Row upon the Face of the Bastions which pierc'd and ruin'd the whole Ap∣proach. 'Tis true the Flanks were so small that they could not plant above three pieces of Canon upon 'em. Which is a usual Fault in the best Fortificati∣ons to hae the Flanks either too narrow or too open But the first of these defects is the worst, in regard that between the two opposite Batteries the great∣est number of Canon always prevails. In a word, the Besiegers having rais'd two Batteries, each of four pieces of Canon, presently put to silence the Enemies Canon from the Flanks. But the Besieged planted so many upon the Faces of the Bastions, the Rampart of which was very low, that they ru∣in'd those of the Besiegers. For which reason, the Duke was constrain'd to raise Shoulderings to hide his Batteries, and cover the Faces of the Bastions. By which means his Canon got the Mastery, and the Besiegers labour'd with more security to perfect their Bridge. Then Bamberg found that it would not be in his Power to hinder the Mat from being fill'd up, and therefore knowing his Garrison to be but weak, he thought it not convenient to stay till the Miners were set to work, in hopes before that, to make a more Advantageous Capitulation. Thereupon, he beat a Parley, Hostages were given on both sides, and the Garrison march'd out the twelfth of Septem∣ber, to the number of five Hundred Men, with two Pieces of Canon. The Duke put Persan's Regiment into the Town, and made Espenan Governour. The winning of this Place, tho more easie then the Prince foresaw or expected, gave great Repu∣taion to the Arms of France; insomuch that seve∣ral Cities sent their Deputies Nor did
till D'Aumont summon'd 'em, but sent Commissioners with their Keys to the D. who receiv'd 'em Honou∣rably; and after he had confirm'd their Priviledges, sent 'em back with Order to dismiss the Imperialists, and receive a French Garrison, which a' Aumont had Instructions to put into the Town. But the Duke could not reap himself the Fruits of the taking of Philipsburgh, nor could he remove from thence before he had repair'd the Fortificati∣ons. For the Enemy was at hand; his Men were much lessen'd and weary'd; his Canon had made great Ruins which were to be repair'd; nor was the Prince in a Condition to stand Mercy, who had both refresh'd and recruited his Army since his re∣treat from Friburgh. So that all the Duke could do was to settle his Quarters in the Places along the Rhine, in such a manner, that the Enemy could nei∣ther regain what he had won, nor force him to a General Battel. He had the River on the one side, the City on the other, the Fort of Rhine before him, and the Mersh, and the Woods behind him. His Army being thus Advantageously Posted, he detach'd Turenne, to go and attack Wormes. This City is not Inferiour either in Dignity or number of Inha∣bitants to any of the Cities of Germany, being Sea∣ted upon the Bnks of the Rhine, and fortifid as much as the Largeness and Situation of it would permit. Duke Charles of Lorrain kept Garrison there, and since the Loss of his Territories, he had hardly any other Place of Retreat but that. Turenne sent away the Foot,Wormes, Maence, and several ther lges taken. his Canon and all o∣ther things necessary for his Design by Water. Which done, he march'd through the Palatinate, with two thousand Horse, and defeated six hundred Mn, which General Beck had sent to Frankendale. The Inhabitants of Wormes also open'd their Gates, and sent away the Lorrainers. Thereupon Turenne
continu'd his March toward Mayence, and detach'd away Roze to take in Oppenheim, a little City seated in a Pain, ill fortifi'd, but defended with a very good Castle. Roze found no Resistance there; and Turenne at the same time presented himself before Mayence, and Lodging himself in the Subburbs, sent a Trumpe to those that commanded in the Ci∣ty, with Offers of Honourable Conditions. Mynce is the Seat of an Archbishop, who is one of the Electors, and one of the Principal Ci∣ties of Germany; besides that, it is Large, Popu∣lous, and well Built, considering that it lyes in a Country where good Architecture was never much known or practis'd. The Situation renders it con∣siderable, being seated just opposite to the mouth of the Mein, which washes one part of the Walls: On the Land side it is defended by a Citadel, with four Bastions. But as it is usual in great Cities, the Fortifications had been long neglected, so that the Principal defence of the Town consisted in the number of Inhabitants, not in the strength of the Ramparts. At the lower end of the City, upon the Bank of the Rhine, stns a Magnificent Cstle, which is the Residence of the Elector. In the time that this City was under the Power of the Swedes, the King had caus'd a Fort of six Bastions call'd Gu∣stawburgh, to be built in that part where the two Rivers meet. But the Imperialists having at length retaken Mayence, the Fort was quitted by the Swedes, and the Electors let it run to ruine. When Vicount Turenne enter'd the Subburbs, there was in th Town an Imperial Garrison of eight Hundred Men: Nevertheless, the Elector not believing he could remain there in safety, was retir'd to Hermestein; so that the Chapter, which has all the Authority of the Government in the Absence of the Arch-bishop, caus'd all the Bodies
of the City to meet together, and after several Deliberations, they resolv'd to send their Commis∣sioners to the Duke of Enguien, and to present the Keys of the Town to himself, to make their Capi∣tulation the more Honourable, by the Quality of the Person that receiv'd 'em. Turenne sent this Answer to the Duke, who lay still with his Army near to Philipsburgh; who thereupon departed with a Convoy of four Hun∣dred Horse, and came to Mayence in a day and a half. And while both sides were drawing up the Articles of the Surrender. Mercy lay posted upon the Hills between Hailbrun and Neckersulm, leaving the Necker before him. Hailbrume is not above fourteen Leagues from Philipsburgh, and Mrcy pretended from thence to put a stop to the Progress of the Duke. To which purpose he detach'd Wolfs, a famous Collonel among the Bavarians, with two hunder'd Horse, and five Hunder'd Drgoons to put himself into Mayence; tho Wolfs could not get thither above a quarter of an hour before the Duke of Enguien. So that the Trumpet which the Duke sent to give the City notice of his coming found Wolfs haranging the Townsmen, and encouraging them to stand upon their own defence, offering the Reinforcement which he had lef on the other side of the Rhine, as also the Assistance of the whole Bavarian Army, which would follow him in a little time. But the Inhabitants, who knew the Duke was in their Subburbs, stood to their Word which they had given to Turenne, and after they had dismiss'd Wolfs out of the City, sent their Deputies to the Duke to conclude their Treaty of Capitulation. The Chapter also oblig'd themselves to send out the Garrison, which they kept in Binghen, a small City, and to admit the French. The Duke gave th Government of Mayence to the Count of Cour∣val,
and put a strong Garrison into the Town, with all things necessary to repair the old Fortifi∣cations and make new ones. Turenne likewise took Creussnack in his March, and d' Aumont invested Landau with twelve hun∣dred Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse. This is a City seated in a Plain, four Leagues from Philips∣burgh, well Peopl'd, and having a Rampart flank'd by two Towers, after the antient manner, with a Moat defended by some Half-Moons and a Covert way. There were in the Town four hundred Lor∣rainers; and it was the only place which the Pala∣tinates had preserv'd in the Palatinate, on this side the Rhine, except Frankendale, where the Spaniards kept a very strong Garrison. While ' Aumont was taking up his Quarters, and beginning his Approaches before Landau, the Duke rejoin'd his Army close by Philipsburgh, that he might be near the Siege which d' Aumont had undertaken; where he understood that the Tren∣ches were already open'd, but that d' Aumont go∣ing to visit the Works was dangerously wounded. Thereupon Turenne was sent to continue the Siege who carry'd on the Trenches with that speed, that in three days a Battery was raisd, and a Lodgement made upon the Counterscarp.He dyed at Spire, within a w days after. The fifth day, the Duke being come to visit the Works, the Lorrainers capitulated with Turenne, and march'd out of the Place. After the taking of Landau, Newstad, Manhei and Magdeburgh, made but little Resistance. So that in one Campaign, the Duke saw himself three times Victorious over the Bavarian Army, Master of the Palatinate, and the Course of the Rhine, from Philipsburgh to Hermenstein, and of all the Country between the Rhine and the Moselle.
There are three things which have not been ob∣serv'd in the Campaign of Friburgh,Three things not observ'd in the Cam∣paign of Friburgh. which are not to be omitted. The First is, that the Duke, as it is credibly reported, the more to encourage his Souldiers to force the Bavarian Camp, threw his Batoon, the Ensign of his Generalship, over the Entrenchments, shewing by that Action, that to prevent his Batoon from falling into the Enemies Hands, there was a neceity of gaining that part where he had thrown it, and that it was to be lookt upon as the Prize which the Duke propos'd to himself to win; and which it behov'd all the Souldiers also to be no less eager of gaining. The Second thing necessary to be observ'd is this, that the Defeat of the Bavarians at the Battel of Friburgh, gave the French an easie opportunity to make such considerable Progresses, that they no sooner presented themselves before a Town, but the Garrison surrender'd. So that the Marquiss d' Aumont having summon'd Gemersheim to open her Gates, she did it immediately. The Deputies also of that Place, accompany'd with the Clergy and Magistray, met the Marquiss, to assure him of their Obedient Submission to the King of France, and besides Landau, which Marshal Turenne took, they made themselves Masters of Magdeburgh, and the City of Bacara The Third thing worthy to be observ'd, and which will shew the Terrour which the Duke of Engin's Name had struck into the Hearts of the Enemies of France was this, that when Turenne had sent Roze to invest Mayence, and that Mercy had sent Wolfs with six hundred Dragoons, and four hundred Horse, to Succour the Place, with promise of all other Assistance necessary, those Offers were rejected. The Besieged answer'd that they were only fair Promises. That never the less the City was Besieg'd, and that when they were to re∣sist
the still Triumphant Arms of the King of France, they must make use of other Weapons the Words, and that the Duke of Enguien's continud Victories gave them great reason to fear that they should not be able successfully to withstand a Force that carry'd all before it. Which Answer to sur∣priz'd Coll. Wolfs, that he immediately retird. And then the Chapter of Mayence sent their Commissi∣oners to the Duke, to inform him of the Resolu∣tion they had taken, to Surrender the City into his Hands, upon Condition that the Prince would Sign the Capitulation as it was drawn up, and that he would come and receive their Oathes of Fidelity. These Offers and Conditions were accepted the Sixteenth of September. The Principal Articles of the Capitulation being, That the Administration as well Ecclesiastical as Secular should remain Free to the Chapter. That Iustice should be administer'd according to the usual manner; and that under that Clause, the Officers should be preserv'd in their Employments and Priviledges. That the Chapter having put themselves under the King of France's Protection, the Duke should not Charge 'em with any new Impositions; and that he should put a Garrison of Five Hundred Men into the Fort. The Duke also made a particular Agreement with the Governour, which immediately concernd the Emperor and the Imperial Garrison that was in the Place. So soon as the Capitulation was Signd, the Duke sent advice of it to their Majesties, and then made his Entrance into the City, where he was receivd with that Pomp and Magnificence which carry'd along with it the Aire and Shew of a Triumph. All the Corporations of Mayence went forth to meet the Prince, and made their Compli∣ments to him in Latin. And the Duke, who under∣stood other things as well as the taking of Towns, and winning of Battels, answerd all their Com∣plements, and all their Speeches in Latin, in so Elo∣quent
a manner, that not only they who had the Advantage to hear him speak were charm'd and ravish'd with Admiration, but the noise of his Wit and Learning spread it self all over Germany, if I may not say all over Europe. Some compard him to Alexander, others to Caesar. The First observd in him that Impetuosity, that Ardour, that Activity, that Heroick Bravery, and Daring Boldness, which in Alexander were joyn'd to the Love of Letters and Learning; and the others believ'd him to be the Living Image of Csar, not only in respect of the Capacity, Prudence and Conduct of that Illustrious Roman, but also in regard of his Eloquence. The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF LEWIS de BOVRBON, Prince of Conde. The Second Book. The Prince of Conde made Go∣vernour of Champagn and Brie.THE Duke of Enguien was become so considerable at Court, that after the Battel of Friburgh, and the reducing of Philipsburgh and Mayence, he was made Governour of Champaigne and Brie; and it was also farther resolv'd that he should again Com∣mand in Germany. 1645.The French took the Field betimes in that Coun∣try, and at the beginning of the Spring they made themselves Masters of three considerable Places, by the prudent Conduct and Bravery of Major Ge∣neral Erlac. The 15th. of April he descended to∣ward the Rhine, where Moser, who commanded the Queen of Sweden's Forces, joyn'd him with three
Hundred Foot, and his own Troop of Horse. All their Forces being embodyd into an Army, besieg'd Lichtenaw, a Castle which the Germans made use of as a convenient Post, to seize the Boats that fell down from Strasburgh to Philipsburgh. That Place held out some Discharges of the Canon for Honours sake, and then surrender'd upon Composition. After that the Marquiss of Baden surrender'd the Castle of Stolburn which belongd to him,The taking of Lichte∣naw, the Castle of Stolbur and Kirp∣penheim tho it were strong∣ly seated, and well provided with Victuals. This doe, General Erlac besieg'd Kirppenheim, well fortifid with Half-Moons, and defended by a broad Moat, lin'd both within and without. The Inhabi∣tants who rely'd upon their Fortifications prepar'd themselves for a stout Defence; but they were con∣straid to give way to the Vigorous Onsets of the Besegers, and surrender'd upon Composition. While Erlac made these lesser Progresses, Turenne acted with Success against the Imperialists. 'Tis true that the Advantages which he won at the be∣ginning of the Campaigne were attended with a sad Event, for in regard he thought he had no reason to fear his being attack'd by those he had so vigo∣rously driven before him, and that he thought 'em a great way off, he was all of a suddain assail'd by Mercy, who was one of the most experienc'd, most vigilant, most piercing, and most politick Captains that ever were. Mercy then surprisd Marshal Tu∣renne near Mariendal, where the Kings Quarters were, and the Marshal was beaten before he could joyn his Men. But certain it is, that if Turenne committed a fault in suffering himself to be sur∣priz'd,Turene beaten at Merienda. he made amends for it with as much Honour as it was possible. For by that presence of Mind which made him find out Remedies in Conjunctures more difficult, and more imminent Dangers, he made a very Honourable Retreat; still defending himself with a Heroick Bravery and Conduct, till
he got to the Passage of the Rhine, and fighting ra∣ther like a Victor then Vanquishd. But the loss which France sustaind by that Ill Suc∣cess was more Advantageously repair'd by the D. of Enguien, who was sent into Germany in Iune. The Prince's Presence gave new Confidence to the French, who were something terrifi'd, and infus'd into 'em that Courage, that Boldness and Resoluti∣on, as prepar'd 'em for the most difficult Under∣takings, and put 'em into the greatest Hopes. So soon as he arriv'd, he possess'd himself of se∣veral Places, which gave a free Passage over the Rhine, and made himself Master of Wimphen, a lit∣tle City seated upon the Necker. And at this time it was that he fought the Battel of Norling,The Battel of Norling. accor∣ding to the following Account. The Loss which the French had sustain'd by the Battel of Mariendal, was soon repair'd by the Duke of Enguien, who was sent into Germany, a little while after. The Presence of the Young Prince, who had won so many Victories, not only enlivend the Courage of the French, but so hotly alarum'd the Imperialists, that at first they knew not what Course to take; and the Prince made the best of the Terrur which he had struck into the Enemy. Immediately he seiz'd upon the most considerable Places upon the Rhine, and cast the Enemy into a perfect Consternation, by the taking of Wimphen and Rotambugh. But in regard he design'd a Nobler Expedition to make himself Master of Heilbrun, he thought it behov'd him to do all he could to weaken the Ba∣varian Army, which would e still opposing his En∣terprises. So that without consulting any farther, after he had prepard every thing ready, he fell upon the Enemy, who lay Encamp'd upn several Hillocks between Wending and Norling. Marshal Grammont commanded the Right Wing, where was
the French Cavalry with Arnaut, Camp-Master Ge∣neral of the Carbines; Turenne le the Left Wing, where was all the German Cavalry. Beltenve, Mar∣sin, and the Marquiss of Castela commanded the Foot between the Wings. Major General Geis, and cin commanded the Second Line, compos'd of two Regiments of Turenne's, six of Foot, and twelve of Horse, that were all Hessians, which were reuni∣ted with the Dukes: And the Body of the Reserve was commanded by Chabot. The Bavarians, who as I have already said, were Posted upon several rising Grounds, no sooner per∣ceiv'd the Approach of the D's. Army, but they pla∣ced themselves very advantageously under a Moun∣tain, for on the one side they had a Village that stood in the Plain, and on the other a Castle, where they had already put their Canon and some Infantry. Now in regard that from the Village to the Mountain there was an easie Ascent for an Army embattell'd, the Duke had a Design in the first place to make himself Master of that Post, as soon as an opportunity should present it self. Neverthe∣less, the Enterprise was not so easie; for there was a necessity of passing between the three Flanks of the Mountain, the Castle and the Village which he design'd to take. But being resolv'd upon it whatsoever Risco he ran, he undertook to make an Onset with the Infanry only; to the end that as he drave the Enemy from the Place he had an Eye up∣on, the two Wings which march'd towards their Cavalry might receive no Annoyance from the Ba∣varians, but that on the other side, they might ad∣vance under the Favour of their own Men's Firing. There was also another Inconvenience which was to be remedy'd: for there was a necessity of assay∣ing the Village in Flank; and it was to be fear'd leat the Men who made the Onset should be beaen by those that stood at the top of the Mountain.
of the Bavarians, so that they push'd forward into the Plain, and were going to fall upon the French Baggage, when a German Regiment not only  'em, but gave em chase. The French also were in a kind of Disorder, i∣somuch that 'twas greatly to be fear'd tey  loose the Victory. The Right Wing was utery broken, in regard they had made no Resst, being vanquish'd almost without striking a . But Turenne, with the first Line of the Lft Win which he commanded, broke into the irst ie of the Enemies Right Wing, tho much more ne∣rous then his, which had been extremely  by the continual firing of the Bavrin Inanry; and by that means he made amends in some sort or the Cowardice of the French Souldiers. The sco Line of the Enemies put themselves at the sa Instant in a Condition to second their irt, a chargd some Squadrons in the Flank; but a his nothing terrifid Turenne. In the mean time,  Enemies began to make their best of some little Ad∣vantage which they might have had, if Turene hd been left to himself. But the Duke having spyd him in that Condition, advanc'd all of a suddain with his second Line, and having rally'd the irst with all the speed imaginable, He and Turenne charg'd the En∣my both at the same time, and having broken soe of their Squadrons, put all their Troops in Disor∣de Here the Duke having perform'd all the D∣ties of a private Souldier, as well as of a great Cap∣tain was shot in the Elbow with a Pistol Bllet, which however did not hinder him from actng. It may be said that till then there had been only some slight Skirmishes, tho there had already bee a great deal of Blood spilt, and a great many Oi∣cers of Note Slain on both Sides. But because they found it necessary to come to a General Battel the Bavarians having brought down their Body of Re∣serve,
and the Troops which had broken the Right Wing, that Turenne seconded, the Duke order'd the Hesians to advance, together with his own Infantry and Cavalry, and march'd himself at the Head of 'em ainst the Enemy. The Dispute was obstinate and bloody for two hours together, and during that time there was no Quarter given on either side. They ught on both sides with so much valour and equa∣lity of Advantage, that it was a difficult thing, while the heat of the Combat lasted, to judge which way the Victory would encline; but at last it fell to the Duke. One part of the Enemy was cut to pieces, the other routed and put to flight. The Ba∣arians lost four thousand Men in this Battel. Tis true that it cost the Duke fifteen hundred, count∣ing in the wounded; but withal he got fifteen pie∣ces of Canon, took forty Colours, and a great num∣ber of Prisoners, of which He was forcd to re∣lease the greatest part, because he could not keep 'em without great Inconvenience to his own Army. But that which compleated this Victory was the ta∣king of Gleen, General of the Imperial Army, who was afterwards exchang'd for Marshal Grammont; and the Death of General Mercy, one of the great∣est Captains o his Age. That very Mercy, of whom the Duke himself and Turenne gave that Honorable Testimony; that it was he alone who for along time sustain'd the tottering Imperial Troops; that he had never been surpriz'd in any Irregular Moti∣on that he had never lost a favourable opportuni∣y, nor ever fail'd of preventing the taking of any, as if he had been present in their Councils. In a word, this Loss of the Bavarians was so great, that it seemd at first as if the Prosperity of their Army had expir'd with their General. And certain it is, that that same Body which had so many times sig∣naliz'd themselves, never after that mov'd as it wnt to do.
day with his, and the D. of Enguien march'd another way with his men, toward the General Rendevoz. The D. of Lorrains Army had already passd the Scheld, with a Resolution to oppose the Designs of the D. of Orleance, and D. of Enguien, But so soon as he understood that the three Bodies of the French Army were marching directly toward him, he re∣pass'd the River at Montagne, in expectation of P∣colomini, Beck and Sambry, that were to join him. But tho that Army were five and twenty thousand strong; tho it coasted all along, in view, the March of the French Army, and that it were already posted along the River under the Walls of Tournay; the French however forbore not to advance a little below the same place, and to seize upon a Pass over the Scheld, over against Trinity Mount. That Pass gave the French an easie opportunity to attack Tournay or Oudenara. But the difficulty was how to pass the River in view of a powerful Army, which in all probability would not sit still and look on. Nevertheless, at a Council of War all the General Officers concluded, that there was necessity for 'em to attempt the Passage. The only difficulty they met with was to secure the Convoys; but the D. of Engi had already found out a Remedy for that. For he had attack'd the Castle of Lannoy,Lannoy aen. seated between Tournay and L', and took it in a days time. Which being done, all their Conveys were securd, and they had no more to do but to put their Resolutions in Execution. But upon a suddain the D. of Orleance alterd his Design, and concluded upon the Siege of Courtray. First of all the two Brigades led by Gassion and Ranzau, got before the Place, and invested on both sides the Ri∣er , upon which it was seated, till the D. of Eguien came up with his Army on that side next o Moncouron and Rolingue. But the little Care they ook to Invest it etimes, gave the Enemy leisure to put a considerable Succour into the Town. Delpon,
a  in great epute for holding out of Towns got in with his own Regiment and twelve Compa∣nys of Foot however all this did but animate the French Generals so much the more. The next day the Trenches were open'd: but the Neighbourhood of the Enemy so near the Trenches, was the reason that the Besiegers were in continual fears of being surpriz'd. The Enemy also made some motions. And the Duke of Enguien gave no∣tio the same day that the Trenches were open'd, that the Spanish Army was advanc'd very near his Camp, with a design to fight him. Thereupon one part of the French Army drew off and prepard to meet the Spaniards, who were con∣strain'd to retreat a long by the Scheldt, into their first Entrenchments. After their Retreate Enguien joyn'd Gasson and Ranzau, to the end they might invest the Town with more ease and assurance. All the French Forces being reunited, the Cir∣cumvallation was begun and finish'd in less then four days, tho it took up almost five Leagues in Compass, in reguard that both Horse as well as Foot were set to work. Orleans with Ranza's Men took up his Quarter beyond the Li, and on that side next to Flanders, from one end of the City to the o∣ther; and he had his Communication with the Quarters of Enguien and Gasson, by means of seve∣ral bridges la'd over the River. Enguien took up his Quarter on this side the River, from Orleance's Quarter to Gassion's, on that side next Tournay; and Gassion from Enguien's to Orleanc's, on that side next Audenard and Gand. The Circumvallation as I have already said, was so vast, that the French Armies were not numerous enough to guard the whole extent of it, so that there were many void paces, through which the Spaniards might have put Reie into the Town, had not the spaces been in∣lo'd with a Line, supported and dfended with a
great number of Redoubts. 'Twas thought by the Besiegers that by this means they had removed the Enemy so far off, that it would be impossible for him to come on. But Charles the IV. Duke or Lorrain, in a sit of Dispair, usual with unfortunate Heros, advanc'd with all his Army, leaving his Bag∣gage behind him and posted himself within Canon Shot of the French Camp, making a shew as if he would attack 'em. And had they march'd directly against the Duke of Lorrain, as it was Enguiens ad∣vice, they had doubtless given him a total Defeat. But Orleance did not relish that Counsel, whose opinion it was that they should only mind reduc∣ing the Town, without running any hazard. So that every Quarter entrench'd themselves, and went on with the Siege, tho very slowly, by reason that Lorain's Army gave fresh Alarums every moment. In the mean time Lorrain being forcd to retreat, upon the news which was brought him, that the Hollanders had taken the Field, and his Presence was necessary in the Neighbourhood to those Quarters where they were drawn together, en∣deavour'd before his departure to put some consi∣derable relief into the Town. But the attempt prov'd fruitless, and cost him also a World of Men, which extreamly abated the Courage of the Be∣sieged, who flatter'd themselves with being re∣liev'd. At the same time Gassion attack'd a Half-Moon and carryd it. Enguien also having open'd his Trenches on that side where he lay, soon af∣ter lodg'd himself upon the Counterscarp of the Half-Moon which he attack'd. The extream faci∣lity that he met with, was the reason that he only made a brisk Onset without any Formality. His Enterprize prov'd successful, and was so much the more applauded, because it made him Master of what he de'd much sooner then if he had gone re∣gularly to wk. However because the Trench was
pearc'd thorough, and not supported with any dgments Traverses or places of Armes, and for that the ogment which he had made upon the Half-Moon was not well secur'd, it was three times regain'd, and the French were driven out with great loss. Nevertheless, nothing but bare necessity restrain'd the Corage of the D. of Enguien. His de∣sire to repair his loss by main force, had like several times to have transported him beyond his Judg∣ment, and made him abandon himself wholly to his Valour. But this same Prince, who as valiant as he was, was no less Judicious then Brave, gave ear to reason, and pref'd the security of for∣mal Approaches, before his boyling Indignation, and the troublesome delays which the Maxims of besieging taught him, before an irregular Daring. And now Lorrain being joynd by the Marquiss of Caracena, there happen'd some Skirmishes between the French and Spaniards The Besieged likewise, who still expected Succour, made continual Sallies and moreover, they rely'd upon their Garrison which was very numerous, and the strength of the Fortifications. For it was surrounded with a good Wall flankd with Towers, with a Rampart and a Moat supply'd with water by the River. But Del∣pon finding that he could not hope to be reliev'd; that all the Half-Moons were taken and that the Besiegers began to fill up the Moate, & fix their Mi∣ners upon the 28 resolv'd to beate a Parley, and had very honourable Articles granted him. After the taking of this Place the French Army rested a while in their Camp, and for sixteen days did nothing else but repair the Breaches of the City; Level some part of their Lines, and Fortifie the weakest places with five or six Half-Moons. So soon as the French had rested, they began to think of New Conquests. For the Dutch Army, to which the D. of Oleince had sent a Reinforce∣ment
of six thousand Men, were pass'd the Sheldt; and the French and Dutch Armies being joyn'd Orleance advanc'd toward Berguen St. Winox, which is a large City, seated upon the River Colme, which about a hundred Paces below, falls into the Canal of Dunkirk, with a resolution to Attack that place. To which purpose, Orleance with Ranzaus Brigade posted himself along the Colme, on that side next Sanberkhen Enguien fix'd himself from his left Hand as far as the Fort of Ventismulr; so that they had invested the City on both sides the River. Gassion took his Post from the Fort of Ventis, beyond the Colme, as far as the Grand Canal from Berghen to Dunkirk, and farther to the Banks of Colme, where he joyn'd to Orleance's Camp. The Place was no sooner invested, but Berghen and Dunkirk, pull'd up all their Sluces; but the French had posted themselves upon two Rising Grounds, and opend two Trenches, one in the Duke of Orleance's, the other in the D. of Enguien's Quarter. So that the Besieged, seeing the French advance so furiously with their Approaches, and that the Cannon from Enguiens Attack had al∣ready broken down their Walls, and that they lay naked to the Shot, demanded to Capitulate. Which being concluded, the Garrison marchd out the 31. of Iuly, in very good order, and was conducted to Dunkirk. So soon as they were Master of Berguen a design was laid for the besieging of Mardicke. To which purpose Messengers were sent into Holland to sol∣licit Admiral Trump to lye with his Men of War before the Place. But the Marquiss of Caracena, judging rightly, by the March of the French Troops, of the design which Orleance and Enguien had form'd, sent away forthwith to Fernando de So∣lis who was Governour of Mardicke, two thou∣sand Foot and a hundred Horse, with all other
things necessary for the defence of the Place. The Circumvallation was finish'd in three Days, and upon the 8h of August at Night, Orleance open'd two Trenches, and Enguen one. The besieged on the other side made several Sallys; and that which was the least advantageous, and made upon En∣guiens Trench, provd to be the most Fatal to the French, for the Prince, upon the first noise of the Sally, flew upon the Enemy with a great number of Volunteers, and the Horse Guard of his Attack, brake through all that oppos'd him, and put all to the Sword, hardly one escaping back. But the Besieged d so furiously that their Shot from the Counterscarp, the Hornwork, the Half-Moons and the Bastions was fatal to a considerable number of the French. The Counts of Flaiz and Rocheguyon were both slain, with the Chevalier de Fiesque. The D. of Nemours was wounded in the Leg with a Mus∣quet Bullet, and the D. of Eng. scorcht in the Face with a Fire-post. Thus the Besieged continu'd their Sallys till the 23d. But all their Canon be∣ing dismounted, and the French pressing upon 'em with an unresistable Fury, they thought it their best course to Capitulate,Mardicke taken. which they did the 24th. and by their Articles they were all made Prisoners of War; to the number of two thousand five hun∣der'd Common Soulders, two Collonels, and For∣ty Captains. Some days after the Surrender of Mardicke, the Duke of Orleance return'd to Court, leaving the General Command of the Army to the Duke of Enguien, who after he was cur'd of his Wounds, pursu'd his Conquests with the same Vigour as before. The Post before Mardicke, was too inconvenient for the Army to make any long stay in those parts. The Prince therefore dislodgd two days after, and pass'd the Colme. But at the same time that Mar∣dicke
I am apt to think that the Dignity of this History may raise my mind to that pitch as to  to hope, without wounding my Modesty, that the Recital will deserve to be suffer'd among the Learned, if it may not deserve their Applause. All people thought, that the Campaign in Flan∣ders during the Year 1646. would have ended with the taking of Mardicke. The Season was far spent, our hardships had been extream, and our Victories highly Honourable. Gaston Duke of Orleance, after he had Commanded our Armies was recall'd to Court; and all things laid together, made people believe that the Army would have been laid up in their WinterQuarters; and that the War would not have been renew'd again till the Spring. Never the less, Lewis Prince of Conde, never accustom'd to end his Campaignes without the having per∣form'd some great Exploit above the Common rate of Courage, did not find his Honour yet sa∣tisfi'd. And tho that after the departure of the Duke of Orleance, who left him General, he had in two days passd several Rivers, repuls'd the Armies of Lamboy and Caracena, and taken the City of Furnes; he could not consent to retreate, the Winter being yet at some distance but form'd designs befitting his Reputation and his Fortune. For so long as the Spaniards, who knew that the loss of a General Battle would be the total Ruine of Flanders, refus'd to put it to the venture, and that there was no other way to continue the War but by Seiges, the Prince resolv'd to undertake one more this Year, and to that purpose calld his Council together, to consult which place he should fall upon: and all opinions were reducd to two, either Menene, or Dunkirk. Menene is a Town seated upon the Lis, between Armentiers and Courtray, in a Fertil and Pleasant Country, famous for the Trade it drove formerly
in Co and eer, and which boasts her Original , and we had fortunately won  Gassion afterwards thought fit to , and by his care it was put into a Condi∣tion able to stain the Siege of a great Army, when Ccena surprizd it rather through the weakness of the Garrison, then for any defect of the Place. They who were for regaining it, alledg'd, That was absoltely necessary to joyn those places which we held uon the Lis That Menene being in the Enemies hands,  Convoys to Courtray could never go sae; that it wold rquire a whole Army to bridle that one City. On the other side, that if we had it in our own hands Provi∣sios might be arryd up the River with little danger and expence that we should be in a condition to make farther Proposals without leaving any thing behind to give us annoyance; that Armentieres and Courtray would faci∣litte the conveincies of the Siege; that it was not fitting to suffer an Enemy in the midst of our strong Holds; and lastly that it was for the Honour of the Nation to preserve by our Arms what our Arms had acquir'd us. These Rea∣sons were plausible and solid in appearance; but they who did not approve 'em, argu'd after this manner. That the Siege of Menene requir'd the crossing of se∣veral Countries, and to undertake a hasty march to pre∣vent the Enemies Diligence, and to be at leisure to en∣trench themselves before the whole Army could joyn; which appear'd the less feasible, because their Forces encamp'd about Newport, near Furnes; they were always restless to know our designs, and that they were ready to follow us which way soever we bent our march. Moreover, the Siege of Courtray accomplishd in view of the Enemy, with con∣tinl hardships, the Succours sent away to the Holland∣ers, during a violent heat, beyond the Nature of the Cli∣mate, in a Country open and without water, unless that of Cnals, and stinking Mershes, bitter and noysome; our qick march toward the Sea Coast, the taking of Berguen, the Siege of Mardike, the Expedition against Furnes,
had almost render'd the Army unfit for Service. On the other side, the Enemy having undertaken no Siege, keep∣ing themselves the best part of the Summer under the shel∣ter of their City, abounding in all sorts of conveniencies, and Provisions were as fresh as when they first quitted their Garrisons, and were in a condition rather to get before us to Menene, then to follow us: but tho we were assur'd of getting there before 'em, and putting our Lines in a po∣sture of defence, yet the River of Lis running round the Place, would oblige us not only to make a large Circumvallation, but moreover to divide our Army into two parts; and this Army would be so lssen'd, as it hap∣pens alwys at the end of a Campaign where the Souldi∣ers have suffer'd great Hardships, that we shall not have Souldiers anow to defend our vast Entrenchments, much less sufficient to carry on the Siege. On the other side, the Enemy will have the Advantage with all his Forces to assail the half of ours, and afterwards to defeat the re∣mainde, if their fist attempts succeed. More especially since the Return of the Infantry, which had repassd the Sea, would not admit 'em the least hopes of any Diversion from the Hollanders, tho the Prince had sent Tourville to 'em to perswade 'em, if he could, to sit down before some Town, were it only to divide the Spainsh Forces, conse∣quently to dream of taking Menene, considering the Con∣dition they were in, was visibly to hazard for a Town of small Importance, the Honour of so many Victories, the Reputation of the Prince, and the Loss of the Army. Add to this, that after the Siege of Mardike, the first Advice was to regain Menene, which tho then it seem'd good, nevertheless, the Surrender of Furnes, which was as it were a Blockade upon Dunkirk, and opend a way to that nobler Expedition, ought to make 'em alter their Counsel, and therefore that of the two designs they were to make choice of that which promis'd most Profit & most Honour. These Considerations having made 'em lay aside that Enterprize which few People contested after the taking of Furnes, they fell to examine the
Attempt upon Dunkirk, where they could not expect to meet with fewer Difficulties. For tho the Situ∣ation render'd the Circumvallation more easie, and that it were but a small March for the Army, yet there were so many Obstacles to obstruct the Design, that it was morally impossible to surmount. There is a necessity, said they, that one part of the Army must Encamp upon some Hills, and the other among stand∣ing Pools, and muddy Grounds. There was no Wood in all the Neighbourhood, nor any Straw for the Souldiers Hutts; no convnience for Lodging the Cavalry; no Forrage for their Subsistance. One part of the Country desert and un∣tilld the War had ruin'd the rest: So that there was no likelyhood that the Army could subsist there one day; much less continue a Siege. The trouble of procuring Victuals was also as great, which could be brought no way but by Calais, or by Sea. But the Dunkirkers might easily drown so much Ground as to deprive 'em of any Communi∣catn by Lnd, and the way by Sea was no less hazar∣dous, because of the Flas and Shoals, and want of Ports; and altogether impossible in stormy weather: So that if it should happen to be bad weather, and that chance to con∣tinue but a little, we must either famish, or be forc'd to raise the Siege, with the Ignominy of having attempted it without foresight. Moreover, as it was a most difficult thing to force Dunkirk so long as her Port was open, so there was no probability that the great Dutch Ships that had lain in the Road ever since the taking of Mardike, could be able to come to an Anchor near the Shoare, if the Winds began to blow so furiously as they had done, more especially in the Engl. Channel, where the Waves are short, and the Sea runs high in bad weather. And when the Dutch are forc'd to keep out at Sea, the Enemy with their small Vessels, will run all hazards to fetch Relief for the Besieged. They farther observ'd, that during the Sep∣tember Tides that swell'd high, 'twould be a hard thing to hinder the Barks from Newport or Ostend from cree∣ping along the Shoar, and getting with the Tyde of Flood
himself confirm'd in his desire to atack it by this, that the Enemies Generals would hardly hazard the event of a Battel, so long as it appeard to them uncertain; for which reason he might the more daringly undertake what he pleas'd, and that there was no fear of those whom their own Interests held to be half vanquish'd already. Thus then the desire of the publick Benefit join'd with the hope of more then ordinary honour, ha∣ving made him resolve to fall upon Dunkirk, he de∣termin'd to vanquish all manner of Obstacles, and to overcome Nature her self that oppos'd his great Design. Nevertheless, to testifie his Moderation in an Action of so great Importance, and to avoid as much as in him lay, the effects of envy the insepa∣rable Companion always of great Atchievements, he caus'd the Opinions which had been debated in Council to be written out, and without imparting his mind publickly to any Body, sent away La Mous∣saye to Court, to inform Ann of Austria, who during the Minority of Lewis the XIV. her Son, successfully govern'd our Empire, in Expectation of her Or∣ders, with a Submission so much the more accepta∣ble to her, that he might have Permission to act without consulting the rest of the great Ministers. Now in regard he had so order'd his Message that he made no question but that the Queen would leave all things to his Management, and that she would permit his Prudence to take the Liberty of his choice, he resolv'd while he stay'd for her Appro∣bation, to employ his time in getting all things which he thought necessary in such a Readiness, that when the Answer came from Court, there was no∣thing to retard his going forward. Four things chiefly put him to a great deal of Trouble; the bad condition of his Men, that lessen'd every day, and which however he design'd for new hardships, grea∣ter then those they had already undergone; the barrenness of the Place whither he was to lead 'em;
the difficulty of hindring the Dunkirkers from com∣municating with Ostend and Newport, and the weak∣ness of Furnes, which left him expos'd to the Enemy, if he drew off his Army. After he had for some time debated with himself the mans to remedy these Inconveniencies, his Pru∣dence at last furnishd him with such as prov'd effe∣ctual. La Ferte Seneterre remain'd upon the Lis with a volant Camp of eight hunder'd Horse, and fifteen hunder'd Foot, with a design to secure the French Conquests, and if the Enemy made any Diversion, to march where necessity calld him. The Prince also gave him Directions with all speed to fortifie those Places which the French held in those Quar∣ters, and to put em into such a Condition, that if he sent for him, he might have 'em well secur'd. He wrote likewise to the Vidame of Amiens, the King's Lieutenant in Picardy, to draw out of the Frontier Garrisons as many Men as possibly he could, and to bring 'em to the Camp. He sent Villequien into Bou∣lonnois to rally the Miltia of the Country that were return'd home after the taking of Mardike. And foreseeing that the French Infantry which had fol∣low'd Grammont into Holland, and which were to return into France in two of the States Vessels, might Land at Mardike, a little before he marchd for Dunkirk, he designd to make use of those Men, and order'd that as soon as they Landed, they should be distributed into Mardike, Bourbourgh and Berghen, to the end they might refresh themselves a little af∣ter the Inconveniencies of the Sea, and be ready so soon as there should be any occasion for 'em at the Siege. He order'd also the Polish Regiments of Pri∣amski and Cabree to take some rest in the Neigh∣bourhood to Calais. Those Foreigners were above seventeen hundred in all, and were newly come in∣to France under the Leading of Sicot. After he had taken those just Measures, that he
might bring together when he pleas'd as many Men as were sufficient to fight the Enemy, should they resolve to fall upon him rather then suffer the Town to fall into his hands, and to carry on all the Labours of the Siege, his next care was to provide for their Subsistence. To which purpose he dis∣patch'd the Intendant Champestrux to Callais, to make Provision of Ammunition and Victuals, and told him which way he would have 'em brought, notwithstanding the Inconveniency of the Season, and the deepness of the Roads; remitting to him the performance in general of what he orderd him in particular. Now, tho that the Dutch Admiral, Trump, a Man famous for Sea Affairs, and whose valour had rais'd his Fortune, was come, by the States Order, with ten Men of War to an Anchor in Dunkirk Road, and that number were sufficient to block up the Port, while the French Navy found the Spaniards Employment in the Mediterranean; nevertheless in regard the small Vessels of the Enemy might creep along the Coast and slip into the Place, the Prince thought it convenient to send for some few Fri∣gates from the French Ports. So that Montigny sent away twelve from Dieppe; Villequier two from Bo∣logne, which were join'd by one from Calais, toge∣ther with some Beelanders which they pickt up upon the Coast. Beelands are small Vessels, longer and narrower then Hoys which they very much resem∣ble, and much in use among the Flemings, for the conveniency of their Trade; and all these small Ves∣sels were under the command of Andonville. There was nothing more now to be done but to put Furnes in a Condition to stop the Enemy while Dunkirk was taken; and to furnish it with Forrage for the Subsistance of the Horse, which the Prince took care of in Person; to the end his presence might make 'em more diligent to hasten their work,
and to see that they spent no more time then what was necessary in finishing the Fortifications, and supplying the Magazines. Furnes is seated between Newport and Dunkirk, at some distance from the Sea, tho it may be conje∣ctur'd that formerly it was very near it, when the Ocean driven by the violence of the North Winds, overflow'd all the Land about it, if not stopp'd by the Mounds that lye in the way. For Fueren or Wu∣eren, as the Flemings now pronounce it, signifies to Navigate; and Naewueren to arrive in Port; as if Furnes had formerly been a Haven for Ships, and that it had deriv'd the name of it from thence. And as a mark of this, the Vi∣count of Furnes holds the first Rank among the Ca∣stellns of Flanders, who are call'd Riverians, in re∣gard it was their Business to guard the Coasts. A great number of Churches and considerable Edifices render the City very beautiful. There is the Cham∣ber still to be seen where Lewis the XI. kept himself close, when being Daphin, he retir'd to Charles the VII. and that the D. of Burgundy protected him from the Anger of his Father, and that Chamber is still adorn'd with the Arms of France and Burgundy. The Country about Furnes is pleasant in Summer, chiefly that which extends to the East and South, by rea∣son of the Meadows and Woods: but the Mershes render it very noysome at other Seasons. 'Tis true that this Inconvenience is amply recompenc'd by the fertility of the Pasturages, which is the reason that in several places they neglect all the care of good Husbandry; and by the great number of Ca∣nals, which are infinitely advantageous for Trade. Nevertheless, there is good store of Plough'd Land, which bears plenty of Corn; and in a word, the Riches of these Parts is such, that Charles the V. was wont to say, That if the rest of Flanders were but like that corner of the World, it would be more worth then the
Indies. The Foundation of it is very ancient; for we find in the year 958. Baldwin Count of Flanders fortifi'd it with out-works of Earth, against the In∣vasions of the Normans. After that, notwithstanding it ad been several times ruin'd by Fire, by Dome∣stic Seditions, Civil Wars, and the funy of the French Arms, nder Robert of Arra, and Philip de , yet still it has recover'd it self after so many Disasters, and was then in a flourishing con∣dition, when the French took it. So that besides the necessity the French had of it, in order to their de∣sign upon Dnkirk, they had reason to preserve it, for the sake of it self. So that the Prince after he had consider'd the Situation, and the nature of the Place, resolv'd to environ it with several Half-Moons, a Hornwork and a Counterscarp; having no other defence at that time then a Wall flankd with Tow∣ers, and a Moat full of Water. To this purpose he distributed the Foot into those places where he in∣tended to break Ground; divided and appointed the Quarters of the Regiments; orderd a Camp-Master to every Quarter to take care of the Work; settl'd the Hours of Rest; nam'd the Bodies which were to relieve one another, and methodizd all things with so much equality, that there might al∣ways be a good number of Souldiers at work all day long. In the mean time, the Cavalry were order'd to cut Wood, and every Troop brought Piles to make Palisadoes and Stakes for the Use of the For∣tifications. He had also before this commanded the Magistrates of Furnes, to order the Peasants through the whole extent of their Jurisdiction, to gather Fo∣age, and bring it into the City. He sent for Boats from all parts to facilitate the Transportation of it; and appointed an Officer to receive it as they hundled it up, and store it up in the Magazines. Never was seen so much Diligence, and so much Order, both at the same time. The Fortifications
were rais'd, the City furnish'd with Provisions, the Cavalry, Infantry, Burgesses, Peasants, Sea-men, every Body quick, and without Confusion, in the performance of what was enjoin'd 'em. All this while, the Prince was every where giving Directi∣ons, and shewing that he had a perfect Understand∣ing of Military Oeconomy. Which to me, seemd so much the more worthy of Applause, because Va∣lour is common to the meanest private Souldier, whereas Fore-sight, and Knowledge in the Art of War, are the distinguishing Qualities of Great Men. So that it appear'd, in a short time, how much the Prsence and Ability of a General puts all things in forwardness. For in the space of 14 days, the Forti∣fications were fiishd, and the Magazines well filld. Now these great Preparations not being unknown to the Spaniards (for the Flemmings spurr'd on with that Affction, which People reserve a little while for the Masters they have lost, gave them continu∣al Intelligence) they readily cnjecturd that the French had a design to attack Dunkirk. Caracena, who lay nearest to the French, was the first who dis∣patch'd away advice of it to Castle Rodrigo, Gover∣nour of the Low Countries, at Brussels. He sent him Information of what he learnt day by day, and by redoubld Couriers, deir'd his Counsel and Assist∣ance, in a Matter of so high Importance as this. The chief Commanders of the Flemmish Armies, after they had shar'd among 'em the defence of these Countries, were at that time seaprated in Posts re∣mote from one another. Their Generalissim, Charles of Lorrain, was drinking Waters at the Spaw; and his Men lay quarterd upon the Frontiers of Holland; as was also Beck with his Body of Flemmings and Walloons, Picolomini, with the principl strength of the Country, was encampd upon the Scheldt, near Dendermonde. Curacena, lay at Newport, command∣ing the Royal Army of Spaniards and Italians, as al∣so
the Germans, and the Liedigeois, which the Empe∣rour had sent at the beginning of the Campaigne; while Lamboy, General of those Forces, constrain'd by Sickness to quit the Service for some time, was gone for the Recovery of his Health to one of his Houses in the County of Liege. This Disposal of the Spanish Forces, seem'd absolutely necessary to Castirodridgo, for the security of the Provinces which he govern'd; and upon the sole conjecture of Appearances, usually false, frequently fraudu∣lent, he durst not disfurnish those Places, which they possess'd, for fear of exposing 'em to the Ar∣mies of the French or Hollanders. But tho there were not so much reason to be afraid of the Hollanders, for that they carry'd on the War more re∣missly, since their Plenipotentiaries had begun a Negotiation of a Truce, with the K. of Spain, in the Assembly at Munster, where the Ministers of the Christian Princes met to settle Peace over Eu∣rope; yet it was plain, that tho both the Armies of Flanders should have joyn'd, there was no likely∣hood they would come to encamp near Dunkirk, so long as the French lay at Furnes; for that being de∣priv'd both by Sea and Land of all Communication with Newport, it would have been their visible ru∣ine, and to have been expos'd an easie Prey to the French, all Flanders being depriv'd of their Veterane Bands, which till then had hinder'd 'em from hast∣ning their Destruction. Thus Castelrodridge, being opt by these Considerations, and the slow manner of acting, customary to that Nation, who wait up∣on time, which they often loose, in hopes that ei∣ther the Season, or the Places, would either hinder or ruine the French, deemd it suficient to keep in a Readiness what he thought necessary for the Re∣lief of Dunkirk, when the Town should be Besieg'd. To the end therefore that nothing might be omit∣ted which he thought might be serviceable to him
in this important necessity, he resolv'd to try whi∣ther he could excite the Parliament of England a∣gainst the French, in regard they seem'd to look upon it as their Interest not to let Dunkirk fall into their Hands. To this purpose, after he had imparted his Resolutions to the Generals he dispatch'd an Express to the Spanish Ambassadour at London, to the end he might be inform'd of his Designs, and make use of his Credit, which was very great with the Repub∣licans at that time, to obtain a considerable Succour. This was the posture of Affairs on both sides, when the Answer from the Court was brought to the Prince. It was written in such a manner, that tho the Ministers started some difficulties in the En∣trprise of Dunkirk, 'twas easie to perceive that they inclin'd to the Design of Attempting it; rightly judging, that if it succeeded, the taking of that place would prove a great Honour to the Queens Regency. Thereupon they referr'd it again to the Prince, to consider whither he would undertake the Enter∣prize or no. The design therefore being resolv'd upon, there was nothing more in the Princes Thoughts but go∣ing to work, and to make the best of the Season, Winter drawing on a pace, and already beginning to pinch the Army. For the security therefore of Furnes,, the Prince left Bosquet Governour, with a Garison of 1200 Foot, and 100 Horse, with In∣structions to send continually to the Camp, Corn, Hay and Straw. All the Souldiers hd orders then to be ready to March, and the 19th. of September, the whole French Army set forward from Furnes to Dunkirk, consist∣ing of between nine and ten thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, without any Baggage, or that Rab∣ble of useless People, that usually follow great Ar∣mies. Gassion and Ranzan Marshalls of France, com∣manded under the Prince. The first having pass'd
through all the Degrees of Warfare, had attaind by his own Merit to be chief in the Princes Favour. The other a Native of Germany, but long devoted to France, found his Services recompenc'd with the greatest Honour to which the French Nobility could aspire. These two had under 'em, for Lieutenants, Villequier & la Fere Imbrand, Chastillon, la Moussaye, Arnauld, Pallua, Lavat, Chabot, Castelnau and Mar∣sin, CampMarshals to the Prince. Quince, Roanete, and Miossans, were the same under Gassion. Norman∣tier, Sicot, and Clanleu, under Ranzau. They had un∣der them very good Officers, few Volunteers but amongst those that were was the Duke of Rets whose Diligence, near the Person of the Prince, du∣ring the whole Campaigne, made him to be greatly taken notice of; and Montauzier who rode Post to wait upon the Prince, upon the first Rumor of the Siege. The Country between Furnes and Dunkerk, is in∣tercut with several Canals, between the New River, and the Colme, beyond which, toward the North, the Downs extend themselves, and the Sea-Sands. The Prince therefore resolv'd to divide the Army into three Parts, as well to possess himself of this Country, as to invest Dunkirk, so soon as he was got out of Furnes. This Disposal render'd his March more easie and swift, and by this means, all the three Bodies which he had separated might arrive before the Town, all at the same time. He chose that side next the Town, as the most dangerous, by reason of Newport, where the Enemy lay encampt. He had with him the Regiments of Persn; Enguien, Conti, Albert, and Mazarn, Vattevile's Regiment of Switzers, and the Battallions of English under Til∣liot, Hacquins and Hansfers. His Cavalry consisted of the Queens Gendarmes, those of Conde, Enguien, Longeville, de l' Hospital, and Grammont, the Light Horse of Conde, and Enguien; the Royal Regiment;
those of Enguien, Mazarin, Grammont, Sceaux, Me∣ille, Marsin, Binse, and four Troops of Arnauds Ca∣rabines. The most part of these Bodies had always serv'd under him, and the Tryals he had put 'em upon, gave him such reason to confide in 'em, that it was much to their Honour. Gassion took the Left Hand of the Prince along the River that runs from Furnes to Dunkirk, with the Companies of French Gurds, six Companies of Swiss Guards, the Regi∣ments of Picardy and Navarr, one of Walloons under Borrnonville, one of Switzers under Guy, and a Bat∣tallion of English under Rocpy. For his Cavalry he had his own Regiment, with those of Coasin, de la Fueilade, Villequier, Rocheguyon, Coeuvres, Bergere, Stref Tillar, and Bussyalmoru. Ranzau march'd tho∣rough the Country that lies on the other side of the New River, with six Companies of the French Guards, the Regimets of Piemont and Orleance, and the Switzers of Molondin. His Cavalry consisted of the Regiments of Orleance, dela Ferte Imbaud, Roque∣laure, Beaujeau, Eclinvilliers, Noirlieu with his own, together with the Fuselers and Cravates. The Ar∣tillery, commanded by Cosse, St. Marsin, Chouppes, and le Borde, consisted of fifteen heavy Canon, some Middling and small Pieces, some Bombs, and a great number of Granadoes. After a March of six Hours, the whole Army ar∣riv'd before Dunkirk, not having met with any con∣siderable Obstacle. Only Ranzau was constrain'd to drive the Enemy from four Redoubts, which they held upon the Canal, that leads from Dunkirk to Bergues, through which he pass'd. Nor would it have been an easie thing to have forc'd 'em in some hours, would they have held out till their Canon could have been brought up; which could not have been done so soon, by reason of the deep and mie∣ry ways, which the Rain had broken. But whither they wanted Resolution, or whether they thought
to spare their Souldiers, they quitted the three first Redoubts, so soon as they saw the Bridges layd to get at 'em, and retreated to the fourth, which was defended by the Canon of the Town; and imme∣diately a hunderd and fifty Horse fall'd out of Dunkirk, and put themselves behind the Fort; as it was thought, with a design to dispute it. But after∣wards it appeard, that their Intention was only to favour the Retreat of their Foot, which was there engag'd. For Noirmonstier, who was comman∣ded to take in the Forts, and who had already pos∣sest himself of the rest, was marching to fall upon the latter. At the same time he also caus'd the first Squadron of the Regiment of Orleance to advance, and order'd Genlis to take a hunderd Musketeers of the French Guards, and seize upon certain old Ruines that lay between the Fort and the Town. But that struck a fear into the Enemy, lest we should hinder their return, and made 'em judge it was dan∣gerous for 'em to stay any longer; so that they made away after a slight Skirmish, and the French Van Curriers drave 'em to their very Counterscarp. Dunkirk is seated among the Downs, that rise up with their white Heads, on the North side, from Eschelle to Calais. On the East it is bounded by Fur∣nes and Newport. Southward, it looks toward Ber∣guen and Flanders: Mardike lies to the West of it; and the Sea washes it to the North. The Territory that belongs to it is very small, and almost every way enclos'd by that of Berguen. The largeness and strength of it proceeds from the convenience of the Sea St. Eloy, preaching the Gospel, built a Chappel there in former Ages, of which there are some Remains still to be seen near the Towers of the City; from whence it derives both Name and Original. Dunkirk, signifying no more then the Church upon the Downs; and it seems that for that Reason they have built the Steeple of St. Eloys
Church so high, that the rising of the Hills does not hinder it from being seen out at Sea; and from the Platform at the top, you may discover in a se∣rene day, the Moutains of Dover, and the Coast of Englan At first, Dunkirk was only a poor Ham∣let, compos'd of Fishermens Hutts, erected for the conveniency of the Haven. Afterwards, Antiquity and Carelessness having spoil'd the Harbour of Mardike, famous at that time, it became considera∣ble by the Ruine of that Port. Baldwin Count of Flanders, Sirnamd the Young, made a City of it in the Year nine hundred four score and sixteen. Af∣terwards it was peopled by the Favour of Philip of Vermandois, who endowing it with several Immuni∣ties, drew great numbers of Inhabitants to it. It would require a particular History to relate, how often it has changd Masters; how often it fell in Partition to Robert de Cassel; how it past to Robert de Barr who by the Marriage of his Daughter, he fix'd it into the Family of St. Pol; how it fell after∣wards to the Families of Vendosm and Bourbon; af∣terwards under the Dominion of the Spaniards. It would be also no less Delightful to understand the various Misfortunes it has undergone; how the En∣glish burnt it in the Year 1388. how it was surpriz'd by the French, a long time after, under the Marshal Termes; what are the Priviledges of the Lords of it? what are the Laws it is govern'd by? what is the Trade which it drives? what is the Supream Marine Council which is there settl'd? what is their Herring-fishing, and the great vnt they have for that Commodity? and what the Priviledges wherewith the Emperor Charles the V. endowd em. But in regard our Design is only to write the Siege of this place, without intending any other Divertise∣ment for the Reader, we shall only give an account of the State of the City, at the time when the Prince's Army sate down before it.
divided into two Cities, the old and  The old is seated upon the Sea-shore, en∣hick Wall, after the ancient man∣ a great many large Towers, sup∣ a spcious Rampart, accompany'd with  with Brick, above 26 foot wide, and  Colme Water, which swells in that  Tides are higher or lower. On Mardike  Sea runs up into the Land, and extending  the Wall of the old City, forms a Ha∣ to contain 200 great Ships: however,  it is very narrow and dangerous, by  of the Shelves and Sands that lye full in the  it. Within the Canal, which is no less  then the Haven, above a hundred Vessels may ide  safety. Out of this Haven sayl'd the  blockd up the mouths of our Rivers, and were cme so formidable upon all the West∣e  France. Antiquity never knew Men pon the Sea then the Dunkirkers. And indeed i i  thing hardly to be believ'd, that this Cy aloe should have almost spoil'd the Trade of  potent Kingdoms of Europe, and  Dtch Fleets that Sail to the New World  from the Spaniards whole Provin∣ces  were not our Merchants Losses as Fa∣ Scandalous Testimony of their Fury and alour. O that side next to France, from the  against the Walls of the old City, the Hve is defended by the Fort de Leon, built upon the , and by consequence ill flank'd, by rea∣so  the Inconvenience of the Place, otherwise small, but strongly Pallisad'd, and furnish'd with a  of great Canon. On the other side of the Haven, rises  Causey which running 5 or 600 Paces  the Sea, covers it on Flanders side and juts upon a small wooden Fort, planted with some Canon. The new City joyns to Fort Leon, and enclosing the rest
of the Harbour; afterwards enlarges and extends it self about the Old one, beyond the way that leads to Newport. It is environ'd with an enclosure of 12 Bastions of Earth, with a Moat full of Water, and a Counterscarp; and two Hornworks fill up the whole space that remains between the hind most Ba∣stion, and the Causey that shoots into the Sea. To∣ward the South, three large Canals run out of Dun∣kirk, and afford the advantage and convenience of transporting in their Beelands, these Commodities which they vend up and down the Country. These Canals fall into the Haven, and serve either to cleanse it, or to drown the Parts adjoyning to the City, as they pull up, or let down their Sluces. The first leads to Bergn, the second to Honsotte, the third to Furns, Newport, and then to Bruge. The Magistrates having begun this latter in the year 1640. and having finish'd it the next year, gave it the name of the New River; the other two are very Ancient. Dunkirk was guarded within with two thousand six hundred Foot, in a 11 Regiments; and without by the Armies of Caracena and Lamboy. In those Re∣giments, the number of Officers equall'd almost that of the Souldiers. There were also in the Town 300 Horse, and 2000 Seamen, accustom'd to Sea Fights; the fury of which makes 'em contemn all other dangers; the Fortifications were well provided with Artillery; and as we have said already, there was nothing wanting in the City that might serve for the defence of it. So soon as the Army came before the City, the Prince assign'd the Quarters, and resolv'd to dispose of his Men in such a manner, that if the Enemy should attempt to raise the Siege, they could not be able either to succour the Town, nor force his Camp, On the East side of him, there was a space of Ground which separates the New River from the Sea. This space of Ground is cover'd in part with
unequal Hills or Downs, both in regard of their Situaion and Heighth, and perfectly extends it self into a Plain, which is water'd by the New River, and then runs on as far as the Canal of Honscotte. From this Canal going to Mardike, there are two Mershes, which are cut out of the Canal of Ber∣guin, and some other Rivers. To the West, you meet with a Plain opposite to the former, other Downs, and then the Sea Shoar. These later Places seem'd sufficiently defended by the Canals, and the Mershes, which made the Access very difficult to those that were not Masters of 'em; as also by the Neighbourhood of Mardike and Berguen, which se∣cur'd em. The greatest danger was toward the East; for that the Enemy setting frward from Newport, which is but 5 Miles from Dunkirk, might come to the Camp in a few Hours, without any Molestation, which obligd the Prince to make sure of that place. To which purpose he caus'd Gassion to encamp with his Brigade, from the Sea Shore to the middle of the Downs the rest he took up himself, and all the Plain as far as the New River. There he lodg'd the Men which he himself lead; and that he might wholly fill up the Place that remain'd void along th Caal of Furnes, he joyn'd to his own Men, ten Companies of French Gendarmes, and Beaujeus Regi∣ment of Horse, which were of Ranzau's Brigade. From the New River, drawing toward the Canal of Bergen, Ranzau had Order to Line the rest of the Plain, with the Bodies of Horse and Foot which the Prince had left him. The Places which the French possess'd, and the inconvenient Situation of the Country serv'd for the rest of the Circumvallation. Only upon the Downs, which lye to the West; the Prince plac'd Villequier, with the Militia of Boulogne, his own Regiment of Horse, and that of Rocheguyon, to the end that the Spaniards, if they should pass the Clme, after they had drawn together at St. Omers
to put in Succour into the Town, between Berguen and Mardike, meeting with that Obstacle might be quite out of hopes. By Sea, the Dutch Ships, and the French Frigates, blockt up the Port, and thus was Dunkirk enclos'd on every side. Moreover, a Bridge was layd over the Canal of Furnes, for the Commu∣nication of Quarters; and two more over the Canals of Honscotte and Berguen, for the Carriages to come over that brought Victuals from Calais to the Camp. The next day the Circumvallation was begun; at which the whole Army wrought. The Prince undertook to cut, and sink a Moat, six Foot deep, and twelve Foot wide, from the Downs, next the Sea, to the Canal of Furnes; and to consolidate the Work, and hinder the Sand from falling into it; he orderd the Lines, which were to be Canon Proof, to be lin'd with Turf. Then he mark'd out the most easie Places for the Attacks, and to secure 'em with Pallilado's and Turnpikes; and about 30 or 40 Pa∣ces beyond the Moat, he drew out another of an qual bigness. Now, in regard the risings of the Downs were unqual, and for that there were some along the Lines, that might annoy the Army, he was constraind to possess himself of all those upper Grounds, to fortifie 'em, and extend his Works a great way, chiefly toward Newport Road, and Gas∣sion's Quarter. There was one of these Hills, which being much higher then the rest, commanded the Camp, from the top of which, the French were to be seen drawn up in order of Battel, and it was dangerous to let the Enemy be Masters of it, so as to plant their Cannon upon it. The Prince there∣fore, to obviate all Annoyances, resolv'd to possess it; and whatever pains it cost him to environ it with two Lines, which should joyn to those of the Circumvallation, to raise a Fort at the top of it, and to plant a Battery upon it. The Sea Shore still remain'd to be fortifid. But
by reason of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, there was no probability of working in the Sand, with∣out being able to fix it; and besides, the shortness of time would not permit the casting up of Mounds. Nevertheless, the rest of the works were insignifi∣cant, if such a space of Sandy Ground should be left unguarded, during low Water. The Prince there∣fore resolv'd to plant a kind of Rail, well fortifi'd with Stakes anow to put a stop to the Enemy for some time, and easie to repair if the Tyde should carry any part of it away. He order'd therefore Piles of Wood to be driven in by main force, the better to sustain the fury of the Waves, and to range 'em so close one to another, that there might be no room to go between 'em; yet still at such a distance as to give way to the violence of the Sea, and break the strength of the Innundation. Nor did he employ less Industry to defend him∣self from the Water, which the Dunkirkers, had let into the Highways, from the New River to Mardike, which were overflow'd in such a manner, that the Wagons that came with Victuals from Calais could not pass. But tho, when the Prince thought of the Siege, he had provided against this Inconvenience, by ordering Champlastreux to cause a great quantity of Ammunition Bread to be bak'd at Berguen, from whence it was brought down the Canal to the Camp, and to send for all the Provision he could in Boats, that crept along the Coasts from Calai: Neverthe∣less, because this way was uncertain and trouble∣some, and for that the Army was still in fear of want, he thought it necessary to clear the High∣ways by turning away the Water. And first they thought to stop the Sluces with Planks, rampar'd with Earth, which would be easily done, and take up but little time. But the Fury of the Waves, which with a wonderful Rapidness, drives back the stream of Rivers, when the Tyde flows in, having
twice carry'd away all their Toyl and Labour, there∣fore they determin'd with great pains to drive in great Piles near the Hollowness of the Sluces, thorough which the Sea rowld in, and to fortiie the Piles with great Stones, and throw in a vast quan∣tity of Earth, till at length the Sluces were stopp'd. At the same time also that he entrench'd himself against the Enemies Forces, and the Obstacles of Na∣ture, the Prince with no less Prudence provided for the Necessities of the Army. He sent away out of the Camp all the Baggage Horses, and a thousand of those that belong'd to the Troopers, which were most harass'd to recruit themselves in the Pasturages about Calais. The Forage which the Barrenness of the Place, & the difficulty of Carriage render'd scant, was very sparingly distributed; taking the pains himself to go twice a day to the place where the Forrage was Landed, to see it equally shar'd. At the same time he commanded Roanette to fetch the In∣fanry that return'd from Holland, and sent Ram∣bur's Regiment to Villequier's Post, the better to se∣cure it; and for that purpose, the Companies of the Garrison of Lorrain and Havre, and Grammon's Regiment took Furnes Road. Those of Noirmonstier and Fbert, stay'd at Berghen, with Directions to come in their Turns, and serve in the Camp, by mounting the Guards of the Trenches. He also orderd Sicot to bring the Polonians within the Lines. In the place where he encamp'd, he retain'd the Battallions of Cabree, and sent the Third which Pri∣amiski commanded to reinforce Gassion's Quarter. That Nation contemns danger, which their Natural Fierceness is ignorant of. The Nobility however are Civil and Ingenious, but Haughty, as are all the rest of the Northern People. Now in regard the Polan∣ders know little what belongs to Sieges, the most part of their Wars being carry'd on in the Field, they came into the Camp without any conveniences
for the making of Hutts. Nor did the Place, which was Barren enough of it self, afford 'em any; so that they were constrain'd like Beasts, to dig them¦selves holes in the Sand, to shelter themselves from the weather. During all this variety of Labour and Toyl, the Prince was up and down every where, leaving no∣thing exempted from his Care; yet still appearing with that Sedateness of Mind, which was easie to be discern'd in his Countenance. So that the Souldiers imitating the Example of his Chearfulness, and re∣doubling their Labour with the same Alacrity, in four days, notwithstanding the continual Rains and Winds, all the Fortifications of the Camp were fi∣nishd, and the Sluces prevented from doing any more harm. The Downs also that were fortifid for defence, lookt like so many great Bastions, and sur∣priz'd the Eyes of those that beheld 'em. Nay, even they that fortifi'd 'em could not but wonder how such prodigious Works could be brought to perfe∣ction in so short a time. Surely, if we consider e∣riously all the Circumstances of those Works, which I have so faithfully describ'd, and afterwards exa∣mine those which are to be found in the Greek and Roman Histories, which we never read without asto∣nishment, will find by a just Comparison, that the Prince has hardly been out done. While they were working at the Entrenchments, the Prince receiv'd news that the Orders which he had sent for securing the Places which the French held upon the Lis, had been punctually obey'd. That La Ferte Seneterre, together with Rovigny and de Pi∣ennes were departed from Bethune, with all their Men, to put in a Convoy of 500 measures of Corn, and some bundles of Match into Courtray, which that Place stood in need of. And it was said, that because they would make the more haste, and for that they understood, that the Enemy had thrown
Trees cross the High-ways, they left the Wagons, and loaded the draught Horses which they un∣spang'd from the Wains, beside that every Horse∣man was order'd to carry a Sack behind him, and so crossing the Enemies Country, in the Night, got safe to Courtray, where they left 500 Men of the Regi∣ments of Antragnes, Tavanes, Lamberte, and the Swiss Guards, and Provision enough for two months for 3000 Souldiers. Lastly that they were return'd to Armentiers, from whence, they could send all ther Men to the Prince. At the heels of this came other News no less ac∣ceptable. Tourville return'd from Holland, and gave a better account of the Success of his Negotiation, then the Inclination of that Republick seem'd to pro∣mise. Frederick Henry Prince of Orange, whose Au∣thority till then had constrain'd the United Provin∣ces to continue the War, then lay labouring under a lingring Distemper, which had much enfeebld the Vigour of his mind, and renderd him less capa∣ble of Business. In the mean time, the Deputies of the States taking the Government into their hands, several among em sway'd by their old Inclinations to Peace, others corrupted with the Gold of Spain, and deeply concern'd for their want of Trade, had set forward their Treaty with the Spaniards, and the Catholick King granting almost all their de∣mands, 'twas much to be fear'd tht the Treaty would be concluded; which happen'd to be an ∣seasonable Conjuncture for the French, in regard they could expect no succour from Hollad However, Tourville had so dextrously follow'd his Instructions, which the Prince had given him, that in spite of all these troublesome Obstacles, the Dutch not only promis'd to break the Trace, but engagd to make a great Diversion in Brabant, and to undertake the Siege of Liere or Malines. Now, tho the Prince built no great hopes upon these Promises of the Hollan∣d
pompous then real nevertheless, be∣cse he made no question but their Army would be  Motion, were it only to make some show of ful∣fing their Promises, he thought he should get ad∣vantage eugh by their March, since it would oblige  Spaniards to divide their Forces; and in regard they that lay at Newport, were too feeble to fight him alone, he should the more easily accomplish the Siege. While things thus pass'd in the Camp, the Ene∣mies Generals, no longer doubting but that Dunkirk was besieg'd, assembl'd at Newport, which was the next place to the Siege, and therefore most Com∣modious for Conference and Execution. Picolominy & amboy were there, being come to joyn Caracena, who had never stirr'd since the taking of Furnes. Beck was also expected, who was hastning thither with long Marches. These Captains being of several Na∣tions, and having various Interests, pretending to be Independant one from the other (tho Picolominy had some Authority above the Rest) frequently retarded the welfare of their Party, through their private and particular Passions; and many times, while they opposd those Counsels which were not giv'n by themselves, their own misunderstandings frustraed good designs. At this time, the Import∣ance of the thing, being joynd with the loss of their Reputation, which the continual Victories of the French had very much lessend, oblig'd 'em to give their opinions generously, and to bethink them∣selves of an entire Union, and which way to force the French to raise their Siege. Nor were they at the bginning without hopes. They found themselves more numerous then the French, promising them∣selves, as they desir'd, and not without great pro∣bability, that the Hollanders, by a quick conclusion of the Peace, would leave 'em at liberty to draw out their Frontier Garrisons, and oppose the D. with very great Forces. Besides, the Inconveniencies of
the D's. being encamp'd in such a place, and the badness of the Season gave 'em hopes that they might defeat the French Army full of Diseases and tyr'd, and enclos'd between their Forces and he Town; besides, that they lay open toward the Sea, & were but badly entrench'd along the Downs. For they could not imagine that in so fw days it had been possible to fortifie the Sea-shore, nor to raise in the Sand such good Defences as the French had done. Nevertheless, not being willing to hazard any thing rashly, and because Beck was not yet come to Newport, to take the most certain measures, they concluded to draw out of all their Bodies a good number of Horse to take Prisoners, and to inform themselves the best they could of the state of the French Camp. They also thought it necessary to pre∣pare at Newport as many Frigates as they could get ready, to the end, that if their Negotiation with England succeeded, they might assist the English Men of War to force the Confederates Fleet; or if they miss'd of Forraign Ayd, that they might attempt the putting in Relief into Dunkirk, by the Favour of Wind and Tyde. In the mean time, the Prince resolvd to carry the Place by main Force; for being a Person of a deep Fore-sight, he rightly conjectur'd, that only the length of the Siege could ruine his Design. Victuals came with great dificulty to the Camp; the Sea grew tempestuous, and ran high; and the Sea-men being forc'd out of Calais, and not daring to venture for fear of losing their Vessls, kept themselves within the Canal of Mardike, with so much obstinacy, that the Officers of that Fort, were constrain'd to let fly with their Great Guns upon 'em, and to sink one of the Beelands to terrifie the rest, and cause em to bear away to the Camp. Nor was the Shore more favourable to 'em then the Sea; many of their Ves∣sels being thrown against the Sands, and stav'd to
pieces. Moreover, the Rain continually falling, soak'd into the Souldiers Hutts, so that they lay half in the Durt; the Wind caus'd 'em to catch great colds nor had they ires sufficient  dry them∣selves; the terrible blasts blew the small Sand among their Victuals, and in their Eyes; & amidst all these hardships, together with their Military Duties in the Guad of the Trenches and Camp; there was a necessity of continually repairing the Breaches, which the Sea made in their Fences, or in the Slu∣ces and emptying the Moats of the Lines which the Wind filld with Sand, which redoubld their Toyl Ill Stabling, and bad food for the Horses, reduc'd 'em into a very bad Condition; and sick∣ness began to seize both Men and Beasts. These vast Inconveniencies nothing dismay'd the Prince, who had seen 'em all present in his thoughts, from the very moment that he form'd the Design; and who as we have already said, had from that time so well taken his Measures that by his extraordinary Dillignce and Industry, his Ar∣my might support it self longer, then he judg'd it necessary to take the Town by force. For in re∣gard it was to be fear'd, that if they went about to Storm the Town with those Securities and Defen∣ces usually prepard for other Souldiers, le after they had spent a long time in raising Works, the approaching Winter might render all their Labour Fruitless, and an ensuing mortality consume the Ar∣my, the Prince took up his first Resolution, which was to make Tryal of the quickness of Execution, and Judiciously perswaded himself, that it was the Preservation of the Souldiers, to hazard a small number in Glorious Attempts, for the Safety of the rest. By that means he prov'd a good Husband of time, the loss of which is never to be recover'd. He satisfi'd the desire of the whole Army, impatient of their Suferings, and brought to pass this renow∣ned
Enterprize, maugre all the Opposition of Men and Nature: having this to comfort him, That whatever happen'd, his Honour would retain en∣tire, not only because it did not depend upon ha∣zard, against which he had fortifi'd himself as much as it was possible but the rather because his Virtue had rais'd him above the reach of ill Fortune. With these thoughts, the very same day that the Entrenchments were finishd, he went to view the Place, together with Gassion and Ranzau; and after he had well considerd it, he resolv'd upon two At∣tacks; te one upon the last Bastion, the other up∣on the Hornwork against it. He order'd the first on∣set to be made by his own Army, which he rein∣forc'd with two Battallions, which he took by turns from both the Marshals; leaving the more easie At∣tack to the two Brigades that were to relieve 'em They attack'd the Bastion in the Face next the Sea, and the Hornwork on that side which was most ex∣posd to the Bastion. In the Evening the Trenches were open'd, and a great Redoubt was rais'd at the beginning of each, and between the two Redoubts they rais'd a Battery of 15 Great Guns. This was done without any Disorder, the Besieged never mo∣lesting the Workmen; whether it were that they thought that what was yet done, would do 'em but little harm; or whither they believ'd it more neces∣sary to employ themselves in finishing certain Out∣works which they had already begun, and to sur∣round 'em with Pallisado's. The Marshals Attack was the first place where any fighting happen'd to be. For between the Pallisados and the Besiegers Trenches, there was an indifferent high Hill, which the Enemy possess'd, and from whence they were to be driven, before the French could carry on their Works. Therefore Noirman∣stier, being upon the Guard that day with ten Com∣panies of the French Guards of Ranzau's Brigae re∣ceiv'd
orders to make himself master of that Down. Thereupon having drawn out a Company of choice Men, under the command of Saujon, Chaily and Rou∣sille, seconded by the rest of the Body which Cour∣celles lead, he fell on with great Resolution. The Souldiers were daring, the Oficers prudent, and as it happens in the first Action of Sieges, every one strove with Emulation to signalize himself. So that the Attack was undertaken with so much Vigour, and in so good Order, that the Enemy astonishd at the fury of the first Onset, gave ground without much resistance, not being able in their Confusion to consider the number of the Assailants, nor to make the best of those Advantages, which the Light of the Moon, and the white Sands, over which the French advancd without any shelter, might have gi∣ven 'em. However, they did not suffer the Attack∣ers to rest long. For all of a suddain, as soon as they had recollected themselves, they return'd to the Charge. Three times they came on again, and were three times repuls'd. In the mean time, Nior∣mnstier, tho he ran up and down where ever the Exigency of Command and Danger summon'd him, had broke ground with so much speed, that maugre those Attacks, he had finishd a Lodgement upon the Down which he had gaind; and they had join'd it by a Line of Retreat, a hunderd and fifty paces in length, with the Works of the French. Never∣theless, the Work was not brought to full Perfe∣ction, for want of Bavins, when about six a Clock in the Morning, the Dunkirkers resolvd to drive the Besiegers out of their Lodgment. Noirmonstier im∣mediately ran with Courcelles,, and the other Cap∣tains, to the Head of the Work, by their presence and Conduct, to encourage the Combatants. At the same time the Enemy threw a great number of Gra∣nados, the breaking of which did the Besiegers the more mischief, in regard there was not one that fell
in vain among the Souldiers that were thick crow∣ded together. The Besieged were in hopes that their Granado's would have put the French in Disorder; and that afterwards they might be repelld with more ease. But when they saw the Officers resolute and accustom'd to Discipline, succeeded one ano∣ther when any one was wounded, and that fresh Souldiers took the place of those that fell, then hopeless to see the small effect of their Granado's, they came to Handiblows with the Besiegers. This encounter which lasted 3 hours, was very bloody, the manner of Combat augmenting their Fury. The Fortune of the Day also waver'd for a long time, the French not willing to abandon their Victory, and the Spaniards striving with all their might to regain it. But at length the Spaniards recoyl'd, and tho they made 3 other Attacks with the same obstinacy, they were still repuls'd, and the Lodgement made capa∣ble befor Night to contain above 300 Men. The Besiegers lost a great number of Men; they had 10 Serjeants kill'd; Porcheux, a Captain of the Guards; Mondebise, a Lieutenant, and two other Officers wounded. Nor was the Enemies Loss less conside∣rable. On their side there dy'd a Volunteer of the House of Croy; and of the French, Barrouliere, an Ensign of the Guards. Saujon, Chailly, Rousille, Loig∣nac, Genlis, Campagnole, and du Voulch, Officers of the same Regiment did signal Service, chiefly Courcelles, who next to Noirmonstier might well assume to him∣self the greatest part of the Honour of that Action. On the other side, at the Principal Attack, where Aubeterre was wounded with a Musket Shot, the Approaches were briskly carryd on. Chatillon, in a little time had advanc'd the Works so far, that there was not much ground to be gaind to come at the Counterscarp; all things went on prosperously, and the speed of the work answer'd the Prince's expe∣ctation.
In the mean time Intelligence came, that the Ene∣mies Armies were set forward out of Newport to ight the Besiegers; and that the foremost Squa∣drons of their Vanguard appea'd between Furnes and Dunkirk. This Intelligence was grounded upon the Advantageous Rumours which the Spaniards causd to be spread about, of great Succours which they were preparing, and of their assurance to force the French Lines; and all this to chear up the de∣jected Minds of the People. Which Reports, the Vlgar believing, had encreas'd 'em with great Ad∣ditions, according to Custome, and the Cavalry that appear'd, seemd in some Measure to confirm 'em. However, the Prince being inform'd that the Forces of Flanders were drawing together about Newport, and desirous to know the truth of the Rumour of their March, that he might prepare for all Acci∣dents, sent out for News, and dispatcht away Or∣ders to La Ferte Seneterre to approach with his Fly∣ing Camp. The next day the French Scouts brought word, that the Cavalry which had alarum'd the Pea∣sants and the Spies, was nothing else but a great Pary sallyd out of Newpor, which fell upon the French Foragers, and that having taken some of 'em, they were retir'd again in hast. Now tho this Report of Relief had spread it self among the Besiegers, yet it wrought no disturbance. There was no Alteration made in the Guard of the amp, which was still dispos'd in the same manner as if the Enemies Army had been in view; the works a the Trenches, and the attack of he Bastion went o, and Arnaud and Marsin were advancd almost to the Foot of the Counterscarp; but with some trouble and danger; the Difficulties encreasing s they drew nearer and nearer to the Enemies defe∣ces. At length, La Moussay coming in his turn, un∣dertook to make a Lodgement. He mounted the Guard with the Battallion of Switzers under Molon∣din,
ring their great  which fore, with extraordinary Fury;  who were altogether expos'd by  workmen, ighting with disadva∣ had already receiv'd two morl  most daring of his men not wil∣ but preferng deth before igno∣ by him. The Tmult, the Night, the  Arms, the Grons of the Wounded,  Combatants caus'd a hidios  the news of this disorder wa carrid  who immediately flew into the  the dager, and by his Preence settl'd all  order again; he caus'd the Men to  o te Works, which La Moussaye repair'd  on with the same Courag, as he had  surviv'd some days the Honour ervice; but Death depriv'd him of all ut the praises of Posterity. At  on the Marshals side, the Tumult was  nor the Combat no less furious. For  carry'd on the Trenches, and Chan∣  possess'd the place of a Fortification, sieged had begun near thei Counter∣ mounting the Guard after them, had  Pllisadoes, one of which lookt toward te ea, the other coverd the Hornwork whither the esiged were carrying on their Wrks. The  of Navarr had attack'd the first, and the  Picry the other. Now the Spaniards  while they defend any strong Hold, th when once the Garrison is distributed to the  most likely to be atack'd, they never change  dring the Siege. When the Besiegers have  Outwork, the Men that defended it, retreat to  Guard of the next Entenchment. Now  had been all along oppos'd to the , from the beginning of the Siee.
And ever since the opening of the Trenches, tho always at Handblows with the Assailants, had de∣fended their Outworks with Resolution and Valour. But now, tir'd with watching and hardship, they quitted their Pallisadoes to the Besiegers almost without any Contest. The Besiegers were Masters of em for some hours, and had finish'd their Lodg∣ments, when Leda, bringing along with him two Companies of natural Spaniards, which he took out of Fort Leon, and animating he Wallos with this Succour, and his Personal Presence, made a Slly at the head of em, tho fruitless as to the Decision of the main Business, yet prosperous at the beginning. He regain`d the Pallisdo, with an extraordinary fu∣ry, which led to the Counterscarp of the Hornwork, and overthrew all that oppos`d him. Grave, Blan∣cafort and Poix, Officers of the Regiment of Picardy, were wounded in sustaining the Assault, and Breaute was kill`d. The Death of the latter added to the Mournful Examples of the Misfort ne of his Ance∣sors, of which the French Histories are full, and con∣firm`d the common opinion, that the Destiny of the Wars of Flanders, is always fatal to those of that Family. La Vieuville, Camp-master of the Regiment of Picardy, assisted Missans, under whom he mount∣ed the Guard. He perceiving that the Souldiers gave ground, and that the Commands of the Officers were not at all regarded, and not broking, while he liv`d that his Regiment should receive an affront, ran with some of his Men where the Conflict was hottest, and throwing himself into the thickest of the Enemy, put a stop to their Victory by his daring Boldness. His Souldiers also, spurr`d on by his dan∣ger, and his Example, returnd to the Onset with so much fury, that they layd the Spaniards sprawling, and regain`d the Lodgement which Missans brought to Perfection, without any Opposition. This was the Posture of things in the Attacks
of the Place. In the mean time Beck arriv'd at Neport, and joynd the rest of the Armies with three thousand Foot, and five and twenty Cor∣s of Horse. He found the affairs of his Party in very great Disorder, and that there was no pos∣sility of succouring Dunkirk. For their Spies, and the French Prisoners which they had taken had inform'd 'em of the strength of the Besiegers Lines, and they judg'd the work so compleat, that they old not without extream rashness, undertake to force . They knew the Prince who defended 'em, to be a Person accustom'd to Victory, pru∣dent in Danger, and that success attended his Wisdom. So that altho their Armies consisted of above twelve thousand Men, that number was not sufficient to accomplish the Enterprize, where multitude only could overlay the Valour of the Bsiegers; and which is of great moment in ma∣ters of War, the Reputation of the Prince had imprinted such a violent Terrour in the minds of the Soldiers, that they dispair'd of Victory, had they been to fight him in the open Field much less to force him out of Entrenchments that were fortifd and better guarded. As for their Negotiations in England, they had mt with little success in 'em. They could obtain but a very inconsiderable supply from the Parlia∣ment, and all the Credi of their Faction, the Po∣licy and Sollicitations of their Embassadors provd ineffectual. Not but that the English for good Reasons of State would have been glad to have cross'd the French in the Conquest of Dunkirk: but more pre∣sig considerations, and the urgency of Affairs at home restrain'd 'em from looking abroad, and oblig'd 'em to preserve their Men and Money for more pressing occasions. But that which utterly broke the design of the Spaniards was this, that the Hollanders, in expecta∣tion
of a Peace, of which there were very plausi∣ble Probabilities, were preparing for some Expe∣dition, not willing so soon to quit the Publick ause, nor their Allies. 'Twas certainly repor∣ted also that they, were marching in hast towards Liere or Malines, and the report ran already of the taking of one of those places. Now tho the danger was not so great, and for that the Hollanders marchd but very slowly, yet certain it is, they would have besiegd some place or other, could they have met with any that had been unprovided for esistance. So that the Spaniards were as much constrain'd to oppose their Proceedings, as they were at the beginning of the War; and were not only de∣privd of the Succour of their Frontier Garrisons, but oblig'd to reinforce em with part of their Army. For which reasons those Genrals were no soon∣er met at Newport, but they were forc'd to separate again; which renderd all their Consultations in∣effectual. For being alone they were not strong enough to repair the loss of Dunkirk, by any other considerable Conquest and they durst not keep any longer together for fear of the Hollanders. In the midst of these Extremities, they resolvd before they parted to march toward Dunkirk, as if they intended to relieve it, and to fall on a sud∣dain upon Furnes, not dispairing to take it with the same speed as the Prince had won it; and hop∣ing by such a Conquest not only in some measure to satisfie the expectation of the People, but to in∣commode the French by depriving them of their Forage. With this resolution, the next day af∣ter Becks Arrival, they took a review of all their Forces, and setting forward from Newport, they Enampt at a Village call'd Adinkirk, and round about the Abby of Dunes, between Furnes and the Sea, and in the Road which the Enemy were to take in their march toward the French Camp. Pre∣sently
the Besiegers ad some thoughts that they might attack their Lines, they giving out the re∣port themselves, on purpose to dissemble their de∣sign and to shew as if they really intended to fight the French Army. Now while the Soldiers were preparing themselves, and that in the midst of their fears of so furious an Assault, the greatest part coceald their sadness under an affectation of false∣joy, they sent out a party to view Furnes. But by accident, they who were sent thither, whether it were that they could not ride round the Plce, or whither they satisfi'd themselves with seeing where it might be most easily attack'd, only took a view of those parts, that had been forti∣fid with gratest care. So that after they had con∣siderd the Defences, being surprizd to see 'em so strong they carrid back word that not only Furnes cold not be taken by Assault, but that altho they should Besiege it regularly, they found it in such a codition, that they would not warrant the Success of the Seige. Upon this news they lost all their hopes of doing any good; and Beck, never stay∣ing an longer, march'd away with seven Regi∣ments of Foot and three of Horse, toward Demer and Neth, to oppose the Hollanders. The rest return'd to encamp near Nwport, and Dixmude, contenting themselves to save those Towns after the loss of Dunkirk. And thus all their great Pre∣parations, and vain Ostentations vanish d into Smake On the other side, the Prince, who up∣on the General belief of their coming to attack him was salli'd out of his Trenches with some Ca∣valry to observe their Motion, finding only the footste of their abandon'd Lodgments, returnd to the Camp, and sent back La Ferte Seneterre to the Banks of the Lis, who was come as far as Berg∣ to be at the Battle. While things were in this Posture, the Besieged
spurr'd on by their Valour, under the leading of a most excellent Captain, and in hopes of being Succour'd, every where intermixd Stratagems of War with couragious Actions, omitting nothing that might be serviceable for their Defence: they were always either in Fight, or hard at Work. They disputed their Trenches with an incredible Obstinacy. When the Besieg'd had carrid 'em, they presently threw up others, and still oppos'd new Obstacles to the Besiegers Armes, and stoppd their Victory at every step they made. They sur∣mounted the Toyles of perpetual Labour and Watching, and contemnd the Pain and Torments of Wounds. On the Besigers side, a Defence so Resolute, infusing despite and shame into, the Sol∣diers, and Emulation & Ambition into the Officers, the French in stead of being repulsd were more incens'd and encouragd by difficulty and danger. The Prince also lookt upon it as an Honour, that the Siege should be signalizd with numerous and famous Atheivements; and knowing how much it would redoud to his Renown, with a small Army and in a few days to subdue a Town suffi∣ciently able to stop the Carreer of great Armies for a long time, employ'd his utmost vigour to at∣tack it, and us'd all his ende vors to hasten the taking of it. And thus Danger ad Fury every where equally increas'd. After Moussaye and Miossans were reliev'd, Chabet who succeeded at the Attack of the Bastion, with the Regiment of Persan, and 300 olanders, gaind the Top of the Countersap. The conflict was very hot; Molanre, a Captain in Persans Reiment fell upon the spot. Malortie and du Fay, his Companions and five Lievetenants were wounded and the work as quit∣ted a good while, the Pioneers having betaken them∣selves to their Heels: but at length the Prin se∣cured the Victory by his Presence, and
odgmen to be finishd. The Besieged on the other side diggd a Traverse on the righthand, which would have very much annoy'd the Besiegers, if Caste, who relievd Chabt, had not carryd it of a suddain. On the t'other side at the Attack of the Hornworks,  with the Regiment of Orleance, Noirmonstier's, and three hunder'd Polanders gain'd those Traverses, from whence he drove the Enemy. Among the Dead, wa found Bie, Major of the Regiments of Orleance and three Lieutenants wounded. Now in regard the  was weaker on that side, and for that the Besieged broke ground with more diligence, they spee∣dily  themselves behind three Redoubts which they environ'd with Palisado's: But Roante,  the Guard, carrid on three Sappings, and we on so brikly with that dfficult labour, that the Besieged could not have time to fortifie thmselves in their new Enterprise. Un the 1st. of Octob. at night, Noirmonstier & Lava mounted the two Trenches, and resolvd together what∣ever it cost 'em, to make themselves Master of the Counterscarp. To which purpose Laval Commanded the Regiments of Eng. and Conty with some Polanders. He divided to the Right and Left the Officers & Soldiers which he resolv'd should begin the attack, & taking the mddle, with those which he had had mae choice of for himself, and fell on pell mell upon three Places at once. Presently there was nothing to be seen but Fire and Smoake, and the Counterscarp of the Bastion was gain'd but when they began to cover themselves, Laval himself working hard among the Soldiers, as he was placing a Barrel, he was lay'd upon the Ground with a Musquet Bullet that took him in the Head, and dy'd some few days after of his Wound. His loss was generally lamented by the whole Army; and the Prince in particular was deeply sorrowful for his Death. He was a Young Gentleman of an Illustrious Family, ambitious of Honour, and capable to have ad∣vanc'd
and vex'd to the Soul to see Dunkirk lost before their Eyes, that they might omi nothing which was to be done, resolv'd notwithstanding the Wind was still against em, to try what they could do by Sea, and by the mens of several small Boats which they had got rea∣dy, knowing that the Seamen were perfectly ac∣quainted with the Coast, to put in a considerable Suc∣cour by Water; whih design, if it succeeded, they were in hopes, that the bad weather, and the Inconve∣niencies of the Encampment would constrain the French to raise the Siege; or at least, that by ruining their Men, the taking of the City would cost 'em their Ar∣my. To this purpose, they hir'd 30 Beelands at New∣port, which they fill'd with their bravest Commandrs and stoutest Souldiers, and which they set to Sea under the Conduct of their most experiec'd Pilots. This Fleet put to Sea in stormy weather, every Body being resolv'd to surmount all difficulties, partly ambitions of Honour, partly covetuous of Reward, and spurr'd on by all those other Incitements, that usually inspire Men with Contempt of Danger. However, the Success no way answerd their fruitless promises, and the joy of the Dunkirker, tha from the top of their Walls be∣held the Beelanders coming, soon turn'd to sorrow. For so soon as the Spaniard saw that they were discover'd by the Hollanders, and that the Sea-men perceiv'd that Trump was preparing t make up to 'em, whither it were that fear depriv'd 'em of their Judgement; or that they could not withstand the Wind and the Sea, as afterwards they said, they betook themselves to flight, and without making the least Effort to weather the Storme, they made all the speed they could to Newport, whither Adonville chasd 'em with the French Frigates. All Men, well skill'd in Sea Affairs, unanimously a∣greed, that tho many of the Beelands might have been taken or sunk, yet had they ventur'd, some might have escap'd and got into the Place; but it had been to lit∣le purpose. For the Town was then so sorely press'd,
tha it mst have been a very considerable Succour that could have preservd it. The Mine that had been a del∣ving under the Horn-work al Night, and all the next Morning was found to be 15 Fot deep, and there was no dout but the effect of it would be very great, in a place so proper as that was. By consequence the Horn-work could hold out no longer, and after the loss of ta Fortiication, the Dunkirkers, securd only by the Walls of their old City, and being incapable of de∣fending themslves, would be constrain'd to Surrender. And Fortn in this seconded the common Opinion, and soon reduc'd the Bsieg'd to the utmost Extremity. For abut two of the Clock in the Afternoon the Mine was sprng; and such was the violence of the Powder, that of a suddain it carryd away the Earth, and the Wall hat were next the Mine, and let a great breach in one of the sides of the Hornwork. Some lazie Soul∣diers, surpriz'd by the Fury of it, wre blown up in∣to the Ayr, and fell down half dismember'd, over∣whelm'd with Stones, and wrapt up in Dust and Smoak. Preently Clanleu orderd Molondine's Swisses to the Breach, who finding it without any defene began a Lodgement. And they had already plac'd 40 Barrels, when the Besieged powring out from behind two Tra∣veres, where they had retir'd till the Mine was sprung, inding there was nothing more to be afraid of then the ordinary Risco's of War, fell on desperately, and mangre all the Resistance of the Besiegers, drave 'em from the top of the Hornwork where they had en∣tench'd themselves. The Switzers full of Indignation retund to the Charge, and continud fighting a long time with dubious Fortune At length they fell to Han∣dy-strokes, which prov'd a cruel and desperate Con∣flct, the Besieged having been accustom'd to Victory, and  knowing themselves lost, if they lost . All the while, the Smoak of the  from the Trenches and the Town,  and noise, occasion'd by the Conflict,
having darkend the day, and depriv'd the Combatas of the knowledge of one another; all of a suddain both Parties, that believd, being each in the same Confusi∣on, that their Enemy had the Advantage, retreated on both sides, and left the Lodgement in the middle between 'em quite abandon'd and this great Disorder lasted for two hours. But at length, the Skie being clear, and all things in a Calm, the Besiegers first began to recover themselves. Clanleu, then led 'em on again to the Breach, where that he might act with more se∣curity, and have his Orders eecuted without Confu∣sion, he was willing they should regan the top of the Lodgement Barrel after Barrel and step by step. And thus he spent the rest of the day, the Enemy not daring to disturb him, till Miossans reliev'd him, and found the Lodgement almost brought to Perfection In this Encounter the Besiegers lost a Captain; two Lieutenants were wounded, and fifty Souldiers either slain or dis∣abl'd; the loss of the besieged being equal Nor must we omit the Death of Semur, the more to be pityd for the oddness of the accident, and for that his Generosity prov'd fatal to him, while he lost his own to preserve the Life of his Friend. Belloy and he did the Duty of Serjeants of Battel, and with their Pikes in their hands sustaind the fury of the Enemies Sally. They had both an Esteem for each other, and there was no less Emulation between 'em. Neither of em would be first that fled from danger, nor be the first that orsook his Companion; Honour and Cou∣rage stopt em in the midst of Peril. In this Noble Contest, Belloy was struck down with a Stone. Semur never minding his own Preservation, but running to help him up again receivd a Musket shot in his Thig of which e dy'd sometime after. But Belloy return'd to the Fight, and the next day was in a Condition to do Service. At the same time that they so warmly engag'd at this Attack, Arnauld having mounted the Guard in the New
length, by a Line of Communication, joynd the two Attacks to the side of the Moat. To that purpose he began after one Sapping, to pierce it; he orderd Ba∣vins to be brought to fill up he Moat, he planted one piece of Canon convenient for Battery, with a Design to preserve the Trenches, which running on with less room, as they approach'd the Place, were the more easily shot thorough by the Canon of the Enemies De∣fences, and therefore it was the more necessary to play from the Trenches to ruine em. Marsin reliev'd him, with the Regiment of Persan, and a Battallion of English, and all that Night continu'd throwing Faggots to fill up the Moat. But in regard he found it to be very broad and deep, and that the Enemy annoy'd his approaches, the Mines could not yet be set to the Bastion; which forc'd him to facili∣tate the building of the Bridge which led thither, to raise a new Battery. The same Night Miossans, with the French Guards of Gassions Brigade, made an end of Lodging himself up∣on the Hornwork, and carry'd on the Sapping to the Entrenchment, which the Enemy had already opposd against him. Some Hours before day Picolominy advancd along the Shoar to the Besiegers Fortification of Piles and Stakes, and alarumd Gassion's Quarter. For he had been told that he might that way put men into Dunkirk, ad retreat without any danger, provided he kept his de∣sign Secret, and that he took the Advantage of the Night, and the fall of the Tyde. Now tho he knew that this Enterprize would not save the Place, yet he was oblig'd to attempt it, by reason of the Honour which, would redound to himself, either to have rein∣forc'd Dunkirk with Relief, or to have been the only Person of all the Generals in Flanders, that durst ap∣proach the Enemies Entrenchments. To this purpose therefore, setting forward from Newport with 500 of the best Troopers in his Army, he march'd all Night
in o good Order, and with such a profound silence, and his Guides had led him so directly, that he had elu∣ded the watchfulness of the French Scouts, and was got to the Soae without being discoverd. There was then some hopes that he might get forward with his Men But the Besiegers Foot Guard, that kept a dili∣gent watch, with their Arms in their hands, fir'd with that fury upon him, that h was forc'd to retreat. S soon as the Prince had notice of the Enemies ap∣proach, he presently mounted, and Sallying out of the Lines, with two Regiments of Horse, march'd with all the speed he could above two Leagues, but could not overtake 'em. Picolominy galloping away full speed, as judging that he should be follow'd, and that he could not avoid being defeated, if he gave the Prince never so little time to joyn him. The Prince, from this time forward, assur'd of the taking of Dunkirk, which only was a work of a little time, and finding he should have enough left him either to reduce Dixmuyde, or to fortifie Courtray, for his Winter Quarters, if he could but oblige Leda to sur∣render, without prolonging his Defence to the last extremity; and being desirous to spare some few days for the refreshment of his Men, resolvd to joyn Ne∣gotiation with force, and to try if he could hasten the end of the Siege by a Conference. For which purpose, he wrote to the Governour of Dunkirk, That having something to impant to him, in reference to an Affair that concernd hislf, and which was of great Importance, he di∣sd leave to send a Person of Quality to him, who should farther unfold his Mind. A Drummer was sent with this Letter, and Leda at the same time return'd for Answer, That he should look upon such a Conference as a very great Honour; but that being oblig`d to give an Ac∣count of his Actions to the Council of Spain, and the Gene∣rls of the Low Countries, he did not judge it proper, ac∣cording to the Rules of Decency, to admit a Person of Qua∣liy in hi Garrison, without Permission first obtain`d. That
it would be much better for him  send o the Camp, and that if his Highness though it cveient thre should a Per∣son attend him the next day to receive his Comands. The Prince having consented to this Proosal,  de Veere Maj. Gen. of s Army, came the next da to the Camp, about ten a Clock in the Morning. After the usual Complements, the Prince coming close to the Matter, told him, That ving always had a high Esteem for Courage whereev he met it, he had never omitted any opportunity to indulge it. That was hi opinion that Vr was to be cherish`d in an Enemy; and that i wa but ust for a Victor to be favourable to the vanquish`d, when their Acts deserv`d it. Therefore tht the Governou nd Officers who had defended Dunkirk, both deserv`d and mht exct from him all manner of civil and fair Vsage, provided they did not deba themselves of the means to receive it. Tha it was sufficient for them to have stopt him so long before a Place, which he might much oner have subdu`d, had any others thn themselves defended it. That they had already acquir`d all the Honour they could expect by the Siege that they had gi∣ven absolute Satisfaction to their Reputation; and therefore, that it was now high time for em to think of their security, and speedily to think of Capitulating, unless they had a mind to ruine themselves. That it behov`d `em to consider that the Armies of Flanders not willing to hazrrd a Rattel we es∣parated; that the Frigates of Newport, were sled after a vain attempt; and that the most vigorou defence they could make hence forward would only delay their Destruction for some few days. However that tho in this Condition they were quite out of Hopes of any Succour, yet he would be so favou∣rable to their Prowess, as to suffer `em to rch out of Dun∣kirk with Honour. But if they stay`d to the last extremity they would constrain him, in despite of his own good Nature, to make use of all the severity of War. Veere seem`d to be surprizd at the Prince`s Speech, & excusing himself for not returning a Reply, in regard he had no power to treat, return`d to the Town, with a promise to inform Leda, and to bring back his An∣swer before Night.
there were two Conjunctures164.  to  the Surrender of the  it was that Expeience shewed them,  to be inused with the Nego from fea and  ha  formerly a   taken at the Battel where y Maal Gubreant, and had  of his Parole. For  afrad of falling again into their  would have done any thing, rather  second time Prisoner to Frnce.  he was in Dunkirk with five Re∣ Artillery of Lmboy's Army, and  that i he lost those Men, and his  and Fortune of his General, upon  depended, would very much decay  means agree to such a loss. Nor was  to sacrifice his particular Interst to the . So that he returnd with a resolu∣ utmost endeavours in persuading th  a Surrender. were not conceal'd from the Prince;  he had discover'd the Trouble and  that Vere was in, and penetrated the  to augment his Fears, to the end  the more confirm him in his thoughts of a  To this purpose he made choice of  under colour of waiting upon Veere  ordered him to accompany him to the  etrance into the City. Pallau had natural ; and being a Person of a jocund  Conversation, he gets ground upon all hom he converses, his Tongue being no les persuasive, then voluble. Therefore having discour∣ b the way, of the extremity to which the  was reduc'd, the weakness of their Party, the Clmncy o the Prince, and he stedfastness of his
Resolution, as also of the Misfortune into which the Governor of Dunkirk might precipitate himself; so soon as he began to find him wavering, he fell insensibly to talk of Lamboy's men, and the hardships of Imprison∣ment; and feigning to be concern'd out of a Principle of Honour and Generosity, in the Misfortunes that threatn'd him, he manag'd his discourse so dexte∣rously, that he never left him, till he judg'd him ab∣solutely resolv'd to sollicit a Surrender. With such a rapidness is the mind of man transported with the impressions of fear; and so true it is, that Reason serves only to augment the belief of Danger, when a man is once dismay'd with the terror of it. Being enter'd the Place, he found Leda perusing Let∣ters which the Spanish Generals had sent him by a Frigat from Newport, which had stole into the Harbour in the night time, the Wind and Tide favouring him. Those Letters were stuff'd with high Encomiums of his Prowess, and with great Promises encourag'd him to hold out some few days longer. And he seem'd willing to prepare himself for it; flattering himself with an Opinion, that he should do the King of Spain a great piece of service; and with hopes, that the Generals would not fail of their Promises. But after Veere had made it out to him, That they did but de∣lude him, That there was nothing to be expected from the inability of Spain; That all the Defence he could make, would be to little purpose; That it would but exasperate the Prince; and that it be∣hov'd him to prepare for a long Imprisonment in an Enemy's Country, if he refus'd to capitulate. These Considerations, together with one more, which was the chiefest; and that was, that he might preserve an Army for the defence of his Partyy, by preserving his Garison compos'd of a great number of Officers, the loss of which would not be easily repair'd, in the miserable condition to which Poverty and long Wars had reduc'd Military Discipline; all these Reasons, I
say, bow'd his haughty mind, and made him resolve upon a Capitulation. And being thus determin'd, he sent back Veere to capitulate, with express Orders to gain as much time as he could, in expectation of being succour'd by the Spaniards: Being desirous to do that honour to the Arms of the King his Master, though he expected no∣thing from them; and the better to justify his sur∣rendring the place, by the more sufficient Testimony of their Disability. He also wrote at the same time to the Generals, of his intended Capitulation, and in∣form'd them of the Reasons which oblig'd him to it. Among other things, That he was unwilling, when it could not be any advantage or honour to them, for five or six days holding out longer, to venture his being made a Prisoner of War in his old Age, and when he was almost worn out in the King's Service; never∣theless, That if they could be certain to relieve him within ten or twelve days, he would do his utmost till that time: otherwise that it would be but a fruitless waste of time and good Soldiers. But this last point of relieving the Place was more difficult to execute, then promise. For on the Mar∣shal's side, Sicot, with the Regiments of Orleans and Noirmonster, had driven the Enemy from their last In∣trenchment upon the Hornwork; so that there re∣main'd no more then to carry on their Approaches to the side of the Moat of the Old Town. In the attack of the Bastion also, where Vignaut, Serjeant of Battel, was kill'd, the greatest Difficulties were surmounted. Moussaye, who led the Regiments of Anguien and Ta∣bert, and a Battalion of English, had finish'd the Bridge of Fagots, and was raedy to set the Miners to work. So that the Promises made to the Gover∣nour, had more of noise then solidity; more of show than truth. Towards night therefore Veere return'd with a power to capitulate; and immediately the Duke gave
order to Balluaw, and Arnaud, men of understanding, and long experience in War, to treat with him. Af∣ter some Contests and Disputes, at length the Articles of Composition were agreed, whereby among other usual things it was concluded, That all the Marks of Honour should be allow'd the Governor and the Sol∣diers; That Lamboy's Regiments should march out with their Artillery; That the Spanish Armies should have three days time to succour Dunkirk; which if they did not do by that time, the Town should be surrender'd to the Prince. This Capitulation was forthwith sign'd by the Prince, and the Governour. At the same time also Hostages were deliver'd by the Garison, by Lamboy's Regiments, and the Townsmen: and so without any more ado, Veere departed for Nieuport, where he was in hopes to meet the Governour. That night the French Officers that were upon the Guard, went on with their Approaches In the Marshal's Attack, Roanette, with the Swiss Guards, and Bournon∣viles Wallons carry'd on the Approaches even with the superficies of the Water of the Moat of the Old Town. In the other Attack, Chabot, with the Regiments of Cont and Albret, with a Battalion of Polanders, re∣took some Traverses, whither the Enemy were re∣turn'd. But Fortune usually crossing Felicity, at the very instant that the assurance of the Capitulation seem'd to warrant that all the danger was over, and that the Besiegers were ready to reap the Fruit of their Victory; and that Chabot, having given his last Di∣rections, was re-passing the Bridge in order to retire, he was struck in the Head with some pieces of a Gra∣nado, and dy'd of his Wound in a few days after. This Accident was the occasion of no small grief to the Prince, who had always rank'd him in the num∣ber of his most familiar Friends. As for his part, he shew'd a great Resolution at his death; no way daunted at the expectation of it, and contemning i when it came.
In the mean time Truces were made, and all the Approaches were strongly guarded, till Veere return'd, that nothing might be attempted afresh. Two days after he return'd no ways deceiv'd in the success of his Journey, from which there was nothing to be hop'd for, and which he had undertaken only to keep up the Reputation of his Party, and to admonish his Generals to provide for all those Places, upon which the Prince is most likely to turn his Victorious Arms after the Surrender of Dunkirk. And now the time for relieving the Town being just ready to expire, in the evening of the third day Veere deliver'd up into the Prince's hands all the New Town; and Miossans, who then commanded in his turn, enter'd the Place with two Squadrons of Horse, and six hundred Foot taken out of the Battalions of French Guards, and the Switzers of Gassions Brigade. Which done, he march'd to take possession of Niuport Gate of the Old Town. 'Tis true, that Governour made some scruple of yielding up the Gate: but at last, being ob∣lig'd to it by his Capitulation, the Soldiers became Masters of it, and there stood all the night under their Arms, within a Pikes length of the Enemy. The next day, being the 11th of October, the Garison be∣gan to march forth about Eight of the Clock in the Morning. The Prince also, not so much out of ostentation, as to prevent Disorders, and to see Leda, for whom he had a high esteem, plac'd him∣self upon the way through which they were to pass. A hundred and fifty Horse appear'd first of all, be∣being follow'd by Lamboy's five Regiments; after which came the Baggage, and then the Artillery be∣longing to the Germans, and two Pieces of the City Cannon, according to the Articles; the Spanish In∣fanry march'd after the Great Guns, and a hundred and fifty Horse brought up the Reer. Leda came last, mounted upon a good Horse, and accompanied with the Principal Officers.
So soon as he perceiv'd the Prince, he alighted, and accosted Him with a profound Respect. On the other side, The Prince, who was also alighted from his Horse, so soon as the Governour came pret∣ty near him, receiv'd him very civilly. After the first Complements, and a great number of Recipro∣cal Encomiums, as the Governour was ready to re∣tire, the Prince stopp'd him, and invited him to stay and see the Garison which he intended to put into Dunkirk. Presently Norssmonstier, who had the leading of 'em, advanc'd at the head of the Battalions of French Guards of Ranza's Brigade, the Regiments of Piemont and Orleans, Molonden's Switzers, and Cabree's Polonians. These Bodies march'd one after another, and with the Foot that enter'd the day before, made two thousand four hundred men, of the stoutest in the Army. While they march'd along, and that the Prince was discoursing with the Governour, the latter com∣paring to himself the Fortune of the Siege of Maestricht with his present Condition, and the great Qualities of two famous Captains that had vanquish'd him, could not chuse but admire the Prince. Puissant Ar∣mies, abundance of all things, length of time, had render'd Frederick Henry of Nassau Victorious. But here the Prince, with a slender Army, pinch'd for want of Necessaries, in a short time had by his Pru∣dence and Courage within thirty days accomplish'd what the Hollanders were three Months bringing to pass. The Garison being march'd by, Leda took his leave of the Prince, who order'd him the Queen's Gens d' Armes, commanded by Franquerot, to conduct him to Nieuport, and then made his Entry into Dun∣kirk. He found in the Magazines a good quantity of Powder, Match, Bullets, Arms, Corn, Forage, and other sorts of Provision and Ammunition. Upon the Fortifications several Pieces of Brass Cannon, and a
great number of Iron Pieces; and in the Port, two great Vessels, three Flutes, and thirteen Frigats, or rather Privateers, which kept the Western Seas of France in a shameful subjection: it being easie by all this to see, that the Besieged had store of all things ne∣cessary for their Defence, and that Valour only had tam'd them. Thus ended the Siege of Dunkirk, at a time when all Erope had their Eyes fix'd upon the Prince. But among so many Nations that beheld with astonishment the Wonders of his Life, there was none but acknow∣ledg'd that his Fortune was beneath his Virtue, and his Prowess. The End of the Second Book.
Memoirs, &c. The THIRD BOOK. THE Siege of Dunkirk was no sooner at an end,What the Prince did after the Siege of Dunkirk. but the Duke took a Resolution to be∣siege Menene. Nevertheless, considering that the Season was too far spent to undertake that Conquest, he only sent Gassion with his Army toward the Abby of Lenzi, to see whether some At∣tempt might not be made upon Dixmude, of which he had a Design to make himself Master, to the end he might in those Quarters refresh some part of his men: But that Enterprize not appearing feasible, he set forward and encamp'd at Hondescott, by reason of the abundance of Forage, after he had set his men at work, to repair as well as they could the Breaches of Dunkirk, and strengthen'd that Place with Men and Ammunition sufficient, and put in two Convoys into Courtray; one of which he conducted himself through a Thousand Dangers. After which, having receiv'd Orders to lay up his Men in their Winter Quarters, he distributed his Forces according to his Orders; leading himself into Champaign that part of the Ar∣my which he commanded in Person, before he join'd the Duke of Orleans. The Government of Dunkirk was join'd to that of Berguen, as well for that Dunkirk
belongs to the Castellame of Berguen, as because that time out of mind, they who commanded in the las place, were always Masters of the Sluce that lies at the Gates of Dunkirk, and is that through which they let in the Sea, to drown all the Countrey when they please. And these two Governments were conferred upon Marshal Ranzau, which equally surpriz'd all people; in regard that no body question'd but that the Court would have cast their eyes upon Mareschal de Gassion, who had so highly signaliz'd himself in the Siege of that place, and who had moreover those Personal Qualities which Ranzau wanted. But this was not the only vexation that mortified Gassion after the Siege of Dunkirk; for out of a Capricio of his un∣lucky star, he would needs embroil himself with the Duke of Enguien, who had a great value for him, and had procur'd him a Marshal's Battoon, in despite of Cardinal Mazarine, who had no kindness for him. This hapned a little before the Armies separated, and upon this occasion. Gassion had taken with his own hand, during the Siege,Gassion quarrels with the Prince. an Officer, one of Lamboy's Battel-Marshals, whom the Duke had promis'd to restore to his Collo∣nel; and the thing had been done as the Duke de∣sir'd; but it was Gassion's Fate to embroil himself at that very instant, with a Prince who till then had been his Protector, and upon whose Affection de∣pended his Good or Bad Fortune. For in regard the Prisoner had his Liberty upon his Parole, the Captain of the Guards could not meet with him time enough to present him to his Collonel so soon as he desi'd. Upon which, the Collonel meeting Gassion presently ater, gave him some hard words, and Gassion, with∣out question, gave him as good as he brought. But however it were, the Officer complain'd to the Duke, That Gassion took no notice of his Orders, and eu∣sed to release his Prisoner. It may be easily imagin'd, how this wrought with the Duke of Engnien, who
was naturally proud and haughty; nor could he theefore estrain his Choler; so that the Marshal coming presently after to wait upon him at his Lodg∣ig, he iercely told him, That he would make him obey his Orders as well as the meanest Soldier in the Army. The Marshal, who expected nothing less, was strangely surpriz'd: However, he did not appear to be much concern'd, in hopes he might have been permitted immediately to have justify'd himself, as it had been easie for him to do. But the Duke would no suffer him to clear his Innocency: He turn'd his back upon him with an gry scorn, and would not hearken to any of his Exses: So that the Marshal was fain to depart the Chamber, after a profound Reverence, not being able to obtain leave to speak so much s one word for himself. No question but the Duke was afterwards better inform'd of what had passed between the Marshal and the Collonel. But however it were, the Prince found that he had treated too imperiously a Marshal of France, and a Person signally accomplish'd; and ou of a Generosity, the more worthy of praise, be∣cause it was voluntary, he would needs give the Mar∣shal a Visit some days after, to make amends for the Heats of his Passion. He talked to him at first con∣cning  Convoy, and some other Affairs, yet all the while affected an obliging Discourse, wherein he intenix'd some hints which were in a manner some sort of Excuses. But the Marshal vext to the Soul, and therefore making no Answer to the Dukes fami∣liar Civilities but with some certain cold Comple∣ments, the Duke resuming his former Haughtiness, told him, That he in vain pretended to set up for a great Captain, and one that the Kingdom stood in need of and that he would have him to know, that he look'd upon him to be no better than a hairbrain'd Corporal, and one whose Service he could easily be
without. After which, he flung out of door, not without letting fall some Threatning Expressions as he went. From which time forward, the Duke cea∣sed to be his Friend, and sate heavy upon his skirts. The D. of Breze slain.In the Month of May, the Duke of Breze, Admi∣ral of France, and Governor of Brouage, and other places, had laid Siege to Orbitello, which he attack'd by Sea and Land: But a Month after the Siege was laid, the Spanish Fleet, commanded by Pementel, much stronger then the French, appear'd with a design to succour the Besieged; at what time both Fleets met, and there hapned an Engagement which lasted three days; wherein, to say truth, the French had the Advantage, but the Admiral was slain with a Cannon Shot. Great Soli∣citations for the D. of Breze's Employ∣ments for the D. of Enguien.The Prince of Conde us'd all his endeavous to ob∣tain the Duke of Breze's Employments for his Son the Duke of Enguien; and his Demand was but reasona∣ble; for the Duke of Enguien being Brother-in-Law to the Duke of Breze, pretended to them of course: But his Merit did an injury to his Claim; so many famous Atchievements, and the Reputation he had acquir'd, to be one of the greatest Captains of his Time, render'd him suspected to the Court, or rather to Cardinal Mazarine. The Prince of Conde, his Fa∣ther, the most Politick Courtier in the Kingdom, let nothing omitted either with the Queen or his Eminency, to bring about his Design. However, Cardinal Mazarine having some reason to dread the Consequences that might attend this Refusal, he thought it requisite to assure himself of some Persons in the Army that had both Wit and Courage, who in case of necessity might be able to sustain the King's Authority among the Soldiers, against the Credit of the Incensed Prince. To which purpose he cast his eye upon Marshal de Gassion, whom he caus'd to be buzz'd in the ear with a thousand false stories to engage him to his Party. Nor was this
all; he caused the Abbot de la Riviere, one of the Duke of Orleans's Favourites, a man fit for any mischief, to act his part; who to augment the Dukes Hatred of Gassion, protested to him with an Oath, that Gassion had taken upon him, with∣out any scruple, the Execution of an Order against his Person; and that he had boasted how sedulously he would see it perform'd. Now tho the Duke of Enguien very much con∣temn'd the Abbot de la Raviera,The Prince leagues himself with the D. of Orleance. yet he gave credit to his words; and finding himself in such a con∣juncture wherein he was absolutely necessary for his purpose, because he had an ascendant over his Ma∣ster, and knew all the Secrets of the Court, he made a shew of having so great a veneration for his Coun∣sels, that the Abbot promis'd him to be intirely de∣voted to his Interests. Now the Duke of Enguien at that time had fasten'd a most strict Tye of Friendship with the Duke of Orleance. But such a Union could never last long, without the Cement and Commu∣nication of a Favourite; so that 'twas necessary for the Duke, notwithstanding his scorn of the Abbot, to enter into a Correspondency with him, and to shew him some outward Marks of his Good Will and Esteem, of which he thought him otherwise altoge∣ther unworthy. However, the Abbot betray'd him, for that Cardina Mazarine sooth'd him up with the hopes of a Cardinal's Cap. Thus the Prince was ain to be treacherous to his own sentiments, and to set all Engines imaginable at work, but all in vain; for it was impossible for him to obtain the Duke of Breze's Employments. About the same time also his Father the Prince of Conde died;The Pr. of Conde, the Father, dies. that is to say, upon the 26th. of December. But the Cardinal,The Pr. of Conde has the Com∣mand of the Army. who mistrusted the Union of the Duke o Orleance and the Duke of Enguien, found the way quickly to part them asunder again: He caus'd the Duke of Orleance to be call'd home, and
left the Prince of Conde with the Army (for now we must no longer call him the Duke of Enguien); and because the Prince should have no reason to complain of him, he caus'd the sole Command of the Army to be conferr'd upon him. The Prince saw well enough, that the Cardinal play'd him soul play; but in regard there was no re∣medy, and for that he preferr'd Honour before Riches, he forgot the refusal of the Employments he desir'd, and gladly accepted the Command of the Army. Nevertheless, after the Death of the Prince his Fa∣ther,The Pr succeeds in his Fa∣ther's Em∣ploy∣ments. he took possession of the High Stewardship of the King's Houshold, as also of the Governments of Burgundy, Bresse, Berry, and some other places; which he gave the Court to understand that he desir'd. How much disgusted soever the Prince of Conde was against the Cardinal and the Court, yet certain it was, that his Generosity, and the Respect which he bare to the Queen, had oblig'd him to dissemble it; but his presence still alarum'd both the Queen and the Cardinal: 'Twas concluded therefore, that he should be removed from the Court; who taking advantage of the conjuncture of Affairs in Catalonia, which were in some disorder, by reason that the Valour of the Count of Harcour had met with a Rub, he was sent into that Countrey under the Character of a Viceroy, and departed in April, 1647.1647. The Pr. of Conde goes to command the Army in Catalo∣nia.The City of Barelona was so overjoy'd that the Prince of Conde was come to Command the King's Army in that Province, that the Magistrates made a Present of a Chain of Gold to the person that brought them the News. As for the Prince himself, he was no sooner arriv'd in Catalonia, but he laid Siege to LeridaHe besie∣ges Lerida, and raises the Siege. but he could not carry the place, which the year before had stopt the Count of Harcourt: He gave Assault upon Assault; but foreseeing that Enterprize would cost him too much Time, and too many Men, he quitted it. In short, the Garison of Lrida was
extremely strong; and the Spaniards had an Army of Twelve thousand men not far from the place; and the Forces which he commanded were nothing near so numerous. Moreover Lerida had for some time put a stop to that Rapidness with which he was wont to cary all that stood before him. But this was only a disadvantage in appearance, and the raising of the Siege was not only honourable but beneficial to France. He made it manifest at that time, that his Head and his Heart acted by Concert; for by that means he preserv'd an Army, with which he made considerable Expeditions the same year; for the 6th. of October he laid Siege to the City and Castle of Ager,He besie∣ges and takes the City and Castle of Ager. upon the Frontiers of Aragon; immediately he caus'd the Trench to be carried on, and adanc'd his Approaches so far in three nights, that a part of his men lodg'd themselves upon the side of the Moat of the Castle, where he rais'd two Batteries, in the mean time he fortified all the Fords of the Rivers, and Passages of the Mountains, to hinder the Spanish Army from relieving the place. The 9th. the Can∣non having made a convenient Breach, he gave so vigorous, an Assault, that the City and Castle were both taken. This Conquest was very considerable; for besides that the Scituation of the City and Castle were very advantageous, it secur'd Ballaguier, and facilitated an Entrance into Aragon. But this was not all while the French were busied in this Siege, the Spaniards attack'd Constantia; but they could not make themselves Masters of it, notwithstanding the vigo∣rous Onsets which they made: The Prince enforc'd them twice to raise the Siege of that place, and con∣strain'd their Army to shelter themselves under the Walls of Lerida, after he had defeated above Fifteen hundred of their Men, and taken a good part of their Baggage and Cannon. At this time France made a Peace with the Empire; but it was absolutely impossible to agree with Spain,
notwithstanding all the endeavours of the Duke of Longuevill, and the rest of the Plenipotentiaries which the Court sent to Munster; and the Continuation of the War expos'd the Kingdom to excessive Expences; so that for supplying the Charges, the Court was con∣strain'd to set forth several Edicts for the raising of Money.The Ori∣ginal of the Trou∣bles in France. And those were the Edicts which were car∣ried to the Parliament, who oppos'd their Verificati∣on, and which were the first occasion of the peoples Discontents, the cause of the Alienation of their Af∣fections; and were the grounds of the first Motions of that Civil War which all the world has heard of and which had like to have ruin'd France, during the Mi∣nority of Lewis XIV. 1648.We shall not here give a particular Account of it; we shall only tell you, That those Edicts which were suggested by Mazarine, being laid to heart by the So∣vereign Courts, the Third Estate, and the people, the Chamber of Accounts of the Court of Aids, uni∣ted together, to try whether they could by their Unanimity prevent Cardinal Mazarine from over∣whelming the Kingdom. This Union, by which the Sovereign Courts went about to enable them∣selves to balance the Royal Authority, or rather the Power of the Cardinal, could not but be ungrateful to the Court, which was govern'd by that Minister; and therefore by a Declaration of the King's, those Societies were orbid to assemble, but apart by them∣selves; and the King himself deliver'd the Declara∣tion; and the Awe which the King's Presence im∣printed in the Parliament, procured the Verification of the Declaration. But this did no way hinder the Parliament from reserving to themselves the Power of Examining it. In short, the next day there hap∣ned a great Dispute among the Members of the Par∣liament Some there were who maintain'd, That in regard the Declaration prohibited their Meetings, they were blindly to obey it, because it was the King
Others upheld the contrary, That the  not hinder their meeting in such a ey had done, in regard they only met  good of the State. To which they added, ook his advantage of the King's Mi∣oi, and made it his business, while the Sun  to enrich himself at the Expence of the King∣d This division of Opinions exasperated their  and every one supported his Party with so  heat, that from that dispute it was, that the Ni nes of Mazarinians and Frondeurs or Slingers,  their Oiginal. They that would have the Dclaation lterally obey'd, were call'd Mazarinians; and they that were of a contrary judgment, were call'd Frodeus. In the midst of these Transactions, the Spaniards, who were not ignorant of what pass'd in France, were willing to make the best advantage of these Disor∣ders.  duke Leopold, Governour of the Low-Countries, and Generalissimo of the Spanish Armies in those Quarers, waited only for the Spring to take the Field; and knowing that the French had taken up their Winter-Quarters far from Coutray, he lay'd a design to besiege that place. Beck, and the Go∣vernour of Oudenard, undertook that Expedition But Pal having forc'd their Lines, oblig'd 'em to , tho they had already gain'd one of the Half-Moon. But the Court desirous to oppose a good General against the Arch-Duke, cast their eyes upon the Prince of Conde. Upon which he set forward for Flanders and so soon as the season would permit him to take the Field, he resolv'd to ay Siege to Ypres.The Pr. of Conde be∣sieges Ypres. It was a hold Attempt, in regard that Town being in the midst of Flanders, might easily be reliev'd; be∣sides, that the Spanish Army was very numerous. But ll these Considerations could not stop him: His  and his good Fortune made him look upon
all Enterprizes to be easie. The Forces also that lay toward the Sea, had Orders to join him, under the Command of Marshal Ranzau. Moreover, he de∣tach'd Four Regiments of Infantry, who laid a Bridge over the River of Ypres; and the 17th. of May the Place was invested. Now in regard the City of Ypre is of a large Ex∣tent, he resolv'd that it should be attack'd in four parts. Grammont posted himself next to Armentiers and Varnetin; the Roads and Avenues from Aire and St. Omers, were stopp'd up by Ranzau; those from Dixmude and Bruges by Palluau; and the Prince of Conde took his Post upon the Avenues from Menene. The Circumvallation was three large Leagues in compass. Now while the French were busied in making their Entrenchments, the Arch-Duke attempted to force their Lines: But in regard the Circumvallation was finish'd, and for that the Besiegers had almost made three Lodgments, he was forc'd to retire. The Spa∣niards take Courtray, while Ypre is besie∣ging.The Spanish General therefore, vexd that he had fail'd of his Enterprize with an Army so considerable, and being desirous besides to repair the Loss which they were like to make, immediately laid siege to Courtray, and took it by Assault. After that, he be∣sieg'd the Castle, where there was a Dam or Water∣stop made of Piles, which join'd to the Ramparts of the City; and having drain'd the Moat, they pre∣sently fell on; and the Soldiers that kept the Citadel being only raw Recruits, refusing to make any great Resistance, were all made Prisoners of War, toge∣ther with all the Officers. Ypre surrender'd present∣ly ater,Ypre taken. not having held out above thirteen days. The Queen had promis'd to give the Government of Ypre to Chatillon; and a King's Lieutenant was al∣ready made choice of, to Command in the absence of the Governor. But when the Prince least expected any such thing, a Courrier brought him a Letter from
the Queen, wherein she signify'd her trouble that she could not gant the Government of the place to the person for whom he had solicited, and to whom she had promis'd it; because she was oblig'd to give it to Paluau, in regard that Courtray had not been lost by his fault. This News surpriz'd the Prince; so that there being no body in the room when he receiv'd the Letter, but Grammont and another Officer, he fell into a most terrible Fury, and inveigh'd with an ex∣traordinary Passion against Mazarine; but Prudence made him conceal some part of his Resentment. The Arch-Duke not satisfy'd with the taking of Courtray,The Spani∣ards take Furnes. resolv'd to attack Le Catelet, and to invest Peronne; but these two Enterprizes fail'd; however having laid siege to Furnes, he carry'd the Town, and also the Castle of Eterre. Three weeks after the Spaniards had taken Furnes,The Pr. retakes it. and that the Forces which lay round that place were drawn off, the Prince of Conde resolv'd to retake it; and to that purpose he order'd Marshal Ranza to be∣siege it. The season was so far spent, that he made some scruple to undertake it; but receiving a second Order, he obey'd it; upon which, the Place was immediately Invested. Thither also the Prince ad∣vanc'd from Le Catelet; and going to the Trenches so soon as he arriv'd, he receiv'd a Musket-Shot in his Thigh, and had it not been for the folding of his Buff-Coat, which was made at the end of the slit be∣hind, his Thigh had been broken, and he had been in great danger. The same day the Town surren∣der'd, and all the Officers and Soldiers were made Hostages of War, to be exchang'd for the Prisoners which the Spaniards had taken during the last Cam∣paign. The Prince, whose Wound was not very con∣iderable, return'd, and carry'd back the men which he brought along with him; and some time after was fought the Battel of Lens, famous for every thing for which a Victory could be valu'd.
Lens is a City in Antois, which Gassion had tak'n in the last Campaign, and was the last Expedition which that great Captain made; for that having been wounded at that Siege with a Musket-Bullet in the Head he dy'd of his Wound the next day.The Bat∣tle of Lens. The Spaniards lay before that Place, and pusht on the Siege with extraordinary Vigor. On the other side, the Prince of Conde, to whom nothing appear'd dif∣ficult, resolv'd to force their Lines, and venture a Battel to relieve the Place; however, he would not rashly engage himself. He stay'd therefore till General Herlack join'd him with the Forces under his Com∣mand; but so soon as that Reinforcement arriv'd, he was forthwith for fighting the Enemy. Now in regard the Place was able to have held out for some time, he flatter'd himself that he should come time enough to succour it; but the day before he set for∣ward, the Town surrender'd. This unexpected News caus'd him to alter his Measures; so that he took some time to consider what Enterprize to undertake. But at length perceiving that the Spaniards were posted much more advantageously then he himself by his own observation had thougt 'em to be; and besides, that there was no Water where he lay with his Men, nor any Forage but in the parts that lay next the Enemy, he resolv'd to quit his Statio. Therefore, that he might retreat in good order, and in a condi∣tion to defend himself, if the Enemy should attack him, he had a Body of a Reserve which he made his Van-guard, and immediately commanded to march. He drew up all his Cavalry in two Lines, and order'd the second to follow the Reserve. The In∣fantry was plac'd behind this second Line, having all the Artillery of the Army before it. The Spaniards perceiv'd this Retreat; but at first they never stirr'd to attack either the Reserve, or the second Line, or the Artilery; which made the Prince believe they would not stir at all. However, after
these Forces were advanc'd at a good distance off, some Regiments of Croaes and Lorrainers, that com∣p'd the Left-Wing of the Arch-Duke's Amy, be∣ga to fall upon the first Line of the French with an extraordinary Fury; and the Troops of that Line sustain'd the first shocks of the Enem with much Bravery; but at length the Spaniards briskly broke into their Body; so that finding themselves unable to fight with any Order, they had been entirely defeat∣ed, i Chaellon with the Gendarmerie which he com∣manded, had not hasten'd to their Succor. He pre∣sently and all of a sudden thunder'd in among those great Squadrons of Croates and Lorrainers; and with∣out giving them time to recollect themselves, drave 'em so vigorously before him, that if those Troops, as victorious as they thought themselves, had not been seconded by all the Arch-Duke's Cavalry, they had been cut in pieces; so that it may be said, That the French Gndarmerie wrested the Victory out of the Spaniards hands. But it being impossible that they should withstand all the Enemies Cavalry, they were at length forc'd to give way. And they were no soon∣ broken, but eight Squadrons, which were advan∣tageously posted to second 'em, forsook their Ground, and betook themselves to a shameful Flight. The Prince, who was not accustom'd to see the me that fought under him recoil before the Enemy, was extremely surpriz'd at the Cowardise of his Hose. But in regard there was no remedy, and that there were now but two things to be done, ei∣ther to rou the Spanish Army, or make an Honoura∣ble etreat, he advanc'd, without losing time, to the Body which Grammont commanded; and calling the principal Officers of the Army together, to consult what course to take, it was resolv'd that they would fight the Enemy, and whatever hazard they ran, not to quit their Resolution.
This being concluded, the Prince told 'em, with a sedate Contenance. That there was no way but either to Vanquish, or Dye, and then began to en∣courage his men. Never General shew'd so great a Resolution as did the Prince at that time; yet through the midst of this Heroick Resolution, and Undaunted Bravery, you might discern a Sedateness of Mind, and a Contempt of Danger, which is the Character of a Hero. He never appear'd less con∣cern'd, tho perhaps he had never been more pro∣vok'd. He gave out all his Orders, and had so well rang'd his men for the Combat, that he openly de∣clar'd, He would get the day, were he but never so little seconded. This Great Prince, who never appear'd so great, as when the Greatest Dangers threaten'd him, took upon himself the Command of the Right Wing The First Line of which Wing, consisting of Nine Squadrons, was commanded by Villequier, Lieutenant-General. The Second, compos'd of Eight, by Nor∣moutier; and Beaujeu had Orders to lead on the Ca∣valry. The Left Wing was led by Grammont and the First Line of that Wing, consisting of Nine Squa∣drons, was commanded by Seneterre, Lieutenant-General; the Second, compos'd only of Seven, was led on by du Plessis Belliere; and St. Maigrin perform'd the Duty of Camp Marshal to the First of these Lines. As for the Main Battel, which consisted of Ten Bat∣talions, it was commanded by Chatillon; and Five Squadrons, which made the Body of the Reserve, were under Herlack's Orders; and Coss had the Charge of the Artillery. All things being thus dispos'd, the Prince rode through all the Lines, encouraging the Soldiers to Fight; he put 'em in mind of their Victories at Ro∣cry and Norlinguen. He told 'em, He would be the first that would engage in the greatest Dangers; and that they needed no more then follow his Example:
And after he had laid before 'em the Honour which the French Nation would acquire if they won the day, he prepar'd to give the Signal of Battel; but a certain Movement of the Spaniards stopt him. For he perceiv'd that the Spanish Cavalry open'd, instead of Advancing; and believing there was some My∣stery in it, he kept his Ground, that he might disco∣ver the meaning of that Movement; of which he was soon inform'd by his sight; for he saw the void spaces between the Horse fill'd up with Foot which made him easily conjecture, that it was the Main Bat∣tel, which he understood the Duke had design'd to Command, believing the Victory sure. The Design of the Spanish Army was no sooner known, but the Prince took his Measures accordingly: He ordered Cosse to march with the Cannon, and play upon the Enemy; and at the same time that the Artillery play'd, the Squadrons and Battalions ad∣vanc'd with such an undaunted Courage as astonish'd the Enemy. The Count de la Sala, who was at the Head of the First Line of the Spanish Left Wing, ad∣vanc'd with a singular Bravery, and gave the Enemy a dreadful Volley of Pistol Shot. The French never fir'd at all, but so soon as de la Sala had made his last discharge, they fell on with their Swords upon the Squadron which was before 'em, with so much Re∣solution, being seconded by some other Troops of the same Wing that they quite disorder'd the first Line of the Enemies Army. Which the Arch-Duke beholding, order'd the second Line to advance, and then both Lines being join'd, the Combat began to be very bloody. But the Spanish Troops being supe∣rior to the Prince's, Villequier and Moussay were beat∣en and taken Prisoners. But then Noirmoutier advan∣cing in the nick of time, drave the two Spanish Lines beore him with such an undaunted Force, that he soon depriv'd 'em of the Honour which they had like to have got, and which seem'd to portend 'em the
Victory. On the other side, the Prince, who was every where, having rally'd the Troops that gave way, sent 'em again to fight afresh. And those Troops, tho half terrify'd, flew upon the Enemies Lines with so much Fury and Courage, that the Spanish Cavalry began to totter. But being vigorously seconded by their Reserve, the two Lines that were almost broken, took Courage, and reurn'd once more to the Charge. At what time Herlack appear'd at the Head of the Dutch Squadrons, and fell upon the Lorainers with such an impetuous Violence, that not being able to withstand the shock, they betook themselves to their Heels, and carry'd all the rest along with them. Grammont, who commanded the Left Wing of the French, and Bucquoy who led the Right Wing of he Spaniards, had not yet struck a Blow. But then they began to engage, and fought with equal advantage for some time; but at length Fortune declar'd in favour of Grammont. At the same time Beck and Cha∣tillon led the two Main Bodies of the Foot; and tho the Victory was a great while very dubious, yet the Prince relying upon the Measures he had taken, and the Stoutness of his Men, made no question of winning the Battel. However, in regard Beck's Re∣giments were supported by a strong Body of Horse, they made the French give ground. But the Gendar∣merie, no less active at the end then at the beginning, seconded the Foot so well, that they rally'd again, re∣sum'd fresh Courage, and then both sides fought with more obstinacy then before, for three hours together, at what time the Prince obtain'd the Victory. The Spanish Army was so numerous, and had so advan∣tageosly posted themselves, that the French were somewhat out of heart at the beginning of the Bat∣tel; but being encourag'd by the Presence of their General, there was no Obstacle, no Hardship which they did not surmount, no Danger which they did
not willingly meet to purchase the Honour of the Dy The Prince himself outbrav'd the Enemies fi∣in like the meanest Soldier, and expos'd himself so frequently,The Pr. wounded. tht he was at length hit with a Mus∣quet let upon the Reines; but the Bullet meeting with the resistance of his Buffcoat, he was discharg'd  small Contusion only. Of the French Army not boe si hundred were slain, and twelve hundred tken Prisoners, and wounded: whereas the Spa∣ird, besides the loss of their Cannon and Baggage, had above eight thousand kill'd, and above fifteen hunded taken Prisoners, among whom was General Beck, the Prince of Ligny, and the Count of St. Amour, General of the Artillery. The Duke of Chatillon, who had signaliz'd himself in the Battel, was made choice of by the Prince to car∣ry the Tidings of so great a Victory to Court; where so considerable a Success was look'd upon as a Testi∣mony of Celestial Favour, for which all the People shew'd a more then ordinary Joy: And for which Te Dm was sung in the Churh of Nostre Dame in Paris where their Majesties were present, as well as  Sovereign Societies, and the Corporations of the City. And to the end, that from this Success they might not only reap considerable Advantages over the Enemy without, but over those whom the King's Council look'd upon as Enemies within the Kingdom; the Cuncil were of Opinion, That it behov'd 'em to mak use of this favourable Opportunity, which  Crmony of Te Deum presented them, to seize upon some of the Principal Members of the Parlia∣ment, who had started those Paradoxes which no way pleas'd the Court, and were follow'd by the whole Cabal of he Slingers. So that upon the very day that Te Deum was sung, several Companies of the Re∣giment of Guards being posted in several Quarters of the City. M. de Broussel was seiz'd,Monsieur de Broussel seiz'd. against whom the Court had a particular Peek, as being the Head of the
Slingers. He was a Councellor of the Great Cham∣ber; a Person of ancient Integrity, but of no great Capacity. He had been all along a great hater of Favourites, and was much reverenc'd by the People, who call'd him their Father. Now although he run a great hazard that seiz'd him, by reason of the singu∣lar affection which the People bore him yet M. de Cominges undertook to do it, and perform'd what he undertook. He seiz'd him while the Companies of Guards were drawn up in a row in the Streets; so that M. de Broussel, together with M. de Blancmesvi, Nephew to the Bishop of Beauvaise, was carried with a good Guard to Bois de Vincennes. Orders were also left with Mr. Laisne, Councellor also of the Great Chamber, to retire into Province, and M. Loizel was banish'd into Montes. The noise of the seizing of de Broussel was no sooner nois'd about Paris, but the People betook themselves to their Arms, the Chains were drawn cross the Streets, the Barricado's were set up in all the Cor∣ners of the public Places, and the Shops were shut up. The Queen thereupon gave orders to reduce the Peo∣ple, and suppress the Sedition; but 'twas impossible to be done, so that the Court was constrain'd to give the Prisoners their liberty. So soon as de Broussel ap∣pear'd among the People, he was saluted with Vol∣leys of small Shot, and accompany'd with loud Ac∣clamations to the Palace, where he, and M. Blanc∣mesvil, receiv'd the Complements of the Parliament and from thence he was conducted, as it were in tri∣umph, by the same people to his Lodging. Now in regard the Antipathy which the Slingers, and the People had against the Cardinal, were the cause of this Uproar, and for that they believ'd, that the good of the Kingdom requir'd, that Mazarin should no longer continue in the weighty Employment of Chief Minister, but rather that he should be banish'd; the Parliament who found themselves encourag'd by what
had happen'd, persisted with redoubl'd vigour in their first Sentiments, and renewd their strength against the Court. And several Persons of Quality, some out of Interest some desirous of Change, most vio∣lently engag'd to ruine the Cardinal. The principal Reasons which that Party alledg'd were,Reasons for the Cardinal's Ruine. That it was a thing unheard of, and ignomi∣nios to a flourishing Kingdom, That a Foreigner, and a born Subject to the King of Spain, should be the prime Minister of France; and that this Minister should also have so absolute a Power, as to be the Umoire of War and Peace That the conferring of Honours, Employments, and all Favours, should be at the sole disposal of his will and pleasure; not to be bestow'd as the Rewards of Merit, good Service, high Quality, but but to gratify particular devotion to his Interest: That his Ambition had carried the Arms of France into Tuscany, at a vast Expence, and without any Advantage to the Nation only to make himself formidable in Italy, and to purchase Principalities for his Kindred: That for his own Interests he had re∣fus'd to admit of the Treay of Peace concluded at Munster, which he had eluded by the Sedulity of Ser∣vien his Creature: That out of Jealousie he design'd the Ruin of Marshal Gassion a little before his death: That he only understood Foreign Affairs; and that by his Italian Politicks he had effac'd that Confidence and good Opinion which the Consederates of France had of the Confidence and Sincerity of the French Na∣tion, which Cardinal Richlieu had establish'd, during his Ministry. That as for the Domestic Affairs of the Kingdom, he was uncapable of managing 'em, in regard the State was become full of Division and Up∣ror during his Government: That he rul'd the Kingdom by Foreign Maxims, no way agreeable to the French Nation: That he had introduc'd such pal∣pable Jugling, and Tricking Quirks of State, that he had expos'd an Illustrious Court to the Contempt and
Railleries of all other Nations. In a word, That he was unable to bear so great a Burthen, and that e had lost his Credit among the People. The An∣swer of Cardinal Mazarin's Party.To this Mazarin's Party made answer, That 'twas no such strange thing for Foreigners to have the Go∣vernment of the State; witness the Cardinal of Lor∣rain, and the Cardinal of Brague, the Duke of Neves Marshal de ets, and Marshal de Ancre: that Mazarin had been nominated to the Cardinalship by France, af∣ter he had done her considerable Services. That Car∣dinal Richlieu, who understood Men, had appointed him his successor in the Ministry: That the deceas'd King, who had a perfect knowledge of the good Qua∣lities of all that were about him, made him President of his Council after the death of Richlieu; That the Queen Regent had suffer'd him to continue in the same Dignity, merely through the necessity of Af∣fairs, and in obedience to the King's last Will and Te∣stament: That all these things were approv'd by all the Wise men of the Realm, and by all the Princes in league with France: That having by his Services an∣swer'd her Majesty's Expectations, she could not lay him aside without doing the Kingdom an Injustice; and without being ingrateful to a Servant so benefi∣cial, and so faithful. That he was so far from fa∣vouring only those who were devoted to the Interests of the Court; That the common Complaint was That in conferring of Honours and Employments, he had too particular a regard to the Servants of the Duke o Orleans, and Monsieur the Prince. That all Affairs were propos'd to the Council, who took such Resolutions as they thought most convenient. That the Accusation against him for opposing the Conclu∣sion of the Peace, was without any ground; neither was it a thing probable, in regard, that besides the general Interest his Eminency's particular Interest oblig'd him to Crown his Ministry, which so many Successes had render'd glorious, with a Treaty that
would have eterniz'd him in the Affection of the Peo∣ple: That it was certain, the Spaniards had always cross'd that Treaty, as the Duke of Longueville, and the Princes themselves could testify. That the Ex∣pedition against Orbitello, and Porto Longone, were the most advantagious that France could have undertak'n, and most proper to bring the Enemy to a speedy Peace; in regard those Places would have kept in subjection those Territories which the Spaniards possess'd in Italy That the Independency which the Duke of Guise affe∣cted at Naples, was not the Reason that the Cardinal afforded him powerful Assistance. That Gassion would have set himself up in Flanders, with little dependance upon the Court. That the Prince never complain'd of his not assisting him either at Catologna, or any other of his Campaigns, as much as lay in his power. That he was constrain'd to have recourse to those Edicts to raise Moey for the Expences of the War; neverthe∣less that the Taxes were abated. That Time had sufficiently evinc'd, That his transporting Money into taly was a meer Fabulous Story, invented on purpose to disgrace him. To this they added, That for twen∣ty years together he had manag'd with honour the Interests of the Princes of Europe. That if the good Intelligence between France and the Vnited Provinces began to flag 'twas because some particular Persons had been suborn'd and corrupted by the Gold of Spain. That in the Administration of State, he had follow'd all the Maxims of Cardinal Richlieu, only that he had onish'd the Cruelty of Punishments. That if he had been oblig'd to promise more then he had per∣form'd, 'twas because the number of those that serv'd in France was very great, and the number of Pre∣tenders much greater. That the State had never knwn more Prosperity, then during his Ministry; and that i in great Executions the honour of the Performance were due to the Generals, the Contri∣ance and Forecast belong'd to him. That France
had been still in quiet, if every body had been unani∣mous in their Duty; if the People had not been drawn from their Obedience by the Suggestions of Persons disaffected; or rather, if the Parliament, who ought to be the true Model of Allegiance, had not pav'd 'em a way to revolt. That the Station where∣in the Cardinal was, had always been expos'd to the Assaults of the Hatred and Envy of all the States; and by consequence 'twas no wonder, if sometimes an Inordinate Ambition were laid to his charge, or if sometimes he were accus'd of Insufficiency. How∣ever, that he was happy in this, That Calumny in her most Venomous Assaults had spar'd his Fidelity, and never attack'd him with the least suspicion of Treachery. But this Answer and Apology of Cardinal Maza∣rine could not hinder his Enemies from persevering in their Design to remove him from the Administration of the Government, and then to Ruin him. And this Design was afterwards so well confirm'd, that it was decreed in the Assembly of the Chambers of the Parliament, That a Solemn Deputation should be sent to the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, and Conty, to beseech them to join with the Parlia∣ment for the effectual Remedy of the Grievances that threaten'd the Kingdom. The Court was at Ruel, when the Cardinal was inform'd of what had pass'd; and he was deeply af∣flicted to see that he must be constrain'd to throw himself into the Prince's Arms, and to secure his Tot∣tering Fortune by his Support. The ta∣king of Lens.The Disorders at Paris not permitting the Prince to reap all those Advantages from the Victory of Lens, which he might have done, he was constrain'd to bound his Conquests with the taking of Lens. And so soon as that Place was taken, he return'd to Court;The Pr. returns to Court. at what time all People beheld him with admiration. For besides that, he was endow'd with so many no∣ble,
so many excellent and rare Qualities, besides the many Signal Victories he had won, he had had no share in the Troubles; insomuch that both Par∣ties look'd upon him as their Defender, and belev'd they might shelter themselves under his Laurels from all manner of troublesome Accidents. And indeed, had he harbour'd at that time those Thoughts in his Breast, which his Enemies afterwards imputed to him, questionless he would have made the best of Opportunities so favourable. For in truth the low condition of the Court, and Publick Admirati∣on equally concurr'd to his Exaltation, and to the Execution of the most Ambitious Designs, which he could have had in his Head. So that in regard he study'd then so little to court the People, and to ma∣nage the Exasperations of those whose Sentiments and Conduct were most opposite to the Regency and the Cardinal, 'tis manifest he had no such design as he was accus'd to have at that time. The Prince had admitted two great Men to be his Confidents,Chatillon and Gram∣mont the Princes Confi∣dents: both Persons of Signal Merit, but opposite in their Judgments as to the Affairs that made so great a noise: These were the Duke of Chatillon, and Marshall Grammont. The first, whose Person and Family were bound in the strictest Tyes of Alliance with the Prince, labour'd to perswade him to declare for the Parliament, or at least to make himself Umpire of the Differences with all the Neutraliy imaginable: The other Engag'd by all manner of Interests with the Court, spent a large stock of pleasing Eloquence to oblige him to side with the Court. But the Prince upon this occasion laid a Comtraint upon his own Temper, rmote from moderate ways, and wrote, together with the Duke of Orleance, to the Parliament, exhorting 'em to fend Commissioners to St. Germains and to put an end to their Differences in a Conference.Declarati∣on of the 28th. of October. Which Conference terminated in an Authentick Declaration
of the Kings, which gve some Respi to the Publik Differences and for that the Straagems of the Ene∣mies of the Court prevail'd so far, that they openly dmanded the Ruin of th Cardinal, the Cou thought it their best way to have recourse o he Duke of Orleans and the Prince.The Court has re∣course to the Duke of Orleans and the Prince. And in regard the Mischief had penetrated so far that it was not t b Eradicated but by strong Medicaments, they wer of Opinion at the same time, that the Natural Mod∣ration of the Duke of Orlen, and his peaceable Te∣per, would not be so proper, as the Prince's more Vigorous Heat; besides, that the Reputation of so great a Captain, the Splendour of his Victories, and he Assistance of his Army, would strike a Terrour in∣to the Male-content, so that the Court labour'd might and main to gain him. The Queen made use of all the most powerful and perswasive Motives, descending even to Tears, and the most melting Expressions telling him, She look't upon him as her third Son: The Cardinal al∣so protested that he should be all his Life time devo∣ted to his Will and Pleasure with an Absolute Sub∣mision: The King likewise tenderly embracing him, recommends to him the welfare of the King∣dom, and the safety of his Person. But notwith∣standing all these Caresses, Marshall Grammont and Le Fellier were the Persons who fully determin'd him to take the Court Party.Grammont and Le Tellior per∣swade the Prince to take the Court Party. They laid before him that by degrees, the Parliament would invade all Authority: That without confining their Ambition within the Bounds of the Declaration of the Confe∣rence at St. Gerans, they would not only take og¦nizance of the Affairs of War, but also dispose of the Fortune of Ministers of State, change 'em, remove 'em, and settle others in their rooms a their plea∣sure that there was reason enough to fea that a length they would Attacque the most priviledg'd Persons in the Kingdom; that the Condiion o
liament would be a Dignity to be , if they come once to impose Laws upon , and the Condition of the Princes  be more miserable should they  to creep to 'em. That this new sort  wonded the Constitution of the Monar∣, which was Absolute and Indepen∣  it was particularly contrary to the Con∣, and the Institution of French Par∣, Tat if any Abuses were crept into the , hey ought to be reform'd by the Assem∣ General, and not by the Decrees  whose Suffrages carry things rather b  then consideration: That every time the  hd exceeded the Bounds of their Duty, they had been always severely check'd, sometimes by  King, sometimes by Henry IV. some∣ts by Charls IX and other Kings their Prede∣cors, upon less dangerous Occasions then what  no in Dispute: That Great Empires were neer supported by Cowardly Counsels: That he  Trial of his Corage and his Forces in   Weighty Conjuncture; and that the Ju∣st of Soveaigns consisted in their Power: That he  of Conde, was concern'd to support the Car∣dl because the Resolutions which had been tak'n  he Person of his Eminency, tended to the Drucion of the Royal Family; and that if the  of Orleans and himself did not stand firm, and  oppose an Enterprize of this Nature, the  with her Children would be constrain'd to implo te Aid of the Princes in League with the . Now besides that the Prince believ'd that the lit∣ the Parliament had taken to conform to the , wounded the Honour of those that were  the Conference, and undermin'd the Foun∣ the Pece that had been Establish'd; these
Discourses made so deep an Impression in his Mind, that he would no longer hear of a Neutrality; so that abandoning all his Care of losing the Affection of the Publick, he had recourse to those Thoughts which inclin'd him to the most violent Extremities. In short,The P's. heat in the Parlia∣ment. going along with the Duke of Orleans to the Palace, he carried himself with so much Heat and Passion, as did him a great deal of Injury in the Hearts of the People. He had no sooner taken his Place, but the President Viole, who had great Credit in the Company, rose up, and took upon him to say, That the occasion of their meeting was of that great Im∣portance, that they could not make one step which did not lead 'em either to Honour or Infamy; nor was there any probability that they could enter into a good Beginning till they had first implor'd the Assi∣stance of the Holy Ghost, and he was preparing for the Solemnity of the Duty. However in regard that while the President was talking, he let fall some dis∣obliging Expressions against the Cardinal, the Prince of Conde, threatning him at the same time with his Looks and Hand, could not forbear to bid him hold his Tongue; and then addressing himself to the First President, in a great Passion told him, That he wonder'd, that he who was the Head of so Fa∣mous an Assembly, did not endeavour to suppress the Liberty which some People gave themselves, who under the pretence of the Publick Good, went about to excite the People to Sedition. Adding withall, That if the King's Youth, and his want of Experi∣ence, were the cause of the Disorders which had hap∣pen'd in the Kingdom, he would have him to know, That the Duke of Orleans, who was there present, and himself, were able to supply both the one and the other; and that the King would not want good Subjects, to reduce the Male-contented to their Duty.
These words offended the whole Assembly: But in regard they ell from the Lips of a Prince of whom they stood in awe, every body was profoundly silent, contenting themselves to utter their disgusts in pri∣ate. As for the first President, he was extramly zealous for the Honour of the Assembly, which the Prince had affronted, in threatning one of the Mem∣bers of it. However, he was not much troubl'd at what had happen'd, because he thought, that when so great a Prince had declar'd himself, those of the Parliament, whose heat and violence he did not ap∣prove, would bethink themselves, and become more moderate. Nevertheless he told the Prince, That he could not forbear complaining of his reprimanding so severely a Member of an Assembly that were only met to remedy the Distractions of the State, and not to kindle new Flames. That he was confident, that what he had done, was out of a good Intention; but in regard that Suffrages were to be permitted, he took the liberty to tell him, That if he had taken ano∣ther course, he would have done better. Lastly, That he read in the Countenances of those who compos'd the Assembly, a great Emotion, and great Discontent: That if he saw some that made no out∣ward shew of any thing, yet they were never a wt the less sad in their hearts, and never the less afflicted. That they were in hopes a Prince, whose  Atchievements had equall'd him to the Greatest Captains in the World, would have join'd with 'em to re-establish the Tranquility of a Kingdom, whose Fron∣tiers he had so well secur'd by his Illustrious Vi∣ctories. This same Speech did not equally satisfy all peo∣ple. The more ancient and prudent sort found that he had spoken much in a few words; and that consi∣dering the Conjuncture of Affairs, the first President could not have done much better then he did. But the younger sort were not so reserv'd; for they began
to murmur one among another. So that the Prince, who was not well pleas'd with the plaints that were made of his proceeding, as not being accustom'd to hear Truths told him, nor to receive any opposition to his Will, was so little master of his own Inclina∣tions, that instead of making amends for what he had done amiss, he turn'd toward the younger sort, and threaten'd them, as he had the President Viole, that is to say, with his looks and hand. They re∣solve to besiege Paris.The Court was overjoyd that the Prince had so openly declar'd in their favour: And in regard that after what had pass'd, he found him self-interested by his own Quarrel, in the Differences of the Court, he greedily listen'd to all Proposals that were made him for reducing the Parliament. Thereupon, it was no hard matter to persuade him, that the best way would be to besiege Paris and that a Siege would not fail to make the People cry out, and mu∣tiny against the Assembly: Or whatever happen'd, that the Parisians wanting Leaders and Men, and be∣ing accustom'd to Plenty and Ease, would make lit∣tle or no Resistance. His Passion caus'd him to ap∣prove these Reasons for strong and undeniable; so that he undertook to be Captain of the Enterprize under the Orders of the Duke of Orleans. But the Duke at first oppos'd the Design, till the Importuni∣ties, and the Persuasions of the Abbot de la Rvre, over-rul'd his Judgment, and got the upper hand of his Calmer Sentiments. 1649.Immediatly the Prince, and Marshal de la Milleray, propos'd the seizing of St. Louis's Island,The King leaves Pa∣ris pri∣vately. St. Antony's Gate, the Arsenal, and the Bastille, and to lodge their Majesties in the Bastille. But whether this Proposal were not sufficiently supported, or whether they were afraid of exposing the person of the King the Court re∣solv'd to quit Paris, and really to besiege the City. So that in the Evening before Twelf-day, the King retir'd from Marshal Grammont's House to the Cardinal's Palace;
and the next Morning, about Three of the Clock, e departed without any noise or bustle for St. Ger∣mans  ye. The same day the King sent a Letter seal'd with his Privy Signet to the Provost of Merchants, and the Sheriffs of Paris, wherein his Majesty de∣clar'd, that he was forc'd to leave the City, to the nd e might not be expos'd to the pernicious Designs of some Officers of Parliament, who held secret In∣telligence with the Enemies of the State: Adding withal, That he hop'd the Citizens would continue faithful o his Service, and prove stedfast in their Du∣ and that in a few days they should farther under∣stand his pleasure. Howver The Citizens no sooner understood that the King was gone, but the Tumult began to wax very great in Paris. They exclaim'd, after a most dreadful manner, against the Cardinal, against the Prince, against the Queen, and against all that car∣ry'd away the King. For the Parisans took his go∣ing away for a Force that had been put upon him. But they were so enrag'd, when they heard that the same day the King was carry'd to St. Germains, that it had been resolv'd in Council to block up Paris; that far from being consternated, they shew'd an extraor∣dinary Resolution, and declar'd themselves prepar'd for all manner of Events. But the Parliament, who more readily foresaw the dismal Consequences of a Civil War, were not so re∣solute as the People. And therefore the first time they met, which was upon the 7th of Ianuary, they sent the King's immediate Servants with their Submis∣sions and very Advantageous Offers. But those Commissioners were sent back without being heard; which extreamly exasperated their Minds. So that the Parliament meeting again upon the 18th, declar'd Ma∣zi an Enemy to the State, and order'd him to depart the Kingdom in Eight days, with full liberty after that for all the King's Subjects to fall upon him where∣ever
they met him. And at the same time they de∣liver'd out Commissions for the raising of Soldiers and took all the Precautions needful upon such Oc∣casions. In the mean time, the Prince, with about six or seven thousand men, which were the Remains of the Army last Summer, block'd up Paris, seizing upon Lagni, Corbect, St. Cloud, St. Denis, and Charenton. On the other side, the Duke d' Elbocut, his Three Sons, the Duke of Brissack and the Marquis de la Boulays went and offer'd their Services to the Parliament; and after that the Prince of Coni, the Duke of Lon∣gueville, the Prince of Marsellac, and Monsieur de Noi∣mouster did the same. The Parliament nominated the Prince of Coni for Generalissimo, and the Duke d' El∣bocut for General; and afterwards join'd the Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal de la Mothe, in equal Commissi∣on with 'em. As for the Duke of Longueville, he would not accept of any Employment, because he could have none that was conformable to his Rank, or none but such as equall'd him with his Inferiors so that he was only present at the Prince of Coni's Councils to give his Advice. When the Prince un∣derstood that Conti and Longueville had privately left St. Germans in the night, and were got into Paris, he went from Charenton to the Court, where he thunder'd most terribly against 'em. But that was no impedi∣ment, but that the Parisian Party bga to grow nu∣merous, having now got among 'em a Prince of the Blood, and another Prince almost absolute in his Go∣vernment of Normandy. De la Mothe also was become considerable in the Armies; but the Duke of Bouillon much more. For besides that he was deeply known in the Affairs of the World, that he was stout, and understood the Art of War to perfection, he was en∣dow'd with an easie, fluent, natural, and insinuating Eloquence; he had a neat Wit, fertile in Expedients, and proper to maintain the most difficult Affairs, a
clr Snse, and a discerning Judgment. And be∣sides e was engag'd in a strict Tye with Marshal Tene, his Brother, who at that time commanded the Army in Germany. Thereupon the Prince, who look'd upon these two Brothers to be his Friends, and Persons of great weight, wrote to the Duke of  that he was afraid, he took it for granted, tht the Prince believ'd he had a hand in Conti and Longevill's with drawing from the Court; for which reason he was desirous to disabuse him; and then conjr'd him to return to St. Germains, where he would procure him all manner of satisfaction touch∣ing his particular Interests. But the Duke of Bouillon caus'd the Letter to be read in Parliament. So that the Court finding they could not depend upon him, and being moreover inform'd of Turenne's disaffection to thei Cause, the King and the Prince, who was in great Reputation among the German Troops, wrote to the several Collonels, not to acknowledge him any longr for General, but to quit him; which they did. The Duke of Beaufort also, who had been wandring about in the Provines upon the Loire ever since his Esape from Vincennes, got to Paris in the time of the Troubles, and offer'd his Service to the Parliament, wh lear'd him of the Accusation of having con∣spir'd against Mazarin's Life, receiv'd him as a Peer of France, and made him one of their Generals. In the mean time, the King's Forces possess'd all he Posts round about Paris; and though the Parlia∣ment's my was more numerous, their Generals ver stirr'd to open any Passage, so that Provisions could no get into the City, but with great difficulty, from , in regard that the Prince could not put a Garison in Bys Conte-Robert, for fear of dividing his Forces and for that he had quitted Charenton, which Cn had made himself master of.
ut the Prince, conseing the Importance of th Post, which securd the Pisia  and or that he long'd to begin wi some Action hat might render his Forces formidable He resol'd to attack it though the Parisin had put tree thousand Men into it.The Pr. attacks Charenton. Advancing thereore with the Duke of O∣len, and all the Princes and Lords of th Court up∣on the 18th of February he committed the Atacking of the Post to the Duke of Chatillon and advan'd with the Cavalry upon a rising ground  hinder the Parisians from succouring the Place. Chtillon perform'd the Princes Orders with all the Conduct and Valour imaginabe but when he had driven the Enemy to the last arricado, he receiv'd a Musqu shot quite through his Body, of which he dy'd the next day in he flower of his Age, lamented by both Parties for his Noble Qualities, and for being slai just at the time when he was ready to have obtain'd those Digni∣ties which his great Servics had perfom'd. The taking of Charenton was much to the dishonour of the Parliament's Generals and Forces, and no less to the honour of the Prince of Conde. For in short, The Prince carry'd that P in view of the Enemy's Ar∣my, and at the Gates of Paris, out of which he had march'd in the sight o Ten thousand men, who seem'd to have taken the Field merely o be Witnesses and Spectators of so great an Action. This Conflict, and these of Bois de Vinnnes, Lagy, and By-Cone Robert, all to the disadvantage of the Paisians, and in one of which the Young Duke of Roba approving himself the worthy Inheritor of his Father's Vertue, lost his Life, made 'em begn to think of Peace. But the diversity of Interests was an Obstacle difficult on surmount. On the other side the Court, who were put up with their Success, and who were in greater hopes by reason of the Princes successful Atchievements, would needs impse too Rigorous Conditions upon the Contrary Pary. So that if both Parties were so
was bcause that a Civil War qually displeasing to both. For this Reson, upon the 20th of Fbay, the King sent a Herald of  accompany'd wih two  who coming to the Gate of St. Hnore,  he had three Pacquets of Letters, one or th Prin of Con, the other for the Parliament, nd a third for the City. Of which the Parliament  fm'd, took the matter into consideration,  a Decree That they should neither admit,  ceive the Herald; but send the King's Ser∣v that is to say, alon, Meliand and Bignon, to  Qeen, to let her know, That if they had refus'd  the Herald, it was not for want of duty,  because Heralds were never sent but to So∣veign Princes, or States, that were in hostility with the Kingdom but that neither the Prince of Conti,  Parliament, nor the City, were either Sove∣rigns,  Enemies, and therefore they besought her Majey, that they might understand her pleasure rom  own Lips. Those Commissioners were well  y the Queen, who told em she was satisfy'd with ir Excuse, and their Submissions; that when he Parliament should return to their duty they should find the effects of her Favour, and Goodwill ad that a or private Persons, they should all of 'em,  oe, find all manner of security, both for thi Persons and estates, in their submission; and the De, of Orlean also, and the Prince, gave 'em th . Now th bh Parties most ardently desir'd Peace,  concluded without a great deal of dif∣ several Deputations and various Cone∣ces whee it was a hard matter to content so  whose Interests were so nice and so diffe∣ren But at length it was concluded at St. German  March; and afterwa the King's De∣ for this so necessary Peace, was verify'd in ool
Parliament, who order'd that Thanks should be re∣turn'd to their Majesties for the Peace which they had restor'd to their Subjects. The Cau∣ses of the Civil War that en∣su'd upon the Impri∣sonment of the Princes.No sooner were the Flames of Civil War extin∣guish'd by this Peace, but they were re-kindl'd in a short time after, and spread it self with more Violence into the principal Provinces of the Kingdom, for the Reasons which I am going to tell ye. Considering what the Prince had done in the pre∣ceding War, in favour of the Court and the Cardi∣nal, it was a difficult thing for them to make him those acknowledgments which his great Services de∣serv'd; or that the Prince should contain himself within the bounds of Modsty, out of a desire of Domination and Superiority, in demanding the most considerable Employments, whether for himself or for those whom he had a mind to favor. And in regard the Cardinal had chiefly reap'd the benefit of the Prince's Assistance, he was the most expos'd to his Demands, his Complaints, his Threatnings, and his Bad Humour. And indeed, during the Parisian War, there had been some Misunderstandings between the Prince and the Cardinal. For as there was at that time a strict and diligent Correspondence between 'em, and for that for the most part Familiarity lessens Esteem, the Respect which the Prince had for the Cardinal was very much abated; and the Cardinal who perciv'd it, had look'd upon those great Virtues which the Prince had made so gloriously appear in the time of the Civil Troubles, as no other then the Effects of Fear and Aversion. Moreover, during that time, the Cardinal plotted to bring the Odium of the Peo∣ple upon the Prince, by endeavouring to make him the Author of all the Mischiefs to which they were expos'd. The Prince also after the Peace, thought it behov'd him to thwart the Cardinal, and to shew the Alienation of his Kindness for him, that he might
regain the Affection of the people, and of a great  o considerable persons which he had lost, for protecting a person so generally hated. Calling to mind alo the submissiveness of the Cardinal du∣ring the last Disorders, he was persuaded That if he should put him in fear, and scorn him, it would be scient to draw upon him new Troubles, and to oblige him to sneak a second time to him, and to have he ame dependance upon him as before. He might also perhaps imagine, by reason of the Kindness hich the Queen shew'd him at St. Germains, that i wold not be impossible for him to make that Prin∣cess sensible of the Cardinal's Defects, and to have all the Authority next her, himself, after he had laid the Cardinal aside. On the other hand, the Cardinal had found, that he could build no solid Foundation upon the Prince's iendship, who was sway'd rather by Capricio, then by Reason or his own Interests, and that time did bu augment his scornful humour so that he began to meditate his Ruin. To which we may add, that Concord and Reputation being incompatible between two persons in the same place, the Cardinal could no more brook a Superior at Court, then the Prince could endure an Equal. And that which contributed considerably to dis∣solve the Knot was this, That the Cardinal was rongly convinc'd, that he could not engage the ince to persevere in his Interests, but by the proba∣bily of new Establishments, which either he pro∣posd Himself to him, or by his Creaures, only to  him, and with a ull rotent afterwards to evade  is Offers and his Promises. All which the  peceiv'd, and was extremely incens'd. Lasly, one of the principal Causes of the Cardi∣nals Disgst against the Prince, and which inspir'd hm wih a Design to ruin him, was the constant op∣poion of the Prince to the raising of the Cardinal's Fily; which I shall thus make out.
Some time before the Troubles, Mazarine, desi∣rous to support his Fortune in France by considerable Alliances, had cast his eyes upon the Duke of Mer∣eur, as a it person to Marry his Niece Mancini, and to confer upon him at the same time the Employment of Lord High Admiral. This Project was interrupted by the War, and reassm'd some time after the Peace, when the Court was at Compiegne, and where there was nothing talk'd of but Festivals and Rejoicings. The Queen spoke of it to the Prince, who durst not oppose it whether he slighted the business, or did not foresee the Consequences of it, or raher because he was afraid of the Noise it would make, should he gain-say it. However it were, notwithstanding his si∣lence at that time, he afterwards most vehemently oppos'd it, and never minded observing any Deco∣rum with the Cardinal. For he spar'd no manner of Raillery or nipping Inectives against his Person. This cut the Cardinal to the heart, and did not a little trouble the Queen. But that which absolutely render'd the Prince suspected at Court was his obstructing another Match which the Cardinal was eager to make between one of his Nieces and the Duke of Candale, at what time Guienne was in Arms, through the Misunderstanding between the D. of Esernon his Father, and the Parliament of Bourdeaux, which had join'd, as also had that of Provnce, with the Parliament of Paris, against Mazarine. Fo the Prince foreseeing that the Mach could not be made without assuring the Government of Guyen to Can∣dale, whom the Parliament and People would be sure to expel, he made use of the Affection of the Bourdelois to hinder the Marriage, and openly declar'd for 'em in the Council, that he might encourage 'em the more to demand another Governor. The Prince's so openly declaring for the Parlia∣ment and Revolters of Guyenne put it positively be∣yond all doubt, that he held a Correspondence with
'em and consequently that he was in Confederacy with all the Factions. And that which augmented the Confusion and Jealousie of the Court, was the Demand which Guyenne made to have the Prince to be Governor of that Province instead of the Duke of Espernon. But new Troubles arose at Paris, occasion'd by the ts of the Town-House, which caus'd the Prince to shew his Zeal in a more violent manner then ever, for the Support of the King's Authority, and a second time to contemn all the Solicitations and Applications of the Slingers; which somewhat re∣x'd him at Court, and caus'd 'em to alter, or at least suspend the Resolutions they had taken against his Person. But while he thus became serviceable to the Crown, he was always careful not to suffer the Cardinal to have any Command over him. To which purpose he diligently set himself to destroy whatever might be  to his Elevation. So that understand∣ing that the Cardinal had a design to marry one of his Nieces with the Duke of Richlieu, he continually  that Match, as he had disappointed the rest, and engaged the young Lord to marry the Marquess 's Widow, and carry'd 'em in his own Coach to , a House belonging to the Duke of Longue∣, where they were marry'd. This Action render'd him more suspected at Court then if he had attempted any thing against the King's Authority. And the Cardinal and his Adherents  insinuated, that he had procur'd that Match only to magnifie his own Reputation, and to draw the D. of Richlieu to his Party, because he was  of Havre, and they took an occasion from thence to hast'n his Imprisonment. But before we come to the Prince's being impri∣son'd,  will be material to give an account of cer∣tain important Passages which happen'd after the Peace.
This Peace not having been publish'd, the Court did not deem it convenient for the Welfare of the State, as well in reference to Affairs at Home as Abroad, that the King should return immediately to his Capital City. For the Ministers did not think it safe to envelop themselves among an enrag'd Popu∣lacy, whom they had so lately besieg'd; and in re∣gard the Campaign drew near, 'twas a plausible pre∣tence for taking a Progress towards the Frontiers, up∣on some considerable Employment. Moreover, they were in hopes that time would calm their minds, and bury the Remembrance of things past. As for the Prince, he thought it was for his Interest and his Ho∣nour to shew himself to a people that had so often loaded him with Imprecations. For which reason he went to Paris, and shew'd himself alone in his Coach, which drew upon him the Respect and Fear of the people, but abated their Resentments. The greatest part of the Parliament, and the principal of the Frondeurs Party, made him Visits for five or six days together; after which he return'd to Court; where the Cardinal's great Joy that he had open'd the way to Paris, was allay'd by his Jealousie of the smallest Actions of that great Prince, whose Valour had drawn upon him the Awe and Veneration of those very persons whom his Courage had offended. Upon his arrival, the Cardinal desirous to remove so dangerous a Competitor, propos'd to him the Com∣mand of the Army in Flanders. But the Prince re∣fus'd to accept it; whether it were that he saw the Cardinal's Aim and Intention through the Proposal, and that he took delight to mortifie him; or that it was more grateful to him to rule the Cabinet. 'Tis true that he had a design to have gone to his Govern∣ment of Burgundy, with an intention to pacifie the Troubles of Guyen and Provence, that were in Arms through the Misunderstandings between the Governors and the Parliaments. But the Cardinal, and the Abbot
de l Bviere, had frustrated his Intermediation, to whose Authority the persons concern'd had referr'd  differences; for they were afraid lest his Um∣ge should augment his Reputation and his Power. However, he would not give over the Journey; and whn he departed from Compeigne, the Cardinal took his Leve of him with a strong Guard, as if he durst not trust his Life with the person who had so often ventur'd his own Life for his preservation. At part∣ing, the Prince desir'd the Commander de Souvie, Le Tell, and other the Cardinal's Confidents, and charged Marhille, his Domestick Servant, to tell him, That he could be none of his Friends if he thought of marrying his Niece to the Duke of Mercoeur. All this while the Court had a powerful Army on Foot, commanded by Count d' Hareourt, who had Orders to sit down before Cambray. For the Cardi∣nal was in hope to refix himself in his Ancient Splen∣dor, by such a glorious Conquest as that, with which he ckl'd his Fancy so much the more, because the Duke had no share in the Design, nor was he to have any in the Execution of it. And that he might have the whole Honour of it, he went from Amiens whre the King was, to the Siege. But Fortune prov'd no way favourable to him, his Enterprize  to his Confusion; for Cambray being reliev'd, , was forc'd to raise his Siege. During the Prince's Absence, the Cardinal had held no other then a Correspondence of Decency and Ci∣vility with him; and the Prince, who began to be sensible of the Prosperity of the Court with some regret, and who was not a little disturb'd about the Siege of Cambray, was no less glad to hear it was rais'd. The Troubles in Guyenne and Provence, and the Difficulties which obstructed the King's Return to Pri pleas'd him as much; because he believ'd that the Cardinal minded nothing else, but which way to surmount all those Obstacles and present Im∣pediments
that obstructed his recovering an Absolute and Independent Authority. And therefore he for∣bore to oment his Discontents either in private or in publick, as if he were willing to lay his Resentments asleep, to the end he might afterwards let 'em loose with more Violence. Also at his return from Bur∣gundy to Pris, before he had seen the Court, he most earnestly solicited all his Friends to take care that the King and the Cardinal might have a Reception into the Metropolis of the Kingdom suitable to their Dig∣nity. Perhaps he strove to compleat a work so glo∣rious as that of restoring the Cardinal, or that he flatter'd himself that such a piece of Service would never be forgot by the Queen. He tay'd till the Court was return'd to Compeigne, where he was receiv'd with more demonstrations of Friendship, then when he parted from thence. After which, his Majesty return'd to Paris; and in that En∣try, the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Family, rode in the same Coach, and the Cardinal in one of the Boots with the Prince, who put a confidence into him by his presence. And the incredible Throng of people who appear'd at that same Entrance, and who abhorr'd the very sight of the Cardinal, did only then let loose their Joy for the King's Return, who at that time took up all their thoughts, and de∣fac'd the remembrance of all their Animosities and past Misfortunes. When their Majesties arriv'd at the Palace-Royal, they receiv'd the Submissions of the D. of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and the rest of the Heads of the Frondeurs; and the Prince compleat∣ed so Noble a day's work, by telling the Queen, That he lookt upon himself to be very happy in ha∣ving fulfill'd the Promise that he made her, to bring back the King. To which her Majety reply'd, Sir, This Service which you have done the Kingdome is so great, that the King and my self should be very ungrateful, should we ever forget it. One of the Prince's Servants who
this Discourse, told him, That his great  him tremble, and that he was afraid  was no more than a Reproach. I  reply'd the Prince: however I have per∣ what I promis'd. When good Services are atred takes place of Acknowledgment.  the Prince found to be true: For all that  in favour of the Cardinal, was one of  which his Mortifications had in∣ that spurr'd him on to ruin him. purpose all things were to be so order'd,  the Frodeurs, nor the D. of Orleans should  the Prince. And to that ef∣fect  the Hatred and Aversion which they  had for him, and which was renew'd  to time, in regard the Prince sometimes  to e reconcil'd to 'em, and embrace their  had shew'd himself to be their  Enemy all the Artifices which the Cardinal  to incline the Frondeurs to rejoice at the  this was the chiefest. had receiv'd a Note, which gave him  That the Frondeurs had a Design upon  and that they had resolv'd to Assassinate  over Ponneuf. This Note he shew'd  the Duke of Orleans, and the Cardi∣n  seem'd to be as much surpriz'd as the rest.  some Consultation what course to take  the truth, 'twas resolv'd, to the end they  themselves without exposing the Per∣so  Duke. That his Coachman should drive  over Pontneuf with the Curtains drawn,  were in it; which was done, while  the mean time stay'd at a Bathing-House  Event. So soon as the Coach was  before the Brazen-Horse, the Coach was  certain persons unknown, who fir'd their
Blunderbusses into it, and wounded a Lacquey be∣longing to the Count of Duras, who rode at the Tail of the Coach. Of which the Prince having immediate notice, demanded Justice of the King and the Queen against the Frondeurs. The Cardinal also seem'd to outdo himself upon this occasion; for his Diligence and his Zeal exceeded the Care and Sedu∣lity of the Prince's nearest Relations, and most Cor∣dial Friends. In the mean time the Frondeurs seeing such a quick and dangerous Accusation taking root against 'em, believ'd it at first to be an Artifice of the Prince's to ruin 'em. However, they were nothing daunted; and tho the report ran, that the Prince would pro∣secute his Revenge with all manner of Violence, the Duke of Beaufort made no suple to visit Marshal Grammon at a time that the Prince supp'd with him, and there spent the remainder of the Evening with∣out the least shew of being concern'd. The Coad∣jutor and he made use of all the ways imaginable to justifie their Innocency to the Prince; and the Mar∣quess of Noirmoustier offer'd on their behalf to join with the whole house of Conde against the Cardinal. But the Prince, who was no less exasperated for the little respect they had shew'd him upon other occasions, as out of a perswasion not to be vanquish'd, that they had a design to Assassinate him, stopt his ears against all their Justifications, and laid aside all other thoughts, but of doing himself Justice with the Consent of the Court, or else of demanding Justice from the Parliament. The first Resolution was too violent; neither did it agree with the Cardinal's con∣ceal'd Design; and the effect of the other was too tedious and dubious. Nevertheless, because it was the intention of the Court to refer this business to the Parliament, on purpose to mortify the Prince with delays, and the vexation to see himself as it were a Suppliant at the Feet of the Judges, the Car∣dinal
wnted not specious pretences to perswade the Prince to take that course. Thereupon he made his complaint to the Palace in the usual forms; and du∣ring the whole course of that Affair, the Cardinal  he pleasure to draw him into all those Snares  he had laid for him. In the mean time the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor demanded that they might be admitted to justifie themselves; which being granted, both Parties quitted all other ways, ad adhered only to the practice of the Palace. But he Prince soon understood by the manner of the Fnders justifying themselves, that their Credit woud balance his; nevertheless he did not penetrate the Cardinal's Dissimulation; and maugre the Opi∣nos and Advice of his Friends, he still believ'd that  acted sincerely. In this posture things re∣'d for some days, while exasperation and im∣ement augmented on both sides. The Prince's Fends and the Frondeurs Friends accompany'd their Chitains every day to the Palace; and all things were carry'd with more Moderation then could be expected between two Parties, whose Leaders were so unequal. Moreover, the Cardinal, in hopes to recover his full Liberty by depriving the Prince of his Freedom, thought it high time to agree with the rondeurs, and that he might securely offer 'em the protection of the Court, without any fear of afford∣ng 'em an opportunity to reconcile themselves to the Prince. So that things could never be better dispos'd of, to incline the Frondeurs to be so far from opposing e Prince's Ruin, as rather to be glad and rejoice at s Imprisonment. There remain'd now nothing more but to set the Duke of Orleans at variance with the Prince; which the Cardinal found a means to do, upon the Marriage of the Duke of Richlieu with Madam du Pons. He aggravated to the Duke, that the Prince had said no∣thing to him of the Marrige; and after he had
sow'd the seeds of Exasperation in his mind, he con∣sulted with Madam de Chevreuse against the Prince's Liberty. And to the end the Abbot de a Riviere, who was so much concern'd to oppose the Ruin of the Prince, as being in hopes of a Cardinal's Cap, by the means of his Reputation, and the Rennncia∣tion of the Prince of Conty, might not break the Measures they had taken, Madam de Chevreuse cun∣ningly complain'd to the Duke of Orleans how little security there would be for the future in taking parti∣cular Measures with him; that whatever he said, was told again to the Prince and Madam Longueville, by the Abbot de la Riviere, who being by them secur'd from meeting any opposition at Rome in his pretensi∣ons to a Cardinal's Cap, makes them acquainted with all his Master's Conduct and Privacies. She perswaded him also, That the Abbot, in whose Coun∣cils he had had a blind Confidence, was privy to the whole Negotiation of the Duke of Richlieu, and Madam du Pons; and that all things were carried on between them so exactly by Concert, that the Prin∣cess her Mother had never so zealously assisted Ma∣damoiselle de Saugeon in her design to turn Carmelite, but to remove her from the Presence and Confidence of the Duke of Orleans, and to hinder her from ob∣serving the Abbot de la Riviere's Carriage, and his blind dependance upon the House of Conde. In short Madam de Chevreuse understood so well how to incense the Duke both against the Prince and the Abbot that she soften'd him for all the impressions that she had a desire to imprint in his mind. One Project also of Madam de Chevreuse's which contributed very much to bring their Design about, was an act of Passion which the Prince committed. For a little before, he went to visit the Dutchess of Orleans with a Lady which he would needs carry into the Presence along with him, notwithstanding that the Officer of the Duke's Guards told him, He
had Orders that no body should enter but himself. Which the Prince never regarded, but went forward; upon which the Officer stepping before the Lady, to prevent he Entrance, the Prince took his Baoon of Cond, and broke it abot the Officer's Shulders. Moreover, the Cardinal renew'd an old Proposal to  Duke of Roan, to engage the Prince to lay claim to the Dignity of Constable, which he would never li to, for fear of creating a Jealousie in the Duke of Orleance. And tho the Prince rejected the Pro∣potion a second time, out of the same consideration, t the Cardinal made that dextrous use of the pri∣ae Coferences which the Prince had with the Dke of Roban upon that subject, that they afforded all  probabilities of a private Negotiation between th Duke of Roan, and the Prince, without impart∣ing it o the Duke of Orleans, and contrary to his opi∣ni and pretensions to the Constable's Sword. So that the Duke having receiv'd all these Impressions, ad peceiving both want of Sincerity and Respect in the Price's proceedings, without any more to do consentd to his being Arrested. The Prince's Friends had several times given him wanting of a Design which they suspected to be , to lay him up in Prison; and from that te he had always some one or other with him of te Royal Palace; tho he gave no credit to their Ad∣ice, and sometimes laught and flouted at those that gave it him In the mean time the Cardinal procu'd the thing to be resolv'd on in Council,1650. and a day to be appoint∣ed fo the Execution of the Order, which was the  of Ianuary.The De∣tenon of the Prin∣ces. Several persons gave the Prince advice of it the same day; but he took no notice of . And that which is more to be wonder'd at is this, th whereas for about Two Months together he had accustom'd himself to be attended by some of his
most faithful Friends when he went to the Palace Royal, he never went alone but that day he was ar∣rested. The Duke of Longueville was at Chaillo, apart from the Dutchess his Wife. To draw him therefore into the snare, the Cardinal sent im word, that the Council was consulting about the apprehending of Couturier, and some others, who were accus'd for ha∣ving attempted the Prince's Life; and that his pre∣sence was necessary to prevent Sedition and Tumult. Immediately the D. of Longueville made haste to Paris, and went to the Palace-Royal upon the 19th of Iu∣nuary in the Evening. The Prince also, according to his custom, came that Evening to attend upon the Queen; at what time the Abbot de la Riviere told him, That the Duke of Orleans would not be at the Council. Upon which the Prince thought at first; that they would abandon his Cause; which made him leave the Queen sooner than he would hve don, and go to the Council-Chamber, whither at the same time came the Prince of Conty and the Duke of Longueville. As for the Cardinal, he was retir'd into his Chamber, and had carry'd the Abbot alog with him, lest he should perceive something, and spoil a Design that was just upon the point of Execution. So that there was only the Chancellor, the Count of Servien, Le Tellier, and some others with the Princes, when de Guitault, Captain of the Queen's Guards, with great respect approach'd the Prince of Conde, and in the Queen's Name whispe'd him in the ear, That he must go to Prison. De Comminge, Cap∣tain of the same Guards, told the Prince of Conty as much; and de Croissy, one of the Ensigns of the same Body, put the same Compliment upon the Duke of Longueville. The Prince a first took it for a piece of Sport, and thought the Queen had done it in a kind of Frolick. But understanding all was in good earnest, Is this then the Recompence (said he) of
Fidelity and Services? And then addressing him∣self to the Chancellor, he desir'd him to go in his Name to the Queen, and beg of her to hear him but for one Minute; ad he pray'd the Count de Servien to sire the same Favour of the Cardinal. As for the Chacllor, he return'd, without being able to ob∣in hi equest; and as for the Count of Servien, e brought no answer back, believing it enough to have given the Cardinal notice that the business was done And then it was that Mazarine imparted the business to the Abbot de la Riviere, who was strange∣ly surpriz'd at it, and could not forbear telling him, That certainly the Duke of Orleans would never suf∣er such an Injury to be done the Princes. To which the Cardinal answer'd, That there had been nothing done without his Consent. Thereupon the Abbot retir'd to spea with his Highness; but he was re∣puls'd in such a manner, that he look'd upon his For∣u to e at an end. , who was gone to fetch his Guard, re∣tur'd with Twenty Soldiers well Arm'd, who look∣ing a squint upon the Princes, seem'd to threaten 'em with something else more fatal then Imprisonments, and carr'd away the Prisoners down a back-pair of Stairs into the Garden, where Guitalt putting 'em all thre into one Coach, conducted 'em to Richlieus Gate, where the Count o Miossans, afterwards for this piece of good service made a Marshal, by the name of Marshal d' Albret, waited with the Gendarmes to carry 'em to Vincennes. And that which is here to be observ'd, is this, That Mazarine orde'd this bu∣siness so cunningly, that the Prince believ'd that all the Preparations which were made to seize his Per∣son, concern'd only the Frondeurs, and out of that perswasion gave himself the Orders for his being more safely conducted to Prison. For the same day the Prince was arrested, the Cardinal sent him word in the Morning, That he had something to impart to
him of great Consequence. Thereupon the Prince went to the Palace-Royal, where the Cardinal told him, That he had been inform'd in good part, that Decoutures had been in Paris about Four and twenty hours, conceal'd in  House near Momatre Gate; and that the Conviction of the Murder intended being infallible, if they could but light upon him he would do well to give an Order to apprehend him; but that in the executing of this Design two things were to be fear'd; that is to say, lest the People and the Coadjutor's Friends should make a Tumult; for that the Coadjutor well knowing his Ruin to be un∣avoidable if Decoutures were taken, would be cer∣tain to procure his escape. And therefore to avoid both the one and the other of these Inconveniences, he thoght it convenient that he should be sent away out of Paris, till the Parliament should order him to be remanded to the common Goal of the City: That the best way was to carry him through Richlieu Gate; and thereore that he would command the Gensdarms to stay behind l' Hostel de Vendosme, in a readiness to march when they should be commanded. The Prince approv'd these Proposals; and blinded by his desire of Revenge, suffer'd himself to be surpriz'd by the Artifices of the Cardinal, and took care for his own being safely carry'd to Prison, which he had like to have discover'd the day beore, entring into the Car∣dinal's Chamber, where Lyonne, Mazarine's Secretary, was writing out the Orders beforehand. Upon the Road to Vineennes the Coach broke, so that the Prisoners were forc'd to stay three or four hours by the way, with only a Guard of Foureen Gensdarmes, yet no body durt adventure to rescue them.The Pari∣sians re∣joice at the Im∣prison∣ment of the Pr. The remembrance of the War, and the present disorders of Paris, were the reason that the blow was easily born with. The People approv'd what had been done against the Prince, and shew'd them∣selves
extreamly joyful at the News: So that the  of Longueville, who was retir'd to a private house in aris, in expectation of things necessary for her  into Normandy, to which she had been ad∣ by her Friends, beheld the Bonfires and other marks of publick rejoycing for the Imprison∣ments of her Brothers, and her Husband. And what was more singular was this, That Persons of the highest Quality and Degree, who afterwards de∣manded, and with an unshak'n Zeal and Constancy prosected their Releasment, then publickly declar'd that their Imprisonment was Legal. But that which soon after made it appear to be , wa a letter sent to the Parliament,The Prin∣ces Inno∣cency. three days ater the Princes were seiz'd, wherein such light and  rimes were laid to their charge, that the greatest of those, who by reason of some remaining  of the year preceding, thought 'em guil∣ty were convinc'd of their Innocency. The first days of their Imprisonment the Princes in∣rig'd against the Cruelty of their Enemies. The Kings Bad which was granted to the most wretch∣d was deny'd to Princes of the Blood. Their Em∣ployments and their Governments, were dispos'd o their Pensions were stopp'd; nay, they lay'd their Hands upon he Assignations given the Prince for the imbursement of fifty thousand Crowns lent to the Queen but six months before. Perraut also being im∣prison'd the same day as his Master, they seiz'd upon all his Papers, turn'd his Servants out of three Houses; and commanded the Princess Dowager, and the Pincess her Daughter-in-law, to retire out of Paris They order'd also President Ferrand, who was nomi∣nated by the Prince for the Administration of his Af∣fairs and the Intendants employ'd by the two others,  defray their Expences. Upon refusal of the first Decree of Council, the President Ferrand, who resolutely resisted, was threat∣en'd
with imprisonment. His Moveables were put to sale. No less then eight Silver Candlesticks mark'd with the Prince's Arms, were sold by an Outcry. And his Sword, the support of the State, the glory of the Regency, the Terrour of all Europe, was with∣in a hairs breadth of being cry'd in the publick Mar∣ket-place by a pitiful Catchpole; that Sword which had defeated the most considerable Forces of Spain, and had sacrific'd to the Security and Welfare of the King, three famous Generals, gain'd whole Provinces to the Crown; that had vanquish'd the Bavarians; the Support and Hopes on which the Empire rely'd, and which had defended the Cardinal himself from the Fury and Animosity of the French. These three Princes suffer'd their Misfortunes with variety of Humours. The Duke of Longuevile was sad and pensive, and spoke not a word. The Prince of Conti wept, and never stirr'd out of his Bed; while the Prince sung, swore, went to Mass a Morn∣ings, read and play'd to pass away his time. 'Tis said, that the Prince, hearing the Prince of Conti desire some-body to bring him a Book, entitl'd, The Imita∣tion of Christ, should presently use this Expression to the Prince of Conti's Friend, And I, Sir, said he, de∣sire you to bring me the Imitation of Monsieur Beaufort; that I may make my escape out of this place, as he did about two years ago and see my heels well at liberty. These Rigorous Proceedings against the Princes were attended with several others. The guard of 'em was committed to the care of De Barr, a Man of great Se∣verity, and whose hard Usage much augmented the Discontents of the Prisoners. Now in regard this man was made choice of by the Cardinal to be the Minister of his Passions, neither the Respect due to the Birth of the Princes, their Services done the Kingdom, nor the honour to be entrusted with those Illustrious Sufferers, made any impression upon his crabbed Disposition. And not contented with four
Bodies of Guards, and five strong Gates, he crowded their Antichambers with Soldiers: He also plac'd Sol∣ds in their very Chambers to observe their Coun∣ces; and many times they were observ'd in their Beds: And that which was most irksome of all, we the Clownishness of their Jaylor's Discoourses. He had not common Civility for 'em, as Princes, but  be always prating in their ears that which was offensive. They were refus'd the Attendance of their own Servants. Only the Complaints of the Princess of Conde causing 'em to fear the effects of some pity, they were forc'd to grant 'em what the King was pleas'd to extend toward 'em. This put their Friends in hope, that they might be able to settle a Corre∣spondence with 'em. Thereupon, they ventur'd a Letter, which was deliver'd 'em: And at length they made use of such dextrous means to hear from 'em, and to send 'em News of what concern'd 'em, that D Barr himself, perceiving, perhaps, some turn of the Tide, lent them his Assistance, when he was sure no notice could be taken of him. For five months that this lucky Stratagem lasted, neither they, nor those that adher'd to their Interests, had any reason to conceive any great hopes of their Releasement. The Success of Normandy and Burgundy, that swell'd the Pride of their Enemies, abated the Courage of their Friends and Servants. Besides that, their Meetings always prov'd fruitless, by reason of the Union and Vigilance of the Cardinal, and Coad∣juor of Paris. In May the Coadjutor disappointed the Petition of the Princess Dowager of Conde, that she might have liberty to prosecute the Releasement of her Sons. She was in hopes that the Cardinal's absence would afford her favourable Opportunities; and that the good Nature of the Duke of Orleans, which had so long with food the Imprisonment of the Princes, would at length produce a Union powerful to van∣quish
the Obstinacy of the Court, and the Malice of those that persecuted her House. But all her Attendance prov'd in vain. They were so far from doing her right upon her Petition, that they would not so much as lend an ear to her Com∣plaints; they rejected her Supplications, and had no regard to her Tears. She might humble her self, if she pleas'd, even to the conjuring her Enemies by all the considerations of Mercy and Compassion; her Requests were still evaded and upon the return of the Court, which remov'd a great way off on pur∣pose, she obtain'd no more then the liberty to abide at Vallery, which she chose of her own accord before Chatillon upon Loin. All this bad Usage cast the Princess into a melancholy Discontent, and Languish∣ment, of which she dy'd the 2d of December. The Cardinal, on the other side, was fully satisfy'd. All things went well in Burgundy and Normandy, and the hopes that he had of the like success in Guyenne; and particularly at Bourdeaux, puft up his Heart, and render'd him inexorable. Now for the right under∣standing of all these particulars, it will be requisite to give a brief Relation of what pass'd in those Provinces during the imprisonment of the Princes. The Count of Tavanes, who was one of those who laid most to heart the Interests of the Prince of Conde,The Count of Tavane's zeal for the Prince of Conde. understanding that he was arrested, together with the Prince of Conti, and the D. of Longuevile, and that they were carry'd to Vincennes, hasten'd to the Marquess of Moussaye Goyon, Governour of Stenay, and inform'd him of what he had heard. Now in regard the Marquess was none of the most resolute men in the world, he appear'd to be strangely alarum'd and surpriz'd, and with a world of confusion, askt the Count what was to be done. It behoves ye, briskly reply'd the Count of Tavanes, to repair with all speed to your Government; and if you have nothing to do any where else, you will find busi∣ness enough there, and you will see me there  very speedily.
Afterwards the Count went to Conde House, where he found the Princess Dowager all in Tears, with a great number of people, all in consternation, not knowing what Resolution to take. There was also in the Garden a good number of the Prince's Of∣ficers who had resolv'd among themselves to go forthwith to Val de Grace, there to seize upon the Cadinal's Neices, and bring 'em away to some one of the Princes Houses, as a gage for the Prince's Life, which they believ'd in danger, by reason of his great Merit, and high Birth. But at the very instant, news came that the Cardinal, apprehensive of some such Designs, had sent for em away from thence before the Princes were arrested. So that all the Officers were forc'd to return to their several Homes, not be∣ing ble to resolve upon any considerable Service which they could do the Prince: only the next day they retid, some to Bellegard, and some to Stonay. Tavanes,What happen'd in Burgun∣dy after the Imprison∣ment of the Prin∣ces. seeing this, departed, and rode all night to get to Milly in Gastinois, which was his own Estate. From thence he retir'd into Burgundy, in hopes that many things might there be done for the Prince. But there was no body willing to stir in those parts, and they that were the Prince's Friends, were rather against him, then for him. Howeve, he spar'd not to visit 'em all a , and to whisper 'em in the ear, but all to no purpos then going to the Castle of the City which belong'd to the Prince, the Commanders which th Prince had plac'd there, of which two were his Domestic Servants, coldly excus'd themselves for ut being able to do any thing for want of men. Up∣on which Tavanes offer'd to bring 'em sixty Musque∣ters, which they promis'd to admit. But two days after, when the Musqueteers were come, and the Count sent word to the Governour to open the Back∣ the Garison made answer, That they could not receive 'em, in regard they had promis'd the City to let no body in. This piece of Infidelity, to∣gether
with the Advice which the Count had given him, that there was a Design to arrest him a Dijon, for'd him to retire in haste to Bellogarde, which he found in such a forelorn Condition, as eaily might satisfy the Judgment of any man, that the Prince, to whom it belong'd, was no way guilty of the Crimes which were laid to his charge, for acting against the Service and Authority of the King. There was very little Ammunition, very few Cannon, and those dismounted; and without Carriages; insomuch, that Tavanes, seeing the bad condition of the Place, resolv'd to go to Stenay, where Marshal Turenne was already retir'd for the Service of the Prince. And in regard he had sent two single Companies, that be∣long'd to the Prince, and two other Companies of the Regiment of Meille, to quarter near his House, du Palli, two little Leagues from Langres, he went thi∣ther to join 'em. He was no sooner arriv'd at that House, but he had advice from Bellegard, that the Horse Regiments of Conde and Enguien were marching thither with the Prince's Guards; and that the Chief Commander had written to him, that he might re∣ceive his Orders. Whereupon, he sent away Guitault de Pechepeirou, to press 'em to meet him at Pallie, from whence they might march directly for Sena, and join Turenne. Guitant being arriv'd at Bellegard, wrote back word to the Count, that all the Officers told him, 'Twas requisite to let their Horses rest for some few days, and that many of the Troops had de∣serted. But the Count was in hast to carry these Troops to Turenne, and therefore he sent with all speed for those Regiments to come up to him, and to let 'em under∣stand, That the greatest Service they could do the Prince, was to quicken their March that they might the sooner be at Stonay. So soon as he had put him∣self at the head of these Troops, he set forward. But in his March he met, soon after his Uncle, the Mar∣es
of Tavnes, who was the King's Lieutenant of  ovince; who having drawn together the Gen∣y, the Archers with their Provost, some well  Troops of Horse, and a Regiment of Foo adventur'd to oppose his Nephew's Passage, ad to prevent his joyning Turenne. The Count resolv'd forthwith to Charge this ody that made a shew of Disputing the Passage ith him; and falling upon 'em, cut all the Caval∣ry  pices, and having taken all the Regiment of oo risoners, made them take an Oath to serve the  and the Prince of Conde against Mazarin. This Defeat of the King's Lieutenant of Burgundy,  a terror into the whole Province, and particu∣lar into Dijon, where they were so hotly alarum'd, that they forcd the very Capuchius to take Arms. Whic caus'd Tavanes to alter his design, and engag'd h to turn all his Horse and Foot against that City, which he was in hopes to take, and make the Inhabi∣tas declare themselves, if they that were in the Cstl which belong'd to the Prince, would but  their Gates to Him. But the Commander of  Castle refus'd to hearken to his Proposals, so that the Count after he had Encamp'd two Days before he Cty, was constrain'd to retreat to Bellegard, in hpes that the Countries would not fail to assist with  Arms, and whatever else he stood in need of Thse movements of the Count of Tavanes, other∣wise unsuccessful, produc'd good Effects: For they constrain'd the King, the Queen, the Cardinal, and all the Court, to take a Journy into Burgundy, and that Progress gave an opportunity to Bourdeaux, Mon∣trd, and Normandy, to declare for the Prince, more especially while the King's Forces were buied in the  of Bllegarde. Tha Place,Bellegarde taken. as has been said already, was in the most pitiful condition in the world to hold out, and
therefore made little Resistance. The Soldiers also that were in it revolted upon sight of the King's Army; so that nothing could be expected from 'em. And Tavanes was constrain'd to surrender the Place much sooner then he would have done to the end he might preserve for the Prince's service a good Num∣ber of Stout men, who were retir'd thither. Tavanes's Soldiers, after the surrender of Bellegarde, were discharg'd, and the Ocers, with all the men of Courage that were there, gave their Paroles before they March'd out, to meet some at Montrond, some at Bourdeaux, and others at Stenay, for the ser∣vice of the Prince; which they did with all Fidelity and Exactness. As for Tavanes, he chose to go to Paris, and joyn the Duke of Nemours, there to try all manner of ways to get the Prince's out of Prison. Now while the Court was busily employed in Bur∣gundy, the Dutchess of Longeville left no stone un∣turn'd in Normandy to engage the Parliament of that Province,What pas∣sed in Nor∣mandy du∣ring the Imprison∣ment of the Prin∣ces. together with the Friends and Places that belong'd to the Due her Husband, to take the Prin∣ces side, and to assure her self also of Hre de Grace. But all the benefit of her Intreagues, and her active stirring in those parts, was only this, that she con∣strain'd the Court to quit Burgundy sooner then they would have done, and to march with all their Forces into Normandy. In short they were no sooner arriv'd there, but the Princess was oblig'd to take Shipping and flye into Holland, and from thence to come to Stenay where she treated with the Spani∣ards about setting the Princes at Liberty Turenne, who was retir'd upon their being first Imprison'd, and who was vehemently incens'd against the Cou, by reason of the Principality of Sedan, which they had taken from his Family some Years before, by constraining the Duke of Bouillon his Brother, then a Prisoner in the Bastille, to throw himself at the Kings Mercy: This Turenne, I say, commanded all the
the Spaniards lent in this conjuncture.  we relate what Turenne did at the head of , le us see what passed in Guyenne. kes of Bouillon, and Rochefocault, the  St. Simon, and the Duke de la Force, were  Persons that Acted in Gyenne; and  highly signaliz'd himself in the War  kindld in that Province; and he is to be  as the chief of all those who there  themselves, and took Arms in favour of the . He it was, that so judicially advis'd the  of Conde to retire with her young Son, the , into the Province of Guyenne. For  that the Person of the Duke was expos'd to  of the Court, he might happ'n to be  Instrument in obtaining his Father's Liber∣ty. nd therefore, after some delay, the Princess , and got through the Mountains of Au∣, to Trenne; notwithstanding the dreadful  that Persons of her Sex, and the young  Age, were forc'd to undergo. The Prin∣ce an he young Duke stay'd with Trenne eight  during which time Brive-la-Gllande was ta∣ nd the Troop of Gendarmes of Prince Thomas,  of a Hundred men. This stop at Turenne,  was necessary to settle the tottering and  Minds of the Bourdelois, to the end she  be there in safety, gave time to General de la , natural Brother to the Duke of Espernoon, and  comanded the King's Forces in that Province,  in the Princesses way, on purpose to  her passage. But She stopping at a House of  of Bouillon's, calld Rochfort, the Duke of  and he march'd against de la Valee  the Forces they had rais'd, and six hundred  men, their Friends. They overtook him a  in Pergord. But he gave ground, not da∣rg to fight, and retreated through the Woods to
Bergerac, with the loss of all his Baggage. After which, the Princess set forward for Bourdeaux, without meeting any opposition in her passage. There remain'd no∣thing more behind, but to surmount the Difficulties which they met with in the City, which was divided into several Cabals. The Duke of Espernon's Crea∣tures, and they that follow'd the new Sentiments, of which the D. of St. Simon had also gotten a smack, af∣ter he had receivd some Letters from the Court, and had heard of the taking of Bllegarde, join'd them∣selves with those that serv'd the Court, and among the rest with de la Vie, Advocate-General in the Par∣liament of Bourdeaux, a Man both subtle and Ambi∣tious. They us'd all their Endeavours to cause the Gates to be shut against the Princess. Nevertheless, so soon as it was known that she was arriv'd at Lor∣mond, near the City, with the Young Duke her Son, all people gave public Testimonies of their Joy. They throng'd out of the City in heaps; they strew'd the High-way with Flowers; and the Barge that carry'd 'em, was attended by all the Boats in the River; the Ships in the Port discharg'd all their Guns, and they enter'd into Bourdeaux, notwithstanding all the un∣derhand Efforts of their Enemies to have hinder'd 'em. 'Tis true, that neither the Parliament, nor the Jurats went to visit 'em in a Body; but there was hardly any, who in private did not give 'em assu∣rances of their faithful Service. In the mean while, the Court's Cabal, and Esper∣non's together, hinder'd the Duke of Billon, and the Duke of Rochefoucault, from being let into the City for the first three or four days; so that they were forced to lie in the Suburbs of the Chareu; where all people went to see 'em, and offer'd to bring 'em in by force. But they refus'd their Civility, contenting themselves to be admitted two days after the Prin∣cess, and that in the Evening too, to prevent any Tumult. The King at that time had no other Forces
, but those under La Valette, which  The Dukes of Bouillon and Rouche∣  consisted in five or six hundred Gen∣ friends, ad some Foot, which they pon their own Lands. Now in regard  disciplin'd Soldiers, 'twas impossible to ogeher, so that they all began to think of  home. For this Reason, 'twas thought  That they should try, before the Gentle∣ , whether they could meet Valette, and  that Resolution away the Dukes march'd di∣ fo Liburne. But he having intelligence of it, , ad avoided fghting a second time, in  the ntry would be speedily retuning home;  if he forbore fighting he should be certainly  o he Field. At the same time Marshal de la Meilleray had Orders o mach toward Bourdeaux, through the Country between the two Seas, and the King advanc'd to∣d Lbune. Of which, when Bouillon and Roche∣focaul had notice they hasten'd their Levies, not∣withstnding the Obstacles they met with, both for wnt of Money, and the great number of persons  in the Parliament and City, that underand crosd their Designs. And things were come to that , which had like to have caus'd great Disor∣. F a Spanish Officer being come to wait upon the Princess of Conde from the King of Spain, and ha∣ving brought along with him 20000 Crowns for the elif of her present Necessities, the Parliament, who ill then had suffer'd her to reside in the City with her Sn, the Duke of Engien, and had never openly de∣cl'd for her, as the people had done, believd that  opposing the Spanish Envoy's being receiv'd into Bodex would suffice, by that single Act, to justi∣y all their past Conduct; seeing that by depriving the Prince's Party of that Relief which they expected rom Spain, his Friends would be reduc'd to a neces∣sity
of receiving such Laws as the Court would impose upon 'em. The Parliament therefore being assem∣bled, order'd that the Spaniard should depart Bour∣deaux forthwith; but the people understandig what would be the Consequences of that Decree, betook themselves to their Arms invested the Palace, and threaten'd to fire it, if they did not repeal their Order. At first they thought to have easily dispers'd the Tumult, upon the appearance of the Jurats that were sent for; but the Disorder increasing upon the delay of the Repeal, the Parliament sent notice to the Dukes of Bouillon and Rochefoucau of the Mutiny, and de∣si'd them to appease it; nor were they sorry that the Parliament stood in need of 'em upon this Occasion. But in regard it was of great importance toward lay∣ing the foundations of their Party, that the people should get the Decree recall'd, before they left the Palace; and afraid besides, lest if they should go a∣bout to regulate the Disorder, they should be taken for the Ringleaders of it, they forbore for some time to answer the Expectations of the Parliament. But perceiving at length that things began to grow to that degree of heat, that without losing any more time, they flew to the Palace with their Guards, and thru∣sting themselves in among the Enrag'd Multitude, to the great danger of their persons, they stopp'd their Fury, and undertook to mediate between Them and the Parliament. Thus the Spanish Envoy had all the liberty he could desire. Afterwards the Generals thought it requisite to make a general Mster of the Inhabitants, that they might be able to know their strength and pre∣pare 'em by degrees to sustain a Siege. They drew 'em up themselves in order of Battel, tho they had receiv'd Advices from several hands, that there was a design on foo to Assassinate 'em. Nevertheless among the continual Volleys that were discharg'd, by
no less then Twelve thousand men, no unlucky Ac∣cident happen'd. After this they began to raise some Outworks about the City; but in regard that Mony came but slowly from Spain, they could not bring any of their Works to perfection. And certain it is, that during all this War, they never receiv'd of the Spaniards above Two hundred and twenty thousand livres; the rest having been taken up upon the Credit of the Princess, the Dukes, or M. Laisne. However, in a little time they made a shift to raise Three thousand Foot, and Seven or eight hundred Horse; with which they took Castellan, within four Leagues of Bourdeaux, and would have extended themselves farther, but that they heard of Meilleray's approach, and that Espernoon was joyn'd with Va∣le. Upon this advice, Bouillon and Rochefoucault di∣spatch'd away Sillery into Spain to hasten away the promis'd Relief: However, they left a Garison in Castelnau, and retreated with the rest of their Forces to Blanquefort, within two Leagues of Bourdeaux. And there it was that the Duke of Espernon came to fall up∣on 'em in their Quarters, at what time Bouillon and Rochefoucault were return'd to Bourdeaux, leaving Chambon to Command the Forces in their Absence, which were much inferior to Espernon's. Nevertheless, tho' they could not defend the Entrance into their Quarters, the Marshes and Canals which environ'd one part of 'em, gave 'em the opportunity, without being broken, to save both their Men and their Baggage. Upon the noise of this Combat, Bouillon and Roche∣foucault, set forward out of Bourdeaux with a good number of the Citizens, and having joyn'd their own men, advanc'd toward Espernon with a resolution to Fight him, but the same Canal, already men∣tioned, prevented their coming to blows: Only some skirmishes happen'd, wherein Espernon lost a great many Officers and Soldiers; of the Bourdelois
very few were kill'd, and Mr. Guitault, the Prince of Conde's Chamberlain was Wounded. After which time Meilleray and Espernon being join'd kept Bourdeaux block'd up, tho at some distance; and they retook the Island of St. George, about four Leagues above the City in the Garon, where the two Dukes had begun some Fortifications. It had been defended for two or three Days with vigour enough, because they got in a fresh Regiment every day, and Valette being there Wounded, dy'd of his Wounds within a few days. But at length the Boat that brought 'em Reliefs and carry'd back those that were reliev'd, being sunk by a Battery which Meilleray had rais'd upon the Rivers side; it struck such a Terrour as well into the Officers as Soldiers, that they surrender'd all Prisoners of War. So that the Bourdelois lost the Island and Twelve hun∣der'd of their best men at one time. This ill success, and the Arrival of the King at Liburn, who also caus'd the Castle of Vaire to be attack'd, lying about two Leagues from Paris, caus'd a great consternation in the City. Upon this the Parliament and the Ci∣tizens perceiving the City ready to be Besieg'd by the King, and finding themselves in want of all things necessary for their Defence, and no Succors coming from Spain made a Decree to desire a Peace upon what conditions the King pleas'd to impose upon 'em, at what time News was brought 'em, that Vaire was tak'n, and that the Governor, named Richon, who surrender'd at discretion was Hang'd. This severity by which the Cardinal thought to have stricken a terror and discord among the Bourdelois, wrought a quite contrary effect. Bouillon and Rochefoucault un∣derstood so well to make their best advantage of it, that by this means he resettl'd the minds of those that wa∣ver'd and were astonishd before, causing the Governor of the Island of St. George, who surrender'd at Di∣cretion, to be Hang'd. And to the end that the Parliament and People might be concern'd with the
Generals, which was no less requisite then bold and daring; they caus'd the Commander to be Try'd by a Council of War, where the Princess and the Duke of Enguien Presided; and which was compos'd not only of the Military Officers, but of two Commissio∣ners from the Parliament, and Thirty six Captains of the City. Who all unanimously Condemn'd the poor Commander, who was a Gentleman, and guilty of no other Crime then of being Unfortunate. The People also, who were enrag'd above measure, would hardly give him time to be Executed, but would have torn him Limb from Limb, and cut him to Peices. This Action astonishd the Court, gave new vigour to the Bourdelois, and made such an alteration in the City, that they resolv'd to abide a Siege, and to defend themselves Couragiously; the Citizens relying upon their own strength, and the Promises of the Spaniards, who put 'em in hopes of a powerful and speedy Succor. In the mean while they hasten'd the Raising of a Fort of Four Bastions at Bastide, which lyes over-against Bourdeaux on the other side of the River. They also carry'd on with great heat and di∣ligence the other Fortifications of the City. But in regard that several of the Citizens had Houses in the Suburbs of St. Surin, they would not permit 'em to be burnt or pull'd down; tho it were made out, That that Suburb would be the first that would be attack'd, and that it was large enough to lodge all the King's Infantry. All they could obtain was only to intercept the Avenues, and to lay the Houses open; For it was impossible to defend so large a place as that with on∣ly the Inhabitants and a few men, that did not a∣mount to above Seven or eight hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse. Nevertheless the Place re∣quir'd a numerous Guard, the access being open to it on every side, and the City Gate which was next it in a very bad condition having nothing to defend it, and for that the Enemy might approach it under Covert.
So that they could have wish'd they could have ∣cur'd that Gate with a Half Moon; but in regard they wanted every thing that was necessary, they made rie of a small Muckhill that lay before the Gate, and which being cut sloping like a Half Moon, with∣out Parapet or Moat, was one of the greatest defen∣ces of he City. The Siege of Bour∣deaux.The King stying at Bourg, Mazarin cam to the Royal Camp, which consisted of about 8000 Foot, and Three thousand Horse. And it was resolv'd that the Suburb of St. Surin should be attack'd, which was a work so much the more easie, for that having the Avenues only Guarded, the Houses might be gain'd without any danger; by which means they might enter into the City, cut off those that defended the Barricado's and the Church, and prevent their retreat into the City. Moreover they thought, that because the Half-Moon was not tena∣ble, they might lodge themselves betimes at the Gate of Dijos. Meilleray therefore caus'd the Houses and Barricado's to be attack'd both at the same time, and Pallau had Orders to enter through the Palais Galien, and to slip between the Suburbs and the City directly to the Half-Moon: But Meilleray falling on before Palluau arriv'd, he found hotter work then he expected. For the Skirmish began so soon as the King's Troops approach'd; and the Citizens had plac'd their small shot in the Hedges and Vineyards which cover'd the Suburbs, which put a stop to the King's men with great loss of the Assaylants Bouillon was in St. Surin's Church yard, with what Citi∣zens he could get out along with him to relieve the Posts, and Rochefoucault was at the Barricade, where the King's men made their Principal Attack and car∣ry'd it. Both sides fir'd with extream fury; so that of the Citizens abou sixscore were slain, and about seven or eight hundred on the King's side: Nevertheless the Suburb was taken. Af∣
which they resolv'd to open their Trenches,  the Half-Moon, and to make an Attack throug the Wlks belonging to the Archbishoprick;  in egard the Hal-Moon had no Moat, the Citi∣ wold not undertake to guard it, but contented thseles ith shooting from behind their Walls. The Besiegers therefore attack'd it three times with tir bsts men, but were repuls'd by Rochefoucault, wh had brought thither the Prince of Conde's Guds and his own, at the same time that the Citi∣n dertd it. The Besieg'd also made three or or Sallies, in every one of which they clear'd the Tnches and burnt the Enemies Lodgments; inso∣h, that in Thirteen days after the Trenches were , they were no frther advanc'd then at first. But i egard the Bourdelois had not Infantry enough to believe the Guards of the Gates attack'd; and for that those who were neither kill'd nor wounded were  for service, by reason of their being weari'd with thiren days hard service together, Bouillon and Rochefcalt found a way to relieve 'em by causing the avalry to serve a foot; and they stay'd there themselves the four or five last days without stirring  their Pos to encourage the Soldiers by their Emple. Before I go any farther,The Pro∣gress of Turenne's Army. 'tis requisite for the keep∣g i memory the just and distinct Ideas of so many  Accidents, to let you know, That the Re∣motness of the Court and the King's Army now bu∣ ploy'd in Guyenne, gave Turenne leisure to make great Progresses. He therefore, taking advantage o the oportunity, took in Caelet, La Chapelle, Cha∣t, Porien, and Rhetel, and made a shew of march∣ing toward Paris, to release the Princes who were at incennes. The news of his March struck a Terror into the Capital City, and made 'em think of a secu∣e Pison wherein to confie the Princes.
Thereupon they all agreed, That it was absolutely necessary that they should be remov'd from Vincennes: But the difficulty was to agree upon the place, where they might be more in safety. Madam Chevreuse, and the Keeper of the Seals, could not determine the point; for there was more in it then only to remove the Princes from Vincennes Tellier, Secretary of State, and others of the Cardinal's Friends propos'd Havre, according as Mazarine had design'd. The Coadjutor thought they were safe enough where they were or if they must be remov'd, no better place then the Bastile. Beaufort was of the same opinion, and stifly maintain'd, That to put 'em in any other place, would be to deliver 'em up to the Cardinal, and give him an opportunity to make use of 'em when he pleas'd, against his Royal Highness himself. That rather then suffer it, he would expose himself to the greatest dangers. That he made no question but that he should be upheld by the people; and that with their support he would undertake any thing. The Duke of Orlance was a long time before he could resolve what to do, but at length his fears aug∣menting upon the news of Turenne's March, he began to think it high time to resolve upon something. How∣ever, the diversity of opinions, and particularly Beaufort's Threatnings, put him to a stand; besides, that the Castles of Pontoise, and St. Germans en Laye, were propos'd to him. But being beset with diffi∣culties on every side, he bethought himself of Mar∣coussy, enclos'd between two Rivers, surrounded with Moats full of water, and strong enough to op∣pose as well the Enemies of the State, as the Prince's Friends. The principal Friends which the Prince had at Pa∣ris, were the Duke of Nemours, and the Count of Tavanes; the first was his Rival; for they both lov'd Madam de Chatillon; which made it a wonder at first that the Duke should be so much concern'd for the
Prince. In short, after the Princes were cary'd to , the Dutchess of Chatillon had link'd her se with the Princess Dowager of Conde, and had so  her business, that she had brought over  to the Prince's Interest, for whom in truth she had  so great a kindness, as for the Duke, but lov'd him however, well knowing he had a great  for her. 'Tis true, that it might be very probable, that  not believe that the Dutchess of Chatillon aced for the Prince out of any principle of Love. And perhaps it might be likewise true, that the Dutchess did not solely act by that principle, but tht the Obgations for which she was indebted to the Prince th Community of nterests, and the  she had to be ally'd to the first Prince of the , might be stronger Motives to induce her to engage  to take the Prince's side. For the underning of which 'tis necessary you should know, That the Dutchess of Chatillon, Daughter of , who lost his ead for fighting a Duel cotray to the Edicts of Lewi XIII. was marry'd to Gspar Duke of Chatillon by the ntermediation and Cdit of the Prince, tho he were himself in Love with he before. But because Gaspar de Coligny, after∣ward Duke of Chailln, upon the Dath of his Fa∣ther and his eldest Brothe, was in Love with Ma∣dam de Buttevie, Coligny besought the Duke to quit his pretension, alledging hat he had a Design to  her. The Prince, who was both a Friend and Knsman of Coligny's, and one who had no other then a are design of Courtship upon the Lady, be∣sides that his Passion was but newly kindl'd, made up scruple to resign his Amours, and promis'd him that he would not only banish 'em from his thoughts, but  him against the Marshal, his Father, and his Kindred, that oppos'd the Match. In short, not∣withstanding all the Decrees of Parliament, and all
Obstacles that the Marshal laid in his way, the Prince assisted Coligny so well, that he caus'd him to carry away Madam de Boutteville by Force, and lent him Twenty thousand Franks for his Subsistence. Coligni carry'd his Mistress to Chesteau-Thierry, where the Marriage being consummated, the new-marry'd Cou∣ple retir'd to Stenay, a place of Security, which the Prince to whom it belong'd, had lent 'em for their Residence. Coligni's not being of Age when he mar∣ried rendring the Marriage void, yet being of Age upon his return to Paris, there was a Contract of Marriage drawn up at Conde-House before the Lady's Relations, and then they were marry'd again at No∣stre-Dame by the Coadjutor. Some time after, Madam de Chatillon, not finding her self well, went to the Waters of Bourbon, where the Duke of Nemours met her and fell in Love with her. After which they lov'd each other with an extraordinary Passion, inso∣much tha Nemours could refuse nothing that Madam de Chatillon demanded of him. But to return to the Series of our History, Nemours whom Love had engag'd on the Prince's side, and avanes who was return'd incognito to Paris after the Surrender of Bellegarde, made it their business to make Friends and upon the report of the Prince's being to be remov'd from Vincennes, had got together all the Friends that possibly they could, with Instructions to be ready to mount along with 'em upon the first call. But when the Princes were remov'd from Vin∣cennes to Marcoussy, they were attended by such a nu∣merous Guard, that Nemours and Tavanes did not think it convenient to appear, and so dismiss'd all those persons that were come to join 'em. The Prince during his Imprisonment at Vincennes, had written a long and elegant Discourse to justifie his Innocency to all France, and to all the world, and to display the Malice of his Grand Enemy. The be∣ginning of this Discourse was put into the hands of a
considerable person by a Soldier, who being won by  was wont to bring News how the Duke did; and hen the Princes were carri'd to Marcoussy, ano∣thr Soldier that escap'd in the hurry, brought the Remider. The Piece is nervously and eloquently compil'd, and justifies that the Illustrious Author knew more then how to manage his Sword. Had it not bee so long as it is, we would have inserted it in this History, but it would almost compose a Tome of i self. 'Tis enough to let you know, That the Prince all along keeps within the Bounds of Respect to their Majesties; and that without murmuring at the Orders, he discovers the Malice of those who had rais'd so great a Persecution against him, and gives admirable and home Answers to all their false Accu∣sations. But tha you may the better see both the Accusati∣ons d the principal Answers, we shall here insert the King's Letter to the Parliament of Pris, con∣cerning the Prince's Imprisonment; and another from a private person to the Parliament, which an∣swers the King's Letter very home, without omitting any thing essential. And this last Letter, which ap∣pear'd some time before their Removal, induc'd the Paliment to seek all the most proper ways to re∣leas the Princes from such an Unjust Captivity. The King's Letter to the Parliament of Paris, touching the Imprisonment of the Princes. THE Resolution which we have been forc'd to take by the Advice of the Queen Regent, our ms Honour'd Lady and Mother, to secre our Per∣sos from our Cousins the Princes of Conde and Conti, and the Duke of Longueville, is of that Importance
for the Welfare of our Service, that altho we owe to God alon the Account of our Actions, and o the Administration of our Kingdom, we thought however, that we could not let both you and the Publick know too soon, the Motives that induc'd  to it; to the end that all our Subjects, being inform of the absolute Necessity which, through the ill Con∣duct of those Princes and the Duke, constrain'd us to proceed with so much Rigor, to prevent the irrepa∣rable Mischiefs that threaten'd this Monarchy, may all redouble their Affection, and concur so far as lies in their power with us, in that aim which we pro∣pose to our selves, to establish a firm Tranquility within our Kingdom, as having understood by ex∣perience to bring our Enemies to reason, whose op∣position to Peace proceeds from no other cause, but only in hopes that the Divisions which have for some time vex'd this Kingdom, will at length turn all things Topsie-turvie, which by the Assistance of God we hope to prevent. We promise our selves, that the Remembrance which all Christendom will resume of the Moderation and Mildness of our Counsels which we have follow'd since our coming to the Crown (which has been such, that often what has proceeded from our natural Indulgence or Prudence for other stronger Reasons, has been imputed to the weakness of our Government) will convince every body, That we had not had recourse to this last Re∣medy, till after we had found all others were of no force. And in truth, when we were to deliberate upon the Arresting a Prince of our Blood, whom we have always tenderly lov'd, and who is otherwise highly to be valu'd for his many Noble Qualities; a Prince so often victorious over his Enemies, against whom he has so frequently signaliz'd his Courage, Certain it is, that tho he soon made an ill use of that Honour which we gave him the opportunity to pur∣chase; and that his proceedings in divers Enterpri∣zes
have given us just occasion from time to time to  his Deigns, we could not without extreme  determine his Imprisonment; and we uld have wink'd at all the Imprudences of his evil Cct, but only the imminent danger that the Kigdom was in to be torn in pieces and unless we  palpably discern'd, that considering the way which the said Prince took, and wherein he made large steps every day, one of these two mischiefs was inevitable, Either the utter destruction, or the Diolution of this Monarchy by the ruin of our Au∣thority; upon the preservation of which principally dpends the Tranquility and Happiness of the people which God has submitted to our Obedience. It is so ntural to all men to love their own works, and to desire as much as in 'em lies, the kind acceptation and merit of 'em, that there is no body, witout doubt, but will presume in regard we have afford oppor∣tunities to our Cousin, by means of those Military Employments wherewith we have entrusted him, to acuire a high Reputation, and for that we have eap'd upon his Family and his own Person Favours of all sorts, no body, we dare say, will believe, that unlss Necessity had compell'd us, we would he been willing to have lost the fruits of all our Favours and to have depriv'd our selves of the Ser∣vices which our Cousin might have done us, both by his Counsels and Performances in times of difficulty, such as are those of a long Minority, had he not de∣iated so far as he has done from the Path of his Du∣ty or if he could have satisfy'd his Ambition with living the Richest Subject this day in Christendom. And ctinly, upon due consideration of the vast Settlements that belong to his Family, either in Em∣ployments, or Governments of Provinces or great Towns, in Lands, or Ready-Money, or Church Re∣nues, it must be acknowledg'd, that so many Fa∣vour, nor so considerable, as we have conferr'd up∣on
our said Cosin, were never in so short a time be∣stow'd upon any one Family; not to reck'n in ou rants to his Relations and Friends at his Reques, and out of the Respect we had for him. He cannot deny, but that he holds at this day from our Bounty solely, all that he enjoys of Places or Governments, in regard all became vacant upon the Death of our Dear Cousin his Father, and that it was in our full Power to have dispos'd of 'em to such other persons as we should have thought sit to have preferr'd be∣fore him. But to go a little higher, every body may call to mind, how that so soon as the Queen Regent, our most Honour'd Lady and Mother, foresaw the Misfortune wherewith Heaven was about to afflict France, by the loss of the Deceased King our most Honour'd Lord and Father; and that there was no longer any hopes of recovering a Health so precious to the Kingdom, she apply'd her self to obtain the good will of our said Cousins, giving order, so soon as she was design'd Regent in the King's houghts, to those in whom that Great Prince put greatest Confi∣dence, to make it their business to perswade him to confer several Favours upon that House. Her Orders were happily obey'd, tho the King thought he had already done enough, having but a little before made the Duke of Anguien General of his principal Army. To which at first he had so great a reluctancy, that he had once resolv'd to order his retiring into Bur∣gundy. They also persuaded him to confer an Honour upon our deceased Cousin the Prince of Conde, which he had long desir'd, which was to make him Presi∣dent of his Council; and some few days after, he was made Grand Master of France, tho the King was resolv'd to have utterly supprest it. The Queen afterwards at the very beginning of her Regency, bestow'd upon him in our Name, the Houses of Chan∣tilli and Dampmatin, which was the Noblest Present that ever any King made to one person. He was al∣so
to purchase the Estate of our Deceased  the Duke of Bellegarde, wherein the Town of  comprehended; which considering the  o the Place it self, and the Scituation of  of our Cousins other Governments, lay  ost convenient for him of any of the Kingdom.  so many Favours, and those extraordinary,  granted to the Father, were no less advanta∣ to the Son, who enjoy'd the benefit of 'em,  was still so Gracious as to confer conside∣ Four on the Person of the D. of Enguien. Our  Mrshal de L'Hospital had the Government of  given him in Recompence of his Services,  was rewarded with the Government  Ton and Citadel of Stenay; yet both the  day ven to the Duke. Upon the Death of , we bestow'd in one day upon his Family  ployment of Grand Master of France, the  of Three Provinces, Burgundy, Bresse, , besides that of Champaigne which he had , and three strong Towns, the Castle of Dijon, , and Bourges, besides Bellegard and  which he had in possession. And we have  to believe, that there never was any Greedi∣ afte large Possessions and soaring Greatness so , but would have been fully gorg'd by  an Efuion of Benefits and Favours of all sorts.  our said Cousin then gave us formal Assurances, That he would never desire any thing more for the  confessing and acknowledging, That what∣ Sevices he had done, or whatever he could do  Kingdom, he could not in reason demand any  n what had been done already for him. Ne∣hele, in a little time after he set a foot other  Clims under precarious and unjust Pretences;  the beter to attain his Ends, renewing his for∣ Discontents, because we had given to our most  Lady and Mother, the Disposal of the place
of Lord High Admiral and Superintendent of the Maritime Affairs, vacant by the Death of our Cou∣sin the Duke of Breze, his Brother-in-Law; as if he had had a particular Privilege to make Hereditary in his Family all the Offices which his Kindred had possess'd during their Lives; forgetting that he had positively promis'd to demand nothing more of us, after we had gratify'd him with so many others upon the Death of his Father, who dy'd presently after the D. of Breze. Nevertheless we resolv'd upon one trial more to give him satisfaction, in hopes that Age would moderate his Excesses, and temper the exorbitant heat of his Ambition; and to the end we might once for all deprive him of any Necessity and Excuse for demanding any more, we heap'd up the Measure to the top; and upon his renew'd Promises never to make any farther Demands, we granted him a new Favour which surpass'd all the rest, by adding to the Towns of Burgundy which he had already, and to Stenay, that of Clermont, with a Gift of all the Demeasnes belonging to it, as also to Stenay and Iamets, which are worth near a Hundred thousand Livres a year. After that, we admitted the Prince of Conti into our Councils at Twenty years of Age, tho his Brother and his Brother-in-Law had a Pensi∣on there already, of a Hundred thousand Livres, and Danvilliers's Employment, for which he was to give a Recompence to the Sieur Danevoux, and had settl'd upon him in our Name divers Bodies of Horse and Foot. We omit several other Favours which we have conferr'd upon our Cousin the Prince of Conde, which alone were sufficient to satisfie any reasonable mind, besides considerable Sums of Money which we have bestow'd upon him every year, and all the Augmentations of Pensions for him or his Family and Relations, for whom he desir'd em. We speak not of the respect which we always had for his Requests or Patents for Dukes, for the Promotions of Ma∣reshals
of Frnce, and a world fo Military Employ∣ets, and others of all sorts, as Abbots, Bishops, and overmets of Places bestow'd at his Recommenda∣ pon persons at his Devotion. Lastly, we call God to witnss. That there is no sort of study or in∣try which we have not put in practice as well to∣ward himself, as with his most familiar Confidents, o ix his mind, and give him satisfaction. And up∣n this account we are oblig'd to testifie, That our mst der and most beloved Uncle the Duke of Or∣ce, peferring the Tranquility of the Kingdom, and the Good of our Service, before any other par∣iculr nterest or Consideration, has all along per∣sded us to these Sentiments, and by that means highly contributed to the advantages of the said Pce, and the satisfaction of all his Demands. But all in vain; no Favour, no Application, no Confi∣ence having hitherto been able to limit his irregular Amiion. The nature of the several pretensions which he has set on foot from time to time, and from which he has edeavour'd to exempt himself with ildness and Prudence, may easily evince to the world, that they were the Sentiments and Transports of such a mind. Sometimes he has vehemently in∣sisted to have the Command of an Army for the Conquest of Frnche Conte, upon condition that he might have the Sovereign Possession of it. In the midst of the last Campaign, while our Army was advanc'd into Flanders, and that it could not be en∣feebled without running the Risco of some great Blow, laying aside all other thoughts which way to annoy the Enemy, even to the hazard of exposing our Fontiers and Strong Holds to the Assaults of our Enemies, he would needs have a Detatchment of a reat Body of Horse drawn out to go to Liege to support the Design which he had to help his Bro∣the he Prince of Conti to the Coadjutorship of that Bioprick, by that means to render more conidera∣ble
the places which he holds upon the Mense, and in his Government of Champaigne, besides another great Establishment wich he projected to erect on that side, as we shall afterwards make appear. All which clearly shews by many remarkable Circumstances, to what a degree he was possess'd with a desire of So∣vereignty. An Imagination the more dangerous in a Mind all Fire like his, because we are moreover well inform'd, That among his intimate Confidents, he has often let fall that pernicious Maxim, That any thing may be done to attain Sovereign Dominion, so that although in a Monarchy setl'd upon such solid Foundations as ours, chiefly upon that Affection and unshaken Fidelity which the French have for their Pri∣vileges and the Persons of their Kings, such a Cri∣minal Thought has been generally attended with the Ruin of those that profest it, yet we should be defective in the Duty which we owe as well to our selves, as to our faithful Subjects, should we not ob∣viate all things which in time might facilitate the exe∣cution of so unjust a Design. For tho what he pro∣poses to himsel were no mark of what he harbours in his breast, yet certain it is, that if we nearly exa∣mine his Conduct ever since our coming to the Crown, no body can disown but that he has an Intention to work other Mischiefs in the Kingdom, which no less require the Remedy we have apply'd, since he openly went about to set up a Dominion formidable to us. That his Design was to weaken and bring down the Royal Authority; that by possessing or securing to himself the principal Places of the Kingdom, and fixing to himself all persons that have any Credit, all men of Parts and signal Endowments, either by Obligation, or out of Fear or Interest, he might be able in time openly to withstand and slight our Will and Pleasure in all things that should no be confor∣mable to his; to sow War and Troubles unpunish'd in the Kingdom, according to his own Interests and
Humours; to make use of all opportunities to ag∣gandize his Fortune. And lastly, to take things , that he might be able during our Minority, to reduce us to a Condition, that when we came of Age, we ould have no more then the Name and Shadow of a King, while in reality he had all the Power and Authority in his own hands. This, in truth, is the most fvourable Interpretation we can make of his Conduct, especially since the Command of our Ar∣s wih which we have entrusted him, has furnish'd hi with opportunities to acquire a great Reputati∣on, and a vast number of Adherents; and moreover ce he finds himself in the possession of so many con∣siderable Settlements, which we have bestow'd upon him one upon another, to oblige him out of Grati∣tde, to have no other thoughts but those of doing  good service. But so far was he from that acknow∣ledgment which we promis'd to our selves, that then i was that he began to pull off his Vizor, and to display the Grandeur of his Credit, to the end that no body should apply themselves to any other but himsel to obtain our Favours, or avoid the Punish∣ent of their Crimes. Then it was, that his con∣l'd Artifices to get all the Officers of our Armies a his Devotion, especially the Foreigners in our Ser∣ice (of which he took a particular care) were chang'd into open Contrivances to gain 'em, and nder 'em dependers upon himself: Then it was that e made i evidently appear, that the Good of our Serice was never his aim in all his Military Perfor∣mances, in regard that in the most pressing Exigen∣cis that ever our Armies were plung'd in, for want of a Chieftan of his Quality and Authority to recti∣fie the Miscarriages and Disorders which our late Troubles had introduc'd, he still avoided the Com∣mnd of our Armies, which formerly he coveed and su'd for with so much earnestness, to the end e might apply himself wholly to the Court, and to his
Cabals, believing the proper time was come to reap the Fruits which he had propos'd to himself, when all the Campaigns were ventur'd upon a general Bat∣tel, upon this Maxim, often applauded by himself, That the winning a Battel augmented his Reputati∣on, and gave him new plausible Pretences to exact farther Rewards. But that if he lost it, and that our Affairs thereby should happen to tumble into Disorder, he sould be the more valu'd for the need there would be of him. Then it was that he be∣came liberal of his Caresses beyond his usual strain, and that he made continual Searches among all the Governors of Towns; and all those who had any Em∣ployments of Consequence, or that were assur'd of 'em by survivance or any other means to attain 'em; That he engaged himself to importune us for the In∣terests of all indifferently, without considering whe∣ther they were prejudicial to the State or no: That he cherish'd all Malecontents: That he flatter'd their Complaints, and promis'd to assist 'em: That he en∣deavour'd to debauch all those who out of Gratitude or Affection adher'd to us and their Duty; lessening the value of our Favours, by persuading 'em, that for the future they were to hope for no more but by his means: Then it was that he exacted from those that offer'd him their Service, an Oath of Fidelity to be faithful to him against all men, without exception of Person or Quality, and that he openly persecuted after various manners, all those that would not enter into his Dependancy upon him: Then it was that all persons who surrender'd themselves to his will, had Merit and Qualities to prefr 'em before any other Competitors; that they who stuck to their Allegiance without any other aim then to do us good service, were always Cowards, and people of no worth; that on the other side they became in an instant, great Personags, worthy of all manner of Employments and Rewards, so soon as they devoted themselves to
his Interests; which was one sure way to ascend from  to Wor, from Inability to Accomplish∣ment. Then it was that he us'd innumerable Artifi∣  decoy all those that had Employments in our , or in the Guards of our Person; that he enly protected all Delinquents, provided they had recourse to Him, tho' they were of contrary Interests fore; That his House was a Notorious Sanctuary for all sorts of Criminals. Then it was that he be∣gan to demand all Vacancies of what Nature soever; that upon all occasions, as well petty as considera∣ble, he took the Market into his own hands, and threaten'd to quit all things, to set up for himself, and put himself at the Head of all those that would  against us. Lastly, then it was, that to shew his Power and his Stedfastness toward those that ell in with his Interests, he was not content with obtain∣ing Favours, but would have the World believe that he wreted 'em out of our hands by Violence. Wit∣ness the Government of Pont-de l' Arthe, which he would have carry'd by a strong hand, and at a day prefix'd, threatning if it were not done, that he would kindle a new Flame in the Kingdom; but in regard he knew full well that the demand which he made of this Place was highly offensive, and general∣ly disapprov'd by all People, he presently gave on that he had not been so eager after the Business, but be∣cause he ad engag'd his word to the Duke of Lon∣gville to procure it for him; declaring moreover, that he must never think to justifie himself, if after so many Benefits of all sorts heap'd upon him, and so many vast Revenues and Offices settl'd upon him, that never had any Prince in France since the begin∣ning of the Monarchy, he ever pretended to beg any thing more either for himself, or for any, of his Friends after a Grant of this Favour. Upon this we were induc'd in that Conjuncture to satisfie his Im∣petuosity, notwithstanding his manner of Behaviour,
to the end we might leave him no pretence of raising disturbance. But though the Accommo∣dation of this Mater has pass'd through the hands of our Dear Unckle the Duke of Oriance, who would needs be Mediator for the preservation of the publick Tranquility, he found the next day that he had made little or no progress, and that he was not the same Man, who the Evening before had testify'd such an entire satisfaction in the Umpirage of our said Dear Unckle, and given his Promise of submission. For the next day he re-assum'd his or∣mer coldness, and shew'd an inclination to do worse, on purpose to extort from us some new Advantages: forgetting the Declaration which he had solemnly re∣new'd, never to claim any thing more, after the Grant of ont de L' Arche. At length, the Queen wearied with so many Relapses, and desirous once for all; if it were possible, to tear up the Root of all Misunder∣standing; order'd him to be roundly press'd to explain himself sincerely and truly what he desir'd, to live quietly, and within the bounds of his duty. Upon which having declar'd, That he was jealous of some Alliances (to which nevertheless, when they were first mention'd to him, he had not only given his Consent, but had advis'd 'em himself for six months together, as believing 'em very advantageous) and having besides testify'd his desire, that the Queen would promise him a sincere and entire affection; as also to have a respect for such Persons as he should recommend to her upon all occasions; and lastly, to impart to him generally her Resolutions upon all Ma∣ters whatsoever; The Queen was so gracious, in the first place, that she might leave him no pretence of diaste or mistrust, as to promise him, that she would conclude no Alliance but by concert with him. And as to the other Points, she engag'd so much the more freely, because she did not remember that she had fail'd n either, but thought she had rather enclin'd
, then omission. But by his proceedings it was soon fter known to what end he had exacted  of unnecessary Promises and that his pur∣p in it was only to have a new pretence to demand more boldly, and execute with more haughtiness and prie whatever should come into his mind, that might be serviceable to his design of making himself  Master of the Forces of the Kingdom. In short, about four days after that, his manner of re∣ying the sincere Affection which the Queen had promis'd him, with all the Solemnities and Securities  deire, was not barely to receive into his Protection all those that demanded it against her, but to offer it himself to several Persons who had incurr'd  displeasure, either a long time before, or by new Oences lately committed. Our Cousin Marshal Scom∣rg son after was in danger of of his life. Presently  h Accident a Council was held in the House  said Prince, the result of which was to demand,  obtain, whatever it cost 'em, the Government of Metz, and Pais Messin, for the Prince of Coi, who was then in treaty also for the Bishoprick of . The Queen, our thrice honour'd Lady and Mother is forc'd, by the idle Conduct of such an Extravagant, to drive him out of her presence; the Pnce openly undertakes to protect him, hinders him fro retiing, comes himself to the Queen to constrain her  him again, and out of an unsufferable want of Rspect, which no true Frenchman can hear with∣out an extraordinary Indignation, he boldly threaten'd to cive the Madman into his House, and bring  every day into the Queen's ht; and had he  prudence been put in hopes, that time would  the Affair; or had he not been afraid  injure some other greater Pretensions which he  at that time, we had been in danger of see∣ing ou thrice honour'd Lady and Mother reduc'd ei∣th to suffer this Affront at his hands, or to have had
recourse to he utmost Extremities in her own defence They who understand not his different Partialities, so prejudicial to the good of the Ste, and our Srvice, may observe 'em in the last Commotions in Provence and Guyen, where in two Affairs of the same nature,  would needs in the one absolutely advance the Autho∣rity of the Governour to the Oppression of the Parlia∣ment and in the other act quite the contrary, with∣out any other reason for acting so oppositely, bt because one of the Governours was his Kinsman, and for that he had no kindness or the other. To the end that by such Examples of his Authority that made such a clatte in the World, every body coming to understand the penalty of his Aversion, and the va∣lue of his Potection, all People might observe that there was no other friendship or dependecy but his to be sought, and give themselves wholly up to him. What other Patience but tha of the Queen's could have endur'd to hear the said Prince, in a Council held in Our Presence, threaten to have the Deputies of Provence bastinado'd even to the breaking of their Bones, because they had presum'd to complain in behalf of their Body, of the ill usage they had re∣ceiv'd from our Cousin the Count d' Allais, contrary to the Conditions of the Pacification granted by Us to that Province. What way to suffer any longer the Violence with which he began to stifle the Liberty of Our Councils, by his impetuous manner of acting to∣ward the Ministers who have the honor to be Members of our Council, of which there was hardly one who was more exempt then another from private Threats and publick Affronts even in Our Presence, when their Consciences and their Duty would not suffer 'em to approve such Counsels as were not conformable to the said Prince's humour? Nor was his moderation more in the Governments wherewith We had entru∣sted him. 'Twas not enough that all the Money which so large a Province as Burgundy, furnish'd with
and affection toward or Treasury  sllow'd up by him and his; unles he had  a Power which made all prive persons  under his Oppreson; of which several have  make private Complaints, and laid be∣f  that nothing more remain'd for him to do,  to ke pon him the Title of Duke to advance  to be Sovereign of the Province. Nor was  Provice of Champagne more ourably us'd by ; all the Towns and Villages, and mos  of the Cties, having been so expo'd to the plun∣drin of the Soldiers that bore his Na; or to the  of thos that had wound themselves into hi favo to obtain didgments, that several have been cstrain'd to qu their Habitations, and retire into the Countries round about adjoining. With what wods  we se forth the Affair of Hre; and the  ways which he made use of to make himself  of that Place, one of the most Impoant in the Kngdom for the sitation of it, and without con∣trdti the best for the strength of it? After he  use of several Artifice to seduce the Youth  Cousin the Duke of Richli, on purpose to  him mary clndestinly a Woman, who for m∣ spects is ntirely at his devotion, not contented  ensibly offended us, by promoting, together with the Prince of Conti, and the Dutchess of Lnge∣vll hi Sister, the Match of a Duke and Peer, pre∣f'd  one of the Principal Offices of State, with∣o  Knowledge and Permission, and authorising  presence a Contract prohibited by the Laws o he Kingdom, as if it had not been enough by this uwful means to have made himself master of the pson of a Young Man, he caus'd him to depart up∣on his Wedding-night, gave him for his Counsellor and Conductor the person of all his Creatures that ha  employ'd to debaush him, and made him throw mself with all speed into Hare, to the end
he might make himself Master of that Place, which being seated at the Mouth of the Seine, might afford him the means to master Rouen and Paris, and keep under his subjection all the Trade of those two Cities; enable him to admit Foreign Assistance, and introduce their Forces into the Kingdom, whenever for his parti∣cular Ends he had a desire to trouble the States. And for that he judg'd it convenient at the same time that there should be a good number of Couriers dispatch'd toward the said Duke of Richlieu, to let him under∣stand Our Interest and his own at that Conjuncture, he dispatch'd several at the same instant to sop others upon the Road; thereby violating to the highest de∣gree imaginable the Respect, Fidelity and Obedience which he owes us. After which, more desperately daring, the Queen having sent her self a Person ex∣presly to carry her Orders to St. Maure, the Gover∣nor of Hare, upon an Accident of so high Conse∣quence, and to let him understand how much he was oblig'd to preserve the Place without suffering any change; the Prince was no sooner advertis'd of it, but he dispatch'd away another Courier, and com∣manded, that if any person should come thither with Orders from the Queen, they should throw him into the Sea, with a stone about his neck; and this with so much presumption, so much scorn of Our Autho∣rity, that he is the first who could ever boast of i. Lastly, that he might wholly by divers ways deprive us of the disposal of that Place, he sent away in all haste the Lady her self, who had so lately been beholding to him for her Match; furnish'd her with Money to enable her more and more to gain upon the Affection of the Young Duke, and conveys by other means still more Money for the payment of the Garison, thereby to gain the good-will of the Officers and Sol∣diers. And that he might have moreover other Peo∣ple more at his devotion, and well known to him, he order'd the Lady to be guarded by a good number
, who put themselves into the Place; giving  tha there was a Design laid to seize her upon the . So many Attempts upon the Royal Power, of hich this last alone of Havre deserves a most ri∣g punishment, has not left us any reason to ubt of the pernicious Designs of Our said Cousin,  then of his boldness to put 'em in execution,  we not in time apply'd a Remedy proportionable to he violence of the Distemper. However, To the d you may be likewise inform'd of the new ways whch  study'd to push on his Design, and of the wor which he had cut out for us, and which we have prevented by his detention, we shall tell you  was under deep Consultation in the last place. He reted with the Ambassador of Mantua for the purchase of the Town and Principality of , not only without Our Leave, but cary also to what we had expresly always refus'd him to meddle with. And because we had warily  some difficulties about the Price, the Sieur  clar'd a little while since to the said Embassa∣do. Th his Master would within a few days send away a Person expresly to Mantua, to conclude the usine with the Duke himself. Upon some obstruct∣ that ose about the Enjoyment of Clermon and the dmesnes adjoining (tho easie to have been smned, as appears since) he was already given  understand, that if he were disturb'd in his posssion there, 'twas but just that Sedan should be given hm, and all the Demesnes belonging to it, which we had given our Cousin the Duke of Bouilon uon the payment of many Millions; upon which, some of his Creatures presently set a foot a Negotia∣tion with the Siur d' Aiguebere for the purchase of the Goenment of Mount Olympus, which he made ac∣count to pay with his own Mony, that so the Govern∣ might fall in the hands of some of his own Freinds, to the end there might be no place in Br∣gundy
but what should he at his Command except Calns. He pressed us to purchase of the Sieure d' Pressis Bezanson at our own charges the Governmen of the City ad Citadel of the City of Autune for one of his Creatures. He had also redoubl'd his ex∣traordinary diligence but a little before to marry the Marquiss de la Moussaye with the Daughter of the Sieur d' Erlack, Governour of Brissa, to the end he might have that important Place also at his Devotion; although as well in that, as in all other things, we have reason to commend the Conduct and Fidelity of the said Sieur d' Erlack. We have been also inform'd from other parts, that he set a foot some other matches, by that means to bring under his devotion the Principal Officers of the Kingdom, and the great∣est number of the most considerable strong Holds. He had sent for up to Court, notwithstanding all his Infirmities, our Cousin the Marshal of Breze to the end they might joyn together to demand the Employ∣ment of Chief and Superintendent of Metz; to the which, though neither the one not the other could have the least imaginary shadow of any Claim, yet the said Prince had been already twice paid, and the said Marshal had been gratify'd upon that considerati∣on, after his Son's death with 30000 Livres chargd upon the Rights of Ancorage, which are the clearest and most ready Mony belonging to that Employment. And moreover, though the Marshal had some Months before, got by our favour and permission a hunder'd and ten thousand Crowns for his Resignation of the Government of Anjou, and ha all the securities ima∣ginable had been made over, that the said Sum should after his death fall to the Duke of Enguien the said Prince and Marshal had a design to press us farther to confer the survivorship of the Government of Saumur to the said Duke of Enguien. Which being granted we know that the said Prince to make himself more considerable in his Governments and Employments,
hd resolv'd to ply us with his utmost importunites, at he might obtain for his Son, not above Six years of Age, all in general that we had bestow'd at seve∣  upon his Father and him. Though we had not been mov'd with the prejudices and dangers abovementon'd, to which we might also add many , which for certain Considerations and Circum∣stnces, 'tis not convenient to make publick; it so happen'd that all our most faithfl Servants that we then had, both in our Council and without, laid be∣fore us, that a longer Patience would render the Ma∣lady uncurable, and that the only way to preserve our State and our Person, was to Arest our said Cousins who holding every day Clandestin Councils in their Houses for the Establishment of that Power which they intended to set up aganst ours, were not asham'd to reckon among other means, besides the great Offi∣ces and Governments which they had in their hands that they were already Masters of all the great Rivers of the Kingdom by reason of the several strong Holds which they have in the Kingdom, or which they thought they had at their devotion in the Kingdom, upon the Rivers Seine, Meuse, Saonne, Rosne, Le, Garonne and Dordogne. In a word, that if possible they might renew the Example of those An∣cien Potentates, who from private Persons, have advanc'd themselves to Sovereign Dignity and to the end the Authority which the said Prince had already Invaded, might be still more conspicuously enlarg'd and supported by a Lawful Power deriv'd from our selves; he vigorously contended to have the Costable's Sword bestow'd upon him, tho' that  be suppress'd; which being join'd to the Bat∣ton of Grand Maste, and the Office of High Admi∣ral, which he would never have surceas'd to demand ha he been Created Constable; by the one he had  all ou Houshold and our Domestick Servants un∣dr his Power by the other the General Command of
all our Foes in the Kingdom; and by the thi the Absolute Dominion over the Sea and Sea-coas And whe we laid beore him, that as for the Co∣sable's Sword, our most Dear Unkle the Duke of O∣leans would have just reason to be offended, in gard of his being our Lieutenant General in all  Armies and Provinces, he requir'd of us to dispatch the Patents forthwith, without our Unkle's Know∣ledge, and to keep 'em private till the Duke could be wrought to agree to 'em, or rather till the De∣signs which he was mediating gave him opportuni∣ty to maintain his Demands by open Force, whatever disorder might happen. In the mean time the bet∣ter to enable himself to force us in every thing, at the same time that he made use of these extraordina∣ry Importunities, he most vehemently demanded un∣der various pretences, that the Regiments which hear his Name, or which depend upon him, and are anow to make a Body of Army, might have leave to advance toward these Quarters; never considering that the greatest part are employ'd in our Service, and for the defence of the Realm, in parts far remote. A Circumstance which we look upon to be worthy of great Consideration, as also that of the Fortificati∣ons of Senay and Clermont, where Men were conti∣nually at wok at his Charges; besides the Price a∣greed upon about a month since, to Fortifie Bellegard for Two Hundred Thousand Franks. Since it can never be presum'd, that unless he had Thoughts and Designs altogether Extraordinary, he would ever Expend his own Treaure to Fortifie Places that are already in a good ondition of themselves, and not threaten'd by any Enemy. We have out of a high respect dissembl'd our Resentments to that degree, that all people will be soon convinc'd that we have run too great a venture through our Patience. 'Tis true, we were in hopes that that same Prudence which our Cousin might acquire by Age, would cool
this viont Hear; that so many Fa∣ Example which we have heap'd upon  have kept him, out of Gratitude, within  of his Duty. But quite the contrary,  reduc'd to that Extremity, either to  him all his Demands (and then we should  soon despoil'd our selves) o to re∣im every thing (and then we should have  him with his Arms in his Hand against us)  moreover that the Profusion of our Favours  no other end but only to encourage him to  every day; that a longer forbear∣ prove the Infallible Loss of the Realm,  means were not found to stop the violent  which had no more Mounds to withstand  prevent a Total Inundation; And having  fo some time, that the Intelligence which we  from all parts agrees in this, that the true  o the Spaniard's Aversion from Peace proceeds  this, that they are willing first to see whither the Prince of Conde's Designs and Actions tend; who, say they, making every day such Progresses as  does toward getting into his Hands the Principal  Holds of the Realm certainly this must in a  time either produce a Civil VVar in the King∣dom, or cause a Renversement of that Monarchy;  hought it would be a defect of our Duty to God, who has entrusted us with the Government of  gdom; to our selves, and the Welfare and  of our Subjects, if we did not without delay  a remedy to the Mischief become so pressing as  nelected might give a Fatal Blow to the Real Tefore we resolv'd by Advice of the Queen Re∣, our thrice Honour'd Lady and Mother, to se∣ the Person of our said Cousin the Prince of Con∣, as also of our Cousin the Prince of Conti, his Bro∣e' Conederate in all his Designs, and who, since  to Paris, has been continually concurring
and levelling with his Brother at all and the same Ends. As for the Duke of Longueville, we promis'd our selves, that the great number of Favours which we have Accumulated upon him, either in Places, or in Honours, or in Estates, and which we have muh Augmented since our last Declarations of Peace, would have oblig'd him according to his Pro∣mises and his Duty, to procure with all his might, the Tranquility of the Province which we had en∣trusted to his Care, and the Good of our Service in the rest of the Realm. But we have observ'd for some time, that he has omitted nothing of Extra∣ordinary or Unjust, to acquire a formidable Reputa∣tion in his Province. That he is not satisfied with possessing divers considerable Fortresses, one of which was wrested out of our Hands with utmost Violence, as has been apparent to every Body; nor with see∣ing all the rest, as well as the Principal Employments of the Province, in the Hands of his Creatures; that he is not contented with the Addition of Bailly of Rouen and Caen to the Employment of Governour in Chief, apparently, that he may have a Legal pretence to disturb the Function of our Ordinary Judges, and by that means to usurp a new Authority as well in the Civil as Military Power. Lastly, that he is not contented to cause his Emissaries to make it their Business to cor∣rupt the Minds of our Faithful Subjects, and make all those who have any Affection for our Service depen∣dent upon himself; not scrup'ling to threaten 'em with utter Ruine, if they refus'd any longer to Espouse his Ambitious Passions; unless he were also a Partaker in the Counsels and principal Designs of our Cousins, the Princes of Conde and Conti; unless he were also every day present at their Deliberations and Debates in their own Houses for the Establishment and Aug∣mentation of their Common Grandeur, and of a Power justly to be suspected by that Authority which God has given us over this Kingdom. Besides that
is Creatures have already been heard insolently to vunt in his House, that tho the last year he could no bring abou the Business alone, they had at last all ogeher done the Work. In consequence of which we are to call him henceforward Duke of Normandy, the being nothing near so much work for him to do o ttain the Soveraignty of the Province, as he  ndergone to arrive at that excess of Power and Srgth which he had in the Province. Seeing in∣deed that he began to Exercise several Acts of that etended Soveraignty, by a formal Refusal of Obe∣diece to our Orders, witness his denial not many days ince,  admit into Pont de l'Arche some Troops of  d'Armes, and Light Horse of our Guard, tho  him in possession of the said Place but a few days before; and tho he had an express Order  Hand to Quarter 'em there. Upon so ma∣ny Considerations we have been constrain'd to secure the Person of our said Cousin the Duke of Longueville. In e mean time, we are willing to let you under∣and that all these Dangers wherewith our Kingdom was threaten'd, were so great and so inforcing, that we may almost be said to have been wanting in the Duty of a Good King, for delaying till now the Re∣medies necessary to prevent 'em. Nevertheless our ove of Iustice, and our Fears lest people should im∣pte to us a Desire to stop the Course of it for other de, has made us keep all things in suspence, tho with a great deal of danger, to give you leisure to fi∣ the Impeachment which you have begun by ou Order, and at the Request of our Attorney Ge∣ral against those who shall be found guilty of the Sedition rais'd the 11th. of December last, or of the Attempt upon the Person of the said Prince, which it is our pleasure shall be continu'd by you without a∣ny Inrruption according to the Rigour of our Laws. Bu understanding that the said Prince had sent for eral Gentlemen, his Retainers, Officers of his
Troops, and that his greatest Confidents were pri∣vately inform'd that he was brooding some great De∣sign, which could not but be to the prejudice of our Authority, and the Tranquility of our Subjects, since he never acquainted us with it; having also receiv'd certain Intelligence, that he was preparing to retire into his Government, in great haste, and without taking his leave, so soon as he should perceive that things were not carry'd to his liking among you, to he Ed he might with more security hatch those Re∣solutions which had been so long forming in his Thoughts; and that in Confederacy with him, the Prince of Conti and Longueville were to repair also at the same time into their Governments; it was no longer in our power to be remiss; and we have been forc'd for the peace of our Realm, to set aside all other Considerations, and to secure their Persons without any more delay. And because that their Accomplices, who labour in search of Opportunities to Embroil the Publick, may endeavour to put an ill Interpreta∣tion upon so just a Resolution, and so necessary for the Tranquility and Welfare of our Kingdom, which our Duty obliges us to prefer before all other things, we declare that we have no intention to do any thing contrary to our Declaration of the 21st. of October 1648. nor against those of March 1649. and others which we have since publish'd, since the Pacification of the Late Troubles in our Good City of Paris, Nor∣mandy, Provene and Guyenne, which it is our Will and Pleasure shall remain in their full Force and Ver∣tue in all the particulars which they contain. Given at Paris, Jan. 19. 1650. A Letter of a Private Person to the Parliament of Paris in Answer to the King's. THE Reason why God is never deceiv'd in his Judgments, and that he never protects Injustice,
is because he is Exempt from Passions, and for that he has an Understanding which pierces to the bottom of hearts, and discerns the Innocent from the Guilty. The on of these Qualities secures him from Error; and the other is the reason that he never acts bu by a motive of Justice. Men are subject both to th one, and the other of these Defects, conary to those Ex∣cellent Perfections, either for want of understanding, or because their Passions are too predominant. So that the sometimes believe the Sun to be dark, because their Eyes are not strong enough to pierce through the Cloud that hides it. That is to say, Somtimes the condemn the most perfect Vertue, because thy are not able to discern it through the false Appear∣ances of Crimes that are imputed to it. We have ob∣serv'd, That hitherto the Judgments of this August Ambly ha been as far remote from these Vices, as the ailty of man will permit. And w hae had rea∣son to believe, by recent Examples, that there are not any dark overcastings of Human Artifice and unning which you are not able to display, nor any Considera∣tio so strong among ye, as that of Justice; you hae given us Testimonies, that the Interests of Great Men are but feeble Arms to vanquish it; that it is proof against all the Snares that can be laid to surprize it; and that only Innocence can be justify'd before y as only Guilt can draw upon it self the Sentences of your Condemnation. Upon this Fon∣ion it is that I have establish'd my hopes of justi∣fying the three Princes whose defence I have under∣tak'n. I know well it would be greatly to their advantage, that you were capable of the first impres∣sions that the suspicion of a Crime, or the Idea of Vertue produce in the Soul of man. I know it were to be wish'd on the Princes behalf, that you would not give your Judgments, till after you had consider'd all the Actions of their Lives. For in short Who is the among ye, that can perswade himself that Mon∣sieur
the Prince ever had any design to ruine the State, if you will but take the pains to consider how oft he has expos'd his Life to preserve it; and how many Victories he has won in order to that end? And who is there that can endure that the least suspicion of a Crime should intermix with so much Glory? But I am willing to despoil 'em of these Advantages, I am willing to deprive 'em of these Foreign Lights, to make appear the luste of their Innocency. I do not desire you should recal to mind the many Famous Victories which one of these Princes has obtain'; or that you should set before your eyes the dangers to which he has expos'd his Person for the safety of the Realm. Forget if it be possible, these Glorious Actions; never mind that it is a Prince who is ac∣cus'd, that not only has preserv'd the Kingdom, but extended the Limits of it. Be mindful only of Ju∣stice; establish your Judgment upon the things them∣selvs, and not upon the Persons; and then, I hope that without considering it is a Prince who is ac∣cus'd, you will soon understand, that is an Innocent Person, that is to be made guilty for the Interest of some particular men. And indeed if you would that we should consider the Crimes that are imputed to him, we shall find that all these Crimes have no ex∣istency, but in the Fancy of those who have invented 'em in order to his ruin. Are not his Victories the greatest part of this Malicious Accusation? He ventur'd, say they, every Summer, a General Battel upon this Maxim, which he has often declar'd, That by gain∣ing the Victory, he should augment his Reputation, and have new plausible pretences for the procuring him new Rewards; and if he lost it, and that there∣by our Affairs should happen to fall into confusion, he should be the more valu'd through the need which they would have of him. A pernicious way of reason∣ing; of which if men should make use, the noblest Actions would be subject to dangerous Interpretati∣ons.
What security is there for brave Men, if such ischievous Comments should be endur'd. There is no Illustrious Person that shall not be ren∣der'd a Guilty Person; there is no Noble Action that all not be misconster'd into a Crime. How long is it that men have been the proper Judges of Intentions? That Secret, God alone has reserv'd to himself; and they who accuse the Prince to have acted upon such wicked Maxims, ought to know that Kings cannot punish an Action, how wicked soever the motive were that inclin'd the person to do it, when it becomes profitable to the State, and if it be not contrary to the Law. I will grant, that desire of Honour caus'd the Prince to hazard so many Battels: I grant that he sought every year new Pretences for new Rewards; Who ever heard that the desire of Honour which in∣dues a Prince to save a Kingdom was ever a Crime of State? They who enact Human Laws, command the observance of 'em; but they never prescribe the motives of it. 'Tis only the Body, and the exterior Action which is under the Jurisdiction of Kings. The Soul, that is to say, the Motives, cannot be command∣ed, but only by him that penetrates the bottom of Consciences; for what Mortal can be the Judges of 'em  But suppose it were a Crime of State to act by Motives of Interest, which are said to be the Primum Mbile's of all this Prince's Actions, upon what proofs cn they ground this Accusation? He went about, say they to make himself the more considerable by the lo of a Battel. This is an extraordinary way for a ma that pretends to be so covetous of Glory; and who very well knew on the other side, that the same sfortune had ruin'd the Reputation of several of our Generals at the Court, who preserv'd themselves in good Credit till the Disaster befell 'em. But because he could never know whether the loss of a Battel could be advantageous, let us see what marks he gave, that he never sought after Victory, but only that
he might have new Pretences for new Rewards When did he ever send to Court, that he would not quit the Army, unless they sent a Pattent for such Places as were become void by the death of the In∣cumbents, to some one of his Friends? When did he oblige the Queen to confer the Government of such Places, as the taking of which had cost him so much hardship, and sometimes the loss of his Blood, to any other Persons then those which she made choice of? Rather quite the contrary, after the taking of Dnkirk at the end of the Campaign, tho a Place of the greatest importance in Flanders, he suffer'd it to be dispos'd of by Cardinal Mazarine to one of his Creatures, who by that means enjoy'd the fruit of all his Watching, and Labour. They say, that they who adher'd to the Person of the Prince, became in a little time Great Personages; and so soon as Persons devoted them∣selves to his Interests, they were sure of being preferr'd to Great Employments, tho otherwise Persons of no desert. I might answer, That 'twas a difficult thing to follow this Prince without hazarding his Life for the King's Service, and without meriting noble Employ∣ments. But upon what foundation can they ground it, that this is the only way to attain to Preferment and Dignity, since we see several that have been long fix'd to his Person, who nevertheless have made no pro∣gresses in their Fortune; whereas, there is no other assured means to pass from Feneancy to Merit, from Inability to Sufficiency, then to belong to Cardinal Mazarine. Which is clearly to be seen in the Persons of de la Fare, de L' Estrade, de Pall, and several others, who enjoy the fairest Governments of France, for ha∣ving done such signal Services to the Government, as having handed the Ruling Minister sometimes from his own Apartment to the Queen's, or sometimes to his Coach. But, my Lords, here is an Accusation that will ad∣mit of no Reply, and which the most strenuous Elo∣quence
would have much ado to justify. He oppos'd the Marriage of the Cardinal's Niece with the D. of  I must confess that this is an unheard of Cme, to hinder the Alliance of the House of Maza∣rine with that of Vendesme; to obstruct a Match so ne∣cessary to Fr, that no Employments could be too great for him that would accept it. In a word, Did we not see that the D. of Mercoeur had a right at that time to make those Demands, the very thoughts of which has render'd the Prince of Conde guilty? 'Tis pretended, that he desir'd the Office of High Steward, Lord High Admiral; which Demands were not only unjust, but criminal, to make a Prince of the Blood, who had won five or six Battels, and tak'n for∣ty strong Holds of great Importance; but the same Demand being made by a Prince that would marry the Cardinal's Niece, both the thought of it ceased to be criminal, and the Demands themselves were lookt upon as just: And it was judg'd, that the man who was able to perform such an Illustrious Action, had a right to demand the most important Places in the Kingdom. It has been often seen in corrupt Ages, that not only Vertue has been oft without reward, and Crimes have gone unpunish'd; but that the Disorder has been so great, that only they who were unworthy Employments were permitted to demand 'em without offence, and that Merit only serv'd to remove men from pretending to Elevated Employments. But this is what we never saw in our days, till during the Mini∣stry of Cardinal Mazarine; for now all men must re∣solve to disown true Worth, and renounce Desert, if he thinks to have any preferment; and he must be careful of pretending to Employments, for fear of be∣ing suspected for a State-offender. With what black and sooty Colours do they besmear the Protection which he gave to the Marriage of the Duke of Richlieu? And yet if you examin all the Circumstances, you will find, that there was not the
least shadow of a Crime in that Action, and that they would fain make that the Effect of a pernicious Design, which proceeded only from a real Friendship, which Madam De Longueville had for the Lady that had her Advantages by it. Persons that know the whole Sto∣ry of that Business, can certifie that the Match was not carry'd on by concert in the whole Family, as is pre∣tended, since the Prince of Conde was not acquainted with it, till it could no longer be conceal'd from him; and that the Duke of Longueville knew nothing of it, till the very instant that Madam de Longueville, who had undertaken the Business, was ready to depart for Try, to accomplish the Design which she had been long contriving for the advantage of Madam de Ponse, and not at all for her own Interest. All the Circumstances of the Marriage, that could occasion any mistrust at Court, proceeded only from the Distrusts of the Queen and Cardinal Mazarine, in reference to the Match. 'Tis true that the Prince advis'd the Duke of Richlieu to retire to Havre so soon as he was marri'd, but he gave him that Council only because he was well ac∣quainted with the jealous Humour of a Minister, who would not fail to draw mischievous Conjectures from a Design that was really innocent, but which might admit of different Interpretations. He rightly judg'd that Mazarine would make use of those Pretences, to wrest that Place from the Duke of Richlieu, and to gra∣tifie the Desire which he had a long time had, to make himself Master of that Place, there being no other way for him to do it. For, my Lords, if you will un∣derstand the real Crime that the Prince committed upon that occasion, was this; That the Prince having caus'd the Duke of Richlieu to marry Madam de Pone, he disappointed Cardinal Mazarine's Design for one of his Neices, who by that Alliance was in hopes to make sure of Havre to himself; a Place of great importance, and a proper place of refuge for him, if he should be forc'd to quit his Ministry.
Twill be no difficult thing for me to justifie his de∣sign to have been Constable; for besides that, he had been put upon it by the malice of Cardinal Mazarine, who had a desire o insinuate into his favour, by ffe∣ring him his Service to bring about that attempt, and by that means render him suspected to the Queen and the Duke of Orleans. What could make this Demand so Criminal a piece of Business? Was he not accom∣plish'd with all things necessary to authorize it? was not his Birth sufficiently illustrious? Had the Dignity been a Novelty in the Nation? Had it not been en∣joy'd by Iames of Bourbon, Charles of Bourbon, and Ihn of Bourbon? Had it not been also within this lit∣te while, in the House of Mntmorency, over the Head of his Father, and Great Great Grandfather? had not the Prince's Arm perform'd great Actions anow to bea that Sword? They pretend that the Demand was injurious to the Duke of Orleans, and that it could not consist with the Quality of Lieutenant-General of the Armies and Provinces, which was confer'd upon the Duke of Orleans; and yet have we not seen the Constable's Sword in the hands of Monsieur de Mont∣morency, at a time when the King of Navarre, the Fa∣ther of Henry IV. was Lieutenant General of the Ar∣mies and Provinces of France, and both perform their Duties at the same Seges of Bourges, Rouen, and other places against the Rebels? But not to trouble my self to justifie the whole Scrowl of the Prince's Accusations which are drawn from his Pretensions, 'tis sufficient to demonstrate that he did not desire these Employ∣ments to make an ill use of 'em, and that he had no design to enlarge his Power, to the prejudice of the Royal Authority, tho' he has given the Queen cause to have unjust Mistrusts of his Power. We cannot judge of his Designs but by his Actions, nor can we tell what he meditated as to the future, but by the Deeds which he perform'd. When did he make use of his Power to lessen the Queen's? have we seen the Provinces
where he had any Credit in Uproar and Tumult, like those of Guienne and Provence? when did he ever foment Divisions? If he had any Authority in the Army, did he not make use of it for the King's Service? So that if it were for this Princes Honour to have acquir'd so much Power in the Kingdom, it was very advantagi∣ous to the Queen, since he made no use of it, but in obedience to her and never concerning himself to make Laws, he only took care to observe 'em, when they were useful to the State. Kings cannot act them∣selves through the whole extent of their Dominions There is a necessity for 'em to put the Image of their Authority into the hands of those who have most me∣rit, and whom they see to be best affected toward the Government. What reason then had the Queen to reproach the Prince with the Favours she had done him, since she was oblig'd to bestow 'em upon so me persons, and no body could receive 'em with more ac∣knowledgment, or more to her Advantage? 'Tis no Crime to be powerful, but 'tis a Crime to employ that Power to the overturning of the State. Let 'em not then accuse the Prince of such great Crimes, be∣cause he had great Pretensions since that not having misemploy'd his Power, to this very moment, to the dsservice of this Monarchy, but rather to the establish∣ment of it, we have no reason to think that he inten∣ded to enlarge it on purpose to destroy it: besides that, the Queen her self had encourag'd him to aspire to the highest Employments; when desiring his pro∣tection for the Cardinal, whom a Decree of your Au∣gust Assembly menac'd with approaching Shipwrack, she assur'd him that she would put the Crown, the Kingdom, all things into his hands and that there was nothing too good, or too great for him, if he per∣form'd a Service so important to the Realm, as to save that Minister, and shelter him from the Thunder which you were ready to dart forth against him. There are credible Testimonies, who heard this Dis∣course
between the Queen, and the Prince of Conde, and who are able to justifie how submissively the Prince receivd her Promises of Reward, assuring the Queen that her Interests were so dear to him, that there was no need to encourage him by any other Motives, to  him to undertake the Protection of those who were so happy as to have hers. Has he not kept his Word? Did he not perform what he promis'd? has he not preserv'd this Minister maugre all France, and supported him almost against all the Provinces of the Kingdom? Nevertheless, after he had perform'd all the ignal Services which the Queen desir'd from his Courage, and from his Obedience, and for which she confess'd her self, that she had nothing in the Kingdom fi to gtifie him, she uses him like a Criminal. While she her elf enforces him to make his Demands, she ac∣cues him of Traiterous Pretensions: As if she had on∣ly gone about to kindle his Ambition by Promises, to he end she might have some Pretence to ruin him; striving to perswade those that are ignorant of Affairs, that he could not aspire to so many Employments, but by Instigations not to be justify'd, and in order to ex∣ecute some pernicious Deigns. Is it not from such a motive as this, that they would fain nfuse into him a desire of Sovereignty, to the end they may have an opportunity to punish his apparent ambition; and that they give out, his ambition has no limits, and that the interests of the Kingdom are not Mods strong enough to stop the impetuous motion of this torrent? tis true, that the Prince demanded leave of the Court to endeavour the Conquest of Franche Con∣e; but I beseech ye to examine with what circumstan∣ces; and what encourag'd him to make that demand which seems to be so Criminal. They were treating at Court with those of Nples, to cast off their Allegianc to the King of Spain, and the Siur de Fontenay Maeuil the Kings Embassador at Rome, had orders to ma∣nage that Affair. An Army was promis'd 'em, pro∣vided
they would acknowledge France, or receive one of the Princes of France for their King. They de∣manded either the King himself, or Monsieur his Bro∣ther, or the Duke of Orleance, or the Prince of Conde; upon which, the rest being past by, the offer was made to the last, The Prince who never neglected any thing when it was for the King's service, and en∣larging his Dominions, gladly accepted the Proposal; he openly oppos'd the desire they had to confer the Admiralty upon his Enemies, who by means of that Employment, out of  articular motive of revenge, might have obstructed the Execution of a design so important, and of so graet advantage to Aggrandize the Kingdom. Observe, I beseech ye, that in all this there was nothing done but by the approbation and impulse of the Court it self. Sometime after this, the Prince, without any other design then to extend the bounds of this Empire, in pursuance of an intention which had been made manifest to him, propos'd the Conquest of Franche Contè, as a thing of no less advan∣tage to the State, and wherein there was not much dif∣ficulty. He offer'd to raise an Army at his own charges, and as if he had foreseen the unjust pretensions which they might have of his Power, he promises to resign the Government of Burgundy and all the strong holds that are in that Province. His courage and his zeal for the King's Service causing him to prefer the Pains and Hardships to be undergone in the Conquest of a Country, before the Tranquility which he enjoy'd in the peaceable Possession of that Pro∣vince which had been given him for his Services, af∣ter the Death of the Prince his Father. Who could blame so generous a Design, so advantageous for the Kingdom, and so honourable for the Prince? There∣upon, the Proposal which he made in Council was joyfully embrac'd: They declar'd to him that it was a Proposal becoming his Courage; and at that time they call'd it a Heroic, which is now term'd an Ambi∣tious
Design. All those thoughts which he had con∣ceiv'd for the enlarging the Kingdom, were lookt upon hen wihout the least appearance of being conceiv'd or his particular Grandeur. So that 'tis no difficult thing to find many heads of an Accusation against him, since his mos noble Actions are his greatest Crimes; and that all his design to aggrandize the Kingdom by his Conquests, are so many false proofs of which his Enemies made use of to destroy him. Who is there but may observe their pernicious manner of Reason∣ing to calumniate the Prince upon several pieces of ad∣vice which he gave upon the different Commotions of Guiene and Provence? They tell ye, that in these two Affairs of the same nature, he went about in one place absolutely to uphold the Authority of the Governor, to the oppression of the Parliament; and that in the other he acted quite contrary, without any other rea∣son, but only that he had a kindness for one of the Governors, and hated the other. But they who set these things on foot, are either bad, or very malicious Politicians. For they say, these two Affairs were both of the same nature, because they were both Pro∣vinces that had taken up Arms against the Authority of the Parliament. But they are to understand that the least circumstance in such Affairs as these, quite alters the nature of the thing, and obliges those that debate upon the remedy of disorders, to vary their Counls, according to time and place, and the hu∣mour of the People they have to deal with: So that he who should take the same Counsel in one Affair, as he took on the other, would do like a Painter that should go about to draw one man's Face, from another man's Picture, because he had the same Parts. But are these sorts of Politicks to be attributed peculiarly to the Prince of Conde? Do not all Histories furnish us with examples of different Conducts, in causing Revolted People to lay down their Arms? Have we not seen some Princes make use of Mildness toward their Sub∣jects
to disarm em, and others to use violent means. We have also observ'd in Histories the same Princes employ different ways, according to the various hu∣mours of the Subjects which they have to govern. And it were in vain for Politicians to have found out the two ways of fear and gentleness to reduce a muti∣nous People, if the same Conduct were to be observ'd upon all occasions, and if both the one and the other were not to be made use of according to the different circumstances that offer themselves in the Disorders that are to be remedy'd. Why then should it be thought strange, that the Prince, after he had consented to make use of Force of Arms to abate the Power of the Parliament of Provence, and strike a terror in the Peo∣ple, should for Reasons, no less considerable, give quite contrary Counsel to remedy the Troubles of Bourdeaux. He thought at first, with those of the Council, that Force was the most sure way to Disarm the People, and that only Terror was the means to re∣duce 'em to their Duty. But having experimented the contrary in the Affair of Provence, was it not very proper to alter such a dangerous Method? Is it to be thought strange, that the Prince who was accus'd to be the Author of all the violences that were committed, should be tir'd out with so many Prosecutions? and that he should represent it to the Court, that the dis∣orders in Guyenne would be more easily appeas'd by ways of mildness and moderation? besides that, he clearly saw the design which Mazarin drave on to carry things with a violent hand, and he knew that his aim was to draw the Duke of Espernon into his Alli∣ance, and bring about the Marriage of one of his Neices, with Monsieur de Caudale. Is the Prince to be ac∣cus'd for having oppos'd such pernicious designs by the justice of his Councels, and for having made use of all his endeavours to stop the course of a revenge so costly to the State, and so contrary to the zeal which Subjects ought to have for the repose and tranquility
of the Kingdom? But my Lords, if Cardinal Mazarin had been well advis'd, he would for his own Interest have suppres this Crime of which the Prince is ac∣cus'd. For can we speak of the Insurrections in Gui∣, without believing him to be the cause of all those Disorders? Do we not well know that he has endeavour'd to ruine that part of the Kingdom, to gratify the revenge of the Duke of Espernon? And thence ought we not to infer, that he would make no scruple to overturn the whole Monarchy, for the satisfaction of his own particular Interest. For in short, if you would be inform'd in few words all the Crimes of Monsieur the Prince are to be reduc'd to this, That he hinder'd the Marriage of the Cardinal's Three Nieces. He openly oppos'd his design of Matching the Eldest to the Duke of Mercoeur, he engag'd, as they pretend, the Duke of Richlieu to marry Madam de Pons, for whom the Cardinal had design'd the other; and by the Peace of Bourdeaux, he disappointed the Alliance he would have made with the Duke of Espernon, which the Duke never promis'd him, but in case he could bring about his revenge. And thus we see likewise, that as soon as the Prince was arrested, the Three Nieces were fetch'd out of their Convent, the better to conceal his Designs; how they were brought back in Triumph to the Palace-Royal, and how one of the Matches was privately accom∣plish'd, the Cardinal not thinking it proper to pub∣lish his intentions, and to let all the world know, that he had not perswaded the Queen and the Duke of Orleans to cause the Prince to be arrested, but be∣cause he obstructed his Designs. Nevertheless, they would fain have it, that every thing which the Prince has done, tends to the Ruin of the Kingdom, and that he never had any other aims in the Counsels which he had given, but his own particular Grandeur. But my Lords, by one convincing Argument to overthrow all that they have alledg'd against him,
to make him appear Guilty, and his Imprisonment just, is it not true that they accuse him of nothing else but an irregular Ambition; and that all his par∣ticular actions which they charge upon him without any proof, are invented to no other design, then to convince People that he had no other intention then to set himself up for a Sovereign, and to Aggrandize his own, to the prejudice of the Royal Authority. But how easie a thing is it to demonstrate the contrary to all the world by recent Examples? We cannot judge of Passions but by outward Effects: Nor is there any but God alone who knows the motions which they produce in the Heart. Now when was it, that the Prince displai'd these marks of an ambition so irregu∣lar? Rather what apparent proofs has he not given of the contrary but very lately? Had he been possest with such a vehement desire of Sovereignty, would he not have declar'd for the Parisian Party? At what time he was proffer'd advantages enough to have tempted the most regular Person in the world? They cry out, he was capable of all Undertakings to Ag∣grandize himself, and that he would never mind the overturning of the State, so soon as he thought him∣self in a condition to establish his Grandeur upon the Ruin of it; and yet when every thing favour'd the pernicious Designs of which he is accus'd, when every thing contributed to satisfy that Ambition which was laid to his charge, when he is to declare himself head of a Party; and that the more to encourage him to it, they give him to understand that his Power shall be unlimited; he stands off, he refuses the Pro∣positions made him, and is so far from putting himself at the head of the Party that he undertakes the Ruine of it. Is this his having a desire of Grandeur deeply engrav'd in his heart, never to make use of the Op∣portunities when they present themselves? Is this the giving marks of an Ambitious Spirit capable of put∣ing all the Provinces into an uproar, to refuse the
Grandeur that is offer'd him, provided he will but consent to be declar'd head of a Party? Who was ever accus'd of passionately desiring a thing, who re∣fus'd it when 'twas proffer'd him? What more fa∣vourable Opportunity could the Prince have expected to display his Ambition? Had he been so violently possess'd with this Desire, the Court would not have been in a condition to have made use of this pretence to Arrest him; or had his Ambition over-sway'd his Zeal for the King's Service and the Queen's Interests, she would never have had an opporunity to have trea∣ted him with so much Cruelty. But this is not the first time that Ingratitude has been the Vice of the Court: And that great Services have been repaid with like Rewards when their Benefactors have gain'd too much Honour by their Noble Actions. Merit is a Crime in Princes under the Tyrannick Government of Ministers, who can never endure the Power of which they are Jealous: So that of necessity they must be reduc'd to live in a drowsie slothfulness per∣nicious to the State, or else resolve to fall into inevi∣able Dangers. These Ministers that strive to exalt themselves into Soveraigns and Gods as much as lyes in their power, never dart their Thunder but against the most Lofty Heads; so that there is no way to a∣void their Tyranny but by an humble Lowliness, which way has been always so odious to the Prince of Conde, that he rather chose to venture his Person by doing Important Services for the Kingdom, and by acquring Honour, then by Tricks of Pusillanimi∣ty to protect himself from the Injustice of those that now seek to Revenge themselves upon his Power. For my Lords, he is Guilty of no other Crime, but that a Polite Historian says one thing of Agricola which may be justly said of the Prince, that Agricola was in perpetual Danger, because he had acquir'd too much Honour, and for that his Power gave un∣just Suspicions to the Emperor Domitian, who could
not endure that a Subject should bear so Potent a Sway in the Empire. Is not this the Prince's Crime? Not that he has Attempted any thing against the State; not that he has done any thing contrary to the Duty which he owes to the King's Service, but they are afraid least such a Thought should enter the Mind of a Prince sufficiently powerful to put it in Execution when ever conceiv'd. Therefore to obviate these pre∣tended Disorders, to cure the Minds of people of these Imaginary Apprehensions, and which one would think he had destroy'd by all the Actions of his Life, he submits himself to the Loss of all his Employ∣ments, and to abandon all his Places, and to despoil himself of all his Crimes, by disrobing himself of all his Power. After all this my Lords, what reason can they have to detain this Prince in Prison? By what Motives either just, or so appearing? What Disorder can his Liberty procure to the State? O upon what Foundation can they ground their Appre∣hensions of his Power? I shall make no stop at so many other feeble Accu∣sations, of which some are so weak that they destroy themselves; such are those concerning the Fortifying of certain Places which they pretend were threaten'd by no Enemy, and yet lye upon the Frontiers, nor shall I trouble my self to make the Innocence of the Other Princes appear, in regard they are only accus'd of sharing Counels with the Prince of Conde; or if any be particularly laid to their Charge, they are so vain that they deserve no Answer. But my Lords, so far am I from defending 'em, that I shall desire to in∣form you of two Crimes which are not laid to their Charge, but which alone have render'd 'em guilty. The one is common to both Princes, and is no more then their having declar'd themselves Heads of the Parisian Party. Now would your Lordships know why this Crime was pas over in silence? they were afraid les that should make you return to your selves,
and bethink your selves, that being Embark'd in the same Party, since those Princes had not taken Arms but i your Defence, you would without question in∣cur the same Misfortune. In a word, ne're doubt but that e're it be long they will study the  Revenge, and that they had exercis'd it before now upon the whole Party, could they have done it with the same security. The Princes having lost the Action of the People, for being reconcil'd to the Cown; the other having all along preserv'd them∣sel in their Favour, for their hatred of Mza∣ri. The other Crime which they take notice of, con∣en th Person of the Duke of Longueville. It has bn no scret for a long tim, that the Cardinal has been sudying his Ruine, and that he had been very diligent to bring the Peace to perfection. I believe, my Lords, you very well know what pass'd at Mun∣ster, the Duke of Longueville us'd his utmost Endea∣vours to bring the Peace to a Conclusion, and the most to the Advantage of France that could be ex∣pected. I suppose also you are sufficiently in∣for'd of the Slights and Artifices that Mazarine made use of by the Means of one of his Creatures, to disappoint the Prince's Glorious Design. 'Tis e∣nough for me to tell you, that that was the Duke of Loville's Crime, and that the Prince had so wor∣ily Acquitted himself in that Negotiation, that it seem'd as if Heaven had reerv'd him to accomplish that Undertaking which he had so happily begun. I know also, that he openly declar'd that he might be∣gin that Negotiation again, and that he promis'd to himf to make it more succesful then it had been. Whi was enough to render him guilty with Maza∣r who is afraid of nothing more then the accom∣plishment of that Design; and therefore 'twas suffici∣en to make him resolve the Imprisonment of a Prince that dy'd his Ruine, because he labour'd so hard the
Welfare of the State, and the Peace of the Kingdom. But my Lords, I do not mind my justifying the Princes before persons who have not taken upon 'm as yet to be their Judges, and who ought already to have pro∣nounc'd the Sentence of their Liberty. Will you suf∣fer your selves to be reproach'd, that after you had design'd to preserve the publick Security in the persons of some few of the Rabble, who were illegally detain'd in Prison you should suffer it to be violated in the per∣sons of three Princes at the same time? If the Laws which ye have so long since establish'd, and which your selves have renew'd by a solemn Declaration, are unjust, why do you with so much eagerness desire the execution of 'em? If they are just, why do you not cause 'em to be exactly observ'd? For what reason should the Laws be less favourable to the Princes, then to the King's meaner Subjects? Are they excepted in the De∣claration, that no body shall be arrested, but they shall be immediately brought to their Trial? Who can re∣lie for the future upon your Decrees? Moreover, I be∣seech you consider, that this Affair concerns your selves. Do you believe that Cardinal Mazarine, so soon as opportunity offers, will be more favourable to several of yor Assembly, then to the Prince? Can you imagin that he will sooner forget the Decree which you made against him, then the particular Affronts which he pretends to have receiv'd from that Prince? Never believe his Violence will stop at the Imprisonment of the Princes, but assure your selves that it will reach your August Assembly, and make you sensible of it by the less'ning of your Authority, and by falling foul upon the Persons of some in particular. Should it so hap∣pen, as I make no doubt of it, if you do not apply necessary Remedies, and stifle not the Mischief in the Birth, what priviledge will you have to assemble? how can you without some sort of shame, do that for the freedom of some few persons of your Assembly, which you are unwilling to undertake for the Liberty
of three Princes, tho' their Imprisonment be one of the boldest Actions that ever were adventur'd? I be∣seech you to conider, that this is but one of the Cardi∣nal's Experiments, who was willing to begin with the most considerable persons in the Kingdom, to the end he may pretend to a kind of priviledge to use in the same manner all those whose Vertues have render'd 'em the Objects of his Revenge. They who have hither escap'd his Tyranny, are to thank their good Fortune, and not his favourable Intentions. So that the Duke of Beaufort, the Coadjutor, and all their Friends, may say what Caesar said to Ptolomy, who presented him with Pompey's Head, who fled for re∣fuge into his Kingdom, after the Battel of Pharsalia; Thanks to my Victory, they make to me those Presents which they would have made to Pompey had he been victorious. If the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutor had not preserv'd the Friendship of the People, who have hi∣therto shelter'd 'em from the Oppressions of that Mi∣nister, there is no question to be made, but that if he thought he could have done it with the same security in Paris, he had made the same sacrifice of their Liberty to the Prince, which he pretends they would have made of his. Let your August Assembly therefore be careful to preserve that Authority which has sav'd it hitherto from the Cardinal's Re∣venge; let 'em consider, that he will never forego his eager Desire to ruin it, and by consequence that it be∣hoves them to deprive him of the power to do it. The only way is, to prserve that Vigour which you have made manifest upon the last Emergencies, and not to release the least Tittle of that Strictness, which has been so much to your Advantage, and the abatement of which will be your utter Ruin. This is that, my Lords, which puts us in hopes that you will not fail to take into your cognizance the Princes Case, and decide a Question so important to the State. There is nothing but what ought to encourage you to this
Noble Resolution: The Interest of the Kingdom ought to induce you, not to be o long depriv'd of Persons so necessary for the support of it. The Honour of your August Assembly engages ye to it: The Laws which you have so lately renew'd, and safety of your own Persons, obliges ye to the same Resolution. I shall add to these things the Testimonies of these Princes, that they have no other Confidence but in you; and that if they could act for their Liberty, their Innocence would not permit 'em to have recourse to any other Ways then those of Justice. Could they have been permitted time to have spoken to their Friends, when their persons were secur'd, I make no question but that they would have said the same that Germanicus said to his, being ready to die the Death which was caus'd by Piso, the most implacable of his Enemies; If there are any among ye, who are concern'd for my Death, and who are desirous to give me other Marks of it, then some unprofitable Tears; there is room for complaining to the Se∣nate, and invoking the Vengeance of the Laws. 'Tis then in conformity to these Princes Intentions that I address my self to your August Assembly, to demand Justice, and to conjure ye to employ your utmost care to pro∣cure their Liberty. 'Tis the only means to strike a Terror into our Enemies, to destroy the hopes which they build upon the Disorders which this Violent At∣tempt is about to bring upon the Kingdom, and to restore Tranquility, Peace and Happiness to the whole Realm. The End of the First Tome.
MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK IV. THE Court was highly incens'd at the News of the Princes being remov'd to Marcoussy:The Court is incens'd at the Prin∣ces being remov'd to Marcoussy, and the Cardinal complains against the Codjutor. The Cardinal acuss'd the Coadjutor of Paris of having advis'd the Duke of Orleance to remove them to that Place, and hindred their being conducted to Havre de Grace, according to his Intention. He believ'd moreover that this Chief of the Faction of the Frondeurs, or Slingers, design'd to have the Princes wholly at his disposal, in order to draw great Ad∣vantages thereby. The Queen exclaim'd publickly against it; and the Arrival of a Trumpet from the Arch-Duke, with a Letter fill'd up with Propositi∣ons of Peace, having oblig'd Monsieur to send the Baron of Verdeonne to him, and afterwards upon his Answer Monsieur D' Avaux, the Cardinal com∣plain'd highly that the Coadjutor had propos'd a Peace, without his participation.
These two causes of Complaint were follow'd by a third, which appear'd no less unjust. Bour∣deaux defended it self vigorously; and the News that came from the Siege, spoke the Success of it so doubtful, that nothing seem'd more proper for the Reputation of the King's Arms than to save that City by a Treaty of Accommodation. There∣fore Monsieur sent for the King's Ministers, and de∣sir'd them to propose to the Parliament, in his Name, to send Deputies to Guienne, about the Treaty. Those Deputies were sent, but not well receiv'd: And others being sent again, the Cardinal gave it out, that the Coadjutor had hindred him by those Deputies from Chastising the Rebellion of the Bour∣delois, and that he frustrated all his Designs. The Coadjutor being inorm'd of these Com∣plaints, was neled to find his Conduct blam'd at Court, after having acted with so much sincerity; and therefore went to Madame de Chevreuse, who, as we have already noted, had contributed con∣siderably towards the Imprisonment of the Princes, and had ever since liv'd in a perfect Intelligence with the Cardinal. He made great Complaints in his turn,The Coad∣jutor's Com∣plaints. and told her, that he could no longer keep any Measures, and that he would look out for new Friends. Madame de Chevreuse endeavour'd to make him alter his Resolution, and to hinder him from breaking with the Court. She represented to him that he ought not to credit bare Reports, which perhaps were spread on purpose by the Princes Friends, in order to divide the Party which was against them; and that before he proceeded any further, it would be proper for him to acquaint the Cardinal with his Intentions, and to ask some Favours of him, thereby to discover the real In∣tentions of his Eminency. The Coadjutor opposd all this a long while, telling her among other things, that whatever fair Promises the Cardinal might
make to him, he would never resolve to procure him the Cardinals Cap, which he desir'd. In fine, he consented at last that Madame de Chevreuse should request the said Cap of the Cardinal. He consider'd that in case the Cardinal should grant her desire, he should only be oblig'd to her for it; and that if he should deny her, his Refusal would enable him to draw her off from the Cardinal's In∣terest. Madame de Chevreuse accordingly writ to the Cardinal,Madame de Chevreuse writes to the Cardi∣nal in fa∣vour of the Coadjutor. The Cardi∣nal's Answer. urging all the Reasons that should oblige him to procure a Cardinal's Cap for the Co∣adjutor. The Cardinal made an Answer, which indeed did not import a direct refusal, but yet contain'd nothing beyond bare Complements, and some Words which only afforded very distant hopes. During these Transactions, all things tended to∣wards an Accommodation in Guienne.Dispositions towards an Accommo∣dation in Guienne. The Court desir'd a Peace, by reason that they fear'd the E∣vent of the Siege of Bourdeaux, the Resistance of which was the more obstinate, because they ex∣pected Succours from Spain, and from the Marshal de La Force, who was upon the point of declaring himself. On the other hand, whereas the Parlia∣ment of Bourdeaux, being tir'd with the length and danger of the Siege, likewise wish'd for a Peace; the Court Cabals, and the Duke d Espernon us'd their utmost Endeavours to dispose the rest of the City to desire it also. To this end the Parliament sent Deputies to Bourg, where the Duke of Orleance's Deputies were arriv'd before to make Propositions of Peace. He desir'd the Princess of Conde, and the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la Rochefoucault like∣wise to send theirs. But whereas those Dukes de∣sign'd nothing but the Liberty of the Princes, and could not consent to a Peace without that Condi∣tion, they barely contented themselves with not opposing a thing, which it was not in their Power
to hinder; and so refus'd to send any body in their Name: They only desir'd the Deputies to be mind∣ful of their Security, and the Liberty of the Prin∣cess, and the Duke d' Enguien, as well as of all the others who had been engag'd in the Interest of the Princes, together with the re-establishment of every one. The Treaty of Bourg.The Deputies went to Bourg, and concluded a Peace, without communicating the Articles of it either to the Princess, or to the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la Rochefoucault. The Conditions of the Treaty were, 1. That the King should be receiv'd in Bourdeaux in the same manner as he us'd to be receiv'd in the other Cities of his Kingdom. 2ly. That the Forces which had defended the Town should march out of it, and might safely go to joyn Monsieur de Turenne's Army. 3ly. That all the Priviledges belonging to the City and Parlia∣ment should be maintain'd. 4ly. That A Cstle so called. Chateau Trompette should remain demolish'd. The Princess of Conde and the Duke d' Enguien were allow'd to go to Montrond, where the King woud keep a small Garrison for their Safety, which Garrison the Princess should chuse her self. The Duke de Bouillon retir'd to Turenne, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault to his Government of Poitou. The Princess, the Duke d' Enguien, together with the Dukes de Bouillon, and de la Rochefoucult depar∣ted at the same time from Bourdeaux for Contras. The Marshal de la Meilleraye, who was going to Bour∣deaux, met the Princess upon the Water, and pro∣pos'd to her to see the King and Queen, putting her in hopes that perhaps the King would grant to the Prayers and Tears of a Woman, what he had thought himself oblig'd to refuse when demanded by Force of Arms. In fine, notwithstanding this Princess's repugnancy to go to Court, the Dukes of Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault prevail'd with her
to follow the Duke de la Meillerays's Advice, to the end that no body might Reproach her with having omitted any thing for the Liberty of her Husband. The Dukes themselves in the sequel us'd their En∣deavours to the same end:The Dukes of Bouillon and de la Rochefou∣cault pro∣pose power∣ful Reasons to the Car∣dinal to en∣gage him to put the Princes at Liberty. They had great Con∣ferences with Cardinal Mazarin, in order to per∣swade him to put the Princes at Liberty. They told him, that the Princes would be so much the more oblig'd to him for it, in that they were sen∣sible that he could not be constrain'd to it by War: That it would be very Glorious for him to make all Europe sensible that it had been in his Power, to Ruine, and to Re-establish the Prince of Conde at pleasure: That the proceeding of the A Faction so called. Frondeurs, evidently shew'd that they intended to make themselves Masters of the Princes, in order to ruin them, to the end that they might afterwards ruin him the more easily: or else to put them at Liberty, thereby to engage them to joyn with them for the Queen's and his Ruin. That the War was at an end in Guienne, but that the desire of renewing it in the whole Kingdom would never end without the Princes being put at Liberty: That he ought to credit them the more, by reason that they made no scruple to tell him so while they were in his Power, and had no Security but his Word: That the Cabals were renewing on all parts in the Parliament of Paris, and in all the o∣ther Parliaments of the Kingdom to procure the Liberty of the Princes, and to  them out of his hands: That they declar'd to him that they would favour whatever Designs tended to get them out of Prison; and that all they could do for him was, to wish they might be oblig'd to him fo it, prefer∣rably to any others. This Discourse shook the Car∣dinal, and rais'd some Jealousie in the Duke of Orleance and the Frondeurs, when they heard of it, the which enclin'd them to unite them∣selves
again with the Princes Friends, and to seek new means to ruin the Cardinal. In the mean time the King and Court departed for Paris, and the Cardinal passing through Blois, began to express a great deal of discontent in rela∣tion to Madame de Chevreuse, who seem'd to be so ar engag'd in the Coadjutor's Interest, that she had desir'd him to procure a Cardinal's Cap for that Prelate.Refusal of a Cardinal's Cap for the Coadjutor. After the Court was arriv'd at Fontainbleau, Madame de Chevreuse notwithstanding this, persi∣sted in representing, Viva Voce, to his Eminency, what she had propos'd to him in Writing concern∣ing the Coadjutor; but she could not avoid a Re∣fusal. However the Cardinal having afterwards reflected upon all the Reasons that had been pro∣pos'd to him by this Dutchess, and moreover dread∣ing her Active Spirit, her Credit, Cunning, and Revenge, he judg'd it best to dissemble for some time, and to give her some kind of hopes, until he had caus'd the Princes to be remov'd in a secure and strong Place,The Cardi∣nal's Dissi∣mulation. being at his disposal, where nei∣ther the Coadjutor, nor even the Duke of Orleance himself might be able to procure their Liberty. He therefore caus'd some body to tell Madame de Chev∣reuse, who was gone to Paris by the Queen's Or∣der, that indeed he foresaw great Inconveniencies in granting her Request, but yet that he was re∣solv'd to satisfie her, and that he would content her as soon as he cam to Paris, in case she advis'd him once more to pue a Cardinal's Cap for the Co∣adjutor, lest he ould change Sides, and joyn with those who desired the Liberty of the Princes. In the mean time he dispos'd all things for their im∣mediate removal to Havre, in order to be soon in a condition to declare himself publickly, and open∣ly to refuse what was exacted from him. To that end the Queen told the Duke of Orleance that the Princes were not in a safe place, and propos'd to
him to take them into his Custody, and to put them in some Place of his own until the King's Minority. Monsieur rejected the Proposition; and resisting the Queen's Intreaties with all his might,They talk about remo∣ving the Princes into some strong place. she added, that since he refus'd to take them in charge himself, she desir'd him at least to consent, that the Princes might be remov'd in some place that were strong of it self, in order to avoid the extraordinary Expences that were necessary to Guard them in so weak a place. The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and Monsieur le Tellier said, that the King's Coffers were so much exhausted, that all Expences were to be avoided, and that there were places in the Kingdom, in which the Princes might be securely Guarded by the Garrison only. Seve∣ral were propos'd before Havre was mention'd; but some Inconveniencies or other being found in all of them, it was finally propos'd. Monsieur op∣posed it violently, by reason that he remembred,Monsieur opposes the Princes be∣ing remo∣ved to Havre. that but three Months before, when the Princes were to be remov'd from Vincennes elsewhere, the Coadjutor, and the Duke of Beaufort refused to con∣sent to their being remov'd to that place, and had protested to oppose it with all their might, in case it were attempted. The Cardinal seeing that Mon∣sieur declar'd that he would not consent to their being carry'd to that place, reply'd, that the Queen, who was to give him notice of her Designs, was not oblig'd to follow his Sentiments. Monsieur had much ado not to flye out to some Extremity against his Eminency. The Queen assum'd the Discourse again immediately, and press'd Monsieur anew either to take the Princes into his own Cu∣stody, or to permit them to be remov'd to Havre; assuring him that he should have as much Autho∣rity there as in Marcoussy,Monsieur consents to the Princes being re∣moved to Havre. and that the Princes should be guarded by the same Person who was engag'd not to deliver them, unless by hers and his
Orders, and by a Command Sign'd by both. To this the Queen added very earnest entreaties; in∣somuch that Monsieur yielded to what she desir'd. Within a few hours after this a Man of Quality representing to Monsieur the Importance, and Con∣sequences of that Removal, and the Prejudice he would receive by it, he immediately sent to Mon∣sieur Le Tellier to Command him not to dispatch the said Orders:He alters his mind. But the Cardinal, who dreaded this change of Mind, had order'd Monsieur Le Tellier to remove from Fntainbleau, and not to re∣turn till Night; during which time the Orders were dispatch'd to De Bar; all things were disposd for the departure of the Princes, and the Forces de∣stin'd to Conduct them, being arriv'd at Marcoussy, put themselves on their March with them towards Havre. Monsieur Le Tellier being return'd home, was oblig'd to wait upon Monsieur, who forbid him sending any Orders to De Bar. Monsieur Le Tellier answe'd, that the Princes went away in the Morn∣ing, and were upon their March, whereupon the Duke of Orleance express'd a great deal of Anger. he sent immediately for the Lord-Keeper, and af∣ter having express'd his Resentment to him, he told him, that he could not approve this Removal; and that the Queen, to whom he had not been able to refuse it, should vanquish him by Reason, and not by Payers. The Queen made him some Re∣proaches about it at Night, and Monsieur being un∣willing to fall out with her, the Princes were con∣ducted to Havre on the fifteenth of November,The Princes are remov'd to Havre. by Count d' Harcourt, who by that Emyloyment so much below his Birth and Courage, blasted the Lawrels of his most Famous Victories. The Princes Friends and Servants were sensibly concern'd at this Removal,The mea∣sures of the Princes Friends are broken. especially, because the Measures they had taken for their Rescue, were thereby absolutely defeated. They had for a con∣siderable
while cunningly establish'd a Correspon∣dence with their Guards, and had omitted nothing to gain them. Moreover they had gain'd some of the Inferiour Officers, who had made themselves sure of a certain number of Souldiers, besides four of the seven Guards, which commonly tarry'd in the Anti-chamber. A Corps de Guard of Fourteen Men was kept under the Prince of Conde's Window, upon a Terrass adjoyning to a Pond. They had resolv'd to launch a Boat made of Leather into it, which the Workman was to conduct close to the said Terrass. The day being set, the four Guards of the Anti-chamber, who had been gain'd, were to seize the Arms of the others, and to dispatch them, in case of Resistance. Those of the Cham∣ber were to be stab'd at the same time with Dag∣gers that had been convey'd to the Prince, who afterwards being favour'd by the Corps de Guard of the Terrass, was to get out of his Window into the Boat, and should have been drawn out of the Ditch by Arnauld, and receiv'd by a Body of Horse, commanded by the Duke of Nemours. But unfortunately some of those who were most zealous for the Princes, being heated with Wine, or an inconsiderate Zeal, declar'd publickly in Pa∣ris, that those Illustrious unfortunate Princes ought to be rescu'd out of Marcoussy; which the Duke of Orleance being acquainted with, he immediately dis∣patch'd new Orders to de Bar to double his Guards, because there was some Plot on foot. This Man executed Monsieur's Orders, and made use of his Advice To the seven former Guards of the Anti-chamber, he added three new ones; whereby the Prince judging that the Plot was discover'd, he im∣mediately acquainted his Friends therewith, desiring them at the same time not to put it in Execuion. Some days after it, de Bar, no longer fearing any thing, restor'd things to their former state, and
remov'd the three new Guards. The Prince gave his Friends notice of it; and as they were prepa∣ring to execute their Design, the Order came to Marcoussy to carry the Princes to Havre. The Cardi∣nal publick∣ly refuses the Cardi∣nal's Cap for the Co∣adjutor.After their being carry'd thither, the Cardinal pull'd off his Mask, and judging himself above any Cabals, he directly refus'd to procure the Car∣dinal's Cap Madame de Chevreuse had so often re∣quested of him for the Coadjutor. This proceed∣ing of the Cardinal's extreamly exasperated both Madame de Chevreuse and the Coadjutor, and dis∣posed them to side with those who desired the Li∣berty of the Princes, nay, moreover to use their utmost Endeavours with Monsieur to incline him to do the same. At that time the Garrison of Rhetel committing great Devastations in Champayne, and those Deva∣stations affording the Cardinal's Enemies an occa∣sion to complain of his Conduct, he departed on the first of October to besiege that place, which Monsieur de Turenne had made himself Master of sometime before, with the Army he commanded, which was composed of the Spanish Forces, those of Lorrain, and of such of the Princes he had been abl to preserve. He was received in all the Ci∣ties of Champayne with such demonstrations of Ho∣nour and Respect, as extreamly surpriz'd the Prin∣ces Friends. He stay'd some days at Chalons, in order to hasten all necessary Preparations, while the Forces assembled, which were to form an Ar∣my of Twelve Thousand Men, to be Commanded by the Marshal Du Plessis Praslin. When the said Army was assembled about Reims, Monsieur de Tu∣renne fatigu'd it by such frequent Skirmishes, and by such vigorous Attacks, that he forc'd it to En∣camp within the City it self, where it remain'd several days without the lea Action, in expecta∣tion of the Cardinal.
As soon as he was arrived, it was resolv'd to March strait to Rhetel, and to Besiege it. This succeeded sooner and better than they had believ'd. The Treachery and Cowardice of Delli Ponti, Go∣vernour of the said Place, broke all Monsieur de Turenne's Measures; for Delli Ponti having promisd to hold out a considerable time, that Marshal had taken Measures with the Spaniards to succour him. His Design was to March strait to Rhetel, and to perform one of these two things, that is, either to oblige the Marshal Du Plessis to raise the Siege, or to Attack the separate Quarters of his Army: But while he was marching at the Head of the Spanish Army to execute that Design, Delli Ponti surren∣der'd the Place by Composition six days sooner than he had promised; which having obliged him to advance in haste, he was constrained to Fight with disadvantage, and lost the Battle, which is called the Battle of Somme Suip, which was fought on the 15th. of December near Rhetel. Monsieur de Bouteville, Brother to Madame de Chatillon, having fought with a great deal of Gal∣lantry under Monsieur de Turenne's Standards, was taken Prisoner, from which the Cardinal expected to draw considerable Advantages, as it appear'd by a Letter written by him to Monsieur Le Tellier, up∣on the Account of the Battle. In effect, his being taken, afforded the Cardi∣nal an occasion to Negotiate with Madame de Cha∣tillon, under pretence of Treating about her Bro∣the's Liberty; and such a Treaty could not fail of giving his Enemies new disquiets, by reason that it could not be concluded unless Madame de Chatillon engag'd to abandon the Prince's Interests, which her Love and Relation to him rendred so dear to her; and to make Monsieur de Nemours forsake them also, she disposing absolutely of him as his Mistress.
In the mean while the Cardinal, after so consi∣derable a Victory,The Effects of the Victo∣ry of Rhetel. return'd in Triumph to Paris, and appeared so puffed up with it, that it renew'd the disgust and dread of his Domination in all Peo∣ple, and rouz'd the Publick Envy and Hatred a∣gainst him, in so much that what at first was a cause of Affliction to the Princes Party, prov'd very fa∣tal in the sequel to Cardinal Mazarin; nay more, the principal cause of the Liberty of the Princes; by reason that the Frondeurs dreading that the gain of the Battle of Rhetel would make the Cardinal too Powerful, prevail'd with Monsieur to quit the Interests of the Court, and altogether resolv'd to set the Princes at Liberty, and to turn out the Car∣dinal. They Treat about the Liberty of the Princes.They had immediately, in order thereunto, se∣veral Meetings with the President Viole, Arnaud, and some others, who had received an absolute Power to Treat from the Princes. Monsieur refer'd the care of adjusting the Conditions, upon which they might consent to put them at Liberty, to the Coadjutor. The Coadjutor began first by securing his own Interests, and would have Madame de Lon∣gueville to be a Security for them; whereupon Mes∣sengers were immediately dispatch'd to Stenay. She offer'd to sign even by the consent of the Spani∣ards;1651. and the Sixteenth of Ianuary the Princes ha∣ving sent their Procurations to the Princess Palatin, the Treaty of the Coadjutor was concluded.Conditions of the Tre∣aty. And whereas it behov'd him as well as Madam de Chev∣reuse to be very cautious to secure themselves against the remembrance of a most sensible Outrage com∣mitted against a Prince equally endued with Wit and Courage, and that nothing but the strongest Tyes could reunite such divided Interests, it was farther required, that the Prince of Conty should Marry Mademoiselle de Chevreuse; and that a sin∣cere Accommodation should be made between the
Princes and the Coadjutor, the Duke of Beaufort and their Friends, together with a general Oblivion of all that was past, and a Faithful Union for the future. Monsieur de Beaufort likewise demanded a considerable Sum of Money for Madame de Mont∣bazon, which the Prince should be obliged to pro∣cure her from the Court, or else to pay it her out of his own Estate: And as to what related to his own Interests, he did not forget to make him re∣nounce the Admiralty. By the Duke of Orleance's Treaty it was propos'd, That the Duke D' Enguien should Marry Made∣moiselle de Vallois, Monsieur's Third Daughter, That the Prince should require no Favours for his Ser∣vants: That he should be link'd to his Royal High∣ness's Interests, towards all, and against all; and that he should require no Employments for him∣self. All these Proposals, together with others that were no less vexatious, were accepted by the Prince, who might say with Justice, that by those different Treaties he was constrained to consent to, he did not become free; but only chang'd his Chains, and was free of the Cardinal's, to receive many others. All things being thus regulated, Monsieur,Monsieur breaks wth the Cari∣nal. Ma∣dame de Chevreue, the Coadjutor, the Duke of Beaufort, all the Frondeurs, and the Parliament de∣clar'd openly in several Assemblies for the Liberty of the Princes; at which time Monsieur resolv'd to break absolutely with the Cardinal. He met with a very favourable Occasion to do it on the First of February in the Council, upon a certain Discourse of his Eminency against the Parliament, which he accus'd of having Designs against the King, like unto those of the Parliament of England. The dangerous Impressions such Discourses might make upon the King's Youth, and his Royal High∣nesses
Affection to the State, together with his Knowledge of the People and Parliament's Loy∣alty, obliged him to Answer, That the Parliament was compos'd of none but such as were Faithful and Loyal to the King; and that those he call'd Frondeurs, were not the less Loyal, thô Enemies to his Person. The Cardinal continuing to speak up∣on the same Tone, and to exclaim against the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor, Monsieur went out of the Council, not to be dis-respectful in the Queen's Presence, and took a firm Resolution ne∣ver to enter into the Council, or Palais Royal, while that Minister should be there, and afterwards ac∣quainted the Queen with his Resolution, in which he always persisted. The Cardi∣nal retires to St. Ger∣mans.The Cardinal perceiving, that all things con∣curr'd for the Liberty of the Princes, and that so many Secret Treaties were forming among their Partisans, between Monsieur and the Faction of the Fronde, and that those very Persons who desir'd the Princes Liberty, were at the same time very earnest for his removal, and his Ruin. The Car∣dinal, I say, in consideration of all these Reasons, resolv'd to retire to St. Germans. He went out of Paris the Night between the sixth and seventh of February, between Eleven and Twelve, through the Gate of Richelieu, accompany'd only by three Men. It is true, that Count Harcourt tarried for him with Two Hundred Horse to conduct him to St. Germans. The Cardinal propos'd by his Retreat to oblige the Duke of Orleance to go to the Palace Royal, and to give the Queen the means to perswade him to alter his Mind, and change his Party, and perhaps in case of a Refusal, to secure him. And in case Monsieur should persist in not going to the said Pa∣lace, and refuse to confer with the Queen, and if those who had espous'd the Princes Interests, and
were firmly united for their Liberty, should con∣tinue to be earnest for their being taken out of Pri∣son, his Eminency was resolved to go to Havre, in order to set the Princes at Liberty himself without any Conditions, thereby to engage the Prince of Conde to afford him his Protection, and to engage him in his Interests, by those good Offices to pre∣vent the Perils that threatned him, and to render all the Secret Treaties that had been made, vain and useless, as well as the Endeavours of those who only pursued his Liberty upon very disadvantageous Terms on his side, particularly one, which de∣priv'd him of his Governments until the King's Majority. Monsieur still persisted in not going to the Palace Royal,The Assem∣bly of the Palace of Orleance. notwithstanding the Cardinal's being re∣mov'd from thence, and all the Promoters of the Princes Liberty redoubled their Cares and Entreaties in order to obtain it. The last Assem∣bly that was held upon that Subject, was at the Pa∣lace of Orleance: It was composed of Monsieur and Madame de Chevreuse, the Lord-Keeper, the Mar∣shal of Villeroy, Monsieur Le Tellier, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, the President Viole, Monsieur Arnaud, the Duke of Beaufort, and the Coadjutor. After some contestations they finally agreed up∣on the Conditions of the Treaty, and at the same time resolv'd that the Duke de la Rochefoucault, the President Viole, Monsieur Arnaud, and Monsieur de la Villiere, Secretary of State, should go to Havre, with a Signet Letter, Sign'd by the Queen and Monsieur, to put the Princes at Liberty. The Cardinal being inform'd with the Resolu∣tion of that Assembly, which was held immedi∣ately after Dinner; he set strait forward towards Havre,The Cardi∣nal goes to Havre, in order to set the Princes at Liberty. in order if possible to prevent the Deputies, and travelled all Night, he arrived there on the 13th. of February in the Morning. As soon as he
entred the Cittadel, he deliver'd a Letter from the Queen to De Bar, who commanded there, where∣by he was ordered to do whatever his Eminency should desire for the Liberty of the Princes. After this he waited upon the Prince, whom he saluted telling him, Sir, I come from Her Majesty to restore you your Liberty: Forget your Prison, love the King, and believe me ever your Servant. The Prince an∣swered, That he thank'd the Queen for the Justice she did him; that he would forget what was past, and that he would still continue to maintain, and promote, as he had ever done, the Interest of the King and State. After this, the Cardinal had a Conference with the Princes, which lasted above an hour. The only Account we have of it, is, That the Cardinal endeavour'd at first to Justifie himself, telling them the Reasons that had induc'd him to secure them: And that in the next place he de∣sired their Friendship, adding haughtily, that they were free to grant it, or refuse it; and that upon any Terms they might go out of Havre that very moment, and repair where ever they pleas'd. Ap∣parently the Princes promis'd him whatever he de∣sir'd. He din'd with them about Ten a Clock, and after a short Repast, he had a private Confe∣rence with the Prince, to whom he said after some other Discourse, that the Duke of Orleance had con∣tributed much to his Imprisonment, at the Coad∣jutor's Sollicitation; and that therefore the safest way for his Highness, was to joyn entirely with the King and Queen, in order to ruin the Faction of the Frondeurs: That all the good Places that were in his Friends Possession, should be his, pro∣vided he would be for Their Majesties; and that as to what related to the Government, his High∣ness might Discourse with Monsieur de Lionne about it, to whom he had imparted all his Secrets. The
Cardinal attended him to his Coach, and in pre∣sence of the Princes of Conty and Longueville, who were got into it before, he humbled himself to embrace his Knees, and to beg his Protection, with Tears in his Eyes, against his Enemies. After this, the Princes went away accompany'd by the Mar∣shal de Gramont,The Princes go from Havre to Paris. and lay Three Leagues off, at a House called Grosmenil, in the way from Havre to Roans, where the Deputies afore-mentioned arri∣ved a moment after them, with Orders from the Court: who could not come sooner, by reason of a Difference between Monsieur de la Urilliere and Monsieur Le Tellier. Monsieur Le Tellier was desirous to have the Commission of going to Havre, in order to make his Court to the Prince, and to enter into his Favour again; and the other like∣wise pretended to it, because Normandy was within his District. The Difference was adjudg'd in fa∣vour of the last. The Princes departed next Morning from Gros∣menil for Paris, where they arrived on the 16th. at Night. It is impossible to express the general Joy that appear'd in that great City at their Arrival.An univer∣sal Ioy for the Liberty and Return of the Prince of Conde. The best part of the Souldiers and Inhabitants wept for Joy at sight of the Prince of Conde, and all strove to out-do each other in their different expressions of i. He receiv'd proofs of that Publick Joy even at Pontoise, where abundance of Persons of the greatest Quality met him. He was met by a great many more at St. Dennis, all the way was so throngd with Coaches and People, that one could not sufficiently admire how such a general Joy could be occasion'd by the Liberty of a Man, whose Imprisonment but thirteen or fourteen Months be∣fore had been so agreeable to every body. The Duke of Orleance met the Princes between La Chapelle and St. Dennis, and by the precipitation
wherewith he ran to embrace the Prince, he dis∣covered the reality of the Complement he made him, which was, that he had never been so trans∣ported with Joy as he was at that moment, nor had ever done any Action with so much Satisfaction. The Prince made him an Answer, as to the Autho of his Liberty. Monsieur having in the next place embrac'd the Prince of Conty, and the Duke of Longueville, presented the Duke of Beaufort and the Coadjutor, whom he had brought along with him, to the Prince of Conde, who received them very kindly; after which the Prince got into the Duke of Orleance's Coach, together with the Prince of Conty, the Duke of Longueville, the Duke of Beau∣fort, the Coadjutor, the Marshal de la Motte, and the Prince of Guimene. They lighted at the Palais Royal, amidst all the Acclamations of the People. Monsieur presented the Princes to the King and Queen, whom he had not visited himself until the day before. There appeared more Complements and Civilities at that first Interview, than Tender∣ness and real Reconciliation. They found the Queen upon her Bed, with whom they tarry'd but little, after having return'd her Thanks for the Justice she had done them, in estoring them to their Liberty. Monsieur return'd to his own Pa∣lace of Luxemburg, and the Prince went to make a Visit to the Duke of Nemours, and that very Evening he waited upon the Dutchess of Orleance, and express'd a great deal of Obligation to her. Monsieur presented several Counsellors of the Par∣liament to him, who happen'd then to be at the Palace of Orleance, whom he received very kindly. His Natural Inclination giving way to his Joy at that time, all those in whom he observed any Joy, received that Day some marks of his Acknowledg∣ment. He Supp'd with Monsieur, where every bo∣dy was free in expressing all manner of Invectives
and Railleries against Mazarin, who finding no safey in Frnce against the Thundring Impeach∣ments and Decrees of the Parliament, was o his way to quit the Kingdom, and to repair to the Elector of Cologne. The next day Monsieur accompanied the Prince,The Prince goes to the Parliament and the Prince of Conty to the Parliament, where being entred, he spoke in these terms: Gentlemen, I have brought my Cousins to you to consummate your Work, according to what you had resolved. I have ac∣quainted them with the Affection wherewith you have all laboured for their Liberty, and have made them sen∣sible of the kindness they ought to have for your House. I hope their Presence will serve for a Remedy against the Disorders of the Kingdom, and that joyntly with s they will contribute towards the good of the State, which I protest to have been the only aim of all my Actions. Monsieur having made an end, the Prince assumed the Discourse, as followeth: Gentlemen, fter having returned Her Majesty Thanks for the Iu∣stice she has done us in putting us at Liberty, I should think my self wanting to my self, if I did not publickly acknowledge the extraordinary Obligations we have re∣ceived from the Duke of Orleance's Goodness, and the Generosiy he has express'd on our behalf. But tho' this Favour we have received from him be so great, that to acknowledge it, I must neither spare my Blood, or Life, yet I should not have thought my self fully satisfied with it, unless I had come to assure this House that I shall ne∣er want Gratitude for the Affection you have expressed towards me. And whereas it obliges me never to se∣parte from your Interests, I desire you to believe that I can have no other, and that on all occasions, I will en∣deavour to shew you, how much I am indebted to you all in geeral, and to every one in particular. The Prince of Conty made a Complement little different from his Brother's; after which, the Prince assu∣ming the Discourse again, told them, that the Duke
of Longueville should have been glad also to have express'd his sense of his Obligements to them, but that they could not be ignorant of the Reasons that hindred him from so doing. The first President answered: Sir, The House can∣not sufficiently express their Ioy at your Return, and think themselves happy to have contributed towards it. The Duke of Orleance's Affection, to which you are indebted for your Liberty, next to the Queen's Goodness, makes us hope that the Confusions which for three whole Years have been like to occasion the Ruin of this Monarchy, and have so much diminished the Royal Authority, will be dissipated by the perfect Union that is to be expected from Princes that are of the same Blood. You are so much concerned in the preservation of the Glory and Greatness thereof, that in labouring to revive the said Authority, and to dispel all Clouds of Division, you will labour for your own Advantage, and render your selves more considerable, by employing your Persons and Cares to keep the People in the Obedience they owe their King and Soveraign. Moreover your Prudence will induce you not to hearken to any Seditious Spirits, who under pretence of specious Advantages, per∣haps may only aim at sowing Divisions among you. Those evil Counsellors must for ever be remov'd from your Persons. And, Sir, considering your Obligations to the Duke of Orleance; (in saying this he look'd upon the Prince) nothing should be capable to divide your Affections and Interests. 'Tis from that Union the State must expect its Repose, the People the relief of their Mi∣series, and the King the Support of his Authority: and it is the only Recompence this House desires, for the Vows they have made for your Liberty, and for the Affection wherewith they have always promoted it. After this, some ask'd for the Declaration of In∣nocence they had agreed to grant for the Princes. But whereas it was not ready yet, and that it re∣quir'd some time to consult the Princes about it,
it was referr'd to another Day. Then Monsieur rose; and the Prince having answer'd all those who did Congratulate his Return, retir'd amidst the Accla∣mations of Joy of an infinite multitude of People which fill'd up the Hall, and strove with Emula∣tion to give him signal proofs of a satisfaction not only capable to make him lose the remembrance of the Joy they had express'd at his Confinement, but also to render his Prison more Glorious than his Victories. The manner of the Prince's Reception at Paris after his being put at Liberty,Addition of Glory to the Prince of Conde. gave a new Lustre to his Glory, and made that Hero confess, that this Re∣ception was no less Glorious to him, than the Great and Famous Victories of Rocroy, Fribourg, Nortlingue, and Lens, in which he had Triumph'd over the most powerful Efforts of the Enemies of France. And indeed this new kind of Glory was greatly due to him,It was his due. since after having rendred such great Services to the State, and discover'd such Eminent Vertues in so many Sieges and Battels, he had been seiz'd and detain'd long in Prison, with all the In∣justice imaginable, and with the utmost Ingratitude from the Court. For in fine, besides the early marks of Valour he had given in the Trenches of Arras, and in the Plains of Ipres, is it not certain that in all probability France would have been over∣whelm'd in the beginning of the Regency, but for the Battle the Prince had won at Rocroy? That Kingdom which had carry'd the Glory of its Arms so far, by the great Genius of Cardinal Richelieu, seem'd to fall by degrees from its Elevation, since that Minister's Death. Spain being at that time attentive in the pursuit of its vast Designs, and per∣haps reckoning upon a Queen, to whom it had given Birth, and who had long been suspected of not being well affected to France: Spain, I say, which at that time look'd upon the King's ap∣proaching
Minority as a Source of Divisions, which after the Death of Lewis XIII. whose Distemper was judg'd incurable by the Physicians, was going to expose so great a State as a Prey to their Am∣bitious Desires. Moreover France wanted Famous Experienc'd Chiefs, as well as well disciplin'd For∣ces: while the Enemies had a Triumphant Army, compos'd of the best Forces of Europe, Commanded by a very Experienc'd General, who only tarry'd for a proper moment to improve a Conjuncture which open'd a large Field to his Hopes; and while the Garrisons of the Kingdom being unprovided, and without Assistance, trembled at the approach of the uncertain Storm which threatned the whole Frontier. Lewis XIII dying in that Conjuncture, the Consternation of his Death, the Weakness of a Minority, a Tumultuous Regency, a Council ex∣posd to Intrigues, and Cabals, Seeds of Division, Great Malecontents, the Agitation of the Court, and the Exhausting of the People, made Spain con∣ceive approaching hopes of the total Ruin of France. The Valour of the Prince of Conde, at that time Duke of Enguien, apply'd a Remedy to all those Evils, by the gain of a Battle, on which the Safety, or Ruin of the State depended. By this Victory he effectually sav'd the Realm, he calm'd it, he encouragd it, and as it were, gave it new Life; he became the Support of the Monarchy, and strengthen'd the dawning Authority of the Young Monarch. That memorable Day was follow'd with a Tor∣rent of Prosperity for France, of Conquests, Bat∣tels gain'd, Cities taken, &c. All the Campains that succeeded this by the Singularity of the En∣terprizes that were form'd and executed by the Duke d' Enguien, equall'd, or surpass'd the most sur∣prizing things we meet with in History. The Bat∣tels of Fribourg and Nortlingue, so celebrated through
the obstinate Resistance of the Enemies, and the Invincible Difficulties that oppos'd the attacking of them: Those Battles, which may very well be compar'd to those of Arbella and Pharsalia, alarm'd and terrify'd the very Heat of the Empire, and finally, forc'd Germany to desire a Peace on such Conditions as France was pleas'd to allow it. The Battle of Lens yet more Glorious and Triumphant, placing the Prince of Conde in the just and indi∣sputable possession of being the Hero of his Age, ais'd at the same time the great and signal Obliga∣tions he had laid upon the Court, to the highest degree, which after that Battle committed a world of Faults without him, and was only sav'd by him in the War of Paris. And yet notwithstanding all this, at a time when all his Designs, all his Vertues, and all his Actions only tended to the King's Ser∣vice, and the Grandeur of the Kingdom, of which he was the chief Ornament, he was Imprison'd, because his Conduct in some Occasions had not ap∣pear'd sufficiently Respectful towards the Queen, and that he had not all the Complaisance for the Car∣dinal, which that Minister desi'd, whom he had the misfotune to displease by the impetuosity of his Temper, which he could not Master; the which, a most, could only be look'd upon as Court Faults, and not Crimes of State, capable of obliterating the Important Services rendred by a first Prince of the Blood. Therefore it is no wonder that after his being put at Liberty again, and return'd to Pa∣ris, the People express'd their Joy, and receiv'd him in Triumph, as if he had been newly return'd from gaining the Battles of Rocroy, Fribourg, Nort∣lingue, and Lens. But unfortunately his Glory, which had appear'd with such a Lustre in so many different manners, was afterwards tarnish'd by a very blameable Con∣duct. For finally, he excited a Civil War, and
took up Arms against his Soveraign. Moeover be acted with so much Imprudence in that War, and committed so many Capital Faults,The Prince of Conde's Glory tar∣nish'd. that thereby he fell infinitely short of those Great Men, who by a wise Conduct, and well-contriv'd Measures archiev'd the highest and most difficult Enteprizes. Not but at the same time the Court also commit∣ted very considerable Faults, and that both Parties maintain'd themselves more through the Faults of each other, than by any good Conduct on their side But that does not justifie the Prince, especi∣ally if we consider that thereby he ruin'd his own Party, and made the Court Triumph. It is most certain that had the Prince been endu'd with all Caesar's Qualifications,The Prince of Conde's Qualifica∣tions dif∣ferent from Caesar's. he should have succeeded in all his Enterprizes. Caesar had a consuminated Pru∣dence; all his steps were measur'd, in so much that he never did any thing without mature deliberation, managing his Zeal, and being more affected with the Solid than the Exterior part, being very cau∣tous in all difficult Affairs, and never wanting a Remedy in the most troublesome Conjunctures. Few Persons have ever been known with so much Equality in their Life, so much Moderation in their Fortune, and so much Clemency when injur'd. He gain'd the Affection of all People by his Good∣ness and Mildness: Those who were Familiar with him, and did espouse his Interests, neither dreaded his Anger or Capricio's. He was Liberal and Mag∣nificent, towards the People, towards his Friends, and even towards his very Enemies. He compass'd his Ends by Mild, Insinuating, Cunning, Secret means. The Prince of Conde did not possess those Qualities. He was of an unequal Temper; he was Rough, Difficult, and Haughty, and an Ene∣my to Precaution. He could not moderate him∣self in his Prosperity or Fortune. He was Passio∣nate, and Revengeful. He did not acknowledge
considerable Services; and when he did, there was no certainty of the continuation of his Gratitude. He was not very sincere to his Friends, not even to those tha were most Illustrious, and most necessary to him. He made Treaties without them, he often neglected their most considerable Interests, and on∣ly minded his own. Neither was he very Liberal, or Magnificent. He did not consult or manage the Temper of the People, and took no great care to gain their Love. He could not Dissemble, nei∣ther could he Act in great Affairs with Cunning and Secrecy. In short, he rely'd too much upon his own Valour, Merit, Reputation, and Quality, and neglected other things that  cessary for the execution of great Undertaki  I shall not mention the Errors he committed in this place; the Reader will sufficiently observe them in the faith∣ful orderly recital I shall make of the principal Actions and Events. But before I proceed any farther, because I am now to treat about the most considerable Point of this History, and that by reason of the partiality of those who have left us Memoirs about it, it is very difficult to distinguish the real Sentiments of the Prince whose Life we are now writing; I will set down, as a necessary Foundation, that the Prince of Conde came out of Prison with Sentiments of Vengeance, not only against Cardinal Mazarin, Madame de Chevreuse, and against the Frondeurs, who had only promoted his Liberty upon disobli∣ging Considerations, and very hard Conditions, but also against the Queen, and against the King. I do not think any body can blame me for what I advance, since the Prince himself, after the Civil War was ended, and he receiv'd into Favour again, condemning his Conduct and former Sentiments, declar'd with Candor to some Persons of Honour and Credit, That he was the most Innocent man alive,
when put into Prison, and the most Guilty at his coming out of it. Alas! pursu'd he with grief, Before that unhappy Prison, I am'd at nothing but the King's Ser∣vice, and the Grandeur of the State. In so much that the Valour, Activity, and Imperious Humour, to∣gether with all the extraordinary Qualifications the Prince was endu'd with, were like unto those mat∣ters from which Exhalations are form'd, which matters serve for cosiderable uses, but being once turn'd into Exhalations, and enclos'd within the Clouds, being attracted thither by the heat of the Sun, they seldom get out of them again, unless it be to strike the most elevated Places, and to over∣throw the  Sumptuous Buildings, and to cause terrible Diso: So likewise the Prince of Conde's Valour and Courage, before his Imprisonment, were only employ'd for the Good of the Kingdom, and the Glory of his Soveraign; but after his be∣ing put at Liberty, all those Heroical Qualities were employ'd on very different Uses; and whereas be∣fore, he had been the Hope, Support, and Joy of the State, he became the Terror of it all on a sud∣den; he attack'd the Royal Authority, and kindled a Civil War, which caus'd great Disorders, as will appear by the sequel of this History. After the return of the Princes to Paris, their Imprisonment was declar'd unjust by the Parlia∣ment and a new Decree was given against Cardi∣nal Mazarin. This Decree of the Parliament was terrible; it condemned that Minister to a perpetual Banishment, and commanded all Frenchmen to fall upon him, if ever he appear'd in the Kingdom, and at the same time confiscated all he had The Queen endeavours to dispose the Prince to consent to the Cardi∣nal's return.During these Transactions, the Queen passionate∣ly desir'd the Cardinal's return, and try'd all means to dispose the Prince to consent to it. To that end she offer'd him, by the Princess Palatin, all man∣ner of Advantages for himself, and for his Friends:
But e only answer'd those fine offers with Com∣plements which engag'd him to nothing. But yet in the sequel the Queen being very pressing to ob∣lige him to express himself, he promised to Treat, whether it were that he had no mind to break so soon with the Queen, and had a mind to carry un∣til things were more favourably dispos'd in his fa∣vour, to have a more plausible pretence of break∣ing publickly; or whether he were really dispos'd to treat, in hopes of obtaining for himself, and for his Friends, the most considerable Employments and Governments, nd thereby put himself in a condition of doing whatever he pleas'd. However he desir'd the Treaty might be kept secret, and so did the Queen: The Queen fear'd to augment the Diffidence of Monsieur, and of the Froders, and to swerve too soon, and without the least pretence, from all the Declarations she had just granted the Parliament against the Cardinal's return. The Prince on his side was afraid his Friends would be angry at his Treating without their participation; that the Duke of Bouillon, and the Marshal of Tu∣renne would quit his Interests, that the Frondeurs, and the Dutchess of Chevreuse would grow his irre∣concileable Enemies, and that the Parliament and the People would on a sudden reflect on the dread∣ful Image of the last War of Paris. Therefore they us'd all the Cautions imaginable to Treat secretly. The Prince went to the Prin∣cess Palatin, whom the Queen had chosen to man∣age the Treaty. She was of the House of Mantua, and Sister to the Queen of Poland. The Count of Servient and Monsieur de Lionne likewise met there from the Queen. The Prince would have the Duke de la Rochefoucault present, and did nothing without the consent of the Prince of Conty his Bro∣ther, and the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister.
The first Project of the Treaty which was pro∣pos'd by the Princess Palatin, was, That Guienne should be given to the Prince, and that the Lord Lieutenancy thereof should be given to whatever Friend of his he should be pleas'd to choose: That the Prince of Conty should have the Government of Provence; And that Gratifications should be made to such as had been engag'd in the Prince's Interests: That nothing should be desir'd of him but barely to retire into his Government, with whatever Forces of his own he should think fit for his own Security: That he should remain there without contributing to Cardinal Mazarin's return, but that he should not oppose the King's Endea∣vours in order thereunto, an that whatever hap∣pen'd, the Prince should be free to be his Friend or Enemy, according as his Conduct should give him cause to love or hate him. Those Conditions were not only confirm'd, but augmented by Mes∣sieurs de Servient and de Lionne. For at the Prince's desire that the Government of Blaye might be ad∣ded to the Lord Lieutenancy of Guienne for the Duke de la Rochefoucault, they gave him all the hopes of it he could desire. They only desir'd time to treat with the Duke d' Angouleme, about the Government of Provence, and to dispose the Queen to grant Blaye. But apparently it was only to give the Cardinal an Account of what past, and to receive his Orders. He was at that time at Brueil in the Arch-Bishoprick of Cologne; and the Queen consulted him as an Oracle. Dispositions towards an absolute breach.This Affair remain'd some time without being discover'd; but he who had been chosen to con∣clude it, soon occasion'd an entire breach, and drove things to the utmost Extremities. Chavigny induces the Prince to break off the Treaty.Monsieur de Chavigny, who was lately recall'd, and plac'd into the Ministry again, was a Mortal Enemy to the Cardinal, and being at that time
the Prince's chief Confident, soon dispos'd him to break off the Treaty with the Queen, against the Advice of Madame de Longueville, the Princess Pa∣latin, and the Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rocefou∣cault. Messieurs de Servient and de Lionne at the same time were imbroil'd on both sides about this Negotiation, and afterwards were both turn'd out.Imbroilures. The Queen deny'd her having ever hearken'd to the Proposition about Blaye, and accus'd Servient of having made it on purpose to raise the Prince's Demands so high, that it should be impossible for her to grant them. As for the Prince, his Com∣plaints against the Count of Servient were, That he had treated with him from the Queen, about Con∣ditions that were unknown to her, or that he had made so many vain Propositions to him to amuse him under pretence of a sincere Treaty, which in effect was only a premeditated Design to Ruin him. Although the Count of Servient was suspected on both sides, it did not lessen the Animosity which began to arise between the Queen and Prince; it was almost equally fomented by all those who came near them. Some represented to the Queen that the Division between the Prince and Madame de Chevreuse about the breach of the Marriage between the Brother of the one, and the Sister of the other, would certainly reconcile the Frondeurs to the Car∣dinal's Interests, and that all things would be soon reduc'd to the state they were in when the Prince was seiz'd. He on the other hand was induc'd to break with the Court by many different Interests: He found no longer any Safety with the Queen, who did nothing without the Cardinal's consent; and he dreaded to be involv'd into his former dis∣graces again. Madame de Longueville was sensible that the Cardinal had made an irreconcileable Breach between her Husband and her, and that
after the impressions he had given him against her Conduct, she could not go to him in Normandy, without exposing her Life, or Liberty. The Duke of Longueville on the other hand us'd his utmost Endeavours to get her to him; and she had no way to avoid that perillous Journey, but by indu∣cing her Brother to quit the Court abruptly, and to prepare for a Civil War. The Prince of Conty had no particular Aim; he follow'd his Sister's Sen∣timents without knowing them, and was for War, because it freed him from his Ecclesiastical Profes∣sion, which he did not love. The Duke of Ne∣mours was very sollicitous for War; not so much out of Ambition, as Jealousie which he had con∣ceiv'd against the Prince. He could not endure his seeing and loving Madame de Chatillon. And whereas he could not hinder his seeing of her, but by separating them; he imagin'd that War was the only means he could imploy to that end, and that it would in time quench the Prince's Passion. The Dukes de Bouillon and de la Rochefoucault did not de∣sire that War, they had lately found by Experience to what invincible Difficulties they are expos'd who undertake to maintain a Civil War against the Per∣son of their King. They were sensible of the Dis∣appointments that attend it. They knew the Weak∣ness of the Spaniards; they were not ignorant how vain and deceitful their Promises were, and that it was not their Interest to advance the Prince's or the Cardinal's Affairs, but only to foment Disorders among them, in order to take an Advantage of the Divisions of France. The Duke of Bouillon more∣over joyn'd his particular Interest to the Publick's, and was in hopes to oblige the Queen sensibly, and to be altogether in her Favour, by contributing to keep the Princes within the Bounds of Duty. As for the Duke de la Rochefoucalt, he durst not so publickly express his repugnancy to that War, by
reason that his Love and Passion for Madame Lon∣gueille oblg'd him to follow the Sentiments of that fair Princess, which tended to the kindling of a Civil War, which the Prince, exasperated by his Misfortunes, and by ill Treatments, desir'd perhaps with as much earnestness. However the Conduct of the Court, and that of the Prince soon furnish'd Subjects of a reciprocal diffidence, the sequel of which prov'd fatal to the State, to a great number of Illustrious Families of the Kingdom, and ruin'd the greatest and most glorious Fortune that was ever seen upon the Head of a Subject. But before we proceed any farther, it will be proper to enlarge upon a thing I have only hinted by the by, which is, that the Prince hindred the Prince of Conty his Brother from Marrying Made∣moiselle de Chevreuse;Reasons which indu∣ced the Prince of Conde to break the Match be∣tween his Brother & Mademoi∣selle de Chevreuse. by reason that in the Con∣ditions of the Treaty that had been made for the Liberty of the Princes, that Marriage had only been desir'd by the Coadjutor, and by Madame de Chvreuse to secure them against the remembrance of the Affront put upon his Highness upon the New Bridge; the care that was taken to sollicit the exe∣cution thereof, only serv'd to revive in his Memo∣ry the Image of that Mortal Injury: In so much that the Prince, who was sensible besides that the Coadjutor and Madame de Chevreuse had taken the Advantage of the Misfortune of his Prison to im∣pose whatever Conditions they pleas'd upon him, could not resolve to dissemble his Resentment, and had rather be forsaken even by his best Friends, than to stoop to Dissemblings, Caresses, and Flatteries to conceal it. He exasperated Madame de Chevreuse and the Frondeurs extreamly by that proceeding, and con∣sequently the People,Several per∣sons aban∣don the Prince of Conde's Party. and even disoblig'd Mes∣sieurs de Bouillon and Turenne to that degree, that
they sided with the Court; whereupon the Duk of Bouillon was plac'd at the Head of the Council, and the Vice-count of Turenne at the Head of the Principal Army. Several other Persons of Noe quitted the Prince's Party by their Example. Even the Count de Bussy, who had serv'd him so well till then, abandon'd him, by reason that being come on purpose from Burgundy to Paris, to Congratu∣late his Highness being put at Liberty; The Prince having thank'd him coldly for the Services he had done him during his Imprisonment, ask'd him at the same time whether he would not resign his Place of Lieutenant of his Chevaux Legers of the Ordnance to Guitault his Cornet, according to the Agreement made about it three Months before his Imprisonment. The Count of Bussy was strangely surpriz'd at that Question, which shew'd but little Gratitude for his past Services, and yet less Value for him, and less Consideration for his Quality; but yet he consented to it, on Condition that he should resign it into his Highnesses own hands. As soon as he had surrender'd it, he quitted him, as the Count de Grand Pré had done before, who, after having espous'd his Party with so much heat, going to Visit the Princes after their being put at Liber∣ty, was receiv'd by them in a very disobliging manner. All these things gave a great check to the Prince of Conde's Affairs, and in the sequel weaken'd his Party considerably.Disadvan∣tageous Reports a∣gainst the Prince of Conde. Moreover it happen'd that those who had quitted his Interests, after having embrac'd them with so much earnestness, spread false Reports against him, and endeavour'd to make people suspect his harbouring ill Designs, thereby the better to colour their change. In effect, soon after, it was reported that the Prince treated with the Enemies of the King and State; in Paris it self by Madame de Longueville,
t  by the Marquess of Sillery, and at Steay by Monsieur de Croissy. It was likewise rumour'd that he would not have desir'd to exchange his Govern∣ment of Burgundy for that of Guienne, but that he degn'd to execute some Criminal Enterprize. The Reasons alledg'd for it were, that the Government of Burgundy was worth Forty Five Thousand Livres more than that of Guienne, and that consequently he certainly design'd to make use of the singular Affection the People of Guienne had for his Person, in order to execute some extraordinary Enterprize. That the People of Guienne as well as the Limosins their Neighbours, were Warlike, Light, and In∣constant. That Poitou, of which the Duke de la Rochefoucault was Governour, was adjoyning to that Province: That the Prince had other Friends, who were very Powerful in other adjacent Provinces: That he had only desir'd Provence for the Prince of Cty, and Auvergne for the Duke of Nemours, in order thereby the better to execute his great De∣signs. It is most certain, that at that very time the Prince had sent the Marquess de Sillery into Flanders, under pretence of dis-engaging Madame de Longue∣ville and the Marshal of Turenne of the Treaties they had made with the Spaniards to procure his Liberty, but in reality with Orders to take Mea∣sure with the Count of Fuensaldaigne, to sound what Assistance the Prince might receive from the King of Spain, in case he were oblig'd to make War. Fuensaldaigne answer'd according to the usual Custom of the Spaniards, in promising in general a great deal more than could reasonably be desir'd of him, and omitted nothing to engage the Prince to take up Arms.
On the other hand the Queen had made a new Engagement with the Coadjutor, who was strange∣ly animated against the Prince,Engage∣ments be∣tween the Queen and the Coad∣jutor. by reason that he had perswaded the Prince of Conty not to Marry Mademoiselle de Chevreuse, and that he had secon∣ded with all his might a Declaration which exclu∣ded all Cardinals, and all Prelates in general from the Ministry. This Engagement between the Queen and the Coadjutor was kept secret, by reason that the Queen could expect no Service from the Frn∣deurs but by their Credit with the People, the which they could preserve no longer than while they were look'd upon as Enemies to the Cardinal. Plots a∣gainst the Prince of Conde.Both Parties equally found their Security in ruining the Prince: Nay, some proffer'd the Queen to kill or seize him. She abhorr'd the first Propo∣sition, and willingly consented to the second. The Coadjutor and Monsieur de Lionne met at the Count of Montresor, to agree about the means to execute that Enterprize. They concluded that it was fit to attempt it, but resolv'd nothing as to the time, or manner of executing it. Monsieur de Lionne dis∣cover'd this Design to the Marshal of Gramont, who communicated it to Monsieur de Chavigny, and he immediately to the Prince. The Prince for some time imagin'd that this Re∣port was only spread on purpose to make him quit Paris; and that it would be a weakness below him to be alarm'd at it, especially since the People took his part to that degree, that he was continually ac∣company'd by an infinite number of Officers of the Army, by those of his own Forces, by his At∣tendants, and by his particular Friends. For these Reasons he chang'd nothing as to his Conduct, ex∣cepting his ceasing to go to the Louvre. Moreover he accidentally deliver'd himself up one day into the King's Power; he happening to be in his Coach in the Ring at a time when the King came through
returning from Hunting, follow'd by his Guards  Chevux Legers. However this Encounter did  produce the Effect the Prince had reason to ; for the King continu'd his way,The King's and the Prince's Coach meet in the Ring. and none of ose that were with him bethought themselves to dvise him about it, without doubt because they ere surpriz'd, as the French always are. The King bserving the Prince's Coach to pass by hastily, ithout stopping, as all Coaches are oblig'd to do hen they meet His Majesty's, only utter'd these ew words, with a Tone, and Air, that may be magin'd, I will teach that Gentleman his Duty. The Prince continu'd his way with speed out of the Ring, not to give the King time to form any De∣sign against him. The Queen and the Frondeurs easily comforted themselves at the missing of so fair an Opportunity, in hopes of seeing their Project soon succeed. In the mean time the continual Advices the Prince receiv'd from all Parts, began to perswade him, that the Court intended to secure him. How∣ever he continu'd some time longer to neglect the taking proper measures to avoid it, alhough all his Friends were very sollicitous for his so doing. In fine, after having so long resisted the wholsom Ad∣vice of his Friends, he was at last alarm'd without a cause. Talking in his Bed with one Monsieur de Vineuil, he receiv'd a Note from a Gentleman, who acquainted him, that two Companies of the Guards were under Arms, and going to march to∣wards the Fauxbourg of St. Germans. This News made him believe they design'd to Invest the Hstel of Conde, which stands in that Suburb: Insomuch that without calling to mind that those Companies were often employd to Guard the Gates, to cause the Duties of Entrance to be paid, which was the end for which they were commanded at that time, he imagin'd they had a Design against his Person.
It is certain that in a Manifesto which appear'd soon after to justifie his removal from Paris, he dclar'd, that besides the movement of the Regimen of Guards,The Prince quits Paris to retire to St. Maur. two or three hundred Persons had been observ'd moving to and fro that Night in the said Suburb. All this then being preceded by the Ad∣vices of his particular Friends, he took Horse in a hurry, and left Paris only attended by seven  eight Men. Being accompany'd by that inconsiderable number, at his going out he was encountred by Two Hundred of Mazarin's Friends arm'd, who notwithstanding durst not undertake any thing a∣gainst him, and let him pass by. He tarry'd some time in the Road for News from the Prince of Conty, to whom he had sent Notice of what past. But a second pleasant Alarm oblig'd him to quit his Post.A pleasant Alarm. Hearing the noise of a great number of Horses, which mov'd towards him on a Tro, he fancy'd it was a Squadron in pursuit of him; and therefore retir'd towards Fleuri near Meudon: However it prov'd that they were only Haglers who travell'd all Night towards Paris. As soon as the Prince of Conty was inform'd that his Brother was retir'd from Paris, he acquainted the Duke de la Rochefoucault with it, who went to joyn the Prince; but the Prince sent him back imme∣diately to Paris, to acquaint the Duke of Orleance from him with the subject of his removal to St. Maur. The Princess, the Prince of Conti, and Ma∣dame de Longueville arriv'd there almost as soon as the Prince:The Prince's Court at St. Maur. And in the first days that Court was as considerable, and as full of Persons of Quality as the King's; moreover he provided all manner of Divertisements to serve his Policy, as Balls, Plays, Gaming, Hunting, and good Chear, which drew a world of wavering Persons thither, which always offer themselves at the forming of Parties, and commonly betray or forsake them, according to
heir Fears or Hopes. However it was judg'd that this great number of People might break the Mea∣ures the Court might have taken for the Besieging of St. Maur, and that this Croud, which on any oher occasion would have been useless and trouble∣some, would be of use in this, and serve to give some Reputation to their Affairs. During these Transactions the Marshals of Gra∣mont and of Villeroy continually mov'd to and fro from the Queen, to endeavour to accommodate those Affairs. The Prince was long before he would admit them in private, and told them, that there was no Safety for him in Paris,The Prince of Conde's Complaints. and that he would never find any there while Mazarin govern'd the Court, as he did by Le Tellier, Servient, and Lionne. That the Cardinal did not live at Breuil like an Exile, but as an Oracle that was continually con∣sulted against him: That having suffer'd so hard, and so unjust a Prison, he knew by Experience that his Innocence could not protect him, or establish his Safety, which he hop'd to find in a Retreat, in which he would still preserve the same Sentiments he had so often evidenc'd for the benefit of the State, and for the King's Glory. The Prince had several Conferences with the Duke of Orleance upon the same Subject, who was as much displeaed as himself, to find the Spirit and Maxims of Cardinal Mazarin Reigning at Court. The Parliament like∣wise made several Complaints about it, and joyn'd with their Highnesses to exclude Le Tellier, Servient, and Lionne both from the Council and Ministry of Affairs, they following the Cardinal's Maxims in all things, and doing nothing without his Orders: Monsieur Le Tellier upon this retir'd of his own ac∣cord, and the Queen having soon after consented to the Exclusion of the two others, the Prince came back to Paris,The Prince returns to Paris. and waited upon the King and Queen, and no longer thought of any thing but
taking Possession of his New Government of Guienne. But before his departure from Paris, he was de∣sirous to shew the Sumptuous Equipage he had pre∣par'd for his Entry into Bourdeaux. Therefore e appear'd in the Streets of Paris in a Magnificen Coach, accompany'd with the most Numerous, and most Glorious Attendance that had been seen in France for a long while; after which he went to the Ring with the same Equipage, where he met the King and Queen accidentally, and in Circum∣stances very different from those of the preceding Meeting I have mention'd. The King and Queen were extreamly surpriz'd and disorder'd to find themselves, as it were, alone amidst a croud of armed Men, compos'd of the Prince's Friends and Attendance, which fill'd up the Ring. The Queen was already very much displeas'd with the Prince, for his having ceas'd to see the King of late, and his being continually with Monsieur, and such of the Parliament as were most animated against the Cardinal; in so much that she was under great Apprehensions at that time. Moreover some Per∣sons of the Court talk'd of it, as if he had really design'd to insult Their Majesties, which made an end of exasperating them against the Prince. The Duke of Orleance having notice of it the next day, endeavour'd to pacifie all, and engag'd the Prince with great difficulty to go to the Louvre. Where Their Majesties receiv'd him so coldly, and with so much indifference, that he retir'd in a Passion, and protested publickly that he would go there no more. This was done in so high a man∣ner, that from that moment People began to be∣lieve the Report that had been spread, of the Prince of Conde's having an Intelligence with the Enemies of the State to wage a War against the King.
The first President Molé himself, who was the Prince's Friend, complain'd of it in a full House, in so much that he seem'd already to have re∣nounc'd his Friendship;Complaints of the first President against the Prince of Conde's Conduct. so much he was a lover of Justice, and had an aversion to Disloyalty and Rebellion against his King. And the Prince of Conty, being at that time in the Parliament, rising to inform that President how Injurious that Suspi∣cion was to the Prince his Brother, who, as he said, aim'd at nothing but the King's Glory, and the Tranquility of the State; he answer'd him, That he was too Young to speak in such a manner be∣fore so August an Assembly, and told him with some sharpness, that he ought to know that in Par∣liament the Princes of the Blood were no more than the bare Counsellors. The President Molé did not Complain without powerful Reasons against the Conduct and ill De∣signs of the Prince.Foundation of those Complaints. For besides divers other things that were come to his knowledge, the Prince, who had only quitted St. Maur to return to Paris, be∣cause he believ'd that this haughty, bold manner of proceeding would give a Reputation to his Af∣fairs, had at the same time sent away the Princess, the Duke D' Enguien, and Madame de Longueville to Montrond, being resolv'd to follow soon after, and to pass from thence into Guienne, where they were well dispos'd to receive him, and to embrace his Party. He had likewise sent the Count de Ta∣vanes to his Forces which serv'd in the Army in Champagne, and had order'd that Count, who at the same time had not much cause to be contented with him, to March those Troops in a Body to Stenay as soon as he should receive Orders from him. He had provided for his Garrisons, and had Two Hundred Thousand Crowns ready Money; in a word, he was preparing for War. He endeavour'd to engage Persons of Quality in his Party, and
among the rest the Duke of Bouillon, and Marshal Turenne. They were both intimate Friends to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who omitted nothing to engage them in the same Party he was oblig'd to follow. The Duke of Bouillon at that time appear'd unresolv'd; he was unwilling to undertake any thing without consulting his own Safety and Advantage, and he was equally diffident of the Court and Prince. He was also willing to see how things would go, before he would declare himself. As for the Marshal of Turenne,Marshal Turenne refuses to take the Prince's Party. he remain'd still firm to the Court Party, and never alter'd since his return from Stenay. He told the Duke de la Rochefoucalt, that he never prais'd the Prince, or made Com∣plaints against him, to avoid Eclaircissements he was unwilling to enter into. That he had omitted nothing to contribute to the Prince's Liberty; but that at the same time it was his Opinion that his Engagement to him was to end with his Prison; and that therefore he thought himself free to make whatever new Engagements he thought fit, accord∣ing to his own Inclinations, or Interest. He ad∣ded, that the Prince had had no consideration for him since his being put at Liberty, and that far from consulting, or imparting his Designs to him, he had not only done the contrary, but besides had suffer'd those very Troops that had combated for him, which did belong to Monsieur de Turenne to perish, rather than speak a word to get Winter Quarters for them. It appear'd by all this that President Mole's Zeal had not been blind, and that he had a good Foun∣dation for his Complaints. The Queen perceiving the first President to be in the state, and in the Sen∣timents she desir'd, and that he had spoken vigo∣rously against the Prince, endeavour'd to improve that favourable Occasion to animate the Parliament against that Prince. To that end, she caused the
Houses t meet on the 17th. of August, and sent the Co of Brienne, Secretary of State, thither, to present them a Paper in His Majesty's Name, which contain'd nothing but Complaints against the Prince. Moreover the Count read it himself in presence of the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Conty, who were in that Assembly. These Complaints were, That whereas so many Decrees, which depriv'd that Cardinal of all manner of Commerce in France, the which had been confirm'd in such a manner by Her Ma∣jesty, that there was no hope left for him ever to pretend to return into the Kingdom, she thought it very hard and strange that notwithstanding, that Minister's Name should serve for a pretence to dis∣affected Persons to continue their Revol. That she could no longer dissemble the Prince's Ill Designs, who himself inclin'd the disaffected to a Revolt, by his publick want of Respect to the King's Per∣son, not having seen him above once, and as it were only out of Ceremony, in above a Month's time since his being in Paris. That he continually spread Libels against the Government, in order to make the People Rise, and to lead them from their Al∣legiance. That he had already laid in Stores, and fortify'd the Garrisons that were in his Power, rais'd Forces in the Provinces he had gain'd, and dispos'd all things so well towards a Revolt, that the Factious only expected his Orders to take Arms. That to that end he had a continual Commerce at Brssels with the Spaniards, and that far from per∣forming the chief Condition on which he was set at Liberty, which was to remove the Garrison, the Enemies of the State had plac'd in Stenay, he kept it still there by their Advice, in order still to have that Post at his Command during the War he de∣sign'd to kindle in the heart of France.
That the Forces he had assembled at Marle, ac∣knowledg'd no Superiour but his Highness, and had no Discipline besides a cruel License of Pilla∣ging Picardy and Champagne, as an Enemy's Coun∣try, to the dishonour and prejudice of the King's Army, which was daily observ'd to diminish con∣siderably by the great number of Deserters, that License brought over into the Prince's. The Queen concluded, saying, that those dismal pressing Ex∣tremities deserv'd to be taken into Consideration by the House, in order to apply proper Remedies thereunto, by declaring themselves absolutely a∣gainst the Authors thereof; and that if they had still the least Affection and Kindness for the King, they could never approve it better than at that time, now His Majesty was going to enter into his Ma∣jority, at which time, according to Law, they were to give him an Account of the Government. After the Reading of this Paper, a general Si∣lence reign'd in the House, none offering to ex∣press their thoughts about it, excepting the Prince of Conty,The Prince of Conty's Answer. who declar'd pretty coldly, That all this was only a vain Artifice of his Brother's Enemies, and that he would find means to destroy and con∣found them However at that time there was a great deal of reason to fear the contrary, by reason of the then disposition of the Parliament. But an In∣cident interven'd which soon alter'd the Dispositi∣ons of that August Assembly, which enabled the Prince happily to execute what the Prince of Conty had so boldly advanc'd in his favour against the Complaints of the Court. And thus it happen'd. As the Parliament was going to deliberate upon these Complaints, News was brought that the Duke of Mercoeur was privately retir'd to Cologne to the Cardinal,Effects of the Iourney and Mar∣iage of the Duke of Mercoeur. and moreover that he had marry'd his Niece of Manciny, to which the Queen had secretly given her Consent. Upon which the Parliament,
who together with the Prince had already suffici∣ently declar'd their dislike of the said Match, ex∣press'd a great deal of Resentment against it, and judg'd that his Highness was not altogether so much to blame as was imagin'd, in complaining still a∣gainst Mazarin after his retreat out of France; and look'd upon that Match as an undeniable Proof of the excessive Power wherewith that Cardinal still rul'd the Court. Therefore, The Prince looking upon this as a very favourable Conjuncture to clear himself from the Aspersions that had been cast upon him,Monsieur's Declara∣tion. pre∣sented a Declaration to the Parliament, written by the hand of Monsieur the King's Uncle, wherein he declar'd, That the Forces the Prince had at Marle, were kept there by his Royal Highnesses Approba∣tion; That it was by his Order they tarry'd there in a Body, and moreover that he had sent le Sieur Valons, to Command them joyntly with his own, in the room of la Ferté Sennetterre, who was a per∣fect Mazarin. That as to the Foreign Garrison that was in Stenay, he was satisfy'd that the Prince had usd his utmost Endeavours to remove them from thence, either by Force, or Composition. That, in a word, he though himself oblig'd to Testifie for his Highness, that he had ever known him to be a Person of an Upright, Generous Soul, entire∣ly devoted to the King and State. And that there∣fore he declar'd he had not the least hand in the precipitated Resolution of the Court to have him Impeach'd of High Treason, for pretended Cor∣respondencies with the Enemies of the Crown. The Prince had no need of any further Apology, after this Declaration of the Duke of Orleance, Lieutenant-General of the Kingdom, especially since the Parliament was sufficiently inclin'd to be∣lieve him Innocent. Nevertheless, the more to confound his Enemies, and to hinder them from
doing of him any prejudice by their Accusations, he added a kind of Maniesto to his Royal High∣nesses Declaration, in Answer to all the Heads of their Accusations against him. The Prince of Conde's Manifesto.He declar'd in the said Manifesto, that he pos∣sess'd no other Estate in France than what his Fa∣ther the late Prince of Conde had left him. That the Cities of Stenay and Clermont had been given him in compensation for the Place of Lord Ad∣miral, which was to be his by Right of Succession, after the Decease of Marshal de Breze his Father-in-law. That after having undergone an Impri∣sonment of Thirteen Months without a Cause, his being put at Liberty should not have been call'd an Act of Grace, but a piece of Justice. That a Prince of the Blood, whose Father had been de∣clar'd Head of the Council by the late King's Te∣stament, could not be excluded from it. That it was very well known that he had no Strong Holds in the Kingdom to Second his pretended Designs of a Revolt; whereas Mazarin was still in possession of them all by his Creatures. That the Court was to blame to envy those few Men he had at Marle, since France was particularly indebted to them for the best part of its last Victories; and that besides they were only assembled there by his Royal High∣nesses Order, who was the Absolute Master there∣of. That the only Reason for which he had de∣sir'd the Court to exchange his Government of Bur∣gundy for Guienne, was to Relieve that poor Pro∣vince from the Misery it was reduc'd to under the proud and violent Domination of the Duke d' E∣spernon, whose Excesses were but too well known in the World. That if he had reserv'd any Places in Burgundy, it was because they were his, the late Prince his Father having bought them, by His Ma∣jesty's Leave and Approbation; and that for that Reason he had a Right to keep them, especially
since no others had been given him in exchange in Guienne. That it was true, that he had abstain'd for some time from seeing the King, and from as∣sisting at the Council; but that no Man of Sense could blame him for it, since his most inveterate Foes, being most in Her Majesty's favour, he had reason to suspect them, and to avoid falling, for the second time, in the same Snare. That since his coming out of Prison, he had been most sol∣licitous to drive the Spanish Garrison out of Stenay and that that was the only end of all that pretend∣ed Commerce with the Enemies of the State, which made so much noise; and that therefore it was a shame to see a Prince of the Blood, under such a Pretence, pursu'd as being guilty of High Treason, and that at the Queen's sollicitations. That the Authors of that outragious Undertaking ought to be inform'd against, and constrain'd either to ju∣stifie their Calumny, or to be prosecuted accord∣ing to Law. That, notwithstanding, he submit∣ted his Estate and Person to the disposal of the Parliament, and to whatever they should be pleas'd to determine. The Prince finding that this Paper had made strong Impressions in his favour,The Prince of Conde demands Iustice of the Parlia∣ment a∣gainst his Accusers. and that all things tended to his Justification in the Parliament, went thither himself, to renew his Complaints Viva Voce, and to demand reparation for the enormous Ca∣lumnies level'd against his Honour, pointing at the same time at the Author's thereof. He said among several other things whereby he design'd the Co∣adjutor of Paris, that nothing could be more odi∣ous than to see Persons whose main business should tend towards the maintaining of Peace, apply themselves unfortunately to the disturbing of it, by outragious Falsities, which an implacable Ha∣tred had made them invent. The Coadjutor justly applying that Discourse to himself, finding himself
seconded by the Queen's Authority and Protection, rising at the same time, answer'd, That all he had done was design'd for the Publick Good, and what could be expected from a Man of Honour, whose Loyalty was untainted; That his Enemies could not accuse him of having broken his Promises, and that few Persons, at that time, were free from that defect. I wonder, reply'd the Prince, who possess'd himself more in that Occasion than he was wont to do, that any body should be so bold in this place, as to dare to cope with a Prince of the Blood, and to con∣test with him. I know, Sir, reply'd the Coadjutor, what is owing to a Prince of the Blood like you: But every body is free in this place; in which, none but the King can expect a perfect Obedience. The First President then assuming the Discourse, told them, that the Place in which they were, was not a place of Quarrel, or Conestation, but a place of Majesty: And seeing besides that the whole Palace was fill'd, on the behalves of the Prince and Coadjutor, with armed Men, ready to Charge each other, and that even Swords glitter'd on all sides, he desir'd the Prince and the Coad∣jutor to cause their Men to retire, in order to al∣low the Gentlemen of the House the Liberty of their Opinions. After this, he turn'd towards the Prince, and told him, Your Highness is to shew by your Example the Honour and Respect that is due to this Assembly. The Prince yielding to that Advice, immedi∣ately sent the Duke de la Rochefoucault to Command his People to retire out of the Palace.Disorder in the great Hall. The Co∣adjutor at the same time went out of the great Room to desire his to retire also. The Duke de la Rochefoucault walk'd seven or eight steps behind him, and was still within the Usher's Bar when the Coadjutor appear'd in the great Hall. At sight of this Prelate all those of his Party drew their
Swords, and the Prince's Friends did the same. Every one sided with the Party he serv'd, and in a moment both Troops joyn'd within reach of their Swords, and yet among so many brave Men, ani∣mated by such different hatreds, none offer'd to make a Pass, or shoot off a Pistol. The Coadjutor seeing so great a Disorder, offer'd to retire into the great Room again: but coming to the Door which goes from the Hall to the Usher's Bar, he found that the Duke de la Rochefoucault had seiz'd it. However he endeavour'd to open it with force: but whereas it only open'd half, and that the Duke de la Rochefoucault held it, that Duke at the instant the Coadjutor was entring, push'd it in such a man∣ner, that he stopt it just as that Prelate's Head was pass'd on the side of the Bar, and his Body still in the Hall. That occasion might have tempted the Duke de la Rochefoucault to kill the greatest Enemy of the Prince's Party, and to Revenge the Shame and Affront a Prince of the Blood had just re∣ceiv'd in full Parliament. He contented himself however with securing him, that his Life might answer for the Event of the Disorder. Thus the Duke de la Rochefoucault, unwilling to commit an Act of Cruelty, and the Prince's Attendants, who at that time were near that Duke, being unresolv'd in a case of that Consequence, gave time to Mon∣sieur de Champlatreux, Son to the first President, to arrive, with Order to dis-engage the Coadjutor, and to draw him out of the greatest peril, he was ever expos'd to. This proceeding of the Duke de la Rochefoucault towards the Coadjutor,The Duke of Orleance's Expedient. prov'd a new Subject of Hatred and Envy amongst them and their Friends, which without doubt would have occasion'd great Disorders, had not the Duke of Orleance compos'd all by an Expedient he invented, which was, That for the future the Coadjutor should no longer assist
at the Assemblies of the Parliament; and that the Prince should only be attended there by a small number of his ordinary Attendance. During these Transactions the Queen perceiving that the Parliament daily declar'd more and more in favour of the Prince,The Prince of Conde justify'd. and that she should ex∣pose her Authority in vain in pursuing his Con∣demnation any further, on a sudden relinquish'd her pursuit, and declar'd that she desir'd nothing so much as his Justification: And some days after it the Prince of Conde, at her Majesty's Intreaty, obtain'd a Decree from the Court, by which the Accusations, and Complaints exhibited against him, were declar'd false, and without ground, as having been contriv'd on purpose to animate the People, and to increase Divisions. After so many Obstacles were happily remov'd, there was reason to expect that all things would soon be reduc'd to a Calm. But the Storm soon rose again about the The Bar∣bons, or peo∣ple wearing long Beards. Barbons: Thus they call'd Monsieur de Châteauneuf, President Mole, and Mon∣sieur de la Vieville, by reason of their long Beards. Those three Old Men, whom the Prince look'd upon as the Cardinal's Slaves, had insinuated them∣selves so far into the Queen's favour, and had en∣gag'd so far into the Intrigues of the Court, since the removal of Messieurs de Servient, Le Tellier, and Lionne, that Monsieur de Chateauneuf was publickly design'd First Minister, President Mole Lord-Keeper of the Great Seal, in Monsieur Seguier's room, from whom it was to be taken, and Monsieur de la Vic∣ville Super-Intendant of the Exchequer. The Prince was so much the more offended therea, because the first had, as it were, declar'd himself an Enemy to his House and Blood, by the Sentence of Death he had pronounc'd at Toulouse against the Duke of Montmorancy; and that it was sufficiently known that the second was not well inclin'd towards him of late
This perhaps was the justest subject of Anger and Indignation the Prince had yet met with: But whatever Complaints he could make to the Court about it,A just cause of Com∣plaint of the Prince. they being perswaded that he had been engag'd with the Spaniards to wage a War against the King, they were only look'd upon as affected Complaints, and Desires, by which he on∣ly propos'd a fair pretence to retire. In the mean time the King's Majority was at hand:The King's Majority. this was the fourth of September, and the Ceremony thereof was to be perform'd on the seventh. This troubled and disquieted the Prince of Conde. He was sensible that this Majority was going to render the King's Authority Absolute, and that the King being at Age, there would be no longer any Safety for him in Paris. He also re∣membred that it was no Novelty to see those kind of Publick Festivals and Solemnities ully'd by the most bloody, and most daring Actions. But at the same ime he consider'd that he could not ab∣sent himself from so Great, and so August a Ce∣remony, without despising too publickly the Rank he was to have in it, and without confirming, and augmenting those very Suspicions that had been conceiv'd against him: Therefore there was a ne∣cessity at least to find out an apparent Pretence to colour his Absence. To that end he made use of one Prioly, a Vene∣tian Gentleman,The Prince of Conde will not as∣sist at the Ceremony of the King's Ma∣jority. to let the Queen understand that he had Business of great Moment to regulate with the Duke of Longueville, and that it concern'd the Publick to have it terminated as soon as could be. This Gentleman was secretly a Friend to the Car∣dinal, and a Pensionary to the Court: He had in∣sinuated himself into the Queen's Favour by his Wit, and by several Services he had rendred her on sundry Occasions, as well as to the Cardinal. And therefore it was not difficult for him to per∣swade
Her Majesty to give her Consent to the In∣terview the Prince desir'd with the Duke of Lon∣gueville, who only consented to it upon the secret assurance he receiv'd in Writing from Prioly, that thereby he would render an acceptable Service to His Majesty. Whereupon the Rendezvous was immediately appointed at Trie. The Prince of Conde endeavours to engage the Duke of Longue∣ville in his Party.The Prince of Conde's Design was not only to have an Occasion to absent himself from the Ce∣remony of the Majority, but also to endeavour to draw the Duke of Longueville in his Party, and by his means to make all Normandy rise in his favour, thereby to give his Party the more Weight and Reputation, especially among stran∣gers. That Duke, who had only endeavour'd to avoid that Interview out of fear of so dangerous an Engagement, was resolv'd not to hearken to the Prince's Propositions, and moreover to disuade him from it as much as possible he could. And whereas Prioly, in whom both did confide, only design'd to fortifie the Duke in his Resolution, in order to discover the better by his resistance, the real Designs, and all the Intrigues of the Prince; the Queen thereby had the Satisfaction to see that the Prince's Cunning and Industry were em∣ploy'd to deceive himself. The Prince of Conde repair'd to the Duke of Longueville at Trie on the appointed day. But be∣fore his departure, he left a Letter with the Prince of Conty for the King, wherein he acquainted His Majesty with the Reasons that hindred him from attending him on the Day of his Majority, and promis'd him an inviolable Loyalty. The Day the Ceremony was perform'd, a little before the King and Court set oward towards the The place where the Parliament Assembles. Palais, the Prince of Conty presented his Brother's Letter to the King. The King receiv'd that Letter with a cold negligent Air, without saying any thing, and
hardly open'd it half, without looking upon the Contents. While the Prince endeavour'd at Trie to engage the Duke of Longueville in his Party, the Duke de la Rochefoucault labou'd at Paris to draw the Duke of Bouillon,The Duke de la Roche∣foucault en∣deavours to engage con∣siderable Persons in the Prince's Party. the Marshal of Turenne, the Prince of Tarente, and the Marquess de la Force into the same Party. In order to conclude with the Duke of Bouillon, who offer'd to declare for the Prince, and to prevail with his Brother the Marshal, and the others above nam'd, to embrace the same Interests. The Duke de la Rochefoucault in the Prince's Name promis'd him the following Conditions.The Duke de la Roche∣foucault Treats with the Duke of Bouillon on the Prince's behalf. 1. To give him Stenay, with the demeans thereof, which he should enjoy with the same Rights and Privi∣ledges the Prince did, until he had caus'd Sedan to be restor'd to him, or else had put him in posses∣sion of the Recompence the Court had promis'd him in exchange for that place. 2. To yield his Pretensions to him upon the Dutchy of Albret. 3. To cause him to be receiv'd into Bellegarde with the Command of that place, and to make no Trea∣ty without causing the Article about the Rank of his House to be compris'd in it. 4. To furnish him a Sum of Money they should agree upon, to raise Forces, in order to make War. The Duke de la Rochefoucault propos'd besides to send the Marshal of Turenne to Stenay, to Clermont, and Danvilliers, there to Command the Prince's Old Troops, which were to retire there, the which being joyn'd to those the Spaniards were to send thither from Flan∣ders, Moieur de Turenne should possess the same Post, which Madame de Longueville and he held while the Princes were in Prison. he was more∣over order'd by the Prince to tell him next, that he design'd to leave the Prince of Conty, Madame de Longueville, and Monsieur de Nemours at Bourges and Montrond, there to raise Men, and make them∣selves
Masters of Berri, of the Bourbonnois, and part of Auvergne, while the Prince should go to Bourdeaux, where he was call'd by the Parliament, and by the People, and where the Spaniards wold furnish him with Forces, Money, and Ships, ac∣cording to the Treaty the Marquess of Sillery had made with the Count of Fuensaldaigne, to facilitate the Rising of the Forces he design'd to raise in Guienne. That the Count of Doignon entred into his Party, to which he joyn'd the Cities of Brouage, R, Oleron, and Rochel: That the Duke of Riche∣lieu would raise Men in Saintonge, and in the Coun∣try of Aunis; The Marquess de la Force in Guienne; The Duke de la Rochefoucault in Poitou and Angou∣mois; The Marquess of Montespan in Gascony; Mon∣sieur d' Arpagon in Rouergue; and that Monsieur de Marsin, who commanded the Army in Catalonia, would be grateful. So many fair Prospects for∣tify'd the Duke of Bouillon in his Design of En∣gaging with the Prince; for which he engag'd his Word to the Duke de la Rochfoucault, on the aforesaid Conditions. Monsieur de Longue∣ville refuses to declare himself.As for Monsieur de Longueville, the Prince could not engage him so far, nor obtain any positive Pro∣mise from him, whether it were that he was un∣resolv'd, or unwilling to enter into a Party, he thought his Wife had form'd, or finally, whether he thought that being engag'd with the Prince, he should be carry'd farther, than he was us'd to go. The Prince of Conde goes from Trie to Chantilly.From Trie, the Prince went to Chantilly, without going through Pontoise, though it was his way, for fear of being watch'd at the passage; and indeed his fear was well grounded, since the Count d' Har∣court and the Dutchess of Eguillon, who had an Ab∣solute Power in those Parts, had made Proposals to the Queen to seize him there, and had dispos'd every thing in order thereunto.
When he was arriv'd at Chantilly, he consider'd that the Dangers which threaten'd him daily in∣creas'd, and that he could not arry long there in safety. Thus, in order to secure his Retreat,The Prince's Retreat. and to amuse the Court while he retir'd to Montrond, he caus'd cunningly some Propositions or an Ac∣commodation to be made to the Queen. In the mean time he remov'd from Chantilly with some Troops of Horse; and having arry'd one day at Angerville at the President Perrault's House, he re∣pair'd to Borgs, where the Applauses of e Peo∣ple and Nobility rais'd his Hopes to that de∣gree, that he imagin'd the whole Kingdom was going to imitate their Example, and declae for him. The Duke of Orleance, who till then had omit∣ted nothg to put a stop to the secret Motions of the Prince of Conde,Monsieur dispatches Croisy to the Prince of Conde, about an Accommo∣dation. and to stile all his Designs of a Civil War, by an Accommodation he endeavour'd to manage for him at the Court, was strangely surpriz'd at his sudden departure. He dispatch'd Monsieur de Croissy to him within a few days, to offer him Just and Reasonable Conditions for an Accommodation, from the Queen, for the per∣formance of which he promis'd to be Security. Those Conditions were, That his Highness should remain in full Liberty in his Government of Guienne, and that his Forces, for which he express'd so great a Concern, should have good Winter Quarters, where they should be in safety, and free from all manner of Injuries, or Violence. Monsieur de Croissy met the Prince at Bourges, who seeing him∣self so near Montrond, answer'd Monsieur de Cro∣iss, that he could not handsomly accept Monsieur's offers on the Queen's, and his own behalf, with∣ou first conferring with the Prince of Conty his Brother, and the Dutchess of Longueville his Sister about it, who at that time were at Montrond, to∣gether
with the Dukes of Nemours and de la Roche∣foucault. This Conference only produc'd a Re∣fusal of the offers that had been made, and a firm Resolution of beginning a Civil War in earnest.
MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK V. CRoissy's Journey thus proving ineffectual, the Prince continu'd his, and arriv'd at Montrond, where he was expected by the Princess, and by Madame de Longueville.The Civil War, ex∣tracted out of the Me∣moirs of the Duke de la Rochefou∣cault. He remain'd there a day to examine the place, which he found the finest, and in the best Condi∣tion imaginable: That very day he drew full In∣structions to Treat with the King of Spain, in which his most considerable Friends were com∣pris'd. Monsieur L' Aisne was chosen for that Ne∣gotiation. Aterwards the Prince gave his Brother and Monsieur de Nemour Money to raise Men in the adjacent Provinces, leaving Vineuil, Intendant of Justice, with them to begin to raise La Taille, a Duty ex∣acted by the King. Contribu∣tions upon Berri and Bourbonnois. He desir'd them to have a particular regard for the City of Bourges, and to maintain it in the same disposition he had et it. The following day he departed from Mon∣trond
with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, at whose House they call'd, where they found abundance of Gentry, who follow'd him. He repai'd with speed to Bourdeaux, where the Princess, and the Duke d' Enguien soon arriv'd after him. He was receiv'd by all the Companies of the City with a great deal of Joy, and it were difficult to decide whether tose fiery people, accustom'd to Revols, were more affected with the Grandeur of his Birth and Reputation, than with their looking upon him as the most Potent Enemy the Duke d' Espernon had. He found the Parliament in the same disposition, and they issu'd out whatever Decrees he desir'd in his Favour. Things being thu happily begun, he thought nothing more proper, than to seize all the King's Revenues in Bourdeaux, and to employ that Mo∣ney in raising of Men speedily, supposing that the Court would immediately March towards him, with whatever Forces they had, in order not to allow him time to draw his in a Body. For that reason, he distributed his Money to all those who were engag'd with him, and press'd them so much to make their Levies, that his Precipitation serv'd them for a pretence to make ill ones. Within a few days after his Arrival, the Count du Doignon came to him, and openly declar'd for his Party; The Duke of Richelieu, and the Marquess de la Force did the same, and the Prince of Tarente, who was come to Taillebourg, sent him word that he likewise enter'd into his Party. Mon∣sieur d' Arpajou was more difficult to be wrought, and he made use of the same Conduct on this Oc∣casion, for which he had already been rewarded during the Princes Imprisonment; He demanded Conditions which could not be granted, and treated with the Court, when he found that the Affairs of the Prince were decaying.
During these Transactions, the Duke de la Roche∣fcault gave the Duke of Bouillon an Account of ha had past at the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and told him at the same time, that the Conditions he d der'd being perform'd, the execution of his Promises was expected. This Duke, for a conside∣rable time, avoided the giving a positive Answer, being desirous, at once, to keep in with the Court, which made him great Advances, and not to break with the Prince, of whom he might stand in need. He likewise saw, that Monsieur de Turenne, whose Interests he once thought inseparable from his, re∣fus'd to joyn with the Prince; That the Prince of Tarente had embrac'd that Party without him, and that the Marquess de la Force remain'd united to Monsier de Turenne. He consider'd, moreover, that neither being follow'd by his Brother, nor by the others I have mention'd, according to his En∣gagement with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, there would not be so much safety for him in the Party he was going to embrace; and that the Prince would express no more Gratitude for what Mon∣sieur de Turenne and he would do for the future, than for what they had already done. He likewise found that there would be a necessity of making a new Treaty with the Prince, less advantageous for him than that they had already agreed upon. In fine, all these Reasons joyn'd to the Promises he receiv'd from the Court, and seconded by all the Industry of his Dutchess, who had a great Influence over him, hindred him from following his first Design, and from declaring for the Prince: But then, in order to get off handsomly, he turn'd Mediator for an Accommodation between him and the Court. After having had some particular Confernces with the Queen upon that Subject, he sent back Gourville, who hd been dispatch'd to him from the Duke de la Rochefoucault, to offer the Prince whatever he had
demanded for himself, and for his Friends, toge∣ther with the disposal of the Government of Blae, without requiring any other Conditions on his side, than those Servient and de Lionne had demanded in the first Project of the Treaty, which was made at Paris, at his coming out of Prison. Moreover, Monsieur de Chateauneuf offer'd o∣ther Propositions of Accommodation by the said Gourville, but whereas they tended to hinder the Cardinal's Return, his Offers could not equal those the Queen had made him by the Duke of Bouillon. He only offer'd to remain inseparably united to the Prince after the Cardinal's overthrow, and to allow him whatever share he should desire in the Government of Affairs. The Court offer'd be∣sides to consent to an Interview between him and the Duke of Orleance at Richelieu, there to Examine together the Conditions of a sincere Peace, where∣unto the Court seem'd to be sincerely inclin'd. But it was the Misfortune of France, and his own, that he refus'd to hearken to so many Advantage∣ous Proffers, being vexd that the Queen's offers should be made by the Duke of Bouillon's means, by reason that he had expected that the said Duke and his Brother would be very considerable to his Party, being sensible that none could maintain the Posts of Bellegarde and Stenay like them; and that besides the old Troops he had left there to be Com∣manded by the Marshal of Turenne, thereby re∣main'd useless, and were in danger of being dissi∣pated or defeated. He consider'd besides that the Measures he had taken with the Spaniards towards Champain would be of no effect, and that neither his own Troops, nor the Spaniards should be able to find out a Chief to fill up that Post, with that Esteem the World had for Monsieur de Turenne. All these Reasons touch'd the Prince sensibly, and tho' he endeavour'd to conceal his Resentments, he could
not forbear answering the Duke of Bouillon pretty smartly; That it was not Honourable to hearken to Propositions one had no mind to effectuate: That he should declare himself according to his Promise; That Monsieur de Turenne should repair at the Head of the Forces that were gone to Ste∣nay, and that then he would be in a condition to hearken to the offers of the Court, and to make an Honourable Treaty. Gourville was sent back with the said Answer, and order'd to acquaint the Duke of Orleance with the Reasons for which he refus'd an Interview at Richelieu. The chief were, That the aim of the said Conference was not to make a Peace, but only to hinder him from ma∣king War: That while the whole Kingdom was at the point of Declaring against the Court, and the Spaniards were preparing considerable Succours of Men, Money, and Ships, endeavours were us'd to engage him upon a Publick Negotiation, the very tumour of which would hinder his Levies, and debauch all those from him, which were go∣ing to embrace his Party. Besides these general Reasons, there were more particular ones, which did not permit him to trust his Interests in the Duke of Orleance's hands, being jealous of his strict Engagements with the Coadjutor of Paris, his de∣clar'd Enemy, as well as that Prelate's with the Court, which had newly promis'd him a Cardi∣nal's Cap. This Incident put him upon a very strange Resolution; for finding that the Coadjutor, either out of Interest, or Pride, affected to cross him continually, he form'd the Design of seizing him in Paris. Whatever difficulty this Enterprize seem'd to be attended with, Gourville undertook it, after having receiv'd the Princes Order for it in Writing; and the Coadjutor had certainly been taken one Evening he went to the Hostel of Chev∣reuse had he come back in his own Coach; but
having discharg'd it, together with his Attendance, the Coach that carry'd him home again could not be distinguish'd with certainty; in so much that the Business was put off for some days, and after∣wards discover'd; those that are employ'd on such Occasions, having seldom Discretion enough to rest satisfy'd with the knowledge one thinks fit to give them, or Fidelity and Secresie enough to put it safely in Execution. Thus all things were dispos'd for War on all sides. Monsieur de Chateauneuf, who at that time was Head, or President of the Council, had caus'd the Cout to repair to Bourges, where the King's Pre∣sence instantly restor'd that City to its former O∣bedience: At the Report of those happy begin∣nings, the Prince of Conty, Madame de Longueville, and Monsieur de Nemours were oblig'd to quit Mon∣trond, with their Forces, to retire into Guienne. They left the Chevalier de Riviere expiring; he dy'd the same day, regretted by all those who knew him, for besides his being possess'd of all the Qualifications requir'd in a compleat Gentle∣man, few Persons of his Age have given so ma∣ny proofs of Conduct, Fidelity, and Generosity, being free from all Self-Interest, as he had done in so many hazardous Enterprizes in which he had been employ'd. The Marquess de Pergan remain'd Governour of that place, which was block'd up by a small Body lodg'd at St. Amand, of which Palluau was Lieute∣nant-General. The Court was come as far as Poitiers, and Monsieur de Chateauneuf insisted to re∣move it to Angoulesme, considering that since the War was only grounded upon the petence of the Cardinal's Return, it was necessary to improve his Absence, and that it was sufficient for the Interest of the State, and yet more for his own in parti∣cular, to continue his said Absence. He likewise
insisted that the King's Presence was a powerful Motive to keep the people in awe at the Birth of these Disorders; That in drawing near the Prince, who was neither certain of Guienne, nor of the Par∣liament of Bourdeaux, his Designs might easily be dissipated, whereas on the contrary they would be strengthen'd by the absence of the Court. But thse Counsels of Chateauneuf rais'd too much Jea∣lousie in the Cardinal's Friends, to be follow'd at Poitiers, without having first been examin'd at Co∣logne: And whereas they were forc'd to tarry for his Orders, their delays and diversity caus'd conti∣nual Irresolutions, and kept the Court incertain at Poitiers until his Return, which follow'd soon after. On the other hand the Baron of Batteville was ar∣riv'd in the River of Bourdeaux with the Spanish Fleet, composd of Eight Men of War, and some Fire-ships. He fortify'd Talmond, where there was a Body of foot of 1500 Men. The City of Saintes had surrender'd it self without Resistance, Taillebourg, which has a Port upon the Charante, was pretty well fortify'd, and the Prince was Master of the River as far as Angoulesme, excepting Coignac. The Count of Ionsac, the King's Lieutenant in Saintonge, and Governour of Coignac, was there in Person, to the end that place might serve him to make his Conditions the better in the Party he should embrace, being as yet unresolv'd. In this irresolution he began a Commerce of Let∣ters with the Prince, and writ enough to him, to make him believe, that he only design'd to save Appearances, and that he woud deliver it into his hands at the approach of a Siege. This hope, ra∣ther than the state of the Prince's Forces, which at that time were very inconsiderable, made him re∣solve upon Marching towards Coignac. He was sen∣sible that the success of his Enterprizes depended upon the Reputation of his Arms; but at the same time he likewise knew that wanting Forces, and all
things necessary to form a Siege, this was the only one he could pretend to succeed in. So that ground∣ing all his hopes upon that Governour, he caus'd the Duke de la Rochefoucault to go from Bourdeaux, to Assemble whatever Forces he had on Foot, which only amounted in all to three Regiments of Foot, and Three Hundred Horse, and to Invest Coignac, where the Prince of Tarente was to repair with what Forces he had. The Report of their March being spread in the Country, whatever could be remov'd out of the Fields, was carry'd into Coignac, and abundance of the Nobility retir'd there also, to express their Zeal for the King's Service, and chiefly to Guard themselves what they had caused to be transported there. This considerable num∣ber of Gentlemen easily kept the Inhabitants in awe, and made them resolve to shut up their Gates, in hopes of being soon reliev'd by Count d' Har∣court, General of the King's Forces, who was ad∣vancing towards them. And whereas they had but little Confidence in the Count of Ionsac, whom they equally suspected of Weakness, and of being gain'd by the Prince, they watch'd him so narrow∣ly, that one may say, that he resolv'd to defend the place, because the Power of Surrendring it was taken from him. This was the only thing in which the Gentry shew'd any Vigour, for during Eight days that the Prince's Men tarry'd before Coignac, without Arms, without Ammunition, without Officers, and with∣out Discipline, being at the same time fatigu'd by continual Rains, which broke the Bridge of Boats they had made over the Charante, for the Commu∣nication of Quarters; those within never made the least use of those Disorders, and kept close with∣in the Town with the Inhabitants, only firing from behind the Walls. However the Prince being in∣form'd that the Town was upon the point of Sur∣rendring,
departed from Bourdeaux, and came to the Camp, with the Duke of Nemours. The day after his Arrival, the Count d' Harcourt receiving Intelligence that the Bridge of Boats was broken, and that Major-General Nort was retrench'd in a Suburb on the other side of the River with 500 Men, without any possibility of being succour'd, march'd against him with 2000 Foot, compos'd of the French and Suitz Guards, and with the King's Gendarmes, Chevanx-Legers, and Guards, and some Gentry. He forc'd Nort's Quarter without hardly meeting any resistance, and thus reliev'd Coignac to the Prince's Face, who was lodg'd on the other side of the River. Count d' Harcourt was satisfy'd with having Reliev'd the place, and suffer'd the Prince to retire without following of him. Notwithstanding this Success was not very con∣siderable in it self, yet it increas'd Count d' Har∣court's Hopes, and gave a Reputation to his Arms. Nay, moreover he judg'd himself in a condition to make some Progresses, and knowing that the Mar∣quess d' Estissac had reduc'd Rochel to its former O∣bedience, excepting the Towers, which shut the Port, he resolv'd to march thither, relying upon the good-will of the Inhabitants, and their hatred to Count du Doignon their Governour. He had caus'd those Towers to be fortify'd, and kept a Garison of Switzers in them, being diffident almost of every body, and expecting to find more Fide∣lity among that Nation, than in his own. But the sequel soon made him sensible that he had taken alse Measures; for Fear and Interest, which are as powerful over those People as over others, gave the Switz a pretence for doing yet more than he had fear'd from the French. It is most certain that this Diffidence of the Count du Doignon prov'd the Ruin of the Prince's Party, who otherwise would at first have march'd with all his Forces to Rochel,
to re-build its Ancient Fortifications, there to fi the Seat of the War, with all the Convenience that such a Situation could afford him: Whereas in order to sooth the Jealous uncertain Temper of that Man, he was forc'd to remain useless at Tonay-Charante, and to suffer Rochel to be lost, without so much as daring to propose the Relief thereof. I must confess that the small Resistance the Garrison of the Towers made, hardly afforded him time enough to form the Design of it: For Count d' Harcourt being arriv'd with his Forces at Rochel, and assisted by the Marquess d' Estissac, lately in∣vested with the Count du Doignon's Governments, he found he Inhabitants dispos'd to afford him all the Assistance he could expect from them. However the Towers might have held out some time, had the Switzers prov'd as brave and faith∣ful, as that Count had expected. But instead of answering his Expectation, they resolv'd to Re∣deem themselves by a piece of Treachery, and af∣ter a Resistance of three days, Count d' Harcourt having sent them word, that he would allow them no Quarter unless they stab'd Basse their Com∣mandant, they made no scruple of executing this horrid Order: But Basse expecting to meet more Compassion from Count d' Harcourt, than from his own Men, flung himself wounded as he was from the top of the Towers into the Port, where that General caus'd him to be dispach'd in his presence, without being mov'd either by the Officers Entrea∣ties, who beg'd his Life, nor by so pitiful a Spe∣ctacle. The loss of that place prov'd very preju∣dicial to the Reputation of the Prince's Arms, for it was imputed to his being diffident of his Forces, whereas it only proceeded from his regard to the Jealousie of the Count du Doignon. He was sensibly concern'd at the News of it, and imagining that all the other Garrisons would follow that Example,
h rei'd to Broage, where he remain'd altogether  had made his Treaty with the Court, whi apparently he has had cause to repent. Cot d' Harcourt being encourag'd by these good Successes, and strengthen'd by ome Forces, tht hd joyn'd his Army, resolv'd to march up to the Prince, who was at Tonay-Charante. But the Prince judging by the Number, and the want of Discipline of his Forces, that he was much infe∣riour to the King's Army, did not think it fit to expect it in that place, and therefore crossing the River in the Night upon a Bridge of Boats, he re∣ti'd to la Bergerie, which is not above half a League distant from Tonay-Charante. The Enemies contenting themselves with having defeated two Squadrons the day before, allow'd him all the time that was necessary to blow up the Tower of Tonay-Carante, and to retire to  Bergerie without at∣tacking of him. Count d' arcourt at that time lost a fair occasion of falling upon his Rear, when he was half over. The very same day he met with a faire yet, which he had not the wit to improve; for the Prince confiding absolutely on a Major-Ge∣neral, who was commanded by him to burn, or break the Bridge of Boats, on that assurance, posted his Men in divers Quarters, some being a League and a half distant from his own, without fear of a sur∣prize, the River lying between him and the Ene∣my. But this Officer only loosen'd the Boats, and let them float down the stream of the River; in so much that Count d' Harcourt's Men having stopt them, the Bridge was re-built in an hours time, and he caus'd Three Hundred Horse, and some Foot to cross over it to guard the head of the said Bridge. This News being brought to the Prince at La Bergerie, he concluded that Count d' Harcourt would march into the middle of his Quarters, in order to destroy them one after
another, as in Prudence he ought to have done. This oblig'd him to dispatch Orders to his Foces to quit their Quarters, and to repair instantly to La Bergerie, and immediately he march'd himsel towards Tonay-Charante with the Dukes of Nemours and de la Rochefoucault, his Guards, and whatever Officers and Voluntiers happen'd to be about him at that time, to discover the Designs of the Ene∣mies, in order to amuse them, until those of his Men which were most distant from him, were come up to him. He found the Advice that had been given him to be true, and the Three Hun∣dred Horse were in Battalia in the Meadow next to the River: But at the same time he found the Enemies had not bethought themselves of what he fear'd, or had lost the Opportunity of putting it in execution, since that not being pass'd while they could do it without hindrance, there was no likely∣hood they would attempt it in his Presence. Some Skirmishes past for some time without any consi∣derable loss on either side; and his Infantry being arriv'd, he caus'd a long Retrenchment to be made over against the Bridge, leaving the Meadow and the River between Count d' Harcourt and him. The two Armies remain'd above three Weeks in the same place, without undertaking any thing, contenting themselves with living in a Fertil Coun∣try, where all things were plenty. In the mean time, the Duke of Bouillon's delays, and all his Conduct convinc'd the Prince, that he was no longer to expect any thing from him, or from Monsieur de Turenne, and for that Reason he exclaim'd and acted against them with all the Pas∣sion imaginable, altho' their Engagements had been different. For it is most certain that the Duke of Bouillon had made an Agreement with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and afterwards with Monsieur Laisné, upon the Conditions heretofore related.
Monier de Turenne on the contrary, had entirely ndon'd the Prince's Inteests from the very mo∣ment he came out of Prison, and as he has decla'd snce, was absolutely ignorant of the Duke of 's Engagements. The Prince being under the necessity of sending  body without delay to ill up the Post he  design'd for Monsieur de Turenne, cast his Eyes upon the Duke of Nemours, whose Birth and great our might in some mnner stand instead of Monsiur de Turenne's Capacity. He dispatch'd him mmediately for Flanders, but he not being able to spport the Inconveniencies of the Sea, was con∣in'd to go by Land, with a great deal of dan∣ger, and loss of time, by reason of the Forces which brought back the Cardinal into France. He likewise sent the Dake de la Rochefoucault back to Bordeaux, to dispose the Prince of Conty to go to Agn to confirm the Peoples Minds, which began to waver upon the new Progress of the King's Arms. He likewise engag'd him to make a Proposition to the Parliament of Bourdeaux, to consent to the put∣ting of the Baron of Batteville and the Spaniards in possession of the City and Castle of Bourg, which they offer'd to Fortifie. During these Transactions, Fontrailles was sent from the Duke of Orleance to the Prince, to see the state of his Affairs, and to inform him, that the Parlament of Paris was ready to joyn with his Royal Higness to oppose Cardinl Mazarin's return; and that his said Highness was desirous to Act joynly with him in that Affair. Fontrailles like∣wise propos'd to him a Reconciliation with the oadjutor, saying, that the Duke of Orleance de∣ir'd it earnestly. The Prince made no positive Answer to that Article, whether it were that he could take no certain Measure with the Coadjutor, or whether he thought that those he should take
would not be approv'd by Madame de Longuevill and by the Duke de la Rochefoucault, to whom  had made a Promise never to be reconcil'd to th Coadjutor without their Approbation. Howeve he told Fontrailles, that he would do what the Duk of Orleance desird when those Affairs should b somewhat riper, and when that Reconciliaio might be of use for the Common Good of th Party. At this very time Count Marsin joyn'd the Princ at La Bergerie, and brought along with him a Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse of the bes Forces he had in the Army of Catalonia, which h commanded. Many have blam'd this Action, and look'd upon it as a piece of Treason: For my part, without taking upon me to condemn, or defend it, I shall barely relate, that Marsin having long been devoted to the Prince's Service, had receiv'd the Government of Bellegarde (which place belongd to him) from him, and that afterwards he had not only protected him in the Service, but by his Cre∣dit he had obtain'd the Vice-Roy-ship of Catalnia, and the Government of Tortose for him, in which he serv'd the King with great Loyalty, and good Fortune. And when the Prince was made a Pri∣soner, Marsin, who was taken up at the same time, was tax'd with no other Crime than being his Crea∣ture. Nay more, his Government of Tortose being given to Launay Gringelinere, he suffer'd it to be ta∣ken soon after. Marsin's Confinement lasted as long as the Prince's, and after his being put at Liberty, he remain'd some time without any Employment: But the Affairs of Catalonia being in an ill Posture, and the Court being at a loss to find a Person ca∣pable to redress them, Marsin was propos'd for the second time by the Prince, and the Duke de la Roche∣foucault made the overture of it to Monsieur Le Tellier, without Marsin's solliciting in the least for
It was impossible for him to defer his Journey nto Catalonia, to expect the issue of the doubtful things that pass'd at the Court, which were more likely to be decided by an Accommodation, than by a Civil War. Therefore he set forward towards his new Employment, for which he was solely ob∣lig'd to the Prince, who had likewise lately given him the Government of Stenay, which was vacant by the Death of la Moussaie. So that this Action of Marsin may bear two very different Constru∣tions: Those who will consider him abandoning  Province the King had entrusted him with, will find him very disloyal; and those who will look upon him running after most pressing, and almost indispensible Obligations, will believe him a very worthy Gentleman. Few Persons of sense will dare to say that he is Guilty, or declare him In∣nocent. In fine, both those that are against him, and those that favour him, will agree in pitying of him; the one, for a Fault he was necessitated to commit; the others, for having acquitted him∣self of what he ow'd, by a fault. The Court was at that time at Poitiers, as I have said, and Monsieur de Chateauneuf possess'd in appearance the first Place in Affairs, altho' the Car∣dinal still possess'd it in Effect. Nevertheless this Old Man's firm, decisive, familiar way of proceed∣ing directly opposite to the Cardinal's, began to give a relish to his Ministry, and even began to please the Queen. The Cardinal was too well inform'd thereof to suffer him to gain any more ground; and it is very probable that he judg'd his return ab∣solutely necessary to remedy the Evil he dreaded in his own particular, since otherwise he little con∣sulted the Interest of the State; in so much that thereby he afforded the Duke of Orleance, and the Parliament of Paris a Pretence to declare against the Court. The Marshal d' Hoquincourt was order'd
to receive Cardinal Mazarin upon the Frontiers Luxemburg with 2000 Horse, and to attend  where the King should be. He cross'd the Kindom without the least molestation, and arriv'd Poitiers as much Master of the Court as he had  been. They affected to give Monsieur de Chaeaneuf little share in this Return, but still witho altering any thing in the rest as to the exeiou o giving him the least mark of disfavour. Th Cardinal himself made some advances to him, bu he being unwilling to expose himself, and condering that it was neither safe, nor honourable fo a Man of his Age and Experience, to continue  the management of Affairs under his Enemy, an that he should undoubtedly continually be expos' to whatever Mortifications he should be pleas'd t impose upon him; he took this Pretence to retire that whereas, by his Advice, it had been resolv' that the King should remove to Angouléme, tha Design was alter'd without having communicated it to him; and at the same time the Siege of Angers resolv'd upon, contrary to his Sentiments: I so much that having taken his Leave of the King he retir'd to Tours. The Court departed soon af∣ter to go to Angers, where the Duke de la Rochefou∣cault had made the People rise, and that Province had declar'd it self for the Prince, at the very time that the Duke of Orleance and the Paliament of Paris joyn'd with him against the Court. All France seem'd in suspence, in expectation of the Event of that Siege, which might have pro∣duc'd great Consequences, had the Defence of it prov'd long enough, or vigorous enough to stop the King. For besides that, the Prince thereby might have secur'd the best Places, and best Neigh∣bouring Provinces, it is most certain that the Ex∣ample of the Duke of Orleance, and of the Parlia∣ment of Paris, would have been follow'd by the
most considerable part of the Kingdom. In effect, had the Court been forc'd to raise that Siege, it would have been reduc'd to great Extreams, and the King's Person had been expos'd to great dan∣gers had it happen'd at the time the Duke of Nemours entred France with the Army from Flan∣ders and the Prince's Old Troops, without meeting any Resistance. This Army pass'd the River Seine at Mnte, where the Duke of Beaufort, who com∣manded the Duke of Orleance's Forces, joyn'd the said Duke of Nemours, and together march'd with an Army of 7000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, towards the River Loire, where they were certain of Blois and Orleance. But whether Angers were not in a Condition to hold out a Siege, by the Division of the Inhabitants, or whether the Duke de Rohan was unwilling to venture his Life and Fortune in confiding in People that seem'd wavering and astonish'd, he deliver'd up the place to the King without much Resistance, and was allow'd to re∣tire to the Duke of Orleance at Paris. Things were in this condition when the Prince remov'd from La Bergerie, where he had remain'd three Weeks, without Count d' Harcourt's, who was on the other side of the River at Tonay Charante, and Master of the Bridge of Boats, having under∣taken any thing against him. Nevertheless as the Number and Goodness of his Forces was very much inferiour to the King's Army, he avoided the occasions of being constrain'd to so unequal a Combat. To that end he march'd to la Bernette, three Leagues distant from the King's Army, in order to have more time to consider in case they should march up to him. He remain'd there some time without any considerable Action on either side: But finding that far from making any Pro∣gress in that Country, he was not able to remain there in sight of Count d' Harcourt, he turn'd all
his thoughts to the preservation of Guienne, and to Fortifie the Cities that were in his Party. To that end he resolvd to march thither with his Ar∣my, and believ'd himself capable to maintain Saintonge for some time, in leaving on the one side the Count du Doignon in the Garrisons, the Spa∣niards at Talmont, and the Prince of Tarente in Saintes and Taillebourg, to hasten their Fortificati∣ons. Having thus given his Orders, he caus'd his Infantry, and his Baggage to march to Talmont, in order to be Transported by Sea to Bourdeaux, and after a long march with his Cavalry the first day, he stopt the second at St. Andras, within four Leagues of Bourdeaux, believing himself without the Enemy's reach. But Count d' Harcourt, who had follow'd him close, arriv'd within sight of his Quarter, when he least suspected it, and would certainly have forc'd it, had his foremost Troops entred it without hesitation; whereas they plac'd themselves in Battalia over against St. Andras, whilst the others attack'd the Quarter of Baltazar, who repuls'd them with Vigour, and came to joyn the Prince, who got on Horse back at the very first noise. They remain'd some time in sight, but the Night proving very dark, there was no Combat, and the Prince retir'd without any loss, being more oblig'd to the Enemies over-great precaution for his Safety, than to his own. Count d' Harcourt follow'd him no farther, and the Prince persisting in the Design of going to Bergerac, in order to For∣tifie it, pass'd at Libourne, of which the Count of Maure was Governour, and left Orders with him for the continuation of some Out-works. The Marshal de la Force arriv'd at Bergerac just as he did, with his Son the Marquess of Castelnau, who commanded there; and the Duke de la Rochefou∣cault, who was come back from the Upper Guienne, with the Prince of Conty, repair'd thither also.
At that time those Factions and Partialities be∣gan to appear at Bourdeaux, which ruin'd the Prince's Party in Guienne, divided his House, and separated hi nearest Relations from his Interests, the which finally reduc'd him to seek a Retreat among the Spaniards, for whom he has often sav'd Flanders. I will relate the causes of so great a Change as briefly as I can, in its proper place, when I come to rehearse the Effects thereof. At present I pass to the recital of what the Prince did during that Interval. His chief care was speedily to repair the Towns of Guienne, and particularly to put Bergerac in a condition of Defence: He employ'd some days about it with great Application, at which time he receiv'd intelligence that his Affairs de∣cay'd in Saintonge; That the Count du Doignon was shut up within his Garrisons, and durst not peep out of them, through his usal Jealousies; That the Prince of Tarente, on his side, had receiv'd some disadvantage in a Combat near Pons; That Saintes, which he judg'd capable of sustaining a long Siege, by the Works that had been made there, and by reason of the Garrison, which was compos'd of his best Forces, had notwitstanding surrender'd it self, without any considerable Defence; and that Taillebourg was besieg'd, and ready to follow the Example of Saintes. He was moreover inform'd, that the Marquess of St. Luc assembled a Body in order to oppose the Prince of Conty, who had ta∣ken Caudecôte, and some other places of small Con∣sequence. This last Evil was the only one he could any ways remedy; but whereas the Marquess was ill at a distance from the Prince of Conty, he did not think it proper to pass into the Upper Guienne, without being more particularly inform'd of what pass'd at Bourdeaux: To which end, he writ to the Princess, and to Madame de Longueville to repair to Libourne, where he arriv'd at the same time with
them. He only tarry'd there a day, and gave what Orders he could to prevent the Progress of the Evil, which Division began to create in his Party, and in his Family. After which, he went away with the Duke de la Rochefoucault to joyn the Prince of Conty, who was at Staffort, four Leagues beyond Agen; And being inform'd by a Courier near Li∣bourne, that St. Luc was marching towards Staffort, he judg'd his presence would be very necessary there, and therefore advanc'd with all the speed imaginable, and found the Prince of Conty, who assembled his Quarters, being perswaded that St. Luc would attack him. This Marquess being at Miradoux with the Regiments of Champayne and Lorrain, his Cavalry being lodg'd apart in Villages and Farms, on a sudden the Prince resolv'd to march all Night, to surprize the Quarters of his Cavalry, and set instatly forward with the Duke de la Rochefoucault: and tho' the Way were long, and the Road bad, he arriv'd before day at a Bridge, where the Enemy had a Guard of Twelve or Fif∣teen Horse. He caus'd them immediately to be charg'd, and those who made their escape, having alarm'd all the rest, they got on Horse-back. Some Squadrons fac'd him near Miradoux, the which he charg'd, and easily broke them. Six Regiments were defeated, and he took abundance of Equipage, and many Prisoners; after which he retir'd towards Miradoux, a small City situate on the top of a Hill, of which it contains one half, and has no other Fortification than an ill Dith, and a single Wall, to which the Houses are adjoyning. At break of Day St. Luc plac'd all his Forces in Battalia upon a Level before the Gate of the Town. The Prince tarry'd at the bottom of the Hill for those the Prince of Conty was to bring him, which arriv'd soon af∣ter: But whereas the ascent is pretty steep, and very long, and that the Soil is fat in Winter time,
and  with Ditches and Furrows, the Prince judg'd it was impossible to march up to the Ene∣mies in Battalia, without disording himself, nay, without breaking himself before he could come up to them. Therefore he only caused his Infantry to advance instantly, and forc'd the Enemy's to retire from some Posts they had possess'd themselves of, by Firing at them. Two or three Squadrons also engag'd, and the whole day past in Skirmishes, St. Lu not quitting the high Ground he was posted upon, and the Prince not thinking it fit to attack him in so Advantageous a Post without Canon, which he could not have until the next day. He order'd two Pieces to be sent for, and in the mean time judging that the Report of his Arrival would surprize his Enemies more than the Advantage he had gain'd over them, he set some Prisoners at Li∣berty, in order to carry the News of it to St. Luc, which soon produc'd the Effect he expected; for the Souldiers were terrify'd at it, and it caus'd such a Consternation even among the Officers, that they had hardly patience to tary till Night, to conceal their Retreat, and fly to Leyoure. The Prince, who had ore-seen this Retreat, plac'd Corps de Guard so near the Enemy's, that Notice was given him of their Retreat as soon as they mov'd; but it may be said, that his extream Diligence hindred him from defeating them absolutely; for without tarrying until the Foot was got into the Road, where he might have cut them in pieces with ease, he charg'd them upon the edge of the Ditch of Miradoux, and falling with Sword in Hand upon the Battalion of Champayne and Lor∣raine, he overthrew them into the Ditch, where they demanded Quarter, flinging down their Arms. But whereas it was impossible to get at them on Horse-back, they found means to get into Miradoux a∣gain, not with a design to defend the place, but
to save their Lives. The Prince of Conty fought all along next the Prince his Brother, who follow'd the Marquess of St. Luc and the Runaways, as far as Leytoure, and then came back to Invest Miradoux, into which Major-General Marins, Cominges, toge∣ther with several other Officers were got. The Prince caus'd them to be summon'd, not imagining that a beaten Party, without Ammunition, o Pro∣visions, would undertake to defend so weak a Place. And indeed they offer'd immediately to surrender it; but the Prince, who was unwilling to let such good Infantry escape, and did not value the place, insisted to have them Prisoners of War, or to ob∣lige them not to serve in six Months time; which Conditions appear'd so hard to them, that they resolv'd to Defend the place themselves, and to make amends for the shame they had suffer'd the day before, instead of augmenting it by such a Capitulation. They found moreover that the In∣habitants had Provisions, and consider'd that the Prince was not in a condition to make Lines: They believ'd that it would be easie to send them Pow∣der, Match, and Lead, as indeed the Marquess of St. Luc did the following day, and still continu'd to refresh them with all Necssaries, as long as the Siege lasted. During these Transactions the Prince sent back the Prince of Conty to Bourdeaux, and soon found that it had been better for him to re∣ceive Miradoux on the Conditions that were offer'd him, than to engage on a Siege, wanting every thing, as he did, not so much as being certain to get any Canon. However as we are often neces∣sitated to continue cally what we have begun in a Heat, he resolv'd to persist in his Enterprize to the end, hoping thereby to astonish his Enemies. To that end he got two Pieces of Ordnance from Agen, the one a Ten, and the other a Twelve Pounder, with a small quantity of Balls; he ima∣gining
that number sufficient to make a Breach, and take the Town by Storm, before Count d' Harcourt who was on his March thither, could come up to him. He made himself Master of some Houses prtty near the Gates, where those two Pieces of Ordnance were plac'd in a Battery, and did a great deal of Execution in the Walls; but the Balls not holding out, he was forc'd to give Souldiers Mo∣ney to gather up the Balls that had been shot, out of the Ditches. The Enemies made a pretty good Defence, considering their scarcity of Ammuni∣tion, and they made two Sallies with a great deal of Vigour. In fine, the Breach began to appear reasonable, and the Wall being fallen with Houses that were adjoyning to it, had made a conside∣rable Overture; but this Rubbish serv'd the Be∣sieged instead of a new Retrenchment, by reason that the top of the House where the Breach was made being fallen into the Cellar, they set it on fire, and retrench'd themselves on the other side; in so much that this burning Cellar became a Ditch, impossible to be cross'd. This Obstacle stop'd the Prince, who was unwilling to hazard an Attack, which certainly would have discourag'd his Men, and encourag'd his Enemies. Therefore he resolv'd to make another Breach in a place where the Houses had no Cellars, and had not fir'd above a day against it, when he was inform'd that Count d' Harcourt was Marching towards him, and would be the next day at Miradoux. Their Forces being too unequal to hazard a Combat, he was forc'd to raise the Siege, and to retire to Staf∣fort, where he arriv'd without having been pursued. This City is neither larger, nor stronger than Mi∣radoux, but whereas Count d' Harcourt was on the other side of the Garonne, and that he could only cross it at Auvilars, the Prince being Master of the other side of the Country, separated his Quarters,
supposing it was sufficient to place some near Au∣vilars, and to Order Parties to be continually de∣tach'd on that side, to be inorm'd of whatever the Enemies should undertake. But he did not con∣sider, that new Forces, and new Officers generally execute what is commanded them in a very diffe∣rent manner from those who have more Experience: And this Order, which would have been sufficient to secure a Camp, was like to ruin the Prince, and to expose him to the shame of being surpriz'd and defeated; by reason that none of the Parties that were Commanded follow'd his Orders, but instead of getting Intelligence of Count d' Harcourt's Mo∣tions, they fell a pillaging the Neighbouring Vil∣lages, in so much that he cross'd the River, and march'd in Battalia in the middle of the Prince's Quarters, and came within a quarter of a League of the place where he was, before any Alarm was given, or he receiv'd the least Notice of it. Fi∣nally, some Men that had been pursu'd having brought him this News with the usual Consternation on such Occasions, he mounted on Horse-back, fol∣low'd b Marsin, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and the Marquess of Montespan, to observe the Enemies De∣signs, but before he had gone five hundred Yards, he saw that their Squadrons detach'd themselves in or∣der to attack his Quarters. In this Extremity he im∣mediately sent Orders to his farthest Quarters o get on Horse-back, and to joyn his Infantry which was encamp'd under Staffort, the which he caus'd to March to Boüe, there to cross the Garonne in Boats, and to retire to Agen. He sent all his Baggage to St. Mary's, having left a Captain and Threescore Musqueteers at Staffort, with a Piece of Canon, which he could not carry along with him. Count d' Harcourt made no better use of this Ad∣vantage than he had done before at Tony-Charante, and at St. Andras; for instead of pursuing the Prince,
and of falling upon him in the disorder of a Retreat he made without Horse, being moreover constrain'd o cross the Garonne to secure himself, he stopt to Invest that Quarter which was nearest to Staffort, call'd Le Pergan, where three or four Hundred Horse of the Prince's and the General's Guards were lodg'd, and thus allow'd him twelve or thir∣teen hours, of which he employ'd the best part at B, in causing his Men to cross the River in the greatest Disorder imaginable, in so much that had they been attack'd, they had certainly been cut to pieces Sometime after the Prince's Arrival at Agen with all his Infanty, some Squadrons appear'd on the other side of the River, which were ad∣vanc'd in order to take some Baggage, which was ready to cross the River; but they were repuls'd with vigour by 60 Horse of the Regiment of Mon∣span, which afforded time enough to some Boats fill'd with Musqueteers to cross over to them, and to force the Enemies to retire. That very day the Prince receiv'd Intelligence that his Horse was ar∣riv'd at St. Mary, without having fought, or lost any part of his Equipage, and that his Guards de∣fended themselves still in Le Pergan, where it was impossible to succour them. The next day they yielded themselves Prisoners of War; and that was the only Advantage Count d' Harcourt drew from an Occasion, in which his Fortune, and the Neg∣ligence of the Prince's Men had offer'd him an en∣tire Victory. These ill Successes were soon follow'd by the Sedition of Agen, the which oblig'd the Prince to turn his greatest hopes towards Paris, and to make it the Seat of War, as I shall relate in the sequel. The War was maintain'd in Guienne much more through the Vigilance and Reputation of the Prince of Conde, than by the Valour and Number of his Forces; and Count d' Harcourt by his Conduct and
Fortune had already repair'd all the disadvantage which the Marquess of St. Luc's Defeat at Mira∣doux had occasion'd. The Siege of Miradoux was rais'd; The Prince of Conde's Guards, and three or four Hundred Horse had been taken at le Pergan, and the Prince of Conde himself with the rest of his Forces had been constrain'd to quit Saffort, and to cross the River Garonne at Boüe, and to retire at Agen: But the Divisions of that City soon made that Prince sensible that it would no longer remain in his Party, than while constrain'd to it by his Presence, or a strong Garrison. And therefore he resolv'd to throw the Regiment of Foot, of Conty into it, and to take possession of one of the Gates of the City, in order to oblige the People to receive a Garrison: But whereas this Design was not kept secret, it was soon rumour'd throughout the City. Upon which the Inhabitants immediately betook themselves to their Arms, and made Barri∣cadoes; The Prince of Conde being inform'd there∣with, got on Horse-back, to stop the Tumult by his Presence, and to remain Master of the Gate of Grave until the aforesaid Regiment had taken possession of it: But the arrival of the Souldiers increas'd the Disorder, instead of appeasing it: They entred and made a halt in the first Street, and tho' the Prince of Conde, the Prince of Conty, and all the Officers endeav'd to appease the Dis∣order, they could not hinder the Streets from being barricado'd in a moment. However the People still preserv'd their Respect towards the Prince of Conde, and towards all the General Officers, but at the same time the Animosity increas'd in all places where his Presence was wanting. It was impossible that things should remain long in that condition; the Souldiers, as I have already rela∣ted, had taken Possession of the Gate of Grave, and half the adjoyning Street; The People were
in Arms, all the Streets were barricado'd, and Corps e Guards plac'd every where; Night drew on, which would have increas'd the Disorder, and the Prince of Conde found himself necessitated either to quit the Town shamefully, or cause it to be pilag'd and burnt, either of which apparently would have ruin'd his Affairs: For if he quitted the Town, the King's Forces would be receivd into it, and if he burnt it, it would occasion the Re∣volt of the whole Province against him. Those Reasons induc'd him to endeavour an Accommo∣dation, which in appearance might save his Autho∣rity, and serve for a pretence to Pardon the Inha∣bitants of Agen. The Duke de la Rochefoucault spoke to some of the most considerable Citizens, and prevail'd with them to go to the Town-Hall, there to Depute some among them to the Prince to beg his Pardon, and to intreat him to come to their Assembly, there to prescribe the means to preserve Agen in the Submission and Loyalty they had sworn to him. The Prince accordingly went thither, and told them, that it had always been his Intention to preserve their Freedom entire; and that the only end for which he had sent Souldiers thither, was to ease them, and help them to Guard the City; but that since they did not desire it, he was willing to remove them, provided the City would raise a Regiment of Foot at their own Charge, and give him the Names of the Officers. These Conditions were easily agreed to; the Bar∣ricado's were remov'd, the Souldiers march'd out again, and the City remain'd in appearance as quiet and full of Submission, as it was before the Sedition. The Prince of Conde, who could not confide in those Appearances, remain'd some time in Agen, to put the City in its former state again; at which time he receiv'd the News, that the Army from Flanders, Commanded by the Duke of Ne∣mours,
and the Duke of Orleance's Forces, Com∣manded by the Duke of Beaufort, were joyn'd, and on their March towards the River Loire. This Joy was notwithstanding mix'd with some Dis∣quiet: On the one hand, he saw an Army from Spain, he had so long expected, in the middle of the Kingdom, which might come to the Relief of Montrod, or to joyn with him in Guienne: But at the same time he was also inform'd that the Dukes of Nemours and of Beaufort could no ways agree, and that their Division was grown to a very dan∣gerous pitch. Their Armies being separate, it was impossible for them to keep the Field before the King's Army, Commanded by the Marshals of Tu∣renne and Hoquincourt, reinforc'd by the Troops he Cardinal had brought along with him, besides the Neighbourhood of the Court. The Duke of Ne∣mours's Orders were to cross the River of Loire, in order to relieve Montrond, and to March imme∣diately towards Guienne; whereas the Orders the Duke of Beaufort daily receiv'd from the Duke of Orleance were directly opposite. Monsieur could not consent that the Army should march away so far from Paris, fearing lest the People, or the Parlia∣ment should alter their minds, seeing the Duke of Nemours's Army march into Guienne, while the King's remain'd in their Neighbourhood. The Co∣adjutor of Paris, in whom Monsieur confided most at that time, seconded this Advice, and augmented the fear and Natural Iresolutions of that Prince. By keeping the Army on this side the River Loire, he made it of no use to the Prince of Conde, whose Enemy he was, and made himself more conside∣rable at Court, by shewing that being Master of Monsieur's Conduct, it was in his power to advance or keep back the Progress of the Army; and thus omitted no means to obtain a Cardinal's Cap. Cha∣vigny on his side harbour'd as great Designs; he
expected to govern Monsieur, by making him sen∣le that e govern'd the Prince; and flatter'd him∣ to become Master of the Prince's Conduct, by shewing him he was Master of Monsieur's. His Pro∣jects did not stop there; from the very beginning of the War he had taken his Measures to become  Negotiator of Peace, and had united himself to the Duke of Roan, believing that he might be equally useful to him with Monsieur, and with the Prince: He likewise thought he had taken all ne∣cessary precautions towards the Cardinal by means of Fabret, Governour of Sedan; and whereas he ut no Bounds to his Ambition and his Hopes, he did not question but in making a particular Peace, he should be chosen with the Cardinal, to conclude the General Peace. He fancy'd moreover that making use of the Credit the Prince of Conde could give him among the Spaniards, he should have all the Credit of the Good Successes, and the Cardi∣nal on the contrary all the Shame, and blame of he ill Events: And that thus he should enter into the Ministry of Affairs again, either with the Glo∣ry of having concluded the Peace, or with the Advantage of laying the blame of it on Mazarin, in case it should not be effected. In order there∣unto he writ several times to the Prince to press him to quit Guienne; he represented to him, how necessary his Presence was in the Army; that in suffering it to be destroy'd, he would lose his last Stake; but that in making Progresses in the heart of the Kingdom, and in the King's sight, he would not only immediately retrieve his Affairs in Guienne, but all the rest of his Party. The Prince of Conde suffer'd himself easily to be perswaded by Chavigny's Reasons; but the principal Motive which induc'd him to it, was his desire of quitting Guienne at a time when the weakness of his Army oblig'd him continually to fly before Count d' Harcourt. He
communicated his Design to the Duke de la Roche∣foucault, and to Marsin; both of them represented to him equally, what was to be feard, and hop'd for, in so doing, without giving him any Advice about it; but at the same time both desir'd earnestly to follow him. He chose the Duke de la Rochefoucault to accompany him, and left Marsin with the Prince of Conty, relying absolutely upon his Care for the maintaining his Party in Guienne, and the preserving of Bourdeaux, not only among the Divisions that had been fomented among the People, and in the Parliament, but also to hinder the separate Inte∣rests of the Prince of Conty, and of Madame de Longueville from augmenting their Mis-understand∣ings, and thereby cause the loss of that City, in which Affairs were in the state I am going to relate. The Inhabitants were divided in two Cabals: The Rich Citizens compos'd the one, who were resolv'd to maintain the Authority of their Magi∣strates, and to render themselves so considerable, and so necessary in the City, that the Prince and Parliament might look upon them as those who could most contribute towards their Preservation. The other Cabal consisted of the meanest, and most seditious part of the City, who having often assembled themselves without any Design at a place near the Castle of the Ha, call'd L' Hormee, at last took the Name of it themselves. The Parliament was as much divided as the People; the Members of that Body who were against the Court were di∣vided in two Factions; The one was call'd the Great Fronde, and the other the Small one. Altho' both of them agreed in being for the Prince, they were very much opposite in all the rest: In the beginning L' Hormee had been united to both, and had often separated from it according to the divers Motives of Interest, which commonly sway those
sor of People: But in the end the Prince of Conty and the Dutchess of Longueville being unhappily allen out, augmented the Credit and Insolence of that Faction to that degree, in order to draw them on their side, that thereby they advanc'd the loss of the Party, in exasperating the Parliament, and the rest of the People, and in giving way to seve∣ral Plots, and other Contrivances of the Court, which finally brought Bourdeaux back to its former Allegiance to the King. I shall only speak en pas∣ent of the Subjects which occasion'd all these Dis∣orders, without entring upon the particulars of ma∣ny things, that cannot be written. The Prince of Conty having suffer'd himself to be perswaded by some of his People, who were gain'd by Cardinal Mazarin, to fall out publickly with the Dutchess of Longueville, upon pretences, which good Manners, and Consanguinity should have oblig'd him to con∣ceal; out of hatred to one another, they kindled the Fury of the Hormee, and sacrific'd, in so many occasions, the greatest Advantage of the Party to their Passions and private Animosities; that instead of establishing their Authority, thereby to make themselves useful to the Prince, as they both de∣sign'd to do, they contributed to the Disorders and Seditions of the people, to that degree, that they were reduc'd themselves to abandon the Prince, and to submit to whatever Conditions the Court was pleas'd to impose upon them. The Duke de la Rochefoucault, being sensible, by a long Experience, that their mutual Grandeur depended on their Union, had made it his business to maintain it a∣mong them, none being so capble of doing it as himself, ever since the War of Paris. But at that time Madame de Longueville imagin'd that it would be more for her Advantage, to take new Measures, and it happen'd that the means she made use of to that end, caus'd a Division between her and her
Brothers. The Prince of Conty was inclind to a Peace, being weary, and tyr'd with a War in which he had only engag'd himself to oblige the Dutchess of Longueville, which he repented of, as soon as ever he fell out with her. He has alledg'd since, in order to his Justification, that the Pince, after having sign'd a Writing, by which he oblig'd himself not to make a Treaty without obtaining the Government of Provence for him, had notwith∣standing, absolutely neglected his Interests. But the real cause of his falling off, was that Animo∣sity, I have mention'd, against his Sister, the which transported him to a degree of Passion and Jea∣lousie against her, that had been much more ex∣cusable in a Lover than a Brother. On the other hand, altho' the Prince of Conde spoke less than he about the Dutchess of Longueville's Conduct, he was as much dissatisfy'd about it in his Heart; he was sensible of her Engagements with the Duke of Nemours, and what it had been like to produce a∣gainst his real Interests; and he fear'd moreover she might enter into new ones, which might yet prove of worse Consequence for him. That which augmented the Dutchess of Longueville's Trouble at that time was, that she thought it impossible ever to be reconcil'd to her Husband, by reason of the ill impressions he had receiv'd about her; and by his being perswaded that she had too great a share in that War. She had likewise vainly attempted to be reconcil'd to the Court by the Princess Pala∣tin's Intermission. In so much that finding her self equally ruin'd on all sides, she imagin'd the only means to re-establish her self was to fom a Party in Bourdeaux, that might prove so powerful, as to recocer her Credit with the Prince of Conde, or with the Court. To that end she judg'd nothing so proper, as to joyn with L' Hormee, and to en∣gage the most Considerable persons into the same
Party. On the contrary, the Prince of Conty, to  his Vengeance, usd all his Endeavours to in his Sisters Credit among the most considerable of that Faction, in order to engage them on his e, chusing rather to permit them all manner of xcesses, than to suffer them to be engag'd with a Person he was so much exasperated against. There∣ore the Prince of Conde fore-seeing what this great Opposition of Sentiments was going to produce in his Party, judging also that this Animosity and Di∣vision would increase by his Absence, left Marsin, as I have said before, in order to remedy as much as in him lay those great Disorders, and on all Oc∣casions to hinder the Prince of Conty and the Dutchess of Longueville from undertaking any thing which might prove prejudicial to him during his absence. So that having regulated with Marsin, and with Laisne what related to the Army in Guienne, the Cabals of Bourdeaux, and those of his Family, he sent for the Prince of Conty to Agen; and lea∣ving him the management of all things, he desir'd him to follow the Counsels of Marsin and Laisne. He also seem'd to repose a great deal of Confidence in the President Viole, tho' in reality he was per∣swaded that he left no body in Bourdeaux, in whom he could truly confide, besides the two first I have nam'd. Having thus dispos'd all things, he prepar'd for his departure from Agen, in order to joyn the Duke of Nemours's Army. This Journey was long, and accompany'd with Difficulties one could hardly ex∣pect to overcome. Count d' Harcourt was near Agen, and there were too many Royalists in the City, not to give him Notice of the Prince's de∣parture. Even those of his own Party had suspe∣cted this Journey, and it had been rumour'd about before it was resolv'd upon. He was to Travel about Sixscore Leagues upon the same Horses: Count
d' Harcourt might not only cause the Prince to be follow'd by Parties, but besides might have given the Court a speedy Account of his March, and order'd all the Cities and Garrisons thereabouts to oppose his Passage: Moreover the Prince could not trust many with his Design, and a small Attendance was not capable to secure him: He was besides oblig'd to perswade every body, that he was going to Bourdeaux, and to hinder the Officers of the Army from accompanying him, under pretence that might not discover his real Intention. To that end he left the Prince of Conty at Agen, and pre∣tending to go to Bourdeaux for two or three days only, he commanded all the Officers and Volun∣ties to remain at Agen with his Brother. He de∣parted from thence on Palm-Sunday at Noon, with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, the Pince of Marsillac, Guitault, Chavaignac, Gourville, and a Valet de Chambre. The Marquess of Levy arry'd for him with Horses at Languais, one of the Duke of Bouillon's Houses, where Bercenes, Captain of the Duke de la Rche∣foucault's Guards, likewise met them: And whereas the Marquess of Levy had a Pasport from Count d' Harcourt, to retire to his House in Auvergne with his Attendance, the Prince of Conde, and those that accompany'd him, pass'd with him, as if they had been those very Servants whose Names were in∣certed in the said Pasport, tho' at last he resolv'd not to make use of it. The greatest Fatigue of that Journey was the extraordinary speed he was oblig'd to make, marching Day and Night, and almost always upon the same Horses, and without ever staying two hours in one and the same place, ei∣ther to sleep, or refresh himself. They baited at two or three Gentlemen's Houses, Friends to the Marquess of Levy, there to rest some few hours, and to buy Horses; but those Gentlemen were so far from suspecting the Prince of Conde to be what
e was, that at one of their Meals, at which time people speak their Thoughts with most freedom, he was inform'd of some things that concern'd his nearest Relations, which pehaps till then he had been ignorant of. In fine, after having march'd through the Vice-County of Turenne, and through Charlies in Auvergne, he arriv'd on the Saturday at Night at Bec-d' Alier, within two Leagues of La Charité, where he cross'd the River Loire with∣out any hindrance, altho' two Troops of Horse were quarter'd in La Charité, commanded by Bussy Rabuin. From thence he dispatch'd Gourville to Pru to acquaint his Royal Highness and Chavigny with his coming; he past Easter-day in Cosnes, where there was a Guard kept; and whereas the Court was at Gien, he told every body, that he and his Companions were going to the King. However concluding that it would be impossible for him to follow the Road of the Court long without being discover'd, he resolv'd to quit it, to take the Road that goes to Chastillon: He was in danger of Re∣penting his not having done it sooner; for having met two Couriers, one of them knw Guitault, and tho' he made no stop to speak to him, his Countenance alter'd sufficiently, to perswade him that he suspected the Prince to be there. He was soon after fully inform'd about it, for having met the Prince's Valet de Chambre who lag'd behind, he stopt him, and threatning to kill him, he learnt that his Suspicion was well grounded. This Ac∣cident not only oblig'd the Prince to quit the Road immediaely, but also to leave Bercenes, Captain of the Duke de la Rochefoucault's Guards, in some ruin'd Buildings that stood near a Bridge, in order to kill the Courier, in case he came that way, which seem'd to be his nearest, to inform the Court of the Prince of Conde's March: But his good For∣tune made him take another way, whereby he
soon carry'd the News of what he had seen to Gien. Whereupon St. Maure was commanded with Twenty Horse to way-lay the Prince between Chastillon and the Duke of Nemours's Army, and to take him dead or alive. The Prince of Conde being sensible that the meeting of the aforesaid Courier would infal∣libly discover his passage, march'd with all speed towards Chastillon: But whereas we were necessita∣ted to Travel 35 Leagues that day, without chan∣ging our Horses, the necessity of Baiting made us lose a great deal of time, and afforded St. Maure time enough to come up to us. Moreover the Prince was like to be taken by another Accident; for be∣ing arriv'd at the Canal of Briare, he met the Quar∣ter-Masters of two or three Regiments of Horse, who were coming to take up Quarters there; and whereas the whole Body was coming thither from different places, it was very difficult to take a safe way. Chavaignac, who was acquainted with a Gentleman thereabouts, call'd la Bruslerie, resolv'd to go to him, and took Guitault along with im, in order to get some Provisions for the Prince of Conde: But that day being destin'd for Adventures, just as Chavaignac was going out of that House in search of the Master thereof, an Officer of the aforemention'd Regiments arriv'd there, and all that the Mistress of the House could do, dreading a Disorder in her House, by the Encounter of Per∣sons of different Parties, was to send her Daughter to Guitault to give him Notice that an Officer be∣longing to the King's Forces was arriv'd there. In the mean while, the Prince, who expected News from Chavaignac, and from Guitault, had been ob∣lig'd to remove from the place where they had left him, by the arrival of these Forces. He had sent his Valt de Chambre to Chastillon, to order the Keeper of the Park to keep the Door open; and thus he was only attended by the Duke de la Roche∣foucault
and the Prince of Marsillac. However they continu'd their March still towards Chastillon. The Prince of Marsillac went a hundred Paces before the Prince, and the Duke de la Rochefoucault follow'd him at the same distance, to the end that being warn'd by either of them, he might have some Advantage to make his Escape. They had not travel'd long in this manner, when they heard the firing of some Pistols on that side where the Valet de Chambre was gone, and at the same time dis∣cover'd four Troopers on their left hand; upon which concluding they were pursu'd, they resolv'd to Charge those four Men, and march'd up to them with a Resolution to suffer themselves to be kill'd rather than taken. But being come nearer to them, they found it was Chavaignac, who was in search of them with three Gentlemen; and they arriv'd together at Chastillon without any dan∣ger. The Prince of Conde receiv'd Tidings there of the Army he was going to joyn, and was in∣form'd that it lay towards Lory, near the Forest of Orleance, within Eight Leagues of Chastillon; he heard moreover that Ten or Twelve Chevaux-Le∣gers of the King's Guard, together with some Offi∣cers were at that time at Chastillon; whereupon he resolv'd to remove from thence about Midnight with speed, with a Guide for Lory. This Guide had like to have occasion'd his Ruin; for after a long March, he found that he was but within a short League of Gien, in so much that going about to quit that Road, to tun towards Lory, the Prince pass'd within Thirty Yards of the place where St. Maure lay in wait for him: But whether he did not know him, or durst not Charge him, nothing oppos'd his Passage, and he arriv'd at Lory, where he heard certain News of his Army, which was but two Leagues distant from them. Altho he conceal'd himself with the same precautions he
had us'd elsewhere, both he and the Duke de la Rochefoucaul were discover'd by several Inhabi∣tants of the place, of which many were the King's and the Duke of Orleance's Servants. But this prov'd an Advantage instead of a Prejudice to him, for some of them got on Horse-back, with him, and accompany'd him to the Army. He met the Van∣guard at the entrance of the Forest of Orleance; some Troopers coming up to him, and he having discover'd himself to them, the whole Army was surpriz'd with an excess of Joy that cannot be ex∣press'd. His Presence had never been so necessary as it was at that time, and had never been less ex∣pected. The Animosity between the Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort daily increas'd, and thereby the sole Prop of the Party daily perish'd through the Division of the Chiefs, at a time when the Pre∣sence of the King, and his Army, should have ob∣lig'd them most to prefer the Publick Good to their particular Quarrels. The Prince was too much concern'd to put an end to those Differences, not to endeavour it with all the earnestness imaginable, which he effected the more easily, by reason that his Arrival taking the Command from them, at the same time it remov'd the main cause of their Jea∣lousie and Hatred. Affairs standing in this Con∣dition, the Army march'd to Lory, where they rested a day, three or four days more were employ'd in going to Montargis, which surrender'd without any Resistance. The Army soon quitted that place, by reason that it was stor'd with Corn and Wine, which might be of use, upon occasion; as also to shw an Example of Mildness, which might prove advantageous to his Party in the other Cities. The Army march'd from Montargis, and went to Chateau∣renard: Gourville arriv'd there at the same time from Paris, to give the Prince an account of his Friends Sntiments about his Conduct towards Mon∣sieur,
and towards the Parliament. Their Advices prov'd very different, for some counsel'd him to remain with the Army, by reason that the Reso∣ions of the Duke of Orleance, and of the Parlia∣ment would always depend on the Event of that War; and that while he should be at the Head of a Victorious Army, the Kings Power would reside in his hands: Whereas in going to Paris, he took away from his Forces the Reputation which his Presence had given them, since he was necessitated to leave the Command thereof to the same Persons, whose Division and Incapacity had been like to produce such great Disorders. Chavigny on the contrary assur'd the Prince that his Presence was absolutely necessary in Paris; That the Cabals of he Court, and of the Cardinal of Rets, daily in∣creas'd in the Parliament; and that finally they would infallibly engage the Duke of Orleance on their side, unless the Prince came in Person to free him from his dependency on them, and to put the Duke of Rohan and Chavigny in possession of a place they could no longer dispute with the Cardinal of Rts without him. They all in general agreed, pre∣ferably to all other things, to undertake some con∣siderable Action against the King's Army, all de∣pending on a Successful Event. At that very time the Prince of Conde receiv'd Intelligence that the Marshal of Hoquincourt's Brigade lay still in sepa∣rate Quarters, pretty near ChateauRenard, and that the next day it was to joyn again with Marshal de Turenne's. Whereupon he resolv'd immediately to March up with all his Army to Marshal d' Hoquin∣court's, before he could have time to assemble his Forces, to retire towards Marshal de Turenne; and the Success answe'd his Expectation. He entred first into two Quarters, which alarm'd the rest; bt that did not hinder him from taking five of them one after another: The four first hardly made any
resistance, but the Mrshal d' Hoquincourt having plac'd himself in Battalia with 800 Horse upon the border of a Brook, which could only be cross'd one Man of a Breast upon a very narrow decay'd Bank, seem'd resolv'd to dispue that Passage; yet nowithstanding the Duke of Nemours had no sooner past this Defile with three or four Men, but the Marshal, who judg'd that all the Army was there, retir'd behind that Quarter, and suffer'd it to be pillag'd, placing himself in Battle again, in hops of an Opportunity to Charge them during the Pln∣der. This Quarter made no more Resistance than the others, but whereas those Houses were cover'd with Thatch, they being set on fire, the Marshal d' Hoquincourt soon discover'd by that Light the Number of the Forces that were past; and find∣ing that there was not above One Hundred Horse, he advanc'd to Charge them with above 800. The Pince of Conde observing this Cavalry that was falling upon him, strait form'd a Squadron of what Men he had about him, and march'd up to his Eemy with so unequal a Number, that i seem'd, as if Chance had assembled all the General Officers of his Army in that place, to make him snsible, what a Loss he might have sustain'd by an ill Event. The fist Rank, in which he fought himself, was compos'd of the Dukes of Nemours, of Beaufort, and de la Rochefoucault, the Prince of Marsillac, the Mar∣quess of Clinchant, who commanded the Spanish Forces, Count Tavannes, Lieutenant-General, of Guitault, Gaucourt, and some other Officers: Both the Squadrons fir'd at a small distance, and yet nei∣ther of them gave ground; but two others having soon after charg'd the Prince's, the Duke of Nemours was shot through the Body with a Pistol, and his Horse kill'd under him. The Prince of Conde's Squadron, not being able to sustain two Charges so close to one another, etird an Hundred steps in
disorder towards the Quarter that was on fire; but the Prince, and the General Oflicers who were with him, riding up to the said Squadron, stopt it. The Enemies contented themselves with having  it give ground, without breaking it: Some Officers and a few Troopers only advanc'd, and the Prince of Marsillac, who chanc'd to be Twelve or Fifteen Yards behind the Squadron that gave ground, turn'd back upon an Officer, whom he 'd between the two Squadrons. The Prince of Conde, as I have declar'd already, stopt his, and forc'd it to turn back upon his Enemies, who had not dar'd to pursue it, for fear of its being sustain'd by some Infantry. During this Disorder Thirty Horse had cross'd the Defile: The Prince of Conde plac'd himself immediately at the Head of them with the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and attacking Marshal d' Hoquincourt in the Flank, he caus'd him to be charg'd in the Front by the Squadron where he had lost the Duke of Beaufort. This made an end of overthrowing the Enemies, of which part threw themselves into Bleneau, and the rest were pursu'd three or four Leagues towards Auxere, without their endeavouring to Rally. They lost all their Baggage, and Three Hundred Horse were taken. This Overthrow might have been greater, had not the Prince been inform'd that Marshal Tu∣renne's Army was in sight. This News oblig'd him to retire to his Foot, who had quitted their Post to Plunder, and having rally'd his Forces, he march'd towards Marshal Turenne, who plac'd his Army in Battle in a very large Plain, within less than Musquet-shot of a very large Wood, through the midst of which the Prince of Conde was oblig'd to March to come up to him. This Passage was large enough of it self to March two Squadrons a-breast: But whereas it was very Marshy, and that several Ditches had been made
to drain it, there was no coming to the Plain with∣out making Defiles. The Prince of Conde finding it possess'd by his Enemies, threw his Infantry to the Right and Left into the Wood which border'd it, in order to keep the Enemy at a distance from it, and it succeeded according to his desires: For Marshal Turenne dreading the Inconveniency of the Musquetry, quitted his Post, to take another at a little more distance, and upon a higher Ground than the Prince's. This Movement perswaded the Prince that he was retiring towards Gien, and that it would be easie to beat him in the disorder of his Retreat, before he could reach it. To this end he caus'd his Cavalry to advance, and made hast to make six Squadrons pass the Defiles, in order to enter the Plain; but the Marshal of Turenne being sensible how disadvantageous it would be for him to Combat the Prince in the Plain, he having a Victorious Army, that was much stronger than his, resolv'd to turn back with Sword in hand, upon those six Squadrons, in order to defeat those that were past, and to stop the remainder of the Forces, that were still on the other side of the Defile. The Prince guessing at his Intention, caus'd his Horse to retire again; and thus the Defiles hindring them from coming at one another, without great dis∣advantage; they only caus'd their Artillery to ad∣vance on both sides, and fir'd a very considerable while at one another, but with a very different success; for besides that the Marshal of Turenne's having more Artillery, and better Guns than his Enemy's, it had the Advantage of a higher Ground over the Princes Forces, which being very close in the passage which separated the Wood, most of the shot did light upon them; and they lost above sixscore Men, and several Officers, among which was Mare, Brother to the Marshal of Grancey. The remainder of the day past in this manner. At the
of the Sun the Marshal of Turenne retir'd  Gien; the Marshal of Hoquincourt, who  joyn'd him since his Defeat, remain'd in the  of the Army, and going with some Officers  draw out the Squadron that was nearest to the ily, he was discover'd by the Prince, who sent him word that he would be glad to see him, and hat he might advance upon his Parole. He did ha, the Prince desir'd, and advancing with some Officers, he met the Prince, accompany'd by the Dukes de la Rochefoucault, and of Beaufort, and two or three more. The Conversation pass'd in Civi∣liies and Railleries on the Prince's side, and in Justifications on the Marshal's for what had hap∣pen'd to him, complaining of Monsieur de Turenne,  in reality and Justice it might be said, that he  perform'd two brave and very bold Actions tht day, the success of which sav'd both him and th Court: For as soon as he receiv'd Intelligence tht the Marshal of Hoquincourt's Brigade, which wa to joyn him the next day, was attack'd, he march'd with a very small number of Men to the place, where he was met in Battalia, where he arry'd all the day for the remainder of his Forces, exposing himself thereby to an inevitable Defeat, had the Prince march'd up directly towards him, instead of pursuing the Forces he had defeated in the Night, for two or three Leagues: He also sav'd that very day the remainders of the King's Army with great Valour and Conduct, when he turn'd back upon the six Squadrons of the Prince, that had past the Defily, and by that Action stopt an Army, which without doubt would have destroy'd h utterly, could it once have been plac'd in Or∣der of Battel in the same Plain where he was. The King's Army being retir'd, the Prince march'd his towards Chatillon, and that Night lodg'd in the Quarters upon the Canal of Briare, near La Bruslerie.
The next day he repair'd to Chatillon with all his Forces, the which he left two days after under the Command of Clinchant and Count Tavannes, in order to go to Paris with the Dukes of Beaufort and de la Rochefoucault. That Journey was of greater Consequence than it appear'd to him at that time; and I am perswaded, that the only desire of going to Paris, there to receive the general Applause which the Success of so perillous a Journey, and so great a Victory deserv'd, made him approve Chavigny's Reasons, who earnestly desir'd to be countenanc'd by the Prince's presence and Autho∣rity, in order to fill up the place which the Car∣dinal of Rets held in the Duke of Orleance's favour. He was in hopes, as I have already declar'd, to render himself equally considerable to those two Princes, by perswading each of them, that he was the real promoter of their Union; besides he fan∣cy'd that it was the easiest way to succeed in his Project with Fabert. He therefore press'd the Prince to come to Paris, in order to oppose the Progress the Cardinal of Rets made upon the Duke of Or∣leance's Mind, and to improve the favourable dis∣position the Parliament was in at that time, having made a Decree, by which they had proscrib'd, and put a Price upon Cardinal Mazarin's Head. Whatever Impressions Chavigny's Counsels made upon the Prince, it is certain that he follow'd them; he was receiv'd at Paris with so many Acclamati∣ons, and such Testimonies of publick Joy, that he did not think he had any cause to Repent his Jour∣ney. All things remain'd for a while in this Con∣dition, but whereas the Army wanted Forrage a∣bout Chatillon and Montargis, and that they durst neither remove it farther from Paris, nor bring it nearer to it; it was remov'd to Estampes, where they imagin'd it might remain a considerable while with safety, and abundance of all things. The
Duk of Nemours was not yet cur'd of his Wound, when the Prince receiv'd Intelligence that some of the King's Forces, Commanded by the Count of Musses, and the Marquess of St. Mesgrin, Lieute∣nnt Generals, were on their March from St. Ger∣s and St. Cloud, with two Pieces of Canon, in  to Charge an Hundred Men of the Regi∣ent of Conde, who had retrench'd themselves upon a Bridge, and had broken one of the Arches of i. Upon this News the Prince got immediately n Horse-back with such as chanc'd to be about im; but the Report thereof being spread through the City, all the Persons of Quality that were there went to meet him at Boulogne, and were follow'd by 8 or 10000 Citizens in Arms. The King's Forces only fir'd some Canon, and retir'd without en∣eaouring to make themselves Masters of the Bridge; but the Prince of Conde being willing to improve the good Disposition of those Citizens, assign'd them Officers, and made them March to∣wads St. Denis, where he was inform'd that there was a Garrison of 200 Switzers; those Forces ar∣'d there about Night, and those within being larm'd thereat, soon alarm'd those without, for the Prince being surrounded by Three Hundred Horse, selected and compos'd of the bravest, and mo undaunted Men of his Party, found himself deseed by them at the very first Firing of the Eemy, none but six persons remaining about him. The remainder fled in a disorder, and fell in a∣mong the Infantry of the Citizens, which was daunted thereat, and had certainly follow'd the Ex∣ample of the Gentry, had not the Prince, and those tha remain'd about him stopt them, and made them nter St. Denis through old Breaches, that were un∣guarded. Whereupon all those persons of Quality who had abandon'd him, came back to him, every one alledging some particular Reason to excuse his
Flight, although the shame of it was common o them all. The Switzers endeavour'd to defend some Barricado's in the Town, but being press'd close, they retir'd into the Abby, where they sur∣render'd themselves within two hours Prisoners of War. No Acts of Hostility were committed a∣gainst the Inhabitants or Convents, and the Prince of Conde reti'd back to Paris, leaving Deslande, a Captain in the Regiment of Conde, with 200 Men in St. Denis, which was re-taken that very Night by the King's Forces; but Deslande retir'd into the Church, where he held out three days. Tho' no particular Circumstance render'd that Action con∣siderable in it self, yet it dispos'd the Citizens to fa∣vour the Prince; and they all prais'd him so much the rather, because every one of them quoted him as a Witness of his Courage, and the Dangers he fancy'd he had been expos'd to in that Action. In the mean while the Duke of Rohan and Chavigny resolv'd to prosecute their first Design, and to take the Advantage of so favourable a Conjuncture, in order to make some Propositions about an Accom∣modation: They imagind the Court would sincere∣ly accomplish whatever Fabert had propos'd to them, only with a Design to engage them with the Car∣dinal, who was willing to make use of them to draw in the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Conde into that Abyss of Negotiations, into the bottom of which no body could ever dive, the which all along prov'd very favourable to him, and fatal to his Enemies. The first days of the Prince's Arrival were no sooner past, but all the Intrigues and Cabals were renew'd again on all sides, and whether he were really weary of maintaining so Penible a War, or that his abode in Paris inspir'd him with a desire and hopes of Peace, for a while he quitted all other thoughts, to apply himself to find out means to make as advantageous a one as
e had projected. The Duke of Rohan and Cha∣ gave him great hopes about it, in order to  him to entrust them with the Care of that Negotiation, and to let them go by themselves ith ulas to St. Germans, there to Treat about is and the Duke of Orleance's Concerns. It was liewise propos'd to send the Duke de la Rochefou∣ hither, and the Prince desir'd it for several Reasons, but he declin'd it, imagining, either that the Peace was already concluded between Monsieur and the Court under-hand by Chavigny, without the Prince's participation, or that it would not be concluded at that time, not only because the Prince's Pretensions were too great, but likewise because the Duke of Rohan and Chavigny would secure their own preferrably to all the rest. Thus the Duke of Rohan, Chavigny, and Goulas went to St. Germans, with positive Orders not to see Cardinal Mazarin, or to Treat about any thing with him. The Duke of Orleance's Demands consisted chiefly in the Re∣moving of the Cardinal; but the Prince of Conde's had more Latitude, by reason that havng engag'd the City and Parliament of Bordeaux in his Party, together with a great number of Persons of Qua∣lity, he had made particular Treaties with them, by which he was engag'd not to make any with the Cour, without comprising their Interests in it, in the manner I shall relate hereafter. No body did in the least question the Success of those Gentlemen's Journey; there being no likelihood that a Man of Chavigny's Parts and Understanding, who knew the Court, and Cardinal Mazarin, by so long an Experience, would have engag'd in so great a Negotiation, having manag'd it for three Months together, without being certain of the Suc∣cess. But every body was soon undeceiv'd by the Return of those Deputies, who had, not only treated with Cardinal Mazarin, contrary to the
express Orders they had receiv'd about it; but moreover, instead of demanding for the Prince, what was set down in their Instructions, had only insisted chiefly, upon the establishing of a necessary Council, almost in the form of that which the late King had order'd upon his Death-Bed; Upon which Condition they were to prevail with the Prince to consent, that Cardinal Mazarin, accom∣pany'd by Chavigny, should go to treat about a Ge∣neral Peace, intead of the Prince; and that it should be Lawful for him to come back into France after the Conclusion thereof. As those Propositions were contrary to the Prince's Interests and Senti∣ments, he receiv'd them with great Indignation a∣gainst Chavigny, and resolv'd for the future never to give him the least knowledge of whatever he should Treat of in Secret with the Court. To that end he gave Gourville Instructions, which were drawn in presence of the Dutchess of Chastillon, the Dukes of Nemours and de la Rochefoucault, which contain'd what followeth. 1. That they would hearken to no Negotiation after that Day; and that they expected a positive Answer to all the Ar∣ticles, of Yes, or No, since they could not desist from any of them. That they desir'd to Act sin∣cerely, and consequently that they would Pro∣mise nothing but what they were willing to per∣form; and that for that Reason, they would be certain of what the Court should Promise. 2. That they desi'd Cardinal Mazarin should immediately quit the Kingdom, and repair to Bouillon. 3. That the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Conde should be impowr'd forthwith to Treat about a General Peace. 4. That to that end Just and Reasonable Conditions should be agreed upon; and that the Prince should be allow'd to send in∣to Spain, in order to agree upon a place for the Conference. 5. That a Council should be made,
compos'd of unsuspected Persons, which should be agreed upon. 6. That there should be no Superintendent, and that the Revenue, Taxes, Impositions, &c. should be regulated by a good Council 7. That all such who had serv'd Mon∣s, or the Prince, should be restor'd to their Estates, and Places, Governments, Pensions, and Assignations, which should be assign'd upon good Funds, and the like for Monsieur, and for the Princes. 8. That Satisfaction should be given to the Duke of Orleance, upon those things he might desire for himself, and for his Friends. 9. That the Forces and Officers that had follow'd the Princes should be treated as they were before, and should possess the same Ranks they had be∣fore. 10. That the Court should grant the In∣habitants of Bordeaux those things they desir'd be∣fore the War, and for which they had Deputies at Court. 11. That the Taxes should be dimi∣nish'd in Guienne, according as it should be agreed upon sincerely. 12. That the Prince of Conty should have leave to Treat with Monsieur d' An∣goulesine about the Government of Provence, and to give him the Government of Champayne in ex∣change, or else to sell it to whoever he should think fit, to give him the Money of it, and that for the overplus he should be assisted with such a Sum of Money as should be agreed upon. 13. That the Government of Auvergne should be given to the Duke of Nemours. 14. That leave should be given to President Viole to Treat about a place of President a Mortier, or of Secretary of State, up∣on Promise, that it should be the first vacant; and a Sum of Money in present to facilitate the obtaining of it. 15. That the Court should grant the Duke de la Rochefoucault the O atent during Life Breviate he de∣sir'd, equal to that of Messieurs de Bouillon, and Guienne, and the Government of Angoumois and
St. Tonge, or the Sum of Sixscore Thousand Crowns, and leave to Purchase the said Government, or any other he should have a mind to. 16. That the Prince of Tarente should have a Breviate about his Rank, equal to the Duke of Bouillon's, and that he should be put in Possession of it, and that he should be reimburs'd for the Losses he had su∣stain'd by the taking and demolishing of Taille∣bourg, according to the Account he should de∣liver about it. 17. That Messieurs de Marsin and du Doignon should be made Marshals of France. 18. That Monsieur de Montespan should be made a Duke. 19. That the Duke of Rohan should be restor'd to his Governments of Anjou and Angers, and that the Pont de Ce, together with the Juris∣diction of Saumur should be granted him 20. That the Government of Bergerac and Sainte Foy should be given to Monsieur de la Force, and the survi∣vance to his Son the Marquess of Castelnau. That the Marquess of Sillery should be certain of being made Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost at the first Promotion, or Instalment; and that a Breviate should be given him for it, together with the Sum of 50000 Crowns, to Purchase a Govern∣ment. Upon which Conditions they would en∣gage to lay down their Arms, and to consent feely to any Advantages for Cardinal Mazarin, and to his Return into France within the space of three Months, or at the time when the Prince having adjusted the Articles of a general Peace with the Spaniards, should be at the place of Con∣ference with the Ministers of Spain, and have given an Account of the Peace's being ready to be sign'd; the which he would not Sign until the said Cardinal were actually return'd: But that the Money mention'd by the Treaty should be paid before his Return.
The Cardinal hearken'd to Gourville's Propositi∣ons, and seem'd not to dislike them, whether it ere that he really was inclin'd to grant them, or that he was willing the Difficulties should arise se where: But the Duke of Bouillon, who dreaded  Peace should be concluded on, without his ha∣ving the Dutchy of Albret, which the Prince was  Possession of, in order to make him a Recom∣pence in part for Sedan; told the Cardinal, That nce he thought it fit to favour all the Prince's Friends, who were his sworn Enemies, he thought it was yet more reasonable to do Justice to his Friends, who had assisted him, and maintain'd him against the Prince. That he found no fault with what was design'd for the Dukes of Nemours and de l Rochefoucault, Marsin, and the others; but that at the same time he could not but think, that ha∣ving so considerable an Interest as the Dutchy of Albret was, nothing should be concluded on with∣ obliging the Prince to satisfie him in that Point. Whatever induc'd the Duke of Bouillon to use these Arguments, it is most certain that they hin∣dred the Cardinal from proceeding any farther, and he sent back Gourville to the Prince, in order to remove that Difficulty. But whereas in all great Affairs delays are commonly very dangerous, they were much more so in this, which was not only compos'd of so many different Interests, and view'd by so many opposite Cabals, which endeavour'd to break it; but was moreover manag'd by the Prince of Conde on one side, and by Cardinal Mazarin on the other; who tho' very opposite in some things, yet were alike in many others, particularly in Treating about all manner of Affairs without any limited Pretentions; which is the Reason that when their desires are granted, they still flatter themselves with obtaining more, perswading themselves to
that degree, that all things are due to their good Fortune, that the Balance can never be kept suffi∣ciently even between them, nor can ever remain long enough in that condition, to afford them time to resolve upon a Treaty, and to conclude it. Other Obstacles were joyn'd to these: It was the Cardi∣nal of Rets's Interest to prevent the Peace, by rea∣son that if it were made without his participation, the Duke of Orleance and the Prince being united with the Court, he would remain expos'd, without any Protection. On the other hand, Chavigny be∣ing disgusted with the Court, and with the Prince after the ill Success of his Negotiation, concluded that it was better to break the Treaty, than suffer it to be made by any but himself. I cannot tell whether the Conformity of In∣terests, that happen'd to meet at that time between the Cardinal of Rets and Chavigny, made them joyn to hinder the Prince's Treaty; or whether either of them prevail'd with the Duke of Orleance to do it; but I have been inform'd since by a Person I must Credit, that while Gourville was at St. Ger∣mans, Monsieur sent the Duke d' Anville to Cardinal Mazarin, to desire him not to conclude any thing with the Prince, because he design'd the Court should be solely oblig'd to him for a Peace: That he was ready to go to the King, and thereby to give an Example which should be follow'd by the Inhabitants, and by the Parliament of Paris. It was very probable that such a Proposition should be hearken'd unto, preferably to all others: And in effect, whether by this Reason, or by the other I have alledg'd before, about the Prince and Cardi∣nal Mazarin's Minds; or whether, as I always be∣liev'd it, the Cardinal was never inclinable to a Peace, and only made use of Negotiations for a Snare, in which he could surprize his Enemies: In fine, all things were entangled to that degree, that
the Duke de la Rochefoucaul no longer would suffer his People to meddle with Negotiations, which in'd his Party, and charg'd Gourville to get a po∣sitive Answer from the Cardinal, the second time he was sent to St. Germans, with Orders never to return thither again. In the mean while, besides that the Prince's In∣clinations were not constantly fix'd on a Peace, he was continually combated by the divers Interests of those who endeavour'd to disswade him from it. Cardinal Mazarin's Enemies did not think them∣selves reveng'd, while he remain'd in France: And the Cardinal of Rets was sensible that in case the Prince should come to an Accommodation it would ruin his Credit, and expose him to his Ene∣mies: Whereas the War continuing, it would cer∣tainly ruin the Prince, or banish Cardinal Mazarin by which means he remaining alone near the Duke of Orleance, might render himself considerable at Court, whereby he propos'd very considerable Ad∣vantages. On the other hand, the Spaniards offer'd whatever might tempt the Prince, and us'd all their Endeavours, in order to prolong the Civil War; his nearest Relations, his Friends, nay, even his ve∣ry Attendants, seconded the same out of Self-In∣terest: In fine, all People were divided in Cabals, to make a Peace, or continue the War. No Arguments or Politicks were omitted to per∣swade the Prince to embrace either of these Parties, when the Dutchess of Chatillon rais'd a desire of Peace in him by more agreeable means: She ima∣gin'd that so great a good was only to be promo∣ted by her Beauty, and mixing some Ambition with the desire of making a new Conquest, she re∣solv'd at once to Triumph over the Prince of Conde's Heart, and to draw from the Court all the Advan∣tages of that Negotiation.
Those were not the only Reason that inspir'd those thoughs in her; Vanity and Revenge contributed more towards it than any thing else: The Emula∣tion which Beauty and Gallantry often produces among Ladies, had occasion'd great Jealousies be∣tween the Dutchess of Longueville, and Madame de Chatillon: They had long conceal'd their Sen∣timents, but at last they appear'd publickly on both sides. Madame de Chatillon, putting no Bounds to her Victory, not only obligd the Duke of Nemours to break off all his Engagements with Madame de Longueville in a very disobliging manner, but at the same time resolv'd to take from her all the knowledge of Afairs, and to be the sole disposer of the Conduct and Interests of the Prince. The Duke of Nemours, who had great Engagements with her, approv'd her Design, and believd that since it was in his power to Regulate the Dutchess of Chatillon's Conduct towards the Prince, she would inspire him with whatever Sentiments he pleas'd, and that thus he should dispose of the Prince's Mind, by the power he had over the Dutchess of Chatillon's. The Duke de la Rochefoucault at that time had the greatest share of any body in the Prince's favour, and at the same time had ve∣ry strict Engagements both with the Duke of Ne∣mours, and with Madame de Chatillon: He was very sensible of the Prince's Irresolutions towards a Peace; and fearing, as it happen'd since, that the Spanish, and the Dutchess of Longueville's Ca∣bals would joyn, in order to remove the Prince from Paris, where he might daily Treat without their Participation; he imagin'd that the Dutchess of Chatillon's Design would be able to remove all the Obstacles that oppos'd a Peace, and for that Reason induc'd the Prince to engage with her, and to give her Merlou for her self. He likewise pre∣vaild with her to behave her self so prudently to∣wards
the Prince, and the Duke of Nemours, as to preserve them both; and perswaded the Duke of Nemours to approve of this Engagement, which he ought not to be Jealous of, since he was acquainted therewith, and that it was only design'd to place him at the Helm of Affairs. This Intrigue being manag'd and regulated by the Duke de la Roche∣focault, gave him almost an absolute Power over all those that compos'd it. And thus those four Persons being equally advantag'd thereby, it would certainly have had at last the Success they had pro∣pos'd, had not Fortune oppos'd it by a World of unavoidable Accidents. In the mean time, the Dutchess of Chatillon be∣ing desirous to appear at Court with all the Advan∣tages she deriv'd from her new Credit: She went thither with so absolute a Power from the Prince, that it was look'd upon rather as an Effect of his Complaisance towards her, and a desire of flatter∣ing her Vanity, than a real Intention of coming to an Accommodation. She came back to Paris with great hopes, but the Cardinal only reap'd solid Advantages by that Negotiation; he gain'd Time, he augmented the Suspicions of the opposite Cabal, and amus'd the Prince at Paris by the hopes of a Treaty, while they took Guienne, and his Towns from him, and while the King's Army, command∣ed by the Marshals of Turenne and Hoquincourt, held the Field, and his was retir'd in Estampes. More∣over it did not remain long there, without re∣ceiving a considerable Loss, which was this; The Marshal of Turenne being inform'd that The first Princess of the Blood, se call'd. Made∣moslle passing through Estampes, had been desirous to see the Army in Battalia, he caus'd his Forces to March, and arriv'd in the Suburb of Estampes, be∣fore those which compos'd the Army that was lodg'd there could be in a condition to defend their Quarter: It was forc'd and pillag'd, and the Mar∣shals
of Turenne and d' Hoquincourt retir'd to theirs, after having kill'd 1000 or 1200 Men of the Princes best Forces, and carry'd away abundance of Pri∣soners. This Success rais'd the hopes of the Court to that degree, that they design'd to Besiege Estampes, and all the Army that was in it. Whatever Difficulty seem'd to attend that Enterprize, it was resolv'd upon, in hopes to meet with Astonishment in the Men, and Division in the Commanders; a Town open in several parts, unprovided, and without probability of Succours from any but the Duke of Lorrain, with whom the Court thought a Treaty had been made. Moreover it is my Opinion, that the Event of the Siege was not so much consider'd, as the Reputation so great an Undertaking would afford the King's Arms: For tho' at the same time the Negotiation was continud with great earnest∣ness, and that the Prince was then very desirous of a Peace, yet it could not reasonably be expected un∣til the Success of Estampes had regulated the Pro∣positions thereof. 1652.During these Transactions the Court-Party made use of that Conjuncture to gain the People, and to form Cabals in the Parliament; and tho' at that time the Duke of Orleance seem'd closely united with the Prince, he notwithstanding daily had particular Conferences with the Cardinal of Rets, who made it his chief business to destroy whatever Resolutions the Prince put him upon. The Siege of Estampes continu'd still, and tho' the Progresses of the King's Army were inconsiderable, yet never∣theless the Reports that were spread up and down the Realm, were advantageous to the King. And Paris look'd for the Succours that was expected from the Duke of Lorrain, as the only thing that could sae the Party. It arriv'd at last after many delays, and no small Suspicions of an Accommodation
between the King and him, however his Presence dissipated that Opinion for a while, and he was receiv'd with extream Joy; his Forces were En∣camp'd near Paris, and the Disorders they com∣mitted were suffered without complaining. At first there happen'd some Disputes between the Prince and him about their Rank; but he finding that the Prince would not desist, relinquish'd his Pretentions so much the rather, because he had only insisted upon it, in order to gain time to make a secret Treaty with the Court, to raise the Siege of Estampes without hazarding a Combat. Nevertheless, as People are never so easily surpris'd, as when they are projecting to deceive others, it happn'd, that the Duke of Lorrain, who expected to derive great advantages from, and to secure himself by his continual Negotiations with the Court, (tho' very unjust) was on a sudden r∣pris'd by the Marshal of Turenne, who marched up to him with all his Army, and required him forth∣with to reire and march back for Flanders. The Duke of Lorrain's Forces were not inferiour to the King's, and a Man who had only valued his Repu∣taion might easily have hazarded a Combat. But whatever Reasons the Duke of Lorrain had for it, he retired with Shame, and submitted to what the Marshal of Turenne was pleas'd to impose upon him he neither acquainted the Duke of Orleance nor the Prince with what pass'd, and the first thing they heard was, that their Forces wre marched out of Estampes, that the King's Army was re∣mov'd from thence, and that the Duke of Lorrain was marching back for Flanders, pretending to have fully perform'd the Orders he had receiv'd from the Spaniards, and his Promise to Monsieur. This nws surpris'd every body, and made the Prince resolve to go to his Army, fearing the King's might fall upon it in the way. He went out of Paris,
accompany'd only by 12 or 15 Horse, whereby he expos'd himself to be taken by the Enemies Par∣ties; however he joyn'd his Army, and led it to∣wards Ville Iuive: Afterwards he marched to St. Cloud, where he made some stay, during which the Havest was not only quite spoil'd, but almost all the Country Houses were burnt. This began to disgust the Parisians, and the Prince had like to have received fatal Marks at the Battel of St. An∣thony. During these Transactions, Gaucourt had secret Conferences with the Cardinal, who sill express'd to him an earnest desire for a Peace; he had alrea∣dy agreed upon the main Conditions, but the more he insisted on the least, the more it was apparent that he had no design to conclude. Those Uncer∣tainties gave new Vigour to all the Cabals, and consequently to the divers Reports that were di∣spersed abroad. Paris never was in greater Agita∣tion, and never was the Prince's mind more divi∣ded to resolve upon Peace or War. The Spaniards endeavour'd to remove him from Paris to hinder a a Peace, and the Dutchess of Longueville's Friends contributed to that Disign, in order to remove him from the Dutchess of Chastillon. Moreover, Mademoiselle at once design'd the same things with the Spaniards, and with the Dutchess of Longuevil∣le; for on the one hand she desir'd the Continua∣tion of the War, to be reveng'd on the Queen and Cardinal, who had hindred her Marriage with the King, and on the other, she was desirous to get the Prince from the Dutchess of Chastillon, and to have a greater share in his Confidence and E∣steem than that Duchess: And therefore in order to gain him, by that which was most sensible to him, she rais'd Forces in his Name, and promis'd him Money to raise more.
Promises being joyn'd to those the Spani∣ mae, and to the Atifices that were us'd by he Duchess of Longueville's Friends, remov'd from  Prince all the thoughts he had of a Peace. Tha which in my Opinion likewise contributed rably to it, was not only the small Confi∣nc he thought he could repose in the Court, but  ng which will hardly be credited from a Per∣son of his Quality and Merit, it was a violent de∣sire of imitating the Duke of Lorrain in many things, and particularly in his behaviour towards his Soldiers and Officers; and he perswaded him∣self, that since the Duke of Lorrain being dispos∣sess'd of his Dominions, his Circumstances not be∣ing near so advantageous as his, had notwithstand∣ing rende'd himself so considerable by his Army nd by his Money, his own Qualifications being inniely superiour to his, his Progresses would proe suitable thereunto, and that in the mean time he sould lead a Life altogether conformable to his own Humour. This has been look'd upon as the true Motive that engag'd the Prince among the Spaniards, and for which he renounc'd whatever his Birth and Serices had acquir'd him in the Kingdom. How∣ever he conceal'd his Sentiments as much as possible he could, and still express'd the same desire for a Peace, the which was still in vain, in Agitation. The Court at that time was at St. Denis, and the Marshal de la Ferté had joyn'd the King's Army with the Forces he had brought from Lorrain. The Prince's Army which was weaker than the least of the two that were oppos'd to him, had till then kept its Post at St. Cloud, in order to make use of the Bridge to avoid an unequal Combat; but the arrival of Marshal de la Ferté enabled the King's Army to divide into two Bodies, and to attack St. Cloud on both sides, by making Bridges towards
St. Denis; the Prince resolv'd to remove from St. Cloud, in order to march to Charenton, and to Post himself in that nook of Land, which makes the Conjunction between the River Marne and the Seine. Without doubt he would not have done it had he followed his own Inclination, and it had been much safer and much easier to leave the Ri∣ver Seine on the left hand, and to march by Meu∣don and Vaugirard, to Encamp under the Faux∣bourg St. Germans, where perhaps he should not have been attack'd for fear of Engaging the Pari∣sians in his Defence. But the Duke of Orleance would by no means consent to it, not only, as was repre∣sented to him, out of fear of a Combat, he might see from the Windows of his Palace of Luxemburg, but also because some perswaded him that the King's Artillery would make a continual Fire against it to force him to quit it. Thus the Opi∣nion of an imaginary Peril, made the Duke of Orleance expose the Prince of Condes Life to the greatest danger he had ever been in. He caus'd his Army to march at the beginning of the Night on the first of Iuly, and expecting to reach Cha∣renton before his Enemies could come up to him, he march'd through the A place like the Ring in Hide-Park. Cours of the Queen-Mo∣ther, and round about the City, from the Gate of St. Honoré to the Gate of St. Anthony, in order to arch from thence to Charenton. He did not desire leave to March through Paris, for fear of a denial, which at that time would have discover'd the ill Condition of his Affairs: Besides he was afraid, that having obtain'd it, his Forces would disperse themselves in the City, and that it would be difficult to force them out of it, in case of Necessity. The Court soon receiv'd Intelligence of his March, and the Marshal of Turenne follow'd him immediately with what Forces he had, in or∣der to stop him, until Marshal de la Ferté, who
ollow'd with is Army, could come up to him. In the mean time the King was sent to Charonne, to behold from that place, as from a Theatre, that Action, which, according to appearances, was like to prove the absolute Overthrow of the Prince, and the end of the Civil War; but in Effect that which prov'd one of the boldest, and most perillous Occa∣sions, that ever was seen in War, and that in which the Prince of Conde's great Endowments appear'd to the best Advantage. Fortune it self seem'd to be reconcil'd to him in that Occasion, and would have a share in a Success, of which both Parties have imputed the Glory to his Valour, and Con∣duct: For he was attac'd precisely at a time, in which he could make use of the Retrenchments the Inhabitants of the Suburb of St. Anthony had made, to secure themselves from being pillag'd by the Duke o Lorrain's Forces, and it was the only place in all the March he design'd that had any Retrenchments, and in which he could avoid be∣ing absolutely defeaed; nay, even some Squadrons of his Rear were charg'd in the Suburb of St. Mar∣tin, by some Men the Marshal of Turenne had de∣tach'd to amuse him;The Battel of the Su∣burb of St. Anthony. they retir'd in disorder in the Retrenchment of the Suburb of St. Anthony, in which he had plac'd himself in Battalia. He had but just so much time as was necessary to that end, and to garnish those Posts through which he could be attack'd, with Foot and Horse: He was forc'd to place the Baggage of the Army upon the side of the Ditch of St. Anthony, because the Parisians had refus'd to receive it. Moreover some Carriages had been plunder'd, and those of the Court-Party had contriv'd Affairs so, that the E∣vent of that Business should be seen from thence, as from a Neuter place.
The Prince of Conde preserv'd about him such of his Attendants as happen'd to be there, and such Persons of Quality as had no Command, the num∣ber of which amounted to about Thirty or Forty. The Marshal of Turenne dispos'd his Attacks with all the Diligence and Confidence of a Man who thinks himself certain of Victory. His detach'd Men being come within 30 Yards of the Retrench∣ment, the Prince came out upon them, with the Squadron I have mention'd, and charging them with Sword in hand, defeated their Battalion ab∣solutely, took some Officers Prisoners, carry'd a∣way their Colours, and retir'd to his Retrench∣ment. On the other hand, the Marquess of St. Mesgrin attack'd the Post that was defended by Count de Tavannes, Lieutenant-General, and Languais, Ma∣reschal de Camp; who made so brave a Resistance, that the Marquess of St. Mesgrin finding that his Infantry flinch'd, being hurry'd on by Heat and Anger, advanc'd with the King's Troop of Chevaux Legers in a Street shut up with Barricado's, where he was kill'd, with the Marquess of Nantouillet, Le Fouilloux, and some others, Mancini, Cardinal Mazarin's Nephew was wounded, and dy'd of his Wounds some time after. The Attacks were continu'd on all sides with great Vigour, and the Prince of Conde charg'd the Ene∣mies a second time, with an equal Success to the first; he appear'd every where, in the middle of the Fire and Combat, and gave his Orders with that calmness of Mind, which is so necessary, and yet so seldom met with on those Occasions. Finally, the King's Forces having forc'd the last Barricado of the Street call'd du Cours, which leads to Vin∣cennes, they entred in Order of Battle as far as the Market-place of the Suburb of St. Anthony; where∣upon the Prince ran thither, charg'd them, and
destroying whatever oppos'd him, regain'd that Po, and forc'd the Enemies out of it. Never∣theless they were Masters of a second Barricado, which was in the Street that goes to Carenton, the which was Forty Yards beyond a very large Square adjoyning to the said Street: The Marquess of oilles had made himself Master of it, and in order to keep it the better, he had caus'd the Houses to be pierc'd through, and had plac'd Musquetiers in all those before which they were oblig'd to pass to come up to the said Barricado. The Prince of Conde did design to go with some Infantry, to cause other Houses to be pierc'd, to force them to retire by a greater Fire, which indeed was the best way; but the Duke of Beaufort, who chanc'd not to be near the Prince at the beginning of the Attack, being somewhat Jealous at the Duke of Nemours having been there all along, press'd the Prince to cause the said Barricado to be attack'd by Infantry that was already tyr'd and discourag'd, the which instead of going up to the Enemy, kept close to the Houses, and would not Advance. At the same time a Squadron of the Forces from Flanders, that had been posted in a Street, which butted in one of the corners of the Square on that side where the Houses were, being no longer able to arry there, for fear of being surrounded as soon as the Houses thereabouts should be taken, came back into the Square, and the Duke of Beaufort believing that they were Enemies, propos'd to the Dkes de la Rochefoucault and Nemours, who arriv'd there at that time, to Charge them, and they be∣ing follow'd by all the Persons of Quality and Vo∣luntiers, they march'd up to them, and expos'd themselves to no purpose to all the Shot of the Bar∣ricado, and of the Houses of the Square, for in joyning they knew themselves to be all of the same Party: But at the same time perceiving some asto∣nishment
in those who guarded the Barricado, the Dukes of Nemours, Beaufort, de la Rochefoucault, and the Prince of Marsillac charg'd them, and forc'd them to quit it: After which they alighted, and guarded it themselves, the Infantry that was Com∣manded refusing to second them. The Prince of Conde stood firm in the Street with those that had rally'd about him. In the mean time, the Enemies, who were possess'd of all the Houses of the Street, seeing the Barricado guarded only by four Men, would certainly have re-taken it, had not the Prince's Squadron hindred them; but there being no Infantry to hinder their Firing from the Windows, they began to Fire again from all sides, and saw the four who kept the Barricade side-ways from head to foot. The Duke of Nemous receiv'd Thirteen Shot upon his Armour; the Duke de la Rochefoucault likewise receiv'd a Musquet-shot in the Face above the Eyes, by which he losing his sight, the Duke of Beaufort and the Prince of Mar∣sillac were oblig'd to retire with these two wounded Lords. The Enemies pursu'd them, but the Prince of Conde advanc'd to dis-engage them, and gave them time to get on Horse back, in so much that they were again oblig'd to abandon to the King's Forces the Post they had just taken from them. Almost all those who had been with them in the Square were kill'd or wounded; among others they lost the Marquesses of Flamarin and de la Roche∣guiffard, the Count of Castres, the Count de Boss, Desfoureaux, La Martiniere, La Motte, Gayonne, Bercenes, Captain of the Guards to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, de L' Huilliere, who likewise belong'd to him, and many others, whose Names cannot be set down here. In fine, the Number of the Dead and Wounded was so considerable on both sides, that both Parties seem'd rather intent to re∣pair their Losses, than to attack their Enemies.
This kind of Truce however was most advan∣tageous to the King's Forces, who were disgusted by so many Attacks, in which they had still been eaten and repuls'd; for during those Transactions, the Marshal de la Ferte march'd with all speed, and was preparing to make a new Effort with his fresh and entire Army, when the Parisians, who till hen had been Spectators of so great an Action, declar'd in favour of the Prince of Conde. They had been so much prejudic'd by the Arts of the Court, and of the Cardinal of Rets, and had been perswaded, to that degree, that the Prince had made a Peace by himself, without minding their Interests, that they did look upon the beginning of that Action, as a Play, that was acted between him and Cardinal Mazarin, to blind them. The Duke of Orleance confirm'd them in that thought, by his giving no Orders in the City to Succour the Prince. The Cardinal of Rets was with him, who still augmented the Trouble and Irreolution of his Mind, in proposing Difficulties to whatever he would undertake. On the other hand, St. Anthony's Gate was guarded by a Regiment of the Train-bands, whose Offi∣cers being gain'd by the Court, almost equally hindred People from going out, or coming into the City. Finally, all things were ill dispos'd to receive the Prince and his Forces there, when The Duke o Orle∣ance's Daughter. Mademoiselle making an Effort upon her Father's Mind, drew him out of the Lethargy in which he had been kept by the Cardinal of Res: She went to the Town-House to order the Citizens to take Arms; and at the same time commanded the Go∣vernour of the Bastille to fire his Ordnance upon the King's Forces, and coming back to St. Anthony's Gate, she not only dispos'd all the Ciizens to re∣ceive the Prince and his Army, but moreover to March out, and to make some Skirmishes, while
his Forces were entring. That which made an end of moving the People in the Prince of Conde's behalf, was to see so many Persons of Quality carry'd back, both dead and wounded. The Duke de la Rochefoucault being willing to improve that fa∣vourable Conjuncture for the Advantage of his Party, although his Wound made both his Eyes almost come out of his Head, went on Horse-back from the place where he was wounded to the Faux∣bourg St. German, exhorting the People to assist the Prince of Conde, and for the future to distinguish better the Intention of those who had accus'd him of having treated with the Court. This for a while had the Effect he desir'd, and Paris was ne∣ver better affected to the Prince, than it was at that time. In the mean time the noise of the Canon of the Bastille, produc'd at one and the same time two very different Sentiments in Cardinal Mazarin's Mind; for at first he believ'd that Paris was De∣claring against the Prince, and that he was going to Triumph over that City, and over his Enemy: But finding that instead thereof, they fir'd upon the King's Forces, he sent Orders to the Marshals of France to retire with the Army, and to March back to St. Denis. That Day prov'd one of the most Glorious of the Prince of Conde's Life, his Valour and his Con∣duct never had a greater share in any of his Victo∣ries; and it may be said with Truth, that so many Persons of Quality never made a smaller number of Men fight. The Colours were carried to Notre Dame, and all the Officers were put at Liberty up∣on their Parole. Notwithstanding this, the Negotiations were continued, every Cabal was desirous to make the Peace, or to hinder the others from doing it; and the Prince and Cardinal were absolutely resolv'd
not to make it. Chavigy had made his Pece  the Prince in Appearance, but it would be difficult to tell what his Sentiments had been ill then, by reason that his natural Levity daily in∣spired him with such as were directly opposite; he was for pushing things to Extremity when ever he had any Prospect of destroying he Cardinal, and of enring into the Ministry of Affairs again; and he was for begging a Peace whenever he imagin∣ed his Lands should be Pillag'd and his Houses pll'd down. Nevertheless, at that time he chanc'd to be of Opinion with the rest, that it would be proper to profit of the good Disposition the Peo∣ple was in, and to propose an Assembly t the TownHouse, in order to resolve, to have the Duke of Orleance acknowledge'd Lieutenant General of the Crown of France: That they should enter into an inseparable Union to procure the removal of the Cardinal, and that the Duke of Beaufort should be invested with the Government of Paris, in the room of the Marshal de L' Hospital; that Broussel should be made Prevost des Merchands, or Lord Mayor, in the room of Le Febure. But that Assembly in which they expected to find the safety of the Party, prov'd one of the main Causes of its Ruine, by an Act of Violence, which was like to have destroyed all those that chanc'd to be in he Town-House, or Hostel de Ville, and made the Prince lose all the advantages he had gain'd by the Battle of St. Anthony. I cannot tell who was the Author of so pernici∣ous a Design, all having equally disown'd it; but in fine, while the Assembly was held, a Croud of all manner of Men in Arms appea'd at the Town-House Gates, crying, That they should not only do all things according to the Prince's Mind, but moreover, that they should instantly deliver all those that were Cardinal Mazarin's Friends. At
first this Noise was only look'd upon as an ordinary effect of the Common People's Impatience, but seeing that the Croud and Tumult increas'd, and that not only the Souldiers, but even the Officers were concern'd in the Riot, the Gates being set on fire, and the Windows shot at, all the Members of the Assembly thought themselves equally undone. Many of them to avoid the Fire, expos'd them∣selves to the Fury of the People, and abundance of Persons of all Qualities, and of all Parties were kill'd: It was generally believ'd that the Prince had sacrific'd his Friends, in order not to be suspected of having destroy'd his Enemies. The Duke of Orleance was not in the least suspected of having any share in that Business, the Odium and Hatred thereof being wholly cast upon the Prince of Conde. As for my part, I am of Opinion, that both of them had employ'd the Duke of Beaufort in it, to frighten such Members of that As∣sembly as were not on their side; tho' at the same time I am perswaded that neither of them had the least Intention of hurting any body. How∣ever they soon appeas'd the Disorder, but they could not race out the Impression it had made in the Peoples Mind. Afterwards it was propos'd to create a Council, compos'd of the Duke of Orleance, of the Prince of Conde, the Chancellor of France, the Princes, Dukes, and Peers, Marshals of France, and Gene∣ral Officers of the Party. Two Presidents a Mortier were to assist at it from the Parliament, the Lord Mayor, or Provost des Merchands, from the City, to Judge definitively, and without Appeal of all Military Causes, and whatever related to the Go∣vernment of the City. This Council augmented the Disorder instead of diminishing it, about the Pretentions of the Rank that was to be held in it, the sequel of which, as
well as of the Assembly, prov'd very Fatal; for the Dukes of Nemours and of Beaufort being already at ods about past differences, or about some Ladies, quarrel'd about Precedency in the Council, and  with Pistols;The Duke of Nemours's Death. the Duke of Nemours was kill'd by the Duke of Beaufort his Brother-in-law. All those who knew that Prince, were mov'd with Grief and Compassion at his Death; even the Publick had cause to lament him; for besides his great and lovely Qualifications, he contributed as much as in him lay to promote a Peace, and both he and the Duke de la Rochefoucault hd relin∣quish'd the Advantages the Prince was oblig'd to procure them by the Treaty, in order to facilitate the Conclusion thereof. But the Death of the one, and the Wound of the other, afforded the Spa∣iards, and Madame de Longueville's Friends all the Liberty they could desire to draw the Prince away. They now suppos'd it would be easie o perswade the Prince to go into Flanders; they dazled him with hopes, and Madame de Chatillon seem'd to appear less Charming to him, because he no longer found an Illustrious Rival to Combat in her Heart. However he did not at first reject the Propositions of a Peace, but taking his measures to continue the War, he offer'd the Duke of Nemours's Em∣ployment to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, who cold not accept it by reason of his Wound; for which Reason he gave it afterwards to the Prince of Tarente. Paris was more divided at that time than ever it had been; The Court daily gain'd Ground in the Parliament, and among the People, the Mur∣der committed at the Town-House having struck every body with Horror: The Army durst not keep the Field, and their abode in Paris exasperated the People the more against the Prince. In ine, his Affairs were reduc'd to the greatest Extremity,
when the Spaniards, who were equally desirous of preventing his Ruin and his Elevation, in order to perpetuate the War, caus'd the Duke of Lorrain to March to Paris for the second time, with a suffi∣cient Body, to stop the King's Army. Nay, more∣over he kept it invested at Villeneuve St. George, and sent word to Paris, that the Enemies would be constrain'd to come to a Battle, or to starve in their Camp. This hope flatter'd the Prince, and he imagin'd he should draw great Advantages from the Event of that Action, although in reality the Marshal of Turenne never wanted Provisions, nor the Liberty of retiring to Melun, withou hazarding a Com∣bat. He did it accordingly, without meeting any Opposition, whilst the Duke of Lorrain was gone to Paris, where the Prince lay sick of a Fe∣ver. Palluau's Forces at that time joyn'd the King's Army, after having taken Montrond: The Marquess of Persan had been block'd up in it from the beginning of the War, by Count Palluau with an inconsiderable Army: But when the Garrison was weaken'd by Hunger and Diseases, he attack'd it by Force, and took it with less Resistance, than could be expected from such brave Men in one of the strongest Places in the World, had nothing been wanting in it. The loss thereof prov'd so much the more sensible to the Prince, by reason that it was occasion'd by his Neglect, since he might easily have succour'd Montrond, whilst the King's Army was towards Compiegne; whereas his Forces in ruining the Country round about Paris increas'd the Inhabitants Hatred against him. The Prince was neither happier, nor better serv'd in Guienne, where the Division between the Prince of Conty and the Dutchess of Longueville serv'd for a Pretence to those who had a mind to quit his Party. Several Cities, following the Example of
Ag, had open'd their Gates to the King's Forces, and the Inhabitants of Perigueux had stabb'd their Governor, and driven out the Garrison; Villeneuve ' Agenois, in which the Marquess of Terbon had thown himself, was the only place that resolv'd to defend it self, and it was done with so much Vigour,  Count d' Harcourt was forc'd to raise the Siege. He did not tarry long in Guienne, after that small Disgrace, and whether he was really diffident of the Court, or that he thought that making himself Master of Brisac, Philipsburg, and Alsatia, he should lay the Foundation of a certain and independent Establishment; he went away from his Army like a Man who dreaded his being made a Prisoner in it, and repair'd to Philipsburg with all the speed imaginable. During these Transactions the Prince of Conde's Ilness increas'd, yet, tho' it was very violent, it prov'd nevertheless less Fatal to him than to Mon∣sieur de Chavigny, who having had a very rough Esclaircissement with the Prince, he was seiz'd with a Fever, of which he dyed few days after. Hi Mifortune did not end with his Life, and Death, which should terminate all Hatreds, seem'd to have reviv'd his Enemy's against him. All man∣ner of Crimes were imputed to him, and the Prince particularly justify'd himself at his Cost, of the Jealousie the Spaniards and the Frondeurs conceiv'd of a secret Treaty with the Court: He complain'd that Chavigny had hearken'd to some Propositions of the Abbot Fouquet without his participation (altho' he had order'd him so to do in Writing) and that he had promis'd to make him relinquish some Ar∣ticles, which he could not do. The Prince like∣wise caus'd a Copy to be written of an intercepted Letter from the aforesaid Abbot, the Original of which I have seen, whereby he acquainted the Court, that Goulas would incline the Duke of Or∣leance
to abandon the Prince, unless he accepted the Conditions of Peace that were offer'd him: But in the Copies the Prince had written of it, he put the Name of Chavigny instead of Goulas; where∣by he accus'd him of Treason, without giving any other Proofs thereof, besides a falsify'd Copy of that Letter written by the said Abbot Fouquet, with whom the Prince daily treated, and gave an Ac∣count thereof to Chavigny. I can only impute the cause of so unjust, and so extraordinary a proceeding to the extream desire the Prince had of making War, the which being oppos'd by his Friends, had made him alter his Conduct towards them, and place all his Confi∣dence in the Spaniards. The Duke of Bouillon's Death.The Duke of Bouillon dy'd at that very time at Pontoise, whose Death should have cur'd Men of Ambition, and disgusted them from making so ma∣ny different Projects, in order to Rise. For the Ambition of that Duke was accompany'd by all the extraordinary Qualifications that could render it prosperous: He was brave, and was a perfect Master in the Orders of War; he had an Easie, Na∣tural, Insinuating Eloquence: A clear Understand∣ing, abounding in Expedients, and fit to manage the most difficult Undertakings; a sound Judgment, and an admirable Talent in distinguishing. He hearken'd mildly to the Counsels that were given him, and he valu'd other Peoples Reasons so much, that he seem'd to draw his Resolutions from thence. But yet those Advantages prov'd almost useless to him, through the obstinacy of his Fortune, which always thwarted his Prudence. The Spaniards were Revenging the Duke of Guise's Enterprize upon the Kingdom of Naples by a long and cruel Imprisonment, and had long prov'd in∣exorable to all those who interceded for his Liberty. However they granted it to the Prince, and on
tht occasion they renounc'd one of their princi∣pal Maxims, to link him the closer to their Party, by a concession that is so extraordinary among them. Thus the Duke of Guise receiv'd his Liberty, when he least expected it, and he came out of Prison, engag'd by so great a Favour, and by his Parole to enter into the Prince of Conde's Interests. He came to him at Paris, and perhaps believing he had ac∣quitted himself of what he ow'd him, by some Complements, and some Visits, he went soon after to meet the Court, to offer the King what such great Obligations exacted from him towards the Prince. As soon as Chavigny was dead, the Prince began to take his Measures to go away with the Duke of Lorrain; and indeed his Conduct had rendred his departure so necessary, that it was the only way he had left; for the Peace was too generally desir'd at Paris to remain there in safety, with a design to op∣pose it. The Duke of Orleance, who had desir'd it all along, and dreaded the Evil the Prince of Conde's Presence might draw upon him, contributed so much the rather towards his Removal, by reason that he found himself thereby free to make a par∣ticular Treaty. Altho' Affairs stood on these terms, the ordinary course of the Negotiation had not been interrupted; for even at that time when Cardinal Mazarin was quitting the Kingdom for the second time, to put a period to the pretences of the Civil War, or to shew that the Prince had other Interests besides his Removal, he sent Langlade, Secretary to the Duke of Bouillon, to the Duke de la Rochefoucault, either out of a real desire to Treat, thereby to facilitate his Return, or hoping to draw great Advantages by his shewing that he desir'd a Peace. In fine, Langlade came, with Conditions that were much
fuller than all the others, and almost conformable to what the Prince had demanded: but they were equally refus'd, and his Fate, which drew him into Flanders, did not permit him to discover the Preci∣pice until it was too late to retreat. Finally, he de∣parted with the Duke of Lorrain, after having ta∣ken vain Measures with the Duke of Orleance to hinder the King from being receiv'd at Paris: But his Credit was not sufficient at that time to cope with the Court's. He was order'd to leave Paris the very day the King was to arrive there, and he obey'd immediately, to avoid being a Spectator of the Triumph of his Enemies, as well as of the Pub∣lick Joy.
MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK VI. THE King came back to Paris on the 29th. of October. 1652.A vast concourse of People went out to meet His Majesty,The King's Return. and when he entred in the Evening into his Metropolis, all the People gave marks of an Extraordinary Joy. The next day the King caus'd a General Par∣don to be read in the Gallery of the Louvre, where the Parliament had been Conven'd by the King's Writ, after which, the said Declaration was re∣corded. In the next place, His Majesty order'd the Duke of Orleance to retire to Limours,Several Persons are order'd to quit Paris. and Ma∣demoiselle de Montpensier to Bois le Vicomte. The Duke of Beaufort, the Duke of Rohan, the Duke de la Rochefoucault, and all the Prince of Condes, and the Dutchess of Longueville's Servants, and all the near Relations of those who were in the Prince's
Service, were also order'd to quit Paris, and to re∣tire elsewhere. The Prince of Conde,The Prince of Conde's Motion. who did not think himself safe by the General Pardon, was gone towards the Frontiers of Picardy, there to receive some Spanish and Lorrain Forces, in order to joyn his Army. After he had receiv'd this Reinforcement, the re∣mainder of the Spanish Forces, and of those of Lorrain, divided themselves to March on both sides of him, in order to joyn and succour him in case of Necessity. After which the Prince march'd towards Rhel with a design to make himself Master of it. He prsented himself before it on the Thirtieth, and took it the same day without any Resistance. He left the Marquess of Persan there with some Infantry, and little Horse; and then he march'd directly to St. Menehoult, with the Forces of Vir∣temberg, with half those of Fuensaldagne, and with Three Thousand Horse of the Duke of Lorrain's, Commanded by the Prince de Ligne. He attack'd St. Menehoult on the first of November, and took it after fourteen days Siege: The Sixteenth of the said Month he receiv'd Notice that Marshal de Tu∣renne had receiv'd a Reinforcement of 3000 Men, and that he was at Vitry le Bruslé with near 15000. Whereupon he resolv'd to make his whole Army cross the Wood towards Clermont, and to Encamp there, in expectation of the Succours of Fuensal∣dagne, which he stood in need of, by reason that after the taking of St. Menehoult, he had sent back the Regiments of Languedoc, of Valois, and Lan∣geron to the Duke of Orleance, for the Reasons I am going to relate. When the Duke of Orleance was retir'd to Limours,The Duke of Orleance's Accommo∣dation. the King sent the Duke d' Anville, and Monsieur Le Tellier to that exil'd Uncle, to Conclude, and Sign an Accommodation with him. The chief Conditions of that Accommodation were, That
should call back his Forces, which con∣sisted of Eight Regiments of Horse, and Three of Foot; That he should give them to the King, but that His Majesty should not employ them against the Prince of Conde. The Treaty being sign'd, Monsieur retir'd to Blois with the King's leave, there to enjoy the Delights of Solitude, and to lead a  Life with The Dut∣chess of Or∣leance. Madame, who had no mind to be concern'd with the Cabals of the Court. The following day he sent Gedouin, Mareschal  Camp, and second Lieutenant to his Gendarmes, to give the Prince of Conde an Account of his Ac∣commodation, and to invite him at the same time to return to his Allegiance, with those that follow'd his Fortune, and to take the Advantage of the Act of Grace His Majesty had granted them. He like∣wise carry'd Orders to bring back the three Regi∣ments I have mention'd, the which the Prince had taken along with him, and were at that time in his Army. This Envoy being arriv'd at the Camp before St. Menehoult, on the third day of the Siege, and having perform'd his Commission to the utmost of his Power, the Prince answer'd him coldly, That he thank'd his Royal Highness for the Advice he gave him of his Treaty with the Court, that both he and his Friends knew the Treatment he had re∣ceiv'd, notwithstanding the Act of Grace, and that they would make their Profit of his Example; and that as for his Royal Highnesses Forces, he would send them back after the end of the Siege; which he perform'd, as above-said. Whilst the Prince of Conde was taking those Places, the Spaniards assembled the Forces of their Garrisons, in order to Invest the City of Bouillon,The Spani∣ards endea∣vour to sur∣prize the Cardinal at Bouillon. and to surprize the Cardinal there, who was raising of Men in the Country of Liege to pass into Cham∣payne, where the Nobility were likewise making
of Levies he was to joyn to some Forces of Nor∣mandy. But his Eminency got happily out of Bou∣illon with a strong Convoy, of which some were kill'd; which oblig'd the Cardinal to retire to Se∣dn. Having assembled there the Forces he had rais'd in the Country of Liege, and there abouts, he march'd from thence with them on the 25th. of November, in order to joyn those that were assemb∣ling by the Nobility in Champayne, and arriv'd at St. Disur at the beginning of December, with Four Thousand Men. The Cardi∣nal and Monsieur de Turenne meet.Monsieur de Turenne, who had Intelligence of every thing, had quitted his Camp at Baillican, and taken his March by Epernay and Chalons towards Reims, where he was to tarry for the Cardinal, and to receive his Forces to joyn them to the King's Army. However they judg'd that the King's Ar∣my was strong enough of it self to Attack the Prince of Conde, and therefore his Eminency march'd to∣wards Chalons in Champayne with his Forces, in or∣der to scour the Frontiers, before his return to Court, where he was impatiently expected by the King, and by the Queen-Mother. The Prince of Conde is made Ge∣neralissimo of the Ar∣mies of Spain.Altho' the Prince of Conde had receiv'd on the 25th of November the Quality of Generalissimo of the King of Spain's Armies, by the Hands of Count Fuensaldagne, he was allow'd no greater number of Forces than he had before: It was a lofty Title which produc'd no Considerable Succours. His trouble.Thus the Conjuncture I have related put the Prince, who was then in a Post near Clermont, to a great los. He expected the Succours Fuensal∣dagne had promis'd him; but he was inform'd that tha Count had receiv'd Orders from the Arch-Duke Leopold, to lead back his Forces into Flanders. However it happen'd happily at that time that the Prince of Tarente came back from Flanders with 5 or 6000 Men he had rais'd there at his own
Charge, and brought them to the Prince of Conde, who in order to acknowledge so great a Service, thought himself oblig'd to give him the General Command over his Forces, the which he desir'd. But by reason that Count Tavannes had always Commanded them,The Count of Tavan∣nes refuss to yield the Command to the Prince of Tarente. the Prince propos'd his Design to him, at which the Earl was both surpriz'd and vex'd. What is it your Highness designs then I should do ere? said he. Does Honour permit me to serve is your Forces under another, after having Commanded them all for so long a time? The Prince answer'd, That having no other way to acknowledge his Ob∣ligations to his Cousin the Prince of Tarente, Ta∣vannes ought to be so much his Friend, as to com∣ply with the present state of his Affairs; and that if it was a trouble to him to yield to that Prince the Command he desir'd, he would prevail with him to be contented to have it alternately with him. Your Highness may dispose of your Forces as you think fit, reply'd Tavannes, and I must thank you for the Medium you are pleas'd to propose to me, but having always Commanded your Forces alone, I cannot resolve to amit a Companion. Therefore I beseech you to give me leave to retire, to leave the sole Command of your Forces to the Prince of Tarente. The Count of Tavannes had for some time been very much dissatisfy'd with the Prince of Conde,Count Tavannes's Discontents. whom he had always serv'd with a great deal of Fidelity and Zeal. He could not forget that this Prince, before his departure from Paris, and while he was sick there, had held a very considerable Council, without having call'd him to it; and that the best Places, and chief Governments of the Kingdom had been dispos'd of before-hand in the said Council, without so much as thinking of him. It is true, that this Count had ever look'd upon this destination of Places and Governments, as a Chy∣merical thing, by reason that it never entred into
his thoughts that the King's Army should be de∣feated, at the time the said Council was held, a the Prince of Conde, and all the Grandees of his Party imagin'd then. Nevertheless it made him sensible that the Prince had but little remembrance of his Services, and that he had but little regard to his Advancement, and his Interest. And therefore he had been very much dissatisfy'd ever since. And being moreover very much sollicited by his Friends to abandon the Prince's Party, he was glad to meet the Occasion I have related, and embrac'd it with Joy. The Prince, having heard those words of Ta∣vannes I have mention'd, quitted that Count ab∣ruptly, and told him with some Anger; that he ought to think more than once on what he was going to do. And when the said Count persisting still in his Resolution, came to take his leave of his Highness, Well, Monsieur de Tavannes said the Prince to him, you are then resolvd not to suffer a Companion to Command my Forces with me, and that Pretence makes you run after the fair hopes which call you back to the Act of Grace: Go then, and give Mazarin the Satisfaction of having snatch'd my Right Arm from me, to employ it against my self. Count de Tavannes was calld at Paris, The Prince's Right Arm. I find by what your Highness tells me, reply'd the Count, that you know me ill for the time I have had the Ho∣nour to serve you. Is it possible, that having seen me abandon all, and sacrifice my Interest to that Honour only, you should think my Heart base enough at present to suffer my self to be govern'd by the Passion of Interest? I find by that, that I am only your Right Arm, because I am not on the side of your Heart. But to ndeceive your Highness, who thinks Interest capable to make me court the Friendship of that Minister, I Protest, and en∣gage my Word to you, that I will neither appear at Court, or take any Employment, until I have the Satis∣faction
of bholding your Highness there in possession of the  that is due to you. Count Tvannes having made this Generous Pro∣tion, took his leave of the Prince,Count Ta∣vannes, re∣tires. and retir'd  his Estate of Pailly near Langres, where he ain'd ever since without any Employment  the Court, and without Gratitude from the Prince. Whereas the King had only consented to Car∣dinal Mazarin's Absence,1653. in order to remove all Ptences of continuing the Civil War,The Cardi∣nal returns to Court. and to re∣establish Peace in his Kingdom, he recall'd him as soon as the state of his Affairs did permit him. This Minister, who kept at no great distance, and who did not cease to Act for His Majesty's In∣terests, had no sooner deliver'd Picardy from the Exrsions of the Enemies, but he return'd to Court. He arriv'd at Paris on the 3d. of February with as much Pomp, and as many Acclamations, as if he had never quitted the Kingdom for the Reasons above mention'd. The remembrance of all that was past seem'd to be bury'd, or that it was de∣sign'd to brave the Prince of Conde's Absence. The King went to meet the Cardinal, and receiv'd him in the most obliging manner that could be. As soon as Cardinal Mazarin found himself ab∣solutely restor'd,The Prince of Conty's Marriage. he apply'd his Mind to strengthen his Power by Considerable Alliances: And being sensible that the Prince of Conty had no inclination to lead a Church-Life, though he was design'd for i, he propos'd one of his Nieces to him, Daugh∣ter to a Gentleman of Rome, Beautiful, and en∣dow'd with all manner of Vertues. The Marriage was concluded, to the Satisfaction of all those that were concern'd. While Paris and the Court was employ'd about Marriage and Divertisements, Burgundy and Guienne persisted in their Revolt;The Rebel∣lion conti∣nues in Bur∣gundy and Guienne. but that Rebellion did
not last long. The City of Bellegarde was the only one in all Burgundy that persisd in the Prince's Party. The Duke d' Espernon, who was Governour of that Province, besieg'd it, and made himself Master of it, after a brave and obstinate Resist∣ance by Count Boutteville, who Commanded there. Marshal de la Ferté Senneterre,The Mar∣shal de la Ferté's Ex∣ploits. Governour of Lor∣rain, being inform'd that the Prince of Conde's Forces were not far from him, attack'd them near Varennes, and defeated them absolutely. After which, that Marshal Invested the Castle of Orne in the Verdunois, the which surrender'd at the ap∣proach of Canon. The Reduction of that Castle was follow'd by that of Sorbec. At first the Go∣vernour refus'd to surrender; but when he saw that the Canon advanc'd, he offer'd to Capitulate; but the Marshal de la Ferté Senneterre refus'd to give him Quarter, and caus'd him to be hang'd at the Gate. This Example of Severity terrify'd the Governours of the other Places to that degree, that they sub∣mitted all without expecting a Siege. After this, the Marshal de la Ferté went to joyn Marshal de Turenne, and they march'd together to∣wards, Champayne, in order to quiet that Province, and to reduce those Towns that held the Prince of Conde's Party. They besieg'd Rhetel, which was Commanded by the Marquess de Persan, and ha∣ving taken the Out-works, they oblig'd that Go∣vernour to Surrender. Count de Brinon, who Commanded the King's Forces in Lorrain, besieg'd Commercy,Commercy taken. the taking of which seem'd very difficult, by reason of the Fortifications the Enemies had made there: But the Governour's Absence, and the Vigour where∣with the Siege was carry'd on, oblig'd the besieg'd to Capitulate.
the Reduction of those Places, there was son o believe that the Rebels would soon re∣ their Allegiance. And indeed the Revolt  no where considerably but in Guienne.Success of the King's Forces in Guienne.  Due of Candal was sent to Command the King's Amy there. He immediately took the Casle o Poujols, and then made himself Master o guillon and Marmande, after which he defeated the Forces Marsin sent to the Mount of Marsan, here to take their Winter Quarters: Whereby he dissiped the most considerable part of the Factions that subsisted still. Several Cities of Limousin, and  were at that time powerfully sollicited to a Rvol; but some of them return'd of them∣slv o the peaceable Domination of their Law∣ul Soveraign; and the others were constrain'd to it by force of Arms, and absolutely to abandon the Prince of Conde's Party. The City of Bordeaux was the only one that persisted in the Rebellion.L' Hormee persists in the Rebel∣lion. That Faction which was call'd L' Hormes, was still very busie, and was in hopes of Considerable Succours by Sea from Englnd, and from Spain. In order to hinder them om receiving the Succours they expected, the Dke of Vendme, High Admiral, was order'd to approach with his Ships, and to raise a Naval Ar∣my The Duke having brought his Ships near, cus'd two Forts to be built upon the Garonne, in order to make himself Master of that River. He likewise seiz'd several Towns that stood upon the Boders thereof, and landed some Forces to joyn to those of the Duke of Candale. The Citizens of Bordeaux who were well affe∣ted, look'd with Grief upon the Continuation of the Revolt: But whereas the Number of the Fa∣ctious exceeded theirs, they durst nor resist them. Nevertheless when they beheld the King's Forces, they form'd the Design of stifling the Rebellion
absolutely. To that end they assembled at the Town-House to conclude a General Peace. They woe white Ribbons, and fix'd Standards of the same colour on the top of their Steeples, in sign of Peace,The Peace of Borde∣aux. and to distinguish themselves from the Hor∣mess, whose Colours were Red, in sign of War and to shew that they were ally'd to Spain. All this oblig'd the Factious to lay down their Arm. All things being dispos'd thus to a good Peace, No∣tice was given thereof to the Duke of Vendôme who immediately dispatch'd his Secretary to know the real Sentiments of the Bordelois. Monsieur de Marsin endeavour'd to create Jealousies about that Envoy, to the end that he might receive no Au∣dience: But Three Hundred Citizens went out to meet him to Conduct him to the Exchange, where he deliver'd his Credentials; and the same day two Citizens were sent to the Duke of Vendôme with A∣ticles of ece. And whereas those Deputies ob∣serv'd that Marsin likewise sent two Officers to the Duke, to make Propositions in his Name, which might hinder the Effect of the Negotiation, they acquainted that Prince in private with the Intent∣ons of those who had sent them; in so much that the Treay of Peace was concluded and sign'd Af∣ter which, the Duke of Vendôme, and the Duke of Candale entred into Bordeaux, where their Presence made an end of dissipating all the Factions. The Parliament, that had been transfer'd sometimes to Agen, and sometimes to Reolle, because it favour'd the Prince of Conde's Party, was re-establish'd in Bordeaux: And as soon as the Peace was Proclaim'd, Colonel Balzar was order'd to quit the City with his Forces; the Prince of Conty retir'd first, to Ca∣dillac, and from thence to Pezenas. The Princess of Conde went to her Husband in Flanders; and the Dutchess of Longuville was order'd to retire to Montreuil-Bellay.
The Disorders of Bordeaux being thus termina∣ to the King's Advantage, all the Province of  was soon restor'd to a perfect Tranquility.  is reported, that in the beginning of the Trou∣bs and Seditions of that Province, Marsin who Commanded the Forces there under the Prince of Cty, sent some very able Men to Cromwel,Cromwel refuses to espose the Prince of Conde's Party. to dvour to draw that Protector of England into the Prince of Conde's Party; but he refus'd to engage in t, or to send any Succours, whether he judg'd th his Authority was not as yet sufficiently Esta∣blish'd, or whether he were persuaded that that Seition would not succeed, and that the King would soon be able to bring them back to their Alliance; or lastl, whether he was to main∣tain a considerable War against Holland. In the mean time the Prince of Conde, who had er'd himself that the Sedition excited in Guienne would be greatly seconded, and that it would be very lsting; and moreover, that it would be an Exam∣pl to all the other Provinces of the Kingdom, pro∣pd to himself to make some Expedition on his side upon the Frontier of Picardy; and in order to succeed the better, he implor'd the Assistance of the King of Spain, who sent him Forces under he Conduct of the Count of Fuensaldagne.The Prince of Conde takes Roye. The Prince intended to seize the Town of Han: but being doubtful of the Sucess, he turn'd his Arms owards Roye, which he caus'd to be invested by the Lroers; Commanded by the Chevalier of Guise. The Gentry thereabouts being reti'd into that Town, declar'd when it was Summon'd to su∣d, That they were resolv'd to defender them∣ves to the utmost Extremity. But, whereas Roye is not sufficiently fortify'd, nor had a sufficient rrison to resist long against an Army of 15000 Men, it surender'd upon Articles after having re∣puls'd the Efforts of the Enemies as long as possible they could.
During these Transactions the French Army besieg'd Mouson; and took it after some Resistance. The Generals press'd that Siege with great vigor, in order to succour Rocroy,Rocroy ta∣ken by the French Ar∣my. which was besieg'd by the Enemies; but Rocroy was taken before the French Forces arriv'd. Mouson taken by the Spanish Ar∣my.The Marshal du Plessis Pralin, to make amends for that Loss besieg'd St. Menehoult, in the Month of November,St. Mene∣hoult taken by the Mar∣shal Plissis. the which did not resist long. The Prince of Conde, tho' sick at that time of a Quar∣tan Ague, us'd his utmost Endeavours to prevent that Conquest. But the Vigour wherewith the Siege was press'd, and the Attacks given, oblig'd it to yield. The King's Presence, who was not far from thence, also contributed much towards the Reduction of that Place. 1654.In the mean time the King finding that the Prince of Conde remain'd still among the Enemies of France,The Prince of Conde impeach'd by the Par∣liament. order'd the Parliament of Paris, which is the Company or Body of the Peets to impeach him. That Prince was accordingly inform'd a∣gainst, at the request of the King's Attorney-Ge∣neral; and the Parliament summon'd the said Prince to appear within a Fortnight after the Publication of the Decree, in the great Chamber, there to an∣swer to all the Articles exhibited against him. But the Prince no-wise designing to appear there, the King dispos'd of his Governments. He gave his Place of Lord Steward of the Houshold to Prince Thomas; Commissioners were appointed to ma∣nage his Estates: and the King being come to the The place where the Parliament sits. Palais on the 28th. of April, the Contents of the Informations given against the Prince were read and Judgment pronounc'd against him, whereby he was declar'd guilty of High-Treason. The Ceremony of the King's Coronation was perform'd at Reims in the Month of Iune, and there the Court resolv'd to besiege Stenay. The
Siege was form'd about the beginning of Iuly, under the Command of the Marquess of Fabert, Governour of Sedan, and the King assisted at it in Person. The Spaniards imagining that all the French Forces were employ'd at that Siege,The Sieges of Stenay and of Arras. resolv'd to besiege Arras. That Enterprize was no sooner resolv'd on, but the Arch-Duke assembled his oces about la Basseé, feigning to have a Design pon that place, after which he march'd directly to Arras. The Spaniards who flatter'd themselves with the taking of that Town, soon ended their Circonvalation, although it contain'd above fix Leagues Circumference, and then they open'd their Trenches: but whereas, they open'd them on that side which was strongest, that oversight cost them near 3500 Men in the Attacks: and after above two Months Siege they found them∣selves only Masters of a small Half Moon, and some inconsiderable Works. Count Mondejeu who com∣manded in Arras was over joy'd to see himself attack'd on that side. He had been surpriz'd, and had but a weak Garrison, he dreaded two Attacks at once, which would have confounded him, but the Spaniards soon rid him of that fear, for not being oblig'd to divide the small Number of Men he had, he defended himself with Success. In the mean time Marshal de Turenne approach'd the Sanish Lines with an Army of 15 or 16000 Men in order to keep them in awe, and to improve all the occasions that might incommode their Camp, until he had receiv'd greater Forces to succour the Place. The Count of Ligneville being sensible that the Neighbourhood of that Army would prove of ill consequence to them, in case they allow'd the French time to retrench themselves, declar'd, That it was his Opinion, to attack them briskly. The Prince of Conde who Commanded the Spanish
Army approv'd this Advice; but the Count of Fuensaldgne as Plenipoteniary persuaded the Arch-Duke not to abandon the Attacks that had been projected, alledging, That tho' one should hav the Fortune to beat Monsieur de Turenne, it would be impossible to continue the Siege, by reason that a∣bundance of Men would certainly be lost in an occasion of that nature. Those two Chiefs being Master, the Prince was oblig'd to acquiesce, and Monsieur de Turenne had time enough allow'd him to retrench himself so well in his Camp, that it was impossible to force him to a Combat, which distracted the Prince. Steny urender'd it self soon after, which ena∣bled th French to send another Army Command∣ed by the Marshal de Hoquincourt, who posted him∣self on the opposite side to Marshal de Turenne, at the Abby. of St. Eloy, having forc'd some Infantry that was lodg'd there, to retire, with Canon Sho. The Armies were so near one another, that the Centries could speak together; insomuch that the Spaniards became as much besieg'd as Besiegers, whereby they soon wanted Bread, no longer en∣joying the Liberty of the Field for Convoys. Yet notwithstanding the Count of Fuensaldagne re∣main'd still obstinate in contining the Attacks, in which they advanc'd but little, though they lost abundance of Men. The Prince of Conde seeing how Affairs went on, was positive to have the Siege rais'd, and to have the Honour in their re∣treat, to force Marshal de Hoquincourt's Army, whic was very easie to do, by reason that the Spanish Army was two parts in three stronger than his, but he could never prevail with him to do it: and confiding more in the Spanish Resolution, than in the Advice of the most Understanding, he chose to look upon the total Ruine of the Army, rather than save it in so glorious a man∣ner.
O the other hand Marshal de Turenne being in∣r'd wh the Condition of the Spaniards by his , he Loss they had sustain'd in their Attacks, d the general Murmurings of the Spanish Army, hich had an ill opinion of the Siege, finally resolv'd o cour the place. The Enterprize was dan∣geros and difficult to be pt in execution; for the  finding themselves in danger of being attck'd, fortified themselves daily, and ha dug geat holes to hinder the Hose from passing there, and to destroy the Foot, but those Inconveniences were provided against. Tht which Monsieur de Trenne was most troubled at, was that the Gover∣nor had not till then been able to give him any acount of his Condition. At last a Souldier ven∣ured out of the Town with a Note, inclosed ithin a small Golden Box, which he swallow'd. Thi Souldier arrived at Monsieur de la Ferte  Quarters, and having remained a Day there without going to Stool he took Clysters, but though he took three they did not work upon him; in the next place they gave him a Draught which hd no effect neither. The Marshal de la Ferte rowing very impatient, was resolved to have the Soldier's Belly ript open, saying, That it was bet∣er to lose a Man than a Place of so much Consequence  Aras. But they gave him another Draught hich proved so strong that he was like to burst ith it, the which brought out th Box. The Goernour inform'd him by the said Note, That he did not fear the Enemy's Power, although they re upon the Ramparts: and that he only dreaded one thing, without explaining himself any farther This puzzled the Generals extreamly, yet after some consideration every body concluded, that Monsieur de Mondejeu feared the Arch-Duke would be ruled by the Prince of Conde, and that
the Succours would be cut in pieces, which in∣deed was to be feared. Neither this Note, nor all the Precautions the Spaniards took could hinder Monsieur de Ture from putting his Resolution in execution. The 19th. of August he crossed the River of Scarps at the Head of his Cavalry, and posted himself be∣tween the Spanish Camp, and Mount St. Eloy and the Marshal de Hoquincourt attack'd the Abby so vigorously with his Infantry, that it surrender'd the same day. The next day Monsieur de Turenne went to discover the Lines which were on the side of Mount St. Eloy, and finding that they were weakly guarded, and that the Prince was at such a distance from them, that it would be impossible for him to come up time enogh to succour them, he resolved to attack them in that place. The 22th. he went to view the Prince of Conde's Quar∣ters, in order to keep the Spaniards uncertain of the place where he design'd to attack the Lines, and having met that Prince, who was come out at the Head of Ten Squadrons, their passed a Skir∣mish between them, in which the Duke of Ioyeuse was wounded, and died some days after. Finally on the 24th. in the Morning the Three French Armies, the first of which was Commanded by Marshal de Turenne, the second by the Marshal de la Ferte, and the third by Marshal de Hoquincourt, began the Attack with five Battalions in Front, at the Head of which at four Yards distance marched detach'd Men to furnish them with Fascines or Bavins, and whatever Instruments, or Tools they had occasion for. The Spaniards suffered the French to pass in several places, without ever firing at them, because they had dug holes there in or∣der to secure themselves. But as soon as they per∣ceiv'd them upon the brim of the first Ditch, they made a dreadful Discharge, which did not how∣ever
the French from overcoming whatever ppos'd their passage. They began immediately  the Pallisadoes, and to fill up the holes:  in a very short space of time all the Spanish ks, Retrenchments, and Parapets were utter∣ly. . The French Forces had been comman∣ not to advance any farther, let the Besiegers  expect them, and make some extraordinary . But no Forces appearing, the French ad∣c'd until they met a Barrier, which stopt them.  de Bellefons, who commanded the Forlorn , having removed it, and thereby open'd the Paage, all the Battalions that had entred the Line  without losing time, the Spaniards no wise  themselves in a posture of defence. At that very time some Regiments having open'd the Lines in another place push'd the Spaniards, which were behind the Breast-work, at which time all Mrshal de Turrenne's Horse charg'd without mee∣ting the least opposition, by reason that the Quar∣ter of the Lorrainers had given ground, and suffer'd Mrshal d' Hoquincourt to enter. But it proved otherwise with Marshal de la Ferte's Forces, they me a resistance they did not expect, the Forces which were coming from the Arch-Duke's and Count Fuensaldagnes Quarter, in order to succour that which Mons. de Turenne attack'd, meeting them, and opposing their passage, with an incre∣dible Bravery. All the Baggage the Spaniards had in the Camp, serv'd as a Barrier, to hinder the French from advancing as easily as they could have wish'd; and that which proved worse than that yet, was a Ravine, or great Flood of Water, which did cut the Line of Circumvallation. Monsieur de Turenne endeavouring to cross it, in that place was forced to expose himself to the Spanish Shot, and to engage with the Prince of Conde, who fought af∣ter his wonted manner, that is, with a Courage that
cannot be express'd Marshal de Turenne was wounded in the left Side in that occasion, but h had the advantage of stopping the Prince's Fury who happen'd not to be well seconded. In the mean time the Marquess of Castelnau ha∣ving push'd six Squadrons that oppos'd him, en∣ter'd Arras, having forc'd a Barriere which was very well defended. He march'd immediately out of it again, with the remainder of his Horse on one side, and the Count of Montdejeu sallying out at another, they forced the Prince of Conde to retire, after having left some Squadrons behind him to favour his Retreat; at which time the Combat redoubled. The Prince perform'd ex∣traordinary Actions on that occasion; and by that Retreat which has been admir'd as much as the Battels he has won; he sav'd the Spanish Army, which was never so much expos'd, or in so much danger of being totally defeated, as it was at that time. However, he abandon'd his Infantry, his Canon,The Siege of Arras rais'd and his Baggage, but even in that he shew'd, that he was great in all things, and that his Prudence equal'd his Valour, which his very Ene∣mies acknowledg'd. As this Retreat was very glorious for the Prince of Conde, it also afforded a great deal of Reputation to Monsieur de Turenne, and the other Generals who reliev'd Arras, and constrain'd the Spaniards to raise the Siege. This happen'd on the 25th of August. 1655.The taking of Stenay, and the raising of the Siege of Arras, were follow'd by the taking of Quesnoy, Cler∣mont Catelet, Landrecy, Conde, and St. Guillain, which were taken by the French, by reason that the Prince of Conde was so much exasperated, that his Advice had not been follow'd at Arras, and even so mor∣tified, that he was unwilling to expose himself to receive new Mortifications in the defence of those places.
But it happen'd otherwise the following year:1656. The French besieg'd Vallenciennes;The Siege of Vallencien∣nes. that City was invested on the 15th of Iune, and the Prince ha∣ving omitted nothing in order to succour it, he scceeded in his design. And whereas he design'd  recover the Honour of the Spaniards, he took  Van-guard of their Army, and having view'd the French Lines, he seiz'd a high Ground they had not yet possess'd themselves of, upon which he lodg'd himself, which incommoded them excee∣dingly. However, this did not hinder them from opening their Trenches, and from pushing on the Siege with a great deal of vigour, until the 16th of Iuly. But the Prince of Conde, who sent Men into the Town every night, having order'd the Governor to open the Sluces that day, which was the day he had pitch'd upon to attack the French Lines, it was accordingly perform'd: The Besie∣ged open'd their Sluces, which broke at once all the Banks the French had rais'd, together with the Bridges they had made upon the Escat, and the Country was overflowed to that degree, that it was impossible for Mareschal de Turenne to succour Mareschal de la Ferte, whose Quarter was attack'd by Don Iohn of Austria, then Governor of the Netherlands, and by the Prince of Conde; and whatever resistance that Mareschal could make, he could not hinder his Lines from being forc'd, and the Spaniards from entering into the Town with a considerable Relief; which oblig'd the French Army to retire, and raise the Siege.The raising of the Siege of Vallenci∣ennes. It is reported, that Marshal de Turenne gave Marshal de la Ferte twice notice to stand upon his Guard, and that the Spaniards designed to relieve the Town that night. Moreover, it is added, that he sent him Men to fortifie his Lines, giving him to understand, that he could not be too careful, ha∣ving to deal with the Prince of Conde; but that
some Jealousie between them made that Genera despise that Advice and Offer. However, it i most certain, that the Prince of Conde, who wa resolv'd to relieve the place at any rate, attack' Marshal de la Ferte's Quarters with so much Fury that he would have accomplish'd his Enterprize whatever Assistance he had receiv'd from Marsha de Turenne. That Prince no sooner appear'd, bu the French Horse being terrified, wheel'd about and abandon'd Marshal de la Ferte, and instead of marching up to the Spaniards, ran away and re∣tir'd. The Disorder was so great among that Cavalry, that finding no Bridges to cross the Escaut, all of them being overflow'd, they lapt down from certain Downs, and sell pell-mell upon Monsieur de Bellefond's Tents. Monsieur de la Ferte was taken, and had been kill'd, but for the Cap∣tain of his Guards, but it cost that poor Gentleman his Life, who throwing himself before the Marshal received a shot in the Head of which he dy'd some days after: Monsieur de Moret, Count d' Estrce, the Lieutenant of the Cardinals Chevaux Legers, the Ensign, and several other Officers belonging to the Gens d' Arms, and Chevaux Legers were taken and above 1500 Men and Horses were downed. The Marshal de la Ferte was carried into the Town, and lodg'd in Mons de Bournonville's House, who was Governor, where the Prince of Conde came to see him; he found him a Bed, where he ran to em∣brace him, after which he said these words to him: I could wish your Comrade had been taken in your stead; not that I fear him in the Field, I should dread you much more than him, but it would have been a satisfa∣ction to me, to see him undergo a Disgrace, which in my opinion he deserves much more than you. All I have to say to you, since you are my Prisoner, is, that you shall be at Liberty as soon as possible I can: I would send you back to morrow, but that I am oblig'd to keep Measures
the Spaniards. As for a Ransome, I desire none,  any of your Money, but I am willing to receive that hich the King shall give for you. Mons. de la Ferte eturn'd him a thousand Thanks, and some days after he was carried to Rocroy. This Digrace surpriz'd the Court a little, and nimated Marshal de Turenne, who preserving the Hopes of making other Conquests in the Low Coun∣ries, attack'd La Capelle, which he took back from the Spaniards, with so much speed, that it was im∣possible for them to relieve it, by reason that the Prince of Conde could not be every where. While the French besieg'd La Capelle,1657. the Spaniards had form'd the Siege of St. Guillain,The taking of S. Guilain and Conde. but rais'd it in oder to assemble all their Forces: But the raising of that Siege not having been able to hinder the French from performing their Enterprize, the Prince of Conde resolved to attack St. Guillain anew the following year; to which the Governor of the Netherlands, the Marquess of Ceracene, and the other Generals having consented, they march'd straight to that place, and took it on the 22d of March. Soon after it, they made themselves Masters of Conde. Marshal de Turenne being vex'd at the Conquests the Spaniards made, resolv'd to be revenged upon Cambrai, for the Losses the Frnch had sustain'd. To that end having placed himself one night at the Head of a small Body of Men, without imparting his Design to any body, he went to invest that place, in which there were no Forces besides the Souldiers in ordinary pay, for the guard of Fner Towns. Mortepaye, and fifty Horse, or thereabouts: Nay, moreover, that which happen'd worse for the King of Spain, was, that the Governor and his Inhabitants did not agree.
The Town being invested on all sides, and th remainder of the French Army being come up, th Bridges of Communication were made, and at th same time all necessary things to work speedil about the Lines, were delivered to the Army. The Prince of Conde soon received Intelligenc of it, and knowing that there was but a very wea Garrison in Cambray, and that the Spanish Army was not ready to march to the relief of it, he march'd thither himself, with all his Horse, which consisted of 18 Squadrons. Being oblig'd to pass through Valenciennes, as soon as he came within two or three leagues of it, he went before, to enquire from those who commanded in the Town, whether they could give him any intelligence of the French Army. They answer'd, That they could not, but that within 24 hours they had heard abundance of Canon shot towards Cambray. I am perswaded, answer'd the Prince, that that Town is besiged, but I will endeavour to relieve it, before the Enemys have made an end of their Lines. After which he desired the Governor to prepare a passage for his Forces: Although those of Valenciennes were not used to suffer Forces to pass through their City, yet they aid, that they were ready to grant him a Passage, if he desired to march through it. The Prince accepted it, and caused his Forces to march through that City He caused those to refresh themselves that pass'd first: Those being got a quarter of a league out of Town, he caused the others to march a lit∣tle further, and those having refresh'd themselves, he took those who had pass'd first, and advanc'd with Five hundred Horse upon a Rising, from whence he perceived the Camp, and the Lines of the French: Moreover, he saw that they were at work. Being convinc'd by his own Eyes, that Mons. de Turenne had besieged Cambray, he came back to his men, and calling all the Officers, he
told them, That if they tarried three days without relieving the Town, the Lines the Enemies were making with all the speed imaginable, would be  the being forc'd: That the Spanish Army was  too great a distance to stay for it; and that nce there was no other Remedy, he was resolv'd to enter into that Town; and, that to that end he would march thither between seven and eight at night. He had no sooner imparted his Design, but he dispos'd his Horse in three Lines, each of them con∣sisting of six Squadrons: He took the command of the second himself, and the hour appointed to march being come, Monsieur de Guitaut, who com∣manded the first, advanced with a design to force whatever should oppose him, and make the least resistance; but it fell out luckily for him, that he ell into the Guard of the Regiment of Palluau, who coming up to the Prince's Forces, crying out, Qui vive? suffered them to pass, believing that they answered Palluau instead of Guitaut, by reason of the termination of those Names. The Prince of Conde followed with the second Line, and found that the Enemies had closed again, yet he forced his way, and passed also.The Prince of Conde enters Cam∣bray, and causes the siege to be raised. The last Line passed likewise, and entred, with the loss of some Officers, after which they marched up to the Pallisade, and entred the Counterscarp. The French Horse were so surprized and frightned, that they did not so much as offer to pursue them: In∣somuch, that Day being come, Monsier de Tu∣renne vex'd at what had happen'd, said, That he would have the Army retire. And accordingly or∣der'd a Retreat to be sounded; and while the Ar∣my was disposing to march, he dispatch'd a Cou∣reer to the Court, to inform them, that the Prince of Conde was entred in Cambray with eighteen
Squadrons, and that he was going to raise the Siege. This place was invested about the end of May. 1658.The Cardinal finding that the Siege of Cambray had not succeeded,The siege of Dunkirk. sent Orders to Monsieur de la Ferte, who had an Army towards the Frontiers of Champagne, to invest Montmidi, which he did, and took it. While Montmidi was besieged, the Spa∣niards made an attempt upon Calis, but were obli∣ged to retire. Besides Montmidi, they lost St. Ve∣nant, and were forced to raise the Siege of Ardres. The French likewise took Bourbourg, Mardik, La Mothe aux-Bois, and some other places. The French had also resolved upon the Siege of Dunkirk the preceding year, and in order thereun∣to had seized all the advantagious Posts that could defend the Avenues thereof, to facilitate the taking of it. Monsieur de Turenne blockt it up by Land, on the side of the Canal which looks towards Mar∣dyk, and on the other as far as the Downs. The English Army, composed of eighteen or twenty Ships, invested it by Sea, and hindred the En∣trance: The Circumvallation being made, they began to open the Trenches on the fifth of Iune. The irst days the Besieged made vigorous Sallies, but were always repulsed. The Spaniards being sensible of the importance of that place, put them∣selves in a posture to relieve it. The Prince of Conde was already advanced, but Marshal de Tu∣renne, who omitted nothing for the success of his Enterprize, kept so well upon his Guard, that it was impossible to surprize him. The Besieged made several other Sallies, in which abundance of Men and Officers were lost on both sides. In the mean time Monsieur de Turenne, while the Siege went on, was informed, That Don Iohn of Austria, the Prince of Conde, and the Marshal de Hoquin∣cou,
who had embraced the Spanish Party, were  from Ypres to Newport, and were resolved to hazard all to relieve Dunkirk: And accordingly News was brought the next day, being the 11th, that they were encamp'd in the Downs near the Abby, and that they were preparing to attack the Besegers. Marshal d' Hoquincourt detach'd him∣self, with threescore Horse, to view the French Lines, but being come too near a Redoubt, where some Souldiers lay conceal'd, he was wounded with five or six Musquet-shot, of which he died within two hours. The French perceiving that the Spa∣niards were resolv'd to engage them, and that it was impossible to avoid it, offerd them Battel on the 14th.The Battel of the Downs. Their Right-wing, commanded by Monsieur de Turenne, was oppos'd by the Prince of Conde, who signaliz'd himself in that Battel, as he had done in others; he had a Horse kill'd un∣der him, whereby he was endanger'd to fall into his Enemies Hands, but the Captain of his Guards happening to be there, gave him his, being better pleas'd to be a Prisoner himself, than to suffer that great Prince to be taken. But notwithstanding all the Perils the Prince of Conde expos'd himself to, and the great Actions he did, the Spaniards lost the Day, and the Battel was no sooner lost, but the Governor of Dunkirk being discourag'd, is desir'd to capitulate, which he did within 5 or 6 days after it: It was on the 23d of Iune. The Town was deliver'd to the English. The taking of Dunkirk was fol∣low'd by that of Bergue, Gravelines, Oudenarde, Ypres, and several other places. Altho' the French had had very considerable Ad∣vantages over the Spaniards,1659. yet they were desi∣rous of a Peace. The Queen, who desir'd it ear∣nestly, had already dispatch'd Monsieur de Lionne into Spain, to lay the Foundations of it with Don Lewis de Haro. And tho' Monsieur de Lionne was
incognito at Madrid, yet that Minister's Negotia∣tions succeeded according to the Queens Wishes. They had agreed upon the general Articles, and there was a suspension of Arms. But the King of Spain declaring that he would have the Prince of Conde compris'd in the Treaty of Peace, the French Minister reply'd, That he had no Orders to hear∣ken to any such Proposition; That the King his Master would be the sole disposer of the Favours he thought fit to grant that Prince, without being impos'd upon in that point. Whereupon the Con∣ferences were broke off. Cardinal Mazarin being sensible that that Diffi∣culty would not easily be removed, communica∣ted it to the Pope, who was Mediator between the two Crowns, in order to his perswading the King of Spain, that he ought to desist in what re∣lated to the Interest of the Prince of Conde, but could obtain nothing. Finally, the Peace was concluded between France and Spain, in the man∣ner every body knows. Cardinal Mazarin con∣sented readily, that the Prince should be compri∣sed in the Treaty, but he desir'd, that whatever related to his being restor'd to his Dignity and Estate, should be left entirely to the King's dispo∣sal. Nevertheless, after many Contestations, the Affair was determin'd in the manner his Catholick Majesty had desir'd it, that is to the Prince of Conde's advantage. These are the Articles that concern'd him, as they are inserted in the Treaty of Peace, made in the Isle of Faisans, in the year 1659. between Philip the Fourth King of Spain, and Lewis the Fourteenth King of France.
1. THE Prince of Conde having declar'd to Cardinal Mazarin Plenipotentiary from his Most Christian Majesty, his Soveraign Lord, in order to acquaint His Majesty therewith, that he is extreamly troubled to have held, for some years past, a Conduct which has displeas'd his Majesty: that he could wish it were in his power to retrieve, tho' with the best part of his Blood, all the Acts of Hostility he has committed both within and out of France, to which he protests that his Misfortunes had engag'd him, rather than any ill Intention against his Service: And that if his Maje∣sty will be so generous, as to make use of his Royal Goodness towards him, forgetting all what is past, and receive him into favour again, he will endeavour to ac∣knowledge it to the last moment of his life, by an invio∣lable Fidelity, and to retrieve what is pass'd, by an ab∣solute submission to all his Commands. And that in the mean time, in Order to begin, and to shew by such Effects as may be in his power, with how much Passion he de∣sires to  honour'd again by his Majesty's Favour and Good-will, he relinquishes whatever may relate to his Interest in the conclusion of the said Peace, and desires nothing but what may proceed from the Clemency and Free-will of the said Lord King, his Soveraign Lord, and besides, desires it may please his Majesty to dispose absolutely, and according to his best liking, and in what manner he shall think fit, of all the Favours his Catho∣lick Majesty shall be pleas'd to bestow upon him, and has already offer'd him, either in Territories and Countries, or in Towns and Moneys, the which he lays all at his Majesty's Feet. Moreover, that he is ready to disband all his Forces, and to deliver up to his Majesty the Cities of Rocroy, Le Chatelet, and Linchamp, of which his said Catholick Majesty has been pleas'd to remit the two first to him. And likewise, that as soon as he has ob∣tain'd Leave, he will send a person on purpose to the said Lord King, to assure him more precisely of the sincerity of
those Sentiments, and the reality of his Submissions, and to give his Mjesty such an Act, or Writing sign'd by im, as his Majesty shall be pleas'd to desire, for an As∣surance that he renounces all Leagues, Treaties, and Associations whatever, he may have made formerly, with His Catholick Majesty: And that for the future he will neither take or receive any Establishment, Pension, or Favour from any foreign King or Potentate. And fi∣nally, that as to whatever relates to his Interest in any kind whatever, he submits it entirely to his Majesty's Pleasure and Disposition, without the least Pretensions. His Majesty being inform'd of the Premisses by his Ple∣nipotentiary, and mov'd by the Proceeding and Submis∣sion of the said Prince, desires and consents that his Inte∣rests should be determin'd in this Treaty, in the following manner granted and agreed on between the two Lord-Kings. 2. First, That the said Prince shall lay down his Arms, at farthest, in the space of eight weeks, to reckon from the day and date of the signing of this present Trea∣ty, and shall effectually disband all his Forces, both Horse and Foot, French or Foreign, the which compose the body of his Army in the Netherlands, and that in such a manner as his Most Christian Majesty shall think fit, ex∣cepting the Garrisons of Rocroy, of Chatelet, and Lin∣champ, the which shall be disbanded at the time of the restitution of the said three Towns. And the said Dis∣arming and Disbanding shall be performed by the said Prince, really and sincerely, without Transportation, Loan, or Sale, true or pretended, to any other Princes or Potentates whatever, Friends or Foes to France, or their Allys. 3. Secondly, That the said Prince sending a person on purpose to his Majesty, to confirm more particularly all the things above-mentiou'd, shall deliver an Act signed by him to his said Majesty, whereby he shall submit to
the execution of what has been agreed upon between the two Lord-Kings, in relation to his Person and Interest, as well as for the Persons and Interests of those that have follow'd him. In consequence of which he shall declare, that he departs sincerely, and renounces bona fidae, to all Leagues, Intelligences, and Treaties of Association or Pro∣tection he may have made and contracted with his Ca∣tholick Majesty, or any other foreign Kings, Potentates, or Princes, or any other persons whatever, both within and out of the Kingdom of France; with promise never to take or receive for the future from the said foreign Kings and Potentates, any Pensions, Establishments, or Favours obliging him to have a dependency on them, nor any Engagements to any King or Potentate, besides His Majesty his Soveraign Lord; on pain, in case of Con∣travention to the said Writing, of forfeiting from that moment the Re-habilitation and Re-establishment that is granted him by the present Treaty, and to return to the same condition he was in on the 1st day of March of the present year. 4. Thirdly, That the said Prince, in performance of what has been before agreed upon between the said Lord-Kings, shall really, and in Fact, deliver into his Most Christian Majesty's Hands the Cities of Rocroy, Le Chaelet, and Linchamp, at the time and day hereaf∣ter mention'd in another Article of this said Treaty. 5. The Premisses being perform'd as abovesaid, his most Christian Majesty, in contemplation of the Peace, and in consideration of his Catholick Majesty's Mediati∣on, making use of his Royal Clemency, will sincerely and heartily receive the said Prince in his Favour, and will with the same Sincerity forget whatever he has done or undertaken, for the time past, against his Service, either within or out of the Kingdom; and will allow his Re∣turn not only into France, but even at his Majesty's Court. After which, his Majesty will restore the said
Prince, in Reality and Fact, to the free possession and enjoyment of all the Estates, Honours, Dgnities, and Priviledges belonging to the first Prince of the Blood. Provided still, that as to what relates to the said E∣states, of whatever Nature they be, the said Prince shall never pretend any thing for the time past, towards the Restitution of the Income or Use of the said Estates, whatever persons may have enjoy'd them by His Ma∣jesty's Orders, nor to the payment, or restitution of his Pensions, Sallaries, or other Rents and Revenues he had upon the Demains, Farms, or General Receipts of the said Lord King; nor yet upon the Account, or pretence of what he might pretend to be due to him by His Ma∣jesty before his going out of the Kingdom, nor for the Demolitions, Degradations, or Damages done by His Majesty's Orders, or otherwise, in any manner what∣ever, in his Estate, Cities, Places, fortify'd, or not fortify'd, Lordships, The Tenure or Honour and Iuris∣diction of a Castle-ship. Chastellenies, Lands, and Houses of the said Prince. 6. And as to what relates to the Garrisons, Govern∣ments of Provinces, or Places, the said Prince enjoy'd and possess'd before his going out of France, his Most Christian Majesty did for a long while constantly refuse to restore them to him, until his being mov'd by the proceeding and Submission of the said Prince above∣mention'd, when he did fully resign his Interests to his pleasure and disposition without the least Pretensions, to∣gether with whatever was offer'd him by his Catholick Majesty to indemnifie him: His said Most Christian Majesty did at last condescend to grant him what fol∣loweth, upon certain Conditions hereafter specify'd; which the said Lord Kings have agreed upon, and thus granted, viz. That provided his Catholick Majesty on his part, instead of what he design'd to give the said Prince to Indemnifie him, shall draw out the Spanish Garrison which lyes in the City, Fort, and Citadel of Juliers, to leave the said place, and Citadel free from
the said Garrison to the Duke of Newburg, on the Conditions, and in the manner that shall be specify'd hereafter in one of the Articles of the present Treaty: A also provided, that his said Catholick Majesty besides the removal of the Spanish Garrison out of the City and Citadel of Juliers, shall deliver to his Most Chri∣stian Majesty the City of Avennes, situate be∣tween the Sambre and the Meuse, with the Appur∣tenances, Dependencies, Annexations, and Demains there∣of in the manner his said Catholick Majesty has en∣gag'd above, by an Article of the said present Treaty (the which place of Avennes his said Majesty likewise design'd among other things to give to the said Prince.) In Consideration of which, as above-mention'd, that is, in Compensation of the delivery and yielding of one of the said places to the Most Christian King, to be united, and for ever annexed to the Crown of France; and the removal of the Spanish Garrison out of the other, in favour of a Prince who is a Friend and Ally to his Most Christian Majesty, who is desirous to Oblige him by vertue of the said Treaty of Alliance: His said most Christian Majesty for all things whatever in general that may relate to the Places, and Governments the said Prince had possess'd, or might reasonably be expected by those that belong'd to him, without excepting any, will give to the said Prince the Government of the Province of Burgundy and Bresse; under which are compriz'd the Countries of Bugey, Gex, and Veromey: As al∣so the particular Governments of the Castle of Dijon, and of the City of St. John de Laune: And to the Duke of Enguien his Son the place of Lord High Stew∣ard of the Kingdom and Houshold, together with Bre∣vats of Assurance to the said Prince, to preserve it in case the said Duke of Enguien should dye before him. 7. His said Majesty shall grant a full Pardon, by his Letters Patent, in de form, for whatever the said Prince, his Relations, Creatures, Friends, Adherents,
and Servants, either Church-men, or Lay-men, have or may have done, or undertaken for the time past a∣gainst his Service; in so much that it may never hurt or prejudice him or them at any time, nor their Heirs, Successors, Administrators, or Assigns, as if the thing had never been. Neither shall his said Majesty at any time make any Enquiry in relation to the said Prince, his Relations, Creatures, Friends, Adherents, and Ser∣vants, whether Ecclesiasticks, or Lay-men, about the Money he, or they have taken out of the general or par∣ticular Receits, or out of the Audits of his Farms: And shall not oblige them to make any Restitution of the said Money or Sums, nor of all the Levies, or Gatherings, Contributions, Impositions, Exactions impos'd upon the people, or Acts of Hostility committed in France, in any wise whatever. Which shall be explain'd more at large in the said Pardon, or Letters Patent, for the en∣tire Security of the said Prince, and of those that have follow'd him, in order that they may never be prosecu∣ted, troubled, or molested about it. 8. That as soon as the said Prince shall have per∣form'd on his part, what is contain'd in the three Ar∣ticles, 2.3. & 4. of this present Treaty, all Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships, and Demains, even those of Clermont, Stenay, and Dun, as he enjoy'd them before his going out of France, and that of Jamets al∣so, in case he did enjoy it, the which heretofore belong'd to the said Prince: Together with all and every his other Estates, Moveables, or Immoveables, of any kind whatever in the manner abovesaid, shall be really and truly return'd to him, or to those the said Prince, being in France, shall Commit, and Depute, to take in his Name the Possession of the said Estates, &c. and to serve him in the administration or management of the same. As also that Restitution shall be made to him, or his said Deputies, of all the Titles, Instruments, and other Writings left by him at the time of his going out
Kidom, in the Houses belonging to the said  and Lordships, or elsewhere. And that the aid  shall e rstor'd to the true and real Possession and  of his said Dutchies, Countis, Lands, Lord∣ ad Demains, with such Rights, Authorities, , Presidial Seats, Royal Cases, Pre∣, and conferring of Benefices, Nominations of  Favours, and Preheminences, or Prerogatives, ich e and his Predecessors did enjoy, as he enjoy'd  before his going out of the Kingdom. But that  ll leav Bellegarde and Montrond in the same Codition they are at present. For the performing of , ll His Majesty's Letters Patent thereunto neces∣s shall be granted him, in as good a form as he shall rire, or desire, without his being lyable to be disturb'd, cuted, or troubled, in the said Possession and En∣ent by the said Lord King, his Heirs, Successors,  Oficers, directly, or indirectly, any Donations, or Gifts, , or Icorporations that may have been made of the said Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships, and De∣ais, Estates, Honours, Dignities, and Prerogatives of first Prince of the Blood notwithstanding, or what∣er derogatory Clauses, Constitutions, or Ordinances cotrary threunto. Neither shall the said Prince, his Her, and Sccessors, by reason of what he may have , either in France before his going from thence, or  of the Kingdom, after his departure from thence;  or any Treaties, Correspondencies, by him made and  with any Princes, or persons of any Condition or Qualiy soever, be lyable to be molested, troubled, or . But that all Proceedings, Decrees, even that of the Parliament of Paris, bearing date the 27th. of March, o the Year 1654. Iudgments, Sentences, and other Acts, which are already past against the said Prince, eiher in Civil or Criminal Cases (unless he has volun∣arily contested in a Civil Suit) shall remain void, and of no Effect, and shall never be prosecuted, as if they had never been. And as to what relates to the Demain
of Albret, which the said Prince enjoyed before his going out of France, the which His Majesty has since other∣wise disposed of, he will in lieu thereof give the said rince the Demain of Bourbonnois, on the same Con∣ditions the Exchange of the said two Demains had al∣ready been adjusted, before the said Prince's going out of the Kingdom. 9. As to the Relations, Friends, Creatures, Adhe∣rents, or Domesticks of the said Prince, either Eccle∣siasticks, or Lay-men, that have followed his Party, they may by Vertue of the Pardons and Indemnities here∣tofore mentioned in the 7th. Article, return into France with the said Prince, and fix their abode in what place they shall think fit. And shall be restored like the other Subjects of the two Kings to the peaceable possession and enjoyment of their Estates, Honours, and Dignities (ex∣cepting the Places, Offices, and Governments they pos∣sessed before their going out of the Kingdom) the said Estates, Honours, and Dignities, to be by them en∣joyed in the same manner they held and did possess them. But still without pretending to any Restitution of the Enjoyments thereof for the time past, either from those on whom His Majesty shall have bestowed them, o in any other manner whatever. As also they shall be restored to their Rights, Names, Dues, Actions, or Plas, Successions, Inheritances, fallen to them, or to the Children, or Widows of the deceased, during their absence out of the Kingdom; and their Goods shall be returned them if still in Being. And his Majesty, in Consideration of the Peace, declares all Proceedings and Decrees Void and of no Effect (excepting what relates to their said Places, Offices, and Governments) even hat of the Parliament of Paris, bearing date the 27th. of March, 1654. as well as all Sentences, Iudgments, Adjudications, Donations, Incorporations, and other Acts, that may have been given against them, or their Heirs, for their having followed the Party of the said Prince;
that as well in Civil as Criminal Cases (unless in  Civil matters as they have voluntarily contested)  that neither they, nor their Heirs shall ver be  to be prosecuted, disturbed, or troubled for the . For the performance of all which Premisses His  Christian Majesty will cause all necessary Letters  to be expedited, both for the said Prince, his Relaions, Friends, Creatures, Adherents, and Dome∣, whether Ecclesiasticks, or Lay-men, containing  Premises in secure and due form. Which Letters  shall be delivered to them, as soon as the said Prince on his part shall have performed the Contents of  three Articles, 2, 3, 4 of this present Treaty. 10. In performance of what is contained in the Sixth Article of this present Treaty, by which His Most Chri∣ Majesty is obliged to give unto the said Prince of Conde, and to the said Duke of Enguien his Son the Governments, and the Place therein specified; and his Catholick Majesty promises, and obliges himself on his , upon the Faith and Word of a King, to remove  of the City, Citadel, or Castle of Juliers, the Spa∣sh Garrison which lyes in the said City, Citadel, or , and whatever other Forces have lately been put  them, or might again be sent thither, in order to Reinforce the Garrison: Leaving in the said City, and Citadel, all the Artillery that is mark'd with the Arms  the House of Cleves, or Juliers, or that has belonged  them: And as for the remainder of the said Artillery, , unition, and Instruments of War, his said ajesty has in the said City and Castle of Juliers, it ll e free for him to remove them: Leaving the said , Ctadel, or Castle of Juliers to the possession of  said Duke of Newburg, or such as shall be ap∣pointed by him to receive it, in the same Quality as he possesses the State of Juliers; The said Duke first de∣ing unto his Catholick Majesty a Writing in due form, signed by his own Hand, to the Satisfaction of
his said Catholick Majesty, whereby he obliges himself not to Sell, Alienate, or Engage the said City, Citadel, or Castle, to any one, or any other Princes, or private Persons; And that he shall neither put, or establish any Garrison there but of his own Forces: As also to grant his said Catholick Majesty, when ever he shall have occasion for it; a pssage for his Forces, either through the said City, or through the State of Juliers; his said Majesty paying at his own Cost and Charges the Expence of the passage of the said Forces, which shall be performed by regulated Days, and reasonable Marches, without being allowed to sojourn, or remain in the Country, the said Duke on such Occasions using whatver precautions may be necessary for the Security of the said City and Cita∣del. And in case the said Duke should be wanting in the performance of those things he obliges himself to, as well not to alienate, as not to put any Garrison in the said City and Citadel, but of his own Forces, or should refuse a passage to his Catholick Majesty's Forces, they paying for it: The said Lord most Christian King pro∣mises upon the Faith and Word of a King, neither to assist the said Duke with Men or Money, nor in any other ways, either by himself, or others, to defend the said Insruction; but on the contrary, shall send his own For∣ces, if necessary, for the Accomplishment of the Pre∣mises. The Peace being Concluded, the Prince of Conde returned into France; he entred it by the way of La Capelle, and passed through Soissons, where he refused to receive any Harangues, or Visits from the Corporations of the City, protesting that he would receive none until he had first had the Ho∣nour of seeing the King. He went from Soissons the next day, being accompany'd with three more in his Coach, viz. the Duke d' Enguien, Messieurs de Houteville, and Guitant. He went to Meaux, and from thence to Coulomiers at the Duke of
ville's, from whence he went to meet the  who was at that time in Provence, in ex∣ion of the Accomplishment of his Marriage  the Infanta of Spain, which was as it were,  first Fruit of the Peace. The King who had made a Progress to Toulouse,  the Queen, Monsieur, and Mademoiselle, where  Cardinal also repair'd about the beginning of ary, 1660. arrived on the 12th. of the said Mnth at Arles,1660. and the 17th. at Aix, where the Prince came two Days after.The King receives the Prince of Conde. Cardinal Mazarin presented him to the King, who receiv'd him with great Demonstration of Kindness, and reite∣rated Assurances that he would forget all that was pa. He follow'd the Court, and assisted at the magnificent Entry their Majesties made in∣to Paris on the 26th. of August of the following Year. The King had long been desirous to acknow∣ledge the Services of some Persons,1661. who were di∣stinguish'd by their Birth, by honouring them with the Colar of the Order of the Holy Ghost. The Length of the War had been an Obstacle to it till then: But the Peace being settled he put that Design in execution, and made Sixty Knights, and Eight Commanders. The Ceremony was perform'd in the Church of the Great Augustin's at Paris, with great Magnificence, on the last of December, 1661. The Order was coner'd first o the Prelates: and after the Service, the King perform'd the Ceremony for the Lay-Knights, be∣ginning with the Prince of Conde, and continuing with the Duke d' Enguien, the Prince of Conti and the Duke of Verneuil. Philip the 4th. King of Spain died on the 17th. of Septmber, 1665.1667. When the Negotiations of Peace were begun, and the Marriage of the King of France with the Infanta first talk of,War in Flanders. the Spai∣ard
oppos'd it at first, for fear of being troubled by the French at some time or other, about the Rights of that Princess: and it fell out according∣ly: The King of France pretending that the Dutchy of Brabant and the Annexions thereof belong'd to the Queen, by Right of Devolution after the Death of Prince Balthazar her Brother, who died on 9th. of October, 1649. he caus'd the said Country to be demanded from the Queen of Spain. Those Pretensions were laugh'd at at Madrid: and upon that refusal, which was expected, France wag'd War into the Low Countries, having first publish'd a Manifesto, by which that Crown endeavour'd to prove, that in taking possession of a Country that belong'd to the Queen, they did not in the least Infringe the last Treaty that had been made with Spain. The King departed from St. Germains on the 14th. of May, and entred the Fields on the 24th. he made choice of Marshal de Turenne for his Lieutenant-General; and sent Marshal d' Aumont towards Dunkirk, there to Command a Body of 7 or 8000 Men. The Marquess of Crequi, who had liv'd from the Court for five or six Years last past was recall'd, and sent upon the Frontiers to∣wards Luxemburgh with 3 or 4000 Men. But the Prince of Conde had no Imployment. She Spani∣ards were constantly beaten during all that Cam∣pagn, and lost Bergue, Furnes, Tournay, Douay, Coutra, and L' Isle. 1668.The King of France not being satisfy'd with his Progresses in Flanders resolv'd to fall upon the Franche Comte, and to make himself Master of it. He did not stay for the Spring to undertake that Conquest. The Prince of Conde who had tarried in his Governments without Action, while Mon∣sieur de Turenne had so many occasions to distin∣guish himself in the Low Countries, was sent before
on the 7th of February of the following . The King who had left Paris to assist at  Expedition arrivd at Dison the following day. The same day the Prince of Conde Summon'd the  to surrender.Bezancon surrenders to the Prince of Conde. The Inhabitants of that City  had been surpriz'd, and were not able to  any resistance resolv'd immediately to ur∣der, saying, That they were willing to submit to  King of France, and to receive him, but as in  Imperial City. However, the Prince having gi∣ them to understand that their City had ceas'd  an Imperial City by the Treaty of Munster, and that in case they obey'd without delay all  Priviledges should be preserv'd, they surren∣de'd innocently without any further Conditions,  opened their Gates. The Duke of Luxemburg enter'd Salins at the same time,The taking of Salins, Dole, Gray, and other places. and Dole was in∣sted on the 9th. The King and the Prince of Cnde being agreed about the Measures that were to be taken in order to reduce that City with as much ease as Bezancon and Salins, Count Chamilly, one of the Major-Generals of the Army, was or∣de'd to summon the Inhabitants to surrender, and  promise them that all their Rights should be preserv'd, in case they would submit voluntarily, nd to threaten them at the same time, that no Quarter should be given them if they made the lest Resistance. Monsieur de Chamilly receiv'd no favourable Answer; whereupon it was resolv'd to take it by force; and three Attacks were made  the 13th. in which the Prince expos'd himself extreamly. The Besieged defended themselves, nd some considerable Officers were kill'd in that occasion. The King seeing the Resistance that was made by those who govern'd in the place, sent Count Grammont the next day to represent to the Parliament the Necesity they lay under of Sur∣rendring, or of being expos'd to the Fury of an
Army, Commanded by a King in Person, and by the Prince of Conde, who was every where attended with Victory. He show'd them not only that there was a great deal of Rashness in resist∣ing such powerful Forces commanded by Chiefs, who till then had met with nothing that could ppose them, but also that it was very dangerous, since the King was resolv'd upon a general Assault, and to give no Quarter. He added to this that all the Privileges of the Citizens of Dole should be preserv'd: That in changing their Government they should not be the less happy: and finally, that they must determine instantly. The Parlia∣ment was strangely perplex'd, but having consider'd that it would be better to submit on the Conditi∣ons that were propos'd to them, than to run the hazard of seeing a whole City in a Flame, and of being expos'd to the Hostility of the Souldiers, they gave Count Grammont full Satisfaction, and he carry'd Hostages along with them for the as∣surance of the Reduction of that Place. The Ca∣pitulation was Sign'd on the 14th. The King also took Grai on the 19th. The Castles of Iou and St. Anne also surrender'd themselves; insomuch that in less than a Month the whole Franche Comté was reduc'd. The Spaniards in order to stop the Torrent of the French Conquests desir'd a Cessation of Arms, which was granted them till May; and by the Trea∣ty of Aix la Chapelle which was made the same Year, the Franche Comté was restor'd to the King of Spain. Nothing considerable pass'd in relation to the Prince of Conde until the Year 1672.1672. when the King of France declar'd War to the Hollanders.The War of Holland. We will enter upon no Particulars here; since no body can be ignorant of the Motives and Pretences of that War, in which the United Princes were like
have been subdu'd by a Prince who aim'd at the Uvsal Monarchy of Europe, and could not  fail'd of his Ends had he subdu'd that flou∣riing Republick, of which God has hitherto de∣ himself the Protector. We will only say,  as the King of France had resolv'd up∣ that War, and to that end assembled an Army of upwards of a Hundred thousand Men, he di∣rided it into three Bodies, of which he Command∣ he Chief in Person, and gave the two others o the Prince of Conde, and to Count Chamilly. The Forces the King was to command had their Rendezvous near Charleroy, and the Prince of  Army about Sedan consisting of 40000 M. The Prince was the first that march'd away, the King was the second, and Count Chamilly fol∣low'd in order to joyn them: after which they  all three towards Mastricht, and incampt  five or six Leagues from thence. Some days after a Council of War was held, in which the Duke of Orleance, the Prince of Conde, and Monsier de Turenne assisted: The first Advices inclin'd to besiege Mastricht, but upon considera∣ion hat it was a dangerous Undertaking, they marhed towards the Rhine. The Body that was commanded by the Prince of Conde march'd first, the King's followed; and the two Armies march∣ for seven or eight Days together without meet∣ing any Forces, excepting Two hundred Men in a Retrenchment, the which the Prince took Pri∣soners the Chevalier de la Rochefoucault, Brother to the Prince of Marsillue, was ll'd in that occa∣on. The Prince of Conde having marched on aid Siege to Wesel,The Prince of Conde besieges and takes Welel. while the King besieg'd Orsoy, and Mosieur de Turenne Burik. As soon as the Prince came before that Town, he caus'd a Battery to be raised upon the side of the Rhine to cut off the
Communication thereof; and having taken some other Precautions he made his Lines, and attack'd the Fort de la Lippe with so much vigour that he took it. It was a Post of very great Consequence. The taking thereof cast the Besieged into so great a Consternation, that they desir'd a Suspension of Arms, until the next day about Noon: this Suspension being granted them, they sent two Deputies to the Prince to let him know, that they were very much surprized that his most Christian Majesty should attack them, since they were Subjects to the E∣lector of Brandenburg; and that the States General were only in possession of the Gates, Rampats, and Fortifications, without exercising any Juris∣diction in the Town; and that therefore they de∣sired their City might be declared Neuter: But that Proposition was not relished. The Prince of Conde continued his Attacks, and cased the Trenches to be made, Fascies to be carried to the side of the Ditch, and finally disposed all things in order to make way for the Miner. In the mean time the Besieged having caused some Pieces of Cannon to be placed upon their Ramparts, for the most par'd dismounted, they made so dreadful a Fire that they kill'd above 4000 French. Tha Defence as vigorous as it was did not hinder the Continuation of that Siege. The Prince of Cond attack'd the Counterscarp; and as soon as it was taken, and his Men lodged upon it, the Besieged did capitulate. This place being of great Conse∣quence, and able to have held out much longer than it did, the vernour was condemn'd to lose his Head, but he having given sufficient Reasons for his Surrendring it at the time he did, the Sen∣tence was not executed.
The Prince of Conde marched from Wesel to  which surrender'd immediately, and from  o Erik which made no resistance neither. , which was besieged by the King, sur∣dred at that time; for which the Governour  his Head. The King of France who had not expected those place would have been taken so easily, being de∣s to push on his Conquests, was stopt by the  of the States General, which ran to the de∣fee of Issl, which is a River that covers all that rt of the Country he design'd to make himself Master of. He resolved to pass the said River; bt whereas it was very deep, and the Banks of a very difficult ascent, he was willing to have the Pince of Conde's Advice before he attempted any thig, and accordingly he writ to him about it: Although the Prince of Conde was used to great Eterprizes he looked upon that to be very dan∣gros, and answered the King that it was im∣prcticable, but that he advised him to attempt to cross the Rhine, where the Hollanders were not un their Guard. The Prince who was desirous  facilitate the Conquest of Holland to the King, ving brib'd a Gentleman of that Country, the d Genleman show'd him a Food towards Tol∣, where the Water was so shallow at the En∣rnce, and at the going out, that there was not bve Two hundred Foot to swim. Count de Giche made a tryal of it, in order to be satisfied of the truth, and having found it wadeable in tha place by the tryal he made of it himself, with oe of his Gentlemen, he acquainted the Prince of Conde therewith, who immediately gave an account of it to the King. That Monarch was so delighted with that News that he instantly quit∣ted his Camp with his Houshould; and having let the Command of the remainder of his Army
to Monsieur de Turenne went to joyn the Prince. The Dutch receiving some Intelligence of the King of France's Design, sent some Forces to the place where the French design'd to cross the Rhine; but by reason of some wrong Motions they could not possibly foresee,Passages of e Rhine. they had not time to retrench themselves. In the mean time as soon as the King of France was arriv'd upon the Banks of the Rhine, he caused some Batteries to be made, and the Army began to cross. Abundance of Volunters and Persons of very great Quality went over at the same time, viz. The Duke of Vivonne, the Counts de Saulx, de Lionne, de Chauvigny and the Count of Nogent who was drown'd. The Prince of Conde who would have a share in that Action cross'd immediately in a Boat with his Son the Duke d' Enguien.The Prince of Conde passes. His Nephew the Duke of Longueville swam it over. As soon as those two Lords where got over, they ran full speed towards a Barrier where some Forces had posted themselves, and began to fire upon them. Those Forces were surpriz'd and frighten'd to that degree that they demanded Quarter, which the Prince of Conde granted them: but the Duke of Longueville who had been drinking a little leapt over the Barrier: The Duke of Enguien follow'd him, and those Men having taken up their Arms again, the Duke of Longueville was kill'd. The Prince of Conde immediately ran thither to mode∣rate the indiscreet heat of those young Lords, but he came too late, and was wounded in the Left-hand with a Musquet-shot. Although his Wound was very painful he would not move from the Combat until all those Men were kill'd. The Wound the Prince receiv'd was not dangerous, but whereas it was in that Hand where he had the Gout com∣monly, it was so troublesome to him, that not
ng able to sleep day or night, or to serve any loger, he was obliged to retire to Arnhem hich the French made themselves Masters of,  well as of several other places. Every body knows what passed in the beginnings of that . The City of Utrecht surrender'd it self like the et,1673. and the Marquess of Rochefort went to take possession of it. The Prince of Conde being cured of his Wound repair'd thither on the 1st. of May of the following Year:Honours done to the Prince of Conde at Utrecht. He was receiv'd there with all the Discharge of the Canon, and the Ringing of the Bills: Monsieur Stoppa who was Governour there presented him with the Keys of the Town in a Silver Bason at his arrival there: having held them for sometime in his Hands he return'd them to him, after which he was conducted to the House that had been pre∣pared for him, by the Garrison, which was all in Arms. Sometime after the Prince of Conde's arrival at Utrecht he went to several places to try whether he could undertake any thing: But he found so good a order every where that he was forc'd to go back without doing any thing, having only caued two Bridges to be built upon the Leck at llemburg, and at Wick, in order to have a Com∣mnication with the Forces that were in the Betau. He lay sick a while, and being oblig'd to keep his Chamber several days, he constantly had the most learned Men in Utrecht about him, whom he receiv'd with all the Civilities imaginable. It is re∣ported that he was desirous to see Spinoza, and old him smiling, That if he would follow him into France, he would put him in a way to live conform∣ably to the Principles of his Theology; that Paris neither wanted fine Women, nor Pleasures; although he look'd upon him as a Derst, and a Man who had no
Religion, he was charm'd with the Conversation he had with him The best part of the Roman Catholicks of the Country of Gelder were so pleased to find them∣selves under the Government of a Catholick King, that their joy cannot be exprest. Being in great hopes that their Religion would become the uppermost, they sent Deputies to the Prince of Conde to dee him to give them those Churches the Protestants possessed in the open Country: The Prince who was sensible that they knew not what they desired, answer'd with some Railleries that put them clear out of countenance: After which he told them, That he had no orders from his Majesty as to what related to what they desired; that in case the King should make himself Master of all the Coun∣try they should have as many Churches as they pleas'd; but that whereas it was not certain yet he advised them to remain quiet, and not so much as to accept one of the Protestant Churches, al∣though it were profer'd them; to avoid the Mor∣tifications of restoring them as soon as the French Army should march away. 1674.The Prince of Conde was very sensible that it was impossible for the King of France to preserve all the places he got from the Hollanders with that surprizing swiftness every body has heard of. The States General who expected nothing less than the War that was declared against them were sur∣priz'd: But being recover'd out of their fright and surprize, having made a League with the House of Austria, and placed the present King of Eng∣land at the Head of it, France found it self oblig'd to abondon all at once almost all the Conquests it had made, and began to fear in its turn: That Crown fearing not to come off with Honour and Advantage out of a War, they had began with so much haughtiness, they had recourse to Intreague.
To that end in order to divide the Hollanders from the rest of the Allies, they made them advanta∣ Propositions in case they would hearken to eace. They offer'd to restore them Mastricht and Grave, which were the two only places they  preserv'd; but the Hollanders refus'd to hear∣n to it, and chose to venture the Hazards of a , rather than to forsake the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the other Princes that were in League with them, and from whom they had ceiv'd an Assistance that had broken all the Masures of France. The King of France finding tat there was no hopes that way, endeavour'd to atter the Ambition of the Prince of Orange by great Promises; but that great Prince rejected them with scorn, and acquainted the States Ge∣neral with the Propositions that had been made to , assuring them that he would compass the ing of the French out of their Country, and that he would give them a considerable Check, in case his Sentiments were follow'd, and his Reso∣lutions executed. The different Interests of the Princes that were  League together hindred things from being car∣d on in the Manner that great Prince desir'd it. Sme were for besieging Grave, or Mastricht; and others for the like reason desired the Siege of Crleroy; others did not care any place should be besieg'd provided a stop were put to the French  and that it should be hinder'd from send∣ing any Succours to Marshal de Turenne: France in the mean time proited by those Irresolutions. The Prince of Orange was inrag'd that he could under∣ake nothing, although he had an Army of near 60000 Men; he met with Oppositions every where. In fine, after many Obstacles that Prince carry'd it in a Council of War, and the Siege of Grave was resolv'd upon, and put in execution by
Monsieur de Rabenhaut. But the taking of that place not proving so easie as it was imagin'd, a∣bout three Months were spent in the taking of it; the Prince of Orange at that time design'd the Siege of Charleroy. Nevertheless he seem'd to have a Design upon some other place. The Prince of Conde who was not easily deceiv'd, posted himself at Pieton, between Charleroy, and Fontaine L' Es∣veque, having the Sambre behind him, and two Woods pretty near the Head of his Army, be∣tween which the Prince of Orange was oblig'd to pass to come to a Combat, which rendred the Ap∣proaches of the Dutch almost impossible. The Prince of Orange in order to oblige the Prince of Conde to quit his Post, made a Detachment of 7 or 8000 Men, which march'd towards the Meuse: But the Prince of Conde suspecting that they only design'd to draw him to some Inconveniences only sent some of his Forces that way, which broke the Prince of Orange's Measures. These two Princes esteem'd and dreaded each other re∣ciprocally: but the one was better serv'd than the other. The Prince of Orange daily form'd new Designs, without being able of putting any of them in execution; and the Prince of Conde propos'd nothing but what he did execute at the same time. This last who took the advantage of the Diffe∣rences that reign'd among the Allies, kept still on the side of the Prince of Orange's Army, and ha∣ving observ'd in one of the Marches of that Army, that the Ground oblig'd him to separate from it, he caus'd his Cavalry to mount, and before the Van could succour the Rear he fought with so much Fortune, that we may say that he had the Advantage at first, but it prov'd otherwise in the end; as will be seen hereafter. This Battle we are going to relate, was fought at Senef on the 11th. of August.
T Sccess of that Battle has been so variously  it is difficult to decide who had the  both Parties have pretended to it, and  Reason, since it pass'd very equal∣ly  both sides. the Armies were about Nivelle,The Battle of Senef. the Con∣ as earnest and sollicitous to come to  Combat, as the French were careful to avoid it,  being resolv'd not to engage with the Prince  unless the advantage were visible on their . The reason thereof was imputed in the  place to the eagerness wherewith the young Prnce of Orange desired to open himself a Passage  rnce through Victory, in order to revenge the Iuies this Country had receiv'd from the , and at the same time to make his first tryal f a pitch'd Battle against so Famous and so Expe∣nc'd a General as the Prince of Conde. In the cond place, it was reported that the Prince of  who was an old General, thought he should expoe his Glory too much, by encountring a oung Prince of Twenty Three Years of Age. ere was another reason which curb'd the Na∣tural eagerness of the Prince of Conde, although the Army he Commanded was compos'd of good Oficers, and chosen Souldiers, well disciplin'd, ready innur'd to Combats, and flush'd by the continual Success that had attended them in two Wars, which could not be said of that which was Commanded by the Prince of Orange. This Rea∣son was, that reflecting to himself that he had been very much out of Favour at the Court of France, during the Reign of Lewis the 14th. he consider'd that he should be call'd to a stricter account than y other, should any considerable Misfortune be∣fall his Army, by reason that thereby the Confe∣derates would have had a free Passage into France, the Frontiers on that side remaining defenceless:
And it is most certain that the loss of a Battle on the side of the French, would have been attended with terrible Consequences, and would have shook the Grandeur of that Crown, by reason of the Discontents that reign'd in the Kingdom, and in which the Prince of Conde was suspected to have a share. Those two different Dispositions oblig'd the two Generals, the one carefully to seek, and the other to avoid a Combat. In fine, the Prince of Orange concluding that the only way to oblige the French to fight, was to undertake the Siege of some considerable Place, which would engage them to the Relief thereof, decamp'd and march'd towards Senef: He divides his Army in three Bo∣dies; the German under the Command of Count de Souch led the Van; the Spaniards under Prince Vaudemont were placed in the Rea, and the Dutch Commanded by Count Waldeck composed the main Body. The Prince of Conde who was Retrench'd pretty near them, having observ'd their March, and seen as we have already observ'd; that they were of necessity oblig'd to pass some Defilies that were very narrow, tarry'd until the Van, and the man Body were pass'd. And as soon as he perceiv'd that the Rear began to march, he came out of his Retrenchments and charg'd the Spaniards vigo∣rously, who made no great resistance; Insomuch that almost in a moment he kill'd above 1500 Men upon the spot, pillag'd, or burnt part of the Equipages, took Standards, and several Prisoners of Note. The Prince of Orange who was at the Hed of his Forces, was extreamly surpriz'd at what pas'd in the Rear, and running thither full speed he found all his Men in disorder, and that the Prince of Conde in order to improve his Ad∣vantage, endeavou'd to cut off one part of the Army, which was divided from the other by a
Wood: That Prince had only time to possess himself a Rising beyond Senef, where he posted his Horse, and plac'd three strong Battalions be∣fore them to guard a Defily; but he could by no means succour the Spaniards, who being broken ell upon the Dutch and put them in a terrible dis∣order; insomuch, that the Prince of Conde pursu∣ing his Advantage made an end of breaking them with ease. Had the Prince of Conde contented himself with that Success, it is most certain that the Victory could not have been disputed, but being incou∣rag'd by the hopes of obtaining a compleat Vi∣ctory, and believing that the Dutch whom he look'd upon as being the worst Souldiers in the World, would never stand their Ground after the absolute Defeat of the Spaniards, he caused his whole Army to advance. This Prince who had pform'd one of the bravest and boldest A∣ctions in Nature, whereby he would have gain'd an Immortal Glory had he stopt there, order'd Chevalier de Tourille, Lieutenant-General, to at∣tack the Prince of Orange. Chevaliar de Tourille answered, That he was ready to go where-ever be should Command, but that if he might be allow'd to speak his Mind, The Prince of Orange was posted so advantageously, that he would certainly lose abundance of Me if he came to a Battle: The Prince of Conde who did not love him, replied in a disdainful manner, That he did not ask his Advice; To which he added, That he had never been deceiv'd in his Opinion of him, which was, that he was much fitter to advise and rea∣son than to fight. These Words stung this Officer to the quick, who certainly was very brave: He march'd away that very moment without a Reply, and pass'd a Defily in order to charge the Prince of Orange's Horse, which stood in Battalia, and executed the Prince of Conde's Orders, but he lost
his Life by it, as well as most the Officers that follow'd him. He liv'd but one Hour after it, and a Moment before he died, he declar'd, That he did not regret his Life, since he died for the Service of his Prince, but that he should have been very glad to live a few Hours longer to see what would become of the Prince of Conde's Undertaking, or ra∣ther to see him perish. In the mean time the Prince of Orange was marching to the Relief of the Spaniards, and of the Squadrons he had detach'd: but he found himself immediately hem'd in by the Run-aways whom he could never stop, either by Words, Blows, Promises, or Reproaches. The Germans being inform'd of what pass'd came in time to re∣inforce the Dutch, at which time the Battle en∣gag'd, and began with great fury on both sides. The Prince of Conde having occasion'd the loss of many brave Men was animated to that degree that he exposed himself like the meanest Sldiers. The Dutch made a very brave resistance; But the Prince of Orange perceiving that he was in dan∣ger of losing his Post made three Battallions ad∣vance to sustain those that were: Before he could post them, his Men being press'd by the Prince of Conde retir'd to Fay, a Village that stood close by them, fortify'd with a Castle and a Church, and surrounded with Hedges. The Prince of Conde who had no longer any regard for his Men, without minding the Losses he had sustain'd in the two preceding Actions, order'd Foces to march that way, and having met the three Batta∣lions we have mention'd, that had not yet joyn'd the others, he put them to flight. The next thing was to force the Prince of Orange out of Fay; but that did not prove easie that Prince who gave so many proofs of Bravery and Prudence in that occasion, being cover'd on
oe side by a Marsh, and on the other by a Wood, which he had lin'd with Infantry: But as no∣thing appear'd impossible to the Prince of Conde, h sent the Duke of Luxemburg towards the Wood, while he undertook to force the Village with his bst Forces; but he met with a brave Resistance o all sides: The Duke of Luxemburg was forc'd to retire with the loss of his best Officers and Souldiers: and the reason why the Prince did not do the same was, that he was resolv'd to over∣come at any rate, to make Attonement for the loss of so many brave Men he had expos'd with∣out any necessity. The remainder of the Officers see∣ing the first Prince of the Blood expos'd to the ut∣most Prils resolv'd to share them with him. Ne∣ver did People expose themselves with more fury, no ever was a braver Resistance made. The ench being repuls'd every where made new Ef∣fors  drove two Battallions of Infantry into a  which they had posted themselves, and charg'd through the Squadrons that sustain'd them, but they lost so many Men in that Action, that they had no reason to boast of the Advantages they had obtain. This dreadful Combat lasted eight Hours by Day-light, and two Hours by the Light of the Moon, which did set to the extream Grief of the two Generals. The Prince of Orange (while this Action lasted) gave all necessary Orders with an admirable Pru∣dence. He neglected no Advantage he could im∣prove, and charg'd the French several times at the Head of his Squadrons with that Bravery and Cou∣rage he has demonstrated in so many occasions: He oppos'd his own Men that were defeated and fe upon him, as well as his Enemies who pur∣su'd their Victory with great vigour, and remain'd engag'd for above six Hours during the greatest heat of the Combat, until he was forc'd away by
the Runaways. He rally'd them several times, and charg'd with them afresh. In fine, he expos'd himself, as well as the Prince of Conde, to more dan∣gers than the meanest Souldier; insomuch that Count de Souches, in one of his Letters to the States-General upon that Subject, declar'd, That during all the time of the Combat, that Prince had shown the Conduct of an old General, and the Valour of a Caesar His Allies and Friends, in giving him the Praises and Glory he deserv'd, did no more than his very Enemies allow'd. They said, that the Prince of Conde had multiply'd himself during the Combat, and that he had met the Prince of Orange every where. But the greatest Testimony he re∣ceiv'd of it, and that which was most glorious, was that which the Prince of Conde gave himself, who speaking of that great Monarch, said, That he had behav'd himself in every thing like an old Captain, excepting only his exposin himself to too many dangers, wherein he had  like a young man. Nevertheless the Prince of Conde, as old as he was had committed the same fault: For, as we have already noted, he expos'd himself that day as much as the youngest man in the Ar∣my, when he perceiv'd that the Battel grew bloody, and that all was at stake, so uncertain the Success did appear. The Combat was obstinate on both sides, and the two Generals expos'd themselves to that degree, that it was evident they had much ra∣ther dye than lose the Battel. The number of the two Armies being pretty equal at the beginning of the Battel, it was com∣puted, that the number of the Slain proved also partly equal on both sides, and that about 15 or 16000 men had been killed, but the French lost more Officers than the Confederates.
Night having parted the two Armies, rather  the Weariness or Weakness of the Combats, the French retir'd to their Camp, and two urs after the Prince of Orange repaird to that which he had design'd for his Army the day be∣re The Confederates pretended the Victory becaue they remain'd Masters of the Field of Bat∣tel; and the French challeng'd it, by reason that they took a greater number of Prisoners and Stan∣dards. But without deciding who had the Honour of the Day, we may say, that the Prince of Orange go a great Victory, in not being vanquish'd by the Prince of Conde; and the Prince of Conde's Glory  as great in not being ovecome by the Prince o Ornge. After the two Armies had refresh'd themselves, and had repair'd as much as they could the Dama∣ges they had sustain'd in that bloody Battel, they arched into the Field again, and kept the World in exptation of a second Engagement before the end of the Campaign. The Prince of Orange used his utmost Endeavours, in order thereunto, but the Prince of Conde chose such advantagious Posts, and retrenched himself so well, that it was impos∣sible to force him without disadvantage. He con∣tented himself with observing the motion of the Enemies, and with preserving the Conquests France had mde, and to hinder the Confederate Army from entring into France, which was the Design the Confederates had projected. The Prince of Orange finding that it was impossi∣bleThe Siege of Oudenarde rais'd. to come to any Action with the Prince of Conde, who kept upon the defensive, laid Siege before Oudenarde, in the Month of September, whereby he obtain'd his End, which was to draw the French out of their Retrenchments. Accor∣dingly the Prince of Conde having received a Sup∣ply
of Forces, which Marshal ' Humier was to bring him,169. he set immediately forward to attempt the relief of that place As soon as the French Ar∣my appeared, the Prince of Orange assembled a Council of War, in which he propos'd to march out of the Lines, in order to attack the Prince of Conde, before his Forces could be refresh'd; which was very well projected. The Spaniards were of the same opinion, but Count de Souches refus'd flat∣ly to consent to it, whereby that occasion was lost; besides, it created such Differences among the general Officers, that the Germans quitted the Trenches the next day, and posted themselves a league from thence, whereby the French got an op∣portunity to send whatever supply they pleas'd in∣to the Town. This oblig'd the Prince of Orange to raise the Siege: Whereupon a French Officer telling the Prince of Conde, that that Prince was unhappy; he reply'd, That he was unhappy as he was brave, and that in time that Genel would prove as formidable to France as his Forefathers had proved to Spain. The following Campaign the King of France took the Castle of Dnant, and besieg'd Huy, which he took about the beginning of Iune, and the 9th of the said Month he invested Limbourg; the thir∣teenth the Lines of Circumvallation were begun: The Prince of Conde, and the Duke ' Enguien arri∣ved in the Camp the same day, with eight Squa∣drons of Horse, and the following day the Marshal of Creque repair'd thither also with 3000 Horse. The Trenches were open'd the same day. The Prince of Orange prepared for the relief of this place, but it surrender'd, without making any re∣sistance, before that Prince arriv'd.
The French Army had fatigu'd too much to ac∣pt any thing else; besides, the time of the Campaign of Germany approaching, there was a necessity of sending Forces to Monsieur de Turenne, who was in great want of it. To that end a De∣tachment was made, and sent to him; and there bing nothing more to be done in Flanders, the King retir'd to Versailles, and left the command of  Army to the Prince of Conde. The Detach∣ment that was sent in Germany turn'd the Scale;  wheras the Prince of Orange was upon the de∣sive before, the Prince of Conde was obliged to do it in his turn, and was put to a great loss. However, the Confederates attempting nothing,  Campaign ended without any considerable Archievements on either side. While the Armies were without Action in Flan∣ders,Marshal Turenne's Death. all things were disposd to fight briskly in Germany, and the Vice-Comte of Turenne was killed at the Eve of the Battel he designed to fight against he Imperialists, on the 27th of Iuly. The Prince of Conde received an Order to command in Ger∣many, after the death of that General: He left Flanders on the 10th of August, and left the com∣mand of the Army to the Duke of Luxemburg. The Imperialists had besieged Haguenau on the 20th of the same Month: The Prince of Conde at that ime joyned the Frnch Army that was encamped near Sedstadt, with a Supply of 15000 men, and being informed of the Siege Montecuculy had made, he marched away immediately with the Forces he had brought along with him, and went towards enfeldon and Erstein, in order to go near the River Prent, to encamp on the 22th at Holsheim, repor∣ting, that he designed to attack the Imperialists, or cut off their Communication with Strasbourg. Montecuculy having notice of his march, went away
the same day from Haguea, in order to offer the Prince Battel,1675 and left 4000 men before the Place. The next day he arrived at Gartnervelt, where the Forces he had left before Hguenau came to joyn him, and he drew so near the Prince of Conde, that there was nothing but the River between the two Armies; but there fell so much Rain about that time, that neither of the Generals durst un∣dertake any thing. The Imperialists only took some Prisoners, among whom was the Prince of Conde's Steward. They likewise cut over a Bridge at Howart near Stratsburg, in order to attack the French Army. Whereas that City had favoured the Designs of Montecuculy in the Siege of Hagunau, which he was oblig'd to raise, the Magistrates were no sooner in∣form'd of the arrival of the Prince of Conde, but they sent Deputies to him, to excuse what they had done; but they did not receive an Answer suitable to their Desires. The Prince of Conde made an∣swer to them, That after having dispatch'd what was most in haste, he would visit them, if the King would believe him. That quick haughty Answer alarm'd that City, which was not unacquainted with the Reputation and Humour of that Prince; they had already made tryal of what he was capable of do∣ing, for at the beginning of the War, Ricousse, one of the Officers of his Houshold, had made an At∣tempt upon the Bridge of Stratsburg, upon less pro∣vocation, the which had been contriv'd in his Clo∣set. But let us return to Montecuculy. He was no soo∣ner come near the Post, where the Prince of Conde was retrench'd, but that Prince fir'd two Pieces of Ordinance to offer him the Combat. The Armies were very equal in strngth: But the Emperors General dreading the first fire of the
ench, and the Reputation of a Prince who pass'd for the best Captain of the Age he ived in would haard nothing, and retired under the Canon of Strtburg. Nevertheless, he caused all the Equi∣page to be placed upon the side of the Ditch of that City, in order not to be incommoded thereby, in case the Prince of Conde should attack him; but that Prince did not intend to attack him in that Post. He retired towards the Mountains, and from thence to Chatenois, where there was abun∣dance of Forrage. Montcuculy went to encamp at Oberneim, where he received a considerable Supply of Horse and Foot. The Prince of Conde having notice of it, earing that General might come to attack him, ortified his Camp with a surprizing diligence, and having soon after received a Reinforcement of 2000 Horse, and some Foot, he thought himself secure. He had had a mind to quit the Post in which he was retrenched, but whereas it shut up the Passages into Lorrain, upon which the Imperia∣lists had some designs, he remained in his Camp, insomuch that Montecuculi thought of nothing far∣ther, than to fortifie himself in Alsatia, where he made some small Conquests. However, in order o raise some Jealousie in the Prince of Conde, he caused Savern to be besieged; but the Prince was no wise moved at it, knowing that the place was very well fortified, and that the Governor would make a brave Defence. And indeed, they were oblig'd to raise the Siege: The Marquess of Bade Dourlak, who commanded the Siege, after the raising of it, march'd into the Country of Brisgaw, which obliged 4000 Horse the Prince of Conde had sent thither, to make a Diversion, to re∣ire to the main Army. Thus ended the Campaign of 1675. in Germany, and all those of the Prince of Conde.
The loss of Monsieur de Turenne was exceeding sensible to the King of France, for several Reasons: But had it only been for the Good of the King∣dom, he could never regret that General too much: And indeed there were so few persons ca∣pable of filling up his place, that when the King had examin'd i, he could hardly fix upon one among all the Princes and Marshals of France. The Prince of Conde was generally the only man whose Va∣lour and Merit was known to every body; but Mons. de Louvois was not his Friend, and the King did nothing without the Advice of that Minister. No body can imagine what reason Mons. de Lou∣voi had to complain of the Prince, but yet it is most certain, that he did not love him, and that he disswaded the King, as much as in him lay, from giving him the Command of the Army in Germany. He acknowledged indeed, that the Prince of Conde was one of the greatest Capains of the Age, and that no body could deny him a Glory he had ac∣quir'd by an infinite number of Battels he had won; but at the same time he said, that he was too fiery, and too undertaking; that it was evident by the Battel of Senef, that he preferred his own Glo∣ry to the Good of the Kingdom; that a wiser General would have gain'd an entire Victory, and preserved those Forces which he lost by his own Fault, after the first Advantages he had obtain'd over the Enemies; and that he durst not answer, that that Prince was as well affected as he had promis'd to be when he made his Peace with his Maesty. Whatever Monsieur de Louvois could say to oblige the King not to give the Command of his Army to the Prince of Conde, that Monarch was so well perswaded of his Capacity, Prudence, and Gallantry, as well as of the Fidelity he had pro∣isd
him, that at that time he had no regard to h Ministers Remonstrances.1676. But the Prince de∣red himself of that Command which was offe∣red him, by the Conditions he would make with te King: He desired the Duke d' Enguiis might mand the Army jointly with him, promising, at he should do nothing without his Order; and tha it was only to have the satisfaction to see his Son, whom he lov'd entirely, in a condition to acquire Glory. But the King, who had no great indness for the Duke d' Enguiris, being moreover of a temper to bestow his Favours freely, without compulsion, would not hearken to that Propositi∣on: Insomuch, that the Marquess of Luovois taking the advantage of that Conjuncture, propos'd the Duke of Luxemburg, who was accepted that very moment. As soon as the Duke of Luxemburg had receiv'd his Orders, he went away for Alsatia, which was the Rendezvous of the Army, which had never been so ine nor so numerous: But all the Officers soon found, that the King had given him an Em∣ployment he was not capable of, and that the Prince of Conde was the only man fit to discharge that Command with Honour in that conjuncture of Affairs. The Proof of this soon appear'd, when the Due of Lorrain besieg'd Philipsburg: That Place hld out four months, and yet the Duke of Lxembrg was not in a Condition to relieve it, tho' at the head of an Army of 50000 men. The King was vry much troubled when the news of the taking of that place was brought him, that he had not sent the Prince of Conde to com∣mand in Germany; but there was no Remedy: However, he ask'd him what should have been done to save that place; Sir, answer'd the Prince, the Duke of Luxemburg should have hinder'd the
Duke of Lorrain from besieging it; and since e ad committed that fault, he should have ventur'd the Ar∣my, and have gone to force the Enemy in his Retrench∣ments to the hazard of a thousand lives, if he had had as many. That was the only way. Altho' the War continued, and that with all the Vigour imaginable, Conferences were held at Nim∣negen, for a Peace, the which was concluded in the manner every body knows.
MEMOIRS OF THE Prince of Conde. BOOK VII. AFter the Peace of Nimwegen,The Prince of Conde re∣tires to Chantilly. the Prince of Conde resolv'd to desire the King's Leave to retire to Chantilly. He told the King in a submissive respectful manner, That his Age and Indispositions oblig'd him to entreat his Majesty to consent to that Retirement. The King having granted it, the Prince quitted the Court, and re∣paired to that House, there to lead a private life. Divers Reasonings were us'd upon the Motives1679. that had induc'd so great a Prince to lead a life so contrary to his Rank, in a Country House.Divers Rea∣sonings upon that R∣treat. Some imagin'd that his Indispositions had put him upon that Resolution, and that it had made him appre∣hensive, not only that his Health would still be more impair'd in the Agitations of the Court, but also that as it might hinder him from making his
Court to the King regularly, his Majesty miht impute that sometimes to a want of Consideration and Respect, which only proceeded from Infirmi∣ty. Others conceiving no other Idea's of the mo∣tives of that Hero's Retreat, but such as were noble and sublime said, That after having acquir'd so so much Glory in Motion and in Action, he was willing to acquire a new sort of Glory in Rest and Solitude: That after so many Battels, and the tumult of Arms, he was desirous to taste those peaceable Virtues, and that qiet Glory that is nei∣ther o be shar'd with the Souldiers, nor with For∣tune, in which all is charming, and nothing daz∣zles, which is beheld without being troubled with the sound of Trumpets, or with the noise of Guns, nor by the Cries of the Wounded, in which a Hero, reduc'd to himself, and possessing himself, appears as great, and is as much respected as when he commands Armies, when all moves at his nod, when he combats and gains Victories. Others alledg'd, that the Prince of Conde receiv'd, from time to time, at Court, Malifications from the King who remembring what he had done former∣ly, gave him sometimes marks of a secret Resent∣ment, and of an Aversion that had never been ab∣soluely remov'd: That the Prince of Conde being very sensible of it, had wisely resolv'd to remove an Object from his Majesty's Eyes, which was not very agreeable to him, the which reviving the thougts of former Transactions, might prove pre∣judicial to the Fortune of the Duke d' Enguien's his Son. It is most certain, that after the Peace of Nim∣wegen, nay, ever since the Prince retir'd to Chan∣tilly, his Highness receiv'd grievous Mortifications. When the Prince of Conde was married to Ma∣damoiselle de Blois, the King's Daughter by Madam de la Velliere, the Prince had the vexation to find
in the Contract of Marriage he was to sign,1655.  Title of High and Mighty Lord, which had al∣ays been given him, was omitted: And there∣ when Monsieur Colbert presented the said Con∣tra to him to sign it, he refus'd it, and went to plain to the King about it, who having heard , answer'd with a disobliging tone, Sign Cosin, . Whereupon the Prince making a great bow did sign. He was likewise reduc'd to the hardship of dong his Rank, upon all occasions, with the King's natural Sons; for, in order to please him, and to make his Court, he behaved himself to∣wards them as if they had been his Equals, tho' never so young. Moreover, when the Prince of Cde was married, the King having made enqui∣y, whether the Prince of Conde had visited Count  Vermandois, Brother of Madamoiselle de Blois, the Prince, who had not made that Visit, being inform'd therewith, immediately waited upon him, to congratulate his Sisters Marriage with his Ne∣phew; and whereas the Count de Vermandois took but a Folding Chair for himself, and caused an Arm-Chair to be presented to the Prince of Conde, the Prince durst not accept it, and sate upon a FoldingChair, like him. The King was extream∣ly pleas'd thereat, and yet he told the Prince, as soon as he saw him, Cousin, you should have taken the Arm-Chair; I expect that Vermandois should re∣spect you. The Prince of Conde gave several other Instances of his Care to please the King, by the Esteem and singular Consideration he express'd to∣wards his Majesty's natural Sons. I say, he gave other Instances of it in the same Conjuncture, in the manner I am going to relate. He being very earnest in Discourse with some Courtiers, the Duke d Maine, and some other young Lords, being at Play near them, and making a great deal of noise, which interrupted their Conversation, which was
very serious, and in which the Prince was very earnest,1679. his Highness said angrily, Hinder those Children from making so much noise. The young Duke u Maine, who was but a Child at that time, having heard it, and addressing himself to the Prince of Conde, spoke these words full of Wit and Vivaci∣ty: Sir, I should esteem my self very happy, to be able to make as much noise hereafter as you have done by so many great Actions, and so many glorious Victories as you have atchiev'd. The Prince of Conde had no sooner heard those words, but he reported them to the King, in order to please him, and to gain his Favour. In fine, all these different Motives which were alledg'd about the Prince of Conde's Retreat, may be joyn'd, and perhaps might altogether induce the Prince to resolve upon the passing of the re∣mainder of his Life at Chantilly, wrap up in his own Merit, and in his own Virtue, although at that very time Deliberations were made in Poland, to raise him to the Throne. And indeed, in that charming Solitude, in which he only liv'd upon Milk, by reason of the Gout he was very much tormented with, he preserv'd a Life for near Twenty years long, which perhaps would not have lasted so long in the Tumults of the Court, he acquir'd a new kind of Glory, which was very considerable; and whereas he only went to Court from time to time, about three or four times a year, and that he omitted nothing at those times to please the King, he gain'd his Favour absolute∣ly, and engag'd him more and more to conceive Sentiments of Affection for the Duke of En∣guien. Oupations of the Prince of Conde at Chanly.As soon as the Prince of Conde was retir'd at Chantilly, he apply'd himself to adorn and embelish his Solitude by all possible means, in which he suc∣ceeded admirably. That House of Chantilly was
only an old Remainder of the House of Mntmo∣rency, and an old Castle that had nothing fine or regular in it; but the Prince made an enchanted Palace of it. And indeed, it was fit he should have a House not only suiable to the greatnes of his Birth, but also to the Glory he had acquir'd in the World: Therefore he imagin'd a very fine Project, which he executed very nobly, and brought it to such a degree of perfection, that in the Order and Cimitry of his abode on all sides it was easie to discover the greatness of his Genius, and Instances of the nobleness of his Heart. Be∣sides the Cimitry and Beauty of the Building, the Groves, Brooks, Arbors, Fountains, Canals, Walks, and Water-works that play'd night and day, all shew'd the elevation or greatness of his Soul, and the politeness of his Mind. In this charming Abode he employ'd himself continually in a manner that was worthy of him: He consulted all manner of good Books, of which he was an admirable good Judge: He carefully ob∣serv'd all manner of Decencies: He employ'd and made those who came to visit him enjoy all man∣ner of innocent. Pleasures and Divertisements: He made continual Reflections, at his leisure hours, on all the Events of his Life, and drew considerable Lessons from thence, for the conduct of Life: And indeed he corrected, in his Retirement, divers Defects that had tarnish'd the Lustre of his Glory He imparted his Knowledge to some, his Counsels to others, and gave marks of his Affection to all. The most ambitious Courtiers, and those that were most fix'd to the Court often, went to study that great man in his Retirement, and always came back with some Improvement. Chantilly was only frequented by men of Sence, and by such who had
Wit enough to delight in hearing that Prince re∣late the divers Events of his Life,1680. and a Thousand other curious things he was wont to say so agree∣ably upon all the Subjects he spoke on: Insomuch that whereas Chantilly abounded equally in things usefu and ageeable, those who were there, forgot all other places with Joy. The Prince of Conde's passion for War.The Prince of Conde still preserving a violent Passion for the Glory that is acquir'd in War, lov'd Motion and Action even in his Retirement. Being possess'd with a noble Jealousie, he could hardly hear any Discourse of War, in the first year of his Solitude, but he took fire immediately: But the Peace not allowing him to appear at the head of Armies, he apply'd himself in gathering and cau∣sing those who made their court to him together, the sweetest and most useful Fruits of his Victories and most surprizing Actions. Visits from the Prince of Conde to the King.He went out of his Retirement from time to time, to visit the King at St. Germain, and at Ver∣sailles, especially upon all extraordinary occasions. Of all Courtiers, none approach'd the Throne with so much Respect, or spoke to His Majesty with so much Submission as he did. And therefore the wisest and most skilful follow'd him in those Occasions, to study his way of making his court to the King. 1681.The Report of his Retirement, and of his emi∣nent Qualifications, drew abundance of the Peo∣ple out of all the Provinces of France,Every body is earnest to visit the P. of Conde at Chantilly. and from the most distant Countries, out of curiosity to see the Wonders that were publish'd about it; and they always found more than had been told them. The favourable reception he made them, his obliging Behaviour towards them, his Application in giving orders o divert them, without sparing any Cost; what they saw him do, whatever they heard him
say, all charm'd them, and they declad afterwards every where, that they had found him no less ad∣mirable at Chantilly, than in Sieges and Combats. And therefore whatever care was taken to shew Strangers of consideration the greatest Curiosities in France, they were uneasie until they could pay their Respects to the Prince of Conde, and have some Conversation with him; and when they re∣turn'd into their own Country, they never fail'd to say, We have seen the Prince of Conde. But of all the Visits the Prince of Conde receiv'd at Chantilly,The King visits the Prince of Conde at Chantilly. the most glorious, without doubt, was that which the King honour'd him with, for which his Highness express'd all the Gratitude imaginable. He receiv'd his Majesty with all the Respects, all the Joy, and all the Cheerfulness that could be express'd, and shew'd on that occasion an extraordinary Magnificence and Liberality, spending Fifty thousand Crowns to treat the King and Court splendidly. This great Prince having pass'd near Twenty years in his Retirement of Chantilly,The Prince of Conde's last Sickness. in the manner I have related, the Thread of his noble Life was cut, by an Accident, which shew'd to what degree the King's Life was dear to him, and how little he valu'd his own compar'd to his. Being inform'd that the Dutchess of Bourbon, his Grand-Daughter, natural Daughter to the King, was seiz'd with the Small Pox at Fontainsbleau, he left Chantilly, notwithstanding his Indisposition, on the II. of Nov. 1686. to go to see that Princess. He met the Duke of Bourbon and Mademoiselle upon the Road, coming back from Fontainsbleau,66. by the King's express Command, upon the first Report of the Small Pox: This young Prince and that young Princess endeavour'd to perswade the Prince of Conde to turn back, and to expect the News of what
should happen at Fountainebleau at Paris. They omitted no Tenderness, Prayers, or Tears to per∣swade him, but they could not prevail, the Prince continued his Journey, and at his first arrival us'd all the means and precautions imaginable to avoid an Accident like unto that which the Small Pox had caus'd in his Family in 1685. by the Death of the Prince of Conti. And whereas the King was coming into the Dutchess of Bourbon's Room, the Prince stop'd him at the Door, and by a resistance equally strong and respectful, he hinderd his Ma∣jesty from coming into a place where the illness of the Air might prove fatal to him; after which he fell into a Swoon within four foot of the place. As ill as he was, he caused himself to be carried several times in a day into her Chamber: But finally, the ill Air, joyn'd to the Fatigue of that last Journey, threw him into a condition which soon put a pe∣riod to his life. The Prince of Conde's condition being spread at Court, and at Paris, a world of Couriers were dispatch'd to him, from all the considerable persons of the Kingdom. The King, who was at Versailles at that time, sent two or three, whom his Highness received with great Respect and Gratitude. The Prince of Conde being detained at Fontaine∣bleau, by an illness, which made every body so fear∣ful of his Life, and the Prince of Conty being con∣find at Chantilly, that Prince, who was out of fa∣vour at Court, wrote a Letter, wherein he declar'd, That his Disquiets for his Highness's Illness were so great, that he could no longer forbear going to enquire about it himself, that he had suffer'd an exceeding great Violence for three weeks together, by conforming himself exactly to his Highness's Pleasure, who had commanded him not to go more out of Chantilly: That the Air of the Small Pox did
not flighten him, and that his Majesty would not disapprove his quitting his ordinary Abode, in that occasion to acquit himself of part of his Duty. The person to whom this Letter was written having gi∣ven the Prince of Conde an account of it, Make answer, said his Highness, to the Prince of Conty, that I am very much oblig'd to him, for the kindness he ex∣presses towards me; but if he loves me, let him remain where he is: I shall be at Paris within these two days, and shall see him there. A Courier arriv'd at the same time from the Duke of Enguien, who had an account given him three or four times a day, about the Prince his Father's Health, according to the Orders he had left every time he had been at Fon∣tainebleau, since the Court had left it. The Duke begg'd of hi Father, by the said Courier, to give him leave to repair to him. The Prince had al∣ready sent him back twice or thrice from Fontaine∣bleau to Versailles, to remain near the King, on whom a great operation had been made; and to observe all the favourable moments in which he might serve the Prince of Conty. He had obey'd, but could no longer endure to be absent from his Father. The Prince being earnestly sollicited to give his Son leave to come to see him, he answerd, That he did not que∣stion but his Son had a great desire to be near him; that he should be very joyful to see him also, but that both of them ought to sacrifice their own Satisfaction to their Du∣ty; that he desir'd him to remain at Court; that as soon as there should be any necessity for his being near him, he would send for him, and that perhaps it should be sooner than either of them should desire it. He sigh'd next and squeez'd the person he was speaking to by the hand, whereby it was suspected that he found himself worse, and that he would not be able to go to Paris within two days, as he had resolv'd. From that time his Distemper encreas'd, and soon discover'd that he had not long to live. And where∣as
Mons. Morin, his Physician, declar'd freely, in feeling his Pulse, that he found it very uneven. But is there no danger, said his Highness, do not dissemble it? Mons. Morin reply'd, that since he commanded hm to speak his Opinion; he thought it was proper to think on the Sacraments of the Church. This is speaking, reply'd his Highness. Whereupon that Prince order'd a Courier to be dispatch'd instantly to Father Dechamps a Jesuit, who was his Confessor, to desire him earnestly to come to him as soon as he cold, to confess him, and to dispose him for death. After which he call'd for the Princess, and for Mons. de Gourville, and while they were gone for, he uttered some words. Mons. de Gourville being come near him, he told him with a compos'd Air, Well Gourville, my Friend, we must part, there is no Remedy. He was going to say more, when he per∣ceiv'd the Princess drown'd in Tears. He conjur'd her with a serene countenance not to afflict herself and to send for the Duke d' Enguien, and the Prince of Conty, to come to him. Some body asked him, Whether the Duke of Bourbon, whom he loved so ten∣derly, should not likewise be sent for, since he was so very sollicitous to pay his Respects to him? I should be very glad to see him, answer'd he, I love him with all my Heart, and as much as a Father can love a Son, but he is an only Son, he must be preserved, and must not be exposed to an ill Air, full of the Small Pox. After this he called for Paper and a Pen, and wrote a whole Page with his own Hand, the which he caused the Dutchess of Enguien and Mons. de Gourville, and order'd it to be sealed, and deliver'd ater his death to the Duke of Enguien. That Wri∣ting related particularly to the Princess his Wife. Moreover, he took the liberty in the same Writing to conjure the King, to be mindful of that Princess, and to be pleas'd to prescribe her the manner in which she was to live; which the King granted.
The Prince of Conde not only express'd by his Cares how much he was concern'd in whatever relaed to the Interests of his Relations; but he likewise remembred all his Servants: He also re∣membred the Poor, to whom he left considerable Legacies, and order'd a Church to be built to serve as a Parish to Chantilly: Although he had declar'd his Will above a Year before concerning 50000 Crowns he had dedicated to charitable Uses, he was very careful in recommending the immediate Execution of his Orders upon that Subject. It was above Eighteen Months since he had done a very commendable thing, n order to ac∣complish'd his earnest desire of paying all the Debs of his Family intirely: He will'd and com∣manded Monsieur de Gourville to examine seriously, and even with rigour against himself, and with Indulgence for his Creditors, all that might be de∣manded of him: He had declar'd that it was his desire, without any farther order from him, to have all great and little Sums paid that should be thought justly due by him; that he only reserv'd to himself the Debts of Grace, to dispose of them as he should think fit. I will, said he, wrong no body, and I had much rather lose part of my Estate, than have a Penny of anothers: I have enough upon my Conscience, without burthening it, besides with so great a load as that of keeping any thing from ano∣ther. While the Prince of Conde applied himself in do∣ing good upon his Death-bed, and in expressing Esteem, Gratitude, and Affection towards divers Persons, he desired to write to the King: I will write to the King, said he: But not being able to do it with his own Hand, by reason that his Strength decay'd continually, he dictated the whole Letter, Word for Word, as followeth:
The Prince of Conde's Letter to the King. I Humbly beseech your Majesty to approve my Writing to you for the last time of my Life: I am in a Condition, in which apparently, I shall not continue long without going to give an account of all my Actions to God. I could wish with all my Heart, that all those that relate to him were as innocent, as all those that relate towards your Majesty; I have nothing to re∣proach my self for any thing I have done, when I first began to appear in the World: I have spar'd nothing for your Majesty's Ser∣vice, and I have endeavour'd to fulfil with Pleasure all the Duties to which my Birth, and the sincere Zeal I had for your Majesty's Glory oblig'd me. It is true, that about the middle of my Life, I have held a Conduct, I have blam'd my self before any body; the which your Majesty has been pleas'd to forgive: I have afterwards endeavour'd to repair my Fault by an inviolable Tye to your Majesty; and my greatest trouble ever since has been my not be∣ing able to do things great enough to deserve your Majesty's Goodness towards me. I have at least this Satisfaction, that I have omitted no∣thing of all that was most dear, and most pre∣cious to me, to show your Majesty, that I had those Sentiments I ought to have for your Per∣son,
and for your State: And all the Favours your Majesty has heap'd upon me, may I yet presume to beg another, which in the Condition I am reduc'd to, would afford me a very sensible Consolation? It is on the Prince of Conty's be∣half. I have Tutor'd him this Year, and I have the Satisfaction to have inspir'd him with such Sentiments, as your Majesty can desire. Father La Chaire is sensible of it, he may sa∣tisfie your Majesty about it: That Prince has certainly some Merit; and had not I discover'd all the Submission imaginable in him towards your Majesty, a very sincere Desire of being rul'd and govern'd in all things by your Ma∣jesty's Will, I should not intreat you most humbly as I do, to restore him what he values above all things in the World, your Favour; he has sigh'd above a Year, and look'd upon him∣self in this Condition as if he were in Purgatory: I beseech your Majesty to release him from it, and to grant him a General Pardon. Perhaps I flatter my self a little too much; But why should I despair of any Favour from the greatest King on Earth, of whom I die, as I always liv'd, most Humble, and most Obedient, and most Zealous Servant and Subject, Lewis de Bourbon.
The Prince of Conde having sign'd this Letter, he order'd it should be kept ready to be sent at the time he should order. After which he apply'd him∣self to his Domestick Affairs again, and to Regu∣late them well with Monsieur de Gourville. His unconcern'd, and peaceable Behaviour, at a time when the Bravest fall into Fainting Fits, generally occasioned by the apprehension of an ap∣proaching Death, he appear'd at that time, what he had been during all his Life, infinitely above other Men. When he had made an end of speaking with Monsieur de Gourville, and had given all the Or∣ders he judg'd necessary for the good of his Family, some took the Liberty to ask him whether he had forgot any thing he desired to declare his Will about. I believe not, answered he; but if I have forgot any thing, 'tis but speaking to my Son; I know his kind∣ness towards me. I know his Heart, it is good, it is great, he will do whatever I could do my self, and more. The Night of the 11th. of December, about Eleven, he put himself in an Arm-Chair near the Fire, in his Night-Gown, and his Legs upon two Folding-Chairs; and within two hours after it he sent for a Jesuit, who was at that time at Fontaine∣bleau. He told him, that he found himself ill, and that since he was going to Travel towards Eternity, it was time to think earnestly upon it. The Duke of Bourbon was mentioned to him again, but he continu'd to answer, that the Satisfaction of seeing him ought not to prevail over the Danger he should be exposed to in coming to Fontainebleau. The Duke of Enguien's Arrival.The Duke of Enguien arriv'd about Six in the Morning. He was seiz'd with a violent Grief see∣ing his Father so near Death. The first thing he told him was, That for his sake the King freely
pardon'd the Prince of Conty for all that was past; and that he was commanded by His Majesty to assure him therewith. This News was very agree∣able to him, by reason that he had desired it above a Year, with an earnestness suitable to the Esteem and Tenderness he for that Prince. He likewise express'd a great deal of Gratitude for His Majesty's Goodness; and whereas the Letter he had written to him over-night was not gone yet, he unseal'd it, to add Thanks to it, in the following terms. MY Son,Addition of the Prince of Conde's Letter to the King. at his Arrival has given me an Account of the Favour Your Majesty has been pleased to to do me, in forgiving the Prince of Conty. I am very Happy to have so much Life left, as to return Your Majesty my most Humble Thanks for it. I dye contented, if you will do me the Iustice to believe, that no body ever had Sentiments so full of Respect and De∣votion towards you, and if I may say so, of Tender∣ness, as Lewis de Bourbon. As soon as the Prince had sign'd what he had added to his Letter, he thank'd the Duke of En∣guien for his having taken his time so well, to re∣store the Prince of Conty to the King's Favour a∣gain. After which they had a very tender Con∣versation together, and gave each other all the marks of the most sincere and greatest Affection that ever was between Father and Son. When they had done, the Prince desired the Dutchess to draw near. He said the most moving, and the finest things in the World to them both, about their Conduct, towards God, towards the King, and towards their Children, whom he named all one after another. In the next place he spoke to them about the strict Union that had always been be∣tween
them, and of their reciprocal Duties, con∣juring them to persevere in living in that perfect Union which had been admired by all the World. He ended this fine Discourse by directing them how to behave themselves towards their Friends, towards their Servants, towards Persons of Qua∣lity, and of all Conditions. After which he em∣braced them, and gave them his Blessing, for them∣selves, and for their Children,The Prince of Conde blesses his Children. wishing them all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth. The Duke of Enguien, equally mov'd with Grief and Gratitude, took his Father's Hands, and kiss'd them, returning him a Thousand Thanks for all his kindnesses. The Prince did not receive those marks of kindness from his Son with Indifference, hey affected him too sensibly: But considering that allowed too much to Nature, at a time he ought to turn all his thoughts on Death, he told him, My Son, you have no Father now. They made a stop there, and for a while only spoke with their Eyes. But they broke that silence to determine with an equal Satisfaction what Em∣ployments should be given to the Officers of his Highnesses Houshold, who express'd his being very well satisfied with them, and desired they might be entertained still by reason of their Merit and Fidelity. After this he turned to Monsieur de Gourville, and said, By all the kindness you have for me, do not con∣ceal from me, how long I have to live. Ask the Phy∣sitians. He often made the same Question all the day long; and he was still answered according to the Condition in which they found him. When ever his Eyes met with the Duke or Dutchess, he discovered the Sentiments of his Heart sufficiently, without needing to express them by words. However he could not forbear telling a
Jesuit softly, who was near his Bed, The Tenderness I observe in my Son, and in his Dutchess towards me, toches me sensibly. The Dutchess of Bourbon sent every quarter of an hour to enquire how he did: She would have come her self, had not the Di∣stemper that kept her in Bed hindred her. For the most part he would see those that came from her, and made very obliging Answers for that Young Princess, towards whom he exprest to the end an extream Tenderness. About Nine, seeing the Duke in a very great Anguish, he told him, that he was moved by his kindness, that he was satisfied with him, beyond what could be exprest by words. At half an hour after Eleven the Prince of Conty arrived.The Prince of Conty's Arrival. The Tendernesses began anew on all sides. After which his Highness embracing the Duke and the Prince of Conty, told them all that a good Father could say to his Children, and con∣jur'd them to love one another like Brothers. He added, that they would never be great Men, nor great Princes, nor good Men, but proportionably as they proved, upright and faithfl to God, and to the King. Father Dechamps arrived a quarter after Twelve,Father De∣champs's Arrival. his Highness opened his Arms to Embrace him, expressing a great Joy to see him. Every body withdrew. The Prince discoursed with that Je∣suit about all that he had resolved within two Years about his Duty and Obligations, and made his Confession to him. About Two a Clock, the Duke of Enguien, the Dutchess, and the Prince of Conty being come near him again,The Prince of Conde desires his Body may be carry'd to Valery, and his Heart into the Iesuits Church. he spoke to them as he had done before, expressing all the Tenderness in the World towards them. At that time he ordered some bo∣dy to tell the Duke, that it was his deire, that his
Body should be carried to In the Diocess of Sens. Valery; but that never∣theless he left him absolut Master of all, and that he might do whatever he thought fit about it, ei∣ther as to the time and place, and the manner of Transporting him thither: That in that as well as in all other things he abandon'd all to his disposi∣tion, submitting to his Will, to which he gave a full Consent from that moment: But however that he should be glad his Heart should be carried into the Church of St. Lewis In the Church of the House of the Iesuits. at Paris, to be plac'd there with his Father's. The Duke received his Orders with the Submis∣sion he ought. And whereas his presence as well as the Dutchesses, and the Prince of Conty's moved him, and hindred him from applying all his thoughts on God, he desired them to withdraw. He also told the Physitians after having thanked them, that they might retire, and that he had no longer any need of their Assistance: And pointing to the Cu∣rate of Fontainebleau, Father Dechamps his Confes∣sor, and the other Clergy-men that were present, These, added he, are at present my real Physitians, who will put me in a way to dye well. In the mean time the Duke and Dutchess, as well as the Prince of Conty begg'd his leave to see him once more, to which he consented, on Con∣dition they should retire immediately. They with∣drew immediately, having seen him; but he was not long without thinking on them: For within half an hour he desired a Jesuit to go to them from him, to bid them a last Farewel. After which, Monsieur de Marege, who belongs to the Prince of Conty, being come into his Chamber, he received him in that obliging manner he was wont to receive every body, especially those he loved, and esteemed, as he did that Gentleman. He told him, You have always served your Master
well: Continue so to do, and never do any∣ing erogatory to the Honour you have of belonging to . He confides in you: You may tell him from me,  present more sensible of than ever I wasSententi words of the Prince of Conde. hat  man must be Iust and Good during his Life, and that there is nothing else solid. After which, he remain'd for some time silent. But then resuming he Discourse again, and giving some new Orders, a Divine venturing to tell him that he lived like a Great Man, and that he ought to dye in the same manner, but especially like a good Christian, he took him by the Hand, and said, You praise me, and I do now deserve it. From that moment he did nothing singular, and expir'd so quietly, that it was hardly observed. Thus dyed that great Prince on the Eleventh of December, 1686. after having lived Sixty Five Years,The Prince of Conde's Death. Three Months, and Three Days. While the Prince of Conde lay a Dying at Fon∣tainebleau,The Prince of Conde's Letter read at Court. the King caus'd that Great Man's Letter to be read at Versailles. Those who observed the three Tenses of his Letter, how slightly he pass'd over his Services at the beginning, and at the end of his Life, and how sincere an Acknowledgment he made of his Faults about the middle, were ex∣treamly mov'd by his Modesty, and the King him∣self could not refrain Tears, saying, That he lost a great Prince; these were his own words: And when that part of the Letter was read where the Prince return'd his Thanks, and declar'd that he dyed Contented, and too Happy, since he had so much Life left, as to express his Gratitude, his Devotion, and if he might say so, his Tenderness to the King, every body did him the Justice to say, that he had Written sincerely. That very day the Duke wrote three Lines to the King, to quaint him with the Prince his Father's Death.
The Duke went to Versailles on the 15th. of December,The Duke goes to Versailles. to pay his Respects to the King; who re∣ceived him with all the Kindness imaginable: And His Majesty express'd to him on the Occasion the Obliging Sentiments he preserved for him, and for his Father. He had taken the Prince of Conty along with him, whom he presented to the King, who made him sensible by his Reception, that he did not repent the Pardon he had granted him three days before, out of Respect to the Prince, and at the Intreaty of the Duke. The Duke did not tarry long at Versailles, and return'd soon to Paris.He goes back to Paris. He received sufficient Te∣stimonies, both at Court and in the City, that the Prince his Father's Death had made a deep Im∣pression in the Hearts and Minds of all People. The Prince of Conde's Body is car∣ried to Va∣lery, and his Heart to the Church of St. Lewis at Paris.In the mean time, the Order that had been given for carrying the Prince's Body to Valery, were put in execution. All things being ready, the Duke went away before any body, on the 21st. of December, and tarry'd at Fontainebleau for the Prince of Conty, who came thither from the King. The Princ's Body was carry'd to Valery on the 22th. and his Heart to the Church of the Pro∣fessed House of the Jesits at Paris on the 24th. be∣ing Christmas-Eve. This Ceremony was per∣form'd with great Magnificence: And the Duke, who appeared in every thing, omitted none of the Duties his Good Nature, and Gratitude exacted from him. 1687.After which, the most Eloquent Persons in the Kingdom were employ'd in making Funeral Ora∣tions, in the Praise and Honour of the Prince of Conde.Funeral Orations in Honour of the Prince of Conde. The King having mourn'd the loss of that great Prince, and often declar'd in the middle of the Court sighing, that he had lost the greatest Man of his Kingdom, assembled the greatest Persons
of his Kingdom in Our La∣dy's Church Notre Dame of Paris on the th. of March, there to pay in Pblick what was ue to the Memory of that Prince and Ordered the Bishop of Meaux to speak the Funeral Oration. That Oration is very fine, and worthy its Author, and the Prince in honour of whom it was spoken. The 26th of Aprill, Father Bourdaloüe, who about three Years, and a half before had spoken in the Church of the Professors House of his Society, in presence of the Prince, the Funeral Elogy of Henry of Bourbon his Father, spoke a Funeral Oraion in the said Church, in Praise of that great Prince, whose Memoirs I am finishing. That Oration is very Elegant, and most Magnificent, especially that part of it, where Father Bourdaloüe speaks without Dissimulation, and at large upon the Prince of Conde's behaviour in the Civil War, is incomparable. Ne∣ver was so skilful, and so happy a boldness known: And that kind of daring in an Orator, if I may use the Expression seems to revive in our Minds that Bravery, and Heroick Fierceness the Prince of Conde used to shew in Battles, and in the greatest Perils, the which was follow'd with so much Suc∣cess. The Abbot du Iarry likewise spoke a Funeral Oration in Honour of the said Prince in the Church of Maubuisson, before the Princess Palatine (who was Abbess of that Religious House) whom we have mention'd several times in thee Memoirs. There are Master-strokes in this last Funeral Elogy. Se∣veral other Orations were made, in several Pro∣vinces of the Kingdom. But whereas, in those kind of Discourses, i is usual to insist upon the Vertues of those for whom they are spoken; and that commonly, tho nothing it said in them but what really is, yet many things are omitted; by reason that those things are sup∣press'd which deserve no Praise; and that those things are disguised which cannot be conceal'd;
and that by a false Light, in which the Orator's skill knows how to place his Hero's dress with cunning, he covers, and paes slightly over those Parts that are defective: It is necessary to have recourse to Hi∣story, to be fully instructed of every thing; and that to a faithful History, like unto this. I am now going to draw the Prince of Cond's Picture, with the same Fidelity I have observ'd throughout this Work. The Prince of Conde's Picture.Lew of Bourbon, second of the Name, first Prince of the Blood; Duke of Bourbon, of Chate∣aurex, of Montmorency, and Bellegarte; Governour of Burgundy and Bresse; first Peer; Lord High Steward of France; Count of Clermont, Stenay, Dun, and Iamets; Knight of the Holy Ghost, and General of the King's Armies, was Tall, and well Shap'd, his Hair Curl'd, lively Eyes, a Ro∣man close Nose, his Cheeks Hollow and Lean, a long Face, and a very Noble and Haughty Phy∣siognomy, his Teeth ill set, and uncleanly, a care∣less Air, taking little care of his Person. He was of a sanguin Constitution, Cholerick, and Strong, he lov'd Hunting, Gaming, Joy, Pleasures, and Divertisements: He likewise lov'd Women, but without any particular Engagements, having ne∣ver had any real Affection but for Madame de Cha∣stillon. In his Youth he abandon'd himself some∣times to small Debauches, and at that time made very pretty diverting Verses upon any Subject that occur'd; they were Extempores no Poet could e∣qual. He had a great Vivacity, a clear Wit, and very good Judgment, and express'd himself with a great deal of Ease. He had much Probity and Honour in great Actions: he was not Liberal, nei∣ther was he Covetous; he Laugh'd much, but disagreeably; he was very free, and very offensive in Railleries. He kept no measures with any Body. He was of a Rough, uneasy, Impetuous, Passio∣nate Temper, and thereby he ruin'd all the advan∣tages
Nature and Fortune, had bestow'd upon him, frustrated the Extraordinary qualifications he was Endow'd with which were such, that he would have obsur'd the Glory of the greatest Men in past Ages, had mildness and Complaisance been Joyn'd to their lively Virtues, that shin'd in him, and to that Supream Valour, which rais'd an Admirati∣on in all the World. He had an admirable Genius for War, and par∣ticularly for Battles. He was Born for military Ex∣peditions insomuch that he wanted no Prenticeship to form him. The Superiority of his Genius serv'd him instead of Art and Experience; and he be∣gan by that which the most famous Conquerors would have been proud to end. He had a Martial heat, which made him dare and undertake all; a Fire, which in the execution render'd all things pos∣sible and easie to him, and a firmness of Soul, which no Obstacle could stop, or any Peril could frighten, which no Resistance could tire, or discourage; a Vigilancy, which could not be surpriz'd; a Judg∣ment wherewith, even in the most dangerous Oc∣casions, he fore-saw whatever might obstruct or fa∣vour the Event of things; a great quickness in Re∣solving, the quickness of his Action not allowing ime to cross it. He knew incomparably well how to improve those Conjunctures and swift Moments on which Victory depends. Nothing could equal his Activity, which in a day of Battle made him, dividing himself, as it were, to appear in all places. Supplying all, Rallying all, and Maintaining all. In so much that he was both General, and Souldier at once, and by his Presence inspir'd his Courage and Valour into a whole Army, even to the vilest Members thereof. And yet he preserv'd a great Presence of Mind in the heat of a Combat, and a Calmness he was never so certain of, as in a En∣gagement, and in the horror of the Tumult. In
the Fire, in the Onet, in the first Moon, some∣thing appear'd in him all on the sudden, so clear, so settled, so lively, so brisk, so mild, and so a∣greeable for his own Men, and so erce, and so theatning for his Enemies, that no body could imagine from whence that mixture of such opposite Qualities could proceed. How great an glorious soever his Actions were, he never applauded them: The Court that pre∣par'd those Applauses for him against his return, which he deserv'd, amir'd his Modesty in re∣ceiving them: Whenever he spoke of his Victo∣ries it was with a Modesty, which neither his Complaisance for those that hearkn'd to him, no their Curiosity could overcome. When he related the gain of a Battle, People would have thought he had had no share in it: he only spoke in praise of those who had behav'd themselves bravely in it to give them the Glory of it, and to make them known at Court: he never was more Eloquent, or more officious than when he did them that Justice, and never more wary than when any body design'd to surprize, or force his Mo∣desty, to make him speak of what related person∣ally to himself: When ny presum'd to praise him, he took their Praises for an Offence, and could not endure Flattery, he dreaded even the very Shadow of it: He held it for a Maxim, that in great Acti∣os one should have no other end than to do well, and so let Glory follow Vertue. He was as sucessful in Sieges as in Battles: He daily invented new means to advance the taking of Towns: He expos'd his Men extreamly, but yet no more than his own Person, and he was really persuaded that he spared his Men, in abridg∣ing the time of danger by the vigour of his At∣tacks. It is most certain that as a General he sel∣do
follow'd the common Maxi of War his impetuous Humour, which was Eemy to Mea∣sure and Precaution, made him neglect Military Discipline, and inclin'd him to act Boldly, always to tempt his Fortune, and even to brave it, and to elieve that in Fighting he must be victorious, and that Victory should not, as it were, dare to zeitate, to declare in his Favour; insomuch that no Man ever was so like Alexander, nor less like Caesar, excepting only Courage and Valour: And therefore it was a common Saying about him, That he was a great Prince by his Birth, a great Man by his Fortune, and a great Captain by his Cou∣rage. He thought he might Command among the Ministers, and behave himself in the same manner a Court, and in the City, as he us'd to do in War; which occasion'd all his Misfortunes: For want of following the Rules of true Policy, and of acting with Mildness and Cunning, he did not suceed, was guilty of several capital Faults, and run on to Extreams, which were attended with mortal Displeasure. In his Retirement he grew sensible of his De∣fects and Fauts, which made him sigh, and by his wise Reflections he became a new Man: He became a great Politician, Prudent, Mild, Civil and Obliging: He made his Court to those that were in Favour: He consented with all the Signs of Satisfaction and Joy, to all the Alliances the King seem'd to desire: He was a Pattern of Ap∣plication, of Devotion, of Submission, and of Obedience to that Monarch: All Courtiers learnt to make their Court of him. In his private Life he quitted all those quick Sallies, those harsh Words, stinging Railleries, and ree Expressions he had been us'd to; he was altogether Mild and Ci∣vil,
his Expressions modest and edifying. Nay moreover he commanded all his Servants to ac∣quit themselves of those Duties to which the Pro∣fession of Christianity oblig'd them, and order'd all such to be turn'd out with Remission, who by their Debauches, or Discourse should cause the least Scandal His Conversation was free and easie, and no body was perplex'd or constraind by the Re∣spect that was due to him, tho' every body was very sensible of it He took care to temper that Respect in making himself familiar with some, and descending to others, being free with, and confiding in these, and entring into the Affairs of those, accommodating and proportioning himself to all. And whereas, all his Life-time he had been a Lover of Sciences, and Reading, and that at Chantilly he read all manner of good Books, even of Religion and Controversie; his Conver∣sation was very improving. His great Genius em∣brac'd every thing, whether Sacred, Prophane, Ancient, Modern, History, Philosophy, Theolo∣gy, all manner of Arts and Sciences, even to the least Secrets of the Mechanicks: No Books scapd him, he was able to Converse with, and Enter∣tain all those that excell'd either in Speculation, or in any Works. And moreover, whereas h had an exquisite Judgment, a nice Taste, a lively Comprehension, a noble and just Faculty of think∣ing, and of expressing himself, and was able to judge of all things like a Master; all People im∣prov'd by his Conversation, and rectify'd their Thoughts either by his penetrating Qestions, or by his Judicious Reflections: His Conversation was Charming, by reason that he could speak to eve∣ry body according to their own Talents, and not to Souldiers about their Undertakings, to Cour∣tiers about their Interest, to Politicians about their
Ngocitios, but also to curious Travellers of what they had discover'd in Nature, in Govern∣ment, or in Commerce; to the Handicraft-man of his Inventions; and finally to the Learned of all kinds, of all the most wonderful Discoveries they had made. He had a very great Affection, and Tender∣ness for his Family, particularly for his Son the Duke of Enguien: and it was chiefly his passionate deire of preserving and advancing his Fortune, that made him behave himself with so much Prudence in the last Period of his Life, and that he managd the King's and his Favourite's Temper with so much Care. He has always had, and ever express'd a great Aversion for Praises, as we have observ'd: All Europe was fill'd with the Fame of his Name, and rng with the Glory of his Exploits; and yet it was hardly mention'd at Chantilly. It was a kind of a Crime to praise him, especially in his Presence: And indeed none durst have presum'd to praise him, seeing him so much above all Praises by his Modesty. When any body desir'd him in this Retirement to relate his fine Action in his Campagns, they perplex'd him. There was a great deal of Pleasure in hearing him: ut it requi'd a great deal of Art to engage to speak upon that Subject, and unless it were by surprize, nothing could be got out of him. Many have been surpriz'd at his not writing the Memoir of his Life: a thing he would have done worthily, and by which he would have laid an eternal Obligation on Posterity. Whatever Intreaties have been made to him about it, none ever could prevail: Nay more, his very Son,
whom he lov'd so enderly could never ob∣tain it: That Refusal must be imputed either to his Modesty, or his Policy. In effect, when∣ever he was desired to write Memoirs of his Life, he answer'd All I have done is only fit to be forgotten: Let the King's Life be written, all others hence forward will be superfluous. At other times he said: I could not do it without speaking advantageously of my self, and perhaps disadvantage∣ously of others: and thats a thing I cannot resolve upon, even in speaking the Truth. We shall now conclude by a Paralel that was made in the Year 1674. between that great Prince and Marshal de Turenne, aout the eminent Qualifications they possess'd in War.
A Paralel between the Prince of Conde and Marshal de Turenne. A Greatness of Genius shines in the Prince of Conde a Knowledge ever present, an im∣petuous Courage, without trouble or precipi∣tation. Monsieur de Turenne has the advantage of Calm∣ness, Capacity, Experience, a firm and secure Valour. The other resolves in Council, is never at a loss in Disorders, taking his Resolution better than any Man living. This forms a Plan of War to himself, dis∣poses all thing to his End, foresees all Obstacles with more Judgment than Slowness. The Activity of the first goes beyond what is necessary in order not to omit any thing that may be of use. The other is as active as he should be, but does nothing that is superfluous, in order not to dissipate, and ruine his Forces by unnecessary Fa∣tigues. The Prince is equally fear'd and esteem'd in point of Command. Monsieur de Turenne is more agreeable, and not less esteem'd, leaving more Satisfaction, but not preserving his Authority so much.
There can never be too much precaution use against the Attacks of the first, and he meets with weakness in the securest Posts. The other meets with Safeties every where, and finds out ways to secure himself against the appearances of his Ruine. In Combats their ORDERS are almost alike. The Prince of Conde knows how to improve Advantages, and to repair Disorders; he makes the most of his Forces: He abandons himself wholly to the Action he is engag'd in, and seems resolv'd to overcome, or not to out-live his Defeat. Monsieur de Turenne omits nothing of what may conduce to the gain of a Battle: when he is happy he improves every thing, preserves what he can; when he is not so, and ever leaves some resource for a better Fortune; whether throgh the Equality of his Temper, or by a long Expe∣rience of good and ill Successes, he receives all manner of Accidents with an even Temper. The Prince is more sensible to Misfortunes than Monsieur de Turenne, but his Haughtiness is more exasperated at it, and his Vertue excited by his Misfortunes proves strong enough to overcome them. Finally the Prince of Conde is the greatest Man in the World for a Day's Action, and Monsieur de Turenne for a Campagne: The one is itter to end Actions gloriously, and the other to end a War advantageously.
The PRINCE makes War with more Glo∣ry for his own Reputation,1686. and Monsieur de Turenne with more advantage for the Interests of the Party, in which he is engag'd. FINIS.
