C6625 12727758 66379
A PERFECT AND EXACT DIRE∣CTION TO ALL those that desire to know the true and just Fees of these Courts following, viz. The Fees of all the Offices belonging to the Court of Common Pleas. A Table of the Prothonotaries Fees. The Fees of the Chancery, according to the Table in the Office. The Ordinance of the Chancery, by Th. Lord Coventry late Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England. LONDON, Printed by R. H. for N. Vavasour, and are to be sold at his Shop in the inner Temple. 1641.
A Table of the Offices. CUstos brevium. fol. 2 The Prothonotaries Office. 3 The secundaries of the Protho∣notaries. 4 Clarke of the warrants office. ibid. The Phillizers. 5 The Exigenters office. ibid. The Chirographers office. 6 The office of the Kings silver. ibid. The office of the Clark of the Treasurie. 7 The Crier of the Court. 8 The keeper of the Treasurie. 9 Inrolling of Fines, Recoveries. ib. A review of a certificate, with an addi∣tion thereunto, and an answer to the Articles. The Chirographer. 10 The Court keeper. 11 The Cryers. ibid. The Porter. 12 Associates of the Nisi prius at Guildhall. ibid. Clarke of the Errors. ibid. An answer to the last articles. 13
The Oath administred. 16 Custos brevium Fees. 18 Fees for the Clarkes of the Custos bre∣vium. 22 Fees allowed to the Bagbearer by the Cu∣stos brevium. 23 The Prothonotaries fees. 24 Fees for rits. 31 The Prothonotaries Clarkes fees. 34 Fees for the Clark of the inrollments. 36 Chirographers fees. 37 Chirographers Clarkes fees. 39 Clarke of the Treasurie. 40 For the keeping the Treasurie. ibid. Clarke of the Kings silver. 42 Phillizers Fees. ibid. Exigenters Fees. 45 Clarke of the Jurors. 48 Clarke of the Essoines. 49 Outlawrie Office. 50 Fees or the Seale. 52 Fees for the Marshall. ibid. Criers Fees. 54 Fees for the keeper of the Court. 55 Fees of the Clarke of the inrolments. ib. Fees for the Porter of the Court. 56 Alienation Office. 57 Fees taken by the Master of the Chancery 57 Fees taken for the Compositions. 58 Ʋnder Sherife of Middlesex. 60 Warden of the Fleet. 61 The Jurors presentment. 66
Judges Fees. 68 Serjeants Fees. 70 Custos brevium Fees. 71 Prothonotaries Office. 73 Secundaries Fees. 74 Clark of the Warrants office. ibid. In the Phillizers office. 75 In the Exigenters office. 76 In the Chirographers office. ibid. In the office of the Kings silver. 77 In the office of the Clark of the Treasurie. 78 The Criers Fees. 80 In the office of the keeper of the Treasurie. 81 In the Outlawrie office. 82 The Proclamators Fees. 83 Clarke of the Juries. ibid. The Clarke of the Essoines. 84 The Court keeper. ibid. The Porters Fees. 85 The Clark of the Errors Fees. 86 The Clark of the Inrolment Fees. 87 The Attornies Fees. 88 The Lo: chiefe Iustice his Fees. 90 Fees belonging to the Judges which doe the businesse. 91 Divident Fees. 93 Puisne Judges Fees. 94 Fees due to the Lord chiefe Justice his Clarks. 96 Lord chiefe Justice his Fees. 99 The Fees due to such Iudges which doe
the businesse. 10 Divident Fees. 103 Puisne Iudges Fees. ibid. A Table of the due fees of the Protho∣notaries. 109 Fees belonging to the Chancery. 127 Ordinances in the Chancery. 134
TERMINO HILLARII, Vicesimo primo Iacobi Regis. 1623. ACcording to your honours dire∣ction, having (since the time of your Lordships pleasure made knowne unto us) received from your Lordships, divers Bills, and Notes of the Fees claimed by severall Officers in the right of their Offi∣ces, in his highnesse Court of Common pleas at Westminster, and thereby, and by Oath to bee administred unto us, concerning your honours pleasures and intendments to be performed, whether all the Fees and Summes of money set downe and claimed respectively in the said Bills and Notes, have been paid since the thir∣tieth yeare of the late Queene Elizabeth, or which, or how many thereof, or what other have been advanced, encreased, or taken since the said thirtieth yeare, in the said Offices, in the said Court of Common Pleas. Upon perusall of the said Bills and Notes, and consideration of the Fees now claimed, and
taken upon our severall knowledges, and upon credible report, we finde some for to be advan∣ced, encreased, raised, and taken since the said thirtieth yeare. And therefore in all humble∣nesse, We have briefly set downe under the title of every Office, such as we at this present re∣spectively know to have been so advanced, en∣creased, raised, and taken with some grounds and reasons of the advancing, encreasing, rai∣sing, and taking thereof, delivered by them, to their severall Notes of Fees annexed. In the Office of Custos Brevium. THere is, and hath been taken by the Clarks there, more than heretofore was taken and claimed by them upon Fines, upon the re∣tourne of Writs of Covenant under colour of Deputations from the Sheriffes, and now is claimed by them for keeping the parts of the Fine. xii. d. Also for filing every Writ after two Termes, for every Terme after, xx. d. Whereas the said Fee of xx. d. was accepted for filing of any Writ at any time within the yeare. Also there is taken by the said Clarkes, for filing of  Writs of Entrie, Summons, and Seisin upon common Recoveries, xii. d. where∣as ormerly iiii. d. was taken as their Master Fee for a post diem.
In the Prothonotaries Office. THere hath beene taken for the most part of seven yeares past, up∣on every judgement in personall, and mixt Actions, over and above the ii. s. in the Bill of their Fees mentioned, and more than was formerly paid, xii. d. being for assessing of Costs for the Judges as is affirmed. Also there hath been taken by the space of foure yeares last past, or there∣abouts, xviii. d. upon every Writ of Entrie, Summons, and Seisin upon common Recoveries, which was not formerly paid. There hath been also taken by the space of twelve or fourteene yeares last past, by them iiii. s. upon the reversall of every Outlawrie, not formerly ta∣ken. They have also received and taken for divers yeares last past, the summe of ix. s. iiii. d. upon every prohibition granted in Court, but whether the same bee a due, and ancient Fee, we doe not certainly know: All which Fees so taken (as we conceive) are up∣on the reasons expressed in a Note, which we have annexed to their Bill of Fees.
The Secondaries of the said Prothonotaries. THere hath been taken by the space of ten yeares last past, or therea∣bouts, xii. d. upon every com∣mon Recovery drawne at the Bar, more than formerly hath been taken, which the Secondaries affirme to have beene taken in respect the Demaundants in such Recoveries have not appeared at the Bar in person. Clarke of the Warrants Office. THere is taken upon every Fine more than formerly iiii. d. for a Warrant of Attourney, and char∣ged out of the Attournies Fee by order of the Judges made 14. Iac. Reg. certi∣fied by this Officer to his Lordship. There was also taken by the Deputy of this Officer for the space of three or foure yeares, and untill within one yeare last past, upon every Fine xviii. d. which was not formerly paid to that Officer, being so taken (as is pretend∣ed) for the retourne of the Writ of
Covenant, and hath since been taken by Master Thomas Iackman, Clarke of the Inrollments of Fines and Recove∣ries, upon the reasons annexed to the Bill of Fees of the Clarke of the War∣rants. In the Phillizers. THere is taken iiii. d. upon every Cap. and viii. d. upon every ap∣pearance of the Defendant, more then was taken before 14. Iac. Reg. which is taken by vertue of an Order made upon the reasons expressed in the same Order to their Bill of Fees an∣nexed. In the Exigenters Office. THere hath been taken ever since 31. Eliz. upon every Exigent more than was formerly taken 1. d. which was so taken in respect of the length of the Proclamation. And there hath beene also taken by the space of three yeares past, i. d. more upon every Exigent, upon such reasons as are offered to your Lordships consi∣derations, in their Certificate of Fees.
In the Chirographers Office. THere is taken by the Clarkes of the said Office for writing the Chirograph of every Fine ii. s. vi. d. which since 30. Eliz. was but xvi. d. which summe of ii. s. vi. d. upon reasons shewed to divers ancient Attournies by the Clarkes of the said Office about seventeene yeares since, was assented unto by the said Attournies, bee the Fine long, or short. In the Office of the Kings silver. THere is encreased, and taken by the space of thirteene yeares last past, or thereabouts iiii. d. upon every Fine by Order made in 8. Iac. Reg. annexed to their Bill of Fees. Also there hath been taken and en∣creased iiii. d. lately, within five yeares since the time last above mentioned for every severall Cap. of a Fine, having more Cap. than one, which was not for∣merly taken. Also for the time of thirteene yeares last past, there hath been taken for eve∣ry
Fine by speciall Commission, iiii. d. which is an encreased Fee. Also there hath beene taken since 8. Iac. Reg vi. d. for every Fine brought into the Office after the end of every Terme, not formerly taken. Also there hath been taken the summ of viii. d. upon every Fine in the We∣sterne Circuits, more than upon Fines in other Counties, which grew to bee taken about 34. Eliz. by colour of de∣putations from the Sheriffes of the Westerne Circuits upon the reasons annexed to his Bill of Fees, most of which said Fees were raised, and en∣creased in the time when Rich. Cham∣bers, Was that Officer. In the Office of the Clarke of the Treasury. THere is of late taken iiii. s. for the search of every Terme after ten yeares, the olde and ancient Fee being but iii. s. iiii. d. There is claimed iii. s. for turning the key of the Treasury after the Terme, whereas there is but xii. d. due. Also there is claimed by his said Bill iiii. d. for search of a Record under ten yeares untill three yeares, no such Fee being due.
The Cryers of the Court. THere is taken by them ii. s. the Fee being but xii. d. for calling every Jury at the Bar, when they fill not. Also they take xvi. s. for keeping eve∣ry Jury during the sitting of the Court, and xxx. s. for keeping them all night, The ancient Fee for the first (as wee understand) being but iiii. s. and the other viii. s. and no more. Also there is taken by them for swea∣ring an Attourney in Court ii. s. more than their ancient Fee, (being iiii. s.) as we are credibly informed. Also they take upon every Baile ta∣ken in Court xii. d. there being no Fee due, that we know, or have heard of. Also they take iiii. s. upon every Nisi prius before my Lord chiefe Justice of the common Pleas at Westminster, there being no such Fee due to our knowledge. Also they demand iiii. s. iiii. d. upon every Wager in Law, there being but ii. s. due, as we have heard.
In the Office of the Keeper of the Treasury. THere is claimed in his Bill for a Search after three yeares, untill ten yeares iiii. d. there being no such Fee due. Also for a Roll carried into the Court, vi. d. there being no such Fee to our knowledge, other than for car∣rying a Roll of the precedent Terme. Also for every Jury at the Barre ii. s. vi. d. there being only xii. d. due, and formerly paid, as we have heard. Also for every Nisi prius tryed in Middlesex ii. s. vi. d. there being but xii. d. due. Also for a copy of a Precipe xviii. d. there being none ever heard of. Also for the acknowledging of a Fine iiii. d. there being nothing due. Also for the key xviii. d. xii. d. being due, and no more.
In the Office of Inrolling, and Ex∣emplifying of Fines and Recoveries. THe Fees challenged by this Of∣ficer (as we conceive) doe differ from the Fees limited by the Sta. 23. Eliz. unto which Stat. we refer our selves. The Chirographer. A review of our former Certificate, with an addition thereto, and an answer to the Articles lately de∣livered unto us by your Lord∣ships. THere is taken by the Clarke of the said Office, for writing of the Chirograph of every Fine, ii. s. vi. d. for which since 30. Eliz. was only paid xii. d. but about Anno 4. Iac. Reg. they did procure the consent of divers ancient Attournies in writing under their hands, for the increase thereof, to make the xii. d. ii. s. vi. d. be the Chiro∣graph
long or short, upon promise ne∣ver to demand any more, yet since they exact, and take more according to the length. The Court-keeper. VVHereas this Officer requi∣reth ix. s. vi. d. for a Wager of Law, his due being only xxii. d. the rest is to be divided amongst the Cryers, Wagermen, and other Of∣ficers. The Cryers. VVHereas it hath been former∣ly certified that ii. s. is due to these Officers for a Wager of Law, upon better consideration wee finde iiii. s. is due unto them out of the ix. s. vi. d.
The Porter. HEE taketh ii. s. vi. d. for every triall at the Barre, his Fee being but xii. d. and for a Nisi prius xii. d. his due being but vi. d. The Associats of the Nisi prius at Guildhall. THis Officer taketh xii. d. for re∣tourne of the Plaintifes Postea, and ii. s. for retourne of the De∣sendants Postea, and for the Defen∣dants Verdict ii. s. which are new en∣creased Fees since 30. Eliz. The Clarke of the Errors. THis Officer taketh for a Supersid. de non molestando iii. s. there being but ii. s. anciently due, and ii. s. for making the Record. He taketh also ii. s. iiii. d. for a Non∣suite in a Writ of Error, being not due, nor paid since 30. Eliz.
An answer to the last Articles. THE Prothonotaries take by the Sheete, and not by the Roll, all the time of our remembrance, eve∣ry sheete containing twelve lines, and every line ten words, according as they have certified in their note of Fees. They take for the certifying the first cause vi. s. and for every other cause ii. s. and so have anciently done. The chiefe Justice his Fee for allow∣ance of a Writ of Error was but xvii. s. vi. d. being upon meane Proces and single judgement, and if it exceed to Ex. post. Cap. and Scire fac. xxxv. s. and for the Supersid. ii. s. and no more, and now is taken for allowance upon meane Proces xx. s. and for a Supersid. iiii. s. The ancient Fee of a Cap. Vtlegat. speciall, is ii. s. iiii. d. and a generall Writ x. d. if more be taken, it is to the writer of the Writ for expedition given by the Attourney as a gratuity. We doe not know of any Fees taken by Bills of Parcels, and at Etiam, more than hath been formerly taken Anno 30. Eliz.
The Judges take only iiii. s. for sign∣ing of a Writ of priviledge, which Fee is, and hath been ancient for any thing we know, and the like for signing of a Procedendo. The ancient Fee for reversing of an Outlawry in a Judges Chamber wee know not, but there hath been taken for the Judge ix. s. viii. d. and xii. d. to his man, and being reversed in Court, iiii. s. as is formerly certified. There is now paid to the Judges horsekeeper for triall of every cause at Guildhall xii. d. and upon triall at the Barre ii. s. to each of the Judges foot∣cloath-keeper, and in many Circuits upon every triall, for keeping the Ju∣ries ii. s. for every Jury, there being on∣ly due xii. d. which was formerly al∣lowed and paid to the Sheriffes Bai∣liffes for keeping of the Juries. Also there hath been taken in some Circuits upon triall of every Nisiprius, wherein a private verdict hath beene given (as Fees for the same verdict) to the Judges Marshall for all manner of Fees to all Officers xv. s. viii. d. but now of late the Judges servants and of∣ficers in some Circuits doe demand, and take x. s. more, not anciently taken. The ancient Fee in a Prohibition, was ix. s. iiii. d. for every witnesse pro∣duced to prove a suggestion out of
Court, and in Court. iiii. s. It is answered in the former Certifi∣cate, the ancient Fee for swearing an Attourney in Court, was ii. s. to the Boxe, and now xx. s. is taken. Every Attourney paies Tearely, of ought to pay iiii. d. to the Clarke of the Warrants, who is appointed to pay the same to the Judges, and is by them di∣stributed to the poore, as is affirmed. There hath been, and is taken for the Boxe upon every satisfaction for a Judgement being under 100. li. vi. d. if 100. l. xii. d. and for every 100. li. so ateably, and the like for a confession, and vi. d. upon a Baile, and every common Recovery. Subscribed thus Hen: Plombe. Sy: Wiseman. Anth: Langston. Geo: Needler. Will: Brag. Ioh: Nichols. Geo: Cooe. Will: Carefield. Peter-Bird. Tho: Agar.
The Oath administred touching the Court of Common Pleas to the inquest of Attournies in Feb. 1627. YOu shall well and truly accord∣ing to your knowledge, give true information to his Majesties Com∣missioners for inquiry after exacted Fees, and innovated Offices, what Of∣fices and places were usually held, kept, and executed in the tenth yeare of the raigne of the late Queene Eliz. or at any time since in the Court of Common Pleas. You shall well and truly, according to your knowledge, give true informa∣tion, what offices and places have been since the eleventh yeare of the said late Queene, invented, innovated, design∣ed, ordained, or erected by Judges, Ju∣stices, or other chiefe Officers in the same Court, and not granted, or men∣tioned to be granted by Letters Pa∣tents under the great Seale of Eng∣land. And what Rewards, Fees, Summe, and Summes of money were in the said eleventh yeare of the said late Queene Eliz. or at any time since,
usually, or accustomably taken, recei∣ved, or had by the Judges, Counsellors, Practisers, or Officers, or their Depu∣ties, or other Ministers, Clarkes, Re∣gisters, or Attournies in the same Court. And what Rewards, Fees, and Summes of money under colour, or by name of Fees, Rewards, Gratuities, Clarkes paines, post Term. post diems, Expedition, or the like, have since the said eleventh yeare of the said late Queene Eliz. been set, imposed, raised, advanced, encreased, incroached, or taken into the said Court, and of the particularities, grounds, or reasons thereof, with all other incidents, and circumstances touching the promisses. And whether have you any Rolls, Warrants, Records, Orders, Tables, Bookes, Entries, or other Notes, or Writings in your custody, whereby the truth in the premisses may be the better found out, and discovered. Or doe you know where any such Rolls, Warrants, Records, Tables, Orders, Bookes, Entries, of other Notes are, or have been, or with whom they now remaine, So help you God. Ex officio per Edm. wodax, cler. commiss.
The Custos Brevium his Fees. These Fees following, are the Fees which are taken by Sir Thomas Spencer, Custos Brevium of his Maiesties Court of Common Pleas, and his Clarkes in right of his said Office, and as they were taken 11. Eliz. by the then Master of the said Office, and his Clarkes. INprimis, for filing any Writ, or o∣ther Record, comming after the day of the retourne thereof, except Writs of priuiledge de veneundo, & redeundo, and also Writs of priviledge called propr. or post diems.iiii. d. Item, For filing any Writ, or other Record (except before excepted) com∣ming after the Terme wherein it was retournable, called a post diem Term.xx. d.
Item, For filing any Writ, or other Record comming after two Termes, called post Termin. for every Terme af∣ter xx. d. a piece, except Exigents, and Outlawries, which pay but only xx. d. a post Termin. be they never so long, after quia pro Dom. Rege,xx. d. Item, For the search of any Writ, or other Record, being under five yeares, for every retourne v. d. except such Writs as where the whole Terme is used to be filed together, which pay only v. d. a Terme, out of which they allow to the Bag-bearerv. d. Item, For the search of any Writ, or other Record of five yeares antiquity, and under ten yeares called a Temple search, for the first retourne ii. s. ix. d. and for every retourne after v. d. ex∣cept such Writs, as where the whole Terme is used to be filed together, which pay likewise for the first Terme, ii. s. ix. d. and for every Terme after v. d. out of which Temple search there is al∣lowed to the Clarke iiii. d. and to the Bag-bearer v. d.ii. s. ix. d. Item, for the search of any Writ, or other Record of ten yeares antiquity and upwards, called a Westm. search for the first Terme ix. s. ix. d. and for every Terme after v. d. except such Writs as where the whole Terme is used to be filed together, which pay
only v. d. a Terme, out of which West. search there is allowed to the Clarkes i. s. i. d. and to the Bag-bearerix. s. ix. d. Item, For the allowance of every Writ of Certiorari, directed to the Cu∣stos Brevium, xiiii. s. ix. d. whereof is al∣lowed to the Clarke ii. s. viii. d. and for certifying thereof, Secundum longitudi∣nem, and according to reason,xiiii. s. ix. d. Item, For the allowance of every Exemplification made out of the Of∣fice of any Writ, or Writs, or other Record, v. s. iiii. d. and to the Clarke for writing and examining thereof Se∣cundum longitudinem, and according to reason,v. s. iv. d Item, For the carrying of any Writ, or other Record to the Court for a re∣versall, or any other occasion ii. s. ix. d. whereof allowed to the Clarkes iiii. d. and to the Bag-bearer,ii. s. ix. Item, For filing any common Reco∣very, Writ, super disseisinam in le post, xii. d. whereof allowed to the Clarkes, viii. d. for entring the same into a book for that purpose,xii. d Item, For entring a Fine with the Custos Brevium, by vertue of the Stat. 5. H. 4. cap. 14. in which Stat. that is called the accustomed old Fee,xxii. d Item, To the Clarke of the same Of∣fice (ab antiquo) who enters the same,ii. d.
Item, Upon the making of the Stat. 4. H. 7. cap. 24. the Custos Brevium was allowed by the Court for carrying, and recarrying of every Fine levied according to that Stat. Westmin. to the Chirographer to proclaime foure Termes,viii. d. Item, For keeping three parts of the Record of every Fine consisting of five parts, iiii. d. a piece,xii. d. In tot. for every Fine iii. s. viii. d. whereof the Master hath ii. s. vi. d. and xiiii. d. is allowed to the Clarkes,iii. s. viii. d. Item, For the amendment of every Writ, or other Record per Warrant. Cur.xx. d. Item, For every Non est factum plea∣ded in Court,ii. s. Item, For every Sheriffes bundle of Writs retournable of the precedent Terme, and comming before Essoine day of the second retourne of the new Terme.viii. d. Tho: Spencer.
The usuall Fees allowed by the Cu∣stos Brevium to the Clarkes of his Office. INprimis, For every Temple search,iiii. d. ii. s. i. d. Item, Out of every Westm. search, Item, To the Clarkes out of the al∣lowance of every Certiorari ii. s. viii. d. and for certifying the same, secundum longitudinem, and according to reason,ii. s. viii. d Item, To the Clarke for writing and examining of every Exemplification, secundum longitudinem. Item, To the Clarke for any Writ, or other Record carried into the Court.iiii. d Item, For entring a common Reco∣very Writ super disseisinam in le post,viii. d. Item, For every Fine passing in the Office,xiiii. d Item, For entring into a Booke every Recipiatur comming under a Judges hand, or by order of Court,xii. d. Item, For every note of Jurors names for the Clarke of the Juries to make further Proces by,iiii. d. Item, For every note of an Exigent for the Clarke of the Outlawries to make further Proces by,viii. d.
Item, For the search of any Booke of Entries, of any Writs for every Terme,viii. d. Item, For the copie of any Writ, or other Record for every Sheete.viii. d. Geo: Venables. Alex: Thurley. The usuall Fees allowed by the Cu∣stos Brevium, to the Bag-bearer of the Office, being alwaies the common Vouchee of the Court. INprimis, For every search under five yeares,i. d. v. d. xii. d. Item, For every Temple search, For every Westm. search, For any Writ, or other Record car∣ried into the Court,v. d. For every common Recovery suffer∣ed in Court (being the common Vou∣chee) iiii. d. a piece,iiii. d. vi. d. For every Attorney sworn in Court,
The Prothonotaries Fees. These Fees are due, and belonging to the three Prothonotaries of the common Pleas. INprimis, For entring every com∣mon Declaration, common Plea in Barre, wherein no Freehold is pleaded, common Replication, and common Rejoynder in actions perso∣nall,xii. d For entring of every speciall Decla∣ration, speciall Plea in Barre, or abate∣ment of Freehold, Replication, or Re∣joynder, and Pleas subsequent in acti∣ons personall not exceeding three sheetes, every sheete containing twelve lines, and every line ten words at the least,ii. s. xii. d And for every sheete exceeding, For every Declaration in actions up∣on the Case Ejectione firme, Annuity, Accompt, Covenant, Conspiracy, De∣ceip, Partition, Pleg. Acquietand.
Debt upon Stat. Plaint in Asize, and the like speciall actions, and in all re∣all, mixt and popular, if the Declara∣tion or Plaint exceed not three sheets,ii. s. xii. d And for every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of every Barre Re∣plication, Rejoynder, and Pleas sub∣sequent in every of the actions last a∣bove mentioned, and in the like acti∣ons not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. And for every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of every Obligation, Indenture, Record, retourne of Cer∣tificate, or the like entred in haec verba not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For recording of every apparance by the Court,ii. s. iv. d For the entrie of every Recogni∣zance without condition, challenge to the Sheriffes, or Coroners, or to the Array, or other speciall averments,ii. s. For the entrie of every Recognizance with the condition,iiii. s. For every judgement in debt deti∣nue, and trespasse without a Tales,ii. s. For the entrie of every Adjourne∣ment,iiii. d. For every judgement, with a Tales besides the Fee abovesaid,ii. s. For every Remanet and judgement for Costs given to the Defendant by the Stat. besides the Fee abovesaid,ii. s.
For every judgement in all other actions, as well personall as mixt Pro∣hibitions, and the like,iiii. s. For every satisfaction Recordatur, Discontinuance, Retraxit, Relinquish∣ment, Nolle prosocuti, or the like in personall actions,ii. s. iii. s. And in reall actions, For the entrie of a single Recovery, and the Writ of seisin thereupon,x. s. vi. d iiii. s. For every Voucher more, For the entrie of every Mittimus, or Dedimus potestatem for a common Re∣covery,vi. s. For the entrie of a Summons at Bar for a common Recovery, and a Writ of Summons, ad warrantizand.iv. s. vi. d For the entrie of a Certiorari, to cer∣tifie a Warrant of Attourney for the Tenant, or Vouchee,iiii. s. vi. s. And if for both, For every common Voucher sent to the common Pleas to summon the Vou∣chee, if the Record be not above three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. And for every sheete more, The like Fees are paid when the Re∣cord is to be remitted after the Vou∣cher determined,ii. s. For the entrie of every speciall Ver∣dict, whereupon a Cur. advisare vult is entred, being not above three sheets,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more,
For the entrie of every generall Verdict, with a Cur. advsare vult, without a Tales,ii. s. iiii. s. And with a Tales, For the entrie of every Remittimus of debt and damages,xii. d. For the entrie of every Information upon a penall Law, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. And for every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of every surmise for a Prohibition to be granted, not exceed∣ing three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For entring of every Audita querela, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For the entrie of every Oath of eve∣ry witnesse to prove the surmise in a Prohibition, or Audita quer. brought by an Infant, and the entrie of the proofes de morte, &c. vita viri in dow∣er, and the like actions and suits,ii. s. For releasing of any default in any reall action,ii. s. For damages cleere in any action where damage is given, if the damage given amount unto five markes, or a∣bove ii. s. in the pound,ii. s. o If under five markes, For examining any Record of Nisi prius,xii. d.
For making the Record for triall of any issue in any of the Counties Pala∣tine, for the first three sheetes,ii. s. iiii. d. For every sheete more, For the exemplification of every Re∣cord, not exceeding sixe sheetes,v. s. xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of Seisin in dower, and dying seised, if the retourne of the seisin exceed not three sheetes,iiii. s. xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For entring the default upon tres∣passe in waste, Quare impedit, if the Count, or title doe not exceed three sheetes,vi. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For the entrie of a Quo warranto, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. . xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of every Plea there∣upon according to the same rate,xii. d. For the entrie of every Plea in con∣tempt, pleaded before Auditors, if it be not above three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For the entrie of every Summons, severances and aide de prior,ii. s. For admission of an Infant to his Guardian, or Procheine Amie,ii. s. iiii. And if by Commission, For entring the Writs of Exemp. de non. ponend. in Iurat. & Paten. de li∣bertatibus allocandis & protectionibus,
Cognizance of Pleas, and the like, ac∣cording to the rates aforesaid, if it ex∣ceed not three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For the entrie of a Defendants dis∣charge upon a cap. pro fine, or con∣tempt,ii. s. For the like upon a rescous retourn∣ed and admitted to his Fine,iiii. s. For traversing the rescous and issue thereon,vi. s. For entring of the allowance of eve∣ry generall and speciall Pardon of Outlawrie before judgement, and af∣ter,v. s. iv. d For entring of a Dies dat, in debt de∣tinue, and trespasse,xii. d. ii. s. And in all other actions, For entring of a receipt of a Feme covert, Tenant in taile, Leassec for yeares, or the like,ii. s. For entring of a Plea, if it exceed not three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, And if the receipt be by Writ, then more for entring the Writ,ii. s. For the entring of an Assize deliver∣ed in Court of the common Pleas, by the Justices of the Assize, to be inrolled for every sheete,xii. d. And if the Assize come into the Court by ertiorari, then more for en∣tring the same,ii.
For entring of every Abridgement of the Demaund. in dower, waste, and the like,ii. s. For the entrie of every Pone to re∣move a Plea by Writ out of the Coun∣ty Court there holden by Justices, and for retourne of the Pone,iiii. s. For the entring of any Record sent into the Court by Mittimus, or other∣wise, and for entring of every Rege in∣consulto, or the like, if it exceed not three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For the entring of every Certiorari of Bastardy, certified by the Bishop, the awarding of the Writ, and judgement thereupon,vi. s. For entrie of the Licence of the Court to purchase a new Writ by jour∣nies of accompt, For entring of every Originall Writ delivered of Record in reall and mixt actions,ii. s.
Fees for Writs. FOr every Writ of Prohibition, or Consulation, not exceeding foure sheetes,ii. s. iiii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For every Withernam, Return. Ha∣bend. after appearance, second delive∣rance, Writ of priviledge, Habeas cor∣pus, Procedendo, Certiorari, Summons, and resummons pet. cap. ven. fac. Scir∣fac. Elegit, Extent. Supersid. Subpen. Writ to the Bishop, Attachment, Di∣string. Iur. Habeas corp. & distring. in Ass. & Attinct. and the like, haberi fac. seisin. haberi fac. poss. Writ of View, Mittimus, Indempnitat. nominis, and every other speciall Writ,ii. s. For the entring of every such other Writ which requires an entring, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For every Testat. scir. fac. & Testat. fieri fac. distring. ad deliberand. and Writs to inquire of damages of Tres∣passe, and Replevin,xii. d. For Writs to enquire of damages in Covenant, Ejectment, Actions upon the Case, and the like,ii. s. vi. d. For every Cap. pro fine,
For the Exigent of a Cap. pro fine.x. d. For entring the retourne in every Writ in the Prothonotaries Roll, o∣ther then the retourne, Non est invent. and upon the Scire fac. nulla hab. bo∣na, whereupon any further processe is awarded, not exceeding foure sheetes,ii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For the entring of every Writ of pri∣viledge, or Habeas corpus, with the baile for one cause,vi. s. ii. s. For every cause more, For the entrie of every Mittimus die & causa,ii. s. For every reversall upon an Out∣lawry, for default of Proclamation, with one name, and the baile upon a Nolle prosecuti,v. s. iv. d ii. s. For every name more, For every reversall, for every insuf∣ficient Exigent, or retourne for one name,8. s. iv. d ii. . For every name more, The Fees abovesaid, are the Fees which were usually and accusto∣mably taken in my Office of chief Prothonotarie of the Court of common Pleas at Westminster, in Ann. 32, & 33. Eliz. nup. Reg. Angl. in which yeare I was admit∣ted to the said Office, and as I verily thinke, the ancient Fees of the Court. Brownelowe.
IN Anno xvi, Iac. Reg. I came to my Office of second Prothonotary of the said Court of common Pleas, and the Fees before mentioned were the Fees which usually and accustoma∣bly then were taken, and I doe verily thinke them to be the ancient Fees of the Court, belonging to my Office. Gulson. THe Fees before recited, are the Fees which were usually and accustomably taken in my said Office of third Prothonotary of the said Court, in Anno 3. Car. Reg. in which instant yeare I was admitted to the said Office, and I verily thinke they are the ancient Fees of the said Court. Moyle.
The Prothonotaries Clarks Fees. INprimis, For the copies of com∣mon Declarations and Pleas, for every sheete written as aforesaid,iiii. d. For every sheete in reall and mixt Actions, and actions upon any Sta∣tute, and the like,viii. d. For drawing every speciall Declarati∣on and Plea, for every sheete,viii. d. For every continuance every Terme, of every Issue, Writ, Impurlance, De∣murrer, speciall Verdict, or Adjourn∣ment,iiii. d. For exemplifying of every Recovery, with a double Voucher,vi. s. xii. d. For every Voucher more, For exemplifying of any Record, not exceeding eight sheetes,v. s. vi. d. For every sheete more, For drawing every extraordinary long Writ, after the rate for every sheete of,viii. d. For the entrie thereof, if it shall so require, for every sheete,iiii. d. For the copie of a judgement, for every sheete,viii. d. For the entrie of every Writ, and re∣tourne thereof into the Prothonotaries
remembrance, for the drawing up of a judgement, if it exceed not three sheetes,vi. d. iiii. d. For every sheete above, For entring every common Rule in the Bill of Pleas, or common remem∣brance,iiii. d. For entring and ingrossing of every Summons for a Recovery, and for ma∣king of the Writ of Summons,ii. s. For the entrie of every Mittimus, or Dedimus potestatem, for a Recovery,ii. s. vi. d For ingrossing of every Nisi prius, after the rate of iiii. d. for every sheete,iiii. d. For entring every Testat. Fieri fac. & Scire fac.iiii. d.
The Fees of the Clarke of the Inrollments, Warrants, and Estreats in the common Pleas, as are now, and have been taken these two and thirty yeares, and as I conceive were taken ever since 31. Eliz. sa∣ving the Fee hereafter mentioned, allowed per ordin. Cur. EVery Inrollment containing a side of a Roll,v. s, x. s. Of a full Roll, And so according to that rate, Every Warrant of Attourney in deb. transg. & deten.iiii. d. xii. d. The Sheriffes Warrants, Every other Warrant, called double Warrants,viii. d. iiii. d. For a post Termin. The Lord Maior of London his War∣rant,v. s. 8. d.
The Secondaries of the Compters in Easter Terme yearely,13. s. 4. d For entring of an Attournies name in the Roll of Attournies, upon his first admittance,iii. s. 4. d For a Warrant upon a Writ of Co∣venant, per ordin. Cur.iiii. d. William Rolfe. Paid to the Clarke by every Attour∣ney iiii. d. a Terme, called the Roll groat, which is paid to the Judges Box, and I conceive it to be due ever since 11. Eliz.iiii. d. Paid also to the Clarke by the Pro∣thonotaries xii. d. upon every Recove∣ry, which is also paid to the Judges,xii. d. To the Clarke when an Attourney is first sworne,xii. d. The Chirographers Fees. INprimis, The ancient Fee limitted by Stat. 11. Eliz. for every Fine,iiii. s. Item, From 4. H. 7. for the ser∣vice in proclaiming Fines,viii. d. Item, By Stat. 23. Eliz. for writing the Roll,iiii. d. So the Chirographers Fee for every Fine is,v. s.
Other Fees also due, and anci∣ently paid to the Chirographer, videlicet, FOr exemplifying a Fine the Term in which it was ingrossed,ii. s. 8. d. For every sheete of every Fine, of twelve lines copied out of the Re∣cord,xii. d. For the sight of every Record being ancient, from H. 8. upwards,iii. s. 4. d For the search of every Fine from H. 8. to this present, for every yeare,viii. d. For the search of every Fine during the raigne of H. 8. for every yeare,xii. d. For certifying of every Record by a Writ of Error,xii. s. For a Quid juris clamat, quae reddat, reddit, & per quae servic.vi. s. v. s For entring a claime upon a Record, For allowing of Proclamations upon Fines brought into the Office after the Terme ended,vi. d. xiiii. d For the post Termin▪ of a Fine, William Blake.
The Chirographers Clarkes Fees for ingrossing of Fines by the Attor∣nies which sue them out. THe Chirographers Clarks have received an allowance of the Attournies for their paines for them, which heretofore have been more advantagious unto them than now it is, being reduced to ii. s. vi. d. in cer∣taine, had and made at the request of 100. or 80. of the most ancient At∣tournies, with Iohn Brewer Esquire, Clarke of the said Office, in 2. or 3. of King Iames: To which agreement had and made in writing, the said At∣tournies set to their hands, and the same was delivered to Sir Edw: Cooke Knight, then chiefe Justice of the com∣mon Pleas, and hath so continued ever since,ii. s. vi. d For this allowance the Clarkes doe write more than all the Officers through which Fines doe paste, viz. They write every Fine long or short, foure times over in a great set hand. Randall.
Fees belonging to the Clarke of the Treasurie. FOr the copie of every issue, and impurance for every sheete,iiii. d. For every Judgement, Deed en∣rolled, and reall Action, for every sheete,viii. d. For the search of every Terme above ten yeares,iv. d. For every Exemplification not ex∣ceeding three sheetes,vii. s. xii. d. For every sheete more, For every Record of Nisi prius not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. iiii. d. For every sheete more, Ex. per Duncombe Cler. Thesaurar. Tho: Richardson, mil. Fees for the Keeper of the Treasurie from 11. Eliz. INprimis, For search of a Terme a∣bove ten yeares,viii. d. iiii. d. For seven yeares under ten years, For three yeares, For search of a Plea Roll,iiii. d.
For a Roll carried into the Court,vi. d. iii. s. xii. d. v. s. ii. s. vi. d. For making up a Term and Record, For every Attourney sworn in Court, For a Jurie at Bar, For a Nisi prius in Midd. For a Wager in Law, For a copie of a Precipe after the Terme,xviii. d. For a Fine acknowledged in the Treasurie,iiii. d. For a Warrant of Attourney lost, un∣entred, and comes to be entred in the Roll after the Terme,iiii. d. For an entrie lost out of the Kings silver, and comes to be entred in the Office,iv. d. From the Clarke of the Treasurie for my attendance every Terme,v. s. xviiid. For my Key after the Terme, William Wese.
These be the Fees which I Henry Ewer, Clarke of the Kings silver have taken since I became Offi∣cer, which was in Mich. 16. Iac. Reg. and were usually taken be∣fore that time by Master Gulson my Predecessor in the said Office, and I doe believe they were due in Anno 11 Eliz. except iiii. d. encreased by order of Court in Hillar. An. 8. Iac. Reg. INprimis, For the Fees of every or∣dinary Fine taken by the Lord chiefe Justice of the common Pleas, or any Judge of Assize in the Western Circuit, together with the copie, o post fine,xviii. d. For every Fine taken in the same Circuit by speciall Commission, and for the copie of the post fine,xxii d. For every ordinary Fine elsewhere in England, and Munmouthshire taken as aforesaid without Commission, and for the copie,x. d. For every Fine taken by speciall Commission out of the Westerne Cir∣cuit, and for the copie,xiv. d. For every several Caption in any Fine
where it is taken at severall times by speciall Commission, over and above the former rates,iiii. d For every Fine certified by certiorari after the death of any Judge, or other Commissioners, over and above the former rates,vi. d. For the post Termin▪ of every Fine brought in the next Vacation after the retourne of the Writ of Covenant,vi. d. For every search of any Fine every Terme,iiii. d. For every copie of the Entrie of the Kings silver,viii. d. For every Fee of a Ne recipiatur of any Fine either by Order or Warrant of the Court, or any Judge,iii. s4. d. For the continuing of any such Or∣der or Warrant from Te me to Terme till it be dissolved,iii. s. 4. d Hen: Ewer. The Phillizers Fees. INprimis, For every Cap. al. & plur. Cap. in Debt, Detinue, and Trespasse, not having more than foure names in a Writ, and Entrie thereof,vi. d. Item, For delivery of every first Cap.
upon Record, and Entrie thereof,iiii. d. For every Testat. upon any of the said Writs, pon. in Replevin & Summons,xii. d. Item, For every Cap. al. & plur. in Accompt, Covenant, Annuity, Ejectio∣ne firme, and upon penall Stat.xii. d. Item, For every Writ in an action upon the Case, or more, according to the length,xii. d. For every retourn. habend. and se∣cond deliverance before appearance and entrie thereof,ii. s. vi. d For every Non omit. & cap. in Wi∣thernam,ii. s. vi. d For every Writ of partition, warrant. charte, Quare imp. and Waste,xii. d. For every Writ for enquiry of da∣mages in reall actions, Scire sac. & Su∣persid.ii. s. For every graund cap. al. sum. pet. cap. and entrie thereof,ii. s. vi. d viii. d. For the copy of the entrie thereof, For the demaundant in every Writ of View, and entrie thereof,ii. s. vi. d viii. d. For the copie of the entrie thereof, For every Writ of seizin and entrie thereof,iv. s. vi. d ii. s. viii. d. For the view paper, For a copie of the entrie thereof, For every Writ of Habeas corpus, duc. coram distring. imp. vic. & distring. ball.ii. s. For every Writ of rescous and entry thereof,ii. s.
For the entrie of every adjournment, discontinuance, and resort,iiii. d. For every speciall baile, and the en∣trie thereof,iis. x. d. For every comparence in reall and mixt actions,iv. d. For every comparence upon Writs to arrest, and the entrie thereof,xii. d. For Searches, Copies, Number Rols, and giving of rules, each of them,iiii. d. Exigenters Fees. EVer since the Stat. of H. 8. which gave the Proclamation upon the Exigent, the whole estate of the Ex∣igenters Office did consist in the ma∣king of three Writs, videlicet, an Exi∣gent, a Supersid, and a Proclamation, All which Writs are warranted by one and the same Record. For all the time of our remembrance and experience in the said Court, which hath been (by the most ancient of us) for about thirty yeares, or therea∣bout, the Fees of the said Writs were as followeth, videlicet; The Supersid.ii. s. xi. d. vi. d. The Exigent, The Proclamation,
Which Fee of vi. d. was given by the Stat. of 6. H. 8. being now about one hundred and ten yeares since. About eight or nine yeares since the Supersid. (quia improvide) being the least Writ in labour, and more in pro∣fit than both the other, was granted by Letters Patents under the great Seale of England, by the late King of fa∣mous memory, to Master Iohn Murray, then of his Majesties Bedchamber, and partly to avoid contestation with his said Majesties graunt, and upon hopes and promises of some recompence ano∣ther way, the Exigenters did give way to the said Patent, and have ever since lost the benefit of the said Supersid. whereupon the Judges did give en∣crease only of i. d. to be taken upon the Exigent, for reliese of the Exigenters and their Clarkes, and so the Exigent was made xii. d. which increase of i. d. is all the recompence which hitherto they have received for that great losse of the Supersid. We have likewise heard that about forty yeares since, and before our times by occasion of an Act of Parliament, made 31. Eliz. whereby the Proclama∣tion of the Exigent was much enlarged without any addition or encrease of ee, there was i. d. added to the Exi∣gent to be given to the poore Clarkes
for writing the said Writs over and a∣bove the ancient allowance, which i. d. hath ever since been paid to the said poore Clarkes accordingly, without any benefit to the Masters themselves. Other increase, addition, or alterati∣on of Fees in our Offices we know not of, nor ever heard of, although the length of the said Exigent, or Procla∣mation with their entries, considering the length of the Supersid. (All which we humbly submit to his Majesties Commissioners) might perhaps have justly deserved some further improve∣ment. And it is certainly true, that no other encrease of Fees hath been in our Offices since 11. Eliz. nor for ought we ever heard, or can by any meanes conjecture for these hundred yeares at the least. Rich: Page. Charles Cooke. Dan: Holford. Io: Millington.
HILLAR. TERTIO Caroli Regis. The Clarke of the Jurors. A note of all such Fees as are now usually taken by the Clarkes of the Iurors of his Maiesties Court of Common Pleas at Westm. be∣ing the same, and no other then such as have been taken time out of minde. INprimis, For a Writ of hab. corp. Jurator. in debt and trespasse,x. d. For the like Writ in all other actions,xvi. d. ii. s. iv. d For a Distring. cum decem Tales, For a Termes search, the copie of a Jurie, a number Roll, and a discontinu∣ance and adjourum: for every of them, Io: Adie.iiii. d.
The Clarke of the Essoines. INprimis, For every Essoine and ex∣ception,iiii. d. iiii. d. iv. d. ii. d. iiii. d. For every adjournment, For the copie, For every Idem dies, For every Nonsuit for want of ad∣journment in actions personall,ii. s. iv. d xii. d. 4. s. iv. d xii. d. For the Copie, For every Nonsuit in Actions reall, For the copie, For the exemplification of every Es∣soine and Nonsuit thereupon when it shall happen, being very seldome,7. s. vi. d 3. s. iv. d xii. d. For the copie thereof, For the Clarke, For severall Fees from severall Offi∣cers of the Court towards the numbring and marking of the Rolls,4. l. 9. s. Fran: Hurst.
Outlawrie Office. In the Kings Attourney generall his Office of the Outlaries exe∣cuted by his Deputy Master Iohnson, the Fees are as follow∣eth, viz. FOr a speciall Cap. Vtlagat. against body, lands, and goods,ii. s. 4. d. xiiii. d. For a propr. For every Writ of hab. corp. & du∣ces tecum, when they are sued forth,ii. s. iv. d xiiii. d. x. d. vi. d. If a propr. For a generall Cap. Vtlagat. If a propr. For ingrossing and certifying a spe∣ciall VVrit, with the Inquisition re∣tourned by the Sheriffe, of lands, or goods found thereupon, and for the Exigent, with the retourne thereof at large certified into the Exchequer, when it is required, the Office Fee is viii. s. unlesse it be commanded by the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, or Barons
of the Exchequer, or by the Kings At∣tourney generall, or Sollicitor, for his Majesties service only, then no Fee isviii. s. aut nil. due. For ingrossing and certifying a re∣versall into the Exchequer to discharge Seizures upon Outlaries, when any is,v. s. iiii. d. And to the Clarke, For entring the reversall in the Out∣larie Office to discharge all Processe thereupon, or upon any Writ of Error,ii. s. 8. d. For certifying of an Outlarie, or re∣versall when it is pleaded,ii. s. iiii. d. And to the Clarke, For search of an Outlarie one Term (as in all other Offices) iiii. d. if above a yeare, then iii. d. a Terme, which isiiii. d. iii. d. the utmost, For entring and filing of an Exigent, with one processe thereupon,iiii. d. These severall Fees aforesaid were paid and received in Easter Terme 34. Eliz. and ever since to mine own knowledge, for so long I have been and continued Clark and Deputy to all Attournies ge∣nerall that have been since that time. These (as I understand) are the true Fees. Ro. Heath. Will. Iohnson.
The Fees of the Seale for Writs. ALL VVrits of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas,vii. d. The exemplifications of the Kings Bench,ii. s. vi. d The exemplifications of the Com∣mon Pleas,ii. s. ii. d. i. d. i. d. Outlaries, Propr. Ri: Ligon. Fees due to the Marshall and Pro∣clamator of the Court of Com∣mon Pleas given by Order made by all the Iudges of the Court, Term. Trin. 31. H. 1. post Con∣questum, and received according∣ly by the said Marshall and Pro∣clamator, for any thing appear∣eth to the contrary, untill 11. Eliz. and ever since. INprimis, For every Judgement, and Nonsuit,iiii. d. viii. d. Item, For every Fine,
Item, For every finall judgement,xii. d. William Senkey, Chiefe Usher of the Exchequer, and Marshall, and Proclamator of the said Court of common Pleas by Lease from Clement Walker Es∣quire, who hath the same Office in inheritance by graund Serje∣antie. The foure Cryers. HEreafter doe ensue the good Or∣dinances and Rules made aswell by the Kings Justices of the com∣mon Pleas in times past, as by the Ju∣stices now being for the good rule and order of the said Court, which same now Justices doe charge and command every of the said Officers and Attour∣nies well and truly to observe and keep upon the paines therein limited. Which said orders were enrolled Termin. Trin. 35. H. 1. post conquestum rot. 494. Io: Priest chiefe Justice of the common Pleas, Ni. Austen, Pet. Arder, Ro. Davers, Ro. Dawbie, Wa. Moile, and Iohn Needeham, Just. of the same Court.
The Cryers Fees from 11. Eliz. FOr every judgement,iiii. d. xii. d. iiii. d. viii. d. viii. d. ii. s. For every finall judgement, For every Nonsuit, For every Fine, For every Recovery, For calling a Jury if they fill not, For every Jurie if they fill, and serve, and give up their Verdict the same day, at the Bar the same day, and for keeping them till then,xvi. s. If the Jurie lie all night, that we be forced to watch and waite on them all night,xxx. s. For carrying every bundle of Re∣cords out of the Treasurie into the Court, and back again into the Trea∣surie,vi. d. vi. s. xii. d. xii. d. 4. s. 4. d. iv. d. For every Attourney that is sworne, For every Baile, For every Oath in Court, For every wager of Law old Fees, For every Scire fac. called in Court, For every Nisi prius before my Lord chiefe Justice,iv. s. xii. d For every Guardian, Ro. Heliard, Iohn Philpot, Tho: wickman, William West.
The Fees of the keeper of the Court, from 11. Eliz. FRom the Clarke of the Treasurie for hanging the cloath of the Court,vi. s. 8. d For a wager of Law, and Wager∣men,ix. s. 6. d v. s. xii. d. ii. s. iv. d. iiii. d. iiii. d. ii. s. For a Jurie at Bar, For every Attourney sworn in Court, For a Nisi prius in Midd. For a Baile, For a Fine, For a Deed acknowledged, For satisfaction acknowledged, Will: Wese. The Fees of the Clarke of the In∣rollments of Fines and Reco∣veries. INprimis, The Fee due to the Judges by the Stat. of 23. Eliz. for inrol∣ling of every Fine and Recovery,6. s. 8. d. Item, Due to the Judges by the same Stat. for exemplifying every inrol∣ment,v. s.
For search of every Fine inrolled for every yeare,xvi. d. For copying every Fine inrolled, for every sheete,xii. d. For the Clarkes Fee for inrolling by the Roll,8. s. 8. d. 8. s. 4. d. 3. s. iv. d For exemplifying after the same rate, For every rule upon amendments, For retourning VVrits of Cove∣nants upon Fines, and VVrits of En∣tries, Summons, and Seizins upon common Recoveries, as deputy of Re∣cord for Sheriffes appointed by the Court, the ancient Fee is,ii. s. The Porter of the Court, his Fees from 11. Eliz. FOr every VVrit of Entrie with M. Attourney generall,iiii. d. v. s. ii. s. vi. d. iiii. d. iiii. d. ii. d. xii. d. iv. d. For a Jury at Bar, For a Nisi prius, For a wager of Law, For a Fine acknowledged, For a Baile, For satisfaction acknowledged, For the Attournies Oath, For a Guardian, Jo: Wade.
Alienation Office. THo: Ravenscroft, rat Poulton, Geo: Coultrop, Esquires Com∣missioners. Tho: Bond Esquire, Receiver. Take no Fees, but receive a certaine stipend from the King. Fees taken by the Master of the Chancery, for that Office ap∣pointed. FOr signifying every Docquet up∣on Licence and Pardon of Alie∣nation,ii. s. For every Writ of Entrie, for lands holden in chiefe,iiii. d. For Writs of Entrie of lands not holden in chiefe,iiii. d.
For Affidavits upon discharge ofii. s. Tenures, Anth: Crosts. The usuall Fees taken in the Office of Compositions, for alienations, by the Clarkes there. FOr a certificate upon a Writ of Entrie,iii. s. 4. d For the warrant to the great Seale for pardon of Alienation,x. s. For viewing the Subjects evidences, search of the Tenures, and drawing of the Affidavit with Proces, to be dis∣charged,vi. s. 8. d For a release in nature of a Pardon of alienation upon a common Recove∣ry, and for the like release upon a spe∣ciall Livery, and also for a release up∣on a generall pardon at the Coronati∣on, or other times for each of them,13. s. 4. d For the note of a Sheriffes discharge upon a seizure,iii. s. 4. d For every Ex. and for certifying thereof into the Exchequer,xii. d. vi. s. 8. d For the Sheriffes acquittance, Hum: Hurleston.
FOr entring in a large booke every Writ of Covenant fineable, videli∣cet, in the Terme time,vi. d. xii. d. And in the Vacation, For entring in another book remain∣ing in the said Office every Docquer upon a licence of Alienation in the Terme time,xii. d. ii. s. And in the Vacation, For every Docquet for a pardon of Alienation in proces of Distring▪ or Scire fac.ii. s. For every Writ of entrie of Lands holden in capite, and entred in the same booke,vi. d. xii. d. And in the Vacation, Hen: Smith. FOr endorsing every writ of Entry,vi. d. For endorsing every writ of Co∣venant in Terme,iiii. d. vi. d. vi. d. In the Vacation, For entring unfiled VVrits, For drawing the discharges of Tenures in Parliament, and entring them,vii. s. Hugh Dodd.
The Vndersheriffe of Middlesex taketh these Fees following in his Maiesties Court of Common Pleas. FOr a Warrant upon a Cap. for every name,iiii. d. ii. s. iiii. d. For retourne of a Venire fac. For a Warrant upon a Cap. Vtlagat. For retourne of a Hab. corpora Iura∣torum,iiii. s. For summoning the jurie, for every name,iiii. d. iiii. d. For a Cepi corpus for every man, For retourne of an Exigent for eve∣ry man,iiii. d. xii. d. ii. s. For retourne of a Proclamation, For retourne of a Scire fac. For retourne of a Nihil overat. & Fier. fac.xii. d. Iames Prym Subvic.
The Warden of the Fleete, his Fees. A note of the Fees due and belong∣ing to the Warden of the Fleete, and under-Officers, as appear∣eth by a Commission under the great Seale of England from the late Queene Eliz. in the third yeare of the raigne, and confirm∣ed in the 37. yeare of her raigne, what every severall prisoner in their severall degrees ought to pay. AN Archbishop, A Duke, A Dur∣chesse, Are to pay for their Commitment Fee to the said Warden and his Officers, having theI. s. 21. 10. first weekes dyet with wine, Also they are to pay for their ordina∣ryI. s. d. 3. 6. 8. weekly dyet with wine,
A Marquis, A Marquesses, An Earle, A Countesse, A Vice-Countesse, Are to pay for their Commitment Fee to the said Warden and his Officers,I. s. 14. 11. having the first weekes dyet, Also they are to pay for their ordi∣nary weekly dyet with wine,2. I. A Lord Spirituall, or Temporall, A Lady, the wife of a Baron, or Lord, Are to pay for their Commitment Fee as abovesaid, having the first weekesI. s. d 11. 5. 10 dyet with wine, Also they are to pay for their ordina∣ryI. s. d. 1. 6. 8. weekly commons with wine, A Knight, A Lady, the wife of a Knight, A Doctor of Divinity, A Do∣ctor of Law, or others of like calling; Are to pay as aforesaid for their Com∣mitment Fee, having the first weekesI. s. 5. 1. dyet with wine, Also they are to pay for their ordina∣rys. d. 18. 6. weekly commons with wine,
An Esquire, A Gentleman, A Gen∣tlewoman that shall sit at the Parlour commons, or any person under that de∣gree, that shall be at the same com∣mons; Are to pay for their Commit∣ment Fee as aforesaid, having the firstI. s. d. 3. 6. 8. weekes dyet with wine, Also they are to pay for their ordina∣ry weekly commons with wine,10. s. A Yeoman, or any others that shall be at the Hall commons, man or wo∣man; Are to pay for their Commit∣ment Fee, having the first weekes dyet. Also they are to pay for their ordina∣ry weekly Commons,5. s. A poore man in the Ward, that hath part of the Boxe; Is to pay for his Commitment Fee, having no dyet,7. s. 4. d
Also there is due to the said War∣den xx. d. per diem, for the whole day, and x. d. for the halfe day, for every man that he may lawfully license to go abroad. MOreover the said Warden hath retourne of Writs as Sheriffes, and Bailisses of liberties have, by which he hath allowance for retourn of every Hab. corp. or Attachment,ii. s. iv. d Also for every Habeas corpus cum causa, there are Fees for retourning the causes, videlicet: For allowing the Writ,ii. s. iv. d ii. s. For retourning the first cause, For every execution, For every action,xii. d. Which are due to the Wardens Clarkes, and v. s. to the Wardens ser∣vants for bringing every prisoner safe to the Bar. Also he hath for allowance of every Supersid. and discharge,ii. s. iv. d
Also when any man is committed by Order out of the Courts of Starch am∣ber, Chancery, Court of Wards and Liveries, Court of Exchequer, Court of Requests, and Court of Duchie, the VVardens servants (being sent to ap∣prehend them, and bring them to the Fleete, according to the tenour of their commitment) have iiii. d. the mile where they are apprehended, and iv. d. the mile backe againe, and the Clarke hath ii. s. for making the Writ. Hen: Lell.
THE JVRORS PRE∣sentment, Februarii, 15. 1627. THE Certificate of us whose names are here under-writ∣ten, Attournies of the Court of Common Pleas, given and presented the fifteenth day of Febr. 1627. unto his Majesties Commissioners for inquirie after exa∣cted Fees, and innovated Offices ac∣cording to the Oath to us, by them in that behalfe administred. Inprimis, As concerning what Offi∣ces were usually holden, kept, or exe∣cuted in the said Court, in the eleventh yeare of the raigne of our late Sove∣raigne Lady Queene Elizabeth; Wee say that our knowledges doe not ex∣tend so far, but for the time of our re∣spective knowledges, there hath beene
in the said Court, these particular Of¦fices and Places following, videlicet: The Custos Brevium. The Prothonotaries. The Clarke of the Warrants. The Chirographer. The Clarke of the Treasury. The Clarke of the Outlaries. The Proclamator of the Court. The Cryers of the Court, whom we take to be but Substitutes to the Proclamator. The Clarke of the Kings silver. The Phillizers. The Exigenters. The Clarke of the Iuries. The Clarke of the Errors. The Seale Office. The Clarke of the Essoines. The Keeper of the Court. The Office of Inrollments, of Fines and Recoveries, erected by Sta. The Porter of the Court. And for new eected Offices, we ne∣ver knew of any other, then the Office following. An Office called the Supersideas Of∣fice, which (as we are informed) is
granted by Letters Patents under the great Scale of England. Touching what Fees, Rewards, Summe, or Summes of money were in the said eleventh yeare of the raigne of our said late Soveraigne Queene Eli∣zabeth, or at any time since usually, or accustomably taken, received, or had by the Judges, Counsellours, or Pra∣ctilers, Officers, or their deputies, or other Ministers, Clarkes, Registers, or Attournies of the said Court, we doe certifie as followeth, videlicet: The Iudges Fees that have beene usually, or accustomably paid, during our remembrances, viz. INprimis, For allowing a Writ of Error upon a single judgement,17. s. 6. d For allowance of a Writ of Er∣ror upon a judgement, upon a Scire fac. or upon an Outlarie after judge∣ment,3. s. For signing every Writ of privi∣ledge Procedendo Supersid. upon a Pro∣cedend. or Hab. corp.iiii. s. For a Baile upon a Writ of privi∣ledge at then Chamber, one cause on∣ly being certified,9. s. 8. d. ii. s. For every cause more,
For a Prohibition,9. s. 8. d. For confessing a judgement at a Judges Chamber,9. s. 8. d. For an Affidavit before a Judge out of Court,xii. d. For acknowledging of a Fine out of Court,9. s. 8. d. For certifying of a Fine, or retourne of a Dedimus potestatem, and not of the Precipe,xvi. d. For every Warrant of Attourney for Recovery taken out of the Court,9. s. 8. d. For reversing of an Outlarie out of Court for one name,9. s. 8. d. ii. s. For every other name, For every witnesse for the proofe of a suggestion upon a Prohibition out of Court,9. s. 8. d. For admission of a Guardian out of Court,9. s. 8. d. 9. s. 8. d. iiii. d. For a privie Verdict, For signing of an Information, For a licence to compound upon an Information,ii. s. vi. d For acknowledging of a deed to bee inrolled in Court,xii. d. For acknowledging of a deed out of Court to be inrolled ix. s. viii. d. now they take butiiii. s. For taking of a speciall Baile upon meane proces out of Court, in the Phil∣lizersxii. d office in Terme,
For taking a speciall Baile upon meane proces after the Terme,9. s. 8. d. For a Warrant under a Judges hand to passe a Fine, where are more than three Cognizois, or three Cog∣nizees, which was not taken till 12. Iac. Reg. per ord. cur.iiii. s. Serjeants Fees. As for Counsellors, there are none attending at the Court of Com∣mon Pleas, other then Serieants at Law, whose ancient Fees have been as followeth, viz. FOr a motion, or setting his hand to a speciall Plea,x. s. For a triall at Barre, or an argu∣ment upon a demurrer,xx. s. For drawing a Recovery at Bar to every Serjeant used in the same Reco∣very,iii. s. 4. d iii. s. 4. d For declaring of a Fine at Bar,
The Custos Brevium. THE Fees mentioned in the Certificate under Master Spen∣cers hand hereto annexed are the usuall, and accustomed Fees, which during our remembrance have been paid, Except. The summe of xii. d. demanded in the Fees of every Fine formerly certifi∣ed, which of late times hath been taken more than heretofore was anciently ta∣ken, and was first claimed by them for retourne of Writs of Covenant under colour of Deputations from the She∣riffes, and now is claimed for keeping three parts of a Fine which we hold not to be due. Also the xx. d. demanded for filing of every Writ after the Terme, and so for every Terme after xx. d. whereas the Fee of xx. d. is not to be paid for filing of any Writ after any Terme, unlesse it be filed after the last filing day of the next subsequent Terme, after the retourne thereof, and more then xx. d. ought not to be paid for filing of any Writ, unlesse it be above a yeare after the retourne. Also the Fee of xii. d. for filing of eve∣ry
Writ of Entrie, Summons, and Sci∣zin upon common Recoveries taken by the Clarkes of that Office, which wee hold not to be due, for that iiii. d. ought to be paid and taken as their Masters Fee for a post diem. And we also certifie that there hath been usually and accustomably paid to the Custos Brevium, or his Clarkes the Fees following, videlicet. For every Ne reciptatur, comming under a Judges hand, or by order in Court,xii. d For every note of Jurors names for the Clarke of the Juries to make fur∣ther proces by,viii. d For every note of an Exigent, for the Clarke of the Outlaries to make fur∣ther proces by,viii. d For the copying of every Writ, or other Record, for every Sheete,viii. d. For the eh of any booke of En∣tries of any Writs, for every Terme searching,iiii. . As for the rest of the Fees mentioned in the said Certificate, the same being Fees demanded by the Clarkes of the Custos Brevium his Office, and Bag∣bearer to be allowed them by the Ma∣ster of the said Office, we know not any such Fees to be due unto them, and doe certifie, that if any such be, the same are to be paid to the same
Clarkes, and Bag-bearer by their said Master out of the Fees before recited, and no others. In the Prothonotaries Office. FIrst, we doe finde nothing to the contrary, but that all the Fees cer∣tified by the said Prothonotaries, are the usuall Fees that have been accusto∣mably paid during the time of our re∣membrance, but we certifie further that there hath been taken by the space often yeares last past, or there abouts upon every judgement in personall, and mixt actions over and above the ii. s. in the Bill of their Fee, certified, and more than anciently was paid, xii. d: which they informe us the judges have for assessing of Costs. There hath been also taken by their Clarkes for about twelve or fourteene yeares last past iiii. s. for the reversall of every Outlarie in Court not former∣ly taken, neither is it certified by them which wee are informed is for the Iudges Fee in liew of an mnt Fee of ix. s. viii. d. due to the Iudges, when the same wa sed at their Cham∣bers.
The Secondaries Fees. THere hath been taken by them by the space of sixteene yeares last past, or thereabouts xii. d. upon every common Recovery drawne at the Bar, more than formerly, or is now certified by the Prothonotaries, but the reason, or ground thereof we know not. In the Clarke of the Warrants Of¦fice. VVEE can say nothing against the Certificate of the Fees of the Clarkes of this Office, but that they have usually been accu∣stomed to be paid during our remem∣brance, saving. That there is, and hath been by the space of eleven yeares or thereabouts taken by him more than formerly up∣on every Fine iiii. d. for a Warrant of Attourney which we know not to bee used before. Also there is in the last mentioned Certificate certified only by Master
Mene mentioned to be paid to the Clarks of the said Prothonotaries xii. d. upon every Recovery, which we know not to be due. In the Phillizers Office. VVEE doe also certifie that the Fees mentioned in the Certi∣ficate of the Phillizers, inti∣tuled, the Fees which the Phillizers of the common Pleas now take, have been usually and accustomably paid during our remembrance for ought we know to the contrary, saving, That there is taken iiii. d. upon eve∣ry first Cap. and viii. d. upon every ap∣pearance of the Defendant in every action more than was formerly taken before 14. Iac. Reg. which is so taken by vertue of an order of the Judges made upon the reasons expressed in the said Order. And for the viii. d. claimed for the copie of the entrie of every grand Cap. al. Summons & Pet. Cap. wee know it not to be due.
In the Exigenters Office. VVEE also certifie that the Fee of ii. s. for a Supersid. for such of them as were made in the said Office, was anciently, and usually taken in the said Office, until a Patent was granted of the said upersid. and that the Fee of x. d. was anciently and usually taken untill about 31. Eliz. for every Exigent except propr. and that ever since there hath been taken more for every Exigent i. d. and for the space of sixe yeares last past, or there∣abouts, i. d. more; The reasons wee know not, but refer the same unto the certificate of the Exigemers. In the Chirographers Office. VVEE acknowledge that the Fees certified by the Chiro∣grapher himselfe, are the u∣suall and accustomed Fees which have been paid all the time of our respective knowledges, but as to the Fees certifi¦ed under Master Randals hand for the Clarkes Fees of that Office, we know
no such Fees due to them for writing the Chirograph of the said Fine, but we say, there hath been used to bee given to the said Clarke that in∣grosleth the said Fine xii. d. for a gratuity. In the Office of the Kings silver. VVEE certifie that the ancient and usuall Fees for entring the Kings silver, of every Fine was only vi. d. and for every Cer∣tiorari for every Fine certified by Cer∣tiorari after the death of a Judge vi. d. and for every search for a Fine for eve∣ry Terme iiii. d. and for the copie of the entrie of the Silver, for every sheet viii. d. if the copie be required, and for every Ne reciptatur, or Ne intratur of a Fine xii. d. And if the Fine come in after a Terme, and after the Rolls are made up to be delivered up out of their hands, the said Clarke of the Kings sil∣ver was allowed reasonable recom∣pence for his paines, but no certaine Fee. And as concerning all the other Fees mentioned in the Certificate un∣der the hand of Master Henry Fwer Clarke of the Kings silver, We certifie
that the same were taken by the said Clarke of late yeares, and since the said eleventh yeare of the said late Queene Eliz. the most ancient of them being not above thirty yeares or there∣abouts, and the rest of far later time, whereof iiii. d. he demandeth by ver∣tue of an Order of the Iudges in that behalfe made: The copie whereof, is to the Certificate annexed. In the Office of the Clarke of the Treasurie. THE Fees mentioned in the Cer∣tificate under the hand of the Lord chiefe Iustice Richardson, for the Fees of the Clarke of the Trea∣sury, we acknowledge to be the usuall and accustomed Fees which have been paid during our remembrance, Except, videlicet: viii. d. of the iiii. s. demanded for search of every Terme above ten years the ancient Fee due to the Clarke of the Treasurie is but iii. s. iiii. d. and the viii. d. residue is due to the keeper of the Treasurie, and is claimed by him in his Certificate.
And we also certifie that besides the Fees certified by the Lord chiefe Iustice Richardson, there is due to the under Clarke in the Treasurie for examining any booke or old Record of Nisi prius, or any transcript of Record, which the Records in the Treasury, if it exceed not eight sheetes xii. d. and if more, then after that rate, and for making and examining the Iurat. of every Re∣cord of Nisi prius iiii. d. But whereas of late there hath been demanded and taken by the under Clarkes of that Office for the exemplifying of every Recovery with single Voucher iiii. s. vi. d. and for exemplifying any other Record, not exceeding eight sheetes, v. s. and for every sheete more, vi. d. and for ingrossing every Record of Nisi prius upon old issues for every sheete iiii. d. We doe certifie that there are no such Fees due unto them, And that the Fees due for those Exemplifi∣cations and Ingrossements are satisfied and contained in the Fees certified by the Master of the said Office.
The Cryers Fees. THe Fees mentioned in the Cer∣tificate under the Cryers hands, We thinke are the usuall and accustomed Fees which have been paid during our remembrance, Except. The Fee of ii. s. by them demanded for the calling of every Jury at the Bar when they fill not, the ancient Fee be∣ing but xii. d. The Fee of xvi. s. by them demanded for keeping of every Jurie during the sitting of the Court, the ancient Fee being but iiii. s. The Fee of xxx. s. for keeping a Jury all night, the ancient Fee being but viii. s. and no more. The Fee of vi. s. for every Attourney sworne in Court, the ancient Fee be¦ing but iiii. s. and no more. The Fee of xii. d. for every baile ta∣ken in Court, there being no Fee at all due unto them. The Fee of xii. d. for every Oath in Court, and for every circ. called in Court, iiii. d. and ii. d. for every Guardian admitted in Court, there being no such Fees due unto them to our knowledges
As for the Fees of iiii. d. for every judgement, xii. d. for every finall judg∣ment, iiii. d. for every Nonsuit, viii. d. for every Fine, and viii. d. for every Recovery, We know no such Fees due unto them, and they be the same which the Proclamator claimeth and hath. In the Office of the keeper of the Treasurie. THe Fees mentioned in the certifi∣cate under the Keeper of the Treasuries hand, We thinke to be all the usuall and accustomed Fees which have been paid during our re∣membrance, Except, IV. d. for a search after three yeares, till ten yeares, nothing being due. The Fee of vi. d. for every Roll car∣ried into Court, there being no such Fee due, other then for a Plea Roll. The ii. s. vi. d. for every Jury at Bar, xii. d. being only due, and no more to our knowledge. The ii. s. vi. d. for a Nisi prius in Middlesex xii. d. only, and no more be∣ing there due. The xviii. d. for his key after the Terme, xii. d. only being due. And as for the Fee of iii. s. for making
up the Terme and Records vi. d. for every wager of Law, xviii. d. for a copy of a Precipe after the Terme, iiii. d. for a Fine acknowledged in the Treasurie, and v. s. from the Clarke of the Trea∣surie for his attendance every Terme, we know not any of them to be due. In the Outlarie Office. THe Fees mentioned in the certifi¦cate under the hand of Master At∣tourney generall for the Fees of the Clarke of the said Office we ac∣knowledge to be the usuall and accu∣stomed Fees which have been paid du∣ring our remembrances. But we doe certifie that under colour of these Fees, where there be more de∣fendants than one in a Writ, there is by them taken for the entrie of the re∣versall to discharge proces thereupon, or upon a Writ of Error for every name, ii. s. viii. d. whereas we conceive there is but ii. s. viii. d. due for all in one Writ of Exigent, that be reversed all one time. Where there is demanded for search of an Outlarie for every Terme within one yeare iiii. d. and for every Terme above the yeare, iii. d. we certifie it is
but only in case where search is made by a stranger, and not by the Attour∣nies for Writs sued out by themselves. The Proclamators Fees. THE Fees mentioned in the cer∣tificate under the hand of Master Senkey for the Fees of the Procla∣mator, we thinke to be the usuall and accustomed Fees which have been paid to that Officer: But we certifie that the Prothonotaries, and the Chirogra∣pher doe receive the said Fees, and not that Officer himselfe, which Fees are now claimed by the Cryers. Clarke of the Iuries. AS for the Fees mentioned in the certificate of the Clarke of the Juries, under his hand we certifie they be the usuall and accustomed Fees which have been paid since and during our remembrances.
The Clarke of the Essoines. THE Fees mentioned in the cer∣tificate under his hand, Wee thinke to bee the usuall Fees which have been paid to that Officer during our remembrance. The vi. s. vi. d. demanded for exem∣plifying of every Esoine and Nonsuit thereupon, and iii. s. iiii. d. for the copy thereof, We know no such Fee to be due unto him. And as for the Fee of iiii. l. ix. s. by him demanded from the Officers of this Court, towards the numbring and marking of the Rolls every Terme, We know not any such Fees due unto him, and if it be, We thinke it be not within our enquirie. The Court Keeper. WHereas this Officer requireth ix. s. vi. d. for every Wager in Law, his due being onely xxii. d. the rest is to be divided amongst the Cryers, Wagermen, and other Of∣ficers, and for the ii. s. vi. d. for a Jurie at
Barre, we certifie that there is onely xii. d. due, and no more. For the Fee of vi. s. viii. d. from the Clarke of the Treasurie for hanging the Cloath of the Court, We know no such Fee due to him, and if it be, it is from the Clarke of the Treasury, and so under favour (as we conceive) not within our enquirie. And as for the Fee of xii. d. for every Attourney sworne in Court, ii. s. for a Nisi prius in Middlesex, iiii. d. for a Baile, iiii. d. for a Fine, iiii. d. for a Re∣covery at Barre, and ii. d. for satisfacti∣on acknowledged, We say there are no such Fees due. The Porters Fees. THE Fees mentioned in the cer∣tificate under the Porters hand, We thinke are the usuall and ac∣customed Fees during our remem∣brances paid, Except, The Fee of v. s. for every triall at Barre, his due being but xii. d. xii. d. for a Nisi prius, his Fee being but vi. d. IV. d. for a Fine which is not to bee paid, but for every Fine acknowledged by a Feme covert in Court.
IV. d. for every Writ of Entrie, iv. d. for a Baile, ii. d. for satisfaction ac∣knowledged, and iiii. d. for a Guardi∣an, We certifie that there are no such Fees due, The Clarke of the Errors Fees. FRom the now Clarke of Errors we have no certificate, but for the Fees formerly certified by Master Moile late Clarke of the Errors, we thinke that the Fees by him certified, are the Fees which usually and accustomably paid during our remembrances, Ex∣cept, The Fee of iii. s. by him demanded for a Supersid. de non molestando, there being but ii. s. due, and ii. s. for making of the Record. The Fee of ii. s. iiii. d. for a Nonsuit upon a Writ of Error, we certifie it is not due.
The Clarke of the Inrollments. THE Fees certified by Master Iackman for the Fees of that Of∣fice, we certifie to be the Fees due by Stat. Except, The Fee of xvi. d. by him demanded for search of every Fine to be inrolled for every yeare, whereas the Fee by Stat. (as we conceive) is but iiii. d. a sheete. The Fee of xii. d. for copying every sheete of every Fine inrolled, whereas the Fee (as we conceive) is but iii. d. a sheete. And as for the Fee of viii. s. iiii. d. for the Clarkes Fee for inrolling by the Roll, and viii. s. iiii. d. for exemplify∣ing after the same rate, and for the iii. s. iiii. d. for the rule upon amend∣ments, we doe certifie that we know no such Fees to be due. And as for the Fee of ii. s. demanded for retourning Writs of Covenant up∣on Fines, Writs of Entries, Summons and Seizins upon common Recoveries, as deputies of Record for Sheriffes ap∣pointed by the Court, we doe certifie that the same Fee is not due unto him, but was anciently due and taken by
the Attournies, and allowed them for returning of the said Writs, and their better care to avoide Errors in sewing forth the said Fines and Recoveries. The Attournies Fees. VVEE doe certifie the Attour∣nies Fee for prosecution is, and during our remem∣brance have been for every Terme it every reall action, And in every other action▪ Bookes and Tables. TOuching the having of any Bookes, Tables, Rolls, Orders, Warrants, Records, Entries, or other Notes, or writings for the disco∣very of those things we are charged with, Wee doe certifie that we have not any in our custody, neither doe wee know where any are, but only in seve∣rall Offices by us certified.
Io: Nichols. Peter Noyes. Geo: Holland. Roger Hide. Rob: Hanson. Io: Wickesteade. Io: Bimbrone. Io: Skinner. Nich: Allen. Fra: Kempe. Io: Rowley. Edw: Waller. Io: Tyrer. Roger Doddeswell. Rob. Benson. Will: Corfield. Tho: Blofield. Fra: Newbone. Anth: Rogers. Anth: Langston Geo: Needler. Will: Cragge. Peter Bird. Edw: Ball. Ro: Hamby. Rich: Morse. Thus farre examined.
The Fees here under mentioned are the Fees due and paid to the Lord chiefe Iustice, and the o∣ther Iustices of the Court of com∣mon Pleas at Westminster, as they were due, and usually paid to our Predecessors, Iustices of the same Court. The Lo: chiefe Justice his Fees. FOR allowance of a Writ of Error upon an Outlarie before judgement,xx. s. For a Baile taken upon an Outlarie upon meane Proces in debt, if the debt be xx. . or above,ii. s. 4. d. For the allowance of a writ of Error upon a judgement,xx. s. For Baile taken in case of debt after judgement,xii. s For the allowance of a writ of Error
upon a judgement upon a Scire fac. and Outlarie after judgement,xxxv. s. For making the Roll that a writ of Error is allowed on,ii. s. iii. s. For a Supersid. For the transcript of a Record being a Proces,6. s. 8. d. 6. s. 8. d. 14. s. 9. d For every proces more, For the retourne of every Certiorar. For the seale of every Record of Nisi prius,ii. s. i. d. For the seale of every Writ sealed in Court,i. d. For the seale of every Exemplifica∣tion,ii. s. ii. d. The Fees following are due to such of the Iudges who doe performe the businesse. FOr acknowledging of a Fine or warrant of Attorney for a common recoverie out of Court,6. s. 8. d. For signing every writ of priviledge, to remove any cause, Habeas corpus, procedendo, or Supersid. upon a Proce∣dendo,iv. s. For every Baile taken out of Court upon any such writ of priviledge, wherein one cause only is retourned,ix. s. 8. d.
For every cause more,ii. s. For the confession of a judgement out of Court,9. . 8. d. For every Phillizers Baile, and o∣ther Baile taken out of Court,9. s. 8. d. For acknowledging satisfaction out of Court,9. s. 8. d. For acknowledging out of Court a Deed to be inrolled,9. s. 8. d. For admission of a Guardian out of Court,9. s. 8. d. For the proofe of a suggestion out of Court, for every witnesse,9. s. 8. d. For a warrant for passing of a Fine, where there are more than three Cog∣nizors, or three Cognizees parties to the Fine,iiii. s. For every Affidavit taken out of Court upon a forraigne Plea, or Rescous,ii. . For any other Affidavit taken out of Court,viii. d. For exhibiting of an Information out of Court,viii. d. For signing a Bill of costs to award an Attachment for not appearing upon a Subpoena,viii. d. For granting a Licence to compound upon a penall Law,ii. s. For assessing of the Kings part of a forfeiture upon a penall Statute after composition with the Informer,ii. s For the commitment out of Court,
of a prisoner to the Fleete, charged with one cause only,9. s. 8. d. For every Baile taken out of Court upon an Outlarie in debt upon meane proces reversed, if the same be xx. l.ii. s. iv. d Divident Fees. These Fees following are due to the Lord chiefe Iustice, and the o∣ther Iudges of the Court of com∣mon Pleas, by way of Divident. FOr confessing of a Judgement in Court,vi▪ d. For acknowledging satisfaction in court, if the debt or damage doe not amount unto 100. l.vi. d. If the debt or damage doe amount to 100. l. xii. d. and for every 100. l. after the same rate,xii. d. For admitting an Infant in court to his Guardian,xii. d. For reversing an Outlarie in Court for error in the Exigent, or retourne,xii. d. For the like for the insufficiency of the Proclamation, or retourne, or for
want of a Proclamation,ii. . For every common Recovery ac∣knowledged in Court,vi. d. vi. d. For a Fine acknowledged in Court, For a Baile taken in Court, or a Baile or Recognizance acknowledged in Court,xii. d. For a deed acknowledged in Court to be inrolled for a discontinuance,xii. d. 9. s. 8. d. For a Prohibition granted, For every wager of Law, or Nonsuit upon a wager of Law,vi. d. For admission of an Attourney to be an Attourney of this court,xx. ▪ The Puisne Iudges Fees. FOr every Fine drawne at the Bar,xii. d. For a Recovery drawne at the Barre with a single Voucher,xviii. d. vi. d. iiii. s. vi. s. 8. d For every Voucher more, For reversall of an Outlary in court, For taking of a privy Verdict, For taxing of costs upon every Ver∣dict, From the Clarke of the Warrants every Terme, to every of the puisne Judges, For every Attourney, whose name is recorded in the Roll of Attournies eve∣ry Terme▪iiii. d.
For inrolling and examining the parts of a Fine, and Writs upon com∣mon Recoveries by the Stat. 23. Eliz.vi. . For the Exemplification and exami∣nation of the parts of a Fine, and VVrits upon common Recoveries by that Stat.v. . For drawing and entring a rule for an amendment upon that Stat.xii. d. For a search made upon the inroll∣ment upon that Stat.iiii. d. For a copie of a Fine, or Writs in∣rolled upon common Recoveries in∣rolled by that Stat. for every sheete,iiii. d. For the retourne of every writ of Covenant brought to levy a Fine upon,x. d. For the retourne of every writ of En∣try to suffer a common Recovery, every writ of Summons and Seizin there∣upon,x. d. An ancient Fee of vi. s. viii. d. for sign∣ing of a Dedimus potestatem due to the Judges of any Court who doe assigne the same, which is now, and of late hath been divided amongst all the Judges that ride the Circuits,6. s. 8. d.
These Fees following are due to the Clarkes of the Lord chiefe Iu∣stice, and other the Iustices of the said Court. TO the Judges Clarke of the Fines, for taking of a Fine, or warrant of Attourney,iii. s. 4. d For certifying of a Fine, or retourne of a Dedimus potestatem,xvi. d. To the Judges Clarke of Bailes, for taking every Baile,xii. d. For entring every caveat to give no∣tice that good Baile may be taken,xii. d. For satisfaction acknowledged out of Court,xii. d For a Deed acknowledged out of Court to be inrolled,xii. d. For the proofe of a suggestion out of Court for every witnesse,xii. d. iiii. d. For an Affidavit taken out of Court, For entring into his Booke an Infor∣mation exhibited out of Court,iiii. d. For entring into his Booke of costs a warrant signed to award an attachment for not appearing upon a Subpoena,iiii. d.
For entring into his booke a licence so compound upon a penall Law,iiii. d. For entring into his booke the Kings part of the forfeiture upon a penall Law assessed by the Iudges, after com∣position with the Informer,vi. d. For entring into a Booke, a commit∣ment out of Court of a prisoner to the Fleete, charged with one cause only,xii. d. To the puisne Iudges Clarke of the Inrollments, for copying, inrolling, and examining the parts of a Fine, and Writs upon Recovery by the Statute, 23. Eliz.8. s. 4. d. For a search made for an inroll∣ment upon that Stat.viii. d. For writing of a Fine, or Writs in∣rolled upon a common Recovery in∣rolled by that Stat.viii. d. Tho: Richardson. Ric: Hutton. Fra: Harvey Geo: Crooke. Hn: Yelerton.
FEBRVARII XVII. 1628. ACcording to an order of his Majesties Commissioners for inquirie after exacted Fees, and innovated Offices, Wee whose names are hereunder subscribed, have met and perused the Iudges Certificate of Fees to us delive∣red by the said Commissioners, which in our former presentment or certifi∣cate we could not so exactly set downe, as we did the Officers Fees, for that we received from the Commissioners seve∣rall certificates of the severall Officers of the said Court, concerning all their severall Fees, but we then had not any certificate from the Iudges of their Fees by them demanded and certified,
but we now having received a certifi∣cate by the said Commissioners from the said Iudges, doe now this seven∣teenth day of February, 1628. upon due consideration thereof had, certifie as followeth, viz. The Lord chiefe Iustice his Fees. INprimis, Touching the xx. s. men∣tioned by the Iudges certificate for allowance of a writ of Error, upon an Outlarie before judgement, or up∣on a writ of Error upon a judgement, which in our former certificate wee mentioned to be but xvii. s. vi. d. upon either of them, We certifie now, that for our respective knowledges there hath been paid in the whole xx. s. for every of the same, but we conceive ii. s. vi. d. thereof was for the Lord chiefe Iustice his Clarks, and only xvii. s. vi. d. for the Iudges. Concerning the ii. s. iiii. d. for a Baile taken upon an Outlarie upon meane proces, the debt being xx. l. or above, mentioned in the Iudges certificate, we certifie that the same hath beene u∣sually paid since an Order made by the Iudges concerning the putting in of a Baile into that case.
Touching the xii. s. mentioned in the said Certificate for a Baile taken in case of debt after judgement, we certi∣fie that since the Stat▪ made for putting▪ in of Baile in that case, the same hat been usually paid. Touching the ii. s. for marking the Roll the writ of Error is allowed  and ii. s. for every Supersid We rti∣fie the same hath been usually paid to the Clarke of the Errors, but whether as due to the Iudge, or his Clarke, wee know not, yet some of the ancientes men of the y say, that there was an¦ciently paid for every such Supersid but ii. s. as we formerly certified in our former Certificate under the title o the Fees of the Clarke of the Errors. As to the Fee of ii. s. ▪ d▪ for the seale of every Record of Nisiprius, the same hath been so anciently paid, saying in case of Prop. Touching the Lord chiefe Iustice  Fee of i. d. for the scale of every W sealed in Court, and ii. d. for the seale of every Exemplification, we certifie them to be due, and parcell of the Fee of vii. d. and ii▪ ▪ ii. d. certified in our former Certificate under the title of Fees of the Seale Office. Touching the rest of the Fees men∣tioned in the Iudges certificate to bee due to the Lord chiefe Iustice, wee
have usually paid the same, and there∣fore doe think them to be due. The Fees due to such of the Iudges as performe the businesse. TOuching the Fee of vi. s. viii. d. for the acknowledging of a Fine, or warrant of Attourney for a common Recovery out of Court, we certifie as formerly, that ix. s. viii. d. hath been usually paid for the same in the whole, but (as we conceive) the Judge hath only vi. s. viii. d. and his Clarke the rest. Touching the ii. s. certified for an Affidavit taken out of Court upon a forreine Plea, or Rescous, we certifie that the same hath been anciently paid, but how the same hath been anciently divided between the Judges and Clarks we know not. Touching the viii. d. certified by the Judges of every other Affidavit taken out of Court, we doe certifie as in our former Certificate, that we have usual∣ly paid xii. d. for the same, whereof we conceive iiii. d. is allowed to the Judges Clarkes, as appeareth by the Judges owne Certificate of their Clarkes Fees. Touching the Fee for granting a
licence to compound upon a penall Law, we certifie as heretofore we have done, that anciently ii. s. vi. d. hath been used to be paid, whereof we con∣ceive ii. s. due to the Judge, and vi. d. to his Clarke. Touching the ix. s. viii. d. for every reversall of an Outlarie out of Court, we certifie that usually we have paid so much for one name, and if there have been more names than one in the writ, then for every other name ii. s. Touching the ii. s. iiii. d. for Baile ta∣ken out of Court upon an Outlarie in debt upon meane proces reversed, if the debt be xx. l. or above, we certifie that ever since the order was made by the Court for putting in Baile in that case, the same hath been usually paid. Touching the iiii. s. certified for a warrant, for passing a Fine where there are more than three Cognizors, or three Cognizees parties to the Fine, we certifie that it hath been paid ever since the order made in that behalfe, as we have certified in our former Certi∣ficate. Touching the rest of their Fees, wee certifie that we have usually paid the same during our respective practises, and therefore thinke them to be due.
The Divident Fees. TOuching the Fee of xx. s. men∣tioned to be paid for the admis∣sion of every Attourney to be an Attourney of the same Court, we doe certifie that the ancient Fee was only ii. s. howsoever of late yeares xx. s. hath been paid, videlicet, for about sixteen yeares. Touching the residue of the Fees cer∣tified by way of Divident, we doe cer∣tifie that we have usually paid the same during our respective practises. The Puisne Iudges Fees. TOuching the xii. d. certified for every Fine drawne at the Bar, and xviii. d. for every Recovery with a single Voucher drawne at Bar, and vi. d. for every Voucher more, wee certifie the same to have been usually paid to the hands of the said Secon∣daries. Touching the xii. d. certified for taxing of costs upon every judgement, we re∣ferre our selves to our former Certifi∣cate
in that behalfe made under the ti∣tle of the Prothonotaries. Touching the xxxiii. s. for every puisne Judge from the Clarke of the warrants, we say it passeth not through our hands▪ nor lyeth in our knowledge, but because the Judges have certified it, we (knowing nothing to the contra∣ry) thinke it to be due. Touching the Fee of x. d. for retourne of every writ of Covenant brought to levie a Fine upon, x. d. for the retourn of every writ of Entrie to suffer a com∣mon Recovery, every writ of Sum∣mons and Seizms thereupon, we certi∣fie as before we have done, under the title of the Clarke of the Inrollments, (whereunto we refer our selves) and conceive the same to be parcell of the ii. s. claimed by the Clarke of the In∣rollments. And touching the residue of the Fees certified to be due to the puisne Judges only, we doe certifie that we have usu∣ally paid the same during our respe∣ctive practises, and therefore thinke them to be due.
Subscribed thus. Anth: Langston. Geo: Needler. Fra: Kempe. Edw: Waller. Ro: Hyde. Io: Rowley. Roger Doddeswell. Ni: Allen. Io: Skinner. Io: Tyrer. Io: Banbury. Io: Wickesteade. Tho: Blofield. Ro: Benson. William Cragge. Peter Bird. William Corefield. Edw: Ball. Ro: Hanson. Ro: Morse. Geo: Holland. Ex. per me Iohan. Dibley Reg. Cle∣ricum dic▪ Commis.
A TABLE OF THE DVE FEES OF The Prothonotaries in THE COVRT OF the Commons PLEAS duodecimo Caroli Regis. London printed, 1641.
These are the Fees due and belon∣ing to the three Prothonotaries of the Court of common Pleas at Westm. for entries of Declarati∣ons, eas, and Iudgements. And also for making and entring of Writs in their severall Offices, and for other dues belonging to them, confirmed and allowed by our So∣veraigne Lord King Charles, by his Letters Patents under the great Seale of England, dated at Cambury the 22. of Iuly, in the 12. yeare of his Raigne, and are men∣tioned and expressed in a Schedule of Fees to the said Letters annex∣ed, and recorded in his Maiesties Court of common Pleas at Westm. in the Terme of S. Michael next following, quinto, sexto, septimo, octavo, nono. INprimis, For the entry of every common Declaration, common Plea in Bar, wherein one Freehold is pleaded, common Replication, and Rejoynder in actions personall,
For the entry of every speciall De∣claration, speciall Plea in Bar, or A∣batement Freehold Replication, or Rejoynder, and Pleas subsequent, in actions personall, not exceeding three sheetes, every sheete containing twelve lines at the least, and every line con∣taining ten words,ii. . viii. d. And for every sheete so exceeding, For every Declaration in actions up∣on the Case Ejectione firme, accompt, annuity, conspiracy, covent, deceit, partition, Plegiis acquiet. and debt up∣on Statutes, plaint in Assize, and the like speciall actions, and in reall mixt popular actions, if the declaration or plaint exceed not three sheetes,ii. s. viii. d. And for every sheete exceeding, For the entring of every Bar, Re∣plication, and Pleas subsequent in eve∣ry of the actions last above recited, and in the title actions, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. viii. d. And for every sheete so exceeding, For the buyer of every Bill, Obliga∣tion, Indenture, Record, or Certifi∣cate, or the like, entred in haec verba, not exceeding the length of three sheetes,ii. s. And for every sheete above that length,viii. d. For recording of every apparance by the Court,2. s. 4. d.
For me entry of every Recognizance without condition, challenge to the Sheriffe or Coroners, or to the Aray, or other speciall averments,ii. s. And for the entring of every Recog∣nizance without a condition,iiii. s. For every judgement in Debt, Tres∣passe, or detinue, without a tales for the Prothonotary,ii. s. And for entring of every adjourne∣ment,iiii. d. For every Judgement with a Tales, besides the Fee above recited,ii. s. For every Remanet, and Judgement for cost given to the Defendant by the Statute, besides the Fee abovesaid,ii. s. For every judgement in all other actions, aswell personall, as mixt, and reall, and prohibitions, and the like,iv. s. For every Satisfaction, Recordatur, Discontinuance, Retraxit, Relinquish∣ment, Nolle prosequi, or the like, in a∣ctions personall,ii. s. iiii. s. And in reall actions, For the entry of a single Recovery, and the writ of seism thereupon,x. s. 6. d. vi. s. And for every Voucher more, For the entrance of a Summons ad Warr. for a common Recovery, and the writ of Summons ad Warr.iv. s. vi. s And if for both, For every forraigne Voucher sent to the common Pleas to summon the
Vouchee, f the Record be not above three sheetes,ii. . viii. d. And for every sheete more, The like Fees are to be paid when the Record is remitted back againe, af∣ter the Voucher determined,2. s. 8. d. For the entry of every speciall Ver∣dict, whereupon a Cur. advisar. vult is entred, being not above the length of three sheetes, written as abovesaid,ii. s. And for every sheete exceeding that length,viii. d. For the entry of every generall Ver∣dict, with a Cur. advisar. vult, without a Tales,ii. s. iiii. . And with a Tales, For the entry of every Remittive of debt or damages,xii. d. For the entry of every Information upon any penall Law, and signing the ubpena only,ii. s. 8. d. For the entring of every surmise for a Prohibition to be granted, not ex∣ceeding the length of three sheetes, as abovesaid,ii. s. And for every sheete above that length,viii . For the entry of the Oath of every witnesse to prove the surmise in a Pro∣hibition, or Audita quercla brought by an Infant and the entry of the proofes de morte & vita viri, dower, and the like actions in suits,ii. s.
For the releasing of any default in any reall action,ii. . And entring the recitall of the grand Cap.iv. s. For damages cleere in every action where damage is given, if the damage given amount to five markes or above, ii. s. in the pound,ii. s. Nihil. xii. d. And if under five markes, For examining every record of N. i. pr. For making the Record for triall of an issue in any of the County Palatine, for the first three sheetes,ii. s. iiii. d. And for every sheete after, For the exemplification of any Re∣cord, not exceeding six sheetes,v. s. And for every sheete exceeding that rate,viii. d. For the entring of Seism in dower, & dying seised, the retourn of the Seism, exceeding not above three sheetes,iiii. s. viii. d. For every sheete exceeding, For entring of writs of Exemption de non ponend. in jurat. and Patents de libertat. elocand. and Protections, cog∣nizance of Pleas, and the like, accord∣ing to the rates abovesaid, if they ex∣ceed not three sheetes,ii. s. viii. d. And for every sheete exceeding, For the entring the default upon the distresse in wast quar. imp. and the like, and judgement thereupon if the title or count doe not exceed three sheetes,6. s. . d.
And if it be more than as aforesaid, for every sheete,viii. d. For entring of a Quo warranto, if it exceed not three sheetes,ii. s. For the entry of every Plea thereup∣on, according to the same rate before,ii. s. 8. d. For the entry of a Plea of accompt pleaded before Auditors, if it be not above 3. sheetes written as abovesaid,ii. s. viii. d. And if more, for every sheet exceeding, For the entry of every Summons, and Surveyance, and Pryor,ii. s. For the admission of an Infant to his Prochin amie, or Guardian,ii. s. iiii. s. And if it be by Commission, For entring of the Defendants discharge upon a Cap. pro fine, or for a contempt,ii. s. For the like upon Rescous, retorned and admitted to his Fine,iiii. s. For traversing of a Rescous, and is∣sue thereupon,vi. s. For entring of the allowance of eve∣ry generall and speciall Pardon of5. s. 4. d. Outlarie before judgement, and after For entring of a Dies dat. in debt, de∣tinue, and trespasse,xi. d. ii. s. And in all other actions, For the entring of the receipt of a feme Covert, Tenant in taile, Lessee for yeares, or the like,ii. s. And for the entry of the Plea, if it ex∣ceed not three sheetes,ii. s. viii. d. And for every sheete exceeding,
And if the receipt be by writ, then more for entring of the writs,ii. s. For the entring of an Assize deliver in the Common Pleas by Justices of Assize to be inrolled for every sheete,xii. d. And if the Assize come into the com∣mon Pleas by Certiorar. then more for entring the Certiorar.ii. s. For entring every abridgement of the demaundant in dower Assize, or the like,ii. s. For the entry of every pone to remove a Plea by writ out of the County Court there holden by Justices, and for the retourne of the Pone,iiii. s. For the entring of any Record sent in the Common Pleas by Mittimus, or otherwise; and likewise for the entry of every Rege inconsulto, or such like,ii. s. viii. d. if it exceed not three sheetes, For every sheete so exceeding, For the entring of every Certificate of Bastardy certified by the Bishop, and the awarding of the writ and judge∣ment thereupon,vi. s. For the entry of the Licence of the Court, to purchase a new writ by Jour∣nies accompts,ii. s. For the entry of every Originall writ delivered of Record in reall mixt actions,ii. s. For the entry of every sheete above three sheetes of every challenge to the
Sheriffe or Coroners, or to the Aray or other speciall averments, or the like,viii. d. For the entry of every Remanet in reall actions,iiii. s. For the entry of every Remittitur in reall and mixt actions,iiii. s. For the entry of every sheete above three sheetes of every aide pryer,viii. d. For the entry of an admission of a Guardian, if it be by Commission and Mittimus,vi. s. For the entry of a privy Seale for every sheete,viii. d. For the entry of the Licence of the Court to compound upon penall Sta∣tutes,ii. s. For entry of every warrant of Attor∣ney made by the Tenant in the com∣mon Recoveries, or the like, after their appearance at the Bar▪ii. s. For every Judgement by speciall Commission of the title in Quare imp. or the like, if it exceed not three sheets,iiii. s. iiii. d. And for every sheete after, For the entring of every speciall im∣parlance,ii. s. For the entring of every Committitur of a Prisoner by the Roll, being brought to the Bar by writ, and every ender of the body in discharge of the Baile,iiii. s. But if it be without writ, then in ei∣ther Case but,ii. s.
For entring of every demaund of a prisoner to appeare and remaund the said prisoner,iiii. s. For the entry of every Essoine in the Plea Rolls, as upon wagers of Law,xii. d. For entry of the Baile upon every Reversall for insufficiency of Exigent, or of the Retourne,2. s. 4. d. For the entry of every Declaration in debt upon demise, or the like speci∣all Declaration, if the Declaration ex∣ceed not three sheetes,ii. s▪ And if such Declaration exceed the number of three sheetes, then for the entry of every such sheete, containing twelve lines, and every line tenne words,viii. d For the entry of every severall Count in actions upon the Case and Accompt, and the like upon severall daies, if the Accompt exceed not three sheetes,ii s. viii. d. And for every sheete so exceeding, For the entry of every severall Count upon an originall Debt, Deti∣nue, Trespasse, and the like,xii. d. For the entry of every speciall con∣dition, or indorsement of any obligati∣on entred in haec verba, not exceeding the length of three sheetes,ii. . viii. d. And for every sheete so exceeding, But if the condition be in debt for paiment of money at one day, or under
the length of two sheetes, then for thexii. d. entring thereof but For the entry of every Mittimus, or Certiorar. and the Retourne thereof,iiii. s. But if the Retourne thereof exceed three sheetes, then for every sheete so exceeding,viii. d. For entring of the Count in a Prohi∣bition, and pleadings thereupon after an appearance of the Defendant, not exceeding the length of three sheetes,viii. d. And for every sheete above that length,viii. d. For the entry of every writ of Attaint or false judgement,ii. s. For the entry of the Retourne thereof and the assignement of Errors, or false Oathes, not exceeding three sheetes,ii. s. viii. d. And for every sheete more, For the entry of every sheete above three sheetes of the Oath of every wit∣nesse examined to prove the surmise in a Prohibition, or Audita querela brought by an Infant, and the entry of the proofes De morte & vita viri in dower, and the like actions and suits,viii. d.
Fees due to the Prothonotaries for Writs, and the Entries of the amongst other dues. FOr every Writ of Prohibition or consultation, not exceeding four sheets,ii. s. iiii▪ d▪ For every Writ so exceeding, For every Withernam return habend. after appearance, second de∣liverance, Writ of priviledge, habeas corpus. procedend. certiorare, Sum∣mons and Resummons, Pete, cape, ve. fac. sci. a. Elegit, extent. superss. Sub pena Writ to the Bishop, Attachment in Ass. Distringas Iu. habeas corpus, and Distringas in Ass. & Attaint, and the like habre Fac. possessionem, Writs of view, mittimus, Idemptitat. habeas, and every other speciall Writ.ii. s. For the entring of such other Writ, which requireth an entring not ex∣ceeding four sheets,ii. s. And if more, for every sheet exceed∣ing as abovesaid,viii. d.
For every Ca. fa. & fi. fa.vi. d. For every Testat. fur. ca. fa. & fi. fa. distringas ad deliberand. and Writs to enquire of damages in trespasses and Replevin,xii. d. For Writs to enquire of damages in Covenant, Ejectment, Actions up∣on the case, and the like,ii. s. vi. d. x. d. For every Capias pro fine, For the Exigent, for a Capias pro fine. For the entry of the Returne of eve∣ry Writ in the Prothonotaries oll other than the Ca. fa. returnd non est invent. and the fi. fa. returnd nulla ha∣bet bon▪ whereupon further processe is awarded not exceeding four sheets,ii. s. viii▪ d. And if more, then for every sheet. For the entring of every sheet of Priviledge or habeas corpus, with the Bayl for one cause,vi. s▪ ii. s. And for every name more, For entry of every Committitur upon a Habeas corpus una cum die & causa,ii. s▪ ii. s. And for every other cause, For every Reversall upon an Outla∣ry for default of Proclamation with one name, and the Bayl o nolle pro∣sequi,4. s. 4. d. ii. s. And for every name more, For every ca. fa. & fi. fa. after a devastavit,ii. s. Whereof by allowance from the Pro∣thonotaries the Clerke hath had,viii. d.
For every sheet exceeding four sheets of Writs to enquire of Damages in Covenant, Ejectment, Actions upon the case, and the like Actions,iiii. d. For the Writ of Liberate, or the like speciall Writ,ii. s. Whereof by allowance from the Pro∣thonotary the Clerke hath had,viii. d. For the entry of every such Writ and the entry of every other speciall Writ which requireth an entry not exceed∣ing four sheets,ii. s. viii. d. xii. d. And for every sheet so exceeding, For every Distringas in petition, Whereof the Clerke by allowance from the Prothonotary hath had,iiii. d. For Writs to enquire of damages in Covenant, Ejectiment, Actions upon the case, and the like Actions if they ex∣ceed not four sheets,ii. s. Whereof by allowance from the Pro∣thonotary the Clerke hath had,viii. d. For the entry of every Committitur, upon habeas corpus una cum die & cau∣sa with one cause returned besides the entry of the Writ,ii. s. ii. s. ii. s. And for the entry of the writ, And for every other cause returned, For the signing of all processe upon information, excepting the first Sub∣pena,
The Prothonotaries Clarkes fees. IMprimis, for the copies of common declaration and pleas for every sheet conteining twelve lines, and every line ten words,iiii. d. For every sheet in Reall and mixt Actions, and Actions upon any Statute and the like,viii. d. For drawing of every speciall decla∣ration and plea, for every sheet,viii. d. For every continuance every Terme of every issue writ, imperlance demurrer or speciall verdict or adjornment,iiii. d. For exemplifying every Recovery with a single voucher,4. s. 6. d. For exemplifying of a double vou∣cher,vi. s. xii. d. And for every voucher more, For exemplifying of any Record not exceeding eight sheets,v. s. vi. d. And for every sheet more, For drawing of every extraordinary long writ after the rate for every sheet,viii. d. And for the entry thereof (if it so re∣quire) for every sheet,iiii. d. For a copy of a judgement for every sheet,viii. d. For the entry of every writ, and the returne thereof into the Prothonotaries
Remembrance for drawing up of avi. d. iiii. d. judgement if it exceed not three sheets. And for every sheet after, For entring of every Common Rule into the Bill of Pleas or Common Re∣membrance,iiii. d. For the entring and ingrossing eve∣ry Summons for a Recovery and for the making of the writ of Summons,ii. s. For entry of every Mittimus and Dedimus potestatem for a Recovery,ii. s. 6. d. For the ingrossing of every Nisi priùs after the rate for every sheet,iiii. d. For entring of every Testat. sur. ca. fa. & si. fa.iiii. d. For the search of one Terme in the Prothonotaries office in his dggets or Remembrances,iiii. d. For the issuing out of the Court mo∣ney if the party receiving it,i. d. in . For the making of every long writ as Prohibitions & the like for every sheet,iiii. d. For the prosecution and issuing out of proces for the King to bring in the party for to make fine for his contempt untill the party render himselfe o bee3. s. 4. d. outlawed besides the fees of the Court, And if there because of Prosecution after the Exigent returned then more,3. s. 4. d. For the copies of suggestion to grant a Prohibition for every sheet,viii. d. For drawing of every surmise to have a Prohibition speciall verdict, and theviii. d. like, for every sheet.
The Prothonotaries Clerkes fees for Informations onely. FOr engrossing of every informa∣tion▪viii. d. For a copy of the said Informa∣tion if it amount to the number of five sheets of paper, or upwards,3. s. 4. d. If it be under the number of five sheets, then for every sheet,viii. d. For the making of every Capias pro¦fine upon an Information,vi. d For entring of the generall issue up∣on the Roll where the information was first entred in the Terme it was first exhibited,viii. d. For the Registring of every licence to compound in the office book.iiii. d An ancient fee due to the second Prothonotaries Clerks onely. FOr recording of every Fine ac∣knowledged at the Bar, writ and moved by a sergeant.iiii. d.
Fees due to the Secondaries of the Prothonotaries in their severall offices. FOr the copy of every common Rule,iiii. d. For taking a note of the Rule of the judges in Court upon the motion of a sergeant for drawing the same Rule in paper in Latin words and entring it into the Bill of Pleas and the copy thereof the draught not exceeding six lines in paper,viii. d. xii. d. If the Rule exceed six lines then, For every wager in law in Court or Nonsuit of the plaintife, upon a wager of law,xii. d. For the entry of the Committitur of any defendant to the Fleet in execution of any judgement or otherwise in Court and for making a copy thereof for the Warden of the Fleet containing the cause of the Commitment,xii. d. For the entring of every Commit∣ment to the Fleet of any person yeeld∣ing himselfe in discharge of his Baile and for the like Copy,xii. d. For attending him from his chamber to westminster to take a privy verdict cried at the Bar,. s. 4. d.
For reading the Record of a demurrer in Court or verdict,xii. d. xii. d. For taking Bail in Court, For entring of an admission of an infant to his prochin Amy or Guar∣dian in the Prothonotaries remem∣brance,xii. d. For the copy of the issue and jurors names to be delivered to the jury upon any triall at the Ba,xii. d. For reading of evidences upon trials at the Bar of each party plaintiffe and defendant,3. s. 4. d. For entring of every satisfaction by speciall warrant Recordatur and dis∣continuance,viii. d. For every satisfaction by generall warrant,iiii. d. For entry of every Bill or Letters of Administration to enable an Exe∣cutor or Administrator to acknowledge satisfaction and the entry of the satis∣faction,xii. d. For every copy of Interrogatories, depositions of persons examined upon Interrogatories by order of the Court for every sheet.viii. d. Per beve de Privato sigillo, wolseley.
A Table of the Fees due unto the Six-Clarkes of the Kings Court of Chancery. FOr all first, second, or other Copies of all Bils, Answers, and other pleadings whatsoe∣ver, as also of all Certificates, and Examinations made or ta∣ken by vertue of any Commission out of this Court, and of the interrogato∣ries therewith retourned, and also of all Declarations, or proceedings by English Bill, or according to the course of the common Law, and for co∣pies of Records, Rolls, or Evidences brought in to be copied, or remaining in the said Court, for every leafe ofviii. d. paper containing fifteen lines, For the inrolling of all Warrants, whereby any Patents, Commissions, Licenses, Pardons, Leases, or other Graunts whatsoever doe passe by, and under the great Seale, after the rate for every skin so passing the great Seale,xx. .
For the nrolling of all warrants for all Commissions of peace for Gaole de∣livery, for a liberty for Oyer and Ter∣miner, for Piracies for the preservation of the game of Swans, and for Com∣missions of enquiry sued out for the be∣nefit of any private person, for every of the said Commissions.xx. d. For the inrolling of all Warrants for all Commissions of appeale, and for the Admiralty, for every one of them,3. s. 4. d. For the inrolling of every warrant, for every ordinary Licence, or pardon of alienation,3. s. 4. d. But if it bee of more then ordinary length, then according to the length, after the rate of xx. s. the skin, and not above. For the inrolling of all Warrants for all Commissions in the nature of Writs of Diem clausit extremum man∣damus devenerunt, qu plura ideotae proband. unatico inquirend. melius in∣quirend. for every of them,3. s. 4. d. For the inrolling of the warrants for every Patent or graunt of the custody of any Ward,6. s. 8. d. For the inrolling of the warrants for every presentation, donation, or revo∣cation to any Rectory, Vicaridge, Deanery, Archdeanery, Chancellor∣ship,
Treasurership or dignity to any Metropoliticall, Cathedrall, or Colle∣giat Church, or for any Canonship, or Prebend in any of the said Churches, or for the Mastership of any Hospitall, or other Ecclesiasticall living, or for the grant of any presentation, or pre∣sentations pro unica vel pluribus vici∣bus thereunto,3. s. 4. d. For the inrolling of the warrants for every Mandamus ad installand.3. s. 4. d. For the inrolling of all warrants for all Licenses for Wines for every life,3. s. 4. d. Or such Fee not exceeding that pro∣portion, as by the Lord Chancel∣lour, or Lord Keeper shall be set downe, and by an order lately made by the right Honourable the Lord Keeper that now is, there is but vi. s. viii. d. paid, although it be granted for their lives, or more. For the inrolling of the warrants for every pardon of Outlawrie,3. s. 4. d. For the inrolling of the warrants for every denization, or commission of Bankrupts,3. s. 4. d. For the writing of every Exemplifi∣cation, aswell of Records in the Tower as of any Record whatsoever, being in their custody after the rate of every skin,26. s. S. d
Of every Client for every Terme hilest his cause dependeth, undeter∣mined by decree, or dismission, the termely fee of3. s. 4. d. If there be twenty Plaintifes or more in one Bill, they all pay but one Fee for one Terme,3. s. 4. d. But for every three Defendants ac∣counting the husband and the wife, but for one person there is the Fee of iii. s. iiii. d. due for their first appearance. And upon the first appearance, if every Defendant appeare severally by himselfe, he is to pay the fee of iii. s. iiii. d. but every Terme afterwards du∣ring the continuance of the cause, there is only the Fee of iii. s. iiii. d. the terme to be paid for all the Defen∣dants that appeared in any Terme or Vacation before in the same cause. For every Attachment, and attach∣ment with Proclamation, which is made in their offices, aswell renewed as o∣ther, unlesse the renovation grow by occasion of the default of the Clarke,ii. s. For every commission of rebellion renewed, or otherwise, unlesse the re∣novation be by the like default of the Clarke,viii. s. ii. s. For the inrollment thereof, And for the inrollment of every com∣mission of Rebellion issuing out of the Court of Starchamber,ii. s.
For the inrollment of every liberate and allocate,3. s. 4. d. For every Commission aswell renew∣ed, as other, to take an answer to heare and determine, or to examine witnes∣ses either beyond the Seas, or in any place or part whatsoever of England, Scotland, or Wales, unlesse the reno∣vation be occasioned by some defect in the former Commission, occasioned by the default of the Clarke, and not of the Client, the summe of6. s. 8. d. And if the Commission to examine witnesses bee joynt, then to each at∣torney,6. s. 8. d. 6. s. 8. d. And if it be ex parte, then but one, For every Commission upon any or∣der of the Court, aswell renewed as other, unlesse the enovation be by the like default of the Clarke,x. s. For every writ of Execution upon any Order,6. s. 8. d. For ingrossing every Bill in Chan∣cery hand, wherein answer is to bee made by Commission, for every leafe,vi. d. xxxiii.  & iiii. d. For drawing and inrolling of every decree and dismission respectively, And neither they, nor their Clarkes to take any further Fees.xxvi. s. & viii. d For every writ of Execution upon a Decree, after the rate for every skin, For the writing of every Sheriffes patent, and for the writ of assistance,
writ of Discharge, commission to take the Sheriffes oathes, the Attournies Fee, as also for the warrant of Attour∣nie, and the writing of the two oathes,30. s. 8. d And for the ten divided Counties mentioned in the acts of Parlia∣ment made in 8. & 13. Eliz. to cleare all future mistakings or doubts, they shall for the time to come take but halfe so much as for other Counties whatsoever hath been used heretofore, and neither they, nor their under-Clarkes are to take by any colour any other Fee for Sheriffes Pa∣tents then aforesaid. The like Fees for every English Es∣cheator, saving for the warrant of At∣torney,30. s. 4. d For the drawing and ingrossing of every Injunction, the Fee,13. s. 4. d But the inrolling of Injunctions is of little use, and needlesse, except only in speciall Cases, when the Court shall appoint them to bee inrolled, and then it is to be done without any new Fee. For every Supersid. for the discharge of any commission, or other writ made
in any of the six Clarkes offices,6. s. 8. d. For every Supersid. of priviledge, pro venientibus vel redeuntibus ad vel a Cancellar.6. s. 8. d For every speciall Certiorar. or pro∣cedendo corpus cum causa, or habeas corpus,6. s. 8. d. For every baile upon every writ of corpus cum causa, or matter of privi∣ledge,ii. s. For all manner of Certiorar. and pro∣cedend. of course,ii. s. For every Recognisance or Bond made to the Court,ii. s. The six Clarkes are to present their Clients causes which are to bee heard either in Court, or at the Rolls, but neither they nor their under Clarkes, nor any other are to take any fee or reward at all therefore, but to rest content with their Fees allowed in this table of Fees.
Ordinances made by Thomas Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, with the advise and assistance of the right honourable Sir Iulius Caesar. Knight, Master of the Rolls, in the Terme of S. Michael the Archangel, in the eleventh year of the raigne of our Soveraigne Lord King Charles, for the re∣dresse of sundry Errors, Defaults and Abuses in the high Court of Chancery, 17. Novemb. 1635. 1. THat Bills, Answers, Re∣plications, and Rejoyn∣ders bee not stuffed with repetition of Deeds, or writings in haec verba, but the effect and substance of so much of them only as is pertinent and materiall to be set downe, and that in effectuall and briefe termes, that long and need∣lesse
traverses of points not traversable, nor materiall, causelesse recitals, tau∣tologies, and multiplication of words, and all other impertinencies occasion∣ing needlesse prolixity be avoided, and the ancient brevity and succinctnesse in Bils, and other pleadings restored, and upon any default herein the party and counsell under whose hand it pas∣seth, shall pay the charge of the copie, and be further punished as the case shall merit. 2. When the Defendants have an∣swered the Plaintiffes, and their coun∣sell are seriously to advise of the an∣swers, and if they finde that upon the answer alone, without further proofe, there be sufficient ground for an or∣der or decree to proceed upon the an∣swer without further lengthening the cause, or if it be needfull to prove one or a few particular points to reply un∣to those points, and not to draw into pleading, or proofes any more than those necessary points, thereby making long bookes, and putting both sides to unnecessary charges, the defaulters herein to be punished by paying the charge of the copies, or otherwise, as the cause shall require. 3. That interrogatories for exami∣ning witnesses be drawne only upon points materiall, and not upon matters
which are either consessed in the plead∣ings, or are impertinent and needlesse to be proved, That the articles which are usually thrust into the beginning of every Schedule of interrogatories, as it were of forme or course, touching the witnesses knowledge of parties, plaintiffes or defendants of the lands, towns, & places in the pleadings, and the like, be not so needlesly used as they are, but if for crosse examining any witnesse, or for other speciall reason, it shall be necessary to minister any such question, every man is left at liberty to doe therein as much as shall be perti∣nent and needfull in a de and sitting place, and if any shall offend against this, the party and such as drew the in∣terrogatories shal be punished by pay∣ing as much as the other side is by that meanes over-charged in copies, and further as the case shall merit. 4. When the parties are at issue, and doe proceed to examination of witnes∣ss either in Court, or by Commission, as the interrogatories are to be perti∣nent and materiall, so the witnesses are to be sorted by those that produce them, that they may be examined upon such interrogatories as are proper and sit for them, and not to examine a multi∣tude of witnesses upon a multitude of questions altogether unknown to them,
as it is too frequently done upon paine that where any grosse abuse or default herein shall bee made appeare to the Court, the defaulter shall pay as much as the other side is by that meanes over∣charged in copies, and shall be further punished if the Court see cause. 5. When a Commission is awarded to examine witnesses, if by the default of him that hath the carriage of the Commission or his Commissioners no∣thing is done, he shall beare all the charge that the other side was put unto about that Commission, either for Fees of Court, bringing, or entertaining Commissioners or witnesses, or other∣wise to be ascertained by the oath of the party, or of him that disbursed the money for him, and shall renew the Commission at his own charges. 6. When a Commission is awarded to examine witnesses, and the one side produceth and examineth all his wit∣nesses, and the other side doth not, but pray a new Commission, if it be grant∣ed, he shall beare as the charge of the renewed Commission both in Court and in the Countrey, as well for the charge and entertainment of his owne Commission, as of the Commissioners of the other side, and the other side shal be permitted to crosse examine the wit∣nesses produced by him that reneweth
the Commission, but if he will examine any other witnesses of his owne, then he shall beare his owne part of the charge, the charges herein mentioned to be as∣certained by the oath of the party, or of him that disbursed the money for him. 7. He at whose instance a Commis∣sion to examine witnesses after a for∣mer Commission executed and return∣ed is once renewed, and he by whose default, or by default of his Commissi∣oners a former Commission was not ex∣ecuted, and thereupon it is renewed, shall at his perill examine all his wit∣nesses by that renewed Commission, o examine them in Court by the end of the Terme wherein that renewed Com∣mission is retournable, without any more, or further delay. 8. When witnesses are examined in Court upon a Schedule of interrogato∣ries, there shall be no new interrogato∣rie put in to examine the same witnes∣ses, but the witnesses shall be examined only upon such interrogatories as were exhibited before the witnesses to be ex∣amined were sworne, neither shall any witnesses be examined in Court after the day of publication, though they were sworne before, so as a copie of the rule of publication be delivered to the examiner, whereby he may take know ledge of the publication.
9. When witnesses are examined in Court, they shall perfect and subscribe their depositions unto such interroga∣tories as they have answered before they depart from the Examiner, or his deputy, and shall not be permitted to make any alterations thereof at any time after, without leave of the Court, unlesse it be in some circumstance of time, or the like, or for making perfect of a summe upon view of any deed, booke, or writing which the witnesses shall shew to the Examiner, before hee admit of such alteration. 10. The six Clarkes who are the on∣ly Attournies in this Court, ought to informe themselves continually of the state and proceedings of their Clients Causes, whereby they may be able to defend their Clients, and to give ac∣count to the Court as the Attournies in all other Courts doe, and not to leave the care and knowledge thereof upon their under Clarkes who attend not in Court, and the Clients and such as follow their Causes are to acquaint their Attournies for that purpose. 11. Such as desire to have their Causes set downe for hearing, must re∣paire to the six Clark that is Attourney in the Cause, at least six daies before the end of the Term, that the six Clark may inform himselfe of the state of the
cause of the long or short dependance thereof in Court of the antiquity of publication of the weight or value of the causes, and all other circumstances materiall, to informe the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls at the time of setting downe of causes, and the six Clark may not refuse to offer the same to be set downe, if he be attended in such due time as aforesaid, nor come unprepared to inform the Lord Keeper or Master of the Rolls of the nature & circumstance of the cause aforesaid, and neither he, nor any of his under-Clarkes, nor any other are to take any Fee, Gratuity, or Reward for the same. 12. The Registers in drawing up Orders shall use all convenient brevi∣ty according to the manner of ancient times, they shall mention the materiall Reports, Affidavits, and former Or∣ders upon which any new Order is grounded to have been read, but shall not repeat the same, they shall not un∣lesse it be by speciall direction of the Court, fill any Order with the disputes of Councell, nor with reasons and al∣legations pro & con, nor mention any reasons but such on which the Court relyed in making the Order, and those with brevity and clearenesse, and if they deliver a draught or copie of any Or∣der
to be perused by Councell, if it be not brought back within 24. houres, they shall enter the Order without at∣tending any longer for an answer from Councell, only they shall forbeare the entries of Decrees and dismissions, un∣till they be signed, that the Lo: Keeper and the Master of the Rolls may re∣forme them, if there be cause at the signing. 13. Whereas the excessive and un∣necessary length and charge of writs de executione decreti have been com∣plained of, from henceforth unlesse the party that sueth out such Writ shall de∣sire that the whole Decree as it is sign∣ed and inrolled be therein recited, the writ, if it be only for paiment of money shall make no other recitall but to this or the like effect, Cum per quoddam Decretum in ur▪ Cancellar. nostr. die Ann egni nostri ordinat. & adjudicatum existt quod tu solveres A. B. centum l b. legal. monetae Angl. tb praec pmus & fir∣mier injungend. mandamus quod praed. centum lb. praefat. A. B. debit. mod solvas et hoc nullatenus omttas periculo incumbente. And if the money by the Decree be payable at certaine daies, or places, then the same daies and places to be expressed in the Writ without any further recitall, and if the Decrees bee
for doing other things to be performed by the party or parties to whom the said Writ is directed, then no more shall be recited in the Writ but the very decre∣tall order, unlesse the decretall order doe in such manner refer to a Report, or Certificate, as without recitall of those points of the Report, or Certifi∣cate which are to be performed by the parties to whom the said Writ is dire∣cted, it will not appeare what is to bee by them performed, and in that case so much of the Report, or Certificate as is to be performed by the said parties shall be recited, and the order con∣firming the same, and no more unlesse it be desired by the party suing out the said Writ, and the Fee thereof to bee paid, shall be after the rate prescribed in the table of Fees, and no more. 14. Every demurrer shall containe the causes of the demurrer, and the Counsell who set their hands to it, are to beware that those causes be not tri∣viall, and where a demurrer or plea is grounded upon the substance and the body of the matter, it shall be deter∣mined in open Court without refe¦rence, and the Register at the instance of the party demurring, shall without any Fee put into the paper of causes after the hearing and assigning a spee∣dy day to every one in order, as hee
commeth to require it, and if the De∣fendant who demurred make no such instance to the Register within eight daies after the plea and demurrer is put in Court, the same without any motion shall be disallowed of course as put in for delay, and the Defendant shall pay ordinary costs, provided that the Register doe not without speciall warrant put above two of those demur∣rers into the paper upon one day. 15. If the demurrer be grounded only upon some error, slip, or mista∣king in the Bill, no Reference shall be made thereof for a week after it comes in, but the Plaintife without any moti∣on shall be admitted of course to a∣mend the said error, slip, or mistaking, paying to the Defendant, or his At∣tourney for his use costs as the sixe Clarkes not towards the cause shall thinke fit, but if the Plaintife in that time doe not amend or alter it, then if the Defendant doe nothing therein within a week following, by getting it ruled or referred, it shall be disallowed of course without any motion as put in for delay, and the Defendant shall pay ordinary costs: but if the Plaintife not amending the same as aforesaid, it bee ruled against him upon Reference, or otherwise, he shall pay the ordinarie costs.
16. When a Plaintife excepteth to a Defendants answer, he shall set down his exceptions in writing, and deliver it to the Councell whose hand is to the answer, or to the Defendants Attorney in Court, and if the Defendants doe within a weeke satisfie the Plaintife of the invalidity of his exceptions, or a∣mend the answer in the same time, or agree with the Plaintife, or his Attour∣ney, or Sollicitor to amend it by such a time as shall be agreed on betweene them, and doe amend it accordingly without putting the Plaintife to obtain a Reference, or make any motion ther∣abouts, then the Defendant shall pay no costs, and if any Plaintife shall presse and procure a Reference within this time, or before this course taken, the Reference shall be void, as obtain∣ed surreptitiously; But if the Defen∣dant doe neither satisfie the Plaintife, nor amend his answer in manner afore∣said, then if upon Reference or other∣wise his answer be ruled insufficient, he shall pay costs according to the course of the Court. 17. The Masters of the Court shall prefixe convenient, but not overlong daies for hearing such matters as are referred to them, and at the times pre∣fixed shall proceed without admitting any fained or dilatorie excuses, especi∣ally
that Councell are otherwise im∣ployed, or cannot attend, or are not instructed (there having been notice and time enough allowed, or the like, and after the daies shall speedily send in their Reports for the case of the Clients attendance, which cannot but draw great charge. 18. If the Case be such as the Ma∣ster cannot proceed in the absence of either party, or his Counsell without just cause absenting, the Master is pre∣sently to certifie the Court of the de∣fault, that the defaulters may be pu∣nished by Commitment, Costs, or o∣therwise, as the cause shall merit, and if the Master doe use or willingly ad∣mit any grosse delay, the Reference is to be removed, and the Master rebuked by the Court. 19. The Masters of the Court are not upon the importunity of Councell, or Clients to make speciall Certificates of matters wherein the Court expects an opinion from them, nor are to doe it, but where their owne judgements in respect of difficulty leadeth them to it, it occasioning for the most part a need∣lesse trouble to the Court, and both de∣lay and expence to the party. 20. No Reference shall be to a Ma∣ster whether an injunction shall bee granted or not, but the same to passe
upon the opinion and judgement of the Court, but if the Court thinke the matter informed sufficient for an in∣junction, but is doubtfull of the truth any point of the information: The Court when it cannot otherwise be fitly done, may be certified thereof by a Ma∣ster who is then to certifie not only whether the information be in sub∣stance true, but if there appeare other matter to confesse and avoid, or other∣wise ballance that information he must not conceale it, but give the Court a cleare and true information. 21. No References are to be made either to Masters, or others (unlesse it be by assent on both sides) to heare and determine the cause upon all the proofes or otherwise; but when the Court hath heard it, and reduced it to particular points, specially if these points have relation to Accompts, or matter of that nature, the Court may fitly leave such to be reduced to cer∣tainty by a Master. 22. The Register shall within tenne daies after the end of every Term cer∣tifie to the Lord Keeper what Referen∣ces depend in the hand of any Master, and how long they have depended, that if any of them have depended overlong, the Court may require an account thereof from the Master, and
quicken him to a speedy dispatch. 23. When a Master certifieth the sufficiency or insufficiency of an An∣swer, Plea, or Demurrer, if either par∣ty rest not in the Report, but trouble the Court to determine it, if the Ma∣sters Report be confirmed, he that op∣poseth it shall not pay double costs. 24. Where the Masters of the Court doe sometime by way of inducement fill a leafe or two of the beginning of their Reports, and sometimes more with a long and particular recitall of the se∣verall points of the orders of Refe∣rence, they shall forbeare such iterati∣ons, the same appearing sufficiently in the orders, and without any other re∣petition then thus, According to an or∣der, or by direction of an order of such a date, shall fall directly into the mat∣ter of their Report, setting downe the same clearely, but as briefly as they can, for the ease both of the Court, and the parties. 25. That Counsellors be carefull what motions they make, and especial∣ly that they move not for any thing which may be had of course without motion, nor for such thing as cannot be granted, as being a constant rule of the Court or common Justice, nor yet for such things, as being granted, serve for little or no purpose, And before
they move the Court, they be sure to be well informed and instructed, lest i the orders obtained by them upon mis∣information to be after avoided, their Clients or themselves bee deservedly punished with costs, or otherwise. 26. When orders be made, especial¦ly if it be upon hearing of Councell on both sides, or after day to shew cause given, and none shewed there being a timely notice, both sides are to rest in it without troubling the Court with new motions to crosse it, unlesse the Counsellour that moves it, be sure that the matter he hath to crosse it be weigh∣ty and important, and will be well proved upon the motion, such as shall doe the contrary are to be punished with good costs, and otherwise, as the Court shall finde cause. 27. That no Counsellour put his hand to a Bill, Answer, or other plead∣ing, unlesse it be drawne by himselfe, or at least perused by himselfe in the paper draught before it be ingrossed, and that the Counsellour that puts his hand to any such, shall be answerable for all things therein, either against these orders or any other the orders or rules of the Court, except only such things as are not to be misliked but for untruth, for which the Client if he in∣formed it, or such as caused it to be put
in without his warrant or information, shall be answerable. 28. If any Counsellours shall pre∣sume to move for one in forma pauperis that is not so admitted, and shall under that pretence move a second motion, the Register shall enter neither of his orders, but shall within foure daies ac∣quaint the Lord Keeper, or Master of the Rolls with the abuse, that he that did it may be condignely punished. 29. Counsellours before they take on them to informe by motion, or other∣wise that any thing is contained in the Bill, Answers, Pleadings, Proofes pub∣lished, or in any Deeds or Records, ought to be carefull in perusing the same themselves, and not to rest upon the information of the Client, o his Sollicitor, who cannot so well judge of them, and whose part it is to produce those things unto the Counsellours, but it is the Counsellours part to direct how far forth the same are to be pressed or urged to the Count, and they are to sustaine the blame or punishment, if either wittingly or negligently, for want of reading or perusing, they a∣buse the Court therein. 30. For avoiding a multitude of idle petitions drawne by persons altogether ignorant of the orders and course of the Court, or the true state of the petitio∣ners
businesse that petitions before they be presented to the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls be shewed to that six Clarke, who is the petitioners Attourney in Court, or to his, and by him approved and subscribed, for which no Fee shall be taken, and this is not to be understood of petitions advised and signed by Councell, nor petitions containing any matter of complaint against the Attourney or his under-Clarke. 31. All the Clarkes of this Court, in copying, ingrossing, inrolling, or other writing, shall doe the same fairely, or∣derly, and Clark-like, not doing it wastfully, nor in lesse Skins or Rolls of parchment, or leaves of Paper then ought to be, thereby increasing their owne and their Masters profit, or the Subjects charge, and if the Master of the Office upon complaint to him, doe not doe right therein, the Lord Keeper, or the Master of the Rolls shall punish both the Master and the Clarke, and yeeld recompence to the complainant upon complaint made to either of them, within two Termes after the offence done. Novemb. 17. 1635. Tho: Coventry C. S. Iul: Caesar.
