C717 12234504 56700
SEMOGRAPHY: OR, SHORT and SWIFT WRITING. Being the most easiest, exactest, and speediest Method of all other that have beene yet extant: the full understanding is so easily attain'd that the Learner hereof needs no other help but the book it selfe,  which will bring him to such exact that in a short time he shall be able to take word for word after the speaker with much ease. Invented and composed for the benefit of others by the Author hereof WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT. And is now set forth and published by his Nephew Ieremiah Rich immediate next to the Authour deceased. There is divers that the Professor hereof hath, taught, that will affirme this hand to ourgoe all others for briefnesse, which have had the sight likewise of other hands. All which desire to learn this hand may have the Booke to teach them. London, Printed in the yeere, 1642.
To the not curious, but honest Reader. KInd Reader, I am not minded to trouble your view with foolish and empty comple∣ments; neither need I write any thing to the praise of short-writing, it is alrea∣dy done by so many to my hand, who have so far strained their finest com∣plements to boast out their own works, that the strongest cords thereof have not only crackt, but very Complemen∣tall-like, they have broken out into large lies: but yet alas we all know that many times men over-strain them∣selves with too long a reach. But to passe that: for my part, I conceive that all the hands that are written are ad∣vantageous to those that write speeches
or Sermons. And, I further conceive, that there is little difference in those hands that are already extant, for those which brag most have least cause: for if their Method be shorter, it is because they commit more to memory: then it is the memory which helpes, and not the Rule; but that must needs be best that is briefest with the least trouble to memory. For if any be pleased so far to charge their memory, there is a way in this hand to write any or all the sen∣tences in the Scripture by markes, which for the most part plainly figu∣reth out the severall sentences they be∣long to; but it would be too long for me to discourse of that here, something to this purpose I have written in the booke, and if any desire further satis∣faction let them repaire to me, and they shall have it. For there is more to be done by this hand then can well be committed to the Presse without great and large expression. Now as for my
commending of the worke, I know not why any man should expect it, seeing it is my owne: for although I am not Father to it, yet am I the right heire, for my Vncle dying left it to me only, and now contrary to the custome of all others, I am willing that any that please should partake with me of this my small portion. Farewell. Thine, JER. RICH.
To all good Artists, that would write The shortest way, lo here's the light. LO here's presented to thy view, What none before could ever shew, For it short-writing we may praise The like hath not been seen these daies: For Method rare, and abbreviation, Excelling all within this Nation; For sure there is not any hand. As farre as I can understand, That doth instruct to write so briefe, With ease to learn; of all its chiefe, An easie apprehension may With few spent houres find out the way, Both for to write, and eke to reade, Such ease doth from these Rules proceede. Here I might lay downe some reason, But it would much be out of season. For he that's pleas'd this book to buy, May reade and know as much as I.
This branch I leave now to thy view, The stock is dead from whence it grew, And thou partaker of his paines, Possesse with joy, thine be the gaines; And when thou knowest, then say I tell The very truth, and so farewell. Per me TIMOTHY LANGLEY Who hath written SHELTONS this 12. yeares, and viewed many others, yet conceives there is none can paral∣lel this. This I will make appeare to any that desires to learne this hand, in 4. or 5. particulars.
SEMOGRAPHY: OR, Short and Swift Writing. FIrst of all in the writing of this Art, it is to be observed that the Learner hereof must be a skilfull speller, having know∣ledge in all manner of words that can be named. For the Briefnesse of this Art consisteth not onely in the easinesse of the Markes or Characters for the same; but in the shortning of words by casting out all such letters that are superfluous, and of little sound, and only to write as much as will bring in the sense of the word. And this he must be skilfull in before he can undertake to write after any, or to take any quantitie of a Sermon. For the help of the Learner in this ob∣serve these things following. First, that at the least one letter may be left out  in the shortest word that can be spoken. Secondly, that sometime two Consonants or more  may be left out, and yet the word sufficiently pro∣nounced.
As in these words, and the like. For might write mit. For fight write fit. For light write lit. For doubt write dot. For dough write do. Thirdly, observe that sometimes a whole syllable may be left out; and yet the word understood plainly. As in these, For commandement write cōmament. For congregation write congation. For resolute write reslut. For communication write comucation. For hypocrite write hypcrite. Fourthly, observe that the like two or three sylla∣bles may be left out. As in these, For incomprehensible write incom. For internall write ntern. For Mephibosheth write Mefb. For Holofernes write Holof. For uncreated write uncre. For redeemed write rd. And the like. It often happeneth that in the end of a long word two or three syllables may be spared.
Fifthly, one Consonant may be changed for ano∣ther  of the like sound, when the other cannot conve∣niently be, as in this Art must be often used. As commonly in the end of long words x may be writ for ch: as in Patriarch, x may expresse it thus Patriarx: And so in divers other. As to write all such words as begin with c: k may be exprest standing in the place of c. As followeth, For com write kom For call write kall For cold write kold For crime write krime For croud write kroud Sixthly, some words may be shortned by the lea∣ving  out of e: sometimes at the beginning, some∣times in the middle, and sometimes at the end. As followeth. In the beginning when it commeth before x. For externall write xternall. For extent write xtent. For extend write xtend. For extreme write xtreme. As also when it commeth before n. As For entrance write ntrance. For enternall write nternall. For entension write ntension. And the like
When e also cometh before s. As For escape write scape. For estate write state. For establish write stablish. And the like. When it cometh before m also, it may be left out in the like manner. When e cometh in the midst of a word, and the sound thereof be drown'd by the Consonant, that fol∣lowes it may be spaed, as when it cometh before r. For internall write intrnall. For interrupt write intrupt. For interpretate write intrprate. For intercession write intrsetion. And the like. And alway at the latter end of a word it may bee spared, because it is but of little sound. As For come write com. For crie write cri. For believe write believ. For belike write belik. For betime write betim. For before write befor. And thus e is cut off from most words by reason it hath but little sound, but especially in the precedent words. Of Diphthongs. A Diphthong is when two vowels meets together in a word, and one of them must of necessitie be soun∣ded: And now because that one doth chiefly sound
the word; therefore the other may bee omitted. As in these. For feare write fer. For heat write het. For meat write met. For feat write set. For great write gret. For feat write fet. And the like. Although two doe come together, yet the first doth principally sound the word; And must be writ as is said. So much for Diphthongs. Observe that for a slow hand there is a help in this  Art, both in speedinesse and also in memory, by the reason that a whole sentence may be joyn'd together, as one marke; And also plainly be read, which I leave and referre to the learner when he comes to them. Having spoken something of this Art in generall, we come to the first point thereof in particular. The Letters of the Alphabet. a / b ch c d e f g h i k l m n o p q q r s s t v w x y y z z
CHAP. I. All which Letters except y must be made before the Pen be taken from the Paper, that is to say, at once. Also observe that q stands for qu. because they al∣wayes come together. Likewise all the Letters (save onely t and y: and y) are to be ended towards the right hand, that you may the better ioyne the next ensuing letter to it. These Letters being so perfectly obtained by heart, that you can make all of them without looking on the Copie, you may proceed to the next. An observation of the Letters ch and i. If it be demanded how all such words shall be ex∣prest as are written with c because that ch will sound the word too soft. I answer that in such words as c must begin and principally sound the word, then sometimes we in this Art doe change another for the like sound; therefore k may serve to expresse c thus: For com write kom For call write kall For cold write kold For cast write kast For can write kan And the like. This may thus be wrought, and yet no prejudice at all in the reading, but rather a help, after a little use. Likewise we have an i Vowell, and not an j Conso∣nant, and it being impossible to observe five places about a common period, therefore we change i for g being of the like sound.
As thus For iohn write gon For ioyn write goyn For iack write gack For ieames write geames For iust write gust When the learner hath all these observations by art concerning the letters, he may proceed to the next, which is double Consonants. CHAP. II. The Double Consonants. To begin   and end. bl Words ld br   lk fl   lm fr   ln dr   lt dw   lp gl   ls gr   lst kn   mp pl   nk pr   ns sh   nt sk   rm sm   rn sn   rs st   th sp   ch str   wh tr       tw      
All which letters or double Consonants, unless  be the three last, are the very letters of the Alphabet joyned together; and therefore they are to be ob∣served: As to write (bl) your (b) alone is thus (): and (l) thus () ; when you ioyne them toge draw (l) from the foot of (b) thus (). As also for to write (ld) your (l) thus (); and (d) thus (), when you ioyne them together draw (d) from the foot of (l) thus (). And the like of all the rest as you shall see them in the copie of the double Consonants and Termina∣tions. The single vowels are in number five: as a. e. i. o. u. most sort of writers observe five places about the Consonants for the same: but I seeing some ill con∣venience in the same by the reason that the places of a and e be so neere the one to the other; that if the writer be not perfect in his writing he may mi∣stake and place a for e, and e for a, which breeds con∣fusion in the reading as by daily experience doth appeare. Therefore for the learners more exactnesse in this Method, I have omitted one of the vowels, and re∣served but foure to be placed about the Consonants▪ and therefore these are to be observed. The Vowell that is omitted is (e) which we write in his own proper Character, and ioyn it to the Conso∣nant when it doth end a word thus: ded set me we fe ye
As also when it doth come in the middle of a word it is expressed thus: bet set let net get het fet And such like. CHAP. 3. The places of the Vowels. b ch d f g The place of (a) is over the head. The place of (i) lower then the head. The place of (o) almost at the bottome. The place of (u) underneath thus; and so are all the Vowels placed. By the places of these foure Vowels the learner may observe to write any manner of word that con∣taineth one or two syllables; as for Example: bat bet bit bot but dat det dit dot dut fat fet fit fot fut gat get git got gut lat let lit lot lut mat met mit mot mut sat set sit sot sut hat het hit hot hut
By the former Examples of the foure Vowels places, and the observation of the Vowell (e) the learner may expresse any manner of word, as by these Examples may appeare. When two Vowels come together in a word, a one of them will sound the word; the other may omitted, as for Example: feat heat meat great seat Where you see that although two Vowels come to∣gether, the first doth sound the word principally, and therefore the other may be spared as we have said before, in the former observation concerning Diphthongs. If two Vowels meet together in a word and they both must be expressed, the former Vowell is expres∣sed by a tittle, and the latter Vowell by placing the last consonant in the place thereof. diall roit poet lion For words of two syllables we observe to separate the syllables in setting the first by it selfe, and ex∣pressing the other, like unto a word of one syllable; As for Example: de file de fame de face de forme be like be time be seech be leeve be come
Thus the learner may observe, by these directions may learne to write any manner of word that can be named, but for the learners brevitie in this Art in writing of long words we have marks to observe for the beginning and ending of the same as followeth: CHAP. 4. Prepositions and Terminations for long words. Com con under pra pre pri pro pru sus suf re ack mount ment tempt core cashion nation ration ation lation tation sion union count sent tent sever ture ternall trance ever
By these Prepositions and Terminations the lear∣ner may observe to expresse all manner of words, they being a sufficient ground for the same. Words by the farmer Examples communication congratulate commandement commission contrition action correspondent containe conforme understand prayer preferre prudent pride proscribe consolation sustaine confirmation condition assault misinformation consent content confusion misbeleeve containing servitude conclude First of all the learner may observe that if he hath a Preposition to begin a word, and never a Termina∣tion to end it, he must end it with one of the letters of the Alphabet. Secondly, if he hath a Termination to end the word (named) and never a Preposition to begin, he must also begin it with a single letter. Lastly, if there happen both a Preposition and a Termination in the word to begin and end the same, he must first write the Preposition and set the Termi∣nation in the place of the Vowell that sounds the word, as may be seen by the word (communication) above-written.
Before we proceed to the Table we may observe certain of the letters expressing words of themselves, and these words being the most common and coming in every sentence, therefore it is thus ordered, that the letters should alone expresse them. The Vse of the Letters. after Double consonants ex∣presse these words. remnant be   small church   the children   you eminent   wherefore or he   example of   is God   his hospitality   &c. I       King       Lord   blessed man   glory in   grace order   knowledge principality   shalt question   impediment For a slow hand there is a helpe in this Art both to speedinesse and also memory by the reason that many words may be left out as superfluous, and the chiefest words of a sentence writ and the other omitted; the ground whereof followeth: abound exceeding large long measurable unspeakable transcendent triumph wide little short small increase
Sentences writ by the former Examples follow. abound in grace increase in knowledge excell in vertue. and in the know∣ledge of Christ. the exceeding love of God. the large love of God to sinfull man. the exceeding love of God to give Christ. the unspeakable love of Christ. his transcendét ri∣ches of grace not to be measured. his grace triumph∣ing over death. the exceeding long suffrings of Christ. the love of God. the power of God. the Joyes of hea∣ven. the torments of hell. the troubles of the Saints. the gate of life. the way of Salva∣tion. the ark of Cove∣nant. and mercy seate as if he should say as well as as good as as long as as much as &c. when thou art cō∣verted strength∣en thy brethren, both high & low, rich and poore, from him that sitteth on the throne to the hewer of wood and the drawer of water.
As for those whose judgements are that the joy∣ning of a sentence breeds an ill convenience in the reading, by the reason that it is spoke divers waies, are not of my mind; for although some common sentence is spoken many wayes, yet for the sentences that are taken out of the Scripture they can be read but the way that they are found, whatsoever the demonstra∣tion thereof may be, therefore I proceed a little fur∣ther in expressing some of them that are most usefull. Wash ye, make you cleane, put away the evill of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to doe evill, Learne to doe well, relieve the father∣lesse and the widow. Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sinnes be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson they shall be as wooll. O that my people would have heard the words that I spake, and to have known my way! I would have fed them with a crop of the finest wheat, and made the rock to drop with honey, and turne my hand against all their adversaries. They say, when will the Sabbath be over that we may sell our Corn, and wine, and oyle? Neither height, nor depth, nor principa∣lities, nor powers shall be able to sepa∣rate us from the love of God, that is in Christ.
Note that there is another way whereby dive short sentences may be writ: First of all  thus written. Last of all  thus written. First of all, the Martyrs of God. Last of all, the Mercies of God. Last of all, the judgements of God. Citie () thus, over-run the Citie () thus come against the citie () thus, to undermine the citie () thus, to war against the citie () thus, ou of the citie () thus, within the citie () thus. THE TABLE. A. Advance admit affliction adultery anger angel against arguments among. B. Behold Baptisme blesse because begin beleeve behind betweene brethren C. Cause children come Christ Church congrega∣tion conscience conversa∣tion comforta∣ble corrupt D. Doe diligence destroy deliver
dwell darknesse discover E. Elect Example enter evill even expect earth. F. Follow faith from foundation forbeare flesh feast fast. G. Give God great glory Gospel good generation generall H. He hath humble heart heaven hypocrite hereticke heare house. I. Instruments instruct increase inward Jesus Christ iudge K. King kingdome know keepe. L. Let love Law Lord life like long M. Mistake mortall Magistrates ministers multitude
N. Neverthelesse neighbours neglect necessitie notwithstand∣ing name nothing now. O. order of observable over others. P. People principall particular publike protection patience pacifie Q. Qualitie question quarter quantitie R. Remember righteousnesse regard Religion reioyce repentance. S. Stand Salvation Spirit selfe-love. small. T. Thinke Trinitie themselves torment thus these those there taste thy trouble. V. Vp vppermost voyce W. we were wise with wickednesse world walke
whether wild worship Y. yet you your yeeld Z. Zeale Kingdome The people of the kingdome the K. of the Kingdome. the Lords of the Kingdome. From East to West, from North to South. The people of the East. the King of the East. the men of the West. the king of West. the country of the North. the men of the North. the cold of the North. And after this manner or from this ground you may write thousands of others. Note yet further that here is another rule of ab∣breviation very necessary. As people: servants: Saints: men: women and children: For all these you must observe six places about your word or marke for your word, when you shall have occasion to write them, as you write God () thus, then observe six places () thus, now the lowest prickes on the backside of God, signifies the people
of God () thus, the next to that the servants of God () thus, the next the Saints of God () thus, the next the men of God on top of the right side of your mark () thus, the next the women of God () thus the last the children of God () thus: and so about the word Israel or Judah, with many other words which the Artist may find out of himselfe, it would be too much to relate. As for Example. The people of God. The people of the Jewes The Servants of God The Servants of Satan The Saints of God The Saints and Servants of God. The men of God The men of Judah The men of Jerusalem The men of Sodome. The women of Samariah Let women be watchfull Let women love their husbands. The children of God The children of the world Let not the children of God fall to sin and wickednesse. Many thousands more might here be added, and by this ground expressed, but the diligent learner may find them out of himselfe when he doth heare the sen∣tence named. And upon the benefit hereof let me have thy Prayers. FINIS.
