D1416 11906661 50708
THE ANATOMY OF Human Bodies; Comprehending the most Modern DISCOVERIES AND CURIOSITIES In that ART. To which is added A Particular Treatise OF THE Small-Pox & Measles. Together with several PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS AND EXPERIENCED CURES. With 139 FIGURES curiously cut in Copper, Representing the several Parts and Operations. Written in Latin by ISBRAND de DIEMERBROECK, Professor of Physick and Anatomy in Utrecht. Translated from the last and most correct and full Edition of the same, By WILLIAM SALMON, Professor of Physick. LONDON Printed for W. WHITWOOD at the Angel and Bible in Little-Britain, 1694. At which place all Dr. Salmons Works are sold
THE PREFACE. HOW beneficial the exact knowledge of the Fabrick of humane Bodies is, and how difficult the same skill is to attain, the continual improvements in Anatomy one Age after another, notwithstanding the utmost diligence of the last, do sufficiently evince. Were it not beneficial, so many Philophers and Physicians in all Ages had not employ'd their pains about it; and were it not difficult, some or other of these great Men had compleated it. Of which number we may reckon Democritus and Hippocrates, the two Parents of solid Philosophy and Physic, one of which great Men was by the City of Abdera invited to take a Journey to cure the other of Madness; but the Phy∣sician finding the Philosopher intent upon his Anatomical scrutiny for the seat of the Bile, and receiving wise Answers to all his other enquiries, returned satisfied that the multitude of that place laboured of the very Disease, which they were so mad to have cured in Democritus. Many more great Men among the Antients, such as Ari∣stotle, Diocles, Erasistratus, Praxagoras, Herophilus, Asclepiades, Euripho and others cultivated this Province; but none in former Ages excelled Galen. Nor was Anatomy in esteem only among Phisophers and Physicians; but even Kings and Emperors were both Specta∣tors of, and Actors in it. Alexander the greatest of Emperors, employ'd both himself and his Master Aristotle sometimes in Dissections, notwithstanding his Conquests and great Affairs, which took up so much of his time and care. Also the best of Emperors, Marcus Antoninus, who was so prudent and wise a Man, gave himself to the search of Nature and to cutting up of humane Bodies, that he might the better understand his own
Frame and Constitution. Nor did several Aegyptian Kings disdain to manage the Anatomical Knife with their own Roy∣al hand. Certain also it is, that Boethus and Paulus Sergius the Roman Consuls, and other great Personages, both Learned and War∣like, honored Galen with their presence at his Anatomical Administrations▪ where they might see and admire the skill and workmanship of the Divine hand in building a Taberna∣cle for the Soul of Man. And indeed among all the advantages of Learning, none is greater than to have skill in Nature; and yet above all, the highest pitch of knowledge is to know our selves. Be he Philosopher, Orator, Lawyer or Divine, that thinks he knows so much, to what purpose is it, if he is wise abroad and a fool at home, if he knows not the Habitation of his Soul, the seat of his Reason, whereby he is willing to distinguish himself specifically from Brutes, and signally from the most of Men? What an exquisite piece of folly would it appear to be, if a Man skill'd in Minerals and Plants, and in most other sub∣jects of Natural enquiry, yet should not know the Animal Oeconomy at all? Certainly he would to judicious Eyes ap∣pear no less impertinent, than the Man that should mind every Mans business but his own, and in balancing Accounts would be found as rich in knowledge, as the foresaid imperti∣nent would be in Estate. For Anatomy is not a knowledge only honorable and plea∣sant; but profitable and highly useful, especially to a Physi∣cian; so necessary, that the Ancients thought it the very Foun∣dation upon which the celebrated Art of Physic is built, which being once taken away, the whole Art must fall to ruine. As an Architect, when he goes to repair a decay'd House, must of necessity know all the Parts of the House, of what substance they must be, of what figure, how many in num∣ber, and how they must one be joyned to another. So he that
professes Physic, can never cure the diseased Parts aright, unless he has an exact Idea of their substance, figure, bulk, number, and mutual connexion one to another, which can only be attained by Anatomy. If a Philosopher ask a Reason of any action either Natural or Animal, it is only the knowledge of the Parts of a Humane Body, that can furnish a Man with an Answer. And if you are to cut out a Thorn, or the Point of any Weapon, or if you are to open a Fistula or an Abscess, you can perform no∣thing aright without Anatomy. It is through want of Skill in this, that sometimes Sense, sometimes Motion, sometimes both are violated, or wholly abolished, and (which is worst of all) a contemptuous neg∣lect hereof by some Physicians has been the cause of present death to some Persons. Of such moment is the knowledge of Anatomy, both in cure of Diseases, and in presaging the Event. But unskilful∣ness makes Men bold where there is reason to fear, and timo∣rous where all is safe, and no occasion of fear is. Yet now adays how many Medical Rabbies are there pre∣tending themselves to be either Chymists or Galenists, and not inferior to the Master of their Sect, who do not under∣stand Books of Anatomy: So far are they from ever having seen or shown to others any Dissections. And divest but these fellows of their Titles, you'll find them mere Syrrup-mongers, endeavouring more to please the Palate than to cure Diseases. Which indeed is the reason we have so many circumforane∣ous Impostors, who promise boldly every thing to the un∣learned Multitude, relying upon Receits for Medicines com∣posed without Reason. Hence it is come to pass, that he who knows but how to make up a Medicine, dares pronounce his Judgment of Diseases, and give his Medicines without any regard had to an able and learned Physician. And so Fellows play with Mens lives, who have skill in nothing, much less in so abstruse an Art as Physick is.
Wisely therefore have our Laws provided, that none but such as are recommended by their Learning and Probity should be admitted to take care of the Health of Men, none I say, but such as are approved of by the Learned. We have not in England wanted our Cato's, Boethus's and Paulus's, who by Law have kept Sycophants and Knaves from Practi∣sing of Physick; who have obliged every one to Practise that Art and Trade he has been brought up to, and who have re∣stored Learning to its place and honor. For only the Learned in Anatomy know, what Part a Disease does primarily affect, and what by Sympathy, of what Nature things are, and what Remedies ought to be applied to each Part, since the Method of Cure varies according to the Nature of several Parts. Only Men skill'd in Anatomy can give true Judgment upon a Wound, whether it be Mortal or no, which is of no small moment to a Judge or Magistrate for their Conduct and Procedure upon Criminals in that particular. Such likewise they must be, who by dissecting a Diseased Body, can procure any advantage to the living, by finding out more proper Remedies, according as by Dissection they have found in others the cause and seat of the Disease. Though by what has already been said, you see the Credit and Reputation Anatomy has in former Ages been, yet the Study of it never flourished more than in this last Age, wherein so many are so strenuously industrious, that one would think in our Age it might be brought to perfection▪ Who can ever forget the Learned Asellius, for finding out the Lacteal Veins? No less than immortal Glory can be due to the Renown'd Harvey, our Country-man, for finding out the Circulation of the Blood. He that cannot acknowledge the Excellency of our Willis for his Anatomy of the Brain, must never pretend to the subject Discourse. The curious Researches of our Wharton on the Glands surpass what has been said in former Times. The Scholastic and Learned Glisson has performed his Share in trasing the Meanders of the
Liver-Vessels. The acute Lower has shown in sensible Terms, how the prime Mover of the Humane Machine ex∣erts its Power. The renowned Bartholinus in Denmark, the Swammerdam's, Bilsius's, de Graaf's, and others in the Low-Countries; but especially the Learned and Laborious Diemer∣broeck, in Utrecht, have raised to themselves immortal Monu∣ments of their Learning and Industry about this Subject. And upon Diemerbroecks Labours principally, what I have here to say, shall be employed. He says, he had for several Years been conversant in Anatomical Studies; that in teach∣ing others, he had learned many things himself that were new, and till his Time altogether unknown; upon which he resolved to write a Book of particular Observations, and make them publick, as he saw several others had done before him. But abundance of his Friends disswaded him from this, and urged him rather to write a whole Body of Anato∣my, and to put into it (besides what Galen, Eustachius, Vesalius, and others had written, who had been most excellent in Works of this Nature) not only his own, but all the Mo∣dern Inventions of all Learned Men whatsoever. This Ad∣vice was not unwelcome to him, because none had attempt∣ed this before him. But the Attendance upon his Practice, the Greatness of the Undertaking, and the Criticalness and Censoriousness of this curious Age, to say nothing of the Malice and Envy of some, did a little deterr him. However, these Difficulties being surmounted, he undertook the Busi∣ness, finished it, and made it publick. All the new things, which either he could find out, or were hitherto found out by the best of Anatomists, he has here brought upon the Stage. He further, in his First Editi∣on, engaged, that whatever hereafter he should find lying hid in obscurity, he would bring to light, and when he died, that he would bequeath all to Posterity. For as long as the Desire of advancing Anatomical Knowledge should continue in the World; he knew innumerable other things would be produced, which we cannot now so much as dream of, such
things he recommends to Posterity, and that out of Love to the common Welfare, Men would not hereafter scruple to undertake this Province. In this Anatomy of his, he tells you, he is not so ambiti∣ous as to arrogate to himself the excellent Sayings, or the new Inventions of others; but desiring to give every one his due Honour; he sets down the Names of the Authors, of whom he borrowed any thing; for, as Pliny says, He ever reckoned it a piece of Good Nature and Modesty, to acknowledge his Bene∣factors, but that it was an Argument of Guilt and Ill Nature, to chuse rather to be catched in Theft, than to restore another his own, when he at the same time is in debt upon Interest. And so he gives to all their Due. For, he professes, he would not be ac∣counted one of these, that by writing of Books, would procure themselves a Name, who by raking and scraping all they can from others, get a great deal together, and vaunt it all for their own, concealing the Authors Names from whence they stole, when in the mean time they mis-apprehend perhaps the Authors Meaning, and what they have thence transcribed, neither they themselves well understand, nor are they able to express it to others. Nevertheless, in quoting of Authors, he uses not many Flatteries and Complements, but avoids all fulsome and A∣dulatory Blandishments, wherewith abundance of Books now adays are rather blotted than adorned, while they style the Authors, whom they cite, the most Eminent, never e∣nough to be commended, the most Acute, the most Famous, the most Learned, the most Noble, the most Celebrated, &c, and adorn themselves, especially such as are yet alive, with I know not what Epithetes (it may be to avoid and prevent some shrowd Objections, which haply they might otherwise fear; or that they themselves being ambitious and delighted with such empty Applause, desire the same Fa∣vour, at one time or other, to be returned upon themselves) he reckons, all he quotes, to be Learned Men, nor does he doubt of it, though he thinks some more Learned than o∣thers.
Therefore he would have no Man take it ill, that he lards not his Name with many such Epithets; because, as Complements now pass indifferently upon all Men, they ra∣ther fully the Illustrious Worth of the Deserving, than add any Splendor to it. In this Book he studies not so much Politeness of Style, as the Truth, which has no occasion for Bombast and Rheto∣ric. But that he may the better discover what the Truth is, in several places he opposes other Mens Opinions, but in a friendly way; some he refutes, and wholly rejects, but without any Malice; here and there he ushers in his own, but without Ambition; and whereas he has observed, that in most Authors, several things are wanting about the True Use of the Parts, many things, either written or judged a∣miss, in several places he treats more fully concerning it, but without Disparagement or Reproach to others. For he ne∣ver reckoned it▪ any Fault in a Learned Man, that all other Mens Writings do not please him alike, nor that he corrects many things, and contradicts many, provided it be done ci∣villy, and without Virulence and Calumny; which alass! is now the Practice of too many Supercilious Scriblers, who, the better to defend their Darling Opinions, and these often taken, and stolen from others, and vouched for their own, had rather attack their Adversaries with foul Words and Scur∣rilous Writings (which does not at all become Learned Men) then concert the difference in friendly Reasonings. In the Seventh Book of this Work, and other where, in describing the Ducts of the Veins, he takes a new and unusu∣al Method; for whereas other Anatomists heretofore de∣rived the Branchings of the Veins from the Vena Cava and other great Veins, to all the Parts of the Body, he on the contrary prosecutes them from the Parts to the great Veins, and so to the Vena Cava, that so the continual Progress of the Blood, according to the Order of Circulation, might the better be demonstrated. Thus much he published in his Life Time: But before
he died, he had made several fresh Collections, and some∣where Alterations. These in this last Edition, from whence this Translation was made, are added by his Learned Son. Wherein we may modestly aver, that the most material things, found either in Ancient or Modern Anatomists, are comprehended, and far more Opinions and Discoveries, than ever were contained in any one Anatomical Treatise yet extant. Now it being agreed by all skilful Physicians, that Anato∣my is the solid Basis of Physic; and (as has before been said) the Learned Diemerbroeck having excelled in laying the Corner Stone, how can it reasonably be suggested, that the same Learned Hand cannot build a Superstructure Correspon∣dent? The Author therefore having not rested in Theory alone, but having put in Practice what he so well knew in the Art of saving Men; and moreover, having given, not only his own, but other Mens Practice in the most Epide∣mic Diseases, the Small-Pox and Measles, which were ne∣ver till this Edition made publick; we thonght we could not do better, than give our Country-men, in their own Tongue, what he so advantagiously has written in the Learned, and only to such as understand that. In these acute and violent Diseases, we find the best Methods yet invented, scarce sufficient to rescue the major Part of Patients from them; how requisite therefore is it, that the Skill of so Learn∣ed and successful a Physician as Ours should not dye with him? But he rests not here, his worthy Son has likewise communicated in this Edition, some of his Fathers Observa∣tions upon various Diseases, wherein consists the Life and Soul of Physic; for in them, as in a Piece of Workman∣ship, you may see the Authors Skill, better than in any Pre∣cepts, inasmuch as it is much easier to prescribe Rules how to act, than to put those same Rules in Practice. So that in this Volume you may have a Summary of the Excellencies in the Art of Physick, which so many Learned Men in all Ages, since Physic was an Art, have by their utmost Diligence and Ingenuity been able to accomplish.
Tab. I.
THE EXPLANATION Of the Sixteen PLATES. The EXPLANATION of the First TABLE. In Folio 68. This Table exhibits the Delineations of the Chyle-bearing Channels, the Pectoral Chyle-bearing Channel, and of the Lymphatic Vessels of the Liver; cut in Brass by their first Discoverers. FIGURE I. All the said Vessels, as they occur in a Dog. A. THE Ventricle. B. The Pylocus. CC. The Duodene Gut. DDD. The Iejune Gut. EEE. The Ilion Gut. F. The Blind Gut. H. The Beginning of the Right Gut. IIIII. The five Lobes of the Liver. K. The Vesicle of the Gall. LL. The Kidneys. MM. The Emulgent Veins. NN. The Hollow Vein. O. The Gate Vein. R. The Vesicle of the Chylus. SS. The Mesentery. TT. The broken Part of the Mesente∣ry, that the Ligature of the Lym∣phatic Vessels of the Liver might be conveniently adapted. aa. The Glandulous Sweet-bread. bb. The Fleshy Sweet-bread, an∣nexed to the Duodenum, and lying under the Ventricle. ccccc. The milkie Veins lying be∣tween the Intestines and the Glan∣dulous Sweet-bread. ddd. The Milkie Veins issuing out of the Glandulous Sweet-bread. eeeee. The Exits of the Lymphatic Vessels from the Liver. fff. The Progress of them to the Kernel. m. And from thence into the Chylus-Bag. gg. Two Branches of the Choller-re∣ceiving Channel. H. The Insertion of this Channel in∣to the Duoclenum. iiiii. The  Veins. m. A Krnel seated under the Porta Vein, receiving the Lymphatic Ves∣sels of the Liver. nn. One of these Channels creeng through the Vesicle of the Gal. oooo. The Ramification of the Por∣ta Vein, and its Ingress into the Liver.
tt. The Veins of the Vesicle of the Gall. xxxx. The Places of the Valves in those Channels. FIGURE II. pppp. The Places of the same Valves. FIGURE III. T. The Bifurcation of the Chyle∣bearing Channel in the Thorax, under the Heart, as it is fre∣quently found. FIGURE IV. z. The various Ramification of the Chyle-bearing Channel less com∣mon. FIGURE V. x. The Axillary Vein, with the Left Iugular i. n. The threefold Insertion of the Chyle-bearing Channel, less com∣mon; for it is more frequently single. FIGURE VI. AAA. The same Insertion in a Mans Head. BB. The Axillary Vein entire. C. The External Iugular Vein. d. The Clavicle. FIGURE VII. A. The Heart removed to the Side. BB. The Lungs turned back. CC. The Hollow Vein. D. The Right Axillary Vein. E. The Left Axillary Vein. F. A part of the same Vein opened to shew the Insertion of the Chyle∣bearing Channel. G. The Sternon delineated only with Points. H. The Left Iugular Vein. II. The Aorta Arteria. KK. The little Chylus-bag. L. The Hepatic Branches of the Hollow Vein. aa. The Emulgent Veins. bb. The Lumbar Veins. dd. The Crural Veins. eeee. The Lymphatic Vessels under the Right Gut, tending upwards to the Chylus-bag, fffff. The Kernels placed by the Crural Veins, out of which those Lymphatic Vessels rise. ggg. The said Lymphatic Vessels ris∣ing out of the Kernels. hhh. The Lymphatic Vessels proceed∣ing between the Muscles of the Abdomen to the Chylus-bag. iiii. The Milkie Veins creeping be∣tween the Glandulous Sweet-bread and the Chylus-bag. kkk. The Glandulous Sweet-bread. ll. The Milkie Mesenteric Veins be∣tween the Glandulous Sweet-bread, and the Chylus-bag. MM. The Chyle-bearing Channel in the Thorax. N. The Insertion of it into the Axil∣lary Vein. oo. The Kernels of the Ster non. pp. Their Lymphatic Vessel dis∣charging it self into the Channel of the Chylus in the Thorax. Q. A little Branch of it proceeding toward the Ribs. RR. The Glandules of the Heart. S. Their Lymphatic Vessels inserted into the Chyle-bearing Channel un∣der the Heart. FIGURE VIII. xx. The Gullet. β. The Kernel annexed to it. γγ. The Lymphatic Vessel arising out of it, and inserted into the Chyle∣bearing Channel. δδ. The Chyle-bearing Channel.
FIGURE IX. The Chyle-bearing Channel in a Dog, as first discover∣ed by Pecquetus, and by him delineated. 1. The Trunk of the Hollow Vein ascending. 2. The Receptacle of the Chylus. 3. The Kidneys. 4. 4. The Diaphragma dissected. 5. 5. The Lumbar Psoa Muscles. 66. The several Meetings of the Chyle-bearing Channels. FIGURE X. The same Chyle-bearing Channel, together with the Chyle-Bag, taken out of a Dog. A. The Trunk of the Hollow Vein as∣cending, open'd upwards in length. BB. The Meeting of the Iugular and Axillary Veins; where the Springs of the Chylus are marked out by Points. CC. The Valves of the Iugular Veins looking downwards. DD. The Distribution of the Milkie Vessels to the Springs, as described by Pacquetus. EEE. Various Meetings of the Mil∣kie Vessels. F. The Ampulla, or upper Part of the Chyle-bearing Bag, conspicuous in the Thorax, near the untouched Diaphragma, toward the Left Side. G. A little Channel appearing on the Right-hand by the Diaphragma. HH. The remaining Portion of the Diaphragma. I. The Receptacle of the Chylus. LLL. The Milkie Mesaraics entring the Chyle-bag, cut off. MMM. Several Valves of the Chyle∣bearing Channel. ooo. Valves preventing the Return of the Ascending Chylus. FIGURE XI. The Chyle. bearing Channel in a Man, as discovered and described by Bartholi∣nus. A. The Upper Chyle-bag rare and seldom seen. bb. Two Chyle bags mutually joyned to the Milkie Vessels, seldom seen, for generally there is but one. ccc. The Milkie Branches ascending from the Bags. D. The single Thoracic Branch. E. The Right Emulgent Artery. FF. The Kidneys. GG. The descending Trunk of the Great Artery, cut off below the Heart. H. The Spine of the Back. K. The Gullet turned back to the side. LL. The Kernels of the Thymas. M. The Thoracic Channel tending to the Subclavial Rib. N. The Insertion of the Chyle-bearing Channel into the Subclavium. o. The Valves. P. The inner Form of the Axillary Vein, expanded and slit the full length. R. The External Form of the Iugu∣lar Vein. TTT. The Ribs of each Side. V. The Bladders in their proper Holes. xx. The Diaphragma laid open on each side.
The EXPLANATION of the Second TABLE. In Fol. 69. This Table shews the Lymphatic Vessels seated in the Neck, as they are describ'd one way by Lewis de Bills, and ano∣ther way by Iacob Henry Pauli. FIGURE I. The Lymphatic Channels of the Neck described by Lewis de Bills, and by him call'd the Dew-bearing Channels. A. THE Dew-bearing Channel ascending upwards from the Cistern. B. The fissure of the said Channel about the fifth and sixth Vertebre of the Thorax. E. The Winding Receptacle which that Channel makes above the small Twigs of the Iugular Vein. F. The windings which that Recepta∣cle makes about the writh'd Recep∣tacle. 3. Part of the Hollow Vein under that Receptacle. 4. The Kernels of the Thorax. G. A Branch of the Dew-bearing Channel, running forth to the Ker∣nels of the Breast. H. The Branch that grows to the Thoratic Kerhels under the wind∣ing of that Channel. I. A Branch of the Dew-bearing Channel, ascending to the upper Kernel of the Neck. K. A little Twig of the first Branch ascending upwards. L. A Branch of the same ascend∣ing to the lower Kernel of the Neck. M. The division of the Branch L. 5. The lowermost Kernel of the Neck. N. The Gullet. O. The Iugular Vein. P. A little Sprig of the Iugular Vein. R. A Trunk of the great Artery. V. The Guts distorted. X. The Dew-bearing, by us called Milkie Veins. YYY. The great Kernel of the Me∣sentery, or Asselius's Sweetbread▪ with the Kernels adjoyning to it. Z. The little Pipes from the Mesen∣teric Glandules toward the Ci∣stern. 6. The Duodene Gut cut off. 7. The Right Gut cut off. 9. The hollow part of the Liver with its Lobes. FIGURE. II. The Lymphatic Channels of the Neck, described by Ia∣cob Henry Pauli. AA. The Hyoides Muscles in the Sternon out of place. B. The Sheild resembling Gristle. C. The Pipe of the Aspera Arteria. DD. The Gullet lying under the Aspera Arteria. EE. The Muscles of the Neck cut a∣thwart. G. The hollow Vein ascending. HHH. The Axillary Veins. II. The External Iugulars out of place. KK. A Sprig of the External Iu∣gular near the Neck. LL. The External Iugulars. M. The single Channel of the Iugular Lymphatics, coming from the long Kernel, and partly spread upon the Gullet, out of place. NN. OO. Two Lymphatic Vessels proceeding from the Cervical Ker∣nels.
Tab: III
P. The common hole like a Viol. qq. Two Appendixes, one entring the Axillary, the other the Iugu∣lar Veins. ss. Pecquetus's and Hornius's Tho∣racic Channel▪ ascending from the Chyle-bag. TT. The upper Ribs. V V. The lower Ribs. 1. The lower conglobated Parotic. 2. A small Kernel seated outwardly above the Iaws. 3. The Maxillary Kernels, round. 4 The oblong Maxillary Kernel. 5 The lesser Kernel sometimes want∣ing. 6. The fleshy Tyroidaean Kernels discovered by Wharton. 7. The Cervical Kernels compacted like a Bunch of Grapes. 8. The Kernels of the Neck, some∣times placed outwardly next the External Iugular, but seldom. 9. The under Axillary Kernel. The EXPLANATION of the Third TABLE. in Fol. 146. This Table shews the Urinary Bladder, and the Testicles in Men, with their dependencies acurately describ'd by Regner de Graef. FIGURE. I. The Urinary Bladder with  Parts annexed. A. THat part of the Urinary Bladder to which the Ura∣chus was annexed. B. The fore-part of the Urinary Blad∣der open'd. CC. The Ureters. DD. The Exit of the Ureters into the Bladder. E. The Neck of the Bladder. FF. The Parts of the seminary Ves∣sels cut off. GG. The Vessels running forth to the seminary Vessels. HH. The Seminary Bladders blown up. I. The Caruncles with two holes through which the Seed breaks forth into the Ureter▪ KK. The Glandulous Body, or the Prostate open'd in the fore∣part. LL. The small mouths of the Chan∣nels of the Glandulous Body, open∣ing into the sides of the Caruncle, and unless they be blown up, con∣spicuous only by certain points. M. The Beak of the Caruncle. N. The Ureter open'd in the upper part. FIGURE II. The Testicles of a Man with its Coverings. A. The Parts of the preparing Ves∣sels cut off. B. The Vaginal Tunicle containing all the Vessels of the Tunicle. C. The beginning of the Cremaster Muscle. D. The Fleshy Fibres of the same, annex'd to the Vaginal Tunicle, and running out the whole length of it. EE. The Fleshy Fibres of the same, ending obscurely in the Vaginal Tunicle. F. The Vaginal Tunicle containing the Testicle.
FIGURE. III. The Testicle with its Cover∣ings annex'd laid bare. A. The Preparing Vessels cut and turn'd back. B. The same Vessels annex'd one to another by slender Membranes. CC. The Artery preparing the Seed, carry through the Belly to the Stones. DD. The Ramifications of the Veins preparing the Seed through the sides of the Stone. E. The Albugenious Tunicle contain∣ing the substance of the Testicle. F. The Vaginal Tunicle thrown back. G. The bigger Globe of the Epidi∣dymis. H. The middle part of the Epididy∣mis. I. The lesser Globe of the same. K. The end of the same, or the be∣ginning of the Vessel carrying the Seed. L. The different Vessel cut away. FIGURE IV. The Testicle inverted. A. The Artery preparing the Seed. B. The division of it into two Branches. CC. The bigger Branch carry'd to the Testicle. DD. The lesser Branch hastening to the Epididymis. E. The bigger Globe of the Epidi∣dymis adhering to the Testicle. FF. The Epididymis inverted, to shew how the Artery runs under it. G. The end of the Epididymis. H. The Vessel carrying the Seed cut away. FIGURE V. A. The beginning of the Epididy∣mis, where the Seminary Vessels perforate the Albugineous Tunicle. BBB. The bigger Globe of the Epi∣didymis drawn upward, to shew the Ramificatious of the Vessels, and their entrance into the Testi∣cle. C. The preparing Vessels cut off. D. The Divarications of the prepa∣ring Vessels through the Albuge∣ous Tunicle. E. The Albugineous Tunicle. FIGURE VI. A. The Body of the Testicle, the Al∣bugineous Tunicle being taken off. BB. The Albugineous Tunicle in∣verted. CCC. The Portions of the preparing Vessels preforating this Tunicle cut away. D. The Albugineous Tunicle sticking close, to the back of the Testicle, by reason of the Membranes of the Testicle there meeting. FIGURE VII. A. The substance of the Testicle, se∣parated from the Albugineous Tu∣nicle. BBB. The Solutions of the substance; by which it appears not to be a Glandulous body, as at first sight it seems to be, but a Body com∣pos'd of Vessels. C. The Albugineous Tunicle stretch'd upward. FIGURE VIII. AAA. The Seminary Vessels of the Testicles placed in a certain order between the thin Membranes. BB. The Seminary Vessels running out through the Membranous sub∣stance sticking to the back of the Testicle. C. Certain small Portions of the Seminary Vessels perforating the Albugineous Tunicle, cut off. DDDD. The Albugineous Tunicle opened, and drawn to the sides.
Tab IV
FIGURE IX. A. The Testicle cut athwart. BBB. The Disposition of the Semina∣ry Vessels. C. The Concourse of the Membranes detaining the Seminary Vessels, least they should be jumbled toge∣ther, sticking close to the Back of the Testicle. FIGURE X. The Prostate or Glandulous Body. AA. The Glandulous Body opened in the Fore-part. B. The Ureter opened in the upper Part. C. The Passages of the Glandulous Body laid bare. O. The Place of the Caruncle, through which the Seed breaks forth into the Ureter. FIGURE XI. The Vessel of the Testicle of a Dormouse. A. The Spermatic Artery descending to the Testicle. BB. The whole Testicle, with admi∣rable Dexterity, cleared so as to shew the Vessels. The EXPLANATION of the Fourth TABLE In Fol. 154. This Table shews the Yard, with the Seminary Vessels, and other Parts annexed to it, exactly delineated by Reg∣ner de Graef. FIGURE I. The hinder Part of the Yard A. The Urinary Vessel. BB. Portions of the Ureters. CC. Portions of the Vessels carrying the Seed. DD. The deferent Vessels dilated like little Boxes. EE. The Vessels running forth to the Seminary Vessels. FFFF. The Seminary Vessels distended with Wind. GG. The Hinder Prospect of the Prostatae. H. The Ureter. I. The Meeting of the deferent Vessels, with the Seminary Vessels. K. The Muscle dilating the Ureter. L. The same Muscle drawn back to the Side. M. The Spungy Part of the Yard un∣der the Ureter. NN. The Ureter. OO. The Spungy Bodies of the Yard. P. The Nut. qq. The Muscles extending the Yard. FIGURE II. The Forepart of the Genital Parts. A. The Urinary Bladder. B. The Neck of the Bladder. CC. Portions of the Ureters. DD. Portions of the Vessels carry∣ing the Seed. EE. Vessels running forth to the Se∣minary Vessels. FF. The Seminary Vessels. GG. The Prostatae.
H. The Ureter adjoyning to its Spongy Part. II. The Spungy Part of the Ureter. KK. The Muscles erecting the Yard. LL. The Beginning of the Nervous Bodies separated from the Share-Bones. MM. The Skin of the Yard drawn to the Sides. NN. The Doubling of the Skin which constitutes the Preputium. OO. The Skin which was annexed behind the Nut. P. The Back of the Yard. Q. The Nut of the Yard. R. The Urinary Passage. SS. The Nerve running forth above the Back of the Yard. V. The Nervous Bodies meeting to∣gether. WW. Two Veins meeting together, and running along the Back of the Yard with one remarkable Branch. X. The Vein opened to shew the Valves. FIGURE III. The Yard divided to the Ureter. AA. The Nut of the Yard, together with the Nervous Bodies divided through the Middle. BB. The Membranes of the Nervous Body of the Yard divided one from the other. CC. An Artery creeping through the Spungy Substance of the Nervous Body. DD. The Spungy Substance of the Yard. EE. The intervening Fence. FF. The Fibrous Shoots of the Inter∣vening Fences, ascending like a Comb. G. The Ureter cut off about the Glandulous Body. H. The Middle of the Ureter. I. The End of the Ureter perforating the Nut. KK▪ The Spungy Substance of the U∣reter. LL. The Beginnings of the Nervous Bodies dilated like little Bel∣lows. MM. The Muscles erecting the Yard. FIGURE IV. The Yard opened at the Side. AA. The Nut laid bare. B. The Bridle. CC. A Portion of the Skin, from which the other Part covering the Yard, is separated. DD. The Ureter lying under the Nervous Bodies. EE. The Membranes of the Nervous Bodies of the Yard divided. FF. An Artery shooting out through the Spungy Substance of the Ner∣vous Body. GG. The Spungy Substance of the Nervous Body. HH. The Orifices of the Arteries cut off. I. The Ureter. K. The Spungy Substance of the U∣reter. LL. The intervening Fence of the Nervous Bodies. FIGURE V. The Yard dissected athwart. AA. The Spungy Substance of the Ner∣vous Bodies. BB. Two Arteries perambulating the Nervous Bodies. C. The Urinary Passage of the U∣reter. D. The Spungy Substance of the U∣reter. E. The Intervening Fence. FF. The strongest Membrane of the Nervous Bodies. G. The thinnest Membrane contain∣ing the Spungy Substance of the Ureter. A. A remarkable Vein creeping a∣long the Back of the Ureter.
Tab. V.
FIGURE VI. The Communication of the different Vessels, with the Seminary Vessels in the Body of Man. AA. The thick Parts of the diffe∣rent Vessels endued with Substance and a small Cavity. BB. The Parts of the different Ves∣sels, endued with a thin Substance and a large Cavity. CC. The Extremities of the Diffe∣rent Vessels, streightned again to∣gether, and gaping with a small Hole into the Neck of the Semi∣nary Vessels. DD. The Neck of the Seminary Ves∣sels divided into two Parts, by means of a certain intervening Membrane, to the end the Seed of the one side should not mix with the Seed of the other, before it comes to the Ureter. EE. The Seminary Vesicles distended with Wind. FF. The Vessels running through them. GGG. The Membranes by which the Vesicles and different Vessels are detained in their Situation. HH. The Blood-bearing Vessels runing out to the sides of the different Ves∣sels, and embracing them with their small Branches. I. The Caruncle through the Pores of which the Seed bursts forth into the Ureter. KK. The Channels of the Glandulous Body gaping into the Ureter, at the sides of the Caruncle. LL. The Glandulous Body divided in the Fore-part. MM. The Ureter opened. FIGURE VII. The same Letters with those of the preceding Figure, as the one shewed the Exter∣nal, so these shew the In∣ternal Substance of the Se∣minal Vessels. The EXPLANATION of the Fifth TABLE, In Folio 174. This Table shews the Constitution of the Womb, and the Female Privities, and the Parts adjoyning, as well in Women with Child, as in empty Women. FIGURE I. The Womb containing an Embryo almost two Months gone. A. THE Womb. B. The greatest Vein among those which are in the Superficies of the Womb. CC. The Pendulous Testicles. DDDD. The Membrane of the Womb, to which the Shootings forth of the Vessels adhere. E. The Nympha. FF. The Hair of the Privities. GG. The Horns of the Womb, in the Superficies of which, appear lit∣tle Veins, according to the Deli∣neation of Aquapendens. But these we do not reckon to be the true Horns. H. The Urinary Passage.
II. The Privity. KK. The Wings. FIGURE II. The Entrance of the VVomb divided according to its Length. A. The Orifice of the Womb. B. The Neck of the Womb. C. The Orifice of the Bladder. D. The Neck or Sheath Divided. FIGURE III, The Substance of the VVomb of a VVoman with Child divided, to shew the Chees∣cake. AAAA. The four Triangular Parts of the Womb reflexed outward. BBB. The Cheescake of a tuberous and unequal Form. C. The Membranous Substance of the Cheescake, thicker than the other Membranes which is annexed to the Womb, but here torn off to shew the Chorion. a. The Chorion. D. The Neck of the Womb divided. FIGURE IV. The Genital Parts of an Emp∣ty VVoman. A. The Right Kidney Kernel. B. The Left Kidney Kernel. CC. The Kidneys on both sides. DD. The Right Emulgent Veins. EE. The Right Emulgent Arteries. FF. The Trunk of the Hollow Vein divided into two Iliac Branches, the Right and Left. G. The Left Emulgent Vein. HH. The Left Emulgent Arteries. II. The Right Spermatic Vein. K. The Right Spermatic Artery. L. The Left Spermatic Arterie. M. The Left Spermatic Vein. NN. The Trunk of the Great Arte∣ry divided into the Right and Left Iliac Branch. OO. The Female Testicles. PP. A Portion of the broad Liga∣ment. QQQQ. The Tubes of the Womb on each side. R. The Bottom of the Womb. SS. The round Ligaments of the Womb cut off below. T. The Neck of the Womb. V. The Hypogastric Vein on the Right Side. V. The Hypogastric Artery on the Left Side. X. The Hypogastric Artery on the Right Side. X. The Hypogastric Vein in the Left Side, extended to the Womb. Y. The Sheath of the Womb. Z. The Urinary Bladder depressed a∣bove the Privity. aa. A Portion of the Ureters cut off about the Bladder. bb. A Portion of the Ureters cut off about the Kidneys. cc. The Vessels preparing the Seed, di∣lated about the Testicles. c. d. The Channel of the Testicles, or the different Vessel. FIGURE V. A. The Right Testicle. BB. The Right Tube depressed. C. The Left Testicle. DD. The Left Tube of the Womb. E. The Bottom of the Womb. FF. The round Ligaments of the Womb. G. The Urinary Bladder inserted into the Sheath of the Womb. HH. Portions of the Ureters. II. The two musculous Supporters of the Clitoris. K. The Body of the Clitoris it self. FIGURE VI. AA. The bottom of the Womb dissect∣ed athwart.
TABULA VI.
BB. The Cavity of the Bottom. C. The Neck of the Womb. D. The little Mouth in the Neck of a Womans Womb which has born a Child. EE. The wrinkl'd Prospect of the Sheath of the Womb dissected. FF. The round Ligaments of the Womb cut off underneath. FIGURE VII. The Womans Yard. A. The Nut of the Yard. B. The Prepuce. CC. The two Supporters. D. The Chink not manifestly pervi∣ous. FIGURE. VIII. AA. The two spongie Bodys of the Yard dissected athwart. B. The Nut of the Yard. C. The Prepuce. DD. The two Supporters. FIGURE IX. A. The Head of the Clitoris promi∣nent under the Skin. BB. The outward Lips of the Privity sundred one from the other. CC. The Nymphae sundred also. D. The Caruncle plac'd about the Urinary passage (a) EE. Two Myrtle-shap'd fleshy Pro∣ductions. FF. Two Membranous expansions containing the Chink. FIGURE X. A. Membrane spread athwart the Privity, taken for the Hymen. FIGURE XI. This shews the Privities of a Female Infant, where the the Parts are the same as in Fig. 9. The EXPLANATION of the Sixth TABLE in Fol. 186. This shews the Genitals of Women taken out of the Body, and placed in their natural Situation, accurately delineated by Regner de Graef. AA. THE Trunk of the great Artery. BB. The Trunk of the hollow Vein. C. The Right Emulgent Vein. D. The Left Emulgent Vein. E. The Right Emulgent Artery. F. The Left Emulgent Artery. GG. The Kidneys. HHH. The Ureters cut off. I. The right Spermatic Artery. K. The left Spermatic Artery. L. The right Spermatic Vein. M. The left Spermatic Vein. NN. The Iliac Arteries. OO. The Iliac Veins. PP. The Internal Branches of the Iliac Artery. QQ. The External Branches of the Iliac Artery. RR. The Internal Branches of the Iliac Vein. SS. The External Branches of the Iliac Vein. TT. The Hypogastric Arteries carri∣ed to the Womb and Sheath. VV. The Hypogastric Veins accom∣paning the said Arteries. XX. Branches of the Hypogastric Artery shooting to the Piss-blad∣der.
YY. Branches of the Hypogastric Vein carry'd to the Bladder. ZZ. Portions of the Umbilical Ar∣teries. a The bottom of the Womb wrapt about with its common Tunicle. bb. The round Ligaments of the Womb, as they are joyn'd to the bottom of it. cc. The Follopian Tubes in their na∣tural Situation. dd The rims of the Tubes. ee. The holes of the Tubes. ff. The Stones in their natural places. g. A portion of the right Gut. h. The Neck of the Womb, the com∣mon Tunicle taken off to shew the Vessels more conspicuously. i. The Fore-part of the Sheath freed from the Piss-bladder. k. The Piss-bladder contracted. ll. Bloody Vessels running through, the Bladder. mm. The Sphincter Muscle girding the Neck of the Bladder. n. The Clitoris. oo. The Nymphae. p. The Urinary Passage. qq. The Lips of the Privity. r. The Orifice of the Sheath. The EXPLANATION of the Seventh TABLE In Fol. 245. This Table shews the Secondines with the Umbilical Vessels, in a human Embryo, and the Parts differing from those of ripe Age exactly describ'd by Casp. Bauhinus, Bartholine and H. Fab. ab Aquapendente. FIGURE. I. AAAA. THE Flesh of the Chees∣cake, or the Uterine Liver. BB. The Amnios Membrane. C. The Umbilical Vessels. D. The Umbilical Vein, and the two Umbilical Arteries. FIGURE II. AAA. The Amnios Membrane. B. The Umbilical Vein and two Um∣bilical Arteries. CC. The Chorion Membrane. DD. The branches of the Veins and Arteries dispeirs'd through the Chorion. E. The Conjunction of the Vessels of the Navel, as they are wrapt about with a little Tunicle resembling a little Gut. FIGURE III. The Skeleton of a dissected Birth, differing in many things from a Man of grown years, as may be seen in the Text. FIGURE IV. Shews the length of the Um∣bilical Vessels from the Cheesecake to the Liver of the Infant, and the progress of the Umbilical Vein from the Navel to the Liver; also the Liver of the Birth and the Gall-bladder. A. The Cheesecake wrapt about with the Chorion. BBBB. The Umbilical Vessels.
TABULA VII
CC. The Liver of the Infant. DD. The two larger Branches of the Umbilical Vein sitting themselves into lesser. EE. The Branches of the Umbilical Arteries. G. The Trunk of the hollow Vein ascending to the gibbious part of the Liver. H. The Gate-veine. I. The Umbilical Vein boaring the Porta and the hollow Vein. K. The Gall-bladder. LLLL. The Vessels of the Chorion, or Branches of the Umbilical Veins and Arteries dispeirsed through the Chorion. FIGURE. V. AAA. The outermost enfolding of the Birth call'd the Chorion. BBB. The Flesh growing to the outer∣most folding, or the Uterine Cheese∣cake or Uterine Liver. CCC. The Vessels distributed. FIGURE VI. AAAA. The bottom of the Womb dissected into four parts. B. Part of the Neck of the Womb. CC. The Veins and Arteries em∣bracing the Neck of the Womb. D. The Utrine Cheesecake. EE. The outermost enfolding of the Birth. FIGURE VII. AA. The substituted Kidneys. BB. The true Kidneys distinguished with several Kernels ill expressed by the Error of the Graver. C. The great Artery, whence branches to the Capsulas and Kidneys. D. The hollow Vein from whence the Emulgents, and little Veins of the Capsulas. The EXPLANATION of the Eight TABLE In Fol. 270. This Table shews the Birth of the Womb describ'd by H. Fab. ab Aquapend. and G. Bartholinus. FIGURE I. Shewing the Situation of the Birth, swimming upon the Moisture, together with the Cheesecake, and the Chorion annex'd to it. A. THE Cheesecake with the Chorion annex'd. B. The Umbilical Vessels. C. The Moisture upon which the Birth swims. DDDD. The four Parts of the Womb. E. The Neck of the Womb. F. The Sheath open'd. G. The most remarkable Trunks of the Vessels of the Chorion. FIGURE II. Shewing the Situation of the Birth in the Womb; which however varies in others. A. The Head Prone with the Nose hid between the Knees. BB. The Buttocks to which the Heels are joyn'd. CC. The Arms. D. The Line drawn about the Neck, and reflex'd above the Forehead, and continuous to the Cheesecake.
FIGURE III. Shews the Situation of the Birth now endeavouring to come forth. A. The Head of the Infant. B. The Privity. CCCC. The upper Parts of the Abdomen taken away with a Pen∣knife. The EXPLANATION of the Ninth TABLE In Fol. 326. Shewing the Heart with its Vessels in its Situation, with the Ventricles and Valves belonging to the same: toge∣ther with the Lungs in their Situation, the Rough Artery and Diaphragma. FIGURE I. A. THE Pericardium enfold∣ing the Heart. BB. The Lungs embracing the Heart in their natural Situation. C. The hollow Vein ascending above the Heart. D. The Original of the Azygos Vein. E. The right Subclavial Vein. F. The right Iugular Vein. G. The left Iugular Vein. H. The left Subclavial Vein. II. The right and left Carotis Ar∣tery. KK. The right and left Subclavial Ar∣tery. LL. The Nerves of the sixth pair descending to the Lungs. M. The Original of the great Artery descending. FIGURE II. A. The Pericardium taken from the Heart. B. The Heart spread over with the Coronarie Veins and Arteries. C. The Trunk of the great Artery shooting out of the Heart. D. The descending Portion of it tur∣ned upward. EE. The Arterious Vein distributed toward the Left hand to the Lungs. F. The Channel between the Arterious Vein and the great Artery, conspi∣cuous only in the new born Birth but dry'd up in those of riper Age. G. The right Branch of the Arte∣rious Vein. HH. The right and left Branch of the veiny Artery. I. The Auricle of the Heart. KK. The Lungs adjoyning to the Heart. L. The Proper Tunicle of the Lungs separated. FIGURE III. Shewing the Heart of an In∣fant entire. A. The Proper Membrane of the Heart separated. B. The Parenchyma of the Heart bare. CC. The right and left Auricle of the Heart. D. The great Artery issuing out of the Heart. E. A portion of the hollow Vein standing without the Heart.
Tab. IX.
FIGURE IV. A. Part of the Heart cut athwart. B. The left Ventricle. CC. The right Ventricle. DD. The Fence of the Heart. FIGURE V. The inside of the Heart. A. The Orifice of the Coronary Vein. B. An Anastomosis between the hollow Vein and the veiny Artery, con∣spicuous only in new born Insants, in ripe years consolidated. CCC. The treble pointed Valves. DDD. The right Ventricle of the Heart open'd. aa. Passages terminating in the Fence. FIGURE VI. A. The Arterious vein dissected in the right Ventricle. BBB. The Semilunary or Sigmoi∣des Valves, in the Orifice of the said Vein. CCC. The right Ventricle of the Heart open'd. FIGURE. VII. A. The Arterious Vein dissected. B. A mark of the Anastomosis be∣tween the veiny Artery and the hollow Vein, as being only to be seen in the Birth. bb. Passages terminating in the Fence within the Membranes. CC. Two Miter-like Valves seated in the left Ventricle at the entrance of the Arterious Vein. DD. The left Ventricle of the Heart open'd. FIGURE. VIII. A. The great Artery dissected near the Heart. BBB. The Semilunar Valves belong∣ing to it. CC. The left Ventricle of the Heart. D. Part of the left Ventricle re∣flexed. FIGURE IX. AB. A right and left Nerve of the sixth pair, to the Lungs. C. A middle Branch between each Nerve. D. An Excursion of the same to the Pericardium. EE. Two larger Branches of the rough Artery, Membranous be∣hind. FF. The hinder Part of the Lungs. G. The proper Membrane of the Lungs separated. HH. A remainder of the Pericar∣dium. I. The Heart in its place, with the Coronary Vessels. FIGURE X. AAA. The inner Superficies of the Sternon, and Gristles connex'd. BB. The Mammary Veins and Ar∣teries descending under the Ster∣non. C. The glandulous Body called the Thymus. DDDD. The sides of the Media∣stinum pull'd off. EE. A hollowness caused by a vul∣sion of the Sternon, between the Membranes of the Mediastinum. F. The Protuberancy of the Mediasti∣num, where the Heart is seated. GG. The Lungs HH. The Diaphragma. I. The Sword resembling Gristle. FIGURE XI. The Diaphragma. AB. The right and left Nerve of the Diaphragma. C. The upper Membrane of it separa∣ted. D. The fleshy substance of it bare. F. The Hole for the hollow Vein.
GGG. The Membranous Part or Center of the Diaphragma. HHH. The Appendixes of the same between which the great Artery de∣scends. FIGURE XII. The glandulous Body seated by the Larynx. AAA. The Kernels growing to the Larinx. B. A portion of the Iugular Vein, two Branches of which pass for∣ward through the said Kernels. FIGURE. XIII. The Aspera Arteria taken out of the Lungs. A. The rough Artery cut off below the Larynx. B. The right Branch of it, divided first twofold; afterward into se∣veral Bronchia. C. The left Branch divided in like manner. dddd. The Extream Parts of the Branches terminating in little Membranous Channels. The EXPLANATION of the Tenth TABLE In Fol. 357. Shewing the Bronchial Artery discover'd by Frederic Ruysch; together with the substance of the Lungs as it was obser∣ved by Malpigius. FIGURE I. The Ramification of the Bronchial Artery. A. THe hinder Part of the Aspe∣ra Arteria, of a Calf cut off from the Larynx. B. The right Branch. C. The left Branch. D. The Bronchial Artery, the little Branches of which accompany the Bronchia to the end. E. The hinder part of the descend∣ing Artery, from whence the In∣tercostals proceed. F. The uppermost Branch, to be found in Calves and Cows only. FIGURE II. This and the following shew the substance of the Lungs. The outermost Piece of the Lungs dry'd containing the Net as it is delineated. FIGURE III. The Inner Vesicles and hollownesses shaddow'd, with a particle of the space in the upper part annex'd. But the Original and entire Pro∣pagation could not be expos'd to the Eye by the Graver's Art. FIGURE IV. The various concinnation of the Lobes, above the Trachea and Pul∣monary Vessels, which are shewn as taken out from their natural Si∣tuation. FIGURE V. The Lungs of Frogs, with the Trachea annex'd. A. The Larynx, which is half gristly.
Tab. XI.
B. A little Chink, which is exactly closed at the Will of the Animal, and being closed, keeps the Lungs Swelled with Air. C. The Seat of the Heart. D. Part of the Exterior Lungs. E. The propagated Net of the Cells F. The Propagation of the Pulmy Artery. G. The Hollow Part of the Lung cut in the middle. H. The Propagation of the Pulmona∣ry Vein, shooting forth to the tops of the Sides. FIGURE VI. Shews the meer Cell, with∣out the intervening Sides, encreased in Magnitude. A. The inner Area of the little Cell. B. The Sides torn away and stop∣ped. C. The Trunk of the Pulmonary Artery, with the Branches Appen∣dent, terminating as it were in Net-work. D. The Trunk of the Pulmonary Vein, wandring with its running Branches over the Tops of the Sides. E. A Vessel at the Bottom, common as well to the lateral Angles of the Sides, as to the continued Ramifi∣cations of the Net. The EXPLANATION of the Eleventh TABLE In Folio 370. Shewing the Larynx with its Muscles; as also the Aspera Arteria, the Gullet, the recurring Nerves, and the upper Part of the Throat, with its Muscles. FIGURE I. The Prospect of the Larynx before. A. THE Hyoides Bone covered with certain little Mem∣branes. B. The lower Side of the Hyoides Bone. D. The upper Side. F. The Second Pair of Muscles, com∣mon to the Larynx. G. The Second Pair of common Mus∣cles, ill described about the Origi∣nal being so narrow. N. The First Pair of Muscles proper to the Larynx. I. Part of the Shield-resembling Gri∣stle. FIGURE II. The hinder Part of the Larynx. L. The Epiglotis. H. The Guttal Gristle. V. The Ninth Muscle of the Larynx. K. The hinder Part of the annular Gristle.
FIGURE III. The hinder Lateral Prospect of the Larynx. V. The Ninth Muscle of the Larynx. P. The Second Pair of the Muscles of the Larynx. R. The Third Pair of the Muscles proper to the Larynx. a. The Right Muscle of the fourth Pair of Muscles, proper to the Larynx. b. The upper Part of the same left Muscle. h. The Prospect of the Shield-resem∣bling Muscle behind. i. The Prospect of the Annular Mus∣cle before. k. The hinder Prospect of the same. l. The Guttal Gristle. FIGURE IV. A. The inner Face of the Epiglottis. aa. The Prominences of the Aryte∣noides Gristles. BB. The Arytenoides Muscles every way loose. CC. The hinder Crycoartenoides Mus∣cles. D. The broader Part of the Annular Gristle. EE. The hinder Membranous Part of the Aspera Arteria. FIGURE V. A. The External Face of the Epi∣glottis joyned to the Larynx. BB. The Thyroartenoides Muscles. CC. The lateral Crycoartenoides Muscles. D. The Crycoides Gristle. EE. The Fore-part of the Aspera Arteria. FIGURE VI. The Lateral Face of the Larynx. A. The Hyoides Bone still covered with certain small Gristles. B. The lower Side of the Hyoides Bone. C. The upper Process of the Scuti∣form Gristle. F. The second pair of Common Mus∣cles to the Larynx. G. The first Pair of common Mus∣cles. H. The Throat. I. The Swallowing Muscle, which o∣thers call the third Pair. K. The Place of the Muscles of the Epiglottis in Brutes that chew the Cud, which is wanting in Men. l. The Guttal Gristle. g. The Fore-part of the Scutiform Gristle. M. The Kernels of the Larynx, an∣nexed to the Root, at the Sides of the Aspera Arteria. FIGURE VII. A. The Hyoides Bone still covered with little Membranes. B. The lower Side of it. C. The upper Side of the Scutiform Gristle. D. The upper Side of the Hyoides Bone. K. The Place of the Muscles of the Epiglottis in Brutes. L. The Epiglottis. h. The Fore-part of the Scutiform Gristle. L. The Epiglottis. M. The Kernels fastned to the Root of the Larynx. H. The Throat.
FIGURE VIII. The Aspera Arteria and Gul∣let, with the recurring Nerves, on the hinder Part. AA. The Muscle drawing the Gullet together. BBB. The Gullet. CCC. The Aspera Arteria under the Throat. D. The Membranous Part of it. EEEE. The Nerves of the Sixth Conjugation. FF. Nerves inserted into the Tongue behind. GG. The Right recurring Nerve turned back to the Humeral Ar∣tery. HH. The Left recurring Nerve wound about the descending Trunk of the Great Artery. II. A Nerve tending to the sinister Orifice of the Ventricle, and the Diaphragma. KK. A Nerve descending to the Dia∣phragma. LL. The Iugular Arteries, of each side one. M. The Left Humeral Artery. N. The Right Humeral Artery. O. the great Artery. PP. Stumps of the Pulmonary Ar∣teries. FIGURE IX. The upper Part of the Throat, with its Muscles. AA. The Cephalopharyngean Mus∣cles. BB. The Sphaenopharyngean Muscles. CC. The Stylopharyngean Muscles. DD. The Sphincter of the Throat di∣vided. E. The inner Face of the Throat. F. The outer Face of the Throat.
The EXPLANATION of the Twelfth TABLE, In Folio 418. This Table, delineated by Willis, shews the Originals of the Nerves of the Fifth and Sixth Pair (according as he num∣bers them) and the Roots of the Intercostal Nerve, pro∣ceeding from them: Also the Originals of the same Inter∣costal Nerve, and the Vagous Pair, and of the Nerve pro∣ceeding from the Spine to the Vagous Pair, carried along to the Region of the Ventricle. Moreover, it represents the Originals and Distributions of the Nerves of the Seventh, Ninth, and Tenth Pair, and of the Nerve of the Dia∣phragma. In the same also are described the Originals of the Vertebral Nerves, and their Communications with the Former, as they are to be found in Men. But it is to be observed, that Willis, in this Table, does not fol∣low the Ancient (which we observe in our Descripti∣on) but his own new Computation of the Number of the Nerves. VVhence it comes to pass, that what we in our Text call the Third, he calls the Fifth; what we the Fifth, he calls the Seventh; what we the Seventh, he calls the Eight Pair. AAA. A Nerve of the Fifth Pair, with the two Branches of it: AA. of which the uppermost tending up-right be∣fore, distributes several Sprigs to the Muscles of the Eyes and Face, to the Nose, Pallate, and upper Part of the whole Mouth. Besides, two little Branches, aa. which are the two Roots of the Intercostal Nerve. The other lower Branch of the Fifth Pair, tending down∣ward, is dispiersed into the lower Iaw and all the Parts of it. aa. The two Sprigs sent from the upper Branch of the fifth Pair, which together with the other little Sprig, b. closing with the Nerve of the Sixth Pair, constitute the Trunk, D. of the Intercostal Nerve. B. A Nerve of the Sixth Pair, tend∣ing streight forward before to the Muscles of the Eye; from the Trunk of which, the Sprig b. which is the third Root of the In∣tercostal Nerve, is reflexed. bbb. The third Root of the Interco∣stal Nerve. C. The Original of the Auditory Nerve, or of the Seventh Pair, with its double Process, soft and hard. c. The softer Branch of it, which is entirely distributed into the inner Part of the Ear, into the Muscle which elevates the Hammer, and into the Cochlea. c. The harder Branch, which rising whole out of the Cranium, and slightly touching the Slip E. of the Eighth Pair, together with that makes a particular Nerve, which is presently divided into several Branches, of which, the 1. Terminates in the Muscles of the Tongue and Hyoides Bone. 2. Is again divided into several Slips; of which the Uppermost
XII
3. Ends in the Muscles of the Face and Mouth. 4. In the Muscles of the Eye-lids and Fore-head. 5. In the Muscles of the Ear. D. The Trunk of the Intercostal Nerve, consisting of the three fore∣said Roots, being about to pass the Ganglio-form'd Fold. Which Fold seems to be the uppermost Node of the Intercostal Nerve, produced without the Cranium. E. The Original of the Nerves of the Vagous Pair, consisting of many Fibres, to which a Nerve rising from the Spine joyns it self, and inoculated with them, passes the Cranium; which being crossed, it goes away, and after Communica∣tion with some of the adjoyning Nerves, ends in the Muscles of the Scapula and Back. e. A little Sprig of the Eight Pair, Meeting the Auditory Branch. fff. Other Slips of the Vagous Pair, tending to the Muscles of the Neck. G. The principal Branch of the same Pair, terminating in the proper Ganglio-form'd Fold. H. The upper Ganglio-form'd Fold of the Vagous Pair, I add which admits the little Sprig K. from the other adjoyning Fold of the Inter∣costal Nerve. hh. A Branch from the foresaid Fold of the Vagous Pair, into the Mus∣cles of the Larynx, a remarkable Branch of which passing under the Scutiform Gristle, meets the re∣current Nerve, and is united to it. i. A small Twig from the Cervical Fold of the Intercostal Nerve, in∣serted into the Trunk of the Va∣gous Pair. KK. The lower Fold of the Vagous Pair, from which several Nerves proceed to the Heart and its Ap∣pendix. l. A remarkable Sprig sent to the Cardiac Fold. m. Nervous Fibres distributed into the Heart and Cardiac Fold. n. The Left recurrent Nerve, which being wound about the descending Trunk of the Aorta, and reflex'd up∣wards towards the Scutiform Gri∣stle in its ascent, imparts many Slips XXXX. to the Aspera Arteria; and lastly, meets the small wig h. sent from the Ganglio form'd Fold. This Recurrent, by moans of its being reflected, sends cer∣tain Branches also to the Heart. L. The recurrent Nerve in the Right Side, which being reflected much higher, twines about the Axillary Artery. o. A remarkable Branch sent from the Trunk of the Vagous Pair in the Left Side; which being pre∣sently divided, one Sprig of it winds about the Trunk of the Pneumonic Vein; the other touch∣ing the hinder Region of the Heart, is scattered into several Slips, which cover the Superficies of it. This is also met by the Cardiac Branch, sent from the Trunk of the other. p. A Sprig of the foresaid Branch encompasing the Pneumonic Vein. q. The other Branch of the same, im∣parting many Shoots to the Heart, which Shoots cover the hinder Su∣perficies of it. rrrr. Small Shoots sent forth from the Trunk of the Vagous Pair, which after a long Course, are in∣serted into the Oesophagus; re∣flexed beyond their proper Situ∣ation. ssss. Many little reflexed Sprigs, whose Ramifications being distributed into the Substance of the Lungs variously bind and tye the Blood∣bearing Vessels. TTT. The Trunk of the Vagous Pair is divided into two Branches, the outer and inner, both which bending toward the like Branches of the other side, are united to them, and after mutual Communi∣cation, constitute the two Stoma∣chic Branches, and upper and low∣ermost VV. Inner Branches, which being united into X. constitute the Ori∣ginal of the Lower Stomachie Branch.
WW. The External Branches, which constitute the upper Stomach▪ Branch. X. The closing of the inner Branches. F. The Original of the Ninth Pair, with many Fibres which united, make a Trunk that is carried toward the Tongue; nevertheless, in its Progress, send∣ing forth two Sprigs. ΘΘ. The first tending downwards, and united to the Branch of the Tenth Pair, terminates in the Sternothyroides Muscle. φφ. The second Sprig, ending in the Muscles of the Hyoides Bone. 99. A Trunk of this Nerve passing into the Body of the Tongue. G. The upper Ganglio-form'd Fold of the Intercostal Nerve, which is the uppermost Node of this Nerve, when it is got out of the Brain. a. A Sprig sent forth from this Fold into the Neighbouring Fold of the Vagous Pair. bb. Two Nervous Processes, by means of which, this Nerve communi∣cates with the Nerve of the Tenth Pair. γ. A Sprig sent to the Sphincter of the Throat. L. The Cervical or middle Fold pro∣per to Man, which is placed in the middle of the Neck in the Trunk of the Intercostal Nerve. δ. A remarkable Branch from the second Vertebral Pair into this Fold, by means of which, this Branch communicates with the Nerve of the Diaphragma, in its first Root. εε. Two Branches from the same Fold into the Trunk of the Nerve of the Diaphragma. 55. Several nervous Fibres from the Cervical Fold to the Recurrent Nerve. θ. A Twig from the same to the Trunk of the Vagous Pair. χ. Another remarkable Sprig into the Recurrent Nerve. χχ. Two remarkable Branches sent to∣ward the Heart, which the other λ. rising a little below, overtakes: These being carried downward, between the Aorta, and the Pneu∣monic Artery, meeting the Paral∣lel Branches of the other side, make the Cardiac Fold Δ. from which the principal Nerves that termi∣nate in the Heart proceed. λ. A Branch proceeding somewhat beneath from the Intercostal Trunk, which with the former is designed to the Cardiac Fold. Δ. The foresaid Cardiac Fold. μ. A little Lappet proceeding from the same which winds about the Pneumonic Artery. γ. The lower Lappet binding the Pneumonic Vein. z. The Intercostal Nerve that sinks into the Cavity of the Breast, where it binds the Axillary Ar∣tery. ηηη. Four Vertebral Nerves sen to the Thoracic Fold, of which, the uppermost binds the Vertebral Ar∣tery. ooo. Three remarkable Nerves sent from the Cardiac Fold, which o∣verspread the Fore-Region of the Heart, as the Nerves P. q. pro∣ceeding from the Trunk of the Va∣gous Pair, impart their Ramifica∣tions to the hinder Part of it. . The Vertebral Artery bound about by the Vertebral Nerves. sss. Nervous Shoots covering the Fore-Region of the Heart. TTT. Nervous Shoots and Fibres distributed to the hinder Part of it. Θ. The lower fold, properly called the Intercostal or Thoracic; into which, besides the Intercoctal Nerve, four Vertebrals are inserted, of which, the uppermost in its. De∣scent, winds about the Vertebral Artery. I. The Intercostal Nerve descending through the Cavity of the Breast, near the Roots of the Ribs, where in its whole Progress, it admits  Branch from the particular middle Vertebres. H. A Nerve of the Tenth Pair, con∣sisting▪ in its Original, of many Fibres, and springing forth be∣tween the first and second Vertebre,
where it presently sends forth two nervous Processes bb. into the upper Fold of the Intercostal Nerve. X. A Branch of the same, which be∣ing united to a little Twig of the ninth Pair, terminates in the Muscle Sternothyroides, immedi∣ately resting upon the Aspera Ar∣teria. 20. A small Twig reversed into the hinder Muscles of the Neck. 21. A small Twig into the Pathetic Spinal Nerve. X. Shoots from the principal Branch of the same Nerve into the Sterno∣thyroides Muscle. I. The Original of the first Vertebral Nerve, which in this as in all o∣ther Vertebral Nerves, consists of many Fibres, of which, the one Bunch proceeds from the upper, the other from the lower Brim of the Spinal▪ Marrow, when they are met close into the same Trunk, which is presently shattered into Nerves distributed several ways. θ. A small Sprig from this Nerve in∣to a Branch of the tenth Pair. θ. Another small Sprig into the Pa∣thetic Spinal. c. A signal Branch sent upwards to the Muscles of the Neck and Ears. T. A small Sprig from the bowed Nerve to the Fore-muscles of the Neck. 7. A Nerve from this Pair to the first Brachial Nerve, from whence the Nerve of the Diaphragma takes its uppermost Root. M. The Original of the second Ver∣tebral Nerve, from which the upper∣most Brachial Branch proceeds, and into which the Nerve of the Diaphragma is first radicated. This Brachial Nerve, in four-footed Beasts, rises near the fourth and fifth Vertebre, and so the Root of the Diaphragma lies beneath. V. The Vertebral Branch designed to the Arm. Y. The Nerve of the Diaphragma, to the Root of which, the Sprig δ. from the Cervical Fold, joyns it self, and a little lower, from the same Fold, two other Branches εε. extend themselves to the Trunk of it. This Communication is only proper to Men. φ. The other Root of the Diaphragma from the second and third Brachi∣al Nerve. χ. The lower Trunk of the Nerve of the Diaphragma, removed out of its place, which in its natural Si∣tuation, crossing the Cavity of the Breast without any Communicati∣on, runs directly to the Diaphrag∣ma; where spreading into three Sprigs, it is inserted into the Musculous Part of it. ψψψ. The rest of the Brachial Nerves. ωωω. The Originals of the Brachial Nerves. 22. The farthest Original of the Spi∣nal Nerve that comes to the Va∣gous Pair. 23. The beginning Trunk of the same Nerve, which in its whole assent, running through the side of the Spinal Pith, passes through the middle Originals of the Verte∣bral Nerves, and from the Stalk of the Pith, receives its Fibres. 24. The descending Trunk of the same Nerve, which parting from the Vagous Pair, is reflexed out∣ward, and after Communication with the Nerves of the Ninth and Tenth Pair, terminates altogether in the Muscles of the Scapula. 25. The lower Process of the same Nerve.
The EXPLANATION of the Thirteenth TABLE In Fol. 419. This Table shews the lower Ramifications of the Vagous and Intercostal Pair distributed to the Ventricle and the Bow∣els of the whole Abdomen: as also the Originals of the Ver∣tebral Nerves, which lye opposite to the former, and are inoculated into some of them. A. THe lower Stomachic branch, which consists of the inner branches of the vagous Pair of each side united together, and which being spread over the Bot∣tom of the Stomach, dispeirses it's shoots and rivolets all along every way. BB. The upper Stomachic branch which consists of the External branches of the vagous Pair uni∣ted together, and creeps through the upper Part of the Ventricle. C. The Coalition of the outer bran∣ches. D. A Nervous Fold compos'd of the fibres of each Stomachic Nerve, united together near the Orifice, and as it were woven into a kind of small Net. aa. The Extremities of each Stoma∣chic Nerve, which there meet the Hepatic Nerves and communicate with them. EE. The Intercostal Nerve in each side, descending near the Roots of the Ribs, and all along from the several Vertebral Nerves εε. recei∣ing a Branch. F. A Branch proceeding from the Intercostal Nerve of the left side, and sent toward the Mesenteric Folds. G. The same Mesenteric Nerve bi∣forked, sends a larger Branch to the Fold which is both the Stomachic and Spleenary and a lesser into the Kidney Fold. H. A Parallel Mesenteric Branch proceeding from the Intercostal Nerve of the right side, and bend∣ing toward the Mesenteric Folds. 3. The bigger Branch of this Nerve in like manner bifork'd, runs to the Hepatic Fold, and the lesser to the Kidney Fold. h. The first Mesenteric Fold of the left side, which is also the Stoma∣chic and Spleenary, from which se∣veral little bundles of Nerves, or numerous Conjugations run several and several ways. 5. The Mesenteric Kidney Fold of the left side, into which besides the Mesenteric Sprig, ββ. two other Nerves are immediately inserted from the Intercostal Nerve. γγγ. From this Fold seated near the Capsula of the Gall, several Nerves and Fibres, are sent to the Kidneys. δδ. The Nerves and Fibres by means of which this Fold chiefly commu∣nicates with the Mesenteric Fold. η. The first little bundle of Nerves tending from the former Fold h. to the Spleen, where being arriv'd, it turns back certain Fibres to the bottom of the Ventricle. n. The second Conjugation of Nerves, from the foresaid Fold to the bot∣tom of the Stomach, whose Fibres communicate with the small Sprigs of the lower Stomachic Nerve. θ. The third Conjugation of Nerves between this Fold and the Hepatic adjoyning. ψ. The fourth Assemblage of Nerves between this and the largest Me∣senteric Fold. 6. The Kidney Mesenteric Fold, into which as in its Parallel, be∣sides the Mesenteric branch. KK. Two Nerves are produc'd from the Intercostal Nerve.
▪ XIII
λ. The Nerves and Fibres between this Fold and the largest of the Mesentery. μ A signal Branch between this Fold, and the adjoyning Hepa∣tic. γ A signal Assemblage of Nerves and Fibres from this Fold to the Kidneys, which climb the Emul∣gent Vessels, and variously bind them. 77. The upper Mesenteric Fold of the right side, called the Hepa∣tic. oo. A numerous Assemblage of Nerves from this Fold to the Liver and Gall-bladder, from whence several Sprigs are distri∣buted to the Pylorus and Sweet∣bread. These Nerves and Fibres ascending toward the Liver, cover the Hepatic Artery with a kind of Net, and almost hide its Trunk. These Sprigs meet toge∣ther with the tops of the Stoma∣chic Nerves aa. π. Sprigs distributed about the Pylo∣rus. ρρ Other Sprigs dispeirs'd into the Sweet-bread. cc. The Nerves extended between the Fold and the largest of the Mesentery, O. The largest Mesenteric Fold, from which a vast Assemblage of Nerves **. arising under the large Kernel of the Mesentery, is dispeirs'd every way into seve∣ral shoots and branches, and di∣stributed to all the Intestines be∣sides the right Gut. Nerves and Fibres extended every way rest all along upon the Arteries and Veins, and bind and tye them after various manners. TT. Nervous shoots from this Fold into the Female Testicles, or Ute∣rine Kernels, which meet the branches of the Vertebral Nerves of the twentieth and one and twen∣tieth Pair sent to the same Parts, and are knit together. VV. The Vertebral branches into the Female Stones. 8. The lowermost Fold of the Mesen∣tery, seated much beneath the for∣mer, and having for their Origi∣nal three Nerves on each side, ari∣sing somewhat lower from the In∣tercostals. ΦΦΦ. Three Nerves on each side sent from the Intercostal Nerve to the lowermost Mesenteric Fold. χχ. A Nerve extended directly from that Fold to the largest Mesenteric Fold, which in its passage receives certain Branches from the Inter∣costal Nerve on each side, viz. 4. 4. 5. 5. 5. and sends it self two Sprigs to the Female Testicles. φφ Two Nerves from the foresaid Nerve to the Female Testicles. 9. Another little Fold somewhat a∣bove this lowermost. ω. A nervous Process extended from the foresaid lowermost Fold into the adjoyning small one. a. A signal Nerve from the least Fold 9. carry'd to the largest Fold of the Mesentery, which during its whole ascent, stretches it self under the right Gut and part of the Colon, and furnishes them with numerous shoots. bb. The other Branch sent down∣wards from the same Fold, which stretches it self under the lower Part of the said right Gut, and affords it numerous shoots. cc. Two Nerves sent downward from the lowermost Mesenteric Fold 8. which being dismissed about the lowermost Cavity of the Belly into the Basin, in that place sink under the two Folds kk. viz. one seated in each side. KK. The double Folds seated within the Basin, the Nerves of which are assign'd for the Excretions of Urine, Dung and Seed, and so they send forth the Nerves d. d. toward the lowermost Mesenteric Fold. dd. A Nerve which ascending from the foresaid Fold on each side, near the sides of the right Gut, inserts several shoots into it: with which being double the other Nerve b. . descending from the smallest Fold, meets.
ee. The Nerves from the same Fold to the Womb. f. A Nerve from the same Fold to the Blader. g. A Nerve to the Prostates. h. A Nerve from the Root of the twenty eighth Vertebral Pair to the Muscle of the Podex. i. The twenty ninth Vertebral Pair, from whence, k. A Nerve to the Sphincter and the rest of the Muscles of the Po∣dex. ll. A signal Nerve on both sides from the same Pair to the Yard. m. Another shorter Branch to the Muscles of the Yard. LL. The Intercostal Nerve below the Kidneys. m. A little Nerve from the Vertebral Branch to the Cremaster Muscle of the Testicle in Men. n. The 21. Vertebral Pair, the Ori∣ginal of which lyes hid near the Kidneys. From this Nerve seve∣ral shoots are sent on both sides to the Female Testicles, which meet with other Mesenteric Sprigs di∣stributed to the same Part. o. A Nerve from the 22. Vertebral Pair, from whence also certain Sprigs to the Female Stones. pppp. Nerves designed for the Thigh, of which those that rise above, in their descent receive Branches from those that rise beneath. q. The Intercostal Nerves bending each to other near the beginning of the Holy-bone, communicating by the transvers Process r. rr. The other transvers Process with∣in the Curvature of the Os Sacrum connecting the two Intercostal Nerves. s. Both Intercostal Nerves terminate into minute Fibres, which Fibres are distributed into the Sphincter of the Podex. t. A Nerve from the 24. Vertebral Pair, which is carry'd to the Ker∣nels of the Groin. vvv. Shoots on each side sent from the Intercostal Nerves to the body of the Ureter. X. A Nerve design'd to the Testicle and Cremaster Muscle; cut off where it goes forth from the Ab∣domen. The EXPLANATION of the Fourteenth TABLE In Fol. 457. FIGURE I. The Exterior Parts of the Eye. AAAA. THE Skin turn'd back, BB. The bigger Muscle of the Orbicular Eye-lid. C. The Tendon of the same in the wider corner of the Eye. DD. The lesser Muscles of the Eye∣lyds. EE. The Brows of the Eye-lids. G. H. The upper and lower Eye-lid. I. The larger Corner. K. The lesser Corner. L. The Conjunctive Tunicle. M. The Corneous Tunicle. FIGURE II. The Muscles and Nerves of the Eye. AAAA. The Cranium cut open. BB. A portion of the dissected Brain. CC. The Cerebel. D. The meeting of the Optic Nerves. EE. Their Progress to both Eyes. GG. The first Muscle of the Eye, cal∣led the Attollent. H. The second Muscle of the left Eye, called the Depressor.
Tab. XIV.
II. The streight inner Muscles, or drawers to, in each Eye. KK. The external streight Muscles or drawers from each Eye. L. The fifth Muscle of the left Eye, or the External Oblique. MM. The sixth Muscle or Internal Oblique, the Tendon of which passes through the Trochlia, N. O. The Optic Nerve of the right Eye. P. The Corneous Tunicle in the midst of which is the Apple. FIGURE III. AA. The Cranium resected. BB. The Cerebel. CCCC. The Dura Mater. D. A portion of the dissected Brain. EE. The Sprig of the Optics. F. Their concourse. GG. Their separation. H. The general Original of the Mus∣cles. II. The Muscle of the Eyelid in its place. K. The streight Muscle drawing the Eye outward. L. The streight Muscle moving the Eye upward. M. The third right Muscle moving the Eye-downward. N. The last right Muscle drawing the Eye to the inner Parts. OO. Branches of the Motory Nerve inserted into the Muscles. PP. The Globeous Body of the Eye it self prominent under the Muscle of the Eye-lid. Q. The upper Eye-lid with its Hairs. R. The Bone broken off. S. The Body of the left Eye. T. The Muscle of the upper Eye-lid, out of its place turn'd back. FIGURE IV. The Eye-brow and Eye-lids. AA. The hairy Eye-brow. BB. The fat of the Eye-brow. CCCC. The inner superficies of the Eye brows. DDD. The Gristle of the Eye-brows. E. The upper edging of Hair. F. The lower edging of Hair. FIGURE V. AA. The Muscle of the upper Eye-lid in it's place BB. The Gristle of the Eye-brow. C. The place of the Eye-lid cut off. D. The hairy edging of the upper Eye-brow. FIGUR VI. AA. The Muscle of the upper Eye∣lid. BB. The Gristle of the same Eye∣brow. C. The Hairs. FIGURE VII. A. The Nerve of Optic. B. The Motory Nerve. C. The rise of all the Muscles. D. The Trochlear Muscle. E. The Trochlea or Wheel. F. The string of the Trochlear Mus∣cle. G. The Internal streight Muscle. H. The External streight Muscle. I. The Muscle of the upper Eye∣lid. KK. The remainder of the Eye-lids cut off. L. The hairy Edgings. FIGURE VIII. AAA. The Gristle of the Eye-lids taken out. B. The Hairs of the upper Eye-brow. C. The Hairs of the lower Eye-brow. FIGURE IX. A. The Corneous Tunicle, with the transparent Apple. B. The streight Muscle Attollent. C. The streight Muscle depressing. D. The inner Muscle bringing to. E. The External Muscle drawing from.
F. The inner Oblique, or Trochlear. G. The outter Oblique, or lower. FIGURE X. A. The Optic Nerve. B. The seventh Muscle proper to many Brutes surrounding the Eye. CCCC. The streight Muscles. D. The Trochlear Muscle. E. The lower Oblique Muscle. FIGURE XI. A. The Optic Nerve. B. The Original of the Muscles. C. The streight lateral Muscle. D. The upper streight Muscle. E. The other streight Muscle. FF. The Fat of the Eye hiding the Muscles and the Optic Nerve. G. Part of the Skin of the upper Eye∣lid cut off. HH. The Sclerotic Tunicle of the Eye. I. The Corneous Tunicle. K. The Apple of the Eye. L. The Hair of the lower Eye-brow. MM. The lower Eye-brow. FIGURE XII. The Annate Tunicle separated and out of place, furnished with several minute Veins and Arteries. FIGURE XIII. The Christalline Tunicle. FIGURE XIV. The Chrystalline Humour and its Figure. FIGURE XV. The Watry Humour. FIGURE XVI. The Vitreous Humour receiving the Chrystalline in the middle. FIGURE XVII. A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Choroides Tunicle laid bare from the Sclerotic. CCCC. Veins depressed through the Sclerotic. DD. The Sclerotic inverted. E. The Rupture of the Sclerotic. FIGURE XVIII. A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Dura Mater surrounding the Optic. CC. The Sclerotic opened, shewing the Nerves through the Fissure. FIGURE XIX. A. The Optic Nerve. BB. The Uveous folded back, and partly separated from the Net∣like. C. Part of the Net-like separated from the Uveous. FIGURE XX. A. The Net of the Tunicle bare. B. The Conjunctive Tunicle, or the White of the Eye. C. The Corneous. D. The Apple of the Eye.
Tab. XV.
The EXPLANATION of the Fifteenth TABLE, In Folio 469. Shewing the Parts of the Ear, especially the Inner Parts. FIGURE I. The External Ear whole with the Muscles and Concavi∣ties. AA. THE Helix of the Ear. BB. The Anthelix. C. The Tragus or Bunching of the Ear. D. The Anti-tragus. E. The Lobe of the outer Ear. FF. The Shell or Hollow of the outer Ear. GG. The Nameless Cavity between the Helix's. H. The Muscle moving the Ear di∣rectly upward. III. The three-fold Muscle drawing it upwards. FIGURE II. AA. The Skin with the Mem∣brane drawn upward and down∣ward. BB. The Gristle constituting the Ear. C. The Hole pervious to the Audito∣ry Passage. D. Part of the Ligament of the out∣er Ear. E. Part of the Lobe of the Ear. FIGURE III. The Fore-part of the Inside Ear. A. Part of the Bone of the Temples, containing the Stony Bone. B. The Auditory Passage. C. The Threshold of the Auditory Passage, or Bee-hive. D. The Mammi-form Process. E. The Style-resembling Process torn off. FIGURE IV. A. A Portion of the Auditory Pas∣sage. BB. The Membrane of the Drum. C. The little Foot of the Hammer transparent through the Menbrane. D. The Teat-like Process. E. The Bodkin-like Process. FIGURE V. The Muscles of the Inside Ear. A. The Muscle moving the Mem∣brane with the Hammer outward. B. The Membrane of the Drum. CC. The Muscle moving the Mem∣brane with the Hammer inward. E. The Head of the Hammer. FIGURE VI. A. Part of the Auditory Passage. B C. The Cavity of the Drum, wherein. B. The Oval Hole, conspicuous when the Stirrup is removed. C. The Round Hole. FIGURE VII. The Stony Bone, with the small Bones of the Tym∣panum, in Place. A. The small Hammer. B. The small Bone called the Anvil. C. The upper Part of the Stirrup.
DD. The Windings of the Cochlea discovered according to their na∣tural Bigness. FIGURE VIII. Four little Bones out of place. A. The little Hammer, with its two Processes. B. The Anvil applied to the Ham∣mer. C. The Stirrup. D. The Orbicular Bone fastned with the Ligament of the Stirrup. FIGURE IX. The lower Face of the Bone of the Temples. A. The Goos-quills transmitted into the Auditory Passage, through the Passage which leads to the Palate. BB. Shews the same Passage next at Hand, though broken in Part. FIGURE X. AA. The Hollowness of the Cochlea, the broader Part of which, runs to the Labyrinth. BB. The Hollowness of the Labirinth, wherein the Oval Hole appears, by reason of the Bone dissected from the side. Four other Holes open∣ing themselves in Circles, are sha∣dowed with Black. The fifth, in the Extream largest Turning of the Cochlea, is broken, FIGURE XI. AA. The first Hole of the Bones of the Temples, into which the Audi∣tory Nerve is admitted. BB. The Stony Process of the Bone of the Temples, in which the demon∣strated Cavities are contained. FIGURE XII. AB. CD. The end of the passage dis∣cover'd. into which the Auditory Nerve enters, the Bone being fil'd away. B. The Hollowness wherein the softer part of the Auditory Nerve, rests at the Center of the Chochlea. CA. An Apophysis between each Por∣tion of the Nerve, prominent like a Bridge. EE. The Footsteps of two Circles, tending to the Labyrinth. FIGURE XIII. A. Part of the Bone of the Tem∣ples in which the Tympanum be∣ing removed, together with the passage receiving the Auditory Nerve, appears. AA. The softer part of the Auditory Nerve. BBB. The harder part of the Auditory Nerve, obliquely descending un∣der the Drum, thicker at the Ex∣it. CC. A Small Nerve from the fourth Pair, joyning it self to the descend∣ing harder Portion of the Audi∣tory Nerve. FIGURE XIV. AA. The Shell. B. The Drum. C. The Hammer. D. The Stirrup. FIGURE XV. E. The Stirrup. F. The orbicular Bone fasten'd with the Ligament of the Stirrup. G. The Oval hole. FIGURE XVI. H. The Hammer. I. The Staple. K. The Stirrup. L. The Orbicular Bone.
Tab. XVI.
The EXPLANATION of the Sixteenth TABLE, In Folio 488. Shewing the Salavary Channels, and the Lymphatic Chan∣nels of the Eyes in a Calves Head, as they are acurately delineated by N. Stenonis and Wharton. FIGURE I. aaaa. THE Parotis conglome∣rated. bb. The Parotis conglobated. c. The Lymphatic Vessel tending downward from the conglobated Parotis. dddd. The Roots of the outer Sali∣val Channel. eee. The Trunk of the Salival Chan∣nel. fff. The outermost Branches of the Iugular Vein. ggg. The Nerves which are between the Kernel and the Head, so are they knit one to another, as in H. II. Little strings of the Nerve accom∣panying the Salival Channel. FIGURE II. aa. The Orifices of the Vessels pro∣ceeding from the lower Kernel of the Cheeks into some of which a Bristle may be thrust. b. The opening of the outermost Salival Channel in the uppermost and Ex∣tream Part of the little Teats. The other points mark out the o∣ther holes, through which the vis∣cous Humor upon squeezing issues forth. FIGURE III. aa. The Kernel under the Tongue. bb. The Vessels belonging to it. cc. The Orifices of the Vessels for excretion. d. A hollowness observ'd at the side of the Tongue. FIGURE IV. A. The holes of the Palate through which the slimy Humor is squeezed out. bb. The Tonsils. FIGURE V. One Vessel among the rest of those that proceed from the Kernel in the lower Part of the Cheeks. FIGURE VI. A. The hinder Part of the Maxil∣lary Kernel. aa. The hindermost Roots of the Sali∣val Channel. C. The hindermost Trunk of the same Channel, ascending the Tendon of the double belly'd Muscle. DD. The return of it and uniting with the foremost Channel. E. The common Trunk of the Salival Channel. F. G. The double belly'd Muscle. H. The Progress of the said Trunk to the Fore-teeth, of the lower Iaw. I. The Opening of the Channel under the Tongue. K. The round Kernel next to the Maxillary. FIGURE. VII. A. The hinder Part of the Maxil∣lary Glandule. BB. The former Part of the same, with the foremost Roots of the Spittle-Channel. C. The hinder Trunk of the same
Channel ascending a Tendon of the double-belly'd Muscle. D. The return of the same and Uni∣on with the foremost Channel. EE. The common Trunk of the Sali∣val Channel. F. G. The double-Muscl'd Muscle. H. The Progress of the Trunk to∣ward the Fore-teeth of the lower Iaw. I. The Salival Channel open'd under the Tongue. K. A round little Kernel nextto the Maxillary. L. A row of Asperities under the side of the Tongue. M. The Tongue out of its place. FIGURE VIII. The Conglobated Kernels. a. The Conglobated Parotis. b. The Conglobated Kernel next the lower Maxillary Kernel. c. Another Conglobated Kernel sea∣ted above the Chaps. d. The common Kernel. e. The Lymphatic Vessel tending to the Confines of the Jugulary and Maxillary Kernel. fff. Three Lymphatic Vessels, carry'd from the three Glandules a. b. c. to the common Glandule d. FIGURE IX. The Left Eye of a Calf. A. The upper nameless Glandule of the Eye. b. The larger Corner of the Eye. c. The lesser Corner of the Eyes. ddd. The Lobes into which the fore∣most Border of the Kernels is di∣vided through the Lymphatic spa∣ces of which eee. They make their Exit. FIGURE X. A. The inner superficies of the Eye∣lid. bbb. The Nameless Kernel which to∣gether with the small Vessels ccc. appears through the slender Tunicle of the Eye-lid. dd. The Orifices of the Lachrymal Vessels. FIGURE XI. A. The Lachrymal Kernel seated in the inner Corner. B. The Gristle proceeding from the Kernel it self. bbb. The gristly Border. cc. The Membrane. dd. Two Entrances, one of each side the Gristle. FIGURE XII. aa. The continuation of the Lachry∣mal points to the Extremities of the Nostrils. bb. The Vessel for excretion proper to the Nostrils.
ANATOMY BOOK I. Of the lowest Cavity. The Preamble. I Am undertaking to write a Book of Anatomy; but am doubtful whether I should term it the Art and Exercise of Physicians, or of Philosophers. For though formerly it was first instituted for their sakes; yet now these are so much taken up with it, that it can scarce be determined, to which Facul∣ty it is more obliged, or to which it is of nearer Affinity: Since in this our Age both the one and the other are as industrious in this Affair, as if the well∣fare of each Faculty lay in Anatomy, and as if both borrowed all their Light from it, as from ano∣ther Sun; so that they who are destitute of Skill in this one Art, are reckoned to walk in darkeness and to know nothing in a manner: Since several others also, who areof neither Faculty, nor indeed professedly of any, are so sollicitous about the knowledge of Man's Body, that may strive how they may bring Anatomy to greater perfection; and most of these men are desirous not only to equalize others in this Exercise, but to signalize themselves above the rest. So that Anatomy, which formerly was undertaken for the sake of Physick, appears now to be the common Pra∣ctice of all men, and as it were the Eye of all solid Knowledge whatever. To whose further advance∣ment, since I also would contribute my Talent, when I have examined first what Anatomy is, and what its Subject, I shall in succinct order take a view of all the Parts of the humane Body.
CHAP. I. Of Anatomy, and Man's Body, its Division and Parts in general. I. ANatomy is an Art whichDefinition of Anatomy teaches the Artificial dis∣section of the Parts of the Body of Man, that what things in them can be known by Sense, may truly appear. The primary subject of Anatomy isSubject. the Body of Man, partly because it is the perfectest; partly because the know∣ledge of a Man's self is very necessary, a great share whereof consists in the know∣ledge of his own Body. Besides, Anatomi∣cal exercises are very necessary for Physi∣cians, and were chiefly instituted for their sakes, whose Studies are directed to the cure of Diseases only in humane Bodies, and not to the cure of Brutes, as being unworthy of their noble Speculations, and therefore left to arriers and other Ple∣beians. So that in this regard the Arti∣ficial Dissection of humane Bodies must be preferred before the Dissection of any Brute whatever; since Physicians may this way far better attain the perfect know∣ledge of the subject of their Art, than if they should search the Bodies of Brutes. In the mean time, however, because humane bodies cannot always conveni∣ently be had, neither will Law nor Piety at any time allow the cutting of them up alive, yet nevertheless it is necessary that we should get the perfect knowledge, of the site, connexion, shape, use, &c. of the Parts by many Dissections and Inspections; for which purpose men use, in defect of humane Bodies, to dissect se∣veral Brutes, sometimes alive, but usually dead, especially such, whose Inwards and most of their Parts are likest in form, site, and use to the humane body; that by the knowledge of them the parts of a humane body may the easilier be known, when afterwards they are once or twice shown in a humane body. II. A humane body is considered ge∣nerallyDifferent considera∣tion of the Body. Generally. or particularly. III. Considered generally, or in the whole, the chief differences are observed in relation both to the shape, stature and colour. What the shape is in the knownDifference of shape. World, every one knows, and dayly sees. But they that have seen the East and West Indies, and that have Tra∣velled other strange and remote Coun∣tries, describe many uncouth and un∣known shapes to us. For some tell, how they have found Men without heads, whose eyes were in their breasts: Others, men with square heads: Others, men all hairy: Others, Salvages, whose shoul∣ders were higher than their heads; they write, such were found in Guajana: O∣thers, men with Tails: And others, men otherwise shaped. Difference of stature consists herein,Difference of Stature. that some are thick, others slender; some short, others tall. Upper France breeds short and slender men, and very few tall people are found there. Nor∣thern Countries breed tall and strong men: And the Germans come nigh them. England and Holland breed a middle sort. Nevertheless, some very tall peo∣ple, though few, are found in the Low Countries. Ten years agone at UtrechtVery tall People. I saw a Maid Seventeen years of Age, so tall, that a proper man could scarce reach to the top of her head with his fingers ends. Neer Schoonhoven, in the Village Leckerkerck, a few years agone, there lived a Country fellow, a Fisher, commonly called the great Clown, a very strong man, I have often seen him, when he stretched out his arm, the tallest of ordinary men might go under it and not touch it. Anno 1665. at Utrecht-Fair, in the Month of Iuly, I saw a very strong man, and very tall, and witty enough, (which is a rarity in such great bodies) above eight feet and an half high, all his Limbs were pro∣portionable, and he was married to a very little woman, whom, when he Travelled, he could without any trouble carry in a Pouch along with him: he was born at Schoonhoven of Parents of an ordinary size. At the same time a Country wench was shewn, Eighteen years of age, who was nigh as tall as the said man, her whole body was well shaped, but she was of a dull capacity. Yet these rare instances of a vast stature which I have seen (like unto which Pla∣terus Observat. l. 3. describes four more) are nothing, compared with some, which are described by Historians. The body of Orestes, which by command of the Oracle was dug out of the Earth, is said to have been seven Cubits long: which Cubits, according to Aulus Gellius, a∣mong the Romans amounted to twelve
feet and a quarter. William Schouten in his Journal reports, that in the Port, cal∣led Desire, neer the Straits of Magellan, he found men of ten and eleven Cubits. Fazellus, decad. 1. lib. 1. cap. 6. mentions several bodies, found in divers places, some of which were seventeen, others eighteen, others twenty, others two and twenty Cubits long, and one of their Teeth weighed five ounces. Pliny writes, that in Crete a Mountain was broke by an Earthquake, and on that occasion a body of forty seven Cubits was found, which some thought Orion's, others Oetius's. So likewise Camerarius relates divers stories of such Giants, Meditat. Histor. cent. 1. cap. 82. And on the other hand likewiseDwarfs. sometimes men are ound of a very low stature, viz. three or four feet long. We call such Dwarfs. Formerly I have seen three or four of them. Platerus Observ. l. 3. in principio, describes three such, which he saw. Aristotle lib. 8. histor. animal. cap. 12. writes for a certain truth, that Pigmies dwell about those place, where the Nile runs into Egypt, and they are such short dwergens, that they are not above an ell high. But this People could never yet be found by the modern Seamen, who have sailed the World over (perhaps, because they could not get with their Ships to that peoples Country) and therefore one might very well question the truth of the story, had not Aristotle, who ought to be trusted a great way, writ it. Nevertheless Spigelius does not believe Aristotle, but reckons his story of the Pigmies a fable, being so perswaded, 1. From the authority of Strabo, lib. 1. Geograph. 2. From the experience of Francis Alvarez a Portugueze, who himself Travelled those parts, wherea∣bout Aristotle writes, the Pigmies are, namely where the Nile runs into Egypt; yet he could no where see or find that little Nation, but says, that those parts were inhabited by middle statured people. The difference of colour is great,Difference of colour. according to the difference of Coun∣tries: For in Europe and Christendom people are white, in Aethiopia and Brasile black, in divers parts of India tawny, in some places almost red, in o∣thers brown, in others whitish. IV. A humane body consideredParticular considera∣tion of the body. particularly, or according to each part, affords for consideration the neat figure of each part, the most convenient con∣nexion, the admirable structure, the necessary action, and lastly, the great, yet harmonous diversity of all and each function and use. V. The part of the Body is any bodilyDefinition of a part. Substance joyned to the whole in con∣tinuity, having its own proper circum∣scription, and with other parts making up the whole, is fitted for some functi∣on or use.What con∣tinuity is. This is an exquisite definition. For First, the part of a humane body must be a bodily substance, and such as is joyned to the whole in continuity (a thing is said to be continued, whose least particles stick one to another in rest) not in contiguity: For contiguous bodies must of necessity be diverse, and one may be separated from the other without hurt∣ing either, both remaining entire. For as Wine contained in a vessel cannot be called a part of the vessel, nor the ves∣sel a part of the wine, because there is no continuity between them two; so likewise blood contained in an Artery, cannot he called a part of the Artery, nor of a humane body, since it is not joyned thereto in any continuity. Secondly, A part must with others make up the whole; for whatever things are above the complement, are not reckoned parts of one body, but are bodies subsisting by themselves, which often adhere to the whole, that they may be nourished by the whole. Thus a child or mole in the womb are not parts of a womans body, but subsist by themselves, and yet by means of the placenta uterina and umbilical vessels, they are joyned to the womb, that they may receive nourishment from it; ne∣vertheless the woman, when she is de∣livered, remains entire. So likewise Sarcomata or fleshy excrescences, and such things, are not reckoned among the parts of a humane body, because they neither make up the complement of the whole, nor are designed for re∣quisite functions and uses, but adhere to the whole, that thereby they may be nourished. VI. Thirdly, A part must be made for some function or use, VII. A Function, or Action, is a cer∣tainWhat a function is. effective motion made by an Organ, through its own proper disposition to it. This is either private, whereby the parts provide for themselves; or publick whereby the whole is provided for; for instance; The stomach by a private acti∣on, or coction, converts the blood brought to it by the Arteries into a sub∣stance like it self, and so is nourished: But it performs another action besides,
whereby it provides for the whole Ani∣mal, to wit, chylification. VIII. The use of a part is a certainWhat vse . aptiude to some proper intention of na∣ture, to wit. Such as not only turns to the benefit of the part, whence it proceeds, but also respects the good of some other part, or of the whole. It is doubly distin∣guished from action. First, because acti∣on is only competible to parts that operate, but use is often competible to things that do nothing at all, that is to such as help an acting part, so that it may act better. Thus the cuticle acts nothing; but its use is to moderate the sense of the skin, to cover it and the extremities of the vessels, and to defend it from external injuries: Fat acts nothing, it only cherishes and moistens the parts and makes their mo∣tion easier: Hair acts nothing; but its use is to cover and adorn the head, and to defend it from external cold. Secondly, Because action is competible to the whole operating Organ, but use to e∣very part of the Organ; for instance; The action of a Muscle is to contract; but the use of the Musculous Membrane is to contain its fibres, and to seperate it from other Muscles; of the Artery, to bring blood to it; as of the nerves, ani∣mal spirits, to support the fibres of the flesh. Yet oftentimes use, action and function are promiscously used by Ana∣tomists: And the action of a part, be∣cause it tends to some end or other, is often called use: And also use, because it excludes not action, is called action. But use is of greater latitude then action. Hippocrates divided things that makeThings that make up the whole. up the whole into things containing, things contained, and things that move or have in themselves the power of motion. Galen calls these three things Solid parts Humors and Spirits. In this di∣vision the threefold parts of the body are not comprehended, but only three things, without which a man cannot con∣tinue entire, that is, alive. For only the containing or solid parts are true parts of the body. Yet these parts cannot continue alive, except they be continual∣ly nourished by the humors. NotWhere the humors & spirits be parts of the Body. that humors are parts of the body, but the proximate matter, which by coction is changed into the substance of the parts, into which till they are changed, they cannot be called parts; and when they are changed, they cannot be called humors: for a bone is not blood, and blood is not bone, though the one be bred of the other. The same must be understood of spirits, which being made of the subtilest and hottest part of the blood, do very much contribute to the nutrition of the body. Therefore though a man cannot continue alive without these three, yet it does not follow, that all these three must necessarily be parts of the body. A Vine consists of solid woody parts, and a Juyce whereby it is nourished, and yet it is evident, this Juice is no part of the Vine, because if a Vine be unseasonably cut, abundance of it runs out, the Vine remaining en∣tire: wherefore a blind man may see, that it is no part if the Vine, but only liqour, which by further coction would be turned into a Vine. Thus also when there is a Flux of blood by the Haemor∣rhoids, Menses or any other part; or when one makes water or sweats, no man in his wits will say, that then the parts of a mans body are voided, al∣though a man cannot live without blood and serum. But if pieces of the Lungs be brought up in coughing, or if pieces of the Kidneys be voided in Urine, as it sometimes happens in their exculcera∣tion, then it is certain that the true parts of the body are voided. Besides, these are parts of the body,Actions proceed from So∣lids. whence actions immediately proceed, and they proceed not from the hu∣mors and spirits, but from solids. For the humors and spirits move not the Heart, Brain, and other parts, but they both breed and move the humors and spirits: for when the Heart, Brain, and other parts are quiet, humors and spirits are neither bred nor moved (this appears in a deep swoon) and though there is abundance of them in the body, and those very hot and fit for motion, as in such as dye of a burning Fever; yet as soon as the Heart is quiet, they neither move through the Arteries, Veins and Nerves, nor are able to move the Heart, or any part else, which is a certain Ar∣gument that they are Passive, and that no Action can proceed from them. And that the humors and spirits are moved by the Heart, and bred in it and other parts, will more plainly appear, lib. 2. cap. 11. and lib. 3. cap. 10, 11. and in several other places. And now though solids cannot actSolids  not without the humors. without the humors and spirits, and by them their Actions (in as much as by their quantity, or quality, as their heat, cold, &c. they are able to cause this or that mutation or temper in Solids) are made quicker, slower, stronger, weaker, better or worse; yet they are
without air; yet air is no part of the body, neither does the Action of respi∣ration proceed from it, but from the muscles of the breast forcing it out, though in the mean time air by giving way to the motion of the muscles, and passing in and out through the Aspera Arteria, affords such an aptitude for respi∣ration, as without it no respiration could be performed; though also by its heat or cold it may make respiration quicker, slower, longer or rarer, according as by these mutations the heat of the parts is augmented or diminished, and there∣upon necessity obliges one to breath quicker or slower. So the Heart and o∣ther solid Parts are not mov'd by the hu∣mors and spirits, but act upon the hu∣mors and spirits, they move, attenuate and concoct them till at length they turn their apt particles into a substance like themselves, and so apply and unite them to themselves, and make them parts of the body, which they were not before they were applied and assimilated. For one part of the body is not nourished with another part of its whole, a bone is not nourished with flesh, nor a vein with a nerve, &c. Neither can that which nourishes the parts, by any means be called a part, for otherwise there would be no difference between a part and its nutriment: With which Nou∣rishment, unless the Parts be daily che∣rished, and their consumed particles re∣stored, their strength and substance would quickly waste and fail, and by that failure at length their Action would be lost. So that Man of necessity must have both Blood and Spirits for the support of Life (hence saith the Text in Levit. 17. 11. the Soul (that is the Life) of the Flesh is in its Blood) as being the near∣est Support of the Body, without which neither the Parts of the Body can act, nor the Man himself live. Yet it does not follow from thence that the Blood and Spirits are part of the Body: For the same might be said of the external Air, without which no Man can live. For take away from a Man the use of external Air either by suffocation or drowning, or any other way, you pre∣sently deprive him of Life, as surely as if you took from him his Blood and Spirits. Yet no man of Judgment will say that the external Air is a part of the Body: Seeing that most certainly, if that without which Life cannot subsist were to be accounted a Part, the exter∣nal Air must of necessity be said to be a Part of our Body, as well as the Blood and Spirits. Moreover it is to be con∣sidered, that if the Humors and Spirits have contracted any Foulness or Distem∣per, they are by the Physicians numbred among the Causes of Diseases, not a∣mong the diseased Parts. Besides, that if they were Parts, they ought to be si∣milar, yet never any Anatomist that I ever yet heard of, recken'd 'em among similar Parts. For most of the Organic Parts are composed out of the Similar. And yet among those Similar Parts which compose the Organic, never did any one reck'n the Blood or Spirits, as Similar Parts. For all the Organs ought to derive their Composition from those things which are proper and fixed, not from those things which are common to all, and fluid, continually wasted and continually renewed. IX. Therefore the Body of Man may exist intire in its Parts without Blood, Spirits, and Air; but it cannot act, nor live without 'em. And thus a Man cannot be said to live without a rational Soul, and to be a perfect and entire Man; yet every one knows that the Soul is not to be reck'n'd among the parts of the corruptible Bo∣dy, as being incorruptible, subsisting of it self, and separable from the rest of the Body; since, that being incorrupti∣ble, it cannot proceed from any incor∣ruptible Body, but derives it self from a divine and heavenly Original, and is infused from above into the corruptible Body, to the end it may act therein so long as the Health and Strength of those corruptible Instruments will permit Acti∣ons to be perform'd. To which we may add, that an Anatomist, when he en∣quires into the parts of human Body, considers 'em as such, not as endu'd with Life, nor as the parts of a Ratio∣nal Creature. Neither does he accompt the Causes of Life and Actions, by any manner of Continuity or Unity adhe∣ring to the Body, to be Parts; nor is it possible for him so to do. And thus it is manifest from what has been said, That the Spirits and Blood, and other Humors neither are nor can be said to be Parts of our Body. Yet all these Arguments will not satisfy the most Eminent I. C. Scaliger, who in his Book, de Subtil. Exercit. 280. Sect. 6. pretends with one Argument, as with a strong battering Ram, to have ruin'd all the Foundations of our Opinion. If the Spirit (saith he, and he con∣cludes the same Thing of the Blood and Spirits) be the Instrument of the Soul, and the Soul is the beginning of Motion, and the Body be the Thing moved, there must of Necessity be a Difference between
the thing moved, and that which moves the Instrument. Therefore if the Spirits are not animated, there will be something between the thing enlivening and en∣liven'd, forming and form'd; which is neither form'd nor enliven'd. But the Body is mov'd because it is enliven'd. Yet is it not mov'd by an external but an internal Principle. Now it is manifest, that the Spirits are also internal, and that the internal Principle of Motion is in them, therefore it follows that they must be part of the Member. But this Argument of the most acute Scaliger, tho' it seems fair to the Eye at first sight, yet (thoroughly considered) will appear to be without Force, as not concluding any thing of Solidity against our Opinion. For the Spirit is no more an Instrument that moves the Body, than the Air is the Instrument that moves the Sight or Hearing. So neither are the Spirits the Instrument of the Soul, but only the necessary Medium, by which the active Soul moves the in∣strumental Body; and also perceives and judges of that Motion so made in that Body. So that it is no such Ab∣surditie (as Scaliger would have it to be) but a Necessity, that there should be something inanimate between the en∣livening Soul, and the instrumental Body enliven'd, which is part of neither, but the Medium, by which the Action of the enliven'd instrumental Body may be perform'd by the enlivening Soul. But, saies Scaliger, the Body is moved, because it is enlivened, and that not by an external, but an internal Principle. We grant the whole; yet we deny the Spirits to be the internal Principle, when it is most apparent that the Soul is the internal Principle which operates by the assistance of the Spirits. So that it cannot from hence be proved that the Spirits live or are Parts of the Body, but only that they are the Medium, by which the Soul moves the Body. But because that Scaliger spy'd at a distance a most difficult Objection, viz. How the Spirits could be a Part of any corporeal Body, when they are always flowing and never in any constant Rest, but continually in Motion through all the Parts of the Body indifferently, to avoid this Stroak, he says that the Spi∣rit's a quarter of that part of the Body where they are at the present time, and when they flow out of that part then they become a part of that Body into which they next infuse themselves; and so onward. But this way of concluding of Arguments is certainly very insipid, and unbeseeming so great a Man, when it is plain from the Definition of a Part, that a part of our Body, is not any fluid and transient Substance but as it is joyned to the Body by Continuity and Rest. X. The Parts of the Body are two∣fold.Division▪ the . 1. In respect of their Substance. 2. In respect of their Functions. XI. In respect of their Substance, they are divided into Similar, and Dissimilar. XII. Similar Parts are those which are divided into Parts like themselves. So that all the Particles are of the same Nature and Substance. And thus every part of a Bone is a Bone; of a Fiber, a Fiber. Which Spigelius calls Consimiles, or altogether alike: the Greeks , or of like Parts. They are commonly reckoned to be ten: Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Mem∣branes, Fibers, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Flesh, and Skin. To these by others are added the Scarf-Skin, Tendons and Fat. By others, the two Humors in the Eyes, the Glassie and the Crystal∣line; by others the Marrow, the Brain, and Back-Bone: And lastly by others, the Hair, and Nails. Of these some are simply Similar, as the Bones, Gristles, Fibres, &c. wherein there is no difference of Particles to the Sight. I say, manifest to the Sight, for that in respect of the several smallest Elements, not to be perceived by the Eyes, but by the Mind, of which they are composed, no part of 'em can be said to be really and simply Similar. Others are only Similar as to the Sen∣ses, wherein there is a difference of Par∣ticles manifest to the Sight, as a Vein, Arterie, Nerve, &c. For a Vein con∣sists of the most subtile Fibers, and a Membrane: An Arterie of Fibers, and a double different Tunicle. A Nerve consists of the Dura and Pia Mater, or Membrane, little Fibers and Marrow. Nevertheless to a slight and careless Sight they seem to be Similar, because they are every where composed after the same manner, and so are like to themselves, as not having any other Substance or Composition in the Brain, than in the Foot or any other Parts. Of the several similar Parts we shall af∣terwards discourse in their proper Places. Now all the similar and solid parts, in the first forming of the Birth are drawn like the Lines of a rough Draught in Painting, out of the Seed; to which the Blood and milkie Juice contain▪d in the Amnion, and Membrane that wraps a∣bout
the Birth soon after joyning, nou∣rish the Parts delineated, and encrease and enlarge their Bulk. 'Till of late, it was believed that the Blood of the Mother in the first forming of the Parts did concur with the Seed, not only as a material but effective Principle (which Opinion was after∣wards exploded by all the most eminent Philosophers) and that some Parts sha∣red of more Seed, others of more Blood, and others received an equal Share of both. And hence proceeded that old Division, which divided the Parts, in respect of this Principle of Generation into Spermatic, which in theirSpermatic, Sanguine, and Mixt. Forming were thought to partake of more Seed than Blood, as the former eight Similar Parts. Others, into San∣guine, in the forming of which the Blood seemed to predominate, as in the Flesh. Others mixt, which were thought to be form'd of equal Parts of Blood and Seed, as the Skin. But this Diver∣sity of the Parts, does not proceed from the first forming, but from the Nourish∣ment, in respect of which some receiv'd more, others less Blood for the Increase of their Substance: Also others are more and more swiftly, others less, and more slowly encreased in their Bulk. Those Parts which are called Sperma∣tic being cut off, never grow again, or be∣ing broken or separated, never grow again but by the assistance of a Heterogeneous Body. Thus a Bone cut off can never be restored; but it being broken, it unites to∣gether again by means of the Callus, or glutinous Substance, that gathers about the Fracture; but Parts made of Blood are soon restored, as is apparent when the Flesh is wounded or cut off. Those that are mixed, are in the mid∣dle, between both. Nevertheless as to the Spermatic Parts, when broken or se∣parated, some question whether they may not be united again without the help of a Heterogeneous Medium: and they believe that in Infants and Children, whose Spermatic Parts, as the Bones, are very tender may be united again by Vertue of a Homogeneous Medium. But seeing we find that even in Children and Infants, wounds of the Skin never unite without a Scar, nor fractures of the Bone without the assistance of the Callous Matter, 'tis most probable that in no Age the Spermatic Parts unite with∣out a Heterogeneous Medium; though it be not so conspicuous by reason of the extraordinary Moisture of the Parts in new Born Children, and young Peo∣ple. XIII. Dissimilar Parts are thoseDissimilar Parts. which are divided into Parts, unlike in Nature and Substance, but not in∣to Parts like themselves. Thus a Hand is not divided into several Hands, but into Bones, Flesh, Nerves and Ar∣teries, &c. XIV. In respect of their Functions, the Parts are distinguished two ways. 1. Into Organic, and not Organic; 2. Into Principal and Subservient. XV. Organical Parts are such asOrganical Parts. are design'd for the performing of Acti∣ons, and to that end have received a certain, determinate and sensible Con∣formation and Fashion. Now that they may have an aptness for the Duties imposed, there are re∣quired in these Parts, Continuity, fit Situation and Number, proper Figure, and Magnitude. Which Parts are not only Dissimilar, as was formerly thought, but also Si∣milar. For Example, a Nerve, tho' it be a Similar Part, yet because it is en∣trusted with the office of Conveighing and distributing the animal Spirits; for this reason it is no less an Organical Part than a Muscle, or a Hand: and the same thing is also to be understood of a Bone, an Arterie, and a Vein. So that it is a frivolous distinction of Caspar Bau∣hinus, and some others, who while they endeavour to exclude Similar Parts, out of the number of Organic, distinguish be∣tween Instruments, and Instrumental Parts; whereas indeed there is no more difference between 'em, than between an Old Woman, and a very Old Woman. XVI. Parts not Organic are thoseParts not Organic. which have a bare Use, but perform no Action, as the Gristles, the Fat, the Hair. XVII. Principal Parts are thosePrincipal Parts. which perform the Noblest and Prin∣cipal Action. By these the Motions of several other Parts are promoted, and from them proceed. And they are reckoned to be three in Number; two, in respect of the Individual; and one in respect of the Species. 1. The Heart, the Foun∣tain of Vivific Heat, and the Primum Mobile of our Body, from whence the vital and Natural Actions proceed. 2. The Brain, the immediate Organ of Sense, Motion, and Cogitation in Man, by means of which all the Animal Acti∣ons are perform'd. 3. The Parts of Ge∣neration;
upon which the Preservation of the Species depends. XVIII. Subservient Parts, are allSubservi∣ent parts. those that are useful and subservient to the Principal: As the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Kidneys, Hands, &c. And these, as necessary to Life, areNoble. to be called either Noble, without which a Man cannot live, as the Lungs, Stomach, Guts, Liver, and the like. O∣thers as not being necessary for Life, but are proper for some use or action, which renders Life more Comfortable, are toIgnoble. be called Ignoble, as an Arm, a Finger, a Foot, a Hand, Ear, Nose, Teeth, &c. which we may want and yet Live. To these may be added, those whose Office is more mean and hardly mani∣fest, as Fat, Hair, Nails, and the like. Now that the Demonstration of these Parts may be the more conveniently made plain, and described in their Or∣der, we shall divide the Body of Man, according to the modern Anatomists in∣to the three Ventricles, and Limbs. XIX. The Venters are certain re∣markable Cavities, containing one or more of the Noble Bowels. In this Place the words Cavity and Venter are not to be strictly taken for the Cavities themselves only, but lest the Members of this Division should be too Numerous, we would have com∣prehended under 'em at large, as well the containing Parts that form those Ca∣vities, as also the Parts contain'd within 'em: together with the Neck, or if there be any other parts annexed to 'em, which may be reckoned to the Members. Afterwards in the following Chapters, when we come to discourse particularly of the several Venters, we shall more at large subdivide 'em into Parts Containing, Contained, and such as are adjoining to them. XX. These three Venters are the uppermost, the middle, and the lower∣most. XXI. The uppermost Venter or Ca∣vityThe upper∣most Venter or Cavity. is the Head, wherein are con∣tained the Brain, the Eyes, the Ears, and other Parts. Now there was a necessity that this same Tower of the principal Faculties should be seated in the highest Place, to the end that being at a further distance from the places where the Nourishment is drest, the most noble Animal Functi∣ons should not be disturb'd by its Steams and thick Exhalations: partly for the convenience of the Senses of Hearing, Seeing and Smelling, whose Objects more easily dart themselves from a higher than a lower place into the Or∣gans of the Senses, and by that means become more perceptible.The middle Venter. XXII. The second or middle Ven∣ter or Cavity is the Breast, the Mansion of the Heart, Lungs, rough Arterie or Windpipe, and the Oesophagus or Gullet. This the great Creator placed in the middle, that as a King resides in the mid'st of his Kingdom, so the Heart the most noble and principal Habitacu∣lum of Life should inhabit this middle∣most Palace of the Microcosmical King∣dom, and there sit as in its Throne, from thence with more convenience to water the several Regions of the Little World with its Rivulets of enlivening Nectar and Heat. XXIII. The third Venter which isThe lower∣most Ven∣ter. generally called the lowermost, and concludes with the Abdomen or Paunch, as the seat of the Liver, Stomach, Guts, Reins, Womb, and many other parts, serving for the Concoction of Nourish∣ment, Evacuation of Excrements, and Generation of Off-spring: therefore necessarily to be placed lowermost, lest the manifold disturbances and abomina∣ble filth of this Kitchin should annoy the superiour principal Viscera in their Fun∣ctions. XXIV. Limbs are the MembersLimbs. adjoyning to the Venters, and distin∣guish'd with Ioynts. These being granted to Man for the better accommodation of Life, are two∣fold, Arms and Legs. XXV. The Arms in Man, are di∣vided into the Shoulders, Elbows, and Hands: The Legg is divided into the Thigh, the Shin, and Foot. According to which Division we haveA Division of the Work. divided this our Anatomy into ten Books. In the first four of which shall be ex∣plain'd the History of those things which are contain'd in the several Cavities and Limbs. In the six latter we shall dis∣course of those things which are com∣mon to the whole Body, the Muscles, Membranes, Fibers, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Bones, Gristles, and Ligaments.
CHAP. II. Of the lowermost Venter in ge∣neral. I. IN regard the lowermost Venter contains in it several moist Parts which are liable to putrefaction, the sink of many Dregs, therefore A∣natomists begin their Dissections from thence, to avoid the effects of swift pu∣trefaction, and to remove those Bowels first out of the way, which might soon∣est infect the whole Body, and so pre∣vent a requisite consideration of the rest. II. This Venter Aristotle (Hist.Nomina. Anim. lib. 1. c. 13.) properly calls : the Common People simply the Belly, in a more reserved signification: which Celsus willing to distinguish from the superiour Venter, calls Imum Ventrem, the lower Belly. III. The lower Venter is all that Ca∣vity,The lower Venter. bounded above by the Sword∣like Cartilage and the Diaphragma or Transverse Muscle; on each side by the lower Ribs, behind by the Ioynts of the Loyns; and below, by the Bones of the Hip, the Os Sacrum and Share-bone, or Os Pubis. IV. The fore parts of this Cavity ad∣joyning to the lower Cartilages of the Ribs, and comprehended under 'em, were by the Ancients call'd Hypo∣chondria and Praecordia; being two, a Right and a Left. V. All that which falls upon theEpigastri∣um. middle Ventricle of the Hypochon∣dria, and the Gutts next to it, for more clear distinctions sake, with Ves∣lingius, is call'd Epigastrium, tho' Riolanus will have it to be the Region of the Stomach: But the Ancients gave the name of Epigastrium to the whole Paunch; which the Arabians call'd Myrach. In the upper part of this Epigastrium is a certain Cavity, by the Greeks call'd  and ; by the La∣tins Scrobiculus Cordis. VI. The middle Region is the Re∣gionThe Region of the Na∣vel. of the Navel, lying equally from the Navel three fingers above and below, whose sideling Parts are by the Greeks call'd , by the Latins Ilia, because the Gut Ilium lies chiefly conceal'd un∣der those places.Hypoga∣strium. VII. That part which is compre∣hended between this Region and the space of the Share, is call'd the Hypo∣gastrium, Imus Venter, and Aqua∣liculus. Whose lateral Parts from the bending of the Hip to the Share, are call'd Inguina, or the Groyns. VIII. The Share▪ by the GreeksThe Share. , is that part next above the Pri∣vities covered with hair in persons grown to full Age. Of each side of which are the , which the Latins call Inguina, or the Groyns.Perinae∣um. IX. The lower part between the Root of the Yard and the Fundament, is call'd the Perinaeum. X. The hinder parts of the PaunchLoyns. or Abdomen above, are fill'd up by the Loyns or Lumbi, below by the Buttocks or Clunes, which the Greeks call  and . The Cleft dividing the Buttocks byButtocks. Hierophilus is call'd , where the hole of the right Intestine breaks forth, vulgarly call'd the Podex or Funda∣ment. XI. This Venter consists of parts containing or external, or of parts contain'd or internal. XII. The Containing, which theyAbdomen. properly call the Abdomen or Paunch, are either common or proper. XIII. The parts contain'd are adap∣ted either for Nourishment, Evacuati∣on of Excrements, or Generation. The Physiognomists affirm that no∣table Conjectures may be made con∣cerning the Disposition of Men from the form and bigness of this Belly. Thus Aristotle affirms that a little Belly is one of the principal Parts from whence Wis∣dom appears in man. Among others, a lat and hollow Belly denotes a man envi∣ous and covetous. A round Belly beto∣kens sobriety. A swag-Belly marks out a sleepy, slothful, stupid Fellow. A Navel swelling out very much, is a sign of a person given to Venery.
CHAP. III. Of the common Containing Parts; and first of the Cuticle and Skin. I. THose are said to be the Com∣mon containing Parts, that infold not only this Belly, but cover all the rest of the Body except the Yard, the Scrotum, or Cod, the Eye∣lids, and some other parts that want Fat. II. These are, the Cuticle, the Skin,The con∣taining parts. the Fat, the fleshy Pannicle, the Mem∣brane common to the Muscles. III. The Cuticle, or Scarf-skin, which theCuticle. Greeks call  (as it were a thing spread over the Skin) is a thin, fast, insensible little Skin spread over the Cutis, and so closely sticking to it, that it cannot be parted from it, but by the raising of little Blisters by the force of Fire or Vesicatories. Aquapendens observed it sometimesSometimes double. double under the Vesicatory, divided into two very thin Skins, an outermost somewhat closer, and an innermost much thinner, and sticking so close to the Skin, that it cannot be taken off with a Pen∣knife; which was so provided by Nature, that seeing the Skin is subject to outward violence, that if one Skin should perish, the other might remain entire, and sup∣ply the uses to which the other was de∣sign'd. IV. It is said to grow from theOriginal. moisture of the Flesh condens'd by the dryness of the ambient Air; but er∣roneously, in regard it appears to have a Seminal Principle as well as the Skin, or any solid Parts. It covers the Skin, and shuts up theThe Use. Mouths of the Vessels that extend to the Skin, and moderates its exquisite Sense, and prevents the overmuch run∣ning out of the moisture. Iulius Castor of Placentia, and several other Anatomists, will not allow it to be a part of Human Body, for four Rea∣sons. 1. Because it was not produc'd out of the Seed in the first forming of the Parts; but afterwards arises from the Excre∣ments of the third Concoction condens'd and dry'd by the Cold, like the film that grows upon Porridge. Which they say is apparent from hence, that when it is taken away or scrap'd off, it easily grows again, which the Spermatic parts never do. 2. Because it is void of Sense; nor is it wasted, as the other parts are, by Di∣seases. 3. Because it does not live. 4. Because it performs no action. But all these Arguments are of no force, as being full of manifest contra∣diction. For by the unanimous consent of all Anatomists, even of those that propose these Arguments; it is allow'd to be the first and outermost of all the containing Parts; in which particular they had all very grosly err'd, were it not a part of Human Body. But let us see what weight their Arguments car∣ry. To the first we say, That the smallest Threds or Fibres of it were form'd out of the Seed, in the first delineation of the Parts. Which is apparent in all A∣bortions covered with a Skin, where there is always a Scarf-skin to be seen; which could not be generated by the ex∣ternal Cold, for there can be no such thing in the clos'd Womb; nor by the driness of any ambient Substance, there being no such thing that can touch the Birth swimming in a moist milkie Li∣quor; and therefore proceeds from some small portion of the Seed. Which is apparent in Ethiopian Infants, as well brought forth in due season, as ejected by Abortion, who bring the external blackness along with 'em out of the Womb. Which Colour only dyes the Scarf-skin, and not the Skin (as Riolanus observ'd in the Dissection of an Ethio∣pian, whose Scarf-skin or Cuticle was only black, the Skin it self being whiter than Snow.) If now they receive that blackness from their first Formation in the Womb, then the Cuticle into which that Colour is incorporated in the very first forming of the Body, had its Ori∣ginal with the rest of the Parts out of the Seed; not from any Excrements, or Viscous Exhalations, in regard that no such things can be at the beginning of Formation. As for its growing again when cut away or rub'd off, it has that quality common also to the Teeth, which are daily worn by Mastication, yet grow again (concerning which see lib. 9. cap. 10. following.) Nay we find, that in the change of Teeth, the greatest part of 'em shed themselves, and afterwards come again. The same quality also is com∣mon to the Sanguin Parts; which are not excluded however out of the num∣ber
of Parts, because they grow again when taken away: seeing they have such a copious nourishment of Blood, that easily admits of such a Restoration. And thus from the ends of the Vessels of the Skin, which it covers and shuts, certain Exhalations breath continually forth like a kind of Dew from the Blood to the Cuticle, for its nourishment, which is sufficient easiy to restore its decay'd and wasted Particles. Then if it be generated, as they say, like a Film growing over Milk thickned with flower, that prove; it to be a part of the Body, proceeding from the same Principle with the rest. For that same cream or film in Milk, is not the Excre∣ment of the Milk condens'd, nor any thing extraneous to the Milk, but the thicker part of the Milk, and therefore the Milk. To the second, we say, that though it be not sensible, nor wasted manifestly in Diseases, yet is it no less a part of the Body than the Bone, which is neither sensible, nor does seem to be wasted. To the third, we say, 'Tis a false Assertion, that it does not live; for it increases and grows with the rest of the Body, (which Parts not living never do) and is nourished with Alimentary Juices, like the rest of the Parts. Which Juices, though they cannot be manifestly percei∣ved by the sight, that signifies nothing, for that happens to those Juices that nourish many Bones, and the Periostea or Membranes that enclose the Bones, the Teeth and many other parts. Be∣sides, it is subject to its Diseases proceed∣ing from bad Humours and Blood, as is apparent in the Leprosie, the Meazles, and many other disaffections. In some it is thinner and softer, in others thicker and harder. But such differences de∣prive the Cuticle of Life, no more than the Skin, which is subject to the same variety. Lastly, who can be so sottish to believe that our whole living Bodies should be covered and born with a dead substance or matter round about it. To the fourth we say, That though it do not act, yet the use of it is absolutely necessary; and consequently that it is no less a part of the Body than a Cartilage or Gristle, the Fat, many Membranes, Flesh, and other Parts which are very useful, but perform no action at all. Therefore we must conclude it a true part of Human Body: 1. Because it is one of those things that fill up the space; for a man without a Cuticle is not a com∣pleat whole man: 2. Because it adheres in Continuity to the Body: 3. Because it is appropriated as aforesaid to a certain necessary use. V. The Skin, Cutis, , asThe Skin. it were , a Band tying together the parts of the Body; in Brutes Pl∣lis and Corium, the Pelt or Hide is a covering Membranous, thick, genera∣ted act of the Seed, and cloathing the External Body, as well to measure the excesses and differences of tactible Qua∣lities, as to preserve it against the as∣saults of accidental Violences. VI. It consists of a Substance properIts Sub∣stance. to it self, being of a middle Nature, between a Nerve, a Membrane, and Flesh. For it is not without Blood, nor so quick of feeling as a Nerve; not so thin as a Membrane; nor so full of Blood as the Flesh; but it is indued with Blood, and as it were a Membrane some∣what sinewy and somewhat fleshy, which by vertue of its fleshiness, enjoys a great∣er thickness than any Membrane; and by vertue of its Nervosity has an acute and quick sense. Aristotle seems to allow it a Substance plainly fleshy; for (in the 29th Problem, & l. 2. de generat. Animal. c. 6.) he af∣firms the Cutis or Skin to be produced of the Flesh growing dry. In which sence also Columbus (l. de Spir. c. 5. & 8.) calls the Skin the Exiccation or drying up of the Flesh. With whom Galen, 3. Me∣thod, and Ferneius l. 5. Pathog. c. 8.) seem to consent, saying, That the Skin is the dryer part of the Flesh that lyes underneath it. But seeing there is so great a difference between the Substance of the Skin, and the Flesh that lies un∣der it; and for that the Skin is almost e∣very where separated from the Flesh by the Fat that runs between, and the fleshy Pannicle, it is apparent that the Skin can be no part of the dry'd up Flesh. I say almost every where, for in the Forehead it sticks so fast to the Muscles under it, that it follows their Motion, and seems to be united to 'em, though in truth it be a part subsisting of it self, and not ge∣nerated by the Flesh of the Muscles, but only most closely fixed to it. Whence we must conclude that the Skin owes its Original to no other part; but that it was produced in the first forming the Parts no less immediately from the Seed, and obtained a Nature no less proper to it self, than any other of the Parts. Lindanus affirms the Substance of it to be twofold; the outward Part, ner∣vous; the inward part fleshy. For he likens the Skin to the rind or peel of an Orange;
whose exterior yellow Substance is thin∣ner, harder, thicker, and more porous. The inner white part thicker, softer, loos∣er and more spungy: and so he believes the Skin to be. And Massa is of the same Opinion, who writes that the Skin consists of two little Skins, and that they may be divided by the edge of a Ra∣zor. VII. In respect of the Substaace theThe Diffe∣rence. Skin differs in thickness, fineness, thin∣ness, and hardness, according to the variety of Temperament, Age, Sex, Re∣gions, and Parts. Here Spigelius proposes a Question,Whether the Instru∣ment of Feeling? Whether the Skin be the Instrument of Feeling? Which Aristotle and Avicen seem to deny, but Galen and his Disci∣ples affirm to be true. For the Solution of the Question, this is briefly to be said: That the Membrane is properly the In∣strument of feeling; and hence the Skin, as it is a Membrane, may be said to feel. But because that other thicker Parts not feeling of themselves are intermixed with the Sensitive Particles, hence it comes to pass, that its feeling Faculty is in some measure moderated, that it might be neither too dull, nor too quick. VIII. It is temperate in the firstThe Tem∣per. Qualities, and enjoys a moderate Sense of Feeling. For in regard it is subservi∣ent to the Sense of Feeling, to the end it may be able the sooner, and with less de∣triment, to feel External Injuries, before the Inward Parts receive any Dammage, it ought to have a mean temper between the tactible Qualities; by means of which it might be able to perceive all Ex∣tremities. And because the Constituti∣on of tactible Qualities is generally felt and examined by the Hands, therefore the innermost Skin of the Hands is most exactly temperate, and of a moderate sensibility, so it be not become brawny by laborious Exercise. VIII. The Figure of it is plain andThe Fi∣gure. Flat; nor has it any other Properties peculiar to it self, but such as it bor∣rows from the Parts subjected to it; according to whose Shape it is either Level or Unequal, Prominent on Exuberant, Contracted or Depres∣sed. In many Parts it has various Lines and Wrinkles according to the variety of its Motions; from the Inspection of which in the Hand the Art of Chiromancy pro∣mises Wonders. IX. It never moves of it self btMotion. when it is mov'd, and then it is mov'd either by the Part which it invests, or by the Muscles annexed to it, as in the Forehead and hinder part of the Head. X. It is nourished by the Blood in∣fusedNourish∣ment and Vessels. into it through innumerable lit∣tle Arteries. It has innumerable little▪ Veins, of which several discharge them∣selves into the Iugulars, the Axillars, or Armhole-Veins, the Epigastric's, Veins of the Loynes, and Saphaenae or Cru∣ral Veins. Innumerable other Veins al∣so return their Blood to the Heart in∣vincibly through some other greater Veins. It receives the Animal Spirits through the Nerves, of which the num∣berless small Branches, and little Fibers terminate in the Skin from the parts be∣neath it; and contribute to the quick∣ness of its Feeling. XI. It is of a continuous or con∣nexedThe Pores. Substance, except only in those places where there is a necessary Per∣foration for the Entrance and Egress of things necessary, as the Mouth, the Nostrils, the Eyes, the Fundament, the Womb, the Pores, &c. XII. In many places it is hairie,Hair. as upon the Head, the Share, the Chin, the Lips, the Armpits; more∣over, but especially in Men, upon the Breast, the Armes, Thighs, and Leggs. But as for the Quantity, Colour, Length, Thickness, and fineness of Hair, there is a very great Variety according to the Temperament and Constitution of the Body. XIII. The Colour of the Skin isColour. various. 1. According to the diver∣sity of Regions. Hence some are deep Yellow, like the Scythians: Others bright Yellow, as the Persians, ac∣cording to Hippocrates. Others Black, as the Ethiopians, Brasilians, and Nigrites. Others between Yellow and Black, as many of the Indians. Others between a deep Yellow, Red, and Black, as the Mauritanians. Others White, as the Europeans. 2. According to the Variety of Temperaments and Humors therein contained. Hence the Flegma∣tick are Pale, the Choleric Yel∣low, the Melancholy Swarthy, and the Sanguine Fresh and Lively. 3. Ac∣cording to the Variety of the parts of the Body: For if it stick to the Flesh, as in the Cheeks, it is more ruddy, if too
much Fat, it looks pale; if to a dry and wrinkled part, brown and dull; if it lye over great Veins, it looks blue. XIV. Whether Action or Use be to beThe Use. attributed to the Skin is disputed. Galen will allow it no Action. li. de Caus. Morb. c. 6. And therefore affirms it to be form'd by Nature particularly for Use. On the other side Iulius Casser of Placentia l. de tact. org. sect. 2. c. 1. besides Use ascribes to it a certain pub∣lick Action, so far as it performs the Act of Touching or Feeling, and dis∣cerns and judges of Qualities. Aristo∣tle agrees with Galen; and many Argu∣ments uphold Casser, which he rehear∣ses and weighs in a long Discourse. l. Citat. à cap. 1. ad 9. And there also at the same time disputes of the Organ of Feeling, from Chap. the 10. to the 19. of the Book even now cited. CHAP. IV. Of the Fat, the fleshy Pannicle and Membrane of the Mus∣cles. I. FAT, is an unctuous or oylieFat. Substance, condens'd by Cold to the thinnest Membrane lying upon the fleshy Pannicle, and closely joyn'd to it, produced out of an oylie and sulphureous part of the Blood, which bing spread under the Skin, excludes no less the penetrating Injuries of Cold, than it hinders the immoderate Dissipa∣tion of the natural Heat, moistning the in∣ward Parts, and facilitating their Motion. When I say it is condensed by Cold, then by Cold I mean a lesser Heat, not an absolute Frigidity void of all Heat. Which is explain'd at large by Andr. Laurentius▪ Anat. l. 6. c. 6. Where by many Reasons and Similitudes he clear∣ly demonstrates, how a lesser Heat may make a Condensation. Valesius also weighs and decides all the Arguments brought to and agen upon this Subject. Controvers. Med. & Philos. l. 1. c. 10. II. The Matter of Fat is Blood: Hence it comes to pass that whereThe Sub∣stance. Blood is wanting, there is never any Fat or Grease. And that not every sort of Blood, but such as is prefectly concocted, Oyly and Sulphureous, made by Concoction out of the most airie and best part of the Nourishment. Hence it comes to pass, that such Persons whose Blood is not Oyly (tho' plentiful) but hot, Melancholic, Choleric, ill Concoct∣ed, Serous, Salt, or which way soever sharp as in Scorbutics and Hypochondri∣acs, never become Fat. For that through the vehement and sharp Fermentation, occasioned by the acrimonious Particles, the oylie Sulphureous Particles in the Blood either are not generated in suffi∣cient Quantity; or being generated or consum'd, before they can be separated from the sanguine Mass, and grow to the Membranes. Hence it is manifest wherefore Children are tenderly plump, but never Fat, because their Blood is very Serous, and the more thick and oyly parts of it, are wasted in the Nou∣rishment and Growth. Therefore Ari∣stotle in his History of Animals l. 3. c. 13. writes, That all Creatures of riper Age sooner grow Fat than such as are young and tender, especially when they are arri∣ved at their full Growth of Length and Breadth, then they come to augment in Profundity. III. The Primarie efficient Cause is moderate Heat (not too fierce, asThe effici∣ent Causes that which dissipates overmuch, nor too little, which neither concocts well, nor dissolves the concurring Vapors) the secondary Cause is the Condensa∣tion of those Vapors raised by that Heat to the colder Membranes. Nor is it a Wonder that Condensation should be made, when those Vapors light upon the Membranes not absolutely cold (tho' they are said to be cold in respect of other Parts that are hotter) but mo∣derately hot as is before said. As we see melted Lead, when it is remov'd from the Fire condenses again tho' the place be very warm, however not so hot as the Fire. Nevertheless those oyly sulphureous Vapors do not only light upon, neither are they always condensed upon the Su∣perficies of the Membranes, but if the Members are sufficiently Porous, they insinuate themselves into their Pores, and spread over the whole Membranes, where they embody together, and be∣come a part of 'em; and by that means the Fat is dispersed through those uni∣versal Membranes, as it is done in that Membrane which lyes next under the Skin. But if the Membranes are more firm and thicker, then the Fat ad∣heres only to their Superficies, as we find in the Intestines, the Heart and some other Parts that are fortify'd with a
firmer and more compacted Mem∣brane. IV. The learned Malpighius (ex∣ercit.Fat Ker∣n,   th de Om. Ping. & Adip.) makes an Enquiry what that is, by means of which, the Oyly and Fat Particles are separated from the Sanguine Mass, seeing that Heat alone (which can raise indifferently any Vapors from the Blood, but not particularly separate the oyly Vapors from the rest) is not sufficient to do it. Whence he con∣jectures  that Separation is made by the means of certain Kernels, appropri∣ated only to that Duty, and that by o∣thers the oyy Particles are infused into certain Channels or Passages, which he calls Ductus Adiposos, or Channels for the Fat, and through which they are spread up and down upon the Mem∣branes. In which place he brings seve∣ral Arguments to support this new Spe∣culation of his. Which new Discovery of so great a Man, is not to be despised, nor to be rashly rejected; but to be more seriously considered; in regard the following Reasons render it somewhat Doubtful. 1. Because the Kernels ne∣ver appear to sight, nor can be any where demonstrated. 2. Because the certain∣ty of the Passages of the Fat and their Cavity, is a thing as much to be dispu∣ted. 3. Because the Fat or oyly Matter is somewhat Viscous, and therefore not so lvable to be separated from the Blood by invisible Kernels; or to pass through the imaginary Cavities of invisible Chan∣nels, when the most subtle Animal Spirits which are liquid and not viscous at all, cannot pass through the invisible Pores of the Nerves, but that they are stopp'd by every slight Obstacle, more especially by the least quantity of viscous Humor, as we find in Palsies. 4. For that a fat Sweat breaths forth from the Bodies of many People, when it is a thing not to be believed, that these sort of Kernels are every where inwardly annexed to the Skin of the whole Bo∣dy. V. Whence it is apparent, what isThe Tem∣perament. to be thought of the Temperament; that is to say, that Fat is moderately hot, tho' it condense in the Cold, and be less hot than Blood. Which Tem∣perament appears, 1. From the Mat∣ter of it, which is Blood concocted, airie and sulphuie. 2. From the effi∣cient Cause, which is Heat. 3. From the Form, which is Ovliness. 4. From the End, which is to help the Concocti∣on of the Parts; and by its temperate Heat to defend against the external Cold. 5. For that it is easy to be set in a Flame. Of which Galen thus writes, l. 4. de usu part. c. 9. That Fat is hot, is known to the Sense it self, by those that use it in∣stead of Oyle. And this also more espe∣cially manifests it to be true, because it's easily set on a light Flame, as approach∣ing nearest the nature of Flame; for no∣thing cold is suddenly kindl'd. VI. Picolominus has asserted thatWhether it has any pe∣culiar Mem∣brane? Fat grows to a proper Solid but most thin Membrane (as we have already affirm'd) for that in Living Creatures the oylie Vapors of the refin'd Blood, would breath out in great Quantitie through the Pores of the Skin, unless some thick and cold Membrane (which Malpigius calls the Adipous Mem∣brane) should restrain and curdle 'em together. But Riolanus in his Anthro∣pogr▪ believes there is no need of any particular Membrane for that work, in regard that Condensation may be well enough performed between the thick∣ness of the Skin, and the fleshy Mem∣brane (perhaps as it grows outwardly to the Intestines and Membranes of the Kidneys: Which he proves from hence, for that in fat Bodies, especially in Wo∣men, the fleshie Membrane lyes wrapt up in Fat, as it were in the middle of it. And the same thing is prov'd by others by this Experiment, that if Fat be mel∣ted at the Fire, there does not remain any Membrane proper to it but only the fleshie Membrane. Hence Riolanus be∣lieves that Fat is not to be taken for any peculiar Part, since it seems to con∣stitute but one only part with the fleshie Membrane. Yet the same Riolanus (in Enchirid. Anatom. l. 2. c. 7.) re∣claiming his former Opinion, attributes a peculiar Membrane to Fat. And this is that which we also believe. For if the Fat which lies under the Skin be pull'd off with the Fingers, you may easily perceive its more close and fast sticking by means of the Membrane; and tho the fleshie Membrane be sometimes o∣verspread with Fat, as sometimes it hap∣pens to the Intestines and other Mem∣branous Parts, this does not prove, but that the Fat it self, which is extended over the whole Body under the Skin, has its own proper Membrane. VII. But here some will object, This Membrane then at the first forming of the Birth ought to have been form'd out of the Seed with the
rest of the solid Parts. But neither in Abortives, nor in Infants newly born, any Flesh is observ'd to lie un∣der the Skin, therefore there can be no such Membrane there as that to which the Fat is said to adhere. I answer, That that Membrane in all new born Infants is most certainly form'd, but by reason of its extraordi∣nary close sticking to the fleshy Panni∣cle, it is not so easily to be discovered. I remember once that in a certain large and fleshy Infant, that was Still-born, I found something of a small peice of Fat, like a kind of Froth, sticking to the Membrane, and as a Rarity not usually to be seen so soon, I shew'd it to all the Lovers of Physick that were by. Pe∣ter Laurembergius also seems to agree with us in this particular; as he, who in his Anat. l. 1. c. 8 demonstrates, That the Fat (he should have said, rather, the Membrane to which the Fat will af∣terwards grow) is form'd in the Womb, and that there never was any Child born without Fat (that is, without the Membrane) surrounding the Body and the Caul. VIII. As the Fat which incompassesThe Fatty Membrane. the Body grows to its own Membrane, so the same thing happens in the Fat of other Parts. For whereever Fat is to be found, as in the Intervals of the Muscles, the Heart, the Kidneys and other parts, there are to be found many thin Membranes, like little Baggs or hollow Lappets, hanging at the Ends of the Vessels, which adhere to another thicker Membrane spread underneath as it were a Base and Foundation. In these the Fat or oyly Matters of the little Bagg being separated from the Blood are condensed and col∣lected; and so out of several little Baggs filled with oyly Matter, being mutual∣ly clapt together, at length are made huge Portions of Fat. Malpighius also, by the help of his Microscopes, has ob∣serv'd that the said little Sacks are va∣riously formed, some being flat, others oval, others of another Shape, and that they are knit together partly by the Membranes of which they are for∣med, partly by the little Net of the Vessels. Nevertheless it is to be obser∣ved, that these little membranous Baggs do not grow to all the thick Mem∣branes, which is the reason that Fat does not grow to all Membranes; as in the Lights, Bladder, the Meninges, or Membranes of the Brain, the Liver and Spleen, &c. in regard that no such membranous Baggs do grow or hang to the Membranes that cloath and invest 'em. Then, as for the Bones it may be questioned in some measure, whether their own Cavities do not supply the place of membranous Baggs, (which Cavities in the larger Bones are bigger, in the lesser Bones lesser and Spungy) or whether any membranous Baggs may be contained in those Cavities, in which the fat Marrow is collected. Which latter seems to be therefore so much the more probable, for that the Marrowy Fat seems to be in a manner interwoven with little Fibres and Membranes. IX. Others there are who fartherWhether a∣ny part of the Body. extend the foresaid Doubt concerning the Membrane of the Fat, and do not put the Question, whether the Fat en∣compassing the Body, either alone, or together with the Membrane to which it sticks, be a Part of the Body it Con∣stitutes; but whether it be any man∣ner of way to be reckoned among the Parts of the Body? They who main∣tain the Negative affirm, 1. That it is not a spermatic Part engendered out of the Seed. 2. That it is not endued with Life like the rest of the Parts, be∣cause it sometimes grows and sometimes wastes Insensibly. 3. For that in case of Hunger and Famine it turns into the Nourishment of the other Parts, where∣as one Part cannot nourish another. 4. Because it performs no Action. 5. Be∣cause it is not restrain'd within any pecu∣liar Circumscription. But because the Affirmative seems to me the more fit to be embraced as the truer, I answer, to the First; that the first and least Deli∣neaments of the spermatic Parts, are on∣ly engendered out of the Seed, which at the first are so thin, that they can hard∣ly be discern'd by the Eye, or else lye hid, as in the Teeth and several other Parts, which do not appear till long af∣ter, when enlarged and encreased by the Nourishment which is daily afforded 'em: And so also it is with Fat. To the Second, That as the Muscles through Diseases insensibly decay, and yet it cannot be said that they are not endued like the rest of the Vessels with Life, thus also the Increase or Decrease of the Fat is no Proof that the Fat is not also endued with Life like the rest of the Parts. To the Third, I answer, That it is not true, that the Fat turns to the Nourishment of the rest of the Parts in
case of Famine; but rather that is most certain, That the Fat is wasted also by long abstinence, like the other Parts, when depriv'd of its Nourishment. To the Fourth, I say, that Galen (l. 6. de placit. c. 8.) allows Action to Fat, by understanding Use, as he also in many other places confounds Action and Use, tho' in reality there be a great diffe∣rence between 'em. Besides that the Cu∣ticle, the spungy Bones of the Nostrils, the various Membranes, the Hair and other Parts, tho' they perform no Action, but only serve to several Uses, are therefore not excluded out of the number of the Parts; for which Rea∣son there is as little cause for the exclu∣sion of Fat from the same Number. To the Fifth, I affirm, That it is restrain'd within its own Circumscription, tho' not contracted to a Point, in like man∣ner as the Flesh, which has no Circum∣scription exactly determined; besides we know that the Figure makes nothing to the Essence of the Part. X. The Colour of Fat in Men, asColour. well as in brute Beasts, differs some∣thing according to Age. For in Youth it is of a yellowish, or rather rosie kind of Colour; in elderly Peo∣ple somewhat enclining to White; but in decrepit People altogether White. Tho' these Rules are not so general in a∣ny Age, but that there may be sometimes an Exception, and the Sport of Nature may be observ'd. Laurembergius attri∣butes this Diversity of Colours to the Qualities of the Blood: Not without reason. Others would rather deduce it from external Causes. But these will agree with Laurembergius, if we will al∣low the Qualities of the Blood to be changed by external Causes: And so the Blood may be said to be changed by the Variety of Causes. XI. Fat is either internally thic∣kened in the internal Parts or ex∣ternal, spread next under the Skin, of which we chiefly speak in this place. This is circumfused over all the Body, except the Lips, upper part of the Ear, the Eye-brows, the Cods, and the Yard, to which it would be but a Burthen. XII. It differs also in QuantityThe Plenty of it. several Ways. 1. In respect of Age: For in florid Age, it is more plen∣tiful than in Childhood and Old-age. 2. In respect of Sex: For in Wo∣men it is more plentiful than in Men. 3. In respect of the Temperament, Region, and Time of the Year: For it less abounds in hot and dry than in cold and moist Tempers. 4. In respect of Motion and Rest: For sedentary and lazy People are more subject to be fat, than they who are given to Exercise, or constrained to hard Labor. 5. In respect of Dyet: For they that feed upon costly Dyet, and indulge their Appetites, and make use of Nourishment of plentiful and good Iuice, are more subject to be fat, than they that live sparingly. 6. In respect of the Parts themselves: For it is more plentiful in those Parts where it is of most use, as the Abdo∣men, Breasts, Buttocks; more spa∣ring in those Parts where it is of lit∣tle Use, as the Hands and Feet; but none at all where it is unprofita∣ble and burthensome. 7. In respect of Health: For healthy People are fuller than sickly and diseased. XIII. Suet grows to the internalAeps or Suet. Parts, being the same with Pingue∣do or Fat in a large Sense. But to speak specifically, it differs from Fat, for that this is softer and more moist, easily melted, and being melted, does not so easily congeal. Whereas Suet is harder and dryer, is much longer in melting, and being melted, more difficultly hardens again. This is cer∣tain however, that several Physicians use the Word promiscuously, and call any oily Substance of any Creature Fat, Grease, or Suet, as they please themselves; which is also to be found in Galen: who is frequently carelesly neg∣lectful of making any Distinction or Property between these Words; and l. 2. Sympt. de pingued. thus writes; If thou wilt call every oily and fat Sub∣stance in Animals Grease; but Fat may be taken for the whole Genus of that sort of Substance. XIV. The fleshy Pannicle, fleshyThe  Pannicle. Membrane, and membranous Muscle, by the Greeks , is a strong Membrane full of fleshy Fibres, espe∣cially about the Forehead, Neck, hinder part of the Head, and Regi∣on of the Ears, spread over the whole Body, as well for Covering as De∣fence, endued with an exquisite Sence, so that being assail'd with sharp Ra∣pers,
it causes a quivering and sha∣king over the whole Body. XV. This Pannicle in Man lyesSituation. next under the Fat, and extends it self to those parts that want Fat, as the Eye-lids, the Lips, the Cods and Yard. In most Brutes it is spread under the Skin, to which it sticks very close, and has the Fat lying under it. By the benefit of which, many Creatures have a Skin that is easily moveable, by means whereof they shake off Flies and other troublesome Insects, as we find in Cows, Harts, and Elephants. XVI. It sticks most closely to theConnexion. Back, and is there thickest, and there∣fore is vulgarly said to derive its Ori∣ginal from thence. In the Neck, the Forehead, and the hairy part of the Head it can hardly be separated from the Muscles that ly under it, and it is so firmly knit to the broad Muscle, that it seems to compose it. XVII. It is somewhat of a ruddyColour. Colour in new-born Infants, in People of riper years it is somewhat white. Which Colour however varies somewhat according to the Fat, the Vessels and Fi∣bres annexed to it; so that it is some∣times more pale, and sometimes between both. XVIII. The inner part is smear'dZas's ab∣surd Opini∣on of the vse. over with a slimy Humour, to make the Muscles slippery, and render their Mo∣tion more easie. N. Zas in his little Dutch Treatise of the Dew of Animals, ascribes a most un∣heard of Use to this Membrane. For he affirms that it attracts to it self the serous Humours from all parts, and that it is the real Receptacle or common Seat of the Serum or Dew. Which serous Hu∣mour flows from thence into all the Spermatic parts, and washes away all their Impurities. That it is the Spring and Source of all our Sweat; and that in all Distempers of the Joynts, it poures forth an incredible quantity of gravelly water, vulgarly call'd Aqua Articularis, or Joynt-water, with many other fanta∣stical Dreams (as he was taught by his illiterate Master Lodowic de Bils) con∣cerning this Membrane, which he frivo∣lously indeavours to impose upon others; altogether ignorant that there is no at∣tractive virtue in this Membrane at all, nor any receptacle or place where such a manifest quantity of the serous Humour or Dew, much less any great quantity, sufficient to be sent to all the Spermatic Vessels, and to be emitted by Sweat; nei∣ther are there Pores sufficient to receive so great a quantity in so compact and thin a Membrane: Moreover, in the Dissections of Bodies, as well living as dead, that Membrane never is to be seen turgid or swelling with any serous or o∣ther dewy Humour, as he calls it. XIX. The Membrane common toThe Mem∣brane of the Mus∣cles. the Muscles, is a thin Membrane cloathing all and every one of the Mus∣cles, and separating them from them∣selves, and the adjacent parts. Riolanus, animadvert. in Bauhin. finds fault with Bauhinus for reckoning this Part in the number of the common Con∣taining Parts; and yet in the mean time calls it a Membrane proper to the Mus∣cles. But Bauhinus's meaning may be easily interpreted for the best; That he reckon'd that Membrane among the com∣mon Containing Coverings, as it is pro∣per only to the Muscles, but common nevertheless to all the Muscles, that is to say such a one as infolds, covers, and contains such and such Muscles only, but in the mean time is common to all the Muscles. CHAP. V. Of the Proper Containing Parts. I. THe Containing Parts properThe Bones. to the lower Belly, are the Bones, Muscles of the Abdomen, and Peritonaeum, or Membrane of the Paunch. II. The Bones are few and large, that is, the Vertebers of the Loyns, the Os Sacrum, with the Crupper-bone adjoyn'd, the Huckle-bone, Hip-bone, and Share-bone; of which more l. 9. c. 12. III. The Muscles of the Paunch orMuscles. Abdomen are ten, (sometimes eight, seldom nine) distinguish'd by their pro∣per Membranes, and the running along or situation of the Fibres; on both sides equally opposite one to another. IV. The first Pair, which is Exter∣nal,Oblique de∣scending. is fram'd by the Oblique descend∣ing Muscles, full of obliquely descend∣ing Fibres also. These arise from the lower part of the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and
eleventh Ribs, before they end in Gri∣stles folded among the Spires of the greater Saw-shap'd Muscle, and the trans∣verse Processes of the Vertebers of the Loyns; sticking also to the side of the Hip-bone, and end with a broad Ten∣don in the middle of the Paunch at the Linea Alba. Which Tendon sticks so close to the Tendon of the next ascend∣ing Muscle, that it is almost inseparable from it, nor can be parted from it with∣out being torn and dilacerated. Now its membranous Tendon begins at the Linea Alba, which Spigelius calls the Similunar or Halfmoon Line. These Tendons in Men (which also happens to the two other lower Pairs, the Ascending and Transverse) are crossed on both sides by the Processes of the Peritonaeum, ex∣tending themselves to the Testicles; but in Women by the Vermiform Ligaments of the Womb; which Passage being o∣vermuch widen'd or broken, if the Call or Intestines fall upon the Groin or Cod, it is the cause of Burstenness. They derive Nerves, Arteries and Veins from the Intercostal Branches at the upper part: V. The Linea Alba is a whitishThe Linea Alba. part running from the Cartilago Mu∣cronata through the middle of the Paunch and Navil, to the Os Pubis, or Share-bone. It has the firm Substance of a Ten∣don, through the Concourse of the Ends of the Tendons of the Descending, As∣cending, Transverse, and Pyramidical Muscles of the Abdomen. It is broader above the Navil, nar∣rower below it; and in Women with Child many times it appears of a blewish Colour; which Colour it has been known to keep till the third Month after Deli∣very. Riolanus animad. in Bauhin. seems to believe it to be a peculiar Membrane running out from the Cartilago Mucro∣nata of the Breast, through the Navil, to the Commissure or joyning of the Share-bone, and receiving the Tendons of the Share-bone. In the same Ani∣mad. in Bauhin. he affirms the Linea Al∣ba to be imaginary; perhaps because that being blind through Age, he could no longer discern it. VI. The second Pair is constitutedObliquely Ascending. by the Muscles obliquely Ascending, furnish'd with Ascending Fibres, which as they ascend, cross the Descending in form of a Letter X. They arise from the Transverse Pro∣cesses of the Vertebers of the Loyns (from whence they receive the Nerves) and the Apophyses or going forth of the Os Sacrum, (but membranous both,) and the outward fleshy part of the Hip-bone▪ Hence the fleshy Ascending are joyn'd at the top to the Cartilages of the eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh Ribs, and terminate in the Linea Alba with a broad nervous Tendon crossing the right Muscles; and are nourish'd by the little Branches of the Arteries growing from the musculous Artery near the Loyns, and casting forth Veins to the musculous Vein. Some Anatomists vulgarly hold, that these Muscles with a double Tendon en∣fold the right Muscles. Which is not very probable. For above, the Tendons of the Ascending Muscles rest upon the right Muscles, and are so fast interwoven with their Tendony Intersections, that they can hardly be separated whole from 'em. But in the lower or inner part of the Muscles those Tendons cannot be discover'd, and therefore they are de∣servedly rejected by Vesalius, and Riola∣nus; and Lawrentius is justly blam'd by Riolanus, for taking notice of 'em in his Sculptures. VII. The third Pair is that of theMusculi Recti. Musculi recti, so call'd because of the streight Course of the Fibres. They are very strong, three or four fingers broad, and about a finger thick. They arise fleshy from each side of the Cartilago Macronata, the Breast-bone, and the Cartilages of the Ribs, (where they receive three or four Nerves from the Intercostal parts) and so descending directly down; and being united almost near the Navil, and distinguish'd with two, three, sometimes four Impressions, as it were into several Muscles, end at length with a strong, thick Tendon in the Share-bones. Some Anatomists de∣scribe their beginning from the Share∣bones, and make 'em to end in the Car∣tilages of the Ribs. Others believe that they consist of several Muscles, and place their beginnings partly in the Car∣tilages of the Ribs, partly in the Share∣bones, and make 'em to end at their In∣tersections, and affirm the several parts contained between the Tendon-like In∣scriptions to be so many Muscles. To which Opinion, not improbable, Spige∣lius gives his consent, induc'd thereto by this Argument, Because they not only receive Nerves from the Intercostals a∣bove, but also below from the first Pair of the Loyns. For it is a perpetual Rule,
that every Muscle moves toward its be∣ginning. But where the Nerve is in∣serted, there, as Galen testifies, is the be∣ginning of the Muscle, (See the Reason l. 5. c. 1.) but here several Nerves are inserted into their Parts, not only above and below, but also those which are in∣terspac'd with separate Interfections; and therefore there are many beginnings of these Muscles; which in regard they cannot be many in one Muscle, therefore all the Musculi Recti do not consist of one, but of several Muscles. Moreover if we consider their primary use, which is strongly to press down the Belly for the Expulsion of Ordure and the Birth; which Compression and Expulsion does not require that either the Breast-bone should be drawn downward, or the Os Pubis upward; but that those Bones should remain in their places, and that all and every the parts of these Muscles should swell together; that so the upper parts of every one should draw upward some parts that are nearest to 'em at the first Intersections; the lower parts other parts which are nearest to 'em, down∣wards; and that the middle parts, lying between the Intersections, should draw to themselves the parts that are next 'em on both sides. Which Contractions being made by distinct and several Parts to several parts, (which cannot be done in one Muscle) it follows that every single Musculus Rectus must consist not of one, but of several Muscles. VIII. As they receive large Arte∣ries from the Epigastrics ascending, and the Mammillary Arteries descending, so they send forth a larger sort of Veins to the Epigastric and Mammil∣lary Veins. IX. These Arteries and Veins at their Ends in the inner part, are vul∣garly said to joyn together about the middle by Anastomoses one into ano∣ther. So that the Ends of the Epiga∣stricks open into the Ends of the Mam∣millary Veins, whence many derive the Consent and Sympathy of the Dugs▪ with the Womb. But I have always obser∣ved these Anastomoses or Openings of one Vein into another, to be wanting; nor did I ever yet meet with any Body wherein these Ends were not distant one from another, the breadth either of a Thumb or a little Finger, so that I am certain the Cause of that Consent can by no means proceed from hence. Thus Vesalius likwise, in Exam. Obs. Fallop. writes; that he has observed that those Vessels are never so united, that it may be said, there is any Communica∣tion between 'em. Bartholin also in dub. anat. de lact. Thorac. c. 1. writes that he sought for these Anastomoses in a sound young Woman, kill'd six weeks after her Delivery, but could find none: rather that the Branches ascending and descend∣ing were about a fingers breadth distant one from another: yet Riolanus defends those Anastomoses most stiffly, Anthropog. l. 2. c. 8. and asserts that he had shewn 'em to a hundred of his Scholars. But for all that, I do not give so much credit to his words, as I do to my own eyes. Perhaps old Riolanus might be dimm-sighted at that time, and so per∣haps might think he saw what was not to be seen. Of these Anastomoses see more l. 6. c. 3. & l. 7. c. 7. X. The fourth pair resting in theThe Pyra∣midal Muscles. lower Place upon the Musculi Recti, are the Pyramidal Muscles, so call'd from their figure which is Pyramidal; but from their use Succenturiati, be∣cause they are thought to assist the Mus∣culi Recti in their duty. They arise small and fleshy from the Share-bones, where they also receive the Nerves. From this larger foundation they rise smaller and smaller, and scarce four fingers bread, ascending the Ends of the Musculi Recti, yet somewhat unequal in length, the left being both shorter and narrower, they thrust their sharp Tendon into the Linea Alba, and sometimes ex∣tend it to the Navel with a slender End. Vesalius▪ Anderncus, and Columbus describe those Ends erroneously for the beginning of the Musc li Recti, seeing that the interceding Membrane, and al∣so the Separation which may be made without any prejudice to the Musculi Recti, also the Obliquity of the Fibres quite different from the strait Muscles, and lastly a peculiar way of thrusting themselves into the Linea Alba, clearly demonstrate that they are several and di∣stinct Muscles. XI. Fallopius and Riolanus as∣cribeTheir Of∣fice. to these Muscles the Office or A∣ction of compressing the Bladder, and promoting the Excretion of Urine, or the Act of making Water. Nevertheless sometimes' both these Muscles are wanting; sometimes the one, and sometimes the other, is lacking; but more frequently the Left than the Right, and then the broader and more fleshy End of the
Right supplies their place. We have several times shewn as well when they have been both to be seen, as when they have been defective, both in Publick and Private Exercises. XII. The fifth Pair consists of theTransverse Muscles. Transverse Muscles, fasten'd to the Peritonaeum underneath, and full of Transverse Fibres. They begin from the Ligament rising from the Transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the Loyns, the Huckle-bone, and the Cartilaginous Neighbourhood of the six inferiour Ribs. And being furnish'd with Arteries, Veins and Nerves obliquely ascending, they end with a large Tendon in the Linea Alba. To these the Peritonaeum sticks so close, that it cannot be separated from 'em without Dilaceratin. XIII. The common Opinion is, thatThe Action of the Mus∣cles of the Abdomen. all the foremention'd Muscles compress the lower Belly, and by that means promote the dispersing of the Nourish∣ment through the Vessels and Bowels, as also the expulsion of super abundant Ex∣crements, and the mature Birth, also that they assist the Breast in strong Re∣spiration, and Expectoration, or forci∣ble throwing off what is offensive to the Lungs, fasten the Contain'd Bow∣els, and defend 'em from External Injuries, and cherish 'em with their Heat. But I think this, that it is con∣venient to discourse somewhat more par∣ticularly of their Actions. For if ge∣nerally they all serve to compress the Belly; which are they that raise the Con∣taining Parts of this Belly? For their E∣levation and Depression is Alternate, and both are equally necessary to the pushing and squeezing forward of the Nourish∣ment and Humours through the Con∣tain'd Parts, which I admire no Person has hitherto taken notice of. And there∣fore there is a notable Distinction to be made of the Operations of these Mus∣cles. XIV. In the first place the two ob∣lique Pair raise the Abdomen. For in regard they swell at their beginnings or fleshy Part, then the Tendons with the Linea Alba draw outward and raise upward; and that same swelling usual∣ly concurs with the swelling of the Dila∣ting Muscles of the Breast; and there∣fore in breathing, the Abdomen is also e∣levated together with the Breast▪ which every man may find in himself. Then again that Elevation may be made with∣out breathing, when the Animal Spirits, especially more copious, are determin'd to these Oblique Muscles, and very few flow into the dilating Muscles of the Breast. This Operation also, among o∣ther things, their Oblique Situation teaches us; (which is not so convenient for pressing forth;) as also their Origi∣nal, and the length of their Tendous. But the other three Pairs manifestly serve for Compression. For the Muscu∣li. Recti, with the Pyramidal, when they swell, cannot but very forcibly depress the Belly; and the transverse Muscles swelling, because they rise from the Loyns, cannot but very strongly con∣tract the Belly, by drawing the Linea Alba backward. Spigelius l. 4. anat. c. 10. ascribes ano∣ther Use to the Muscles of the Abdomen, that is, to move the Trunk of the Body at the Sides Circularly and Obliquely, and to bend the Body forward. Of which two Offices, the one is to be as∣cribed to the Oblique, the other to the Streight Muscles. Besides the foresaid Muscles, those Muscles seated in the Region of the Loyns and Ossa Sacra, may be reckon'd among the Muscles of the Inferiour Bel∣ly: But because that they are chiefly serviceable to the Action of other Parts, they are not muster'd in the Order of the Muscles of this Belly. XV. The most inward ContainingThe Peri∣tonaeum. Part of the Abdomen is the Perito∣naeum, by the Arabians call'd Zip∣hach, because it is spread over all the Bowels of this Belly, and not only contains and restrains 'em, but clothes them with a Common Tunicle. Vesalius and Bauhinus, following the Opinion of Galen, de su part. lib. 4. cap. 9. ascribe to it the Office of compressing the Intestines, and to the Exclusion of the Birth. But in regard that Action or Compression is Voluntary, it is neces∣sarily perform'd by the Muscles, the In∣struments of voluntary Motion, by which means the compress'd Peritonaem pushes forward, and so presses forth only by Accident. XVI. It is a thin and soft Mem∣brane, interwoven with Spermatic Fi∣bres, smooth within-side, and as it were besmear'd over with Moisture, without fibrous and somewhat rough. XVII. It is improperly said to de∣rive its Original from the first and se∣cond Vertebrae of the Loyns, because
the thickness of it is more in that place, and its Connexion firmer. I say improperly, because no one Sper∣matic Part derives it self from another, but all take their Original from the Seed. Fallopius is of Opinion that it has its beginning from the beginning of the Mesentery. Lindan, agreeing with Rio∣lanus, deduces its beginning from the Membrane outwardly infolding the Ves∣sels and the Bowels. But in regard this Membrane is rather to be taken from the Peritonaeum that spreads it self over all the lower Belly, the Peritoneum can never derive its beginning from that. XVIII. Jacobus Sylvius observes itIts Dupli∣city. in men, to be thicker and stronger in the upper part of the Belly, in women to∣ward the lower part of the Belly. Which Bauhinus believes so order'd by Na∣ture in the one, as being more addicted to Gluttony; in the other, for the sake of the Womb, and the Birth to be there∣in conceived. But Spigelius affirms it to be thicker in both Sexes always in the lower part, and never in the upper. Which he believes was so ordain'd by Nature with great Prudence, as being the Part which is most obnoxious to Ruptures; in regard that whether we sit, walk, or stand, the Bowels always weigh downwards; and therefore that the Pe∣ritonaeum may be better enabled to sustain their weight, she thought it necessary to strengthen and fortifie that part. XIX. It has very small Nerves thatIts Vessels. arise from the Vertebra's of the Breast and Loyns. Arteries and Veins that spring from the Diaphragmatic, Mam∣mary, and Epigastric Vessels. XXI. It is bor'd thorough at the passage of the Gullet and Vessels above and below, and proceeding outward in the Birth, as also of the Vermiform Ligaments of the Womb. Moreover, its outward Membrane forms in men, two Oblong Processes, like more loose sort of Chanels descending toward the Scrotum, for the defence of the Testicles and Spermatic Vessels descending and turning again. XXII. This Membrane is call'd Vaginalis, the Sheath-Membrane, be∣cause it comprehends the Stones as it were in a Sheath. But in Women, whose Stones are not pendulous without, it extends it self on both sides to the end of the Round Ligaments of the Womb; and proceeding forward, together with it, without the Abdomen, extends it self above the Share-bones to the Clitores. But its inner Membrane sticks fast, and grows to the Spermatic Vessels, or the foresaid Ligaments of the Womb, pas∣sing forward, and together with the Vagi∣nal Membrane, extending without the Cavity of the Abdomen. For that Mem∣brane being either dilated or broken in that place causes Bitterness; so that the Intestine and Caul in Men falls into the Scrotum; in Women down upon their Groyns. Which Rupture or Dilation of the Peritonaeum, if it happen in the Navel, is call'd Hernia Umbilicalis, or the Navel-Rupture. CHAP. VI. Of the Parts Contain'd; and first of the Caul. I. THE Parts Contain'd in the Abdomen, either perform the publick Concoctions; or serve for the distribution of the Nourishment and Blood; or expel the Exerements, or serve for Generation. The Stomach, small Guts, Sweet∣bread, Liver, Spleen, and Caul (which is serviceable to them) perform the pub∣lick Duties of Concoction. The Arteries, Veins, Milky and Lymphatic Vessels serve for the distri∣bution of the Nourishment and Blood. The thick Intestine, the Gall-bladder, the Porus Biliarius, the Kidneys, and the Urinary Bladder, expell the Ex∣crements. The Spermatic Vessels, the Stones, the Parastatae or crooked Vessels at the back of the Testicles; the Prostatae or Glandules under the Seminal Bladders, the Seminary Vessels, the Womans Pri∣vities, her Womb and Neck of the Womb contribute to Generation. But tho' in Men the Yard and Testicles are excluded out of the Abdomen, yet are they by Anatomists reckon'd among the Parts contain'd▪ because the Spermatic Vessels go forth toward the Testicles from the Internal Parts, and the diffe∣rent Vessels proceed from the Testicles toward the inner Vessels; and for that the Seed which is collected together in the inner Prostatae and Seminary Vessels, flows out of the Yard. Of all which we are to treat in the fol∣lowing Chapters according to their order.
II. The Peritonaeum being open'd, presently appear the Navel Vessels. Of which in the 32. Chapter. III. Those being remov'd, the CaulThe Caul. offers it self; in Latin Omentum, as it were Operimentum, because it covers the Bowels. The Greeks call it Epiploon, for that it does, as it were, swim over the Guts; sometime Garga∣mon, sometimes Sagena, that is, a Net, or little Net; for that by reason of the stragling Course of its Vessels, it resem∣bles a Fisher-man's Net: the Arabians call it Zirbus. It covers all the Sangui∣neous Parts; tho' it appears fatter over some, and more membranous over others. IV. It is a thin and double Mem∣braneThe De∣scription. rumpled like a Purse, arising from the Peritonaeum that infolds the out∣side of the Stomach and Colon. Riolanus derives its Original from the Mesentery: Which Opinion differs not from the first, when the Mesentery has its Membranes from the Peritonaeum; of which it is a certain sort of Production. V. It consists of a thin MembraneIts Sub∣stance and Connexion. interwoven with several folds, and small thred-like Fibres, growing in the forepart to the bottom of the Sto∣mach and the Spleen, and sometime also to the round Lobb of the Liver, at the hinder part growing to the Co∣lon, and so folded like a Sack; as also of several Vessels, and a soft kind of Fat, which is chiefly spread about the Vessels, and is very plentiful in fat People. VI. It has a world of Veins, whichIts Vessels. it transmits to those which run toward the Liver from the Stomach and Spleen, and so to the Vena Porta, or great Vein of the Abdomen. With which are intermix'd several Arteries from the Branches of the Ramus Coe∣liacus and Mesenterick Artery, and some few Nerves that proceed from the Plexures of the Intercostal Nerves of the sixth Pair. VII. The Roots of the Blood-con∣veighingIts Inter∣weaving. Vessels, meet one another here and there with an Anastomoses, leaving conspicuous Spaces between each other, which are also fill'd themselves with smaller Branches; springing side∣long from the larger Roots, by means of whose frequent Conjunction an ap∣parent Net is form'd, whose middle Spaces exhibit various Figures fram'd with wonderful Art and Workmanship. Many of these lesser Branches also run out into the Fat, and not only thrust themselves slightly into the outermost Lumps, but also penetrate farther in, and are fasten'd to the Lumps or little Globes of Fat: and sometimes they are hid with a small thin Membrane spread over 'em, so that they are imperceptible. Malpigius Exercit. de Oment. ping. & Adip. exactly describes the Structure of the Caul, in an Ox, a Sheep, a Hart, a Dog, and some other Animals. VIII. Veslingius asserts, that se∣veralThe Gla∣dules. little Kernels, plain to be seen, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, are scattered up and down in the said Vessels. But Riolanus animad. in Vesling. & Barthol. affirms that he never ob∣served any such Kernels. But through Age he seems to have forgot a truer As∣sertion in Anthropogr. where he ac∣knowledges some few. And indeed they are very few, and those only under the lower and deeper Part, under the Py∣lorus, or right Orifice of the Ventricle, and the Spleen. In like manner Wharton, in his Ade∣nographia makes mention of but very few. For c. 12. he writes, That he only found two little Kernels, but those always in the Caul. One bigger in the place where it joyns with the Pylorus; which he observ'd receiv'd some few milkie Vessels running from the bottom of the Stomach toward the length of the Caul (but he is in an Error, for there are not any milkie Veins that derive themselves from the bottom of the Stomach, but as far as I could find by three or four Obser∣vations, these Vessels do not seem to be milkie, and advancing to the Kernel, but rather Lymphatic, and proceeding out of the Kernel.) These Vessels, the same Author says that afterwards, viz. from the length of the Caul they run with an oblique Course toward the right Extremitie of the Sweetbread, which they partly seem to creep under, and partly glide by, tending toward the common Receptacle of the Chylus, into which they disburthen themselves. The other Kernel he asserts to be a little less, which he affirms to have found sometimes double, sometimes treble, sometimes consisting of more Bodies. But if many Kernels are found in any Body that was sickly, at his Death, he calls those Kernels Adventitious, because they are not to be found in healthy Bo∣dys.
IX. The learned Malpigius, be∣sidesCorpora adiposa. the aforesaid Vessels, observes o∣ther very thin and slender Bodies, ex∣tended like small Threads, among the Vessels that shoot sorth, which he calls Corpora adiposa, or fat Bodys: and he believes 'em to be certain pecu∣liar hollow Vessels, carrying the mate∣rials of Fat for the Generation of Fat, tho' it be impossible to observe their Original, by reason of their extream Slenderness. In the mean time he is of Opinion that these Materials of Fat are separated from the Blood by the means of certain invisible adipous Kernels, and are so sent to these Vessels, and thro' those conveighed into the Membranes, rhere to be coagulated into Fat. For as there are certain peculiar Kernels appointed for the separation of Acid, Salt, Bitter, Lympid, &c. Humors, from the Blood (for this shall be made out in the following Chapter) so he believes that there must be certain peculiar Kernels (which he calls A lipous) of necessity appointed of oily and fat Par∣ticles from the Blood; and that those oily Particles being separated, are to be carried through certain peculiar adipous Vessels, in the same manner as the Blood, the Animal Spirits, the Chylus, and lympid Humor, called Lympha, are carryed through peculiar Vessels; upon which he introduces many ingeni∣ous and probable Conjectures. But what it is that makes me question the Truth of these Kernels and Adipous Vessels, I have already set down in the fourth Chapter preceding; where I have made mention of these Kernels. X. The Caul is seated about theIts Situ∣ation. Intestines, into whose Windings and Turnings it insinuates it self, and spreads a great part of its self be∣tween the Spleen and the Stomach. XI. In many Persons it scarcelyThe Big∣ness. extends it self below the Region of the Navel, in some farther, reach∣ing even to the Bladder, and some∣times in fat Women compressing the Mouth of the Womb (to the bottom of which it rarely grows) it occasions Barrenness, as Hippocrates testifies: And in Men if it fall down through the torn Peritonaeum into the Scrotum, it causes that Rupture which is called E∣piploce, when the Caul falls into the outward Skin of the Cods. It appears in more Folds and Doubles toward the Spleen than in any other Parts. Some∣times in Women after Delivery; re∣maining all rumpled about the middle of the Belly, it occasions terrible and frequently returning Pains. XII. For the most part, in MenThe Weight. grown up, it hardly exceeds the weight of half a Pound; and yet sometimes it has bin known to weigh several Pounds. Thus it is found to be won∣derfully encreased in some Diseases: And Wharton relates that in a Virgin that dy'd of a Cachexie, he saw a Caul that was fleshy, or rather Glandulous; about half a Thumb thick. Sometimes also in fat and tun belly'd People that are sound, it is covered over with a great quantity of Fat, which encreases its weight. Thus Vesalius l. 5. c. 4. saw a Caul, which being augmented to the weight of four or five Pounds, drew down the Stomach with its Ponderosity, and was the Occasion of the Parties Death by its weight. XIII. By cherishing the Heat of theIts vse. Stomach and Guts, it causes more successful and speedier Concoctions. It supports the splenick Branch, and other Vessels tending to the Stomach, Co∣lon, and Duodenum. Moreover it many times receives the Impurities and Dreggs of the Liver, as appears out of Hippocrates, l. 7. 55. also out of his 4. lib. de Morb. & lib. 1. de Morb. Mulier. As also from the Observations of Rio∣lanus, Rossetus, and other Physicians. CHAP. VII. Of the Ventricle, Hunger, and the Chylus. I. TAke off the Caul, and pre∣sentlyThe Sto∣mach. the Ventricle or Sto∣mach appears; as it were a little Bel∣ly, call'd by the Greeks , as also Gaster. II. It is an organic Part of theDefinition. lower Belly, seated in the Epigastri∣on, next under the Diaphragma, which receives the Nourishment ta∣ken, prepared by Mastication, and let down through the Gullet, and there concocts it; and dissolving the best part of the Nutritive Substance, con∣verts it into a Chylus or whitish kind of Substance, like to Cream.
III. It consists of a triple Mem∣brane;Mem∣branes. the outermost thick and com∣mon, springing from the Peritonaeum, the middle, fleshy, the innermost, full of Wrinkles, and covered over with a viscous Crustiness, to preserve it from the Injuries of Acid Iuices. IV. In the middle and innermostFibres. Membrane, in the first place, there is to be seen great Variety of Fibres ex∣tended, some obliquely, some streight, and some Circular: For the strength∣ning of the Bowels, and more easy Retention and Expulsion. V. The innermost Tunicle is vul∣garlyThe inner Tunicle. said to be common to the Gullet and Oesophagus; whereas it is of a far different Nature and Structure, and in regard of its Temper and Com∣position, contains a most admirable fermenting Quality, which the Mem∣brane of the Mouth of the Stomach and Oesophagus is not indued withal; and hence it engenders and stores up within it self a peculiar Fermentative Humor; which being in a sound Con∣dition, the Concoctions of the Stomach are rightly perform'd, but being vitia∣ted by the Mixture of Choler, or any other depraved Humors, occasion a bad Concoction. And therefore it would be better to say that this Tunicle is not common with, but continuous to the Oesophagus and Mouth of the Stomach. For there is a great Difference between Continuitie and Communitie. For the one denotes only the inseparable Adhesion of the Substance alone; but the other sig∣nifys the Equality both of Faculties and Uses. For Example, the great Arterie, is continuous to the Heart, but not com∣mon, as not having such Qualities and Actions as the Heart has. VI. The Temperament of the Sto∣machTempera∣ment. is moderately Hot, not so hot as the Heart, Liver, and many other Parts. Which moderate Heat is aug∣mented and cherished by the Heat of the Parts that lie round about it: To the end the Concoction of the Chylus may be the better accomplished; which otherwise is greatly endammaged by the Excesses of these Parts either in Heat or Cold. VII. In a Man there is but oneThe Num∣ber. Stomach: It being a rare thing to find two Stomachs in any Body: Of which I never read but three Observati∣ons; of which one concerning a Sto∣mach divided into two, is cited out of Ioselinus by Theod Schenkius, in Anat. The other is cited by the same Person out of the Observations of Salmuthus: And the Third is set down by Riolanus, Anthropogr. l. 2. c. 20. in these Words. Once I saw a double Stomach continu'd, but distinguished with a narrow Mouth in a Woman publickly dissected in the Year 1624. In this Woman the Stomach was oblong, narrow in the Middle, equalling the Gut Colon in Breadth and Largeness. Which being dissected, I found that nar∣row Part, being like the Pylorus, to end in another large Cavity, which afterwards terminated in a thicker Orifice, which was the real Pylorus, from whence, as an Ecphysis, the first Intestine took its begin∣ning. Beside these three Examples, I do not remember that ever I read any thing farther upon this Subject. But there are two Stomachs in Animals that chew the Cud, and many other Animals, that feed upon harder and raw Nourish∣ment; also in Birds that cast up their Meat out of their Stomachs to feed their Young ones. And then the First by the Latins was called Ingluvies, or the Crap: Which is more Membrany and Thinner, the other more Thick and Fleshy. And in the First the Matter seems to be prepared for concocting, the Second to be perfectly Concocted. It is said that in some Creatures three Sto∣machs have bin found; and Riolanus testifys, that four have bin found in those Creatures, which chewing the Cud have Teeth only in one Jaw. VIII. The Shape of the Stomach isFigure. Oblong, Gibbous toward the right Part, and slenderer toward the Right. IX. It rests upon the Back-BoneSituati. near the first Verteber of the Loyns, and with the left Part, which is rounder and bigger, giving way to the Liver, it hangs forward toward the left Side: The left Side being the slenderer, and covered with the left Lobe of the Liver, and supported by the Sweetbread, is joyned to the Du∣odenum, or first of the small Guts. X. The Bigness varies according toThe Big∣ness. the Diversity of Ages and bigness of Bodys; to the Proportion of which it ought to answer; tho' that be no certain and perpetual Rule. For I have dissected several tall Men, who have had very small Stomachs, and se∣veral Men of a short Stature, that have
had large Ventricles. Gluttons, Vora∣cious, or Greedy People, have general∣ly large Stomachs. Such was that, which Schenkius anat. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 14. affirms that he saw in a great Glutton that held ten Quarts of Wine. That was also a large one, mentioned by Spigelius Anat. l. 8. c. 8. that contain'd fourteen Pints of Liquor: Which was found in a Man that had a large Mouth. Whence Bau∣hinus Anat. l. 1. c. 46. believes that a Man may judge of the bigness of the Stomach from the largeness of the Mouth: And that such as have a wide Mouth▪ have a large Stomach, and are Voracious: Which is also the Opinion of Spigelius. But neither is that Rule without Exception: For I remember that Falcoburgis, a certain famous Ana∣tomist of Leiden, cut up before us, in the publick Theater, the Body of a very tall strong Man, who in his Life time had bin a stout drinker, and a great Eater, and always Healthy until he came to be hanged against his Will, in whom we saw so small a Stomach, that it hardly amounted to half the bigness of an ordinary Mans Stomach: But trebly exceeded other Ventricles in thickness. XI. It is distinguished into theThe Bot∣tom. Bottom or Cavity (the one the lower or greatest Part, inclining to the left Side, with its chiefest and largest Part, where the first Concoction is finished) and two Orifices, the Right and Left. XII. The left Orifice, commonlyThe Sto∣mach. called the upper Orifice, is that which is properly the Stomach, and Conti∣nuous to the Gullet and Diaphrag∣ma, about the eleventh Verteber of the Breast, over against the Cartilago Mucronata, admits the swallowed Nourishment. This, exceeding the o∣ther in Bigness, thickness, and Large∣ness, is interwoven with many orbicular Fibres, somewhat fleshy (which cause its more firm Contraction, and in the various Postures of the Body lying down, hinders the Nourishment from falling back into the Mouth) and Nerves from the sixth Pair; and in that is the natural Heat of the Appe∣tite, according to the vulgar Opinion: Not that the Act of Desiring is there performed, which is only in the Brain, but that through the Intervals there is such a Cause in it, the Trouble of which being perceiv'd in the Brain, stirs up such an Act of Desiring. XIII. The other Orisice, which isThe Pylo∣rus. the Lower, properly called Pylorus, or the Door-keeper, is narrower than the other, somewhat bow'd toward the Back Bone, on the left Side, full of Fibres thwarting one another, having a thicker Circle, and shap'd like an Orbicular Muscle (by means of which it detains the Nourishment for some time, lest it should slip away too soon, and undigested) and continuous to the Duodenum Gut, send the concocted Nourishment to the Bowels. Which Nourishment does not pass by a steep Fall, as lying equally high with the Stomach, but ascends before Expul∣sion. XIV. The Ventricle receives Nerves,The Ves∣sels. Arteries, and Veins. XV. It receives Nerves from theIts Nerves. sixth Pair. For that both the Trunks of the wandering Pair, be∣low the Ramus pneumonicus, de∣scending along the Sides of the Oe∣sophagus, is divided into two Bran∣ches, the External and Internal. Of these, the External by and by joyn together again, and embody into one Nerve, and spreads it self over the up∣per part of the Ventricle with many Shoots. The Internal also running to∣gether, make one Nerve, which de∣scending along the Oesophagus, and the external part of the Stomach, encom∣pass the bottom of the Ventricle, and sends into it a great number of Fibres. Through these Nerves the Animal Spi∣rits flow in great Quantity into the Ven∣tricle, contributing to it a quick Sense of Feeling: Which because of the lar∣ger Quantity of Nerves dispersed into the Stomach, becomes more sensible in the upper Part than the lower, which is thought to be the cause of Hunger. Through these Nerves of the wandering Pair is infused into the Fibres of the Ventricle, a natural Power of Contract∣ing themselves, in all Expulsions, of what ever is contained in the Ventricle: And by means of them also is that great Consent between the Ventricle and the Brain. XVI. It receives its Arteries fromIts Arte∣ries. the Coeliac Arterie, which serve to carry the Alimentary Blood with which it is nourished. XVII. It is sprinkl'd with severalIts Veins. Branches of small Veins sculking a∣mong its Tunicles, many of which
meeting here and there, and closing to∣gether, they form at length four more remarkable Veins, which run to the Porta Vein, that is the 1. Gastrick, which is bigger than the rest, 2. and 3. the right and left Gastroëpiploid, 4. and the Pyloric Branch: Also another Vein,Vas breve. called the Vas breve, or Vas Venosum (which issues forth from the Ventricle sometimes with one, sometimes with two, sometimes three, and sometimes more Branches, to be inserted into the Spleen Branch. By these the remainder of the Blood, which is left after the Nourishment of the Stomach is con∣veighed to the Liver. XVIII. Formerly Physicians asser∣tedIt carrys nothing from the Spleen to the Ventri∣cle. that there was a certain acid Iuice or Blood, which ascended into the Ventricle through the Vas breve, for the Nourishment of it, as also to create an Appetite, and stir up Hun∣ger in the Ventricle. But the very Sight it self demonstrates the False∣hood of this Doctrine in the Dissecti∣ons of living Animals, in which it is apparent that there is nothing flows from the Spleen to the Ventricle; but that the Blood continually flows from the Ventricle to the splenic Branch: For upon tying the Vas breve, there will presently appear a Swelling between the Ventricle and the Ligature; but a shrinking of the Vessels between the Li∣gature and the splenetic Branch. Which is a certain Sign that the Blood flows as we have said; and that it hardly reach∣es the Spleen (for the Entrance of the Vas breve into the splenetic Vein, for the most part, is somwhat distant from the Spleen) nor does it enter into the Spleen, but is poured forth into the splenetic Branch, and flows from thence directly to the Porta. More of this Matter may be seen in the following 16. Chapter. XIX. Here we are to note by theThe Trian∣gular Space. way, that some learned Men are very trivial in their Exposition of the 54. Aphorism of Hippocrates l. 7. where he says, They who have any Flegm included between the Ventricle and Diaphragma, are troubled with Pain, because the Flegm has no Passage to either Belly, &c. Induc'd by these Words, they assert, That between the lest Sde of the Ventricle and the Dia∣phragma, there is a large Triangular Cavitie, fenc'd about with Membranes proceeding as well from the Ventricle, as from the Diaphragma and Caul, which nevertheless is a gross Mistake: For that there are no Membranes sent from those Parts that meet in that place, neither is there any such Cavity form'd there. In∣deed sometimes a Portion of the Caul insinuates it self between the Diaphrag∣ma and the hinder part of the Ventricle, so that sometimes it counterfeits the swel∣ling of the Spleen. And this is that without all doubt, which has deceived the Patrons of the said Opinion, not be∣ing well versed in Anatomie. XX. The Ventricle, tho' it be not aIt is mo∣veable. principal Part, yet is it an assistant and serviceable Part; To which we are ciefly beholding for the Preparati∣on of the Nourishment (whence Quin∣tus Serenus, a Sammic Poet, calls it the King of the Body. They on Truths Royal Basis seem to stand, Who give the Stomach the Supreme Command: If it be Strong, it gives Strength, Vi∣gor too, To other Parts: If weak, their Over∣throw. And therefore all Diseases that assaultWounds of the Sto∣mach m∣tal. it are to be accounted very dangerous; and the Wounds which it receives are by Hippocrates, 6. Aphor. 17. deservedly accounted Mortal; because the mem∣branous Vessels are hard to be cur'd in that part: and if they happen about the Stomach, by reason of the great num∣ber of Nerves intermingled in those pla∣ces, they kill the Patient with continual Convulsions and Hichups: but if they light upon the lower part, the swallow'd Nourishment presently falls through the Holes into the Cavity of the Abdomen, where in a short time they rot the other Bowels with their Corruption and Pu∣trefaction. However tho' Use and Rea∣son confirms that saying of Hippocrates, yet this Rule sometimes, tho' not fre∣quently, admits an Exception; for it has been known that some Wounds of the Ventricle have been cur'd. And of such Cures we find Examples set down by Fallopius de cap. Vuln. c. 12. Cornax in Epist. Iulius Alexandrinus Annot. ad l. 6. c. 4. Therapeut. Galen. Schenkius also collects other Stories from others, Obser∣vat.A rare Ob∣servation. l. 3. Such a Cure I observ'd in the Month of December 1641. in a Country ad, who in upper Holland was wound∣ed with the Stab of a Penknife in the right side of the Ventricle; the wound being of an indifferent size, so that for eight days together we saw all his Meat
and Drink came out again at the Orifice, especially if you did but press the lower part of the Ventricle with your hand: Which Efflux of his Nourishment stop∣ped for seven days, but then return'd a∣gain for three days, and no more; nor did the Nourishment discharge it self so much as it did before. Afterwards be∣ing ordered to lye upon his right side day and night, nothing more flow'd out; so that no other Disease happening, and the Surgeon following his Cure, the Pa∣tient, beyond mine and the Expectation of all Men, within six or seven weeks was perfectly cur'd. Nor did he after∣wards feel the effect of any detriment which the wound had left behind, nor any hurt done to his Stomach. But, More miraculous are those Accidents concerning two Knife-swallowers, of which the first is related by Bernard. Sue∣vs, Tract. de Inspect. Vulner. Crollius in Praefat. Basilic. Sennertus Prax. lib. 1. part. 1. Sect. 1. c. 15. and several others, of a Bohemian Country-man, who in the Year 1602. at Prague, swallowed a Knife nine Inches long; which Knife, after it had lain seven weeks, was at length cut out of his Stomach, and the Patient perfectly cur'd. The other Accident George Lothus and Roger Hempsing relate, as seen by themselves, in a particular part of Ger∣many, of a young Man of two and twenty years of Age, who at Regiomont in Prussia, in the Month of May 1635. swallowed a Knife by chance, the breadth of two hands in length, the smooth Haft slipping down unawares. Which Knife was cut out of his Stomach six weeks after, and the Patient perfectly cur'd in a Month. This Knife was af∣terwards given by Daniel Becker, a Phy∣sician of Dantzick, to Otho Heurnius then Professor of Physic and Anatomy at Ley∣den, where it is still preserved among other Rarities in the Anatomy-Thea∣tre. XXI. That Stones do grow in theThat Stones grow in the Ventricle. Kidneys and Bladder, is a thing fre∣quently known, and sadly experienced; and that Stones have been also found in the Liver, Lungs, and several o∣ther parts, is that which the Observa∣tions of Physicians testifie: but that they should breed in the Stomach, is a thing hardly ever heard of; and yet Bauschius gives us four Examples of it. Ephemerid. Med. Phys. Tom. 2. Observ. 181. The first out of Iames Dobie Zenki, who reports, That a certain Woman, after long Pains in her Stomach, vomited up two Stones about the bigness each of an Almond, and was presently freed from her Gripes. The second out of Laurentius Scholtzius, who writes, That a certain Person, long tormented with cruel pain in his Sto∣mach, at length vomited up a very large, oblong, and hard Stone, upon which his pain ceased. The third out of the same Author, of a Woman who at forty years of Age was troubled with a Pain and Swelling of her Stomach, want of Appetite, and continual Reaching; In whose Stomach, after she was dead, were found as many Stones as a man could well hold in the hollow of his hand, which being long kept, moul∣der'd away, and crumbl'd into a kind of yellow Salt: He adds a fourth Exam∣ple of Count George of Oppendorf, in whose Stomach were also found several little Stones. XXII. The Action of the StomachIts Action. is to make the Chylus, that is, to ex∣tract a Milkie Iuice by peculiar Con∣coction out of the several Nourish∣ments, which is call'd the Chyle. XXIII. The Chyle is a MilkieThe Chyle. Iuice like the Cream of a Ptisan, pre∣par'd and concocted out of the Nou∣rishment received into the Sto∣mach. XXIV. The Nourishment or FoodThe manner of Conco∣ction. is concocted in the Stomach by way of Fermentation; by which means they dissolve, and so the Iuice is extracted out of 'em. XXV. Fermentation is twofold.Fermenta∣tion two∣fold. One whereby the Particles of the Mix∣ture are stirr'd about of themselves, grow warm, and are rarify'd; and by dissolving the Salt which binds 'em together, they are so separated, that they become more full of Spirits: and are then for the greatest part mixed together again, and tho' more full of Spirits, yet remain mix'd. The o∣ther, which is by many call'd Effer∣vescency, is that by which the Acid Particles of the Salt, for the greatest part, boyling together with some Wa∣try and Tartarous Matter, are con∣center'd by Coagulation, and so are separated from other Particles of the Mixture, that they never return to an exact Union and Mixture with 'em again.
XXVI. After the first Manner Fermentation causes Chylification: tho' in our following Discourses, when we design to express a vehement Fer∣mentation, we shall make use of the word Effervescency. XXVII. This Fermentation is madeThe man∣ner of Fer∣mentation. when the Salt parts of the swallow'd Food, are by the heat of the Stomach, and the acid Iuice, dissolv'd, melted, and become full of Spirits, and withal corrode and move about the Sulphu∣rous Particles, and so after a kind of Combat forsaking the strict Chains of their Mixture, are expanded and sha∣ken somewhat sowre and sharper as they are, through the thicker Mass, together with the sulphury spiritous Particles jogg'd together in like manner, and be∣cause of their passage deny'd, and mix∣ture of the thicker Matter not yet fully dissolv'd, being driven back again, they assail that Mass with motion upon mo∣tion, and divide and expand the smallest Particles of it one from another, and dispose 'em to a more easie separation, and to receive the form of another Pap∣like and Milkie Mixture. But as for what Particles cannot be sufficiently dis∣solv'd by this Fermentation, or reduc'd to a Milkie Substance, they become Ex∣crement, whose separation from the Milkie Juice is wrought in the Guts. XXVIII. This fermentative Conco∣ctionThe force of Fermen∣tation. (which is finish'd without any vehement Motion upward or down∣ward, or any tumultuous Agitation through the Cavity of the Ventricle, as happens in Water boyling over the Fire) is so violent, that by the force of it the hardest Meats, which can hardly be mollified with a whole days boyling over a Kitchin-fire, in a few hours are not only soften'd, but so dissolv'd and melted, that the Particles being forc'd from their friendly Union, and torn one from another, and mix'd with the Liquor either inherent or in∣fus'd into the Stomach, they are turn'd into a Pap-like Consistency, not unlike to the Cream of a Ptisan. XXIX. Now that the Food is ra∣therThe reason of Chylifi∣cation. turn'd into Chyle, than into Choler, Blood, or any other Humour, that is to be attributed to the peculiar Quality of the Substance of the Ventri∣cle, or to the Specific Temper and pe∣culiar Structure, and consequently to the Specific Ferment and manner of Fermentation; as the peculiar Quality of the Liver and Spleen produces ano∣ther Ferment, and as Blood is made in the Heart. However it is not done by the fermentative Particles alive, which are mix'd with the swallow'd Food, nor by a moderate Heat, as some are of O∣pinion. For they only conduce to the dissolution of the Nourishment, but the moderate Heat to promote the said Con∣coction or Fermentation, and excite the absconding Power to Action. But why that Concoction and Dissolution pro∣duces the Chylus, rather than any other Humour, that is to be attributed to the peculiar Quality of the Substance, there is no other Reason to be given for that, but only the peculiar Quality of the Substance, in respect of which, the Heat operates otherwise in the Stomach, than in the Heart or any other part; and there disposes of the Ferment after ano∣ther manner than in any other Bowel. Thus as the Kitchin-fire mollifies one way by Boyling, another way by Roast∣ing, another way, that which is Fry'd in Butter, or otherwise, that which is pre∣par'd in Vinegar or Pickle, and that by reason of the Substances by which, and upon which that soft'ning is to be brought to pass: Thus the Heat of our Body, by reason of the proper dispositi∣on of the Ventricle, and the Juices there∣in contain'd and bred, therefore other∣wise soften and dissolve the Nourishment in the Stomach than the other parts, and disposes the Ferment after another manner, to inable that Ferment to dis∣solve and concoct the swallow'd Nou∣rishment, in a distinct manner from the Reconcoction in other parts of the Nou∣rishment already melted and dissolv'd for second Concoction. So that by reason of this peculiar Quality, while the Stomach is sane, and acts accord∣ing to Nature, there can be no other Juice there made than a white Chyle. XXX. Paracelsus writes that Ar∣chaeus with his Mechanic Spirits could perfect Chylification in the Stomach: but by Archaeus he means the innate Heat. To this Opinion Riolanus seems to adhere in Not. ad Epist. Wallaei. Ne∣vertheless he admits something of a sha∣dow of a peculiar Quality, in these words: I attribute the Cause to the diversity of the innate Heat, in the manner of the Substance, that is, saith he, the pro∣perty of the innate Heat. Not that the innate Heat differs of it self in
Substance. But when it cannot subsist without a Body or Substance without it self, it must operate variously accord∣ing to the diversity of that Substance in the several parts. XXXI. Hence it is apparent, how frivolous that is which some assert, That the Ventricle does not make the Chyle, but is only an Instrument and Receptacle where the Chyle is made; and that it no otherwise makes the Chyle than the Pot wherein the Meat is boyl'd makes the Broth. But I would fain know who is so blind as not to see, that when Chylification is attribu∣ted to the Stomach, we do not mean the bare Membranes of the Ventricle, but a live and sound Ventricle that is furnish'd with its own Spirit and Heat, and a Con∣venient proper Ferment generated out of the peculiar Quality of its own Substance, with none of which things a Porridge Pot can be said to be endued. XXXII. The Colour of the ChyleThe Colour of the Chyle. is Milkie and somewhat white, by reason of the sulphury Particles, dis∣solv'd with the salt ones, and mix'd with the acid Ferment of the Stomach. For every Liquor impregnated with Sulphur and a Volatile Salt, or a Salt admirably well dissolv'd, presently turns to a kind of Milk, if any thing of acid Moisture be pour'd upon it. Which is prov'd sufficiently by the preparations of Sulphur, and the Extracts of Vegetable Rosins. Also Spirit of Hartshorn or Soot, being sprinkled with any liquid Juice, or only fair Water, presently turns to a kind of Milk. XXXIII. Plempius and WalaeusWhether it may be red. are of Opinion that the Chylus is not always white; but that from red Nou∣rishment it becomes red, from green, green. But herein they mistake; for were it not white of it self, it never would be found always white in the Milky Ves∣sels of the Mesentery and Breast; but we should also meet with red, green, or any other Colour, which was never yet observ'd by any Person. True it is, that frequently it appears sometimes more, sometimes less serous and thin, in the pectoral Chanel of the Chylus, according as there is more or less of the Lymphatic Juice, which flows in great quantity from all parts into the Chyle∣bearing Bag; which Limpid Juice, when there is no Chyle, continually and lei∣surely flows alone through that Chanel; nevertheless the Chyle that appears in those Milky ways, is never seen to be of any other Colour than white. XXXIV. Therefore tho' the whi∣tish Colour of it may be something darken'd in the Ventricle and Intestins by many other thick Particles of the Nourishment tinctur'd with green, red, or any other Colour, and inter∣mix'd with it, in such a manner that the Mixture cannot be discern'd, it does not thence follow, that the Chy∣lus of it self has any other Colour than white. For tho' in green Herbs the white, or rather pellucid Colour of the spirituous and watery Parts be not appa∣rent to the sight, it follows not from thence, that the spiritous and watry part of those Herbs is of a green Co∣lour; for if the separation be made by distillation, it presently appears pellucid. And so it is with the Chylus, for being separated from the Mass which is tin∣ctur'd with any more cloudy Colour, mix'd with the acid Ferment of the Pancras or Sweetbread, it never appears of an other Colour than white. XXXV. But because Chylification cannot go forward unless the Nou∣rishment be swallowed into the Sto∣mach, it will not be amiss, before we prosecute any farther the History of Chylification, first to inquire into the cause of Hunger, that so we may more easily attain to the more perfect know∣ledge of Chylification. XXXVI. What Hunger is there isWhat i Hunger. no man but can readily give an ac∣count, that is to say, a desire of Food. But what it is that provokes that de∣sire, and is the occasion of it, has been variously disputed among the Philoso∣phers. XXXVII. Anciently they held thatWhether from suck∣ing. it proceeded from the attraction or sucking of the emptied Parts; and that the first emptied Parts suck'd it from the Veins, the Veins from the Liver, the Liver from the Stomach en∣du'd with a peculiar sucking Quality; which act of sucking they thought occa∣sioned that trouble which we call Hun∣ger. But this Opinion is now adays utterly exploded. First, for that ac∣cording to this Opinion plethoric Persons would never be hungry: Secondly, be∣cause there can be no such attaction by the emptied Parts through the Veins
from the Liver, by reason of the little Lappets or Folding-doors that hinder it. XXXVIII. Others observing thatWhether from an a∣cid Iuice. acid things create Hunger, believ'd it to be occasion'd by the acid Iuices, carried from the Spleen through the Vas breve to the Ventricle. But this Opinion Modern Anatomy more curious has utterly destroy'd, demonstrating in living Animals, that the Blood descends through that Vessel from the Stomach toward the Spleen, and so empties it self into the Splenic Branch, but that nothing flows a contrary Course from the Spleen to the Stomach. XXXIX. Many there are, of whichWhether from the Iuices of the Arte∣ries. number Regius, who affirms that Hunger is occasion'd by the biting of the emptied Ventricle, by certain sharp and hot Iuices, continually forc'd through the Arteries into the Ventricle or its Tunicles, which after the Expul∣sion of the Chylus, not knowing what to gnaw upon, prick the Ventricle, whereby the Nerve of the sixth Pair, being mov'd within it after a certain manner, excites an Imagination of taking Nourishment for the relief of that pricking. But this Opinion is from hence confuted, for that the Blood of the Arteries, by reason of the Domini∣on of the Sulphury Particles, is by no means sowre, but smooth, soft and sweet; so that it neither does, nor can cause any troublesome pricking or corrosion, neither in the Tunicles of the Ventricle, nor of any other Parts, tho' of most exquisite Sense (as the Adnate or Conjunctive Tunicle of the Eye, the Nut of the Yard, &c.) Besides, it would hence fol∣low, That by how much the more of this Arterious Blood is thrust forward to the emptied Stomach, so much the more hungry a man would be: but the Contrary is apparent in burn∣ing Fevers, that such as in health have fasted two days together, are no more a hungry, whereas their Stomach is clearly emptied, and the Blood con∣tinually flowing through the Arteries into the Stomach. Then if Hunger should be provok'd by that Corrosion, why does not that hungry Corrosion happen in such People? We were about forty of us one timeA Story. travelling together, in our Return out of France, at what time being becalm'd at Sea, so that there was a necessity for us to tarry longer than we expected, all our Provision, Water and other Drink being near spent, so that at length we were constrain'd to fast the third day, not having a crumb of Bread nor a draught of Drink to help our selves: but after we had fasted half a day, or a little more, there was not one that perceiv'd himself a hungry; so that the third day was no other way troublesome to us, but that it weak'ned us, and made us faint: Neither did the Arterious. Blood occasion any hungry Corrosion in our empty Stomachs. And thus not only Reason, but also Experience, utterly overthrows the a∣foresaid Opinion. And therefore Ludo∣vicus de la Forge vainly invents a way for this Arterious fermentative Liquor from the Arteries to the Stomach, in Annot. ad Cartesii lib. de Hom▪ where, saith he, It may be here question'd, why that Liquor (i. e. the Fermentative) is carried through the Arteries to the Sto∣mach and Ventricle, rather than to other Parts. To which I answer, That the Arteries conveigh it equally to all Parts, but the Pores of all the Membranes are not so convenient to give it passage, as the Pores of the Ventricle. Now that this feign'd Subterfuge is of no moment, ap∣pears from hence, That in the Mem∣brances of the Brain, and many others, whose Pores are so convenient, that the Blood may be able to flow in greater quantity through them, than is convey'd to the Stomach; yet there is neither any Corrosion or Vellication of the Part. Some, that they may de∣fend this Corrosion the better, say That the Blood which is conveighed, or flows to the Stomach, is sharper than that which is conveighed to any other Part. But this no way coheres with Truth, because all the Blood is one and the same which is sent out of the Heart to all the Parts of the whole Body; nor is there any thing to sepa∣rate the sharp from the milder Particles, or thrusts 'em forward to these, rather than to those Parts. XL. Others lastly, to whose Opini∣onThe tru Cause. we think fit to subscribe, assert that Hunger is occasioned by certain acid fermentative Particles, bred out of the Spittle swallowed down, and some others somewhat Salt or indi∣gested Acids, adhering to the Tuni∣cles of the Ventricle, and by that drawn to some kind of Acidity; or remain∣ing in it after the Expulsion of the Chylus, stitching to the inner
wrinkl'd Membrane (especially about the upper Orifice) and a Vellication, trouble∣some to the Stomach, which being communicated by the Nerves of the sixth Pair to the Brain, thereby an Imagination of Eating is excited, to appease the troublesom Corrosion. XLI. This Acrimonie is infused into those fermentative Particles by the Stomach, when the sulphurous Parts are jumbl'd in the Iuices that stick to the inner Tunicle, and the Salts are melted by the convenient Heat of the Ventricle to a degree of Fusion, and so they turn Acid after a Specific Man∣ner. To which purpose the swallowed Spittle descending to the Stomach may be very prevalent (for this hath a fer∣mentative Quality in it self, as we shall shew ye l. 3. c. 24.) and to the same effect may also conduce the subacid Pancreatic, or Sweetbread Juice being infused into the Duodenum, if any Part of it shall rise toward the Stomach, or shall transmit any acid Vapors or Exha∣lations from the Intestin to it. XLII. Here some Object, and say,An Ob∣jection. if this be the Cause of Hunger, then when the Stomach is full, and Con∣coction and Fermentation are both busily employ'd, Men would be most Hungry; for then many more acid and fermentaceous Particles are called forth to their Work, which must of Necessity pull and tear the Ventricle much more than the few before men∣tioned. 'Tis deny'd. For the Parti∣cles to be fermented and fermented, that is dissolv'd, will be more; but not the Fermentaceous, or Particles dissolving. Of which we have an Example in Le∣ven'd Bread, whose single Parts have no power to ferment another Mass of Flower; because the acid Particles are no longer predominant, but the Sulphu∣reous, as appears by the sweetness of the tast: And so long as that prevalency of the sulphury Particles continues in the dissolv'd Particles, so long they cannot become Acid or Fermentaceous (for Sul∣phur is Sweet.) As appears in Fevers, wherein acid Medicins are generally most plentifully prescrib'd, for the subduing of the sulphury Predominancy: And restoring the convenient fermentaceous Quality. For when the Prevalency of the sulphureous Particles is overpowered by the Force of the salt Acids, then comes the fermentaceous Acidity to be introdud. So that there are not more acid, sharp, and corroding Particles in the full Ventricle concocting the Food▪ or if there be, they are so stain'd by the copious Liquor intermixt, so that they can occasion no troublesom Vellication to the Stomach; by which means the Hunger cannot be greater at that time, but rather ceases altogether. But when the Ghylus, and with that the dissolv'd sulphureous Particles intermixt with the salt are gone off to the Intestins, then the Remainder that sticks to the inner Tunicle of the Ventricle, or is carried thither with the spittly Juice, as being freed for the most part from the redun∣dancy of sulphurous Particles, grows sowre through the heat of the Ventricle, and so begins to tear again, and renews the Appetite, which ceases again, when that Acidity comes to be retemper'd by the Meat and Drink thrown into the Stomach, and its Acrimony comes to be mitigated and blunted. XLIII. But if these fermentaceous Iuices are not only not moderated in the Stomach, but that through some defect of the Liver, Sweetbread, or other Parts, over sharp Humors are too abundantly bred in the Body; or flow from the Head, or some inferior Parts, into the Stomach, in so great a Quantity, that their Acrimonie can∣not be sufficiently tam'd and temper'd by the swallowed Food, then happens that preternatural Hunger which weCanine Appeite call Canine; with which they who are troubl'd, often vomit up undigested Meat together with sowre Iuices like the Iuice of Limon (as they them∣selves confess) and by reason of the gnawing Acrimony, occasioned by the extream viscousness of the Humors remaining in the Ventricle, presently become hungry again and fall to eat. But if the fermentaceous Particles are in themselves very viscous, or thicker, and of a slower Motion, then they require a longer time to elevate them∣selves and excite Hunger; which chiefly happens when the acid Spirits less a∣bound in the whole Body, and conse∣quently in the Spittle, and that viscous Humor that sticks to the inner Tunicle of the Stomach. XLIV. Sometimes also it happens that Hunger is frequently diminished, when bitter Choler ascends in too great Quantity into the Stomach (as
in cholerick Men, in the Iaundise, and several sorts of Fevers) and there∣in by its Mixture corrupts not only the fermentaceous Relicks of the Nou∣rishment remaining in the Stomach after the Expulsion of the Chyle, but al∣so the Spittle that flows to it. The more remote Causes of lessening the Appetite are various, as excess of Sleep and La∣ziness, excess of Care, and looseness of the Belly, &c. Overmuch Sleep, and too much sitting still, for that for want of sufficient Exercise of the Body, the Humors also are not sufficiently stirr'd; nor are the acid Particles conveniently separated from the Viscous, so that they cannot be sufficiently roused up to Acti∣on. In extraordinary Cares of the Mind hunger is not perceiv'd, because the Thoughts are otherwise employ'd. And as for loosness of the Belly, 'tis a certain Truth that the Ferment is vitiated. XLV. Now these fermentaceousThe Fer∣ment. Particles that excite Hunger, as ap∣pears by what has bin said, are acid, or somewhat acid, and are the same that promote the Conoction of the Stomach, and ferment and dissolve the swallowed Nourishment. Hence it is, that Acids moderately taken in∣crease the Appetite, and cause a better Concoction of the Stomach. Of which we have an Experiment (besides our daily Experience in our Seamen, who make long Voyages to the Indies. For having fed upon thick and hard Meats for a long time, hence it comes to pass that their Appetites are deprav'd, and their Concoctions but weak; which breeds a Scorbutic ill Habit of Body. But when they come to Islands or Coun∣tries where they meet with plenty of Limons, and other acid Fruits, present∣ly their Appetite is restored, and all the concoctive Faculties, that languished be∣fore, are renewed, together with their Strength, through the said acidity, and so in a short time they recover their for∣mer Health. Therefore to keep the Seamen in Health in those long and te∣dious Voyages, the Masters of Vessels are wont to carry along with 'em a cer∣tain Quantity of Citron Juice, which they distribute now and then among the Mariners, when they find their Sto∣machs begin to fail 'em. XLVI. Acid therefore are those fermentaceous Particles which excite Hunger; which if they be wanting in the Stomach, the Appetite fails, nor can the Chylification be perfected, but the Meat is thrown off into the Bowels raw and unconcocted as when it was first swallowed down: But they being again restored to the Stomach, the Con∣coction returns, and the Appetite is re∣stored. Hence says Hippocrates 6. Aph. 1. In long Fluxes of the Belly, if sowre Belches happen, it is a good Sign. XLVII. Now how it comes to pass that the fermentaceous Particles ob∣tain that embased Acrimony, has bin already said, by an apt Heat melting those salt Particles to a degree of being Liquid and ready to flow. I say, Apt. For as Bread becomes well leavened in a luke warm Place by the Ferment mix∣ed with it, in a cold Place in great dif∣ficulty, but in a hot Oven can never be fermented: So this Acidity which will not be excited but by a moderate Heat of the Stomach, will not be stirr'd by too small a Heat, and is scattered and dispelled by too great a Heat; and thereby those Juices that should make the Ferment will be quite consum'd. Hence Flegmatic People that are troubled with a cold Distemper of the Stomach, have neither good Appetites nor good Concoctions; and Choleric Persons, who are infested with an over-hot Temper of the Stomach, have none at all. How∣ever it does not follow from this, that the greater the Heat of the Stomach is, the quicker must be the Appetite, and the stronger and better the Concoction: For the contrary appears in burning Feavers, and an Inflammation of the Stomach: As also in a Lyon, whether he be accounted the hottest of all Creatures, yet can he not digest Iron, Gold, Brass, or the like; which however are easily digested in the Stomach of an Estriche, as being endued with a sharper Ferment, tho' not with so fervent a Heat. As Langius relates that he saw at the Duke of Ferrara's Court an Estriche both swallow and digest those Metals, l. 1. Epist. 12. XLVIII. Therefore it is not the Heat but the Ferment, which in some is more sharp and acid, in others more moderate, which is the next Cause of the Appetite and Digestion of the Stomach: But moderate Heat is the Cause which disposes the Matter which begets that Ferment that elevates and ex∣cites to Action. XLIX. But whereas this PowerWhat is the chylifying Heat. and Vertue in the Stomach of making
this Ferment, and of Chylifying by its Assistance, cannot be excited into Action but by an apt and moderate Heat, some there are who question what, or rather where this Heat lies that produces this Action. Whether it be the Heat of the Membranes of the Ventricle, or the Parts that ly round it, or of any Humor, or any Spirits. Cer∣tainly there is no difference of this Heat in the diversity of Subjects, in relation to self; for all Heat is excited by the Motion and Agitation of the least Parti∣cles and subtil Matter (for because the Heat is fiercer in red hot Iron, slacker in the Flame of Straw; this does not ar∣gue the difference of the Heat it self, but of the Quantity, proceeding from the diversity of the Subject to which it is inherent) But the Diversity of Operations proceeds from the diversity of the things themselves, upon which, and by virtue of which the Heat acts. For the same Heat melts Wax, hardens Clay, wasts the Meat upon the Spit, bakes it in the Oven, and boyls in the Pot, putrifys in a Dunghil, and hatch∣es Eggs in a Stove, without the assistance of a Hen. In like manner to promote the Act of Chylification, it is required that the moderate Heat (which is no more than one and the same, should be proportionably adapted in the Stomach; that is, both in its Membranes, its Hu∣mours and Spirits, and that it should be cherished and foster'd in like manner by the Heat of the Parts that lie round a∣bout it; for so being truly and aptly proportion'd, it is impossible but the Ventricle must act properly and natu∣rally toward the Chylification of proper Matter, by dissolving and extracting a Chylus out of it. L. The Preparation of Nourish∣mentThe man∣ner of Chy∣lification. for Chylification proceeds gradu∣ally after a certain kind of Method. For first the Spittle is mixed with the Meat which is chewed and masticated in the Mouth, not only softning them, but infusing into them, a fermentative Quality (of which Quality see l. 3. c. 6. & 24.) then comes Drink, Ale, Wine, or any other Liquor, which for the most part contains in it self acid Particles and fermentaceous Spirits. This Nourish∣ment the Stomach strictly embraces, and squeezes it self round about it by the help of its Fibres, and mingles with it the Specific fermentaceous Juices, as well those bred in the interior Tunicle, as those that are affused upon the Spit∣tle. Then by an apt and proper Heat there is a Mixture and Liquation or Melting of the whole Substance of the Nourishment together. For that the fermentaceous Particles sliding into the Pores of the Nourishment, withal get into their very Particles themselves, stir about, melt and dissolve the more pure from the thick, and render 'em more fluid, to the end they may be able to endure another form of Mixture; and be united among themselves into the form of a milky Cream. Which be∣ing done, by the squeezing of the Ven∣tricle they fall down to the Intestins to∣gether with the thicker Mass with which they are intermixt; in them to be separated by the mixture of Choler and the pancreatick or Juice, after ano∣ther manner of Fermentation, and so to be thrust down to the milky Ves∣sels. LI. The certain Time for the fi∣nishingThe time for Chylifi∣cation. of Chylification cannot be de∣termined. For here is great Variety observed proceeding from the variety of the Temperament of the Stomach, Age, Sex, Position, and Disposition of the Parts adjoyning, and the Nature of the Nourishment themselves. LII. But why some Meats are di∣gested sooner, some later; the Reason is to be given from the variety of the Meats themselves in Substance, Hard∣ness, Solidness, Thickness, Thinness, Heat, Cold, &c. For which reason some are dissolved with more case and sooner, some with more Difficulty and later in the Stomach. But then again, why the same Meats are in others sooner in others later concocted; and where∣fore some Stomachs will easily concoct raw Fish, hard Flesh, half boyl'd, or tho' it be raw, but the Stomachs of o∣thers will with great Difficulty the ten∣derest and best prepared Dyet; this pro∣ceeds from the various Constitution of the Stomach, the Ferment, and the pro∣portion of Heat. LIII. What I speak of Meats, the same is to be understood of Drinks: Which for the same Reasons, and be∣cause of the same Varieties, are di∣gested in others well, in others ill, in others sooner, in others later; and render the Digestions of the Stomach, in others better, in others worse. For Example, if Wine or any other Liquor be drank plentifully, that is ei∣ther quickly digested, by reason of the
great Plenty, Thinness, and Spirituosi∣ty of acid Particles, and so flows down to the Intestines; or else by reason of the extraordinary Quantity, being very hea∣vy and troublesome to the Stomach, is thrust forth raw and undigested; of which Crudity the signs are sowre Belches, Vomiting, Rumbling in the Guts, and Crude Urines. LIV. If fair Water be drank which contains no acid Particles, in a hot∣ter Stomach, or where sharp and hot Humours abound, there it uses to temper, and somewhat to suppress an excessive and stinking Fermentation: but in a colder Stomach, and full of cold Iuices, it hinders Digestion. For that by its cold Moisture it dulls the sharp fermentaceous Particles contain'd in the Stomach, and the Meat receiv'd; that is, by its intermix'd and plentiful Aquosity it breaks to pieces and separates the least Particles of the active Princi∣ples at too great a distance one from a∣nother, so that they cannot act with a mutual and sufficient activity one upon another, so that then there happens a lesser Motion, and for want of that the more cold arises, so that the fermentace∣ous Particles cannot be sufficiently atte∣nuated by the heat of the Stomach, nor elevated to a just degree of Effervescen∣cy; and then they become unable to act upon the Particles that are to be fermen∣ted. LV. Note also that fat Meats tooFat things abate hun∣ger. plentifully eaten abate hunger, and render the Chylifying Concoction more difficult; because they dull the Acri∣mony of the fermentaceous Particles: or rather because they so involve the chiefest part of the Particles of the Nou∣rishment receiv'd, that the sharp fer∣mentaceous Particles cannot act with conveniency upon 'em; which efficacy of Fat is to be seen in External Things. For Silver or Pewter Vessels being smear'd over with Fat, are not to be corroded by sharp Vinegar infus'd, tho' the Vinegar retain all its Acrimony. Nei∣ther will Aqua fortis corrode the Skin if well greas'd over. Thus the sharp fer∣mentaceous Matter acts with very great difficulty upon Meats that are over fat; which is the reason that the eating of too much Fat occasions vomiting. See more of Ferment, c. 17. & l. 2. c. 12. LVI. Ludovicus de Bills; a kind of a paradoxical Anatomist is said to have observ'd the Time of Chylification in the dissection of Dogs, after this manner, according to the Report of N. Zas. If a Dog be fed with only sweet Milk, then the Chylification will be perfected about two hours after: Mix white Bread with that Milk, it will be three hours, or somewhat less, before the Chylification will be perfected. If the Milk be thicken'd with Barly Meal, and so eaten by the Dog, it will be four hours before the Chylus will appear in the Stomach: But feed the Dog with white Bread only, and it will require six hours to perfect the Chylus. But these Observations of Bills are ve∣ry uncertain; for that all the Stomachs of Dogs are not of the same Constituti∣on, nor in the same Condition of Sani∣ty, nor digest their Meat in an equal space of Time; thence it will come to pass, that Digestion which shall be ac∣complish'd in the Ventricle of one with∣in an hour, shall not be finish'd in ano∣ther in two or three hours, though it be of the same Meat. Moreover, un∣less these Observations be meant of all sorts of Concoctions of Nourishment re∣ceived by the Stomach, they will con∣tradict both Reason and Experience, which will teach us that neither in Men nor Dogs, all Meats that are swallow'd into the Stomach, are digested together, nor are all their apt and agreeing Parti∣cles turn'd into Chyle; all at a time, the thinner first, the thicker afterwards, so that there can be no certain time pre∣fix'd for Chylification. For Milk being eaten with Bread, tho' perhaps it re∣quires three hours, before all the apt Particles shall be turn'd into Chylus; yet will it not be three hours before some Chyle be produced out of it; for the thinner Particles of the Milk will be sooner turn'd into Chyle, which will be conspicuous after one, sometimes in half an hour, and sometimes sooner, while the Bread and thicker Particles of the Milk shall remain to the third hour in the Ventricle. He then who affirms that the Chylification is not perfected be∣fore the end of the third hour, is in an Errour, for the very first hour a good part of it was perfected and finish'd. LVII. Bernard Swalve in querel. & opprob. Ventric. elegantly describes the time of Chylification, and the Ob∣stacles that may happen to hinder it. Where he introduces the Stomach thusThe  diments and  of . speaking: All things that are receiv'd do not equally resist my Labour. One gives way sooner than another. Upon Milk meats I spend
but an hour; not full two upon Pot-herbs: Nor does the softness of Fish require that time. Food made of Flower, as Bread and Crust, I can hardly dissolve into Cream in four hours; and the harder the Flesh is, the longer and more diligently must I labour. Mutton and Beef require seven hours to tame their Contumacy. Here I stand in need of a greater quantity of A∣cids, and a greater resort and assistance of Spirits. Now my Substance operates more strongly, and then all these things are fre∣quently weaken'd and dispoil'd of their force. I omit to mention many things that disturb my Office, and hinder me in my du∣ty, now this, now that, which puts me in∣to a languishing Condition. For this is my misery, hence my tears, that I cannot resist the Invasion of External Injuries, and that I am expos'd to so many and so great Errours and Mistakes that obstruct me in my Employment. These Mischiefs are so fruitful, that I cannot always obtain my End in Digestion. LVIII. Assuredly these things are ve∣ryThe Order of Chylii∣cation. well and succinctly described by Swalve, for that many and several sorts of Food being eaten at one Meal, do not all together, and at one equal distance of time, suddenly part with their Milkie Iuice; but according to the greater or lesser force of the Sto∣mach, and the fermenting acid Iuice, and the difference of Food in Sub∣stance, Quantity, Quality, Hardness, Viscosity, Thinness, Solidity, &c. The more spirituous and thinner Parts in some are sooner, in others later dis∣solv'd, and turn into Chyle; and they which are first digested, pass first through the Pylore or Orifice, the other remain∣ing a longer time in the Stomach, till a more accurate dissolution. This pro∣ceeding is manifest from the Refreshment after the Meal; For the strength of Na∣ture is soon repair'd, whereas the Meat is easily perceiv'd to remain in the Sto∣mach. Which first Refreshment is caused by the thinner Particles of the Nourishment first dissolv'd and concoct∣ed, and already discharg'd by the Sto∣mach. Which, should they remain in the Stomach till the absolute Concoction of the harder Masses, by that over-long stay they would be too much digested, and so become corrupted, or vitiated at least. And this Method is evident in the dissection of Dogs, kill'd presently after they have fill'd their Bellies. For generally in their Bowels and chyliferous or milkie Vessels, there is found a thin∣ner sort of Chyle, which we have many times shewn to the Spectators in a suffici∣ent Quantity, scarce an hour or two af∣ter they had eaten: especially if they fed upon a more juicy fort of Meats, when the chiefest part of the Food, not being yet turn'd into Chyle, still remain'd in the Ventricle. LIX. Hence appears the mistake ofThe Order of Meats; many Physicians, who thought that the Nourishment which was first eaten was first discharg'd out of the Stomach; those things which were last eaten were last parted with. And hence they have been very careful to prescribe an Order in Feeding; as, to eat those things which are of easie Concoction first, and those things which are hard of Digestion last, for fear of begetting Crudities through a preposterous Order in Feeding; accord∣ing to the Admonitions of Fernelius 3. de Sympt. Caus. c. 1. 5. Pathol. c. 3. Mercu∣rialis 3. Prax. c. 12. Sennertus 3. Prax. part. 1. Sect. 2. c. 9. and of many others. Certainly whatever Variety is received into the Stomach is confus'd, mix'd, and jumbled together, and that by Fermen∣tation, by which the spiritous and thin Particles spread themselves, and free themselves from the dissolv'd thicker Substances, and so the thick being stirr'd and agitated together with the thin; by that motion there is made a Mixture of all together; of all which Mass, that which is sufficiently digested passes through the Pylorus, that which requires farther Concoction, remains of a harder Substance in the Stomach. LX. Here three hard Questions are to be examined in their Order. First, Whether if Hunger be occasion'd by the acid fermentaceous Particles, crea∣ting a troublesome Vellication in the Stomach, what is the Cause of that which is call'd Pica, or a deprav'd Ap∣petite (as when People long for Chalk, Oatmeal, Lime, and the like.) Se∣condly, Whether in a Dyspepsie (or dif∣ficulty of Digestion and Fermentation in the Guts) Choler can be bred in the Stomach, such as is evacuated upward and downward in the Disease call'd Cho∣lera. Thirdly, Whether the whole Chyle, when concocted on the Stomach, fall in∣to the Intestines. LXI. As to the first, The Cause of a deprav'd Appetite (call'd Pica and Malacia) seems to us not to have been by any person sufficiently explain'd; when as the affect it self is a thing to be admir'd, in regard the force of it
is such, especially in Virgins and Wo∣men (for men are seldom troubled with it) that they will often with a wonderful desire covet Meal, Chalk, Tobacco-pipes, Dirt, Coals, Lime, Tarr, raw Flesh, Fruits, and other strange things altogether unfit for Nou∣rishment; as live Fish, the fleshy and brawny part of the Members of a living Man, and Stones, (as Sennertus reports that he knew a Woman that swallowed every day two pound of a Grindstone, till she had at length devour'd it all) be∣sides several other Precedents cited by Physicians, and what daily occurs to our Observation. Now they generally af∣firm the Cause of this Mischief to be the deprav'd Humours contain'd in the Ventricle, which, according to their va∣rious Natures, excite in some a various Appetite to this, in others to that, whe∣ther bad or good: in some, to dissimilar noxious things, in others to similar, as the vitious Humours according to their diffe∣rent qualifications variously tear & move the little Fibres of the Nerves of the Ven∣tritle, by the peculiar Motion of which communicated to the Brain, there arises the same Motion in an instant in the Brain, by which a peculiar Appetite is stirred up to this or that thing. Francis de le Boe Sylvius Prax. l. 1. c. 2. as also in the Dictates of the Private Colledge assembled in the Year 1660. going about to explain this thing more particularly, asserts that the Cause of this deprav'd Appetite is a vitious Ferment of the Sto∣mach, corrupted either by the vitious Nourishment, Physic, or Poyson, swal∣low'd down; or by several Diseases, especially such as are incident to Wo∣men, infecting the whole Mass of Blood, then the Spittle, and lastly the Ferment of the Ventricle, and disposing 'em to an ill habit. But if this formal Reason be of any force, let us from thence also ask this Question, Why such an Appe∣tite, coveting this unusual Dyet, is also to be found in those who are troubled with no vitious Humours in the Sto∣mach, as I have sometimes found by Experience; tho' I cannot deny but that there may be now and then for all that some ill Humours in the Stomach? Wherefore in a Man, whose Ferment and Ventricle are without fault, meerly upon the wistful looking upon some Pi∣cture, sometimes of Fish, sometimes of Fruits, or other things not fit for Dyet, shall find himself to have a strong Sto∣mach for these things? in the same man∣ner as the looking upon the Picture of a naked Venus excites many Men to Vene∣ry? What, and of what sort must be the Nature and admirable Quality that must so move the little Fibres of the Nerves and the Brain, that by reason of that special Motion there must be an Appe∣tite to Grindstones, Tobacco-pipes, Coals, &c. which there is no body but knows can never be desir'd as a remedy against that troublesome gnawing, or as neces∣sary for Nourishment. LXII. And therefore these things must proceed from some other Cause, that is to say, from the Mistake of the Imagination, and thence a deprav'd Iudgment arising from an ill habit of the Brain, and a vitious Motion of the Spirits; and not from the pravity of the Humours in the Stomach. For according as the vitious Humours aug∣ment or diminish the Vellication of the Fibres more or less intensly, it may in∣crease or abate the Appetite, but not di∣rect it to a particular choice of Dyet, especially such a one as is unnatural. For Hunger is a natural nstinct, by which Nature is barely excited to receive Nou∣rishment, as a remedy for the gnawing, but not more especially to this o that Food, or to this or that Dyet, if it may be so call'd, as being altogether unnatural. LXIII. Then as for that which is said, That sound healthy People being a hungry, covet sometimes Fish, some∣times Flesh, sometimes Fruit, now roasted, now boyl'd, &c. This pro∣ceeds not from any peculiar Vellication or Gnawing, but from an Animal Ap∣petite, which judges that sometimes such sort of Meats, sometimes another, sometimes sweet, sometimes sowre, will be more grateful and proper for the Stomach; and therefore sometimes they covet more eagerly Wormwood-wine, raw Herrings, and several other things of themselves ungrateful, than others more pleasing to the Palate, and more wholesome. LXIV. Now since the Choice or Re∣fusal of Meat, or of any thing else, depends upon the Iudgment, and Iudg∣ment proceeds from the Brain, cer∣tainly the Cause of coveting this or that peculiar thing, is not to be sought for in the Stomach but in the Brain; which if it be out of order, through bad Humours, and ill Vapours arising from any filth gathered together in the Womb, Spleen, or Sweetbread, and hence as∣scending
up to the Brain, easily occasions deprav'd Imaginations, whence follows a deep deprav'd  Judgment, and through the mistake of that Judgment, noxious and absurd things are covered, rather than the best and most wholsome, as Chalk, Coals, &c. (A thing well known to happen to melancholly People, who many times doat upon one particular thing, tho' in other things their Judg∣ment is sound enough.) For how far Intent and frequent Cogitation upon a thing avails to increase such a deprav'd Appetite, is apparent in Women with Child, who many times long to that degree, that if they cannot get what they desire, the Child shall carry the Mark of the thing long'd for. Which impression cannot be said to preceed from any deprav'd Humours of the Sto∣mach, but from the Brain; for that the Imagination being intense upon those things, and Judgment made upon their use, and Benefit proceeds from thence, and the Ideas of those things are con∣veigh'd from thence, and imprinted up∣on the Birth by the Animal Spirits. Besides, they that are troubled with a deprav'd Appetite, do not always long for one and the same thing, but some∣times for one thing, sometimes another, as their Fancies are fix'd more upon one thing than another, which cannot be imputed to any ill Humour adhering to the Ventricle; for that then the longing for variety of things must proceed from the variety of Humours. Besides, these sort of Patients are troubled with a de∣prav'd Appetite when they are a hungry, and then they most eagerly long for those things which they have thought of before, whether good or bad; and be∣lieve 'em then not to be bad or hurtful, but pleasing and wholesom. Which Depravation of the Appetite I have cur'd more by Cunning than by Physic; en∣joyning the People of the House never to mention in the hearing of the Pati∣ents those hurtful things, and to remove all sorts of Pictures out of their sight; and in the mean time to feed 'em with wholesom Dyet, and that often in the Day, to prevent their being much an hungry. LXV. There is one Objection re-mains,An Obje∣ction. that is to say, If a deprav'd Appetite were not caus'd by the ill ha∣bit of the Stomach, the Patients would be sick upon the eating such kind of noxious Dyet, neither would such things be digested in the Stomach; but on the other side, it appears that few or none suffer any harm by it, with∣out doubt because there are those de∣prav'd Iuices in the Stomach, which are able to digest that preternatural Dyet, which the Stomach seems to have particularly requir'd, as a remedy for that peculiar Vellication or Twitch∣ing of the Nerves. But the force of this Objection is easily answer'd, when it is consider'd that it is not absolutely true, that such Patients receive no Dam∣mage from such incongruous and pre∣ternatural Dyet, and that it is only true in very few, and that only once, twice, or thrice, but that afterwards they are cruelly afflicted by it, contracting Oppi∣lations of the Bowels, the Dropsie, the wild Scab or Maunge, call'd Psora; and several other Distempers. But the rea∣son why they receive no Dammage at first, is twofold. First, Because upon the eager devou∣ring of these things the Animal Spirits flow in great Plenty to the Stomach (as upon Venereal thoughts they flow in great abundance to the Generating Parts; together with a great quantity of Arteri∣ous Blood. Now how effectually these Natural Spirits operate in nourishing the Body, we shall explain more at large, l. 3. c. 11. and how far they conduce to the Concoctions of the Stomach, if they flow into it more plentifully than is usu∣al, is apparent in those Slaves to their Bellies, that waste whole days and nights in thinking what they shall eat, and are always stuffing their Guts. For they, by reason of the plentiful Spirits design'd for the Stomach, have much swifter and better Concoctions, than such as are al∣ways busi'd at their Studies, whose Ani∣mal Spirits are call'd another way; and therefore are frequently troubled with Crudities, and hardly are able to digest the lightest Food. Secondly, Because they that are trou∣bled with a deprav'd Appetite, are for the most part melancholy; or such as breed more sowre fermentaceous Juices, are more sharp and copious than usual, in the Spleen, Sweatbread and Ventricle; whence when they begin to be a hungry, they have a sharper Stomach, and far more easily digest whatever they eat, than others; nay, than they themselves can do at another time. Thus I have known a Woman with Child, that long∣ing for ripe Cherries, has at one time eaten up six or seven pound together; another that has eaten thirty Cheesecakes; and another that would eat raw salt Herrings and digest 'em well, when
at other times they did not use to be so greedy. And hence it comes to pass, that at sueh a time they will digest a large quantity of Meat, or those preter∣natural Things (as Oatemeal, Chalk, and Coals) or at least the Stomach dis∣charges 'em without any harm. But if they continue that immoderate Course of Dyet, that sharper Juice at length failing, it becomes such a Di∣sturbance to the Bowels and Stomach, that their Concoctions are thereby plain∣ly interrupted and deprav'd, to the breeding of copious bad Juices, that in∣crease a great quantity of ill Humors, which is the cause of several Di∣stempers. From all which I think it is sufficiently manifest, that a deprav'd Appetite does not primarily proceed from any deprav'd Humors bred in the Stomach, or sticking to it, but from some defect of the Brain, and mistake of the Imagination. LXVI. The second Problem is af∣firm'dWhether Choler be generated in the Sto∣mach. by Regius, and several other Physicians, altho' it be far from being true. For in a crazy Condition of Health, the Humors in the Stomach may be corrupted several ways, and many bad ones may be gathered to∣gether, and yet never any Choler bred therein. And for that which is exone∣rated upwards and downwards in the Disease called Cholera, that is not bred in the Stomach but in the Liver, col∣lected and amassed together in the Blad∣der of the Gall, the Porus Biliarius, and other places adjoyning; from whence, sharply or sowerly fermenting and boy∣ling, it bursts forth at last, with great Violence, into the Duodenum, and by virtue of that Motion is discharged and thrust out partly upward, through the Stomach, partly downward through the rest of the Intestines. Which is suffici∣ently apparent from hence, in regard that the Invasions of Choler are subitane, no Signs preceeding of any ill Affection of the Ventricle, or of any Choler bred or gathered togethet within it; and for that often when People have made a good Meal, not feeling any Disturbance either in the Appetite, or in Digestion, it overflows in their Sleep at Midnight, and sometimes in the day time, with∣out any foregoing Notice; which cer∣tainly could not but precede, if a copi∣ous quantity of Choler, the Cause of the Disaster, were bred in the Stomach, or gathered there together. Neither will Reason permit us to believe, that Nature has constituted various and se∣veral Organs to perform one and the same Office, such as is the Generation of Choler. For to obain that End, she makes use only of one sort of Means; and thus the Stomach alone Chylifys, the Liver alone breeds Choler, To wi that serous or lympha∣tick Iuice, of which Choler, by means of the Fer∣mentum in the Gall. Bladder i bred. See more here∣of in▪ Sy∣nopsis Me∣dicinae, l▪ 4. c. 8. Sect. 10. § 14. ad 36. Salmon. the Heart only breeds Blood, &c. Nor does the usual Subterfuge avail in this place; that Choler generated in the Stomach, is not natural, but preternatural Choler. For to this I answer, that that Choler, which the Distemper, call'd Cholera, (which Choler, they say, is bred in the Stomach) and in the Loosenesses of many Infants is discharged in great quantity, is a sharp, and for the most part eruginous or green Choler; I have found it to be such in the dissected Bodys of many that have dy'd of this Distemper, heap∣ed up together in great Quantity in the Gall-Bladder, and the ductus Cholodi∣chus; but little or none in the Stomach. Which is a certain Sign, that this Cho∣ler, when it is in a boyling Condition, breaks forth into the Stomach and In∣testines, but that it is not bred there. LXVII. In Infants that have dy'd of such a green choleric Loosness, I have observ'd, and that frequently, the Gall-bladders full of very green Choler, and swell'd to the bigness of a large Hens Egg. So that it is most certain that where the natural, there the preternatural Choler is bred; that is to say, on the Liver. This is to be un∣derstood  the  before ∣pressed,  we have hinted i the Mr∣gin of the former P∣ragraph, Salmon. But some will say, that it is impossible that so great a quantity of green Choler should be so suddenly bred in the Liver, or be col∣lected and stir'd up from any other Part within it, as uses to be evacuated in the Disease called Cholera, in a few Hours: For in the space of four and twenty Hours, several Pints of that Matter are evacuated, to the filling of some Chamberpots, and therefore of necessity it must be true, that that Cho∣ler is at that time bred in the Stomach. To which I answer, That this Choler being gathered together from all Parts to fill the Gall Bladder, for the most part is of a dark green Color, and very sharp, and when this, being in a boyling Condition, breaks forth into the Inte∣stines and Ventricle, then it vexes and tears those Parts, and like a violently pricking Medicin, causes the Serous, and various other Humors, to flow from all Parts to the Intestines. Which being tinctur'd by a small quantity of green Choler infused into the Ventricle and Intestins, become all of a green Colour and so are discharged green out of the
Body: Which Redundancy of flowing Humors being sometimes very great, the Ignorant believe that it is only meer Choler that is expel'd the Body in such a great Quantity, when they are only other Humors coloured by the Choler. Now that this Choler causes such a Tincture by its Intermixture, I know by Experience; for that with half a Spoonful of that Juice taken out of the Gall-bagg; I have, in the sight of seve∣ral People, tinctured a whole Pint of Water. LXVIII. The affirmative PatronsWhether part of the Chylus be carried to the Spleen? of the third Problem, with whom Regius consents, assure us that all the Chylus does not flow from the Stomach to the Intestins, but that some Part of it is conveighed to the Spleen, through the Vas venosum breve, and other neighbouring Ga∣stric Veins. For Proof of which they give a two sold Reason. The first is, because the Birth in the Womb is nou∣rished first of all with the milky Juice that swims at the top of it, and through the Navel-vein sticking to it, and not as yet extended to the Placenta, conveigh∣ed to the Liver and Heart of the Infant. Now if this happen to the Embryo; 'tis no wonder that when a Man is born, that part of the Chylus should pass thro' the Gastric Veins to the Spleen. The other Reason is, that after a Man has fed heartily, there follows such a sud∣den Refection, that so great and so sud∣den could never happen, if the whole Chylus were first to pass through all the milky Vessels; and that some part of it did not rather get to the Spleen by a shorter Cut, and thence reach to the Heart more speedily. LXIX. To the first Reason, I an∣swer, That the Embryo is not at that time nourished with the milky Iuice, but with the remainder of the seminal Liquor, poured upon it by reason of its vicinity to it, entring the Pores, and soon after received into the Mouth: And that the Navel▪ vein, be∣ing at length fastened to the uterine Pla∣centa, can neither receive or attract any more milky Juice; So that an Agree∣ment with it and the Gastric Veins, was ill contriv'd from hence. Moreover, supposing that any thing of the alimen∣tary Juice were carried at that time to the Liver of the Birth through the Na∣vel Vein; I say, it does not follow from thence, that the Chylus in Men born, passes also out of the Ventricle through the Gastric Veins, and out of the Intestins through the Mesaraics: That Compari∣son being altogether lame, seeing that several Parts are in such a manner ser∣viceable to the Birth, which they can∣not pretend to in Men born. Of which, all the Navel Vessels afford us an Ex∣ample, the Foramen Ovale in the Heart; the Closure of the Arteria Pulmonaris with the Aorta, &c. besides that seve∣ral Parts have no use as yet in the Birth, that come to be serviceable in Men born, as the Lungs, the Liver, the Spleen, the genital Parts, the Eyes, the Nose, the Ears. So that from the use of any Part in the Birth▪ there can be concluded no use of any Part in a Man born; as we cannot conclude any use of the Gastric and Mesraic Veins from the use of the Umbilical. LXX. As to the second Reason, it seems to infer a very plausible Argu∣ment from sudden Refreshment, that follows after Eating and Drinking, which is thought to be occasioned from hence, because that the more subtil Part of the Chyle, passing by a shor∣ter Cut from the Ventricle to the Spleen, gets far sooner to the Heart, and refreshes it, than if it were first to pass to the Intestins, thence thro' several milkie Vessels to the Vein cal∣led Subclavia, and so through the Vena cava to the Heart. Nay, I have sometimes heard that for a farther Proof of this Assertion, that an Exam∣ple was cited by Regius out of Ferneli∣us, of a certain Female Patient, whose Pylorus or Orifice of the Stomach was wholly obstructed, yet did she cat every Day, tho' she threw what she cat up again, and in that manner liv'd a long time. Which could never have bin, says Regius, unless something of the Chylus had bin conveighed out of the Stomach through the Gastric Veins to the Spleen. 1. Because the Chyle enters no other but the milky Vessels. 2. Be∣cause there are no milky Vessels at all, that are carried to the Stomach, or from the Stomach (as Deusingius pretends to assert Institut. Anat. tho' I do not be∣lieve that ever any Deusingian will pre∣sume to make out) so that if the Chyle should pass from thence to the Spleen, it ought to be conveighed through the Vas breve, and other Blood conveigh∣ing Veins; whereas they neither admit the Chylus, nor can receive it, for the Reasons brought concerning the Mesa∣raicks
l. 7. c. 2. 3. Because the Chyle is not separated from the thicker Mass, nor enters the milky Vessels, unless Choler be first mixed with it, together with the pancreatic Juice, which doth separate and attenuat it by a peculiar Fermen∣tation or Effervescency from the thicker matter that involves it; which Choler is poured forth into the Guts, and not into the Stomach, and if it should be carried to the Ventricle by Chance, that is, contrary to the usual Motion of Na∣ture, and then Chylification is disturb'd. Now that the Chyle cannot be separa∣ted from the thicker Matter, or atte∣nuated by Fermentation without the In∣termixture of Choler, so that it may be able to enter the milky Vessels, is apparent in those People that are trou∣bled with the yellow Jaundice; in whom, by reasn that the Choler cannot flow into the Duodenum, by reason of some Obstruction of the Cholodochus, or any other Cause whatever, that Distemper happens, because the Choler being de∣ny'd Passage into the Duodenum, the Patients cannot go so often to the Stool, and when they do, the Excrement is for the most part Chylous and white, col∣lected together in the Guts, and cannot be fermented and distributed for want of Choler. How true this Passage is, I leave to those who have read what I have for∣merly it in my Synophs Medicinae l 4. c. 8. sect. 10. § 14. ad 36: but be∣sides what we have there spoken we have had several Icterical Patients, in whom none of this has bin true, but their Stools have bin as nu∣merous as before, and in some more nu∣merous, and in most of them of as good a co∣lour as for∣merly: Moreover, I have near a hundred times seen the Excre∣ments Chy∣lous, white, and some∣times like Clay, void of all man∣ner of red∣dish or yel∣lowish Co∣lour, & yet the Person not only free from the yellow Iaundice, but also in good Health. Salmon. As to the suddain Re∣freshment after Meals, that comes not to pass by reason of any shorter Cut from the Stomach to the Spleen, and from thence through the Liver and Ve∣na Cava to the Heart (which however is not a shorter way neither, than when it is carried from the Ventricle to the Intestines) but because the subtil Va∣pors of the Nourishment, penetrate through the Pores of the Ventricle to the Heart (For the whole Body, as Hip∣pocrates testifies, is , or full of Streams) and likewise all together gent∣ly tickle the Nerves of the Sixth Pair, common to the Heart and Ventricle; which is apparent from hence, because not only Nourishment, but all fragrant Smells, and cordial Epithemes or Ap∣plications, refresh those that are subject to swooning, and recover 'em out of their Fits; when as neither the Odors nor those things from whence the O∣dors exhale, reach either the Spleen or the Heart, but only the most subtil Vapors make their Passage through the Pores. And moreover 'tis wonder∣ful to think how soon the thin Particles of the Nourishment, which require but little Digestion, pierce through the mil∣ky Vessels to the Vein Subclavia, and the Heart. I have given to Doggs, empty'd with long Fasting, liquid Nou∣rishment of easy Digestion, and within three quarters of an Hour after having dissected 'em, I found in that short space of time a watery Chyle, very plentiful in all the lacteous or milky Vessels, car∣ried from the Ventricle and the Inte∣stines, tho' the Food seem'd to be all en∣tire in the Stomach. The History cited out of Fernelius seems not to be very rightly quoted. For I do not remem∣ber that ever Fernelius wrote any thing of Obstruction of the Pylore. In∣deed in his L. 6. Patholog. c. 1. he relates a Story of a Woman with Child, that had a hard swelling in her Stomach, so that no Nourishment could descend in∣to her Stomach, but presently upon touching that Orifice they returned to∣wards the Throat again, which Woman in two Months time, with all the Art and Endeavours that were used, could get nothing into her Stomach. But what is this Story to the Proof of the Opinion forementioned? He tells us the Nourishment could not descend into the Stomach, therefore no Chyle could there be made out of it; neither could the Chyle flow from the Stomach to the Spleen. The Story of Philip Salmuth Cent. 1. Obs. 20. might have bin cited and objected much more to the Pur∣pose, of a certain Person who was troubl'd with continual Vomiting, and was forc'd to throw back all the Meat he swallowed, by reason the Passage was stopp'd by a Scirrhous or hard Swel∣ling at the Mouth of the Pylore, as was found after he was dead. Another Sto∣ry like this is recorded by Benivenius observat. 36. and another by Riverius cent. 1. Obser. 60. and another by Schen∣kius exerc. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 33. not unlike the Story which Io. Vander Meer rela∣ted to me of an Accident seen as well by himself as by several of the Physici∣ons in Delph, of a certain Woman that for half a Year lay very ill at Delf, and vomited up all the Meat she eat after some few Hours, the first well con∣cocted, the next loathsome and smel∣ling very badly: After which her E∣vacuations by Stool began to cease by degrees; so that for the first Week she did not go to Stool above twice or thrice, then once a week, and then hardly once in a Month, which brought her to nothing but Skin and Bone, till at length she dy'd: In whose Body, being opened, was found a Py∣lore all Cartilaginous, with an Orifice so small, that it would only give Passage to a little Needle. But seeing it appears
by these Histories, that the Pylore can never be suddenly nor long so streight∣ned, but by degrees, so the passage of the Chylus is obstructed by degrees, from whence it comes to pass, that for want of sufficient Nourishment, the strength is wasted insensibly, and the Body emacia∣ted by degrees: Seeing also that by their going to stool, tho' it were but very sel∣dom, and for that the Pylore would ad∣mit the passage of a little Needle, that it would not admit a greater Body, it appear'd that the Pylore in those Per∣sons was not totally obstructed, or if it were wholly clos'd up, yet that they did not live long by reason of that Ob∣struction, but dy'd in a short time, it cannot thence be prov'd that the Chylus passes from thence to the Spleen. For if this were true, the Patients strength would not have fail'd so soon through the Obstruction of the Pylore, nor have yielded so easie an Access to Death. LXXI. Bernard Swalve consider∣ingWhether the Chylus enters the Gastric Veins. these Difficulties, Lib. de Querel▪ & Approb. Ventric. p. 63, 64. dares not assert that Refreshment is occasion'd by the Chylus coming a shorter way than through the Intestins, but writes that supposing a case of necessity, the little Orifices of the Gastric Veins in the Tunicles of the Ventricle gape a little, and that into them, it is not the Chylus, which is too thick, but a more Liquid Iuice is speedily in∣fus'd presently, to be intermix'd with the Blood flowing back to the Heart. But according to this Assertion Swalve seems to offer a most cruel Violence to the Gastric Veins, and to force 'em to confirm his Speculation, as if by agree∣ment he would, at his own pleasure shut 'em up, but upon this Condition, that they should not gape, but in a time of necessity, or being open, should not emp∣ty their Blood into the Cavity of the Ventricle (which otherwise might easily happen, and so occasion Vomiting of Blood,) and that they should not take the Chylus it self, but only sup up a Liquid Humour out of the Stomach, and so carry it in a hurry to the Heart. LXXII. The use of the Chylus ishe use of  Chylus. A second igression. Whether a∣ parts are  by the Chylus. to breed good Blood out of it: But whether any parts are nourished at the first hand by the Chylus, before it be chang'd into Blood, is a Controversie. This Galen most plainly writes con∣cerning the Ventricle, l. 3. de Natural. Fa∣cult. c. 6. in these words▪ Moreover this is the end (that is of the Concoction of the Stomach) that so much as is apt and agree∣ing in Quality, should take some part to its self. And therefore that which is the best in the nourishment, that it draws to it self in the nature of a Vapour, and by degrees, stores up in its Tunicles, and fixes it to 'em. When it is fully satisfied, whatever of Nourishment remains, that it throws off as burdensome. The same thing he also asserts, c. 12, 13. of the same Book. Val∣lesius confirms this Opinion of Galen by many Arguments, Controvers. Med. & Philos. l. 1. c. 14. That the Ventricle is nourish'd by the Chylus, the shape of its Substance, and these Reasons over and a∣bove, teus. If the Ventricle were not nourish▪d by the Chylus, neither would it digest the Food. For why does it generate the Chylus? Is it not to send it to the Liver? Therefore 'tis the Care of the Ventricle to nourish the Liver; and there∣fore it is not guided by Nature, but by Intellect. For those things that operate by Nature, are never concern'd with the care of other things. Moreover, either the Ventricle retains some part of the Chylus, and sends some part to the Liver, or it retains nothing at all of it. If it retain'd nothing, it would presently covet more, since only Nourishment seems to be that which can protect it from Hunger; and therefore the Blood alone is not proper to nourish the Mem∣bers. Endis Parisanus is also of the same Opinion with Galen, l. 5. Subtil. Exercit. 3. c. 2. as likewise Hen▪ Regius Medic. l. 1. c. 4. neither do Peramatus and Montaltus differ from the rest. A∣ristotle contradicts Galen, who shews by many Reasons, l. 2. de part. Animal. c. ▪ that the Blood is the last Aliment, and that all the Parts are immediately ou∣rish'd by that, and not by the Chylus. Plempius l. 2. Fund. Med. c. 8. tho' he thinks that both Pats may be easily maintain'd by reason of the weakness of the Arguments; nevertheless he asserts with Aristotle, That the Ventricle, and all the Parts, are at first hand nourish'd with the Blood, and supports this Opi∣nion by many Arguments. Of the same Opinion is Bernard Swalve in que∣rel. & Opprob. Ventric. we are also enclin'd to approve the Opinion of Aristotle, That the Blood is the last Nourishment▪ But I would have this added, That the Chylus contributes a certain Irrigation necessary▪ to moisten the Stomach and Milkie Vessels, without which they could not continue sound, tho' they may be nourished by the Blood. In the same manner, as many Herbs being ex∣pos'd
to the heat of the Sun▪ tho' they receive sufficient Nourishment from the Earth, yet languish and wither, unless they be often water'd; the moisture of the Water contributing new vigour to 'em; as loosning again the Particles too much dry'd and contracted by the heat of the Sun, and by that means giving a freer ingress to the Nourishment. In like manner the Tunicles of the Ventri∣cle and Milkie Vessels, unless moysten'd by the Chylus, would grow too dry, and so the Pores of the Substance being con∣tracted, would not so readily admit the nutritive Blood flowing into 'em, and for that reason would be much weak∣ned, and at length quite fal in their Of∣fice. Which is the reason that by long fasting the Milkie Vessels are many times so dry'd up, that they can never be o∣pen'd again, which afterwards obstruct∣ing the Distribution of the Chylus, causes an Atrohie that consumes the Patient. But when there is a defect of that moi∣sture in the Brain, then the troublesom contraction of its Tunicles causes Thirst, and the Vellication occasion'd by the fermentaceous Juice that sticks to 'em, begets Hunger, neither of which a new Chylus pacifies by its Nutrition, but the Humid Moistures swallow'd produce that effect, and the Chylus extracted out of those by their moist'ning, by which the contraction of the Tunicles is releas'd; and the Acrimony of the Juice yet twitches, is temper'd and mitigated. And that this is done only by Humecta∣tion, is maniest from hence; for that all moist'ning things, as Ale, Water, Ptisan, and the like, being plentifully drank, presently allay and abate the thirst and hunger for the time. LXXIII. But what shall we say of the Child in the Womb, which seems to be nourish'd by the Milkie Iuice a∣lone of the Amnion or Membrane that enfolds the Birth, at what time there is no Blood that flows as yet through the Navel Vessels? To which I answer, That the Birth is nourish'd by the thicker Particles of the Seed re∣maining after the forming of the Body of the said Seed, first partly chang'd into Blood in the Beating Bladder, or Bubble; partly clos'd together by Proxi∣mity ad some kind of Concoction: not that it is nourish'd by the Chylus or any Milkie Juice of the Amnion Membrane: but then the remaining Particles of the Seed being consum'd, then it is nourish'd by Blood made of the Lacteous Liquor of the Amnium. By which nevertheless it could not be nourish'd, were it desti∣tute of that Moisture with which it is water'd by the Lacteous Liquor. See more of this c. 29. of this Book. LXXIV. If any one shall acknow∣ledge, That the Stomach, which be∣cause it is manifestly furnish'd with se∣veral Veins and Arteries, is therefore nourish'd with Blood, but deny that the Milkie Vessels were to be nourish'd with it, when they receive into 'em no Blood conveighing Arteries. I answer, That there are innumerable Parts in our Body, wherein the Arteries are not to be discern'd, tho' it be certain they enter into those Parts. And to which we can perceive no way through which the Blood should be conveigh'd; which Parts nevertheless are nourish'd by the Blood, and not by the Chyls. Of which sort are the Corneos Tuni e, the Ueters, the Membrane of the Tympanum or Drum of the Ear, sundry Ligaments and Bones, may Gristles, &c In which number the Milkie and Lymphatic Ves∣sels may be reckon'd. For tho' En∣trace of the Blood into 'em be not so perceptible, yet can it not be thence con∣cluded, that the Blood does not find a way into those Vessels, when in many other Parts the Entrance of the Blood is not discernable, and yet their being nou∣rish'd proves the Access and Entrance of the Blood. CHAP. VIII. Of the Guts. I. FRom the right Orifice of the Ventricle, call▪d the Pylore, the Guts are continu'd; by the Greeks , because they are placed within the Body; and henco by the Latins call'd also Interanea. II. They are Oblong Bodies, Mem∣branous,The . Concave, Round, variously wreath'd about, reaching from the Ventricle to the Podex, serving to re∣ceive the Chylus, and to contain andWhether they d   to the r∣king the Chyle. make way for the Excrements. I say for receiving the Chyle, &c. But it is a thing much controverted, whether they do not also contribute to the making the Chyle. For this seems to have been the Opinion of Galen, who l. 4. de us part.
has these words; The Guts, though they were not fram'd for the Concoction of the Chylus, but only to contain and distribute it, yet because Nature is sometimes sloth∣ful and idle, in its passage through the Guts, it comes to be perfectly elaborated. Aretaeus and Aretius follow the Opinion of Galen, and among the more modern Authors Spigelius; and the very Simi∣litude of the Structure of the Ventricle, the Guts seem to make for him; as well in the Substance, Temper, Colour, and Contexture of the Tunicles. And Plempius, sway'd by these Authorities, l. 2. Fund. Med. c. 8. assumes the Affir∣mative; and affirms that the same Con∣coction which is perform'd in the Sto∣mach, may be perform'd in the Guts (which Regius also inculcates) and hence concludes, the Clysters made of Liquid Nourishments, given at the Fundament, may nourish, in regard there is a thick Chylus concocted out of 'em in the Guts, and carry'd away through the Milkie Vessels, and so communicated to the whole Body. But we rather approve the Negative; for that seeing all man∣ner of Crudity proceeds from a cold and moist Distemper of the Stomach, (as in a Lientery) the Meat is evacuated without any alteration, or without any manner of Concoction, which however, were there any chylifying virtue in the Guts running a long way through their crooked Windings and Meanders, would at least gain some kind of Alteration in∣to a Chylus. Moreover, the Choler flows continually together with the Sweetbread Juice into the Guts, and in them indeed ferments the concocted Nourishment, but by the virtue of that peculiar Effervescency, and its Bitterness, it rather hinders than promotes chylific Concoction, as is apparent when it sticks in too great quantity to the Stomach. And then who can believe, that Clysters mixt with the Excrement in the thick Gut, can be chang'd into a Chylus, and consequently nourish the Body. The stinking Place, and the feculent Ordure therein intermix'd, plainly teach us, that there can be no alteration into Chyle made there. Perchance they may so far repair the strength of the Body, as some more subtil and benign Vapours may ascend through the Pores and Ves∣sels to some superiour Bowels, and some∣what refresh 'em, in the same manner as the Odor of Wine, hot Bread, Ho∣ney, Aqua vitae, and roast Meat, re∣ceiv'd thorough the Nostrils, refresh the fainting Spirits, tho' they be not turn'd into a Chylus. III. The length of the Guts exceedsThe length. or equals the length of the Person whose they are, six times more, or less, (others who also measure in the Stomach and Gullet, say seven times, or somewhat less.) Hippocrates stretches 'em out to twelve or thirteen Cubits. Vesalius to fourteen Italian Ells and a half. We commonly measure 'em at fourteen of our Dutch Ells, or very near. Only in the Year 1668. in November, once at a Public Dissection we found the Guts of one Person to be sixteen Ells and a half; and hence, that they might lye in a little room, placed in the Ab∣domen with several windings and crooked Circumvolutions, and joyned to the Mesentery, by means of which they were ty'd to the Back, and sustain'd by the Cavities, the Os Ilium. IV. There was a necessity for such aThe reason of the length. length and circumvolution, that the concocted Nourishment falling down from the Stomach, might stay the long∣er in the Guts, be more conveniently fermented by the mixture of the yel∣low Choler, and the Pancreatic Iuice, and by that means the more subtil Parts of the Chyle being separated from the thicker Mass, might with more ease be thrust forward into the narrow Orifices of the Milkie Vessels, partly by the proper Peristaltic Motion of the Entrals, partly, and that chief∣ly, by the impulse of the Muscles of the Abdomen, mov'd by the force of Respiration: And to that end, because the Separation ought to be made in the small Guts, Nature leads about, and forces the thinner Substances through several windings and turnings as through so many Stops and Remora's, whereas she carries the thicker Substances tho∣rough a Circular and Oblique Passage only. Moreover, she has form'd cer∣tain little Folding-doors to open and shut, which hinder the over rapid course of those things that flow downward. For had the Chylus flow'd down through the short Guts, either before a due and con∣venient Fermentation, or could pass from 'em, whereby the Body had been deceiv'd of its due and convenient. Nou∣rishment, she had constrain'd Man to eat often for the support of himself, and to supply that defect by continual fil∣ling. Of this Cabrolius and Riolans give us several Examples, that is to say of Men most voracious, in whom, after
their decease, one Gut has been found, and that wonderfully short, in the shape of a great Roman S. Add to this, that the Excrements had flow'd down much more speedily, and had thereby expos'd Man to the more frequent duty of Eva∣cuation. V. Their Circumference is round,Their Cir∣cumference to the end they may be more capacious, and for the more easie descent of those things that pass through 'em. VI. Their Substance is Membra∣nous,Their Sub∣stance and Tunicles. like the Stomach, having also a triple Tunicle. The Exterior common, and overcast with Fat, arising from the Membranes of the Mesentery, springing from the Peritonaeum. The Middlemost fleshy; interwoven with several thinner Fibres, especially the transverse and streight Fibres. The Innermost nervous, which in the slender Guts is wrinkl'd, to stop the Chylus, and overspread with a kind of fleshy spongy Crust, but very thin, (which some call the Peristoma, others the Silken Covering, others the Woolly Moss) through which Fallopius believes the Chylus to be transmitted and strain'd, as it were, through a Sponge; and to prevent the Injuries of the sharp Humours, and for the better defence slippery, by reason of a slimy Clammi∣ness, generated cut of the Excrements of the third Concoction; but in the thick∣er Guts dilated into little Cells. Riolanus l. 2. Anthrop. c. 12. writes; tho' without any ground, that the Carneous and Fleshy Tunicle, which is the middlemost in the Stomach, is the innermost in the Guts, and that the innermost is thick, but how∣ever more nervous, and not much diffe∣rent from the inner Tunicle of the Ven∣tricle. VII. Now in regard the Guts areWhether they have an attra∣ctive force. furnish'd with Fibres of all sorts; the Question is, Whether they have an attractive Force, by which they may draw the Chylus out of the Ventricle. Many maintain the Affirmative, induc'd thereto by the Authority of Avicen, and many other Arguments; but erroneous∣ly; seeing there is in 'em no such attra∣ctive Force. In like manner there is also another Question started concerning their Retentive Faculty. Both Questi∣ons are learnedly and at large discussed by Andrew Laurence l. 6. Anat. c. 15. Quaest. 10, 11. VIII. They draw their Nerves fromNerves and Arteries. the sixth Pair; their Arteries from the Mesenteric Branch, both upper and lower, and some from the Intestinal Branch of the Coeliac Artery. IX. Innumerable Roots of smallVeins. Veins dispers'd between their Tunicles, meeting together about the knitting of the Mesentery, form many Veins, from the Ingress of the Mesentery, which they ascend together, call'd the Mesa∣raics; which at the upper part of the Mesentery, a little before its Ingress into the Vena Porta, close together into two greater Branches, and so con∣stitute the right and left Mesaraic Vein. X. Into these Vessels are ingraftedThe Milly Vessels. the Mesenteric Milkie Vessels, gaping with their Orifices toward the inner Guts, and receiving the Chyle from 'em, and conveighing it to the Grand Receptacle of the Chyle. XI. The Temperament of the GutsTempera∣ment. is said to be cold and dry; that is to say, speaking comparatively, as they are less hot and dry than many other Parts. XII. The Use of the Guts appearsTheir . by what has been said already, not on∣ly to receive the Nourishment concocted in the Stomach, but also that a Sepa∣ration may be made there in them, of what is useful, from what is unprofita∣ble; and from them to send what is profitable into the Milkie Vessels, and exonerate what is unprofitable at the Fundament. XIII. Now the act of PropulsionTheir Mo∣tion. and Expulsion, is perform'd by the Compressure of the Muscles of the Ab∣domen, which is very much assisted by the proper Motion of the small Guts, proceeding from the Contraction of the Fibres, resting in their proper Tunicles, which is very conspicuous in living Cats and Coneys dissected. And it is most certain, that this Motion of the Fibres is perform'd by the Oblique, but chiefly by the Transverse Fibres, and by them the Things contain'd are thrust down from the upper Parts to the lower. Which Motion, if it happen to be irre∣gular, which rarely happens, and that the Fibres by their Contraction move the things contain'd in the Guts, begin∣ning from the lower Parts to the superi∣our, then the Ordure carried up from the thick Intestines, ascends into the Sto∣mach,
and is thence vomited out at the Mouth. Thus I remember I hand∣ledAn Obser∣vation. a young Lad that lay sick at Nim∣meghen, who, besides many other nasty1. things, vomited up a Suppository that was given him at the Fundament. And here at Utrecht, in the Year 1658. in2. April, I had prescrib'd a Clyster to the most prudent and grave Consul Wede, who then lay very ill, which being in∣jected at the Fundament, in a little time he vomited up again, from which ex∣travagant Motion I concluded a Prog∣nostic of Death, which ensued some few hours after. XIV. Tho' there be but one GutThe Divi∣sion. from the Pylore to the Fundament, yet in regard of the thickness of the Substance, the Magnitude, Shape, and variety of Function, it is distinguish'd by Anatomists, into the thin or slender Guts, and into the thick. XV. The thin or small Gut, so call'dThe thin Gut. from the thinness of its Substance, possesses all the Navel-Region, and the Hypogastrium. And this, according to the shape, situation, length, and plenty of Lacteous Vessels, is by the Ancients said to be threefold. The Duodenum, Iejunum, and Ilium. XVI. The first is continuous to theThe Duo∣denum. Pylore, by Galen call'd , the springing, or proceedings forth: by the ancient Greeks, and Hierophylus, , and thence commonly by the Latins call'd Duodenum, from the measure of two Transverse Fingers; tho' most Modern Anatomists will hardly allow it the measure of four Fingers. But if you reckon from the Pylorus to the Inflexion of the Iejunum, where it rises upward athwart, lying un∣der the Sweetbread, then it will be found to be twelve Fingers in length. XVII. This Duodenum contigu∣ousThe Sub∣stance. to the Pylore upon the right side, nor wreath'd with Circumvolutions, tho' it be narrower than the rest of the Guts, yet is of a thicker Substance than all the rest of the small or thin Guts, and is bor'd thorough, about the breadth of four or five Fingers from the Pylore (but seldom about the middle of the Jejunum, though Plempius says he has seen it) in the wrinkle of its Flexure, where sticks out a little Teat, sometimes with one hole common to the Cholidochus; and that other found out by Wirtzungius, sometimes perforated with two several holes proper to both Chanels. Which holes, if they be two, the one transmits into the Ductm , the other into the . But if there be bt one Chanel at the Ingress, (which is frequent in Men, very seldom in Dogs) then the Point thrust into that Gut to∣ward the upper Parts, enters the Ductus Biliartus; if toward the lower Parts, it enters the Ductus Pancreaticus. Veslingi∣us reports, and daily Dissections teach us, that this Gut is found to be of an extraordinary laxity and largeness, and then seems to be joyn'd as a lesser Ven∣tricle to the larger Ventricle. Which Laxity happens from the sharp fermen∣taceous and vitlous Humours sliding into it; which occasions vehement fermenta∣ceous Ebullitions, by which the Gut is not only very much distended, but often times fill'd with troublesome Rumb∣lings, great Pains, sharp Prickings, and extraordinary Anguish which thence a∣rise. XVIII. It begins, as has been said,Situation. from the Pylore, and by and by go∣ing down backwards under the Ventri∣cle, it is reflex'd toward the right Kidney, and adhering to the broader end of the Pancreas or Sweetbread, is fasten'd to the Vertebers of the Loyns and the left Kidney by membranous Ligaments, and then extending it self downward to the beginning of its windings, ends under the Colon▪ XIX. The second is call'd by theThe Jeju∣num. Greeks , by the Latins Jejunum, because it is found empty for the most part, as well for the great quantity of the Milkie Vessels that enter into it, as also because of the more speedy Ebul∣lition of the Chylus, by reason of the Choler and Pancreatick Iuice flowing at first hand through its proper Chanels, or its separation from the Dregs, and passage into the Milkie Vessels. XX. It is in length about twelve orSituation and bigness thirteen Palms, and about a Fingers breadth wrinkled with many windings; and seated under the Pancreas, near the Back-bone, in the Region of the Navel, chiefly toward the left side, be∣ginning from the first Circumvolution of the Intestines, and ending where it ceases to look black and bluish,
and to be empty. Theodore Kerckringius Observ. 39. takes notice in this Gut of some little Valves or Folding-doors, as it were, for that they do not so shut up the Gut, as to fill up all its Cavity: But about the middle of its Cavity so shut it up, that being each of 'em broader at one end than another, they grow narrow∣er by degrees, and then a little lower are received by another, which being broader in that part where the other is narrower, so frame and constitute the Gut, that those things which fall down from the upper Parts may slip down, but not be precipitated as it were at one fall. The same Kerckringius was the first also that discover'd and observ'd Valves or little Trap-doors like to these in the Colon Gut, which he has plainly shewn me in a thick and blown Gut, and then dry'd, which is the best way to discern 'em most perspicuously. And therefore he deservedly merits the Applause of this first Invention, seeing that never any Person before ever made mention of these Foling Docrs or Valves, that I know of. XXI. The third proceeding fromThe Ilium Gut. the foremention'd, is call'd Ilium, by the Greeks , from its being twisted and twirl'd; and Volvulus by the Latins, by reason of its Circum∣volution, and the multitude of its Twistings. XXII. This being seated under theSituation and bigness. Navel, next the Lateral Parts of the Abdomen and the Ribs, equals the breadth of a transverse Finger; and in length exceeding the other two Measures one or two and twenty Palms. XXIII. The Original of it is where the Intestine begins to grow narrower, and being somewhat ruddy, ends at Bauhinus's Valve, where the Colon begins. XXIV. That which follows is call'dThe thick Guts. Intestinum Crassum, the thick Gut, as being of a more fleshy and thick Substance; and that is also divided into three Parts, the Blind, the Co∣lon, and Intestinum Rectum, or the Right Gut. XXV. The first is that which theThe blind Gut. Greeks call , the Latins Caecum, so call'd from its obscure use; or else because it is not passible or penetrable at the other end; whence it is also call'd , Mesocolon. And therefore it is a small Appendix, like a long Worm, sticking to the beginning of the Colon, in length about four Fin∣gers transverse, having a small Cavity in People grown up altogether empty, but in the Birth full of Excrements. Spigelius has sometimes found a round Worm within it. In fourfooted Beasts it contains some Excrements for the most part. XXVI. It is not fasten'd to theConnexi∣on. Mesentery, but by the help of the Peritonaeum is joyn'd to the Right Kidney. XXVII. The Use of this Gut wasThe Use. unknown till of late; tho' some there were that attributed to it this Use, others that, tho' all were but vain con∣jectures, with which they thought fit∣ting rather to expose, than confess their own Ignorance. XXVIII. The second of the thick Guts is called Colon, as much as to say , or hollow, as being the most hollow of all the Guts; or as o∣thers will have it, from  to hinder, because the Excrements are Stops in its little Cells. This is larger and broader than the rest, as being eight or nine Palms in length. XXIX. It begins about the OsSituatir. Ilium, knitting it self to the next Kidney; hence it ascends upward, and then being turned toward the Liver, it proceeds athwart under the bottom of the Stomach, to which, by the help of the Caul, it is joyned, and on the left Hand is joyned to the Spleen and left Kidney with thin Membranes, and then winding a∣bout the left Os Ilium, weaves to the beginning of the Intestinum Rectum. It possesses the upper Part of the Bel∣ly. 1. To the end the Excrements that are gathered within it, may be rowl'd down by their Weight, and so the more easily exonerated. 2. To as∣sist in some measure the Concoction of the Stomach by the heat of the Excre∣ments; in regard the Chymists believe no Digestion to be so natural as that which is perfected by the heat of Dung. 3. Secondly, to prevent the middle Mesentery from being compressed by the weight of the Excrements: Which would very much straiten the milkie and Lymphatic Vessels, and Mesaraic Veins and Arteries.
XXX. It has a proper Ligament,Its Liga∣ment. about the breadth of the middle Fin∣ger, according to its length extended at the upper Part from the Caecum to the Intestinum Rectum, wherein the Row of little Cells is contain'd. XXXI. It is ty'd to the upper andConnexi∣on. lower Parts by the Assistance of the Peritonaeum. Veslingius ascribes to it two peculiar suspensorie Ligaments that never appear. But the Extremity of it, which below the left Kidney extends it self to the beginning of the Intesti∣nam Rectum, is ty'd to no part, but re∣mains free from any manner of Band, and is overspread with a good quanti∣ty of Fat. XXXII. At the Ingress of the thinBauhi∣nus's Valves. Gut, it has an orbicular Valve, or little solding Door, looking upwards, which prevents the Ascension of the Excrements and Vapors, which from the first Finder, is now called Bau∣hinus's Valve, tho' others rather as∣cribe the first Discovery to Varolius, and Salomon Albertus: But Riolanus raises a bitter Contest concerning it. XXXIII. Anatomists do not agree in the Description of this Valve. 1. Some say, that it is a Membrane sticking to the Gut on one side, and drawing before it a Curtain. 2. O∣thers say, it consists of two Mem∣branes opposite one to another, placed toward the inner Parts of the Colon, which closing together, shut up the thin Gut. 3. Others believe there is no true Valve in that place, but a fleshy Circle, wrapt over the thin Gut, where it enters the thick one, and contracting it like the sphincter Mus∣cle. 4. We our selves formerly, as has bin said in the Preliminaries, could not think it to be any other than a loose circular Membrane, or some little Lappet of the Ilium Gut, where it enters the Colon: Which when any thing ascends out of the Ili∣um into the Colon, gives way and opens: But when the quagmiry Excrements or Vapors descend from the Colon to the Ilium, falls and folds down, and so by ob∣structing the way, hinders the passage towards the thin Guts; in the same man∣ner as in the little long Gutters of Lea∣ther hanging out at the sides of Ships, through which the Water that falls up∣on▪ the Decks, readily flows out again. But tho' the Waves dash upon those; Gutters, yet because they do not mix with the Water, therefore the Water coming not into them, does not flow back. Now that we might be assur'd in this our last Opinion, I thought it convenient to fish out the Truth a little farther by some Experiment. And therefore having taken the Colon out of a Body, with a part of the Ilium, and ty'd it at both ends with a Pack thread, and blew into it with a strong Breath, through a small Pipe, and kept the Wind within with a small Thread, and then dry'd the Gut, so distended, in the Air, till it became hard: And then we could clearly discern, not only those half opening Valves of the Colon sound out by Kerckringius, but we also ob∣serv'd the aforesaid Valve of Bauhinus, to be a Membrane spread athwart over the Ingress of the thin Gut, and hang∣ing somewhat over toward the inner Parts of the Colon, and bo'd through in the middle from one side to the other with a right or straight Hole, as if slit with a Penknife. And so we observ'd also, that the Lips of both those Open∣ings closing, the Ingress of the Ilium into the Colon was so guarded by these Valves that nothing could fly back again▪ And by this View we found, that of the foresaid four Opinions, the second was the most probable, but that the first, third, and fourth, which was our own, was a Deviation from the Truth. Only that the third rightly and truly asserts, that there is a certain fleshy Circle which laps the Ingress of the Ilium into the Colon. XXXIV. In this Colon, theThe Use. thicker sort of Excrements are ga∣thered together, and contain'd till the time of Exoneration, whereas it would be a great Shame and Trouble to have his Excrements continually dropping from him. For which rea∣son it is very large and capacious, and has little closing Valves, to stop and re∣tard the Excrements. And by reason it encompasses almost the whole Abdo∣men, sometimes ascending, sometimes descending, hence it happens that the Dregs and Excrements to be expell'd, pass down more slowly, requiring two or three times of compressing it self for their Expulsion. XXXV. The third and last of theThe Inte∣stinum Rectum▪ thick Guts, is the Intestinum Re∣ctum, which descending in a streight Line into the hollow of the Hips, ends
in the Fundament. Call'd by the Greeks , because it runs on without any Excrescencies or Windings; also , because it is the Beginning; or , because it constrains us as it were by a kind of Command, to quit our selves of the Burthen that oppres∣ses us. XXXVI. It is far inferior to theThe Big∣ness. Colon in Length and Brdth, as not being above one Palme and a half in Length, and about three Fingers broad; but in Thickness and Carno∣sity exceeds all the Guts: Being out∣wardly covered with fat Appurtenan∣ces. XXXVII. It is ty'd to the Os Sa∣crum;Connexi∣on. and Coccyx, by means of the Peritonaeum, and in Men is fastned to the Root of the Penis, in Women to the Womb by a musculous Substance, whence springs the great Consent of these Parts. XXXVIII. The End of it is theThe Fun∣dament. Fundament, called Anus, and Po∣dex, which has three Muscles: The First, which is called Sphincter, and is fasten'd to the lowest Parts of the Os Sacrum, embraces and purses up the Fundament orbicularly, to keep in the Excrements. To this, there are some who add another, but of a thinner Substance for the same Use, inseparably joyn'd to the former, and as it were riveted into the Skin, at the Extremity of the Fundament. But this the greatest part of Ana∣tomists confound with the first, and make but one of both. The other two are called Levatores, or Funda∣ment-Lifters, which rising from the Ligaments of the Coxendix, and Os Sacrum, descend distinct to the Sphincter, and intermix their Inser∣tions with it, to the end they may draw the Fundament back again, brought down by the Force of strain∣ing, in Evacuation. Tho' Riolanus derives their Original from the Bones themselves, yet he divides 'em errone∣ously into four Muscles, whereas such a Division cannot be made without Di∣laceration, as de Marchettis well ob∣serves, Anat. c. 3. These Muscles being loosened by any Accident, cause a fal∣ling of the Fundament, or rather a sinking down of the Gut. XXXIX. Into the Fundament areHaemor∣rhoid Veins. ingrafted the Roots of the Haemor∣rhoid Veins, which are two fold. Of which, the Internal ascending some∣times to the Right, sometimes to the Left Mesenteric Veins, and sometimes to the Splenic Branch, empty their Blood into the Vena Porta; but the Ex∣ternal enter into the Hypogastric Branch. XL. Arteries accompany the Veins,Arteries. proceeding partly from the lower Me∣senteric Branch, and partly from the Hypogastric Arterie. XLI. To these, three or four littleNerves. Veins joyn themselves, deriv'd from the extream parts of the pith of the Back, which make this Gut very sen∣sible, and infuse Spirits into the Muscles to enable their Contraction. CHAP. IX. Of the Mesenterie. I. THE Mesenterie, or , is so called from its Situa∣tion, as being placed in the middle of the Bowels. II. It is a membranous Part sea∣tedSituati and vse. in the middle of the lower Belly; destin'd not only to bring the Vessels safe to the Intestins, and carry 'em back again, but also to be a common Band of all the Guts themselves, lest their manifest Windings and Turn∣ings should be confounded and intangl'd to the manifest hazard of Life and Health. III. Which tho' it be but one, isThe Divi∣sion. divided by some into the Mesaraeum, or Mesenterie, and the Mesocolon, while the thin Guts stick to the first, the thick Guts to the latter. IV. It consists of a double strongMem∣branes. Membrane, continuous to the Perito∣naeum, and every where stuft with Fat. Besides which, Wharton writes Adenograph. c. 7. That he has found out and demonstrated a Third Middle∣most and proper to it, somewhat thin∣ner than the former, and propping up the Vessels and Kernels within it. V. From the Center to the Circum∣ferenceBigness  Shape. it is about the bigness of a Span. But the Shape of it is Circu∣lar,
whose Circumference is contract∣ed into innumerable Folds, to streigh∣ten the length and widness of the Guts, and to contain their proper Situation and Order. In the Middle it is large, Oblong in the Sides, especi∣ally on the left Side, where it descends to the right Gut. But it is of an extra∣ordinary thickness in fat People, the bulk of Fat being largely augmented: In others it is much more thin. VI. It rises about the uppermostts Rise. and third Vertebra of the Loyns, to which it is ty'd with a very firm Connexion. Fallopius believes it to de∣rive its Original at the Nervous Plexa∣re, or Knitting, from whence it takes its Beginning; of which more c. 18. & l. 3. c. 8. VII. It has several very small andIts Ker∣nels. soft Glandules, inserted among the Membranes; and in the middle, one great one, all which it is most certain do manifestly conduce to the attenu∣ation and greater Perfection of the Chylus. And of these Glandules there is great Difference found in the num∣ber, not only in several sorts of Animals, but in many Individuals of the same Species: However this is observ'd in Man, where they are sewer in number, their bigness compensates that Defect. Now that they conduce to the Attenua∣tion and perfecting the Chylus hence ap∣pears, for that innumerable milkie Ves∣sels run through 'em (after what man∣ner is to be seen Cap. 11.) and pour the Chylus into 'em, to imbibe in it something of a slight subacid Quality, for its grea∣ter Perfection; which Vessels procee∣ding from 'em, meet together at length in the middlemost great Glandule, and thence in a direct and short Channel are carry'd to the Receptacle of the Chylus, into which they empty their milkie Juice. This Glandule Fallopius and Asellus erroneously call the Pancre∣as or Sweetbread, and many at this day, the Pancreas Mesenterii; but very far different from the real Pancreas seated under the Stomach. VIII. This both Experience andThe use of the Ker∣nels. our own Eyes do teach us. For if these Glandules come to be obstructed by any Accident, or that the Liquor bred in 'em (concerning which see something in the preceding Chapter, & l. 2. c. 2.) and which is to be of necessity, mix'd with the milkie Iuice, has by any accident acquir'd an over acid Sharpness, then the milkie Iuice within 'em becomes coagulated in the Form of a Cheese, and by reason of its abundant Overflowing swells very much: By which means the Passage is obstructed to the Chylus that comes next, whence such People as are troubled with this Distempet (by reason of the Di∣stribution of the Chylus is obstructed) are troubled with the Coeliac Flux, and grip'd with Pains in the Belly, and by reason of Passage deny'd to the Nourishment, labour under an Atrophie, and by degrees are wasted to death. Of which I have already given three Ex∣amples. IX. The first was of a Scotch Soul∣dier,Observ. ▪ who during his stay in India, and a long tedious Voyage upon his return, having fed upon unwholesom Dyet all the while, fell into a languish∣ing Sickness, and labouring under a Coeliac Flux with Gripings of the Guts, tho' his Appetite was still in∣different good, was brought to our Hospital, where after he had lain three or four Months, and that all this had been try'd in vain to cure his Coeliac Flux, at length he dy'd as lean as a Rake. The Body be∣ing opened, first there was to be seen an overgrowing Spleen hard and black; a Pancreas extreamly swell'd, hard and of an Ash-Colour; we also found the innumerable Glandules in the Mesente∣rie (which in some Persons are hardly discernable) to be very tumid, and somewhat hard, insomuch that some were as big as a Bean, but most of 'em as big as a Filberd, and some few as big as a Nutmeg. But when they came to be dissected, there was nothing in 'em, but a certain white Cream coagu∣lated into a milkie Substance. X. The second Example was of aObserv. ▪ poor Girl of about eleven Years of Age, who dying of such a Flux of the Belly, accompanied with rumbling and Pain in the Belly, was reduced to nothing but Skin and Bone. I o∣pen'd her Body in November 1656. at the request of her Parents, who be∣lieved her to have been bewitch'd and kill'd by diabolical Arts, and by the murmuring and hissing in her Guts, be∣liev'd Snakes, Toads, and other Crea∣tures to have bin bred in her Bowels. But when she came to be open'd, we
found, as in the former innumerable Glandules of the Mesenterie, very tu∣mid and somewhat hard, of which ma∣ny were as big as a Filbert, and some somewhat bigger. Their outward Co∣lour in some was white, in others speck∣led like black and white Marble: But within fide, as well in these as in all the rest, was contained a very white milkie Juice, curdl'd into the form of a Cheese. The Spleen and Pancreas somewhat exceeded their due Proportion. XI. The third Example was of aObserv. 3. noble Danish Child, called Nicholas Retz, between seven and eight Years of Age, who having lain under a great Atrophie for several Months, accompanied with griping in the Guts, at length reduced to Skin and Bone, dy'd in June 1662. Whereupon be∣ing desired by his Friends and others, who had the Care of him, to examine the cause of the Child's Death for the Satisfaction of his Parents, I opened the Body in the Presence of several Specta∣tors; and there I shew'd the Liver, Spleen, Heart, Lungs, Kidneys, Ven∣tricle, and Guts, all in good Order and well Condition: Only the Pancreas was somewhat swell'd and ill coloured: But in the Mesenterie appear'd the certain Cause of his Death: For that the in∣numerable Glandules of the Mesenterie, were swell'd to such a wonderful degree, with an extraordinary hardness, some as big as a Filberd, others somewhat bigger, and many as big as a Bean: They were all of a white Colour, and contained in 'em a white Cream coa∣gulated to the hardness of a dryer sort of Cheese, which hindring the Passage of the succeding Chylus, was the cause of the Atrophie, and consequently of the Death of the Child that ensu'd. XII. From whence it is sufficient∣ly apparent that the Coeliac Flux, and Atrophie, is occasioned by the Obstruction of those Glandules or Kernels. Nor is that their Use, which Anatomists commonly ascribe to 'em, that is to say to prop the Veins and Arteries carried through the Mesenterie, but in them, as in all Glandules, there is something of a particular fermentaceous Liquor bred, to be mix'd with the milkie Chylus; and for that Reason they be∣come serviceable to the milkie Vessels (not the Sanguiferous) and hence by reason of their Obstruction, or some∣thing else amiss (such as is occasioned by a vitious Ferment mingled with the Duodenum) many times the Membranes of the Mesenterium are stuft with a world of ill Humors, the occasion of lan∣guishing Fevers, and several obstinate and diuturnal Distempers. XIII. Riolanus has conceiv'd aThe Opini∣on of Ri∣olanus. strange Opinion of these Glandules, Anthropog c. 15. while he asserts, that by reason of them, the Root and Foundation of all Strumas is in the Mesenterie: And that never any Strumas appeared without the Body, unless the Mesenterie were strumous; Which he says, was also the Opinion of Guido and Iulius Pollux, with whom it seems he rather chose to mistake, than to understand by physical Practice and Philosophy, that Strumas have no Af∣finity at all with the Glandules of the Mesentery, being only design'd for the farther Preparation of the Chylus alone. Neither can those Strumas that break out on the outside of the Body, pre∣tend in any manner to any Cause or Ori∣ginal in the Mesenterie: Since daily Ex∣perience tells us, that most People who are troubled with Struma's, are sound in all other Parts of their Bodys; nor do they complain of any Distemper in the lower part of the Belly, whereas the Diseases of the Mesenterie are usual∣ly very fatal to the Patient. And the very Cure it self instructs us in the con∣trary, which is chiefly perform'd by Topics, that would never prevail, if the original Cause of the Distemper lay concealed in the Mesenterie. Lastly in the Dissections of Persons troubled with Strumas, the same thing manifestly ap∣pears, who are for the most part seen to have a sound Mesenterie. XIV. The Mesenterie derives itsIts Nerves. Nerves from the Plexure of the in∣ner Nerves of the sixth Pair; and the Nerves proceeding from the Mar∣row of the Loyns; which causes it to be so sensible in its membranous Part, tho' it be more dull of Feeling in its Fat and glandulous Part, for which Rea∣son Apostemes ly long conceal'd in it be∣fore they be discern'd as they should be, either by the Patient or Physician. XV. Its Arteries proceed from theIts Arte∣ries. mesenterie Branch of the great Arte∣rie, the Right and Left, or the Up∣per and Lower. XVI. It has several Veins runningIt Veins. between its Membranes, call'd the
Mesaraic, which rising with very small roots from the Tunicles of the Guts, and mutually opening one into another, as they frequently meet in the Mesentery, at length meet altogether in the two greater Branches, that is, the right and left Mesenteric continues to the Vena Porta. These infuse the Blood, forc'd through the Arteries to the Mesentery and Guts, being the re∣mainder of the Nourishment of these Parts, into the Porta Vein, thence to be conveigh'd to the Liver. Of the Use of the Porta and Mesaraic Veins, see more l. 7. c. 2. XVII. Besides the Arteries andMilkie Vessels. Mesaraic Veins, an innumerable Com∣pany of Milkie Veins, and many Lym∣phatic Vessels run through it, of which we shall discourse c. 11. & 13. CHAP. X. Of the Pancreas or Sweetbread. I. THE Pancreas or Sweetbread so call'd in Latin, as being all Flesh, is also call'd by another name , and by the Latins Lactes, from its inner white and milkie co∣lour. II. It is a glandulous, loose andThe defini∣tion and si∣tuation. shapeless Body, situated at the first Vertebra's of the Loyns, under the hinder part and bottom of the Sto∣mach, cloath'd with a thin Membrane from the Peritonaeum, and as it were hanging at it. III. The shape of it is oblong andShape. flat. IV. With its broader part adjoyn∣ingConnexion. to the Confines of the Liver, it lyes under the Stomach near the first Verteber of the Loyns; and including the Meatus Biliarius and Trunk of the Porta is joyned to the Duodenum: Hence it extends it self toward the Spleen, and sharpens by degrees, but is not fasten'd to it. V. The Substance of it is altogetherIts Sub∣stance. glandulous, and consists of many as it were little Knots or Knobs, cohe∣ring together by means of the Vasa Intercidentia, or interpassing Vessels, and many small Fibres, and included in the common Membrane taken from the Peritonaeum. From whence it is that Francis de le Boe Sylvius describes the Sweetbread to be a conglomerated Glandule, compos'd as it were of many small Kernels gather'd in a cluster toge∣ther, and cloath'd with their own pro∣per little Membrane. These little Knobs make a shew of being hard, but taken together, seem to be very soft, by reason of their loose Connexion. VI. The colour of it is pale, hardlyIts Colour. shewing the least tincture of any Blood; neither does it agree in colour with any of the fleshy parts. And hence proceeds the wonder, that by the ancient Anatomists it should be call'd , that is, all fleshy; whereas it should have been rather nam'd , or all kernelly. VII. The bigness is not the sameIts bigness. in all Persons; for sometimes you shall find it to equal the length of six, seven, or more cross Fingers, seldom so short as three or four. Its greatest breadth is generally two Fingers and a half; its thickness the breadth of one Finger. VIII. The weight of it is various,Its weight. according to the weight and difference of the Body. Wharton has observ'd it in Men of full-grown Age to weigh four or five Ounces for the most part. Regner de Graef has observ'd it in Hor∣ses to weigh eleven Ounces. In sickly People it exceeds the usual bigness, and is often full of Corruption (of which Riolanus, Hildan, R. de Graef, Horsti∣us, Tulpius, Blasius, and others, give us several Examples,) and sometimes also little Stones breed within it, as were found to the number of seven or eight, at Pa∣ris, in the Body of a certain deceas'd Nobleman, by the Report of R. de Graef, lib. de Succ. Pancreat. who also adds in the same place another Example out of Sennertus, of a Pancreas harden'd to a Gristly Substance. IX. It is furnish'd with smallIts Nerves Nerves from the sixth Pair, more e∣specially from the upper Plexure of the Abdomen. X. It receives its Arteries from theArteries. left Branch of the Coeliac Artery, leaning toward the Back; and some∣times from the Splenic Artery. XI. It sends forth its Veins to theVeins. Splenic Branch near the Porta: Fur∣thermore, it transmits a Trunk of the
Vein, which in some measure it em∣braces. XII. It is also stor'd with manyLymphatic Vessels. Lymphatic Vessels: In the middle part of it, according to its length, a pe∣culiar Chanel extends it self, indiffe∣rently capacious, and consisting of a thin and strong Membrane, call'd from the first Discoverer Ductus Wirt∣zungianus. XIII. This one Chanel runs through the middle of the Bowels, and re∣ceives an innumerable Company of little and small Vessels, open into it from all parts of the Bowels. Among which there is one somewhat bigger than the rest, which it admits in its lower part, not far from its Ingress into the Intestin. Sometimes there are two Chanels to be found, but not equal in their length, of which the one keeps its wonted Station; the other remains a little lower; but both are joyned to∣gether for the most part, and make one Orifice: Sometimes also the other enters the Ductus Cholidochus near the Duode∣num, while t'other perforates the Inte∣stine a little below. Frederic Ruisch, Ob∣servat. Anat. 12. writes, That he has often observ'd two Pancreatic Chanels in Human Carkases, of which neither had any Communication with the Du∣ctus Cholidochus: also that he rarely found this Chanel single in Dogs. For that in reference to this Chanel the Sport of Nature is various, even in the same Creatures sometimes, but more especial∣ly according to the diversity of Animals. For that some have one, which is most frequent in Men: Others two, others three, which being often joyn'd toge∣ther, before their Exit out of the Pan∣creas, sometimes enter the Intestine se∣parately. In some, they are inserted into the Ductus Biliarius; in others, part∣ly into the Intestine, in some few, they are inserted into the Stomach; which happens most frequently in some sort of Fish. XIV. The Chanel call'd the Wirt∣zungian, tho' it be easily discover'd in Men, yet is not so soon found out in Dogs; because their Pancreas is not contracted, as in Men; but thin and extended in length; and sometimes as it were divided into certain Parts. But if the Instrument be thrust into its Orifice, where it opens into the Dode∣num, the Chanel is presently to be found. XV. The Orifice of the said Cha∣nelThe Exit of the Cha∣nel. discharges it self into the Duode∣num, having an opening sufficiently large, sometimes the breadth of four, sometimes five or six Fingers from the Pylorus, in a remarkable wrinkle of the Flexure of the Duodenum, (where there is a very small extuberancy, de∣noting its Exit) next to the going forth of the Biliary Pore in Men, in Dogs about two Fingers breadth below the Exit of the Meatus Biliarius, and not unfre∣quently opening into the very Biliary Chanel it self, (as is familiarly observ'd in Sheep) and some affirm that there is a Valve belonging to it, looking outward, and obstructing the Ingress of any thing out of the Intestine into the Chanel. But because the Chanel from part of the Intestine easily admits the Instrument, and for that this Valve did never mani∣festly appear to us, we are apt to believe, that an Oblique Insertion into the Inte∣stine is sufficient to exclude the Hu∣mours, as shall be said concerning the Ductus Biliarius, c. 15. In another part being extended toward the Spleen; it grows slenderer and slenderer, till it quite vanishes, before it reach the ex∣tream Part of the Pancreas, so that it never touches the Spleen, nor enters it, which is that which some have endea∣vour'd to perswade us. How Nicolas Steno found this Chanel call'd Wirtzungian in Birds, he most ele∣gantly describes Lib. de Musc. & Glandul. in these words: XVI. There is, saith he, an Ob∣servation made upon Birds, that is of very great use for the Explanation of the Wirtzungian Duct. For in seve∣ral sorts of Birds, I have seen a dou∣ble Pancreatic Chanel, meeting also with a double Ductus Biliarius (of which the one comes from the Vessel of the Gall, where it does not lye upon the Liver, the other from the Liver it self) the Insertion of which four Ves∣sels varies three manner of ways. For either they all meet together in one Mouth, or every Pancreatic Chanel, with its Bilary, enters into a common Mouth, so that the Intestine is only pervious at two holes; or else every Chanel having its own particular Cha∣nel, is the occasion that there are four ways into the Intestines. Lately I saw the Hepatic Ductus in a Turky-Hen, where it went forth out of the
Liver single, but then being divided in its progress, it ran to the Intestine with two little Chanels, so that the In∣testine by that means receiv'd the Cho∣ler out of three little Vessels. XVII. Into this Wirtzungian Duct, out of all those little Knots, of which the Pancreas consists in Men, certain little Branches like small Rivulets run abroad, and pour out the Pancreatic Humour, prepar'd and concocted in the little Knots of the said Pancreas, to be thence carried to the Duodenum. But in that Chanel there is never any Pancreatic Iuice to be found, because it flows with a steep Current into the Duo∣denum, and never stays in the Chanel: In like manner as the Urine flowing from the Reins through the Ureters, by reason of its rapid Passage, is never to be found in them. XVIII. I admire at Lindanus Med.Whether the Chanel be an Ar∣tery. Physiol. c. 16. Art. 16. vers. 244▪ where he asserts this Chanel to be an Artery; but that it is uncertain from whence it springs, whether from the Aorta, or the Coeliac, before its Splenetic Emission. Assuredly it has no similitude with the Artery, neither in Substance nor in Use, neither is it any where continuous with the Arteries: nei∣ther does it beat, or contain any Blood as the Arteries, but without any Blood car∣ries in it a certain peculiar Liquor; nei∣ther does it discharge it self into the Veins, as the Arteries do, but into the Cavity of the Intestine. Neither is it true which Lindanus adds, that is to say, That from this Chanel (which he calls an Artery) several little forked Branches are extended into that Bowel, whereas indeed several little forked Branches run out from the little Knobs of the Bowel into the Chanel, as has been said. There∣fore less erroneous were they, who affirm∣ed this Chanel to be a Vein, as resem∣bling a Vein in the Structure and Spe∣cies of its Substance, whereas indeed it is no Vein, nor carries any Blood, but is another sort of Membranous Vessel, appointed for the Conveyance of a pecu∣liar Humour. XIX. As to the Office of this Bow∣elThe Office of the Sweetbread (and I hope no Body will be offend∣ed, that by virtue of a peculiar Philo∣sophical Licence, we call this noble Glandulous Body a Bowel) there have arisen sharp Contests; while some af∣firm'd that it did only support the Divi∣sions and Separations of the Vessels, and lay under the Stomach like a Pillow; others asserted that it fed upon the cru∣der Portion of the Blood; others that it assisted the Heart in Sanguification; o∣thers that it drew Melancholy from the Spleen, or furnish'd the Stomach with fermentaceous Juice, or supply'd the place of the distemper'd Spleen. Others that it receiv'd the Chylus, and concocted it to a greater perfection, and separated the Choleric Excrement from it. All which Opinions, when I found 'em to be meerly Conjectural▪ and altogether uncertain, nor supported by any solid Reasons or Experience, I thought fit to be a little more diligent than ordinary in the Examination of this almost neg∣lected part of Anatomy: and at length, after many Experiments (of which some succeeded ill, some well; for that besides the Pancreatic Iuice; there flow'd for the most part great store of Choler by the Ductus Cholidochus into the Duodenum, ty'd both above and below, and then slit long-ways; which Choler spoil'd both the Colour and Taste of the Pan∣creatic Juice) I found by the Dissections, as well of Living as of newly strangled Creatures, a certain Sublimpid and Sa∣livatick, or Spittly sort of Liquor flow from the Ductus Pancreaticus, somewhat sowre, and slightly Acid (tho' Needham, contrary to all Experience, denies its A∣cidity.) And sometimes having some∣thing of Saltness mix'd with it (and the same in mangy Dogs I have observ'd to stink, and to be of a very ill taste) I say I observ'd this clear and salivous or spittly sort of Liquor to flow from the Ductus Pancreaticns into the Duodenum, and that sometimes to a very considera∣ble quantity; but never any of the Vasa Chylifera extended to this Bowel, nor e∣ver was any Chyle found in it. XX. Whence I judg'd, that tho'A Digres∣sion. several Anatomists have describ'd se∣veral Vasa Chylifera running out of this Bowel, and caus'd 'em to be de∣lineated in their Tables; nay tho' Schenckius himself deriv'd the Vasa Chylifera from hence, and were di∣stributed from hence toward the Me∣sentery, tho' Veslingius and Baccius affirm that the Chylus flow'd out of it being wounded, and tho' Dominicus de Marchettis fancy'd that he had observ'd several Chanels running out toward the Liver, and distributed from it to the Guts, yet that all they
were deceiv'd by some preconceiv'd O∣pinion;The use of the Sweet∣bread Iuice. and that neither the Vasa Chylifera do run out of it, neither is the Chylus emptied forth into it, but that there is in it a peculiar Humour concocted in it, bred out of the serous and saltish part of the Arterious Blood which is carried into it, mixt with some Animal Spirits brought and con∣veigh'd through the small and scarce discernable Nerves. Which Humour flowing into the Duodenum, and be∣ing there mixt with the Choler flowing also thither, and the Nourishment digested in the Stomach, and falling down through the Pylore into the Sto∣mach, raises a peculiar Effervescency in those Aliments, by virtue whereof the profitable Chylous Particles are se∣parated from the Excrementitious, at∣tenuated, and made more fit for Li∣quation and Distribution. And this Operation is apparent from the Diversi∣ty of the Substance of the Aliments con∣cocted in the Stomach, and still contain'd there, from the Substance of those which are already fall'n down into the Guts. For those are more viscous and thicker, and retain the Colours of the various sorts of Food; These more fluid, less slimy, and more white. Which aptness for Liquation is prepar'd, to the end that by the Peristaltic Motion of the Intestines the Chylous Particles may be forc'd through their innermost mucous Tu∣nicle into the Milkie Vessels, while the rest that are more thick fall down by de∣grees into the thick Guts, there to be kept till the time of Evacuation. Now this Effervescency is occasion'd by the Volatil Salt of the Choler, and the sulphu∣rous Oyl meeting with the Acidness of the Pancreatic Iuice, as in Chymistry we find in like manner the same Efferve∣scencies occasion'd by the meeting toge∣ther of the like Mixtures. XXI. These things being more seri∣ously consider'd, I was confirm'd in my self, that the Pancreas or Sweet∣bread is no such useless Bowel, as it is by many describ'd to be; nor that the Iuice which is prepar'd within it is so small, that it can scarcely be di∣scern'd, nor that it is unprofitable or excrementitious, as many have hither∣to thought; but that it is a Iuice of which there is a moderate Quantity, and by reason of its specific subacid Quality very necessary to raise a new Effervescency in the Guts, together with the Choler that is mixed with it, of the Nourishment concocted and fall'n already down from the Sto∣mach, and by that means a separation of the profitable from the unprofitable Particles, and that therefore a sound Constitution of Health depends in good part upon a sound Pancreas or Sweet∣bread, and that through the unsound∣ness of the Sweet-bread many Diseases proceed, hitherto ascrib'd to Distem∣pers of the Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, and other parts. And it may be easily observ'd, that upon its Juice being out of order, that is either too plentiful or too sharp (especially if there be too co∣pious a mixture of sharp Choler) there is occasion'd an Effervescency too vio∣lent and disorderly in the Guts, which is the cause of sowre Vomits, Belchings, Wind, distension of the Bowels, Diar∣rhea's, Dysenteries, Colick Passions, and several other Diseases▪ tho' it is as certain, that most of these Diseases may proceed from a vitiousness in the Choler only. XXII. On the other side, if the Sweetbread Iuice be two scanty, too mild and insipid, it causes but a weak Effervescency, Obstructions, Atrophie, and extraordinary binding of the Bo∣dy. Or being too Salt and Acid, and rising toward the Stomach, it occasions Canine Hunger, Reaching, sowre Belch∣es, &c. but falling down into the Guts, extraordinary Gripings, Corrodings, Loosness, &c. Ascending toward the Head, together with the Blood, Epi∣leptic Convulsions, and as it were Hy∣steric Passions, and Melancholy Ra∣vings. Therefore Highmore out of Aubertus, relates, That in a noble Wo∣man, long troubled with an Epilepsie, and as it were an Hysteric Passion, and at length dying of those Distempers, there was nothing found defective but her Sweetbread. XXIII. Ascending toward the Sto∣mach or the Heart, it causes Palpita∣tions of the Heart, Swooning Fits, to∣gether with an inequality and weak∣ness of the Pulses, &c. Thus High∣more relates from the same Aubertus, That a Merchant of Leyden could not sleep, or if he did, he swooned away, and at length went away in one of those
Fits; in whose Carkass, all other parts being safe, only the Sweetbread was found putrified with an Aposteme. And thus according as this Juice is variously affect∣ed, it occasions various Distempers, as are to be seen in those that are troubled with Hypochondriacal Diseases, of which a great part are to be attributed to the bad disposition of this Juice. Which Impurities it contracts, partly through ill Dyet, as salt Meats, smoak'd Meats, Sowre, Acid Food, and such like; or through the bad Concoctions of the o∣ther Bowels, especially of the Spleen: For that from these Causes, by reason of the vitious Ferment of the Blood, many Particles of the Blood in the Heart being render'd less spiritous, and some∣what acid and salt, and remaining prone to Coagulation, and so being carried through this Bowel to the Arteries, can∣not be sufficiently concocted therein, nor chang'd into a Ferment convenient and proper for the concocted Aliments already slid down to the Guts. XXIV. Two years after I had made these Examinations, and committed 'em to writing, there was brought me a Disputation of the Learned Regner de Graef, once my Scholar, held in the Academy of Leyden, under the Presidentship of the famous Professor Fr. de le Boe Sylvius, concerning the Pancreas or Sweetbread, and its Iuice, which confirm'd me much more in my Opinion. For at length, among many other Experiments, after several Endeavours and Inventions to little or no purpose, he found out an ingenious way, whereby this Juice might be ga∣thered together in a living Dog; which he afterwards very liberally shewed to Us, and several other Spectators, in the Month of March, 1665. He took a fasting Dog, and having ty'd his Mouth that he should not bite, and opened his Aspera Arteria with a Pen-knife, that he might breath through that hole, pre∣sently he ript open his Abdomen, and then binds the Gut, as well under the Pylore, as under the Egress of the Pan∣creatic Ductus, and then dissects and opens it between those two Ligatures in the Ex∣ternal Part, which is free from the Me∣sentery; and with a Sponge wipes away the Choler, Flegm, and other Stuff which he found there. Then taking a small Quill of a wild Duck, at the one end of which he had fitted a small Glass Bottle close stop'd round about, he thrust the other end into the Ductus Pan∣creaticus, which in Dogs is two Inches broad below the Egress of the Ductus Biliarius; and then with a needle and a double Thred, sew'd the Gut and the Ductus to the Quill and the Bottle, so that the Quill with the Glass Bottle, hanging without the Abdomen, should not stir either from the Gut or the Du∣ctus. This done, he put back the Guts that hung out before into the inner Parts, and sews up the slit of the Abdomen with a strong Thread, and so keeps the Dog alive as long as he could, that is, for eight or ten Hours. In this manner, within the space of seven or eight hours, he received into his Bottle an indifferent quantity of this Limpid Juice that di∣still'd into the Bottle thorough the Quill, sometimes half an Ounce, sometimes six Drams, sometimes a whole Ounce; of which we tasted, and found the taste to be the same as I had tasted in several of my Experiments before mentioned, that is, a little sowre, somewhat saltish, and somewhat Subacid. The whole O∣peration De Graef relates more at large in his Disputation, and describes in his Tables annexed; and farther testifies, That in some Dogs, that perhaps were not so sound, he has observ'd that Juice to be very impure, that it yielded some∣times a stinking, sometimes a nauseous, sometimes a very austere and astringent taste; in so much that they who tasted it were all that day troubled with an uneasie Suffocation, sometimes with stinking Belches, and Reaching of the Stomach. The same De Graef, in a lit∣tle French Book which he published in the Year 1666. upon the same Subject, writes, That at Anjou, in a Man that dy'd suddenly, and was dissected before he was cold, he collecttd together the Pan∣creatic Juice, and found the Acidity of it to be so very pleasant to the taste, that he never tasted the like in Dogs. And in the same Book, and more at large in Lib. de Suc. Pancreat. Edit. An. 1671. c. 7, 8, 9, 11. he discourses of the Qualities of this Juice, how being mix∣ed with the Choler, it promotes Effer∣vescency, and causes the Chyle to be white; and what Distempers it causes, if vitious; all which would be too long here to repeat. Most certainly a most ingenious Invention, and for which the Industrious and Learned Discoverer de∣serves a high Applause, who by this Industry of his has lighted us a Candle to the better and clearer knowledge of most Diseases.
XXV. But by the way we are to ob∣serve, That as the first Discoverers of new Inventions are generally giv'n to err in this, that they have such a ten∣der affection for their new-born Em∣bryo's, tho' yet but weak and imperfect, that they will observe no Deficiency or Error in 'em, but with an extraordi∣nary Pride, loathsome to all Company, endeavour to extoll'em above others, more mature and perfected by Age and Experience; So does Regner de Gra∣ef in this part shew himself a little faulty, while he following the most fa∣mous Francis de le Boe Sylvius, from this one discovered Cause of many Dis∣eases, endeavours to deduce the Cau∣ses and Originals of all Distempers; believing that Diarrheas, Dysente∣ries, Colic, Epilepsies, Syncopes, Hysterical Suffocations, Fluxes of the Terms, Agues, and I know not how many other Diseases, proceed from this one Cause; as if no other vitious Humours, bred by the ill Habits of the other Parts, could ever occasion such Diseases. Whereas a thousand Disse∣ctions of Bodies, that have dy'd of those Diseases, plainly demonstrated that those Diseases were occasion'd by the viticus habit of the other Parts, in regard the Pancreas in them was absolutely sound. XXVI. We have also in the sight of many Spectators demonstrated, that when the Sweetbread has been safe and untouch'd, Diarrheas, Dysenteries and Colicks have proceeded from some Corruption of the Liver and Cho∣ler; Epilepsies from the depravation of the Brain and Meninx's, or by some stinking Ulcer in the Ear: also that several Fevers are occasion'd by vitious Humours bred in the Body through the bad Temper, ill Concocti∣on, Corruption, Ulceration or In∣flammation of the other Bowels and Parts, as in Pleurisies, Inflammati∣ons of the Lungs, Squinancies, Phrensies, &c. Also that many times deadly Symptomes and most terrible Hysteric Passions and Fits are occasi∣on'd only by the Distemper of the Testicles preternaturally swell'd, and containing a virulent, yellow, livid Iuice, sending up virulent Exhalati∣ons to the upper Parts. Which Dis∣eases have been many times cur'd by the Evacuation of that vitious Matter, without applying any Medicins to the Pancreas or Sweetbread, that was altoge∣ther Innocent of the Distemper. XXVII. In the Year 1667. No∣vemb. 16. I dissected in our Hospital a Carkass of a young Maid of four and twenty years of Age, which had lain sick for three years together, some∣times troubled with immoderate de∣fluxions of her Courses, sometimes with Gripes of the Colick, sometimes with Diarrhea's, and want of Appetite; lastly an▪ Anasacra or Hydropsical swelling of the whole Body; and toward her latter end oppress'd with a tedious Cough, accompanied with filthy Spittle; in which Body we found the Sweet∣bread almost entire, and without any Dammage; but the Liver was in a very bad Condition, not dy'd with a red, but with a black and bluish Co∣lour, and the Lungs full of many little Ulcers. Which being seen, many Per∣sons, as well Physicians as Students in Physic, renounc'd the Opinion of Sylvi∣us, and Regner de Graef. XXVIII. On the other side Whar∣ton has started a new Opinion con∣cerning the Use of the Sweetbread, be∣lieving the Excrementitious Iuices of the Nerves to be purified therein, and chiefly of that Complication which lies under the Nerves. Which from the sweet Taste of the Substance of the Sweetbread, he judges not to be bitter or sharp, but sweet and insipid. But in many other Places of his Adenogra∣phy, he discourses after another manner of the other Glandules; and affirms 'em to prepare the Alimentary Juice for the nourishment of the Nerves. But who can believe that there should be a redun∣dancy of Excrements in the most pure Animal Spirits, and that they should flow from all parts of the Body through invisible Pores to the Pancreas only, there to be separated from the Animal Spirits? Or who is not able to see that the thicker Juices prepared in the Glandules, can never pass thorough the thick Substance of the Nerves, but they must occasion Obstructions and Palsies. But more of these things l. 8. c. 1. XXIX. By what has been said, it is apparent how far the Ancients, and
many of the Moderns were mistaken in their Opinions concerning the Use of the Sweet-bread; and among the rest Fernelius, who asserts that most of the superfluous and unprofitable Moistures are heaped up together in the Sweet-bread as in a Sink, and thence flow into the Guts. But in regard this Bowel it self is covered with a thicker Membrane, and all the parti∣cular Glandules are covered by them∣selves with a thin little Membrane, nor has it any other Vessels that enter into it, unless some very small Arteries and Veins, and very slender Nerves, there does not appear any way for the super∣fluous and excrementitious Moistures of other Parts to enter the Sweet-bread: Besides that there is no Reason why they should be forced more to this Part than to the Kidneys, Guts, or other evacuating Parts. XXX. Seeing then it is apparent by what has bin said, what the Con∣stitution and Use of the Sweet-bread, and Sweet-bread Iuice is. We will only add two Things by way of Co∣rollary. 1. How that particular Juice is generated in the Sweet-bread? 2. How Great, and what sort of Effervescency it raises in the Guts. XXXI As to the First, our mo∣dernThe Gene∣ration of the panore∣atic Iuice. Philosophers teach us, that the Blood contains in it all manner of Humors, Acid, Bitter, Salt, Sweet, Insipid, Thick, Thin, &c. And that, of these, certain particular Parts of the Body admit of such and such particularly, which by reason of cer∣tain Disposition of Magnitude and Figure, have an extraordinary Ana∣logy with their little Pores; but ex∣clude others by reason of their Dis∣proportion: And so by reason of that specific Constitution of the Pores, the cholerick Humors are most properly separated in the Liver; the Serous in the Reins, and the pancreatic Iuice in the Sweet-bread. But tho' it must be granted, that in the Nourishment of the singular Parts by reason of the cer∣tain and peculiar Disposition of the Pores in each, some Particles of the Blood stick to these, others better and more closely to those, till they are changed into their Substance: Yet this is not to be granted in the Generation of Humors, from whence at length, that general Nourishment, the Blood, proceeds. For in the Blood is contain∣ed a Matter, out of which Humors of all sorts may be form'd, as it is fermen∣ted, mingl'd, and reconcocted in these or those various Bowels, and several Parts, yet is there not in the Blood a∣ny Pancreatic, Splenetic, Choleric Juice, &c. (as in Wheat and Bread there is not really any Chylus, Choler, or Blood) but it is a Heterogeneous Mat∣ter containing such and such different Particles, which being after a peculiar manner mingled and concocted in the proper Vessels, become Humors Sweet, Bitter, Acid, &c. Not by reason of a∣ny Analogy with the Pores, but because of the specific Nature, Temper, and Structure of the specific Parts. And thus the matter is contained in the Earth, out of which, according to the Variety of Mixture and Concoction, a thousand sorts of Herbs, Trees, Flowers, Shrubs, and other things are generated: And thus in like manner several Forms of things are shap'd by the Hands of the Artificer: While one makes Statues, another Bricks, another earthen Ves∣sels of all sorts, tho' such things were never in the Earth before, nor could be said to have bin. The Blood there∣fore, which is sweet, flowing through the splenic Arterie into the Spleen, is there depriv'd of the greatest part of its Sweetness, and gains a subacid Quality somewhat saltish; not by reason of the Pores of the Spleen, but by reason of the natural subacid Quality of the Spleen, which it infuses in the Blood and certain other Humors that accompany it. Sweet Wine thus grows sowre, being poured into a Vinegar-Vessel; not by reason of the Pores of the Vessel, ha∣ving some kind of Analogie either be∣tween the Wine it self and the Particles of the Vinegar, or else because there was an Acidity in the Wine before, and its acid Particles were only mix'd with the Vinegar, and the sweet not mixed; but because the sowre Acidity of the Vinegar, contained in the Ves∣sel, might there fix the sweet sulphury Spirits of the Wine, and exalting the Salt and Acid above 'em, altogether de∣prive it of its Sweetness. For in that manner is Choler bred in the Liver: not that it was really praeexistent in the Blood, or for that the Pores of the Li∣ver have any Analogie, with the chole∣ric Particles of the Blood, were the occa∣sion of its being separated from it; but because the sweet Blood, flowing in great Quantity through the splenic Branch
to the Porta out of the mesaraic Veins, with a mixture of the splenetic Juice, becomes so altered, that it is fermented and concocted after a new Manner in the Liver (which proceeds from the peculiar Temper, Structure, and Fer∣ment prepared in it) by which means many Particles of it are made Choler, which were not so before that new Mix∣ture and Concoction: Concerning which see the following 15th. Chap. de Genera∣tione Bilis. And thus it is in the Pan∣creas, wherein some part of the Blood flowing into it through the small Ar∣teries, is changed into Sweet-bread Juice (the rest proceeding forward to its Fountain the Heart) not by reason of the Analogy of the Pores of the Sweet-bread with that Juice; but by rea∣son of the new Alteration which the Blood undergoes in it, occasioned by the particular Property or Nature of the Part, together with the new Mix∣ture and Concoction. XXXII. As to the second we haveThe Effer∣vescency of the Choler,    .] affirm'd, that the pancreatic Iuice being mix'd with the Choler that flows to it, causes a new Effervescen∣cie in the Duodenum. Which is ap∣parent in the Dissection of living Dogs; in whom generally there is a spumous Humour boyling in the said Intestine, which is raised by the Aci∣dity of the pancreatic Iuice, and the mixture of Choler, abounding in Volatile and fixed Salt. Which is that very thing which Chymical Ope∣ration teaches us; viz. That acid Spi∣rits meeting with the lixivious Salt, al∣ways fall a boyling if there be nothing in∣termix'd to prevent the Operation. Now that in Choler there is contained a lixi∣vious Salt besides the oily sulphury Parts, is hence apparent, for that both may be separated from it by chymical Art. And then the Tast discovers the moderately sharp Acidity of the pan∣creatic Juice; and moreover for that being put into sweet Milk, it presently curdles it, even as Vinegar and other sharp Juices do. Lastly, for a farther Proof of that Effervescency occasioned by the mixture of Choler with the pan∣creatic Juice, we will add the twice re∣peated Experiment of D. Schuylius, Tract. de Vet. Medicin. The Abdomen of a live Dog, saith he, being opened, I ty'd the Duodenum with a String, not far from the Pylorus; and with another String a little below the Insertion of the pancreatic Ductus, and so left the Dog, having sow'd up the Abdomen again. Three Hours after, the Dog being still a∣live, and strong, for he had lost very lit∣tle Blood, the Abdomen being opened a∣gain, we found the Space between the two Ligatres so extreamly distended, that it would not yield to the Compression of the Fingers, but threaten'd a Rupture, nor did we find the Dogs Gall-bag less di∣stended. A most intense and burning Heat also scalded that intercepted Part of the Duodenum; in which, when I had made a little Wound with a Lancet, together with the Humors contained there∣in, great store of Wind brake out with the usual Noise and ratling of breaking Wind; from whence also, a sowre kind of Smell offended the Noses of the standers by; which when the Gut was more opened, none of the Spectators could endure. Which was a manifest Argument, that there had not only flow'd thither such a Quantity of Choler, and pancreatic Iuice, but that there was an Effervescency raised in 'em, not a mild and moderate one as in sound People, but extreamly vehement. For not only that part of the Intestin was full, but distended extraordinarily by a violent force and rushing of the Blood and Spirits. Nor was it probable that that part of the Duodenum could have bin so distended, nor that the Vapors, Exhalations, Humors, and Wind, could have bin dissipated with so great a Force, but by the Effervescency and Agitation of Particles quite contrary to those Humors. Some few days after I repeated the same Experiment, in the presence of several Students; and within two Hours or little more, that Portion of the Intestin swell'd very much, but did not burn so violent∣ly: But having opened that swell'd Por∣tion of the Intestin, which I had ty'd before, frothy Bubbles brake out with a loud noise, with which that Space of the Gut was distended. So that it is not for Impudence it self to raise any more Doubts concerning the Truth of this Ef∣fervescency. CHAP. XI. Of the Mesenteric Milkie Vessels. I. THE milkie Vessels conveigh∣ing the white Chylus from the Guts through the Mesentery, were first discovered in our Age;
And in the Yeor 1622, by Gaspar Asellius, Anatomist of Padua. I say in our Age, for that Hippocra∣tes and others had some obscure Knowledg of 'em. Galen also saw 'em and observ'd 'em; but he believ'd 'em to be Arteries, and sway'd by that Er∣ror, assirm'd that the Orifices of the Arteries reaching to the Intestines, re∣ceiv'd some small Quantity of Nourish∣ment, appears l. 4. de Off. Part. c. 17. & l. 3. de natural. Facult. c. 13. & lib. an Sang. in Art. content. c. 5. II. Asellius was the first that gaveThe Name. em the Name of milkie Veins. But in regard they carry no Blood, and for that their Substance is far diffe∣rent from that of the Veins, as being much more transparent and thinner, we thought it more proper to call 'em milkie Vessels for better distincti∣ons Sake. III. They are thin transparentThe De∣scription. Vessels covered with a single Tuni∣cle, scattered through the Mesentery, infinite in number, appointed for con∣veighing the Chylus. IV. They take their Original fromThe Ori∣ginal. the Guts (the chiefest Part from the Iejunum and other small Guts, a∣mong whose Tunicles, with several small and slender ends of Roots they open into the inner Hollowness of the Intostines, their Orifices lying hid, under a spungy kind of Slime, into which the Chylus is squeezed by Com∣pression of the said Guts, and from whence it is received by the gaping Vessels.) From hence, with an oblique Passage, they ascend the Mesentery, by the way interwoven one among ano∣ther, and variously confused, and so proceed forward between and thorough many little Glandules, chiefly those that are placed at the Separation of these Vessels, toward the great or middlemost Glandule of the Mesen∣tery, into which a very great number enter, and a many cross over the Su∣perficies of it, and afterwards end at the great Receptacle of the Chylus, absconded under that great Glandule. But they never enter the Liver, as some with Waleus and  endeavour to persuade us. Neither do any of 'em open into the Vena Porta, the Vena Ca∣va, or Mesenteric Vein; tho' Lindanus, fol∣lowing Waleus (l. 2. Physiolog. c. 5.) asserts that Mistake. Nor are they ever continued with the Mesaraic Veins, as being Slips of them, which was a Fig∣ment of Deusiagius. Nor ever were a∣ny seen to proceed from the Stomach. V. Wharton observes in his Ade∣nographia,How they pass the Glandules. that those Vessels in their Entrance into the Glandules, or a little before, are divided and subdi∣vided into several little Branches, and so are quite obscur'd in the very Substance of the Glandules, and after they have so in a manner disappear'd in the very middle of the Glandules, presently new Strings of the said Ves∣sels spring out again, from the very Body of the said Glandules, which meeting together form a Trunck as be∣fore, and being carried toward the Beginning of the Mesentry, associates to it self other Branches of the same kind meeting with it, and is by them enlarged. Thus without doubt, those Vessels that enter the great Glandule, spring out of it again as from a new Root, and into the Receptacle of the Chylus. VI. They have many Valves whichTheir Valves. admit the Entrance of the Chylus from the Guts, and hinder its Return, which tho' they cannot be easily de∣monstrated to the Sight, by reason of their extraordinary smallness, yet thus are they easily apprehended; that is to say, if these milkie Vessels are pressed toward the great Glandule, they presently grow empty: And Fre∣dric Risch, a Physician formerly at the , now at Asterdam, and a famous Dissecter, had publickly shewn 'em, and caused 'em to be engraven in his Plates: But if the same Com∣pressure be made from the Kernel to∣ward the Guts, the Chylus stops, neither can it be thrust forward. Which is the reason that in Dogs and other Crea∣tures well fed, that are dissected alive, or hang'd three hours after they have fed, these milke Vessels appear soon af∣ter very numerous and full of Juice in the Mesentery: But while the Guts are stirr'd and mov'd up and down by the Anatomists, together with the Mesen∣tery annexed for Demonstration sake, that milky Juice is squeezed out of 'em by that Motion, and flows to the Re∣ceptacle of the Chylus; and so these
small Vessels in the Mesentery vanish as it were from between your Fingers, and escape the Sight, when being empty'd, by reason of their thinness and transpa∣rency, as has bin already said, they can no longer be discern'd. VII. The use of these milkie Vessels,Their Use. is to conveigh not the Blood, but the Chylus from the Guts to the great Glandule of the Mesentery, and thence to the Receptacle of the Chyle. And this the whitish Colour of the contain'd Juice teaches us, which in a Creature kill'd three or four hours after feeding, is like the Cream of Milk, and disap∣pears when the Distribution of the Chy∣lus is at an end, nor does the Blood ever succeed into its Place, and so the Chylus being evacuated, these pellucid and small Cobweb-lawn Vessels, for want of that milkie Colour almost escape the Sight, which is the Reason why they have lavn undiscovered for so many Ages. I say almost, in regard that to these that look narrowly, they remain conspicuous in the form of little Fibres. Which deceiv'd Galen and some others, who took these little Fibres for Nerves or very small Arteries. VIII. Now that the Chylus isA Proof. carried through these Vessels from the Guts to the Receptacle, is appa∣rent from hence, for that if in a living Animal well fed, and sud∣dainly dissected three hours after, they be ty'd in the middle, there will happen a swelling between the Liga∣ture and the Gut, and a lankness in the other Part. And the same is also manifest from the Situation of the Valves, of which we have already spoken. IX. The cause why the Chylus en∣tersThe impul∣sive Cause. the milkie Vessels, and is forced through those, is twofold. The one more feeble: a kind of rowling Con∣traction perform'd by the Fibres of the Guts themselves, which Con∣traction is conspicuous in Cats and Rabbets dissected alive. The other is stronger, powerfully assisting the for∣mer, an Impulse of the Muscles of the Abdomen mov'd upwards and downwards by the Act of Breathing: By which the Chylous, and consequent∣ly the thin and most spirituous Parts of the Nourishment concocted in the Sto∣mach, and fermented by the mixture of Choler, and the Pancreatic or Sweet∣bread Juice in the Guts, being separa∣ted from the grosser and more crude Mass, are forc'd out of the Guts into the gaping Orifices of the milkie Ves∣sels. Which Orifices, by reason of their extream Narrowness, will not however admit the grosser Parts; and hence it comes to pass, that being separated from the thin Chylous Parts, and forced to the thick Guts, they are exonerated through the Fundament as unprofitable Excre∣ments. X. From what has bin said, it appears that these Chyle-bearing Ves∣sels, do not always conveigh the Chy∣lus (for they are often found emp∣ty) but only by Intervals: That is, so soon as the Chylus is perfected in the Stomach, and descends from thence to the Intestines. XI. Deusingius in his Treatise deWhether  Chylus e attracted. motu Chyli, believes that Expulsi∣on only is not sufficient; and there∣fore he adds to it Sucking or Attracti∣on, the necessity of which he endea∣vours to prove by these Reasons. If there be no Attraction (says he) but that all Motion must be referr'd to Impulsions, how shall we think that the Nourishment enters from the Mo∣ther into the Umbilical Veins, or by what Cause can it be forc'd thither? Or how does the Alimentary matter in an Egg reach to the Heart of the Chicken? Unless by Attraction, by means of the Motion of Rarefaction, and the Reciprocal Distension and Contraction of the Heart. But these Reasons are not of Force enough to de∣fend and establish the said Opinion. I answer therefore to both, That no Nourishment enters immediately from the Mother into the umbilical Veins; but that as well the Blood, as the milkie Juice, by the Impulse of the Mo∣ther is forced from the Womb only in∣to the Uterine Placenta (as shall be de∣monstrated more at large c. 30. of this Book) and thence by the Impulse which is caused by the umbilical Arteries from the Heart of the Birth toward the said Placenta, the Blood of the Mother that lies therein, being rarify'd and concocted by the arterious Blood of the Embryo, is forc'd into the umbili∣cal Vein, and the Chylus also is forc'd along into the Vasa Chylifera, that tend to the Concavity of the Amnion, or Membrane that enfolds the Birth. If
any one enquires how the rarify'd Juice enters the Embryo, before the Navel be grown to its just Magnitude, and how such a Motion of the Heart is caus'd by its Arteries? I answer, That that In∣gress is caus'd by a kind of sliding or slipping into it; but there is a great dif∣ference between attraction and slipping into a thing. For a hard, heavy, dry, or any other such kind of Substance is attracted, that cannot follow of it self, and sticks to the thing that draws it: but a soft and fluid thing slides or slips in; which finding a lower evacuated place, can neither contain it self, nor subsist in its place, but slides in of it self without attraction. As for Example; If the Wa∣ter next the Mill is cast upward by the Water-Mill, the subsequent Water can∣not be said to be drawn by the Mill, which is sufficiently distant from it, nor is any way joyn'd with it, but not being a∣ble to support it self, slides voluntarily down to the empty space. And in this manner the Liquation of the Chylus slips into the Embryo. For while the Heart continually makes Blood of the Matter that daily offers it self, and forces it a∣way from it, presently the Particles of the adjoyning Liquation or dissolv'd Nou∣rishment, slip of their own accords into the empty Pores, and supply the Vacuum. So that there is no attraction of the Nourishment in the Embryo. And the same is to be said of the Chicken in an Egg, into which the Alimentary Nou∣rishment enters, partly by slipping, part∣ly by the Impulse of the Heart of the Chicken. CHAP. XII. Of the Ductus Chyliferus of the Breast, and the Receptacle of the Chyle. I. THis Chyliferos Ductus ofThe De∣scription. the Thorax, is a Vessel ex∣tended from the Region of the Loyns all the length of the Back-bone, to the Subclavial Vein, lying under the short Ribs; through which the Chylus being pour'd into it, out of the Milkie Mesenterics, together with the Lym∣pha or pellucid Water, is carried to the Subclavial Vein. But because the Passage of the Chylus through it is not continual, hence some, not without rea∣son, have thought that this Vessel ought to be more properly call'd Ductum Lym∣phaticumThe Great Lymphatic Chanel. Magnum, the Great Lympha∣tic Chanel; for that as soon as the Chylus vanishes, it is found to be re-supply'd by the Lymphatic Water. II. The first Discovery of this is a∣scribedThe Disco∣verers. to John Pecquet of Diep▪ John van Horn, a famous Anato∣mist of Leyden, both which disco∣ver'd it in the Years 1650. and 1652. neither being private to what the other had done; and in our Time publickly shew'd it, and caus'd it to be engraven in their Plates. But altho' we are much beholding to 'em for their Diligence for restoring to the great Benefit of Physic, the know∣ledge of this Vessel, which had lain bu∣ry'd in darkness for almost a whole Age, through the negligence and unskilfulness of Anatomists, for rendring the know∣ledge of it more perfect, and making it apparent by publick demonstration; and all this without any Information before∣hand; yet are they not to assume to themselves the whole honour of the first Invention. For above a hundred years ago this very Passage was first observ'd and taken notice of in the Dissection of Horses, by the most famous Anatomist Bartholomew Eustachius, who Lib. de Ve∣na sine pari, Antigram. 13. writes thus: In those Creatures, (says he) speaking of Horses) from the great sinister Iugal Trunk, where the hinder seat of the Root of the Internal Iugular Vein appears, (he believes it to be the Subclavial, where the Jugular enters it above) a great Root springs forth, which, besides that it hath a Semicircular Orifice at its beginning, (clearly designing a Valve;) there is also another Root, full of a watery Humour; and not far from its Original, divided in∣to two parts, which meeting in one stock again that spreads no Branches, near the sinister side of the Vertebra's, penetrating the Diaphragma, is carried downward to∣ward the middle of the Loyns, where be∣coming broader, and embracing the great Artery, it concludes in an obscure ending, which I have not as yet so well▪ found out. From which words it is apparent, that this Passage was first discover'd and ob∣serv'd by Eustachius, but the use of it was not rightly understood. For he de∣scribes the Beginning of it from the Sub∣clavial Vein, where the End is: and the End in the Loyns where the Beginning is: So that we are beholding to Eusta∣chius for the first, but ruder detection;
but to Van Horn and Pecquet for the more accurate and perfect knowledge and demonstration of it. III. But tho' there may be one con∣tinued Chanel from the Loyns to the Subclavial Vein, yet because it has a broad capaciousness at the beginning, like a little Bag, first receiving the Chylus out of the Mesenteric Vessels, it is excellently well distinguish'd into the Receptacle of the Chylus, and the Ductus Chyliferus. IV. The Receptacle of the Chy∣lusThe Recep∣tacle of the Chyle. is the Original of this Chanel, more capacious than the Chanel it self, and is a kind of a little Cell, seated in the Loyns, into which the Chylus first flows out of the Mesaraic Milkie Veins, and is collected into that as into a Common Receptacle, which was the reason that Pecquet first call'd this little Cell by the name of the Re∣ceptacle of the Chyle. Which ne∣vertheless Van Horn would rather have call'd by the name of the Little Milkie Bag. This Bartholinus calls the Milkie Lumbar Glandule, but erroneously, in regard the Substance of it has no Re∣semblance with the Substance of the Glandules. Walter Charleton calls it by the name of the Pecquetian Conceptacle, from the Discoverer. But in regard it receives as well the Lymphatic Water poured forth from the Glandules of the adjacent Parts, as the Chylus it self (for in a live Creature, if you squeeze out the Chylus with your Thumb, it is pre∣sently fill'd with Lymphatic Water) it may be no less properly call'd the Re∣ceptacle of the Lympha, as well as the Chylus, and so much the rather because the Chylus only flows into it at such and such Intervals, but the Lympha fills it continually. V. The Seat of this Receptacle isThe Recep∣tacle of the Lympha. under the Coeliac and Emulgent Veins, almost in the middle Region, between the Muscles Psoas, the Kidneys and the Renal Glandules, which, together with the Kidneys, it touches by im∣mediate Contract, so that there can hardly be separated with a Penknife certain little Branches running be∣tween. Yet in all Creatures it does not exactly keep the middle place of the Loyns, but in Beasts most commonly inclines toward the left side, near the hollow Vein descending, close to the left Kidney, seldom turns to the right side, or keeps directly in the midst of the Lum∣bal Muscles. VI. In Brute Beasts this Vessel isThe Num∣ber. generally single, with one Cavity; sometimes twofold; that is, one in each side. Sometimes one, with a little Membrane going between, as it were distinguish'd into two Cells. Moreover, sometimes three of these Vessels have been said to have been found, two in one, and one in the other side; which is more than we have ever met with as yet. Bartholinus has ob∣serv'd three in a Man; two of a bigger size, set one upon another, but con∣ioyn'd with mutual milkie little Branch∣es, seated between the Cava descending, and the Aorta Veins, in an Angle, which the Emulgents make meet with the Ve∣na Cva. The third somewhat higher, and nearer to the Diaphragma, and lo∣sing it self in its Nervous beginning under the Appendix. VII. The shape of this Receptacle isThe Shape. for the most part round, and some∣what compress'd; but many times O∣val. VIII. It varies in Bigness: Fre∣quentlyThe Big∣ness. it fills the space between the Lumbar Muscles, extending it self to the Kidneys and their Kernels. In Brutes we find it sometimes a little big∣ger, somewhat extended toward the lower parts. IX. The inner Cavity, the ChyleThe Wi∣ness. being taken out, sometimes equals two Ioynts of the Fore-fingers, sometimes only one of those Ioynts; sometimes it will hardly admit the top of the Finger. In Men the Cavity is less than in Beasts; But the Substance of the little Bladder is much more solid, as being very thin, smooth and soft in Brutes, in Men thicker. X. From the upper part of the Re∣ceptacleDuctus Chylife∣rus of the Breast. rises a Branch somewhat broad, call'd the Ductus Chiliferus of the Breast, or the Great Lympha∣tic, consisting of a thin and pellucid small Membrane, like the Receptacle, leaning upon the Back-bone about the middle below the great Artery, covered with the thin skin that covers the Ribs, and winding somewhat toward the right side of the Artery, where it is more conspicuous in its lower part, the Guts being remov'd to the right side,
with the Mesentery and the Dia∣phragma cut off. Hence proceeding farther upward under the Great Ar∣tery, about the fifth and sixth Verteber of the Breast, it turns a little without the Great Artery toward the left side, and so between the Intercostal Arte∣ries and Veins, ascends to the sinister Subclavial, into which it opens in the lower part or side, in that part where the sinister Iugular enters into it in the upper place. But at the entrance it does not open into it with a wide Gaping, but with six or seven little small Holes, covered over together with a little broad Valve in the inner Concavity of the Subclavial Vein, which Valve looks from the Shoulder towards the Vena Cava, where is appointed the Ingress of the Chylus and Lymphatic Iuice out of the Ductus Chyliferus into the Subclavial Vein; but the Return of the same Juice, and of the Blood also into the said Cha∣nel out of the Subclavial Vein, is pre∣vented. XI. Sometimes two Branches, some∣whatTwo Cha∣nels. swelling, ascend from the Recep∣tacle, which nevertheless we find uni∣ted below in the middle under the Great Artery, as if there were but one Chanel only in the upper part. XII. In Human Bodies sometimes,Two or more Re∣ceptacles of the Chyle. tho' very seldom, there are to be found two or three Receptacles of the Chylus, and from each arise particular Ductus's, which being united in their Progress, at length with one Ductus proceed to the left Subclavial Vein. XIII. Their usual Insertion is intoThe Inser∣tion. the left Subclavial Vein, as well in Men as in Beasts; but very rarely do Anatomists observe the Insertion into both Subclavial Veins. Whence I judge that it is scarce to be found in one Beast of an hundred. Thus Bar∣tholinus reports that he found the Inser∣tion of the Ductus Chyliferus into the left Subclavial Vein in the Dissections of six Men and several Beasts, and once only in a Dog its Ingress into the right Subclavi∣al also. Pecquet observ'd two Branches ascending upwards, joyn'd here and there together in the Mid-way, with several parallel little Branches, and meeting to∣gether at the third Verteber of the Breast, and then divided again, of which one entred the right, the other the left Sub∣clavial. XIV. In the inner part, this ChanelIts Valves. has many Valves, preventing the Re∣turn of the Chylus and ascending Lymphatic Juice, sufficiently mani∣fest from hence, because the Chylus contain'd in it may be easily forc'd up∣ward by the Finger, but by no means downward; and for that the Ductus being bor'd thorough in any part, the Milkie Juice tending upward from the lower part, flows out; but in the upper part, above the little wound, stays with∣in the Valves, nor will descend to the wound made in the Chanel. Moreover, for that the Breath blown into it, through a small Pipe thrust into it; or Liquor injected into it through a Syringe, easi∣ly ascends upward, but cannot be forc'd downward. XV. The Discovery of this DuctusThe way to discover it. Chyliferus belonging to the Breast, is not always equally to be made with the same easiness, for that because its Tunicle is pellucid, and lyes under the inner cloathing of the Ribs, it is not so easily obvious to the sight, espe∣cially if it be empty of Chyle, as fre∣quently it is some hours after Meals, or after Fasting: but it presently ap∣pears when it swells with a whitish Chylus. And therefore it presently shews it self in live Dogs, or strangled three or four hours after a full Meal. And then also the Ingress of the Milkie Mesenteric Veins into the Receptacle of the Chyle, from the great Glandule of the Mesentery, manifestly displays it self. Bartholinus writes that he readily found this Chanel with the Receptacle in the Bodies of two men newly hang'd, that had fed heartily before their deaths. In such as lye sick, and dye of the Disease, it is hard to be discover'd, as being emp∣ty of Chylus, for that sick People eat very little, especially when Death ap∣proaches, and that their Stomach makes hardly any Chylus out of the Nourish∣ment receiv'd. Nevertheless in the Year 1654. I found it in two Persons that dy'd through the Violence of the Dis∣ease, and shew'd it to some Students in Physick. First in April, in the Body of a Woman emaciated by a long Dis∣ease, but while she liv'd, very thirsty. In which Body, the next day after the Woman dy'd, I found it swell'd with Serous and Lymphatic Humour, and shew'd it to the Spectators that were pre∣sent. The second time was in May, in the Body of a Woman that dy'd of a
Pleurisie, in her right side, and in her life time, provok'd by continual thirst, had drank very much: and for that reason, both the Receptacle and this Ductus were very much swell'd with Se∣rous Humours. But in both Bodies I found the Situation of the Chanel to be such, as it us'd to be in Dogs, and that its Insertion was into the sinister Subcla∣vial. Only in the first Body the Re∣ceptacle of the Chylus was small, in the latter more large, as admitting into it the whole Joynt of the Thumb. After∣wards we have search'd for, and found this Ductus in several Human Bodies, tho' we have found some variety as to the Receptacle, as sometimes that there was but only one, sometimes that one distinguish'd or divided with a small Membrane in the middle; sometimes by reason of a double protuberancy, they seem'd to be two distinct Recepta∣cles: and sometimes that out of this one Ductus very seldom two arose; which afterwards clos'd together in one. But hitherto we never found in Men the In∣sertion of this Ductus into the right Subclavial, but always into the left. XVI. But whether the Ductus Chyliferus sends any Branches to the Breasts and Womb, we shall inquire in our Discourse of the Womb and Teats. While we were writing this, cameLewis de Bill's Cir∣cle. forth in Print a small Dutch Treatise of Lewis de Bills, wherein he boasts to have found out a much further Propagation of the Lactiferous and Chyliferous Ves∣sels. For he writes, and gives you the draught of it in a Plate annexed, that the Ductus Chyliferus belonging to the Breast, makes a wreath'd Circle to the Division of the Jugular Veins (which afterwards some rather chuse to call the Labyrinth, others the Twisted Turning) and that two little Branches ran from it to the Glandules of the Teats, and two ascended further upwards to the Glan∣dules of the Neck. For my part, I have several times search'd for the Con∣tinuation of this Contorted Circle with the Chyliferous Duct of the Breast, but could never bring or follow this Chanel farther than the Subclavial Vein. Never∣theless, understanding by report of o∣thers, that the said Circle could not of∣ten be found, yet that it was sometimes discover'd by Steno and others, I order'd my Dissections of Dogs after another manner, that is, from the upper part of the Throat to the Sternum or Breast∣bone, and upon several diligent Inquisi∣tions after this Circle, sometimes I found it manifestly conspicuous, especially if it were blown up; for so it became most obvious to the View of the Spectators. At other times I found nothing else, but only a various Concourse of several Lymphatic Vessels, taking their Rise out of the Jugular Glandules, the Glan∣dules behind the Ears, and others adja∣cent thereto, and thence running out to several Veins, and then discharging it self into them. In the mean time I ob∣serv'd this also very accurately, That this Concourse of small Lymphatic Vessels, was not continu'd with the Chyliferous Duct of the Breast, nor receiv'd the Chy∣lus from, or carried it farther to the Glan∣dules that lye round it, as Lewis de Bills erroneously asserts; but quite the con∣trary, that that Lymphatic Juice was carried from the said Glandules to that Lymphatic Circle or various Concourse of several Vessels (I say various, because it is not always the same in all Bodies) and thence by means of several little Branches spreading farther, is emptied into several Veins, as the Glandules of the Armpits and Groins, by means of their Lymphatic Vessels, exonerate their Lymphatic Juice for the most part into the Milkie Vessels. XVII. But tho' this Circle has ap∣pear'd to us now and then, and other times not at all; yet it is manifest that some could never discover it. For of late their came to our hands, the Anatome of the Bilsian Anatome, by Ia∣cob Henry Paulus Royal Professor in the Academy of Hoppenhaghen, wherein that Learned Person utterly explodes the said Bilsian Labyrinth, as a meer Fable, because he could never find it, but only some kind of Concourse of small Lym∣phatic Vessels, as aforesaid. His words are these, L. 6. of the said Book: The new Chylifer Chanel, says he, which D. John van Horn has first divulg'd, (he means the Pectoral Chanel) when it leaves the Breast, does not again ascend toward the Throat, or come to be taken notice of again: And the wreathed Receptacle of Bilsius, with its Windings, Turnings, Pipes, Branches and small Twigs, is nothing else but the Propagations and Excurrencies of the Lymphatic Iugular Vessels from the upper Glandules to the Glandules of the Armpits, and this on both sides. Wherein Nature sports her self after a wonderful manner, in the same manner as in the Veins of the Hands and Feet, and which have been obvious to me at several times in several varieties. But generally they kept this Order, that the Ductus proceeds alone by it self from the Oblong Glandule
of the Iaw, where it lyes between the hud∣dle of the Parotides, and Wharton's Glandules at the lower Seat of the Larynx, call'd Thyroidae, accompanied sometimes with three or four small Branches, which often close with another Branch, proceed∣ing from the lesser Glandules, which ad∣joyns to the Caro idal Artery, and the In∣ternal Iugular Vein, tho'▪ not always. This Ductus then forsaking the Gullet, over which it is spread, associates it self to the External Iugular Vein, and creeping un∣der it, sometimes crosses over, sometimes passes by two other Lymphatic Vessels, which proceeding from the Glandules of the Neck, in the middle of the Neck mutually embrace and bind each other, and are the occasion of many Branches, but no proper Circle, unless a man will fancy it so to be. And therefore that famous Circle is a meer La∣byrinth, and an inextricable Errour. But all those Propagations of Vessels, when they have once reach'd and pass'd the Branch of the External Iugular (to which frequently adjoyns a small Glandule also) proceeding from the Muscle that bends the Head or Mastoides, fall into a common Ductus like a Glass Viol, with a wide Belly, and as it were blown like a bladder, so that it might not improperly be call'd a Recepta∣cle by Bilsius. From which, at length, double Appendixes extend themselves, of which the one enters the Armpit Vein, near the Pipe of the rough Artery, in the place where the Carotidal Arteries arise from the Trunk: the other at a little distance enters the External Iugular: To which another Lymphatick Vessel (which hitherto Anato∣mists have deriv'd originally from the Ioynts) joyns it self from the Subaxillary Glandules. So that there happens a meet∣ing of several Insertions, that is below, of the Pectoral Ductus (an Error; for that never passes beyond the Subclavial Vein) from the side of the Axillary Vessels; a∣bove, of the Lymphatical Iugular Vessels, and Vessels arising out of the Thymus, which is one of the Iugular Glandules, but seldom any passing of one into ano∣ther. XVIII. This Description the same Author, in a new Plate annex'd, ap∣parently demonstrates, and in the same seventh Chapter, adds the way to find out the Iugular Lymphatics. But tho' the foresaid Doctor Paulus wittily enough derides Bilsius's Circle, yet is it not probable that Bilsius at his dissection should delude so many Learn∣ed Men that were present, into that Blind∣ness and Madness, as to testifie in a Pub∣lic Writing, that they saw such a Circle clearly by him demonstrated, which was not really there to be seen: Could they be all so blind? Besides, we our selves, and several others, have seen this Cir∣cle, tho' we could not always find it. Which we the rather believe may hap∣pen through the Sport of Nature, in re∣gard that in some Dogs the Circle is found to be perfect; in others only a disorderly Concourse of Lymphatic Vessels about the Throat. To conclude then, I assert this in the mean time, That this Circle is no Production of the Tho∣racical Ductus Chyliferus (as Bilsius er∣roneously avers and delineates) and that, as has been said, it receives no Chylus from it, nor carries any Chylus, but is a Chanel into which the Lymphatic Juice, being carried from the Circumjacent Glandules, and other parts, and to be conveigh'd into the neighbouring Veins, and other parts, is collected together. Now whether the Chylus and Lym∣phatic Humour be one and the same thing, or whether distinct Juices. See Chap. 13. following. XIX. The use of the ChyliferousThe vse. or Great Lymphatic Pectoral Du∣ctus, is to conveigh the Lymphatic Iuice continually, and the Chylus at certain Intervals, being forc'd out of the Milkie Mesaraic Vessels, and at∣tenuated therein, by the mixture of the Lymphatic Iuice, to the Subclavial Vein, to the end the Lymphatic Iuice may prepare the Blood to cause an Ef∣fervescency in the heart, and that the Chylus mixed with the Venal Blood, and carried together with it through the Vena Cava to the Heart; may be chang'd by that into Blood. XX. That the Chylus and Lym∣phaticThe ascent of the Chylus. Iuice ascends upward, not on∣ly the Situation of the Valves, but o∣cular observation in the very Dissecti∣on of Animals, sufficiently teach us, by means of a string ty'd about this Cha∣nel; for presently there will be a swel∣ling between the Knot and the Recep∣tacle, and a lankness above the Liga∣ture. Which Experiment proves suc∣cessful in a Dog newly hang'd, if when the Knot is ty'd, the Guts, together with the Mesentery, be lightly press'd by the hand, and so by that Compression the Chylus be squeez'd out of the Chyliferous Mesaraic Vessels into the Receptacle, and out of that into the Pectoral Du∣ctus.
XXI. Now that the Chylus enters the Subclavial Vein, together with the Lymphatic Iuice, and thence is carried to the Heart through the Vena Cava, besides that what has been already said concerning the Holes, is obvious to the sight; it is also appa∣rent from hence, for that a good quan∣tity of Milk being injected into the Du∣ctus Chyliferus, it is forthwith carried into the Subclavial Vein, hence into the Vena Cava and right Ventricle of the Heart, together with the Blood con∣tain'd in the Vena Cava, and may be seen to flow out at the Wound made in the Ventricle. XXII. Now the Cause Impulsive thatThe impul∣sive Cause. forces the Chylus, together with the Lymphatic Iuice, out of the Receptacle into this Ductus Pectoralis, and so for∣ward into the Subclavial Vein, is the same that forces it out of the Guts into the Milkie Mesaraic Vessels (of which in the preceding Chapter, that is to say, the Motion of the Muscles of the Abdomen, mov'd upward and down∣ward with the act of Respiration, which causes a soft and gentle. Impulsion of the Chylus through all the Milkie Ves∣sels, which impulse is conspicuously ma∣nifest from hence; for that if in a li∣ving Creature the Muscles of the Ab∣domen be open'd and dissected, and thereby their Motion be taken away, and then the Bowels of the lower Bel∣ly be gently squeez'd, presently we shall see the Milkie Iuice move forward, and croud through all the Milkie Ves∣sels; and tho' that Compression has no Operation upon the Pectoral Ductus, yet the Chylus forc'd into it by that Com∣pression out of the Receptacle, is by that forc'd upward, as one Wave pushes for∣ward another. XXIII. Here now arises a Question,Whether the whole Chylus as∣cend to the Subclavial. Whether the whole Chylus ascend through this Chanel to the Subclavial? and whether or no also a great part of it do not enter the Mesaraicks, and so ascend to the Liver? To which, we say, that the whole Chylus passes to the Subclavial Vein, except that which out of the Chyliferous Bag, by an extraor∣dinary Course sometimes, tho' very seldom flows to the Urine Bladder, (of which see more c. 18.) or else in Women with Child, according to its ordinary course flows to the Womb, (See c. 30.) or in Women that give suck to the Breasts; (See l. 2. c. 2.) But Regius is of another Opinion, believing that part of the Chylus is carried to the Spleen out of the Stomach through the Gastric Veins, and part through the Mesaraics to the Liver. Of which, the one is refuted by us in the preceding Chap. 7. and the o∣ther L. 7. c. 2. Deusingius smartly main∣tains, that the whole Chylus is not carri∣ed to the Subclavial through the Ductus Thoracicus, and confirms his Opinion by these Arguments. Exercit. de Chylificat. & Chylimotu. 1. Saith he, There is no congruous pro∣portion of Nature between the innumera∣ble Milkie Veins scattered through the Me∣sentery, and the Thoracic Ducts (which nevertheless are seldom more than one) conveighing the Chylus beyond the Axil∣lary Veins. 2. How shall the Thoracic Duct be able, without prejudice, to transmit such a quan∣tity of Chylus, carried through so many Milkie Vessels, to the Receptacle of the Chylus? 3. So very small a portion of the Chy∣lus as is carried through the Ductus Tho∣racicus to the Axillaries and Vena Cava, does not suffice to supply the continual waste of Blood, agitated and boyling through the whole Body, nor to repair the continu∣al wearing out of all the parts. 4. Seeing there is a great quantity of Chyle made, and but very little can pass through the streights of the Ductus Tho∣racicus, where shall the rest of the Chylus remain, which between every Meal is not able to pass through the small Thoracic Duct? 5. That same largest quantity of the Chylus, which in time of Breeding and giving Suck, is carried to the Womb and Dugs, whither is that carried, when the time of Breeding and giving Suck is over, when it is very probable that it cannot pass through the Ductus Thoracicus. 6. If the Ductus Thoracicus of a live Animal be quickly ty'd with a string, the motion of the Milkie Liquour in the Me∣sentery is not perceiv'd to be hindered. And then he adds the Experiment of Lewis de Bills, by which he believes it to be obvious to sight. These are the principal Arguments by which that Famous Artist endea∣vours to uphold his Opinion. Now let us examin of what weight they are, and whether they are so ponderous as they promise to be, to the end we may see whether Truth will give her voice for this acute Invention.
XXIV. I answer to the first and se∣cond, That there is not only a lesser but a greater Proportion between the Milkie Mesenteric Vessels, and one or two Thoracic Ducts, than there is between so many innumerable Veins that proceed from the Head, the Trunk, the Feet, the Arms, and some other Parts, and one Vena Ca∣va into which they all evacuate them∣selves. For if we consider so many Myriads of Veins, all of 'em may be thought to evacuate into the Vena Cava ten times as much Blood, as either the Vena Cava can contain, or disburthen from it self. And yet who does not see that it is done without any disorder; and why therefore should we wonder that the same should be conveniently done in the Milkie Vessels? Besides, we must consider that the flowing of the Chylus is not so continual; for many times there is a great distance between the two Meals, at what time there is no Chylus that is either made or flows (which is manifest to the Eye in Creatures hang'd a long time after they have fed, in which those Vessels are found empty of Chylus) and that Men who feed often, or else eat to excess, and therefore nei∣ther Concoct the Chylus over hastily, or in over great quantity, so that it cannot swiftly make its way through those Pas∣sages, such men are out of order, either because they do not digest the Food they have eaten sufficiently, or for that the quantity of the Chylus being too great, cannot pass quick enough through those Milkie Vessels, and therefore by the way, by reason of its longer stay, grows thick, sowre, coagulates, or is other∣wise corrupted, which breeds Obstructi∣ons, and impedes the Passage of the Chylus. Lastly, If we may argue from similitude, we must consider how much serous Humour passes in a little time through the narrow Ureters: which, if it may be done with so little trouble in those Vessels, why may not so much pass through the Milkie Vessels, and the Ductus Thoracicus? XXV. To the third and fourth I answer, That the portion of the Chy∣lus that passes through the Ductus Thoracicus, is not so small in quanti∣ty, but very copious, as is obvious to the sight. If a living Dog be quickly open'd four or five hours after he has been well fed, and the Milkie Vessels in the middle of the Breast be cut away, and then the Intestines together with the Mesentery, be alternately and softly pressed by the hand, so they be relax'd (as in Respiration that Compressure is alternately made in healthy and living Creatures) then it will appear what a quantity of Chylus passes through that Vessel in the Breast. For in a short time a great quantity will flow forth into the hollowness of the Breast; neither shall any thing be discern'd to flow thither through any other Passages. Moreover, by the singular Observation of Walaeus, there is wasted every day in a healthy Plethoric Person, very near a pound of Blood. Is it impossible that in a whole days time a pound of Chylus should pass through the Milkie Vessels, to restore and supply that waste of Blood? In the space of half a quarter of an hour we have squeez'd out above two Ounces by the same way as is before express'd, how much therefore might pass in a whole day? certainly much more may be thought to pass than is wasted, supposing that the Chylus were continually present in the Guts, from whence being continually present, and still passing, proceeds the growth and increase of the Body, and the Plethory is caus'd. To this may be ad∣ded Lower's Experiment, cited by Gualter Needham, l. de Format. Foet. c. 1. who in a live Dog having made a hole in the right side of his Breast, tore the Receptacle of the Chylus with his Fin∣ger near the Diaphragma, and then sewing up the External Wound, pre∣serv'd the Dog alive: nevertheless, tho' the Dog were very well fed, within three days, he dy'd, as being starv'd to death: but then after he had opened the Body, the whole Chylus was found to be cram'd into that part of the Breast which was wounded, and the Veins being o∣pen'd, the blood was seen to be much thicker without any serous Humour, or Refreshment by any mixture of the Chylus. XXVI. To the fifth I answer, That a great part of the Chylus that is wont to be carried through the Ductus Thoracicus to the Subclavial Vein, during the time of breeding and gi∣ving suck, is carried to the Womb and the Dugs, and because that for want of that Chylus, which is carried ano∣ther way, the Womans Body is not sufficiently nourish'd; hence those Wo∣men (if they be otherwise healthy) by the force of Nature, become more hun∣gry and greedy, that by eating and drinking that defect may be supply'd
and that in the mean time the Necessities of Nature may be fur∣nished, which requires Nourishment for the Embryo or Birth. But if through any Distemper of the Stomach, or of any other Parts, those Women are not so hungry, but eat little or less than they were wont to do, then they grow weak, by reason that the Chylus is carried ano∣ther way for the Nourishment of the Birth, and are emaciated almost to skin and bone, as we find by daily Experi∣ence. XXVII. To the sixth, That when the Pectoral Chanel is ty'd, and the Creature lyes a dying, we see that the Milkie Mesentery, being partly press'd by the adjoyning Parts that lye upon 'em, and partly flagging one upon a∣nother, vanish by little and little. This is true; but not because the Chylus enters the Mesaraic Veins, but because it is pour'd forth into the Chyliferous Bag, and the Ductus Thoracicus, which are then dilated and extended more than is usual by the Chylus, and when they can hold no more, then it stays about the great Glandule of the Mesentery in the Milkie Mesaraics, and may be seen therein for a whole day and longer, which could not be, if the Chylus enter'd the Mesaraic Veins. XXVIII. As for the Experiment of Lewis de Bills, which has seduc'd too unwarily several Learned Men in∣to another Opinion, what is to be thought of that, we shall tell you L. 7. c. 2. Iohn Swammerdam in his Miracles ofWhether the whole Chylus as∣cend through the Mesaraic Veins to the Liver? Nature p. 29. promising to himself that he will restore to the Liver the Office of Sanguification, or of making Blood, affirms, that the whole Chylus ascends through the Mesaraic Veins to the Li∣ver, and that what we see in the milkie Vessels is nothing else but a whitish lym∣phatic Juice. And this he proves from hence, for that as he says, we find the Blood as it were streaked and mixed with white Lines in the Mesaraics, sometimes as it were mark'd with Spots, and sometimes he found nothing but pure Chylus in 'em; and at length he adds these Words; In the Gate Vein, tho' not ty'd, we have often seen the Chy∣lus, and taken it out of the same; and we have seen many of the Mesaraics fill'd with Chylus. Now if any Person will suf∣fer himself to be persuaded into these things, let him, for me, I envy him not. But for my part I give more Credit to Asellius, Pecquet, Deusingius, Wharton, and several others, but espe∣cially to my own Eyes; than to such Writings as these: Unless Swammerdam can prove all that I have nam'd to have bin Purblind, and his own Party the only sharp-sighted People in the World. For they that have any Skill in Anato∣my are to be persuaded rather by De∣monstration than by Writing, as be such who have Eyes in their Heads and believe what they see. But in regard that Swammerdam promises to explain these things more at large in his Anatomicis Curiosis (so he calls his Treatise which is now in the Press) we will there ex∣pect a more curious Explanation, in the mean time we will stick to our former Opinion. But why the Blood is some∣times of a bad Colour in the Mesara∣ics we shall shew l. 7. c. 2. However Swammerdam, to confirm his own Opi∣nion, adds another Argument taken from that which never any one could yet demonstrate, that the Chylus is car∣ried out of the Guts into the milkie Veins of the first sort. But by the same Argument will I prove, that the Chylus is not carried into the Mesaraic Veins, because no Man could ever yet demonstrate its Ingress out of the Guts into those Veins. 'Tis true that Iohn Horn Epist. ad Rolphin. say's he can make it out by Demonstration, but was never yet so good as his Word; tho' if there be any at this day who pretend to do it, I wish they would ad∣mit me to be a Spectator, and then I may be able to judg of these Sayings. Again, No Man could ever yet demon∣strate to the Eye the manifest Passage of the Seed out of the Testicles through the different Vessels into the little se∣minary Bladder: Does this prove that the Seed is not conveighed through these Passages in living People, because it cannot be demonstrated in dead Bodys? The Seed conspicuous in the Parastatae or Vessels affixed to the back of the Testi∣cles, and the seminary Vessels, without any more manifest Demonstration, suf∣ficiently prove, that it ought to be con∣veighed out of the Testicles and Para∣statae through those Vessels, seeing that the Seed is made in no other Parts out of the Testicles, (as we shall shew c. 22.) and there are no other Passages to the seminary Vessels. In like manner when we see that the Chylus concocted in the Stomach flows no where else than to the Intestins, and is then conspicuous with its white Colour, which is apparent
from those white Chylous Stools in the Coeliac Fluxes or Loosness of the Belly, and is also seen to be no less white in the milkie mesenteric Vessels, the chy∣liferous Bagg, and the pectoral milkie Channel: Nay seeing moreover, that after long Famin the Guts being emp∣ty'd of the Chylus, it is no longer to be found in the said milkie Vessels, nor does any such white Liquor appear in any other Vessels; What Man in his Wits, by the Dictate of Reason only, will question whether the Chylus passes out of the Guts into the milkie mensen∣teric Vessels, and thence are pressed for∣ward to the rest of the milkie Vessels, tho' the first Entrance were never yet demonstrated to the Eye. The Defect of which Demonstration proceeds from hence, that there is such a pressing and moving forward of the Humors and Spi∣rits in the Bowels and other Parts which are entire and endu'd with Life, which no Art can perfectly demonstrate to the Eye in dead, mangl'd, and dissected Bodys. In the mean time how the Chy∣lus passes out of the Guts into the mil∣kie mesenteric Vessels, has bin already shewn in the foregoing Chapter. Lastly, what Swammerdam writes, That it is on∣ly a white lymphatic Juice which is carried through the milkie Vessels, let him, I beseech him, tell that Story to those that know no Difference between the Lympha and the Chylus, nor can distinguish between those Liquors or Juices. We affirm and demonstrate that both Liquors pass through the said milkie Vessels, and why the milkie Liquor is mix'd with the lymphatic Juice, we teach a little before in the same Chapter, and in the following 17. XXIX. Besides the Passage of the Chylus already mentioned, which many maintain to be through the Mesaraics to the Vena Porta, Rio∣lanus l. 2. Enchir. c. 18. Walaeus Epist. ad Barthol. & Maurocorda∣tus l. de mot. & us. Pulm. c. 13. write, That they have observed the Distribution of the Chylus to other Parts; and farther relate that they have taken notice that the milkie Vessels run forward to the very Liver, the Sweetbread, the Trunck of the Vena Cava, near the Emulgents, to the Vena Porta and Mesenteric, and some others. But all those learned Men were most apparently deceiv'd by the lymphatic Vessels, which they thought to be the milkie Vessels, as is apparent from the Text of the forecited Places, and from what shall be said in the following Chapter concerning the Rise and Distribution of the Lymphatics. CHAP. XIII. Of the lymphatic Vessels of the Lympha. I. THE lymphatic Vessels are thinThe Defi∣nition. and pellucid Vessels, conveigh∣ing the Lympha, which is a thin transparent, and clear Liquor, to the Vasa Chylifera and the Veins. II. The first Discoverers of theseThe Dis∣coverers. were Thomas Bartholinus, and Olaus Rudbech, between whom there is a very great and sharp Dispute for the Honour of the first Discovery, while each one assumes to himself. These two in Years 1650 and 1651, searching after something else in dead Bodys, happen'd by chance into the Knowlege of these Vessels, perhaps nei∣ther of 'em knowing that the other had made the Discovery, so that both may contend unjustly to ascribe that Honour singly to themselves, which may be e∣qually due to both. However Glisson and Charleton affirm that these Vessels were discovered and shown at London by one Ioliff an English Man, before they were made known by Bartholinus. But Bartholine in his Spicilege, affirms upon his Word, that he knew that Io∣liff was not born before his Discovery, and that he never knew him either by Name or by Report. III. Bartholine gives to these Ves∣selsThe Names. the Names of Lymphatic, Wa∣tery, and Crystalline, and the Li∣quor therein contained he call'd by a very proper Name, Lympha, from its Clearness and crystalline Bright∣ness. Olaus Rudbech chooses rather to call 'em the watery Channels of the Liver and Glandules. IV. They consist of clear and cob∣web-likeThe Sub∣stance. Skin, out of which being brok'n, if the Water happen to flow out, they presently disappear, because their Tunicles are affixed to the Ves∣sels
and Membranes that lie under 'em, from which, by reason of their ex∣tream Thinness and Clearness, they cannot be distinguished. V. Their Number is not to beTheir Number. numbered, and therefore not to be certainly determined. VI. Their Colour is TransparentColour and Shape. and Chrystalline: Their Shape Ob∣long, full of Holes, and hollow like the Veins, but very knotty: Their Breadth but very small. VII. They have several Valves ad∣mittingTheir Valves. the Lympha into the Vasa Chylifera, and several Veins, but hindering its Return. These Valves has Lewis de Bils most obstinately all a∣long deny'd, till they were shown him at the Hague, delineated in Plates, and made public in a printed Treatise by Frederic Ruysch, a most excellent Phy∣sician and Anatomist, who discovered 'em bent like a Crescent, fix'd to the Sides of the Vessels, and plac'd oppo∣site one to another, but much more numerous and thinner than any that are to be met with in the Veins. Which Valves may be also observ'd without any opening of the Vessels: For the Lym∣pha contain'd being press'd with the Finger contrary to its proper Motion, is every where stop'd by the Valves. VIII. Lewis de Bills, who hadBils's Error. call'd these Vessels before the Dew∣bearing-Channels, finding himself convinc'd by Dr. Ruisch as to the Valves, presently invented a kind of Evasion, and published it abroad to save his Reputation in a little Dis∣course Printed at Rotterdam 1668. He distinguishes between the lymphatic Iuice and the Dew; confessing the one to be carried to the Veins and milkie Vessels through the lymphatic Vessels, which are furnish'd with Valves, and affirms this to have bin found out by himself many Years before (tho' how truly, appears by Bartholinus's Answer de experiment. Bilsian. to Nich. Zas, Prin∣ted 1661. p. 11.) but this he says flows through particular little Pipes, con∣sisting of very small Fibres woven to∣gether, but furnish'd with no folding Shutters, seated among the Veins and Tunicles of the Arteries and lympha∣tic Vessels, like a kind of Moss, with a continued Course from the inner Parts to the exterior. An excellent Evasion indeed, whereby he endeavours to un∣derprop the Truth of his first Opinion by certain imaginary little Pipes. I call 'em Imaginary, because that as yet ne∣ver any, tho' but a young Practitioner in Anatomy, who does not easily ap∣prehend there can be no such Pipes in Nature, when the Tunicles of the Veins and Arterys so closely adhere and stick one to another, that they are hardly separable by any Art, and that there are no such intervening of Pipes or a∣ny other Passages to be seen, tho' Men had Lynx's Eyes, much less demonstra∣ble: Seeing that in regard of this same close sticking of the Tunicles, many sharp-sighted Anatomists have question∣ed, whether the Veins consist of one or two Tunicles. Which may be said of the lymphatic Vessels, which seem to consist of one single Tunic. IX. There can be no certain Si∣tuationTheir Si∣tuation. assigned to the lymphatic Vessels; in regard they are to be found in several Parts of the Body, and in the Trunck accompanying many Veins, especially the greater, and seem to be fasten'd to 'em by little Fibres. Many are also conspicuous in the Mid∣dle, and innumerable in the lower Bel∣ly, which do not accompany the big∣ger Veins. Many also are found in the Arms at the sides of the Brachial Vein; as also in the Thighs, sticking to the Iliac and Crural Veins. Some there are that hold that these Vessels are joyned to the Muscles, but I could never ob∣serve any in the Muscles themselves. X. Concerning their Rise, thereTheir Rise. have bin formerly very great Dis∣putes; but by the singular Industry of modern Anatomists, those Mists are in a great Measure scattered. Nicholas Steno, a most accurate Dis∣secter, has laboured so diligently in search of their Rise, that at last l. de Musc. & gland. he pronounces for certain upon the Testimony of his own View, that there is an Inter∣course between all the lymphatic Vessels and the Glandules, especially such as are clustered together; which to that pur∣pose have a kind of Hollowness in the Middle, in which that Liquor is col∣lected out of the Body of the Glandule, as having a farther Journey to make through the lymphatic Vessels. Thus also Malpigius, lib. de hepat. writes, that all the lymphatic Vessels, in what Parts soever, still every where arise out of the clustered Glandules, which are found in a thousand Places of the Body, even those that proceed out of the very Liver.
Which he affirms, as having found those Glandules in the Hollow and Covering of the Liver of a Calf, where the bloody Vessels, and the Hepatic Chan∣nel enter it. In like manner Frederic Ruisch reports that he has in the Liver of a Man found, as it were, a Chain of Glandules; under the Gall-Bladder, which were hard but mix'd with no Blood. XI. A great Number of these Ves∣sels go forth from the Liver, which is manifest to the Sight, tho' no Li∣gature be made use of, but if a Li∣gature be made use of between the Stomach and the Liver in that part of the Mesentry which knits the Li∣ver to the Ventricle and Guts, by which Ligature the Vena Portae, with the Bilarie shall be comprehended: Then presently (if the Experiment be try'd upon a living Creature) be∣tween the Ligature and the Liver, there will be a Swelling of these Ves∣sels, which will more increase if the Liver be gently pressed by the Hand. But they chiefly arise out of the hol∣low Part of the Liver, where the Glan∣dules aforesaid are principally seated, and some of 'em cross over the Vesi∣cle of the Gall. But whether or no, or how they run through the Substance it self of the Liver, that is not visible to the Eye, nor can it be as yet found out by any Instruments or any other Art. Glisson, in Anat. Hepat. searching back∣ward, found that they creep under the Capsula of the Vena Portae (which Cap∣sula is a Membrane from the Peritone∣um enfolding the Vena Portae, where it enters the Liver) and that there they hide themselves, nor could he observe any farther Progress; from the Con∣jecture it might be probable, that they follow the Distribution of the Capsula, and Bilarie Passage included in the same, and never enter the Substance of the Li∣ver. But to us it seems more likely, that arising out of the clustered Glan∣dules seated in the hollow part of the Liver, they presently break forth and shew themselves; and therefore that they neither follow the Course of the Capsula and Bilarie Passage, nor can be much dispers'd through the Substance of the Liver. XII. How Pecquet has observed tho Egress of the lymphatic Vessels out of the Liver, he himself describes lib. de lact. Thorac. of the second Edition. Behold, says he, having slit the Belly of a live Dog, I search for the lympha∣tic Passages. These being supported by the Trunck of the Vena▪ Portae, after the manner of Ivy, presently shew themselves▪ to the greedy Eyes of those that are called to the Sight. Then after many Encomi∣ums to the eternal Memory of Bartholine, seeing some running toward the Duode∣num, other toward the Center of the Me∣sentry, like so many Furrows, I bind'em apart from the Porta with several Strings. From the Liver all swelling upon their being ty'd, the other way languid, va∣nished from the sharpest Eye; then loosning the Knots, the Lympha pouring out of the Liver again, through various Springs most worthy to be observ'd, by the means of most evident Vehicles of Aqueducts, it seem'd to creep into the Sweetbread. These things has Pecquet excellently well observ'd (tho' at that time he knew not the true Rise of those Ves∣sels from the clustered Glandules of the Liver) for the lymphatic Vessels issuing out of the Liver, through the Duplica∣ture of part of the Mesentery knitting the Liver and Guts to the Back, creep on as well above as below the Sides of the Vena Portae, and Ductus Choli∣dochus, the greatest part toward the Mesentery; and under the Vena Cava, near the fleshy Pancreas annexed to the Ventricle and Duodenum, several with little dispersed Branches pass over a certain Glandule lying under the Vena porta, and sticking to it in many Bodies (being sometimes one, sometimes two or three, seldom none at all) and thence together with many others, passing beyond that Glandule, throw themselves into the Receptacle of the Chylus. XIII. Now lately that accurate Dissector Frederic Ruisch, has ob∣serv'd also several lymphatic Ves∣sels to proceed from the Spleen, not only from the Superficies, but from the inner Part of it, accompanying the splenic Arteries and Nerves, and sets down a singular Method by which it may be found out lib. de Valv. Lymph. And farther notes, that they are not equally so numerous in all Crea∣tures of the same Species; and that the Spleen of a Man has fewer than that of a Calf. XIV. The same Ruisch, in theFrom the Lungs. same Book, writes that he has also
seen lymphatic Vessels in the Lungs. Bartholin avers the same; and Olaus Rudbech has caused 'em to be engrav'd in Copper. XV. Moreover in other Parts these Vessels arise from the cluster'd Glandules; which Glandules have this specific Virtue, to imbue the sal∣tish Particles separated from the Se∣rum, by Dissolution with a slight A∣cidity: For the Lympha contains in it somewhat of Acid. They that pro∣ceedTheir In∣sertion in∣to several Parts. from the Glandules of the Neck, empty themselves for the most part in∣to the Labyrinth (of which in the fore∣going Chapter) or Concourse of the lymphatic Vessels seated between the ju∣gular Veins. But those that proceed from the Axillary Glandules they de∣scend, and partly according to the length of the Vena Cava are carried to the Cystis of the Chylus; partly in the Mid-way, enter the Thoracick Chylife∣rous Duct, into which is opened a Branch proceeding from the Glandule of the Oeso∣phagus or Gullet. Those that rise out of the Groyns of the Loins, ascend, and running under the lower part of the chyliferous Receptacle, empty their Lympha into it, at the Entrance forti∣fy'd with double Folders, preventing the slipping of the milky Juice into 'em. Now that several lymphatic Ves∣sels empty themselves into the Recepta∣cle of the Chyle, is hence manifest, if up∣on the opening of a live Animal, you press the Receptacle with your Thumb, and so empty the Chylus out of it. For then it presently swells and is fill'd up again with the Lympha. XVI. Nor do they open only intoTheir In∣sertion in∣the Veins. the Vasa Chylifera, but also into many Veins. And thus Nicholas Steno observ'd, that they gape into the Iugu∣lar and other Veins, and pour forth their Lympha. And Frederic Ruisch writes, that it appears to him by Liga∣ture, and the Structure of the Valves, that all the Conveiances of the Lympha, which are found in the Lungs, empty their Liquor into the Subclavial, Axil∣lary, and Iugular Veins. Whither they that arise out of the Joynts are carried is not yet discovered. Some there are who report they have seen clustered Glandules in the Joynts, from whence, no doubt, proceeds the Original of these Vessels; and as to their Insertion, there is no doubt but that they discharge themselves into the Vasa Chylifera, and into several Veins. XVII. Lewis de Bils, out of hisBils's Error. Ignorance of the Valves of the lym∣phatic Vessels, in his Epistolary Dis∣sertation publish'd An. 1659. describes a quite contrary Course of the Lym∣pha, through a Mistake most remote from Truth, and seems not at all to distinguish the Lympha from the chylous Iuice. And the Admirers ofWhether the Lym∣pha be the same with the chylous Iuice; Bs, choose rather to err with him, than to follow the Truth. Among the rest Nicholas Zas, in his Dutch Trea∣tise of the Dew of Animals; and others who have seen the Demonstrations of Bils, believe they have observed the Lympha to be the same thing with the chylous Juice contain'd in the milkie Vessels, and that it is carried out of the Bag, and other chyliferous Vessels to the Liver, and to the Glandules of the Groins, Armpits, Jaws, and others, and from them flows also to the Sperma∣tic parts, for to moisten and nourish 'em; but that it is not carried from the Glandules and Liver to the Vasa Chylife∣ra. Moreover that it only appears thinner and clearer, as being strain'd through the Glandules. XVIII. But our Eyes, and ReasonThe ∣tation. it self teaches us quite the Contrary. XIX. Our Eysight thus: Because that besides myself, Bartholin, Van Horn, Pecquer, N. Steno and seve∣ral other Sharp-sighted Persons could never perceive any other Course of this Liquor, than from the Liver, and not from the Glandules of the Armpits, Loyns, and Groyns, (and the same Reason certainly will hold in other remoter Parts) toward many Veins, but chiefest of all to∣ward the Receptacle of the Chyle, and other Vasa Chylifera, to which it may be easily forc'd with the Fin∣ger; but cannot be mov'd from them toward the Glandules or Liver, by reason of the Obstruction of the Valves. Nay if in the Dissection of a living Crea∣ture, the Vessels be ty'd (which has bin often experimented by me and my Scholars) there will be a swelling be∣twen the Knot and the Glandules, but a lankness and emptiness toward the Vasa Chylifera. Nor is it of any moment what Regius offers, l. 4. Physic. c. 7. E∣dit. 1661. That upon the tying of a Knot, these lymphatic Vessels will swell beyond the Knot; because the Juice that was wont to be press'd into 'em, is not
pressed forward by reason of the Liga∣ture, and hence when they fall, by their falling they squeez the Juice contained in 'em backward toward the Ligature. But wherefore I pray, do they not squeez it forward, seeing that by the same Reason it might far more easily be done than backward? And if that Motion ought to be made forward, why does it not so fall out in Veins that are ty'd, as well as in the Mesenteric and Thoracick milkie Vessels? Wherefore do not these Vessels, when the farther Progtess of the contain'd juice is ob∣structed by the Ligature, by their Fall squeez the Juice backward toward the Ligature, but are almost quite empty beyond the Ligature? Have they not the same Right and Power, as the lym∣phatic Vessels? Wherefore also, when there is no Ligature, cannot the Lym∣pha be forc'd by the Finger from the chyliferous Bagg toward the Liver and Glandules of the Groyns and Armpits, tho' it may be easily for'd toward the Vasa Chyliferae▪ Why do the Valves ob∣struct this, more than that Motion of the Lympha? Certainly all these things plainly teach us that the Lympha does not move from, but to the chyliferous Bag, and the Vasa Chylifera. In the Liver, or a little below the Liver, the thing is so plainly manifest by the fore∣mentioned Ligature, that it is beyond the Contradiction of any Man that has Eyes; whenas there is no Chylus strain'd through the Liver, nor any Chylus that comes thither, whatever Regius, Bils, and other Asserters of antiquated Learn∣ing and erroneous Demonstrations, so vigorously maintain to the Contrary; as shall be more largely prov'd l. 7. c. 2. Now then if this happen thus in the Li∣ver, why shall the same thing seem such a wonder in the forementioned Glandules, in which the same thing is evident by Ligature? Why must the Glandules of the Groyns and Armpits make milkie Juice, and not rather ex∣tract it out of the Vasa Sanguifera them∣selves, in like manner as we see, that in the Ventricles of the Brain, the small Glandules adhering to the Choroïdal Plexure (so far as which no milkie or chylous Liquor penetrates) extract a se∣rous and lymphatic Liquor out of the Vessels to which they adjoyn; and dis∣charge it into the Cavities of the Ven∣tricles? However if any Follower or Admirer of Lemis de Bils, either will be pleased, or can at any time demon∣strate this thing otherwise to us, so as to convince us by seeing it with our Eyes, we shall rest satisfy'd, in the mean time we are bound to believe what we have hitherto seen and now asserted. XX. Reason also gainsay's the fore∣said Opinion: For that the milkie Iuice of the chyliferous Receptacle, cannot immediately upon its slipping out of the Receptacle toward the Glan∣dules, supposing 'em to be the Glan∣dules of the Groyns, changed in∣to this pellucid and clear Lympha, and lose all its milkie Colour in a Moment. But this they say is done, because it is strain'd through the Glan∣dules lying in the Mid-way. But there are no Glandules where the Insertion of the lower lymphatic Vessels into the Re∣ceptacle of the Chylus shews it self. There are two indeed a little lower, but the various lymphatic Vessels pass by 'em at such a Distance that they do not so much as touch 'em; so that the Lympha con∣tained in them cannot attain its transpa∣rent Thinness from such a Straining. Others more studious of Novelty than Truth, that they may by some means or other underprop this new Opinion, assert with Regius, that the milkie Juice being infused with Violence into the Receptacle of the Chyle, becomes Fro∣thy and White, but by Cessaion, the Froth ceasing, becomes watery, and flows to the Glandules, so coloured like Water: Like brown Ale, which being poured forcibly into the Glass, foams at the top with a white Froth, but let it stand a little, and the Froth turns a∣gain to watery Liquor. But how lame this Simile is, is every way apparent▪ For certainly there is not so much Vio∣lence in the Motion of the Chylus which should occasion the chylous Juice to be∣come white and frothy; for that natu∣ral Motion proceeds softly and gently, of which no more violent Motion can ever be felt by a Man, not discern'd by the Eye in Dissections of living Crea∣tures. So that if it presently loses its white Colour (which they call Spumo∣sity) descending from the chyliferous Bagg by a short way to the Loins and Glandules of the Groins, why does it retain it in a Channel four times as long, ascending to the subclavial Veins▪ Whence has it that whiteness in the Intestines and milkie Mesaraics before it is infused into the chyliferous Bagg with that feign'd Violence? Wherefore stan∣ding quiet in the milkie Vessels, or taken out in a Spoon, by that Sedate∣ness does it not lose its Colour, but still preserve its whiteness?
XXI. And thus, whether we con∣sider the Autopsia, viz. Ocular Con∣vincement, or Reason, the Lympha∣tic Vessels do not seem to have any o∣ther Original than from the cluster'd Glandules, and the Parts by us al∣ready mention'd. And further also, it manifestly appears that the Lympha is a Liquor very much distinct from the Chylus. XXII. After the description of theseWhat sort of Liquor the Lym∣pha is? Chanels or Vessels, let us examine in few words what sort of Liquor the Lympha contain'd in 'em is. For the Opinions of Learned Men are very va∣rious in this Matter; and every one ad∣vances his own as truest, or at least most probable. XXIII. Bartholine de vas. Lymp.Whether Water. Brut. c. 6. writes that the Lympha is a simple Water, being the remainder of the Nourishment, as it is Elementary. This Martin Bocdan (who, Apol. 2. Memb. 11. Artic. 3. agrees with his Prae∣ceptor) asserts in Man to be diffus'd be∣tween the at Membrane and the Mus∣cles, but in other Creatures is contain'd under the Skin, and because it does not all transpire through the Skin, therefore that these Vessels were made for its E∣vacuation. But both the one, and the o∣ther, describe a very mean rise, substance, and use of this Lympha, when such a simple Water could never be sufficiently expell'd through the Pores only by the heat of the Parts, nor would there be such a necessity for it to be carried in∣ward through the Pores of the Body. If you say that this is requisite for the moist'ning of the Parts, certainly that Office is sufficiently perform'd by the moisture of the Meat and Drink as∣sum'd. Besides, a meer Water never settles into a Gelly, as this Lympha will do, if it stand a while in a Spoon. XXIV. Glisson Anat. Hep. be∣lievesWhether a Vapour of the Blood. the Lympha to be a Liquor con∣sisting of the Vapors of the Blood, gather'd together like Dew, forc'd in∣to these Vessels, and flowing back with the Vehicle of the Nourishment brought through the Nerves. But this Opinion is confuted by these Reasons; 1. Because such Vapors may easily thicken into Dew or Water, but never like the Lym∣pha into a Gelly. 2. For that the Sup∣position of the Nutritive Juice being car∣ried through the Nerves, is false, and by us C. 16. of this Book, and L. 3. c. 11. and L. 8. c. 1. sufficiently refuted. 3. Be∣cause the Vapours of the Blood, partly invisibly through the Pores, and visibly by Sweat, partly by the Expiration of the Lungs, or else condens'd, may be emptied with the Urine, Stool, Weep∣ing, &c. so that if that be all, there is nothing that compells 'em to enter those Vessels. XXV. Backius does not seem toWhether the Lym∣phatis Ves∣sels are Veins. differ much from Glisson, who seems to deduce those Vapours of the Blood out of the Veins into these Vessels; for he affirms the Lymphatic Vessels to be Veins arising from the veiny Trunk. But in regard there is a vast variety of Substance between them and the Veins, and for that no such Original appears, nor not so much as the least shadow of it, about the veiny Trunk, or Vena Ca∣va; seeing also they are never known to arise from any other Veins, but are some∣times inserted into 'em out of the clu∣ster'd Glandules, 'tis to be thought that this Opinion is far from the Truth. XXVI. George Seger, Dissert. Anat. Artic. 2. pronounces the Lym∣pha to be the Animal Spirits, or to be made out of 'em, which after they are distributed into all Parts through the Nerves, are partly there consum'd and dissipated, and partly congeal into this Water. With Seger agrees Francis de le Boe Sylvius, Disputat. Med. 4. Thes. 31. and more at large Disput. 8. Thes. 40, 41. But that this Invention of Seger is more Ingenious than True, is apparent from hence, for that the Animal Spirits are such thin Vapours, that there are not the like in the whole Body (for they pe∣netrate with an extraordinary swiftness the narrowest and most invisible Pores of the Nerves) whence it is very likely that they being pour'd forth into the Sub∣stance of the hotter Parts, presently do their duty with an extraordinary swift∣ness; and for the remaining part, by reason of its extream tenuity and vola∣tility, is far more swiftly dissipated by the heat of the Parts than any other Va∣pours, and much less congeal into Li∣quor, than any other extravasated Va∣pours, unless it happen in some colder Parts, as in the Testicles, of which we shall treat c. 28. And how suddenly they are dissipated, is apparent from that weariness which follows violent Exercise, or in the suddain Laxation of the con∣tracted Muscles. Moreover, should these Spirits congeal into this Liquor in the Parts to which they flow down, hot∣ter
than the Brain, certainly they would much sooner, and more easily, congeal in the Brain and Marrow of the Back, by reason of the greater degree of Cold in both, that is by reason of the Heat which is less in them than in other Parts: but they are never seen to be condens'd in them, neither can such a sort of Liquor penetrate through the Nerves; and if in them they are not condens'd into Li∣quor, much less in the Parts hotter than the Brain, the heat of which would ea∣sily dissipate such thin Vapours. Lastly, a most copious quantity of Lympha flows from the Liver and its Glandules, to which nevertheless there are so few, and such slender Nerves that reach, that some Anatomists question their ingress into 'em. Also in the Ventricles of the Brain, from the Choroidal Plexure▪ a copious quantity of Lympha, somewhat thicker, is separated by the small Glan∣dules lying between it, thence design'd to flow forth through the Papillary Pro∣cesses, and yet there are no Nerves, that enter that Plexure. From whence it is apparent that the Lympha is not made of Animal Spirits condens'd. XXVII. Bernard Swalve L. deWhether composed of Animal Spirits and Acids. Pancreat. p. 76. believes the Lympha to be compos'd of the Remainder of the Animal Spirits that have lost their Volatility, with somewhat of an Acid Spirit mix'd with it out of the Glan∣dules, and so entring the Lymphatic Vessels. The greatest part of the Lym∣pha, says he, is beholding to the Animal Spirit, the lesser to the Acid Spirit. But what has been already said destroys this Opinion; as also this, that the Lympha is continually mov'd through innumerable hollow Vessels in great quantity, whereas so great a quantity of Animal Spirits can never pass in so great a quantity through the invisible Pores of the Nerves, and cannot be carried to the making of the Lympha. Moreover, for that a great quantity of Lympha breaks thorough several Vessels; into which nevertheless, as has been said, very few Animal Spirits can be carried, and that through very few and most slender Nerves. Add to this, that the Acid Spirit of the Glandules has a coagulating Power, and therefore would be a strange obstruction to the thinness of the Liver. Moreover, Swalve himself Eod. lib. p. 88. and 89. most eagerly maintains, that nothing, not so much as the thinnest of Liquors can be carried through the Pores of the Nerves, and therefore much less such a quantity of Spirits, out of which a part of such a copious Lympha must be made. XXVIII. N. Zas above-cited, writes,Whether A∣limentary. That the Lympha, which he calls Dew, is an Alimentary Iuice, by which the Nerves, the Membranes, Tendons, also the Tunicles of the Veins and Ar∣teries, and all the Spermatics are nou∣rish'd, increas'd in growth and en∣larg'd. But among all the foregoing Opinions, there is none that carries with it less probability than this; which is ut∣terly destroy'd by what we have written L. 2. c. 12. where we prove at large that all the Parts are nourish'd by the Blood, and not by any other Humours. But Lewis de Bills, from whence Zas draws all his main Fundamentals, finding that Zas was too short in the defence of his Argument, has found out another In∣vention; for he distinguishes between Dew and Lympha, and says that the Dew serves for the Uses by Zas assign'd, but not the Lympha: He also ascribes diffe∣rent Passages to each of them, by which they flow to their parts; of which passa∣ges or ways I have lately treated, and sufficiently demonstrated the vanity of this Invention. Seeing then that most Learned Men, and Studious Assertors of the Commonwealth of Physic, did not discern the true Original of this Lympha, and hardly seem to have reach'd the use of it, I will not be afraid to venture my own Opinion concerning this Matter.What sort of Liquor it is. XXIX. I take the Lympha to be a fermentaceous Liquor, separated from the serous part of the Blood in the cluster'd Glandules, yet not simple, but mingl'd with much volatile and liquid Salt, and impregnated with some few sulphury Particles, which by reason of the thinness of its Parts en∣ters these Vessels, and is carried through them, partly to the Vafa Chy∣lifera, partly to many Veins. To THOSE, that in them it may by its mixture make the Chylus thinner and more easie, and more apt to make an easie Dilatation in the Heart. To THESE, to the end that being mingl'd with the Venal Blood, not at present so thin, it may prepare it to a quick Dilatation in the Heart: for in both respects the Mixture of it is very necessary. For the Chylus of it self is somewhat sweetish, and some∣what fatty, which shews the predomi∣nancy of the sulphury Juice, not as yet
become sufficiently spiritous. And hence, by reason of the viscid and thick Parti∣cles, seeing that if it came alone to the Heart, it is unapt for Dilatation, there is a necessity, that by the way this Liquor should be thin, saltish, sowrish, and en∣du'd with a kind of fermentaceous Qua∣lity, to attenuate its viscousness, and pre∣pare it for Fermentation. For as Mi∣neral Sulphur, by reason of its viscous Particles, by it self slowly, and by de∣grees, but by the mixture of the Salt-Peter, cutting those Particles, kindles at the very touch of Fire; so also the sul∣phury Particles of the Chylus, if other saltish and thin Particles were not mix'd with it to a just proportion, would be slowly, and not suddenly dilated, and become spiritous in the Heart. XXX. To which purpose aforesaid the Pancreatic Iuice does also in some measure contribute, being mix'd with the Chylus in the Duodenum, which is a kind of a stronger and sharper Lympha, and indu'd with a more vigorous fermentaceous Quality. And therefore it is that this Lympha being carried with the Chylus to the Heart, ren∣ders it more easily diffusive, and fit to be alter'd into spiritous Blood. As in Gunpowder the Mineral Sulphur mix'd with the Salt-peter and Coals, presently takes fire. But the Venal Blood, having lost a great part of its Spirits in the nourishment of the Parts, and the length of its Course, has need of some mix∣ture of the Lympha to facilitate its fusion in the Heart. But because it is much thinner than the Chylus, and still mix'd with many Spirits: Hence it is that it requires the less quantity of Lympha, and that's the reason that fewer Lymphatic Vessels open into the Veins, but a vast number into the Milkie Vessels. XXXI. Now because this LymphaWhether the Serum. is separated from the serous part of the Blood, the Question is whether it be not the Serum, or a Liquor different from it? To which I answer, That it is not the Serum, but a particular thin Liquor, extracted out of the Se∣rous part of the Blood. For in this serous Humour, besides the watery Par∣ticles, are contained other briny Parti∣cles in good quantity, and some sulphury Particles. The salt Particles are appa∣rent from the briny taste of Tears, Sweat, and Urine; the sulphury from hence, that stale Urine being heated, is easily fir'd by the touch of the least flame. Then again in these there are other more vis∣cous, more crude and fix'd Parts, as are often to be discern'd in Urine; others more thin and spiritous, which by rea∣son of their extraordinary thinness, to∣gether with the thin watery part of the Serum in which they abide, being separa∣ted from the thicker Particles on the cluster'd Glandules, easily enter those narrow Orifices of the Lymphatic Ves∣sels, proceeding from those Glandules, (from whence the thicker Particles are excluded by reason of their thickness) and through these are carried to the Va∣sa Chylifera and several Veins. XXXII. The difference between theThe diffe∣rence be∣tween the Lympha and the Se∣rum. Lympha and the Serum, is hence made plain; for that the Lympha being taken out in a spoon, not only held to the fire for the thinner Particles to exhale (which is the direction of Rolfincius) but being cool'd of it self, without any Exhalation before the fire, thickens into a Gelly; whereas the Serum will neither thicken before the fire, nor without fire. For that the Salt of the Lympha, which seems to contain in it somewhat of sowrish, being reduc'd to an extraordinary thinness in its most thin watery Particles, and im∣pregnated with some sulphury Particles, while any heat remains in it, is very fluid; but being condens'd by the Cold, is not fixed into hard and salt Crystals; but together with the sulphury Parts mix'd with it, by reason of their fatty viscousness, by which the hardness of the salt Particles is soften'd, it congeals into a Gelly, which again dissolves into a most thin Liquor by the heat of the fire. Whereas on the contrary, the cru∣der Particles of the Serum condens'd by the Cold, will never dissolve through the heat of the fire (which is apparent in Urine) but into crude and clammy Strings, and many of 'em retain a Stony and Tartarous Form, and will never re∣turn to their former thinness. XXXIII. Now out of what parts the Lympha proceeds, which is to be separated in the Glandules, and de∣riv'd into the Lymphatic Vessels, is by many question'd, Glisson believes it proceeds from the Nerves; Bar∣tholine from the Arteries. The first is absurd: Because the invisible Pores of the Nerves cannot give passage to such a visible and copious Liquor, with∣out a Palsie of the Parts, and an ex∣tream Relaxation of the Nerves with
continual Moisture. The latter is more probable, by reason of the quan∣tity of the Lympha, which cannot be so copiously strain'd out of any Vessels as out of the Arteries, in regard that all the Glandules receive some ends of the Arteries. And so from that Arte∣rious Blood forc'd into the Glandules, by reason of their Specific Structure, the Lympha seems to be separated in the same manner almost as the Serum is separated from the Blood in the Kidneys: and from the little Arteries of the Choroi∣dal Plexure the lymyid serous Liquor is separated from the same Blood by the Glandules lying between, and deposited in the Cavities of the Ventricles of the Brain, from thence to be evacuated through the Papillary Processes, or Ex∣tremities of the Olfactory Nerves. But in the Liver, which receives very few Arteries, but sends forth many Lympha∣tic Vessels, and pours forth a copious quantity of Lympha out of its Glandules, this Lympha cannot be there so copiously separated and pour'd forth out of so few Arteries chiefly creeping along the Ex∣terior Membrane, but is rather separated from the Blood brought through the Vena Portae (which here performs the office of an Artery) by the Glandules that adhere to the hollow part of it. XXXIV. But what it is that pressesThe Impul∣sive Cause. forth the Lympha out of the Glan∣dules of the Liver, Spleen, and other parts, and thrusts it farther when once enter'd the Lymphatic Vessels, is apparent from what has been said concerning the thrusting forward of the Chylus, c. 11. & 12. For the impul∣sive Cause is the same, that is to say the Motion and Pressure, partly of the low∣er part of the Belly by the Muscles of the Abdomen mov'd upward and down∣ward; partly by the Respiration of the Lungs. That which proceeds from the Joynts, is mov'd by the motion of the Muscles of those Parts; as we find by the motion of the Jaws and the Tongue a great quantity of Spittle flow into the Mouth, which Spittle is a kind of Lym∣phatic Iuice, but somewhat thicker, whereas when a man sits motionless, or lyes asleep, his Spittle is nothing so plen∣tiful. For by the Compressure of these Parts, as well the Glandules therein con∣ceal'd, as also the Lymphatic Vessels, are press'd, not only by the Muscles, but also by the incumbent flat Bowels, by which means the contain'd Liquor is squeez'd and thrust forward out of those Ves∣sels. XXXV. Charleton, Oeconom. Animal. writes that the Motion of the Lympha through its Chanels is very slow. But Bartholine in Spielleg▪ confutes that Opinion, and proves the contrary. For my part, I believe the Lympha to be mov'd sometimes slower, sometimes swifter, according to the more vehement or remiss motion of the Parts where the cluster'd Glandules and the Lymphatic Vessels lye, as happens in the Salival Vessels under the Tongue, which proceed from cluster'd Glandules. XXXVI. Observe by the way con∣cerningThe Cause of the Dropsie call'd Asci∣tes. the Lymphatick Vessels lying hid in the lower Belly, that if they be broken up by any accident, (for they are very tender) then there happens to be a serous Liquor pour'd forth into the hollow of the Abdomen, the in∣crease of which at length insensibly pro∣duces that sort of Dropsie, call'd Asci∣tes; tho' it may also proceed from o∣ther Causes. In the Year 1658▪ we dissected a young1. Observa∣tion. Woman of four and twenty years of Age, which for seventeen years had la∣bour'd under that Distemper call'd As∣cites, and at length dy'd of it. In whom I did not perceive the least desect of her Bowels, only that some of the Lym∣phatic Vessels were broken, which was the Cause of the Distemper; for in her Childhood she had been cruelly us'd by her Parents, who were wont to kick and thump her; and those blows occasion'd the breaking of her Lymphatic Vessels. Which Suspicion, the Humours that were gathered together in the Abdomen, did not a little confirm. For they ap∣pear'd somewhat coagulated in the Bo∣dy, when it was cold; tho' it was not come to that consistency of a Gelly, as is usually seen in the Lympha when ta∣ken out of the Lymphatic Vessels in a Spoon. However, the reason why she had liv'd so long in Misery, was the soundness of her Bowels, and for that by reason of the youthful heat of her Body, much of the Serous Moisture insensibly flowing into the Concavity of the Abdo∣men, was every day consum'd. XXXVII. These Vessels being bro∣ken,2. Observa∣tion. sometimes also it happens that the Lymphatic Liquor does not come to be pour'd forth into the Cavity of the Abdomen, but flows out between the
neighbouring Membranes, and that occasions the production of those watry Bladders, call'd Hydatides, with which the Liver sometimes within, sometimes without, and sometimes al∣so the Mesentery, and other parts in the Abdomen are seen to abound. A great number of these Bladders (some as big as a Pigeons Egg, others as a Hen Egg, and many less) William Stra∣ten, at that time Physic and Anatomy Prosessor in our Academy, afterwards principal Physician to the Prince of O∣range, shew'd us in the hollow part of the Liver of a Thief that was hang'd, Febr. 1647. We have also shew'd 'em growing sometimes in the Mesentery be∣fore the Students in Physic at our Ho∣spital: and there also we have seen Livers, which withoutside have been cover'd with little Bladders full of Lympid Wa∣ter, of which number, some having been lately broken, had insus'd a Serous Li∣quor into the Cavity of the Abdomen, and by that means had occasion'd an Ascites. Hence I concluded that the Dropsie, call'd Ascites, is never genera∣ted without some Solution of the Conti∣nuum of the inner Parts of the Abdomen, whatever the Cause of it may be, and I thought their Opinion to be rejected, that this Disease is begot by the conden∣sation of the Vapours exhaling out of the Internal Parts into Water, when that Exhalation in some Men happens to be continual, and yet very few come to be troubled with the Ascites. Volker Coiter, Obser. Chirurg. Musc. p. 117. writes that he himself found in the Bo∣dy of a Phthisical and Dropsical Man, the Bowels of the lower Belly wasted, and emptied of all their Moisture; but little Bladders, some bigger, some less, adhering every where to the Mesentery, Peritonaeum, Intestines, Spleen, Liver, and all the Bowels, and all those little Bladders full of Water. The same Case is cited by Cordaeus. Com. 5. ad Hipp. de Morb. Mul. XXXVIII. Now there may be several Causes for the breaking of these Vessels: But besides violent and external Acci∣dents, the most frequent Cause is, either Corrosion by sharp Humours, or else their Obstruction and Compression. And for this Reason the Ascites happens to Gluttons and great Drinkers, that e∣very day stuff and swill their Guts, who from the Crudities hence bred, either heap together a great quantity of sharp Humours in the Body, or else bring a weakness and obstructions upon the Bow∣els, by which means these little Vessels are either corroded, or else compress'd and straiten'd, that they cannot carry and discharge their Lymphatic Humour as they were wont to do, which there∣fore flowing out of the Lymphatio Ves∣sels, either causes little Membranes a∣mong the Bladders; or else the covering Membranes being broken, it slides into the Concavity of the Abdomen. CHAP. XIV. Of the Liver. I. THe Liver , or Jecur, is a remarkable Bowel seated in the right Hypochondrion under the Diaphragma or Midriff, of a vast bigness, round and smooth in the con∣vex or gibbous part, but concave in the lower part, where it rests upon the right side of the Stomach. II. In Dogs and many other BeastsLobes. it is divided into several Lobes, but in Man it is contiguous, swelling into a little Lobe in the lower simous, saddle or flat part. It is rarely divided into three Lobes, which Iames Sylvis in I∣sagoge, reports to have seen. III. The bigness of the Liver is notBigness. the same in all Creatures, but accord∣ing to the proportion of Bodies, it is larger in Man than in other Creatures, and the natural and ordinary bigness is such, that it descends three or four fingers below the Bastard Ribs, and extends it self somewhat beyond the pointed Cartilage of the Breast. An∣drew Laurentius writes, that in cowardly People, great Drinkers and Gluttons, the Liver is thought to be bigger. Which Rule however, 'tis very probable, is ly∣able to many Exceptions. In a preter∣natural Constitution it deviates from its ordinary Magnitude, as well in excess as defect. In the Year 1660. I dissected a Body wherein the Liver was of that enormous Magnitude, that it caus'd Ad∣miration in all the Spectators; for below it reached down to the Groyns, and ex∣tended it self from the right side to the Spleen, and so possessed the chiefest part of the whole lower Belly. But tho' to the outward view and touch, it seem'd
to be of a healthy Colour and sound Substance, yet we found in the middle of it a large hollowness, from whence to the amazement of all the Beholders, we took out eleven Market pounds of Mat∣ter, white, well-concocted, and without any ill smell. Other monstrous large Livers are describ'd by Spigelius Anat. l. 8. c. 12. Riolanus Anthrop. l. 2. c. 21. Bartholine Obs. cent. 1. hist. 85. and by se∣veral others. IV. Less frequently is the Liver defective for want of its due proporti∣on. And yet we find an Example of that too in Riolanus, lib. citat. who writes that at Paris, in a certain Body, was found a Liver that was no bigger than a Kidney; and thence he observes out of Avicen, that the smalness of the Liver is always noxious, but not the bigness. How you may guess at the largeness of the Liver by the bigness of the fingers, See l. 4. c. 1. V. The Substance of it is soft andSubstance. ruddy, like congeal'd Blood, the firm∣ness of which appears nevertheless when the Liver is boyl'd. There lye hid in it many Kernels, out of which the Lym∣phatic Vessels break forth. VI. Malpigius, who has examin'd the substance and inner parts of the Liver, most accurately by his Micro∣scopes, l. de hep. c. 2. has observ'd many things unheard of, and hitherto altogether undiscover'd. 1. That the substance of the Liver in a Man con∣sists of little Lobes, which shew forth a heap of Clusters, and are cloath'd with their own enfolding Membrane, and strengthen'd by membranous Knots continued athwart, so that there may be observ'd middle spaces, and little small chinks, between the sides of the Lobes. 2. That the whole Mass of the Liver consists of glandulous Balls and several Roots of Vessels; and hence, that they may all cooperate for the common good, there is a necessity of an intercourse between the Vessels and these Glandules. 3. That the Branches of the Vessels of the Porta, Vena Cava, and Porus Biliarius in an equal number through all the small Lobes, and that the Roots of the Ve∣na Portae supply'd the place of Arte∣ries, and that there is such a Corre∣spondence between the Porta and the Porus Biliarius, that both their little Branches are closely contain'd under the same Covering. 4. That the Roots of the said Vessels are not joyn'd toge∣ther by way of Anastomois, but that the glandulous Balls, constituting the chief substance of the Liver, are in the middle between the Vessels that bring and carry, by means whereof those that carry infuse their liquor into those that bring. From which Observations he concludes that the Liver is a conglomera∣ted or cluster'd glandule separating the Choler, and this (Ibid. cap. 3.) he endea∣vours to prove by several Reasons. And because this is proper to conglomerated Glandules, that besides the Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, they enjoy their own proper emptying Vessel (as is apparent in the Parotides, Sweetbread, and others) which is dispers'd through their Sub∣stance, and extracting and carrying off the design'd Humour; he asserts this Ves∣sel in the Liver to be the Porus Biliarius with the Gall Bag. Most certainly these new Observations of the famous Malpigius dispel many Hepatic Obscurities, and lighten us to the inmost knowledge of the Liver. For formerly there was no que∣stion made, but Choler was generated in the Liver; but how it came to be se∣parated from the Blood, was not known: but now by the Observations of this quick-sighted Artist, it appears to be done by the small Kernels and glandulousAs to the truth of this Hypo∣thesis, see our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 4. cap. 8. Sect. 10. §. 14. ad 36. where we have, by indubitable Reason, strong Argu∣ments, and matter of Fact, prov'd that there is no Choler or Ble separated from the Blood in the Liver. Salmon. Balls lying up and down *. VII. But tho' Malpigius, by reasonWhether the Liver may be call'd a Bowel. of these new Golden Inventions seems unwilling to call the Liver a Bowel for the future, but rather a conglomerated or cluster'd Glandule; yet I beseech him to grant us this liberty, that we may still, for a while, call it a Bowel, lest by too sudden a change of the name, we should render our Discourse ob∣scure, especially among those who ne∣ver heard of this Denomination be∣fore. VIII. In the mean time the Condi∣tion of the unfortunate Liver is to be lamented; as being that which for∣merly was call'd the Principal Bowel, and by Galen seated in the highest
Throne of Sanguisication, and there has been worship'd for many Ages by the common consent of Physic; yet that in these our times it should be torn and depos'd from its Throne, and de∣spoil'd of all its Soveraignty; nay that it should be said to be dead, and there∣fore be buried, and only remembred with an Ironical Epitaph by Bartholine, and yet contrary to the expectation of all men, like a Silkworm chang'd into a Butterflie, so metamorphos'd into a piti∣ful conglomerated Glandule, be beholding to a miserable resurrection in that like∣ness. IX. The Colour of the Liver obvi∣ousColour of the Liver. to sight, which is ruddy, is not peculiar to it, by reason of its frame, and composition, but accidental, by reason of the copious quantity of Blood infus'd into it, through the Vena Portae, as by the following Ex∣periment of Glissons may appear. The proper Colour of it is pale, slightly inclining to yellow, which however it seems to be a tincture which it receives from the Choler passing through it: and hence it is that Malpigius ascribes to it a white Colour. X. By reason of the vast quantityThe Tem∣perament. of Blood that flows to it, the tempera∣ment of it is hot and moist, and by its heat it cherishes and comforts the Sto∣mach. XI. It is incompass'd with a thinIts Mem∣brane. Membrane, arising from the Perito∣naeum that girds the Diaphragma, and rolls it self back about the Li∣ver. XII. It hangs as it were strictlyThe Liga∣ments. fasten'd above through all its Circum∣ference to the Diaphragma, with a broad membranous strong Ligament, arising from the Peritonaeum, where it adheres to the joynted Cartilage. Erroneously therefore wrote Spigelius, that it is distant a fingers breadth from the Diaphragma. This Ligament is not only fasten'd to the outermost Mem∣brane of the Liver, but constitutes it, and to the end it may sustain the weight of so large a Bowel without the hazard of breaking, it descends toward the in∣ner parts of it, and is fasten'd to the common sheath or swath of the Branch of the Vena Portae, where the Navel Vein adjoyns to it. To this broad Liga∣ment is joyn'd another peculiar round and strong Ligament springing also from the Peritonaeum, where the Liver is joyn'd upon the right and left side to the Diaphragma. But this Ligament we have seen more than once wanting in Men; and for the most part is not to be found in Beasts; and there some Disse∣cters of Beasts, that have not seen many Dissections of Human Bodies, from their Dissection of Brutes, believ'd that Liga∣ment to be frequently wanting in Men. Below, it is fasten'd to the Abdomen by the Navel Ligament, that is, the Navel Vein cut off after the Birth, and chang'd into a Ligament, by which the massie Bowel is kept fast in its place, and hin∣der'd from ascending higher with the Diaphragma. XIII. It also adheres to other neigh∣bouring Parts, as the Vena Cava and Vena Portae, the Omentum, &c. Which Ligaments however do not hold it in its hanging Posture. XIV. By these Ligaments, altho' the Liver be fix'd in its place, yet is it not so straightly ty'd, but that it may be mov'd with Convenience e∣nough in Respiration upwards and downwards, and in the Motion of the Body to the Right or Left, or in any other Posture, as Necessity requires. XV. It admits into it four veryIts . small Nerves; two from the sixth Pair; a third from the Stomach Pair, and a fourth from the Costal Pair; to which the obtuse Sense or Feeling of that Membrane or Tunicle only that involves it is attributed; for they do not seem to penetrate into the inner Substance of it. However Galen 4. de us. part. c. 23. & 3. de loc. affect. c. 3. & 4. has observ'd two nota∣ble Nerves which accompany the Vena Portae enter the Parenchyma. It wanted not bigger nor more inward Nerves, as that which needed not to feel, and ma∣king the Ferment it self, might well be without the fermentative Quality of the Animal Spirits. XVI. It is furnished with veryIts Arte∣ries. small Arteries coming to it from the right Coeliac Branch (according to Veslingius very few, but according to Walaeus innumerable) and Do∣minic. de Marchettis anat. c. 4. writes that he has sometimes seen when the upper Mesenteric Artery has communicated a large Branch to
the Liver. These Arteries Galen tells us are chiefly dispersed through the Hollow or Saddle Part of it. Rolfinch says that he has observ'd 'em very nu∣merous in the Convex Part of it. Glis∣son observes no little Branches of small Arteries extended toward the inner Parts of the Liver, but all plainly to terminate in the Membrane. Reason altogether confirms Glissons Opinion; for the Substance of the Liver has hard∣ly any need of Arteries, seeing that the Blood flows to it in Quantity sufficient enough through the Porta Vein (which here performs the Office of an Arterie) which Blood by reason of its similitude in Substance, is more convenient for its own Nourishment and making of choleric Ferment, than the Arterous Blood. Nor does the Vena Portae with its Branches, nor the Roots of the Vena Cava want Arteries; as being suf∣ficiently furnished and nourished with their own contain'd Blood; nor does it ever appear, that any little Branches of Arteries are inserted into the Tunicles of any Veins for their Nourishment. Therefore because fewer Parts of the Liver are nourished with arterial Blood, Veslingus seems not erroneously to have observ'd, that only a few Arteries enter the Liver. Hence Lindan takes notice, and that very truly, that those Arteries seem rather to stop in the investing Membrane, than to penetrate into the Substance of the Liver. XVII. It has double Veins. ForThe Veins. in the upper Part, the Vena Cava seems to be joyn'd to it, into which many Roots being up and down dis∣persed through the Substance of the Liver, discharge their Blood. With these Roots, in the lower Part, meet the little Branches of the Vena Portae, which run likewise through the whole Parenchyma. XVIII. To these Vessels is adjoynedThe Choler Vessels. the Porus Biliarius, which is disper∣sed through the Liver with innumera∣ble Roots, receiving the Choler sepa∣rated from the bloody Ferment: With which moreover are intermingl'd other very thin Roots afterwards closing together, and in one little Pipe con∣veighing the Choler to the Vesicle of the Gall. XIX. Besides these Vessels, AselliusThe Lym∣phatic Vessels. writes, that he has observ'd a Branch of the milkie Vessels in the Liver. But without doubt the Egress of the lymphatic Vessels, at that time alto∣gether unknown, from the Liver, de∣ceived him. For there are no milkie or chyliferous Vessels that run to the Liver, as we have a thousand times demonstrated in our Dissections of Brutes as well alive as dead; but many milkie Vessels issue forth out of it, car∣rying a most clear and transparent Juice. So also Gualter Charleton l. de Oecon. Animal. saith, that the same is to him unquestionable by a thousand Experiments, and there∣fore he concluded without any farther Scruple that there was no Portion of the Chylus conveighed to the Liver. And therefore no Credit is to be given to Gassendus and Backius, who believe the Chylus to be carried to the Liver through the Ductus Cholidochus. For the obstructing Valves, and the narrow and oblique Entrance of the Ductus into the Duodenum, and the contrary Motion of the Choleric, and Pancreatic or Sweet∣bread Juice toward the Intestine, in living Animals obvious to the Sight, sufficiently refute their Opinion. XX. The Vessels of the Liver areThe Inter∣mixture of the Vessels. intermix'd after a wonderful manner through its Substance or little Lobes, as plainly appears if the Flesh be se∣parated, which is to be done leisurely and carefully, for fear of tearing the Vessels. For the performing of which Excarnation, Glisson describes three ways. Anat. hep. c. 21. Formerly it was asserted by the Anatomists, that the Roots of the Vena Cava ran chiefly through the upper Part, but that the little Branches of the Vena Portae ran chiefly through the lower part of the Liver. But by the more indefatigable Industry of Glisson and Malpigius, it is since discovered, that both the aforesaid Vessels, and the small Branches of the Gall-Vessels, are equally dispers'd and intermix'd one with another through the whole Parenchyma, and reach to e∣very Part alike: But that the little Branches of the Gall-Vessels are much less than those of the Vena Cava or Portae: For that through those the few∣er and thinner Choleric Humours glide; through these the more bloody and somewhat thicker are to be conveighed. And it was but Reason that these Ves∣sels should be dispersed through the whole Bowel, when all its Parts con∣spire to the same Performances. How∣ever the Liver is harder in its lower
Part, by reason of the Ingress and E∣gress of the larger Vessels, as also for that the Conglobated Glandules are there chiefly seated. XXI. But how all these little Branches are intermingl'd one among another in the Liver, there is a great Dispute among the Anatomists. For I say nothing of the Lymphatic Vessels, for that they take their Rise no farther than from the Conglobated Glandules, nor enter any farther into the rest of the Substance of the Liver. The greatest part of Anatomists, following Galen, write that the little Branches of the Porta with the Roots of the Vena Cava, are joyned together by many Anastomo∣ses, so that sometimes they close toge∣ther at their Ends, sometimes their Ends enter into the Sides of other little Branches; and that to these the inter∣jected Bilarie Vessels are fasten'd by frequent Anastomoses. To these Fallo∣pius, Cartesius, Riolanus, and several o∣thers are of a contrary Judgment, who altogether question those Anastomoses, and affirm that either they are not at all, or else very obscure. Bartholine writes, from the Observation of Har∣vey, that the Roots of the Vena Portae creeping through the Gibbous Part of the Liver, are covered with Sieve-like Tunicles full of infinite Pinholes, other∣wise than the Branches of the Vena Ca∣va, which are divided into large Arms, and that the various Excursions of each Vessel run forth into the Bossie Part of the Bowel without any Anastomoses. Bau∣hinus tells us of a remarkable Anastomo∣ses, which represents a Channel, and is as it were a common and continued Pas∣sage from the Branches of the Vena Portae into the Roots of the Vena Cava, admitting the point of a good bigg Bod∣kin. Into this apparent Channel others deny that any Branches of the Vena Porta are opened, because that no such Opening could either be seen or ob∣serv'd. Glisson writes that this Chanel is a Production or Continuation of the Umbilical Vein through which, in the Embryo, the Navel-Blood is carried di∣rectly to the Vena Cava: But that it is altogether shut up in Men that are once Born, and together with the Umbilical Vein supplys the Office of a Ligament, neither do any Orifices of any other Vessels open into it. XXII. So that how the Blood flows out of the little Branches of the Ve∣na Portae into the Roots of the Ve∣na Cava, and Vena Portae, from the foresaid various and differing Opini∣ons can hardly be made manifest. XXIII. In this Obscurity not onlyThe Pas∣sage of the lood out of the Por∣ta into the Cava. Malpigius by his Observations made with his Microscope, but Glisson, an exact Examiner of the Liver, af∣fords us great Light. Which latter, by his frequent Excarnations of this Bowel, writes that he has found by Ex∣perience, that the Branches of the Ve∣na Portae and Vena Cava, joyn one to another, and there grow close together, but do not open into one another, nor that any little Branches are inserted in∣to the Side of one another, or close with the Ends of any other, but only that the Sanguineous Humors are emptyed through the Ends of the Branches of the Vena Portae into the Substance of the Liver, and from thence again enters the gaping Ends of the Vena Cava, and Gall Vessels, all which Ends terminate into the Substance of the Liver; (this Mal∣pigius, as abovesaid, observed to be per∣form'd or done by the means of the Glandulous Balls, of which the Sub∣stance of the Liver chiefly consists) and that there is as much Blood and Hu∣mors suck'd up through the gaping Ends of those Roots, as is poured into the Substance of the Branches of the Por∣ta, always granting a due and just pro∣portion of the Bowel. Certainly I believe there is great Cre∣dit to be given to the Experience of this famous Person. For his Treatise sufficiently testifies that he was very di∣ligent and laborious in making his Scru∣tinies into the Liver; and therefore we have thought it necessary to quote his Experiment, by which he solidly proves that there are no Anastomoses of the Vessels in the Liver, anat. Hep. c. 33. in these Words. XXIV. For the farther Confirma∣tion,Glisson's memorable Experi∣ment. saith he, of this Opinion, I will bring one memorable Experi∣ment, which gives a great Light not only to this Passage of the Blood out of the Vena Portae into the Cava, but to several other things belonging to the Circulation of the Blood. At a  therefore at London, we thought fit to try, how easily Water being forc'd into the Porta would pass through the Liver. To that end we took a good large Ox's Bladder, fitted to a Pipe (as when we give a Glister) and fill'd it with warm Water coloured with a little Milk, and then having ty'd it with a String that none of the Liquor might slide
back, we put in the top of the Pipe into the Porta near the Liver. Presently the Bladder being hard squez'd, the Water passing through the Pipe, enters the Ve∣na Cava, and thence carried into the right Sinus of the Heart, goes to the Lungs through the Arterious Vein, and passing through them slides down into the left Ventricle, thence is carried into the Aor∣ta; and lastly we discern clear Milkie Footsteps of this Humor in the Kidneys. The Liquor thus transmitted into the Li∣ver, wash'd away the Blood by degrees, not only from the larger Vessels, but also from the Capillaries and the Parenchy∣ma it self. For the bloody Colour seem'd to vanish by degrees, and by and by all the Blood being wash'd away, the Liver turn'd from a white and dark Brown in∣to a kind of Yellow. Which Colour, as seems most probable to me, is nearest the natural Colour of the Liver, than the Ruddie which it borrows from the Blood continually passing through it. After this Experiment made, we cut pretty deep in∣to the Parenchyma it self, that we might know whether the inner Parts of it were likewise chang'd, and there we also found all the Blood so washed away likewise, that it could hardly be done in such a manner any other way: For that the whole Pa∣renchyma was all of the same Colour be∣fore mentioned. Now if the injected Li∣quor had penetrated the Liver by the help of the Anastomoses, how came it to pass that all the Blood was thence wash'd a∣way, and that the Parenchyma having lost the bloody Colour, should presently of its own Accord put on the new Colour. Certainly the Water could add no Colour to it, which it wants it self. Nor could the Milk impart to it that dark Brown Colour, altho' by that means it might re∣tain something of its Whiteness. But for the avoyding of all farther Dispute, I often try'd this Experiment with Water alone. Yet still the Colour appear'd to be pale and dark Brown; and because it appear'd to be alike in all the parts of the Parenchyma, it was a certain sign, that the Water wash'd all the Parts a∣like. Which could not any way have been done, if part of it, having made its Passage through the Anastomoses had slid immediately into the Vena Cava. Now that the Blood naturally takes the same Road with the Water, I do not be∣lieve there is any one that questions. And therefore I think it fit thereupon to con∣clude that the Blood does not glide through those feign'd Anastomoses, but runs tho∣rough the Parenchyma of the Liver it self. XXV. This celebrated Experi∣ment, added to the celebrated Obser∣vations of Malpigius, so clearly il∣lustrates the Understanding of a thing hitherto so obsure, that now there can be no farther Doubt con∣cerning the manner of the Passage of the Blood out of the Porta into the Vena Cava, nor of the natu∣ral Colour of the Liver it self, which being boyl'd, appears to be of a pale yellowish Colour, inclining to a dark Brown. And hence moreover it is most clearly apparent, how in other Parts also, the Circulation of the Blood is made not only through the Anasto∣moses of the Arteries with the Veins, but through the Pores of the Substance of the Parts themselves. Of which more at large l. 2. c. 8. XXVI. As the Trunk of the Por∣ta Vein entring the Liver in the hol∣low Part, sends forth a thousand Branches into it, so likewise a thou∣sand Roots of the Vena Cava are dispersed through those interjacent Ramifications, and there by little and little meet together toward the upper∣most and inner part of the Liver, and become fewer and larger, till at length they close into one Trunk, Con∣tinuous to the Vena Cava: Which, according to Riolanus, is fortified with a Valve preventing the Ingress of the Blood out of the Vena Cava into the Liver. Concerning which see l. 7. c. 10. But before they close toge∣ther into that Trunk, certain membra∣nous Circles on the inner Side, like Valves, are opposed to the Boughs of the larger Roots meeting together, sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner, which Bartholine has observ'd looking toward the greater Tunicle. These hinder the Return of the Blood going forward toward the Vena Cava. XXVII. Concerning the Office ofThe Office of the Li∣ver. the Liver there are various Opinions, of which the Ancientest and the most received is from Galen, who saith that Sanguification is compleated in the Liver, and that it is the true and primary sanguifying or blood∣making Bowel. But this Opinion, after the Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood, has been wholly abolish'd; since it is found that the Blood is only made in the Heart.
Which Hippocrates himself clearly sig∣nifies L. 4. de Morb. where he says, The Heart is the Fountain of Blood; the seat of Chler is in the Liver. Moreover, Reason contradicts that Opinion: First, Because there are no Milkie Vessels that reach to the Liver, and consequently no∣thing of the Chylus is carried thither to be chang'd into blood; for that the Chy∣lus neither ascends nor passes through the Mesaraic Veins, we shall farther shew L. 7. c. 22. Secondly, Because in the Embryo the Heart and the Blood are seen before any Rudiments of the Liver are seen: whereas the Liver, if it were the Effici∣ent of Sanguification, of Necessity, it ought to precede its Effect, that is to say, the Blood. Thirdly, Because when all the Bowels are form'd, and that in the beginning of the Formation all the Vessels are fill'd with Blood, then is the Liver still of a whitish colour, and inclining somewhat to yellow; which is a sign it does not generate the ruddy blood, seeing that of necessity it ought to be colour'd from the beginning by the blood which it generates and contains, before all the other Parts. But in the beginning it is of a pale colour, after∣wards somewhat yellowish, which after∣wards it preserves in its Substance, tho' clouded by the copious mixture of the blood. XXVIII. Bartholine at first was of opinion that the more refin'd and concocted part of the Chylus was car∣ried through the Milkie Vessels, and that out of the Chylus the cruder blood is generated, which is afterwards to be brought to perfection in the Heart. And Deusingius, a stiff Defender of this Opinion, believes the Chylus comes to the Liver through the Mesaraic Veins, Tract. de Sanguific. Nay, that some of the Milkie Vessels reach from the Sweet∣bread to the Liver, and enter the hol∣low parts of it: of the former of which Opinions was Regius. But afterwards Bartholine renounc'd this Opinion, and that with good reason, because it could be no way defended. 1. Because no Milkie Vessels reach the Liver. 2. No Chylus passes through the Mesaraics. 3. Because if the Heart should make blood of the crude blood made in the Liver, and not of the Chylus it self, of necessity all the Milkie Vessels must run to the Liver, and carry thither all their Chyle, to be turn'd into blood, and none would run to the Subclavial Veins, and a good part of the Chylus would ascend through the Mesaraics to the Liver. But our Eye-sight convinces us of the truth of the first, and Reason of the latter. See l. 7. c. 2. XXIX. Glisson believes the Paren∣chymaWhether it be a Streiner. of the Liver to be a certain Streiner through which the Blood and Humours pass, and that those alterati∣ons which they undergo in the Liver, are accomplish'd by percolation. True it is, such a simple streining may sepa∣rate the thin from the thick, but occasi∣on no other alteration worth speaking of. Besides, where there is any streining, there the thin pass thorough, and the thick remain behind. But through the Liver not only all the Blood passes, neither is there any thing of thick that remains behind; but also some part of the ruddy Blood passing thorough, lo∣sing its own nature and sweetness, is chang'd into bitter and yellow Choler. If Glisson should perchance object, That that same Choler is the thicker part, and therefore it does not pass with the rest of the blood, but is evacuated thorough the Ductus Biliarius; I answer, That the Choler indeed does often acquire a certain thickness in the Gall-bag, through its long standing, and the dissipation of the most thin parts by the heat; but that the said Choler, so long as it re∣mains in the Liver mix'd with the blood, is thinner than the blood it self. And this I will prove by the Roots of the Porus Biliarius, and the Gall-bladder, which are much less, much thinner and narrower, than the Roots of the Vena Cava inserted into the Liver. For if it were thicker, it could never be suck'd in, and evacuated through Vessels much thinner than the rest; and leave the thinner to be receiv'd by the bigger and larger Roots of the hollow Vein. Be∣sides, the Choler sweats through the Tunicles of the Gall-bladder, and dyes the neighbouring Bowels of a yellow colour, whereas the blood never sweats through any Tunicles of the Veins, which are thinner and softer than that Bag; and this is very likely to be true, because it is much thicker. XXX. Therefore the true office ofThe true office. the Liver is to moisten the Blood with a sulphury Dew, and together with the Spleen to perfect the Ferment of that and the Chylus. And therefore all Men, all Creatures, as well by Land as by Water, are furnish'd with the Li∣ver, because without that Ferment the spiritous blood could never be made. XXXI. From all that has been said,
it appears, that the Liver was always reckon'd among the principal parts, when Galen ascrib'd to it the office of Blood-making; and though in our Age it be depos'd from that Employ∣ment, and reckon'd among the Mini∣sterial Parts; yet is it to be rank'd among the Noble Parts, the Use of which we cannot be without, and which officiates in one of the highest Offices, and whose Diseases are most dangerous, and destructive to the health of the whole Body. Especially the Wounds that are given it, are by Hippocrates and Celsus numbred among the deadly and incurable, by reason the copious efflux of Blood kills the Pa∣tient before it can be stanch'd by any Me∣dicaments; or if the Blood happen to be stop'd, yet the Ulcer that follows the Wound is very rarely or never to be cur'd; so that of three thousand wound∣ed in that part, hardly one escapes. Yet I remember five Cures of that Bowel, which are reckon'd however next to Mi∣racles. The first is related by Gemma l. 1. Cos∣morit. c. 6. of a Spaniard cur'd of a Wound in his Liver. The second Bertin says he saw L. 13. c. 7. of a Noble Man, whose Liver was not only wounded, but some part of the Liver carried away by the wound, and yet cur'd contrary to all expectation. The third of a Patient cur'd by Ca∣brolius himself; which Patient had a wound that reach'd the deepest part of the Liver, Observat. 18. The fourth related by the same Ca∣brolius out of Rochus of Tarragon. The fifth mentioned by Hildan, Cent. 2. Observ. 34. of a certain Helvetian, who after a piece of his wounded Liver was taken out, and terrible symptoms of approaching death, yet recover'd. XXXII. But these are Miracles ofNone wounded in the Liver escape. Nature which Averrhoes formerly as∣serted to happen sometimes in Cures. For my part I have seen several Wounds of the Liver, as well in the Field as in other Places, but never yet saw any man so wounded escape. XXXIII. Things unusual are sel∣domWorms and Stones in the Liver. found in the Liver, yet we find in some Writers the Relations of Stones and Worms that have been seen therein. Among the rest Hierome Mntu is reports that he has seen a Liver full of Worms I once saw the Li∣ver of a great Drinker of Canary, which when it was cut in two with the Knife, abounded with ma∣ny thousands of Worms; and above a quart of small living Worms were taken from it: this man usually drank two, three, or four quarts of Canary in a day, and that for some years together, by reason whereof he grew fat, and dyed suddenly without any pre∣monitory Sickness: indeed the whole Substance of the Liver was nothing but Worms. Salmon.: and such kind of Worms Wier is and Bauhinus have ob∣serv'd. Borell is found a Hairy worm in the Liver of a Dog. Then for Stones, the Experience of se∣veral convinces us that they have been found in the Liver: but they are rarely generated in the Liver; yet the Author of the German Physical Ephemerides cites one Example out of George Greiselius, of a certain Lady in the lower part of the Lobe of whose Liver there grew a Blad∣der a hands breadth in length, wherein was contained a shining black glutinous Humour, and in the middle of it a Stone as big as a Hens Egg, shining also, as if it had been full of Niter, but insipid and without any smell, weighing an onnce and eighteen grains. The same Author cites another Example out of Iames of Negropont, of a Liver of an unusual big∣ness, weighing above twelve pounds, which was hard, yellow, and here and there strew'd with hard Stones; and in the Gall-bladder, besides much yellow small sand, were contain'd two round, yellow, rough Stones, about the bigness of a Musket-bullet: besides which, another lesser Stone stopp'd up the Meatus Hepa∣ticus to the Gall-bladder. But tho' Stones are rarely found in the Livers of Men, yet in the Livers of diseased Oxen and Sheep, we have sometimes found 'em very numerous, some red, some yellowish; others white like Tartar of Wine. XXXIV. To this Story of the Li∣verThe Liver sometimes joyned with the Lungs. may be added a certain Conjun∣ction of the Liver with the Lungs, and a wonderful situation of both of them, and the parts adjoyning, which D. Wassenaer, a famous Physician at Utrecht, imparted to me in writing, as seen by him in a little Child of Cor∣nelius de Mirop, Governour of Win∣genlangenraeck. This Child was in his life time Asthmatic, and vexed with a frequent and terrible Cough, upon e∣very slight occasion; and at length dy'd of a Fever at seven years of Age. Whose Body being open'd the 2d of Febr. 1665. in the presence of D. Goyer, the said Was∣senaer, and two or three Chirurgions and others.
XXXV. The Abdomen being laidA History. open, saith he, and the Breast, there was no Diaphragma to be found by which the Thorax is separated from the lower Belly. Nor was there any more than one Lobe of the Lungs, which being continued on the right side with the Liver, seem'd to be like it both in colour and substance. There was no spunginess in that Lobe, which crossing the middle of the Liver, un∣der the hollow part of it, stuck out like an Appendix. Out of the midst of the Liver certain Passages, like the Gristles of the Windpipe, deriv'd themselves into the Aspera Arteria it self. There was no skin or cover that appear'd about the Ribs; for the Li∣ver and right part of its Lobe, stuck every where so close to the Ribs, that they could not be separated but by a Penknife. The Pericardium, in which there was but very little Liquor, enfold∣ed but half the Heart, which about the bottom, together with the left and upper part of the Lobe of the Lungs, was so firmly united to the Spine of the Back, as the Liver and right side of the lobe of the Lungs was fasten'd to the Ribs. In the Convex and lower part of the Liver, about the ninth Rib was an Ulcer, full of well concocted Matter. The Stomach also, consider∣ing the proportion of the Body, and the Age of the Child, was twice as big as it ought to have been. XXXVI. And thus sometimes we meet with wonderful things, as to the situation, structure, and connexion of the Bowels. As for Example; No less rare andAnother Rarity, where no Liver or Spleen could be found. monstrous is that, which upon his own, and the testimony of several other Phy∣sicians and Chirurgions, Schenkius af∣firms, Observ. l. 3. viz. that in the Year 1564. in the dissection of the dead Bo∣dy of Ortelius, a Merchant of Antwerp, there was not so much as the footstep to be seen of any Liver or Spleen; but that the substance of all the Intestines was fleshie, and much more solid than the flesh of the Muscles, that it seem'd to resemble the flesh of the Heart. That the Vena Cava had taken its rise from the Origi∣nal it self, which was thought to be the Cause that the Patient in his life time was so frequently tormented with an In∣flammation and Aposteme in his Lungs. Malpigius therefore conjectures, and that not without reason, that the glan∣dulous substance of the Liver, contrary to the order of Nature, was extended all the length of the Intestines. CHAP. XV. Of the Choler Vessels, and the Cho∣ler it self. I. FOR the discharge of the Cho∣lerTwo passa∣ges in the right and hollow part of the Li∣ver. there are two Passages ap∣pointed in the right and hollow part of the Liver, that is to say, the Gall∣bladder, and the Porus Bilarius. Thorough the latter the more feculent and milder Choler flows into the Inte∣stines. Into the former the thinner Cho∣ler Rather a kind of Lymphatic Iuice, fr in the place above-cited of Synop. sis Medicinae, it is there demonstratively proved, that there is  such thing in Nature, as the separation of Gall from the ; but a kind of Lymphatic Iuice, which by the Fermentum of the Gall-bladder is changed into Gall. Salmon. flows, and staying there a while, by that stay cuts off the proper quality of the part, but more from the remaining Liquor that sticks to it, acquires a shar∣per and more fermentative quality. II. The Gall-bladder is an oblongThe Gall-bladder. Bladder, fashion'd like a Pear, some∣what round, hollow, and seated in the caveous or hollow part of the Li∣ver. III. At the uppermost and middleSituation. part it is joyn'd to the hollow of the Liver; the rest of it hangs forth with∣out the body of the Liver; where touching the right side of the Ventri∣cle, and the Gut Colon, it frequent∣ly moistens and stains both with the Choler transpiring through its Tuni∣cles. IV. It is furnish'd with a doubleMem∣branes. Membrane. The one exterior with∣out Fibres, rising from the Peritonae∣um, which invests the pendulous part without the Liver, and fastens it to the Liver, and is the same with the exterior Membrane of the Liver. The other proper and more thick, strength∣ned with a slippery Slime against the Acrimony of the contain'd Humour.
This several Anatomists, with Laurenti∣us, affirm to be interwoven with all man∣nerIts Fibres. of Fibres, and that with the right Fi∣bres it attracts the Choler to it, with the oblique, it retains the Choler in it, and with the Transverse expells it. Yet to o∣thers these Fibres seem to be imaginary, in regard they cannot by any way be de∣monstrated; and therefore Fallopius and Riolanus explode 'em; and Glisson both rejects and refutes their Use describ'd by Laurentius. But Laurentius's Cause may be well enough maintain'd, if we say that although these Fibres cannot be ma∣nifestly demonstrated, yet they may be discern'd by Reason, seeing this part stands no less in need of Fibres to main∣tain and strengthen it, than the Veins, Arteries, the Piss-bladder, and several others, which when they are dilated, contract again by means of their Fibres, and so return again to their former Con∣dition. Which distention happens in the Gall-bladder by reason of the redun∣dancy of the Gall, or else its Efferve∣scency; which, a Contraction by means of Fibres, tho' invisible or obscure, must be of necessity, not only to press forth the Choler out of the Bladder, (which Glisson grants) but also to reduce the Gall-bladder to its first condition. To this we may add, that Fibres are admit∣ted by Anatomists in Veins, which never∣theless no man can easily demonstrate, though it be manifest from their crooked swellings that they have Fibres. V. It has two sorts of Vessels, someTwo sorts of Vessels. that open into the Cavity of it; of which more anon. Others, which run thorough its Tunicles or Membranes, which are fourfold. 1. Small little Arteries, proceeding from the upper right Branch of the Cae∣llac. 2. Many Capillary Veins, bringing back the remainder of the blood after Nourishment supply'd, and at length closing in two small Branches, through which it pours forth this blood into the Vena Portae. 3. A little Nerve hardly conspicuous, deduc'd from the branch of the sixth Pair creeping through the Tunicle of the Liver. 4. Some few Lymphatic Vessels propagated from the Liver, running through its exterior parts. The Arteries and a Nerve enter it about the Neck of it. The Veins go forth the same way toward the Porta The Lym∣phatic Vessels in Men enter the same way, and running thorough the bottom of the Gall-bladder, at the lower part are joyn∣ed with the rest of the Lymphatics pro∣ceeding from the Liver. But in those Creatures where the Gall-bladder hangs forth out of the Liver, they enter at the Neck, and fetching a Circuit about the bottom, return the same way toward o∣ther Lymphatic Vessels proceeding out of the Liver. VI. This Bladder is divided intoThe divisi∣on. bottom and neck. VII. The bottom is larger, round,The bot∣tom. or shap'd like a Pear, dangling below, of the colour of the Gall contain'd in it; sometimes yellow, sometimes rust∣colour'd, sometimes black, and some∣times of a Garlick green. VIII. In the bottom of this sameStones sometimes found in it. Gall-bladder are found several Stones, but so light, that being thrown into Water, they will swim at the top. Of these I have observ'd sundry colours: sometimes yellow, sometimes black in∣clining to green, and sometimes speckl'd like Marble. These seem to be genera∣ted out of Choler, void of any Acrimo∣ny, which in regard it never boyls, never breaks out of the said Gall-bladder, but is harden'd within it by degrees into Stones, by the heat of the Liver. For∣merlyObservati∣on. I dissected a Person that dy'd of the Jaundice, after he had been for some years troubled with a black and green Iaundice I have twice in my life seen Patients afflicted with a green Iaundice: the one I cured; the other dyed, being given over by other Physicians, as uncurable. The Patient whom I cured, was all over of a yellowish green: he which dyed was of a dark or deep green. The cause or reason for this Distemper is rendred in our Synopsis Medicinae, lib. 4. cap. S. Sect. 10. § 26. ad 36. to which I refer you. Salmon., in whose Gall-bladder I found a Stone somewhat black, and of an indifferent blackness. Fernelius Patholog. l. 6. c. 5. gives us a Relation of a certain old man, who had such a large Stone in his Gall-bladder, filling the whole Concavity of it to that degree, that he might be thought to have no Bladder at all. Other innumerable Examples there are of Stones found in the Gall-bladder, frequent to be seen in the Writings of Physicians. IX. The neck of the Bladder isThe Neck. narrower, and toward the upper parts is streightned into a thin passage, which ends in a common passage lead∣ing to the Intestines. X. In this neck, according to theWhether a∣ny Valves in it. Opinion of Andrew Laurentius, Ves∣lingius, and Bartholine, there are Valves to be discern'd, sometimes two, sometimes three, preventing the
Return into the Bladder of the Choler which ought to flow into the Intestines. But I could never observe any such things; however, I observ'd the E∣gress of the Bladder to be most strait, and the Neck of it to be full of many wrinkles, lest the descent of the Cho∣ler should be too easie and too slippery, and therefore to render the Evacuation the more slow. In like manner neither could Riolanus and Glisson find those Valves. For the said narrowness of the Neck seems to be order'd by Nature to that end, that the Choler being once got into its Bladder, should not present∣ly return again, but stay for some time within, to acquire a sharper Acrimony, and more fermentative quality This is something of the Do∣ctrine which we have main∣tained in the places aforecited of our Sy∣nopsis Me∣dicinae; which thing is worthy the serious con∣sideration of all the Sons of Art: and it is without doubt, the same kind of Iuice, which being conveyed to other parts (as the Amygdalae, maxillary Glandules, Womens Breasts, Piss-bladders, Pancreas, Seminal Vessels, and Pores of the Skin,) by the Fermentum of the same parts is converted into the Humor proper to the same; (as Spittle, Milk, Urine, and Iuice, Seed, and Sweat.) Salmon., from the nature and property of the place, and by the mixture of the sharp Choler still remaining in the Bladder, which being once well mingled with it, and thence raising a slight Effervescency in the Cho∣ler it self, it happens that the wrinkles of the Neck being dilated and gaping by means of that distension, some part of it being attenuated and made more fluid by that Effervescency, cannot conveni∣ently be contain'd, but is forc'd down to the Intestines. Of which see more C. 17. following. XI. The Choler is carried to theThe way of the Choler to the Blad∣der. Bladder through many small Roots, scatter'd up and down in the Liver a∣mong many little Branches of the Ve∣na Cava and Vena Portae, (as has been said in the foregoing Chapter,) which closing together into one passage, through that passage pour forth the Choler That is, the Serous or Lympha∣phatic Iuice, which by the Fermentum of the Bladder, as afore∣said, is changed into the Choleric Humor, for several and vari∣ous intentions of Nature. Salmon. into the Gall-bladder. But these Roots are so small, that they are hardly to be seen; only the Trunk into which they all run, is to be found. And Glisson describes the way of searching for it, and finding it out, Anat. Hep. c. 13. This Trunk we have often seen very ap∣parent with some Roots in an Ox Liver, admitting a good big Bodkin; to which, at the entrance into the Bladder of the Gall, sometimes a small, and sometimes a large Valve is affix'd, which hinders the return of the Choler out of the Bladder into the Liver. In Dogs, whose Liver is divided into several Lobes, we have often found, and visibly shewn to the Standers by two or three Trunks. If you ask then, how it returns in Per∣sons that are troubled with the Jaundice? I answer that it does not return, but that the Choler which is generated in the Liver, for want of convenient Effer∣vescency and Fermentation, is not sepa∣rated from the blood, and therefore ne∣ver flows into the Bladder, but remains mix'd with the blood, and together with that is carried to the hollow Vein, the Heart, and the rest of the Body. XII. The Use of the Gall-bladderThe vse. is to collect the Choler with which, in healthy Persons, it is moderately re∣plenish'd, yet not fill'd so full, but that it might contain half a spoonful more. In a sickly habit of body it is some∣times swell'd and stuff'd with Choler; sometimes, but very rarely, altogether empty. XIII. The other Choler Vessel is theThe Bilary Porus. Porus Bilarius, call'd the Bilary Pas∣sage, which is an oblong Chanel, twice as large as the neck of the Bladder, proceeding from the Liver not far from the Vena Portae, and conveigh∣ing the Choler receiv'd by the Liver into the common Chanel, which glides not only somewhat thicker and more dreggy through the broader Chanel, but also milder; where it does not tarry by the way, or acquire a more eager A∣crimony, either by a longer stop, or from the nature of the place, as the o∣ther already collected in the Blad∣der. XIV. To this there are some thatThe Valves. appropriate double Valves, preventing the regress of the Choler into the Li∣ver; the one at its Exit out of the Liver, and the other at its Entrance into the Ductus Communis. But o∣others deny there are any such Valves, because they cannot be found by Anato∣mists. But Reason seems to perswade us, if there are not two, yet that there ought to be one, seeing it is manifest that there is such a Valve in the Trunk which hin∣ders the regress of the Choler. Por our parts, we shall forbear to determine the Controversie, till our Eyes, and certain
Demonstration shall give a definitive Sentence. XV. Now here a Question may a∣rise,Whether two sorts of Choler. Whether there be two sorts of Choler generated in the Liver, of which the one sort, being the sharper, flows into the Gall-bladder; and the other milder flows through the Choler Pas∣sage? I say, No; but that it is one and the same Choler, whose somewhat more feculent parts nevertheless more easily pass through the Porus Bilarius, as being broader, and by reason of their feculency are less eager; but the more thinner parts are conveigh'd into the Gall-bladder; to the end they may there be made more sharp, and acquire a more efficacious fermentative power, as well from the Specific Temper of the Body, as from the Mixture of the sharp Choleric Juice remaining in the Bladder. XVI. But that the Choler, whichDifferen∣ces of Cho∣ler. glides through the Porus Bilarius, differs in some qualities from that which is contain'd in the Gall, Mal∣pigius has experienc'd, Lib. de liene, c. 6. and found that which flows through the said Porus to be more mix'd and less sharp, nor coloured a∣like, and being heated by the fire, yields a most strong scent, which the other does not do. Perhaps it may be objected, That many times there is a thick and slimy Choler found in the Gall∣bladder, which for the most part is very insipid, and void of Acrimony. I an∣swer, That it is not so thick when it first enters the Gall-bladder (for being thick and viscous, it could never pass through the narrow Passages of the Roots, but when the Gall-bladder is obstructed, or that the Choler for some other cause is detain'd within it longer than is requi∣site, then the thinner parts being dissipa∣ted by the heat of the Liver, the Choler becomes thick and viscous in it, contrary to its natural temper; and sometimes is dry'd to a stony hardness: which for the most part happens for this reason, because it has not a fermentative quality, strong enough to stir it up to the Effervescency, and so to timely expulsion. In like manner, I say, that the Choler becomes whitish and insipid in the Bladder, for want of that saltish and sow'rish Liquor that comes from the Spleen, by reason of the corruption or defect of which Li∣quor, the Liver begets vicious Choler Or rather Iuice, for the genera∣ting of Choler, as aforesaid. Salmon., which may easily happen in a sickly Con∣stitution, wherein any other Humors in any other part of the Body, may alter from their natural habit. XVII. Now the Porus Bilarius re∣ceivesThe way of the Choler into the Bilary Po∣rus. that milder sort of Choler by means of innumerable Roots that are dispers'd through the Liver, which accompany the little Branches of the Vena Portae to all parts of the Liver (some excepted, to which the Roots of the Gall-bladder are extended,) nay, they are wrapt about with one and the same Tunicle, arising from the Mem∣brane that enfolds the Liver, in like manner as the Spermatic Vein and Ar∣tery; and by means of that so closely stick one to another, that they cannot be separated one from another without tearing; in so much that at first sight they seem to be one and the same Vessel, and can only be discern'd to be distinct from the variety of the Colour, if they be held up to a clear light, which can∣not be done but when the Liver is excar∣nated. XVIII. Franciscus Sylvius de leSylvius his Opinion. Boe is of opinion that they are not the little Branches of the Vena Portae which are cover'd with one common Tunicle with the Roots of the Bilary Porus, but that they are the little Branches of the Hepatic Artery, which he reports that he saw discover'd and demonstrated by John van Horn, Di∣sputat. Med. 6. Thes. 52. But with∣out doubt, in that demonstration the little Gall Branches, which because of the Liquor contain'd in them, are not so ruddy as the Veins, were by Van Horn taken for Arteries. But that which Sylvius adds, That the He∣patic Artery, for the most part inclosed within the common Covering, is inserted into the little Branches of the Hepatic Bilary Porus, I will believe it when I see it. I know there is a very close conjun∣ction of the little Branches of the Porta and the Gall Vessels, but of no Artery. And hence, that there is any Insertion of any Artery by Anastomoses into the Bila∣ry Vessels, must be prov'd before my Eyes by demonstration, before I can giveThe Choler is taken from the Substance of the Li∣ver. credit to it. XIX. And therefore the Roots of the Porus receive the Choler or Iuice generating of it from the Substance of
the Liver it self, into which several little Branches of the Vena Portae, few of the Hepatic Arteries empty their Blood, which is presently alter'd therein, and by the mixture of sulphury and saltish Particles is concocted after a new manner, and in many of its Particles grows bitter, and turns into Choler. Which Choleric Particles, by means of the Glandulous Balls (of which Malpigius asserts the Substance of the Liver chiefly to consist) are separated from the other bloody Particles, which are less alter'd by that Concoction, and suck'd up by the Roots of the Porus Bi∣larius and Gall-bladder. XX. And, as has been already said of the Arteries, there are many that feign several Anastomoses between the Extremities of the Twigs of the Vena Portae and the Bilary Roots, although there are no such things as we have shew'n in the foregoing Chapter. And which Glisson clearly evinces by many Reasons and Experience, ought not to be; in regard that the whole Alteration of the Blood into Choler, and separation and transfusion of it out of the Veins into the Bilary Vessels, is made by means of the Glandulous Balls. XXI. Now the Choler flowing asThe Du∣ctus Cho∣lidochus. well from the Liver through the Bilary Porus, as out of the Gall-bladder, meets in one common Chanel, call'd the Ductus Cholidochus, which is a Me∣atus Chanel or Passage made out of the Necks of the Bilary Porus, and the Gall-bladder meeting together. XXII. This goes for the most partIt is for the most part solita∣ry. alone, sometimes admitting the Pan∣creatic Chanel at the end of it (which is very frequent in a Man, seldom in a Dog,) toward the end of the Duo∣denum, or beginning of the Jejunum, obliquely between both Tunicles of the Intestine, for the most part single, sel∣dom double about the end, with an In∣sertion of about a fingers breadth, o∣pens toward the hollow of the Inte∣stine, and empties its Choler into the Guts, as well immediately out of the Liver, as out of the Vesicle of the Gall. Others, and not without reason, rather believe that this whole Chanel is no more than the Bilary Porus, extended from the Liver to the Guts, into which, on the side, is inserted the Neck of the Gall∣bladder. XXIII. Vesalius and Sylvius assertIts Valves. that there are certain loose little Mem∣branes fix'd to the Orifice of this Cha∣nel like Valves, preventing the Re∣turn of the Choler from the Guts to the Liver. But if we inquire more dili∣gently, there will be no membranous Valves to be found here, only an Inter∣nal loose Membrane of the Intestine, de∣press'd by the concocted Nourishment passing thorough, so shuts up the way, that no Liquor can enter the Chanel from the Guts, which when the Choler descends and seeks to go forth out of the Chanel, presently opens and gives it a free Passage. XXIV. Glisson allows to that partGlisson would have it to be a Sphincter Muscle. of the Chanel which obliquely enters and bores the Gut, Fibres like Rings, which he believes are open'd like the Sphincter Muscles, when plenty of Choler makes its way, but are then con∣tracted again when that Choler is pass'd away, till more new Choler comes. And these Fibres, as he says, prevent a∣ny Humour from ascending from the Guts to the Liver or Gall-bladder. But perhaps Glisson took that little piece of Flesh which bunches out at the Exit of the Ductus Cholidochus into the Guts, for some little Shincter Muscle. XXV. But because that some ob∣liqueAn Obje∣ction ∣swer'd. Passage into the Guts is very narrow, and the Channel broad, hence the other seems not able to transmit hardly the tenth part of the Choler through a Channel no wider than a Goose-Quill, therefore Glisson thought that the foresaid Ductus Cholido∣chus, did not only do the Duty of Chanels to conveigh the Choler, but also perform'd the Office of Recepta∣cles or Bladders, to contain and keep it for some time. But in the Dissections of dead Carcasses 'tis very rarely seen that any Choler is contain'd in those Vessels. And therefore 'tis more probable that the Choler most usually descends in a small Quantity from the Liver and the Gall-Bladder (for a small Quantity serves to procure Effer∣vescency or Fermentation of the Chylus, together with the Pancreatic Juice) and therefore by reason there is so little of it, it may easily pass through the Streights of the oblique Passage. Which Pas∣sage however being obstructed contrary to Nature, then the Choler happens to stop in the Ductus Cholidochus, as it were
in some Bladder, which never happens according to Nature in a a state of Health. For then a little Choler somewhat sharp, suffices to provoke Evacuation, to cause a Distention of the Ductus, and to open the Passages. XXVI. Here we must observe byAn unusual Constituti∣on. the way a certain Constitution of the Gall Vessels seldome happening, which we saw in the Year 1668. in the Dis∣section of a Woman about thirty Years of Age, who having been long trou∣bled with a Dropsy not very terrible, but partly an Anasacra, partly an Ascites, at length dy'd of it. In this Body we found the Liver not Rud∣dy, but inclining to Yellow: In the rest of the Bowels there was hardly any Yellowness to be observ'd, and an over∣abounding serous Humor fill'd the hol∣lowness of the Abdomen. The Gall-BladderA white Gall-Blad∣der. was White both within and without, as also the Chanel running forth toward the Ductus Cholidochus Communis; and so large as to admit al∣most a Mans little Finger. But neither in the Bladder, nor in the Chanel was any Choler at all, but a white kind of Juice, very Viscous, and not very much. Nevertheless in the common Ductus Cholidochus (which is the Bilarie Porus extended to the Guts) just entring into the Duodenum, there was contained an indifferent Quantity of yellow Choler, which by the yellow Choler within, was plainly discovered to have flow'd into the Duodenum. XXVII. Hence we may raise a greatAn Argu∣ment for the Passage of Choler through the bilary Pore. Argument against those who affirm that no Choler at all flows from the Liver through the Bilary Porus to the Guts, but that part of the Choler flowing from the Vesicle, breaks forth into the Duodenum, and part as∣cends through the Bilary Porus, and so enters the Liver. Which that it cannot be done, is manifest from this Observation. For seeing that no Cho∣ler was contained in the Vesicle, nor in its Chanel, and yet the Choler was car∣ried to the Duodenum, it could be con∣veighed from no other Part than from the Liver, through the Bilary Porus, and the common Ductus Cholidochus, wherein there was Choler also found. XXVIII. Here a Question arises,Whether the Choler ows conti∣nually. whether the Choler descends to the Guts continually, and with an equal Course? For Resolution of which Question, I think it proper to di∣stinguish between that Choler which flows from the Liver through the Po∣rus, and that which falls from the Gall-Bladder. Now that some Cho∣ler, tho' but a small Quantity continu∣ally flows to the Guts, and is presently mix'd with the Pancreatic Juice, flowing also in a small Quantity, is apparent to Sight in the Dislection of living Crea∣tures. But I should think that to be the milder sort, descending from the Liver through the Bilary Porus; not the shar∣per and more fermentative Sort that comes from the Bladder, as being that, which by reason of the narrowness of the Neck of the Bladder, does not seem to glide out of its place, unless when by its Effervescency it dilates the Bladder and its Neck, and makes way for it self. And so I think that this Sort does not flow but by Intervals out of the Blad∣der; and more especially when the Gall-Bladder is pressed by the Stomach full of Meat, as resting upon the right Side of it: And when by reason of the Concoction and Fermentation so near it, the Choler also begins to boyl in the said Gall-Bladder. For that same sharp Choleric Ferment is not flowing conti∣nually, nor do the Intestines always re∣quire the same Quantity of it. But chie∣fly then (when a new Chylus, being to be separated from the Guts) it either slides, or is about to slide down into 'em, Glisson on the other side, believes, that when the Stomach is full▪ or that the Chylus is descending to the lower Parts, the flowing of the Choler is not there∣by promoted, but rather hinder'd. But according to the Opinion of Galen and the Ancients, he asserts, that the Cho∣ler stays for some time in the Gall-Ves∣sels, and afterwards of a suddain is for∣ced down from thence into the Guts; and does the Office of a Clyster to purge 'em. Which was that which be∣fore Glisson, Spigelius both believed and maintained: Tho' according to the O∣pinion of these two Persons the Choler would flow into the Intestines when there was no need of it. But the Ground of this Error was this, That Galen and his Followers thought the Choler to be a meer Excrement, and that it only pro∣moted the Evacuation of the Dreggs of Nourishment, but were ignorant that it is altogether necessary to the Fermenta∣tion of the Chylus. Of which more in the following Chapter. XXIX. Besides the common ChanelThe unuu∣al Chanel. already mentioned, in the Year 1655.
in April, I publicly shew'd in the Anatomy Theater another unusual Cha∣nel, thinner than the other usual Cha∣nel, which nevertheless was there at the same time, and full of Yellow Cho∣ler, which had no Correspondency with the Bilary Porus, or the com∣mon Ductus Cholidochus already mentioned, but had its Rise apart above the Neck of the Gall-Bladder, where the Bladder begins to be streightened toward the Neck: Be∣sides that it was carried apart by it self to the Duodenum, into which it was in∣serted about a Fingers breadth from the Insertion of the common Ductus Choli∣doch is. The next Year in another Bo∣dy we observed something that was rare, that is to say besides the usual Ductus Cholidochus, another unusual Meatus or Chanel, extended from the middle of the Gall-Bladder, directly to that part of the Gut Colon adjoyning to it. And thus sometimes we shall observe a Chanel to extend it self from the Gall-Bladder to the Pylorus, and sometimes to the bottom of the Stomach. But these are the unusual Sports and Varie∣ties of Nature, seldome to be seen. XXX. From what has been said,A Digres∣sion. it is apparent that Choler is made in the Liver, That is to say the Iuice ge∣nerating Choler more speci∣ally, be∣cause the same Iuice cannot be brought from other remote Parts at the same time. Salmon. and from hence flows forth from the Choler Vessels into the Guts. It remains now that we speak something of its Generation and its Use. XXXI. Choler then is a Fermenta∣ceousWhat Cho∣ler is. Iuice prepar'd in the Liver out of the Venal Blood, and specific splenetic Iuice. That is to say, the said Iuice is prepared and fitted in the Liver for Separation, to be received into the Gall-Bladder, and there by the Fermentum inherent, to be perfected, and made that choleric Iuice, which is bitter, and so sent into the Ieju∣num. Salmon. XXXII. It is generated as well out of the Sulphury and Unctuous Parti∣cles of the Venal Blood, as the Salt and Acid Particles of the sowrish Li∣quor coming from the Spleen, toge∣ther with those that flow through the Vena Portae, being beforehand Con∣cocted, mixed and prepared in the Liver after a specific manner. For the sulphureous Juice, altho' it be sweetish of it self, being for some time concocted with the saltish Ferment, grows bitter and changes its Colour. Now that this is the matter of which Choler Con∣sists, the Art of Chymistry teaches us, as being that by which but little fixed Salt and Water, but much volatil Salt and Oyle may be extracted from the Choler of the Bladder, if in its natural Condition. XXXIII. This Choler concocted inThe Mi∣on of C∣ler. the Liver, one Part of it, being the thinnest, remaining mix'd with the Blood, is carried to the Vena Cava, and therein, infuses into the Blood a certain fermentative Quality, by which it is made fit to be presently dilated in the Heart. The other Part more bitter and more fermentaceous, partly of a milder Quality, flows through the Bilary Porus to the Intestins; and part∣ly forc'd into the Gall-Bladder, from the Property of the Place and the Juice abiding in it, becomes yet more bitter and sharp, and acquires a stronger fer∣mentative Quality. XXXIV. From the Ignorance ofWhether Choler be generated in  Par. this Motion of the Choler, some famous Physicians, as Galen, Lud. Merca∣tor, Helmont, Krempsius, Hoffman, and others made a Doubt whether some Choler were not generated in the Stomach, Heart, Head, and Kid∣neys, as well as in the Liver and Gall-Vessels; which seems to be prov'd by the Vomiting of Choler, in the Dis∣ease call'd Cholera, and the yellow Froth sometimes swimming upon ex∣tracted Blood, the Bitterness of the Excrements contain'd in the Ears, and the choleric Colour of Urines. But their Mistake proceeded from hence, that they thought Choler to be a meer Excrement, and that it was all of it sent through the Gall-Vessels to the Gutts, and from thence evacuated; and were ignorant that in the Distemper called Cholera, being forc'd out of the Blad∣der into the Guts, the greatest part of it ascended into the Stomach, and so was vomited up; as also that a good part of it was carried to the Heart, and mixed for Fermentation sake with the Blood, and circulated with the Blood through all the Body, and hence the Colour of it appeared in the Froth swimming upon the Blood, and in U∣rines; Hence also the Colour and Tast
of it proceeded in the Excrements of the Ears, tho' it be not generated in the Parts that evacuate those Excrements. XXXV. The property of PlaceThe Place generating Choler, de∣pends upon the inner Tunicle of the Gall-Bladder, & the Choler residing therein. conducing to the Generation of Cho∣ler, depends partly upon the inner Tunicle of the Gall-Bladder it self, which is endu'd with a peculiar fer∣mentaceous Quality: Partly upon the Choler residing in that Bladder, which by a longer Stay, being there fermen∣ted and Boyling, becomes more sharp and bitter, and by that means ferments and renders more sharp the fresh milder Choler flowing out of the Li∣ver into the Bladder; and so by conti∣nuance the sharper Choler boyling, flows out of the Bladder, and the milder taking its Room, and staying there, becomes more sharp. Nevertheless the Choler acquires either a more intense or remiss Acrimony, according as more or fewer, and those more sharp or mil∣der, saltish and sowrish Juices, flowing from the Spleen to the Liver, and there are intermixt with the sulphurous Juice, and are more or less concocted. For if the Juice that flows from the splenetic Branch, be either less in Quantity or less Sharp, the Choler becomes less Sharp and less effectual to promote a Fermentative Effervescency; which grow∣ing Clammy in the Choler Vessels of the Liver, and Bladder, as not being suffi∣ciently attehuated by that weak Effer∣vescency, causes the Jaundice and many other Obstructions. But if the Liquor that flows from the Spleen be too sharp, then the Choler becomes too sharp and eager as well in the Vasa Bilaria of the Liver, as in the Gall-Bladder, and that Acrimony corroding too violently in the Fermentation, causes great Pains, Cholera's, Dysenteries, and other Distem∣pers, especially if a sowre Pancreatic Juice flow into the Intestins at the same time. XXXVI. Francis de le Boe Syl∣vius,A new Opi∣nion. considering the very small and almost invincible Passages, through which the Choler is conveighed from the Liver to the Gall-Bladder, con∣ceiv'd quite another Opinion of its Generation. For he imagins Choler to be generated out of the most simi∣lar Parts of the Blood conveighed through the Cystic Arteries to the Gall-Bladder, and penetrating by de∣grees through the Pores of its Tuni∣cle into the Concavity it self, and there presently changing into the same Nature with the rest of the Choler; in like manner as a Iugg of Wine, being poured into a Tub of Vinegar streight becomes Vinegar. This Opinion of Sylvius comes very near the Truth, if it be considered as to the Particles or Matter of which Choler is ge∣nerated: But as to the Ways and Passages leading that Matter to the proper Place, I am very confident he is wide from the Mark▪ For the Passages out of the Liver into the Gall-Bladder (whi are indeed Strainers)▪ are evident in many Persons to the  Eyes; but with a Microscope, they appear famous. So  deny them, a man must absolutely deny his Senses. Salmon. Regius is also of the same Opinion, Philos. Natur. l. 4. c. 12. who neverthe∣less seems to acknowledg the Bilarie Roots, extracting the Choler out of the venal Blood infused into the Liver. But these three things destroy the Fiction of Sylvius. 1. For that never any Signs appear of any Blood infused into the Hollow of the Gall-Bladder; no, not so much as the least Drop ever observ'd by any Anatomists; whereas in all other Parts wherein any Juice, Liquor, or Spi∣rit, is to be made of Blood, there are some marks of Blood that manifestly appear, as in the Brain and Testicles. 2. Because that Choler is generated in some Creatures that are said to be desti∣tute of a Gall-Bladder, as in the Hart, the Fallow Deer, the Camel, &c. In which Creatures it cannot be generated in the Vesicula Fellis, out of the Blood that glides through the Arteries, but being generated in the Liver it self, flows through the Bilary Porus. 3. Because those Vessels are sometimes obstructed through which the Choler is conveighed to the Porus, and Gall-Bladder, which is the cause of the Jaundice, by reason of the great Quantity of Choler diffused over the whole Body; when as it is ap∣parent that no Choler was generated in the mean time in the Porus, or empty Gall-Bladder, tho▪ the Cystic Arteries conveighed Blood sufficient to the Blad∣der as they used to do. 4. Because that in Gluttons and great Drinkers, the Jaundice proceeding from a hot Distem∣per of the Liver, cannot be caused by the arterial Blood being chang'd into Choler, which was equally both before and then carried o the Gall-Bladder; nor is there any Reason it should then be more copiously conveighed thither to be changed into Choler, than at a∣ny other time. 5. Because this Opinion seems to presuppose as if all the whole Mass of Choler were generated in the
Gall-Bladder, whereas it is all genera∣ted in the Liver I beg the Diversion of the Au∣thor in be∣lieving of this, since the contra∣ry can be prov'd by ocular De∣monstrati∣on. Salmon. before it comes to the Bladder: As is apparent from hence, for that very much Choler flows through the Porus to the Intestin, which never comes near the Gall-Bladder; and there∣fore could not be generated out of the Particles of the arterial Blood, gliding into the Bladder. 6. Because this Opi∣nion seems also to maintain, that real Choler does not pre-exist in the Blood, and that the Particles of it being sepa∣rated from the Blood, flow down into the hollow of the Bladder, and are there made perfect Choler. But the Vanity of this Opinion we have at large demon∣strated. C. 10. artic. de generat. Suc. pan∣creat. XXXVII. Moreover what Sylvi∣us,The Inser∣tion of the Hepatic Artery into the Bran∣ches of the Porus un∣certain. in his Addition to his Disputati∣on, alledges for the Support of his Opinion, do not seem to be of so much Weight, as to establish his Doctrine. For the Insertion of the Hepatic Ar∣tery into the Branches of the Porus does not prove it, because the Inserti∣on it self is as yet very much questi∣oned, as being grounded more upon uncertain Belief than certain Sight, and therefore to be laid up among those Doubts which are not to be cre∣dited unless visible to the Eyes. In like manner also his Experiment made in a Dogg, by means of a little Pipe thrust into the Hepatic Artery, and blowing through it into the Gall-Blad∣der, is very uncertain, even by the Con∣fession of Sylvius himself, Thes. 54. Moreover if the Wind could be so ea∣sily blown into the Concavity of the Gall-Bladder, store of Blood might ea∣sily be also forc'd into it by the Protru∣sion of the Heart and the Cystic Arterys, which never was yet observ'd by any Person. XXXVIII. But Malpigius abso∣lutelyWhether Choler be only sepa∣rated and not gene∣rated. denys the Generation of Choler, l. de hep. l. 3. believing that Choler is not generated out of any Blood by the Mixture and Concoction of seve∣ral Humors in the Blood; but that it is only separated from the Blood by means of the Glandulous Balls of the Liver it self, and that such as it is, it pre-exists in the Blood, and therefore has need of nothing more than Separation. Which Separation he thinks to be thus brought to pass▪ Neither, says he, is there any Necessity for Suction, to the End the Choler should be sent to the Intestins or Gall-Bladder through the Porus, for a strong and conti∣nued Compression of the Glandules of the Liver, caused by continual Respiration, and the Impulse of the Blood running through the Arteries, and the Branches of the Portae promote the Office of Separati∣on in the Glandulous Balls, and its Pro∣pulsion through the Branches of the Porus, as it happens in other conglomerated, and conglobated Kernels, in the Parotides and the like. XXXIX. But herein the learned Gentleman is very much mistaken, for there is in the Blood coming to the Liver and bilarie Vessels, a cer∣tain Substance intended for Choler, but not Choler it self. This Assertion of the learned Author agrees with Truth it self, and with what we have before (in several places) declared con∣cerning this matter, and without doubt in this Sense he is al∣ways to be understood, when he speaks at any time of the Sepa∣ration of Choler from the Blood in the Liver, viz. That it is a certain Substance intended for Choler, but not Choler it self: The which Substance or Iuice is neither Yellow nor Bit∣ter, nor Choler, nor contains any Choler till it is transmitted thereinto by the proper Ferment of the Part. Salmon. As there is in the Nourishment a certain Matter, out of which a Chylus is to be prepared by the mixture of a spe∣cific Ferment, and the specific Concoction of the Stomach, which is not the Chy∣lus it self: And in the Chylus there is the Substance of Blood, but not the Blood it self: And▪ as these Humors the Chylus and Blood are made by specific Fermen∣tations and Concoctions in the Bowels, design'd for that purpose, of those things which before they were not; in like manner the yellow and bitter Choler▪ is made out of sweet Blood, and acid sple∣nic Juice (of which neither is yellow or bitter, neither of 'em is Choler, or con∣tain any Choler in themselves) being mix'd together in the Liver, and fer∣mented and concocted after a specific Manner: And the chiefest part of it (for some of the thinnest remains mix'd with the Blood, is carried to the Vena Cava and the Heart, is separated from the rest of the Blood, being unfit to be chan∣ged into Choler, and is carried to the Roots of the bilary Vessels, and so by degrees proceeds to the Porus and bilarie Bladder. In like manner as in Chymi∣stry, various Bodies are changed into Metals, which before were not Me∣tals: And out of things void of Colour, mixed and boyling together, a new Co∣lour is raised, which was not in the Sub∣stance
before; as out of white Salt-Tar∣tar, and transparent Spirit of Wine is produced a red Colour. And hence it may be certainly concluded, that there is not any single Separation of Choler pre-existent in the Blood, but a new Generation of Choler which was not be∣fore. As to the Arguments which Mal∣pigius alledges of the pre-existency of Urine in the Blood, and other things too prolix to be here cited, they are not of so much Moment as to prove that pre-existency of Choler in the Blood, and single Separation from it; when as there is not the same Reason for the Separation of the superfluous Se∣rum pre-existent, and the Generation of necessary Choler not pre-existent. Of this see more in C. 10. already cited. XL. The natural Colour of CholerColour and Tast. is yellow, the Tast bitter, and somewhat tart, the Substance Fluid. But by several Causes, all these three in a sick∣ly habit of Body suffer Alteration, as the Blood is either in a bad or good Condition, or the splenetic Iuice con∣veighed to the Liver is more or less Salt, Acid, Sowre, or Austere. For hence arise many preternatural Qualitys of Choler, and as they vary, happen Fevers, Cholerick Distempers, Dysente∣ries, Iaundice, Colic Pains, and several other Diseases. Which Regner Graef affirms to arise only from the Corrupti∣on of the Pancreatic Iuice; but contra∣ry to Experience, for the Dissections of Bodys that have been brought to the Grave by those Diseases, frequently tell us, that when the Sweetbread has been firm and sound, the Cause of the Dis∣ease has lain hid in the Liver, Bladder, and other Bilarie Vessels; tho' we do not deny but that the same Diseases may arise from a vitious Pancreas. Hence there are several Alterations of the Co∣lour of the Choler, which is sometimes Pale, sometimes Saffron Coloured, some∣times Red, sometimes Rust-coloured, and sometimes inclining to Black. Ne∣vertheless Regner de Graef, not conside∣ring the Flux of the splenetic Juice to the Liver, has conceiv'd a quite diffe∣rent Opinion concerning these preterna∣tural Colours: Believing that same va∣riety of Colours happens to the Choler not in the Gall-Bladder, nor in the Cho∣ler Vessels, but in the Duodenum, and that by the Mixture of the Pancreatic, acid or sowre Juice, no otherwise than if it should change its natural Yellow into any other Colour in the Gall-Bladder it self. But in the Dissections of Bodys that have dy'd in our Hospital, we have demonstratively and frequently shewn a Green Eruginous or Rust Coloured, and sometimes a blackish Colour in the Bladder it self before the mixture of the Pancreatic Juice; nay in the Daughter of the Lord Vich, who dy'd of an Eru∣ginous Flux of the Belly, and after her Death by me dissected in the sight of several Physicians, we found the Gall-Bladder swell'd to the bigness of a Hens Egg, and full of an Eruginous Choler: Which we have also observ'd in some other Infants that have dy'd of the same Diarrhoea, as also in others who have dy'd of the Disease Cholera. So that the various Colours of the Choler do not always proceed from the Mixture of the Pancreatic Iuice in the Intestins, but are often acquired in the Gall-Bladder, and Bilary Vessels, in the same man∣ner as we have already rehearsed. Of which see more in the preceding C. 7. XLI. But now that the severalVariety of Colours from vari∣ety of Hu∣mors, con∣firm'd by Observati∣on. Humors engendered in the Body being mix'd with the Blood, according to the diversity of Qualitys, occasion a great Variety of Colour, is apparent from these Experiments which we have observ'd in the Gall of an Ox. Which being mix'd with acid things, as Oyle of Vitriol, or Tartar, or Vinegar first boyl'd a little, then growing very thick, became of a green Colour, but being strongly shaken in a Flaggon with these Acids turn'd to a whitish Colour. Be∣ing mix'd with ordinary Cinamon Wa∣ter, it became more Thin, more Yel∣low, and more Fluid: But being mix'd with Spirit of Wine; presently separa∣ted from it, and setled at the Bottom. Lastly, being mixed with fair Water, a little Gall dyed a great deal of Water of a Saffron Colour. XLII. Of the motion of the CholerWhether the Choler ascend to the Liver through the Porus. we have spoken; that is to say, that some part of it mixed with the Blood, tends from the Liver to the Vena Cava, but that the greatest Part is carried to the Bilary Vessels, and so through the Porus and Gall-Bladder to the Intestines. But the Opinions of others are far different concerning this Matter. Vesalius (following the Judgment of Golen) writes that the Choler is drawn out of the Porus to the Gall-bladder, and from thence is forced down to the In∣testines. But this Opinion fails, because it does not demonstrate the Way thro' which the Choler comes from the Po∣rus to the Gall-bladder. To which it
cannot ascend through the Chanel of the Gall-bladder, and through that de∣scend again from the Gall-bladder to the Intestines, for that in the parts of our Body there is neither any drawing of Humors, nor any natural going and returning the same way. Fallopius l. 3. Observ. c. 7. believes that the Choler of the Liver does not ascend, unless when the Mouth of the common meatus Cho∣lidochus is stopped by some Cause or o∣ther, but that upon such an Occasion it may be done. But the Wrinkles and Narrowness of the Neck of the Gall∣bladder contradict this Opinion, alto∣gether impeding the Ingress of the Cho∣ler ascending this way; so that the Cho∣ler thrust forward from the Gall-blad∣der it self by compressing into the com∣mon Ductus Cholidochus, can by no means be repell'd back into the Gall∣bladder by a contrary Compression of the said Ductus. From these Backius very much differs, Dissert. de corde c. 3. & 6. who asserts that the Choler is carried directly out of the Cystis to the common Ductus Cholidochus, but that the Extremity of it, which ends in the Intestines, is so fram'd, that it does not permit the Exit of the Choler, but rea∣dily gives way to the Chylus descending from the Stomach; and suffers in like manner its ascent to the Liver. And that it communicates as well the Chy∣lus, as more especially a part of the Choler through the same Hole to the Pancreatic Wirtzungian Ductus. But the very Sight it self evinces and destroys the Opinion of Backius, by which it ap∣pears to the Eye in the Dissections of living Animals, that as well the Choler as the Pancreatic Iuice break forth from their own Places into the Duodenum, but that nothing of the Chylus can enter through that way out of the Guts by a contrary Conveighance. Francis de le Boe Sylvius, introduces still another Mo∣tion of the Chylus, and asserts that the Choler which is bred in the Bladder flows to the common Ductus Cholidochus, and is carried from thence partly to the Guts, partly ascends through the bilary Porus to the Liver, and there being mix'd with the Blood renders it more thin; but that no blood flows from the Liver through the Porus to the Intestines. And this in his Additament he proves from hence, because that by blowing through a Reed there is a Passage open from the Porus to the Liver. A most egregious Consequence; and this is such another. The breath blown through a Pipe into the Ureter, passes into the Kid∣ney, and farther into the Emulgent Vein, and Vena Cava, therefore the Urinous Serum is carried out of the Bladder through the Ureter to the Kidney. Cer∣tainly it would be very strange, if the Choler which is bred in the Liver, and from thence once empty'd into the Ve∣sicle, should return through the Porus to the Liver. But the Falshood of this Opinion appears from many things al∣ready said. First from the rare Consti∣tution of the Gall Vessels: And the Force of it is quite enervated by the Experiment of the perspicacious Malpi∣gius, l. de hep. c. 7. In a Cat, saith he, of a few Months old, where the Gall-blad∣der is conspicuously prominent, I have ty'd the Neck of the Cystis with a Thread, and empty'd it out of a Wound in the Middle. Then have I again bound the Extremity of the Ductus Cholidochus, where it opens into the Intestin: Then the Creature still living for some convenient space of time, I have found the intercep∣ted bilary Porus extreamly swell'd, and a Portion of the common Ductus Cholido∣chus. And that I might prevent all Pos∣sibility of Separating the Choler by the help of the Cystis, after I had first ty'd a hard Knot in the Neck of it, I cut off the Cystis it self, and threw it away. And yet I found the same Swelling follow in the hollow'd Pores by reason of the flowing Choler. Moreover I try'd with my Fin∣ger to drive upward the Choler contained in the Vessels that so swell'd, yet would it return with a Force, nor could be kept back unless with an extraordinary Violence. A little after he adds, It is most certain, from many times repeated Observation, that the Extremity of the Cystic Passage being bound, so that not the least part of the Substance of the Cystis or of its Neck, re∣main beyond the Ligature, but that only the common Ductus Cholidochus, and the bilary Porus may run directly toward the Intestines; and then tying another Knot near the Jejunum, a remarkable Quantity of Choler will be collected toge∣ther, and evacuated out of a small Wound made beyond the Ligature in the mid Way; which Knot may be several times unty'd, that the Porus Bilarius being plen∣tifully fill'd may be emptied again. XLIII. To which Experiment may be added three or four Observations of Riolanus, Anthropog. l. 2. c. 22. From whence it appears as plain as Day, that the Choler flowing from the Gall-bladder never ascends tho∣rough the Bilary Porus to the Liver; And that no Choler often descends from
the bladder, yet in the interim flows in great quantity from the Liver through the Poras Communis to the Intestines, and therein, if it be endu'd with bad qua∣lities, produces Diarrhoeas, Dysenteries, the Disease Cholera, cruel Gripings, and other Distempers. XLIV. Concerning the use of theThe use of the Choler. Bladder, there have been hitherto great Disputes among the most Emi∣nent Doctors. Aristotle thought it to be separated from the Blood, as a meer noxious Excrement; whose Opi∣nion is followed by many. And hence it is that Bauhinus, Anat. l. 1. c. 45. makes a doubt whether the Collection of the Choler in the Bladder be necessary to Life; when the ancients affirm'd the cause of long life to be the emptiness of the Gall-bladder, deducing their Argu∣ment from Harts, that have no Gall, and yet live long. Haly Abbas, and A∣vicen, say that it heats and strengthens the Liver, and helps its Concoction. Zirbus writes, that it defends the Liver and other parts from Putrefaction. Which Opinion, tho' it be exploded by Vesalius, yet does it not displease Riolanus. Hel∣mont asserts it to be the Balsom of the Liver, and all the Blood. Glisson asserts that it does not only preserve the Liver from Putrefaction, but prevents its Ob∣structions, purifies the Blood, and hin∣ders its Coagulation. Veslingius also says that it preserves the very Chylus from Putrefaction. Many Neoterics, accord∣ing to the Opinion of Galen, have de∣sign'd only to promote the Evacuation of the Excrements out of the Guts; which Bartholine says, are thereby made fluid, and fit for motion. And thus all have made a doubt concerning the Use of this Noble Juice, which is found to be want∣ing in no Man, and which no Man can live without: and of which Fernelius writes, that many People have dy'd, in whom there has been found no other cause of their Death, than that the Gall-bladder was altogether empty of Gall. XLV. Manifest therefore it is, thatIts chief vse is for Fermenta∣tion. Choler has a more noble Use, than hi∣therto has been ascrib'd to it by Physici∣ans and Philosophers. And indeed the chiefest Use of it is to be service∣able to Fermentation. Of which more at large c. 17. CHAP. XVI. Of the Spleen. I. THE Spleen, call'd by theThe names. Latines Splen, by the Greeks , is an Organic Part, or Bowel seated in the left Hypochondrium, under the Diaphragma, between the Stomach and the Ribs. II. It is very rare, or rather prodi∣gious,Unusual Situation. as both Aristotle and Pliny te∣stifie, that the Spleen should change places with the Liver, that is, that this should be in the left, and the other in the right Hypochondrium, which nevertheless has been observ'd by Cor∣nelius Gemma, and Talentonius. And such an unusual Accident Cattierus de∣scribes; and Bartholine relates two or three Histories to the same purpose, Ob∣servat. Anat. Rar. Cent. 2. Hist. Also it is as unusual for the Spleen to be wanting; which defect nevertheless Hollerias re∣ports that he saw in a certain Woman, and was found in Ortelius, as has been said c. 14. Andrew Laurentius also makes mention of a Body dissected at Pa∣ris, that had no Spleen; in which the Splenetick Branch ended in a small Glan∣dulous Body. Thus Kerckringius in his Anat. Observ. writes, that in two Births dissected at Amsterdam, he observ'd the Spleen to be wanting. Aristotle also te∣stifies that the Spleen is wanting in several Creatures, L. 3. de part. Animal. All Creatures, saith he, that have Blood have a Liver, but all have not a Spleen. And c. 24. All most perfect Creatures only have a Spleen. Thus Riolanus, following A∣ristotle's Opinion, Creatures that have none or very small Lungs, have none or a very small Spleen. Ent also in Apolog. writes that he has observ'd several Birds to have no Spleen. III. In Men it is generally but one,The num∣ber. and seldom exceeds that number. Ne∣vertheless Cabrolius, Observ. 15. as also Posthius, and Dominic de Marchettis, have fond two. Fallopius observes, in Observ. that he has seen three; frequently in Dogs there are two, not so often three; une∣qual in bigness; out of each of which there is a vessel extended to the Splene∣tick branch. And the same thing per∣haps may fall out in other Creatures. For Aristotle de Generat. Animal. l. 4. c. 4. writes that some brute Creatures have a
double Spleen; and that some have none at all. IV. The Convex part of it is knitThe Con∣nexion. to the Diaphragma, not so fast and tite as the Liver, but superficially, as also to the left Kidney by small mem∣branous Fibres springing from the Pe∣ritonaeum. And yet in Novemb. 1668. we found so fast a Connexion of it to the Diaphragma, the left Kidney, and the left Lobe of the Liver, extended so far, that the Connexion could hardly be se∣ver'd without dilaceration: but this rare∣ly happens. The flat part adheres to the Caul, and the adjoyning Parts, and be∣ing so bound, in sane bodies seldom de∣scends beyond the lowest Rib: but the Li∣gaments being loosen'd, it is felt in a lower place, to the great disturbance of health; but the Ligaments being quite broken, som∣times it slides down into the Hypogastri∣m; which Cabrolius observ'd to have hap∣pened to a certain Noble Man; whose Spleen swam upon the whole Concavity of his belly Not ma∣ny months ago I had a Child un∣der my cure who had a Spleen so large, that it covered almost the whole Ab∣domen, and reached down to the left Groin: it was so apparent, that it might outward∣ly be felt, being above nine Inches in length, and about seven In∣ches in breadth. The Child died, and was opened; by which we were confirmed in the extravagancy of this Bowel. Salmon. And which by Riolanus was seen in a Parisian Woman, whose Spleen rested upon her Womb, and for two years deceiv'd the Physicians, who took it for a Mole; whereas when the dead body was open'd, the cause of the Swelling, and the Womans Death, were both found together to have proceeded from the Spleens being fall'n down out of its place. V. The bigness of the Spleen inThe big∣ness. Men is various, according to the di∣versity of Bodies and Constitutions. For generally it is six Inches long, three broad, and about the thickness of the Thumb. I diseased bodies it some∣times grows to an enormous bigness; so that its protuberancy beyond the Ribs may be both felt and seen. The that inhabit moist Regions and Fenny Places, have large Spleens. Lindan reports also, That the Common People of Friezland, that use for their common Drink sowre Butter-milk, have great Livers. In the Year 1657. I dissected a body, wherein I found a four square hard Spleen, about the bigness of a mans head. Fernelius also writes that there was a Liver seen, that for bulk and quantity exceeded the Liver. Wepfer found a Spleen in the bo∣dy of a Noble Woman, that in length exceeded five hands breadth, four in breadth, and one and a half in thickness, and weighed about six common pounds, and so exceeded the Liver in bigness. Aetius l. 7. c. 10, 16. writes, that in Sple∣netic Persons this Bowel sometimes reach∣es in length to the Groins, and with its breadth touches the Liver. Such great Spleens as these Vesalius also and Mar∣cellus Donatus testifie that they have seen themselves. And Cabrolius makes men∣tion of one that weigh'd five pounds. Schenkius also relates out of Gamerus the Story of one that weigh'd three and twenty pound. But such prodigious bulks are very unusual. In the mean time, the more preternaturally big this Bowel is, the worse it is with the Patient whose body is the more extenuated thereby, because it does not afford mat∣ter sufficient to accomplish convenient Fermentation in the Liver, of which the blood being destitute, cannot be attenu∣ated and brought to persection as it ought to be; but is left, sowre, acid, thick, and otherwise unprofitable for the Nourish∣ment of the Parts. From whence arises the Scurvy, as Hippocrates first observ'd, l. 2. Poreth. They, saith he, are troubled with bad Gums, and stinking Breaths, who have large Spleens: but they who having large Spleens are subject to bleed, and yet have no ill smell in their mouths, they are troubled with bad Ulcers and black Spots in their Legs. VI. Spigelius has observ'd, ThatLean people most subject to  Spleens. they who have large Veins, have larger Spleens, and therefore lean People are more subject to swoll'n Spleens than they who are fat. VII. Rarely the Spleen is less thanSmall Spleens. its natural proportion, and yet I re∣member some Examples of such. 1. Vi∣dus Vidius the younger, L. 12. de Cu∣rat. Morb. c. 10. in the Body of a Man very cachectic, found a Spleen no big∣ger than a Pigeons Egg, almost as hard as a Stone. 2. Salmuth Cent. 2. Ob∣serv. 21. in a Woman that dyed in Child-bed, otherwise very healthy while she lived, had found a Spleen so small, that it hardly exceeded the bigness of a Man's Thumb. 3. Riolanus also reports that the Spleen of Thuanus the Historian hardly weigh'd an Ounce. 4. Conringius asfirms, that hardly any footstep of a Spleen appeared in the Princess of Luxem∣burgh.The Shape. VIII. The shape of it is oblong, like an Oxe's Tongue, whence some have
call'd it the Tongue-Bowel, as being not unlike it in Oxen, Dogs, and ma∣ny other Brutes: it is somewhat full of Crinkles within side; but the outside is somewhat bunchy or bossie. But in Man the shape of it is found to receive sundry Figures: as being in some tri∣angular, in others gibbous, square, round, sharp pointed; and in others distinguish'd into Lobes. The upper∣most and thicker part of it is call'd by Hippocrates and Ruffus the Head, the thinner part the Tail. IX. The Colour in a Child in the Colour. Womb is ruddy; in Persons grown up to maturity of a lead Colour, or black and bluish. And Spigelius has ob∣serv'd it, and shwn it in dissection of grown Persons, when it has been as red as the Liver, which has been also observ'd by Vesalius, Bauhinus, and Conringius. The cause of which va∣riety of Colour proceeds from variety of Dyet, and alteration of Temper and Heat; for thereby is caus'd a great alte∣ration of the Humors of the whole Bo∣dy, and so of those Humours that are carried to the Spleen, whence the variety of Colour.Mem∣braces. X. It is surrounded with a double Membrane; one exterior from the Peritonaeum; the other thin and pro∣per to it self, proceeding from the ex∣terior Membranes of the Vessels en∣tring the Spleen, and interwoven with a neat and wonderful contexture of Fibres. Which Tunicles or Membranes have their Arteries, Veins, and Nerves from those that pass through the inner Substance. Malpigius l. de Lien. c. 1. remarks a wonderful hardness of the inner Mem∣brane, not yet observ'd by Us. It is ob∣serv'd, says he, by many, that that Mem∣brane becomes bony; and Boschius has seen it so hard toward the Muscles of the Abdomen, that he suspected some scyr∣rhosity to be within it. And many times, especially in Sheep, I have observ'd little Stones of a Pargetty Substance, Ulcers all'd Melicerides, and other Tumours, proceeding perhaps from the various conglutinating matter breaking forth from the Extremities of the Vessels. In the next Chapter he writes, that he himself once saw that Cartilaginous or Gristly Membrane in an Ox, and that the same was observ'd by Spigelius. XI. Between both Membranes shootVarious Lymphatic Vessels, form'd like a kind of Net. forth various Lymphatic Vessels, like a kind of a Net, furnish'd with seve∣ral Valves, which according to the ob∣servation of Malpigius, contain a yel∣lowish or somewhat reddish Liquor, but by my own, and the observation of o∣thers, a Limpid, and by conspicuous passages carried through the Cawle, cast forth into the Receptacle of the Chylus. All which arise from many very small conglomerated Kernels contain'd in the Spleen.It is fur∣nish'd with Fibres. XII. It is also furnish'd with innu∣merable Fibres thin and strong, com∣pos'd of little Strings twisted together with a wonderful piece of Workman∣ship, without any hollowness in them∣selves. Glisson indeed attributes some∣thing of hollowness to 'em, and mis∣guided by that Error, that he thought they contributed to conveigh the Ali∣mentary Juice to the Nerves. Malpigi∣us altogether doubtful as to their Cavity, confesses he could not perceive it, and yet leaves it to more piercing and fortunate Inventions to determine the matter. O∣thers, less accurate Inspectors, believ'd those Fibres to be a Contexture of the smallest Sanguiferous Vessels. XIII. Besides the foremention'dIts Vessels. Lymphatic Vessels conspicuous among the Tunicles, it receives also other Vessels, as Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, dispers'd thorough its whole Body. XIV. It is watered with two Arte∣ries,Its Arte∣ries. one entring the upper part, the other the lower part: which Malpigi∣us observ'd to enter the Parenchyma, or Substance of the Spleen in an Ox and Sheep with one Branch, but in a Dog, a Horse, and several other Crea∣tures, with three or four Branches. These Arteries are carried from the Branch of the left Coeliaca, which they call the Splenetick Artery, and sometimes from a certain Branch going forth from the Trunk of the Aorta, and with a winding Course proceeding to the Spleen by the side of the Pancre∣as, and being there divided into a thousand Branches, are dispers'd all over it. Through these Arteries the Blood is forc'd, for which if there be not a passage sufficiently free, to the Roots of the Veins and the Splenetick
Branch, so that it comes to boyl too much in the Spleen, there happens a Pul∣sation in the Spleen no less than that in the Arteries. Of which Tulpius relates a miraculous Story, L. 2. Observ. 28. of a Pulsation of the Liver that was heard at the distance of thirty foot. XV. It sends forth a great VeinIts Veins. from the flat part, call'd the Splenetic Branch, which sticks close to the Pa∣renchyma with numberless Roots, out of which insensibly closing together, sometimes three, sometimes four or more greater Branches are found, by and by concurring altogether into that one Splenetick Branch which runs forth athwart under the Ventricle, through the upper parts of the Caul, to the Vena Portae, and discharges it self into it. XVI. Highmore denies so manyHighmore denies the great num∣ber of the Veins. Veins, or that they run so far into the Bowel, and asserts the numerous San∣guiferous Vessels to be only little Branches of the Arteries dispers'd through the whole Bowel, and believes the Anatomists to be deceiv'd, as mi∣staking Fibres for Veins. But this same Bowel, of so remarkable a bigness, in respect of its Function, cannot but have many blood-bearing Vessels of both sorts, which tho' they can hardly be demon∣strated perfectly distinct, yet may they be comprehended by the Understanding. For if there be so many Arteries that pour blood into the Bowel, there must be also many Veins to assume that infus'd Blood, and to carry it into the Splenetick Branch; for otherwise there would be a Restagnation of the blood, and conse∣quently a Tumor and Inflammation of the Bowel. XVII. Highmore hath also observ'dIts Valves. in the said Veins at the Exit out of the Spleen, certain little Valves looking forth from the Spleen, and soplac'd, as to suffer nothing to flow from the Splene∣tick Branch to the Spleen, but only the Humours from the Spleen into the Splenetick Branch. Which Valves, tho' by reason of their extraordinary thinness, they can hardly be demonstra∣ted, yet are they presently perceiv'd, so soon as the Splenetick Branch is puff't up, or that Water be injected into it through a Syringe; for then they hinder the breath and the water from penetrating into the Spleen. XVIII. Bauhlnus, Bartholine, andIts A▪ moses. some others write, that in the inner part of the Bowel, several Branches of Arteries close together with the ends of the Veins by Anastomoses, by which means the Blood is transfus'd out of them into these; and so flow to the Splenetick Branch. But this seems not so probable, seeing that the blood in such a Passage or Transfusion only can∣not acquire a requisite subacid fermenta∣tive quality. And hence it is necessary, that that transfusion of the blood be made by some interceding Medium (as happens in the Liver, of which we shall say more below, when we come to dis∣course of the Function of the Spleen. In the mean while one remarkable Anasto∣mosis is to be observ'd (rarely two) by which the Trunk of the Artery, before it enters the Spleen, closes with the Sple∣netick Branch. Which seems to be form'd to that end, partly that the Arterious Blood▪ by its mixture, may render the Humours more fluid that are carried out of the Spleen to the Splenetic Branch, and excite 'em to more speedy motion. Partly, that the redundant and superfluous blood, which by reason of the narrowness of the Passages cannot pass with that requisite swiftness through the Spleen, may flow through this Anastomosis into the Sple∣netick Branch. XIX. Now there is a Vessel call'dThe Vas breve. Vas venosum breve, which enters the Splenetick Branch, not far from, or rather just at its going forth, frequent∣ly in Man at the very Exit of the Branch out of the Spleen; in Beasts, a little farther off, the Roots of which Vessel sticking to the Ventricle, meet together about the bottom of it, seldom joyning into one, frequently into two or more Chanels, and so constitute sometimes one, sometimes two or three Vasa brevia, which all shoot forth in∣to the Splenetick Branch. In Dogs and other brute Beasts, rarely one, frequent several Vasa brevia, descend into the said Splenetick Vessel. XX. Sometimes a certain Vein as∣cendingInternal Haemor∣rhoid V upwards from the inner part of the Podex, enters the Splenetick Branch at the lower part, and pours forth its blood into it. The Roots of which adhering to the inner part of the Podex, are call'd Venae Haemorrhoi∣dales internae, the Internal Haemor∣rhoidal
Veins, of which nevertheless the Trunk is most frequently inserted into the let Mesenteric Vein. These Ves∣sels, that is to say Arteries and Veins, be∣fore their Entrance, are covered with a double Tunicle; the outermost of which they put off when they enter, and cast next about the Spleen, and by that means the Tunicle of the Spleen is made out of it. XXI. Besides the forementionedNo Chy∣lus goes to the Spleen. Vessels carrying manifest Humours, some there are who tell us of milkie Vessels. But it is most certain that no milkie Vessels shoot forth to the Spleen. For if the Chylus were carried thi∣ther, it would run the hazard of a Coa∣gulation, by reason of the acidity of the Splenetick Liquor. And there∣fore they are also mistaken who think that part of the Chylus ascends from the Vena Portae, through the Splenetic Branch to the Spleen, as was former∣ly asserted by the Ancients, and lately by Ent, Apolog. Art. 23. But through that Branch, as well the blood that remains out of the Nourishment of the Stomach, as that which is after a pe∣culiar manner concocted in the Spleen is swiftly carried through the Vena Portae and the Liver. Which is most apparent in the Dissections of living A∣nimals by a knot fasten'd upon that Branch. For presently a swelling will arise between the Ligature and the Spleen, and a lankness toward the Vena Portae. Which Ligature, if it be ty'd in live Dogs, somewhat before the En∣trance of the Vas breve into the Splene∣tick Branch, then the swelling will ap∣pear between the Spleen and the Liga∣ture, and the lankness on the other side. Which is a certain sign, that none of the thinnest Chylus, which nevertheless Regi∣us inculcates is carried from the Stomach to the Spleen through Vas venosum breve, or other Gastric Vessels, to be there al∣ter'd into a fermentaceous matter; but that the venal blood only descends from the Ventricle through that Vessel, and flows directly through the Splenetick Branch to the Vena Portae. Moreover if the said Ligature be ty'd upon the Vas breve it self, then are we taught another thing; for then presently the swelling ap∣pears between the Ligature and the Ves∣sel, and the lankness toward the Splene∣tick Branch. By which it is plain, that the blood descends from the Veins of the Ventricle, as has been said, but that no Melancholy or Acid Juice ascends this way to the Ventricle, and is pour'd forth to create hunger, according to the Asser∣tion of the Ancients. Lastly, if the short Vessel be open'd by Incision above the Ligature, and the Liquor flowing out be taken up in a Spoon, any man may see that it is only the pure Venal Blood, with∣out any mixture of Chylus; and that it differs not a jot either in Substance or in Colour, from any other Venal Blood; and this whether you look upon it warm or cold. Which plainly overthrows the Opinion of those, who affirm part of the Chylus to be carried to the Spleen through those Passages. An Opinion which we have sufficiently refuted in the seventh Chapter above. XXII. Besides the foresaid Vessels,Its Nerves the Spleen also receives two little Branches of Nerves, deriv'd from the Costal Branch of the sixth Pair, which do not only pass through the out∣ward Tunicle, and not lose them∣selves there, as was formerly thought by many, but penetrating further in∣ward, are distributed through the innermost parts of the Bowel, with a manifold Ramification, which little Branches accompany the Blood-bearing Vessels, and are enfolded in the same Covering with them, being form'd out of the proper Membrane that covers the Spleen, which at the entrance of the Vessels turning inward, and shap'd into the fashion of a Pipe, accompanies, and as it were gathers into a Bundle the Ramifications of the said Vessels Glisson also observes that these Nerves, the nearer they approach to the Spleen, the larger they grow; as they likewise do in a little space after they have en∣ter'd the Spleen. XXIII. Moreover, Glisson writes,Whether they carry any Ali∣mentary Liquor? that the ends of these Nerves are uni∣ted with Nervous Fibres, and by that means a certain Alimentary Li∣quor is infus'd out of the one into the other, and carried from these to the greater Nerves (which Alimentary Liquor, he says withal, is pour'd forth through the Parenchyma of the Spleen, being first extended by the Fibres themselves) afterwards this Liquor is conveigh'd into the Folding of the Nerves adjoyning to the Renal Glan∣dules, from thence, as occasion shall
serve, to be distributed into all the Nerves of the Body, either immedi∣ately through the Nerves of the sixth Pair, or by the means of the Brain and Spinal Marrow; and so to be carried to all parts of the Body. But the most learned Person is in this par∣ticular altogether out of the way. For, as has been said, the Fibres are not hollow, nor have the Nerves sufficient Cavities through which any Liquor pre∣pared in the Spleen can pass: nor was e∣ver any Anatomist so quick-sighted as to see any Liquor in the Nerves, or that after Dissection could squeez the least drop out of 'em. Besides, it is un∣questionable, and no more than what is receiv'd and establish'd by all Philoso∣phers, that the Animal Spirits are thrust forward through the Invisible Pores of the Nerves from the Brain and oblong Marrow into all the parts of the Body: Now then, shall any other visible Ali∣mentary Liquor, thicker than the Spi∣rits, ascend from the Spleen to the Brain, or its Marrow through the same Invisi∣ble Pores by any other Chanel or Stream? Will the Nerves receive the Alimenta∣ry Juice from the Spleen into themselves, not only to be cast forth into other parts, but also to be remitted back into the Spleen it self? Shall at another time the smallest drop of Liquor falling upon the Nerves beget a Palsie, and shall this en∣tring in abundance out of the Spleen pro∣duce no harm? These are very great Absurdities, and therefore an Opinion supported by such slender Props must fall of Necessity. See more of this L. 8. c. 1. XXIV. Here some one perhaps mayWherefore the Spleen is not so quick of Feeling. put the Question how it comes to pass, that the Spleen furnish'd with so ma∣ny little Branches of Nerves should be so dull of Feeling, seeing that the Nerves are not only endued with a most quick Sense, but also contribute to all the membranous Parts by the animal Spirits a most acute Feeling? The reason of this is, because there is a continual Numness upon those Nerves occasioned by the subacid Substance of the Spleen, which is perceived in the Tast of the Spleen being boyl'd, and Sowre withal, as also by acid fermenta∣tive Iuice which is bred therein, en∣compassing the Nerves. As the chew∣ing of acid and sowre things begets a Numness in the Teeth, so that their Sense of Feeling is much less, or at least more obtuse than at another time. And thus much concerning the Ves∣sels, whose State and Condition, how they were found out by accurate In∣spection into the Spleen of an Ox, Malpigius describes l. de lien. c. 3. XXV. After the Fibres and theThe Sub∣stance. Vessels, the Substance it self of the Spleen is to be enquired into; which in a sound Spleen is somewhat hard and firm; and endures handling without any harm; but in a sickly Condition of Health grows softer and is easily dissolv'd. Thus in Scorbu∣tic and Hypochondriacal Persons I have often found it so soft upon Dissection, that with the least Touch the Finger would enter into it: And the external Air would easily dissolve it; tho' out∣wardly at first sight there was nothing to be discovered amiss either in Bigness or Colour. I dissected a Scorbutic Thief that was hang'd in March 1651. The Substance of whose Spleen was very soft; yet neither exceeding due Proportion nor ill Colour; and at that time, being cold Weather, within two days, it was dis∣solved by the external Air into a fro∣thy Liquor of an obscure red Colour, so that unless it were several Fibres and thin Vessels, there was nothing solid appeared within its Membrane. From whence appears the Mistake of many, who in the Scurvy and Hypochondriacal Distemper, Quartan Agues, and other Diseases arising from the Spleen, always lay the Fault upon the Obstruction, Hardness, and Tumor of this Bowel, when for the most part there is never∣theless no such Fault in it to be found in those that dye of those Distempers, and only some specific Dyscrasis or peculiar Disposition of the Part receding from its natural Sanity, are the cause of these Distempers; while that peculiar Indis∣position begets some Matter either too Acid or too Sharp, too weak or too fix'd, or some other way out of Order. Yet we do not deny but that in a preterna∣tural State, sometimes it becomes so brawny and hard, that it may be felt without side of the Body. Nay George Queccius, a Physician of Norimberg and Schenckius, have seen Spleens that have been crusted in the Middle with a Car∣tilaginous Substance. XXVI. Many have affirm'd thatWhether  be li  Substance of the  ver. this Substance is like the Substance of the Liver, and that this Bowel per∣forms the same Office with it, and that when that Bowel is out of Order,
this Bowel alone does its Duty. But the Dissimilitude of each Part is suf∣ficiently apparent both from the Colour and the Tast. For the Colour, which in a raw Liver is Ruddy and altoge∣ther Sanguine, in the Spleen is Black and Blue, or of a leaden Colour. And that which in a boyl'd or roasted Liver is somewhat Yellowish, in a roasted Spleen is like the Dreggs of red Wine. Then the Tast of a boyl'd Liver is be∣tween bitterish and sweetish; the Tast of a boyl'd Spleen is somewhat acid and sowrish. XXVII. It is commonly held, thatWhether it be bloody. the Substance of the Spleen is a cer∣tain Mass of clotted Blood, suppor∣ting the Vessels that run through it; because it is easily made fluid by a slight Attrition. But Malpigius, ut∣terly destroys this Opinion, who ha∣ving accurately searched into the My∣steries of this Bowel with his Micro∣scopes, writes that the whole Body of the Spleen is a membranous Mass di∣stinguished into little Cells and Apart∣ments, and not so thick a Body as it has been formerly describ'd to be, but loose and thin. And to this Know∣ledg he attain'd by a particular Experi∣ment: That is by blowing up the Spleen through the Splenetic Artery and Branch, till it was very much swollen, and drying it swell'd as it was; for so, he says, it may be plainly seen, that the whole Mass of the Spleen consists of Mem∣branous Ends or Cells like the Cells of Hony-combs. And as for the Original of these Cells, and their wonderful Structure, he elegantly and at large de∣scribes it in his Book de Liene, where it is to be read. XXVIII. The same Malpigius wasLittle Glandules in the Spleen. the first that observed in the Sub∣stance of the Spleen several little Glandules worthy Observation: Of which he thus writes. In the Spleen, says he, are to be observ'd several nu∣merous Clusters of little Glandules, or ra∣ther little Bladders or Baggs dispersed through the whole Spleen, that resemble a Cluster of Grapes exactly. The least of these Glandules are of an Oval Figure, and in bigness little differ from the▪ Glan∣dules of the Kidneys. Their Colour as I have always observ'd, is White; and al∣tho' the Vasa Sanguinea of the Spleen by the pouring in of Ink swell and play a∣bout 'em, these preserve the same Colour. Their Substance seems to be Membranous; but soft and subject to crumble. Their Hollowness by reason of their extraordina∣ry Smallness, is not perceptible to the Eye, and only to be apprehended by Conjecture▪ while being slit they seem to fall one into another. They are very numerous and almost innumerable, and are wonderfully placed in the forementioned Cells of the whole Spleen, where vulgarly its Paren∣chyma is said to be. Also from the Slips there hang little Boxes, or else from the Fibres that arise from it: And besides the ends of the Arteries like young Vine Shoots, or crawling Ivy creep about 'em, which is to be observ'd in a fresh Splee, the Arteries being blacken'd. They hang for the most part in Clusters, every Cluster containing seven or eight. Yet they do not so easily appear in the Spleen of every Creature. Nay in the Spleen of an Ox, a Sheep, or a Goat, they are only to be dis∣covered upon Laceration of the Bowel; or by a slight shaving with a Penkife, and long washing with fair Water. They are not so easly discrib'd in a Man. But if by the occasion of any Disease the whole Body of the▪ Glandules swell, they appear more manifest, being enlarg'd in Bigness, as I observ'd in a Girl that dy'd, whose Spleen was full of little Globes dispersed in Clusters. More than this in the same place he tells ye his Opinion of the Use of Glandules, and what separation of Humors is made therein in a Discourse at large. Certainly we are much indebted to this quicksighted Malpigius, who by his Microscopes, has so clearly dispell'd the thick Clouds that hung over the Knowledg of the Spleen, to the end the use of it, which was doubtful before, may be the better understood. XXIX. Sometimes unusual thingsUnusual things found in the Spleen. have been found in the Spleen, Vesa∣lius l. 19. de Corp. fab. c. 9. writes that he found in the Spleen of a cer∣tain Person, small enough, but of an extraordinary Hardness, Fat growing to the gibbous or bunchy Part, com∣pacted together like a hard white Stone. Schenkius, Observ. l. 3. relates that there was found in the Body of a Spoletan Lord a Spleen without any Juice or Pulp at all, empty like a Purse, and fix'd to the left Ribs. Trneiferus in Exam. Urin. writes that he found a Stone in the Spleen of a certain noble Woman, of the Bigness of a Chestnut, soft as Alabaster, weighing two Oun∣ces and five Drams, consisting as it were
of thin places wrapt one within another like Eggshels. In like manner Fallopius has observed Stones to be bred in the Spleen. In the Year 1667. in Ianuary, we dissected a Woman in the presence of several Spectators, whose Spleen was exact, as to its Proportion, and for heat and hardness well enough; but in the fore-part, where it looks toward the Stomach, we observ'd a white Sub∣stance much different from the Substance of the Bowel, hard and firm, and which would scarce give way to the crushing of the Fingers, about the bigness of a Goose Egg, not growing withoutside to the Bowel, nor swelling outward from it, but plainly and truly continuous with it, and being a part of it, tho' no∣thing like the other Particles of the Bow∣el; neither could it be called Fat or a Glandule, from whose Service it differ'd altogether. XXX. Concerning the Temper ofThe Tem∣per of the Spleen. the Spleen, some question whether it be to be call'd a hot or a cold Part? To which I answer that it ought to be call'd a cold Part. Not that it is really cold, but less hot than the Heart, Liver, and many other Bowels; and besides, because it refrigerates the arte∣rious Blood that flows into it, and makes it subacid; and fixes and dulls its sulphury hot Particles, and deprives 'em of all their Volatilitie. XXXI. Concerning the Action ofThe Acti∣on. the Spleen, various are the Opinions of the Learned. Erasistratus, and Ruffus the Ephesian will allow it no Office or Function. A∣ristotle affirms it to be necessary by Acci∣dent, like the Excrements of the Belly and Bladder. Hippocrates calls the Spleen a Fountain of Water. And hence perhaps Wharton affirms that it sucks forth a watry Liquor out of the Blood, but to what end cannot be discovered, unless it be for the Nourishment of the Nerves: Which Opinion we have suf∣ficiently refuted; to which he adds se∣veral other things of little Moment con∣cerning the use of the Spleen. XXXII. Many according to theWhether it separate Melancholy from the Chylus. Opinion of Galen and the Ancients, believed the Office of it to be, to se∣parate the feculent or melancholy part of the Chylus, and to attract it through the splenetic▪ Branch, and to collect it into its self (as the Gall-bladder re∣ceives the yellow Choler) and to con∣coct it somwhat, than to empty it a∣gain partly through the Vas Breve into the Stomach to excite Hunger, and partly through the splenetic Branch into the Intestins, and through the Haemorrhoidal Vein to the Podex. Which Opinion Bauhi∣nus, Riolan, and Bartholine, have refuted by many and almost the same Reasons; tho' there were little need of so many, when these three are sufficient to destroy it. 1. Because there is no such large Hollowness in the Spleen, where such Excrement should be stor'd up. 2. Because there is no way through which it may be commodiously evacu∣ated, since it neither ought nor can pass and repass through the same Splenetic Branch. 3. Because if in a living Ani∣mal you tye a Knot upon the Splenetic Vein, the Vas venosum breve, and the Haemorrhoidal Vein, it demonstrates the contrary, as we have already shown, which Demonstration alone is sufficient to destroy that fond Opinion. XXXIII. Vesalius, Plater, CharlesWhether it make Blood. Piso, Bauhin, Spigelius, Jessenus, and many others, affirm'd the Spleen to be a sanguifying Bowel, no less than the Liver, and call'd it, as A∣ristotle does, Hepar Vicarium, the Deputy-Liver: believing when the Liver was distempered, that this Bow∣el did execute its Office. Chiefly en∣duc'd by this Argument, because the Spleen in the Birth is of a ruddy Colour, just like the Liver, and for that the Spleen being deprav'd, San∣guification is annoy'd. Then they thought, that that same Blood which was made in the Spleen serv'd for the Nourishment of Bowels contain'd in the Abdomen, as the Liver-blood serves for the Nourishment of the rest of the Parts. Which splenetick Blood they affirm'd was made of the watry feculent Chylus, which some believe to be car∣ried thither through the Milkie Vessels, others from the Stomach through the Vas Breve, and others, that it was at∣tracted by the Spleen through the Sple∣netic Branch. But this Opinion by ma∣ny things already said, is most plainly overturned: Seeing the Work of San∣guification is not accomplished either by the Liver or the Spleen, but only by the Heart: there being no Vessels that proceed from the Liver through which any Blood can conveniently flow to the Nourishment of the Parts seated in the
Abdomen: Neither are there any Pas∣sages that convey the Chylus to the Spleen, as being a Part to which no Milkie Vessels run: Neither is any thing carried through the Vas venosum breve from the Stomach; seeing that the said Vas breve is not inserted into the Spleen, but into the Splenetic Branch without the Spleen; nor can any Attraction be made of the Splenetic Branch toward the Spleen, as is before prov'd. Veslin∣gius therefore observing this Difficulty of the Access of the Chylus, flyes to the Invisible Pores of the Ventricle; through which he says, there is a watry Chylus conveighed to the Spleen; but proves it by no Reasons. Lastly this Opinion is totally refuted by the circular Moti∣on of the Blood, by which it is appa∣rent that no Blood is carried to the Parts from the Liver or Spleen through the Veins for the Ends of Nutrition; nor can be carried by any manner of Means by reason of the obstructing Valves; but that the Boold is all transuted from the Heart through the Arteries to all the Parts. XXXIV. Emilius Parisanus, Sub∣til.Whether it prepare blood for the eart. l. 6. Exercit. 2. c. 3. following the Opinion of Ulmus, believes that the Spleen prepares Arterious Blood out of the best part of the Chylus for the left Ventricle of the Heart; which Blood is carried through the Arteries into the Aorta, and thence into the left Ventricle of the Heart. Which Fiction Ent deservedly derides and explodes, Apolog. Artic. 23. Galen also writes, that some of the Scholars of Erasistratus believ'd that the whole Chy∣lus was carried to the Spleen, by which it was made into a courser sort of Blood for the Liver. But both these Opinions are so absurd, that if we only consider the Passages and Motion of the Blood, they want no farther Refutation. XXXV. Walaeus observing thatWhether it  the  part of the blood. there was no motion of the Humours through the Splenetick Branch to the Spleen, nor that any milkie Vessels reach'd thither, concluded rightly, that the matter concocted in the Spleen is Arterial Blood infus'd into it through the Coeliaca. Only in this he fail'd, that he thought the Spleen at∣tracted to it self the acid part of the blood, and not the rest, as if the Spleen being endu'd with judgment and taste, was more pleas'd with the acid than the sweet part, and not only could distin∣guish, but knew how to separate the one from the other. Moreover, he consi∣der'd not, that in Arterial Blood there are no Particles actually acid, but that acid Particles are generated in the Spleen out of the saltest Particles of it, which being mix'd with the Venal Blood, serve instead of a Ferment, whose slightest aci∣dity concocted in a specific manner in the Liver with the sulphurous Particles, changes it into a biliary Ferment, which by that Effervescency that is made in the Heart, perishes again and vanishes. XXXVI. Glisson asserts that theWhether it nourish the Nerves. chief Action of the Spleen is to make Alimentary Liquor for the Nou∣rishment of the Nerves, which Opini∣on we rejected when we discours'd of the Nerves of the Spleen. XXXVII. As for Helmont's Opi∣nion,Whether the seat of the Soul. who places the seat of the sensi∣tive Soul in the Spleen, it is not worth a Refutation. XXXVIII. The most accurate andAn Expe∣riment of Malpigius industrious Malpigius, being very much dissatisfied concerning the Action and Use of the Spleen, to the end he might be able to assert something more certain than others had done, resolv'd to try an ingenious Experiment, hoping thereby to discover some light in this obscure darkness. In a young Dog (says he) having made a wound in the left Hypochondrium, the bloody Vessels of the Spleen bursting forth at the gates of the Spleen, were ty'd with a string, then thrusting back what was coming forth into their places, the Perito∣naeum and Muscles being sow'd up together, and the skin loosly united, in a few days time the wound was cur'd. In a weeks time the Dog recover'd, and ran about as he us'd to do, so that as long as he liv'd there was no sign observ'd that any harm had been done him, or of the hurt of his health: But becoming more hungry, he greedily devour'd his Meat, and eat Bones or any thing of that nature; and his Ex∣crement observ'd the exact course of Na∣ture. One thing only I observ'd, that the Dog piss't frequently, and very much; which though it be customary to other Dogs, yet this seem'd to exceed the common cu∣stome. The habit of body every way heal∣thy and fat; and in nimbleness and brisk∣ness equal to others of his kind. But this was peculiar in the external habit of his body, a swelling of the right Hypochon∣drium, so that the extream Ribs burgeon'd out beyond the rest. Thereupon, fresh hopes
encouraging, a second Dissection is design'd. The Spleen then in the slit Abdomen whose Vessels were fast ty'd, appear'd very slender, so that being wrapt with the Caul, there hard∣ly remain'd any footstep of it behind. For it resembled a small bag interwoven with Membranes: the Blood-Vessels numerously dispers'd to the Stomach, and through the Caul, were entire and flourishing, and full of blood. The Splenetic Branch open, and natural, surrounded with its natural fat. The Liver to sight, as to substance, colour, and shootings forth of the Branches, all in good order: only you might have said it ex∣ceeded a little in bigness, in regard it spread it self largely over the left Hypochondri∣um. Neither was there any thing found amiss in the Breast or the Abdomen, or the fleshy part: the blood brisk, ruddy, and fluid. All these things being found in a Dog, gave us not the least light to find out the use of the Liver. Certainly it is a wonder that nothing could be learnt or found out concerning the Use of the Spleen: Nevertheless I put down this, that I might excite others to make the like Experiments; that so at length the true use of the Spleen may come not only to be taught by Reason, but to be shewn and prov'd by Demon∣stration. XXXIX. From what has been said,The true Action of the Spleen. it is abundantly apparent how various and uncertain the Opinions of most Doctors are concerning the Use of the Spleen, so that hardly any one has hit upon the true use of it; which is no o∣ther, than to make acid matter out of the Arterial Blood, out of which be∣ing again mix'd with the sulphurous Particles in the Liver, and concocted after a specific manner, the bilious Fer∣ment of the Blood and Chylus is made. But how that acid Matter or Juice is ge∣nerated within it, is not so easie to be ex∣plain'd. That Operation seems to pro∣ceed in this manner. In the Substance of the Liver, which is acid by nature, are contain'd many Glandules; now the blood is pour'd into those small Glan∣dules through the ends of the Arteries; and into that the Animal Spirits are in∣fus'd through the ends of the Nerves, concluding in those Glandules, which taming the sulphurous spirit of the blood, give it a slight Acrimony; with which be∣ing once endu'd by the compression of the adjoyning parts, it is squeez'd out of the said Glandules, and swallowed up by the Roots of the Splenetick Vein; and so flows through the Splenetick Vein through the Porta and Liver. But before it runs under the Roots of the Veins, it seems to stay in the adjacent Cells, whose Sub∣stance is acid, and by that stay acquires in them a more eager acidity, as Wine standing in a Vinegar Vessel, acquires a more acid Acrimony. XL. Here arises a Question, Whe∣therWhether a man may live with his Spleen cut out. the Spleen be a Vessel necessary to Life; and whether it may be taken and cut out of a Man's Body, and the wound heal'd again without any da∣mage of Life or Health? For the Af∣firmative part the Authority of Pliny of∣fers it self, who L. 11. c. 37. thus writes, It is certain that the Bird call'd Aegoce∣phalus has no Spleen, nor any of those Creatures that want blood. It is many times a peculiar impediment, and therefore they that are troubled with it, have it burnt out; and Creatures are said to live after it is taken out by Incision. Trallian seems to prove Plinies Opinion by a Practical Example, who L. 8. re∣lates that a Soldier was once cur'd by him, the whole region of whose Spleen had been burnt with barbarous hot I∣ron-Tools. Bartholine also Cent. 4. Anat. Rar. Hist. 51. endeavours to confirm the Authority of Pliny, by the Experience of Fierovantus, boasting that he had cut the Spleen out of a certain Woman, and so restor'd her to health; of which he writes there is no question to be made, because of the Witnesses, whereas he produces no Witnesses of any credit. This Experiment of Fierovantus, Deusin∣gius both quotes and admires, and out of Francis Rousset, brings the Testimonies of two inconsiderable obscure Surgeons, who affirm'd that they had taken out Spleens that were alter'd and wounded, and had heal'd the Patients with success; and giving undoubted credit to these Te∣stimonials, he concludes concerning the Spleen; This Bowel is not necessary for Life, but only for a more happy Constitution of Health; not so much to being, as to well∣being; not to Nutrition and Preservation simply, but to a better Nutrition, as the generation of a thinner, more elaborate, and more spiritous Blood. To the Con∣firmation of which Opinion, the forego∣ing Experiment of Malpigius very much conduces, taken out of the same Author. And that same new way, lately first in∣vented in England, of cutting the Spleen out of Dogs that live for all that, seems very much to favour this Opinion. As we also, with several others, have seen a whole Spleen taken, or cut out of a Dog, the Abdomen of the left side being slit by
Regnerde Graesf, and the Vessels of the Spleen well ty'd with a strong Thred: afterwards the wond being cur'd, the Dog was recover'd, for which reason we call'd the Dog Spleenless. At the same time the same accurate Dissecter R. de Graesf, told us, That the English gave him an account, how that those Dogs after their Spleens were taken out, were afterwards always barren: and that therefore he resolv'd to try the Experi∣ment in a Bitch, which he kept after he had cut out the Spleen and cur'd the wound: but thls Bitch growing proud was lin'd by a Dog, and whelp'd two Puppies, by which he refuted the obser∣vation of the English. All these things seem to shew that there is no great ne∣cessity of this Bowol for Life, nor so no∣ble a use as hitherto has been attributed to it. The Negative is maintain'd, not only by the Ancients, but also by Levinus Lemnius, Toby Knoblock, Lindan, and innumerable other Neoteric Physicians; nay, of six thousand you shall hardly find one that does not altogether ex∣plode the former Opinion. Of which Clius Aurelianus thus writes; That the Spleen may be cut or taken away, we have heard indeed related in words, but never actually perform'd. Reason also and Ex∣perience support the same Negative. XLI. Reason: For that the chiefThe former Opinion re∣ed by Reason. Architect never made any thing in our Bodies in vain, and therefore all the Bowels, none excepted, and all the parts are found and given to some necessary Use. What man then in his Sens can believe, that so eminent and large a Bowel as the Spleen is, and with which all Creatures that have blood, ex∣cept some few, are endu'd, should be gi∣ven in vain to Men and Beasts, without any necessity for Human Life. Of whose true Function and Use, altho' we in these darknesses of Nature, may not perhaps so rightly judge, and raise sharp Disputes upon this Subject, yet this does not take away the Use of the Bowel it self for the support of Life, seeing that not only its remarkable bigness, and admirable connexion and society with other Bowels, sufficiently shew, but also Health proceeding from its soundness, and several Diseases arising from its de∣prav'd Constitution, daily teach us the Necessity of it. XLII. Experience: For that ne∣ver,By Experi∣ence. that I know of, it was ever seen, heard, written or observ'd by any Physician of any Credit or Authority, that ever any man had his Spleen cut out and liv'd. The Story of Trallian proves nothing; for he does not say that his Patients Spleen was cut out, or con∣sum'd and wasted by Ustion; but only that the exterior Region of the Spleen was cauteriz'd. As for Fierovantus, he was a strowling Mountebank, of no Au∣thority, and very little Credit, who en∣deavour'd to impose upon silly People, that he might appear a greater Physici∣an among the Vulgar than he was. As for those obscure Chirurgeons cited out of Roussettus, there is the same Credit to be given to them. And we remember a thousand other such like little Fables re∣lated to us, by certain ignorant and vain∣glorious Surgeons, to whom there was no Credit to be given. Certainly, if the thing were really so, we should not need in this Age to fetch Testimonials from Mountebanks and stupid Barber Chirur∣geons, since we have had so many thou∣sand eminent and famous Physicians and Philosophers, who have made it their business to dive into the Mysteries of Nature, of whom, tho' not all, yet some would have seen and observ'd some∣thing concerning this matter. But now the whole Confirmation rests upon the uncertain Testimonies of some obscure Authors, which are contradicted by o∣ther more ponderous Reasons, besides the former alledged; so that the said O∣pinion can no longer be propt by any more such weak Supporters: For that besides the Nerves, large Blood-bearing Vessels enter the Spleen of a Man, and go forth again; two Splenetick Arteries and various Veins meeting in one Sple∣netick Branch, of which the sole re∣section is sufficient, to kill a man with a vast Flux of blood. For it is not pro∣bable that these Vessels can be so straitly bound by any Knots, or other astringent Remedies, but that the Flux of blood must be very great for all that. Or if they be bound with Strings (which in that hidden part of Man cannot conve∣niently be done, as is known to them that understand the Constitution and Connexion of the Bowel) yet then not long after, the Threads being putrify'd, either a deadly Flux of blood or a Gan∣grene, must of necessity follow. More∣over, I my self have more than once seen Spleens wounded with Swords and Spears, but never knew any man so wounded escape, notwithstanding all the diligence that I and other Surgeons could use. Now if only the wounds, and
those slight ones too, of this Bowel are Mortal; nay, if only its being out of order, its obstruction, or any other Di∣stemper so grievously disturb the whole body, and many times occasion death; how much more deadly will it be, how much more destructive to the body and to life, when it is all taken away? As for Dogs, whose Spleens are cut out, they do not all live; nay, of many so serv'd, very few recover; and they, the rest of their lives, dull, heavy and sloth∣ful, nor do they live long. And that for this reason without doubt; for that for want of convenient matter to be afford∣ed from the Spleen, convenient Ferment cannot be prepar'd in the Liver, which causes a thicker blood to be generated in the Heart, out of which blood but few Animal and Vital Spirits can be rais'd, and those very thick. Besides, what may be done safely and conveniently in a Dog, to attempt that in Man, to the ha∣zard of Life, would be a Villany. For that which in this particular proves not mortal in a Dog, would certainly kill a Man. Without doubt, there is no Per∣son of sound Judgment but must suffer himself to be perswaded, but that this Bowel executes a more necessary Action in Man, than in a Dog, in whom the Pancreas, or other part, may better sup∣ply the office of the Spleen, than in a Man, as in whom the whole Bowel is furnish'd with so many Arteries, Veins, and Nerves, and furnish'd with its own Parenchyma, and consequently cannot be created in vain. XLIII. Hence it is apparent whatThe Spleen▪ not of so great vse in a Dog as in a Man. is to be answer'd to that Experiment of Malpigius, that is to say, that be∣cause there is a lesser use of a Spleen, and not so necessary an action requir'd from it in a Dog as in a Man: hence it happens that some Dogs may want the use of it, and yet not all; Experience teaching us, that several have perish'd in a short time, whose Spleens have been cut out, and few have escap'd. Whereas it is otherwise in Man, in whom seeing the least disorder of the Spleen many ways, and after a wonderful man∣ner disturbs the whole Microcosmical Kingdom, much more dammage would it receive from the taking it out of the Body. XLIV. And therefore we must con∣cludeIt is a most necessary Bowel for Life. the Spleen to be in man most ne∣cessary for Life, and that it cannot be cut out, and the life of man be still preserv'd. CHAP. XVII. Of the Function of the Liver and Spleen; also of the use of Choler, the Pancreatick and Lymphatick Iuice. I. HOW various the OpinionsA Dig∣sion. of several Men have been concerning the use of Choler, the Pan∣creatic Iuice, and the Lympha, we have shewn in the foregoing Chapters. But since no Body has as yet perceiv'd, or at least describ'd the Dignity of those Bowels, nor the necessity of those Juices, it will be now time that those Mysteries that have lain hid for so many Ages, should be brought to light, from the knowledge whereof will arise the greatest light to Physic, and the obscure and un∣known Causes of many Diseases will be discover'd. II. The Actions of the Liver, theThe ∣ons of the three ∣els. Spleen, and the Sweet-bread all con∣spire to the self same end, and prepare the Ferment of the Blood and Chylus together, in the making whereof the Functions of these three must of ne∣cessity concur, when the one cannot perfect this business without the o∣ther. As Leaven is mix'd with Flowre of Wheat kneaded with warm Water, that thereby the more thick and earthy Parts of the Wheat may be dissolv'd, and the spirituous Parts asleep and ly∣ing hid in that terrestrial Mass may be attenuated and stirr'd up, and so the whole Mass of Bread being throughly besprinkl'd with those attenuated Spirits is made more light and easy for Digesti∣on: Thus there is a necessity for the Ferment to be mix'd with the Chylus and Venal Blood, by means of which the spirituous Particles lying hid therein, may be attenuated and quicken'd up, and so the whole Mass be more fit for Sangui∣fication and Nourishment. III. Now that same Leaven ofThe Fer∣ment of Bread,     operates. Bread, which will bring us more ea∣sily to the Knowledg of the Ferment of the Blood and Chylus, is gene∣rally
made of some Quantity of Meal which is kneaded together with warm Water, to which is added a small Quantity of Salt & Vinegar, and so kept in a warm Place, till the salt or acid Spirits are somewhat volati∣liz'd by the Heat, and pierce through the Particles of the Mass of Flower, and dilate and separate 'em, and so render the whole Mass▪ Subacid and Fermentative. Then a little Piece of this acid Ferment being mix'd into the Mass of Meal kneaded with warm Water, causes the whole Mass to ferment. For those Fermentaceous Particles diffuse themselves through the whole Mass, and cut and attenuate all the Parts of the Dough, and the Spirits therein lying hid. Our Country Folks mix also Yest with their Dough to the same end; and others perhaps may use another Ferment; but all Ferment, what∣ever it be, consists of Salt, Acid, Sowre, and Corroding things, melted and some∣what volatiliz'd with a moderate Heat: Which if they be thicker and closer, are more slowly dissolv'd, and their Power shews it self more slowly, and must be mix'd a longer time with the Dough be∣fore they can ferment it, as happens in the first Ferment, which must be mix'd for many Hours, and sometimes a whole Night, to perfect its Work. But if by the Mixture of certain sulphury Particles they become Spirituous and more Volatiliz'd, they ferment presently as we find in Yest, which within an Hour, or half an Hour, and sometimes sooner, accomplishes its Operation. For the more spirituous sharp Particles be in this more free from the Matter wherein they are lodged, and for that Reason are in∣dued with a more penetrating Power, operate more suddainly, and in a short time dissolve the thick Particles of the Dough, and more swiftly rouse the la∣tent Spirits, which they do yet more vi∣olently, if a little Honey be added toNte this , viz.  Honey  the Ferment. the Yest: For the Honey contains in it self sharp Particles, but lately dissolv'd by the Sulphury, and involv'd within 'em. But nothing of this is perform'd without a moderate Heat, as being that by which the salt Particles must be brought to a moderate acid Quality, and something of Volatility. IV. In the same manner it is withChyle and  fer∣ in  same . the Chylus and Venal Blood, which if they be not attenuated and pre∣pared by the Mixture of convenient Ferment before Sanguification, then they fail to be full of spirits in the heart. That is to say, the Spirits lying asleep therein, are not sufficiently separated from the more thick and serous Matter, but lye drowsie still, which produces thick and watery blood, of little use to nourish the Body and strengthen the Parts; whence the Body becomes lan∣guid, and both Natural and Animal Actions go but slowly forward. V. This Ferment of the Blood andThe Liver causes the Ferment. Chylus is made by the Liver, with which Hepatic Ferment however, the Pancreatic Iuice is mixt in the Duo∣denum, for the more special prepara∣tion of the Chylus flowing out of the Stomach. VI. The matter out of which theThe matter of the Fer∣ment. Liver makes this Ferment, is the Ve∣nal Blood flowing into it from the Gastric and Mesaraics through the Vena Portae, and a small quantity through the small Branches of the E∣patic Artery, with which is mix'd a sowre, salt, acid Iuice, made in the Spleen of the Arterial Blood flowing into it through the Arteries, and the Animal Spirits through the Nerves, which is carried through the Splenetic Branch to the Vena Portae, and toge∣ther with the Blood with which it is mixed is conveighed to the Liver. VII. And by means of this sharpPreparati∣on of the Ferment. and corroding Iuice, by the specific power of the Liver, the spiritous Par∣ticles, as well the sulphury as salt, la∣tent in that Venal Blood, are dissolv'd, attenuated, and also made somewhat sharp and fermentative, and some cer∣tain thinnest part of' em, like fair and clear water, by means of the conglo∣merated Glandules seated chiefly in the hollow part of the Liver, separating it self from the remaining thicker part of the Blood through many Lymphatic Vessels, is carried from the Liver in∣to several Veins, to prepare the Venal Blood flowing toward the Heart. But the greatest part of it is carried to the Vasa Chylifera, in them to prepare the Chylus for succeeding Fermentation in the Heart. To which end also a certain fermentative Spittle, as also a salt and somewhat acid Lympha is also carried thither from the Glandules of the Arm∣holes, Groyns, and other Glandules, and somewhat of the thinner Pancreatic
Iuice out of the Intestines, together with the Chylus, enters the Vasa Chyli∣fera. VIII. But as in Ale that works,Yest, or the Ferment of Beer. many spirits already rais'd, are alrea∣dy mingled with the whole quantity of Ale, and render it spiritous, strong, and fit to be attenuated and digested in the Stomachs of those that drink it: So also many spirits being still inter∣mix'd and coop'd up within the more thick and viscous Particles of the Ale, ascend with them to the top, and boyl∣ing, or rather fermenting and frothy, burst forth out of the Vessel with a noise. Which frothy Substance has a kind of bitterish sharp, intermix'd with something of a sweetish taste. And this is that which our Houswives call Yest, and we the Flower of Ale, which being preserv'd, serv'd to ferment new Ale, or new Dough. IX. Thus the Operation also pro∣ceedsGeneration of Choler. in the Liver, and the more sharp fermentative spirits, being mix'd with the thicker and more viscous sulphury Iuices, (for Sulphur is clammy) and strongly boyling or fermenting, when by reason of the viscosity of the Iuices wherein they are lodg'd, they cannot enter the conglomerated Glandules, and from thence the Lymphatic Vessels, and yet by reason of their sharp Ebul∣lition they are parted, together with the Iuice wherein they are lodg'd, become bitter, and are call'd by the name of Choler. Which Choler, by the means of the Glandulous Balls, flows by de∣grees to the Intestines thorough the bila∣ry Porus and the Gall-bladder, to the end that there, together with the Pancreatic Iuice, it may be mixed with the thicker Mass; that is to say, with the Nourish∣ment concocted in the Stomach, and now descending to the Intestines, that it may also cause that to boyl, and by that means dissolve and separate the thinner parts of the Chylus from the thicker, and atte∣nuate to that degree, that they may be forc'd into the narrow Orifices of the Milkie Vessels. X. To that purpose this CholerCholer slides down the Ductus Cholido∣chus into the Jeju∣num. slides down through the Ductus Cho∣lidochus to the beginning of the In∣testines, that is, the Duodenum, and is there presently mix'd with the Pan∣creatic Juice flowing thither through the Wirtzungian Chanel, from the Sweetbread, and by that means is by and by mingled with the Alimentary Mass concocted in the Stomach, and descending from it, and causes it to boyl. XI. And because at the beginningWhy the Jejunum is empty. it is sharper, and retains its full vi∣gour, and for that by reason of the mixture of the Pancreatic acid Iuice, it is presently ready for Ebullition; hence in that very beginning, the Ef∣fervescency is most intense; which is the reason that the Milkie Iuice, lodg'd in the Mass, concocted in the Stomach, is for the most part immedi∣ately separated in the Jejunum, and through the innumerable Milkie Ves∣sels belonging to this Gut more than to any other, with an extraordinary speed push'd forward to the Receptacle of the Chylus, for which reason that Gut is for the most part found empty and fasting. But in the next Guts, by rea∣son of the most thin fermentative Spirits dissipated at the beginning, the Efferve∣scency is somewhat slower and less effe∣ctual, and the separation of the Chylus from the thicker Mass that remains is more tardy, which is the reason they have fewer Milkie Vessels. Lastly, The remainder of that fermentaceous Matter being mix'd in the thick Intestines, with the thick dregs of the Nourishment, be∣ing now slowly dissolv'd, by reason the more subtil parts and strength of it are wasted by a long Effervescency in the thin Guts, causes a more slow and less frequent (and that not without a longer stay) fermentative Effervescency in them, which moving and distending the feculent filth, and rendring it more sharp, molests the Guts, and so provokes 'em to evacuation. And now because this Effervescency happens to be late, therefore those Provocations are not frequent, so that men in health seldom go to stool above once or twice in a day. And as that remaining Ferment is more or less acrimonious, hence it causes in the Excrement a swister or later, a more intense or remiss Effervescency, whence more frequent or more seldom going to the Stool. XII. But how it comes to pass thatHow  Choler  com  sharp. the said Choler becomes more sharp and fermentative in man, proceeds from hence, that all the milder Choler does not presently flow directly from the Liver through the bilary Porus into
the Intestines, but a good part of it, and that the thinnest is carried from the Liver through the gaully Roots into the Gall-Bladder, and there stays a while, that by the specific Property and Temper of the Place, the more sharp Spirits, through that Stay, may be the more vigorously roused up and exalted, and thence, boyling a little in the Cystis, may flow to the Intestines: Into which Place being brought, and being either too little, or too sharp, it may there be the cause of Diseases of both kinds. XIII. But the superfluous and chief∣estThe far∣ther Pro∣gress of the Fermenta∣tion. part of the Venal Blood, of which the Ferment is made in the Liver, which neither could nor ought to be chang'd into the Nature of Choler or Lympha, being plentifully furnish'd with the fermentative Quality of the made Ferment, flows into the Vena Cava, with which from above out of the subclavial Veins, it meets a prepar'd and attenuated Chylus, or in the ab∣sence of that the Lymphatic Liquor alone, mix'd with the Blood of the Subclavial Veins, and so by degrees enter the right Ventricle of the Heart, and there by reason of that previous convenient Preparation, or attenuati∣on, are presently dilated into a Blood∣like spirituous Vapor; as Gunpowder presently flashes into a Flame when touch'd by Fire. Now that the Blood flowing out of the Liver into the Vena Cava, is mix'd and endu'd with a Fer∣mentative, and chiefly Choleric Quality appears from hence, that if in a Crea∣ture newly kill'd the Liver be cut from the Vena cava, and the Blood flowing out of it sav'd, put but a little Spirit of Niter to that Blood, and presently it be∣comes of a Rust-Colour, which hap∣pens in no other Blood, and by that means the Bilious Ferment concealed within it, is discover'd. XIV. But that that same bloody  of  Blood. Spirit may be more perfect, and re∣tain its Vigor the longer, by the beat∣ing of the Heart it is forced imme∣diately through the Pulmonary Arte∣ry into the Lungs, and there by the Cold of the Aire breath'd in is con∣densed into Liquor, and flows through the Pulmonary Vein into the left Ventricle of the Heart, wherein again (as Spirit of Wine is rectifi'd by a second Distillation) it attains the ut∣most Perfection of spirituous Blood, and so is forc'd into the Aorta, that thereby it may be communicated thro' the lesser Arteries, and through all the Parts of the Body, to nourish and en∣liven 'em. Out of which Nourish∣ment, that Blood which at length re∣mains, being depriv'd of the greatest part of its Spirits, enters the lesser Veins, and by those is carried to the greater, and by them again to the Heart, to the end it may be there a∣gain attenuated and become Spirituous. But because in that Circulation, many parts of the Blood are consum'd in the Nourishment of the Parts, whose Sub∣stance also is continually consum'd and dissipated by the Heat; hence it is ne∣cessary that a new Chylus fit to be changed into Blood be again mix'd with the venal Blood returning to the Heart, to supply the place of what is wasted. And thus our Life consists in such a con∣tinual Nourishment, which failing, pre∣sently Health is impair'd, and the Oyl of our Lamp being wasted we goe quite out. XV. It may be questioned whenceThe Origi∣nal of Fer∣ment. those sharp hot fermentative Qualities arise in our Nature. I answer, out of Sulphur and Salt. The first Emotion is from Sulphur, but the primary A∣crimony is from Salt, which besides Sulphur is lodg'd in all Nourishment. For there is nothing which we eat that does not naturally contain a Salt in it, tho' some things contain more, some less: and Sulphur dissolves the Salt, and renders it fluid. Which being dissolv'd and attenuated, cor∣rodes, penetrates and dissolves by means of its Acrimony, all the Par∣ticles of the Nourishment, and so dis∣poses 'em for the Extraction of the Spirits that ly hid within 'em. Which Operation is Fermentation, without which Man could not live; and with which being weak or deprav'd, a Man lives miserably. Now to advance this Fermentation the more prosperously, by instinct of Nature to the natural Salt which is in our Nourishment we add the help of Sea Salt, which we mix with our Meat, and with which we powder our Flesh: And so much the harder the Substance of the Meat is, and conse∣quently the more violent Fermentation,
and effective Ferment they require for Digestion, so much the more we desire to have 'em well salted; as Beef and Pork. For that the Salt in such Meats causes a more easy Digestion. So that the sulphury Spirits that are to reduce that Salt to Fusion, are sufficiently re∣dundant and effectual in Man, as in young and choleric People. And of this we have a manifest Example in a Herring, which being salted and eaten raw eastly digests in the Stomach, but not being salted, tho' boyl'd, is with great Difficulty digested. Moreover that the Fermenting Spirits lying hid in that thick Salt may be roused up to Action, we boyle our Meat in the Kitch∣in, that the more fix'd and solid Parts of it may be the better dissolv'd, and so prepared to Fusion and Volatilitie, that they may be the more easily tam'd and vanquish'd in the Stomach, when we feed upon those harder sorts of Food, we make use of sharp spirituous and sul∣phury Sawces, as Spice, Turheps, Anise, Carrots, Mustard; many times drink strong Wine, and Spirit of Wine after Meals. For the sulphury Spirits being mixed with the Salt, potently dissolve and penetrate the thick and sixed Parti∣cles, and a fitness to melt, and so advance the Energie of Fermentation. Which chylifying Operation is very much assisted partly by the Spittle which flows from the Mouth to the Stomach and is endued with a fermentative Quality; partly by a peculiar Ferment, which is made out of some part of the Chylus, remaining after its Concoction and Ex∣pulsion of the greatest part to the In∣testines, in the Stomach, and sticking to the Folds and Pores of the innermost Tunicle, and there turning sowre. And so by that first Fermentation the more spirituous and profitable Parts of the Nourishment come forth of the thicker Mass like Cream, and assume the Name of Chylus. XVI. Out of this Chylus endu'dBlood is made of the Chylus in the Heart. with many salt and sulphury Particles from the Nourishment received by means of a new fermentative Prepa∣ration, caused by the Choler, Pancre∣atic Iuice, and Lympha, the Blood is made in the Heart, which contains in it self those salt Particles of the Chylus, but more attenuated and mix'd more exactly with the Sulphu∣reous. XVII. Out of the salt Particles ofAnother Ferment in the Spleen. this Blood, flowing to the Spleen, the splenic Artery, and to the Sweetbread, and many other Glandules through peculiar Arteries, and somewhat sepa∣rated by the Afflux of Animal Spi∣rits, there is another matter of Fer∣ment to be composed in the Spleen and Parts aforesaid, to be the great∣est part concocted into a more perfect Ferment by the Liver for the Venal Blood and Chylus. XVIII. And thus the first Origi∣nalFer   degrees  be . of Internal Ferment is from the Nourishment, which afterwards is more and more attenuated by various Concoctions, and alter'd in our Body into a more subtle Ferment. XIX. Now that it is the true Of∣ficeThe true Office of the Liver, Spleen,   to  . of the Liver, Spleen, and Sweet∣bread, to make Ferment in the man∣ner aforesaid, is apparent from hence, that when those Bowels are perfectly Sound, and perform their Duty ac∣cording to Nature, the whole Mass of Blood is better and more full of Spi∣rits, and thence the Body more Live∣ly and Active, and all the Natural and Animal Operations are rightly perform'd. On the other side, when these Bowels are out of Order, a thou∣sand Diseases arise from the Blood and Chylus ill fermented. XX. As we have already said there. is a sharp Salt, acid Iuice which is made in the Liver out of the artery Blood, copiously forc'd through the splenic Artery into this Bowel, which by the plentiful pouring in of Animal Spirits through the Nerves, and by the specific Temper of this Bowel is soon altered, and the sulphury Spirit that was before predominant in it is dull'd, fix'd, and suffocated, so the salt acid latent Spirits comes forth in∣to Action, and the salt Particles, somewhat separated from the Sulphury, get the upper hand: And hence it comes to pass, that the hot sweetish Blood flows through the Arteries in∣to the Spleen, but by and by the sul∣phury Heat being extinguish'd, toge∣ther with the Sweetness, it becomes Saltish, or somewhat Acid, and flows through the Splenic Branch from the Spleen to the Liver: Which is the Reason a boyl'd Spleen tasts somewhat Sowrish. And thus it happens in this
Matter, as in a Vinegar Vessel, Vine∣gar is made out of Wine; for the Vine∣gar Vessel is laid in a warm Place, commonly in the Garret, where the Sun may come at it. Into this Vessel, not quite full, they pour a moderate Quan∣tity of good strong Wine (for weak Wine will not make good Vinegar.) Which done, presently the sulphury sweet Spirit of the Wine is fix'd and suffocated by the salt and acid Particles predominating in the Vinegar, and the salt and acid Particles which are lodg'd in the Wine are melted, dissolv'd, at∣tenuated, and forc'd to Action by the sharp Acidity of the Vinegar, and so the Wine turns Eager, and becomes Vi∣negar. And thus the sulphureous Spi∣rit of the Arterial Blood, is fix'd and stifl'd, partly by the Animal Spirits flowing through the Nerves, partly by the acid and salt Spirits prepared and contain'd in the Spleen; and the salt and acid Spirits that are in it get the up∣per hand; which afterwards, new sul∣phury Spirits that ly in the Venal Blood, being mix'd therewith afresh, are to be by the Liver altered into perfect Fer∣ment. XXI. Now that the first MatterThe first Matter of the Fer∣ment pre∣pared in the Spleen. of the Ferment to be perfected in the Liver is prepared in the Spleen, may be in some measure demonstrated by Experience. For if the Spleen of an Ox, Hog, or other Male Creature be cut into small Bits, and macerated in luke-warm Water, and afterwards mix∣ed with a small Quantity of Dough, it dilates it, and causes it to ferment, like Yest or any other Leven: Which it does so much the more effectually if the smallest Quantity of Vinegar be ad∣ded to it. XXII. Now if this Function of theThe rise of Diseases from the Spleen. Spleen be interrupted, there are two Causes of Diseases which arise from thence. Some by reason of the salt and acid Iuice too thick and fix'd: Others when it is too thin and vola∣tile. For when the salt and acid Juices in the Spleen are not sufficiently dissolv'd and attenuated, then the Spirits which are extracted out of them are too sharp, corroding, and in too great Abun∣dance, and this Diversity produces Di∣versity of Diseases. XXIII. If the Spleen be weak, ei∣therIn a weak Spleen the acid Iuice is not e∣nough con∣cocted. through its own or the Fault of the Nourishment, or through any o∣ther Cause, then the acid Iuice that is concocted in it, is not sufficiently dissolv'd, attenuated, and volatiliz'd, but remains thick, and tartarous, or earthy, and the greatest Part of it lyes heap'd together in the Bladdery Substance of the Spleen, and adjoyning Parts, by reason of its crude Visco∣sity, which causes the Spleen to wax great, and to swell, in regard the Spirit that lies hid within it is not sufficiently rous'd up, but boyling a little in the narrow Passages in the Spleen and about the Spleen, distends the whole Spleen and Parts adjoyn∣ing to it, and raises a thousand win∣dy Vapours with rumbling and roar∣ing, and a troublesome Distemper fa∣miliar to Hypochondriacks. Which Mischiefs are very much encreased by a deprav'd Condition of the Pancreas, proceeding from the Blood corrupted by the vitious Humors of the Spleen, and brought to it through the Arteries. By reason whereof it concocts its own Juice but ill; and of over Salt, leaves it too Acid or Austere, which partly be∣gets great Obstructions in the Pancreas, the Disturbes of the Function of that Bowel: Partly flowing into the Inte∣stines, causes an undue Effervescency therein, and infuses a bad subacid Qua∣lity into the Chylus; whereby it becomes lyable to fixation, or coagulation; nor cannot be sufficiently attenuated. Whence by reason of the more fixed and thick∣er Chylus remaining in the Abdomen, and less prepared to farther Solution, are generated Obstructions in the mil∣kie Vessels, in the Mesentery, and Glan∣dules of the Mesentery, and therein a great Quantity of crude and ill Humors is heaped together, from the Quantity and Corruption of which a thousand Diseases arise, which are vulgarly cal∣led Melancholic, and are said to arise from the Spleen, but how they are bred by it, has not been as yet sufficiently Explain'd. But when the Blood remains too thick for want of effectual and con∣venient Ferment, and Spirits not sup∣ply'd in sufficient Quantity, the whole Body grows dull and languid, and ma∣ny Diseases arise. For the Blood being thick and not sufficiently Spirituous, and having salt crude and slimy Parts in∣termix'd with it, by coagulating the Humors in the Liver and other Bowels of the Abdomen, it breeds Obstructions and Scirrhosities. It is not sufficiently di∣lated in the Heart, but is forc'd too thick
into the Lungs, and there being yet more refrigerated by the Air drawn in, it diffi∣cultly passes through the narrow Pas∣sages of 'em, and so stuffing the Lungs, and compressing the Gristles of the Windpipe, causes difficulty of Breathing. In the Heart it self by reason of the ine∣quality of the Particles, and the difficult Dilatation of many, it produces an un∣equal, and sometimes an intermitting Pulse. In the Brain passing difficultly and disorderly through those narrow Channels, it causes Noises and Heavi∣ness of the Head; and because it endam∣mages the natural Constitution of the Brain, and because it tears it with its remaining Acrimony, the principal A∣nimal Actions are thereby impaired, the Imagination and Judgment are deprav'd, the Memory is spoyl'd, and thence Mad∣ness, and Restlesness, Watching, and such like Inconveniencies arise which cause true Melancholy. But if that thick∣er Salt be somewhat more exalted and fluid, and yet is not sufficiently Spiritu∣ous, then the Blood requires an acid and austere Disposition, as in the Scur∣vy; and then the nervous Parts are torn and rack'd by it, the thin Skins in∣velloping the Bones are pain'd, and the softer Parts are corroded, the Guts also are terribly grip'd, and Ulcers arise in the Thighs very hard to be cured: Moreover the Blood becomes unfit for Nutrition, and thence a slow Atrophie of the whole Body. The aforesaid salt Particles being coagulated in colder Kidneys and separated from the serous Humor, harden into Stones; but being separated in the Joynts and fixed to the sensitive Parts, and corroding 'em, they cause the sharp Pains of the Gout: And lastly, heap'd together in greater Quanti∣ty, they breed knotty Bunches and Corns. All which things happen if the fermentaceous Juice in the Spleen be too raw and thick. XXIV. But if the same Iuice beThe said Ferment too thin & full of Spi∣rits causes other Di∣seases. too thin and full of Spirits, and be prepared too sharp, then other Di∣seases arise. It excites in the Blood a great Heat conjoyned with some Acri∣mony, which because of the quick and disorderly Motion of the Animal Spi∣rits causes Restlesness, Watchings, high Deliriums, and Madness. Sticking lightly, coagulated in the Guts, it breeds the running Gout, for that sharp Hu∣mor being by reason of its Tenuity ea∣sily dissipated in one Part, presently the Pain arises again in another Part, to which some other Particles of the same Blood happen to adhere. XXV. The Spleen Scirrhous, orThe Spleen vitiated begets ma∣ny Evils. Obstructed, or any other manner of way vitiated by breeding a bad fer∣mentaceous Iuice, begets a thousand grievous Mischiefs. All which things sufficiently make manifest the Office and Duty of the Spleen. XXVI. And in like manner, theThe Fun∣ctions of the Liver are apparent from the Diseases that pro∣ceed from it. Function of the Liver is apparent, from the Diseases that proceed from it when the Liver is colder than or∣dinary, it is not able duly to digest the said Splenetic Iuice, and together with the Venal Blood, and the sul∣phuryDiseases a∣rising from the Spleen. Iuice intermix'd and sticking to it, to alter the splenetic Iuice into a due Ferment: Whereby there can never be a due Fermentation. The Chylus is not sufficiently concocted, nor sufficiently prepared for future Fermen∣tation in the Heart. The venal Blood becomes Crude, Serous, neither does it get Spirits sufficient in the Heart, but is attenuated only into a watry Vapour, which turns to a watry Liquor in theThe cause of Anasar∣ca. Vessels and sost Parts, and so filling the whole Body with Serum, begets the Dropsy call'd Anasarca, attended with continual Drought, by reason of the salt Particles lodg'd in the Serum not well mix'd with the Blood, which together with the Juices flowing from the Salival Vessels, and at that time also saltish, being carried to the Chaps and Gullet, by reason of their dry Vellication, or twitching of the Part, occasion continu∣al Drought. XXVII. But when the Liver is hot, and consequently weak, then by exal∣ting the sulphury and oily Spirits out of the Blood, it raises 'em in too great a Quantity; by which the Force of the acid Iuice coming from the Spleen is very much weakened, and a bad Ferment generated. which pro∣duces Inflammations, Corruption, Fe∣vers, and other hot Diseases arising from an over deprav'd Fermentation, and begets over much Choler. Which Choler if it grow milder by reason of the Mixture of a little acid Juice, then it breeds the yellow Iaundice. But if sharp by reason of much Salt or acid and sharp splenetic Juice concocted with it, then it occasions the Disease Cholera, Diarrhaea Dysentery, and other like Di∣seases.
XXVIII. The Liver obstructed andThe Liver Scirrhous. scirrhous not causing the Generation and due distribution of good Fer∣ment, is also the Cause of several Crudities and many Diseases arising from Crudities. As for the fermentaceous Quality of the Pancreatic Juice, and what Disea∣ses arise from a deprav'd Sweetbread, has already been discoursed C. 10. XXIX. In the Birth, while it isFerment in the Birth. in the Womb, there is no need of any such Ferment at the Beginning, be∣cause it is nourished by the Dissolu∣tion and Fusion of the Seed, which contains in it self a Spirit moderately Fermentaceous; and then by the milkie Iuice contained in the Amni∣nium that needs less Ferment. Af∣terwards when it requires somewhat stronger Nourishment, brought through the umbilical Vein, and begins to en∣joy it, then the whole Uterine Pla∣centa supplies the Office of the Spleen and Liver, and makes a more mild Ferment, more proper for the Birth in the Beginning. In the mean time the Liver and Spleen increase their Ferment to future Uses, that is, to prepare a more sharp Ferment afterwards, that is, when the Child being born should feed upon more solid Nourishment. Which Duty however those Bowels do not perform presently after the Birth of the Child, as it were by way of a Leap, but were also by degrees accustomed to it in the Womb. For the more the Heat of the Heart increases, and Blood is generated more full of Spirits, and the more the Brain is brought to Perfection and becomes stronger, the more sharp Spirits are generated in the Womb. And out of these two things, Blood and Animal Spirits meeting every day stron∣ger and stronger in the Spleen, which by Degrees is brought to greater Perfection together with the Spleen, and preparation of the fermentaceous Matter begins to be made; and as for the manner of preparing the same Matter, the said Bowels have gain'd to a sufficient Perfection; as ap∣pears by the Choler, which you shall find well concocted in the Gall-bladder of a newborn Infant. XXX. And thus I think I haveConclusion. set forth the true, and never as yet sufficiently demonstrated Duty of the Liver and Spleen: As also the Use of Choler, Pancreatic Iuice and Lympha. Many more things might be alledged for farther Proof, but to the Learned what has been said may suffice. The impartial Reader may confer these things with the Opinions of other Doctors that have wrote before us; and then he will perceive how far they have err'd from the Mark. XXXI. And now from what hasThe  derac. twee Live Splee been said it is manifestly apparent what a necessary League and Confe∣deracy there is between the Liver and the Spleen, and what and how many Diseases arise from the bad Constitution of either of these two Bowels. How unlikely it is for a Man to live after his Spleen is cut out of his Body. It is also apparent how erroneously the second grand Concoction is said to be made in the Liver, Spleen, and Sweet∣bread, when of necessity it must be made in the Heart. For the forementioned Ferment is only made of the Blood, and the Blood must be first made in the Heart before it can come to the Liver, Spleen, and Sweetbread. And therefore the second general Concoction is made in the Heart, the third in the Liver, Spleen, and Sweetbread. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Serum and Kidneys. I. HAving thus explain'd theOf rum Rei Office of the Liver and Spleen, it follows that we discourse of those Parts which evacuate the Se∣rum, which is necessarily mix'd in great Quantity with the Blood, when it is too redundant. II. Now the Serum is a wateryThe give cessa thin flux to  Bloo Part of the Meat and Drink, con∣cocted together with the salt and sulphury Iuices of the Nourishment, and plentifully mix'd with the Blood, to give perfect Mixture and necessary Thinness and Fluxibility, by means whereof it may penetrate the narrow∣est Passages; to wash away and mix with it the Impurities of the same and the more crude salt Particles, that together with it self they may be e∣vacuated by Spittle, Sweat and Urine.
III. And here it is that the OpinionWhether it be an Ali∣mentary Iuice. of Jerome Barbatus, and some others, is to be rejected, who endeavour by many Reasons to prove that the Serum is a Humour no less Alimentary than the Blood, and that it nourishes the Spermatic Vessels, as the blood nourishes the fleshy. But their Arguments are so weak, that it is not worth the while to refute ▪em. For tho' the Nourishment cannot be distributed to the Parts with∣out the Serum, and that there are con∣tain'd in it some salt and sulphurous Particles, nevertheless it cannot thence be concluded, that that same Serum nou∣rishes the Spermatic Vessels, and that the Blood is excluded from that perform∣ance. But of this more at large L. 2. c. 12. But for this Serum, because there is a necessity for an abundance of it to be mix'd with the blood, and to be daily renew'd, and yet it is not apply'd to any Substance of the Parts, therefore it is that Emunctories are requisite for the Evacu∣ation of its too much redundant Super∣fluity. IV. These Emunctories or Evacuato∣ries,The Emun∣ctories twofold. are twofold, External or Internal. V. Again, the External are two∣fold:The exter∣nal Eva∣cuatories. First, these, thorough which there is a manifest, but not perpetual Evacuation; as the Eyes, Mouth, and Nostrils. From the Eyes fall the se∣rous Humours of Tears. Through the Mouth and Nostrils the greatest part of the serous and flegmatic Humours and Vapours are expell'd, in Hawking, Spitting, Salivation, and the Murrh; as also in Respiration, which is conspi∣cuous in the Winter. Secondly, Those Evacuatories through which there is made insensible Transpiration, that is to say, the Pores of the Skin, through which day and night there is a continual and insensible Exhalation of the serous Vapour, which is often perceived in the form of Sweat. Now this Evacuation of the serous Humour through the Pores, far exceeds all other sensible Evacuations of what Excrements soever. As for ex∣ample; If a Man have taken in one day twelve pound of Nourishment, he shall evacuate through the Pores of the Skin, and by Transpiration near nine pound of Excrement in vapour, and hardly two by sensible Evacuation. Which San∣ctorius taught us by an ingenious Experi∣ment. He to that purpose weighed in a pair of exact Scales, a young Man in the Morning, after he had been at the House of Easment; and besides that, he weighed apart all the Meat which he was to eat that day. Then he as exact∣ly pois'd the weight of his Spittle, U∣rine, and Stool, collected all together, and then weighed the same Person at the same hour fasting, as he did before. By which means he found that the Excre∣ment insensibly evacuated through the Pores, exceeded far in weight all other sensible Evacuations. VI. The Internal Evacuatories areThe exter∣nal Evacu∣atories of the Serum. the Reins and Piss-bladder, with the Parts thereupon depending. VII. But before we begin withWhether a∣ny diffe∣rence be∣tween the Serum, Sweat and Urine. them, here is one Scruple to be re∣mov'd; Whether the Serum and Sweat, under which ought to be com∣prehended Exhalations and Vapours, consist of the same Materials, and a∣gree in Substance: Which is that which the generality of Physicians unanimous∣ly consent to. Tho' Lodowic Mercatus differs from all the rest, as he that be∣lieves these four Humours to be distinct in Substance. But this Doubt may be easily resolv'd, by alledging that the Serum of it self is a meer watery Liquor; but that the Urine and Sweat are not Liquors so simple as the Serum so pro∣perly taken, but Liquors endued with a certain saltness, and concocted with salt Particles, differing little or nothing, in respect of Substance, one from the other, yet in the mean time their chiefest part is Serum, from whence the serous Hu∣mours, which are not erroneously for the most part call'd Serum, the word being taken at large, and the Denomination from the greater part of the Substance. VIII. The Reins are so call'd fromThe Reins▪ , to flow, because the Urine, like so many Rivers, flows from them, and  from  to piss. IX. They are in number two; sel∣domTwo in number. more or less: For it is look'd up∣on as a Prodigy, that there should be more than one Kidney upon one side, and none in the other, ▪or two Kidneys upon one side; which nevertheless has been sometimes found to be true. Ca∣brolius in two Bodies by him dissected, found one Kidney leaning upon the Ver∣tebers of the Loyns. X. These two Kidneys are seatedTheir place behind the Ventricle and the Guts, un∣der the Liver and Spleen, on both sides near the Spine, at the head of the Psoa Muscle. Whence it comes to pass that
that Muscle, being compress'd by the Stone in the Kidney, there happens a numbness in the Hip. However Riolanus in Animadvers. in Bartholin. alledges that that numbness proceeds from hence, that the Compression is made in that place, where those three Nerves are inserted into the musculous part of the Psoa, of which that remarkable Nerve is made in the Thigh, which is thence extended to the Foot: But in regard that Nerve in the Thigh is compos'd, not only of three, but of seven Nerves, that is to say, the four lower Nerves of the Loyns, and the three upper of the Os Sacrum, some of which abscond under the head of the Psoa. I do not see how the head of the Psoa, being compress'd, it should follow that the Nerves of the Thigh, seated in a lower place, should come to be com∣press'd, and that thence a numbness of the Thigh should follow. XI. They lye upon the sides of theThe Situa∣tion. Aorta and Vena Cava, between the two Membranes of the Peritonaeum; the right being placed a little lower than the left. But the situation is very seldom alike; for either the right is some∣what higher than the left; nevertheless in Beasts the left is many times the lower. XII. They are both seldom of an e∣qual bigness; for the most part the leftThe Big∣ness. being somewhat bigger than the right. They generally take up the length of three Vertebers, and sometimes four: three fingers broad, and equalling the thickness of the Thumb. Sometimes the whole bulk is found to be lesser, and sometimes bigger, which Bartholine be∣lieves he has observ'd in those that were most prone to Venery. Sometimes the bigness increases to Monstrosity; such was that which we saw in the Carkass of a certain Person in the Year 1658. both whose Reins surpass'd the bigness of half a Man's head: For that Nature won∣derfully sports her self in bigness, number, figure, and vessels. Of which there are various and remarkable Examples in Eustachius, Fernelius, Vesalius, Carpus, Botallus, Bauhinus, and others. Yet this Variety is very rare, and hardly to be found in one among six hundred. XIII. In Figure they represent a French Bean, or the expanded Leaf of wildThe Fi∣gure. Spikenard. On the Outside they are gib∣bous, and bow'd backward: On the in∣side somewhat hollow at the ingress and egress of the Vessels. The Superficies in a Man of ripe years is smooth and equal; otherwise in a Cow, Sheep, and many other brute Creatures, in whom it is un∣equal; as if the Kidneys were compos'd of many round fleshy little Lumps or Buttons. Which external shape they also shew in new-born Children, which remains for three years, and sometimes for six years after the Birth, as Riolan witnesses. Eustachius reports that he ne∣ver observ'd that shape in Men grown up, but only twice. But Dominic. de Mar∣chettis writes that he shew'd the same Figure twice or thrice in the Theatre at Padua. Once I remember I saw the same in a Man run thorough the middle of the Abdomen above each Kidney with a Sword: In whose body, when at the request of the Magistrate, I enquir'd into the Cause of his death, and the Nature of the wound, by chance I found such a Figure of the Kidneys, as if compos'd of small Buttons. XIV. They are cloathed with twoTheir Mem∣branes. Membranes; of which the outermost is common, proceeding from the Peri∣tonaeum, call'd the Fatty, because that in fat people it is surrounded with a great quantity of fat. Into this the Arteria Adiposa runs, from the Aor∣ta: out of it proceeds the Vena Adi∣posa, which the right Kidney sends to the Emulgent, rarely to the Trunk of the Vena Cava; the left sends forth to the Vena Cava. This Membrane knits both Reins to the Loyns and Dia∣phragma; the right also to the blind Gut, and sometimes to the Liver; the left to the Spleen and Colon. The innermost and proper Membrane is form'd out of the external Tunicle of the Vessels being dilated, (which Ves∣sels enter the Kidney with one only Tunicle.) Into which little Nerves are inserted, proceeding from the Fold of the sixth Pair, and the Thoracical Branch, affording a dull sense of feeling to the Kidney: which being nevertheless extended further into the Ureters, endue them with a most acute sense, and for that reason are the Cause that in Nephritic Pains the Stomach having a fellow feel∣ing, has oftentimes a desire to vomit. But very few Nerves, and those very small, and hardly conspicuous, enter the Substance of the Kidneys it self. XV. Both the Kidneys have twoThe Vesse large Vasa sanguifera; that is to say, an Artery and an Emulgent Vein; among which are sprinkled certain small
Lymphatic Vessels, as some ima∣gine. XVI. The Emulgent Artery, pro∣ducedThe Emul∣gent Arte∣ry. from the Trunk of the descend∣ing Aorta, being first doubled, enters the flat part of the Kidney; thence it is dispers'd through the Substance of it with divers Branches, and therein vanishes into extream small and invi∣sible Twigs. Through this Artery, which is very large, great store of blood is carried to the Kidney, partly to nou∣rish it, together with its Urinary Vessels; partly that a good part of the serous Hu∣mor may be separated from it in its Glan∣dules, and that being emptied through the little Urinary Fibres, and Papillary Caruncles, or the ten little Bodies in the Reins, into the Pelvis, or Receptacle of the Reins, the blood may become less serous. This Artery we have once seen in the right Kidney, inserted into the lowermost part of the Kidney. XVII. The Emulgent Vein is a lit∣tleThe Emul∣gent Vein. larger than the Artery. This, with innumerable Roots meeting together in this Trunk, adheres to the Kidney and its Glandules, and thence pro∣ceeding out of it from the flat part, runs on to the Vena Cava, into which it opens with a broad Orifice, so situated as to give a free passage for the Blood into the Vena Cava; but hindring it from flowing out of the Vena Cava into the Emulgent. Whence it is cer∣tain, that the Blood is forc'd into the Kidney by the Emulgent Artery only, and part of it remaining after the Nou∣rishment of the Kidney, being freed from a good quantity of the serous Humour in the little Glandules, flows through the Emulgent Vein into the Vena Cava. I think it was never observ'd that two E∣mulgent Veins proceeded out of one Kid∣ney; yet once it was seen, and publickly demonstrated by us in a dissected Body, in Novemb. 1668. Both were of the u∣sual largeness; and one proceeded from the middlemost flat part of the Kidney, after the wonted manner; the other from the lowermost part of the same right Kidney, and about the breadth of half a Thumb one below the other, was in∣serted into the Vena Cava. And some∣thing like this I find to be observed by Saltzman in Observ. Anat.The left Emulgent Vein high∣er and longer than the right. XVIII. The left of these Emulgent Veins in a Man enters the Vena Cava somewhat in a higher place, and is lon∣ger than the right, by reason of the higher and remoter situation of the Kidney from the Vena Cava. In ma∣ny Beasts the right is the higher. Some∣times their number is unequal, and their Progress unequal, as shall be shewn more at large L. 7. c. 6. XIX. The dissemination and di∣spersingThe di∣spersing of the Vessels through the Kidneys.▪ of both the Emulgent Vessels through the Kidney, cannot be exact∣ly demonstrated, because of the ex∣tream slenderness of the Branches, and the dimness of the Sight. In the mean while several Anatomists have written various Speculations concerning this matter, according to the diversity of their Opinions. Among the rest, Rolfinch asserts that the Roots of the E∣mulgent Veins meet together with the ends of the Emulgent Arteries by Anastomoses, and that he reports to be first observ'd by Eustachius, L. de Ren. But Malpigi∣us lately has sufficiently demonstrated the vanity of these Conjunctions, who by his Microscopes observ'd that several ends of little Arteries end in very small Glandules, adhering to the little Urina∣ry Fibres or Vessels; and that so some part of the Serum is separated from the Blood of those small Arteries, and car∣ried by the Urinary Vessels to the Pel∣vis, or Receptacle of the Kidneys: but that the rest of that Blood is suck'd up by the ends of the Veins, and so flows to the Emulgent Vein, and thence to the Vena Cava. XX. In the inner part of the Kid∣neyThe Pelvis. is contain'd the Pelvis or Infun∣dibulum, which is nothing else but a membranous Concavity, compos'd of the Ureter, expanded and dilated in the hollow of the Kidney, and reaching thither with open and broad Branches, sometimes eight or ten, like Pipes: XXI. Over which lye little piecesThe Papil∣lary Ca∣runcles. of Flesh or Carunculae, vulgarly call'd Papillares, by Rondeletius, Mam∣millares, (over each one) like small Kernels, not so deep coloured, but harder than the rest of the Flesh, about the bigness of a Pea, somewhat broad∣er above, convex below, with holes bor'd through, but so small that will hardly admit a hair. Malpigius ob∣serv'd over and above, that innumerable Fibres also extend themselves toward the gibbous part from the Appendixes of the Pelvis form'd into a Bow; and that some portions of the Pelvis, like extend∣ed
Vessels, accompanying the Vasa San∣guifera, extend themselves toward the Circumference. XXII. The Substance of the Reins,The Sub∣stance of the Reins. as far as occurs to the sight, appears to be as it were fibrous, form'd out of the concourse and intermixture of the smallest Vessels joyned together, to∣gether with something of Carnosity in∣terventing, endu'd with various slen∣der little Chanels. To the outward touch somewhat hard, but within side indifferently spungy; without of a dark ruddy colour, but toward the Pelvis or Kidney Receptacle, more pale. XXIII. This is as much as generallyThe Super∣ficies smooth in Men, rough in Chil∣dren. is obvious to the sight in the Reins. But not very long ago Malpigius was the first who discover'd more Secrets in the Reins, which were unknown to the pre∣ceding Anatomists; and because all A∣natomists are upon this score much be∣holding to that great Man: of necessity the Mysteries by him revealed are here to be added. Neither is any thing to be detracted from the Honour of this first Discoverer. He writes L. de Ren. that tho' in MenThe Disco∣veries of Malpigius grown up the Superficies of the Kidneys appears generally smooth, yet that in Children new born it is unequal (as has been already said,) and that that same Conjunction of the Buttons or Balls in grown People is still to be discern'd on the inside from the diversity of the Co∣lour, which in the little Balls without, and toward the sides to which they are conjoyn'd, is ruddy, toward the inner parts is more pale. But as in Beasts those little Glandules are round, but to∣ward the inner parts, being extended to an obtuse narrowness, are joyned toge∣ther sometimes quadrangular, quinquan∣gular, and sometimes sexangular; so like∣wise in Men there is plainly to be ob∣serv'd from the diversity of the Colour, the like, but a closer Conjunction of the little Balls. Then he adds, That the Membrane being taken away in a new, and as yet soft Kidney, certain round and very short Bodies roll'd up like Worms, may be discern'd by the help of a Microscope; not unlike those that are found in the Substance of the Kid∣ney when cut asunder in the middle; and that this Connexion of Vermicular Vessels composing the external Superfi∣cies of the Kidneys, is the same with the Vessels descending to the Renal Re∣ceptacle. And that by the same Micro∣scope are to be observ'd wonderful Branches of the Vessels lying hid under the outward Superficies, with little Glandules appendant, and dispers'd through the Superficies of the Kidney toward the Renal Receptacle: as also cer∣tain continu'd winding spaces and little Concavities running through the whole outward Superficies of the Kidneys, con∣spicuous by the pouring in a little Ink through the Emulgent Vessels: as also in∣numerable little Chanels, which resem∣ble, as seems to the Eye, a sort of Fibres or Liver-like Flesh, but are really mem∣branous and hollow, and by their being crowded together, constitute the Sub∣stance of the Reins, and are the Vessels that discharge the Urine. Moreover, he says, That the Membrane of the Kidney being taken away, and an Inje∣ction of Spirit of Wine dy'd of a black Colour, being made into the Emulgent Artery, innumerable small Kernels are to be observ'd, annexed here and there to double forked Arteries, and dy'd of a black Colour by the said Injection; as also several others between the bundles of the Urinary Vessels, and the Spaces intervening, which little Kernels hang as it were like Apples upon the Vasa San∣guifera, swelling with the black Injection, and spread into the form of a fair Tree. From these Kernels, where the ends of the Arteries lose themselves, he believes it also profitable that the Orifices of Veins arise, and that the smallest Nerves are produc'd from hence, and that the dis∣charging Vessels are extended so far from the Ureter, seeing this is always the property of the Glandules, that the several Berries or Buttons produce their proper discharging Branch, besides the Veins and Arteries, as is done in the Li∣ver, according to what we have said. He has also observ'd that those little Chanels or small Urinary Fibres being very ma∣ny in number, lose themselves in every one of the Papillary Caruncles seated in the Renal Receptacle, and through those sweat through the Urine into the Recep∣tacle; which Piss descends into the Pa∣pillary Caruncles, not thorough any of the little Pores of the Pelvis, as was for∣merly thought, but through these Cha∣nels only, and out of them into the Re∣nal Receptacle. And as for those Papil∣lary Tunicles (of which some are round, others flat or oblong) he believes 'em to be nothing else but the Concourse of ma∣ny small Chanels united together. He adds, That he certainly knows by dili∣gent and frequently repeated Dissection, that in the Kidney of a Man, the Uri∣nary Vessels that resemble solid and compacted sleshy Fibres, and yet are hol∣low,
end in the said apparent Papillary Tunicles, which with a swelling protube∣rancy open into the Renal Receptacle, and each receive or admit so many little Pipes or Vessels as amount to the num∣ber of twelve, and that the same Urina∣ry Vessels are extended from the Cir∣cumference to those Teats, as to the Cen∣ter. Lastly, Malpigius annexes a Question, How Gravel and Stones can descend into the Receptacle of the Kidneys thorough those Fibtes and Teats which are so ex∣treamly narrow? To which he an∣swers, That small Gravel may pass through, because the Vessels are mem∣branous and apt to dilate. I rather think he should have said, that the tartarous Substance sticking to the Serum that pas∣ses thorough, hardens into Gravel and Stones in the Renal Receptacle, after it is slid through those slender Vessels, which frequently happens: Sometimes it hardens also in the Vessels themselves, and having broken 'em, fall into the Receptacle afterwards; and if much of that matter be harden'd in those Vessels, and there remain, then the Substance of the Kidneys becomes gravelly and sto∣ny. XXIV. The Use of the Kidneys isThe use of the Reins. to separate and evacuate the redundant serous Moisture from the Blood, which is carried to 'em, together with the Blood, through the Emulgent Ar∣teries; from which Blood, in its pas∣sage through the Glandules of the Reins, the Urinary Fibres, and the Papillary Caruncles, a good part of the Serum is separated, and distills into the Renal Receptacle or Pelvis, and thence slides through the Ureters to the Piss-bladder. But the remainder of the Blood and mix'd serous Humour (for all the Serum is not separated from the Blood) that is sent through the Emul∣gent Veins to the Vena Cava. XXV. But how that separation ofThe first Digression. the Serum is made, is hard to explain. For that the two first things upon which the Explication depends, are altogether obscure, that is to say, the Specific Fer∣mentation, and the peculiar disposition of the Pores in the Reins. XXVI. For, that there is a certainHow the Separation of the Se∣rum is made. Specific Effervescency or separating Fermentation in the Reins, or about the Reins, by which part of the Se∣rum, together with the Impurities mix'd with it, is separated from the Blood, three Reasons teach us. 1. First, For that most Diureticks a∣bound with Salt, which causes that Fer∣mentation; nay, many of these Diure∣tics are Salts themselves, as Salt of Beans, Vine-stalks, Iuniper, Prunella, &c. 2. Be∣cause Sudorisics (by which the Serum is separated from the Blood) are very effe∣ctual, whether Salt of Wormwood, Car∣duus, Mother-wort, &c. or such as are endued with an acid Salt, as Vinegar, Oyl of Vitriol or Sulphur, Spirit of Salt, and the like, which cause or increase that Effervescency. 3. For that in cold Distempers, as the Anasarca, by reason of the weak Constitution of the Liver, because there is not a strong and suffici∣ent Ferment prepar'd, for which reason the crude Serum is not sufficiently sepa∣rated from the Blood, nor yet attenua∣ted; thence it happens that very little U∣rine is discharg'd, tho' the Serum abound in all parts of the Body, and distends all the parts with a sensible Tumour. But how by that Effervescency part of the Serum, with its Impurities, comes to be separated, and what form it assumes to pass alone through those narrow and porous passages of the Kidneys, the Blood being excluded from 'em, who∣ever can demonstrate this, deserves the Laurel. XXVII. Here the Glandules of theWhe  the K∣nels? Kidneys assume to themselves a great priviledge, in which very few doubt but that there is a peculiar power of separating the Serum from the Blood. But in regard that besides the Serum, Matter also, slimy Flegm, and other Humours This  be much doubted whether that which after ∣sing, when the inter∣nal hea of it is va∣nished, ap∣pear to be Matter, slimy Flegm, or other very thick Humours, came so thick out of the Reins, or that Gravel or Sand should be sent out of the Blood i that largeness: I think, yea know the contrary; and that ose so thick Humours, Matter, or Flegm, are as thin as the rest of the Urine from the internal heat of the parts; after the same manner as it happens in Gelly-broths, which while very hot, will be liquid and fluid, but having lost their heat, become thicker: the  happens in the Reins, but with this difference, that the glutino Substance is less in proportion to the quantity of Urine, than it is in Gellies, and therefore being old cannot be so thick and : so Sand or Gravel, while in the Blood, is no such thing, but a  Paste or Tartar, which after hardens in that form. Salmon. much thicker than the Blood it self, nay, Gravel and Stones are discharged with the Urine; hence whe∣ther this Separation of the Blood be to be ascrib'd to the Glandules alone, was question'd by many; who therefore joyn'd to their assistance a specific dispo∣sition of the Pores in the Kidneys, no less obscure and unknown than the foresaid specific Fermentation, and peculiar power in the Glandules to separate the Serum.
For who, I would fain know, will unfold to us, wherefore the Serum, with the Hu∣mours contain'd in it, separated from the Blood by the foresaid specific Fer∣mentation, descend through the Pores of the Kidneys and Glandules, without any Blood, when in the mean time, the pu∣rulent Matter brought from the Breast, and altogether mix'd with the Blood, has been often seen to pass through the same Pores without any Blood? Thus in the Year 1638. I cur'd a Merchant ofObserv. 1. Nimmeghen, who was troubled with an Imposthum, which was at length dis∣charg'd through the Urinary Passages in two days time, with some pain in his U∣reters, two Chamber-pots full of white Matter well concocted, and somewhat thick, and so was free'd from his Apo∣steme. Whereas before the same Mat∣ter (the Fluctuation of which was not only perceiv'd by himself, by reason of his difficult breathing, but also was ea∣sily heard in the stirring of his Body back∣ward and forward) threaten'd him not only with a Consumption, but with cer∣tain Death. XXVIII. Something to the sameObserv. 2. purpose I also observ'd in the Year 1639. in a Servant of the Lord of Soulen, who being troubled with an Aposteme in his Breast, all the Mat∣ter was discharg'd through the Urina∣ry Passages, with a terrible pain in the Loyns and Ureters, by reason of the di∣stension of the parts caused by the pas∣sage of the thick Matter. Andrew Laurentius also, Anat. l. 9. quaest. 12.Observ. 3. relates a Story of the same nature, by him observ'd in a certain Person trou∣bled with an Empyema, whose Body being opened, he found a certain sort of stink∣ing Matter in great quantity in the Con∣cavity of the Breast and the left hollow∣ness of the Heart, of the same nature with that which came from him with his Urine, which was a certain sign that it came from the Breast through the Heart to the Kidneys. XXIX. These and such like things,The thing farther considered. while others consider and observe a difficult Explication of the Matter, they reject the Glandules, and affirm the whole Business to be done by the sole peculiar disposition of the Pores in the Kidneys, that is to say, their Apti∣tude and Structure, which they cannot describe, neither by means whereof the thick Matter finds a passage through them, but the thinner Blood cannot pass. Fling, say they, thin Chaff, Pease and Beans, into a Country Farmers Barn-Sive, the thicker Pease and Beans easily pass through the Holes, but the long thin Chaff remains in the Sive. But tho' the aptitude of the Pores in dry things may occasion such Accidents, 'tis much to be doubted, whether in liquid and fluid Bodies mix'd together, the same thing may happen, especially when neither exceeds the other in fat; that is to say, whether a Substance four times thicker than the Blood, by reason of the said Structure of the Pores alone, may be able to pass through such narrow Pores, which do not only not give pas∣sage to the blood that is mix'd with it, and is much thinner, but stops it. Whether also the blood which is so thin and fluid, that it has been sometimes seen to sweat through the Pores of the Skin, coming to the Pores of the Reins, cannot as ea∣sily, or rather much more easily be shap'd to the form of the Pores of the Reins, than Matter which is so thick, that it can hardly pass thorough the Ureters, but many times extreamly tor∣ments 'em by their distension. And so that Reason, as to the particular Stru∣cture of the Pores of the Reins, seems hardly sufficient to explain the said Eva∣cuation; therefore there is something yet lies hid which no body yet could e∣ver discover: In the mean time, tho' the Cause of this thing do not manifest∣ly appear, this is certain as to the thing it self; and we our selves have seen Mat∣ter carried from the Breast to the Kid∣neys and Bladder, discharg'd in great quantity, without any intermixture of blood. XXX. But we shall not insist altoge∣therThe thing considered in solids. upon Liquids; what shall we say of things that are solid and hard, are they also shap'd in like manner, so as to be strain'd through the Pores of the Kidneys, without any concomitancy of Blood? Yet there are several Examples of hard things that are discharg'd with the Urine, without any blood attending. Thus Longinus relates a Story of a Vir∣gin, that being surpriz'd with a suddain laughter, swallow'd three Needles which she held in her Mouth, which came from her again in three days with her Urine. Alexander Benedict. l. 3. Anat. c. 9. writes another Story of a Pack-needle, four fingers breadth long▪ which descended into the Bladder, and was afterwards found in the dissected body. Iohn Mat∣thaeus also relates, that a small Iron Nail being swallow'd unawares, was taken a
long time after, cut of the Bladder with a Stone cut out at the same time, (the Stone cleaving round about the Nail, as if the Nail had been the groundwork of the Stone. My Wife swallow'd a small Needle that carried an ordinary Thred, which in three days came from her a∣gain with her Urine, August 8. 1665. Nr did the Needle put her to any pain while it lay in her Body. IuliusAnnot. ad c. 14. de Sub∣stan. fac. Natural. Alexandrinus has observ'd little pieces of the Roots of Parsly, as big as a farthing, swallow'd the day before, discharg'd a∣gain with the Urine. Nicholas Floren∣tineSerm. 4. Tract. 4. c. 29. reports that a Person, who had eat Mushrooms not exactly concocted, piss'd out again remarkable Bits of 'em with his Urine. Plutarch relates the Story. 8. Sym∣pos. Prob. 9. of a Man, who after a long difficulty of his Urine, at length voided a knotted Barly-stalk. George Ierome Velschius Observat. 60. relates another Story of one that was wont to void Grape-stones, bits of Lettice, and Meat, together with his Urine. And of another, that when he drank the hot Bath-waters, frequently voided with his Urine whole pieces of Melon-seeds which he was us'd to eat. Pigraeus and Hildan tell ye of some that have piss'd out Aniseeds and Alke∣kengi. All which things, it is both said and believ'd by most hitherto, do pass through the narrow streights of the Kid∣neys, where the blood cannot make its way. How then will the adapted dispo∣sition and structure of the Pores afore∣said suffice? I hardly believe it. For that such hard and large Bodies, passing the milkie Vessels, should first pass the Vena Cava, and igh the Cavity of the Heart, thence through the narrow and scarcely visible passages of the Lungs, to the left side insensibly, without any pain or prejudice, and then be conveyed through the Aorta and Emulgent Arte∣ries to the Kidneys, and be strain'd through their Urinary Fibres and Papil∣lary Pores, and that no blood should go along with 'em, surpasses both Belief and Reason, nor can be prov'd by any Ex∣perience, seeing that no Physician or A∣natomist ever found Needles, Seeds, Straws, or any such like things swal∣lowed, either in the Vena Cava, the Ven∣tricles of the Heart, the Lungs, the Aor∣ta, or the Kidneys. XXXI. These things when formerlyOther pas∣sages sup∣posed lead∣ing to the Bladder. I seriously consider'd with my self, and withal bethought my self that they who in great quantity drink the Spaw Waters, and other sharp and diuretic Waters, in half an hours time evacuate forth a∣gain three, four, or more pound of Se∣rum, without any alteration of the Heart; and that it is very unlikely that so great a quantity of crude and uncoloured Serum should so suddainly pass through the Heart, Lungs, and Kidneys, without any prejudice. I began to think that of necessity, besides the Veins, there must be some other Passages through which the more copi∣ous Serum, and those hard Substances already mention'd come to the Blad∣der. XXXII. And these ways or pas∣sagesThe milkie Vessels to the Bladder and Womb. I suspected to be certain milkie Vessels, which are carried to the Blad∣der through occult and hitherto un∣known ways; and tho' not in all, yet in some men are so open toward the Bladder, that they are sufficient to transmit the milkie Chylus and plen∣tiful Serum, but also solid, hard, and long Substances. And this Conjecture of mine the Observations of Physicians seem to confirm, who have sometimes seen the Chylous milkie Matter evacua∣ted with the Urine. Nicholas Florentine Serm. 5. Tract. 10. c. 21. reports that he knew a young Man about thirty years of Age, who every day voided, besides a great quantity of Urine, without any pain, about half a Urinal full of Milk. Capellus the Physician, by the Testimo∣ny of Bauhinus, saw a Woman that eva∣cuated half a Cup full of Milk out of her Bladder. Andrew Lawrentius has ob∣served several Child-bearing Women to have voided a great Quantity of Milk out of their Wombs and Bladders. Whence it is manifestly apparent that some milkie Vessels run forth, not only to the Womb, but to the Bladder, and may discharge themselves into those parts, if there be no Obstruction, that is, if those Vessels are not obstructed, compressed, or stop'd up by some other means, as they seem to be in most men; which is thought to be the reason that the milkie Chylus so rarely flows to the Bladder. But in re∣gard these Passages are short, and not so winding as many others are, it may easily happen that other solid Substances, besides the Chylus, may pass through 'em, as Seeds, Needles, Straws, &c. But much more easily may a great part of the crude Serum, increas'd by much drinking, flow through these Passages, and be evacuated through the Bladder, in regard so large a quantity of blood cannot be so suddainly run through other
Vessels, and circulate through the Heart. And hence it is that such Urine proves of a watery Colour, differing much in Colour and Consistence from that Urine which is concocted with the blood, which follows well colour'd after the Evacuati∣on of much copious crude Serum, and manifestly shews that it pass'd through o∣ther parts, (than the other crude Serum,) that is, through the Lungs, Heart, and Kidneys, and there obtain'd a larger Concoction. I also conjectur'd that those Liquors which we drink, and whose co∣lour and smell remains in the Urine, are carried the same way; for should they pass through the Heart, they would lose both. Actuarius l. 2. de Iud. Urin. c. 20. relates the History of a sick Person to whom he had given a black Medicin, who soon after made black water without any prejudice. And many times Mid∣wives, by the colour and smell of the Excrements that flow from Child-bear∣ing Women, know what the Woman with Child has been eating before. Saf∣fron being given in drink to a Woman in Labour, in a quarter of an hour dy'd the Birth of a yellow Colour, and yet the Saffron could not pass through the Heart in so short a time, nor from thence be sent to the Womb, much less pre∣serve its Colour entire in passing through so many several Chanels. Iohn Ferdi∣nand Hertodius, fed a Bitch for some days before she whelp'd with Meat dy'd with Saffron, and after he had open'd her, found the Dissolution or Liquation among the Membranes, and the Pup∣pies dy'd of a yellow Colour, and yet the Chylus was white in the milkie Ves∣sels, not tinctur'd with any other Co∣lour. I my self have seen those who have eaten the fat growing to the Kid∣neys of Lambs, rosted, and in a short time voided it all again with their U∣rine. Oyl of Turpentine immediately imparts its smell to the Urine. And Asparagus provokes Urine, crude, mud∣dy, and retaining their own smell. Whereas if such Juices should make a long Circuit through the Heart and other Bowels, they could never come to the Bladder so suddainly, so raw, and yet retaining their own smell. Which are certain Indications that there are certain milkie Vessels occult, and taking ano∣ther Course than the rest, which extend themselves, some to the Womb, and some to the Piss-bladder, and that Li∣quors of this nature, and other solid Sub∣stances, may sometimes through those more open Chanels, reach those parts. Which Vessels, tho' hitherto they were never conspicuous to the sight, nor de∣monstrated by any Anatomist, yet of necessity must be there. Such milkie Ves∣sels extended toward the Teats, are not to be seen, and yet that there are such Vessels, stalks of Herbs eaten the day before, and voided through the Paps, and Broth dy'd with Saffron, flowing out at the Teats of the same Colour, sufficiently declare. Now if these Ves∣sels in the Teats are invisible to the Eyes▪ what wonder that they which tend to the Womb and Bladder should not be dis∣cover'd? However, for the better clear∣ing of this difficulty, I would desire all Anatomists, that they would use a little more than ordinary diligence in the search of these Vessels for the common benefit, to the end that what is now but meerly conjectur'd at, may come to be evident by solid Demonstrations. Others there are who never thinking of the milkie Vessels, have invented, or at least imagin'd other ways. XXXIII. Bartholine l. de Lact.Bartho∣line's O∣pinion, that there is some other and shorter way. Thorac. l. 6. & 9. believes that this same thick Matter, Needles, the mil∣kie Iuice, and the like, and in great Drinkers, and those that cannot hold their Water, the Liquor they drink, nothing or very little alter'd, are car∣ried by a direct and short way to the Emulgent Arteries, and so through the Kidneys to the Bladder. But these Passages are not confirm'd by sight, because those Chanels from the Chyle∣bearing bag to the Emulgent Arteries are not to be found, nor any Branches carried to the Sweet-bread and Liver, of which he also discourses in the same place: and therefore the Lymphatic Ves∣sels seem to have deceived this learned Person, as well as many others. More∣over, grant that the milkie Vessels reach to the said parts, yet how is it possible that Needles, Bodkins, and the like, of a great length, and not to be bent, should pass through those narrow and winding porous Passages of the Substance of the Reins? And therefore of necessity this Invention of so famous a Man, must fall to the ground.Clemens Niloe his Opinion. XXXIV. Clemens Niloe writes that some of the milkie Vessels are car∣ried to the Vice-Reins, or black Cho∣ler Kidneys, call'd Capsulae Atrabi∣lariae, and that from those the se∣rous Liquors flow to the external Tu∣nicle, and thence farther through the Ureters to the Bladder. But the Hy∣pothesis
falters, or rather fails altogether in this, that the Hypothesis was first to be prov'd that the milkie Vessels are carried thither. Besides, there is no passage from these black Choler▪Cakets to the Ureters, but they discharge themselves into the Emlgeut Veins, or Vena Cava, and so nothing can come from them to the Ureters. XXXV. Bernard Swalve goingThe Opini∣on of Ber∣nard Swalve in this mr. about to shew more manifest and shorter ways, writes, that the Bath-waters, acid Iuices, and any Liquor plentiful∣ly drank is easily sck't up in the Sto∣mach by the Gastrick Veins, gaping pre∣sently upon their approach, and so are immediately carried to the Heart. But the vanity of this Fiction is every way apparent. For the more plentiful draughts of acid Liquors, whether Wine, or any other Liquid Juice, were re∣ceiv'd by the Gastrick Veins in the Ventri∣cle, must of necessity be carried then to the Vena Portae, the Liver, the Vena Ca∣va and the Lungs, and in so long a way, and passing through so many Bowels, must of necessity be subject to a remark∣able change; and alter their colours, whereas before they are presently piss'd out without any colour at all. Nor could they retain the  inctures of Saffron, Ru∣barb and other things, and be piss'd out as they are with the same hue and smell as they went in. Moreover, by the Confession of Swalve himself, there is nothing thick or chylous canpass through those ways, by reason of their extraordinary narrowness; whereas we find by experience, that Matter, Needles, Milk, and black Physick, has been pre∣sently discharg'd by Urine. Then again, if so great a quantity of cold Acids, as is commonly consum'd in a short space, should be carried through the forementi∣oned passages, certainly the heat of the Liver, Heart, and Lungs, would be ex∣tinguish'd by that same actual Cold, and the whole Body would become cold∣er than Marble, and so shortness of Breath, Dropsies, and such like Distem∣pers would presently seize all those that drink those Liquors: whereas experience tells us that those Distempers are cur'd by Acids. Thus the Opinions of Doctors con∣cerning a shorter way to the Bladder are very uncertain, among which neverthe∣less our own above mention'd seems to be most probable, till another more like∣ly be discover'd. XXXVI. Forestus, Duretus, andWhether there be a consent be∣tween the Kidneys. after them Beverovicius and Laselius, write, that one Kidney being obstru∣cted, the other becomes useless, and lo∣sing its own action, intercepts the fow∣ing of the Urine; which RiolanusSecond di∣gression. says has been more than once ob∣serv'd by himself; which he also be∣lieves comes to pass by reason of the sympathy between each other, by reason of their partnership in duty; and hence if the one be out of order, the other growing feeble, immediately lan∣guishes: Which Veslingius also intimates in few words. But in this particular I take Experience to be prefer'd before the Authorities and Opinions of the most learned Men, which has many times taught us the contrary; that is to say, That one Kidney being obstructed, or any other way distemper'd, the other remains sound, and makes sufficient way for the Urine, of which I could produce several Examples, which for brevities sake I omit. Sometimes indeed we have seen, that by a Stone falling down upon one Kidney, the passage of the Urine has been stop'd; which has not happen'd by reason of any sympathy, but because unfelt by the Patient, the other Kidney had been long obstructed before, and yet the Urine having sufficient passage through the opposite Kidney: which op∣posite Kidney being by chance obstruct∣ed likewise, presently the passage of the Urine is quite stop'd up. Which the Dissections of dead Bodies apparently teach us. For many times we have found one Ureter quite obstructed near the Ori∣fice, which the sick Person never percei∣ved in his life time, while his Urine pass'd freely through the other. Nor did we ever observe a total suppression of U∣rine, where the Kidneys were faulty, but we found upon Dissection both Kid∣neys obstructed. The Lord Wede, a Noble man of Utrecht, often at other times subject to Nephritic Pains, found his Urine of a suddain supprest by rea∣son of an Obstruction in his Kidneys, and yet without any pain: Presently that same whimsey of consent came into the Physicians heads, believing that one Kidney was suddainly obstructed, and that the other fail'd in its Office by con∣sent. At length all Remedies in vain attempted, in fourteen days he dy'd. But then his Body being open'd, in both Kid∣neys was found a Stone of an indifferent bigness, shap'd like a Pear, that was fall'n upon the Orifice of the Ureter, and had
quite damm'd up the urinary Passage. Who would now have thought that in both Kidneys two Stones should be fallen at the same time upon both the Orifi∣ces of the Ureters? And therefore it is most probable that long before, one Kid∣ney had been obstructed, tho' he felt no great Prejudice by it, so long as the other was open; but when the Stone fell upon the Ureter of the other Rein, then the Urine was altogether suppres∣sed. Certain it is, that that Suppressi∣on of Urine was not caused by the Ob∣struction of one Kidney, and consequent∣ly not by any sympathetical Affection of the other. It is also farther to be noted that in the Dissections of Dogs, we shall often find in the one Kidney a long, thick, ruddie Worm that has eaten all the fleshy Substance of the Bowel, whereas there could be nothing more sound than the opposite Kidney; which shew'd no sign of Sympathizing with the Miser of the other. XXXVII. But tho' it be the onlyWhether the Kid∣neys  Blood. Office of the Reins to separate the Serum from the Blood, nevertheless some more narrowly considering their fleshy Substance and peculiar Bigness, attribute also to 'em the Function of preparing and farther elaborating and concocting the Blood; Which Opinion Deusingius, following Beverovicius, most stifly defends. But if by Concoction he means that Elaboration only, by which the secous Excrement is separated from the Blood, then his Opinion may be tolerated: But if such an elaborate Con∣coction, by which the Blood is made more Spirituous and Perfect, then his Opinion is to be rejected, there being no Bowel that brings the Blood to grea∣ter Perfection than the Heart, from which the more remote it is, the more imperfect it is: Nor can any thing of its lost Perfection be restor'd by any other Part, no not by the Kidneys themselves. For which Reason the Blood must re∣turn to the Heart to be restored to its pristine Vigor. XXXVIII. Besides the foresaid Of∣fice,Another Action. others according to the Opinion of Sennertus ascrib'd another Action to the Kidneys, which is the Prepara∣tion of Seed: Which they uphold by several Reasons, of which these are the Chief. 1. Because the Kidneys have a pecu∣liar Parenchyma as the rest of the Bow∣els have; now in regard there is a pecu∣liar Power of Concoction in the peculi∣ar Flesh of every one of the Bowels, that peculiar Quality must not be de∣ny'd the Kidneys, which can be no o∣ther than a seminific Concoction, when Straining is sufficient for the Separation of the Serum, and there is no need of Concoction. 2. Because the emulgent Arteries and Veins are too large to serve only for the Conveyance of the Serum, it seems most probable that a great part of the Blood being separated from the Serum, is concocted in the Kidneys into a semi∣nal Juice, which is to be further con∣cocted in the Testicles. 3. Because when the Seed is suppres∣sed and over much retain'd, the Kidneys are out of Order. 4. Because Topics apply'd to the Re∣gion of the Kidneys, prove beneficial in a Gonorrhea. 5. Because a hot Constitution of the Reins causes a Proclivity to Venery, lustful Dreams and Pollutions; and the hotter it is, the sharper the Seed is. XXXIX. But these are chaffi Rea∣sons,Refuta∣tion. and of no force, to which we an∣swer thus in order. 1. That the Kidneys indeed are cer∣tain straining Vessels, whereby good part of the Serum is separated from the Blood that passes through, and falling into the Renal Receptacle flows out again. But this Straining can never be, unless a certain necessary specific separating Fer∣mentation precede, separating the Blood from the Serum; and so the Kidneys do not simply separate the Serum by strain∣ing, but transmits, as it were, through a Sponge, that which is separated by the said Fermentation. Moreover because a great Quantity of Serum is to be sepa∣rated and transmitted, hence there is a a Necessity for larger and greater Strai∣ners. For if so much Serum, separated by continual Fermentation, were to be strain'd through small Strainers, would they be so loose, that together with the Serum separated by the said Concoction, the thinner part of the Blood would al∣so slip through 'em. 2. Much of the Blood were to be car∣ried through the emulgent Arteries be∣ing very large for the Separation of a moderate part of the Blood only, for the Blood was not to be depriv'd of all the Serum, to preserve it fluid. But through the Emulgent Veins nothing flows to the Kidneys, as is apparent from the Circulation of the Blood, and the Valves which are placed at the En∣trance of the emulgent Veins into the Vena Cava. Lastly, neither does that
Consequence follow. Much Blood flows to the Reins, and therefore out of some part of it the matter of the Seed is pre∣pared in the Kidneys. 3. Nor does that other Consequence. The Kidneys are out of Order through Retention of the Seed; Therefore the Kidneys both prepare and supyly the Matter of the Seed. For then this Con∣sequence would be as true. The Head∣ach proceeds from the Retention and Boyling of the Choler, therefore the Head prepares Choler. 4. Neither is this Consequence true. Topics apply'd to the Region of the Kidneys are beneficial in the Gonorrhea, therefore the Kidneys supply seminal Matter. For then would this be as cer∣tain. Cold Water apply'd to the Testi∣cles stops bleeding at the Nose, therefore the Testicles made Blood to be carried to the Nostrils. 5. A hot Constitution of the Kidneys is a Sign of Proneness to Lust, but not the Cause. For this is usual that where all the spermatic Vessels are hotter, there the Kidneys are also hotter. Not that the Kidneys add a greater Heat to the Seed: But the Vapors rising from the hot Seed, heat and warm the Kid∣neys. So that in Brute Animals that are ripe and libidinous, not gelt, you shall perceive a certain seminal Savour and Tast in the Kidneys. XL. Lastly we may add for aThat no Spcifick Vessels are extended from the Reins to the Testicles. Conclusion, that no specific Vessels are extended from the Kidneys to the Testicles, through which the seminal Matter can be carried thither. That the spermatic Arteries carry blood to the Testicles out of the Trunc of the Aorta, and the Superfluity flows back through the spermatic Veins to the Ve∣na Cava (whose Valves are so plac'd, that nothing can slide through them to the Testicles) and so these Vessels can∣not perform that Office, and as for other Vessels there are none. XLI. From what has been said itWhether Wounds in the Kid∣neys be mortal. appears, that the Kidneys are Parts that evacuate the serous Excrement, most necessary for the Support of Life. The Question is therefore whe∣ther the Wounds of the Kidneys are mortal or no? We must say, they are Mortal, and that of a hundred wounded in the Kidneys, scarce one recovers perfect Health. Which Le∣thality proceeds not from the Nobleness or Excellency of the Reins, but from the Concourse of supervening Symp∣tomes. That is to say, a vast Flux of blood cutting off the Vessels, Obstructi∣on of Urine, or else the Impossibility of the Retention of it: Great Pain, Inflam∣mation, Exulceration, Apostumation, by reason of the continual Thorough∣fare of the sharp Serum, difficult to be cured; and other Accidents that weare the Strength of the Patient to Death. For tho' the Kidneys are not principal Parts, yet are they such, the use of which we cannot want, which Use being either wholly suppressed or obstructed, Life ceases. True it is that some People who have been wounded in the Kidneys have liv'd, and to the more unskilful have seem'd to be cur'd, but at last the reviving Apostumes have carried off the Patient. Thus Fallopius, Cornelius Gem∣ma, Dodoneus, Forestus, Valleriola, and others, relate various Examples of Per∣sons wounded in the Kidneys who su∣perviv'd for some Years, but at length however they dy'd of those Wounds. But that some die sooner, some later, the Reason is this, that some Wounds are more or less deep, and the attending Symptomes more or less violent. How∣ever for my part in all my five and for∣ty Years Practice, I never saw any bo∣dy wounded in the Reins that ever per∣fectly recovered, tho' I have met with many such Wounds to be cured, espe∣cially when I practised young in the Camp; which makes me admire the Vanity of so many Surgeous, that dare bragg they have many times perfectly cured People wounded in the Kidneys. But what shall we then say of the cut∣ting of Stones out of the Kidneys? To which Avicen inclines, Canon. l. 3. Fen. 18. tract. 2. c. 18. Of which also Pa∣reus writes, lib. de Affect. When it swells and bunches out (meaning the Stone of the Kidney in the Loyns) at that time you must cut near the Kidney, and drain∣ing out the Matter, cure the Gravel with Medicaments provoking Urine. But we must say that whoever has a Stone cut out of the Kidney cannot supervive the Section. 'Tis reported that such a Cure once was undertook and accomplished with Success in Spain, upon a Person condemn'd to die. But if it were true, as is greatly to be doubted, it is to be numbered among the Miracles. XLII. Here by the way we are toA Plexure of Nerves between the two Kid∣neys. observe, that there is a certain Plex∣ure of Nerves between the two Kidneys under the Ventricle, consist∣ing of a double Costal, and Stomachi∣cal Nerve; From which all the Parts
of the lower Belly borrow their Nerves, of which more l. 3. c. 8. CHAP. XIX. Of the Capsulae or Deputy Kid∣neys. I. THE Capsulae Kidneys byThe Names. Julius Casser are called the Deputy Kidneys, by Wharton the Glandules adjoyning to the Nervous Plexure, by Bartholine the black Choler Cases, or Capsulae Atrabila∣riae. II. They are two Glandulous Bo∣dies,Situation. of which one leans upon each Kidney, where they look toward the Vena Cava under the Diaphrag∣ma, at the upper Part of the Mem∣brana Adiposa, to which it sticks so close, that oft-times it is overseen by the more Negligent, and the Kid∣neys being taken out, is left annexed to the Membrane of the Diaphrag∣ma. The left Glandule is nearest the Dia∣phragma, the right is nearest the Vena Cava; and the left is placed somewhat higher than the right: But in Brutes for the most part neither joyn close to the Reins, but ly distant about the breadth of half a Thumb, and plac'd some∣what toward the Diaphragma, the Fat lying between. They are found in that Place where the Nervous Plexure is to be seen, to which they are firmly knit. III. They seldome exceed the num∣berThe Num∣ber. of Two. IV. Their Substance is not muchSubstance. unlike the Substance of the Kidneys, but looser, sometimes of a ruddy Co∣lour, sometimes like Fat. V. In Shape they are seldome likeThe Fi∣gure the Kidneys (and yet I have more than once seen 'em exactly represent the Figure of the Kidneys) but fre∣quently like a piece of flat Past; be∣tween Square and Oblong: Sometimes also they are Triangular and Oval, but rarely Round. VI. In grown People they areBigness. much less than the Kidneys; extended to the Quantity of a vomiting Nut, and the right uses to exceed the left in bigness, seldome the left exceeds the right. In the birth and Children till almost half a Year old, they almost e∣qual the Kidneys; but afterwards they do not grow proportionably to the rest of the Parts; and when the Privities begin to have Hair, they cease to grow any more. However they do not diminish again in grown People, as some have averr'd. For in Consumpti∣ons and Hectic Feavers where all the Parts are emaciated, these remain sound and untouch'd, and preserve their won∣ted bigness. VII. They are wrapt about with aTunicle. thin Tunicle, by which they are strongly fasten'd to the outward Membrane of the Kidneys. VIII. They have an apparent Con∣cavityConcavity; full of Windings and Tur∣nings, but so little that it will hard∣ly admit a Pea, and therefore more Conspicuous in the Birth than in grown People, which contains a black fecu∣lent. Matter, with which Colour also the Inside of it is also tinctured. IX. Wharton observes that aWhar∣ton's Ob∣servation. great number of little Holes procee∣ding from the very Substance it self of these Glandules terminate into this Concavity with gaping small Orifices, but that the Cavity it self opens into the next Vein, and is there fortifi'd with a Valve, opening toward the Vein, but closed behind. This they send from themselves for the most part to the Emulgent, sometimes to the Ve∣nae adiposae, sometimes they insert a small Twig of the Vena Cava, proceeding out of their Cavity with a large and broad Orifice. X. They also borrow an ArteryArtery from the Emulgent, from the Emulgent, and sometimes one or more Branches from the Trunk of the Aorta. XI. They admit very smell littleNerves from the Ramus Thoraci∣cus. Nerves from the Stomach Branch of the sixth Pair, running to the proper Tunicle of the Reins. XII. The use of these Kernels isUse of these Glandules not well known. hitherto unknown. Some with Veslin∣gius believe that they help to draw the serous Moisture, and collect the black Choler, which like a Rennet provokes the Separation of the Serum from the
Blood. Spigelius thinks 'em made to fill up the Vacuum which is between the Kidneys and the Diaphragma, and for a Prop to the Stomach in that Part, which is above the Emulgent Veins and Arteries; Others think that they sup∣port the Division of the Retiform'd Plexure of Nerves. Riolanus, That they are of no use in Men grown to Maturi∣ty, but that their Use is only to be sought for in the birth, wherein he be∣lieves they receive a certain Juice ap∣propriated to the Generation of the Kidney Fat; for that in the body of an Infant there is no Fat generated till after he is brought forth into the World, at what time that Juice formerly collected is produced into Act. Glisson believes that they separate the Juice that serves for the Nourishment of the Nerves from the rest of the blood, that it may be carried pure to the Nerves. All which Opinions nevertheless are meerly con∣jectural, and lean upon no solid Foun∣dation. Wharton believes that there is a certain Juice unapt for the Generati∣on of Nerves exonerated into these lit∣tle Coffers from the Plexures of the Nerves upon which they lean; which Juice however flowing from thence into the Veins, may there be useful for other Purposes. But neither is this any other than a meer uncertain Conjecture, for that it is hardly credible that either this or any other thick and feculent Humour could be conveighed through the most narrow Pores of the more so∣lid Substance of the Nerves. Others con∣jecture that there is a certain Rennet pre∣pared in these Glandules, which flowing from thence to the Kidneys, causes there∣in a quick Separation of the Serum from the blood. Which Opinion certainly carries with it great Probability; if the way from these Pasages to the Kidneys could be demonstrated. But what if we should say, That that same black Juice is prepared out of the Arterious Blood, and obtains a certain fermenta∣tive Power, necessary for the Venal Blood, for which reason it flows from them not to other Parts, but endued with the same Quality flows through the Veins proceeding from the Capsulae to the Vena Cava: But neither is this any more than a Conjecture. Hence because the Use of these Glan∣dules is so little known, I am persuaded it happens, that they were never taken into due Consideration by any of our Physicians: Whereas we find that many Diseases arise from their being out of Or∣der. And therefore it is to be hop'd that all Practisers, both Physicians and Ana∣tomists, will for the future observe these Parts more diligently, and by frequent Dissections of dead Carkasses inform themselves what Diseases their Disorder and ill Temparature may occasion. CHAP. XX. Of the Ureters. I. THE Ureters,  fromDefinition.  to make Water and , are certain oblong and white Vessels, or round Channels pro∣ceeding from the Kidneys receiving the Serum strein'd from the Reins, and carrying it to the Bladder, to∣gether with the Gravel, Choler, Mat∣ter, and other Iuices mix'd with the Serum. II. They arise from the inwardSource. Concavity of the Kidneys, whose va∣rious Pipes meeting and closing toge∣ther, form the Ureter. III. One is generally granted toNumber. each Kidney, seldome any more are found, tho' it were twice my chance to find more; which two Ureters however were united on both sides near the Blad∣der, and enter'd it with an Orifice. IV. They consist of a thick two∣foldThe Sub∣stance. and white Membrane, the outer∣most common, the innermost peculiar. But Riolanus more judiciously acknow∣ledges but one peculiar Membrane, for that there is no outermost common Membrane joyned to it from the Peri∣tonaeum. The Ureters generally are con∣tained under the Peritonaeum, together with many other Parts, but they are not particularly enfolded by that Mem∣brane, nor receive any peculiar Tunicle from the Peritonaeum, as the Ventricle, the Vena Cava, the Liver and many other Bowels and Vessels do. But the peculiar and only Membrane of which they consist, is a Membrane strong, ner∣vous, strengthened with some Fibres, oblique and streight, and Arteries and small Veins from the neighbouring Parts; and furnish'd with Nerves from the sixth Pair and the Marrow of the Loyns, which endue it with an exqui∣site Sense of Feeling: Which little Nerves however Riolanus will not allow
the reters, believing it enough to ex∣cite Pain, that they are Membranous, seeing that from the distension of a Membrane by a Stone or any sharp Substance, there follows a Pain severe enough to be endur'd. Wherein he mi∣stakes, for that any such thing can hap∣pen without the flowing in of the Spirits through the Nerves, is prov'd from the Palsey▪ in which Distemper the Mem∣branes do not feel, through the Defect of Animal Spirits, nor do they display the least sign of Feeling that may be thought to proceed from their Structure and Composition. V. These are very small in a Man;Bigness. about a Handful in length, and about the breadth of a Straw: Tho' sometimes they are very much dilated by Stones passing violently through and with a tormenting Pain; so that sometimes they have been seen as broad as the small Gut. VI. They proceed downwards fromSituation. the Reins above the Pso Muscles that be in the Hip, between the double Mem∣branes of the Peritonaeum, somewhat reflex'd toward the lower Parts, and in some manner, by an oblique Course be∣tween the Membranes of the Bladder, are inserted about the hinder parts of the Neck of the Bladder, and are con∣tinued with the inner Substance of the Bladder, in which place some believe 'em to be fortified with Valves at their Oriices, hindering the Return of the Urine from the upper Parts. Which Valves however Riolanus, Andrew Lau∣rentius, and Plempius call in Question, and say that their oblique and winding Ingress into the Bladder stops the Re∣turn of the Urine out of the Bladder, for which Opinion we also give our Vote. CHAP. XXI. Of the Piss-Bladder. I. THE Piss-Bladder, ,Definition. is a Membranous Organical Part of the lower Belly, which retains the Serum received from the Kidneys, and at length discharges it as being troublesom either through its Weight or Acrimony. II. It is seated in the Hypogastri∣um,Situation. between the double Tunicles of the Peritonaeum, in the Cavity which is form'd by the Os Sacrum, the Hip-Bone and Share-Bone. In Men it leans upon the Intestinum Rectum, and is joyn'd to the Prostatae Glandules; in Women it sticks to the Neck of the Womb, and in both is fastened to the Share-Bone before; and it is also annex∣ed to the Navel by the Urachus. III. It consists of a threefold Mem∣brane,Mem∣branes. of which the outermost in Men, but not in Brutes, being surrounded with Fat proceeds from the Perito∣naeum. The middlemost, which is thicker is endued with fleshy Fibres for Contraction and Expulsion of the Urine: and hence by Aquapendens, and Bartholine, called the enfolding Muscle, by Spigelius the Thruster downward of the Urine. This if it be too much distended by oo great a quantity of Urine, occasions a total sup∣pression of Urine, because the Fibres of it being too much distended are so weak∣ned, that they cannot contract them∣selves again. Which sort of Suppressi∣on of Urine Forestus writes that he him∣self was troubled with l. 25. Observ. 14. The innermost is thinner, and being of a more exquisite Sense of Feeling is pro∣tected by a kind of Slime from the Cor∣rosion of the Liquor contained in it. This is found very much wrinkl'd in People that are troubl'd with the Stone. IV. The Figure of it, is oblong,The Fi∣gure. globous, or round, and sometimes, sharp like a Pear. V. The Bigness is not alike in all,Bigness. but in some larger, in some less; which extraordinary largeness is occasioned by its frequent and violent Distensi∣ons, by too long a Retention of the Water. VI. It has one Cavity, which byIts Conca∣vities. the Observations of Physicians in some few has been seen distinguished into two, by a Membrane or Fence in the middle. VII. There are three Holes belong∣ingIts Holes. to it, of which the two lesser before the Neck are open to the Entrance of the Ureters: The third, which is the bigger, in the Neck gives way to the Urine going forth. VIII. It receives Arteries fromIts Vessels▪ the Hypogastries, entring the sides of the Neck, and carrying thither
Blood for its Nourishment: The re∣mainder of which it pours forth through little Veins into the Hypo∣gastric Vein. It admits Nerves from the sixth Pair and the Marrow of the Os Sacrum. IX. It is divided into BottomIts Divisi∣on. and Neck. X. The Bottom comprehends theThe Bot∣tom. upper and broader part of the Blad∣der; from which the Urachus is ex∣tended upwards to the Navel; which Urachus together with the adjoyning umbilical Arteries in People of ripe Years proves a strong Ligament, pre∣venting the falling down of the Bot∣tom upon the Neck. Of the Urachus see more, c. 32. XI. The Neck is the lower andThe Neck. narrower Part, which in Men being longer and straighter is carried to the Root of the Yard, and opens into the Urinary Passage or Piss-Pipe. But in Women shorter and broader; hang∣ing above over the Neck of the Womb, and opens itself under the Clitoris, a little above the Entrance of the Sheath or Matrix between the Nymphae. In both Sexes fleshy, woven out of many Fibres, chiefly Transverse and Orbicu∣lar, lying hid among the right Fibres encompassing the whole Body of the Bladder, which constitute the Sphincter Muscle, pulling together the Neck of the Bladder to prevent the Urine from coming away unseasonably, and wind∣ing about the Prostatae, as may be seen in the following Chapter. As for those Anatomists that describe several other Muscles of the Bladder, they do but make themselves ridiculous: As the Ex∣ternal Sphincter, the Thruster down, &c. which are nothing else but the fleshy Membrane of the Bladder. XII. Over this Neck in Men to∣wardIts Valves. the Piss-Bladder, a little Mem∣brane overspreads it self, like a small Valve, which prevents the Seed which is forc'd toward the Piss-Pipe from flowing into the Bladder, and the falling of the Urine which flows out of the Bladder into the seminal Pipes. Which may be demonstrated if a Bod∣kin be put into the Bladder toward the Piss-Pipe, into which it enters easily without any Obstacle; but not the con∣trary way, unless by the Force of Di∣laceration. This little Membrane is broken by the Immission of a Cathe∣ter into the Bladder, and sometimes is corroded away in a Gonorrhea. Bartho∣line reports from the Observation of Riolanus, that this Membrane is to be found in Boys till twenty Years of Age, but not after that. Which Observati∣on I do not take to be any perpetual Rule. For in Practice we have many times broken this Membrane not with∣out great Pain ensuing, in older Men by immission of the Catheter. Perhaps Rio∣lanus might observe this in the Dissecti∣ons of dead Bodies in France. For the French Youth being extreamly Lustful, and abandoning themselves to their Ve∣nery, and frequently Clapp'd, it may easily happen that this Membrane may be eaten away by the corroding Seed, as it passes through the Channel. CHAP. XXII. Of the Parts in Men serving forSee Table 3. & 4. the Generation of the Seed. I. AFter the Organs of Nourish∣ment,Preamble. by which the Food is prepared for the Support of the Bo∣dy, which would else decay, Order and Method require that we should proceed to the Description of the In∣struments of Generation, by which the Perennity of human kind which Na∣ture has deny'd to Individuals is preserv'd by Procreation. II. These Parts are called Puden∣daThe Privi∣ties. from Pudor Modesty, as being those Parts of which Man was not asham'd before Sin. But after he had sin'd he took notice of his Ignominious Nakedness, and was asham'd. Theo∣phrastus Paracelsus writes, that Men be∣fore Sin wanted these Parts; but that af∣ter Sin committed they were added by the Creator, in perpetual Remembrance of the shameless Fact he had commit∣ted: And because our first Parents fell through the Temptation of the Devil, therefore to Adam was given a genital Member or Yard like a Serpent, and to Eve a Member of Generation like the Serpents Den. Now whether this be the Reason that the Adamite's Serpent is never at rest but when he is entering Eve's Den, and that Eve's Den with so much Love and Desire receives and
admits the Adamite's Serpent, I leave to others to dispute. III. These same Privities, whichGenitals. are also call'd Genitals, being in both Sexes not fram'd alike, necessarily we must discourse of both apart: And first for the Generating Parts of Man, in the same Order as the Seed is generated, moves within 'em, and is ejected. IV. The Genital Parts in Men areThe Geni∣tal Parts of Men. such Parts as are design'd for a Man to beget his own Likeness in a Wo∣man. These Parts are divided into In∣ternal and External; of which some ly hid in the Cavity of the Abdomen, o∣thers are conspicuous without: Howe∣ver all these both outward and internal Parts that serve for Generation are two∣fold: Others prepare the Seed, of which in this Chapter; others conveigh the Seed into the Womb, of which in the following Chapter. V. Among those which make theThe sper∣matic Ves∣sels. Seed in the first place occur the Sper∣matic Vessels: Which are vulgarly call'd preparing Vessels, because that formerly it was thought the Blood was there prepared for the Generati∣on of Seed. These are twofold: That is to say, two Arteries, and as many Veins which are more conspicuous and bigger than the Arteries. Some write that they have seen the Arteries bigger than the Veins, which must be preternatu∣ral, and contrary to the Circulation of the Blood (for then through large and broad Arteries more Blood would be carried than could be return'd back through smaller and lesser Veins; whence it is probable that such a thing never happen'd, but that the Anatomists that writ so had a Mist before their Eyes. VI. The spermatic Arteries carrySpermatic Arteries. Blood for the making of the Seed and the Nourishment of the Testicles: Of which, the Right a little below, the Left close by or a little above the Emulgent, sometimes both together a∣bout the Distance of two Fingers un∣der the Emulgent, arise out of the Trunk of the great Artery before. But then the Right ascending the Trunk of the Vena Cava proceeds obliquely to the Vein of the same side, and the Left proceeds directly to the Vein of its own Side. Nevertheless Riolanus has observed that both sometimes proceed from the Emulgent; and sometimes not two but one only to have sprung out of the Trunk of the Aorta, and to have perform'd the Duty of the two. In like manner, George Qck a Physician of Norimbergh, observed this single Arte∣ry in a dead masculine Body springing from the forepart of the Aorta, which being divided into two Branches above the separation of the Crural Branches, joyn'd afterwards on both sides to the descending spermatic Vein. And by the Relation of Hoffman, Peter Paw, in the Year 1598. in the dead Body of an old Man, found no more than one spermatic Artery, proceeding from the middle Trunk of the Aorta, ten times bigger than those Arteries wont to appear in others, and ending in the Testicles, be∣ing without question double fork'd be∣fore. But these Accidents rarely hap∣pen, as in that Person of whom Corne∣lius Gemma writes, Art. Cyclog. lib. 2. Often, says he, we have seen three or four seminal Arteries. In the place of often, I had rather he had said some∣times: For the increased Number is so seldom found, that of six Hundred A∣natomists scarce one has seen it: But generally two spermatic Arteries of each side one, spring from the Trunk of the Aorta. VII. Bauhinus, Riolanus, andWhether the Arte∣ries my be wanting. others report that these Arteries sometimes are of one side, and some∣times both in both sides are obsorv'd to be wanting, and this they affirm to be the cause of Barrenness. Which thing Reason convinces us, can never be true, seeing that the Blood cannot be carried to the Stones through any other Passages, than through these Arteries; the Veins, by reason of the Obstructi∣ons of the Valves, sending no Blood to the Testicles. And so for want of Mat∣ter (which they affirm to be the cause of Barrenness, not only no Seed can be made, but neither can the Stones be supplied with Nourishment; and by that means would wast and dry up: Or else surpriz'd with a Sphacelus (which is an Extinction of Life and Sense, would fall down; whereas in those Bodies where one or both Bodies are said to be wanting, the Stones were found to be sufficiently swelling and juicie, and a copious Quantity of Seed conspicuous in the seminal Vessels. And therefore there must be some Deceit or Mistake in what they alledge, which proceeds from hence, which may often happen by reason of the extraordinary thinness of the Arteries, that those Arteries might
be cut off either through the Impru∣dence or overhasty Dissection of the Anatomists; and so could be neither found nor demonstrated, which is the reason they readily persuade themselves and the Spectators, that they are wan∣ting through some defect of Nature. VIII. The Spermatic Veins carrySpermatic Veins car∣ry the Blood to the Ve∣na Cava. the Blood to the Vena Cava, which remains after the Nourishment of the Stones, and making the Seed. Of these, the right Vein from the right Stone ascending the Trunk of the Vena Cava before, a little above the rise of the Emulgent, enters the Vena Cava; and the left enters the Emulgent on the same side, rarely the Vena Cava. Ri∣olanus also writes that he has observ'd the right Vein inserted into the right Emulgent, which I never happened to see. Into both these Spermatic Veins within the Abdomen, several slender Branches proceeding from the Caul and Peritonaeum, open themselves, by the Observation of Regner de Graef; as also that the Veins do not proceed in so streight a Line as the Arteries. And Do minic de Marchettis, anat. c. 6. writes that he twice or thrice saw the Sperma∣tic Vein, ascending from the Stone into the Abdomen, divide it self in the mid∣way into three Branches, which singly enter'd the Trunk of the Vena Cava. IX. But least the Blood ascendingValves. through them, should slide back to the Stones, they are furnished with many semicircular Valves, like half-Moons, disposed in a double Order, and looking upwards, and so preven∣ting the Return of the Blood. Also at the Entrance of each into the said great Veins, there is to be seen a little Swelling, which is raised by the Valve when distended with Blood, looking to∣ward the Vena Cava, as Rolfincius not without reason, as he believes, con∣jectures, and Highmore shews that Valve in Delineation, in the right Vein one, and double in the left. X. To each Stone belongs one Ar∣teryThe Pro∣gress of the Spermatic Vessels. and one Vein, and these two Ves∣sels, more above, at their beginning about the Reins, are somewhat distant one from another, but by and by in their Progress joyn together, and are somewhat writh'd one into another, and so firmly fastened together with a Tunicle rising from the Peritonaeum, that they can hardly be separated by Art. Iohn Saltzman tells us of three human Bodies, wherein he observed a left Artery, rising▪ a little above the E∣mulgent, which did not presently joyn to the Vein, but first ascended upward toward the emulgent Vein, passed over it, and wound it self about it, and thence being presently joyn'd with the Sperma∣tic Vein, descended downward after the usual manner. XI. Thus joyn'd above the Ure∣tersThe Way they make. they are carried down to the Groyns, where together with a slender Muscle from the Fold of the sixth Pair latent in the Abdomen (and sometimes another is added from the 21st. or 22d. Pair of spinal Marrow) and the Cremaster or hanging Mus∣cle, they pierce the Peritonaeum, en∣ter its Process, which is the Extensi∣on of the outward Membrane of the Peritonaeum toward the Scrotum, forming the Sheath, wherein several Spermatic Vessels are contain'd toge∣ther with the Testicle; In which Pro∣cess being divided into several small Branches complicated one among ano∣ther with infinite Windings and Circum∣volutions, they proceed to the Testi∣cles. Nevertheless the inner Membrane of the Peritonaeum at that same Opening or Entrance, sticks most close to the side of the Vessels: For that Membrane being broken, Burstenness follows, the Gutt, the Caul, Water and Wind fal∣ling down through the Rupture into the Production of the Peritonaeum and the Scrotum. Now these Vessels afore∣said having thus reach'd the Stones, se∣parate themselves again, and with a winding Course of the Artery quite through the whole length of the Artery, run out as far as the lesser Protuberance of the Epididymis, or winding Vessel, fix'd to the Back of the Testicles, and there again divided first into two, then into several small Branches, return part∣ly to the opposite Extremity of the Te∣sticle, partly lose themselves within the Substance of the Stones. But the Veins divided into very small Roots, are in∣serted into the little Branches of the small Arteries, and with a kind of Net∣work are joyned together one to ano∣ther; sometimes by a meer leaning and touch, sometimes by Anastomoses. But that here are neither observ'd nor al∣low'd any Anastomoses of the little Arte∣ries with the slender Veins is apparent from the Injection of the Liquor into the Arteries, which never enters the Veins. Neither ought these Anastomo∣ses
to be there: For if the Blood could pass through those Anastomoses from the Ar∣teries, nothing of it or very little would go to the Stones, but pass to the Vena Cava far more speedily and more easi∣ly by those broader ways or Anastomo∣ses, than through the narrow and invi∣sible passages of the Stones themselves. XII. Andrew Lawrentius, Bauhi∣nus,The Error of the A∣natomists. Veslingius, and many other Ana∣tomists were grosly mistaken in this, that they thought the Spermatic Artery and Vein ended in the Parastate or Epididymis; and there was changed into the deferent Vessel, as a Body continuous to it self. Whereas it is appa∣rent to those that look more narrowly, that those Vessels do not enter the Epididymis or Parastate, but the Testicle it self, and that the Parastate may be there separated from the Stone, those Vessels still re∣maining whole, and adhering to the Te∣sticle it self; For the blood enters the Stones themselves, as Regner de Graef, by an ingenious Experiment apparently demonstrates, lib. before cited. That O∣pinion, says he, which holds that the Blood does not enter the Stones, appears to be false, as clearly as the noonday light, by the following Experiment. Thrust in a small Pipe into the Artery, and immit with a Syring, a Liquor tictured with some Colour towards the Testicle, and you shall very neatly discover the Progress of the Arteries, for that the same Liquor having reached the supream part of the Stones, or that part where it first enters, diffuses it self, leaving the Epididymises untouched within the inner tunicle of the Testicles, and runs onward toward the bottom, where while it turns again, it divides it self, and as it were wantons into several small Branches, which sometimes to the Right, sometimes to the Left, diffuse them∣selves through the very substance of the Te∣sticles. XIII. These Vessels thus complicatedThe Fold represent∣ing the Form of the Ten∣drils of a Vine. and connexed constitute that Plexure, which the Anatomists call Pampino∣formis, as resembling the Tendrils of a Vine, or Varicosus, from its simi∣litude to the crooked windings of the Veins: Also the Pyramidal Body, from its Shape and Figure; as being more narrow at the beginning, and multiplying as it descends, till it ends at the Stone with a broader Basis. Herophylus, as Galen testifies, calls this Fold the Cirsoides Parastate, resembling the winding dilatation of the Veins; which Name Rioanus also gives it. Others call it the Variciform Parastate, by reason of the Windings and Turnings of the Vessels, which Name or Appellati∣on Vestingius erroneously attributes to the hinder part of the Epididymis: Where∣as there are no such writh'd and compli∣cated blood-conveighing Vessels to be seen in that part. XIV. In this same Fold sometimeHernia varicosa. happens that sort of Burstenness called Varicosa, when a thick and Melan∣choly Blood happens into those Mean∣ders. Sometimes also a Fleshy Bursten∣nessHernia Carnosa. is here occasioned by the bruising this Fold by a fall, a blow, or by hard ri∣ding; through which Contusion a spungy Flesh grows up, and that fre∣quently to the bigness of two or three Fists: which is rarely perfectly cured, but by cutting away the Stone of the side affected. XV. However, Regner de GraefDe Graef's Opinion. lib. de part. Gen. Viror. affirms, That such a Complication of the said Vessels forming a Pyramidical or winding Body, is not plainly to be discern'd in Men, but that a Trunk of the Artery, without any Net-shap'd divarication runs directly to the Testi∣cle, and is divided into two Branches three or four singers breadth above the Testicles; of which, one is absconded under the Epididymis, and the other proceeds forward to the Stone; of the truth of which his own Eyes have been witnesses. And hence he does not be∣lieve there is any such Net-shap'd Con∣texture of small Arteries with the little Veins; which happens otherwise in ma∣ny Brutes, in which he confesses the Ar∣tery to be wreath'd into several Curles and Tendrils with the Trunk of the Vein. But the fleshy Burstenness which happens in this part, as also the Contexture of the Blood-bearing Vessels, conspicuous in the same place, and in the same manner in Men, as in many Beasts, seem to evince the contrary: Unless it were that per∣haps Regner de Graef would have said, that altho' that same contexture in Brutes seems to consist of Veins and Arteries complicated together, that the same in men is form'd of small branches only of the Vein, returning from the Stone. Which whether it be otherwise in Men than in Brutes, I believe to be a very great Question; the Artery crossing it only directly. But because we have not
yet so exactly observ'd it, we will leave the Question undetermin'd, till we have an opportunity to inquire more diligent∣ly into it. XVI. The Anastomoses of these Ar∣teriesNo Anasto∣moses. one into another, and of the Veins with the Arteries, as unquestion∣able, have been described by many. But Regner de Graef, by Injection of some sort of Liquor into the Artery, and several strong Arguments, affirms and proves, that there neither are any such Anstomoses, nor ought, nor can be. XVII. From what has been said, itThe Office of the Ves∣sels. is apparent, what the Arteries, what the Veins perform in reference to their use; that is to say, that the one bring blood, and the other carry back the blood that is superfluous. Whence ap∣pears the vanity of the Opinion of Ga∣len, Bauhinus, Spigelius, and several o∣thers, who extend the Office of these Vessels too far, and talk of I know not what preparation of the Blood, and al∣teration of the Colour to white, whereas there is no such thing perform'd in these Vessels, as appears by Inspection it self; but that the Blood is of a ruddy Colour, which is extracted out of these Veins, as well as out of other Blood-bearing Vessels, neither is there any thing of a whitish humour contain'd therein. XVIII. These Vessels thus mutuallyThe Stones. connex'd together, run forward to the Stones or Testicles, which are Genital parts hanging down in the Cod or Scro∣tum without the hollowness of the Ab∣domen, ordaind for the making of Seed. They are call'd estes or Stones, because they are a testimony of Virility or Man∣hood; and hence it was that the Romans of old admitted only Men to give testi∣mony in all Causes and Trials, rejecting those that were depriv'd of their Testes, as not Men. XIX. They are two in number,Their num∣ber. therefore by Herophylus call'd , or Twins, partly for the more perfect Generation of the Seed; partly that if one should be lost or maim'd, the other might supply the place and office of both. The number is rarely ewer or more; in regard it seldom happens that any one is born with one Stone; tho' such acci∣dents have happen'd: of which Riolan, Borellius, and Regner de Graef, produce several Examples. Very seldom also more are found in one Person, tho' it is said to be a thing familiar to some Fa∣milies. And Fernelius tells us of a cer∣tain Family known to himself, of which all the Males had three Stones. And Forestus, Borellus, and Regner de Graef, and others, afford us several Examples of People that have had three Stones. But seldom of all it happens that any Man is born without any Stones, and yet perform the Act of Manhood in Copula∣tion; yet Cabrolius gives us an Example. XX. The Stones are pendulous atSituation. the Root of the Yard, and there ab∣sconded in the Scrotum or Cod; sel∣dom and preternatural it is that both should be included within the Cavity of the Abdomen, which nevertheless has been seen by Regner de Graef; to which he adds another seen by Francis de le Boe Sylvius. Riolanus also observ'd one to have been absconded within the Abdomen, in a noble Person, who nevertheless had a numerous Off-spring by his Wife. The same was also observ'd by my self in a strong Man, who nevertheless had seve∣ral Children. Paraeus, likewise Martin Ruland and Bartholine, prove by several Examples, that both Stones have lain hid for some time, either in the Groyn, or in the Cavity of the Abdomen, which that after the hair began to appear, fell down naturally into the Cod. XXI. In shape and bigness they areShape and igness. like a Pigeons Egg, and sometimes a small Hen-egg, somewhat flat of each side. Yet in both there is some varie∣ty, according as the Vessels adjoyning are more or less swell'd. Generally likewise the left exceeds in bigness the right, and hangs down somewhat low∣er; rarely the right is bigger than the left. Sometime in Veneral Distempers now and then one, or both, grow to an usual bigness, which afterwards when the Disease has been cur'd, I have observ'd to continue as long as the Party liv'd without any prejudice; but this is pre∣ternatural: as is also that which Lazarus Riverius reports, of one whose Testicles exceeded the Stones of a Horse in big∣ness, from which afterward fell very hard pieces of a stony Substance. And no less extraordinary is that which Hil∣dan observes of a certain Person that was troubled with a Dropsie, whose right Stone being grown as big as a Goose Egg, was found stufft full of Hairs intermix'd with a purulent, oily and white matter. Plater likewise gives us an Example of Stones as big as a Man's head in a Person that was very bulky and fat. XXII. Their Substance is peculiar,Their Sub∣stance.
there being none like it of all the other parts of the Body, whitish and soft, consisting of innumerable very little small Ropes of the Seminal Vessels joyn'd together in a continu'd Series: in which, altho there be no manifest Con∣cavity to be perceiv'd, yet that the said little Ropes are hollow, and conveigh the Seed invisibly, is apparent, if they be made visible. Now Regner de Graef was he that first taught us the way to make 'em visible to the sight: for he in a Dog, or other living Animal, tyes the Deferent Vessel, by which means the in∣nermost little strings of the little Vessels of the Testicles, otherwise impercepti∣ble, will easily become conspicuously distended, and fill with Seminal Matter. He tells us also that these Vessels appear through a whitish Tunicle full of white Seed in the Testicles of a larger Dor∣mouse: he adds also, that if you put the same Testicles into Water after you have stript off the Tunicle, and stir them a little in the Water, the little Vessels of their own accord, without the help of Instruments, will separate one from ano∣ther, and the whole Substance of the Testicles appear to be compos'd of no∣thing but small Vessels; which he had often made out to the Physicians and Surgeons of Delph. And the same thing he also shew'd me lately in the Stone of a Dormouse, which was so dissolv'd into little small whitish Vessels, that it seem'd to consist altogether of such. Tho' in the mean time it be very probable that in a living Creature there may be some peculiar, tender, marrowy Substance, with certain imperceptible Glandules, in∣termix'd with those Vessels, which in the washing, dissolution, and preparati∣on of those Vessels, is separated from 'em, and disappears. For it can hardly be believ'd that the Stones should consist of little Vessels alone, supported and connected without any other Substance, seeing that in all the rest of the Bowels, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Brain, &c. the Vessels that run thorough are supported and fasten'd by the Peculiar Substance of that Bowel, and the Humours contain'd in 'em, by reason of the Property, or peculiar Temper and Formation of the Substance adjoyning to those Vessels, un∣dergo a very great and specific Alterati∣on, which is no more than what mayThe Seed∣bearing Vessels ex∣tended to a great length. probably happen, as well in the Stones as other Bowels. XXIII. The said Seed-bearing Vessels of the Stones being once loosen'd from each other▪ are to be extended to a wonderful length, requisite in those places, to that end that the Seminal mat∣ter by a longer stay, and a slower passage, being more exactly and diligently prepa∣red, may attain to a greater perfection. They are in an Error who write that the Stones are little small Glandules, as not having neither temper, their frame or fashion, their substance nor their use; but are noble Parts that give both strength and vigour to Men. Nay, they may indeed be said to be the principal Parts, as con∣tributing so effectually to the Procrea∣tion and Preservation of Mankind. XXIV. They receive, as has beenVessels. said, very small Arteries from the Spermaticks, and send forth small Veins to the Vena Cava and left E∣mulgent. Nerves also they have, ac∣cording to the Vulgar Opinion deriv'd from the sixth wandring Pair, and the twelfth Pair of the Breast. In Novemb. 1668. and again in Decemb. 1670. seeking more narrowly for these Nerves in publick Dissections of Humane Bodies, we observ'd only one little Nerve belonging to each Stone, a little above that place where the Spermatick Vessels seem to make their Exit out of the Abdomea, which joyn'd themselves with the Spermatick Vessels, and so en∣tering their common sheath, ran forward to the Stone, but by reason of its extra∣ordinary slenderness, we could not well observe whether it were some little small branch of the sixth Pair of Nerves, or of the twelfth Pair of the Breast, or as o∣thers, not without reason, will have it, of the twentieth or one and twentieth Pair of the Spinal Marrow; which last seems to me most probable. And so, up∣on view, very few small Nerves, and perhaps but only one, seem to run out to every Stone. On the contrary, Glis∣son however has lately written that he has seen several Nerves in the Stones contributing Matter to the Generation of Seed: which great quantity of Nerves we could never observe in 'em; but very few, and those such as we could hardly get to reach beyond the whitish Tunicle. For they are not conspicuous in the in∣ner Substance of the Stones, as well by reason of their extream Tenuity, as through their whitish Colour; tho' it is most certain that they give Animal Spi∣rits to the blood that flows thither through the Arteries. XXV. But whether the Blood∣bearingDistributi∣on of the Vessels. Vessels enter the Substance of
the Stones it self, or terminate in the whitish Tunicle, is by some disputed. Hippocrates seems to be or the first Opi∣nion, Lib. de Loc. in Hom. & Lib. de Oss. Nat. where he writes that certain Veins do run to the Testicles. Where by Veins he understands some of the blood∣conveighing Vessels, that is to say, Veins and Arteries. Others, by reason that the Ingress of these Vessels is so obscure, thought those Vessels did not enter the inner parts of the Stones; they not ap∣pearing within the Stones, but only dis∣seminated through the white Tunicle. But this Doubt will vanish, if we look a little more narrowly into the Use and Formation of the Stones. XXVI. Their Use and Office isThe use and Office of the Stones. to make Seed, and to that end they are compos'd of a peculiar Substance and innumerable Seminal Vessels wherein Seed is made. But because Matter is requisite for the making of Seed, hence Reason teaches us, that of necessity there must be Blood-bearing Vessels, and little Nerves inserted into those Seed-bearing Vessels, for the sup∣ply and infusion of matter, by degrees to be changed into Seed. But some perhaps will object, that the ruddy Colour of the Blood-bearing Vessels demonstrates, that there is Blood in them; which Colour however is hard∣ly ever seen in the substance of the Stones, and therefore no Blood-bearing Vessels seem to enter that substance. I answer, that happens through the extraordinary thinness of the Arteries, pressed by the white Seed-bearing Vessels; for which reason in a thousand other parts the little small Arteries and Veins are impercepti∣ble. Besides if a Stone be newly taken out of the Body, and any ruddy Liquor be injected through a Syringe into the Spermatic Artery, several Blood-bearing Vessels will swell up in the midst of the Stone, and so become conspicuous. Lastly, I shall add what I have learnt by experience in Man, That is, in cutting out the Stones of vigorous and healthy Men that have been slain; that for the most part no Blood-bearing Vessels are to be discovered in the inner Substance, no nor in the Stones of living People cut out after the Cure of Burstenness; or at most only some small Foot-steps of such Vessels appear in those sound persons. But in Bodies emaciated by Diseases▪ I have observed several small Branches of Blood-bearing▪ Vessels slightly mani∣fest, but very slender, running through the inner parts of the Stones, which we did not only shew privately to several young Students in Physick, but in March 1663. November 1668. in two Human Bodies emaciated by a long Distemper, shewed the same to divers Spectators publickly in our Anatomy Theater. The cause of which seems to be this: For that as there is in the Brain a peculiar Specific power, by vertue of which Ani∣mal Spirits are made of the Blood in its Vessels, Fibres and Pores, so also there is in the Testicles a peculiar Seminifick Power, by vertue of which the Blood being carried into their Vasa Sanguifera, is altered into Seed. Now this active Power being strong and vigorous in sound People; hence the more subtile and more salt Particles of the Blood, carried through the little Arteries to their more inward parts, together with the Animal Spirits coming through the Nerves, fall into those Plexures or labyrinth-like, and most wonderfully interwoven Va∣sa Sanguifera, and being there received by them lose their ruddy Colour, as the Chylus loses its white Colour in the Heart, and is changed into white Seed, But as for that small remainder of Blood remaining in the Vasa Sanguifera, it is so obscur'd and discolour'd by the white∣ness of the substance of the Stones, and the said Vasa Sanguifera, that it is not preceptible to the sight. But in sickly People whose Stones as well as other bowels are weak, the separation of those Particles of blood which are necessary for the making of Seed, is neither well perform'd, nor with sufficient speed, for which reason the Sanguiferous Vessels are more tumid, and containing more blood than ordinary, and more visible to the Sight. Moreover at the same time the ill separated, and over ruddy Particles of the blood, being affused into the Seminiferous Vessels, are but ill and slowly concocted, and altered into Seed therein, and therefore the Sanguine red Colour appears in some measure here and there in these Vessels. For the same cause it also happens, that in those that are too frequent in Copulation, there is sometimes an Ejection of blood in∣stead of Seed; the Stones being so de∣bilitated by frequent Venery, and over much spending of the Seed, that the convenient Particles of blood flowing into those Vessels, cannot so soon be separated from the rest, nor changed into blood; Now the forementioned Power proceeds from an apt, convenient and proper formation and temper of the Stones, which temper being either altered or weakned by Diseases, or over∣much
use of Women, they also suffer in their Seminific Power: as for the same reason the Power of making Spirits is weaken'd in the Brain. XXVII. Here a great question ari∣ses,A Questi∣on, How the Separa∣tion of va∣rious Par∣ticles from the Blood are made? How the more salt Particles of the Arterial Blood infus'd into the Stones, and most apt for Generati∣on, and the watery or white Parti∣cles come to be separated from the red Particles? Which is a thing so dubious, so obscure and intricate, that never any Man as yet durst go about to unfold it: or at least they who durst attempt to say any thing, flying to peculiarity of Sub∣stance and Pores, seem to have hardly said any thing at all. In the preceding 14 Chapter we have told ye, how that in the Liver the Separation of Humours to be segregated from the rest of the sanguin Humours, is performed by small invisible Glaudulous Balls, formerly unknown, but in our times discovered by the diligence of Malpigills, with the help of his Microscopes. Also c. 18. We have likewise shewn ye, that the blood passing through the Ash-coloured Sub∣stance of the Brain, in that passage, by reason of the peculiar property of its Glandulous Substance, and its Pores, lo∣ses its most subtil and spirituous saltish Particles, which being imbibed by the beginning and roots of the small Nerves, are there by degrees more and more ra∣rified and attenuated and exalted to a more refin'd Spirituosity, while the o∣ther ruddy and more Sulphury Parti∣cles are sucked up by the more small Veins, and so by degrees return to the Heart. And thus it seems probable, that the same Operation is perform'd in the Stones. How Nature performs this Opera∣tion we have de∣monstra∣tively shewn in our Synop∣sis Medi∣cinae, lib. 4. cap. 8. Sect. 10. §. 14. ad 36. to which I shall refer you. Sal∣mon. For either some very small, and hitherto by reason of their extraordinary Exility, invisible Ker∣nels, or Glandulous Balls are intermix'd and scattered among the small Vessels of the Testicles, by means of which such a necessary Separation is made: Or else there is a certain white marrowy peculiar substance surrounding the small Ves∣sels of the Testicles, of which the Stones chiefly consist, into which Substance the Arterious Blood being infused, loses in its passage, the most subtil saltish Parti∣cles, of which the Seed chiefly consists, most apt for the generation of Seed, to be thereupon suckt up by the peculiar Vasa seminifera of the Testicles, and more exactly to be prepared, while the other Particles entring the Orifices of the small and imperceptible Veins, return to the Spermatick Veins, and so farther to the Heart. But which of these ways is to be asserted, or whether any other third way is to be determin'd upon, we shall leave to them, who by a more ac∣curate Inspection, or by the help of Mi∣croscopes, shall be able to make a clear discovery. In the mean time there must be something certain and assur'd of ne∣cessity, by means of which the aforesaid Separation is to be performed. For o∣therwise, if by Transfusion alone the blood should immediately flow out of the Arteries into the Seminal Vessels, there would be no reason why it should not all be converted into Seed, but that some part of it should return through the little Veins to the Heart; and more∣over, why its red Colour should not alwas appear in the said Vessels. XXVIII. Besides the Vessels alrea∣dyLymphatic Vessels ob∣served in the Testi∣cles. mentioned, by more accurate In∣spection of Anatomists, and that not so lately neither, many Lymphatick Vessels have bin observed, arising with∣in the Tunicles of the Testicles, meeting one another with several Anastomoses, and ascending with the deferent Ves∣sels upward into the Abdomen, and there emptying their Lymphatic juice into the Vasa Chylifera. They are furnish'd with several Valves looking up∣ward, preventing the falling back into the Testicles of the Lymphatic juice, ascending from the Testicles. These lit∣tle Vessels are easily visible to the Eyes of the Beholders, if the Vasa Sanguifera be but ty'd a little above the Stones, and then the Stones be but stirr'd, for then these Vasa Lymphatica shall be observ'd to swell between those ty'd Vessels, as is daily to be experimented in living Ani∣mals, and human Bodies that have not bin long dead. Now because there is a correspondence between all the Lym∣phatick Vessels and the Glandules, and that their Original is deriv'd from them; hence because they arise from the inner Substance of the Testicles, that is mainly confirm'd which I spoke before, of the invisible Glandules intermingl'd among the Vessels of the Testicles, and separating a Salsugious matter proper for the Generation of the Seed from the Arterial Blood. XXIX. A strong, thick, hard, slen∣derThe Tuni∣cle called Albugi∣neous. proper Tunicle is the first Covering that involves the substance of the Stones, called the White or Nervous Tunicle, which being a little rough withinside, sticks every way close to it,
and binds it together, being somewhat soft, for fear of being broken. With∣outside it is somewhat moist, and be∣dew'd with a watery Humour, and ra∣ther in the Extremities than in the Middle, has the Epididymis's cling∣ing to it. By means of this Tunicle, the Vasa Sanguifera, together with the Nerves that penetrate it on every side, more safely reach to the innermost parts of the Stone, and the Lymphatic Vessels more conveniently spring out of 'em. XXX. Round about this, for itsThe Vagi∣nal Tuni∣cle. better defence, is enwrapt another strong and slender Tunicle like a sheath, and therefore call'd , or the Vaginal Tunicle, which is form'd by the Process of the outward Membrane of the Peritonaeum. Riolanus writes that this Tunicle again is enfolded by a∣nother slender and red Tunicle springing from the Cremaster dilated. But in re∣gard it is nothing but the Cremaster Mus∣cle dilated, it cannot well be taken for any peculiar Membrane enfolding the Stone. XXXI. The Stones are furnish'dThe Mus∣cles. with two Muscles, call'd , or hanging Muscles; of which each Stone has one, which both together arise from the Spine of the Share-bone, or as Rio∣lanus will rather have it from the fleshy extremity of the Oblique ascending Muscle; slender, smooth within, and be dew'd with a watery Humour; without∣side rough and fibrous, with their fleshy Fibres encompass outwardly almost the whole Process of the Peritonaeum, especially the hinder part, and so hold up the hanging pendulous Stones; and in Copulation bring 'em upward, that while the Seminary Vessels are evacua∣ted, presently the Seminal Chanels be∣ing abbreviated, and the Stones mode∣rately compressed with the Parastates, new Seed may be carried more easily and speedily into the emptied Vessels. XXXII. The Testicles thus fortifi∣edThe od, call'd Scro∣tum. and cloath'd, hang forth without the Abdomen, in a Purse or soft wrink∣led little Bag, call'd by the Latines Scrotum and Scortum, by the Greeks  and , which by a middle Line or Seam being divided into the right and left part, and interwoven with several Vessels, is form'd out of a Cuticle, and a more soft and slender Skin; and within another slender Tu∣nicle adheres to it, rising out of the fleshy Pannicle, call'd , which cleaves to the Vaginal Tunicle with many membranous Fibres. Regner de Graef writes that he knew a Man, who by virtue of this Tunicle (for it could not be done by the Skin, drew up his Scrotum, as he listed himself, and caus'd a Motion in it, at the request of the stan∣ders by at any time, not unlike the Pe∣ristaltic or crawling Motion of the En∣trails. But because voluntary Motions are only perform'd by the Muscles, I am apt to believe that the Cremaster Muscles in that Person stuck to the Tunicle; which Muscles are in some men so strong, that they will move their Testicles and the Scrotum too, if adhering to them, as they please themselves. But there is no Fat be∣tween either Tunicle of the Scrotum, which would be but a burden and im∣pediment to the part. XXXIII. Some Symptoms of healthSigns of Health. or sickness are wont to be taken from the Scrotum. For as a Scrotum wrink∣led and contracted is a sign of sane health, so a relax'd Scrotum is frequently a sign of weakness, provided such a relaxation proceed not from any External Cause; by which sign Nurses and Women judge of the health of Infants. XXXIV. The Seed being preparedThe Seed flows from the Testi∣cles through the Deferent Vessels. and made in the Stones, flows from thence through the Vasa deferentia toward the seminal Vesicle. But which way it comes out of the Stones into the Parastates does not so ma∣nifestly appear: For as the Entrance of the Vasa Sanguifera into the Substance of the Testicles is very obscure, so the way through which the Seed flows out of the Stones into the Parastatae is hard∣ly perceptible to the Eye, which is the reason Anatomists do not agree in de∣scribing it. Highmore writes that in the middle of the Stone he found a certain Body round, white and thick, not un∣like the Vasa deferentia extended from the bottom of the Stones to the upper Part, and strongly inserted into the in∣ner part of the Albuginous Tunicle, and penetrating the Tunicle, and thrusting it∣self into the Head of the Parastatae. That same whitish Body appeared like∣wise to me long before I saw Highmore's Writings, into which all the winding Fibres of the Testicles seem'd to throw themselves, but I durst not assert it to be the Ductus that conveigh'd the Seed to the Parastatae; because I could not per∣ceive any Concavity in it. I saw suf∣ficiently that same strong ingrating of
it into the inner part of the white Tu∣nicle of which Highmore speaks; but I could not discern the Perforation of the Tunicle by that white Body; and there∣fore I thought it ordain'd for some o∣ther use, that is to say, to the end that together with other crooked Fibres an∣nexed to it, it might serve to strength∣en the Vessels, as well those that enter the Testicle, as those that are therein contain'd; and thence they hasten'd to∣wards the outward parts of the Testicle to the Epididymis, to prevent a Confu∣sion of all the Parts together: In like manner as in the Inside of an Orange or Citron, certain whitish harder Bodys are observ'd, by which the Vessels that convey the Juice and the Vesicles con∣taining the Seed are fortify'd and up∣held. Spigelius has another Conceit as concerning this very thing: For he says that between the Stones and the Para∣states, at the upper part where they are joyned together, several slender Vessels pass thorough. In like manner Riola∣nus also writes, that there is a small Hole to be found through which the seminal Humour enters the Substance of the Stones, and other three little Branches that run out from the Stone into the Vas deferens. These learned Men seem to have seen something as it were tho∣rough a Cloud, and to have added eve∣ry one a Chip of their own, according to their own Conjectures. But Regner de Graef, through his singular Diligence has illustrated all these Incertainties and made 'em much more perspicuous, who has observed these things of the Egress of the Vasa Seminifera. We have clear∣ly seen, saith he, their Egress out of the Stone, and have found it to be quite o∣therwise than Highmore has described it to Us. For they do not go forth from the Testicle with one thick Channel, but in many Animals with six or seven slen∣der Channels, each of which being bent from side to side, from the bigger Globe of the Epididymis; and meeting together therein with one single Channel run forth to the seminary Vessels. He adds that those slender Channels, while they break forth through the Albuginous Tunicle, can hardly be seen but when they are swoll'n with Seed. XXXV. The Seed therefore flowsThe Para∣statae. out of the Stones into the Parastatae, so call'd because they stand by or are attendant upon the Stones, and being variously writhed and contorted like those crooked Windings of the Veins call'd Varix's, are by the Greeks cal∣led , because they stick to the Stones, and as it were lye upon 'em. Now the Parastatae or Epididymidae, (for by both Names we design the same thing, notwithstanding the Distinction of Riolanus) are two white, somewhat hard, oblong Bodies, of which one lies upon each Testicle while they are as yet wrapt up, but still in the Albuginous Tunicle, and is infolded in the Tunicle common to the Spermatic Vessels, and toward both Extreams of both Testi∣cles is most closely fasten'd to the Albu∣ginous Tunicle, but in the middle sticks but loosely to it and is easily parted. XXXVI. The beginning of theseThe Begin∣ning. Parastates rises up somewhat swelling in that place where the Varicose Bo∣dy approaches to the Stone; to which it adheres so close that many Anato∣mists, have formerly thought that that same Body did not enter the Stones but the Parastates, and que∣stioned by which way the Blood should come to the Stones. This Be∣ginning is somewhat hard, furnished with no manifest Hollowness, but arising with six or seven Roots from the Stone. XXXVII. In their Progress theThe Pro∣gress. Parastates descending to the lower∣most Parts of the Stone, are for the most part of an equal Figure and Shape, and are folded and twisted together with several serpentine Cour∣ses or Windings, and contain a white Seed. Then turning upward again with a wrinkled and somewhat swel∣ling circular Progress, after their Re∣flexion; they are freed from their closer Connexion to the Stones, and only rest upon their Tunicle, and go forth into one Passage continuous to the Vasa deferentia. From which Vessel they differ no otherwise, only that this proceeds with a straight Course, and they with many Windings and Tur∣nings, and also by reason of their thin∣ness are somewhat softer. XXXVIII. Vesalius ascribes to 'emTheir Sub∣stance. a Nervous Substance, Fallopius a Glandulous. But Regner de Graef has lately taught us that neither is true: Who by a singular Dexterity untwisted the winding and folded Body of each Parastate, by warily cutting first the exterior, then the se∣cond Membrane, and so extended
this Body into a prodigious Length, which he writes did apparently appear in an ordinary Creature to exceed the length of five Ells, and to be one en∣tire Vessel containing Seed, straiten'd in its Situation by lateral Contorsions to and again twisted one upon another. He adds moreover, that at the upper part of the Stones, in its Original it is so slender, that it may be compared to a small Thread, but by degrees it grows so thick, that being increased to the bigness of a small Packthread, at length it makes the Vessel that carries the Seed: And from hence he also believes that the Stones differ no otherwise from the Parastates, only that the former consist of sundry minute Vessels, the latter for the most part of one Channel or thicker Vessel, and that the Parastates differ from the Vasa deferentia only in this, that the latter proceed with a right Course, the former with many Oblique or Windings and Turnings, and are somewhat softer by reason of their ex∣tream Thinness. From which Experi∣ment it is abundantly apparent, that there is nothing of a glandulous Substance in the Parastates, nor any thing of ner∣vous, as having a conspicuous Cavi∣ty containing Seed apparent to acute Eyes, which is not to be found in Nerves. But it is necessary that the Seed being concocted in the Stones should pass through those serpentine Windings, to the end it may by a longer Delay and a slower Passage, not only be better ela∣borated but acquire a greater Per∣fection. XXXIX. As to the Use of theseThe Functi∣on. Parts, it is erroneously described by Spigelius, who attributes a seminific Power only to the Parastates, exclu∣ding the Stones from that Office, which he will have only to collect the serous Excrements of that Concoction, be∣cause that in the Stones there is no Seed, but only a serous Humour to be found. Dominic de Marchettis, because there does not seem to be any Hole ma∣nifest to the Eye, through which the Seed made in the Stones, may be emp∣tyed out of 'em again, concludes from thence, that the Stones were only made to cherish the Epididymises with their Heat for the more easy and speedy Al∣teration of the Blood into Seed in those Vessels. But the former tells us no rea∣son wherefore Nature should ordain a greater Part for the separation of Ex∣crement, and less part for the seminific Action. Neither does he shew through what ways those collected Excrements are again evacuated out of the Stones. Nor does the Latter make it appear, how the Stones, which are the colder Parts, should cherish the Epididymises with their Heat. But they both seem to have fal∣len into the same Error with many o∣thers, for that they were both of Opini∣on that the Arteries and spermatic Veins did enter the Parastates and not the Stones, which Vessels, seeing they enter the Stones themselves and not the Pa∣rastates, it is sufficiently apparent that the spirituous Seed being made in the Stones, and from thence ascending tho∣rough Vessels hardly perceptible, is yet farther prepared, and by a long and winding Labyrinth gains a greater Per∣fection, and so by degrees is poured forth into the Vasa deferentia. XL. Now the Vasa deferentia,Vasa defe∣rentia. deferent or ejaculating Vessels are two white Bodies, somewhat hard, round, in some measure like a bigger sort of Nerve, extended from the Parasta∣tes to the seminary Vesicles porous within, without any seeming conspi∣cuous Hollowness. And yet Regner de Graef, a most perspicacious Enquirer in∣to the Mysteries of these Parts, gives us some farther Proof of this Hollow∣ness, in these Words. The Vas defe∣rens, says he, is endu'd with a manifest Hollowness; which that it may be dis∣cerned, this Vessel is to be opened six or seven Fingers breadth above the Testicle; then force the Breath blown in, or the coloured Liquor syring'd into it toward the Testicle, and you shall find the Vessel di∣stended, and discern the coloured Liquor through the middle of it run in a right Channel to the Stone. Then you shall perceive the Cavity in the Vessel it self rowle from side to side, and lastly to be bow'd by degrees with the Vessel, in the same manner as Serpents and Eeles when they strive to creep with more than usual Swift∣ness, and so with Windings, not circular, but Sideways, runs on to the Bodies of the Testicles. Thus its Hollowness appears toward the Stones, now how it may be observed toward the seminary Vesicles, he tells us a little after. This, says he, if ye desire to know clearly and distinctly, thrust only a little Pipe into the Vas defe∣rens, which being distended either by blow∣ing into it or injection of some Liquor, you shall observe those seminary Vesicles to be speedily distended before any thing
breaks forth into the Urethra. Hence ap∣pears their Error, who affirm that the Va∣sa semen deferentia, or Vessels that carry the Seed, have no Communion with the seminary Vesicles, as being absolutely dif∣ferent from 'em, and that they evacuate themselves through two peculiar Holes in∣to the Urethra, distinct from those through which the seminal Matter breaks forth from the Vessels. LXI. John Swammerdam, sharp∣lyOther Opi∣nions. reproves this last Experiment of Regner de Graef, and asserts for a certain that the Vesiculae Seminariae, or seminary Vesicles have no Commu∣nion with the Vasa deferentia, nor receive any Moisture from 'em; and for the more solid Proof of this, he tells us of a seminal Vesicle that he has at home, inserted in three distinct Places in the Vasa deferentia. This Argument Regner de Graef derides, and in Opposition, bids him shew more than ten seminal Vesicles wherein he can demonstrate that the seminal Vesi∣cles do not terminate in the Vasa defe∣rentia, but the Vasa deferentia in them. Iohn Van Horn, sway'd by the Opini∣on of Swammerdam, writes that the Seed breaks forth through peculiar Holes out of the Vasa deferentia, but through other Holes out of the Vesicles into the Urethra. But Swammerdam re∣jects this Opinion of Horn, saying that it is only true in Bulls, and not in Men, in whom the Vesicles have an Exit in∣to the Vasa deferentia in three distinct Places, but no other Communication with 'em. But I am of Opinion, that that same threefold Egress of the Vesi∣cles into the Vasa deferentia, assign'd 'em by Swammerdam, is rather the Entrance of the said Vasa deferentia into the Ve∣sicles, through which the Seed flows out of the one into the other. For in the Dissections of human Bodies we manifestly find, that the seminary Ve∣sicles being squeez'd by the Finger, the Seed does not break forth out of them into the Vasa deferentia through those three distinct Openings, but in the same place into the Urethra. Which is a certain Demonstration, that the Seed flows forth through those three Orifi∣ces into the Vesicles, but does not flow out of 'em again the same way. Lastly, After he has said all, Swammerdam con∣cludes, that there is a fourfold Matter, out of which the Seed is made. One out of the Testicles; a Second, from the Ends of the Vasa deferentia; a Third, out of the seminary Vesicles; a Fourth, pro∣ceeding from the Parastates. But, in regard that Entities are not to be multi∣plied without Necessity, I know not why so many Matters of one Seed, and so many Parts should be alledg'd for the Preparation of those several Matters. No Man, I suppose, will deny, but that the Seed is compounded of Arterial Blood, and Animal Spirits, and seeing that Spermatic Arteries, together with small Nerves, are carried into the Testi∣cles, and that there is no Progress of either to the Vasa deferentia, the Vesi∣cles or Parastates any where to be sepa∣rately discern'd, it seems more likely, that there is but one seminal Matter, that is to say, Arterial Blood, conjoyn'd with animal Spirits, which is altered and concocted into true Seed in that wonderful Contexture of the Vessels of which the Stones consist, and which flowing from them through the Para∣states, and Vasa deferentia, in those Windings and Turnings gains something to its greater Perfection, by which means it may be preserv'd in the semi∣nary Vessels untainted, till the time of necessary Evacuation. And hence it is that the Experiment of Regner de Graef, seems more consonant to Reason; by which the Communication of the Vasa deferentia with the Vesicles is confirm'd, than that of Horn and Swammerdam, by which it is opposed. For as they pro∣duce the Testimony of Ocular View, so does he, but where Ocular View is deficient, there Reason is to be call'd to our Assistance, and she is to determine concerning the Truth of the Matter. And this Example may help us; for as Spirit of Wine being so thin and subtil, that ascending the Alembic, it becomes Invisible, and cannot be embody'd till descending from thence through the Ser∣pentine Brass Tube set in cold Water, it attains such a Perfection of Conden∣sation, that it flows down into the Re∣ceptacle to be preserv'd for Use. In like manner the several Windings and Me∣anders of the Vasa deferentia, serve to concoct and thicken the Seed, afore it fall into the seminary Vessels. Moreo∣ver as Nature in our Bodies appoints one Part to make the Chylus, which Chy∣lus flowing through the long Meanders of the Intestines, acquires therein a great Purity, and Separation from feculent Matter; tho' the Intestines themselves conduce nothing to the making of the Chylus it self: So is it in all the sperma∣tic vessels, which singly make no parti∣cular Matter conducing to the Compo∣sition
of the Seed, but only the Stones alter the first Matter into Seed, That is to say, the Lymphatic Matter,  or Aeous Iuice, call it by what Name you please, which is separated from the Blood, and sent by the Vasa spermatica into the Testicles, is there by their own proper Fermentum converted into Seed, as we have formerly declared concerning the Generation of other Iuices destinated to particular Ends according to the Nature of the Parts and Necessities enforcing the same. As our Author even in this place declares in so many Words, to wit, That it is done by a specific Fermentation of Humour in some speci∣fic Part or Bowel, without which it could not be made: the reason of which he renders immediately, for that the said Bowels, when weak or enfeebled, are not then able to prepare those new Iuices. Salmon. which in its Passage through the other Parts gains some greater Perfection, and ap∣ter Disposition to be preserv'd without Corruption for Use. Lastly, That some new Humour or Juice, as Chylus, Blood, Choler, &c. may be made, it is not brought to pass by a bare Confusion of various Matters, but by a specific Fermentation of the Hu∣mours in some specific Part or Bowel, without which no other new Juice or Humour can be made of no Humours, as is apparent when those Bowels are be∣come weak and enfeebled by any un∣sound Constitution; for then they are not able to prepare those new Juices. But now if the most noble Seed, which contains in it self a Compendium of en∣tire Man, should be composed out of those four Matters flowing and mixing together in the Ureter from several Parts, as Swammerdam believes, then a new seminal Liquor would be made out of those four Matters simply mix'd and confus'd, without any other peculiar Concoction of those four Matters so con∣fused, appointed and precedent in any other design'd Part or Bowel which is contrary to the Custom of Nature and Reason. In the last place I would de∣sire Swammerdam to tell me, whether that Matter by him call'd the Second di∣stilling from the Ends of the Vasa defe∣rentia; be divers and distinct from that first Matter which flows from the Stones; and if it be different or distinct, as he will have it to be, from whence those Vasa deferentia receive their Matter, un∣less it be from the Stones and their Pa∣rastates, when no other small vessels o∣pen into their Cavities. But to the Bu∣siness. XLII. One of the Vasa deferen∣tiaTheir Pro∣gress. rises out of the Parastate of each Stone, and creeping upward through the Process of the Peritonaeum, en∣ters the Abdomen the same way through which the spermatic Vessels descend toward the Stone. Now when both are entered the Abdomen, by and by they are divided above the Ure∣ters, and with a reflexed Course run a∣long to the hinder Region of the Blad∣der, and above the right Gut, near the Neck of the Bladder, before they meet together again, are dilated and made thicker, and much about the Sides of that meeting together, stick to the semi∣nary Vessels, into which they open and discharge their Seed, and thence united together, both of 'em vanish in the Pro∣statae of its own Side. XLIII. The Seminary or SeminalSeminal Vessels. Vessels are as it were little Cells dispo∣sed in Clusters, collecting and pre∣serving the Seed flowing from the Stones to the Vasa deferentia; of which they contain a great Quantity, till being troublesom either in Quanti∣ty or Quality, or else in Copulation, it be squeez'd out, by the Swelling of the Muscles of the Yard, and neighbouring Parts compressing the Vesicles, through the same narrow Passage through which it fell into the Vesicles; and by the same Compression be thrust forward toward the Ureter, through two most narrow Chanels crossing through the middle of the Prostates, and so comes to be eva∣cuated into it, through two very small Holes, through which, the Vessels be∣ing pressed by the Finger, the Seed in dead Bodies is observed to pass through in small Drops, like Quicksilver strain∣ed through a piece of Leather. Here Swammerdam notes that in Moles the se∣minal Vesicles, which in those Creatures are very large, have their particular Muscles with which they are girded a∣bout; but we could never observe any such Muscles in Men. Neither let any Man think it a strange or unusual thing, that any Humour should flow in or out of any Part the same way; for in this case there is a double Motion to be considered; the one ordinary ordain'd by Nature, acting spontaneously, by which the Seed flows out of the Vasa de∣ferentia into the said Vesicles: Another caused by the force of Compression, by which Motion the Vesicles being com∣pressed, the Seed is squeez'd forward to∣ward the Urethra, through the same Hole it fell in, and is evacuated into it; which Motion is to be called violent, whether it be done willingly, or by a strong and sharp Provocation unwil∣lingly. Some tho' erroneously attribute to these Vessels the Office not only of col∣lecting,
but of making the Seed; seeing that the thinness of their Substance ren∣ders 'em uncapable for such a duty, and for that the Seed is already perfectly concocted and finished in the Parastates and Vasa Deferentia. XLIV. They consist of a thin Mem∣brane,Their Sub∣stance. furnish'd with little Arteries, Veins and Nerves, with which some think the Lymphatic Vessels to be in∣termix'd. XLV. In length they hardly exceedBigness. three Fingers breadth, in breadth and thickness equalling the breadth of one finger; but for the most part somewhat bigger in the one than the other side. XLVI. They are seated on both sidesSituation. at the Ligaments of the Piss-bladder and right Gut, at the sides near the meeting of the Vasa Deferentia, a lit∣tle before their meeting, and adhere very close to the Prostates. XLVII. They are double, dividedNumber. one from another by a kind of Space, and both emit the Seed into the Ure∣thra through several Chanels, and a peculiar hole for the continual supply of Generation; so that if those in one side should be damnified by Stone, Cut∣ting, or any other Accident, the others being whole in the other side, may be sufficient to supply the office of Genera∣tion; as we hear and see with one Ear or Eye, when the Action ceases in the o∣ther. XLVIII. Cavities they have, not on∣lyTheir Ca∣vities. one, but full of windings, and com∣pos'd of several Cells, dispos'd in Clu∣sters, exactly representing the little Cells in the Glandules of a Pome∣granate, to prevent the whole Mass of Seed from being wasted in one Act of Copulation: but that the Windings and Meanders should be able to reserve enough to serve for several Acts of Coiti∣on. XLIX. To these obscure PassagesWhether any Valve. through which the Seed flows into the Urethra, some Anatomists affix a little piece of Flesh; and Veslingius thinks there is a Valve to prevent the continual Efflux of Seed. But certain∣ly there is no need of it in this place, see∣ing that the narrowness of almost invisi∣ble Passages is sufficient to contain the Seed: Besides, that in healthy People it cannot flow out without a Compres∣sion of the Vesicles; which being once compress'd (whether it be by  of Seed, or too much heat, or Acrimony thereof, which causes a Titillation of the adjoyning Parts, which provokes them to a Contraction, and consequently to a Compression of the Vessels) it must of necessity flow out, and cannot be hinder'd by any Valve. Riolanus better observes that in young Lads, till twenty years of Age, that never were troubled with the Gonorrhea, there is a Membrane wrapt about like a Valve, so plac'd, as not to hinder the Efflux of the Seed out of the Vessels, but the flowing of it into the Piss-bladder. But 'tis a wonder that Riolanus should allow this Valve or Membrane only to young Lads, seeing it is to be discern'd in elder People, it not corroded by the Acrimony of the Seed in a Gonorrhea, and is also often broken with great pain in elderly People by the Immission of a Catheter. L. These obscure Passages from theThe Cause of the Go∣norrhea. Vesicles to the Urethra, if they be cor∣roded away by the Acrimony of the Seed (which Acrimony is contracted by unclean Venery) or if debiliated or dilated of themselves, they become o∣ver loose in that part (which we have observ'd in old men too much using Copulation) then follows a Gonor∣rhea. And in this manner both Vesa∣lius and Spigelius have observ'd those Passages very much dilated in Persons that have dy'd of a Gonorrhea. Galen and Highmore tell us of a cer∣tain oily Humour which is pour'd forth out of these Vessels, to smooth and make slippery the Passage of the Urethra, lest it should be injur'd by the Acrimony of the Urine or Seed. But for my part, I could never squeez any thing out of these Vesicles than only Seed; and therefore I believe it to be a thing beyond all doubt, that there is nothing but Seed contain'd in those Vessels, and that the slipperiness of the Urethra does not arise from any oily Humour flowing from the Vesicles, but from some slimy part of the Nourishment of the Urethra, with which that innermost passage is be∣smear'd, which is the reason also of the slipperiness of the Piss-bladder, Guts, and several other Parts. LI. Adjoyning to the Urinary Ve∣siclesThe Pro∣states. stand the Prostates, which are two Bodies, but so close joyn'd together, that they seem to constitute one Body; they are glandulous, somewhat hard,
whitish, and spungy; flat before and behind, round on the sides, and are wrapt about with a thick Fibrous and strong Membrane, rising from the Va∣sa Deferentia, and the lower part of the Bladder, and closely joyn'd to the Piss-bladder at the Root of the Yard. LII. They are about the bigness of aThe bigness Walnut, but bigger or less according to the salaciousness of the Party, or the more frequent use of Copulation. LIII. They are also furnish'd withTheir Ves∣sels. some few Nerves, as also Veins and Arteries, chiefly conspicuous in the Ex∣ternal Tunicle. LIV. These Prostates, tho' at firstTheir Li∣quor. sight they seem hardly to contain any Iuice, nor to have any Commerce with the Vasa Deferentia, yet in People extreamly Letcherous, that have dy'd presently after Coition, they appear swelling with a slimy Liquor, and many little Vesicles are to be found full of that limpid slimy Liquor, which being compress'd flows into the Ure∣thra by the way of the Seed. LV. But Regner de Graef hasThe passage of this Li∣quor. observ'd this slimy Liquor to be car∣ried through many Chanels absconded in the inner Body of the Prostates: and at length meeting all together. In the innermost hollowness of it, says he, several Passages appear, all which, as many as there are, at the sides of a large little piece of Flesh, evacuate themselves into the Urethra. The Orifices of these are stop'd up with certain small hits of Flesh, lest the Matter made in the Glandulous Body should slow forth at other times than in Copulation, or least the Urine should flow into their Body through those Pas∣sages. LVI. Then he adds a way howHow they may be dis∣cerned. these Passages may be discern'd. They, says he, who are so curious as to examin these Passages any farther; let 'em first squeez out their natural Liquor, and then swell 'em up with a hollow Straw, at what time being distended with the breath, they will display their Ramifications ap∣parently, at the sides of which little Cells a∣bout the bigness of a Mustard-seed distinctly appear, which when the Passages are blown up, swell together, so that at first sight you would take the whole Substance of this Body to be spungy, and to consist of several round oblong, and several other figur'd Vessels. Now as to the number of the describ'd Ves∣sels that terminate in the Urethra, it is not always the same in all Bodies. Yet we ne∣ver observ'd less than ten in a Man: In Dogs we have numbred sometimes ninety and more, through which this serous Mat∣ter flow'd out of this glandulous Body, be∣ing compress'd. That which is most re∣markable in these Chanels, is this, That there is no such communication of 'em one with another, by means whereof the Wind should burst out of one Chanel into another; for that they are so distinct one from ano∣ther, that one Chanel being blown up, only some part of the glandulous Body is ex∣tended; and the other Chanel being puff'd up, the other part swells; so that the Sub∣stance of the glandulous Body may be di∣stinguish'd into so many Divisions as there are Chanels to be found in it. And thus has Regner de Graef by his singular in∣dustry egregiously discover'd the great Mystery of the Prostatae hitherto un∣known. LVII. Riolanus observes that theIts Muscle. Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder, orbi∣cular, fleshy, two fingers broad, envelops the Prostatae, and that it is in that place separated from the Substance of the Bladder, the Prostatae lying be∣tween; and thence it happens that when they are press'd by the Sphincter, the Seminal Liquor is squeez'd out of 'em: and that at the same time by the same Compression the Bladder is clos'd to prevent the Urine from flowing out with the Seed. But in regard the Seed does not flow out of the Prostates only in∣to the Urethra, but out of the Seminal Vessels chiefly, Riolanus ought rather to have said, that the Prostates and Semina∣ry Vesicles are compress'd together by that same constraint of the Sphincter, and so the Seminal Liquor, together with the Seed collected in the Vessels, is at the same time sent from them to the Urethra. Lindan here asserts two Mus∣cles, of which he calls the inmost the Sphincter, the other the Fascial or Plai∣stred; about two fingers broad, wrapt about the neck of the Bladder, and the Prostates resting upon the Glandules. Upon which, as he says, depends the power of opening or shutting those parts. But in regard that Lindan has only de∣scrib'd these Muscles from his own Spe∣culative Contemplation, never demon∣stratively shewn 'em, we think it but reasonable to question the Truth of 'em till farther Confirmation.
LVIII. The Prostatae in the middleThe form of the Pro∣statae. of the upper part, seem to be somewhat hollow'd like a Funnel, and there it is that they admit the Passages of the Seminal Vesicles penetrating through the middle of 'em, which being ta∣per'd at this Entrance, run along ve∣ry small to the Urethra, into which they are open'd with a very slender Exit. LIX. These Prostatae, as also theThey are indu'd with an acute Sense. Stones, are endued with a most acute sense, and much conduce to the plea∣sure of Copulation. But we are to talk with some distinction, when we speak of the exact sense of these, and of the Stones; for the acute sense is only in the outward Membrane involving these Parts; for in the Substance it self there is very little or no feeling: For tho' both Glisson and Wharton attribute many Nerves to the Prostates and Stones, for my part I could never observe but very few, and those very small which are carried thither, and that those are chiefly dispers'd through the infolding Tunicle. LX. The use of the Prostates isTheir Use. somewhat disputed. Some think it probable that they add some greater perfection to the Seed which is made in the Stones, and render it more fruitful. Which Opinion, however displeases others, by reason of the small Commerce which they say there is be∣tween the Vessels preserving the Seed and the Prostates. But this small Commerce Regner de Graef endeavours to prove: For, says he, the Piss-bladder being taken away in the middle, according to its length, let the glandulous Body be dissected (so he always calls the Prosta∣tes) and the Chanels of the Vasa Deferen∣tia and Vesicles be closely pursu'd to their Exit into the Urethra, and be separated from the glandulous Body, then putting a little Pipe into the Vessels carrying the Seed, if any Liquor be forc'd into their Ca∣vity by the help of a Syringe, the Seminal Vessels swell with the Deferents themselves, the Liquor flowing strongly through the Hole into the Urethra, which if they be stopped about their Exit into the Urethra, nothing bursts forth out of the Chanels in that place where they are annexed to the glandu∣lous Bodies, tho' the Seminary Vessels be for∣cibly disten led; which would necessarily happen, had they a mutual Commerce with the glandulous Body. Hence Regner de Graef infers that there is neither any Seed generated in 'em, nor any thing Seminal contain'd in 'em; but believes that what is therein contain'd, is something peculiar, some slimy Liquor, which serves for a vehi∣cle to the Seed issuing out of the Vessels, with which he judges the Seed to be en∣compass'd, lest it should vanish before it comes to the Womb. But in regard that in dead Carkasses the demonstrati∣ons of the Parts are not the same as in living Bodies; the Pores and narrow Passages being then so clos'd, that they will admit no breath to go through, whereas they are passable in living Bo∣dies, I question whether those things suf∣ficiently prove that Experiment of Graef, according to his foremention'd Opini∣on. For tho' he perspicuously explain thereby as well the little Caverns of the Prostates, as the Liquor in them con∣tain'd, and also their evacuating Passa∣ges, yet he does not tell us truly what that Liquor is, of what Matter genera∣ted, and wherefore that Commerce be∣tween the Seminary Vessels and the Pro∣states, is not so little as he describes it, but rather so much, and so necessary, that those Chanels through which the Seed is squeez'd out of the Vessels, ought to run through the middle of the Prostates to the Urethra, and through them empty the Seed into it, at the same time that the Liquor of the Prostates flows into it. Here we are at a stand, and therefore, seeing the Prostates were not placed in vain where they are, nor in vain admit the evacuating Chanels of the Vessels through the middle of their Substance; seeing they are no way bene∣ficial to the Piss-bladder, or to the Eva∣cuation of the Urine; seeing lastly that they contain a certain proper kind of slimy Juice, and being compress'd, empty it into the Urethra, with the Seed of the Vesicles; it seems also probable to us, that there is a great Commerce between them and the Seminary Ves∣sels, and that the Seed carried thither through the occult Productions of the Va∣sa Deferentia, is contain'd in them, or else that they add something necessary to the greater perfection of the Seed, tho' the foresaid Commerce be not so perspi∣cuous to the sight. That there is Seed contain'd in 'em, is apparent from the Observation of Vesalius, related in one that was troubled with a Gonrrhea, A∣nat. l. 5. c. 13. In one, saith he, that was troubled with a Flux of Seed against his will, when we dissected him at Padua, we found this glandulous Body, when it was divided, no less full of Seed than the Stones themselves: and if we must confess
the truth, all the while of the Dissection, in no part of the Body so great a quantity of Seed, as was found in this glandulous Body, tho' it varied from the Substance of the Stones in softness and smoothness. If therefore they contain Seed, they are not to be esteem'd such mean Parts as Regner de Graef seems to account 'em. I he object that their Liquor is not true Seed; however of necessity he must con∣fess, that the Seed without it cannot have its utmost perfection of Foecundity: for if without that Liquor the Seed could be perfectly fruitful, the Prostates would not be given to all Males, but would have been wanting in many as unprofi∣table and superfluous. LXI. Here also the Opinion ofWhether a threefold Seed. Wharton is to be rejected, Lib. de Gland. c. 31. and of Antony Eve∣rard, who both alledge that there is a threefold different Seed made in di∣vers parts. The first and most noble in the Stones; the second more serous in the Seminary Vessels; and the third more thick and viscous in the Prosta∣tes. And that this threefold matter necessarily concurs to Generation; so that if one of 'em be absent, the Seed becomes unfruitful and barren. But they affirm this without any foundation; neither do they consider that the same Seed which is made in the Stones, in its passage through the Parastates, acquires a greater perfection; and so some part of it is conveigh'd through the Vasa De∣ferentia, through the occult Extremities of those Parts to the Prostates, but the greater part of it is carried to the Semi∣nary Vessels, and is there reserv'd till the time of Evacuation. Neither is there any other Matter which is to be chang'd into Seed, that flows to these Parts, or is concocted or preserv'd in 'em, than that very Seed which is con∣cocted and prepar'd in the Stones. Be∣sides, if there be such a necessity of this triplicity, how shall the Seed be genera∣ted in Animals, which naturally want Seminary Vessels, as certain in Dogs; and is to be question'd in Wolves and Foxes: which Animals however have a very fruitful Seed. This Opinion is by many strenuous Arguments more at large refuted by Regner de Graef, Lib. de viror. Organ. LXII. Here two things remain toTwo Que∣stions. be inquir'd into: First, What is the true ction of the Stones? Second∣ly, How the Seed, which is thick, can pass through invisible Pores from the Stones to the Seminary Vessels and Prostates? LXIII. As to the first, our OpinionThe action of the Stones. from what has been said is plainly made out, that the Office of the Stones is to make Seed out of the Arterial Blood, and concurring Animal Spirit. From this Opinion of ours many de∣part. For Aristotle was the first who taught that the Stones conduce no other∣wise to the generation of Seed, than that they extend the Seminary Vessels by their weight, for the more convenient ejaculation of Seed; whose followers are Fallopius, Cabrolius, Spigelius, Regius, and several others, induc'd chiefly by these Reasons. 1. Because there is never any Seed found in 'em. 2. Because they have no Cavities or Ven∣tricles to receive and preserve it. 3. Because they admit no manifest Ves∣sels through which the Seminal Matter flows in and out. 4. Because Fish, Serpents, and many o∣ther Creatures that want Stones, gene∣rate. 5. Because it is observ'd that some Beasts have generated after their Stones were cut out: As Aristotle tells us of a Bull that bull'd a Cow, and got a Calf, after his Stones were cut out. 6. Because Cabrolius reports Observ. Anat. 3. that at Montpelier he dissected the dead body of a Man that had ravished a Virgin, in whom he could find no Stones neither within or without, but only Semi∣nal Vessels. 7. Because the same Cabrolius saw a young Man that had no Stone, who never∣theless was married, and had several Chil∣dren by his Wife. LXIV. But all these ArgumentsReasons a∣gainst the former Ob∣jections. are easily refuted by the following Rea∣sons: 1. Though the Seed be not ordinarily seen in the Stones, by reason of its extra∣ordinary thinness, and the extream thin∣ness of the Vasa Seminifera, or Seed-bear∣ing Vessels, yet does it not follow that the Seed is therein generated. For there are no Animal Spirits to be seen in the Brain and Nerves, by reason of their subtility, yet can it not be thence con∣cluded that they are not generated in the Brain, or that they do not flow through the Nerves. Now how the spi∣rituous Seed is in the Stones, is hence apparent, because it passes invisibly out of them through the narrow straits of
the Vasa Deferentia, and is only plainly conspicuous in the Seminary Vesicles, in which the thicker Particles of it, being now deposited beyond the power of the concocting Parts, are more thickned, the better to enwrap the more subtile prolific Spirit, and prevent its dissipati∣on. In the mean time, that the Seed being invisible in the Stones, yet may be made visible by Art, Regner de Graef has found out and taught us by this acute Experiment; who ty'd very hard the Vas Semen deferens, or Vessel bearing the Seed in a live Dog; so that no Seed could flow out of the Testicles, tho' at the same time the Matter that was to be chang'd into Seed flow'd in plentifully. In this Dog, after Copula∣tion, he found the Stones and Parastates so swell'd with Seed, that they were di∣stended to a large bulk. 2. Tho' they have no manifest Cavi∣ties or Ventricles, that proves nothing to the contrary; seeing there are no Ventricles in the Spleen or Liver, and yet those Bowels make necessary Ferment for the whole Body. 3. Tho' they do not seem to have any Vessels in the Substance it self in sound People, yet that they reach to the Stones, and pass through 'em, partly may be seen in crazie Bodies, partly may be prov'd by Reasons; for they are are nourish'd, live, and are sensible, therefore they ad∣mit Arteries and Nerves. From that Nourishment there is something of blood that remains over and above, which is to be remitted to the Vena Cava, and therefore since they cannot send it but through the Veins, of necessity they send forth Veins from themselves. Now then, if these Vessels, which are certain∣ly and necessarily within the said Stones, are not conspicuous neither in the sound bodies of Men slain, nor cut out of the living bodies of such as are burst, what wonder is it, if the small whitish Seed∣bearing Vessels, or those small Chanels through which the Vessels send forth Seed from themselves into the Parastates, and out of them through the Vasa De∣ferentia into the Seminary Vesicles, should be invisible; which nevertheless Regner de Graef has by his singular dex∣terity detected and render'd conspicuous. In the Substance of the Brain there are no Vessels to be found, but several pass through it, and open themselves, and pour blood into it, as is apparent from the innumerable bloody little spots that appear in the dissected Substance. Nei∣ther are any passages to be seen in the Nerves, yet that Animal Spirits perpe∣tually flow through their invisible Pores, is not to be question'd. In like manner the most subtile Arterial Blood, pene∣trating through the smallest Arteries to the inner parts of the Stones, and the Animal Spirits may enter the Stones through the Nerves, and the spiritous Seed being made, may again issue forth out of them through other invisible Chanels, and so be conveigh'd through the Vasa Deferentia to the Seminary Ve∣sicles and Prostates; tho' the passages themselves, by reason of their subtility, cannot be discern'd by the Eye. 4. Tho' some Animals, destitute of Stones, do generate, it does not follow that the Stones do not make Seed, be∣cause those untesticl'd Animals have something analogous to Stones, wherein their Seed is prepar'd, and according to their nature no less prolific than that which in other Creatures is made in the Stones. Thus in Male-fish we have known that whitish Body, which in our Lan∣guage is call'd Hompsell, supply the of∣fice of the Stones; and that they do co∣pulate is manifest in River-fish, and no less certain in Sea-fish. Not many years ago we saw a Whale that was thrown upon our Coast, that had a Yard six or seven foot long; which Nature, no que∣stion had given him for the sake of Co∣pulation. Hence it is not to be doubted, but that the lesser Fish are also furnish'd with Genitals; which tho' invisible to us, as in Frogs, yet that they have such Members, is plain by their engend'ring▪ or else that they have something else in lieu of Stones. As for Serpents, which as Aristotle says want Stones, that he speaks not true in all, the Venetian Phy∣sicians and Apothecaries well know, who by the Report of Aemilius Parisanus, distinguish the Male-Serpents from the Female by the Yard and Stones. And tho' perhaps there may be many that want Stones, yet in them, as in Fish, there will be something found equivalent to supply the place of Stones. 5. That some Creatures are said to have engender'd after their Stones were cut out; this, (if it be true) proceeds from hence, that before the Stones were cut out, the Seminary Vessels were fill'd with Seed, which afterwards being de∣priv'd of Stones, they ejected by Copu∣lation into the Womb; and so begot by virtue of a Seed that was perfected in the Stones before. But such an Act of Ge∣neration can be perform'd no more than once; for the Vessels being emptied, there can be no restoration of new Seed, for want of the Stones and new Matter.
The last of which Regius perhaps will deny, who believes that same Seed to be only generated in the Prostates and Seminary Vesicles, and not in the Stones; and so tho' the Stones be taken away, the Generation of Seed may go forward in those parts. But this Man holds an Opinion contrary to the Experience of all Ages, which has always taught us, That Men and brute Animals, having lost their Stones, become altogether bar∣ren and unfit for Generation; and that they never recover new Seed, though the Prostates and Vesicles remain un∣touch'd, and without any dammage. Reason also confirms Experience; for out of what Matter should they make Seed, seeing that when the Stones are cut off, the Spermatic Vessels are also cut away that bring Blood for the gene∣ration of Seed? Seeing also that the Matter which is to be alter'd into Seed, can come through no other parts than through those Vessels first to the Stones, thence through the Vasa Deferentia to the Prostates and Seminary Vesicles? 6. The first story of Cabrolius proves nothing against our Opinion, because it ges a preternatural accident that rarely happens: nor is it apparent by the Hi∣story, whether ever the Ravisher ejected his Seed. Moreover, if perhaps he did eject, without doubt there was something in that Person equivalent to Stones, in which the Seed might be made; which Cabrolius perhaps did not observe, be∣cause it was not either by him discover'd or known. Iohn Schenckius writes, Ob∣servat. l. 3. that in Ortelius, a Merchant of Antwerp, there was no Stomach to be found after his death, but that in stead thereof the first Gut was loose, and very fleshie, which supply'd the office of the Stomach. Now from such a rare Accident as this, will any Man conclude that the Stomach does not chylifie, but that the Chylus is made in the Duodene or Iejune Gut? In like manner from this un∣usual Accident of Cabrolius, it does not follow that the Stones do not make Seed. 7. From the latter story of Cabrolius it is manifest, That that same young Man without Stones, or so thought to be, had his Stones conceal'd and latent with∣in his Abdomen, and that he did not pro∣create without Stones. Thus Bauhinus tells us of a young Man of about twen∣ty years of Age, who had no Stones pendulous without, who nevertheless was extreamly Lascivious. In like manner I. my self, not many years ago, knew a Man in Upper Holland, that had more Children than Money, that had no Stones hanging down in his Cods: and another I knew in the Territory of Vienna, one of whose Stones is manifestly to be felt in his Groyn; the other no where: and therefore without doubt it must be latent in his Abdomen. LXV. Therefore it must be takenBy what power Seed is genera∣ted. for a certain Truth, That the Seed is made in the Stones. Now if any one should demand by what power, or af∣ter what manner the Stones make Seed? I shall answer, That that same Faculty proceeds from the propriety of their Substance, their proper Temper and ad∣mirable Structure, fram'd out of the meeting and complication of small Vessels. Which Faculty I shall then more at large explain, when he that asks me the Question, shall tell me first by what power the Stomach, out of the re∣ceiv'd Nourishments, prepares no other Juice than the Chylus; the Heart out of the Chylus makes only Blood, and the Brain out of the Blood makes only Ani∣mal Spirits. LXVI. But seeing that both StonesWhether Males are begot by the right Stone, Fe∣males by the left. make Seed which is equally good, and that there is no reason why it should be better in the right than in the left, 'tis thence apparent in what an Error they are, who write that Males are begot out of the Seed of the right Stone; Females by that of the left. The Contrary to which Assertion, besides di∣vers Reasons which we here omit for brevities sake, daily Experience makes manifest; while several People that have had but one Stone, sometimes right, sometimes left, have had Children of both Sexes. Captain Couper, becoming bursten, by reason of a violent fall from his Horse, and not being to be cur'd but by the taking away of one Stone, had afterwards by his Wife several Children of both Sexes. The same Accident hap∣pen'd to Bernard Z. who when a young Man, had one Stone taken from him by reason of his being bursten; who therefore was wont to brag that he could got more Children with one Stone, than others could get with two: For he was very much addicted to Venery, and had a great number of Children by five Wives, and several Illegitimates. LXVII. Now as to the other doubt, How the Seed, which is not only con∣spicuous to the sight, but seems to be of a thicker Substance, can issue out of
the Stones through invisible passages, to the Seminary Vesicles and Prosta∣tes, that is done in the same manner in the Seed as in the Blood. For in the Blood some parts are spiritous and very subtile, others thicker and more viscid, yet all fluid, which being mixt together, obtain such a thinness of parts, that they are every where able to pass through the invisible Pores of the Substance of the Parts. For do but shave the Cuticle slightly, and by and by the Blood▪ issues forth through the in∣visible Pores of the Skin, and so insinu∣ates it self into other Pores of other parts of the Body. And thus in the Seed the thicker Particles become so fluid by the thin and spiritous Particles intermix'd, containing much volatile Salt in them∣selves, as also by the peculiar Efferves∣cency rais'd in the Stones, that they may the more easily pass through the most narrow and invisible passages of the Va∣sa Deferentia, though the whole sub∣stance of the Seed, when it is ejected forth, seems to be thicker. The thick and best concocted Seed passes obviously out of the Seminary Vesicles through the small and scarce visible passages into the Urethra, if the Vesicles be press'd with the finger, like Quicksilver strain'd through a thin piece of Leather; where∣fore then may not the Seed, which is now more volatiliz'd before that con∣densation which happens in the Vesicles, in like manner pass through the invisi∣ble passages of the Vasa Deferentia? In immoderate Coition, Experience tells us, That sometimes instead of Seed Blood is ejected, which Blood if it pass through the invisible passages of the said Vessels, why not the Seed? Nevertheless I will not in the mean time deny but that the Seed may be corrupted in the Testicles, upon some Accidents, as un∣clean Coition, &c. and be then so coa∣gulated and thicken'd, that it cannot pass thorough, and then Tumours in the Testicles happen, and other incon∣veniencies. But how any spiritous Humour, containing in it much of volatile Salt, can pass through invisi∣ble Pores, we shall shew more at large Lib. 3. Cap. 11. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Yard. I. THE Seed being made inThe Yard. the forefaid Organs, has need of a peculiar Instrument, through which to inject it into the Womb, to which end Nature has form'd the Yard to perform that Office. II. Now the Yard (by the LatinsThe Names call'd Priapus, Virga, Mentula, Ve∣retrum, Coles, & Membrum Virile, or Genitale; by the Greeks  &  & ) is an Organic part primarily appointed by Nature for the injection of Seed into the Womb, and secondarily for the evacuation of U∣rine. This is that Priapus who is the Tu∣telar Angel of Nature's Garden. Whom Virgins and the youthful Maids im∣plore; But married Women on their backs adore. That same Inchanter who by his Incan∣tations a thousand ways bewitches the Female Sex. This is that part which makes ripe Virgins run mad, leads ho∣nest Women oftentimes astray, exhi∣lirates the sad and melancholy, and in∣fuses new vigour into 'em: That by its fellowfeeling warms the colder sort, by its ingress weakens the drowsie, and by its rubbing to and fro, makes the torpid lively and chearful, and raises 'em to a high pitch of pleasure. That by virtue of its sweet influence thickens young Mai∣dens about the Hanches, and infuses wit and knowledge into ignorant Girls, by making 'em the nursing Mothers of Children. III. By reason of these wondersWhethr a living Creature. which it works, Plato in his Timaeus, thought the Yard to be a sort of living Animal, and to have its own Moti∣ons and Inclinations, oftentimes re∣bellious and opposite to the Rule of Reason, because it is endu'd with an inbred quality so desirous of Generati∣on. Aristotle also agrees with Plato, who calls the genital Member an Animal, Lib. de Animal. mot. c. ult. But in regard this longing Motion is not only inbred in the Yard, but also in the Brain, and is from thence infus'd into the Yard: and where∣as
one Animal cannot be the intregal part of another; and whereas the Yard is only part of a Creature, compleating the whole with other Parts, it cannot certainly be call'd a living Creature, but only a Part and Member of a living Creature. IV. It is seated at the Root of theSituation, Figure, and Bigness. Sharebone. The shape of it is oblong, and for the most part round, yet some∣what flat on the upper side. The thick∣ness and length of it is proper for the Venereal Act, tho' in some larger, in others less. Generally however Men of short stature, who live abstaining from Venery, also such as have large Noses, are furnish'd with a larger Yard: And hence it is that the more salacious sort of Men and Women make a judgment of the largeness of a Man's Yard from the bigness of the Nose in Men; and by the wideness of the Mouth in Women of the wideness of their Privities, according to these Verses: Ad formam Naris noscetur Mentula maris, Ad formamque Oris noscetur Res Muliebris. Mens Tools according to their Noses grow, Large as their Mouths are Womens too below. Also Fools and the most blockish sort of People are said to have great Tools. Which Rules however does not always hold, but are subject to many Excepti∣ons. Spigelius Anat. l. 1. c. 10. judges from the bigness of the Yard, of the Man's more or less proneness to Venery. A larger Yard, says he, rather fills the Womb with its bulk, than waters it with a fertile Seed. For it is not so proper for Venery, which it neither vigorously under∣takes, nor long tustains; the Muscles that should stiffen the rigid Spear being enfeebl'd by its weight. A smaller one therefore, on the other side is more furious and more fuitful, in regard that by tickling of the neck of the Womb, it provokes forth the Womens Seed with more delight, and maintains the Combat longer. Alexander Petronius, Lib. 2. de Morb. Ital. c. 17. conjectures at the Wit and Parts of the Person by the bigness of his Yard; and says that a large Tool de∣monstrates a thick stupid Scull, like that of the Ass. V. The Yard consists of a Cuticle,Its Sub∣snce. a Skin, a fleshie Membrane, and its own peculiar Substance: But it has no fat; for that by its weight and bulk would be a hindrance to the part, and by stupefying the quickness of Sense, would hebetate and take away a great part of the pleasure. But its own proper Substance is most convenient for it; not bony, as in a Dog, Fox, or Wolf; not cartilaginous nor fleshie; but such as may be relax'd or extended properly for the ejection of Seed. Which there∣fore four parts constitute, the Urethra, two nervous Bodies, and the Nut. VI. The Urethra or Piss-pipe isThe Ure∣thra. the lower part of it; the inside of which is cloathed with a thin and sen∣sible, the outside with a fungous and fi∣brous Membrane; and it is continuous to the neck of the Bladder, but not of the same Substance with it: for it is somewhat more spungy, and of a darker colour. So that in the erection of the Yard it may swell and be distended, and then fall again; which things cannot fall out in the neck of the Piss-bladder. Moreover, it is separated by Concoction from the neck of the Bladder, and then the difference of its Substance most ap∣parently manifests it self. From whence appears the Error of Andreas Laurentius, who writes that the Urethra is nothing else than the Substance of the Yard pro∣long'd to the end of the Yard, or the more extended neck of the Bladder. In the mean while, that it has a great com∣merce with the nervous Bodies, is hence apparent, that it swells and flags together with them. VII. The Urethra is of an equalThe large∣ness. largeness through its whole passage, ex∣cept in its forepart near the Exit, where the Nut is joyn'd with the ner∣vous Bodies; as being the place where it has a little superficial hollowness, into which the sharp Urine falling in the Stone, while it is mov'd about in that place, causes great pain, and is a shrew'd sign of the Stone: and therein some∣times a sharp Liquor stopping in those that are troubled with the Gonorrhea, causes a very painful Exulceration. VIII. The Use of it is to conveighIts vse. the Seed and Urine: to which purpose several small and almost imperceptible Chanels open into it from the Prostates, and two narrow Vessels from the Semi∣nary Vessels transmitting Seed, of both which we have spoken in the former Chapter, and the neck of the Piss-blad∣der; and there is in it also a little mem∣branous Valve, of which Cap. 20.
IX. Upon the upper part of theThe ner∣vous Bo∣dies. Urethra rest two nervous Bodies con∣stituting the greatest part of the Yard. Withoutside they are thick like an Ar∣tery, also thick and hard; withinside thin and spungy, of a black colour in∣clining first to red, as it were filled with blackish Blood. X. They arise on each side from theTheir Rise. lower parts of the Hipbone, and are fasten'd to 'em with very strong Liga∣ments, and meet together about the middle of the Share-bone, to which they are fasten'd with a nervous Li∣gament underneath, but distinguish'd one from another by the coming be∣tween of a thin, pellucid and fibrous membranous Partition. Which Par∣tition, the nearer it comes to the Nut, the thinner it grows; so that before it comes to the middle of the Yard, it as∣cends by degrees from the Urethra to∣wards the back, and thence proceeding a little farther, insensibly becomes so thin, that near the Nut it is hardly to be seen, and so those so nervous Bodies seem in that place to embody into one. XI. The inner spongy part of theseThe Vessels of the ner∣vous Bo∣dies. Bodies is fram'd of little Arteries, little Veins, and little Nerves inter∣woven together in the form of a Net, and the spiritous Blood (which flows thither through the Nerves, running thither out of the Privity) being there collected, and growing hot with the Itch of Concupiscence, dilates and ex∣tends those parts, as Bauhinus, Rio∣lanus, and Veslingius agree. Fal∣lopius makes no mention of the Net, but writes that there are two large Nerves, and between as many dilated Arteries that extend themselves as far as the Nut; in like manner that double Veins run forth to the nervous Veins; but that generally in the midst of the separation they meet together in one Vein, which runs through the middle of the back of the Yard among the Arteries to the Nut: and that these Vessels arise from much about the fourth Vertebra, the Aorta and the great Veins that run toward the Thighs, and about the Conjunction of the Share∣bones penetrating through the forked O∣riginal of the Yard, are carried to the back of the Yard. This is a very exact description by Fallopius of the Vessels, of which the smallest Branches open to∣ward the inner spungy Substance of the nervous Bodies: and when the Animal Spirits, with the hot Arterious Blood, flow more plentifully into it out of the Nerves and Arteries, then the Yard grows hot and extends it self: but when the Spirits cease to flow into it, then the more copious Blood and Spirits already within it, are suckt up by the little Branches of the small Veins, and then the Yard falls again. Now that the Yard is extended by the influx of Blood and Spirits, is easily demonstrated in Bodies newly dead: for if you immit Water through a Syringe thrust into the Ori∣fices of the Veins, and then force that Water forward toward the nervous Bo∣dies, we shall find the Yard to be ex∣tended in the same manner, as we find it stiffen'd in those that are alive by the Influx of Blood and Animal Spirits. Ne∣vertheless this same inner Substance of these Bodies is not a meer weaving of these Vessels into the likeness of a Net, as Bauhinus, Riolanus, and Veslingius assert, but it is a fibrous Substance, com∣pos'd of innumerable little Fibres, run∣ning and spreading this way and that way, equally restraining the surrounding Membrane from too much dilatation, and underpropping the little Vessels that are interwoven betwixt 'em; and so recei∣ving within their hollow spaces the Blood and Spirits wandring out of the Vessels through that same Substance. Wharton writes that those Bodies have a glandulous Flesh within, which after a certain manner fills and stuffs up its little Boxes, and defends from too much fal∣ling and weakness in the Interstitiums of Coition. But Regner de Graef demon∣strates and evinces by Ocular view, that there is no such thing as that glandulous Flesh in the little hollownesses, which he proves by an egregious Experiment there at large set down. XII. At the end of the Yard is theThe Glans. Nut, in Latin Glans, in Greek , in which the two foresaid nervous Bo∣dies, with the Urethra, end. The lower part of which, that exceeds those three Bodies somewhat in compass, is call'd , or the Crown. XIII. The Figure of it is somewhatFigure and Colour. like a Top; the colour of it, when the Yard is fallen, somewhat bluish; when erected red. XIV. It has a Substance peculiar toSubstance. it self, fleshie, soft, spungy, exquisite for its sense of feeling, and enfolded with a thin Membrane, and hollow'd with a long hole before. The infold∣ing
Membrane is produced from the in∣ner Membrane of the Ureter, which go∣ing out at the hole, turns back and spreads it self over all the Nut, and en∣dows it with a most acute sense of feel∣ing, which it ought to have first to that end, to excite the greater pleasure in Co∣pulation, which unless it should be, hard∣ly any one would mind the Act of Ge∣neration, and so the race of Mankind would in a short time be extinct. Of which thing Andreas Laurentius thus ele∣gantly writes, Anat. l. 7. c. 1. Hence, says he, the Titillation of the obscene Parts, and the most exquisite sense of feeling: for who would desire such a nasty thing as Co∣pulation, embrace and indulge with so much eagerness? With what face would that Divine Creature Man, so full of Reason and Consideration, be brought to handle the obscene Parts of Women, desild with so many Nastinesses, and for that cause plac'd in the lower part of the Body, like the Sink? What Woman would throw her self into the Embraces of the Male, knowing the Terrour of her nine Months burden, and the Pain of her Labour, which many times also proves no less fatal than painful, or en∣dure the Cares and Toyls of breeding up her Birth, were it not for that incredible sting of tickling pleasure with which the Genitals are endu'd. XV. The outward part of the NutThe Fore∣skin. is cover'd with a Praeputium; which is compos'd of a Cuticle and a Skin, a little nervous and thin Skin proceed∣ing inwardly from the fleshie Pannicle. XVI. This toward the lower part,The Bridle. below the hole, is ty'd to the Nut with a little Bridle. XVII. This is that Praeputium orPraeputi∣um. Foreskin which is cut away by the Jews and Mahometans: and it is a wonderful thing, what divers Persons of great Credit have related to us from their own Observation, that this Part is six times bigger in the Children of Jews and Turks, than in our Chri∣stian Infants: And in some is of a prodigious bigness, even to the breadth of a Thumb, and hangs down below the Nut, till cut away. And Veslingius testifies the same thing of the Children of the Egyptians and Arabians. This Foreskin in Copulation rolls back from the Nut, and slips below the Crown, by which means the whole bulk and thickness of the Yard is made equal without any roughness: and this repeat∣ed drawing forward and slipping back of the Foreskin in Copulation, is thought to increase the pleasure of Women in Copulation: and hence Riolanus tells us out of Fragosa's Spanish Surgery, that the Turkish and Ethiopian Women co∣vet more eagerly the Company of Chri∣stian Slaves, than of their Circumciz'd Husbands, as much more delightful. Sometimes it happens that this Fore∣skin is so strait and narrow, that it can∣not be slipt from the Nut, which causes the standing of the Yard to be very painful, while the Nut is straitned with∣in that narrow enclosure: of which sort of Patients I have met with many in Practice, and cur'd'em by Incision of the Foreskin in the upper part: the Lips of which Incision are easily cur'd, but the Nut will never come to be cover'd with the Praeputium afterwards; which is not a straw matter; seeing I have known se∣veral who have had so short a Foreskin, that it never cover'd the Nut, who suf∣fer'd however no Inconvenience for all that. XVIII. The Yard receives all man∣nerThe Vessels of the Yard, and first the Arte∣ries. of Vessels. It has two remarka∣ble innermost Arteries from the Hy∣pogastrics, dispers'd first through the Nervous Bodies, at the beginning of whose Meeting they enter, and run along quite the length of the Yard, sending forth little Branches to the Sides: But the outermost Arteries it receives from the Pudenda. XIX. It sends forth the inner VeinsThe Veins. to the Hypogastrics; and the outer Veins to the Privities. XX. It has outer and inner NervesThe Nerves. from the Marrow of the Os Sacrum; of which two, of a moderate Bigness, run quite the length of the Yard at the lower Part, together with the Ar∣teries and Veins. XXI. It is mov'd with four Mus∣cles:Muscles. Of which two shorter and thicker, proceeding from the Tuberous Ner∣vous Beginning of Hip or Huckle∣bone, not far from the Exit are fastened to the Bodies of the Yard, and serve for Erection. The other two longer and slenderer rising from the Sphincter Muscle of the right Gut, and carried underneath, are inserted into the Sides of the Ure∣thra about the Middle, which they dilate for the more ready Emission of Seed and Urine, and also compress
the Seminary Vessels seated in the Perinaeum, or Space between the Cod and the Fundament. And because they hasten forth the little Drops of Seed and Urine, they are call'd Accele∣rators. This Use of the Muscles Regner de Graef absolutely rejects, and ascribes to 'em a far different Function, that when they swell they may compress the Nervous Bodies on both sides, and by that means suddainly thrust forward to∣ward the Nut, the Blood flowing in through the Arteries, and for some time stop the same Blood being about to flow back again, by compressing the Veins, thereby to preserve the Yard stiff for some time. But in regard the Office of the Muscle is only single, by contract∣ing it self to draw the Part to which it is fasten'd, and that the Muscle was pri∣marily ordain'd for that sort of Acti∣on, and whatever happens from it be∣sides that Action of its own, that happens only by Accident; of Necessity, as in all others, so in the Muscles of the Yard, that Action is to be held unquestiona∣ble, and we must of necessity maintain that these Muscles cause the Erection of the Yard, and Dilatation of the Urethra. If by Accident, while they swell, they may somewhat compress the Nervous Bodies, according to Regner de Graef, that does not take away their peculiar and primary Action, nor can it be concluded from thence, that they do not erect the Yard, but only serve for that accidental Use. XXII. When in the heat of LustErection of the Yard. the Animal Spirits plentifully flow in∣to these Muscles and the two nervous Bodies, then the Yard stirr'd with venereal Violence is extended and be∣comes stiff. The manner and Bulk of which Extension all Men understand that are not in the number of bewitch'd and srigid. But that certainly must be a vehement Extension beyond the usual Measure in the young Man of two and twenty Years of Age, which Schenkius speaks of in exercit. An. who without a∣ny trouble for half an hour together carried a Pewter Flagon containing five Measures of Ale, upon his standing Yard, not without the Admiration and Laughter of those that beheld it. XXIII. The Office of the YardIts Office. Whether a∣ny Genera∣tion with∣out the Im∣mission of the Yard. sufficiently appears from the Definiti∣on, and what has been already said. XXIV. But in regard that Gene∣ration cannot be accomplished without the Yard, by the Consent of all Phi∣losophers and Physicians, the Questi∣on is whether it can be perfected without Immission of the Yard into the Sheath of the Womb? Reason dictates that it cannot otherwise be per∣form'd, since without the Immission of the Yard, the Seed of the Man cannot be injected into the Womb of the Wo∣man. Yet Experience has sometimes taught the contrary, viz. That Wo∣men have conceived without the Im∣mission of the Yard. Of which Riola∣nus gives us four Examples, one upon his Knowledg, and three upon the Re∣port of others. Lately, says he, we saw a Woman at Paris, who by means of a hard and difficult Labour had her genital Parts torn and dilacerated, whose Nymphae, and four Caruncles were so closely grown together, that they would hardly admit the end of a Probe, and yet this Woman conceived with Child: For the Womb covetous of that Food, had attracted with∣in the Lips of the Privities, the Seed that was shed round about it; as a Hart draws Serpents out of their Holes by the Breath of his Nostrils. When she was ready to be brought to Bed, the Hole was opened by the means of a Speculum Ve∣neris, to that wideness which was requisite for the coming forth of the Birth, and so she was delivered of a perfect Birth safe and well. A Second he cites that was seen at Pa∣ris in the Year 1609. A Third, he cites out of Clementina 1. Quest. 15. de Consang. of a certain Maid impregnated, the Fences of whose Virginity were all firm and untouch'd. A Fourth he quotes out of Fabricius's Surgery, of a Wo∣man that conceived meerly from the Embraces of the Man, without the Im∣mission of the Yard. A History like to which of a Roman Virgin, to whom the like Accident happened, is related by Henry a Monichem in Lyserus Observat. 13. I my self remember in the Year 1637. being then at Nimmeghen, that I was sent for to a poor Womans Labour, living near the Crane Gate, of whom the Midwife related, that a strong transverse Membrane with a little Hole in the middle, was extended at the Entrance of the Sheath, so strong that she could not burst it with her Finger: This hin∣dered the Midwife from getting in her Finger; and in regard she was much less in a Condition to receive her Husbands Yard, all wondered how she could be got with Child. Upon which the Hus∣band confessed that he frequently try'd
whether he could make way through that Obstacle when he was at the stiffest, but that he never could penetrate or get farther in; however that in the Attempt he had several times spent against that Membrane. Whence I conjecture that the same Seed ascended through the a∣foresaid Hole in the Membrane to∣ward the Womb, and by that means the Woman came to Conceive. I ad∣vised the cutting away that Membrane, and dilating the Part, but her Modesty not willing to admit a Surgeon in the midst of bitter Pangs of Childbed, the Passage being shut against the Birth by that sturdy Membrane, she lost both her own and the Life of the Child. By all which Examples it appears that sometimes there may be a Conception without Immission. But these are Ac∣cidents that rarely happen, whose Ex∣amples constitute no Rule, in regard that Husbands rarely complain of such kind of Obstacles. XXV. The Parts next adjoyningThe Parts adjoyning. to the Yard are called by various Names. The Part above is called Pubes; to the Parts on each Side are given the Name of Inguina or the Groyns: The Part from the Root of the Cod to the Fundament is called the Perinaeum, from  to flow about, because that Part is gene∣rally moist with Sweat. All which Parts, the Pubes, the Groyns, Perinaeum, Scrotum, to the Circuit of the Podex in People grown to mature Age abound with Hair, with which Nature would in some Measure cover the secret Parts. Which Hair both in Men and Women, begins to appear about the fourteenth Year, when riper Reason distinguishes Vice from Vertue. Riolanus also ob∣serves that in Women who have no Perinaeum; seldom any Hair grows about the Podex, unless when they come to be very Old. CHAP. XXIV. Of the secret Parts of Women serving to the Generation of Seed and Eggs. I. IN the foregoing Chapters weA prooemial Discourse. have explained the genital Parts of Men: Order therefore re∣quires that we should now proceed to the generative Parts of Women, that is, to the Description of those Parts, that involve Women in a thousand Miseries, enervate Men a thousand manners of ways, by means of which weak and feeble Women triumph o∣ver the strongest of Men. Parts which have ruined many the most po∣tent Kings, destroy'd Emperors, made wise Men Fools, deceived the Learned, seduced the Prudent, thrown the Sound into most shameful Distempers, impo∣verished the Rich, and vanquished the stoutest Hero's: That hurried holy Da∣vid into Sin, led away Salomon to Ido∣latry, prostrated the Strength of Samp∣son, and compell'd the stoutest Hercules to the Distaff; for whose Sake Sichem was laid wast, Ilium ruined, and many Kingdoms have been depopulated: I say to the Description of those Parts, which alone by some peculiar sorts of Inchantments are able to drive the Minds of most Men, and those the most Pru∣dent, to Distraction, while they think these to be the sweetest and the fairest Parts in Women, which are the most foul and nasty in her whole Body, sor∣did and diseased Parts; besmear'd with ugly Blood and Matter, defil'd with hourly Piss: Smelling of Sulphur and Puddle-Water, and as if unworthy to be seen placed by Nature in the most remote and secret Part of the whole Bo∣dy, next to the Anus and its Dung; being the Sink of all the Nastiness and Uncleanness of her Body. To the De∣scription of those Parts in which, tho' the Barathrum of all the Nastiness of Womans Body, the proudest of Crea∣tures, in a short time to ascend Heaven it self, even Man himself is conceiv'd, delineated, form'd and brought to Per∣fection by the Will of the first Crea∣tor; that afterwards calling to mind his abject Beginning, his sordid and un∣clean Domicil, he might not swell with Pride, nor erect his Bristles against his Creator, but with all Humility admire the Omnipotency of God; and adore his Divine Sublimity and Majesty with due Veneration; and implore from him another better, more blessed, and eter∣nal Habitation for his Soul in Heaven, not to be obtained but through his Im∣mense Clemency and Mercy. II. Now these Parts serving forThe Divi∣sion. Generation in Women, are twofold; some are ordered for the making and passage of the Seed or Eggs; and o∣thers for Conception.
III. In the making of Eggs sundryThe prepa∣ring Ves∣sels. Parts are of great Use: Among which we meet first with the prepa∣ring Vessels, which are twofold, Ar∣teries, and Spermatic Veins. IV. The Spermatic Arteries areSpermatic Arteries two. two, proceeding under the Emulgent from the Aorta, and carrying spiri∣tuous Blood to the Stones for their Nourishment and the making of Eggs. The left of these Arteries Riolanus re∣ports that he himself has seen in many Women to spring from the Emulgent, which I could never see in my Life. Bartholine also writes that he has obser∣ved a Defect of both. What is to be thought concerning this Matter has been above declared C. 22. Regner de Graef has accurately noted how these Arteries descend from their Beginning to the Stones. The Spermatic Arteries of Wo∣men, says he, differ from the Spermatic Arteries of Men, for those which in Men hasten with a direct Course to the Stones, in Women are sometimes wreathed into various Curles, imitating the Shoots and Tendrils of Vines; and sometimes winding from side to side, with a Serpentine Course approach the Stones, and that more nume∣rously in the one than the other Side, and seldom are ordered after the same man∣ner as in Men. With these Arteries descending by the Sides of the Womb, on both sides meets the Hypogastric Artery; ascending by the same sides with a winding and ser∣pentine Course, which as some thought, clos'd together by Anastomoses with the Spermatic Artery; but quite contrary to all Sense and Reason, when the Blood of the Arteries forc'd upward and downward by the Pulsation of the Heart, cannot be forc'd upward and downward out of one Artery into another: For so either two contrary Motions must be granted in the same Artery, which is absur'd; or the Blood of both Arteries would meet one with the other, and so not be able to flow any farther, but of necessity must stop by the way. V. The Spermatic Veins are like∣wiseSpermatic Veins. two, carrying back the Blood that remains after the Nourishment of the Stones and Eggs, to the Vena Ca∣va. The Right Vein of these two as∣cends from the Testicle to the Trunk of the Vena Cava, below the Emul∣gent, but the Left ascends to the E∣mulgent it self, and opens into it af∣ter the same manner as in Men. Saltzman observ'd these Veins double on both Sides in a certain Woman, as he testifies in his Observat. Anat. But this happens very rarely. Both these Vessels are shorter than in Men, because that the Stones of Wo∣men do not hang forth without the Ab∣domen; and somewhat separated above, but in their Progress toward the lower Parts, they go joyn'd both together, and are closely knit together with a Tunicle proceeding from the Peritonaeum. Ne∣vertheless they do not fall out of the Pe∣ritonaeum, but are divided into two Branches near the Stones, of which the uppermost is inserted into the Stone with a threefold Root, and in its En∣trance constitutes a watry Body, but somewhat obscure, according to the Opinion of Ruffus Ephesius, to which Dominic de Marchettis subscribes: The other is divided below the Stones into three Branches, of which the one goes to the bottom of the Womb; another approaches the Tube and round Liga∣ment; a Third, creeping through the sides of the Womb under the common Membrane, ends in the Neck of it, wherein being divided into most slender Branches, it mixes with the Hypogastric Vessels turn'd upwards, in the form of a Net. Through which Passage some∣times the Flowers flow from some Women with Child, and not from the inner Con∣cavity of the Womb. Which Blood however at that time, flows not thither so plentifully through the Spermatic Vessels as through the Hypogastrics. VI. Besides these little Vasa San∣guifera,Nerves. there are very small Nerves that run forth to the Stones from the sixth Pair, and the Lumballs. VII. Wharton also believes thereLymphatic Vessels. are some Lymphatic Vessels that run between the rest of the Vessels; which also was observ'd by Regner de Graef. VIII. To the Spermatic Vessels be∣lowThe Sper∣matic Ves∣sels adhere to the Te∣sticles. adhere the Stones, whose Histo∣ry before we begin, it behoves us to promise a few things. That is to say, that in our times, wherein many Secrets lying hid in the Body are brought to Sight by Anatomy, by the same Dili∣gence of Anatomists, the unknown Ova∣ries, and Eggs in Womens Privities have been discovered, by which means it has been found that their Testicles are real Ovaries, wherein real Eggs are bred and contain'd, as in the Ovaries of Fowl.
This new Invention easily drew to it self the Lovers of Novelty: But others desirous of a more accurate View joyn'd with Reason, could not be so easily per∣suaded to believe it. But afterwards, when upon a clearer Demonstration of these Eggs, men still took more Pains, it came to this at length, that no Ana∣tomists of Repute and Experience make any farther Doubt of them. IX. The first Discovery of theseThe first Discoverer of these Ovaries. Ovaries and Eggs we owe to John Van Horn, an Anatomist of Ley∣den, who published this his Discovery in an Epistle to Rolfinch, printed 1668. By whom other Anatomists being incited, resolv'd to go on with what Van Horn, snatch'd away by an untimely Death, could not live to bring to Perfection: Among whom, Regner de Graef, Physician of Delph, deserves the Laurel, tho' to the great Damage of the Art of Anatomy, snatch∣ed away likewise in the Flower of his Age, who put forth his accurate Disco∣very with elegant Cuts, and his own Spe∣culations upon the History of Eggs, in the beginning of the Year 1672. Whom, some Months after followed Iohn Swam∣merdam, a Physician of Amsterdam, who nevertheless in his little Book which he calls the Miracle of Nature, contends most sharply with Regner de Graef for the first little Honour of putting forth Cuts, and that with so much Heat, that he seems to besmear the whole Ova∣ry together with the Eggs, not with Honey, but with most bitter Gall, com∣plaining, that he could not prevent the other with a more early Edition of his Book. That Womens Stones are ordained for the generating of Seed, tho' not so perfect as is the Seed in Men; and that this Seed is infused partly into the Womb, partly into the Uterine Sheath, from these Stones through the Fallopian Tubes, and other Passages describ'd by other Persons, in former Ages even till our times, was written and taken for granted by all Physicians and Anato∣mists, so that it was by my self held for a thing not to be controverted: Which was the reason that I wrested some Ar∣guments against this new Invention of Eggs and Ovaries, which till then I ne∣ver saw or heard of. But afterwards examining the thing more diligently, and comparing the Observations of o∣thers, printed upon that Subject, with my own ocular Views, I found that my own, and the Opinion of the Ancients could not hold: which I am forc'd to confess in this second Edition of my Anatomy. X. These Stones are two, moreTheir Number. soft, more flagging, more unequal, and less than in Men. But some∣times somewhat bigger and softer, some∣times lesser, harder and dryer, according to the Age of the Party, and her mode∣rate or immoderate use of Venery. XI. Their Bigness according toWeight & Magni∣tude. Diversity of Age Regner de Graef describes by weight. For he observ'd in Children and new-born Infants, the Stones to be from five Grains to half a Scruple; in such as had at∣tained to Puberty, and were in the Flowre of their Age, that the Stones generally weigh'd a Dram and a half, and so were much about half the Bigness of a Mans Stone: By this account it appears that the Testicles of a Man weigh but three Drams: However whether they may be ac∣counted as the more general Weight or Magnitude in all Men, I will not determine. This I can tell, that in two Men opened, neither of which were extraordinary great or large Persons, a Testicle of the one weighed six Drams, and of the other five Drams: So that I believe there is a great Diversity, s to the Weight of them, in all Mankind. Salmon. That in more elderly People they be∣came less and harder: In decrepit Persons that they weigh still a Scruple. But 'tis very probable this Rule cannot be so exactly set down, but that it may suffer some Exception, and that in Wo∣mens as in Mens, there may be some Variety of the Bigness. For in Persons that have dy'd in the Flowre of their Age, according as they have been more or less prone to Venery, we have ob∣served the Bigness, and consequently the Weight to vary, by our Inspection of dead Bodies, nor have we found 'em to be alike small in old Women. XII. They are seated within theSituation. Concavity of the Abdomen, adjoy∣ning on both sides to the sides of the Womb, at the upper part of the Bot∣tom, in Women that are clear, about two Fingers, or one and a half re∣mote from it; (but in Women with Child, the Bottom swelling recedes upwards by degrees) and fasten'd to it with broad membranous Ligaments. On the other part, adhering to the Spermatic Vessels, by the help of the Membranes wherein those Vessels are infolded, about the Rion of the O
Ilium, they stick closely to the Perito∣naeum, and observe the same hight with the bottom of the Womb in Women that are empty, but in Women with Child are remov'd more and more from it, ascending by reason of its In∣crease. But they hang by no Cremaster Muscle, for that not being pendulous without, they need not those Muscles to draw 'em up to the upper Parts, so that they are only held and strengthen∣ed by the broad Ligaments. XIII. Their Figure for the mostTheir Fi∣gure. part Semi-Oval, in the fore and hin∣derpart somewhat broad and de∣press'd. XIV. They are infolded with aThe Tuni∣cle. strong Tunicle, call'd in greek , which some aver to be single and pro∣per to themselves; others single, but produc'd from the Peritonaeum; o∣thers double and consisting of one pro∣per, and another common, proceeding from the Peritonaeum, strongly an∣nexed to the former. But this Divisi∣on of it into two Membranes, seems to be a thing hardly to be seen, and dif∣ficult to be affirm'd. XV. They differ in Substance ve∣ryDifference from mens Ticles. much from the Stones of Men, whereas the one are form'd of little seminary Vessels joyn'd and interwo∣ven one within another with a won∣derful Order: But these consist of Membranes, Vessels, and other Bo∣dies. XVI. This Substance of theirs,Their Sub∣stance. Regner de Graef has with great Diligence inquired into, discovered and describ'd in these Words. Their inward Substance, says he, is composed chiefly of many little Membranes and small Fibres, loosely united one with another, in the space between which are found several Bodies, which are within ei∣ther naturally or preternaturally. The Bodies naturally found in the Membranous Substance of the Stones, are little Vessels full of Liquor, Nerves, and preparing Vessels, which rn forward almost in the same manner as in Men, to the Stones, and creep through their whole Substance, and enter the Vessels, in whose Tunicles numerous Tunicles vanish after they have copiously dispersed and spread themselves, as we find in the Yolks of Eggs annexed to the Bch of the Ovary. And, saith he, the Lymphatic Vessels found in the Stones, whether they enter their Sub∣stance we have not so clearly discovered as to affirm it; tho' we believe it agreea∣ble to Truth. And he adds farther, That what things are sometimes only na∣turally found in the Stones of Women are little Buttons, which like the Conglome∣rated Glandules, consisting of many Par∣ticles tending in a direct Course from the Center to the Periferie, and are infolded with their own proper Membrane. We do not say these little Glandules or But∣tons are always in the Stones of Females, for they are only discovered in 'em after Copulation one or more, as the Female is to bring forth one or more Creatures into the World after that Copulation. Nor are they alike in all Creatures, nor in all sorts of Creatures. For in Cows they are of a yellow, in Sheep of a red, in other Crea∣tures of an Ash-colour. Moreover some few days after Copulation they come to be of a thinner Substance, and the middle of 'em contain a lympid Liquor included in a Membrane, which being thrust forth together with the Membrane, there remains a small Hollowness only in 'em, which by degrees is so entirely defaced, that in the last Months of Childbearing they seem to be composed of a solid Substance: At length the Birth being born, those little Glandules diminish, and at last quite va∣nish. Now those things that are obser∣ved to be Preternatural in the Stones of Women are watery Bladders, call'd Hydatides, little stony Concretions, and preternatural Swellings, call'd Steatomata, and the like. XVII. Sometimes other preterna∣turalPreterna∣tural things in Womens Stones. things are found therein, in a sickly Condition of Body. In the Years 1656, 1658, 1663. I dissected three Women, wherein one Stone ex∣ceeded the other the bigness of a Stool-Ball, and contained a viscous Humour, the other Stone being sound and well. In several others that were much trou∣bled with the Mother while they liv'd, for the most part I found some excess of Bigness indeed, but far less, than in that before mentioned, and sometimes in one, sometimes in both, a certain Saffron coloured, or yellowish sort of Liquor. Dominic de Marchettis, in a certain Woman, saw the right Testicle swell'd to the bigness of a Hens Egg, and full of Serosity: And in another the Stones so intangled with the Ligaments and Tubes, that they seem'd to be one fleshy Mass without Distinction. Bauhi∣nus writes that Stones have sometimes
been seen bigger than a Mans Fist: And there he makes mention of the Dropsie in the Stones, in a Woman that dy'd of such a Dropsie; out of the swelling of whose right Stone he drew out nine Pints of Serum, the left exceeding the bigness of a Quince, and abounding with many watery Bladders. To these he adds the Story of another Woman, whose right Testicle he found to be as big as a Goose Egg, full of long white Hair sticking in the Tunicle, encom∣passed with a kind of slimy Matter like Suet. The aforesaid Vesicles which are found in the Stones, according to the Nature of which Regner de Graef makes mention, were also long before observ'd by Falloius, and Caster, but what they were, or to what Use they serv'd they could not tell. XVIII. These things afterwardsEggs. Van Horn, Epist. ad Rolfinc. was the first that call'd Eggs, and that most convenient Name succeeding Anatomists deservedly retain'd, seeing that they are really Eggs, and that while they were yet but very small, there is nothing but a certain thin sort of Liquor contain'd in 'em, which is like to the White contained in the Eggs of Birds, and those Eggs being boyl'd, it hardens in the same man∣ner like the White in the Eggs of Birds. Neither does it differ in Con∣sistence or Savour from this White. Quite otherwise than the Liquor con∣tained in the Hydatides or watery Blad∣ders (which Fallopius, Vesalius, Riola∣nus, and others, erroneously took for these Eggs) which will neither harden with boyling, nor savour at all like the White in the Eggs of Birds. XIX. The Eggs of Women and ofThe Mem∣branes of Eggs. all other Creatures that bring forth living Animals, are wrapt about with a double Membrane, one thicker, the other thinner. The one in Conception makes the Chorion, and the other the Amnion. Now in Creatures bringing forth living Conceptions, there was no need that the outward Membrane should be hard and crusty, as in Birds: For in the one it was to be preserv'd without the Body, and therefore to be defended by that outermost Rind from external Injuries. But this hardness was not ne∣cessary to preserve 'em while within the Body, as in which external Injuries are sufficiently kept off by the hot Parts that ly round about it, the Womb, the Ab∣domen, &c. XX. But that Eggs are found inEggs in all sorts of Creatures. all sorts of Creatures, is now certain∣ly taken for a thing ratified and con∣firm'd on all Hands, which as it is accorded as to Birds, Fish, and se∣veral sorts of Insects, so by innume∣rable Dissections, the same is now as unquestionable as to Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions. Tho' according to the diversity of Creatures, the variety of Bigness is not the same but very different; and more than that, besides greater already brought to Ma∣turity, in many there are found several lesser, that would by degrees have grown to their full bigness. Nor is the Num∣ber always the same, but one, two, three, or more, according to the number of Conceptions which the Creature will bring forth. But in those Creatures where the matter is not apt and proper for the Engendering of fruitful Eggs, as in old Women and Mules, or by reason of the ill Temper and Composition of the Eggs, there they become Barren. XXI. These Eggs are begot in theThe Mat∣ter of Eggs. Stones of Females that bring forth living Conceptions, out of a spiritu∣ous Blood flowing through the pre∣paring Arteries, and an Animal Spi∣rit flowing through invisible Nerves to the Stones; and leaving in their membranous and kernelly Substance Matter sufficient and proper for their Generation, while the rest of the re∣maining Humours return to the Heart, through the little Veins and small Lymphatic Vessels. XXII. From all that has been said,Ovaries. our modern Anatomists conclude, following their Leader Van Horn, that the Testicles of Women should be rather called their Ovaries than their Stones; and that chiefly for this Reason, for that neither in Shape nor Substance, nor in what they contain they have any Likeness or Resem∣blance to the Stones of Men. And hence it was without doubt, that they were accompanied by many unprofitable Parts; tho' their absolute necessity ap∣pears from the spaying of Women, who, upon the cutting out of these Parts be∣come no less barren, than Men upon the cutting out their Stones. But whe∣ther Stones or Ovaries, 'tis not a Straw
matter, so we agree in the main about the thing it self. XXIII. Now how these Eggs comeVarious Errors of the coming of the Seed to the Womb. to the Womb from the said Ovarie, as being most obscure, requires a stricter Examination. By what Pas∣sages the Womans Seed came to the Womb from her Stones, before the discovery of Eggs, several have va∣ried in their Explanation. Some, with Galen, thought those short Proces∣ses extended from the Stones to the Neck of the Womb, were the Vasa deferentia, or deferent Vessels. Others conjecture that from these Processes near the Womb, there was deriv'd a pecu∣liar▪ Branch to the Neck of the Womb, and so the Seed was carried partly to the bottom of the Womb, partly to the beginning of the Neck; and that the Seed was evacuated through the upper way in empty Women, but through the lower way in Women with Child. Ri∣olanus describes a little hard Vessel from the lower part of the Testicle, white and very slender, and another like it contain'd between the Tube of the Womb, through which two being joyn'd together, in the bottom of the Womb he alledges the Seed to be poured forth into the Concavity of the Womb; and lastly from these he believes another little slender Branch to be also deriv'd to the Neck of the Womb. But more modern Anatomy plainly shews, that the first were deceived by the Divarica∣tion of the preparing Arteries. Riola∣nus, by his Inspection of the little Nerves running forth that way: And that through the first Passages nothing but Blood passes; through the latter no∣thing of Seed, but only invisible Animal Spirit. Spigelius, and Veslingius, asserted that part of the Seed in empty Women pas∣sed through the round or lumbrical Li∣gaments of the Womb; but that all the Seed in Women with Child copulating flow'd through the same toward the Clitoris and Sheath, with whom formerly I altogether agreed, because I saw there∣in, toward the end, a slimy sort of Li∣quor like Seed; which might be some flegmatic Excrement, but afterwards I forsook their Party, for that being ad∣monished by the Observations of others, by a more accurate Inspection, I could not find any Hollowness in those Ves∣sels through which those Vessels could pass. That the Seed of the Woman is not injected into the Cavity, but into the Porosities of the Substance of the womb it self: And the Seed of the Man, either is not injected into the Cavity of the Womb, or being injected into it, by and by flows out of it again, as of no use, Harvey's Inspections could never per∣suade me; for by that means the Seed of the Woman being enfertiliz'd with the Seed of the Man, in order of Cir∣culation, might easily be driven through all parts of the Body, and so be ma∣tur'd by any convenient Heat; and be adapted for the Formation of the Birth. XXIV. These things premised,The true way of the Seed and the Eggs. from all that has been said, it is clear∣ly manifest that there is no true fe∣male Seed, as the Women's Eggs and the Vasa deferentia of the Eggs suf∣ficiently declare; but that the most spirituous Parts of the Prolific male Seed being injected into the Womb, flows through the Tubes from the Womb to the Testicles and the Eggs therein contain'd; and that those Eggs impregnated with this Seed fall from the Testicles, and are received by the Extremities of the Tubes an∣nexed to 'em, and so through those by degrees are thrust forward to the Womb. XXV. These Tubes, from theirThe Tubes. first Inventor were call'd Fallopian, and are the Vasa deferentia, or de∣ferent Vessels, wherein Fallopius af∣firms that he has both found and shewn before credible Spectators most exquisite Seed. Which Tubes he thus describes. But that same seminary Pas∣sage, says he, rises very slender and nar∣row, nervous and white, from the Horn of the Womb it self, and when it has par∣ted a little way from it, it becomes broa∣der by degrees, and curls it self like the Tendril of a Vine, till it comes near the end; then those Tendril-like Wrinkles cea∣sing, and being become very broad, it ends in a certain Extremity which seems to be membranous and fleshy by reason of its red Colour; which Extremity is very much ragged, and worn like the Edges of a worn Cloth, and has a large Hole, which always lies shut, those extream Edges and Iaggs falling down together, which if they be carefully opened and di∣lated, resemble the extream Orifice of a brazen Tube. XXVI. These Tubes of the Womb,What the Tubes are. so called from their crooked Shape,
are two Bodies adjoyning to the sides af the womb, hollow, stretch'd out from the bottom of the womb, and composed of two Membranes. XXVII. The innermost of theseTheir Mem∣branes. Membranes is common with that which closes the womb withinside, but not so smooth, and that more about the Extremities than in the middle. The outward Membrane is common with the external Membrane of the womb, and very smooth, near to the womb somewhat thicker, but about the Extremities thinner or smal∣ler. XXVIII. The beginnings of theThe Figure of the Tubes. Tubes running forth from the womb, by degrees are more and more dila∣ted, and having acquired a remar∣kable Capaciousness, by degrees become more and more crooked, and run on with a tendril-like Course till they encompass about the one half of the Substance of the Stones with the other Extremity; and are very much di∣lated about the Stones in the first place, and by and by contracted, and beyond their Contraction slit into many Iaggs, to which Regner de Graef has observed▪ many watery Bladders and hard Stones to stick. Now because that after the said Dila∣tation, being suddainly narrowed again, they run to the Stones with a very slen∣der Course, hence it is that in women at first sight they seem somewhat re∣mote from the Stones; and only fasten to the Stones by a thin Interposition of Membranes like the wings of Bats. But in many Creatures they are found to be very near annexed to the Stones, and in many they half embrace the Stones. And so the Tubes according to Nature are passable from the Stones to the Womb, but only once Regner de Graef found 'em preternaturally clos'd up. XXIX. They are furnished withThe Vessels. spermatic Arteries, and Nerves from the same, that penetrate the bottom of the womb. XXX. Wharton ascribes ValvesWhether they have Valves. to these Tubes, so placed that nothing of seminal Matter may flow from the Stones to the womb, and affirms that he observ'd it in the Dissection of a Mare. Others describe to us Valves placed in a contrary Situation, preventing the Ingress of things contain∣ed in the womb, into the Tubes. But besides Inspection, Reason teaches us there can be no Valves in these Vessels, when the Contraction of the Extremi∣ties alone is such, that they will not al∣low the Passage of any thing through 'em, unless in heat of Lust they be di∣lated by a plentiful Flux of arterious Blood and Spirits, and so the spirituous part of the masculine Seed may pene∣trate from the Womb to the Stones and the Eggs, and then again permit these Eggs to pass from the Stones to the Womb. XXXI Some there are that haveWhether distin∣guished in∣to Cells. conceited several Cells and various Receptacles distinct one from another, and from thence have ascribed to 'em the use of the seminary Vessels of Men. But they were deceived by the sight of the contorted Parte; whereas in Tubes dissected and blown up according to their Length, there is only one Cavity to be seen, distinguished with no Cells or Valves, and here and there some∣what unequally dilated. XXXII. The capaciousness and lengthLength. of these Tubes cannot certainly be de∣scrib'd, in regard that the difference of Age, the use of Copulation, and ma∣ny other Accidents cause an extraordi∣nary variety in these things. Through the Tubes therefore the spi∣ritous part of the Male-seed injected into the Womb, is carried to the Stones, and the Eggs therein contain'd, and these Eggs again proceed from the Stones to the Womb. But how these come to the Womb through these narrow passages of the Egg-Chanel; this, tho' it be hard to be describ'd, yet by Similitudes it seems not difficult to be conceiv'd in the Mind, and explicated. XXXIII. Many Fruits in theirHow the Eggs come from the Testicles to the Womb. Seasons, as Cherries, Damsons, Peach∣es, Walnuts, &c. whose Seeds, which are like to Eggs, are brought to such a bigness and fitness, as to be impregna∣ted, gape of themselves, and so those Seeds included in their Rinds (which Rinds at first stuck close to their Sub∣stance, but afterwards loosen'd from it) fall out of them; but so long as they cease to be irradiated and cherish'd by the dewie Moisture of the Earth, and the Influx of the spiritous Solar heat (which are to them like the Seed of the Male) they lye hid within their
strong Shells or Cases; but when that enfertilizing Influx of the Earths Moi∣sture, and of the Solar or other conve∣nient heat, entring through the invisi∣ble Pores of the said Shells or Cases, has brought them to a greater perfecti∣on of Fertility; by and by those Shells or Cases grow soft in their Sutures, and so the Stones, tho very hard, open, and the Seeds included within grow moist and more juicy, and dilating themselves, quit the Stones, and so thrust forth the Bud, which is the first thing form'd in order to the new pro∣duction. And the same thing happens in Pease, Beans, Wheat, Barley, Melons, Cucumbers, whose Seeds are wrapt up in a little Membrane instead of a Stone. In like manner Womens Eggs, and the Eggs of all Creatures that bring forth li∣ving Conceptions, as also of Birds, in their Ovary, by means of the Nou∣rishment brought 'em through the small little Arteries and invisible Nerves, ac∣quire a just bigness, and such an aptitude that they may be impregnated by the spiritous part of the Male-seed. Which Fertility if they acquire by Copulation, and so become seal'd with the Seal of Fertility, the little Cells wherein they are included in the Ovary, grow soft, di∣late and loosen themselves (as the stones of Fruits, willing to quit their Seeds for new Production, open of their own ac∣cords) and so when they can no longer be contain'd in those little Cells by rea∣son of their growth, and the loosning of the Cells, they fall of themselves into the Egg-Chanels or Tubes, which are relax'd to that degree by the increase of Heat and Spirits, in the Act of Copulation, that they afford the ripe Eggs an easie passage toward the Womb, which after∣wards by the gentle Compression of the Abdomen caus'd by Respiration, are gent∣ly thrust forward through the Tubes into the Womb it self, wherein, by reason of the narrow Orifice of the Womb, they are stop'd and detain'd, there to be che∣rish'd by its moderate Heat and conve∣nient Moisture, and the vivific Spirit la∣tent therein, and infus'd with the Male∣seed, may be freed from its Fetters, and proceeding from power to act, may be∣gin the delineation of the Infant Structure. Of which more Cap. 28, 29. XXXIV. Here arises a very singu∣larA difficulty concerning the Wind∣eggs in Women. and considerable Question, viz. When Birds, without the Coition of the Male, lay their perfect Eggs, (which they call Wind-eggs) whether mature Virgins, and Women depriv'd of Men, and without the assistance of Copulati∣on, may not be able sometime to bring forth their Eggs? 'Tis very probable that in Women of cold Tempers, and not prone to Venery, such Accidents will hardly fall out, seeing there is not in them such a copious afflux of hot Blood and Spirits, which is much promoted by intent venereal thoughts, to the genera∣tive Parts, that the little Boxes of the O∣vary and the Tubes, should be sufficient∣ly relax'd and dilated for the exclusion and passage of the Eggs: But in hot Women, itching with Lust, prone to Co∣pulation, and continually intent upon venereal thoughts, sometimes the Parts may be so relax'd by a copious afflux of Blood and Seed to the Parts, that the Eggs, when mature, may drop of them∣selves into the Tubes out of the Ovary, and through them be carried to the Womb: yet not so as to be there long detain'd, because of the Orifice of the Womb's being open, as not being exactly shut, but when it contains the Man's Seed for Conception, or else the Birth. But why these same Womens Wind-eggs were never observ'd by any Person be∣fore, happen'd, I suppose, from hence, for that Women do not inspect what things slip out of their Wombs, or know what they are; nor will they suffer Men to view those things, among which, if there should be an Egg sometimes, it would not be discern'd by them. Be∣sides that by reason of the tender Skin wherewith it is enwrapt, it might fall out broken, or else be broken among the Linen with which Women dry up their Uterine Excrements, and so lose alto∣gether its shape of an Egg, which else would be visible to the Eye. However, in the mean time this has recall'd to my memory, what many years since a Wo∣man, not of the meanest quality, whose Daughter being about four and twenty years of Age, wanton enough, yet ho∣nest, was troubled with vehement fits of the Mother, related to me; that is to say, That my Prescriptions, which were administred to her, nothing availing, her Midwife had many times deliver'd her from her present Distemper, and immi∣nent danger of Death, by thrusting her finger into the sheath of the Womb; with which she kept rubbing there so long till she brought down a certain vis∣cous Liquor out of the Womb, which was often accompanied with a certain clear transparent little Bubble, and so
the Person in a Swoon came to her self again. This I laugh't at, at that time when I never so much as dream't of Womens Eggs; but afterwards it came into my mind, that that same Bubble was a Wind-egg, of which thing I could now give a better Judgment, could I meet with such a Bubble that were again to be seen. Moreover, it is very proba∣ble that those Wind-eggs are frequently evacuated by those salacious Women, who lying with Men, through some di∣stemper of the Seed, never conceive: For why should their Eggs be less carried out of the Ovary to the Womb, than the Eggs of those of others that conceive? especially when they themselves have Eggs which are proper for Fertility, if they were but bedew'd with a fertile Male-seed? which is apparent from this, that some Women lying with their Hus∣bands never Conceive, but lying with other Men presently prove with Child. XXXV. This Conjecture of Wind∣eggsThe opini∣on of Wind∣eggs con∣firm'd. is yet more confirm'd by that wonderful Story related by Bartholine of a Norway Woman, who after ele∣ven kindly Labours, at length in the Year 1639. being in Labour with her twelfth Child, brought forth two Eggs with extraordinary Pains, like to Hen∣eggs, only that the Shell was not so white. Such another sort of Egg it was that the Woman brought forth, with the usual pains of Childbirth, in the Terri∣tory of Vicenza, in the Year 1621. by the Report of Iohn Rodias, Cent. 3. Observ. 57. Without doubt the Female-seed contain'd in these Eggs, was either un∣fruitful, or which is more likely, by rea∣son of the unusual thickness of the Ex∣terior Membrane, the Male-seed could not penetrate through the over-strait∣ned Pores, to the inner parts of the Eggs, and consequently not be mix'd with the Womans Seed latent within; and by that means could not frame any Embryo out of it self; for which reason those Eggs remain'd unfruitful like the Wind-eggs of Fowl living without their Males. Now there are three very remarkable things to be observ'd in the Eggs of the said Women. 1. That being little as they are, and sliding out of the Tubes into the Womb, they should stay there so long. 2. That they should grow to the bigness of a Hens-egg in the Womb. 3. That the Exterior Membrane should grow so hard, as to harden into a Shell; which is a thing scarce ever heard of, nor ever observ'd by any other Physici∣ans that we read of. XXXVI. We told ye before thatThe reason of the re∣laxation of the Tubes. the Egg Chanels or Tubes were so re∣lax'd by the abundani flowing in of the Animal Spirits and hot Blood, that through them the spiritous part of the Male-seed might the more easily be a∣ble to penetrate to the Ovary and the Eggs; and the Eggs themselves might the more easily slip into them, be re∣ceiv'd by them, and hasten'd forward into the Womb. Now that this is the true cause of this relaxation, no man will wonder▪ who has try'd how strait the Genitals of honest Women are, if that afflux do not happen; that is when they Copulate without any Lust, so that it is a trouble to 'em to receive the Yard: and then again, how loose they are, and with what pleasure they Copulate and admit the Yard, where that afflux plen∣tifully happens; for I do not speak of Cur∣tizans, who by the overmuch use, or ra∣ther abuse of Copulation, have their Genital Parts so worn and loose, that they can never be contracted and wrink∣led again. He also that shall consider, how much the same afflux relaxes the Orifice and Sheath of the Womb, when a large and mature Birth, endeavouring to pass through those narrow passages, by its kicking and motion afflicts and pains those Parts, will easily confess the same. For then all those Parts dilate themselves: the former, to transmit the Eggs; the latter, to exclude the mature Birth; and that not being endu'd with any Art or Knowledge, but as being relax'd and mollify'd by a copious afflux of Blood and Animal Spirits, at that time flowing more to those parts than at other times, through the determination of the Mind. Which afflux afterwards ceasing, all those Parts so vastly relax'd, within a few days return to their pristine consti∣tution and straitness. XXXVII. From what has beenBirths con∣ceiv'd and form'd in the Tubes. said, it is manifestly apparent that Eggs are carried from the Womens Stones or Ovaries through the Tubes to the Womb. Which is confirm'd yet more by the Observations of some credi∣ble Physicians, by whom, in the dissecti∣ons of Big-belly'd Women it has been found, that by reason of those Eggs be∣ing detain'd in the Tubes, through some unnatural cause, and not passing through into the Womb, that the Births were found in the Tubes, and found therein by dissection after Death; of which Regner de Graef brings some Examples out of
Riolanus and Benedict Vassalius. Which tho' we look'd upon formerly as Old∣womens Fables, now upon better know∣ledge of the Eggs and Tubes, we believe to be true. XXXVIII. Besides these Observati∣ons,This whole business de∣monstrated at the The∣atre in Amster∣dam. this whole business was plainly de∣monstrated at the Theatre in Amster∣dam, April 15. 1673. by Ocular Inspection, by the Learned Frederic de Ruisch, a most famous Physician and Professor of Surgery and Anatomy. And this in a Woman, who in a short time after she had conceiv'd dy'd of some suddain Accident, of whom he thus writes: Not only the Tube of the right, but also of the left side, were somewhat more ruddy, thicker, and more distended than u∣sual, to the admiration of all the Beholders. The Tube of the right side was somewhat writh'd, toward the opening of the Ovary. The Womb, without any foregoing prepa∣ration, we cut up in the presence of a noble Company of Physicians: There we observ'd the Womb to be somewhat thicker than or∣dinary, more ruddy and more spungy, and its Concavity fill'd with a Lympid Liquor, upon which there swam the beginnings of a Birth, of a mucilaginous Substance, which rude Mass was afterwards so dissolv'd by the Air, that there was no footstep of it to be seen. In that same rude foundation of a Birth, I could not perceive any shape of Human Body. And therefore, whether that Foundation were an Embryo, or only an impregnated Egg, I much question. 'Tis also worthy observation, That the hollow∣ness of the Ovary out of which the Egg had fallen, was not only of a deep red colour, but also spungy, as we find in the Womb, the Birth being newly deliver'd: so that to me the Egg seems to be cherish'd in the O∣vary, as the Birth in the Womb. More∣over, I cannot but wonder at what I find also in other ingravidated Bodies, why both the Spermatic Veins, are so much wider than the Arteries: For if the Arteries should exceed the Veins it would be no wonder, seeing that the Birth requires much Nourish∣ment. I found the Orifice of a Womb not closely shut within, as some Authors will have it, but gaping more than usually, &c. XXXIX. From this demonstrationHow the Substance of the O∣vary be∣comes spun∣gy and o∣pen. we may clearly be convinc'd, not only how the Substance of the Ovary, ready to quit the Egg, becomes spungy and open, but also how the Fallopian Tubes, carrying the Egg from the O∣vary to the Womb, at that time became more thick and patent. But why the Spermatic Veins running through the womb, exceed the Arteries, we shall give the Reason Cap. 27. but why he found the Orifice of the womb gaping at that more than usual rate, is beyond mine and the common Observation of other Anatomists. Only this may be said, That being open'd to receive the Egg into the womb but a little before, the suddain approach of Death gave it not leisure to close again; or being re∣lax'd by the suddain and disorderly Commotion of the Spirits, continued open. XL. In a Womans Egg (for IThree things to be consider'd in Womens Eggs. speak not of the Eggs of Brutes) three things are to be consider'd: 1. Its External little Skins, which after Conception constitute the Chorion and Amnion. 2. The plentiful Humours or Liquors contain'd in those little Skins. 3. The small Crystalline Bub∣ble appearing in a fertile Egg already conceiv'd in the Womb. Of all which in their due places. XLI. After this History of Eggs,Whence the pleasure of Copulation▪ one doubt remains; that is, If the Eggs are carried through the Tubes into the Womb, and nothing else of Seed flows from the Stones, whence proceeds that pleasure which Big-belly'd Women have in Copulation, at what time no Eggs are carried anew to the Womb, in regard the Extremities of the Tubes are so exactly shut? as also in such as have their Womb cut out for the cure of some Disease, particularly the falling down of the Womb? Also in Women of fifty, who cease to have any more Eggs in their Ovaries? Moreover, whence proceeds that Seed which flows from Women in Copulation into their Sheath, and bursts forth in the Night in Lascivious Dreams? I answer, That that same great pleasure in Coition does not arise from the Eggs passing from the Ovary to the womb, but rather from the Eruption of that Seed (if it may be called Seed) which proceeds from that glandulous Substance encompassing the Bladder, which Seed is equally in Big-belly'd and Empty-belly'd grown women, and in such as have their wombs cut out, and may break forth with Pleasure into the Sheaths, as well in Nocturnal Dreams as otherwise. But we must understand that the pleasure of
women in Copulation, proceeds not so much from the bursting forth of the said Seminal Matter into the Sheath, as from the rubbing of the Clitoris, as it is with Men by the rubbing of the Nut. XLII. There remains to be enqui∣red,Whether Women may be ca∣strated, and have their Stones cut out? Whether Women may be castrated, and have their Stones cut out? I an∣swer, That Women cannot be castra∣ted without great hazard of their lives: for the small Guts must be cut on both sides, which is very hazardous, in re∣gord that upon the least wound of the Abdomen, and especially of the small Gut penetrating the Abdomen, the Guts presently burst forth. Which wounds in this case must be of a good bigness, for the fingers to be thrust in, the Guts to be remov'd, to the end the Stones may be found and brought forth. Besides, upon the cutting off the Stone, the Spermatic Vessels are also cut away, from whence it would be very hard to stop the flux of Blood into the lower Bel∣ly; which appears from hence, that it is a hard matter to stop the blood in men, whose Vessels may however be much more conveniently bound or cauteriz'd. For tho', as Galen testifies, Sows might be spay'd in Cappaocia and Asia, and the same thing be practis'd among the Germans and Westphalians: though Bitches in the same manner may be spay'd; yet the cutting out of womens Stones is not to be attempted with like security; for Mankind is not to be ex∣pos'd to the same dangers with brute Beasts, among which many of the Fe∣males dye when spay'd. And therefore I wonder that Platerus, a man of great Judgment, should think that women might be spay'd as easily as brute Beasts, not considering the difficulty and cruelty of the Operation, accompanied with a thousand hazards, which enjoyn all men, especially Christians, to abhor such a wicked piece of Villany. Tho' Histories assure us that it was a Cruelty most bar∣barously and ignominiously practis'd up∣on women in former Ages. The Creo∣phagi, a People so call'd in Arabia, as Alexander ab Alexandro testifies, not on∣ly gelt their men, but castrated their wo∣men, according to the Example of the Egyptians, who were wont to spay their women in that manner. Xanthus, cited by Athenaeus, relates that Adramytes King of the Lybians, spay'd his women, and made use of 'em instead of Eunuchs: and He∣sychius and Suidas accuse Gyges of the same Crime. XLIII. Wierus makes mention ofAnother sort of Ca∣stration. the other sort of Castration, by cutting out a womans womb, by which she is made unfit for Conception; which he relates fell out very successfully to a cer∣tain Sowgelder, who suspecting his Daughter to be guilty of Adultery, spay'd her by cutting out her womb. But this way of Castration is no less ha∣zardous than the other. CHAP. XXV. Of the Womb and its Motion. HAving explain'd the Parts that serve for the making and evacua∣tion o the Eggs and Female Seed, we come now to those where Conception is finish'd, that is to say, the womb and its several parts. I. The Womb, which is also call'dThe W. Matrix, and Vulva (by the Greeks  and , and sometimes ) is an organic part serving for Genera∣tion, seated in the middle of the Hy∣pogastrium,Its . between the Bladder and the right Gut, in the strong Pelvis, form'd out of the Os Ilium, the Hip∣bone, the Share, and Os Sacrum. Which Pelvis is larger in women than in men. And in time of Labour, the strong Ligaments about the Os Sacrum, and Os Puis, being loosen'd, and the Cocyx, or last portion of the Back-bone giving way, may yet be further stretch'd to re∣lease the Birth out of the straits of the Uterine Prison. II. The Substance of it in VirginsIts Sub∣stan. is white, nervous, thick, and com∣pacted: in women with Child some∣what spungy and soft. III. It has two Membranes. TheIts Mem∣brane. outermost doubled and strong from the Peritonaeum; smooth, and smear'd over with a watery Humour, by means of which Membrane it is fasten'd to the Intestinum Rectum, the Bladder and the adjacent lateral parts. The innermost, which is proper to it, is fi∣brous, and more porous, rising from the inner substance of the womb, and firmly fasten'd to it, rough in the larger Cavity, about the Neck, full of wrinkles or surrows, and full of little Pores.
IV. Between these Membranes isThe space between the Mem∣branes. found a fleshie and fibrous Contexture, which in Big-belly'd women, by reason of the great quantity of Nutritive Humours flowing to it, swells together with the said Membranes, so that the more the Birth grows and increases, the more fleshie, fibrous and thicker the womb grows, which in the last Months of a womans Time equals the thickness of a Thumb, and sometimes of two fingers. Neither does this thick∣ness proceed from the Humours pene∣trating into the Porosities of the womb, as many believe; but is a real thick flesh, which afterwards, like Muscles, serves for the expulsion of the Birth. Such a sort of fleshie Substance of the womb in Novemb. 1653. I publickly shewed in our Anatomy Theatre, in the body of a woman dying in Childbed, twelve hours after her decease; and not long after in another woman that dy'd in Labour, together with the Child. But this same increas'd flesh, after the birth is deliver'd, the blood and hu∣mours flowing out presently with the Birth, or afterwards, drys up again, and so the womb returns to its pristine shape and bigness. V. The bigness of the womb is notThe bigness very considerable; but varies accord∣ing to Age, and the use of Copulation. In Virgins it is about two fingers in breadth, but seldom above three fin∣gers in length; which bigness is some what extended in those that make use of men, and is still bigger in fruitful wo∣men that have born many Children. How far it increases in Big-bellied women is known to every body. VI. Regner de Graef distinguishesIts weight. its bigness according to the difference of Age, by weight. In new-born Children, says he, we have observ'd the womb to have weigh'd a dram, and sometimes a dram and a half. In old Women and Virgins growing Ripe, it is of that bigness as to weigh from an Ounce to an Ounce and an half. In stronger Women, that have had many Children, and use fre∣quent Copulation, it seldom exceeds two Ounces. But a most monstrous and diseas'd womb was that which Regner de Graef in the same place tells us took up the whole Concavity of the Abdomen, and weighed at least forty pounds. VII. The shape of it resembles aIts shape. Pear, or rather a Surgeons ucurbit; in Virgins somewhat flat before and behind; in such as have had Children, more round. VIII. The hollowness of it is butIts hollow∣ness. small, as being no more than in women not with Child, especially in Virgins, and will contain a good big Bean; but after Conception increases and dilates it self with the whole womb. This is not distinguish'd with any Cells, as in most brute Beasts that bring forth living Conceptions; but only by a future, or rather certain Line extended in length, and drawn along only in the inner part of the fleshie Tunicle, and so by it is di∣vided into the right and left part; like the Line which appears in the outside of the Scrotum in men. Which Concavity however is so order'd, that it is not equal and altogether round, but toward the right and left side. As it were extended into a Horn, being somewhat longer to∣ward the little Orifice or Mouth of it, so that it is almost Triangular. It is very rarely seen that this Cavity is divided by a middle Separation, tho' Riolanus brings two Examples of such a Division. In this Cavity there settles for the most part an oily kind of Liquor in empty women, defending that secret Shrine of Nature from Drought, and preserving it prepar'd for necessary Fruitfulness. IX. Those parts that seem somewhatThe Horns. to swell from the sides of the bottom, are call'd the Horns of the Womb. But these are more manifest in Beasts that bring forth living Conceptions, whose Womb being parted into two parts, is divided into two apparent and long Horns, distinguish'd within∣side into little Cells. But it is seldom seen that such Horns are found in Wo∣men, as Silvius found in a certain Maid, and of which Schenkius cites the Example out of Bauhinus, Obser∣vat. l. 4. Riolanus refuses to call these Horns the swelling Extremities of the womb, but the Tules; wherein Van Horn and Swammerdam seem to take his part. But what is vulgarly asserted con∣cerning these Horns, my opinion is, should rather be understood of the womb it self, than of the inner Cavity of the womb: For a womans womb is not horned, but truly round and some∣what flat. But its Concavity is extend∣ed both to the right and left, after the
manner of a Horn, as is manifest by the Dissection of it X. It is fasten'd to the neighbour∣ing conne∣xion. parts by the neck and bottom. The neck by means of the Peritonae∣um, is fasten'd before to the Piss∣bladder and the Share-bones, behind to the Intestinum Rectum and the Os Sacrum; and about the Privity joyns with the Podex, loosely adhering at the sides to the Peritonaeum. The bottom, as to its own Substance, is fa∣sten'd above to no part, that its extensi∣on may be the freer. XI. At the sides it hangs ty'd withIts Liga∣menis. two pair of Ligaments. Of which the first, which is the uppermost, resembling in shape the wings of Bats, is strong, broad, membranous, loose, soft, and be∣ing interwoven with fleshie Fibres, pro∣ceeds from the Peritonaeum doubled in that place (whence Vesalius and Arch∣angelus imagine both parts of the sides to be so many Muscles) and be∣ing fasten'd to the Tubes, Stones, and Protuberances of the bottom, joyns the Matrix to the Ossa Ilii, which be∣ing immoderately loosen'd or broken by any outward violence, the Womb de∣scends into the Cavity, and sometimes slides forth; at least, if the Substance it self of the womb become loose also through any Accident; which tho' in per∣fect health it be thick and compacted, in a sickly Constitution of body it relaxes, like the Scrotum in men. XII. Soranus and Aretaeus assert,The opini∣ons of So∣ranus and Aretaeus about the falling down of the Womb, re∣futed. That not the whole womb, but its in∣ternal fleshie Tunicle only, with the primary Substance of the womb, slips down to the Groyns, the outward mem∣branous Tunicle, which is firmly fa∣sten'd to the neighbouring parts re∣maining whole. But because this Opi∣nion presupposes a wonderful dilacerati∣on of the body of the womb into two parts, the outermost and innermost, which is altogether impossible, it is to be held for most certain that the innermost fle∣shie Membrane of the Womb, cannot descend into the Fall, but that of neces∣sity the whole body of the womb, turn'd upside down, slides from its place. VIII. This falling down of the womb,Whether the Womb can fall. by all Physicians hitherto granted, Theodore Kerkringius an eminent Anatomist, now strenuously denies; and writing upon that Subject, bitterly in∣veighs against Andrew Laurentius, Veslingius, and Bartholine, as if they, among others, had erroneously judg'd of this matter, and says that a certain Relaxation of the Neck, which hangs forth without the Privity, causes all these idle Mistakes. But let the learned Gentleman recant his words; for, because he never saw a fall'n womb, he over-rashly and petu∣lantly derides others that have been eye∣witnesses of the thing; and most excel∣lent Physicians, as to that matter, both in Practice and Theory, much more skilful and conversant. Let him read in Carpus, the Story of a woman whose womb did not only slip down without the Privity, but was also cut away. Let him read in Paraeus the Example of a womb fall'n down, and cut off by Pa∣raeus himself. Let him also read Hil∣dan's Cent. 4. Observ. 60, 61, 62. where he will find three Examples of a womb fall'n down, related by a Person of ex∣act Credit. Let him read Dominic de Marchettis, Anat. c. 7. that he himself three times saw a womb fall'n, replac'd it, and cur'd it. Let him read many more such like Examples in Avenzoar, Matthew de Gradibus, Nicholas Floren∣tinus, Benivenias, Christopher a Vega, Paulus Aegineta, Mercurialis, Bottn, Lice, Sennrtus, and othees. All which Persns, and many others, were not so stupid, nor so blind, but that they knew a womb when it was fall'n. To these let him add my own Testimony, who in a certain young woman saw her womb hang out of the Cavity to the breadth of two fingers, which I handled with my own hands, and with a proper Instru∣ment thrust back into its place, and af∣terwards so well cur'd the Patient, that the same part never fell afterwards. Be∣sides that, all that has been said is yet more confirm'd by the Doctrine of Hip∣pocrates, who Lib. 2. de Morb. Mulier and in several other places plainly teaches, that the womb does sometimes slip forth, and also adds the Causes and the Cure of such a falling down; with whom Ga∣len also agrees. Reason also confirms the Experience of this thing: For if a copious affluency of cold Humours may so relax the little joynt of the Hip, that the head of the Thigh-bone shall fall out of its Cavity, call'd Acetabulum, what wonder is it that an affluency of the like Humours should so relax the womb it self, and its Ligaments, that not being able to restrain it, the womb should
fall down? Hence we find that the same Accident happens in moist places, especi∣ally to women that are of a cold and moist Temper, and troubled with a re∣dundancy of flegmatic Humours, in which the womb sometimes descends to the Orifice of the Privities, and some∣times slips down all of it without. As to what Kerkringius says, That it is not the womb it self, but a certain re∣laxation of the Neck or Sheath; I would ask him this Question, Whether the womb remaining in its proper place, the sheath can be so much extended down∣ward as to hang forth without the Pri∣vities? And therefore for the future, as to those things that he has not seen, let him believe those that have. XIV. Here another Question ari∣ses,Whether the Womb be inverted in the fall. Whether the Womb in the fall be turn'd upside down? That it must of necessity be inverted, and cannot o∣therwise slip forth, Reason teaches. Yet Regner de Graef thinks this impos∣sible in Virgins, by reason of the extra∣ordinary narrowness of the Uterine Ori∣fice. But that it is possible only in Child∣bearing women, when the Secundine sticking too close, is over-violently pull'd by an unskilful Midwife. Indeed I be∣lieve it to be true, that the womb rarely falls in Virgins; but that it happens to other women at other times than when they bear Children, I my self have seen; for which I could produce the Examples of many honest women, if Modesty would permit me: And therefore let the Example by me already alledg'd suffice, where the womb hung forth of the wo∣mans body inverted. XV. The other lower pair of Liga∣ments,The other pair of Li∣gaments whence they proceed. round like Worms, somewhat ruddy, proceed on both sides from the sides of the Womb like Muscles, and so descends to the Groyns; (whence Riolanus thought the Womb to be wrapt about with the Cremaster Mus∣cle, and Vesalius calls 'em the Mus∣cles of the Womb) then passing through the doubled Production of the Perito∣naeum, and the Tendons of the ob∣lique Muscles of the Abdomen are pre∣sently strengthen'd with fleshie Fibres proceeding from the Os Ilium, and be∣ing reflex'd above the Share-bones, approach the Clitoris, and there end. Some Anatomists assert, That the re∣maining part of this Pair is extended farther into the fatty interal Membrane of the Thigh, and with that descends to the Knee, or according to some, descends to the Foot; which Riolanus thinks to be the reason why women in the first Months of their Breeding complain of pains within their Thighs. But they were deceiv'd, in not observing that the said Membrane being extended to the Knee, does not proceed from the Lumbrical Ligament, nor has any communion with it, but that it plainly arises from the Cartilaginous Ligament of the Os Pubis or Share-bone. These Ligaments loosl bind the bottom of the womb in the parts before and behind. Bauhinus observing loose Pores within 'em, and sometimes a kind of viscous Humour in the lower part, believ'd that they serv'd for two uses; partly to do the office of Ligaments, partly to evacuate through those Pores the superfluous Humours of the Genitals. Spigelius likewise obser∣ving that viscous Humour, judg'd it to be the Seed, which in women, as to some part of it, is carried through these Liga∣ments, which he thinks to be the true Vasa Deferentia, to the Uterine Sheath and the Clitoris. The same viscous Humour ater that led me astray into Spigelius's Opinion, from which after∣wards I revolted for the Reasons menti∣on'd in the foregoing Chapter. Veslingius dreamt that beside the Seed something of uncleanness gather'd about the womb, and was evacuated through these Liga∣ments; which nevertheless is altogether impossible, in regard they have no hol∣lowness capable to trasmit both Seed and such an excrementitious filth: either is it probable that those two Substances are ever mix'd or flow together through any other passages, seeing that the Seed must of necessity be contaminated and corrup∣ted by that nastiness. Erroeously there∣fore does Andreas Laurentius assert, That these round Ligaments are sometimes so dilated, that they cause the Rupture call'd Bbonocele; notwithstanding that they can never be dilated so wide as to receive the Intestine or Caul. But the Rupture Bubonocele is occasion'd in women as in men, that is, when the Gut or Caul slides down into the dilated or broken Production of the Peritonaeum wrapt a∣bout these Ligaments, and accompany∣ing and embracing 'em without the Abdo∣men to the Grovns, as in men it includes the Spermatic Vessels within it self. XVI. The Womb is furnished withIts Vessels. several Arteries and Veins, far more numerous and bigger, and more wind∣ing than the Sheath. Nevertheless the
Arteries are much more numerous than the Veins, for the Veins are very few, in respect of the Arteries; and those chiefly dispers'd thorough the outward parts of the womb. Whence that of Aristotle, that from the greater Vein, no Vein is deriv'd to the womb, but from the Aorta many and very thick. But in these words the Philosopher does not deny but that some Veins run along thorough the Superficies of the womb; which eve∣ry man that has eyes may see; but he means that very few or none of those Veins enter the inner Substance of it, but many Arteries do it. XVII. The Arteries that creepArteries. through the upper part of it, descend from the seminal Vessels before they form the Vasa praeparantia, or pre∣paring Vessels: But those which di∣sperse themselves through the middle and lower Part, proceed from the crural and hypogastric Vessels of the same Artery. There is such a Con∣junction of these Arteries, that they can hardly be distinguished one from ano∣ther, by reason of their Ends gaping in∣to Branches both of the one and the o∣ther: When the Spermatic or Hypoga∣stric Arteries being fill'd with Breath, presently the Arteries of the other side, for the most part swell together, at least in the same manner as the Arteries of the Sheath. XVIII. The upper Veins ascend toVeins. the Vena Cava, and empty them∣selves into it near the Emulgent: the lower enter the Hypogastrics. The upper Arteries are vulgarly said to meet together with the upper Veins, and the Lower, with the lower Veins, by various Anastomoses: But as yet I could never observe those Anastomoses: This only I observ'd, that the little Veins arising from the Substance of the womb, are intermix'd one among another, and mutually open one into the other; but that none are conjoyn'd with the Arte∣ries by Anastomoses; and so that the Ar∣teries only meet here and there by Ana∣stomoses. For the Arteries with their Orifices enter the very Substance of the womb, into which they pour their Blood, which is every way distributed therein through winding Chanels and little Pipes: which some thought to be the Cavities or Glan∣dules called Cotyledons, to which, in Conception, the Placenta or Uterine Li∣ver sticks, in which at that time they gape, and pour Blood into it to be pre∣pared for the Nourishment of the Birth; and also contribute copious alimentary Blood to the very spungy Substance of the womb, seated between both Mem∣branes, the which causes the womb at that time to swell to a bigger Bulk, and so as the Birth grows, the womb's Ha∣bitation also swells. To which end at that time large and turgid Vessels are to be seen, by reason of the plenty of Blood which they contain more at that time than before Conception. XIX. For at such time as womenThe cause of the flow∣ers. are not with Child, the Blood which superabounds every Month at certain Periods, is forc'd in great quantity through the Arteries to the womb, with a certain kind of Effervescency; and when as there are but few Veins in the inner Substance of it, through which the Circulation of so much Blood can be conveniently made, and the Orifices of the said little Pipes are now soft and smooth, hence it comes to pass that the redundant Blood, which by reason of its quantity cannot be sud∣dainly circulated, as being superfluous and troublesom to Nature through its quantity, flows forth through the ga∣ping and open Orifices of the Pipes, also through the ends of the Vessels end∣ing in the neck of the womb. But in such women wherein those little Pipes are closer shut, in them their flowers flow only through the ends of the Vessels ending in the Neck or Sheath of the womb; or else stop, if that fermentative quality be not yet come to such a per∣fection, as to raise such an Effervescency in the Blood. XX. Now what this Uterine Fer∣mentWhat is the Uterine Ferment. is, and where it is generated, which provokes that Effervescency of the Blood at prefix'd monthly periods in empty women, but very seldom in women with child, has been but little inquired into as yet. We shall suspend our Judgment in this particular, by rea∣son of the obscurity of the thing; and yet we leave it to be consider'd, whether the fermentaceous Matter in the Spleen, Li∣ver, Sweetbread, and Glandules and o∣ther parts, and carried with the Blood through the Arteries to the womb, and there some part of it being left, and collected together by degrees (for you shall always find a viscous slimy Humour in the dissected wombs of empty women)
gains some peculiar quality, from a cer∣tain specific property of the womb, which provokes that specific fermentation (as the same Matter is endu'd with a peculiar quality in the Stomach, to extract the Chylus out of the Nourishment) by means of which, that Humour in healthy Peo∣ple being matur'd to that volatility in a Months space, to boyl of it self, the whole body of the woman, but especial∣ly those parts next the womb are put into a Commotion, and the superfluous or boyling blood, dilating the swelling Orifices of the Vessels, is thrust forth; and that same quality or just volatility of the said fermentaceous Humour ceasing, the menstruous evacuation also ceases; as in women with child, and women that have lain long sick. XXI. Aristotle not understandingAristotle's Opinion. this ferment of the womb, and the thence proceeding effervescency of the Blood, asserts that womens flowers are pro∣vok'd by the influence and motion of the Moon. Which Opinion, with his leave, stands upon no Foundation, or rather is plainly contrary to Reason: for according to that Opinion, all women would have their flowers at the same time, and they would only flow at that certain time, wherein the Moon being mov'd to that determin'd point of Hea∣ven, caus'd that specific influence; where∣as during the whole monthly Course of the Moon, there is not any day, nor any hour, wherein here and there over the whole world innumerable women are not troubled with their flowers. XXII. Vain is also their Opinion,Whether from the redundant blood? who believe the monthly Courses to be mov'd by the redundant blood collected in the Vessels of the womb; in regard those Vessels are not able to contain so great a quantity of blood as is evacua∣ted every period. Or if they should collect it by degrees, and so reserve it for a Month, they must be strangely swell'd, whereas it is apparent by inspection in dissected Bodies, tho' plethoric, dying at the very instant of their monthly evacu∣ations, or when it began to happen, that there appears then no more unusual swel∣ling of the womb than at another time. Add to this, that in lean women fre∣quently given to fast, in whom there is no such redundancy of blood, neverthe∣less the flowers have their usual Course. Lastly, the continual circulation of the blood does not permit such a stagnation in the Vessels of the womb, which if it should happen, the blood would there be in danger of a suddain Putrefaction, and would afflict the woman long before the time of her Evacuation with most terrible Symptoms and Effects; whereas the menstruous blood is not putrid, not differs in it self in goodness from the rest of the blood. This is confirm'd by the testimony of the fam'd Hippocrates. But the blood, says he, gushes out as from a Sa∣crifice, and is quickly congeal'd, if the woman be healthy. Which Aristotle al∣so asserts in these words; And those which are call'd flowers gush forth, which is as it were the blood of a Creature newly kill'd. I say, of it self; because, if in some it be vitious, sharp, noysom to the smell, or otherwise corrupted when it is evacuated, it has not that imperfection in it self, but contracts it from the viti∣ous nastiness bred and remaining in a distemper'd and sickly womb, or else at the time of the menstruous Effervescen∣cy flowing from other parts to this same Sink, together with the blood, and vitia∣ting the blood by its mixture. And this is the meaning of Hippocrates, where he says, and it corrodes the Earth like Vine∣gor, and gnaws whereever it touches the woman, and exulcerates the womb. Certain therefore it is that the monthly Courses are provok'd into motion by the fore∣said Effervescency of the blood ferment∣ing in the Vessels of the womb. Which Effervescency, if sometimes it be occa∣sion'd, not by the foresaid Uterine fer∣ment alone, but by other Causes, then sometimes it happens that the Courses are still in motion beyond the ordinary Period, as often happens in the Small Pox, malignant and burning Fevers, &c. XXIII. There also belong to the upperNerves. parts of the womb small little Nerves, rising from the inner Branch of the sixth Pair; to the middle and lower parts, little Branches proceeding from the Nerves of the Os Sacrum. XXIV. The office of the womb is toIts Office. receive the Seed of the man, and to preserve and cherish the womans Eggs, till the Birth be form'd, and being brought to maturity, and wanting more Air, to thrust it forth into the world. Moreover, it is ordain'd for another se∣condary use, that is, the Purgation of the womans body. Which two offices, Aretaeus comprehends in three words: A womans womb, says he, is useful for Birth and Purgation.
XXV. The womb is therefore a part necessary for Generation; but thence there is no Conclusion to be drawn, that it is a part necessarily con∣ducing to the life of a woman; seeing that a woman way live without a womb; as is apparent in them, whose womb slipping out, is not only ulce∣rated and corrupted by the external cold, but also cut out, and yet upon the growing up of a Cartilaginous Sub∣stance consolidating within the hole of the womb cut off, the same women have liv'd in health for many years; and more than that, have lain with their Husbands, and almost with the same pleasure, as if they had a womb; of which there are sundry Examples cited by several Physi∣cians of great Reputation. XXVI. But seeing that the womb isWhether it forms the Birth. a part most necessary to Generation, wherein the Conception ought to be made, and the Birth form'd, the Question is, Whether by any specific power or faculty the forming of the Birth be there brought to perfection. To which I answer Negatively; for that the forming power is in the Seed, and the womb contributes no more to the Gene∣ration of Man, than the Earth to the Generation of Plants; that is to say, it affords a secure Harbour for the Seed and the Eggs; temperate and sufficient nourishment. XXVII. Now tho' it were held forWhether the Birth may be form'd out of the womb. a thing undoubted and unquestionable by all the Ancients without exception, that the Office of conceiving wholly be∣long'd to the womb, and that the Birth could not be conceiv'd any where out of the womb; yet in this Age it has been discover'd and observ'd by famous Men, tho' it rarely happen, that the Birth has been conceiv'd in the Ute∣rine Tubes. But that same Story seems incredible related by Philip Salmuth, of a certain man that ejected his Seed by a Lip Copulation into his Wives moth, who upon that conceiv'd a Child in her Stomach, and afterwards vomited it up as big as ones finger: as if a Child could be conceiv'd out of the Seed of the man without the womans Egg; and that in the Stomach too, full of fermentaceous Juices and Aliments to be concocted. I admire that Philip Salmuth, a Learned Man, should give so much credit to an old Womans Fable, as to think it wor∣thy to be inserted among his Observati∣ons. Nor does that Story of a Child born at Pont a Mosson, conceiv'd and form'd in the middle of the Abdomen, and found there after the death of the Mother, deserve more credit. Which Story was printed by Laurence Strasius at Dormstadt, in the Year 1662. with the Judgments of several famous Physicians and Professors upon it: Which Story I know not how it can be true, unless you will say, that perhaps the Egg being be∣fore impregnated by the dew of the Male-seed in the Ovary, and ready to fall out of the Stones into the Tubes, coming by chance to the Borders of the Tubes, should slip into the Cavity of the Abdo∣men, before its entrance into the Tube, and so by the cherishing heat of that place the Birth should be form'd therein: which nevertheless seems very improba∣ble; and therefore such Stories as these not without reason, are derided and ex∣ploded by the Learned Guido Patinus, Bartholine, and others. XXVIII. Concerning the motion ofThe Moti∣on of the womb. the womb, there is a famous Question started, whether it ascend or tumble to and fro, as it is said to do in the Hysteric Passion, or Fits of the Mo∣ther. The affirmative part is defended by Aretaeus, Fernelius, Laurentius, Spigelius, and especially by Daniel Sennertus, who Prax. l. 4. part. 1. sect. 2. c. 15. cites and applauds the Opinions of the foresaid Physicians as infallible Oracles, and makes a great addition of farther Proof; and rejects the contrary Opinion of Ga∣len, as altogether repugnant to truth. Now the Reasons that perswaded those Learned Men into the affirmative, were chiefly these two: 1. The Perswasions of idle women, who affirm that they not only perceive it within the Globe of the womb as big as a Goos-egg, ascend in the Hysteric Passi∣on as high as the Diaphragma, but also feel it outwardly with their hands; nay, some are so confident as to tell you, they feel it as high as their Throats. Ferne∣lius l. 6. patholog. c. 16. writes, That he, being induc'd by the Complaints and Intreaties of the Women, has some∣times felt it with his hand carried up in∣to the Stomach like a little Globe, by which it has been strangely oppress'd. 2. The Fumes; because that in the hysteric Suffocation, stinking Smells held to the Nostrils, either diminish or take away the Effect; but sweet Smells ex∣asperate and bring the fit. Of which the first they say proceeds from hence, because
the womb, which is endu'd as it were with a sort of reason, flies stinking smells, which being held to the Nose, it presently descends to avoid 'em. The latter, because it is delighted with sweet smells, and therefore if they be apply'd to the Nostrils, it presently ascends to meet 'em. And that which seems to con∣firm this Opinion the more, is this, be∣cause the same sweet things being rubb'd about the inside of the Privity, imme∣diately abates the fit; because the womb, as they say, descends to those things with which it is delighted. From whence they conclude, That the Womb ascends with a spontaneous Motion, and may be mov'd any way; nor ought that to be wonder'd at, say they, when its Motion upward in Wo∣men with Child, and downward in the falling of the Womb, is a thing so well known. These Reasons were thought to be of so much weight by many, that they led men of great repute into the Labyrinth of Error. But on the other side, That the womb does not ascend upward of its own accord, nor is mov'd with a wan∣dring Motion through the lower Belly, may be demonstrated by several Rea∣sons. 1. The Ligaments prevent it; not on∣ly the Vermiform, those in the shape of a Worm, but chiefly the Lateral, like to the Wings of Batts, which are so strong, that they can by no means suffer such a suddain Extension. Add to this, That the Uterine Sheath is also firmly fastened to the neighbouring parts, the Bladder, the right Intestine, the Privity, &c. All which parts in the ascent of the womb, would be likewise drawn up to∣gether toward the upper parts with great pain and trouble; and yet we never hear those that are troubled with fits of the Mother▪ ever complain of any such pain∣ful Attraction. 2. The womb is so small in empty women, that it cannot extend it self to the Diaphragma, tho' it should be vio∣lently dragg'd up by the hand; or at∣tenuated by extraordinary Extension in∣to the thinnest Membrane that can be. 3. In a Woman with Child, tho' it be large, yet no rational man will say, that in an hysteric Suffocation the womb with the birth included in it, is able to ascend to the Diaphragma and the Throat. 4. In the dissected Bodies of those that have dy'd of the hysteric Passion, of which I have dissected many, I have often observ'd that neither the womb was swell'd, nor any way remov'd out of his place, tho' while they liv'd, at the very last gasp they have complain'd extream∣ly of its ascent to the Diaphragma, and their very Throats. Nay more, in the said Distemper I have rarely met with any fault in the womb, but have ound it in one or both Stones. XXIX. The Globe or SubstanceWhat as∣cends or ri∣ses up in sits of the Mo∣ther, is not the womb. which is said to ascend from the lower Belly to the Stomach and higher, is not the Womb, nor, as Riolanus be∣lieves, the Stones or Tubes of the Womb, swelling with putrify'd Seed, and violently agitated up and down; for those parts are not so loose nor so bigg, as to ascend above the Stomach, or to be felt, as big as a Hen or a Goose∣egg; but the Intestines or Guts, which are struck and torn by some malignant and sharp Vapors, ascending from the Womb or the Stones; as in the Epilep∣sie, a sharp malignant Vapour arises from the great Toe, or some other part, to the Head, and there by its Vellica∣tion causes an unusual and vehement Contraction of the Nerves. Now this pain in the Guts being communicated to the Sense in the Head, presently to repel the Mischief, and exclude the Cause, a great number of Animal Spirits are po∣sted into their Fibres, by the swelling of which the Guts are contracted, and then if there be any wind in the Guts, as ge∣nerally there is, they contract themselves about that wind, and by compressing and squeezing it together, make that same Globe. And thus by the Acrimony of the same Vapour ascending higher, the Diaphragma, the Muscles of the Throat and Jaws, and other parts, are contracted by the copious influx of Animal Spirits, whence proceeds that Suffocation. Nor does the hard binding of a broad Swathe or a long Napkin about the belly avail in such a case, to hinder the ascent of that same Substance or Globe which wo∣men take to be their womb, any other∣wise, than only because that by means of that hard binding, the copious ascent of that sharp malignant Vapour, ari∣sing from the womb or stones, is hin∣der'd, which Vapour being then de∣tain'd below that Ligature, is dissipa∣ted by the heat of the surrounding parts.
XXX. Here by the way we areWhether Hysterical Effects a∣rise from the Sweet∣bread Iuice? to take notice, that Francis de le Boe Sylvius, with whom Regner de Graef, agrees in this Particular, does not acknowledg the forementioned cause of the Hysteric Passion, but has imagined another quite different; that is to say, that the Fault of the Pan∣creatic Iuice is the only cause of the Hysteric Symptomes aforesaid, and so most couragiously rejects the Opi∣nions in this case of all the antient and most of the modern Physicians, and excuses the Womb and spermatick Parts from being the Occasion of those Symptoms. But altho' some Symp∣toms having as it were some Similitude with some hysteric Effects, may some∣times be occasioned by the defects of the Pancreatic Juice, which I am un∣willing altogether to deny, yet by di∣ligent Observation they may be suffi∣ciently distinguished one from the o∣ther, and I my self have observ'd 'em no less in Men than in Women: never∣theless always to accuse the unfortunate Pancreas of this Miscarriage seems a little too hard, when the Dissections of Women, as well by my self as others, many times instructed us, that the Sweet∣bread had no share many times in those hysteric Affections, as being altogether sound and perfect; but that the Fault lay in the Stones, that were very much swell'd, sometimes one, and sometimes both, half as bigg as a Hens Egg, some∣times ill coloured, and full of a viru∣lent Liquor; and when as also it has been observed that in such a uterine Suffocation, that all the Symptomes have ceased upon Copulation, or the evacuation of Seed upon the Midwife's digitizing the part affected; and that by the use of moderate Coition the re∣turn of the Fit has been prevented, whereas the same Remedies us'd could no way avail to remove any Distem∣per of the pancreatic Juice either easily, suddainly, well or pleasantly. XXXI. Neither can any thing beNothing to be conclu∣ded from Scents con∣cerning the Motion of the Womb. concluded from Scents in behalf of the said Opinion touching the Moti∣on of the Womb. For the Womb is not endued with Understanding, and consequently is no way affected with this or that good or bad Smell. For it has no Nose, nor any other Organ of Smelling, and therefore makes no Di∣stinction between sweet or stinking Smells: neither covets or loves, or flies or hates either the one or the other; neither is sensible of any Smells as Smells; neither is affected by them, as they are Smells, but by their hot attenuating sharp discussing Quality. XXXII. Now that stinking SmellsWhy stink∣ing Smells are profi∣table. held to the Nostrils abate the Hyste∣ric Fit, it is not because the Womb avoiding the Stench of stinking Smells descends, but because the Sense of smelling being offended by the ill Smells, the Brain contracts it self; and so not only sends fewer Spirits to the contracting Fibres of the Guts, and Nerves of the Mesentery, the Diaphragma, and the Muscles of the Iaws, but also stops the Entrance of the Vapors ascending from the Testi∣cles and Womb into those Parts, and expells those that were entered before. Which stinking Smells by virtue of their singular discussing Faculty dissipate as well in the Brain as in the Jaws, and so the Woman not only recovers herself, but upon the Relaxation of the Mus∣cles of the Jaws is freed from her Fit. XXXIII. On the other side sweetWhy sweet Smells are hurtful. Smells increase the Fit, not because the Womb ascends to meet 'em, but because while their Fragrancie delights the Sense, to the end the woman may the longer enjoy that Pleasure, the Brain dilates it self, and so not on∣ly permits a greater Quantity of Spi∣rits to flow to the Fibres aforesaid, and increase the Fit, but also admits more plentifully a greater Quantity of noxious Vapours ascending from the Womb, through the Pores every way dilated; whence the Effects of the Hysterical Passion, Anxietie, Raving, Drowsiness, and sometimes Epileptic Convulsions, &c. But sweet things being rubb'd about the inside of the Privity, because they attenuate the thick and ma∣lignant Humours, they dilate the Pores, and powerfully discuss. Trincavel, Eustachius Rudius, Her∣cules Saxonia, and Mercurialis give quite different Reasons for this thing, which Daniel Sennertus rejects and refutes: Who nevertheless not being well able to get out of this Labyrinth, and finding that the Womb is not sensible of Smells, nor is affected by 'em as they are Smells, flys to a certain hidden Quality affecting the Womb, imperceptible to
our Senses, which he believes to adhere in such a manner to the Odours, as not to be separated from 'em. But there is no such need in this case of flying to any such occult Quality, when the whole thing is plainly to be made out by ma∣nifest Qualities and Reasons. XXXIV. That the Womb in wo∣menThe Moti∣on of the Womb in Women with Child. with Child extends it self every way, or slips out in falling down, makes nothing to prove its sponta∣neous Motion: For in Women with Child the womb does not simply ascend, but grows and swells upward and round about through all its parts: For as the Birth grows, so its Domicil inlarges it self; and the bigger the Child grows, the bigger, thicker, and more fleshy be∣comes the womb; so that near the time of Delivery it comes to be as thick as a Mans Thumb, or the breadth of two Fingers. Which is not caused by the sole Influence of the Blood and Humours into the Porosities of the womb, but by a real, firm, and fleshy Increment. But there is a great Diffe∣rence between the inlarging of the womb, and its spontaneous Motion. For the one requires a long time, the other is done in a Moment, and should and ought to cease: In the one the Substance of the womb is enlarged and thicken'd, in the other it ought to be extended and attenuated. XXXV. In the falling down of theIts Motion in falling down. Womb, the Motion is not Spontane∣ous, for the Ligaments of it being loosened, and the Substance of it be∣ing affected with a cold and moist Distemper, it falls with its own weight, as all heavy things, and pa∣ralytic Members, having lost their own spontaneous Motion, slip down∣wards. In the same manner as a Man who falls from a high Stee∣ple, does not move himself downward of his own accord, but is mov'd by his own weight against his will. From all which it is apparent, that the womb moves neither upward nor downward, nor tumbles about the lower Belly with a vagous Motion; but sometimes by accident, sometimes through Lankness slides to the sides and lower parts. XXXVI. But against this our Con∣clusionA Child born, the Mother be∣ing dead. another Difficulty opposes it self: That is, if the Womb do not move it self of its own accord, how comes it to pass, that sometimes af∣ter the Death of the Mother, the Birth in the womb is expell'd forth? Thus Bartholinus, in the Treatise entit∣led Phinx Theologico Philosophica, re∣lates the Story of an Infant, that with a loud cry was brought safe and sound out of the womb of the dead Mother. And such was the Birth of Scipio and Manlius, upon the Records of History. Eber also produces an Example of a Child born after the Death of his Mo∣ther; and Rolfinch produces another out of the memorable Speeches of Wolfang Silberus. Three more are cited by Phi∣lip Salmuth; Bartholin also testifies the same thing to have happened at Coppen∣hagen Hist. Anat. Cent. 1. And I remem∣ber another Accident of the same Na∣ture that was told me at Montfurt. Har∣vey also relates another of the same na∣ture, Exercit. de part. A Woman, says he, being dead in the Evening, was left alone in the Chamber, and the next Morning the Child was found between her Thighs, having made its own way. Now as to the Difficulty, we say this, That the Mother being dead, the In∣fant may for some time survive in the womb; so that being alive and strong, and the Orifice of the womb open, and the Genitals being slippery and loose by reason of the preceding Labours, and the Efflux of the serous Matter, it may so happen that the strugling Birth may get forth by its own Endeavours, tho' as∣sisted by no Motion of the dead womb; and that such Births have been frequent∣ly cut out of the Abdomens of the dead Mother is notoriously known. But the first Accident rarely happens tho' fre∣quently it falls out, that women after most bitter Pangs of Childbearing, their Strength failing, fall into a profound Swoon, so that they are thought to be dead, and are sometimes buried for such, tho' it has been known that they have afterwards come to themselves. VVhich often happens to those that are troubled with the Hysteric Passion, and for that reason being thought to be dead, are committed fairly to the Ground, as the Observations of many Physicians make manifest. Iohannes Matthaeus, Physician to the Marquis of Baden, pro∣duces a memorable Example of this. Quaest. medicar. 4. An Accident deser∣ving Compassion, says he, happened at Madrid in Spain, where a noble Matron, of the Family of D. Francis de Lasso, after she had lain in a Trance for three days after a hard Travel, her Relations believing her dead, was carried into the Vault appointed for the Burial of the Fa∣mily.
Some Months after the Vault be∣ing opened, for the Burial of some other Person, the Carcass was found in the same place where it was laid, holding a dead Infant in her right Arm. Whence it appears that the Matron, when she was buried, was not really dead, but had been delivered of an un∣fortunate Infant, which she held in her Arms. Now in such a case I say it may easily happen, that the woman which was thought to be dead the day before, the next day was delivered, and in a shorttime after expired: For in extra∣ordinary Cases of Necessity, Nature sometimes performs wonders. For which Reason, the woman is thought to have been delivered after her Death, who nevertheless was not dead at the time of her Delivery. So that from hence no spontaneous or proper Motion of the womb can be inferred. If after this, any one will be so obstinate as to believe that the womb is alive after the De∣cease of the woman, and is mov'd of it self by its own proper Power, of ne∣cessity with Plato he will split upon a most hard Rock of Absurdity, while he concludes that the womb is a Creature of it self, not living a Life common to the rest of the Body; and hence it will follow that one Creature is composed of two, or that one Creature is the perfecting part of the other. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Parts of the Womb. I. IN the womb particularly areThe parts of the Womb enumera∣ted. to be considered the Bottom, the Neck, the Sheath, and the Si∣nus Pudoris, or Mouth of the Pri∣vity it self. II. The Bottom is the uppermostThe Bot∣tom. part of the womb, properly colled the Matrix, Uterus, or Womb, outward∣ly smooth and equal, besmear'd with a slippery sort of Liquor, in women not separated by any winding Promi∣nencies of Horns, nor so distingui∣shed with Cells, as in most part of Beasts that bring forth living Con∣ceptions, It is harder and thicker in those that are not with Child, about the bigness of a Pigeons Egg, or somewhat bigger, which varies however accor∣ding to the use of Copulation, Con∣ception, and Age. III. It has one Hollowness, yet notIts Cavity. exactly round, but somewhat stretched forth on both sides as it were like a Horn, toward the sides, in Persons deceased, hardly able to hold a Kid∣ney Bean, but without doubt more loose in libidinous Coition; somewhat rugged with wrinkles for the better Retention of the Seed, and in women, before they come to be with Child, besmear'd with a viscous kind of Slime. This is distinguished with a kind of large Seam into the right and left Part: In one of which Males, in the other Females are conceived, as Hippo∣crates and Galen have asserted. In the narrow Streights of this Cavity, the Vivific Spirit of Male Seed infused into the womans Egg, finishes out of it self that wonderful Structure of so many Parts, so that at length a noble Crea∣ture, shortly to ascend Heaven it self, breaks out of this small, close, and na∣sty Prison. IV. The Neck of the womb, whichThe N. many confound with the Sheath, is the lower and narrower part of the womb, containing the innermost Orifice of the womb. VVhich Hole is oblong and transverse, or overthwart, like the Hole in the nut of the Yard; in Vir∣gins narrow and smooth, but in such as have had Children, bigger, and furnish'd as it were with two Lips somewhat hard, or little pieces of Flesh somewhat Tumid, which Lips are hard∣ly or never to be found in Virgins. This Orifice is exactly shut after the Reception of the Seed, and as it were seal'd up with a slimy viscous yellowish Humour, that by the Report of Galen, it will not admit the point of a Probe, neither does it open before the time of Travel, unless by ervent and libidinous Coition, whence sometimes happens Superfoetation. But at the time of De∣livery for the Expulsion of the Birth it dilates and spreads after a miraculous manner like a Rose; and then the fore∣said Lips of the Orifice, as I have ob∣serv'd in women deceased when bigg with Child, equal in thickness half a Finger, very loose, slippery, and hol∣lowWhether the Yard reach the Orifice of the W. like a Spunge. V. Rarely the Yard of a Man in Copulation reaches so far as this Ori∣fice,
which Riolanus however asserts may happen sometimes. It may be, says he, that a longer Yard, when the Orifice is open, at the time when the Flowers flow, being thrust into that Orifice, may be there detain'd and squeez'd, as happens in the Lime∣ing of Bitches; which that it has hap∣pen'd to some, I am credibly inform'd. Thus when I was a Student at Leyden, I remember, there was a young Bride∣groom in that Town, that being over∣wanton with his Bride, had so hamper'd himself in her Privities▪ that he could not draw his Yard forth, till Delmehorst the Physician unty'd the Knot, by cast∣ing cold Water upon the part. Certainly 'tis a wonder how such a narrow Orifice of the Womb can be so much dilated, as to receive the Nut of the Yard; which is the reason some think it impossible to be done, and look upon as Fables, whatever has been said touching this matter. But this is to be said, that in a very fervent Lust, all those obscene parts grow very hot, and are relax'd to that degree, as to receive the Yard with ease: as appears by the Uterine Sheath, which not being heated by libidinous Ardour, is so strait that it will not admit the Yard without diffi∣culty, but in the Act of Venery, thro' the more copious affluency of Blood and Spi∣rits, stiffens, grows warm, and swells, and then becomes so loose, and soft, that it ea∣sily receives the Yard. Therefore it would be no wonder, if in some, through extream Lust, this Orifice of the Womb be so relax'd, as to admit the Yard, e∣specially if the Sheath be short, and the Yard so long as to reach and enter the Sybilline Chink. Nor is this more to be admired at, than that the Orifice it self in time of Labour, should of its own ac∣cord be so relax'd for a large Infant to pass thorough, or for the Chirurgeon to thrust in his Hand and part of his Arm to draw forth the Birth, when necessity requires. VI. Continuous to the bottom andThe sheath. neck of the Womb, is the Greater Neck or Gate of the Womb, com∣monly call'd the Vagina or Sheath; because it receives the Yard like a Sheath. This is a smooth and soft Chanel, e∣very way enclosing and grasping the Yard in Copulation, furnish'd with fleshie Fibres running out in length, by which it is fasten'd to the other adjacent parts; and withinside, full of orbicular furrows or wrinkles, more in the upper part than the lower, and more toward the Privity than toward the Womb, and un∣equal, to procure the greater pleasure of Titillation from rubbing to and fro; of a membranous, and as it were nervous, and somewhat spungy Substance, which swells in the heat of Lust, the better to embrace the Yard; about the length of the middle finger, and as broad as the Intestinum Rectum. Nevertheless, the length, breadth, and loosness of it vary according to the Age of the Person, her Use of Venery, and her natural Consti∣tution: and sometimes this length and breadth of the Sheath varies according to the length or bigness of the Yard in Men. Whence Spigelius thus writes, Annat. l. 8. c. 22. The Sheath every where embraces the Yard, and frames it self to all is Dimen∣sions, so that it meets a short one, gives way to a long one, dilates to a thick one, and straitens to a small one: for Nature so ma∣nages all these differences, in respect to the magnitude of the Yard, that it is needless to endeavour to fit the Tools, or regard their proportion, for that the great Fabri∣cator has every where done it so admi∣rably. In like manner in Virgins, and Wo∣men not so prone to Venery, as in those that never had Children or Labour under an immoderate Flux of their Flowers, or their Whites, the wrinkles are much deeper and thicker, and more numerous; but in Women that have had many Chil∣dren, as also in Harlots often lain with∣al, they are neither so deep nor so nu∣merous, if not many times worn smooth. VII. This Sheath in Infants is re∣markablyThe large∣ness. capacious, tho' the Orifice be very narrow: as it is also in grown Virgins never lain with, which in the first act of Coition is somewhat dilated, with the rupture of the Hymen; but in Women that use but moderate Co∣pulation, it remains still in such a condition, that the Yard passes through a kind of looser sort of Sphincter Muscle toward the innermost Sheath. VIII. It is furnish'd with VesselsThe Vessels of the Sheath. of all sorts. It has two sorts of Arte∣ries: some from the HaemorrhoidalThe Arte∣ries. Arteries, creeping through the lower part of it; others from the Hypoga∣strics descending along the sides of it, and then dispers'd through the whole Sheath, and in the upper part for the
most part adhering to the Arteries of the Womb. IX. Several Veins it sends forth fromThe Veins. its lower part to the Haemorrhoidals; the rest, far more in number, and eve∣ry way dispers'd into its Substance, to the Hypogastrics, into which they empty the Blood which is contain'd in 'em, from thence to be conveigh'd far∣ther to the greater Vessels, and so to the heart. And out of these Blood∣bearing Vessels it is that that same little Net is form'd discover'd by Regner de Graef. X. It receives its Nerves from thoseIts Nerves. that run out from the Os Sacrum. XI. Regner de Graef also writes,Lymphatic Vessels. That he has here observ'd certain very small Lymphatic Vessels, which in their ascent penetrating through the External Substance of the Womb, meet together by degrees, and increase like small Rivulets, till they came to the great Receptacle of the Chylus, and then open themselves into it. Besides these Vessels, there run out in∣to the forepart of the Sheath those Cha∣nels sticking to the Substance of the Uri∣nary Passage, of which hereafter. XII. To the end of it, that is, atThe Neck of the Blad∣der. its first entrance under the Nymphs, both before and atop adheres the neck of the Piss-bladder, wrapt about with the Sphincter, having there an Exit; but in the hinder part it is firmly fa∣sten'd with the binding Muscle of the Intestinum Rectum. Regner de Graef has well observ'd, that the Sphincter of the Bladder em∣braces the lower part of the Sheath with a conveighance of Fibres, three fingers broad; to the end that in Coition it might be able gently to close it self a∣bout the Yard; which Constriction▪ he believes to be mainly helped forward by other Bodies, found out by himself, of which he thus writes: To this Constricti∣on those Bodies contribute after a wonderful manner, which, the fleshie Expansions ari∣sing from the Sphincter, being remov'd, appear on both sides near the Lips of the Privity in the lower part of the Sheath. For they ascend on both sides to the mem∣branous Substance, which is fasten'd to the neighbouring Parts, and to the Clitoris▪ and there terminate and vanish: so that the Bodies of the right and left side have no Communion one with another; as may be seen if either be fill'd with Wine: for the Body of the right side being blown up, the left never swells; neither if the left be fill'd, is the right distended, or the Clitoris ere∣cted. The outward Substance of these con∣sists of a very thin Membrane; the inner, which for the most part, like the inner Sub∣stance of the Clitoris, by reason of the quan∣tity of coagulated Blood, is of a blackish co∣lour, is woven out of several little Fibres and Vessels, united and twisted one among another, which for its resemblance to a Net is call'd Plexus Retiformis, the Net re∣sembling Fold. This Plexus Retiformis, or Net-re∣semblingThe Net∣resembling Fold. Fold is in my opinion there plac'd, that the Orifice of the Sheath may be so much the closer straiten'd, and the Virile Member straitly embrac'd: For being di∣stended with that plenty of Blood, when by reason of the fleshie Fibres of the Sphincter Muscle compressing it, it cannot swell out∣ward, it must swell inwardly, and straiten the Orifice of the Sheath. Now the disten∣sion of these parts will appear to the Eye, if the bloody Vessels running through along the back of the Clitoris be fill'd with a little breath, for then the whole Privity swells together with that same Fold. Now because this Chanel of the Sheath is narrower in Virgins, many, with Soranus, believe that the pain which Virgins feel in the first act of Coition, and the Blood which breaks forth, is caus'd by the Dilatation of this Chanel by the Yard, and the Rupture of the little Veins and Arteries passing tho∣rough it; which others rather ascribe to the Rupture of the Vagina, or Sheath. XIII. The Use of the Vagina, orThe use of the Vagi∣na. Sheath, is to receive the Yard, to em∣brace and gently gird it self about it. To this end it grows warm in the heat of Lust, by reason of the Afflux of Blood and Spirits to it. So that it is somewhat in a manner erected, and dilates it self, the more conveni∣ently to admit the Yard. Whereas, when that heat is over by reason of its laxity and softness, it prevents the en∣trance of the External Air; nor if the woman be in a Bathe, will it admit water to enter the womb: but when a woman has her monthly Purgations, or is troubled with the Whites, as also in time of Labour it does not dilate it self, but the closing sides of it, being press'd down by the weight of the Birth, and Hu∣mours part one from another, and so are compelled to give way to necessary E∣vacuation.
XIV. Now that the Vagina mustThe reason of that use. and ought to be dilated in the same manner as has been said, and with∣out that dilatation would hardly admit the Virile Member, is plain from those women that take no pleasure either in a violent or unvoluntary Coition; but rather on the other side, complain of great pains, by reason of the violent forcing of the sides of the Vagina one from another through the force of the entring Yard: and is yet more apparent from the pain that some Virgins feel that come to be lain withal before they have any understanding, and consequently no understanding to warm them to the Acti∣on. In reference to which Plazzonus relates a very sad Story. Lately, says he, it hap∣pened, that a young man being to lye with his Bride the first night, what with his eager haste, and the robustious intrusion of his Member, he not only broke the neck of her Bladder, but the Intestinum Rectum, withal. For which I could give no other Reason, but that her Privity, not us'd to erection, slagg'd in its first performance of admitting and receiving her Husband's first Addresses. Thus, I remember, that I knew a young Bride in upper Batavia, to whom, by the violent immission of the Yard in the first Act of Coition, and suddain dilatation of the Vagina, there happen'd such a prodigious Flux of Blood, that in three hours she lost her Life, together with her Virginity. And the like unfortunate Accident some years ago befell the Daughter of a cer∣tain Citizen of Utrecht, who was so wounded the first night, that before morn∣ing, the Flux of Blood not being to be stopp'd, she expir'd. XV. Below the insertion of theA thin ner∣vous Mem∣brane call'd Hymen. Neck of the Bladder, in Virgins, there appears a thin nervous Mem∣brane, continuous to the Neck of the Substance, and sticking orbicularly to its sides, interwoven with fleshie Fibres, and furnish'd with many little Arteries and Veins, and bor'd through the middle for the Efflux of the month∣ly Purgations, that in grown Virgins it will hardly admit the top of the lit∣tle finger, which the Ancients call'd Hymen, others the Claustrum of Vir∣ginity, others the Girdle of Chastity. Which being safe and whole, is a cer∣tain sign of Virginity, and being that which must of necessity be broken by the first irruption of the Virile Member, and sens forth a small quantity of Blood, which they call Flos Virginitatis, the Flower of Virginity: but being broken, it vanishes, and never more grows a∣gain. XVI. This Membrane, to theHymen sometimes not perfo∣rated, but like a Sive. great loss of health, has been observ'd by Cabrolius, Vesalius, and others, not thin and perforated, as is before mention'd; but somewhat thick, firm, and contiguous, and sometimes bor'd through like a Sive. So in the Year 1666. in the Month of March, we dis∣sected a young Woman of three and twenty years of Age, wherein we found that same Membrane continuous, not perforated at all, and so firm, that the stoutest Efforts of a lusty young Bride grown could never have pierc'd it. Now when it is so extreamly strong, then in grown Women, there is a stop∣page of the Flowers, and other Evacua∣tions that way, which is the Death of many Virgins, unless cur'd by cutting the Membrane; of which sort of Cure there are several Examples to be found in Benivenius, Wierus, Aquapendens, Hil∣dan, and several others. Here some have been of Opinion, That the said Membrane, hard and unperforated, is a Substance quite different from the Hy∣men, growing there contrary to the order of Nature: whereas in truth it is the Hymen it self, preternaturally harden'd to that Solidity, neither will any man ever find any other. XVII. Many question the truth ofWhether Hymen or no? this Membrane, others deny that ever it was found, and account as Fables whatever has been said concerning the Hymen. Others with Oribasius, Soranus, Fernelius, and Laurentius, conceited Virginity to be nothing else than the wrinkled straitness of the Fe∣male Vagina, overspread with Veins, the dilaceration of which in the first Act of Coition, and the rupture of the little Veins, by means of the same vi∣olence, causes a light Flux of Blood. But Vesalius and Fallopius, most expert Anatomists, have found that Membrane in all Virgins, as have also Columbus, Plater, Picolomni, Iubart, Spigelius, Wierus, Regner de Graef, and several other eminent Persons, to whose Ocular Testimony we must give credit. And not only they, but I my self, at the Dis∣section of a Virgin about two and twen∣ty years of Age, in Decemb. 1671. shew'd that Membrane to several Students in
Physic, resembling a membranous Ring orbicularly plac'd in the Vagina of the Womb, with a hole in the middle as big as the top of the little finger, not exactly round, but somewhat oblong in the upper part. And Swammerdam writes that he took out such a Hymen out of the Body of a Virgin which resembled the flat perforated small Ring, that is put under the Glass in Prospective Glas∣ses, and closes all the rest of the opening of the Tube; as this Membrane shuts up the Tube of the Sheath, and the outer∣most Neck of the Womb. XVIII. It is question'd by some,Whether the want of the Hymen be a sign of Virginity lost. Whether upon the want of that Mem∣brane it may be well and truly said, that such a Maid, where such a defect is found, has been deflowr'd by another Man? Riolanus well observes, That the defect of this Membrane is not al∣ways a sign of deflowr'd Virginity; be∣cause▪ most certainly it is not to be found in all Virgins: For many times lascivi∣ous and wanton Girls break that Mem∣brane unknowingly, in their imitation of Coition, with their Finger, or any other Instrument. Besides, that in some it is so thin and so soft, that easily gi∣ving way in the first Act, it neither makes any resistance against the Bride∣groom, nor does it bleed at all. Besides that, it may be corroded away by the passing thorough of sharp Hu∣mours, or else broken by a fall or a blow, or by the Midwives finger, as in the Hysteric Passion. Now that it may be so relax'd and soften'd by the Afflux of the Flowers, and other Humours, as to give free pas∣sage to the Yard without pain or trou∣ble, and will dilate rather than be dila∣cerated, and consequently never emit a∣ny blood in the first Act, Pinaeus makes out by two Examples, which he cites Lib. 1. de Not. Virgin. c. 6. And thus that Text in Deuteronomy is certainly to be expounded: that is to say, if the red piece of Linnen were shew'd, then there was no doubt to be made of the Virgi∣nity of the Maid: but notwithstanding, if it could not be produc'd, yet however it was not to be concluded that the Maid had lost her Virginity; but before too severe a Sentence be pronounc'd, inqui∣ry was to be made, why that Efflux of Blood fail'd in the first Coition; whether she had been broken up before, or whe∣ther it might not be an effect of any other of those Natural Causes by me recited. But before I leave this place, I cannot but add the elegant Verses of Catullus, which he writes De slore Virginitatis, to wit, concerning that Blood which com∣monly breaks forth upon the Rupture of the Membrane Hymen, in the first Coiti∣on. Ut slos in septis secretis nascitur hortis, Ignotus pecori, nullo contusus aratro: Quem mulcent aurae, firmat Sol, educat im∣ber, Multi illum pueri, multae optavere puellae. Idem cum tenui carptus defloruit ungue. Nulli illum pueri, nullae optavere puellae. Sic Virgo, dum intacta manet, tum chara suis: sed Cum Castum amisit, polluto corpore, slorem, Nec pueris jucunda manet, nec chara puellis. Which I render into English thus: As Flowers in enclosed Gardens grow, Not cropt by Beasts, nor bruised by the Plough: Whose brighter Glories, Solar Beams invest, And Fragrancies by gentle Rain increast; Invites all Human kind, to love, and take: That same, when cropt, its Beauty does forsake. Those that before ador'd it, now despise And slight the once dear Object of their Eyes. Such is a Virgin, while she so remains, While her unspotted Honour she re∣tains. But when that's blasted, she's no more the same; Nor to her Virgin Vertues can lay claim. But like a wither'd Flower is undon, And by all Human kind is pist upon. Those that before ador'd her, now despise, And slight the once dear Object of their Eyes. XIX. Upon this Membrane restThe Myr∣tle form'd little pieces of Flesh. four Carunculae, or little pieces of flesh, call'd the Myrtiformes, Myrtle shap'd, because they resemble the Berries of Myr∣tle; so plac'd, that every one possesses an Angle, and answer one another in a square. One of 'em, bigger than the rest, and forked, belongs to the hole of the Urinary passage, which it shuts when the Urine is voided. The second stands behind opposite to this: the o∣ther two are collateral. These Carunculae, or little pieces of Flesh, in some are shorter, in some long∣er, thicker or slenderer. Which are said to meet together, with certain little
Membranes, in the outermost part, leaving a hole in the middle, whose closing together some take for the Hymen Membrane. XX. They are said to be appointedTheir vse. for Pleasure and Titillation while their being swell'd and puff't up, straitens and bewitchingly squeezes the Yard. These Caruncles are so describ'd by several Anatomists, as if they were to be found in all Women; when there is on∣ly one to be found in Virgins, but all four are to be found in Persons deflowr'd. But as for the second Membrane, made by the closing of these Caruncles, over and above the Hymen, I shall believe it when any Body shews it me. Riolanus, the most accurate Anato∣mist of his time, not without reason suspects those three lesser Tunicles, not to be real little pieces of Flesh, but little swellings or warts proceeding from the Rupture of the Hymen, and the wrink∣ling the Vagina of the Privity: and re∣ports that he has found that wrinkled roughness altogether levell'd for the pas∣sages of the Child, in Women that have been deliver'd six or seven days, which, were they true little pieces of Flesh, would preserve their shape and substance in the distension of the Neck of the Womb; or at least some sign of 'em would re∣main, whereas there is nothing to be seen of 'em, but when the Privity is a∣gain reduc'd to its accustom'd straitness. He adds, that these three little Bodies, were they real little pieces of Flesh, would be a great impediment to Women in La∣bour, for that their roughness and ine∣quality would hinder the Egress of the Infant. He proves the truth of this As∣sertion by Ocular view and experience, affirming that in the Dissections of Vir∣gins, after he had separated the Nymphs, he found a fleshie or circular Membrane, perforated with a little hole in the mid∣dle, big enough for a Pea to go through, which Membrane being torn, he saw no other Caruncles, but one always apply'd to the Orifice of the Bladder; but the other three he never found; and conje∣ctures the foremention'd Caruncle to be the Extremity of the Sphincter of the Bladder. XXI. Therefore in regard they onlyThe Wo∣mans Pri∣vities. are to be found in married People, the Hymen being broken, and not in Vir∣gins, he strongly infers that those three lesser Caruncles, are nothing else than the Angular parts of this broken Mem∣brane, pucker'd up into a heap by the wrinkling of the fleshie Vagina. And thus has this most excellent Person, by his great Experience, unfolded those doubts, which have hitherto occasion'd so many Disputes among Anatomists concerning the Hymen, and the Carunc'es. XXII. The outward part of theThe out∣ward part of the Womb, or Vulva. Womb, call'd in Greek , in Latin Pudendum Muliebre, Membrum Genitale, and Vulva, as it were Valva, or a Folding Door, being clos'd with two Valva's and Nymphs like Folding Doors; also Orificium Exterius, the Outward O∣rifice, and Cunnus, from , to conceive; in English, the Womans Privities or Quaint, is seated in the foremost Region of the Share-bone. XXIII. In Virgins it is much lessThe big∣ness. and thicker than in those that have had Children, and in those that are ar∣riv'd at years of Maturity, is cover'd with Hair above and on each side, while Nature endeavours to hide the obscene Part. Spigelius believes there may be a cer∣tain Judgment made of the bigness of the Privity by several External Marks. For, says he Anat. l. 1. c. 10. the propor∣tion of the Womans Privity is to be taken for the most part from her mouth: for they that have wide mouths and large eyes, have generally large Privities; and I have ob∣serv'd by manifold Experience, that all thick and fat Women that have large Breasts and Bellies, have also large Privi∣ties. On the other side, they that have lit∣tle flat Breasts, a narrow Mouth, a peeked Chin, and thin Lips, have likewise straiter and narrower Privities. XXIV. The outward Lips appearThe Lips. first to the Eye, which toward the Hair are somewhat thicker and higher rais'd, and there closing, and more protube∣rant, compose the Mount of Venus,The Mount of Venus. as being seated at the Threshold of Ve∣nus's Temple, which they that offer to Venus must be forc'd to enter. XXV. They are compos'd of a pecu∣liarOf what they are composed▪ fleshie Substance, and in some measure spungy, which in heat of Lust swells, and at the time of Delivery becomes very soft and tumid. It was my hap to see in two Women newly deliver'd of the Birth, when the Secun∣dine follow'd, their Lips so loosen'd, and a great part of the Uterine Liver thrust it self into them; whereupon the Mid∣wife,
not understanding what such an unusual Accident meant, the Physician and Surgeon were call'd, who observing the Lips to be stuff't with the said Liver, and for that reason unusually swell'd, and withal, as it were a piece of black Flesh budding forth, thought the Pri∣vity to be torn in the Labour, and the part to be already gangren'd. There∣upon believing the Woman to be in ve∣ry great danger, I was sought for. But when I came to view the Privity, I pre∣sently observ'd that black Flesh to be a part of the Vterine Liver, which had thrust it self into the Lips, being inward∣ly dilated, which being drawn out with a pair of Nippers, both Women were freed from the imaginary fear of any Gangrene. XXVI. Riolanus attributes to theseA slight Motion in the Lips. Lips a slight Motion of Dilatation and Constriction, which he affirms to have been often experienced in lustful Women, stimulated more than usually with the stings of Venery. And farther, he says that the Constriction is made by the Muscle of the Clitoris, extended under the Lips of the Privity; and the Dilatation by the other Muscle, which is under the Ligament. Lindan will rather have these two Muscles ex∣tended from the Sphincter of the Podex through the Groyns, and being thin and broad, to be inserted into the Internal Front of the Lips, and upon the Evacua∣tion of Urine, that the Lips are by them divided, and after pissing clos'd again. XXVII. Near to the Lips standThe Nymphs. two fleshie soft Productions, call'd Nymphae, Nymphs, or Wings; in Greek . These arise at the joyning together or commissure of the Share-bones, where they are joyn'd with an acute Angle, and constitute the wrinkl'd fleshie Production, that clothes the Clitoris, like the Praeputi∣um; and descend about half way, the Lips every where touching one another for the most part, and end in their lower part with an obtuse Angle, as being almost of a Triangular Figure; resembling somewhat in colour that part of the Cock's Comb, that hangs under his Throat. XXVIII. They are of a ruddy Sub∣stance,Their Sub∣stance. partly fleshie, partly membra∣nous, soft, puffie, clad with a thin Tunicle, different in thickness and bigness, according to the diversity of Age; being generally about a fingers joynt in length, and thin, nor very broad in Virgins till five and twenty years of Age. In those of riper years, especially such as have lain with Man, and born Children, they become thicker and broader; but never descend above half way the Lips. These very seldom grow luxuriant in our Regions; but a∣mong the Egyptians, by the report of Galen, frequently grow out to such a length, that through the shame and trouble which they cause, they are forc'd to make use of Incision. XXIX. These Nymphs, togetherTheir Ves∣sels. with the Lips, besides the little Nerves from the sixth Pair, have very many remarkable Vessels dispers'd through the outer and inner Substance. For they receive Arteries from the Branch of the Inner Iliac (call'd the Privity-Branch) conveighing plenty of Blood in the heat of Lust, which causes 'em to swell. They also send Veins to the Privity-Vein, into which, when the heat of Lust is over, they again empty their collected Blood. Which Veins in Women with Child sometimes swell to that degree, that they resemble those Swellings, call'd Varices. XXX. The use of the Lips andTheir Use. Nymphs is to close and straiten the Entrance of the Privity; and to pre∣serve the Womb from the Injuries of the External Air. Concerning the Lips and Nymphs, IAn Obser∣vation. observ'd an unusual Accident at Nim∣meghen, in the year 1640. A certain Wo∣man, a Seaman's Wife, together with her Daughter about four and twenty years of Age, and after she had shed a great many Tears, out of her modesty, made her complaint, That her Daugh∣ter was uncapable of Man, and asked me if I could remove the Obstacle. She told me that her Daughter's Privity, presently after she was born, was well shap'd, but being after that put to Nurse, and carelesly look' after, her Buttocks, Privities, and Parts adjoyning, would be miserably excoriated by the Acrimony of the Urine and Excrement, by which means her Privity clos'd together, lea∣ving only a little hole for the passage of her Urine and Flowers. When I view'd the Part, I found the Lips and the Nymphs were exactly grown together, as if there never had been any passage before. Thereupon thrusting an Iron
Probe in at the hole, I found that the closure was only superficial, but that with∣in there was nothing grown preternatu∣rally together. Sending therefore for Henry Chatborn the Surgeon, I order'd him to make an Incision upon the Iron Probe thrust into the hole, and then to cure up the Wound; which was done in a few days: insomuch that the Maid in three Months after being married to a Husband, there were no farther Com∣plaints of the narrowness of the Privity, and the next year she was deliver'd of a lusty Infant. XXXI. Between the closing Lips,The Cleft of the Pri∣vity. appears the Rift, or Clift of the Pri∣vity: and the Wings and Lips being separated, the Cleft appears still deep∣er, which the Moderns call the Dike, or the Great Cleft, to distinguish it from the first mention'd. This runs a∣long from the Share bones to the fold∣ing of the Buttocks and the Podex, di∣stant from it about a thumbs breadth, and the more backward it bends, the broader and deeper it is; and forms as it were a hollow Valley, or a hollow Dike, representing the shape of a small Ship, and terminates in the Border of the Ori∣fice of the Uterine Vagina. This same space, which is generally call'd Inter∣fmineum, and Interforamineum, we have observ'd in hard Labours most terribly dilacerated, and by that means the Cleft or lower part of the Vagina has gap'd to the very Podex, difficultly cur'd in some, and in others, never. Into the middle of the Dike enters the Orifice of the neck of the Womb, or Vagina, or Chanel that receives the Yard. To which, at the upper part adjoyns the urinary Passage, through which the Urine flows out of the Bladder. Which Orifice of the neck of the Womb or Vagina, is sometimes so straitened by Chaps and Fissures, or the Scar of some Exulceration, that never afterwards they are able to lie with their Husbands. Sometimes also after violent Labour be∣ing dilacerated, it closes up altogether, and leaves the woman unperforated, or else with a very small Hole. Of which Bauhinus produces several Examples, Anat. l. 1. c. 39. And Cabrolius in his Observ. 23. relates the Stoppage of this Orifice in a Chirurgeon, and how it was open'd again by a Chirurgeon. XXXII. Now a little higher in theThe Clito∣ris. middle part between the Wings, there juts out a small Particle called in Greek , Clitoris, , or , to wantonize and lasciviously to handle a Womans Privities. Avicen calls it Albathara, or a Twigg. By Albucasis it is called Tentigo. For it answers the Virile Twig, or Rod, in Shape, Situation, Substance, Repletion with Spirits and Erection, differing only in bigness and length. XXXIII. It is a small round BodyIts Sul∣stance. consisting of two nervous Portions black within and spungy, rising on both sides from the Excrescence of the Huckle-Bone, as from two Thighs meeting together at the Conjunction of the Share-Bone. Which Beginnings, or Thighs Riolanus calls the white Li∣gaments. To these Thighs the round Liga∣ments of the Womb reach with their Ends, which formerly being led astray by Spigelius, I took to be the Vessels conveighing the Seed. XXXIV. The Extremity or NutThe Ten∣tigo. of the Clitoris, is called Tentigo, having a Substance like that of the Nut of a Mans Yard, which is co∣vered with a certain thin Skin, like the Praeputium, proceeding from the Conjunction of the Wings. At the top there appears a long hole like the hole of a Mans Yard, but not pervi∣ous or bor'd quite through. XXXV. The Clitoris like a MansIts Mus∣cles. Yard, has four Muscles serving for the same Office, two round above ari∣sing from the Hip-Bone; and two be∣low, broad and fleshy, proceeding from the Sphincter of the Podex, which creeping backward through the Lips of the Privity, are fasten'd to the Clitoris. The use of which Reg∣ner de Graef believes to be not so much for the Erection of the Clitoris as for the Contraction of the Orifice of the Uterine Vagina. Pinaeus acknowledges only three Muscles. XXXVI. It receives Arteries fromIts Arte∣ries and o∣ther Ves∣sels. the Privitie-Arteries, which in the heat of Concupiscence and Coition, bring spirituous Blood in great Quan∣tity, which afterwards the privity Veins carry back to the greater Veins. Besides these Regner de Graef has observ'd such like Vessels to reach from the Haemmorrhoidals to the Clitoris. Now these Vessels are communicated to the Clitoris, where the two meeting they constitute its third body, whose Sub∣stance
they enter only with small little Branches, and together with the Ani∣mal Spirit flowing through the Nerves, cause it to swell in the height of Concu∣piscence. The same Regner de Graef observes that the Veins of the right and left side for the most part are clos'd to∣gether by Anastomoses, before they de∣scend to the sides of the Clitoris, and run forward to the Net resembling Fold and other parts of the Pudendum; but that in the Arteries of each side Anasto∣moses are rarely to be found. XXXVII. Besides the Vasa San∣guifera,Its Nerves. there is also a small Nerve, proceeding from the sixth Pair, which endues it with an exquisite Sense of Feeling, and occasions that pleasing Titillation in the act of Venerie, so that the chiefest Seat of Womens Plea∣sure in Coition is in this part. VVhence by Bauhinus it's call'd the Sting of Venus; by Columbus and others the Sweetness of Love. Nevertheless the most charming and voluptuous Titillation lies in the rubbing of the Tentigo or Nut. XXXVIII. Very rarely, or hardlyA bonie Clitoris. ever do we hear of what Bauhinus has observed concerning a Clitoris, that it became bony in a Venetian Curte∣san; which by reason of its extream Hardness did so offend and hurt her Lo∣vers in Coition, that many times by reason of Inflammations they were for∣ced to fly to the Surgeon for Help. XXXIX. A little below the Clito∣ris,The Exit of the Vri∣nary Pas∣sage. above the Mouth of the Uterine Vagina, between the Nymphae, the exit of the Urinary Passage is Con∣spicuous; which being somewhat pro∣minent, and composing the superior Caruncle, is the Extremity of the Sphincter of the Bladder, by means of which Sphincter, after the Urine evacu∣ated, the Orifice of the bladder is again drawn together and closed up. XL. The neck of the Bladder inThe neck of the Blad∣der. grown Women is the breadth of two Fingers in length, wrapt about by the Sphincter Muscle, which enfolds the whole length of it. XLI. But the neck it self consistsThe Pro∣states of Women. within of a thin Membrane, which the Membranous Substance girdles round, being as it were glandulous, whitish, and about the length of one Finger thick, and full of Pores, especially near the Exit of the Urinary Passage, through which several larger Chanels running, terminate near the Exit of the Urinary Passage, and in the fore∣part of the Uterine Vagina. Some there are who think that the virious, se∣rous, and flegmatick Humours that day∣ly flow from many women, are evacu∣ated through these Chanels; but Reg∣ner de Graef, a most accurate Anato∣mist, not without good Reason ascri∣bing to that thicker Substance encompas∣sing the Urethra the use of the Prostates, believes that there is bred therein a kind of seminal and somewhat slimy Juice, endued with a certain Acrimony and Saltness, which causes Desire, and makes women Salacious, and breaking forth through those little Chanels and Pores, renders the Privities delightfully Slippe∣ry in Coition. The same Regner de Graef, who believes that viscous Matter coming from the Yard in the Gonorrhea, to be seldom evacuated from the Stones or seminal Vessels, but most frequently from the Stones, believes also that in women troubled with the Gonorrhea, the same matter is evacuated out of these Parts alone, which he calls Prostates, and confirms it by this Example. Now that the Gonorrhea, says he, slows from the Glandulous Body, and through the little Sewers in and about the Urinary Passage, the Dissection of a certain Wo∣man infected with this Disease made ma∣nifest, for her Womb and Vagina being untouch'd, we found only the Glandulous Body or Prostates to be faulty. XLII. But the said Orifice or neckThe Orifice may be di∣lated. of the Bladder, by reason of the soft∣ness of the Substance, may easily be dilated, for Stones of an indifferent bigness to be expell'd and brought a∣way by the great quantity of Urine rushing out at the same time with lit∣tle or no Trouble; or so that the same Stones, Dilatation being first made by the help of Instruments, may be drawn out of the bladder without any Incision, as we find it many times successfully done by your Lithotomists. XLIII. The Clitoris is usually butThe Big∣ness. small, and lies hid under the Nymphs in the middle fatter part of the Pri∣vities, or in the top of the larger Cleft: Afterwards in grown People it grows somewhat prominent, and when it swells it stirs up Concupi∣scence. Riolanus well observes that in living People, where all things swell with
Heat and Spirit, this Part is manifestly to be seen, especially in the more Lasci∣vious, that have more voluptuously addicted themselves to Copulation; but that in dead women it hardly appears, by reason of the smallness of its bulk, that falls upon the Dissipation of the Spirits. And yet we publicly shew'd it at the Theater in the dissected body of one not above twenty four Years of Age. XLIV. Sometimes it happens, thatIts Irregu∣larities. contrary to the common Course of Nature, this part grows out much more in length like the Yard of a Man, so that Women have made an ill use of it, by copulating with others of their own Sex, hence called Con∣fricatrices, but anciently Tribades. Thus Platerus asserts that he saw a wo∣mans Clitoris, equalling in length and thickness the Neck of a Goose. Riola∣nus and Schenkius have observed it as long as a Mans little Finger. Regner de Graef saw a Girl new Born, whose Cli∣toris had such a Resemblance to a Mans Yard, that the Midwife and the rest of the women there present, took it for a Boy; and gave it a Mans Name in Baptism. Plempius writes of one Hele∣na, that lay with several Women and vitiated several Virgins with that Part. I my self in a certain woman at Mont∣fort saw a Clitoris as long and thick as the ordinary Yard of a Man, which happened to grow to that extent, after she had lain in three or four times. XLV. This is that part which inHerma∣phrodites. Hermaphrodites thus prodigiously en∣creasing forms the Virile Member, which appears from hence, that in the slit of the Nut there is no conspicuous Perforation to be seen; tho' the Stones seem to joyn to it at the sides without. Such an Hermaphrodite I remember I once saw in France near Anjou about 28 Years of Age; who was bearded about the Mouth like a Man, yet went in womens Apparel, and for a small mat∣ter turn'd up her Coats to any one that had a mind to satisfy Curiosity. In this Party, the Clitoris at the upper end of the Privity, was grown out of the Pri∣vity about half a Fingers length, and as thick as a Mans Yard, with a Nut, Bri∣dle, and Foreskin, as in Men; only that the Slit of the Nut was not perforated. Such another English Hermaphrodite, about 22 Years of Age, in the Year 1668, we saw at Utretcht, whose Gover∣nour reported that he was born a perfect Girl, but that when she came to be about five or six Years of Age, her Genitals began to be changed, and by that time she came to be ten Years old, her Yard became conspicuous. We saw the Yard hanging forth about half a Finger long, but the Slit of the Nut was not persora∣ted, otherwise not unlike a Mans Yard, the Praeputium of which was form'd by the Closure of the Nymphs: which half covered and uncovered the Nut as in Men. And this Yard would upon ve∣nereal and lascivious Thoughts erect it self a Fingers length, as his Governour reported. In each of the Lips of the Privity, as in so many Cods, one Stone was contained. A little below the Cli∣toris, was the urinary Passage, and the Sheath of the Womb. His Governour related that he had his monthly Cour∣ses at set times like other women; and in height of Lust the Seed would flow forth: but that the Hermaphrodite him∣self could not tell whether it flow'd through his Yard, or from his Female Privities. His Duggs, that were but small, and his hairy Breast and Thighs, seem'd to denote something Masculine, as also his Voice and his Hair, which was very thick and curling, with the Beard apparently beginning to shoot forth upon his Lips. At first he wore womans Apparel, but the next Year, when I saw him again at my own House, by reason his Beard grew so notorious, he altered his Habit, and put on Mans Apparel. From whence it appears that these Hermaphrodites, are not such as partake of both Sexes, but are really women, whose Genitals are not right∣ly form'd, while the Stones fall down into the Lips of the Privity, and the Clitoris grows out to an extraordinary Length. XLVI. Here arises a very weightyWhether the Seed pass tho∣rough the Clitoris. Question, whether your Confricatrices and Hermaphrodites, lying with other wo∣men, spend any Seed through their Cli∣toral Yard, and eject it into the Womb? I must confess I was once so much for the Affirmative, that I maintained it in the first Edition of my Anatomy: think∣ing it might be confirm'd by Reason and Experience. By Reason: Because I thought it no more a Wonder for the Seed to pass the invisible Pores of the Slit of the Clitoris, than in Men for it to pass from the Stones to the Urinary Vesicles, through the invisible Pores of the Vasa deferentia. Add to this, that those female Rubbers do not feel less Pleasure in that Coition, than Men in
their Copulation with Emission of Seed. By Experience: Because I my self formerly knew a woman, of no mean Quality, that made her Complaints to me, that when she was young, and feeling the Itch of Lechery, she was wont often to rub her Clitoris with her Finger, and so was wont to provoke her self to spend her Seed with great delight: But in progress of time this ill Custom turn'd to a Distem∣per: So that if her Privity were never so little touch'd either by the Cushion where she ate, or by her own Drawers when she walk'd, or by any other man∣ner of way, presently her Seed flew from her whether she would or no, nei∣ther was she able to retain it at her own Pleasure; upon which she came to me for Remedy. She told me moreover that she could certainly feel her Clitoris swell and itch upon the least wanton Thought, and that she certainly believ'd, that the Seed which was provok'd by the rubbing of her Finger flew out from that part, meaning her Clitoris. Here comes in a remarkable Story, related by Iacob Duval Tract. de Her∣maph. with the whole Proceedings of the Court upon the Tryal: Where among other things he reports, that a certain Widow woman, who had two Sons li∣ving, by her deceased Husband, and was married the second time, through Ignorance, to a Hermaphrodite, confes∣sed that the said Hermaphrodite one Night entered her Body four times, and so strenuously and naturally did her busi∣ness, that she never lay with her Husband with more Pleasure. Which Reasons and Examples seem'd formerly to me to prove that your female Rubbers and Hermaphrodites lying with other women, eject their Seed out of the Clitoris, as Men out of the Yard. But because in this Age Anatomy grows still to more and more Perfection, through the great Diligence and Labour of many eminent Persons, hence it came to pass that by frequent Examination and Inspection, I found the round Ligaments of the Womb not to be the ways through which the Seed could be carried to the Clitoris; nor that there was any Ure∣thra, nor any thing like it in the Clitoris; not that any Seed could pass through its Slit, and therefore of necessity it behov'd me to recant my former Opinion; fin∣ding the forementioned Reasons and Examples not sufficient to defend it. For as to that woman that provoked forth a seminal Matter by the rubbing of the Cli∣toris, 'tis very likely that that same vis∣cous Matter flew out of the foresaid Prostates, into the Vagina, as it is frequent with Men to spend upon rubbing their own Yards; and then bursting forth of the Mouth of the Sheath, moisten'd the Clitoris, which deceiv'd the woman and made her think that the Seed flew out of the Clitoris. The same is to be said of other female Rubbers exercising other women, as also of Duvals Hermaphro∣dite, whose wife thought he had spent into her body through his extended Clitoris. VVhich Error proceeded from hence, that while her Husband rubbed the sheath of her womb with his Clito∣ral Yard, the viscous Matter being pro∣voked out of her Prostates by the Plea∣sure of Frication, flew out into her Va∣gina, with which Pleasure the woman being ravished and deceiv'd, thought it had proceeded from the Seed ejected into her womb by the Hermaphrodite. But all these things being more seriously considered, most certain it is, that no Seed of women is evacuated through the Clitoris. XLVII. Thus having describ'd all. the Parts of Women serving for Ge∣neration; here are two Questions to be answered. First, Whether the Ge∣nitals of Women differ from those of Men but only in Situation. Second∣ly, Whether a Woman may be changed into a Man. XLVIII. As to the first, GalenWhether the Geni∣tals of Men and Women dif∣fer in no∣thing but in Situati∣on. seem to demonstrate and teach it, in his Book de usu Part. with whom many both Grecians and Arabians take part, who unanimously affirm that the Genitals of Women differ on∣ly in Situation: The one by reason of the colder temper of Women and weakness of Nature being conceal'd within, the other by reason of the ex∣traordinrry Heat and Strength of Na∣ture, being thrust forth of the Body. For that if the womb should be thrust forth, it would hang with the inside turn'd the outside, and the external smooth and equal part would become the innermost, and the inner rugged and unequal side would become outermost, and so form a Cod, and the Stones that cleave to the sides within the Abdomen, would be contained in that innermost Scrotum, which Scrotum were to be di∣stinguished with a Seam in the middle, as the womb is distinguished within, to which the Clitoris being remov'd would form a Yard above it. Or if the Mans Cod should be forc'd toward the inner
Parts, then it must have the form of the womb within the Abdomen; and the Stones contain'd therein must cleave to the sides on each side, and the Yard drawn in, must be hid like the Cli∣toris. XLIX. But tho' this most ingeniousThe instru∣ments of Generation differ in each Sex, being com∣par'd. Contrivance be adorn'd with some pro∣bability, yet certain it is, that the Genital Parts of both Sexes, tho' they seem in some things to resemble one another, but only in Situation, never∣theless they differ very much in many things. For 1. in women, the Arteries and Veins are much shorter, and more twisted than in men. 2. They want the Pyra∣midal Body form'd out of the Veins and Arteries, before their entrance into the Stones. 3. Secondly they want the Pa∣rastates and Seminal Vessels. 4. Their Prostates are of a different shape from those of men. 5. The Tubes are wanting in men; and the Vasa Deferentia are of another sort than those in women. 6. The Testicles differ in bigness and shape; being much less, more moist, and lither in women than in men. 7. The Substance of mens Stones consists of Seminary Vessels (with some few Vasa Sanguifera) interwomen one within another; but the Stones of women con∣sist of Membranes, Vessels, Cups, Vesicles, and other Bodies. 8. The Clitoris dif∣fers very much from the man's Yard in length and thickness; neither is it per∣forated with any conspicuous hole like the Yard. 9. There is no Urethra in the Clitoris. 10. The Scrotum differs ex∣treamly from the Substance of the womb, as being that which in the womb is thick, compacted and nervous, and in women with child grows to the thickness of two fingers: in the Cod the skin is soft, wrinkled, and never increases in thick∣ness. 11. In Brutes, who have a horn∣ed womb, it is apparent, that the womb turn'd inside outside, will not form a Scrotum, tho' their Males have a Scro∣tum like the Scrotum of men: in their Females nothing like a Clitoris or a Yard was ever yet discover'd: or if the Scrotum should be turn'd to the inner parts, could the Yard supply the place of a Clitoris, seeing that in a Dog, a Wolf, a Fox, and several other Creatures, the Yard is inwardly bony. So that if it were true, that the Genitals in men differ'd only in Situation, the same also would happen in Brutes; which, as is obvious to any man, neither is nor can be. When it is apparent that the secret Parts of men and women differ not only in Situation, but in Substance, Bigness, and Use. L. As to the latter, Whether wo∣menWhether women may be chang'd into men▪ may be chang'd into Men, Expe∣rience seems to confirm it as a thing most certain, and the Authority of Histories: For there are several Stories of Women chang'd into Men. Pliny writes, that in the Consulship of Licinius Crassus, and Cassius Longinus, there was a Child born at Cassinum of a Virgin, which by the command of the South∣sayers, was carried into a Desart Island. He also relates what Mutianus asserts, That he saw a Maid at Argos, who after she was married, became so much a Man, with Beard and all other Virile parts, that she afterwards married a Wife: and that of the same sort he saw a little Boy at Smyrna. Pliny adds, That he saw in Africa, L. Cossicius, a Citizen of Trisidis, now Tensert, who being a Female, and married, upon the very Wedding-day was changed into a Male. Among our Modern Authors Cardinal Volaterran under Alexander VI. attests that he saw a Virgin, who had a Yard that fell down upon her Nuptial day. Pontanus tells us of a Woman of Cajeta, a Fisherman's Wife, that became a Man, after she had been fourteen years a Wo∣man: and the same thing happen'd to E∣milia the Wife of Antony Spensa, a Citi∣zen of Eboli in the Kingdom of Naples; ten years after she was married. With several other Examples brought, Duval, Merula, Donatus, and others, which seem to confirm the Affirmative part. But if we consider the thing more narrowly, it is sufficiently apparent that all Historians that wrote those Stories, gave too much credit to Vulgar Re∣port, without inquiring as they ought to have done, into the truth of the Mat∣ter. LI. 1. We read that it has so fall'nObservati∣ons. out, that some Males, tho' very rare∣ly, have had their Yards that have lain latent within the Abdomen; as we our selves have seen the Stones lye hid in the Groyns more than once; and hence the Midwives and Women find∣ing the Yard as it were laid up in a Cleft, took the Infant that was born to be a Girl, and took care that it should be baptiz'd as a Girl: but after∣wards Youth and Puberty coming on, the latent Pintle swelling in the heat of Lust, broke loose from its narrow Consinement. But such Men were not
Women before, tho' so adjudg'd by ig∣norant Women, and Men altogether as idle, till their Genitals making way in the heat and fury of libidinous desires, they were thought to be chang'd out of Women into Men; and such were all the Accidents mention'd in Pliny and Volaterrane, in which Examples there is no more to be observ'd, but that the Yard broke forth upon the Nuptial day, when loose Desires and amorous Flames had warm'd and heated all the Bo∣dy. 2. As we have already observ'd, in some Women of full Age, the Clitoris sometimes grows to the bigness of a Man's Yard, insomuch that they are a∣ble to lye with others of their own Sex; and when that happens, what wonder is it if the ignorant Vulgar perswade them∣selves that such Women are changed in∣to Men: and such as these seem to be the Accidents related by Pontanus. 3. Many times it happens, especially among Persons of great Quality, that the Mothers apprehensive of some danger, either from Enemies, or loss of Inheri∣tance, warily and prudently conceal the Male Sex, dissemble a Boy to be a Girl, and to that purpose all the time of their Childhood, put the Boy into Girls ap∣parel: but at length the Sons contemning their Female habit, have put on Man's clothes, which might cause a report a∣mong the Vulgar, that the Girls were chang'd into Boys. Thus in the time of Ferdinand the first King of Naples, Ca∣rola and Francisca, the two Daughters of Lewis Guerna, were said to have chang'd Sex at fifteen years of Age. I should rather have said, had chang'd their Apparel: For no question, but to conceal their Sex, so long they went in Womens Apparel, which at fifteen years of Age they threw off; fearing otherwise to be betray'd by their Voices, and the budding forth of their Beards, what∣ever Fulgosus invents to the contra∣ry. 4. Sometimes it happens that some are born Hermaphrodites, and because it is counted an abominable thing to partake of both Sexes, their Mothers make it their business to hide that defect from their very Cradles, and to bring up such Children in Womens habit; but then, if at any time appinted their Beards be∣gin to grow, they are forc'd to change their habit: and so are said to be chang'd from Men to Women. 5. Sometimes it happens through an extraordinary change of Temper that some Women come to have Beards and deep Voices, which is the reason the Common People think 'em to be chang'd out of Women into Men. Thus Hip∣pocrates l. 6. tells us of two Women, Phaetusa, the Wife of Pythias, and La∣rissa the Wife of Gorippus, who by rea∣son of the suppression of their monthly Flowers, became deep voiced, and beard∣ed like Men. LII. And thus most certain it is,No woman ever chang'd her Sex. that never any Woman chang'd her Sex, or can change it; but that what∣ever Historians have written concern∣ing these Metamorphoses, are all idle and ridiculous Fables: while they, be∣ing over-credulous, were deceiv'd by Vulgar report, and not examining the Truth, as they ought to have done, contrary to what they intended, ob∣truded Falsities upon their Rea∣ders. Lastly, we shall add this, That if Women at any time were ever chang'd into Men, without doubt Men were sometimes chang'd into Women. Which nevertheless was never heard of: and the reason is, Because the Yard being hid up in a Chink resembling the Female Cleft, may swell and break forth in the heat of Youth; and so the Person thought to be a woman, becomes chang'd into a Man: but being once pendant without, can never be drawn back, to form a Woman's Privity. CHAP. XXVII. Of the Constitution and Frame of the Female Genital Parts in Women with Child. THo' the Generative Parts of Wo∣men are so constituted as we have describ'd, yet of necessity there is some∣thing more to be added, how they are alter'd in Women with Child, and to shew the difference between empty Wo∣men and Women with Child. I. The Womb in empty Women isThe womb in empty women. about the bigness of a Wallnut, or a good Pigeons Egg; of a fleshie, ner∣vous, solid, and somewhat hard Sub∣stance, the Concavity within being ve∣ry small; which Form and Constitution it still retains in the beginning of Con∣ception,
when first it clasps it self about the Seed retain'd. II. The Birth encreasing, this Sub∣stanceIn women with child. becomes more soft and spungy; and by degrees, as the birth grows bigger, so the Substance enlarges it self, and the Womb grows thicker. And so the Birth and its Habitation encreases together to that degree, so that at length about the upper part of the bottom, it comes to be as thick as a Man's thumb, or the breadth of two fingers. III. By that time a Woman is halfThe swel∣ling of the Breasts. gone, the Breasts begin to swell, and the Teats being squeez'd, the Milk comes forth at first more watery, after∣wards thicker. At the same time the place above the Paps enlarges circularly, and the Teats before contracted grow more loose and tumid; the Lips also of the Privity swell out fuller and round∣er. IV. The Orifice of the Womb with∣inThe strait∣ning of the Orifice. is clos'd up, and so continues exactly clos'd all the time the woman goes with child, being damm'd up with a kind of viscous Slime; so that nothing can flow out of the womb, nor any thing be admitted into it: unless by chance, in a very lustful Copulation, happening to gape somewhat wider than ordinary, it receives the Male Seed, which occasions a Superfoetation. The same Orifice in the first Months of Child∣bearing, is hard, but afterwards hard and pulpous. V. The womb increasing in bigness,The Situa∣tion of the Guts. the small Guts separate themselves to the sides of it: If the Birth incline more to the right side, the Guts are driven to the left side, and so quite the contrary: and hence it is that women believe they have Twins. At the same time the Caul is forc'd up∣ward; concerning which Riolanus ob∣serves, that if it wrap it self about the Stomach, the woman has no Appetite to her Victuals all the time. VI. The Stones, which in emptyThe Situa∣tion of the Stones. women are rounder and looser, and rest upon the upper part of the womb, in women with child, by reason of the enlargement of the womb, seem to descend; and first to rest upon the middlemost, afterwards upon the low∣ermost sides of the womb. More∣over, after the sixth Month, they be∣came more contracted, flatter, and some∣what long; and the Spermatic Veins are much bigger than the Arteries. VII. The Neck is drawn upward,The condi∣tion of the Neck. longer, but narrower: And two Months before the Birth, the innerThe Relax∣ation of the Orifice. Orifice of the womb becomes more loose and tumid, and by degrees di∣lates it self as the woman grows nearer her time, unfolding it self like a Rose; as if Nature were preparing a way for the Birth to grow forth; in which work she is not a little assisted by the weight and strong motion of the strugling In∣fant. In the last Month the Lips of the Pri∣vity become more soft and more tumid: and the neck or sheath of the womb, be∣ing press'd by the weight of the Infant, is so shorten'd, that the mouth of the womb may be easily felt by immission of the finger. In the last two or three weeks before the woman's time, the foresaid Orifice of the womb is moisten'd with a certain glutinous and viscous Humour, to ren∣der it more loose, and apt to gape, and be dilated without violence, and give the freer passage to the Infant in going forth.Bigness of the Vessels. VIII. From the Stones to the Tubes, the bottom of the womb, and neck, the Vessels are bigger, and more appa∣rent than usual. For Cornelius Gem∣ma observes, that Vessels of the womb it self are more distended and tumid after many Labours. But that seems too hyperbolical which Bartholine writes, that the Vessels of the womb in time of Child-bearing, swell with Blood to that degree, especially near the time of De∣livery, that the Emulgents are half as large as the Aorta or Vena cava. I have seen 'em very large indeed, but never so large. But perhaps he wrote this upon the Dissection of some Female Elephant. And yet Regner de Graef confirms the same thing: In women with child, says he, I have sometimes seen those Vessels di∣lated to that degree, that I could easily thrust my finger into their hollowness; which after the Evacuation of the Secundines, are so contracted again, that in sixteen days space, together with the womb, they reco∣verThe reason why the Vasa San∣guifera are so much dilated in women with child. their wonted proportion; only that they are more tisted and contorted in those that have had many Children, by reason of their being extended more in length. IX. The reason why the Vasa San∣guifera are so much dilated in women
with child, is said to be the necessity of a greater quantity of Blood, requisite in that place for the Nourishment of the Infant. But in regard the forcing of the Blood through the Arteries, is swift enough for the Nourishment of all the Parts, and that without any extraor∣dinary dilatation of the Vessels, and for the same reason sufficient for the Nou∣rishment of the Birth in the womb; therefore there seems to be another quite different Reason of this dilatation: that is to say, Because that through the increa∣sing of the Substance of the Womb, and the weighty bulk of the growing Infant, the Veins of the womb being more than u∣sually compress'd, will not permit so free a Circulation of the Blood as in empty or free Women. And seeing that more flows in through the Arteries, than can pass through the compress'd Veins, and be remitted back time enough to the heart, hence it is that the Blood, by reason of its slower Circulation, which in the mean time is forc'd through the Arteries with an equal Chanel, being there de∣tain'd and collected together in greater quantity, more and more distends the Sanguiferous Vessels, so that toward the time of Delivery they are more than usually large. Which nevertheless, after Delivery, the said Compression ceasing, and the Circulation becoming free, with∣in a few days are contracted by the Fi∣bres themselves, and return to their first Condition. In like manner the same thick Sub∣stance of the womb, no less than the Ves∣sels, presently after Delivery, and the Evacuation of the Secundines, begins to fall and dry up, so that in a few days it recovers its pristine solidity and hardness; and this sometimes in six or seven, some∣times in fourteen, or more days. All which things the accurate inspe∣ction of many Child-bearing women, and women with child hath taught us. CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Seed. HAving examin'd the Parts of Ge∣neration, Order requires that we should proceed to the History of the Birth contain'd in the womb. Which before we begin, we shall premise some things concerning the first Foundations and Principles of the Birth: Beginning first with Human Seed; and discoursing in the next of the Conception, and the Form∣ing of the Birth. I. The Seed is sometimes call'dThe Name. Sperm, sometimes Geniture. And tho' Aristotle seems to make some di∣stinction between Sperm and Ge∣niture, as if the one were the Seed of those that copulate, the other of those that never engender; and tho' others take Geniture for that Seed only which may properly be call▪d fruitful; others for the Seed of man and woman mixt together: Nevertheless, because the same Philosopher confounds these Names up and down in other places, as also Galen, and many others do, we also intend to make use of these Names for one and the same thing. But because in Generation there are two Seeds that come to be consider'd, of which neither can produce any thing a∣part; but which being duly mixt toge∣ther to perfect Generation, I think it will be most beneficial to discourse first of the Seed of man, and then of the Seed of woman apart, and of what proceeds from the mixture of both. II. The Seed of man therefore is a. frothy, white, viscous Liquor, im∣pregnated with a germinating or blos∣soming spirit, made in the Stones and other Spermatic Vessels of Arterious Blood and Animal Spirits, for the Generation of a like Creature. We think that Opinion to be rejected as unworthy refutation, maintain'd by Aristotle, and asserted by his Followers, that the Seed is an Excrement of the third Concoction, when as it is the most noble Substance of the whole Body, as it were a Compendium of the whole Man; or at least such a Substance as contais in it self the Compendium of all Man∣kind. In what Parts it is generated, we have sufficiently explain'd Cap. 22. and Cap. 24. III. Of the Matter of which Seed,What the Matter of it? is generated, and the Parts out of which that matter proceeds, various are the Opinions of Philosophers.The opin of the An∣cients. IV. Avicen says, That the Seed proceeds from the Brain, Heart, and Liver. Some think it falls from the more solid Parts into the lesser Veins,
and from those ascends into the greater, and like a little Cloud or Settlement, swims upon the rest of the Humours, and at length is attracted by the power of the Stones. The reasons of which Opinions, and their Refutations, may be seen in Aristotle, Fernelius, Laurentius, and Vallesius. V. Many of the Ancients likewiseThe Anci∣ents say it is made of the Iuice falling from the Brain and Spinal Marrow. have asserted that the Seed is made of a certain Iuice that falls from the Brain and Marrow of the Back-bone. Thus writes Hippocrates l. de Gen. that the Seed is diffus'd out of the Brain into the Loyns and Marrow of the Back-bone. Thus also writes Plato in Timaeus, That the Seed is a Deflux of the Marrow of the Back-bone; and Almaeon, that it is a Portion of the Brain. VI. The more Modern Authors,The opini∣on of Mo∣dern Au∣thors. who could find no such large Convey∣ances from the Brain and Spinal Mar∣row to the Stones, rejected the foresaid Opinion altogether, and asserted the Blood to be generated out of the Blood flowing through the Spermatical Vessels to the Stones. Which Opinion, as most true and indubitable, for many A∣ges has been receiv'd and taught by all the Philosophers. VII. But of late Glisson, Wharton,Opposed by some Eng∣lish Physi∣cians with∣out Reason. and Charleton, English Physicians, have oppos'd this receiv'd Opinion, who write that the Matter of the Seed is a more crude and chylous Humour, carried from the Mesentery to the Brain, and thence to the Stones through the Nerves, of which they say there are a vast number inserted into the Testi∣cles and Epididymis: which is con∣trary however to all Experience; when our own Eyes tell us, tha only very few, and those very small, and scarce visible, Nerves reach to those Parts. VIII. Clement Niloe produces a∣notherClement Niloe's o∣pinion er∣roneous. Opinion, affirming the Seed to be generated out of the Lymphatic Liquor. But in regard the Lympha never flows to the Stones out of any o∣ther Parts, but while the Seed is making, is separated out of that Seminal Matter, and out of the Testicles themselves through the Lymphatic Vessels that take their rise within the Testicles, ascends to the Abdomen, and so to the Vasa Sangui∣fera, it is apparent that the Seed is not made out of the Lympha; but that the Lympha is only occasion'd by the making of the Seed; as it is also an Effect of the making of bilious Ferment, Cap. 13, 14. Moreover, if the Lympha should be car∣ried to the Testicles, as it is not, and in them should be mix'd with the Mat∣ter that is to be chang'd into Seed, then it would not hold proportion with the Matter so to be chang'd into Seed, but only with the Ferment preparing the Matter, that it may be conveninently turn'd into Seed. So that Niloe does not seem to have observ'd the Motion of the Stones upward, nor to have understood the use of it, Cap. 13. & 17. IX. Hieronymus Barbatus of Pa∣dua,Barbatus of Padua his opinion. seems not to recede far from this Opinion, who Lib. de Sang. & Sero. writes that the Seed is not generated out of the Seed, but out of the Serum. Which Opinion he endeavours to sup∣port with many, but such insipid Rea∣sons, as are not worth Refutation. But none of these, either Modern or Ancient Opinions, have hit the Mark. But he who considers more seriously the Prolific Liquor, will certainly find, that to the making of the Seed there concurs for Matter, partly Blood, flowing throughThe true Matter of the Seed. the Spermatic Arteries; partly Animal Spirits brought through the Nerves. X. That the Blood constitutes theThe Blood constitutes the first Mass of Seed. first Mass of the Seed, is apparent from the large Spermatic Arteries car∣ried to the Stones, which carry more Blood than only serves for the Nourish∣ment of the Stones. The same is con∣firm'd by the Spermatic Veins, carrying back to the Vena Cava the Blood that remains after the Nourishment of the Stones, and making of the Seed. The same is also taught by Experience, when upon immoderate Copulation, we shall find the Blood to be ejected in∣stead of Seed, not without some kind of Titillation; as Aristotle himself ac∣knowledges, and the observation of se∣veral Physicians testifies, by reason that the Blood flowing in great quantity through the Arteries, has not sufficient time to stay in the Stones, nor Animal Spirit pour'd out of the Nerves strong and plentiful enough, that the Blood could be converted into Seed in so short a space. Add to this that in the Stones themselves, and other Spermatic Vessels weaken'd by immoderate Copulation, and the overmuch dissipation of the Spi∣rits, the Seminific power becomes debili∣tated
so far, as not to be able so speedily to convert into Seed the Blood which is brought, being destitute of sufficient Spi∣rit from the Nerves. Which weakness is apparent from hence, that after im∣moderate Copulation the Seed first ge∣nerated is crude and watery. And this Experience Reason supports, which teach∣es us that the Blood concurs in the Seed, as the primary and greatest part of the Matter. For that in our Bodies all things are enliven'd by the Vital Spirit flowing from the Heart; and inherent in the Arterious Blood, and that decaying, no∣thing can be reviv'd: for that if upon any occasion that Blood be stopp'd from flowing into the parts, they presently dye away. Hence of necessity that enliven∣ing Spirit must be infus'd into the Seed, as containing in it self an enlivening Pow∣er, chiefly requisite in the Seed: which Spirit, since it cannot be conferr'd with∣out the Subject to which it is inherent, that is, Arterious Blood, hence it follows undoubtedly, that the Blood concurs to constitute the Matter of the Seed. XI. Now that the Animal Spirits,That the A∣nimal Spi∣rits contri∣bute to the making of the Seed. brought by the Nerves, and thicken'd in the Stones into a thin Liquor, and mix'd with the Blood, of necessity concurs to the Matter of the Seed, is apparent from hence, that there is a great Correspondence between the Brains and the Testicles, in regard the Brain, the Nerves, and all the nervous Parts are much weaken'd by immoderate Copulation; and in re∣gard that the waste of much Seed, wasts also a great part of the Animal Spirits, attended by lassitude and a manifest impairing of the Strength, to∣gether with sadness and dejection of Mind; there is thereby a disturbance in a Man's Countenance, accompanied with a trembling of the Limbs; all which things declare that the Animal Spirits are plentifully evacuated with the Seed. Which Seed, if it were only made of the Blood, such Symptomes would never attend the Evacuation of a little Seed; for that a whole Pint of Blood taken from a Man, does not weaken him so much as the loss of an Ounce of Seed. To this we may add the Consideration of the Spinal Consumption, thus descri∣bed by Hippocrates, Lib. 2. de Morb. The Spinal Consumption, says he, arises from the Marrow of the Back-bone, and chiefly seizes upon new married and libidinous Brides. Concerning which, if you ask the Patient, he will tell you, that he feels as it were Flies and Emmets creeping along from the upper parts, as the Head, &c. down to the Back-bone. And when he goes to Stool, or makes Water, he voids a great quantity of Liquid Genital Seed; nor can he generate, tho' he lyes with his Wife. He is the Laughing-stock of Venus, and suffers Nocturnal Pollutions as well as at o∣ther times: but especially when he has tra∣vell'd a sleep place, or run hard; he draws his breath short, he loses his strength, his Head akes, and his Ears sound. By the Description of this Disease, it is sufficiently manifest, that there is a certain Spirit that flows through the Nerves from the Brain and Back-bone to the Composition of the Seed. For hence it is that the Brain, being weaken'd af∣ter immoderate Coition, there happens a Deflux of Spirits not sufficiently con∣cocted, but crude, from the Brain to the Spinal Marrow, whence happens a Col∣liquation, and a flagging and loosness of the Nerves. Hence Nocturnal Polluti∣ons in the sleep, the Spermatic Vessels being weaken'd by immoderate Coition, and having lost their retentive Faculty: besides that that same crude and un∣concocted Spirit flowing through the Nerves, becomes somewhat salt and acri∣monious, and with its Acrimony velli∣cating and tickling the weaken'd Geni∣tals, provokes them to an Effusion of Seed. XII. Now this Animal Spirit dif∣fus'dSalt the chief Co∣position in the Seed. through the Nerves from the Brain to the Stones, and there thick∣ned into a thin Liquor, there in that same Contexture of small Vessels, of which the Substance of the Stones con∣sists, is mingled with the spiritous Blood, and by slightly fermenting it with its Acrimony, and separating the Lymphatic Iuice, which is to be car∣ried upward through the Lymphatic Vessels, rising out of the Substance of the Stones, to the inner parts of the Abdomen, by the means of certain small, scarce visible Glandules, di∣spers'd among the small Vessels of the Testicles, specifically dissolves the saltish Particles of it, and separates it from the Redundancy of the Sulphurous Liquor, with which salt Particles, and some few Sulphury, in its long and winding passage through the small Ves∣sels of the Stones, by a specific Facul∣ty of the Stones themselves it is con∣cocted
into Seed, which flows from the Parastates through the Vasa Deferen∣tia into the Seminary Vesicles, where it is condens'd into a frothy Liquor, and is reserv'd till the time of Evacua∣tion. Now because this salt Liquor has the greatest share in the Composition of the Seed, and that its fruitfulness and balsamic Power chiefly proceeds from thence, the Ancients feign'd that Venus sprang out of the Sea, and gave the Ap∣pellation of salacity to Lust. XIII. Now that the salter ParticlesThe Proof. of the Blood separated by a certain Effervescency, necessarily, and in great quantity concur in the Composition of the Seed, and far exceed the sulphury Particles, various Arguments assure us. First, Because in fat Bodies, where fat and sulphurous Humours predomi∣nate, there is little Seed generated, and hence they have little proclivity to Ve∣nery. 2. Because in drier Bodies, where salt Humours predominate, much Seed is generated, which make 'em more able for the Sports of Venus. 3. Because the subacid Seed exhales a kind of smell, which must necessarily pro∣ceed from a dissolv'd Salt. 4. Because the increasing of that in quantity excites an itching Titillation, and provoke to Lasciviousness. 5. Because the Fertility of most things proceeds from Salt, either melted or dis∣solv'd by heat, and thence it is no won∣der that the foecundity of Human Seed chiefly depends upon it. The first is appa∣rent from many Experiments. Wood∣ashes, especially of Burnt-oak, strew'd over the Fields, renders 'em much more fertile, and that Fertility is more lasting than the spreading of Cow-dung over the same Fields, which only causes a Fertility quick and of short drance: Because they contain a greater quantity of Salt, which being melted by the Rain, and attenuated by the heat of the Sun, augments that Fertility of Grass and Herbs. Grounds dung'd with the Dung either of Men, or Pigeons, or Poul∣try, enfertilize those Lands ten times more than either Cow; or Horse dung; because the other contains ten times a greater quan∣tity of balsamic Salt. Rain-water im∣pregnated with much volatile Salt, at∣tenuated by the heat of the Sun, and with the watery Vapours exhal'd and thick∣ned into clouds, causes the Herbs and Plants to flourish and grow to a greater Perfection, than if water'd with other Water. Hence Aristotle writes in his Hist. Animal. l. 8. c. 19. that Reeds which grow in Lakes and Ditches, never thrive so well as when great store of Rain falls. In like manner Fish in their Ponds thrive much better when it rains. The Dew impregnated with a Volatile and Balsa∣mick Salt, produces several sorts of Worms and Insects upon the Trees. In Vinegar expos'd to the Sun, and long kept, we find many times little Worms to breed; concerning which thing, Bar∣tholine gives us a remarkable Observa∣tion, Hist. Anat. cent. 4. hist. 13. who ad∣mires it indeed, but seems not to under∣stand the Reason. Which is plain, be∣cause the whole Acidity of the Vinegar proceeds from the Salt being exactly melted and dissolv'd; which appears from the Spirit of Salt, which is most acid, and for that common Salt being boyl'd with Vinegar, renders it much more a∣cid. Now the thinnest Particles of this melted Salt, attenuated and volatiliz'd by the heat of the Sun, agitate the Par∣ticles of the Vinegar with particular Motions, and so joyning with some af∣ter one, with others after another man∣ner, beget a kind of Fertility which breeds Worms, enliven'd by the Beams of the Sun. And thus I think we have sufficiently prov'd that there is a very great balsa∣mic power in Salt, and that the foecun∣dity of all things living proceeds from and out of Salt. So that it need not seem a wonder, that more salt Particles should be requisite to compose the Mat∣ter of Seed than sulphury Particles. But I have told you that they are plentifully separated from the Blood by a certain way of Fermentation, caus'd by the Ani∣mal Spirits flowing to the Stones; which Animal Spirit consists of salt, sharp Par∣ticles. XIV. Now if the Animal SpiritsWhen the Seed is well made. flow through the Nerves in sufficient quantity, and strong enough, to the Stones, and there be concocted into a spiritous Liquor, together with the said spiritous Salt part of the Arterious Blood, or be duly prepar'd and chang'd in the long windings and turnings, the Seed becomes well concocted, spiri∣tuous, and fruitful; which thickning in the Seminary Vessels, in Copulation is ejected white. But if that Spirit flow weak, and in small quantity to the Stones, the Seed then generated be∣comes crude, watery, and not so white▪
the Spirits being dissipated, as it hap∣pens, through immoderate Copulation; and the Spermatic Parts become weak, frigid, and moist; through which ill temper of the Parts, the narrow ends of the little Nerves that lose themselves in the Stones, grow limber, and fall, so that very few Animal Spirits can penetrate to the Stones; and such as pass through are stifled by the extream coldness and moisture of the Stones: and thence it happens that there is no convenient Fermentation in the Blood flowing through the Spermatic Arteries, but the greatest part of it is converted into crude, waterish, and sharp Juice, which being carried to the Seminary Ve∣sicles, and there gather'd together, easily burst forth into the Urethra, especially in Venereal Dreams. XV. And for the same Reason the viscous Seminal Matter, that uses to settle in the Prostates, is also crude and watery, and by its extraordinary Moisture relaxing the Pores, toward the Urethra in Men, toward the U∣terine Vagina in Women, flows forth without being felt, and unvoluntarily,The reason of the Go∣norrhea Simplex. which causes the Simple Gonorrhea. Which Seminal Matter, if it be in∣fected with any impure Venereal Ma∣lignity, and sharp Corruption, presently happens a Virulent Gonorrhea, which is attended many times by Corrosion and Exulceration. Now this Efflux of Seminal Matter, or Simple Gonorrhea, many times molests the Patient for a long time, even whole years together, with little debilitating the strength; because that spiritous Liquor coming from the Nerves, is mix'd in a small quantity, with such Seed, and very few or no Ani∣mal Spirits waste themselves in its Eva∣cuation; which at other times in libidi∣nous Copulation flow to the obscene Parts in great quantity, and are dissipa∣ted to the great wasting of a mans strength: whereas there is no labour in the sponta∣neous and unfelt Emission of the Seed. Thus Bartholine reports that he saw at Padua, a Person that had been troubled with this Efflux of his Seed for above thirty years, without any prejudice to his health; and another at Bergamo in∣fested with the same Distemper for ten years, in other respects healthful, but only that he was very much emacia∣ted. XVI. If any Person wonder howHow the Matters composing the Seed flow toge∣ther. such a spiritous Animal Vapour should flow so copiously through such narrow and hardly conspicuous little Nerves, let him consider that the Arteries also, by that time they come to the Stones, are almost invisible, and yet they carry a great deal of Blood. Moreover, let him know that those copious Va∣pours are not carried thither so copious∣ly, by reason of the extream thinness of the little Nerves, only that they de∣scend by degrees to the Stones: And hence after a stout Copulation, and much Emission of Seed, there is requisite some space of time before a sufficient recruit can come for the generation of new Seed. XVII. But some will say, ThoseAn Obji∣on answer∣ed. little Nerves seem only to terminate in the Tunicle next wrapt about the Stones, which for that reason is en∣du'd with a quick Sense, but never reach to the innermost Substance of the Stones, which for that reason is insen∣sible, as is apparent from several Di∣stempers, which is a sign that those Spirits cannot flow to the inner Sub∣stance. I answer, That as there are no Nerves, so neither are any Blood-bear∣ing Vessels to be seen in the Stones of healthy People; however, it does not follow from thence, that there are no such Vessels in those Parts, for that they are there, and in whom, and when con∣spicuous, we have declared Cap. 22. So without doubt there are some slender Nerves in those Parts, though not to be perceived by reason of their white Co∣lour and extream Exility. Which Exi∣lity, and the small quanity of Spirits that pass through 'em, may be the reason that the inner Substance of the Stones is so dull of feeling: Besides, that the in∣ner Substance of the Stones is nothing membranous, for there is also an acute Sense in Membranes; and because the Stones, and other Parenchyma's of the Bowels have their proper and peculiar Substance, consisting of Vessels interwo∣ven one among another, the like to which there is not in the whole Body, besides which, by reason of its structure and feeling, is of an obtuse Sense, as the Sub∣stance of the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, &c. All which Parts, like the Stones, have their exact Sense of feeling, lying only in the Tunicle that enfolds 'em.
XVIII. But here another Difficul∣tyA Diffi∣culty. arises, more weighty than the for∣mer, that seeing the animal Spirits are every way disposed of by the Mind, now here, now there, at pleasure, why they are never copiously disposed of to flow into the Testicles, and cause 'em to swell, especially upon lustful Cogi∣tations? I answer, those Spirits are not unequally disposed of to any Parts, but first to those that require some short stretching forth, to the end they may act, or act more vigorously, as the Eyes, when any thing is to be view'd with more attention; the Womb, when the Birth is to be expell'd; the Genitals in Copulation; then and chiefly then they are disposed of to those parts that serve for volun∣tary Motion, as the Muscles. But they flow always equally with a continued Course to the Parts only sensitive, as al∣so to those Parts wherein they contri∣bute any thing to Nourishment or Fer∣mentation, as being an Influx that has nothing common with the Will: And that they flow sometimes in less, some∣times in greater Quantity to those Parts which are sensitive, and so occasion a quicker or a more obtuse Sense of Fee∣ling, that happens not through the de∣termination of the Mind, but by reason of their greater or lesser quantity, or the largeness or narrowness of the Passages. And thus the Animal Spirits flow to the Testicles, not by any determined, but meerly by a natural Motion. XIX. Now in the Seed thus madeTwo parts of the Seed. of the said Matter, two parts are to be considered: Some subtil, and very spirituous, which are very few, but very effective: Which we now call the Germen or Blossom: Others thick∣er, frothy and watery, which consti∣tute the chiefest part of the Seed, and nourish and involve the spirituous Parts. XX. Now these spirituous andThick and spirituous Parts mix∣ed and clot∣ted toge∣ther com∣pose the Mass of the Seed. thicker Parts being mix'd and clot∣ted together compose the Mass of the Seed, containing in themselves a dou∣ble Principle, an Efficient and a Ma∣terial. Which Material is double, the one out of which the first Threads of the Birth are form'd, which is the most spirituous Part, containing the ef∣ficient or forming Principle; the o∣ther Alimentary, being the thicker part of the Seed melted and dissolved. XXI. If this efficient Principle beWhere the efficient Principle is wanting, the Seed is unfruitful. not in the Seed, as it happens in un∣fruitful Seed, then when nothing can be form'd out of it, it flows away and is corrupted. But if the effici∣ent Principle ready to break forth in∣to Act, be destitute of the material Principle, by which it ought to be fo∣mented and sustain'd: Then also no∣thing comes of it, as when the Seed, the second or third Day after Injecti∣on, by reason of some suddain Fright, or other Accident, flows out of the womb; and then nothing comes of the Blossom. But these two Principles being united together, act nothing upon one another but are Idle, so long as the material thicker Principle be curdled together; for this detains the spirituous efficient Principle, as it were intangl'd and lull'd asleep, and so restrains it, that it cannot put it self forth into Action. But when the thicker material Principle is dissolv'd and melted in some convenient Place by the external proper Heat of the womb, then its inbred efficient Spirit by degrees gets rid of those Fetters, is rous'd up and becomes free, and its Power breaks forth into Act, and proceeding through the Uterine Tubes to the Ova∣ries, enfertilizes the Eggs which are there∣in ready prepared and matur'd, and begins to act in them, and in each of them out of it self to delineate and form that which is to be form'd, while the thicker parts of the Seed are mel∣ted and made fit; to receive and gently cherish the Eggs falling out of the Ova∣ries through the Tubes into the Womb. For if the Eggs should fall into a dry womb, they would produce no more than the Seed of a Plant cast into dry Ground. For as nothing comes of that Seed unless sow'd in a Ground moisten'd with a tepid Humidity, so nothing comes of the Egg unless it fall into a womb watered with a convenient lukewarm Moisture. XXII. Some will say, this cannotAn Objecti∣on answe∣red. be so, for the Eggs of Fowl do not fall into a moist womb, but into a dry Nest, and yet a Chicken is hatch'd out of this Egg. I answer, That as for Birds and other Creatures that lay Eggs, there is not the same Reason for them, neither do they require any such Moisture of the womb, or thicker part of the masculine Seed, but only the Fo∣mentation of Warmth. For being to
hatch Chickens without themselves, pro∣vident Nature has provided for them, within the shells of the Eggs, what was requisite and could not be conferr'd by any thing extrinsic, that is a copious convenient Moisture, wherein the spiri∣tuous part of the male Seed may form out of it self what is to be form'd, and nourish it also with the same, till it comes to the maturity of a Chicken. And therefore it is that the Eggs of Fowl have a Yolk, which is deny'd to all the Eggs of Creatures that bring forth li∣ving Conceptions. In which sort of Creatures it neither is nor could be so. For they being to bring forth large Births, there could not be Nourishment sufficient contained in little Eggs, by which the Birth might be augmented and nourished to such a Bigness. Hence it is of necessity that extensive Nourish∣ment must flow into the Eggs, and come to the Birth; and first the thicker parts of the male Seed already melted, ought gently to receive the new form'd Body and nourish it by Apposition; and then other more copious Nourishment must be conveighed by the Mother to the womb for the Nourishment of the large Birth. Having thus spoken sufficiently in ge∣neralOf the spi∣rituous Part. of the matter of the Seed, now let us a little more accurately consider the spirituous Part. XXIII. Hippocrates discoursing ofThe Opini∣on of Hip∣pocrates concerning the spiritu∣ous pt of the Seed. the spirituous Part, writes in several Places, that the Seed falls from all Parts, that is to say, that something is generated in every Part, resembling the nature of the Part; which being conveighed from each part to the Stones, and mix'd with the thicker Matter, together with that same thick∣er Matter composes the Seed, con∣taining in it self the Ideas of all and every part. XXIV. Aristotle ascribes a celesti∣alOf Aristo∣tle. Nature to this spiritual Part, like the nature of the Stars: For, saith he, there is in the Seed of all Creatures, that which renders the Seed fruitful, and is called Heat, and yet no Fire, nor any such Quality, but a Spirit which is contained in the Seed and frothy Body; as also Nature, that is the Soul, which is in that Spirit, an∣swerable in proportion to the Element of the Stars.What is the spirituous Part. XXV. Now that we may inquire more narrowly into the Original and Nature of this spirituous Part of the Seed, we are first to understand, that it is a most subtle Body produced by another Body, having a fitness by the help of external Causes, to produce and form another Body, like to that from which it had its own Modelling. For when this Body has gain'd a pro∣per Matter wherein to subsist, it is to∣gether with that matter deposited in a convenient place, and freed from all In∣cumbrances. XXVI. That it is a Body is appa∣rent,It is a Body. because it is subject to corporeal Laws, Putrefaction, Corruption, and Change, &c. and is produc'd by a Bo∣dy, and not from a rational Soul; from which if it were produc'd, it could not be corrupted, for that be∣ing incorruptible, must generate some∣thing incorruptible like it self. But that it is corrupted is apparent in the Emission of fruitful Seed, from which no Conception happens; for then no∣thing is generated out of it, but it pe∣rishes, and is corrupted like other cor∣ruptible Substances. XXVII. That it is produced out ofIt is pro∣duced out of a Body. a Body is plain from hence, that it is generated and not created: As also that it is produced out of the Sub∣stance of the Seed, dissolv'd by the ambient Heat and Moisture, loosning the conjoyn'd Mass of the mix'd Bo∣dy, and is nothing else but a thin Vapour fluid and moveable, volati∣liz'd by the Heat. For which reason it would easily fly away unless it were detain'd, as being wrapt about by the thicker Particles of the Seed not so apt for Volatility; and by and by straitly enclosed by the womb and its proper Membranes, and in regard of its salt Particles, of which for the most part it consists, it were somewhat inclin'd to fix∣ation, and so were hindered and stop'd in its Flight. XXVIII. That it has an Aptitude apti∣tude. from the convenient Matter of which it self consists, and wherein it inheres, by the help of external Causes to pro∣duce and form a Body like to that from whence it proceeded, Experience teaches us. But whence that Aptitude proceeds is not altogether so mani∣fest.
XXIX. That the Figures and FormsThe nature of the spi∣rituous Part. of Bodies arise from the various Constitution, partly of the forming Cause, partly of the Matter out of which they are compounded, is a thing confessed among the Philosophers. In Generation therefore a just and due Con∣stitution and Disposition of the Matter is required, that the formal Cause may act upon it, and form and generate something out of it. Now the foresaid Spirit rooted in the Seed, containing in it self the forming Form, call'd Nature, both has and perfects that requisite dis∣position of Matter; and that is the first Agent or Principle of the forming of the Birth, and also the first and next Matter of the Parts to be delineated. For there is a certain efficient Spirit in∣fused into all natural Seeds, which ari∣sing out of the thinnest and most vola∣tile salt and sulphury Particles of the Seed it self, concocted after a particular manner by the Heat, and intermixed with the more fixed Particles of the Seed; is the primary cause of Formati∣on, and the primary and next matter of the Body to be form'd, and actuates the other Particles of the Seed, and as it were leads the Dance of natural Moti∣ons, which being coagulated, absent, extinct or suffocated, there can be no Generation. Now if such a Spirit be contain'd in all Seeds, then certainly in the Seed of Man. XXX. Now a small Particle ofWhere the Idea of all the Parts is contained. this Spirit contains in it self the Ideas of all and singular the Parts of the whole Body, which Parts it is able a∣gain to form out of it self, when by the Assistance of the Uterine Heat, being somewhat loosen'd and freed from the thicker Mass of the Seed, it advances toward the Ovaries, and enters the Eggs, and in them now carried through the Tubes into the Womb, it is agitated, mov'd and rouz'd into Action. For being agi∣tated, it acts, and acting, it cannot do otherwise, than out of that convenient Matter of which it consists it self, and where it is inherent, that is out of it self to form such Parts, of which it contains in it self the Ideas, and so by degrees renders the rest of the Matter of the Egg apt and fit, which giving way to the Growth of those Forms, may be able also to assume their Shape. Which I shall endeavour to illustrate by a Com∣parison. As Coles extinguished, Straw, Turf, Wood, and other Materials, do not take Fire, nor flame out, unless some subtle Matter, having the form of Fire, enter 'em, and raise the first Idea of Fire, which then makes fit the rest of the Matter, that it may be able to as∣sume the like form of Fire: so there is no Creature of the same likeness raised out of the Egg, unless it enter some Egg, which bears the Idea of that same Creature, which making of it self the first delineation of that Creature, at the same time renders the rest of the Matter of that same Egg fit, first to increase its Delineation, and then assume the form of all its Parts. Now this is that same Idea-bearing Spirit ingrafted in the Male Seed, and separated from its thicker Mass by the benefit of the Uterine Heat, and so infused into the Eggs. XXXI. Now the Seed receivesIdeas whence and what they are? those Ideas from all and every singu∣lar Part; for as from all Bodies in∣finite subtle Beams issue forth, expres∣sing the Figure and external Colour of all those Bodies from whence they flow, so also from every the smallest Particles of the Body, certain most subtil little Bodies issuing from the smallest Particles of the Body, like most spirituous Atoms, are mix'd with the said Spirit flowing from them, which then has the same Impression of the Body from whence it flow'd, and receiv'd the same small forth-flowing Body, that lighting upon the proper Subject to which it is inherent, it may be effectual out of it self to pro∣duce and form a Body like to that from which it received the imprinted Shapes. For those most subtle Bodies flowing either from some Body, or some part of a Body, cannot but have ob∣tain'd a model or fashioning from it, such as are the Shapes of the Things within the Bodies out of which they flow. And so the seminal Spirit obtains some pro∣priety of those Particles of the Body, out of which it flow'd, and that not only of the Figure, but of the whole Nature. XXXII. But these Proprieties ofThe Pro∣perties of the singular Particles not separa∣ted, meet in every Par∣ticle and display themselves in the for∣mation. the singular Particles, are not separa∣ted in that Spirit, but fall and meet together in every Particle of it, and then display themselves again in the Formation; In like manner as a thousand Beams of visible things meet together in one Mirror, and out of
them distinguishes the Figures and Colours of every particular thing. And hence it is that every Particle of this Spirit has a power to form the whole Creature. Which Efficacy however is more powerful, when many Particles are collected together in one Bubble. For as a few visible Beams flowing from a∣ny thing whatever, sufficiently represent the Figure and Colour of it, and yet that Figure and that Colour are more apparently, more accurately, and right∣ly discovered, if many Beams concur to depaint and set it forth, as in Concave Glasses; so also the particular Particles of this Spirit have a power to form the whole, yet is the Fashioning more per∣fect, if many Particles endu'd with the same Power be joyn'd together, and execute their work with united force. Now if the Particles of this Spirit be collected in the Bubbles not of one, but of several Eggs, thence the Generation of several Births, for the forming Spirit has sufficient Power to form the whole in every Bubble. Which is easily ob∣serv'd in Birds. For the Sperm of a Cock, which is injected into the Hen but in a very small Quantity, but full of Spirit, when it lights into the Ovary, is dispersed through all those Eggs which are already come to Maturity; and is the sole Cause of enfertilizing the small Particles in each Egg, and being agitated by the external Heat, and the little quantity of Spirit absconded therein, is the efficient Cause of the Chicken; and also the Matter of the first Delineati∣on. XXXIII. Now this same SpiritHow tss Spirit comes to the Stones? flowing from the several Particles is mixed with the Blood, and is cir∣culated together with it through the whole Body, and gives it an aptness to nourish all the Parts. For if the Blood had not something in it self like to the several Parts, it could not nourish all the Parts, and add some∣thing alike to every individual Par∣ticle. The Particles of this Blood which are changed into Seed, contain al∣so this same Form-bearing Spirit within 'em, which is therefore involv'd within the Seed made in the Stones, and that inHow these Parts are generated out of the Seed, which the Parents wanted be∣fore Gene∣ration. a considerable Quantity, and composes its more noble and primary efficient Part, yet such as cannot subsist nor be preserv'd entire without the thicker ma∣terial Part. XXXIV. Here arises a difficult Question, how those Parts are gene∣rated out of the Seed, of which Parts the Parents were destitute long before Generation, seeing that no Idea, no forming Power, or Architectonic Spi∣rit can flow from them? I answer, that this is done, because the Imaginati∣on of the Parents supplies that Defect, who daily seeing other Infants, Boys, and grown People, born and well sha∣ped with all their Members, firmly imagine with themselves that they shall beget the like. And so no less imprint the Ideas of the defective Parts in the said Spirit, and model both it and the whole Seed no otherwise than if the modelling had proceeded from those Parts. For how far Imagination prevails in this par∣ticular, appears in Women with Child, who by the force of Imagination only forming strange Ideas, frequently add to the Birth not only the strange Figures, Colours, and Spots of the things ima∣gined, but the things themselves accor∣ding to their whole Nature. Thus have some Infants been born with Horns, when the Mother has been so frighted by a horned Beast, that she conceived such a deep impression of that Horn, that has not only disfigured the Child with the Mold or Colour, but with the very Substance of the Horn growing out. I my self in the Year 1637, knew a Wo∣man of thirty Years of Age in Gelder∣land, who kept an Ape with a long Tail, and took great delight in it. This Wo∣man was about a Month gon with Child, at what time the Ape of a sud∣dain leaping upon her Shoulders, strook her over the Face with his Tail: whence the woman conceived such an Idea of the Ape's Tail, and cherished it so strong∣ly in her Imagination, that at length she brought forth a Child with a Tail at the end of that Portion of the Back cal∣led the Coccyx, thinly hair'd and of the same Colour with the Tail of the Ape, which the Surgeons having cut off at the Request of the Parents, the part gan∣gren'd to the loss of the Childs Life. Ex∣perience also teaches us, that if a wo∣man with Child continually and strong∣ly think of the maim'd part of any Man, from which she took a suddain Fright, she brings a maim'd Infant into the World, tho' both she and her Husband had their Limbs perfect and quite the contrary: if she continually think of a perfect and sound Child, she will bring forth a Child perfect in its Limbs, tho' perhaps either she or her Husband might want a Limb. In like manner, a
Man may more easily imprint into the seminal Spirits the Ideas of Parts de∣fective, than the Woman through her Imagination can deface, alter, or de∣prave those parts: And as this is certain of a woman by Experience, the same is still more certain of a Man. Neither is it to be questioned but that if the Pa∣rents think continually and much upon those defective Parts, nor by other Ima∣ginations imprint in the seminal Spirit the Ideas of those defective Parts, they shall beget Children maim'd in those parts. This is apparent from hence in the first part, that if the Parents were born maim'd in any part, when they have not been able afterwards to imagin any Ideas of the entireness of that part, as being that which they never knew perfect in themselves, frequently the Children are maim'd in that part. But if they were maim'd in any Member long after they were born, then easily and strongly imagining the Idea of that part of which they knew the soundness and the use before, they may supply that defect in the Seed and its Spirit. XXXV. But how the said Idea'sHow Idea's imagined are imprin∣ted in the Seed. are imprinted in the Seed by the Ima∣gination of the Parent is not so easily explain'd. However thus it seems to happen. The Image of the thing of∣ten and seriously thought upon, is ex∣actly delineated in the Brain; and that Picture and its bringing into Shape being imprinted in the Animal Spirits, and by them communicated also to the arterious Blood, together with these, that are to be the matter of the Seed, is carried to the Stones, and in the making of the Seed sup∣plies therein the defect of those Ideas, which could not flow from the parts of which the Parent was destitute, and so the Seed with its enlivening Spirit, furnished with all the necessary Idea's of the several parts of the whole Body, acquires such an Aptitude that all the parts may be form'd out of it, even those Parts of which the Parent is destitute. That this is thus done in the Seed, is no such Wonder, seeing that after the same manner sometimes the Ide∣a's of various things, are imprinted in the Birth already form'd through the strong Imagination of the Mother: Because that the Idea's of things imagined and exactly depainted in the Brain, being imprinted in the Animal Spirits, by the determination of the Spirits made by the Mind, or Will, together with the Arterious Blood flow to the womb, of which, and of the Birth therein contain∣ed the great bellied Woman often thinks; thence they are carried through the umbilical Vein to the Birth it self, which being very tender, by reason of the ex∣traordinary softness of its Body, easily receives the Idea strongly imprinted in∣to it by the Imagination of the Mother, (as an Image seen is imprinted into the soft Brain, to be shortly offered again to the Memory) which is very small at the Beginning, but increases more and more as the Child grows in the womb; as Letters or Pictures slightly engraven with a Penknife upon the Rinds of a Cucumber or Melon, grow by degrees with the Fruit. And thus al∣so the Images of visible things, at a great Distance are depainted in the Tunicle of the Eye, by the help of the Interme∣diate Air, and Sounds are conveighed through the Air to Places remote. XXXVI. Swammerdam proposingAnother Question to be answe∣red. this Doubt to me in his Miracle of Nature, How it comes to pass that Parents maim'd in some Parts, be∣get whole Children, as if he would with one Herculean Argument diluci∣date the whole Obscurity, answers, be∣cause all the parts are contained in the Egg. But if this be the true Cause, how comes it, that out of that one Egg, containing all the Parts, sometimes a Child happens to be born maim'd in some parts; and that sometimes when the Parents are sound and perfect in all their Limbs; and such, as before that, have begot, and afterwards also beget entire limb'd Children. Why should the Foundation of an Arm, or a Legg, or any other part be more wanting, in that Egg, than in the Eggs of other women, both before and afterwards con∣veighed to the womb, out of which en∣tire Childeren have been conceived? If these women's Eggs contain all the parts of the birth in themselves, why does Swammerdam himself say, that Levi, long before he was born, lay in the Loyns of his Parents? Will he have also some Eggs to be generated in the Loyns of Men? 'Tis to be fear'd he will shortly bring 'em, as well out of the Heads as out of the Loyns of Men and the Stones of Women. XXXVII. Here another Doubt a∣rises;Whether Children can pr∣create. seeing that those spirituous Ir∣radiations equally happen from all parts of the Body, in the Body of a Child, as well as of one grown to Ma∣turity:
Why the Office of Generation may not equally be perform'd as well by a Child as by a Person fully grown: When as the forming Spirit is equal∣ly present in both? I answer, this falls ou for two Causes. 1. Because that in a Child, that Spirit has not yet a Subject wherein to inhabit. For the Blood be∣ing very Oylie, is consumed in the Growth and nourishment of the Body, so that there is no superfluous blood out of which the seed can be duly made. 2. Because that in a Child there are want∣ing those requisite Mediums to perfect that Work; For besides the extream Oyliness of the Matter, and its unapt∣ness, the spermatic Vessels are over weak to make Seed. In Males, the Yard is too short, and the Passages are too nar∣row to conveigh the Seed out of the Stones to the seminary Vessels, and thence to the Vrethra. In Females the Vessels are two small and straitened, and the womb too narrow to receive the Seed. XXXVIII. From what has beenWhence the likeness of Features said, perhaps some one may raise a∣nother Question; seeing that the spiri∣tuous dea-bearing Irradiations are to be considered only in the Seed of a Man, how it comes to pass that the Birth does not always resemble the Male parent in likeness of Feature and Form, but frequently the Mo∣ther? Hippocrates of old gave sundry Reasons for this, taken from the vari∣ous Quality and Quantity of the Seed of a Man and Woman mix'd together: Whose Opinion many follow, but do not explain it all alike. Among whom are Capivaccius, and Deusingius, whose Opinions, because they are grounded upon no solid Foundations, we shall o∣mit for Brevities Sake. My Opinion is, that all this whole Matter depends upon the Imagination of the Mother. For a bigg-bellied Woman always think∣ing this or that when she is awake, and converting her Thoughts for the most part to the Birth contained in the womb, if she be an admirer of herself, and of the outward Shape and Form of her own Body, the Child will be like her. But if she be a Person that is altogether taken with the Shape and Features of her Husband, and often imprint his Image into her Imagination, the Child will be like the Father. But that this Resem∣blance does not proceed from the Qua∣lity or Quantity of the Seed of the Man and Woman, is hence apparent, for that a bigg-bellied Woman strongly concei∣ving in her Imagination the external Features of any other Man, with whom she never had any Familiarity, the Child shall be like to him: Nay, and many times, by beholding monstrous Forms and Shapes, imprints and stamps 'em many times upon the Births. For wonder∣ful is the Force of Imagination, especially in Bigg-bellied Women; of which Thomas Fienus has written an excellent Tractate. Thus far concerning the Mans Seed: Now particularly in a few words con∣cerning the Seed of women, the use and necessity of it. XXXIX. Here presently we meetOf the wo∣mans Seed. a Question, at the very Threshold, whether Women have Seed or no? Aristotle affirms that women have noWhether Women have any Seed or  Seed; but that their Flowers supply the place of the Seed. For which they who follow this same Prince of Philosophers, give these Reasons. 1. Because there is no way through which the Seed can pass from the Stones to the Womb. 2. Because the womans Seed can contribute nothing to Generation; and for that it has been found that Women have many times conceived without being sensible of any Pleasure in Coition; and there∣fore without any emission of Seed. 3. Because the same Accidents do not be∣fall women, at that time that Seed is said to be generated in them, as happen to Men at that age, that is to say, their Voices do not change, their Nerves are not stronger, their Body is not dry'd, neither are they more perfect in the Gifts of the Mind, &c. 4. Because by the Testimony of Harvey, the Testicles of women in the Act of Generation do not swell, nor vary from their wonted Constitution either before or after Coiti∣on: Neither is there any sign or mark of their Use or Necessity either in Coi∣tion or Generation. 5. Because that by reason of the injection of the womans Seed into the womb in bigg-bellied wo∣men, frequent Abortion happens after Copulation. For that Seed must either be corrupted in the womb, and so bring various Mischiefs, and at length Death upon the inclosed Birth; or else it must slip out of the womb, and so the Orifice of the womb being opened, Abortion must follow. And hence they conclude that women have no Seed, and so that their Stones are only given for Orna∣ment, like the Paps of Men. XL. But this Opinion long sus∣pected,That Wo∣men have Seed. at length has been deservedly re∣jected by most men; it being sufficiently apparent▪ that women have Seed from hence, that they have Stones, sperma∣tic
Arteries, and Veins, and deferent Vessels as Tubes, and Prostates, which Parts not being given 'em in vain, no question serve for the Generation of Seed. Moreover in the Stones themselves the Eggs are conspi∣cuously to be seen, containing a transpa∣rent White, well deserving the Name of Seed, which being matur'd, and bedew'd and impregnated with the male Seed, are conveighed through the deferent Ves∣sels or Tubes▪ and so carried to the womb. Lastly, Women in Coition emit a cer∣tain seminal Matter out of the Prostates with great Pleasure, and after Coition suffer the same Symptomes as happen to Men, sadness, lassitude, conturbation in their Countenances, numness, and cessa∣tion from Desire. Thus both the First and Second Reason of the Aristotelians falls to the Ground. For that the Seed of women included in the Eggs, is alto∣gether necessary for Generation is appa∣rent from hence, that nothing is begot by the Male Seed, unless the Spirituous Part of it, light into the Liquor resem∣bling the white of an Egg, as into the sole Matter proper for its use: And for that women never conceive, that have no Eggs in their Ovaries, as in elderly women; or at least none that are im∣pregnated and carried out of their Ova∣ries to the womb: As neither do they Conceive who never emit with Pleasure any seminal Liquor out of their Prosta∣tes. And therefore there is no Credit to be given to those that cry they were ravished by Force, and conceived without Pleasure. Lastly, Because that among Brutes, Bitches, Sowes, and other female Creatures, being spay'd become Barren, as being depriv'd of the Organs generating Seed-bearing Eggs. To which we may add, that the Holy Scripture makes mention of the Seed of the Woman, as most necessary to Generation. The Third Reason of the Aristotelians is of no Value; For that at the time that Seed is generated, their Voices do not change, nor their Nerves grow stronger, &c. The Reason of that is, because the whole Temperament of their Bo∣dies is much colder and moister than Mens; and therefore the Seed included in their Eggs, is much more crude and moist than the Seed of Man, nor does it diffuse such a hot and sharp Fermenta∣ceous Expiration through the whole Body as a Mans Seed. No less vain is the Fourth Argument, for that the Con∣stitution of the Stones was observed by Harvey not to vary either before or af∣ter Copulation, that was so imagin'd by Harvey, because that in a Beast killed before Copulation, he could neither dis∣cern nor know what was the difference of the Constitution in the Copulation it∣self; and in another killed after Copu∣lation he could not find what was the Constitution in the Coition. For if perhaps the Stones did swell in Coition, the swelling of the Genital Parts most certainly fell through the terror of Death, and Death ensuing, and so re∣turn'd to their former lank Constituti∣on; in like manner as a Mans Yard tho' stiff with Lust, flaggs upon the least Fear or apprehension of Death. Further∣more, neither in Coition nor after Co∣ition does any manifest Difference out∣wardly appear to the Eye, neither in the Stones of Men or Women, only that they are drawn upward in Men, yet whether or no there happens any plea∣sing Alteration in the Stones of Females in the venereal Act when the Eggs are impregnated with the due of the Male Seed, this tho' Brute Animals cannot discover in Words, yet their Gesticula∣tion sufficiently declares it: And there∣fore rational Women confess it, that they feel an extraordinary Pleasure in their Wombs, and all the adjacent parts; among which are the Stones, ad∣hering to the Sides of the Womb. To these Reasons may be ad∣ded one more, taken from Maids who have been seised with the Furor Uterinus, and have dyed of the same. In whom (being opened) the Testicles of one, or both, have been found extraordinarily swell'd beyond their natural bigness; and Au∣thors report that some Pounds of the seminal Matter has been taken out of the Testicles of one who died of that Distem∣per. I have seen several who have had that Disease, of which two of them dyed by the force of the Malady. I desired them both to be opened, which was done. And in both, the Testicles were extreamly swell'd. In the first, the right Testicle as bigg as twice a mans Fist doubled, and being opened, there was near  Pint of seminal Matter which ran and was squeezed out of it. In the other, the right Testicle in like manner was tumified and is big again as the former, and as black as Soot, stinking ex∣treamly, so that the Surgeon judged it a Gangreen. Salmon. The Fifth Argument proves nothing; for they who at the time of Ingravidati∣on from the Eggs injected into the womb by Coition, are afraid of Dam∣mage to the Birth and future Abortions, they are mistaken in that to think that in the Copulations of bigbellied women any Seed bearing Eggs fall anew into the Cavity of the womb, not knowing that those Passages, after Conception, remain clos'd up till the Delivery: As also the Vessels appointed for the Evacu∣ation of the Menstruum's: And that that Pleasure, which such women are sensible of in Copulation, does not proceed from any Egg or Seed slipping out of the Stones into the womb, but from the Viscous Seminal Matter, which isWomens Testicles were made for absulute Necessity. squeez'd out of the Prostates into the Ute∣rine Uagina. LX. From what has been said it
is sufficiently demonstrable, that Wo∣mens Stones were not given 'em only for Ornament, according to the Ari∣stotelians, which can be none in a part that is always hidden and never conspicuous, but for absolute Necessity. XLII. Now what that Necessity is, letWhat this Necessity is. us inquire: And therefore that some∣thing may be produced out of Plants, there is equally required both a Ferti∣lity of the Earth, and a fecundity of the Seed. The Fecundity of this Seed consists in the spirituous Blossom; the fertility of the Earth in a conveni∣ent Heat and Moisture, duly moisten∣ed and impregnated with Salt and sulphury Particles. Unless these two concur, nothing can be produced from the Seed of a Plant. For Example, Let the best Wheat be thrown into a heap of Salt, Iron, Lead, or dry Sand, nothing grows from thence, tho' the Seed be fruitful in it self, because it does not light into convenient Matter, wherein the generative Principle may be dissolv'd and set at work. In like manner let the same Seed be cast into Earth where there is too great a quantity of Salt, Lime, Canker, or any such matter, endu'd with a corroding and sharp Quality, then the Seed is corrupted and extinguished, together with its generative Principle, and produces nothing; but if it be thrown into a fat Earth well dung'd, then the Heat assisting the more thin Particles of the terrene Moisture, enter the small Pores of the Seed, and are in∣termix'd with its Substance, which there∣upon swells, and so the Germen, or ge∣nerative Principle is dissolved and falls to work, and whatever is thence form'd is nourished, augmented, and increased by the same Moisture, melted and mix'd together with the thicker Particles of the Seed▪ being afterwards to receive from the Earth more and more solid Nourishment when once it has taken Root. XLIII. And thus it is in the Ge∣nerationA Compa∣rison be∣tween the Womb and the Earth. of Man. The Womb is the Earth, first receiving the masculine fruitful Seed: But unless that Land be moistened with a convenient dewie Moisture, embrace and dissolve that received masculine Seed, and send forth its more subtle engendring Parts through the Tubes to the Eggs contained in the Stones or Ovaries, and that the Eggs thus impregnated proceed to the Womb, that through its cherishing Heat the generative Prin∣ciple infused into 'em may fall to work; I say unless all this be, from the mas∣culine Seed alone, tho' never so fruit∣ful, there will be nothing generated: For nothing is generated from the Male Seed alone, tho' most fruitful in its self. Now, that same Female Al∣buminous Seed of the Eggs is like the fat moisture of the Earth; nay it is the very fat prepared Moisture it self, which conveniently receiving the spirituous part of the Male Seed and entering its Pores, dissolves it, rowses the genera∣tive Principle latent therein, and excites it to Action. Which proceeding into Act, presently forms out of its self, in a small Compendium, the whole that is to be form'd, that is the first Delineations of the whole Birth, and nourishes it with that agreeable Albuminous Moisture up∣on which it swims first by Irroration and Apposition, till it be brought to such a Solidity, and that the Bowels are be∣come so strong, that afterwards they may be able to make and prepare for themselves Nourishment carried to the Womb and infused through the Mouth and Navel. XLIV. Hence it is apparent whyWhy a Wo∣man does not con∣ceive every time she is lain with. Copulation does not follow every time that a man lies with an Empty woman: because that if a woman, through any Distemper of the Ovaries, or their bad Structure, or by reason of her years, or through any other cause be destitute of Eggs, or that the albuminous Matter latent in the Eggs be badly temper'd, too sharp, too hot, too cold, or endu'd with any bad quality, and so be unfit for the dissolution of the Procreative Male Seed; then no Conception can happen, because the spiritous procreative Principle of the Male Seed, is for the same Reasons stifled and corrupted. But this is not the only cause why Con∣ception is hinder'd: for it frequently al∣so happens, that the Eggs of Women are not come to their just Maturity, or through some Impediment of the Passa∣ges, the generative Principle cannot come to the Eggs, nor the Eggs to the Womb; or else the Male Seed being weak of its self, and destitute of a generative Prin∣ciple, or for that its generative Principle is corrupted and suffocated in the Womb, before it can reach the Eggs, by
reason of the bad temper of the Womb, or else from the vitious Humours there∣in settled; for which Reasons there can be no Conception. XLV. However it be, the true, ma∣nifest,The Male Seed is that without which there can be no Genera∣tion. and necessary Use of the Male Seed appears from what has been al∣ready said; as being that without which there can be no Generation of Man, no more than Generation of Plants, without a fruitful Moisture of the Earth. XLVI. Here a material QuestionWhether the Womans Seed be the cause of Formati∣on. arises; If there be such a necessity of the Female Seed, in respect of the dis∣solving, cherishing, nourishing Matter, whether it have any share in the form∣ing the Birth? Hitherto it has been the common Opi∣nion, That it has a share as well of the forming Cause, as of being the nourish∣ing Matter; and that it is mix'd with the Man's Seed, and that one Mass is made of those two Seeds mix'd together, and that out of that Mass being ferment∣ed in the Womb, the spirituous procrea∣tive Principle is drawn forth, by which, and out of which, the Members of the Birth are delineated and form'd. Which Opinion Sennertus very speciously both propounds and defends; and of which Ludovicus Mercatus is no less a strenu∣ous Patron, who thinks with one Hercu∣lean Argument to remove the whole Doubt, and to prove the forming Power of the Female Seed. Whatever assimi∣lates, (saith he) suffering with Victory, of necessity acts: but the Son is sometimes made like the Mother; therefore the Mo∣ther acts in the Generation of the Son. XLVII. But tho' this whole Argu∣mentIt follows not that the Womans Seed affords any Power to form the Birth. should be granted, it does not follow that the Womans Seed affords any power to the forming of the Birth. For there is a great deal of difference between the Mother acting, and the Seed of the Mother acting. For the Mother acts upon the Man's, and her own Seed, while she warms, cherish∣es, and embraces both in her Womb, and so rowses that same procreative Principle into Action. But this renders it fit for the Nutritive Matter. But nei∣ther She nor her Seed contribute any thing to the forming of the Parts, but as Mediums, by which the latent Power in Male Seed is set at work. But if the Womans Seed should act in forming and delineating the Birth, then it ought to contain in it self an active Principle of forming the Parts, which might be pro∣voked from power to act out of that a∣lone, by the cherishing of the Uterine Heat; but it has not, nor is any such thing drawn forth out of it, as we have prov'd before, and is manifest in Wind-Eggs. The likeness of the Son to the Mother proves nothing, in regard the Cause of it does not proceed from any act of the Seed; but is imprinted from another Cause, for the most part upon the Birth it self while it is forming, and oftentimes after it is form'd and fur∣nish'd with all its Members, and some∣times some Weeks or Months after it is form'd: For that innumerable Exam∣ples of Big-belly'd Women teach us that the various strong Imaginations of the Mother, and unusual motions and deter∣minations of the Spirits proceeding from thence, do wonderfully change the Birth already form'd, and imprint this or that figure upon it like soft Wax: while some affrighted by some terrible sight, others looking upon Pictures, either with de∣light or abhorrency, others earnestly longing for Cherries, or other Fruits, have imprinted strange Forms and Moles upon the Birth, and that not long before Delivery; which active power never∣theless neither proceeds from the Seed of the Woman, nor can be any way attri∣buted to her, the Action being done long after the forming of the Birth. XLVIII. Besides the said ArgumentThree other more weighty Argu∣ments. of Mercatus, there are three more ponderous produc'd by other Persons: 1. Because a Mule is generated be∣tween a Mare and an Ass. 2. Because that between a Man and a Beast, no Man but an irrational Creature is ge∣nerated. 3. Because a white Woman many times Conceives by an Ethiopian, and produces a white Infant. Which things seem not to be done but by the forming power of the Female Seed, as it concurs with the forming power of the Male Seed. XLIX. Before I dissolve these Dif∣ficulties,The Male Seed does not proceed into Act unless there be a fit fer∣ment mix∣ed with it. I judge it reasonable to consi∣der, that the Male Seed does not pro∣ceed into act; neither is there any thing produced out of it like to that from whence it proceeded, unless there be a convenient Ferment and Nou∣rishment mixed with it; and if there be any Defect or Error, or Cor∣ruption in either, or in both, then either nothing, or something Vicious,
is produced out of it, which Nature perfects however as far as it can. In like manner as we see among Plants, that the Seed of Barly and Wheat thrown into barren Ground degenerates into Darnel, and other unprofitable Herbs, having no resemblance to the former, by reason of the Defect of convenient Ferment and Nourishment. L. This being premised, I come toThe An∣swer to the former Ar∣guments. To the first Argument. the Objections, and answer to the first, that it does not prove that the female Seed concurs with the Mascu∣line as the efficient Cause of Formati∣on: But that in the said Case the active Principle of Generation is nei∣ther duly produced out of the Masculine Sex, nor conveniently proceeds into Action, by reason of the Impediments that occur, because that the Seed of the Ass is neither in the Egg conve∣niently enough dissolved and provoked into Act by the Seed of the Mare, proportionably to the Nature of that Creature; neither is there Nourish∣ment sufficiently convenient afforded to it in the first Formation. Hence the Workwoman Nature, who never is idle, when she cannot form and perfect an Ass, begets a Creature next approach∣ing to the Nature of the Ass, that is to say a Mule, which in respect of the As∣ses forming Seed is by Nature an Ass, but in respect of the first Nutriment af∣forded in great Quantity by the Mare, and participating of the Nature of the Mare, causes a bulk of Body bigger than that of the Ass, and in some measure re∣sembling that of the Mare. LI. To the Second I say, That theAnswer to the second Argument. same Defect happens to the Seed of the Man in the Womb and Eggs of the female Brute, and hence Nature instead of a human Birth, generates out of it an irrational Monster. In like manner as in the Eggs and Wombs of women themselves, by reason of the same defect of convenient Ferment of the womans Seed, or some Corruption of that or the first Nourishment, instead of a Man, sometimes out of the fruitful male Seed Moles are generated, some∣times Brute Beasts, like Frogs, half Dogs, Dormice, Lizzards, and such like Monsters, of which there are seve∣ral Examples to be found among Wri∣ters of Physical Observations, and a∣mong some Historians. Which Mon∣sters however are not generated by the female Seed, as containing in it self any forming Power, but through the De∣fect of the female Seed, which being in a bad Condition causes that impediment, by which the forming Power of the male Seed is so disturbed and obstruct∣ed, that it cannot act aright. LII. To the Third I say, That aAnswer to the third Argument. white Woman may bring forth a white Infant, tho' got with Child by a Ne∣gro. Not through any forming Pow∣er in her Seed, but through her strong Imagination and Fancy of a white Child; and through the same strength of Imagination a Negro Woman may bring forth a white Infant. Certain∣ly the Imagination of women conceiving and with Child, works wonders, not on∣ly as to the forming of the Birth, but also after the Formation: And yet no∣thing of this can be ascrib'd to the actu∣ating Power of the womans Seed. LIII. Some there were who thought,Another . that in the Mare before mentioned, and in other brute Animals, the Ima∣gination strongly operates in the form∣ing the Birth: Which others as stre∣nuously deny; And because brute Ani∣mals are void of Reason, therefore they will not allow 'em any Imagination, but if any thing unusual were begotten in the womb, they think it happened from the forming Power of the female Seed. LIV. To these Arguments I an∣swer,An Answer thereo. That tho' Brutes may be said to be void of Reason, Understanding, and Memory, yet they have something proportionable to it, as is manifest from their Actions (the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: The Bee when she brings home her Hony, knows her own Apartment from a hundred that are like it; and a Dog understands the Commands of his Master, and does them.) And that there is something analogous to Imagination in Beasts Conceiving and bigg with Young, is apparent from the Story of Jacob Gen. 30.. And I my self, with several others, saw a remarkable Exam∣ple of this thing. In the Year 1626. there came by chance a Dromedary to Montfort, which the owner carried a∣bout to be shown. The Creature was very large, round and cleft Hoofs, very thick Knees, and swell'd to the bigness of a Mans Head. This Dromedary by
chance, and out of the way, met a Mare which had been covered about two or three days before by a Stonehorse; which took such a Fright at the suddain meet∣ing this Creature, that presently starting back she threw the Country Man that rid her; and when her time was out she foal'd a Colt, of which all the right Thigh before was like the Thigh of a Drome∣dary, with a large round Hoof and cleft, which Colt afterwards grew to be a strong Horse, which we saw afterwards for many years working both in the Plough and the Cart. Certainly no Man in his Wits will say that this Error in Shaping proceeded from any efficient forming Power in the Seed of the Mare; but rather from the strength of Imagi∣nation. LV. Thomas Consentinus fanci∣edThe Opini∣on of Con∣sentinus and Deu∣singius confuted. a quite contrary Opinion touching this Matter, for he writes, that as well the first Matter from whence, as the efficient Cause by which the Birth is form'd, lies wholly in the female Seed: But that the Mans Seed is neither the matter of the Seed to be form'd, neither contains the forming Power in it self; nor contributes a∣ny thing to Generation, but only a certain insensible Substance, which on∣ly kneads and moves the Matter brought by the Woman. With him Deusingius agrees Lib. de Genesi Micro∣cosmi, where he most plainly teaches, that the Birth is solely form'd out of the female Seed, and that it is not only the Matter out of which it is delineated, but that there is also in it a vegetable Soul that forms the Birth. But that it can∣not be produc'd into Act, but by the assistance of the male Seed, as a kind of Ferment that dissolves its Substance, and so setting the latent Soul at Liberty, and provoking it to act. But this new Opinion is far remote from Truth while it attributes to the imperfect Seed of Women, questioned by some whether it deserve the Name of Seed, the whole power of forming, and the sole matter for the Form. For the Seed of a Tree, Wheat, Beans, or Pease, which is like the Seed of the Man, being cast into its Womb the Earth, does not dissolve the Seed or Juice of the Earth by its assisting Heat, and produce its like out of it; but is dissolved by it, and so the spiri∣tuous part of it being set at Liberty, and proceeding to Action forms out of it self the first Lineaments to be form'd, and nourishes and enlarges 'em when they are form'd, with the more thick Par∣ticles of it self (which seem to supply the place of the womans Seed) and then with the agreeable and convenient Juice of the Earth. The thing is appa∣rent in a Pea or a Bean, which being laid in a warm and moist Place, do not themselves ferment the moist Air, that any thing should be generated out of it, but are dissolved by the Air, and so the spirituous part being set at Liberty, and falling to work, in themselves, and out of themselves, form the thing that is to be form'd, and cast forth the first Bud. So it is in the male Seed both of Men and Beasts, which being cast into the womb, and entring the Eggs with its fructifying part, does not within them produce any aptness in the womans Seed to form any thing out of it self, but its generative Principle being dis∣solv'd by the female Seed contain'd in the Eggs, containing the forming Pow∣er, is collected in a small Bubble, where∣in being set at liberty, it forms out of it self what is to be form'd; and then the womans Seed included in the Egg, which first supplied the place of fermen∣taceous Juice, presently after serves for the first nourishment of the thing form'd. Moreover what Deusingius talks of the Seed of a Cock injected into the Ovarie of a Hen, that makes nothing against us: For that the smallest quantity of the Seed of a Cock is sufficient, for the first Lineaments of the Chicken to be form'd out of it. For if a human Birth, at the first laying its Foundations does not ex∣ceed the bigness of a Pismire, how much smaller and less, must the first Rudi∣ments of a Chicken be, and how small a Portion of Seed will its first Delineati∣on require? Nor is it true what Deusin∣gius adds, that the Cock at one treading infertilizes the whole Ovary, and all the Eggs contained in it, nay that the very smallest Egg, some scarce so big as a Pea, are thereby infertiliz'd, tho' the Cock never tread Hen more. For the Seed of the Cock neither enters nor infertilizes other Eggs, than those that are come to a just Maturity. The rest that are small, and not ripe, are no more impregnated by the Seed of the Cock than a Girl of five or six Years can be impregnated by the Seed of a Man: For those crude and unripe Eggs are as yet not fit to admit and receive the Seed of the Cock, and therefore dai∣ly treading is required, to the end that those Eggs which every day grow ripe, may be impregnated by the Seed of the Cock. And hence it is that those Hens
that are seldom trod, lay many wind Eggs that come to nothing. And there∣fore it is that they who desire many Chickens, choose out the Eggs of such Hens as were most frequently trod by a brisk Cock. The same Consideration may extend it self to womens Eggs, which so long as they are unripe, will not ad∣mit the generative Principle of the male Seed, which is the reason that many young Women of cold Constitu∣tions, do not conceive in several Months after they are married, because their Eggs are unripe and unfit to receive the generative part of mans Seed, which afterwards they do when they come to full Maturity. LVI. Swammerdam also seems toThe Opini∣on of Swam∣merdam refuted. ascribe both the Matter and the for∣ming Spirit to the Seed of the wo∣man. Fecundation or Conception, saith he, is nothing else, but a Com∣munication of more perfect Motion. So that the Egg, which was nourished and laid in the Ovary, after Concep∣tion, the Ovary being left, may live and be nourished after a more perfect manner, that it may be thought to look after and maintain it self. And in another place he says, all the Parts are in the Egg. And assuming to him∣self the Opinion of Consentinus and Deu∣singius, he asserts that the Seed of man contributes nothing to Fecundity, and that neither the Matter out of which the first Delineation is made, nor that form∣ing Spirit is in it. But if he bring not stronger Reasons than that of may be thought; certainly his Argument will be too weak to confirm his Opinion, or re∣fute mine already proposed concerning the Seed of Man. And indeed how mistrustful he is of his own Opinion, he shews ye in these Words of his, Fe∣cundation cannot be demonstrated but by Reasoning, and very difficultly by Ex∣perience. LVII. These and the like Conside∣rationsWhether the Seed of women be a Matter ne∣cessary for Genera∣tion. are the Reasons that the afore∣said Opinion of the forming Power of womans Seed has been dislik'd by many famous Men, who therefore judg∣ed that the womans Seed concurr'd in Generation as a matter necessary to receive the procreative Part of the fe∣male Seed to cherish and give it Li∣berty, and set it at work; and to nourish the Embryo first delineated, but contributes no Matter to the forming of the Lineaments, nor can claim any thing of efficient Cause in forming the Birth. Which latter was the Opinion of Aristotle, stiffly after∣wards defended by Caesar of Cremona, as also by Scaliger, in these words. As there can be but one form of one thing, so the Principle containing that Form can be but one. Therefore the Seed of Man is but one. For being simple and indivi∣sible in its Form, it cannot be composed of two, which it would be if it should proceed from the Male and the Female. Subtil. Exercit. 268. Several other Ar∣guments he adds in the same place, by which he does not only deny all forming Power in the female Seed, but refuses to acknowledg the Seed it self; nor will he seem to allow it any ministerial Functi∣on. Scaliger's Arguments are very weigh∣ty; so that I easily agree with him, that the form and act of Formation proceeds only from the Seed of the Man, and that the womans Seed contributes no forming effective Cause to the shaping and delineation of the Birth. Yet I cannot with Scaliger wholly renounce the womans Seed; for I have both asserted and prov'd it to be very necessary for Generation. And being necessary, yet not having a forming Power, it cannot otherwise be necessary but only in respect of that Matter, without which the Power of the mans Seed cannot be waken'd and rowsed into Act. Now that it is not endu'd with a forming Power, appears from hence, that a woman cannot con∣ceive of herself without the help of male Copulation. Tho' it may be very pro∣bable that in her nocturnal Pollutions, which happen to women as well as men, besides the seminal Matter breaking forth out of the Prostates into the Vagina, many times the Eggs slip out and evacu∣ate through the Tubes into the Womb. Which nevertheless, if the Seed inclu∣ded in the Eggs contained two Principles of Generation, Active and Passive, see∣ing she has both Place, Time, and Nou∣rishment convenient within her own Body, could not choose but conceive of herself. Besides, Nature has so provi∣ded, that there shall be only one Agent to produce a natural Effect, by the Te∣stimony of Aristotle; but if the Seed of the woman participated of the formal and efficient Cause, then there would be two active Principles, the Seed of the woman, and the Seed of the man, which is repugnant to the Order of Nature. Again, if both Sexes contributed an active Power, the Male would produce either
the same with the Woman, or another quite contrary: If the same, then one would superabound; if different, then Twins would always be begot, or Her∣maphrodites, which rarely happens. Last∣ly, our Opinion is confirm'd by the Na∣tural Instinct of Mankind; for the Chil∣dren are not denominated from the Mo∣ther, but generally from the Father, as from him, who being their Efficient Principle, contributed to their being form'd. LVIII. Hence it is apparent thatThe Seed of the Wo∣man con∣tains in it self no forming power. the Seed of the Woman does not con∣tain in it self any forming Power in reference to the Birth, nor is any Effi∣cient Cause thereof; nor as the first mat∣ter, contributes to the first matter of the Birth that is to be form'd: but that it is only necessary as a matter gent∣ly receiving the generative Principle of the Male Seed, dissolving and fomenting it, and setting at liberty the forming spi∣rit inherent in the generative Principle; and disposing it to act, and to form all the first Lineaments of the Body out of it self, and nourishing the Embryo, when reduced into shape. LIX. Hippocrates does not seemThe Opini∣on of Hippocra∣tes. to favour this Opinion of ours, who writes thus, Lib. 1. de Genitur. In Man there is both the Male and Fe∣male Seed; and so likewise it is in Woman; but the Male Seed is the stronger: and Ge∣neration must of necessity be accomplish'd by the stronger. In which words Hippocrates seems to intimate, that Womens seed partakes no less of the Efficient Cause than the Man's. I answer, That in Generation, the strength of the Seeds con∣sists partly in the Efficient Cause, partly in the Material preparing for Formation. And both Causes being taken separately, may be called eitheir strong or weak, or to use Hippocrates's phrase, either Virile or Female. When the Efficient Cause of Formation, which is in the Male Seed, is strong or virile, and the material, cherishing, and nourishing Cause, which is the Female Seed, is likewise strong or virile, then of both together comes a Male Child. If either Cause be weak, yet one stronger than the other, then from the Cause that prevails proceeds a Boy or a Girl. So that it cannot be concluded from the words of Hippocrates himself, that he allowed the Female Seed an Efficient Power; but that he has plac'd that same strength of which he speaks, no less in the Material preparing Cause than in the Efficient, and that by strength in the Male Seed he understood a strong and robust efficient Power of Forming; in the Womans Seed, an ex∣cellent temper of preparing and nourish∣ing Matter, and an aptitude to set at li∣berty the efficient principle latent in the Virile Seed. LX. Veslingius fancied quite ano∣therThe Opini∣on of Ves∣lingius. Opinion of the Womans Seed; for he acknowledges therein a double substance; one Corporeal, requisite for the forming of the Birth, and another more watery, which loosens the parts of the Womb, cherishes and preserves the Birth, and which he says, flows conti∣nually into the Womb after Concep∣tion. The Portion, saith he, of Spermatic Moisture, which slows from the Stones to the bottom of the Womb, is of a more no∣ble use after Conception. For upon this swims the rude little Body of the Embryo, at the beginning of its conformation; and so not only hinders the more intense heat of the Womb from making any irregular disso∣lution of any thing, but gently sustains the Birth it self in the strong shogs of the Mothers Body, and secures the Umbilical Vessels, at that time as thin as a hair, from danger of a Rupture. Veslingius has done well to consider two parts in the Seed of the Woman: but in that he was greatly deceived according to the ancient Opinion, that the Man and the Womans Seed were mix'd toge∣ther in the Womb, and so thought the Birth to be form'd out of that Mixture; and that he also believed, that the Mil∣ky Juice, which in Big-bellied Women flows to the Womb for the nourishment of the Child, to be the more watery part of the Womans Seed. Concerning which Juice, see Chap. 31. LXI. At this day, according to theHarvey's Opinion. Opinion of Harvey, many people as∣sert, that the Womens Seed, after Con∣ception, together with the Man's Seed, flows out again from the Womb, as be∣ing altogether of no use. Yet tho' the vanity of that Opinion be apparent from what has been said, we shall examin it however more at large in the next Chapter. After this Explanation made, both of the Man's and Womans Seed, two things remain to be inquired into in general concerning the Seed. First, At what Age the Seed is generated; and Secondly, Why Eunuchs and gelt Animals become fatter and more languid?
LXII. As to the first, The Seed isAt what Age the Seed is ge∣nerated. not generated till the habit of the Bo∣dy becomes dryer and stronger, and when the Body is come to its full growth. And hence it is, that because the Body attains that strength and firmness between the fourteenth and twentieth year, that then the Seed be∣gins to be generated, and acquires eve∣ry day so much the greater perfection, by how much the Body grows stronger, and needs less growth. Now the rea∣son why Seed is not generated at younger years, and in Childhood, is vulgarly imputed to the growth of the Body, upon which the superfluous part of the Blood, of which the Seed is here∣after to be made, is then consumed. But this Reason is far fetch'd, and only a sign of the Cause why Seed is not generated. First therefore we are to enquire, why at younger years the Body most increases in bulk, and grows so fast, that by the knowledge of this we may come to know why the Seed is not generated at that Age. LXIII. The growth of the Body pro∣ceedsThe growth of the Bo∣dy, whence. from hence, because all the Parts abound with a moist, sulphurous, oily Iuice, and for that reason are very flexible and apt to extend; so that the Animal Spirits flowing into them, the Blood pour'd into the Arteries for Nou∣rishment sake, do not so sharply ferment, and therefore cannot make a sufficient separation of the salt Particles from the sulphury. Partly because their force is debilitated by the copious Moisture, and oiliness of the sulphury parts. partly because the Brain it self, being as yet very much over moist, does not at that time breed such sharp Humours, as to make a smart Effervescency, which afterwards come to be genera∣ted in greater quantity when all the parts come to be drier. For this Rea∣son also the Spermatic Vessels, where the chief strength of Semnification lies, are not then so very much dryed, but by reason of the copious more moist and oily Particles of the Nourishment, con∣tinually poured in upon them, they are extended, and grow in length and thick∣ness: and that so much the more swiftly, by how much more moist and oily Nourishment feeds them, as it happens in Infancy and Childhood. But their strength and solidity is then more in∣creased when they become dryer and grow less. I speak of moderate and convenient driness, not of a total con∣sumption of moisture. Now the reason why they become more dry is, because the overmuch oily Moisture is by degrees consum'd by the increasing heat, and by that means the overmuch moisture and lankness of the Spermatic Parts is abated, and they become stronger, in regard a greater quantity of the salt Particles se∣parated from the Blood, is mingled with them, and is more firmly united and as∣similated to them. LXIV. The same cause that promotesWhy Chil∣dren do not generate Seed. and cherishes the growth of the Body, hinders the Generation of Seed in Chil∣dren. Hence it is that the Blood is more moist and oily; and the Animal Spirits themselves less sharp, and fewer in quantity, flow to the Stones, so that there is only enough for the growth of the Parts, but not for the Generation of Seed. But afterwards, through the increase of heat that oily superfluous sub∣stance being somewhat wasted, then the Brain being dryer begets sharper Animal Spirits, which being mix'd with the Ar∣terious Blood, carried through the Nerves to the Stones, more easily sepa∣rate from it the salter Particles more fit for the Generation of Seed, with which being condens'd and mix'd into a thin Liquor by the proper quality of the Stones proceeding from their peculiar structure and temper, they are concocted into Seed, which becomes so much the more perfect, by how much the copious Moisture is predominant therein, which in perfect Seed ought to be but mode∣rate. LXV. And hence it is also apparent    wherefore in old Age, very little, or watery, or no Seed at all is made in the Stones: Because that by reason of their abated heat, over much moisture again prevails at that Age through the whole Body; tho' not so oily as in Childhood, but crude and more watery, whence the Brain becomes moister, and begets fewer or less eager Spirits, and the Blood becomes colder and moister. Moreover, the Parts themselves con∣cocting the Seed, become more languid and over moist, and consequently unapt, as well in respect of the Matter, as their own proper debility, to make Seed: I except some sort of old men, vigorous in their old Age, who at fourscore and fourscore and ten have begot Children,
as Platerus relates concerning his own Father. LXVI. As to the latter Question,Why gelded Animals grow fat. why Eunuchs and gelded Animals be∣come more languid and less vigo∣rous, the Reason is, because that through the cutting out of the Stones, there follows an extraordinary change of the whole Temper of the Body; in regard that lustful seminal Breathing ceases, which is diffus'd over all the Parts of the Body (which is appa∣rent from the peculiar Smell and Rankness of Tast in the Flesh of Beasts ungelt) and by means of which the Blood and other Humours are more warmly heated, and the Spirits ren∣dered more smart and vigorous. This remarkable Alteration of Tempera∣ment is apparent in Eunuchs from hence, that the Hair grown before Ca∣stration never falls off, and the Hair not grown before, either upon the Lips or other parts, never comes: Quite con∣trary to what befalls those that are not geit. LXVII. The same is manifestly ob∣servedAn Obser∣vation in gelt Deer. in Deer who shed their large Beams every Year, and then new ones come the next Year in their places; but being gelt presently after they have shed their Horns, their Antlers ne∣ver grow again, but they become very fat. Now this change of Temper, caused by the defect of lustful and mas∣culine seminal inward Breathings tho∣rough the whole Body, tends toward Cold, whence it happens that the Blood becomes more oily and less fervent, and the animal Spirits are generated less sharp and vigorous, and less dispers'd, and that part of the Blood, which other∣wise ought to be consum'd in Seed and seminal Spirits, remains solely in the Body; fills the Vessels, and more plen∣tifully nourishes every part; and that plenty and oyliness of the Blood moi∣stens and plumps up the Body to a more extraordinary Corpulency. For the fermenting Quality of the animal Spirits in such an abounding Quantity of san∣guineous Juice, tho' less fervent, being now more languid and remiss, becomes less able to separate the sulphury and oi∣ly Particles of the Blood from the salt ones, which for that reason remaining mix'd together in greater quantity, and joyn'd together for the nourishment of the Parts, moisten them less, and ren∣der them fatter, but more languid, and not so strong. For that Interposition hinders the more dry and salter Parti∣cles of the Blood from being firmly u∣nited to the spermatic Vessels. LXVIII. To this we may add,In gelt Persons or Beasts, the Spirits be∣come less sharp and subtle, and so less fit for animal Actions. that in those that are gelt, by reason of that extraordinary Redundancy of oylie Blood, the Brain it self is over∣much moistened, whence the Spirits become less sharp, subtil and vigorous, and consequently less sharp and fit for animal Actions. Which make Eu∣nuchs more dull, less couragious, lan∣guid, and effeminate, and slower in all the Exercises both of Body and Mind. LXIX. From the same RedundancyWhy fat People less fit for Ve∣nery. in the Blood of oily Particles, dulling the Acrimony of the animal Spirits, it happens, that they who are natural∣ly fat and gross, generate less Seed and slower, are less fit for the Sports of Venus, and are soon tired. Where∣as on the other side strong lean People are prone to Venery, and hold out longer. Because they have more Seed, and more quickly replenish'd, besides that their animal Spirits are sharper and more copious; and their fermenting Power is not so soon abated by the o∣ver much Plenty of Oily Moisture. But some will say, why are not Children fat for the same Reason? Because the re∣dundant moist and dew-like Blood is consum'd in the growth and increase of the Body. LXX. From what has been saidWhy in a Plethory the Body be∣comes un∣weildy, weak, slothful, drowsy, sleepy, &c. it appears, wherefore in a Plethory the Body becomes unwieldy, slothful, and weak, and all the animal Acti∣ons, both the principal, and others grow drowsy, and the Persons them∣selves are sleepy and heavy Headed, &c. because that by reason of the extraordi∣nary Redundancy of the oylie Particles in the Blood, the animal Spirits are ge∣nerated fewer in Quantity, less sharp and active. Now what that fermenting Power of the animal Spirits, so often mentioned, is, see l. 3. c. 11.
CHAP. XXIX. Of Conception, and the forming of the Embryo. I. WHen the fruitful Seed ofConcep∣tion. both Sexes is received into a Womb well dispos'd, and is detain'd inclos'd therein, it is called Conception. II. This Conception is made in theWhere it is made. Cavity of the Womb it self, and not in any Pores of the inner Mem∣branes; in regard that no Quantity of injected Seed can be contain'd in the Pores, neither is the prolific Prin∣ciple, being separated from the thicker Mass of the Seed, included in the Pores, but is carried through the Tubes to the Ovary; with which the Eggs being impregnated, pass the same way to the Womb, where they are detain'd and cherished. But as for those, who following Harvey, assert that the Seed being injected into the Womb, soon after flows out again, the prolific Principle only remaining within, and tell us that the Conception is per∣fected not in the Cavity of the Womb, but in the Pores of the internal Mem∣branes, which Regius also affirms: how far they are mistaken shall appear by that which follows. III. Now it is necessary, that theThe Orifice of the Womb must be closed after Con∣ception. Seed being receiv'd and detain'd, that the Orifice of the Womb should be closed, and so continue; at least for the first Months, to the end that Spirit, wherein the fruitfulness of the Seed continues, should not be dissipa∣ted and lost, before it slide through the Tubes to the Ovaries; which would easily happen, were not the Orifice well closed; that the Eggs also being im∣pregnated with the said Spirit, and so carried from the Ovaries to the Womb, should not slip forth, nor be corrupted by the entrance of the Air. This Closure of the Womb, as Galen affirms, and we have seen, is so strait and exact that it will not admit the topWhether the Seed of both Sexes concurs. of a Probe. IV. Now I speak of the Seed of both Sexes, neither will I be so rash, as with Aristotle, or with Harvey, to question the Womans Seed, or to be∣lieve that Conception cannot be made without it, having prov'd the necessity of it in the former Chapter; for tho' it be not the efficient Cause of Formati∣on, yet is it such a material Cause, as ought necessarily to concur in the Eggs with the prolific Principle of the male Seed to its Dissolution, and the Expedi∣tion of its Operation; and it also con∣stitutes the Matter, together with the more watery dissolv'd Parts of the mas∣culine Seed, by which the most slender, the most tender and smallest Threads of the Members of the Embryo being by this time form'd, may first be cherished, and then receive its Nourishment from it, as likewise its Growth; as also for the forming of the Membrane it self, the Amnion, and the Chorion; in like manner as in a Hens Egg we see the Shell, and the inner thin Membrane form'd out of the Seed of the Hen, before her being trod by the Cock; as is apparent in Wind Eggs. Which Shell however, together with the fore∣said thin Membrane in the Eggs of Hens and other Birds, neither grow nor are enlarged after the Eggs are laid, be∣cause they have acquired their just Ca∣paciousness and Magnitude before the Eggs were laid; as being to be hatch'd without the Body of the Birds, quite o∣therwise than in other Creatures that bring forth live Conceptions, in which, as the Embryo grows, those Membranes must of necessity encrease. And hence because the womans Seed alone is not sufficient to supply that daily Growth in the Womb: First the more watery Parts of the male Seed residing in the Womb, and the Blood and other Hu∣mours conveighed through the Vasa Sanguifera, joyn themselves to its as∣sistance. V. Here we think fit to explodeAristotle's Opinion a∣bout the menstruous Blood ex∣ploded. the Opinion of those who with Ari∣stotle say that the menstruous Blood concurs in like manner with the Seed to the first forming of the Parts. For all the Parts are delineated out of the Seed alone, and that by and out of the most subtil and most spirituous part of it: Neither does the menstruous Blood, nor any other Blood contribute any thing more than Nourishment, which causes the Growth of the Parts. VI. After Conception the Orifice ofThe dete∣sion of the Seed. the Womb is not only closed, but the whole Womb▪ contracts it self about
the Seed, to the end it may the better detain and embrace it. Thus Galen reports that the Women have often told him, that after Conception they have felt a certain motion in the Privities, that did as it were pull and contract them together. VII. The Seed being detain'd inThe Col∣liquation of the Seed. the Womb, is cherish'd, alter'd, and melted by the dewie heat of the Womb; and so its thicker and more fix'd Par∣ticles, being dissolv'd by a more firm cleaving and binding together, the more spirituous and active parts which lay imprison'd in those thicker Parti∣cles being set at liberty, presently pass through the Uterine Tubes to the O∣varies, to the end they may enter the Eggs that are come to maturity, and impregnate them, wherein they meet in a small Bubble, and like a transpa∣rent and crystalline Liquor appear in the Egg carried to the Womb. VIII. Now in this small Bubble on∣lyIn the small Bubble only is the for∣ming of the Embryo. is the forming of the whole Embryo perfected. For in that same thin and spirituous part of the Seed the Archite∣ctonic Faculty lies, which by the che∣rishing of the Uterine heat, together with its subject in which it is fix'd, that is to say, that same thin and spi∣rituous Liquor of the Seed, being set at liberty breaks forth into Action. For it cannot be free, but it must act: nor can it be set at liberty, unless by an External Cause; that is, by the heat of the Womb, the whole Mass of the Mas∣culine Seed being ejected in Copulation, be dissolv'd and melted, and by that means the spirituous or prolific Part be∣ing separated from it, be carried through the Tubes to the Ovaries, and then shut up in the Eggs, return again with them to the Womb. For as nothing can produce it self, so neither can any form produce it self out of Matter. But break∣ing forth into Act out of its slender in∣closure, it begins the delineation of the whole Embryo, and in a short time com∣pleats it. For presently the thin Parti∣cles of the Bubble are gently agitated, and mov'd one among another, and co∣agulated here and there into various forms and shapes, and innumerable pas∣sages are hollow'd out through them, and so all the Parts of the Body are form'd: because that same spirituous Mat∣ter of the Bubble being separated from the thicker Mass, contains in it self Idea's of all the Parts, and hence acquires an aptitude to receive the forms of all the Parts, and shape the Figures in it self. Now because there is but a very small quantity of that spirituous part included in the Bubble, and still the least and most subtil part of that is expended up∣on the Delineation of the Embryo, there∣fore the Birth at the beginning is scarcely so big as an Emmet.Delineati∣on perfor∣med solely by the Seed. IX. Hence it is apparent, because the Liquor contain'd in that Bubble is the most subtil part of the Masculine Seed, that the first delineaments of all the Parts are form'd out of the Seed a∣lone, that is, out of the most thin and subtil part of it, and then is afterwards increas'd, and more embody'd, first by the thicker Particles both of the Man and Womans Seed melted and dif∣fus'd, and then by the milkie watery Iuice flowing through the Navel.Aristotle's Errour in affirming that all the parts are form'd not out of the Seed, but out of the Blood. X. From what has been said, it is manifest how much Aristotle swerv'd from the Truth, while he affirms that all the Parts are form'd, not out of the Seed, but out of the Blood: nay, while he attributes to the Male Seed no share, either as to the Formation or the Matter; but only affirms that the menstruous Blood by motion, generates both form and parts. The Seed, says he, is no part of the Embryo, as the Carpenter contributes nothing to the matter of the Wood; neither is there any part of the Car∣penters Art in what is fram'd, but form and species proceeds from that by motion in the matter. In which Error Harvey also fell, while he endeavour'd to prove that the Blood exists before all the other Members; and hence all the first threads of all the parts are delineated out of the Blood; which he would seem to confirm more strenuously Exercit. 56. It seems a Paradox, says he) that the Blood should be made and imbued with vital Spirit, before the Blood-making or moving Organs are in being. Thus Exercit. 16. he says, that the Blood is first in being, and that Pulsation comes afterward. But we an∣swer to Harvey, That tho' the little Heart, which sanguifies, cannot be well discern'd at first, or clearly be distin∣guish'd from other parts; yet of necessity it must be form'd, together with the rest of the parts, before the Blood, and be∣ing form'd presently beats; tho' the slen∣der Pulse cannot be discerned by us at the beginning. For all the Parts delinea∣ted out of the pellucid, spirituous, seminal
Liquor inclos'd in the Bubble; and so by reason of their colour, and their ex∣tream smallness are hardly to be distin∣guish'd by the sight. For otherwise, that there is a heart, and that it exists before the Blood, the Effect manifestly declares. For seeing there is no Blood contained in the Bubble before delineati∣on, nor can flow into it from any other part; therefore that which is observ'd in it at the beginning of the delineation, when any small Threads begin to ap∣pear, must of necessity be generated within it; now then if no other part ge∣nerate blood but the heart, nor any blood can be generated spontaneously, and by it self, of necessity when any signs of blood begin to appear in the Liquefacti∣on of the Bubble, which are easily visi∣ble, because of their ruddy colour, we must of necessity conclude a praeexistency of the Efficient Cause of blood, which is the heart, tho' it cannot be so easily dis∣cern'd or known to be what it is, by rea∣son of its transparency and exility. So likewise if the blood be moved through the Vessels, since it cannot be done with∣out pulsation of the heart, most certain it is that the heart beats, tho' the pulsa∣tion be not to be discern'd. For the rea∣son why neither the little heart, nor its pulsation, cannot be discern'd, is not be∣cause there are no such things, but be∣cause they are so extreamly small, as not to be discernable to our eyes. More∣over, the thing is manifest in an Egg put under a Hen; for the colliquation with the Bubble that first appears to the Eye, is before the blood: and since it includes in its Bubble the forming power that makes the Chicken, and for that the blood can never penetrate the inner parts of the Egg, it is an Argument that the Members of the Chicken delineated, are delineated out of the Bubble of that Col∣liquation, and not out of the blood. And thus a Plant is not generated out of the green Juice, with which it is afterwards nourish'd, but out of the spirituous pro∣lisic Principle latent in the Seed. But when the Plant is generated, then it goes on with its work in preparing the Juice which it makes for its Nourishment. To this we may add, That it appears by inspection into a Hen Egg, that a small leaping print and the blood are seen to∣gether. XI. Whence it is apparent that thereThere can be no blood before the Organ that makes the blood is form'd. can be no Blood, before the Organ that makes the Blood, that is the heart; which if the delineaments of the whole Body were form'd out of the Blood, ought to be form'd with the rest after the Blood, which is false, as we find by the testimony of our own eyes, and which the Reasons before alledged confirm. And therefore the first Threads of the Infant are delineated out of the Seed a∣lone, and not out of the blood; neither does the Architectonic Spirit bring forth into Action, out of the Blood, but out of the prolific Principle, and the sangui∣fic Bowel the heart being form'd, pre∣sently that begets the blood, and puts it into motion. Deusingius discoursing of this matter, thus breaks out; What Cap∣tain, (says he) or what Intelligence directs the blood through the vagous and floating matter of Conception? What assisting In∣telligence (when first it is destitute of un∣derstanding) shall design for it the seat for the forming the Bowels? Where is the heart to be form'd? where the Reins to be plac'd? where the Brains or the Spleen? lest the Brains should choose their seat in the Abdomen, and the Intestines theirs in the Scull? What Cause shall move it to a Circulation afterwards, unless it were mov'd by the beating Vesicle of the heart? What Providence shall so restrain its wan∣dring at first without any Receptacles, and upon the building of the several Conduit∣pipes, shall direct its course into each of them. XII. Now it is not any sort, but aIt is a pe∣culiar and appropria∣ted  that is requisite for the Embryo. particular and appropriated Nourish∣ment that is requisite for the small Bo∣dy of the Embryo, already delineated in the Bubble, by which, without the visible concoction of the Bowels, it may be cherish'd and enlarg'd. Now this Nourishment could neither be Blood nor Chylus, as wanting a greater preparation and concoction before they can nourish; and therefore for that purpose the pro∣vident Creator has included Female Seed in the Womans Egg, like a cer∣tain white of a Hen Egg, as being a most mild Humour, most apt for the first cherishing and moistning Nourish∣ment of the swimming Embryo, nearest approaching to the nature of the tender parts already delineated, nor having need of much concoction, but only a slight preparation, and a gentle colli∣quation and attenuation, through the mild heat of the Womb. Thus also Galen writes, That the Embryo is first nourish'd by the Female Seed, as being that which is more familiar to its nature than the blood; since every thing that is nourish'd must be nourish'd by its like. As we find that Chickens are first nou∣rish'd in the Eggs with the inner white,
which is the Seed of the Birds. But in regard that in the little Egg, which in women falls out of the Ovarie through the Tubes into the Womb, there cannot be much female Seed contain'd, there∣fore there is added to it a watery Juice, being the remainder of the Mans Seed already melted and attenuated, after the prolific Principle being separated from it, and driven to the Ovaries, which the Egg falling down into the Womb, gentlely receives and embraces, and pene∣trating the Pores of its little Stems, and by that means entring the inner parts, and mingling it self with the albumi∣neous female Juice, encreases in quanti∣ty the Colliquation where the Embryo swims, and also strongly distends and amplifies the little Skins of the Egg, that there may be a larger Seat for the Em∣bryo, and more Nourishment, next ap∣proaching the Nature of its Principles. But whether that seminal Liquor, which flows from the Prostates of women in Copulation, be mix'd with the residue of the mans Seed in the Womb, or pre∣sently flow forth after the Act, I can∣not hitherto certainly find out. Besides the prolific Principle before inclosed in the Egg goes to work much more strong∣ly and vigorously, when the thicker dissolv'd part of the mans Seed has ente∣red thorough its Tunicles into the inner parts of it; and by mixture of it self has conveniently dissolv'd the albumi∣neous female Seed, to make it more fit to rowle the Spirit of the prolific Prin∣ciple into Act. The same appears also in Plants, in whose Seed the prolifc Principle being included and intangled, never proceeds into Act, till they have suck'd in the Juice of the Earth through their Husks and Shells, which dissolves the inner Substance that resembles the womans Seed, and so sets the prolific Principle at Liberty to fall to work: And so the first Cherishing and Nou∣rishment of the Embryo, is like that Sub∣stance, out of which it is form'd, or at least form'd out of the like. Which is observ'd also by Aristotle, who says, The Matter is the same that constitutes and enlarges the Creature. For whatever is added to the delineated Parts while they grow, ought to be like that Substance, out of which they were fram'd. In which Particular Harvey also agrees. XIII. Nor let any body wonder,How the residue of the mans Seed enters the Bubble. that the remainder of the masculine Seed dissolved and attenuated, should penetrate and enter the inner Parts of the Egg, through the Pores of the little Skins of the womans Egg (which Skins are very tender and porous at first, but composing the Chorion and Amnion so close and firm, that they will suffer the Penetration of no Hu∣mour.) For this Penetration may as well happen in a womans Egg, as in the Seeds of Plants, that through the Pres of their hard Shells easily imbibe the Moisture of the Earth, by which the Rind is then very much dilated, which causes the Seeds to swell, and wth that imbib'd Moisture of the arth mixed with the thicker dissolv'd Particles of the Seed, the delineated Kernel so soon as shaped is nourished; which being brought to that bigness as to want more Nourishment, that cast forth Roots like Navils, to draw out of the Earth a stronger Nourishment through them. And thus it is a in human Embryo, and the dissolv'd remainder of the mans Seed mix'd therewith. But this Nourishment being almost spent, the Womb begins to enlarge it self, for the Passage, tho∣rough it, of the Nourishment to the Em∣bryo, as through a Root. XIV. This foresaid Matter, nou∣rishesA twosold  of  . the Parts two ways. First by a close Apposition; as the tender deli∣neated Parts are every way moisten'd and increased by it. Secondly, By the Assimilation of the Aliments concocted in their proper Bowels. For that the newly form'd Bowels of the Em∣bryo, at first cannot undertake Con∣coctions, nor prepare or make Nou∣rishment, which is the reason that the thin Nourishment is afforded by Ap∣position ot of the seminal Matter prepared before. But soon after the Heart makes Blood of the same Mat∣ter, for the more plentiful intrinsic Nourishment of the Parts, and then to the Nourishment by Application, is added another Nourishment by Re∣ception. Both these ways at the Beginning Harvey acknowledges, Exercit. 9. For, says he, in all Nutrition and groing there is equally necessary a near Applica∣tion of the Parts, and Concoctin and Distribution of the apply'd Nourishment, neither is the one to be accompted less true Nourishment than the other, seeing that it happens by the Access. Apposition, Ag∣glutination, and Transmutation of new Nourishment. Neither are Pease or Beans said less to be nourished with the Humor
of the Earth, which they suck in through their Tunicles, like Spuges, then if they should admit the same Nourishment tho∣rogh the Orifices of little Veins, &c. But at length that seminal Liquor be∣ing spent, and the Bowels being by this time well grown and corrobrated, and the milkie Juice flowing copiously into the Amnion, the Nourishment by Ap∣plication ceases by degrees, and Nou∣rishment by inward Reception, that is, by the Blood takes place. Because that milkie Liquor is not so agreeable to the parts of the Birth, as the first seminal Liquor, and therefore requires a more perfect Concoction and Alteration into Blood before it can nourish. XV. But the Blood being bred inThe Blood bred in the Heart cleaves to the small Fibres of the Parts: First of the Heart, then of the Li∣ver, Lungs, Kidneys, Stomach, Muscles, &c. the Heart, and imparted to the whole Body, cleaves to the small Threads of the Parts, first of the Heart, then of the Liver, Lungs, Kidneys, Stomach, and Muscles, &c. For there are va∣rious thicker Particles in the Blood, thin, salt, sulphury, mix'd, of which some cleave to and are more convenient for these, and are united to them as they are more proper and agreeable to their Nature; according to which variety of Nature they undergo several Alterati∣ons, before they can be Assimilated. And the more the Blood grows to these deli∣neated Threads, so much the more the fleshy Masses of the Bowels encrease, and the rest of the Parts also by degrees, are more and more compleated, and grow stronger and stronger, tho' some later, some sooner, according as Nature has use for 'em. XVI. Whence it is that the HeartThe Heart acts, san∣guifies, and beats first of all. manifestly acts, sanguifies, and beats first of all; because the perfection and action of it, is of all others the first and most chiefly necessary: And still the Bran appears like a thicker sort of puddle Water, when all the rest of the Parts are upon their growth: And tho' afterwards it contribute somewhat bene∣ficial to Nourishment, yet in the begin∣ning, when all the slender Delineaments, are but just form'd, contain a kind of fermentaceous Quality in themselves, and neither require nor can endure a strong Fermentation, there is no need of its Assistance. Beside the brain also many other Parts do but very slightly appear, till some time after the first Foundations are laid, and some Parts not till after the birth of the Infant, as the Teeth, tho' they were all delineated at the beginning. For as Nature, the Parts being already delineated, presently acts by their assistance as her eed re∣quires, so does she perfect the Organs not by growth, but as the necessity of Use requires their Perfection. And as we may collect what parts are form'd by their Action, tho' they cannot be discern'd by the Eye, so we may col∣lect that those Parts are of special Use which are first finished, among which are the Heart. XVII. And thus it is apparent,How the Embryo is nourished. that the Embryo is generated out of the prolific Principle contained in the Bubble, that it is afterwards nourish∣ed, first by the Seed of the woman, and the melted remainder of the mans, afterwards with that seminal Nourish∣ment and Blood, and lastly with Blood alone. XVIII. This Opinion of ours isWhether the Seed  ou  after . contrary to theirs, who alledg that man is produc'd and form'd out of the specific Principle alone, that is, out of the spirituous and efficacious part of the Seed, but that the whole Mass of the Seed beside, is altogether un∣profitable, and therefore flows out a∣gain after Conception. True it is, that the first Lineaments or Threads of the whole Body are form'd out of the Egg alone, infused into the wo∣mans Egg and collected in the Bub∣ble; but it is as great a mistake, that after the separation of the prolific Principle, and the real Conception, that the rest of the Seed flows out as un∣profitable, as being repugnant, 1. to Reason. 2. To the Authorities of the best Physicians. 3. To Experience. 1. Reason. Because that when the Seed is received into the Womb, and once Conception happens, the Orifice of the Womb is so exactly closed, that nothing can flow out again. 2. Authorities. For Hippocrates ex∣presly declares, That if a Woman after Copulation does not conceive, the Seed of both Sexes flows out again: But if she conceive, the Seed never flws out again. For that being once cordially embraced, the Womb is closed up, the Orifice being contracted by reason of its Moisture, and as well the womans as the mans Seed are mixed together. So that if a woman has had Children, and observes when the Seed first began to stay in her Body, she shall know the day she conceiv'd. The same Hippocrates in his Treatise
de Natura Puri, has these words. If the Geniture of both Parents stays in the womans Womb, then first, because the wo∣man is seldom at rest, it is mingled, con∣dens'd and thickens with heat. The words of Galen are, If the Seed remains in the Matrix, the woman will conceive. And in another place, I have read all the Physicians that have writ of this Matter, which I find to affirm the same thing, that if a woman will conceive, of neces∣sity the mans Seed must remain in her Bo∣dy. In like manner Macroius. The Seed, says he, that after Injection does not come forth again in seven Hours, may be pro∣nounc'd to stay in order to Conception. Which most of the Ancients, both Greeks, and Arabians, in all their Wri∣tings assert, as having learn'd it from manifold Observation. Among the Moderns, Fernelius, Ludovicus Merca∣tus, and several others, maintain the same Doctrine. 3. Experience. For Galen writes that he has often been told by Persons expe∣rienced in those Affairs, that Mares, Bitches, Asses, Cows, Goats, and Sheep, manifestly retain the Seed in their Wombs; as also, that he himself has frequently made tryal of it, and always observ'd in all Creatures that retain'd their Seed after Conception, and became impreg∣nated, that the Seed was still found in the Womb upon Dissection. Which if Galen found to be always true in brute Animals, why not in Women? But use confirms the same, for women cer∣tainly know themselves to be with child, if they observe their Privities to conti∣nue dry after Copulation, and that none of the Seed comes away from them. Ask a hundred women one after ano∣ther, and they will unanimously confess that to be a certain sign of their Con∣ceiving, and being with Child; and they should certainly know by that sign when they conceived, but that after Copula∣tion in the Night they fall asleep; or after Copulation in the day time, taken up with other business, they never take exact Notice whether the Seed comes from them or no. Which not being diligently observed by 'em, they seldom know certainly when they conceiv'd, and begin their Reckoning from the time they miss'd their Flowers, and so are frequently mistaken in their Ac∣compt. XIX. But neither the foresaid Rea∣son,Harvey's Opinion that the Seed flows out again. nor the Authorities of the most famous Physicians, nor the Acknow∣ledgments of the Women themselves, could prevail so far, but that Harvey will still maintain, that the Seed con∣tributes nothing to the Growth and forming of the Parts, and for that reason asserts, that the Seed either does not enter the Womb, or being entered, flows out again, without Pre∣judice to Conception. Into which Er∣ror he has also drawn Regius, and several other Philosophers. The Rea∣sons that confirm him in his Opinion, he takes from Ocular Testimony, as having dissected several Dos, Hinds, and many other brute Creatures, yet never found any Seed in their wombs, tho' he believes several of those Crea∣tures to have been with young. In Bitches, Conies, and several other Ani∣mals, saith he, I have made tryal, that there is nothing to be found in the womb for several days after Coition, that I am convinced that the Birth does not proceed from the Seed, either of Male or Female injected into the womb in Coition, nor from the menstruous Blood, as the Matter, according to Aristotle, neither that there is any Conception presently after Coition; and that therefore it cannot be true, that in a prolific Coition there is any Matter prepared in the womb, which the Virtue of the male Seed coagulates like Rennet, for there is nothing at all to be seen there∣in for several days. And in another Place, Exercit. 17. In the Cavity of the womb, saith he, I never, could find any Seed of the Male, nor any thing else that render'd toward Conception: And yet the Males every day copulated with the Fe∣males, and I dissected several of those Fe∣males, and this I have always found to be true by the Experience of many Years. Now when after frequent Tryals, I still met with nothing in the Cavity of the Womb, I began at first to dout, whether the Seed of the Man could by any man∣ner of way, either by injection or attracti∣on, enter the Place of Conception. And at length often repeated Inspection con∣firm'd me in the Opinion, that nothing of Seed ever reached those Places. And from hence at last he concludes that the mans Seed neither contain'd in it self the active Power of Forming, nor was the matter out of which the thing was to be form'd; nor that it en∣tered the Womb, or was therein de∣tain'd: And that he might describe the Principle and Subject of Conception, he flies to Quality without Matter, to Spe∣cies without Subject, and an idle Con∣ception of the Womb without the Brain.
For, saith he, because there is nothing sensible to be found in the Womb after Conception, and yet there is a necessity that there should be something to inferti∣lize, and that cannot be Corporeal, it re∣mains that we have Recourse to meer Con∣ception, and Conception of Species without Matter, that no man may question but that the same thing happens here, which happens in the Brain. And a little after, As we from the Conception of a form or Idea in the Brain, produce another like it in our Actions. So the Idea or Species of the Parent being in the Womb, by the assistance of the form∣ing Faculty begets a Birth resembling it, while he imprints upon his Work a Spe∣cies which he has in himself immortal. And so he concludes that Conception is produced in the Womb by the re∣ceiving of Species's without, and that the Womb it self, while it stirs up the forming Faculty according to that Idea conceived in it self, is the principal Cause of Formation, whereas the whole Formation is accomplish'd in the Egg, both in and out of the prolifick Principle of the Seed; and the womb affords nothing but a convenient place and cherishing receptacle for the Seed. XX. Now tho' Deusingius contra∣dictsDeusingi∣us his Opi∣nion. Harvey, yet he seems to be in a great quandary, and shunning Charyb∣dis for fear of falling into Scylla, pro∣poses the Question quite otherwise than Harvey, but confirms his Opinion with no more solidity at all. For he writes that the Seed of the Male, be∣ing injected into the Privities of the Wo∣man, and as it were by infection, changes as well the accidental as substantial tem∣per of the womb and whole body, and confers such a disposition upon the body and the womb, by which it is wrought to the top of maturity, and impregnated, as Fruits are ripen'd by the Summers heat: So that tho' afterwards the whole mass of the Male Seed flow forth of the womb after Coition, or tho' the spirituous por∣tion also exhale into nothing, yet the spirituous substance of the Womans bo∣dy receives such an impression from the said temper, as the spirituous portion of the Man's Seed first made by vertue of its own proper nature. In which words the learned Man seems to ascribe to the Seed of Man in conception no other ef∣fect, than that it changes the disposition of the Woman and her womb, and con∣tributes to it an aptitude to form and find materials, but that the Seed of the Man after coition comes away again, as altogether useless: As if that change of temper, and preparation to maturity, were to be made in coition, so suddainly, and as it were at a jump, by the only in∣jection of the Male Seed; and that the Woman, not long before ripe for Man of her self, through the increase of her own proper heat, and of blood and spi∣rits, did not become fit for the generati∣on of eggs and conception, and that con∣ception did not in a short time happen after coition, but only upon a great and preceding preparation, and a long alte∣ration of the Womans whole body, caus'd by the frequent injection of the Man's Seed. Besides, the Comparison is ill, that the Seed of the Man should mature the Woman, as the Sun ripens the Fruit; because a Woman is not ma∣tur'd by the Man's Seed, but by her own inward heat, and so produces such Fruit, that is, her own Seed included in the Egg, to cherish and ferment the pro∣lific Principle separated from the Man's Seed, and infus'd into the Egg, and to set it at liberty; as also for the generating of the Tunicles and Membranes that enfold the Birth, and for the most pro∣per and convenient Nourishment of the new-form'd Birth. XXI. So that Harvey's InspectionsHarvey deluded both him∣self and Deusingi∣us. into the Conceptions of brute Animals, not only deluded himself but Deusin∣gius, Regius, and several other learn∣ed Men, who suffered themselves to be led astray before they had throughly examin'd the matter. I acknowledge my self to be an admirer of Harvey's Ex∣periments, and his extraordinary Inge∣nuity and Industry in the Dissection of Beasts, and give him great Credit; and I believe that in most Beasts dissected af∣ter Coition, he found no Seed in the Womb: Now it does not follow from thence, what he would infer, That the Seed in Coition does not enter the Womb, and that it comes away again presently after Coition, and yet Concep∣tion happens, and therefore that the Seed is useless in Conception. For that those Inspections of Harvey do not cer∣tainly prove that the Seed was not de∣tain'd in the Womb, when Conception was over, or at the time of conceiving: For tho' he never could find any Seed in the wombs of those Creatures, which he dissected, yet that concludes nothing of certainty, nor proves that those Beasts were impregnated, or that there would have been a Conception from former Coitions, had they been permitted lon∣ger
life. And certainly there are many Arguments that destroy both his Rea∣sons and the Arguments drawn from his Experiments. XXII. 1. The Seed injected mightHarvey's Experi∣ments ex∣amin'd; first, that the Seed might fall out, and so no concep∣tion. come away again after Coition, either of its own accord, as happens in Wo∣men that do not conceive; or shogg'd out, and so there might be no Conception. For he himself writes, that Does and Hinds do copulate every day for a whole Month together, and therefore they ma∣ny times copulate in vain: after which vain Coition the Seed flows again out of the Womb: For generally those Crea∣tures conceive upon the last Copulation, especially those that bring forth but one at a time, because that after Conception they admit the Male no more. Now if Harvey in his Dissections did not light upon one of those Does which had not yet admitted the least conceiving Copu∣lation, or at least had not as yet con∣ceiv'd, 'twas no wonder he found no Seed in their Wombs, as being shaken out after Coition. Thus I remember a∣bout ten years ago, in the Company of several others, I saw a Mare, that as soon as the Horse had covered her, cast out the Seed again; but the Horse con∣tinuing to cover her for three or four days together, at length the last time she retain'd her Seed, and would not admit the Horse to cover her any more: So that if the Mare had been open'd the first or second day, there would have been no Seed found in her womb: But if she had been dissected after the last Coi∣tion, by which she conceiv'd, without doubt there would have been found Seed in her womb. And so would Harvey have found, had he light upon Does that had conceiv'd. For tho' in such a vast Herd of Deer several perhaps might have conceiv'd, it does not follow that he dissected those that were impregnated; altho' he might have accidentally fallen upon the one, as well as the other. 2. While those Creatures, after a long chace, are wearied, frightned, and at length kill'd, 'tis not to be wonder'd at, that tho' they should have conceiv'd two or three days before, if the Seed scarce yet melted should fall out of the womb, the Orifice being open'd, in that vast conturbation of Spirits, both before and after they are taken. For daily Ex∣perience tells us, that many Women upon terrible Frights, have not only cast forth the Seed conceived, but even the Birth it self already form'd. 3. If Bitches, Conies, and other Crea∣tures urine and dung while they are kil∣ling, for fear of death; nay, if the fear of punishment only work the same effects upon some, no wonder that the Females of those Creatures, a few days or hours after Coition, should shed their conceiv'd Seed out of their wombs, while they are killing, and so that no Seed should be found in their wombs. 4. The Seed included in the womb, to the end that something may be produc'd out of it, undergoes a great alteration in the womb; nor does it altogether re∣tain that form of substance which it had when it was first injected; and so per∣haps Harvey did not believe it to be Seed, either being already melted, or else ima∣gining it was not there, because so lit∣tle. XXIII. From what has been said,That Har∣vey's Ex∣periments prove not what he la∣bours to maintain. it appears that Harvey's Experiments cannot prove those things which he la∣bours to maintain by them. And therefore it is not for any to suffer him∣self easily to be perswaded, that the Seed is of no use in Conception, but that it flows out again from the womb, either before or after Conception. And there∣fore I think there is more credit to be given to Galen in this particular, who being inform'd, as well by his own, as the Experiments of others, found the thing to be otherwise. Moreover, I do not believe we ought to deny our credit to rational Women themselves, who by speaking satisfie us, that in Women that conceive, the Seed does not flow forth out of the womb; of which dumb and irrational Creatures are not able to give any account. Lastly, I cannot think there is any credit to be given to the Speculations taken from the sole inspecti∣on into brute Beasts, there being little of certainty in 'em, as being explain'd and wrested, rather according to the preconceived Opinion of the Inspecter, than according to Truth. More than all this, Harvey himself writes, that about the eighteenth, or at most the twentieth day of November, he has seen, sometimes in the right, and sometimes in the left Horn of a Does womb, a transparent colliquated matter, and crystalline, contain'd within its own proper Tunicle, and in the middle bloody Fibres, and a jumping point. Which Matter, since it was not rain'd down from Heaven, I would sain know what else it could be, but the Seed of the Fe∣male inclos'd in the Egg, together with the jumping point, and increas'd by the
mass of the dissolv'd Masculine Seed, en∣compassed with the Chorion and Amnion? Now that he did not find the same Mat∣ter in many others, no question the Rea∣son was, because he seldom lighted upon those Creatures that had conceiv'd. XXIV. And therefore there is noThe Seed, after Con∣ception, flows not out of the womb. doubt to be made, but that the Seed after Conception, neither flows again out of the womb, neither is it, accord∣ing to Aristotle, rarified into Spirit, and dissipated, or that it vanishes any other way, but that it is detain'd with∣in the womb, and thus with that, toge∣ther with that other Seed contain'd in the Womans Egg, the Birth is first of all both cherish'd and nourish'd. XXV. In the mean time I wouldTh Ftus is form'd of the Seed, and nou∣rish'd by the same. not have any man think that I propound things absurd, while I affirm that the Birth is delineated and form'd out of the Seed, and in the beginning by the same Seed is also nourished; and so one and the same Seed serves for two several uses. For in the Seed there are two distinct parts; some spi∣rituous, out of which the Birth is de∣lineated and form'd; others thicker and less spirituous, from whence is ta∣ken the next Matter requisite for the first nourishment of the form'd parts, their increase and greater perfection; yet the Birth can neither be form'd out of those, nor ish'd by them: For the same thing does not form and nourish, but divers parts of the same thing. The same thing happens in the Seed of Man, and all Creatures producing living Con∣ceptions, as in the Seed of a Plant, where∣in Theophrastes acknowledges two parts, one spirituous, upon which the prolific or procreating power depends; the other thicker, that nourishes the spirituous part, by vertue of which the Seed of the Plant springs forth, and casts out some leaves, tho' not set in the Earth, as containing in it self the Nourishment first re∣quir'd. But now let us return to the Bub∣ble from whence the first Nourishment of the Embryo led us astray. XXVI. That the first and sole foun∣dationThe Birth is form'd in the Bubble. of the Birth is wrought in this Bubble, out of the Crystalline humour contain'd therein, and surrounded with a peculiar invisible Pellicle, Hip∣pocrates has observ'd, by that time the Seed has been six days old: for he writes that he has seen the Internal Pel∣licle or little Skin, (that is the Bubble) whose innermost Liquor was transparent, out of the middle of which somewhat thin shot it self forth, which he thought to be the Navel. XXVII. As to the time of Formation,The time of Forma∣tion. there is some dispute about it among Physicians. Hippocrates tells us, that the Seed being receiv'd into the womb, ought to have some appearances upon the seventh day, and that if the A∣bortion thrown out within that time, be put into water, and diligently view'd, all the first foundations of all the parts may be manifestly discern'd therein. Others affirm this Formation of the parts not to be accomplish'd so soon as seven days, but after a longer time. Strato the Peripatetic, and Diocles Cari∣stius, by the report of Macrobius, in his Comment upon Scipio's Dream, asserted that the human figure was form'd with∣in five weeks, or about the thirty fifth day, to the Bigness of a Bee, yet not so, but that all the Members, and all the designed Lineaments of the whole Body appeared in that Epitome. Aristotle a∣verrs, that the little body of the Birth settles as it were in a little Membrane up∣on the fortieth day▪ which being broken, the Birth it self appears about the bigness of a large Emmet, with all the Mem∣bers distinct, and all other things, Geni∣tals and all. Which Opinion of Aristo∣tle may be easily reconciled with that of Hippocrates: For he computes from the time that the Seed was injected into the womb to the whole, and manifest by visible formation of the Birth. Which time he asserts to be in all forty days. Hippocrates begins his Computation from the time that the Birth begins to be form'd into Members; that is to say, af∣ter the Seed being first melted in the womb, and the prolific Principle being separated from it, and fall'n down to the Egg through the Tubes, and there col∣lected in the Bubble, (all which is done within the first days,) at length it begins to be dispers'd for the delineation of the Parts. Moreover, Aristotle describes the perfect and visible; Hippocrates the rude and scarce visible Formation of all the Parts: these requiring more, the other fewer days. Fernelius, agreeing with Aristotle, writes that he has seen a per∣fect Birth within the fortieth day; but does not tell us how big it was. Others more modern, say, they have observ'd it as big and as long as the little finger,
within that time, toward the end of the third Month, about a handful long, and toward the fifth about a foot long; which however does not seem to be very pro∣bable, when I have seen the contrary with my own eyes. But without que∣stion those Modern Authors were de∣ceived i this, that they did not under∣stand the exact beginning of the Con∣ception, as is apparent from the follow∣ing Histories of Abortive Births. XXVIII. Harvey writes, that in aFirst Hi∣story. Female Conception as big as an Hen Egg, he found the Birth as long as a good big Bean, with a pretty big Head, which the Brain out-grew, like a kind of Comb; and that the Brain was like curdl'd Milk. Instead of a Scull there was a Membrane somewhat resembling Leather; and the Face appear'd shap'd like a Dogs, without any Nose to be seen. XXIX. Some years since I had anThe Second History. opportunity to see an Abortion of a few weeks, upon which I made these Ob∣servations. The bigness of the Abor∣tion, together with the Membrane, was about the quantity of an Hen-egg. The Chorion loose, wrinkled, and somewhat rough and hairy without side, sprinkled with many very small Veins, all which met together at the top of it, to which there stuck a small, fleshie, long, shape∣less, and bloody Mass, from whence the said Veins seem'd to derive themselves. Furthermore, the same Chorion was ea∣sily separated from the Amnion, and that with a very slight handling, except in that part where the said little piece of flesh stuck. But within the Amnion a certain watery Dissolution, somewhat viscous, and plentiful enough. In the middle of which there swam a small Em∣bryo every way free, and no where stick∣ing to the Amnion. The Trunk of this Body was hardly so big as the half of a small Pea slit in two. At the top of which the Head was fasten'd to a most slender Neck, about as big as a silk Thread. The Head was very big in comparison of the Trunk, equalling the fourth part of the whole Trunk; where∣in black Eyes were very conspicuous; the Nose did not swell out, but in the place of it there appear'd a certain white Line. Nothing of the Ears was to be seen, as neither the Shape nor opening of the Mouth, only a small overthwart Line offered it self to view in the same place. Instead of a Scull, a thin Mem∣brane git the Brain, which shew'd like the diminutive white of an Egg. The Trunk did not seem distinguish'd into two Bellies, but seem'd to consist all of one Belly, and in the inner part of it cer∣tain small Bowels, covered with a thin transparent small Membrane, shew'd themselves, but so confusedly, that they could not be distinguish'd one from the other. A little below the middle of the Trunk a slender whitish small Branch issued forth, which was the Navel, but so short, that the length of it hardly ex∣ceeded half the breadth of a slender Straw. Moreover, there appear'd above, certain obscure delineations of the Arms; below, of the Thighs and Legs, in which the Fingers and Toes were on∣ly distinguish'd by small little Lines. This Woman, when she miscarried, thought her self to have been gone seven or eight weeks of her time. XXX. Two years after that, ano∣therThe Third. Woman miscarried: the Aborti∣on was about the bigness of a small Hen-egg. Without a fleshie Particle stuck fast to the Membranes; out of which fleshie Particle, the Vessels of the Chorion deriv'd themselves, as I have observ'd in the preceding Abortion. But this was a little bigger, as being a∣bout the bigness of half a Nutmeg. The Chorion being open'd, no Liquor flow'd forth; for there was nothing contain'd between the two Membranes, nor could the Allantois or Urinary Tunicle be seen among 'em. Nevertheless the Chorion did not stick to the Amnion, but only was as it were placed upon it, and was ea∣sily separated from it, with little hand∣ling, unless where the little piece of flesh was joyn'd to it on the outer side, for there the Amnion was fasten'd to the Chorion. Within the Amnion the Dis∣solution was found to be moderate as to quantity, in the middle o  I found a small Embryo, with a large Head in comparison of the whole, because that all the rest of the little Body seem'd to be three or four times bigger than the Head, which was no bigger than a small Pea, and joyn'd with a small neck about the thickness of three silk Threads twist∣ed together. In the hinder part of this lay the Brain, like a white Comb, and the whole Head was surrounded with a whole Skin, under which was the soft Brain stirr'd up like the white of an Egg. In the part before little black Eyes were apparently conspicuous, but no Ears ap∣pear'd. A white little Line mark'd out the Place for the Nose and Mouth. The
rest of the Body shew'd it self rudely de∣lineated into a Trunk and small Arteries; but was much more soft than in the fore∣going Abortment, like a thicker sort of Slime, that would not endure the least touch without suffering an Injury. Per∣chance this extraordinary softness pro∣ceeded from some Corruption, and be∣cause the Embryo had been dead for some time; for the Lady had been ill three or four weeks before she miscarried, not knowing she was with Child. XXXI. In the Year 1663. in De∣cember,The fourth. the same Lady again Mis∣carried, after her Husband thought she had been six weeks gone. The A∣bortment was about the bigness of a small Hen-egg. The fleshie Particle outwardly cleaving to the Membranes was much bigger than in the foregoing Abortments, extending it self half way the Chorion. Within the Membranes there was a sufficient quantity of dissolv'd Juice. Upon the dissolution swam the slender Embryo, about the bigness of a great Emet, where the Head, manifestly to be distinguish'd, appear'd fasten'd to the small Trunk, with two diminutive black little points, designing the place of the Eyes: The Trunk was somewhat bow'd like the Keel of a Boat, wherein some Bowels seem'd to appear, but so confusedly as not to be distinguish'd: and for Arteries, there were none visible. Besides this little Embryo, a little crystal Bubble still swam upon the same dis∣solv'd Juice, (such as I found in the foregoing Abortments together with the Embryo,) about the bigness of a small Filbird, of a most transparent colour, wherein I could not perceive any deli∣neations of the Embryo: perhaps out of this the Female Birth might be after∣wards delineated; which they say is la∣ter brought to perfection than the Male, and so the production of Twins might happen. XXXII. Now if the Embryo in theThe vani∣ty of some men who pretend to shew dry'd Abort∣ments, since scarce any thing can be discern'd before the fortieth day. eighth or ninth week be no bigger than a Pea or a Tare, and about the fortieth day be no bigger than a large Emet, cer∣tainly their demonstrations are to be accompted very ridiculous, who shewing some diminutive dry'd Abortments to be seen, endeavour'd to perswade their Spectators that one is the Conception of six or eight days, the other of thirteen days or a fortnight; when as they are much bigger than those by me seen and describ'd; and that it is altogether ve∣ry probable, that scarce any thing of the form'd Embryo can be discern'd by the Eye before the fortieth day. Be∣sides that, it is manifest from the first form'd Embryo, that the whole mass of the Male and Female Seed cannot be wasted in forming so small a Body, when out of the least drop of it such a small Body may be form'd as big as a large Emet: Therefore the rest of the mass, which flows not out of the womb, nor is wasted in forming the parts, cherises and nourishes those parts soon after, and contributes to their growth. But because that residue of the Seed is soon consum'd presently, therefore a plentiful milkie Juice supplies its room, which then be∣gins to flow into the Amnion, and that plentifully when the Umbilical Vessels are grown to their due bulk. XXXIII. From what has been said,The Birth not form'd of the whole mass of Seed. it is apparently manifest, that the Birth is form'd, not of the whole mass of the Seed, but only of the most spirituous and thinnest part thereof, collected first like a transparent Crystal into a dimi∣nutive Bubble, as has been already said before. And now what others have observed, and I my self have seen in reference to this Bubble, let us now in few words take notice. XXXIV. Riolanus Animad vers.First Ob∣servation concerning the Bubbl of Riola∣nus. in Laurent. tit. de formato Foetu, sets down this Observation in reference to the Crystalline Bubble. Lately, says he, there was brought me the producti∣on of one Month, like a small Hens egg, so wrapt about with its Membranes; of which the outermost was, as it were, like small flocks, and very fibrous, the beginning and foundation of the Placenta. This Mem∣brane being slit, three little baggs were con∣spicuous within, contiguous one to another like little Clusters of Grapes. Within those Vessels was contain'd a transparent water: and in one of the Bladders which was the middlemost, was to be seen a little Body like an Emet, and a fine slender Thread pro∣duc'd from it. That little Body resembled a Birth without form, and not to be distin∣guish'd, as far as could be discern'd by the Eye, most nicely beholding that Miracle of Nature: But the ruddy Thread mark'd out the Navel. XXXV. This Passage does not aThe dis∣course con∣cerning the Bubble il∣lustrates the Proposi∣tion. little illustrate our understanding of the Bubble. But I except against one Error therein, arising from a pre∣conceived Opinion, that the Embryo
was forthwith nourish'd by the Navel: And I believe that Riolanus was ve∣ry much out as to that same Thread, which he alledges to be the Navel. For as it is apparent from our second preceding Relation, if in that Embryo seen by my self, newly broken forth from the Bubble, and narrowly inspected by my own Eyes, to which I give more cre∣dit than to the sayings of others; and then more perfectly form'd, the Navel scarcely swell'd out to the breadth of half a small Straw, nor any farther cast forth any Thread, how much less could the Navel▪thread be any farther extended from this same rude, undistinguishable, and scarcely begun Birth. Furthermore, at the beginning the parts are increas'd swifter or slower, according to the more or less necessity of their use. And in re∣gard that at the beginning there is as yet no necessity of their Use, in regard the Birth does not as yet want Umbili∣cal Blood, hence it comes to pass, that at the beginning it is extended to a con∣spicuous length, but afterwards by de∣grees grows out of the Birth; as we shall make appear Cap. 32. XXXVI. The same Riolanus addsThe second Observati∣on of Rio∣lanus. another Observation of the same Na∣ture, out of Carpus's Commentaries upon Mundinus, wherein Carpus ob∣serves three little Bubbles touching each other. So also Platerus, Quaest. Med. Quaest. 1. writes, that in an Abortion about the bigness of a Filbird, he found three little Bubbles within a thin Amnion, and be∣lieves them to be the Foundations of the three principal Parts, the Heart, Brain, and Liver. For my part I never saw so small an Abortion, about the bigness of a Filbird, nor ever read of any one be∣sides Platerus that ever saw such another. Besides, the Citations lately produced out of Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Riola∣nus teach us, that the Opinion of Pla∣terus cannot be true, from whence it is apparent that the Birth is wholly deli∣neated, form'd, and to be found in one Bubble only: In the other two Riolanus found a transparent Water▪ Carpus be∣lieves that Embryo's would have also been found in those Bubbles full of transparent Water, had they stay'd lon∣ger in the womb, but Female ones, which are later form'd. Which, according to the Experiments of Hippocrates and Ari∣stotle, in some measure seems probable. At least, this is most certain, that in and out of the transparent Liquor of one Bubble, the Birth is delineated and form'd. And therefore I am perswaded that three Bubbles, as those learned Per∣sons saw 'em, are very rarely to be seen, but that generally there is but one in the Conception, unless when a Woman conceives Twins, or three Children at a time; to which there must be added a fourth Bubble in Women that conceive more, like the Scotch-women, who fre∣quently conceive four at a time. XXXVII. Now I am the more con∣firm'dThe third Observati∣on. in this Opinion, by an Aborti∣on that was brought to me at the same time that I was writing and inquiring into these things, by a noted Midwife, in which I found not Three, but only one Bubble surrounded with a thin Cobweb-like Membrane. This lay hid between a plentiful Seminal Colliquati∣on, which was watery, somewhat thick and viscous, wrapt about with two Mem∣branes, the Chorion and the Amnion, and swam at the top of it, free, and no where joyning to the Amnion. But to those external Membranes, in one very little part, there stuck without side, a certain small, fleshie, soft, formless, and bloody Mass, about the bigness of the twelfth part of the Abortion, which be∣ing somewhat endammaged in the outer∣most part of it, seem'd to have been torn from the Womb. The Bubble con∣tained a transparent Water, clear as Cry∣stal; wherein I could observe neither a∣ny blood, nor any thing else, unless it were some very small little Lines, hard∣ly discernable, which were without doubt the outside Lineaments of the Embryo. The Woman that thus miscarried, knew not that she had conceiv'd, but being struck with a suddain and more than or∣dinary dread, cast that Matter out of her womb without any pain, and little strain∣ing. XXXVIII. About the same time IThe fourth Observati∣on. saw another very young Conception up∣on the Miscarriage of a Minister's Wife, wherein I found in like manner one only Bubble very transparent and Crystalline, about the bigness of a Fil∣bird, wherein there appear'd no little Lines, either bloody, white, or of any other Colour. To the exteriour Mem∣brane of that wrapt about the Colli∣quation, there stuck also very close, as in the former, a little fleshie and bloody Particle, endammaged without side, and as it were torn from the womb. From this most tender little Mass, I apparently observ'd certain Blood-bearing little
Vessels to derive themselves and to spread themselves very numerously tho∣rough the Chorion. But in the inner part of the Amnion, besides the seminal watry Colliquation, upon which the Bubble swam, I could not observe any thing bloody, nor any small Vessels in the Substance of it. These two Mem∣branes were easily to be separated one from the other, neither was there any Liquor contained between 'em. XXXIX. The Magnitude of theseThe Colli∣quated Matter & Bubble proceeds both from the man and wo∣mans Seed. two Abortions, the foregoing and this, was about the bigness of a Hen-Egg, and their Membranes contained more of the Colliquation than half an Egg∣shell would hold; which in regard it could not altogether with the Bubble proceed from the mans Seed, of ne∣cessity the womans Seed must be mix∣ed with it, tho' the Bubble without all Question sprang solely out of the mans Seed. XL. Taught by these two Experi∣ments,In one Birth, but one only Bubble. I am apt to believe, that there is but only one Bubble in the Concep∣tion generally, and seldome any more, unless when more Births are to be form'd. But tho' hitherto I never saw any more, yet I am loth to contradict the Experience of Riolanus, Carpus, and Platerus, or to doubt of the Truth of it: And perhaps it may be my Chance to see more at another time. XLI. In the Formation of theIn what Order the Parts are form'd. Birth, the more curious Question yet remains; which Parts of the Body are form'd in the first place, which in the second, which in the third, and which in the last Place. Aristot. l. de Invent. Writes that the Heart of Creatures endued with Blood is the first generated, which he observ'd in Eggs, after the Hen had sate three Days and as many Nights, as he asserts l. 6. de hist. Animal. Ent is of Aristotle's Opini∣on, believing the Heart first to be form'd, and to be the efficient Cause of the forming the rest of the Parts. The Seed, says he, emitted in Copulation into the Womb by the Male, constitutes only the Heart in Conception; for no part of the Creature consists of Seed besides the Heart. And in another place, he says, That the Heart moves not only after the Birth is form'd, but also from the Beginning, and is the efficient, not the material Cause of the Formation. With Ent seems Regi∣us to agree, l. 4. Philos. Natur. Others believe the Brain, others the Liver, o∣thers that they are all three form'd to∣gether; and afterwards the Guts, the Spleen, and Lungs. And this is the O∣pinion of Galen, l. 4. de Usu Partium, which many follow. The Humour, says he, that smears the inner Surface of the Womb, is turn'd into a Membrane, wherein the forming Spirit being every way enclosed, puts forth its natural Mo∣tions, procreating three Points, answering to the three principal Parts, which being swell'd and distended by the Violence of the Heat, form their Bellies, the Heart, the Breast, the Brain, the Head, the Liver, the Abdomen. Then the other Parts are delineated and form'd together, and then by degrees flows the thin Blood to their Nourishment. Others with Bauhinus, be∣lieve the umbilical Vessels to be first produced, as being chiefly and first of all necessary in respect of Nourishment. Others affirm the Bones to be first form'd, as being the Basis and necessary Foun∣dation of the whole Body. And thus one judges one way, another another way, of a thing so obscure. But who, I would fain know survey'd Nature at her work, that he should be able to know all these things so exactly? If the Embryo in forty days be no bigger than an Emmet, how small must it be upon the thirtieth Day? within which time ne∣vertheless all the Delineations are per∣fect, tho' not discernable to our Eyes. Who in that small Body shall deter∣mine which Part is formed first, which in the second, and which in the last Place? These are Mysteries which the sublime Creator thought fit to conceal from our Understanding: so that if we make any farther Inquiry into 'em, Galen will reprehend us. If thou inqut∣rest, says he, over nicely how these things are made, thou wilt be convinced that thou understand'st neither thy own Weak∣ness, nor the Omnipotency of the Work∣master. XLII. In the mean time, if it beAll the Parts form'd to∣gether. lawful in a Matter so obscure to make any Conjectures, I believe that all the solid Parts are delineated and form'd together, because they do not mutual∣ly depend one upon another, but are all the immediate Works of Nature. Moreover one cannot be, or act with∣out the other: A Body cannot be without a more solid Foundation, which is afterwards to be Bony. The Heart cannot act without Veins and Arteries, nor the Brain without
Nerves, nor the Stomach without Guts, &c. For there is no reason why one Part should be form'd be∣fore another. In the foresaid Bubble the Matter is contain'd which is proper for the Generation of all the Parts, which wants no farther Preparation; and the Architectonic Spirit may equally delineate and form at the same time all the Parts out of the same matter. And wherefore should it form the Heart, as Ent would have it, sooner than the other Parts? To prepare Matter for the Ge∣neration of the rest? That's done alrea∣dy. Certainly it cannot be said that the Heart generates and forms other Parts, when it only prepares Matter for the Nourishment and Growth of the whole, from which not their Generation pro∣ceeds, but their greater Perfection be∣ing generated to perform their several Offices. For if the Heart at the begin∣ning should generate other Parts, why does it not produce new Parts after the Birth of the Infant, when it is stronger, and operates more powerfully? That it prepares Nourishment for all the Parts after the Child is born, is confessed by all, why should it not do the same at the beginning? Shall it have any other Action assigned it at this, than at ano∣ther time. But you will say the Heart is first of all conspicuous, the rest of the Bowels and all the other Parts appear later, and therefore is first form'd. Now who can discern in an Embryo, at the be∣ginning, no bigger than an Emmet, what Parts are already form'd with the beating Heart? Which tho' it be the defect of our Sight, yet Reason suffici∣ently teaches us, that all the Parts are delineated together, since the Harmony of all together is so great and so neces∣sary, that they cannot subsist or act one without another. And indeed it seems but probable that the forming Spirits contain'd in the Bubble, and beginning the Formation of all the Parts more vi∣gorously perform their Work, and more speedily strengthen and perfect all Parts already delineated, after they are at more Liberty from the thicker Colli∣quation, as being assisted by the Heat of the Heart, excited and kindled by a particular Fermentation: But certain it is, that before that Assistance they began the Formation of all and singular the Parts: Of which, tho' such and such first appear, in the forming whereof most Spirits were employ'd, and of which there is the greatest Necessity for their Use, however this does not exclude the De∣lineation of the rest of the Parts, which our Sight cannot discern. XLIII. Here if any one will objectAn Objecti∣on here an∣swered. that perhaps the spermatick Parts are delineated together, but that the bloo∣dy Parts are afterwards of necessity to be produc'd. I answer, that when we speak of the Formation of the Parts, we speak of the first Delinea∣tions, or Out-lines of all the Parts, and all those we say are form'd out of the Seed alone; into which the bloo∣dy Nutriment is afterwards infused, by which they acquire a greater Bulk and Bigness. Yet in the mean time there is no bloody part in the whole Body, which is not intermixed with sper∣matic Threads: and so no part can tru∣ly be said to be form'd out of the Blood, and to subsist without a spermatic Foun∣dation. This was the ancient Opinion of Hippocrates. All the Members, says he, are discerned and augmented together, not one before or after another: only those that are naturally bigger, are seen before the other, tho' they were not form'd be∣fore. And in another place, There is not in my Opinion, any beginning of the Body; but all the Parts seem equally to be both beginning and end together. For the Circle being drawn, there is no end to be found. Now what Parts are first visible, how the order of Formation proceeds gra∣dually, as far as the Eye can discern, is elegantly described by Harvey, Tract. de generat. Animal. whom the Reader may do well to consult, together with Antony Everard in his Lib. de Ortu Ani∣mal. XLIV. But now seeing the form'dWhether the Brain in the Embryo makes ani∣mal Spirits and per∣forms ani∣mal Acti∣ons. Parts came once to associate to them∣selves, and assimilate the Nourishment brought 'em, and so begin to grow by Nutrition; seeing the Heart also be∣gins its natural Action of Sanguifica∣tion from its smallest Point or Be∣ginning: Some more curiously inquire; whether the Brain, which is very soft in the Embryo, makes animal Spirits, and by their Assistance performs ani∣mal Actions. I answer, That as the Actions of many parts are idle at first, as of the Lungs, Eyes, Ears, Teeth, and Stones, &c. Of which there is no absolute Necessity at the Beginning; so the Actions of the Brain, Liver, and Spleen being more necessary, be∣gin
at the Beginning, but so weakly, by reason of the Infirmity of the Or∣gans, that they cannot be discern'd. But by degrees the more perfect they grow, the more perceptible they are. And hence it is probable that the Brain at the beginning may begin to make a∣nimal Spirits, but very few and very weak, because there is less need of 'em at the beginning: But the stronger the Brain grows, and the more need of Spi∣rits there is, the stronger and more vigo∣rous Spirits it makes. As is apparent by that time a woman has gone half her time, when the Child begins to stir, which Motion cannot be perform'd with∣out those more plentiful Spirits. And from that time the Brain is so corrobo∣rated, that at length it begets more plen∣tiful and vigorous Spirits fit to perform the chiefest animal Actions. Which prin∣cipal Actions however are idle in the Birth inclosed in the Womb, where there is no occasion or necessity of Ima∣gination, Thought, or Memory: But the Infant being born; the Brain increa∣sing in Strength, begets more vigorous and efficacious Spirits. Therefore Chil∣dren as they are weaker of Body, so are they weaker in their Intellectuals: Be∣cause the Faculties of the Soul do not well perform their Offices till the Organs are perfect; only the Feeling and mo∣ving Faculties begin to act from the time of the Childs quickning. For from that time the Motion of the Infant is peceived by the Mother, and the Birth sympathizes with the Mothers Pains. Which Cardanus proves by pouring cold water upon the Belly of the Mother, for thereby the Infant will beforc'd to move in the womb, and by that means he tries whether women with Child are quick or no. XLV. I shall here add one thingWhether the Child in the Womb sleeps and wakes? more, which is controverted among the Philosophers whether the Infant wakes and sleeps in the Womb? A∣vicen utterly denies any such thing. However Women with Child will tell ye, that they manifestly feel the Mo∣tion of the Child when it is awake, and the resting of it when it sleeps. But we are to say that Sleep is the Rest of the Senses for the repairing and re∣newing the animal Spirits wasted by watching, occasioned by the Contracti∣on of the Pores and Passages of the Brain. On the contrary that Wakeful∣ness is a convenient opening of the Pores of the Brain, and flowing in of the ani∣mal Spirits through them into the Or∣gans of the Senses, sufficient for the performance of their Actions. But nei∣ther of these can be said to belong to the birth included in the womb. For First; the Spirits are not wasted, but only few, and those weak are made, and therefore the Rest, which is in the Infant unborn, cannot be call'd Sleep, because it pro∣ceeds not from the Causes of Sleep, that is to say, the wast of the Spirits, and the Contraction of the Pores of the brain, nor has it the end of Sleep, which is the Restoration of decay'd and wasted Spi∣rits. Secondly, The Motion of the In∣fant cannot be said to be waking, be∣cause it wants the true Causes of waking, which is the opening of the Pores of the brain, and an Influx of Spirits into the Organs of Sense, sufficient to perform the Actions of the Senses. The first can∣not be, by reason of the extream Moi∣sture and Softness of the brain: Nor the latter, by reason there is not as yet generated a sufficient Quantity of Spirits. Moreover the Motion and Feeling of the Infant does not presuppose a necessity of waking: For that men grown up, and matur'd by age, when fast asleep many times tumble and toss in their Sleep, and sometimes walk and talk, and being prick'd feel and contract their injured Members, and yet never wake. There∣fore we must conclude that the Infant in the womb cannot be truly said to sleep or wake, but only sometimes to rest and sometimes to be mov'd. XLVI. Here perhaps by way of aAnother . What is the Architecto∣nic Vertue? Corollary some one may ask me, what is that same Architectonic Vertue la∣tent in the prolific Seed which per∣forms the Formation of the Parts? In the foregoing Chapter we have dis∣coursed at large concerning the enli∣vening Spirit implanted in the Prolific Seed, as it is the Subject of the first forming Spirit; but because no Spirit of it self and by its own Power, seems able to perfect Generation, unless it have in its self some effective Principle, by virtue whereof it produces that Effect; hence the Question arises what that is that af∣fords that active Force to the Spirit, and power to form a living body, and en∣dues the Matter with all manner of Per∣fection, and produces Order, Figure, Growth, Number, Situation, and those other things which are observed in li∣ving bodies? Which is a thing hitherto unknown, and has held the Minds of all Philosophers in deep Suspense. Of whom the greatest part have rather chosen ta∣citly
to admire the Supream Operator and his work, than to unfold him, and so affirm with Lactantius, That Man contributes nothing to his Birth but the Matter, which is the Seed, but that all the rest is the handy work of God, the Concep∣tion, the forming of the Body, the inspira∣tion of the Soul, and the conservation of the Parts. In which sense, says Harvey, most truly and piously does he believe, who deduces the Generations of all things from the same Eternal and Omnipotent Deity; upon whose pleasure depends the Universa∣lity of the things themselves. But others, who believe that the Bounds of Nature are not so slightly to be skipped over, nor think that in the Inquiries after the Principles of Generation, there is such a necessity to have recourse to the first Architect and Governour of the whole Universe, but that the first forming and efficient Cause created by God, with the Things themselves, and infus'd and planted within 'em, is to be sought out of the Things themselves, more arro∣gantly have presum'd to give us a clear∣er Explication of the Matter by Philo∣sophical Reason, yet differing in their Opinions, which are various and ma∣nifold. XLVII. For Galen calls this Ar∣chitectonicWhat the Architecto∣nic Power i? vari∣ous Opini∣ons about it. Power, sometimes by the name of Nature; sometimes Natural Heat, sometimes the Inbred Tempe∣rament, sometimes the Spirit, which he affirms to be a Substance of it self moveable, and always moveable. Ari∣stotle distinguishing between the Heat or Spirit of the Seed and Nature; asserts the Artichectonic Power to be that Nature which is in the Spirit of the Seed; and therefore distinct from the Spirit it self, which is inherent in the Spirit as in its Subject, and acts upon the Spirit as its Matter. This Nature in the Spirit of the Seed was also acknowledged by Hippocrates; saying, That it is learned, tho' it has not learnt rightly to act. Not that it is Rational, but because, as Galen explains it, it acts of it self all that is necessary to be acted, without any direction. Hence Deusingius defines it to be a certain immaterial Sub∣stance arising out of the Matter so deter∣min'd to the Matter by the Supream God, that it can neither be, nor subsist, nor ope∣rate without it. This same Architectonic Vertue, o∣thers, with Avicen, call the Intelligence; others, with Averrhoes and Scotus, a Coe∣lestial Force, or a Divine Efficacy. Ia∣cob Scheggius calls it , o , active or forming Reason; and says that by the word Reason, or ; he understands a Substantial Form, which is not to be apprehended by Sense, but by the Understanding and Reason. And so while he seems to speak something, he says nothing at all. XLVIII. The Platonics call it aThe opini∣on of the Platonists General Soul diffus'd through the whole World, which according to the diversity of Materials and Seeds, pro∣duces various Generations; as a Plant from the Seed of a Plant, a Man from the Seed of a Man, a Horse from that of a Horse, a Fish from that of aPlotinus makes a di∣stinction between the Architecto∣nic Vertue and the Platonic Soul of the World. Fish, &c. But Plotin, the great Plato∣nist, distinguishes this same Architecto∣nic Vertue from the Platonic Soul of the World, as produc'd from that by which it is produc'd: and therefore he calls it Nature flowing from the Soul of the World; which he says is the Essential Act of it, and the Life depending upon it. Themistius says; that the forming Power is the Soul inclos'd in the Seed, po∣tentially enliven'd. Deusingius, in his Original of the Soul, calls it Nature in the Seed; that is, as he explains himself, a Soul potentially subsisting in the Seed, be∣ing in it self the Beginning and Cause of Motion: But in a Body already form'd, he calls it the Soul actually subsisting. And so without any necessity at all, distin∣guishes one and the same thing into two, and gives it two distinct names, as it ei∣ther rests or acts, and according to the diversity of the Subject to be form'd, or else already form'd. Just as if a man distinguishing between a Painter lazily sleeping, or painting awake, should call the one, Nature latent in his Spirit, as one that could paint if he were awake; and the other a real Painter, as one actually painting: as if the Painter that slept were not as much a Painter, as he that actual∣ly painted. Whereas, as it appears by the Effects, that which is able to form a Body at first out of the Seed, and that which actually forms, were not one and the same thing: and so by a certain continuation the form of the thing formed remains. This Opinion of his Deusingius seems to have drawn from the Institutes of the Platonists; who di∣stinguish between the Soul, and Being a Soul, that is, between the Substance of the Soul, which is said to be in the Seed, and the Appellation of Nature, and the Soul which acts at this prsent, and is the form of the form'd Body. Fernelius calls the Plastic Power a Spirit; but he does
not mean such a common Spirit, which the Physicians say is rais'd by the prepa∣rations of the Bowels out of the Hu∣mours; but some other Spirit of far sub∣limer Excellency: For, says he, this Spi∣rit is an Ethereal Body, the Seat and Bond of Heat and the Faculties, and the first In∣strument of the Duty to be perform'd. And Lib. 2. de Abdit. c. 10. he believes it to be something that flows down from Hea∣ven: For, says he, the Heaven without a∣ny Seed produces many, both Creatures and Plants, but the Seed generates nothing without the Heaven. The Seed only pre∣pares aptly and conveniently Materials for the begetting of Things; the Heaven sends into the Matter prepar'd Form, and con∣summate Perfection, and raises Life in all Things. A little after he adds, One Form of Heaven within its Power comprehends all the Forms that ever were or can be of all Creatures, Plants, Stones, and Metals, and impregnated with those innumerable Forms, casts as in a Mold, and generates all things out of it self. XLIX. Others believe the PlasticOpinions concerning this Plastic Vertue. Vertue to be a certain Power flowing into the Seed from the Soul of the Mo∣ther. Others call it a Vegetative Soul; and make no distinction between this and Nature; but say that Fertile Seed of necessity must be enlivened. This Soul of the Seed Iulius Scaliger and Ludovicus Mercatus stiffly defend. And Sennertus following their footsteps, Institut. Med. lib. 1. cap. 10. has these words: They seem all to me to be in an Error, who deny the Soul, which is the Cause of Formation, to be in the Seed: For if you grant the forming power to be in the Seed, you must allow the Soul to be likewise in it. For in regard the Powers are not separable from the Soul, of which they are the Powers, it is impossible that the Powers proper to any thing should be in a Subject, wherein the Form is not from whence the Power slows. And since we come to the know∣ledge of the latent Essence by the Operations, what's the reason we do not attribute a Soul to the Seed, that sufficiently manifests it self therein by its Operations. But they are two: the enlivening of the Seed and the Con∣ception; and the forming of all the parts that are necessary for the Actions of Life. For every Soul, as is manifest in the Seed of Plants, is preserv'd while the Soul is in it, and remains prolific for some time; and while it is sound and uncorrupted, in a proper place, and with convenient Nou∣rishment, operates as living, and exercises its operations upon the matter at hand; which is not only to be seen in some Crea∣tures by the Action it self, but in the rege∣nerating of some parts, especially in Plants. For the same Operations are observ'd in the Seed, and in Plants sound in all their parts, which shew the same Agent in both. For it is altogether the same Operation whereby the Soul latent in the Seed forms the Body of the Plant out of the Matter at∣tracted, and afterwards every year restores the fallen Leaves and gather'd Flowers, and thrusts out new Branches and new Roots; and therefore it is a sign and Argument of the same Faculty, and of the same Soul. And this not only in Plants, but also in the Seeds of perfect Creatures, must of necessi∣ty be allow'd to be done: For as the Flesh is not made out of Blood, unless the Flesh it self enliven'd change the Blood into Flesh, much less shall a Creature be made of Seed, if the Seed want a Soul. And a little af∣ter he adds; For the Body of Creatures be∣ing the most excellent and perfect, it follows that what is not enlivened cannot be the principal Cause of the enlivened Body, but that the Body enlivened is produced by a Body enlivened as the principal Cause. And certainly these Arguments of Sen∣nertus are of great weight to prove that there is a Vegetative Soul in all generated Bodies: which is also stiffly maintain'd by Deusingius, De Gener. Foet. in Utero, part. 2. sect. 1. L. But because a Doubt may hereWhence the Seed has its Soul. arise, from whence the Seed has this Soul, it will not be amiss to add some∣thing for the clearer illustration and confirmation of the said Opinion. We must know then that▪ all and singular the parts of a living animated Body, ought to participate of that Soul, and to live by it; and hence that which is separated to the perfection of the Seed out of the several parts, ought also to participate of the same Soul, which is also to inter∣mix with the Mass of the Seed. And because out of all and every part, some∣thing of most spirituous parts, like A∣toms, is allow'd to the making and per∣fection of the Seed; hence it comes to pass, that the Epitome of the whole anima∣ted Body endu'd with the like Soul, is contain'd in the Seed: and that Soul, the Seed being deposited in a convenient place, is separated from the thicker parts of the Seed, by the Heat, with that same Matter of the Seed wherein it inheres, that is to say, the most spirituous part divided from all and every the other parts, and rows'd into Action, and so throughout forms a resemblance to that form which is separated together with
that same subtile part of the Seed; un∣less prevented and hinder'd in its Opera∣tion, or that it be extinguish'd and suffo∣cated by any defect of the Heat or cir∣cumfus'd Matter. LI. But it may be objected, ThatAn objecti∣on, that the forms of a∣nimated Being are indivisible, answered. the Forms of animated Beings are in∣divisible, and hence that no parts of the Soul can be separated from the sin∣gle parts, but that those parts meeting together in the Seed, constitute the whole and entire Soul: To which I answer; That the Forms of animated Beings are not of themselves divisible; however they may be divided according to the division of the Matter, so that the Matter be such, wherein the Soul can commodiously lye hid, and out of which it may be rais'd again to its du∣ty, by the natural Heat temper'd to a convenient degree. This is apparent to the Eye in a Willow, wherein any Bough being torn off from the Tree, the Soul is divided according to the division of the Matter, and as it remains in the Tree it self, so likewise in the Bough; as appears by its Operation. For that Bough being planted in a moist Ground, the present Soul acts in it forthwith, and produces Leaves, Roots, and Boughs, and the Mother Tree it self shews no less the presence of the Soul in it self by the same Operations. So likewise in Creatures, that same spirituous Essence which is separated from all the several living parts to be carried to the Seed, participates of the same Soul of the parts out of which it is separated, as being a∣ble to afford a convenient Domicil for the Soul, (seeing that where such a Do∣micil cannot be afforded, the living Soul fails) and so being mix'd with the Seed, it causes the Seed to be potentially anima∣ted, if the substance of the Seed be right∣ly tempered; which Soul, potentially lying hid therein, the Seed being deposi∣ted in a convenient place, being after∣wards freed from the Fetters of the thicker Substance wherein it is enclos'd, is rais'd into Action; and acting forms out of the Subject wherein it inheres, like parts to those out of which the Separati∣on was made, as being of the same Spe∣cies with the Soul out of which it was se∣parated. LII. And therefore when it is saidHow Ari∣stotle and his Follow∣ers are to be under∣stood. by Aristotle, and other Philosophers, That the Soul lies hid potentially only in the Seed; this is not to be under∣stood, as if the Essence of the Soul were not present, but in reference to its being intangled in the other thicker Matter of the Seed, so that it cannot act till disintangled from it, the Seed being deposited in some convenient place, by the Heat which dissolves the said Matter; but so separated, it acts forthwith: and out of its spirituous Subject separated from the parts of the Creature, delineates and forms what is to be form'd, and increases it with the next adjacent Nutriment. For the Seed being of the number of Effici∣ents, and seeing every Agent acts, not as it is potentially but actually such, it must not be denied but that the Soul is actu∣ally in the Seed, tho' by reason of the Impediments its Action does not present∣ly appear. LIII. But here it may be question'd,Whether that Soul which forms the Birth, be in the Man's Seed only, or in the Womans also. Whether that Soul which forms the Birth be only in the Man's Seed, or as well in the Womans? I say that it is only in the Man's Seed: for if part of the Soul should proceed from the Man, part from the Woman, then the Soul would prove a compound thing, whereas it is meerly simple. Or if it should be deriv'd all from the Male, and all from the Woman, then there would be two Principles of Formation, of which one would be superfluous. For there would be no necessity that the act∣ing Principle of the Male should be joyn∣ed with the acting Principle of the Fe∣male; for that the latter having an act∣ing Principle in it self, and a place con∣venient, as the womb, convenient nou∣rishment, and all other things conveni∣ent, would not want any other efficient Principle of the Male, but might con∣ceive in it self, and form the Birth out of its animated Seed with the Coition of the Male. And in Creatures that lay Eggs, a Chicken might be hatch'd out of Wind-eggs without the Cock's tread∣ing. Neither of which were ever heard of. LIV. Aemilius Parisanus, tho' heThe Opini∣on of Pari∣sanus. understood not this Mystery exactly, yet seems to have observ'd something obscurely, and therefore he constitutes a twofold Seed; he had better have said, twofold parts of the Seed: one generated in the Genital Parts, which he denies to be animated; the other not ge∣nerated in the Genital Parts, but divided from the whole, which he allows to be animated.
LV. Others, who will not allow inhether  Soul be Rational. Mankind any other Soul particularly than the Rational, assert that That a∣lone perfects the Lineaments of all the Parts out of the Seminal Matter con∣veniently offer'd, and is the Architect of its own Habitation; and stiffly up∣hold their Opinion with several Argu∣ments, and so tacitly endeavour to maintain that the Rational Soul isSee also Bartholi∣nus's Ana∣tomic Con∣troversies upon the same Sub∣ject. The Soul not ex traduce. ex traduce, or by Propagation, no otherwise than as the Body is propaga∣ted. Concerning which may be read that most acute Tractate of the Genera∣tion of Living Creatures, written by Sen∣nertus. LVI. But these Principles most Philosophers, and all Divines oppose with great heat, and affirm the Ratio∣nal Soul not to be propagated, but to be created and infused. To whose Opi∣nion we readily submit; because the Soul is not of that nature that it can produce any thing of it self; it has no∣thing to do in the Formation of the Body, nor with any Natural Actions, it is not to be divided into parts, nor corruptible as the rest of the Body, but immutable, and separable from the Bo∣dy which it inspires. Besides that, it is not created like the Bodies of Creatures, which were commanded to be produced out of Earth and Water, according to their kind, wherein the Vegetative Soul of every one is included: but after the whole Body of Man was form'd alive out of the Earth, God is said to have breathed into him the Breath of Life, and then he became a living Creature. Whence it is manifestly apparent, that the Rational Soul of Man, inspired by God, was not form'd out of Earth, Wa∣ter, or any other corruptible Matter, like his corruptible Body, which was form'd out of Clay, before the breathing of his Soul into him: But that it pro∣ceeded incorruptible and simple from the immediate Operation of God, without any parts, by the separation of which it could be dissolv'd and dye, as the Bo∣dy for the same Reason perishes with its vegetable Soul; and subsists of it self when its Temporal Habitation is fallen. For which Reason Man is not only said to live Naturally, like other Creatures, but after the Image of God, which sort of living is not ascrib'd to any other Creatures. LVII. But these latter, tho' theyThat the Soul is not Rational. seem to discourse rightly and truly of the Creation and Infusion of the Ratio∣nal Soul, yet if they do not likewise admit a Vegetative Soul in Man, they are under a gross mistake, nor do they unfold the first Efficient Principle, con∣cerning the Explanation of which the Question is here, and not of the Ori∣ginal of the Rational Soul. Against those therefore that will not admit a Vegetative Soul in Man, I bring these two powerful Arguments. First, Seeing that the Rational Soul is not propagated by Generation, but Created, of necessity it must be infus'd, and that either into a living or a dead Body. Not into a dead Body, for that Soul cannot inhabit a dead Body, nor enliven it, for its life is different from the life of the Body; which perishes while the Soul departs out of the Body, and lives to perpetuity: Therefore it is in∣fus'd into a living Body: What then rais'd Life in the Body before the Infu∣sion of the Rational Soul? It will be said perhaps, That at the same time that the Parts are to be delineated, the Rational Soul is infus'd, and that it is which in∣troduces Life▪ and is Life it self. I an∣swer, Not when they are to be delinea∣ted, but after all the Parts are compleat∣ly delineated and form'd, then the Ra∣tional Soul is infus'd, according to the Testimony of the Scripture it self: where it is said that God first form'd Man out of the Dust of the Earth; (observe the word Man, therefore a living Creature, or a Creature endued with a Vegetative Soul;) and then inspired into him the Breath of Life, and he became a living Creature; as much as to say, that then was inspired into him his perpetual li∣ving and Immortal Soul. Therefore▪ as then, so also afterwards the Rational Soul does not form and enliven the Bo∣dy, but is infus'd into the Body form'd and living: I say living, for that which forms the Body, of necessity enlivens it, and lives it self: For such a wonderful Structure cannot be form'd by a dead thing; nor by Heat alone, which only serves to attenuate and melt the Sub∣stance of the Seed, and rowse and set at liberty the forming Spirit, lying hid and entangled within it, and excite it to acti∣on, not able of it self to form the Parts of the Body, nor to adjust the order and shape of all its Parts. And therefore it is not the Rational Soul, but this same enlivening Spirit (which Galen calls Na∣ture,
we the Vegetative Soul) rais'd out of the Seed it self wherein it is potential∣ly, is that which out of it self, and the Subject wherein it abides, and out of which it proceeded, forms and enlivens the Body, and all its agreeing Parts; in∣to which being form'd and living, the Rational Soul is afterwards infus'd, and united to it, to determine and temper the Motions of the Corporeal Soul, till the Body, proving at length unfit to en∣tertain it any longer, it departs out of it; not being the occasion of Death, of it self, but chas'd and expell'd from its Habitatation by the death of the Body: So no way guilty of the death of the Bo∣dy by its recess, as by its access it contri∣buted nothing to its life. This is appa∣rent from hence, for that the Immortal Soul cannot give Mortal Life, of which it is destitute it self, to a Body corrupti∣ble and separable from it. For what∣ever gives a living Form to a Body, that also gives a Life and Form like to it self, as is apparent in all Brutes and Plants: Therefore if the Rational Soul were to give a Form to the Body, it would of necessity give an Immortal Form like its own, such a one as is not in the Bo∣dy. LVIII. Moreover, it is hardly toThe Ratio∣nal Soul not present when the parts were first deli∣neated. be believ'd, that when the Parts came first to be delineated, that the Rational Soul should be present at that beginning a the first Agent; and more impro∣bable to be believed, that when the Embryo first delineated is cast out of the womb by▪ Abortion, no bigger than an Emmet or a small Pea, from a Bo∣dy hardly discernable, a Rational Soul should be cast forth at the same time, that should be liable to give an account of Good and Evil Actions at the last This sa∣vours too much of Calvin's Doctrine, for the usual Doctrines of Original Sin are made the great foundation of that horrible Proposition concerning Reprobation, the consequences of which reproach God with In∣justice, they charge God foolishly, and deny his Goodness and his Wisdom in many Instances. For (as a learned Divine of the Church of England says) 1. If God decrees us to be born sinners, Then he makes us to be sinners; and then where is his Goodness? 2. If God damns any for that, he damns us for what we could not help, and for what himself did; and then where is his Iustice? 3. If God sentence us to that damnation, which he cannot in justice inflict; where is his Wisdom? 4. If God for the sin of Adam, brings upon us a necessity of sinning; where is our Liberty, and why is a Law imposed against sin? 5. If God does cast Infants into Hell for the sin of others, and yet did not condemn devils but for their own sin; where is his Love to Mankind? 6. If God cause the damna∣tion of so many millions of persons, who are no sinners on their own stock, and yet swears, that he desireth not the death of a sin∣ner; where then is his Mercy, and where his Truth? 7. If God has given us a Nature by derivation which is wholly corrupted; then how can it be that all which God made is Good? where then is his Providence and Power, and where the Glory of the Crea∣tion? But since God is all Goodness, and Iustice, and Wisdom, and Love, and that he governs all things and all men wisely and holily, and that he gives us a wise Law; and binds that Law on us by Promises and Threatnings; I think there is reason to assert these things to the Glory of the Divine Majesty. Thus far that excellent Person. Salmon. Day, or else to perish with it. Nor is it for us to judge of heavenly Matters above the reach of our Under∣standings, especially of the time of the Infusion of this Rational Soul: Though they seem to determine something pro∣bable concerning it, who judging right∣ly according to Truth, that the Ratio∣nal Soul is created by God , or im∣mediately, assert with St. Austin, That the Soul is infus'd by Creation, and crea∣ted by Infusion: that is, that it was not first fram'd in Heaven to be sent into the form'd Body; but that it is united to the Body at the moment of Creation, and created at the very moment of Infusion. But whether that Creation and Associa∣tion happens at the beginning of the forming of the Body, or whether in the first, second, third, or fourth Month, or in any other Month after the Birth be∣gan to be form'd; or at what time the Body may be fit to receive the Soul; that is not our business so accurately to en∣quire into; for that the Body must be fit to receive the Soul, and that if the Body undergo any material Change of its Temperament and Confirmation, presently the Soul takes its flight, as Ga∣len acknowledges. But our Apprehensi∣on is not sufficiently perspicacious for us punctually to understand that precise time, which is only known to God the Creator of the Soul: and therefore says Willis, When all things were rightly di∣spos'd for its reception, it was created im∣mediately of God, and pour'd into the Bo∣dy: And therefore it is only for Philo∣sophers to inquire into the Original of that same perishing Life in the body of Man, which is the Habitacle of the Ra∣tional Soul in this Vale of Misery for a Time; which Life, upon good grounds, we affirm to be far different from the Life of a Rational Soul, nor can arise from it. The second Argument which I pro∣duce, is this; The Rational Soul is in∣fus'd either into the Seed, or into the Birth when form'd. The first is not true, for then upon any effusion of fer∣tile Seed, not follow'd by Conception, a Soul would be lost; and so all Divines would commit a heinous sin of public Soul-murder, in suffering young lusty Men to marry Women above Fifty, knowing there can be no Production
from such unequal Matches. To which, if it be answer'd, That the Seed of the Man never proves fertile but when mix'd with the Seed of the Woman. I an∣swer, That the efficient Power is all in the Man's Seed, and that the Womans Seed is only material, and the next Ali∣mentary Principle. If therefore that ef∣ficient Power first forming the Birth, were the Rational Soul it self, it ought to be solely in the Man's Seed; and in that case the Divines and Law-givers could not exempt themselves from Soul∣murder; from which however all Men readily excuse 'em, even those that hold the Soul to be propagated. If the latter be true, let the opposing Party tell us, what was the first Moving or efficient Cause in the Seed, which began to move and enliven the Seed before the Infusion of the Rational Soul. Of necessity it must be something else besides the Ra∣tional Soul, and therefore the Vegetative Soul. But Philosophers teach us, that in every living Compound there can be but one Soul, and that in Man comprehends the Vegetative within it self; and that the latter is only an Accident, and tem∣pering of the Substance, that is to say, the innate Heat, and such a disposition of the Heart, Brains, and other Bowels, as also of the Spirits themselves, as is in a condition to act: and therefore there cannot be two distinct Souls in Man; one Vegetative, the other Rational. But tho' Aristotle of old, and many Philo∣sophers now teach the same Doctrine, it is not to be thence inferr'd that the Doctrine is true: they are Men, and may Err. The foregoing Reasons suf∣ficiently demonstrate the thing to be o∣therwise, and abundantly inform us, That the Life of the Body would be per∣petual, if the Rational Soul were once to enliven it: For wherefore should it be less able to do it in the end, than at the beginning, when it can suffer no dimi∣nution of its Faculties? and if at the be∣ginning it disposes the Matter for Life, why should it not proceed and do it without end? Moreover, seeing that a Vegetative Soul is admitted among Brutes as the only Mistress and Enliven∣er of the Organical Body, wherefore may not such a Soul be admitted in the Body of Man, which is no less corrup∣tible than the Body of the Beast? To this we may add, That the diversity of Actions, the necessity of two Souls in Man, is apparent: For the Flesh covets a∣gainst the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh. And this Intestine War every Man has Experience of in himself: For the Corporeal Soul abiding in the Body, inclines a Man to Sensual Pleasures; the Rational, which is of a higher Origi∣nal, dehorts us to abstain from mischie∣vous Lust, and invites us to Holiness, and raises our thoughts from things pe∣rishable and Earthy, to things Divine and Incorruptible. This Civil War Me∣dea felt in her self, whence she cried out, —Video meliora, proboque, Deteriora sequor— The better things I see and do approve; The worse I follow after, seek, and love. LIX. Lastly, The Corporeal Soul,The Corpo∣real Soul makes Con∣clusions, and acts af∣ter its own manner, but far inferi∣or to the Rational Soul. tho' it not only apprehend Things in their simple Capacity, but laying seve∣ral Things together, makes Conclusions after its own manner, as appears from the Actions of Dogs, Apes, Elephants, &c. yet are its Actions far inferiour to those of the Rational Soul. For this not only beholds the Idea's conceiv'd by the Fancy of that Corporeal Soul, but also judges whether they are true or false, good or ill, disordered, or in or∣der: and often stops the fury of the Corporeal Soul, unsteadfastly roving through various Phantasms, and recal∣ling it from these or those Conceptions, directs it to others, and at its own plea∣sure bounds it within certain Limits, lest it should stray from the Truth, and by that means governs and moderates its Actions. LX. For the better illustration ofThe Mat∣ter illu∣strated from Holy Scripture. this Mystery, there will some farther light appear in that which follows; tho' indeed the whole Cloud is dissolv'd by the Soveraign Iudge, which is the Holy Scripture, which declares that there is a Vegetable Soul both in Men, as well as in Beasts. Of Brutes, it is manifest in these words; Let the Earth produce every living Creature according to its kind, Cattel, and Reptiles, and e∣very Beast of the Field according to its kind. And the same is to be deduc'd from Gen. 9. v. 10, 12, 15, 16. Levit. 24. c. 18. and Iob 12. v. 10. in all which places the Scripture speaks of a Living Soul produced out of the Earth or Cor∣poreal Matter, and joyned to the Li∣ving Body, therefore corruptible, and liable to perish upon the dissolution of the mix'd Body. And this fort of Soul in Men the sacred Scripture not only acknowledges, but distinguishes from the Immortal Rational Soul, calling he one
simply, a Living Soul; the other the Spirit given by God. The first is appa∣rent from several Texts of Scripture; Gen. 2 v. 7. Exod. 21. v. 23. Levit. 24. v. 18. Deut. 19. v. 21.  Reg. 19. v. 4. where Elias desired the death of his Soul. And in the Gospel of St. Iohn c. 10. v. 11. The good Shepherd lays down his Life for his Sheep. Which certainly cannot be understood of the Immortal Rational Soul, which never dyes; but of that Soul which gives life, as well to Brutes as Men; and at the beginning form'd the Organic Body, and being it self Corpo∣real, is produced out of Corporeal Mat∣ter, and perishes again together with the Body which it form'd; and upon the perishing of which, the Rational Soul infus'd from above, immediately takes its flight, as not having any habitation in the body of Man longer than Life en∣dures. This Immortal Rational Soul, the holy Text, to distinguish it from the Vegetative Soul, which is corruptible like the Matter from whence it proceeds, calls for the most part a Spirit, and some∣times only the Soul. Thus David, Psalm 15. v. 10. Thou wilt not leave my Soul in the Grave. And Psalm 30. v. 10. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Thus Eccles. 14. v. 17. The Spirit returns to God that gave it. Thus Stephen, Acts 7. v. 60. Lord Iesus receive my Spirit. And Matth. 27. v. 50. And when he had cried with a loud voice he yielded up the Ghost; repeated by St. Iohn, c. 19. v. 13. All which latter Texts cannot be under∣stood but only of the Immortal Soul. LXI. But because it is apparentAn Answer to such as object that there can∣not be two Souls in Man. from what has been said, That there are two Souls in Man; what shall we answer to those that object, and say, there cannot be two Souls in Man, be∣cause several Forms cannot actuate the same Matter? We say that there is but one Soul that immediately actu∣ates the same Matter, and gives Form to the Species, that is the Vegetative Soul; but that the Rational Soul, which is of a sublimer Original, only dwells in the Body, but never form'd it at the beginning. So that there are not two, but only one Form that actuates the Matter. Which is manifest from hence; for that when the Body form'd perishes, the forming Form pe∣rishes likewise with it; but the Rational Soul neither perishes, nor is corrupted with it. Therefore this neither is, nor was the forming Form, but something else infus'd into the Body already form'd, and subsisting of it self, which by vertue of the forming Form abides in the Body; and when that fails, presently forsakes the Body, and subsists entirely of it self, without being united to it. LXII. But here another QuestionThe sensi∣tive Soul, what? arises; Whether, if a Vegetative Soul be to be allow'd, which indifferently enlivens Plants and Animals, there be not also a third peculiar sensitive Soul to be allow'd, that feels as well in Man as in Beasts, and performs O∣perations different from those of the Vegetative Soul? To which I answer; That the Vegetative Soul is the same that feels in those Creatures, which have those Mediums and apt Organs ne∣cessarily requir'd for feeling; as Brains, Eyes, Ears, &c. but where those Or∣gans are wanting, as in Plants, they are not said to be sensible, but only to live as Vegetables. We must therefore yield, according to Sacred Scripture, and for the Reasons already alledged, that there is in Man a Vital, Vegetable Mortal Soul, distinct from the rational immortal Soul; and that that is the Soul which is the chief Actress in the Formation of the Birth, the same also which many call the Architectonic Power, or the Plastic Efficacy. LXIII. And thus I think I haveThe Archi∣tectonic or Vegetative Soul sub∣sists in a Man with the Ratio∣nal Soul. sufficiently demonstrated that the Ar∣chitectonic Power is the Vegetative Soul it self, and that it may subsist in a living Man conveniently, toge∣ther with the Rational Soul. And now one would think there were no more to be said as to this Particular; but be∣cause we have already made an Excursi∣on somewhat too far beyond the Limits of our Port, before we return back, let us spread our Sails, and steer a little far∣ther into the Ocean, that we may shew a safer Course to others that sail in this Turbulent Sea, and are in continual danger of Shipwrack among the Shelves and Rocks of Error and Mistake. The first Doubt that occurs in the History of the Vegetative Soul, is, where to assign it a Seat in the Body of Man, and other perfect Creatures; which has occasioned great Disputes among Philo∣sophers. LXIV. That it abides in all Parts ofThe Seat of the Vege∣table Soul, where? the Living Body, scarce any one will deny, as being apparent from its a∣ctions in all parts of the Body. So that the Peripatetics asserting it to be equally diffus'd into all parts alike,
say that it is in All, and All in eve∣ry Part. That is to say, that one and the same Numerical Vegetable Soul ex∣tended through the whole Body enlivens the whole. But because it is divisible with the Matter wherein it abides; there∣fore that which abides in the Parts that are torn from the whole, not only constitutes a part of the Soul which en∣livens the whole, but constitutes the whole Soul in that part so torn off; which either dyes with the part torn off, for want of Nourishment, as when any animal Part is cut off, for then all that whole Soul which enliven'd that part fails and fades away for want of Nourish∣ment: Or else, having convenient Nou∣rishment operates in the dismembred Part, and performs the Act of En∣livening. Which is apparent in many Plants; as for Example, of a Willow Bough, which being torn from the Tree, and again planted in the Earth, will grow as well as the Tree from which it was pull'd; and therefore every bough enjoys the whole Soul, as the Mother-Tree retains the whole Soul, and so both the one and other grow and increase alike, not by vertue of any part of the Soul, but of the whole Soul, as is ap∣parent by the Action: For that Vivifi∣cation and Nutrition is perform'd in all the boughs, which cannot be perform'd by a part of the Soul, but by all the Soul. And so the foresaid Maxim of the Peripatetics may be rightly ex∣pounded, which nevertheless has hither∣to, by many Philosophers, been too hastily rejected as false and impossible. LXV. Among those that have notWhether in some parts more than in others? rightly apprehended, the learned Wil∣lis, seems to have been one, who in his 4. Chap. de anim. Brutor. thus writes. The Corporeal Soul, says he, in more perfect Brutes, and common to Man, is extended to the whole Organical Body, and vivifies, actuates, and irradiates both its several Parts and Humours, so that it seems to subsist in both of them actually, and to have as it were its imperial Seats. But the immediate Subjects of the Soul are the vital Liquor or the Blood, circulated by a perpetual Circulation of the Heart, Arteries, and Veins, and the animal Li∣quor or nervous Iuice flowing gently with∣in the Brain and its Appendixes. The Soul inhabits and graces with its Presence both these Provinces; but as it cannot be wholly together in both at once, it actuates them both as it were divided and by its Parts. For as one Part living within its Blood, is of a certain fiery Nature, be∣ing enkindled like a Flame. So the other being diffused through the animal Liquor, seems as it were Light, or the Rayes of Light slowing from that Flame. And a little after, There are therefore Corporeal Souls ac∣cording to its two chief Functions in the Organical body; viz. the Vital and the Animal; two distinct Parts, that is to say, the Flamy and the Lucid. LXVI. From this Text of WillisWillis not congruous in this mat∣ter to Rea∣son. it appears, that the most famous Per∣son conceived a new Opinion of the Soul, but less congruous to Reason. For First, He alledges that the Soul, besides the Parts of the Body enlivens likewise the Humours and Spirits, where∣in he very much deviates from the Truth. For that the Humours and Spirits do not live, but they would live were they enliven'd by a Soul. Second∣ly, Seeing that Life cannot be ascribed to the fluid Nourishments continually passing away, nor joyn'd to the whole in Continuity, but only to the real Parts of the Body: Willis seems tacitly to take it for a thing not to be question'd, that the Blood and animal Spirits are the true Parts of an animated Body, no less than the solid Parts adhering to the whole in Continuity, which that it is not true, we have demonstrated in the first Chapter of this Book. Thirdly, He asserts that the Blood and animal Spi∣rits are the immediate Subjects of the Soul, the contrary to which is apparent, for that the immediate Subjects of the Soul are the Parts themselves of the Bo∣dy, among which neither the Blood, nor Spirits, nor any other of the Humours are to be numbered. Fourthly, Contra∣ry to Reason he constitutes two Parts of the Body, one Fierie or Flammeous, another Lucid, and ascribes to each par∣ticular Seats, to the one the Blood, to the other the animal Liquor; for thus the Soul that had no Feet before, will have two Feet in this our Age, and with one Foot shall tread upon the Blood, with the other upon the animal Liquor. Yet lest the Soul, having broken one Leg by Accident should chance to fall, provident Dr. Willis has provided her a third Leg. But besides these two Mem∣bers, says he, of the Soul, fitted to the individual Body, a certain other Portion of it, taken from both, and as it were the Epitome of the whole Soul, is placed apart, for the Conservation of its Species. This as it were an Appendix of the vital Flame, growing up in the Blood, is for the most part Lucid or Light, and consists
of animal Spirits, which being collected in∣to a certain little Bundle, and having got an appropriate Humour, are hidden up among the spermatic bodies. And thus the Soul that formerly knew neither how to walk or stand, now shall stand more firmly supported with three Leggs. And yet with all her three Leggs she will halt, not without danger of falling, and therefore if any one could furnish her with a fourth Leg, then she would not only stand more stoutly, but proceed e∣qually in all her Actions, without halt∣ing, like a strong fourfooted Horse. But setting the Jest aside, it is apparent from what has been said, that the learned Wil∣lis did not rightly understand the Maxim of the Peripatetics, and for that Reason miserably mangl'd and divided the Soul, indivisible so far as it abides in the whole, into several Parts at his own Pleasure, whereas it is the same and of the same Nature in all the Parts. If a∣ny one should here object, That the Seed is also potentially animated, and that from thence it is manifest, that the Hu∣mours may live and be animated as well as the Parts of the Body, which we have so strenuously deny'd; I an∣swer that the Seed is no nutritive Hu∣mour like the Blood, and animal Li∣quor, nor is any longer a part of the in∣dividual Body, Iohn, or Peter, from whence it is separated, but a specific Juice, containing in it self a Compendium of the whole Man, and the Ideas of all the Parts, and therefore the Soul may lie hid therein, as in all the Parts of the whole Body, till at length separated from its Entanglements by Heat, it declares its being present by its enlivening Acti∣ons: Which enlivening Actions never proceed, nor can proceed, from any nu∣tritive Humours, or redundant after Nourishment. LXVII. But seeing the Philoso∣phersWhat the Vegetative Soul is? of our Age leave no Stone of Enquiry unturn'd, nor are ever at rest, till they have found out some∣thing in their most obscure Searches, whereby to perswade themselves and o∣thers that they are within reach of the Truth. I would have them now explain to us what this vegetable Soul is, which is the first efficient and Protoplastic Principle in the Forma∣tion of the Birth: For otherwise, if we were to acquiesce in the Name a∣lone, the efficient Principle might be affirm'd to be rather a Chimera than an efficient Principle. If perhaps any one shall say with Aristotle, That the Soul is the beginning of Motion. Or, That it is the first Act of a natural body potenti∣ally having Life. Or with Fernelis, That it is the Perfection of an Organic body, and whatever shall give Life to that body, and introduce vital Actions. Or with Sennertus, That it is an Act and substantial Form, by which such a body is animated. Or with some of our modern Philosophers, That it is the first matter of Fermentation and Formati∣on, and that Life is nothing else but Fer∣mentation; These are all meer Words and meer Chimeras. For by such words the Essence of the Soul is no way un∣folded: Nor does it appear, what that beginning of Motion, or what that first Act is; nor what that Perfection, or substantial Form, or first matter of Fer∣mentation is. In Man alone we know the rational Soul, its Divinity, and its Immortality only by Revelation, and Faith, and by its wonderful and divine Operations. But no Man unfolds that substantial Form, that first Act, that first Matter of Fermentation, by which all animate Beings obtain Life, and are thence said to live, nor what that first Act, that Form or Matter is; but all Men acquiesce in the Name alone of a Vegetable Soul. LXVIII. This same Soul I call theThis Soul is the vivi∣fic Spirit produced out of Cor∣poreal Matter. vivific Spirit produced out of Cor∣poreal Matter, surpassing all other Spi∣rits produced out of Matter. Now altho' this Definition of mine be suf∣ficient to denote the Substance it self of the Soul, or rather the Subject wherein it abides, nevertheless it will not satisfy many who desire a farther Explication of the Nature of this Spi∣rit, which however it is better to con∣template in Thought, than to express in Words. For how, or with what Knowledg instructed, it forms and joyns the Parts of the Body to be form'd, so fitly, and with so much decency of Or∣der and Shape, he only knows who a∣lone, and first of all created all things at the Beginning. What it is that rowses it, and frees it from the Incumbrances wherewith it is surrounded, and brings it upon the Stage of Action, has been already sufficiently explain'd; that is to say, the Heat acting in convenient place and time upon the Seed; for that with∣out such a Heat it cannot be dissolved or waken'd out of the thicker Mat∣ter.The Opini∣on of Re∣gius. LXIX. Regius thinks he has found
out a way to unfold this Gordian Rid∣dle more clearly and after another manner promising to explain this obscure Mystery of Nature, as do many others, by manifest Reasons. He writes that the Formation of the Birth is perfected by the heat as well of the Womb as of the Seeds, by which their Particles are agitated in the Womb; and being agitated by rea∣son of their Shapes and Magnitudes which they have acquired in the se∣minary Passages tempered and shap'd after a certain manner, of necessity become in the Womb a perfect prolific Principle of the Creature to be form'd, furnished with Alimentary Iuice, and cloathed with little Membranes, in some Measure resembling the Seeds of Plants. Then he adds that this Ex∣plication of the Formation of the Birth is so manifest, that there is no farther Necessity of framing in the Womb or Seed any Idea, Fantasie, or Principle of a Soul or any other Faculty, to be the Author of Formation. But the most learn'd Gentleman, who at first sight promises something of a Delphian O∣racle, in these words does but explain the lesser Obscurity by the greater Obscu∣rity, and swelling with an extraordinary Self-Conceit, he is pleased with his own Invention, as to believe that never any Man ever did or ever will invent any thing more subtilly and ingeniously; when as there is nothing in it but Va∣nity and Ostentation. For what others call the Soul of the Seed, the vegetative Soul, the Plastic Power, the Archi∣tectonic Vertue, &c. that he calls cer∣tain Shapes and Magnitudes of the Par∣ticles of the Seeds, more difficult to be apprehended than plastic Power, or ve∣getative Soul. And altho' perhaps some Persons may believe that the Artificial Formation of other things without Life may in some Measure be conceived by his mechanic Explication annexed, yet does it not from thence appear, how the Parts of our living Body are generated out of the diversity of the Shapes and Magnitudes of the Particles of the Seed; what should occasion the Heart to be form'd in the middle of the Breast, and not in the Abdomen or Head, why there should be in that particularly eleven Valves and no more; wherefore not two Hearts in one Birth; how the Parts re∣ceive Life from the Principle of the Birth, and what introduces Motion and Actions, &c. All which, with an innu∣merable number of other things, he that will refer to the Shapes and Magnitudes of the Particles of the Seed, ought first to tell us what they are, and how they are mixed. Who does not this, propo∣ses his Shapes and Figures as meer Ima∣ginary Chimeras, and clears up no Ob∣scurity, but wraps us up in more Dark∣ness, and while he pretends to tell us something of Novelty and better, says nothing at all, but intangles an obscure thing in newer but obscurer Terms. LXX. Lately Tho. Willis has setWillis's Opinion. forth the Substance and Nature of this Soul quite otherwise, de an. Brut. c. 2. Where after he has asserted the Soul of Brutes, which we call Vegeta∣tive to be Corporeal, and extended through the whole Body, and divisible together with the Matter wherein it abides, at length concludes, that the Soul lying hid in the Blood or Vital Liquor, is either a certain Fire or Flame. But that we have affirm'd the Soul of a brute, says he, to be not only Corporeal and extended, but that it is of a certain fiery Nature, and its Act or Substance is either a Flame or a breath, near to, or a Kin to Flame, besides the large Testimo∣nies of Authors both Ancient and Modern, Reasons and Arguments almost demonstra∣tive, have also induc'd me to it. As to what appertains to the Suffrages of others, that I may not seem to insist upon the Au∣thority of a single Gassendus, who has maintained this Hypothesis, I shall here cite many both ancient Philosophers and Physicians. For not to mention Demo∣critus, Epicurus, Lartius, Lucretius, and their Followers, Hippocrates, Plato, Pythagoras; Aristotle, Galen, with ma∣ny others, tho' disagreeing about other things; Yet in this Opinion, That the Soul was either a Fire, or something Ana∣logical to it, they all shook Hands; to whom, among the Moderns, Fernelius, Heurnius, Cartesius, Hogeland, and o∣thers also have joyn'd themselves; and lately Honoratus Faber has delivered in express Words, That the Soul of the brute is Corporeal, and its Substance Fire. LXXI. But while the famous Tho∣masWillis Re∣fated. Willis, with all those most in∣genious Philosophers and Physicians, asserts the Soul to be Fire, he names indeed a Body of the greatest Activi∣ty, but such a one as consumes and
destroys all things in which and upon which it acts: whereas the Soul by its Presence does not destroy those Bodies in which it is and acts, but preserves 'em in their soundnss, excites the Mem∣bers to their Functions, and defends 'em from Corruption, till those Bodies, wherein it abides, are destroy'd by some other Cause, together with the Soul it self. Moreover, among all those famous men, not one could ever teach, what it is that forces or instructs that Fire in the Generation of the Creature to adapt and joyn all and singular the parts in such an exact and admirable order together, and in every one to perform such various and determin'd Operations; as the making the Chylus in the Stomach, Blood in the Heart, Animal Spirits in the Brain, Sight in the Eye, Hearing in the Ear, Taste in the Tongue: why through its extraordinary activity and rapid Motion, it does not hinder the Forma∣tion of the Organs, and rather destroy 'em being form'd, then form 'em it self, and produce variety of Actions out of each. LXXII. Moreover, the foresaidWillis his Explana∣tion of this Soul. Thomas Willis, pretending to ex∣plain the Soul yet more perspicuously, defines it a little after to be a Heap of contiguous Particles existing in a swift Motion. And then to shew the nature and original of those Particles, he thus proceeds, Cap. 4. In Mechanical things, Fire, Air, and Light are chiefly energe∣tical, which human Industry is always wont to use, for the more stupendious and no less necessary Works. In like manner we may believe, that the supream Work-master, to wit, the Great Creator, in the beginning did make the greatly active, and most sub∣tile Souls of living Creatures out of their Particles, as the most active, to which he also gave a greater, and as it were a su∣pernatural Virtue and Efficacy from the most excellent Structure of the Organs, most exquisitely labour'd beyond the Workman∣ship of any other Machine. LXXIII. But suppose the SubstanceThe Au∣thors Ani∣madversi∣ons. of the Organ, wherein the Soul most nearly resides to be made out of such Principles, and so the Organ of the Soul to be well compos'd, what is this to our Enquiry? The true Existence of the Soul consists not in the Substance of the Organ, but in its own Substance, and appears by its Act or Operation. As the sight consists not in an Eye well compos'd of good Substance, but in the Act of Seeing, and perception of the vi∣sible Rayes; which Act of Sight the Soul accomplishes by means of the Or∣gan of Sight well form'd. But now I would fain know what that is which gives life to that heap of Particles, con∣stituting the substance of the Soul, and by its Presence forms and enlivens the other Parts, and excites 'em to so many various, wonderful, and distinct Opera∣tions? when it is said that the Soul is a heap of most subtile Particles, or a Fire, then only by an impropriety of Speech, the Thing containing is designed for the Thing contained, that is, some most subtile Subject wherein the Soul most nearly resides. For that properly it is something else besides Fire, is apparent from the contrariety of the Actions: For the Fire destroys, the Soul preserves: the Fire destroys Bodies form'd; the Soul both forms and produces things not form'd. The Fire is sensible of nothing; the Soul by means of the sensitive Or∣gans, sees, hears, and tasts, &c. Hence the most learned Willis, tho' a most stout Asserter of his own Opinion, at length is forced to distinguish the Soul from its Corporeal Subject: For, says he, as soon as any Matter is dispos'd to receive Life, by the Laws of the Creation, the Soul, which is the fom of the thing, and the Body, which is said to be the Mat∣ter, began to be form'd under a certain Spe∣cies, according to the Character imprinted in 'em. LXXIV. Therefore the Form, thatThe form of the Soul is different from the Matter it inhabits. is the Soul, is something different from that same Matter, which is the next Subject or Habitaculum of the Soul. In like manner, speaking of the Princi∣ples of the Soul, As to the first beginnings of the Corporeal Soul, says he, this, as a Shell-fish, forms and its its Shell to it self, exists somewhat a little sooner, and so more noble than the Organical Body: Because a certain portion of Animal Spirits, or most subtile Animals, or a little Soul not yet in∣kindled, lyes hid in the Seminal Humour, which having gotten a proper fire place, and at length being kindled from the Soul of the Parent acting or leaning to it, as a flame from a flame, begins to shine forth and un∣fold it self, a little before the first Ground∣work of the Body is laid. This orders the Web of the Conception, and agitates the apply'd Matter, &c. LXXV. Now I would have Dr.Willis his little dimi∣nutive Soul. Thomas Willis explain what he means by that Little Diminutive Soul not
yet enkindled. For a heap of Animal Spirits, or any Atoms whatever, can be nothing but the nearest Matter wherein it abides: For such a Subject does not live, unless there be in it some living thing to enliven that heap. For such a Subject, in Generation, neither knows how, or was ever taught to form, delineate, compose, and en∣large all the Parts in such exact order. Which what it is we know not, only we find it by its effects. Hence Willis him∣self acknowledges, that the Soul cannot be perceived by our Senses, but only we under∣stand it by its effects and operations. From which words of his it appears, that what∣ever Dr. Willis said before of Fire, and a heap of Animal Spirits and Atoms, they are only meer and most uncertain Con∣jectures, which denote not the Soul it self, but only either its next Subject, wherein it abides, or by a Similitude of thinnest Body of swiftest Action, the manner, in some measure, of their Acti∣ons. For to assert that the Soul is a Heap of most subtile Atoms, or a Fire, is the same as to assert, that the Sight is Fire, because that by the means of the most subtile moveable Fire, its Action is accomplish'd, nor can be accomplish'd without it. Whereas it is not that same Medium into which the visible Rays are imprinted as the Subject, and with it conveigh'd to the Eyes, but the percep∣tion of those Rays that make the sight. As therefore that Percipient is something else quite different from the Air, by means of which the visible Rays are convey'd to the visible Organs. So the Soul is somewhat else, which is different from the Fire, or any other heap of A∣toms, by means of which it subsists and operates in the Body. LXXVI. From whence it is appa∣rentWillis his Absurdity. how absurd that is, which Dr. Willis adds, Cap. 2. The Existency of the Corporeal Soul depends al∣together upon its Act or Life. The word depends is ill; he should have rather said, becomes known. For by the Act it self, or Life, we only discover, that such a Soul is present and acts, to enliven the Body wherein it abides. For Example; when I write any thing, by that Act it is known that the hand of a writer performs that Act: However, the Hand that writes is quite different from the Act, which is the writing; and does not altogether depend upon that Act; only by that Act the presence of the Agent is made known. Wherefore it is not well added by Dr. Willis, The Essence of this begins altoge∣ther from Life, as it were from the firing of a subtile Matter. I say he asserts this erroneously, for that the Soul does not begin from Life, which nevertheless lies as it were imprisoned in the Seed, till with its spirituous Subject, wherein it re∣sides, it remains wrapt up in the thicker Particles of the Seed; from whence be∣ing set at liberty in a convenient place by the Heat, it begins to act and perform its duty, and enliven, form, nourish, and increase the Body where it resides; and thus by these actions we discover, that such an enlivening Soul is in the Bo∣dy.The Affe∣ctions or Passions of the Soul. LXXVII. Of the Affections or Passions of this Soul many things might be written, which however we purposely omit, lest our Digression should be too tedious. In the mean while we recommend to the Readers what the learned Willis propounds upon this Subject in his Hist. de Anim. Brut. from Cap. 8. to Cap. 16. where he writes so elegantly and splendidly concerning the Passions, that he does not only shew the sharpness of his Wit, but carries away the Laurel from all others that have wrote before him. LXXVIII. We shall only add oneWhether the Soul be nourish'd. Question more, Seeing that the Vege∣tative Soul is Corporeal, whether it be nourish'd by those Nourishments which are brought for the support of the Body wherein it abides? It was an ancient say∣ing of Hippocrates, That the Soul al∣ways grows till death. Hence some have concluded that the Soul wasts like all the other parts of the Body, and is repair'd from time to time by the Nourishment, together with those Parts wherein it re∣sides. But seeing the Nature of the Sub∣stance of that Soul is unknown to us, and for that reason in the mean time reaches us, that it abides in some Subject which is the nearest, as in some subtile Spirit, and by that means enlivens the Body, we think that same saying of Hippocrates is rather to be understood of that same nearest subject of the Soul, without which most certainly it cannot subsist, than of the Soul it self; concerning whose sub∣stance, what, and of what Nature it is, and whether it want Nourishment, we can determine nothing certainly. When the flame of a Lamp is cherish'd and continued, we do not nourish it with a flame like to it self, but something that
nourishes the Subject to which it adheres, as Oyl with Oyl; which Subject failing at length, the flame fails, which how∣ever is somewhat distinct from it subject, for Oyl is not flame or fire; neither is Fire Oyl. But it is a diminutive Fire latent in the Oyl, which being kindled by another flame, issues forth out of it by degrees, but cannot subsist without it, and so there is a necessity of recruiting, not the flame of the Lamp with another flame, but the subject of it, that is the Oyl, to the end it may be continued. In like manner 'tis not the Soul, but its nearest Subject, which is to be nourish'd, and so by the nourishment of that the Soul is continu'd. But that Dr. Willis believes the contrary is apparent from these words of his: As the thicker Parti∣cles of the Nutritive Iuice repair the losses of the Corporeal Bulk, so the more subtile Particles of it repair the waste of this same Soul. And thus he believes, that not only the near Subject, but the Soul it self to be nourish'd: which is left to e∣very Man's liberty to think what he pleases. LXXIX. In the mean while thereWhat this Life or Soul is, the Philoso∣phers igno∣rant. are such eager Contentions about the Original, Seat, Subject, Essence, Sub∣stance, and the whole History of the Soul, the most acute Philosophers, could never yet find out and tell us what this same Life or Soul is, concerning which so much has been discours'd and written, and which is the prime Actress in the Generation of all Creatures, and forms the whole that is to be form'd. Here therefore it is that we are all at a loss; here we find how ignorant we are; here we perceive how vainly we waste our time, in prying into those Mysteries which the most Sublime Creator would not have us understand: Here we ob∣serve the Arrogancy of many, who in the unfolding such Secrets of Nature, with a haughty Ostentation endeavour to shew their Knowledge and their Learn∣ing, when they utter nothing but meer empty words. Certainly it behoves us in Mysteries of this Nature tacitly to ac∣quiesce, and patiently to be contented with our Ignorance, and rather to ad∣mire the Power of the Almighty, than to be too scrutinous into forbidden My∣steries, mindful of those Verses of Lu∣cretius: Multa sacro tegit involucro Natura: neque ullis Fas est scire quidem mortalibus omnia: multa Admirare modò, necnon venerare: neque illa Inquires quae sunt, arcanis proxima: nam∣que In manibus quae sunt, vix nos ea scire pu∣tandum est. Usque adeo procul à nobis praesentia veri. The Sense of which is this: Nature, much under Vails seems to con∣ceal, Nor was it fit, she all things should re∣veal. It is not just, proud, foolish Man should know All things she does within the Orbs be∣low. Nor is it fit Man should be made so wise: Lest knowing all, he should her Skill despise. Some of her Works as wonderful she made; And some, the worship of the Gods in∣vade. Things near, if hid, we may not search into: The more remote, less lawful are to know. Those things with which we daily do converse, Their very Names we scarcely may re∣hearse. So far off still, Truths presence seems to stand, We scarce the Name, much less the Thing command. CHAP. XXX. Containing the History of the Birth contained in the Womb. And first of the Placenta or U∣terine Liver, and the Cavities call'd Acetables. HAving thus finish'd the History of the Seed and Conception, toge∣ther with that of the Formation of the Birth; now let us proceed to the History of the Birth when form'd, and contain'd in the Womb. I. Upon opening the Womb of aThe Ute∣rine Liver. Big-bellied Woman, there presently appears a fleshie Substance, which Fal∣lopius from some resemblance which it
has to a Cheescake, calls the Uterine Cheescake, or Placenta; others from its resemblance in use, colour, and substance, call it the Uterine Liver. II. This Liver is a Bowel after itsThe Defi∣nition. own manner fleshie, soft, consisting of innumerable Fibres and small little Ves∣sels, and Blood between, condens'd in dead People, by means whereof the Birth adheres to the Womb, but more especially to the bottom of it. III. At first the Seed of the ManIts Origi∣nal. being injected into the Womb (if Con∣ception happen) is every way enclos'd by the whole Circumference of the Womb, and is found contiguous to it. Then by the nourishing heat of the Womb it is melted and dissolv'd, and so the prolific spirituous part being se∣parated out of it, it retires forth∣with through the Uterine Tubes toward the Ovaries, there to imprint upon the ripe Egg the Seal of Fertility. This Egg in the Ovary is surrounded with two little Pellicles, of which the one is thicker and stronger; the other thinner and weaker, as in Birds an outer∣most hard shell, and an inner thin Mem∣brane grows in the Egg out of the Seed of the Hen. To the outermost of these Membranes, at the very first beginning certain downy Lineaments form'd out of the Female Seed are seen to adhere: to which also, at the very same first begin∣ning, a certain ruddy soft substance joyns it self, which seems to arise from the substance it self of the womb, in the same place where the Egg slips through the Tube into the Womb, by means where∣of it adheres by and by to the Womb, and is furnish'd by the Womb with some Blood-conveighing Vessels, which it imparts to the Chorion, as being those Vessels which are discern'd in the Chori∣on, before any Formation of the Birth, nor can be derived thence from any o∣ther part. These downy beginnings of the Placenta, or Uterine Liver, increase by little and little through the affusion of that same Blood to this very Bowel, whose substance at the end of the third Month is notably conspicuous. Within the inner Membrane is included the whole Colliquation of the Seed, toge∣ther with the Crystalline Bubble, where∣in the Birth is form'd out of the prolific Principle infus'd into it; which being form'd swims upon the Colliquation, free and adhering no where to any Mem∣branes, and for some time is nourish'd with that alone. IV. Afterwards, when the increa∣singWhen the Umbili∣cal Vessels begin to grow. Embryo begins to want a more plentiful Nourishment, the Extremi∣ties of the Umbilical Vessels grow out more and more, and are extended to∣ward this Liver (which from that time begins to be more manifestly con∣spicuous, to the end they may draw a firmer Alimentary Iuice from thence, and carry it to the Birth, as the Plants by means, of their Roots suck nutritive Iuice from the Earth. But how these Vessels cross the Membranes, and come to this Liver, see Chap. 32. V. Harvey, in an Abortion castHarvey's Observati∣ons of the beginning of the Pla∣centa in  Abortive. forth about the bigness of a Hen-egg, observ'd withal in the outward and upper part of the Chorion, as it were a thin Slime, or a certain Down, de∣noting the first Rudiments of the growing Placenta; and in the inner part of the same several Roots and Branches of the Umbilical Vessels, but never the Chorion sticking to the womb. But the reason why he never saw the Chorion slicking to the womb, perhaps might be, either because the Matter to be pour'd forth out of the womb for the increase of the Placenta, was not yet increas'd to a sufficient quan∣tity; or because the fleshic Particle, which we have seen sticking to the Chorion, in the Expulsion of that Conception, was not torn from the womb, but from the Chorion; and so the Chorion coming forth together with it, was not by Harvey seen to stick to the womb. But those Roots of the Vessels which Harvey took for the Umbilical Productions, seem not to have been the little Branches of the Umbilical Vessels, in regard the Navel could not be grown out to that length in that time, nor reach so far, but were rather little Vessels extending themselves from that same fleshie substance sticking above to the Chorion, with which the Umbilical Vessels are wont to intermix themselves. See the Abortions in the preceding Chap∣ter. VI. By what has been said, it isWhether coagulated Blood? sufficiently apparent, that the beginning of the Placenta, or Uterine Liver, is not generated out of the impurer part of the menstruous Blood flowing from the womb, the more pure part in the mean season passing to the Birth through the Umbilical Vein, (as ma∣ny have erroneonsly asserted:) seeing
that the first threads of it are delinea∣ted out of the Womans Seed as well as the Chorion and Amnion; to which afterwards the nourishment is brought, not from the more impure, but from good Blood pouring in. And therefore they were grosly mistaken, who judg'd it not to be any Bowel, but only a heap of menstruous Blood collected and coa∣gulated without the Vessels, and preserv'd in that place for the nourishment of the Birth, whereas both in respect of its be∣ginning, its fibrous substance, and its use, it appears no less to be a Bowel than the other Liver seated in the right Hypochon∣drion. Besides that, the upholders of this Opinion do not consider, that the Blood cannot subsist without Corruption nine Months together out of the Ves∣sels in the womb, or any other hot and moist place; and daily Experience teaches us, what terrible Mischiefs follow upon the Extravasation of the Blood tho' it be good, if it stay in the place but a few Months. VII. Fabricius ab AquapendenteAquapen∣deat's O∣pinion. calls this Liver a Fleshie Substance, and a Fleshie Mole; not that it is simply flesh, but a Bowel that has a pe∣culiar and proper fibrous Contexture, and a flesh convenient for it self, whose first threads are delineated out of the Womans Seed; and afterwards a pe∣culiar fleshie Substance thicken'd out of the Vital Blood, which first flows from the Mother more plentifully thither through the Uterine Vessels, and after∣wards is forc'd thither from the Heart of the Birth through the Umbilical Arteries. For when the Umbilical Vessels are come to the Uterine Liver, a certain spirituous Nectar, or Vital Spi∣rit, flows out together with Arterious Blood from the heart of the Birth, which as it increases, nourishes, enlivens, and excites to action all the Parts of the Birth, and its Membranes, the spirituous Blood of the Mother assisting and afford∣ing the greatest part of the Matter, so does it enlarge and nourish this Placenta or Uterine Liver. VIII. This Liver in a single Con∣ceptionThe num∣ber of Placenta's. is alway single; and in the Conception of Twins, both Births have one common Liver containing the Na∣vels of both; but sometimes each Birth has a distinct and proper Uterine Li∣ver. However, Wharton believes that both Twins have a peculiar Placenta, but so contiguous; that they seem to be but one. But that the Opinion of Whar∣ton express'd by the word always, is not generally true, Experience teaches us; by which it appears, that sometimes the contrary happens. And therefore we are certainly to conclude, That in the Conception of Twins there is sometimes one Liver, sometimes two. But for what reason, and in what cases there happens sometimes one, and sometimes two, is a Mystery hitherto unreveal'd, and un∣known to all Practisers; which never∣theless we shall endeavour to unfold in the next Chapter, when we come to discourse of the State of the Membranes in Twins. IX. The Substance of it is peculiarIts Sub∣stance. to it self, soft, loose, brittle, thin, fur∣row'd with several furrows, and as it were here and there slightly divided; yet in the mean time altogether fibrous, being a Contexture of innumerable Threads and diminutive Fibres, and infinite little Branches of diminutive Vessels, and swelling with coagulated Blood pour'd in, not much unlike the looser Parenchyma of the Liver, tho' less firm, and easily dissolv'd and mangled by a slight attrition. And such a sort of Substance, as well at other times, as particularly in December 1665. we shewed to several Doctors of Physic and Students, in a Woman that dy'd af∣ter she had been six Months gone. And lately in the Placenta's of two live Wo∣men, from whom we extracted the Births when they could not be deliver'd of themselves: which Placenta's, after the Extraction of the Birth, were sepa∣rated whole from the Womb, and drawn forth together with the Mem∣branes. X. It is of a dark ruddy Colour,Its Colour. not unlike the Colour of the Spleen; somewhat more ruddy, seldom pa∣ler. XI. The Shape of the whole UterineShape and bigness. Liver is for the most part Circular, sometimes Long, or Quadrangular, seldom Triangular; but unequal in its Circumference. But the bigness and thickness various, according to the Condition of the Body and the Birth, and the Time of the Womans going. For in Abortions of thirty and forty Days it hardly appears about the Roots of the Navel, hardly then extended thither. But after that the spirituous
Blood flowing thither in greater Quanti∣ty, it grows and enlarges every day, till at length it comes to its Perfection, about a Foot in Breadth, or so much as may be extended between the two Thumbs and fore-Fingers extended in Compass: About two or three Fingers thick in the Middle, but thinner in the Extremities. Nicolaus Hoboken, an accurate Inspector into these Placenta's, writes that he never saw any one thicker than a Thumbs breadth, or very little more. Never∣theless we are to observe that there is some variety in the breadth and thick∣ness, being found sometimes to be thick∣er, and sometimes thinner in all Secun∣dines. XII. In the hollow Part next theThe Super∣ficies. Birth, the Superficies of it is equal and concave like a small Platter. Up∣on the gibbous Side unequal with se∣veral Excrescencies, with which it fastens it self to the inside of the Womb, no other Substance interceed∣ing, the fungous or spungy parts here and there slightly swelling out at the time of Impregnation, and rests up∣on it with its open Pores. And the Womb also, at that time more spungy, opening its Pores and the Extremities of its Arteries, joyns immediately to the Placenta, yet without any mutual Ana∣stomoses of the Veins or Arteries either of the one or the other (concerning which several Anatomists have written several Fancies contrary to Truth, meerly up∣on the Score of Conjecture) and so it transfuses the Alimentary Blood and milky Juice into this Placenta, which after Delivery, the said Placenta being torn away and separated, for many days together flows from those Openings or little Holes. XIII. In the Middle, or about theThe Ingress of the Na∣vel. Middle, and sometimes toward one or the other Side a diminutive lit∣tle umbilical Gut is sasten'd to it, with its Vessels included, by means whereof there is a necessary Communi∣cation between the Placenta, and the Birth; of which more c. 32. XIV. A Vein, and two umbilicalIts Vessels. Arteries are inserted into it, which are intermix'd with Roots in the Substance of it, with a wonderful Fold∣ing, and are thought to joyn together with some Anastomoses. But the Ra∣misications of the Arteries are gene∣rally more numerous, more serpentine and knotty, but less and more ruddy: The Ramifications of the Vein less in number, but larger and thicker, less contorted, and of a darker Colour. However the bigger part of the Roots is not joyn'd by Anastomoses; but the Arteries pour forth the Blood which is brought from the Heart of the Birth into the Parenchyma of the Placenta; which together with a good part of the Blood flowing through the small Vessels of the Womb, being altered by the Ute∣rine Liver, and endu'd with a slight fer∣mentaceous Quality, the gaping Roots of the Vein assume and convey to the Birth. XV. It has been the common O∣pinion,Whether any Ana∣stomoses between the Vessels of the Womb and Cheese∣cake. according to the Sentence of Galen, That the diminutive Branches of these small Arteries and Veins are not only joyn'd together by Anasto∣moses between themselves, but also with the Extremities of the Vessels of the Womb; and hence, after Delive∣ry, by their being broken off from the falling Uterine Liver, there happens a great Flux of Blood. But we ob∣serve in Brutes, That certain Vessels at∣tracting Nourishment out of the little Placenta's of the Chorion, are manifestly extended into the Pores of the little pieces of Flesh swelling out from the Womb, but that no Anastomoses descend from the Womb or its Protuberances into the Placentulae of the Chorion, nor that there are any Placentulae between the Vessels of these Placentulae and the Womb. Which it is probable to be no less true in human Conception, and that no blood-bearing Vessels run out from the Womb into the Placenta, but less that they joyn together by Anasto∣moses with the Umbilicals; seeing that the blood descends like Dew, only by de∣grees from the Ends of the Uterine Ar∣teries, gaping at the time of the wo∣mans being ingravidated, where it is prepared for the Nourishment of the Birth, as we shall shew hereafter. XVI. Wharton seems to assert,Whar∣ton's Opi∣nion. that several Vasa Sanguifera are ex∣tended from the Womb it self no less than from the Navel of the Birth, into the Placenta, however that they are intermix'd with 'em. For he says that the Placenta is divided in∣to two Halves, easily separable one from the other. Of which two Halves, the one manifestly looks toward the
parts of the Womb, and the other to∣wards the parts of the Embryo. And that all the Uterine Vessels, distri∣buted toward the Placenta, terminate in that same half which looks toward the womb, and there are consumed into little hairy Strings, and do not at all pass thorough the other half. Also that the umbilical Vessels which run forward toward that half of the Placenta which is fixed to the Chorion, are all exhausted into small Hair in the same half; nei∣ther do they pass into the opposite Me∣dietie contiguous to the womb. But this most famous Person presupposes a Division of the Placenta, never to be found, and never demonstrable; and thence erroneously concludes, that the diminutive Vessels running from one place to another, reach no farther than the one half; whereas there are no Va∣sa Sanguifera that descend from the womb to the Placenta, and for that it is most certain that the umbilical Ves∣sels penetrate through the whole. But as for those diminutive Vessels that are derived from the little piece of Flesh af∣fixed to the Chorion at the beginning of the Conception, they are distributed through the whole Chorion, before the Formation of the Birth, and seem to have none or very little Communicati∣on with the Placenta: Concerning which, 'tis very much to be doubted whether they proceed from any Continuation of the Vessels of the womb. To which Obscurity the most accurate Inspection of the famous Nicolaus Hoboken, have given us a very great Light, who never could observe any Productions of the blood-bearing Vessels from the womb in∣to the Placenta, whenas he has inquir'd into, and laid open, with great Study and Industry above other men, all the Mysteries of the Placenta and the whole Secundine; published in a Treatise, de Secundin Human. adorn'd with Cuts de∣lineated with his own Hand, and ex∣posed to the View and Judgment of all Men. XVII. The same Wharton believes,Whether a∣ny Veins and Arte∣ries in the ? that there are also lymphatic Vessels in∣termix'd with the Veins and Arteries in the uterine Liver, and that then enters together with them the Navel of the Birth. But he adds, that tho∣rough those the milkie Iuice poured forth from the Womb toward the Placenta, is conveighed to the Birth. But we have prov'd it already that there are no such conspicuous Vessels extended from the Womb to the Birth; and that if Wharton by accident saw any lit∣tle whitish Vessels carried from the Pla∣centa to the Womb, through the um∣bilical diminutive Gut, 'tis very pro∣bable he might be deceived and mistake the milkie Vessels for Lymphatics; as differing very little either in shape or thinness. Unless we should say, that the lymphatic Vessels do not only and always carry the Lymphatic Iuice, but the Chylus also in various places, where the Chylus is offered, and so that the same thing may likewise happen in the Placenta, as it often happens in that large pectoral Vessel, called the Thora∣cick Chyliductus. In the mean time Hoboken, a most accurate observer of these things never could find any lym∣phatic Vessels in the Liver, neither did they ever occur to me, tho' I have dili∣gently sought after them. XVIII. Some there are who assert,Whether a∣ny Nerves in the Cheescake? that there are also certain small dimi∣nutive Nerves, and that there is a certain nutritive Iuice conveighed through those for the benefit of the Birth. But I would fain know of those People, whence those Nerves have their Original, from the Father or the Mother, or from the Birth? The first cannot be, by what we have said already, in regard there are no Vessels that extend themselves out of the Placenta into the Womb. And that the latter cannot be true, is apparent from hence, because it is contrary to Reason and all Belief, that any Nerves should be extended so far from the most soft Substance of the brain of the birth, and that they should run from the bo∣dy of the Womb it self, through the whole length of the Navel to the Pla∣centa: Besides that in the Delivery, by the breaking of those Nerves the birth it self would be greatly endangered. Lastly, Because there are no nutritious Juices carried through the Nerves, nei∣ther can be carried through 'em, as we shall shew more at large l. 8. c. 1. We have said a little before, that the Vessels and Pores of the Womb, do gape a little toward the Placenta, and empty their Juices into it like a kind of Dew. This many strenuously deny in Women: And yet at the same time they grant that the Vessels of the Womb are opened into the Uterine Caruncles of Beasts, and pour forth their alimenta∣ry Juice into their little Caverns, which is again suck'd up out of them by the
little branches of the umbilical Vessels, and out of those Cotyledons is carried to the Womb, as we find true by ocu∣lar Testimony. But it is not worth while to use many words in refuting the Opinion of these Men, as contradicting not only the Sight it self, but one ano∣ther, seeing that they allow alimentary Juice to the Placenta's or Cotyledons of Beasts, and yet deny them to the Pla∣centa's in Women; whereas there is the same use and necessity of the same part in both, and for that it is apparent by what has been already said that the ali∣mentary Juice is no less in the Cotyledons of Women than of Beasts. XIX. The Place where the Pla∣centaThe Place of Adhesi∣on. sticks to the Womb cannot be certainly assign'd; for sometimes it is joyn'd and firmly adheres to it in the right side▪ sometimes in the left, and sometimes at the hinder part of the bottom of the Womb; and where it is fastened within to the Chorion, there it admits the Entrance of the umbilical Vessels. But when it begins to increase, in the first Months it sticks as closely to it, as the unripe Fruit to the Tree. But the bigger the Birth grows, and the nearer to Delivery, so it still parts the more easily from the Womb, and at length, when the Fruit is quite ripe, after the Expulsion of the birth, falls off from the Womb. XX. By the general Vogue of theThe Opini∣ons of the Ancients. Ancients it is said to adhere to the Womb by Acetables, concerning which Acetables however there is a very great dispute. 1. Some think 'em to be the Protube∣ranciesOpinion. of the Vessels of the womb, like to Hemorrhoids or Warts, with which the Embryo is nourish'd. But this is derided by Erotian in his Onomasticon. 2. Others with Diocles assert'em to be certain Mamillary Processes, swelling out from the body of the womb into its Ca∣vity, during the time of Ingravidation, for the Nourishment of the Birth: which is also exploded by Soranus Ephesius. 3. Others with Protagoras, back'd as they say, by Hippocrates and Galen, af∣firm that the Acetables are the Orifices of the Vessels swelling with overplus of blood, dispersed through the inner Tunicle of the Womb? And thus Van Horn asserts 'em to be a certain arteri∣ous larger sort of little Pipes gaping in∣to the Cavity of the Womb. Which Opinion was started long before by Spi∣gelius, but rejected by Nicolas Mas∣sa. 4. Formerly they held that the Ker∣nelly Pieces of Flesh, resembling the Leaves of the Herb Wall-Penny-Wort, were placed between the Chorion and the Womb, adjoyn'd to the Orifices of the Vessels, and took them for the Cotyle∣dons. 5. Riolanus writes that the Placenta is fastened to the sides of the Womb by an innumerable number of Fibrous Pro∣ductions, and gives the Name of Coty∣ledons to these Fibres: And besides these affirms that there are no other apparent Cotyledons in Women. 6 Fallopius, Arantius, and many o∣ther quick-sighted Anatomists, deny that there are any Acetables or Cotyle∣dons in a womans Womb; with whom also Harvey agrees: who describes the Cotyledons in beasts, but deny women to have any, or that they have any thing like 'em. On the other side Silvius stoutly maintains that there are Aceta∣bles in women, and affirms that they are to be seen in a woman near her Time, or but newly delivered. With whom Carolus Gemma, and Laurentius agree, Galen indeed asserts that women have Cotyledons, but he confirms it only by the Authority of other Anatomists; and says they are the Orifices of the Ves∣sels of the Womb; or rather the clo∣sing together of the Vessels of the womb and the birth by Anastomosis: Which Opinion we have already refuted. In such a Dissention of learned Men, tho' it be hard to assert any thing of certainty, yet the Truth is to be inqui∣red into, in regard it seems a thing not to be doubted, but that women have A∣cetables, in regard that Hippocrates, who neither could deceive nor be deceived, as Macrobius testifies, makes mention of 'em; which he would not do to no pur∣pose nor by mistake. First then let us consider what these Cotyledons are, and next, whether they are in women with Child? XXI. Certain Parts appearing inThe Name deriv'd. the Womb of a woman with Child, are called by the Greeks , and that from a two fold Resemblance. First from the Likeness which they have to the Herb Cotyledon, which the Latins call Venus-Navel, in English Wall-Pennywort, an Herb, whose Leaves are somewhat thick, smooth, full of Iuice, round, unequal in Compass, and a little hollow in
the middle. Secondly, From the likeness which they have to the Cavity of the Hip-bone, which is call'd , and contains the head of the Thigh-bone. From which Resemblance, they are also call'd by the Latins Accep∣tabuld, because they receive something into their hollowness; but more fre∣quently Acetabula, because they are like to little Sawcers, wherein they use to bring Vinegar to the Table. XXII. From this Derivation of theWhat the Cotyle∣dons are. Name it manifestly appears, That Hip∣pocrates and the rest of the Ancients, by Cotyledons never meant any Protu∣berancies of the Vessels, or any other fleshie or mamillary Excrescencies, or fibrous Ligaments, but some certain things that were hollow, or else their Cavities themselves: And therefore they were all under a gross mistake that took those Protuberancies for Cotyle∣dons. XXIII. We are now to enquire inIn what Creatures to be seen. what Creatures they are to be found? I answer; That they are to be found as well in Women, as in any other Creatures that produce living Births, only different in figure and shape. For in Women, if we do but accurate∣ly consider the Matter, there are not many, but one Cotyledon, and sometimes two in Women that have conceived Twins. For indeed the whole Uterine Placenta, which is convex toward the Womb, hollow toward the Chorion, is all together, somewhat thick, full of Juice, round, unequal in the circumfe∣rence, exactly resembling the Herb Wall-Pennimort, or else the figure of a little Sawcer. Of this Womans Cotyle∣don, Hippocrates makes mention Sect. 5. Aph. 45. Those Women, who being mode∣rately corpulent, miscarry at the end of two or three Months, without any manifest oc∣casion, their Cotyledons are full of slime, and therefore by reason of their ponderosity, are not able to contain the Birth, but are broken. For if great store of flegmatic slimy Humours lye heavy upon the Pla∣centa, being soften'd and becoming lank in the gibbous part of it, where it sticks to the inner spunginess of the womb, of necessity it must be unloosned, together with the Birth, which by its means, sticks also to the Womb. Now Hippocrates speaks of Cotyledons in the Plural Num∣ber, not that he would have one Wo∣man, that has conceiv'd but one Birth, have more Cotyledons or Placentae; but because he is discoursing in the Plural Number of Women in general, who tho' singly, they have but one, yet ma∣ny together have several Cotyledons. This, if many famous Anatomists had more attentively consider'd, and among the rest our most quick-sighted Harvey, they had not so unwarily deny'd Cotyledons in Women, nor rejected so easily the Au∣thority of Hippocrates in that particular. And therefore, according to the first Re∣semblance, Cotyledons are in Wo∣men. XXIV. But according to the latterCotyle∣dons in Brutes. Resemblance, they are to be found in most Beasts that bring forth living Productions, who during their Im∣pregnation, have several little pieces of flesh, somewhat thick and hard, spun∣gy and prominent, rising from the Womb in time of Impregnation toward the inner Cavity, and sticking close to it, and like a Honycomb, hollow'd into several little conspicuous Cells, contain∣ing a certain Alimentary Iuice, as is to be seen in Ews, Cows, and several o∣ther Creatures. And some there were that took these little fleshinesses of the womb▪ others those little diminutive holes before mention'd for real Cotyle∣dons: when as neither the one nor the other have any resemblance with the Ca∣vity of the Hip-bone. But those single fleshinesses of the Womb are encom∣pass'd by another thin ruddy soft piece of flesh adhering to the Chorion, and furnish'd with the innumerable small Ex∣tremities of the Umbilical Vessels, entring the little diminutive holes of the protuberant Caruncles of the Womb, and hollow toward the little fleshiness of the womb: Which thin hollow fleshi∣nesses adhering to the Chorion, and em∣bracing the thick protuberant fleshinesses of the womb, are the true Cotyledons, having a hollowness like the Cavity of the Hip-bone: and as the one compre∣hends the head of the Thigh-bone, so these in like manner comprehend the protuberant fleshinesses of the womb: and hence they are called Loculamenta, or Pigeon-holes, that is, distinct Places, each one of which receives a Caruncle of the womb. But these fleshinesses of the Chorion in those Beasts that have 'em, supply the place of the Placenta, and receive the Juices received by the Carun∣cles of the womb, and conveigh them through the Umbilical Vessels to the Birth. For that every one of the thin
Extremities of the Umbilical Vessels ad∣hering to them, are inserted into the se∣veral diminutive holes of the Caruncles of the womb, fill'd with a certain nutri∣tive slimy Juice, as a Honycomb is fill'd with Honey, wherewith several Beasts seem to be nourish'd in the womb. Which little Vessels, when they are drawn forth out of the diminutive holes of the Ca∣runcles of the womb, the said slimy Juice is to be seen sticking to their Roots, and is extended out of the holes, like small white Threads. Nevertheless 'tis very probable, that that same Juice being con∣dens'd by the Cold in dead Animals be∣comes so thick, as the Lymphatic Juice is congeal'd into a Gelly, but that in li∣ving and warm Creatures it is not so thick or viscous, but thin and fluid, to the end it may the more easily glide through the most narrow Vessels into the Cavity of the Amnion, and so reach to the Birth. But we must observe by the way, that those little fleshinesses of the Chorion at the beginning of the Im∣pregnation, are difficultly to be separa∣ted from the Caruncles of the womb: but the Embryo increasing, as it were come to maturity, are dissolv'd and loosen'd by degrees, and at length fall off of themselves, and in the delivery are expell'd, together with the Birth; and the Protuberancies swelling from the womb, decrease again by degrees, and contract themselves. XXV. The use of the Uterine Li∣verThe use of the Placen∣ta in Wo∣men. in a Woman is, partly to support the milkie Umbilical Vessels, which attract the milkie watery Iuice out of the Pores or diminutive holes of the womb: partly after a peculiar manner to concoct and prepare the Blood, flow∣ing as well from the Mother, through the Uterine Arteries; partly from the Birth, through the Umbilicals, to render it more serviceable for the nou∣rishment of the Birth. This was Har∣vey's meaning, where he says, More∣over the Placenta concocts the nutritive Iuice coming from the Mother for the nou∣rishment of the Birth. But what altera∣tion or concoction the Blood undergoes in Human concoction, that has hitherto not been so clearly understood, neither has any one written concerning it. For our part, we think it very probable, that the Uterine Liver dissolves the thicker and salt Particles of the Blood, and inter∣mixes it with the sulphury, and so makes the necessary bloody ferment for the Blood of the Embryo, without which the Blood in the heart of it cannot be well dilated, and performs that function a∣lone, which in Men born the Liver and Spleen perform together. For as in Man born, the Arterial Blood is forc'd through the Splenetic Artery into the Spleen, and therein concocted, after a particular man∣ner, is conveigh'd through the Splenetic Branch and the Vena Porta to the Liver, to the end it may be mixed with the venal Blood coming from the Mesa∣raic Veins, there to be concocted again after a new Manner, and to acquire the perfection of a Fermentaceous Liquor, and that obtain'd immediately imbibes the venal Blood flowing from all parts, as also the Chylus gliding through the Subclavial Vein, with it's fermenta∣ceous quality, so that coming to the Heart, it may be there dilated and turn'd into Spirituous Blood; In like man∣ner, in the Birth, the Blood is forc'd out of the Iliac Arteries through the Umbilical Veins into the Placenta, to the end it may be mingled with the Blood flowing from the Womb, be digested and acquire some slight kind of Fermen∣taceous power: and so it is carryed through the Umbilical Vein, to the Li∣ver of the Embryo, and flowing through that into the Vena Cava, is there mix'd with the Blood and the Chylus, (gene∣rated out of the Liquor of the Amnion suck't in at the Mouth of the Birth) flowing from the Vena Cava: and so all that mixture being prepar'd and imbib'd with a slight Fermentaceous Quality, pas∣ses gradatim to the Heart, and is there∣in dilated and made Spirituous. Proba∣ble therefore it is, that as in the Embryo, the Lungs are quiet, so that the Liver and Spleen do not as yet officiate, as in a Man born, which is manifest, 1. From the bulk of the Liver, too bigg for the Body of the Embryo; 2. From the Co∣lour of the Embryo, too bright, and perfectly ruddy, which in Men born, when it officiates, is black and blue. XXVI. Those Bowels therefore, notThe Pla∣centa sup∣plies the Office of some other Bowels. being able as yet sufficiently to dissolve, and prepare them to a fermentaceous height, in the Birth, by reason of their weak and tender Constitution, provi∣dent Nature therefore has substituted in their place for the time a Uterine Liver, which supplies the Office of both from the time that the Blood begins to flow from the Birth, through the Um∣bilical Arteries into the Uterine Li∣ver, till the Delivery. For as in the Birth it is requisite the Blood should be
less sharp, and consequently ought to be concocted not in both, but in one Ven∣tricle of the Heart; so likewise the Fer∣mentaceous Liquor that is to be mixed with it, ought to be less acrimonious, and by the same consequence ought not to be prepared and concocted in the Li∣ver and Spleen as in Man born, but only in the Uterine Placenta, to the end it may be more mild and temperate when it enters the Birth. XXVII. Now there are four Reasons toWhy the Placenta sticks to the Womb. be given, wherefore the Placenta sticks to the Womb. 1. That thereby the Birth may be more firmly contained in the womb. 2. That the watry milkie juices de∣scending from the Womb of the Mother, may be conveniently conveyed through the proper Milkiy Umbilical Vessels, passing through the Uterine Liver into the Umbilical Diminutive Gutt, and thence into the concavity of the Amni∣on. 3. That the Placenta it self may not be nourished only by the Blood of the Birth, flowing through the Umbili∣cal Arteries, which is very small at the Beginning, but also and that chief∣ly with the Mothers Blood, and so may grow the faster, and be made fit for the performance of its duty; there being a necessity for some dissolution at the beginning, of the Salt or Tarta∣rous Particles in the Blood, by means of a certain slight formentaceous Li∣quor, to promote more swiftly the In∣crease of the solid parts. Vid. l. 2. c. 12. 4. To the end there may be a more copious Contribution of the Mo∣thers Blood, flowing out of the little Vessels of the Womb, into the Uterin Liver, that that same larger quantity of Blood may be mixed in the Placenta with the lesser Quantity of Arterious Blood, flowing thither from the Iliac Arteries of the Birth, through the Um∣bilical Arteries: and being there conco∣cted may be endued with a slight fer∣mentaceous Quality, and so falling in∣to the Heart, may be presently dilated and altered into spirituous Blood. For as in Man born, to the end the Blood may be made right and good, twenty or more parts of the venal Blood are mix'd in the Vena Cava, with one part of the Chylus flowing through the Thoracic Ductus Chyliferus, before they come together to the Heart: So ought it to be done in the Birth: Which not ha∣ving so much Blood of it self to mix with a convenient portion of the Chylus, necessarily for the supply of that defect, there is required a portion of the Mo∣thers Blood, which together with the Arterious Blood of the Embryo, flowing thither from the Iliac Arteries, being conveniently prepared, is communica∣ted continually to the Birth, through the Umbilical Vein. XXVIII. Here it may be objected,An Objecti∣on. that that same Blood will flow either into the Umbilical Vessels, or into the substance of the Uterine Liver. That the first is not true, is apparent from hence, that there is no Communion by Anastomoses between the Vessels of the Womb, and the Umbilicals. If the latter should be true, then the Extrava∣sated Blood would grow corrupt, which would occasion Inflammations, Apostemes and other Mischiefs; therefore, &c. Now the former being granted I answer to the latter, That the Concoctions of the other Bowels, and many other parts, instructs us, that it cannot be true by a∣ny means: For the Chylus being pour'd forth into the Glandules of the Breasts is not there corrupted, but concocted in∣to Milk: the venal Blood pour'd forth into the substance of the Liver, acquires a Fermentaceous Quality without any cor∣ruption, and is carryed to the Vena Cava; the Blood also pour'd forth into the Kid∣neys, despoyl'd of a good part of its Serum, without any corruption, is con∣vey'd to the Vena Cava: So also the Blood which flows into the Uterine Li∣ver, is not therein corrupted, but is concocted after a peculiar manner, and undergoes some necessary Alteration, which having suffered, it enters the Roots of the Umbilical Vein. XXIX. Beyond all Controversy there∣foreThe Blood flows from the Womb into the Uterine Liver. it is, that the Blood flows from the Womb into the Uterine Liver. Which we find by the flux of Blood that hap∣pens for many days in time of Travail by the tearing away of the Uterine Liver from those open'd extremities of the Vessels of the Womb, which before gaped into it. XXX. But besides the Blood, thereA Watery Milky juice flows from the Womb to the Amni∣on. is a watery, Viscous, Milkie Liquor which flows from the Womb to the hol∣lowness of the Amnion, which is seen to flow forth at the time of Delivery and presently afterwards. So Andrew Laurentius relates, Anat. l. 1. quest. 10. that he had seen several Women in
Travail emit a great quantity of milk from the womb. Schenkius also reports out of Bauhinus, that Capellus, the Phy∣sician, saw a Woman who discharg'd half a Cup full of milk out of her womb and bladder. And hence Deusingius con∣cludes, that the milkie Juice flows from the womb into the Uterine Liver, that is into the milkie Umbilical Vessels passing through that Liver. Which Opinion is confirm'd by this, for that often in Women in travail about the end of the Flux, the Secundines grow whitish, and become as it were of a milkie colour; which presently ceases through the suck∣ing of the Breasts. But whether that milkie Juice flows from the womb into the substance it self of the Placenta, is much question'd by some. Others say, that partly through the ruddy and bloo∣dy colour of the Parenchyma of the Pla∣centa; partly, for that never in the whole Placenta that milky Humour, or any thing like it, was to be found by any A∣natomists, the contrary is to be asserted. In this Obscurity the more accurate Dis∣section of Brutes gives us some light, by which we find a certain whitish viscous Humour settled in their Uterine Carun∣cles, into which the Roots of the milky Umbilical Vessels, adhering to the little Vessels of the Chorion, are inserted, and receive that Juice, and convey it to the Birth. So it seems also probable, that some such like milky Iuice, in Women, flows through some peculiar milky Ves∣sels to the womb into some proper Ca∣runcles riveted into the inner porous sub∣stance of the womb it self: and that the milky Umbilical Vessels passing through the Placenta, are inserted into 'em, which receive that Liquor, and carry it to the Amnion. For as in Brutes certain spun∣gy Excrescencies grow out from the womb receiving that Juice, so likewise it is probable that in a Womans womb, there are certain little spungy Caverns for the same use, tho' not conspicuous as in Brutes. For if there be a milky Li∣quor to be found in the Uterine Carun∣cles of Brutes, which in dead Creatures becomes thick and viscous through the Cold, and thence sufficiently to be seen, without doubt also, within the porous substance of a Womans womb, there must be some little Caverns by which that milky Juice flowing from the womb is particularly collected and re∣ceiv'd. And as from the Veins of the womb, and the Arteries gaping toward the Placenta, the blood is pour'd into the bloody parts of the Uterine Liver, and carried from them through the Umbilical Vein to the Liver of the Birth, so it is likely that the milky Juice is car∣ried from the little milk-bearing Cells of the womb into the Umbilical milky Vessels. But because those Uterine Cells of the milky Juice have not hitherto been observ'd by any Person, this is no proof that they are not there; for the Lymphatic Vessels themselves, the milky Mesenteries and Pectoral Vessels lay con∣ceal'd for many Ages; and yet it can∣not be said but that they were there. So likewise at this day the Production of the Urinary Passage in the Birth without the Navel, and the milky Vessels running toward the Breasts, are not conspicuous, tho' it be most certain that the Urine of the Birth flows through that passage into the Allantoides, seated between the Cho∣rion and the Amnion; through this, the milky Chylus is carried to the breasts. Moreover, Anatomists have seldom an opportunity in a breeding Woman to ob∣serve the substance or constitution of the womb, or of narrowly surveying the Uterine Placenta when whole; or if any such opportunity were offer'd, no body has hitherto thought of looking after those milky Uterine Cells: And besides the Passage of the milky Vessels through the Placenta, being broken by reason of the softness of the substance, and the flow∣ing forth of the blood, cannot be seen. To which we may add, that in Women, for some time dead, those milky Cells of the Womb, and milk-bearing Vessels of the Womb are impossible to be dis∣cern'd, as they might be discover'd in the bodies of such as come to a suddain end, and presently open'd. We must conclude therefore, that as in Brutes the Maternal milky Iuice is collected in the little Cells of the Caruncles of the Womb; so also in Women that Juice is receiv'd by cer∣tain little Caverns of the womb, fix'd into its inner substance, which is porous in certain places while the Woman is breeding, tho' they do not swell out in that manner, nor are so manifest as in Brutes. For if there were no such things as those little milky Cells, to what use should those milky Vessels be, as well those of the Mother extended to the womb, as the Umbilical Vessels of the birth? Which nevertheless that they are both there, I do not think is at all to be que∣stion'd: For that there are Uterine milky Vessels, has been found by the more quick∣sighted Anatomist sometimes since; as we shall shew more at large in the next Chapter. So likewise that there are Um∣bilical milk-bearing Vessels, is apparent from hence, that there is a milky Juice
contain'd in the little Gut, flowing from thence to the hollowness of the Amnion, which when the whitish Colour suffici∣ently declares that it is not carried through the Vasa Sanguifera, of necessity it must come thither through the milky Vessels extended from the Navel of the birth toward the womb. But because this Juice is not so white as the milk of the breasts, but of a more watery Co∣lour, Wharton therefore will have it to be call'd rather Gelly, and that, because it is somewhat clammy and clear, and being cold congeals like Gelly, and that not only in the Amnion, but in the little Gut; for it is found in both. But Gualter Needham will oppose both what has been said, and what is to be said in the next Chapter, who labours altoge∣ther to perswade us, that this same mil∣kie or chylous Juice is carried not through any milkie Vessels, but through the Arteries, together with the blood to∣ward the Womb; and there again being separated pure from the blood, is emptied into the hollowness of the Amnion. As if there were any understanding or pro∣vident separating faculty in the Arteries, by whose instinct they knew how to car∣ry that milky Juice forc'd into 'em by the heart, together with the blood, after∣wards, in the time of Child-bearing, and at no other time, pure and unmix'd, without any other blood, directly to the womb, and perhaps to the breasts, but no where else: and there to separate it with so much prudence from the blood, and send it from the ends of the Arteries to∣ward the hollowness of the Amnion, to the end this thicker and more slimy Juice should flow from those ends, but the ar∣terious blood which is much thinner and fluid, out of a particular favour, should be detain'd in its own Vessels. Most stu∣pendious Miracle of Nature! But per∣haps it may be objected, Choler in the Liver, Serum, Matter, Tartar in the Kidneys, in spontaneous and procured Loosnesses, as vicious Humours are se∣parated from the blood, and ejected forth, what wonder then that the same should happen to the Chylus, as to the womb? I answer, that those separations of the said Humours from the blood in the Liver, Kidneys, and other parts, are made by the force of the Bowels fram'd to that end; of which, the whole consti∣tution of the Substance and the Pores is such; as likewise the peculiar fermenta∣tion proceeding from thence, that those Bowels being sound and well, of necessity must make those separations, and cannot act otherwise: in like manner as the pe∣culiar fermentaceous Iuice generated in the Duodenum by the power of the Liver and Sweetbread, separates the whitish Chylus from the Alimentary Mass concocted in the Stomach. But if the Chylus were to be separated from the arterious blood near the womb, it must be done without the help of any Bowel, or without any peculiar fermentaceous Iuice generated in any Bowel particular ordained for that use; for no such Bowel is there at any time to be found. Add to this, that not any such separation whatever could bring it to pass, that that same milky Juice should be determin'd to certain particular parts, as the womb and breasts, and that at particular times, of breeding and giving suck, and at no other time. For the heart is the one and only general thruster forth of the arterious blood, and that continually, without any di∣stinction of parts or times, but to all parts and at all times. Lastly, this is al∣so to be consider'd, that those said Chylous and milky Humours before that separati∣on from the blood; really and actually ought to have been in the arterious blood, and to have been mix'd with it: whereas on the contrary, never any true Chylus either actually or potential∣ly is contain'd in the blood that passes through the heart, nor there dilated▪ and so thrust forward into the Arteries, as we shall shew L. 2. c. 12. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Membranes enfolding the Birth; and the humours therein contained. I. NExt the Uterine Liver fol∣low two Membranes enfold∣ing the Birth, and as it were enclosing it in an Egg, Chorion, and Amnios, which because being both joyn'd toge∣ther, they are expell'd out of the womb together with the Placenta, presently after the birth of the Child; are by the Latins call'd Secundae or Secundine,Secundines. Seconds or Secundines; by the Greeks  and , as being things that come forth in the second place. II. The Chorion is an ExteriorThe Chori∣on. Membrane encompassing the whole
Birth, thick and interwoven with se∣veral small diminutive Fibres, like Threads, smooth within, and some∣what rough without; here and there sprinkl'd with a little Fat, and where it sticks to the bottom of the Womb by the help of the Placenta, furnished with several Vessels proceeding from the first Caruncle described C. 29. As also from the Uterine Liver, and Umbilical Vessels: Of which those are to be seen in great number in the Cho∣rion before the Formation of the Birth; but these, after the Navel is grown out to its full length from the Birth, enter the Membrane, and are intermix∣ed with the former, and so being strengthened with this Membrane as with a Coverlet, pass forward to the Uterine Liver annexed to the Chorion. III. Nicholaus Hoboken, besidesThe Urina∣ry Mem∣brane. the Chorion, describes another Mem∣brane, thin and transparent, not ha∣ving any visible Branches of Vessels, very like the Amnios sticking to the Chorion, and easily separated from it with the Nails, without the help of a Penknife; but sticking very close a∣bout the Region of the Placenta sticking to the Chorion. This third Membrane between the Chorion and the Amnios, Needham was the first that found out, and call'd it very fitly the Urinary Membrane, rationally affirming it to supply the place of the Alantoides in Brutes, and that between that and the Chorion, the Urine of the Birth was collected and kept till Delivery. And thus by this Invention of the most fa∣mous Needham, and the Confirmation of the same by Hoboken's Inspections in∣to the Secundines, all those Doubts are most splendidly removed concerning the Alantois of Women, and the Place where the Urine of the Embryo is con∣tain'd, and preserv'd till delivery. I my self, by Needham's Directions, have sought for and found it; and so laid a∣side all those Doubts which have puzl'd me before concerning the Alantois in Women. This Membrane, when others also saw, they took it for the inner part of the Chorion, and so asserted the Cho∣rion to consist of a double Membrane, to which Opinion many other Anato∣mists gave their Consent. IV. The Amnios is the inner Mem∣brane,Amnios. next enfolding the Birth and sostly enclosing it, hence call'd by the Names of Amiculum and Indusium, the Cloak, or Shirt, gently resting upon the Chorion, yet no where joyn'd to it, but only in one very small place in the upper Part at the Ca∣runcle describ'd C. 29. This is very thin and single, soft, smooth, and transparent, distant from the Birth with a loose Space, furnished with little Vessels hardly Visible, issuing from the foresaid Caruncle, and the um∣bilical Vessels. This Membrane Aqua∣pendens thought to be double; who per∣haps lighting upon the urinary Mem∣brane before mentioned, thought it to be a part of the Amnion. Now these small Vessels by reason of their extra∣ordinary Exility, are very rarely to be discern'd by the Eye, and therefore Ho∣boken, and some others thought it had no Vessels; but erroneously, when Life, Nourishment, and Growth, teach us that it cannot want Vessels; seeing that in the Spiders web-like, and glassy Tu∣nicle of the Eye, there are no Vessels conspicuous; and yet they are no less nourished with Blood than other Parts, and those Vessels are sufficiently conspi∣cuous in the Net-like Tunicle wrap'd a∣bout the vitreous Humour. Needham writes that these little Vessels are ma∣nifestly to be discerned in a new ejected and warm Amnion, but vanish as soon as it comes to be cold. Wharton more∣over allows the Amnios Lymphatic Ves∣sels, which in regard they are at no time to be seen, nor any way useful therein, whether they be there or no, I very much doubt. V. Sometimes at the time of De∣liveryThe Caul on the Head. it happens that a torn-off Part of this Amnios will stick to the head of this Birth, and that the Child is born with it, as if he had a Caul or Cap upon his Head, for which reason such Births are called Galeati, or with Caps or Cauls on them. From this Cap the Midwifes make great Ob∣servations upon the future Good or Ill Fortune of the Infant, according to the Diversity of the Colour, and diligently preserve it, as a Fee belonging to them∣selves, by that means to scare and ter∣rify the Parents of the Infant with their Fictions and Stories, and procure the more Money for it from the Parents, whom they ridiculously make believe that if the Infant did not eat that Cap in Powder, or else carry it about him all his Life time in a Box, he should prove unfortunate or else Epileptic; or
be continually haunted with Spirits and Hobgoblins: but if he did eat or carry it about him, that then he should be happy and fortunate. VI. But we are to observe, thatThe Con∣tion of the Mem∣branes in Twins. when a Woman has conceived Twins, they are for the most part wrapt about with one Chorion; but that each Embryo has a distinct Amnion, and that there is contained in each Am∣nion, a distinct milkie Humour, as we find in Chessnuts and Almonds, the outward Shells of which, tho' they include two Kernels, yet each Kernel has its proper Tunicle whereby they are separated one from another. Now if it happen that the Amnions of Twins are broken by any blow, fall, bruise, or through any other means; or else were not sufficiently distinguished at the beginning, then the Embryo's in those Parts where they touch one ano∣ther grow together, and a Monster comes to be brought forth. But many times it also happens, that the distinct Embryo's are ensolded in distinct Cho∣ons. VII. The reason of this was for∣merlyThe reason thereof, and of mon∣strous Births. altogether unknown; but since the discovery of Womens Ovaries and Eggs, it is easily explain'd. For as we often see in Hen Eggs two Yolks, with their distinct Whites, separated by a very thin Membrane, included in one hard Shell, and from such Eggs impregnated by the Cock and set under the Hen, rarely two and well form'd Chickens hatch'd, but frequent∣ly one monstrous Chicken, with four Wings and Feet, and two Heads; for that the Membranes being broken, the two Chickens being hatch'd toge∣ther grow into one. So it may hap∣pen in the Eggs of women, that two Eggs may be included in one harder Shell, which constitutes the Chorion: And then if the Membranes of the Am∣nios are strong enough, the Twins remain separated one from the other, and Na∣vels issuing from each, are inserted both together into one Placenta adhering to the Chorion, and at length brought to Maturity, come forth apart in the Delivery, and when the latter is come forth, there follows but one Secundine, which contained 'em both in the womb: Neither can there be two Placentae, be∣cause but one Placenta can be fasten'd to one Chorion. But if the Membranes of the Amnios were very weak and broken, then the Twins immediately resting one upon another, grew together by reason of the extream Softness of the bodies, and so being joyn'd toge∣ther come forth monstrous in the birth. But if it happen that two distinct ma∣ture Eggs impregnated with the male Seed, slip out of the womans Ovaries through the Fallopian Tubes into the Womb, then each Embryo comes to be included in distinct Membranes, Chori∣on, and Amnion; and each also, (of necessity to receive the Navel of each Embryo) have a distinct Placenta ad∣hering to its proper Amnion (as in Brutes that bring forth several at a time, every Embryo has a distinct and peculi∣ar Placentula) and come forth apart at the time of Delivery, their proper Se∣cundines following each; unless by chance the Placentae stick more closely to the Womb; and then at length being both together loosen'd, both the Secun∣dines follow after the Delivery of the Twins: And sometimes we have seen one Twin follow the other not till the next; or two days afterward. As in Twins, so it is when a woman has Con∣ceived three or four Children at a time, which Births are here very rare, but frequent in Scotland. From what has been said also arises the Solution of that Doubt concerning the number of Pla∣centae in Twins, when one, and when two or more are necessary: That is, one, when Twins are comprehended in one Chorion; two, when each are inclu∣ded in their proper Chorions: Which two nevertheless lye so close many times to one another, that they seem to be but one at first sight. For the umbili∣cal Vessels of each Twin, passing tho∣rough their proper Chorion and Amni∣on, ought to be presently inserted into the Placenta growing in the exterior part of that Chorion; to the end that by its means the Embryo may stick to the Womb. But they must not be inserted into the Placenta growing to the Chori∣on of another Birth, as being that which those Vessels do not immediately enter, nor so much as tend toward it. VIII. These two Membranes, theThe Origi∣nal of these Mem∣branes. Chorion and the Amnios, are vul∣garly thought to be Productions of the Membranes of the Abdomen of the Birth. For that the umbilical Ves∣sels proceeding from the Abdomen of the Birth, are included within two Membranes, constituting the lit∣tle
Gut: Of which the innermost, which is the thinner, is thought to be produced from the Peritoneum; the outermost, which is the thicker, from the Carnous Membrane These Membranes being dilated to the end of the Navel, and expanded about the Birth, out of the innermost the Amnion is said to be form'd, out of the Exterior the Chorion: And this is the Opinion of Harvey. Hippocrates also seems to inti∣mate the same thing, where he says, out of the Navel extended are form'd two Membranes. Who also saw in the Con∣ception of a singing Wench, a Mem∣brane produced from the Navel which contained the Conception. If any one object, that these Membranes are ge∣nerated before the parts of the Birth are delineated. I answer, that the Threads of the first Delineation, tho' they are not visible to the Eye, are yet in Being. For in a Hen-Egg we ob∣serve a little ruddy dancing Poynt (which is thought to be the Heart) which can∣not beat unless it receive something tho∣rough the Veins, and force it through the Arteries; and yet tho' neither the one or the other are visible, yet Rea∣son teaches us, that they are in Being. In like manner in a human Birth, tho' all the first Lineaments are not to be seen, yet they are there, and the Navel may be produced out of them, together with the Membranes infolding the Birth. If any one shall say that in a Hen-Egg there are Membranes before the Navel is delineated, nay before the Egg is set under the Hen: I answer, that in an Egg, before the Delineation of the Parts, all things requisite ought to be in readiness; which cannot be contributed by the Hen toward their De∣lineation; as in Creatures that bring forth live Conceptions they are prepa∣red by degrees together with the Deli∣neation. For these receive from the Womb of the Dam more Nourishment over and above to supply their Growth; from which Nourishment also these Membranes delineated out of the Female Seed receive their Growth. These Opinions of Harvey pleased me also formerly, but after I saw, in the Abortions described C. 29▪ these Mem∣branes already form'd, nay very large and strong, before the Formation of the Birth begun, while the procreative Mat∣ter is collected in the Crystaline Bub∣ble; no Threads at all being as yet ex∣tended from the Bubble; and also in the beginning of the Embryo already form'd, a Foundation hardly conspicuous to bud forth out of the belly, nor any the least Delineaments of the Vessels extend∣ed from it through the Colliquation or dissolv'd Matter, toward the Mem∣branes; but the Embryo altogether free, nor joyn'd to any part swimming upon the Colliquation; and both Membranes already sufficiently strong, and wrap'd about the whole dissolv'd Matter, and furnished with conspicuous Vessels, I thought my self obliged to recede from that Opinion, and not without reason; in regard it was impossible that such strong Membranes, so conspicuous and so large, should be generated out of any invisible String (of which Harvey speaks) which never any Person could so much as dream to be form'd out of the Bub∣ble at first collected together. IX. Therefore these Membranes doTheir true Original. not arise from their Beginning; but are generated in the Womens Ova∣ries themselves out of the female Seed▪ as we have said c. 24. and are en∣compassed with Eggs. Which Eggs being afterwards discharged into the Womb, their outward Membranes swell, and the Chorion grows thicker (like Leather steep'd in Water) and being very much dilated, constitute these two Membranes, the Chorion and the Amnion. And as the out∣ward Shell of a Hen or other Birds Egg, before it be laid, sticks with a little Branch to the Ovary; so also in a wo∣man these Membranes by means of a Caruncle sticking to the Chorion, adhere not to the Ovary but to the Womb it self at the very beginning; as appears in the Abortions describ'd c. 29. and per∣haps in that very part where the Egg descends out of the Tube into the Womb; and embrace the whole dis∣solv'd Matter together with the Cry∣stalline Bubble collected therein; and so within their Walls, through the benigne Cherishing of the Uterine Heat, the Ar∣chitectonic Spirit latent in the Bubble, is set at Liberty, and roused into Action. As for those slender small Vasa Sanguisera, which from the beginning are seen di∣spersed through the Chorion (as we have observed in the forecited Abortions) I have observed them to be produced not from the Birth then not as yet form'd, or from the Crystalline Bubble, furnish∣ed as yet with no blood or blood-bear∣ing Vessels; but from that fleshy, spun∣gy, and plainly rubicund Particle, which at the upper part stuck to the Chorion,
and seem'd to be endamag'd without∣side, and as it were torn from the Womb (so that it might appear that the Chori∣on stuck to the Womb by means of it) which seem'd to receive those little Ves∣sels from the Vessels of the Womb by Continuation, and so send them to the Chorion. X. Besides the foresaid Membranes,Alan∣toides. there is in Brutes that bring forth li∣ving Conceptions, a third Membrane found in form of a Bagg, very thin, and furnish'd with no visible Vessels. This by Galen and the ancient Physi∣cians is called , from , a kind of Pudding, like the Gut wherein Puddings use to be made. For according to Suidas, ; is taken for  a Gut. Hence the Latins call it the Far∣ciminal, or Pudding Membrane, and sometimes the Intestinal or Gut Mem∣brane; tho' it does not in all Creatures retain the shape of a Pudding or Gut, but in many resembles a broad Swath. XI. It is a most thin Membrane,What it is. smooth, hollow, soft, and yet thick, without any Vessels conspicuous to the Eye, by no means enfolding the whole Birth, extended to the utmost extre∣mity from one Horn of the Womb to the other, waxing slender at the ex∣tream Parts that enter the Horns of the Womb, till it end in a Point. XII. It rises with a narrow Begin∣ning,Is Origi∣al. where the Urachus or Passage of the Urine, continuous to it, opens in∣to its Hollowness, and presently dilates it self. XIII. It is seated between the Cho∣rionSituation. and the Amnion, from which it may be easily separated. XIV. Its Use is to collect the U∣rineIts vse. of the Embryo, flowing out of the Bladder through the Urachus, and to preserve it till the time of De∣livery. From which use of it, Need∣ham calls it in all Creatures which have a Placenta, the Urinary Membrane. XV. Its Bigness and Figure va∣riesIts Shape and Big∣ness. according to the Difference of Creatures. For in some it resembles a Gut in shape and bigness, in others a broad Swath, and is much larger, as in a Cow, much more in a Mare, in which Creature it is every way fastened to the Chorion, and enfolds the whole Birth to∣gether with the Amnion. But as for its bigness and shape in Sows, Coneys, Doggs, and some other Creatures, Gualter Need∣ham exactly describes upon View. l. de format. Foet. And in the same place adds the whole discourse concerning it, and the manner of finding it out in Brutes. XVI. Now seeing that Urine a∣boundsWhether a∣ny Allan∣tois in Women? in the Conceptions of all Crea∣tures that bring forth living Births, while they remain in the Womb, and that there is a necessity for the same to be discharged out of the Womb, and reserv'd somewhere till the time of Delivery, the Question is whether this Membrane Alantois, be in all Crea∣tures, especially in Women? Aquapen∣dens says, that Women, Cats, and Bitches are destitute of this Membrane, as also are all other Creatures that have Teeth in both Jaws: And that the U∣rine of their Conceptions is collected in no peculiar Vessel, but flows out of the Urachus between the Chorion and the Amnion, and is there reserv'd till the time of Delivery. But our modern more quicksighted Anatomists have found it now in many of those Creatures who were deny'd it before. Yet do these very much question whether it be in Women. Harvey who overlook'd it in Brutes, denies any such thing in Women. On the other side, High∣more not only allows it to Brutes, but admits it in Women; and assigns it in them the same Use, which it is vulgarly said to have in Brutes: That is, to re∣ceive the Urine of the Embryo through the Urachus, and reserve it till the time of Delivery: And agreeing with Vesalius, says it is easy to be found, if in a bigg∣bellied Woman the Dissection should be begun from the Placenta, otherwise by reason of its extream Slenderness it is ea∣sy to be broken. But here Needham well observes, that Vesalius at the time that he wrote, had never dissected any wo∣man with Child (as he confesses him∣self in the same place) and therefore made a Judgment of women by what he observ'd in doggs: And describ'd a hu∣man Embryo wrap'd in the Secundines of a Whelp. But afterwards, when he had dissected a woman with Child, he changed his Opinion, and number'd but two Membranes in a woman, that is to say the Amnion and Alantois, reaching the Chorion not under the name of a Membrane, but of the whole Concepti∣on. In this Obscurity, the Quicksighted Needham gave us great Light, who de∣scribes not any Farciminal or Pudding∣like Membrane, such as the Alantois in many beasts, but a bagg quite of another Fashion, wherein the Urine of the Con∣ception
is collected and reserved till the time of Delivery. The Secundines, says he, being received by the Midwife, let 'em be laid in their proper Posture, as well as may be. Then taking a small Pack∣thread, follow it as far as the Amnion. This is fastened to the Packthread a lit∣tle below the Placenta, the rest hangs free. If the Amnion be fresh, you shall find the little Veins of it; otherwise they vanisht, the Blood being run out, and the Mem∣brane cold. This being left about the Packthread, go to the next Membrane, which if you prick withoutside about the Placenta, or tear the extream Edges with your Fingers, you shall find to be easily di∣vided into two; of which the outermost is porous and spungy, and full of little Veins; the innermost very slippery, and extreamly transparent, but void of Veins and Arte∣ries. That I take for the Chorion, this for the Urinary Tunicle. It cannot be call'd a folding or facing of the former, because of the dissimilitude of the Substance; but whether we look upon the Situation, Figure, or Substance of it, it is the same with the Urinary Membrane of all Pla∣centa breeding Animals. But it is not shap'd like the Alantois, neither is there any Membrane of that Figure in a Wo∣man. From which words it is apparent that there is no such Alantois allow'd to women as in beasts. But this also ap∣pears over and above, that Needham rightly and truly asserted the inner thi Membrane next adhering to the Cho∣rion, to supply the place of the Alantois in women, and that the Urine flow'd out of the bladder of the birth through the Urachus, between that and the Cho∣rion, where it is reserved till the time of Delivery. And this Invention of Gualter Needham's, Nicolas Hoboken found out, confirm'd, and describ'd, in most Secundines, lib▪ de Secund. Human. XVII. Within the Amnion, be∣sidesA milkie Liquor within the Amnion. the Embryo, is contained cer∣tain milkie Liquor in great Quanti∣ty, very like to watery Milk, some∣what oylie, which Harvey calls the Colliquamentum, or dissolv'd Mat∣ter, in which the Embryo swims, and which sticks to it, when first born, all over the Body, and is usu∣ally washed off by the Midwife with warm Water, or Wine and Butter. XVIII. But here I think it neces∣saryThe Filth sticking to the Birth. to distinguish between that Li∣quor wherein the Embryo at its first Delineation swims, and that wherein it swims afterward. For the first is the seminal Residue of the Mans and Womans Seed, and is well and truly call'd the dissolv'd Matter. But the lat∣ter is that, which when the former is consum'd, and the Navel being now brought to the Uterine Liver, flows through the Umbilical Vessels, and is a Juice meerly milkie, but watery, not to be call'd by the Name of Colliqua∣mentum. Here by the way, we may take no∣tice of the Error of Fabricius, and some others, who thought that same unctu∣ous Uncleanness sticking to the body of the Child new born, to be an Excre∣ment of the third Concoction, made in the whole habit. As also of that Mis∣take of Claudius de la Courvee, who lib. de nutrit. foet, writes that it is nothing else than an Excrement, falling from the Brain through the Mouth and Nostrils. But it was nothing but the Ignorance of the Nature and Use of the milkie Liquor contained in the Am∣nion that produc'd these Errors. XIX. Concerning the Liquor in theWhat the Liquor in the Amni∣on . Amnion, there are two different O∣pinions of the Physicians: While some think it to be the Urine, others the Sweat of the Conception. But neither of the two have hit the Mark. XX. That it is not Urine, appears i b . by this, for that this Liquor is found in the Birth new form'd, in great a∣bundance, whereas so small an Em∣bryo never discharges any Urine. Nay, for that it is found in the Amnios before the birth is form'd; whereas there can nothing of Urine flow from the Crystalline Bubble. XXI. That it is not sweat, is henceW S. apparent, that before the Birth is form'd and perfected, or else from the beginning of the Formation of the Birth, it is impossible that Sweat so unctuous, and thick, and in so great abundance should flow from so small an Embryo, which exceeds in quan∣tity, ten times or more, the little Bo∣dy of the Embryo. Moreover, if this Liquor were an Ex∣crement, whether Urine or Sweat, or any thing else, it would encrease as the Birth grows. But ocular Inspection teaches us the contrary. For in Sheep it so manifestly abates by degrees, as the Birth enlarges, that a little before the Lamb is yean'd, there is hardly any remaining; tho' it abounded at the be∣ginning.
Lastly, Sweat and Urine are acrimonious Excrements, wherein if the tender Embryo, covered with an extra∣ordinary thin and soft Skin, should swim for nine or ten Months together, it would be much injured by that Acri∣mony. As we find the Skin of new born Ifants to be many times very much corroded by the Sharpness of the U∣rine: tho' their Skin be much harder and firmer than the Skin of the Birth in the Womb. XXII. Riolanus, Anthropog. l.Whether any Steam. 6. c. 7. acknowledges this Liquor to be the Sweat of the Birth; but c. 8. he says it is the Steam of the arteri∣ous Blood fuming from the Heart, and so turn'd into that Water that surrounds the Birth. Which if it were true, that Liquor ought to be at the beginning, whereas there is none or ve∣ry little blood as yet, neither can be a∣ny or very little, but is more and more increased as the birth enlarges: Where∣as on the contrary it abounds very much at the beginning, and from that time forward abates by degrees: And how little is to be found in Sheep after yean∣ing, has been said already. XXIII. Therefore this Liquor con∣tain'dIt is an Alimentary Humour. in the Amnios, is no Excre∣ment, but an Alimentary Humour, and nourishes with its Matter, out of which at the Beginning is taken the Nourishment of all and singular the Parts of the Embryo: And hence follows their Encrease. For it is the next Nourishment wherewith the Birth is nourished at first. For therein it is found to swim, before the Uterine Liver manifestly appears, from which at length being enlarged, the Umbilical blood-bearing Vessels mani∣festly suck forth blood; with which a∣lone, if the birth were to be nourished, it would for some time at the beginning want all manner of Nourishment, nei∣ther would there be any Alimentary Matter to supply the first Growth of the Parts. But hence also it appears to be a nutritious Humour, and to be taken in at the Mouth by the Birth, for that in Colour, Tast, and Consistency it dif∣fers little or nothing from that Liquor which is found in the Stomach of the Birth. XXIV. In the first forming of theWhat sort of Liquor it is. Birth this Liquor is nothing else but the Seed of the Woman (like the white of an Egg) inclosed in the Egg, mix'd with the Residue of the Mans Seed being dissolv'd. After∣wards when the umbilical Vessels are grown to their just length, and entered the Uterine Liver, then is the milkie Juice carried thither through the mil∣kie Umbilical Vessels from the milk∣bearing Cells of the Womb, whose whitish Colour, sweetish Tast, and like∣ness of Substance little differ from the Chylous Liquor, somewhat mix'd with the Lympha, and which is found in the Pectoral Chylifer Channel, and its Recep∣tacle. Whence it is altogether pro∣bable, that it is the purer part of the Chylus, somewhat watery by its Mix∣ture with the Lympha, carried from the Mother to the Hollowness of the Amni∣os, through the Passages mentioned in the foregoing Chapter; nay it is plea∣sing to the Tast, like watery Milk; for which we do not take so much the Judg∣ment of our own Tast, but Harvey's Proof from this, that almost all brute Creatures that bring forth living Con∣ceptions, lick it up from their young ones newly brought forth, and swallow it; whereas they never touch the Ex∣crements of the Birth. Wharton writes, that it is a LiquorWhether it proceed from   poured forth from the Nerves within the Amnion; perchance, because that being deceived by the white Colour, he took the milky Vessels to be Nerves. Needham thinks that it is a milky Li∣quor carried thither through the e∣ries, somewhat mixed with the Ner∣vous Liquor: which Opinion we resute, l. 2. c. 12. XXV. Nicolas Hoboken alsoHobo∣ken's Opinion. asserts this Liquor to be carried tho∣rough the Arteries, tho' after another manner. For tho' up and down in o∣ther places of his book de secund. Hu∣man. he writes that he could not ob∣serve any blood-bearing Vessels in the Amnios: Yet in his Treatise de secund. Vitul. he writes that the Arteries possess in a plentiful number the Tunicle of the Amnios, and that in that place there is a great Correspondence between them and very many small Glandules, not only in great number besieging the outer parts of the little String, but the inner parts of the Amnios: So far forth as by means of those little Glandules, the Ar∣terious blood carried thither, is affected and prepared, that the said Liquor may be thence conveighed to the Hollow of the Amnios. But he does not add what Alteration it undergoes, nor does he a∣ny way prove that Correspondence
which he supposes by Conjecture. Moreover in many parts, by means of the Glandules the Lympha is separated from the blood, as Choler in the Liver, the splenetic Juice in the Spleen, &c. But it was never heard that any Juice which is not in that blood▪ could be se∣parated from it, or that the Arterious Blood could be changed into milkie Juice. XXVI. Here we meet with one Dif∣ficulty,A Difficul∣ty concern∣ing the milkie Ute∣rine Vessels and the Umbili∣cals. that is to say, that the mil∣kie Vessels, as well those that come from the Mother to the Womb, as those that run from the Birth to the Womb, are never to be seen, But no Man will make a wonder of this, who sees how easily all blood-bearing Ves∣sels, even the Chyle-bearing Pectoral Channel, which is somewhat bigger, ly hid when empty; and sometimes the Lymphatic Vessels being empty'd dis∣appear, so that they neither be discern'd or found any more. He also that has observ'd how invisible those Passages are through which sometimes in the Dropsy the serous Humours of the Abdomen, and in the flowing of the Whites, that vast Sink of the Vitious Humours is emptyed through the Womb, from the Liver, Mesentery, and other Vessels of the Abdomen. So also these milkie Uterine and Umbilical Channels, with∣out Question, are very small, and in dead women evacuated, and thence they have hitherto so long layn hid, that they have scap'd the Sight of the Ana∣tomists. Of which nevertheless there have not long since been some Disco∣veries made, which some Persons not dreaming of the milkie Vessels, have ta∣ken for Lymphatics, others for diminu∣tive Nerves. XXVII. Charleton reports thatVanhorn observ'd 2 milkie Branches descend to∣wards the great Ar∣tery, &c. Vanhorn, a famous Anatomist of Leyden, in an Epistle to Thomas Bartholin, wrote that he observ'd two milkie Branches descending toward the Separation of the great Artery, extended to the Seat of the Womb near the Crurals. Something also to this purpose has Anthony Everard obser∣ved in Coneys: For he writes that in a Coney with young, he observ'd some milk-bearing Channels, arising from the descending Trunk that run along together with the Spermatic Vessels to the parts serving for Generation. Deu∣singius gives a clear ocular Description of these Vessels; de hum. Corp. Fab. p. 7. c. 3. For, says he, that there are mil∣kie Vessels also belong to the Womb, con∣veighing Alimentary Iuice to the Birth, we have not only in another place, by most solid Arguments demonstrated; but observ'd by ocular Inspection in Bitches Whelps innumerable diminutive milkie Branches running through the broad Liga∣ments of the Womb, to the Horns them∣selves, and the whole Body of the Womb. Moreover we observ'd in the Year 1655. a little milkie Branch entring together with the Umbilical Vessels through the Navel of the Whelps contained in the Womb. And as in other Creatures so there is no Question to be made but there is in Women. But tho' we have not hitherto seen these milkie Conveigh∣ances to the womb, however it suffices for the Demonstration of the Truth, that they have been discovered by more quick-sighted Anatomists; and that al∣so it may be demonstrated by most certain Arguments, that of necessity they must be there, tho' they are seldom conspicuous. 1. Because there is a great Similitude in Colour, Tast, and Substance between the Liquors of the Chyle-bearing Pectoral Channel and the Amnios. 2. Because in breeding Wo∣men, a certain Chylous Milkie Liquor flows in great abundance from the womb. As has been observ'd and seen by An∣drew Laurentius, Zacutus, Lusitanus and others. 3. For that colour'd Liquors being swallowed down, come presently to the womb, which cannot penetrate thither so suddainly through any other than the milkie Vessels conceal'd and devious from the rest. Thus writes Iohn Heurnius, that upon the giving of Saf∣fron in Broths, a Woman brought forth a Child stain'd with a Saffron Colour. Also Henrie ab Heers reports, That a Woman having swallowed Saffron, with∣in half a quarter of an Hour brought forth a Child stained with a yellow Co∣lour. Which Colour could not pos∣sibly reach so soon to the womb and the birth, unless together with the Chylus, it were carried thither, through certain milkie Vessels devious from the rest. For if the Saffron were first to be con∣cocted in the Heart, and then to be carried thither with the Blood, it would lose its Colour. Or grant it still to be retained, yet it would require the In∣terval of some Hours before it could come to the womb. Concerning this Matter see some other things said c. 18. whereby the remarkable Experiment try'd by Herdotius in a Bitch with Puppy, this same devious Passage of the milky Juice to the womb is made very
apparent, and there illustrated with o∣ther Observations. XXVIII. Here we are to take no∣ticeCurveus hi mistake. of the mistake of Curveus, who writes, that at the beginning there is a Humour in great abundance collected between the Chorion and the Amnios, and that that being filter'd through the Membrane of the Amnion, pene∣trates to the inner hollowness of the Amnion; and that this inner Iuice differs not from the other, but only in its thinness caus'd by the same filtration. Whereas the Humour, which is found without the Amnion, is not contain'd simply in the Chorion, but between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane; neither is there any at the beginning in that part to be filter'd, whereas from the very beginning the moisture mode∣rately abounds in the Amnion; and whereas the inner Juice is not thinner, but much more thick and viscous than that which afterwards increases between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane. Moreover, the milky Juice of this Am∣nion, being boyl'd, grows to the consi∣stence of a Gelly, but the other without the Amnion thickens without any boyl∣ing. The first is apparent by the Expe∣riment of Rolfinch, Lib. 6. Dissert. Anat. c. 32. Where, says he, We boyl'd the Humours wherein the Birth swims with a gentle heat, when the thinner Particles be∣ing consum'd, that which remain'd at the bottom was clammy like Glue. The Hu∣mours upon the Tongue taste somewhat sweetish, so that this glutinous Substance is grateful to the taste; neither is there any thing of luxivious or salt in it. But it does not only grow thick and viscous by boyl∣ing, but also the Cold congeals it to a moderate thickness and viscosity, by which I have seen this Juice thicken'd in the Umbilical Intestine to the thickness of a perfect Gelly, and in the Amnion to the consistency of the white of an Egg. XXIX. Now tho' it may seem to beThe passage of the Iuice. a thing unquestionable that this milky Iuice is carried through some milky Vessels from the Mother to the Womb, and from that through the milky Vessels of the Placenta, within the hollowness of the Amnion, yet from what part of the Mother, and from whence these milky Vessels proceed toward the womb, has been hitherto discovered by no body that I know of. Some by uncertain Conjectures believe that they are extend∣ed thither from the Thoracic Chyle∣bearing Chanel, others from the Chyle∣bearing Bag, others from the Sweet-bread. Of which, if any clear demonstration could be made out, the Question would be at an end. Ent most couragiously endeavours to dispel this Cloud of Dark∣ness, Apol. Digress. 5. where he writes, That this Liquor is deriv'd from no in∣ner milky Vessels, but that it flows from the Womans breasts to the womb, and that the birth is nourish'd with the Mo∣thers milk, no less within than without the womb: and for this reason he believes the Teats of brute Beasts to stand so near the womb; to the end the milk may flow from them more easily to the womb. But as for the passage which way, he takes no great care: For he writes that the Milk descends from the breasts through the Mamillary Veins, and from thence into the Epigastrics, joyned to them by Anastomosis, and through those flows down to the womb. But that he may not seem to contradict Circulation altogether, he says, That it may happen without any prejudice, that there may be a Flux contrary to the usual Circulation through some Veins, if there be a new Attractor. He adds, That it is for this reason that the Milk is generated in the breast so long before delivery; that is so soon as the Woman quickens. So that if the Milk did not flow to the birth, the Woman would be very much prejudic'd, and the Blood being detain'd for three or four Months together would be corrupted. Last∣ly, he anexes the Authority of Hippo∣crates, who says, Aph. 5. 37. If the breasts of a Woman with child suddainly fall and grow lank, she miscarries. For, says Ent, when the Milk fails in the breast, there can be no nourishment afforded to the birth in the womb, which for that reason dies, and is thrown out by Abortion. XXX. But tho' these things areEnt's Opi∣nion confu∣ted. speciously propounded by Ent, yet there are many things that subvert the learn∣ed Gentleman's Argument. 1. Because that milky Liquor abounds within the Amnion, before any thing of Milk be generated in the breasts. 2. Because it is impossible that the blood should be carried upward, and the milky Juice downward at the same time through the Mammillary and Epi∣gastric Veins. 3. Because that between the Mam∣millary and Epigastric Veins there are no such Anastomoses as he proposes. 4. For that the milky Liquor of the Breasts passing through those blood-con∣veighing
passages, would lose its white colour by its mixture with the blood, and so it would not be found to be white, but red in the Amnion. 5. For that the feeble heart of a small Embryo could never be able to draw this milky Juice from the Mothers breasts: besides that, there is no such distant at∣traction in the body of Man, and whe∣ther there be any such at a nearer di∣stance, is much to be question'd. 6. For that the Milk, from the one half of the Womans time, till the time of Delivery, never remains in the breast, but entring the Mammillary Veins, toge∣ther with their blood, is carried in the order of Circulation to the Vena Cava, as the Chylus reaches thither through the Subclavial Vein, which is the reason it is neither corrupted, nor does the Wo∣man any prejudice at all. 7. As to Hippocrates his affirming the lankness of the breast to be a sign of A∣bortion; for this in a Woman shews that either the Chylus is defective, or that it is all carried to the heart, and none to the womb or breasts. Hence Hippocrates concludes, That if formerly the Chylus flow'd in great abundance to the breasts, they dry up of a suddain, as appears by the lankness of the breasts, much more will that fail which is carried in a lesser quantity to the womb, for the nourish∣ment of the tender birth, and that through much narrower Vessels, and so of necessity the birth must dye for want of nourishment, and be cast forth by A∣bortion. XXXI. From all which it is appa∣rent,That this milky Iuice does not come from the Breasts. that milky Iuice, let it come from what parts it will to the Womb, it does not come from the Breasts; and that their Opinion i most probable who believe it flows from the Chyle-bag, the Pectoral Passage, and other Internal Chyle-bearing Vessels, tho' there has been as yet no clear Demonstration of those Passages. XXXII. Veslingius either not ob∣serving,The Opini∣on of Ves∣lingius touching the use of this Iuice. or ignorant of the nourish∣ment of the Birth at the Mouth, as∣cribes to this milky Liquor of the Am∣nion a use of small Importance. For he says that it only preserves the tender Vessels of the Embryo swimming upon it, in the violent Motions of the Mother; and when the time of Delivery ap∣proaches, that it softens and loosens the Maternal places by its Efflux, to render the passage of the Infant more easie: Moreover, he thinks it to be the more watery part of the Womans Seed, as we have said before Cap. 28. XXXIII. The Amnios, UrinaryThe Am∣nios, Uri∣nary Mem∣brane and Chorion stick close one to ano∣ther. Membrane and Chorion, at the Ca∣runcle in Abortions describ'd Cap. 29. sticks close one to another (where they transmit the Umbilical Vessels toward the Uterine Liver) but every where else they lye loosely only at the beginning of the Conception; and when at length the Umbilical Vessels have pass'd those Membranes, then through the flowing in of the Urine of the birth through the Urachus, the Urinary Membrane begins to recede from the Chorion (which till that time seemed to be the inner part of the Chorion; and between that and the Chorion the urinary serous Humour be∣gins daily to increase, as the birth grows; so that near the time of Delivery it is there to be found in great quantity. XXXIV. This Urinary Liquor Rio∣lanusThe Opii∣on of Rio∣lanus. denies to be there, and affirms that there is no Liquor to be found without side the Amnios. And so Veslingius seems never to have di∣stinctly observ'd it; for he says that no Humour can be collected together between the Membranes of the birth, by reason of their sticking so close to∣gether. But Ocular inspection teache us that there is no such close Connexion, but only a loose Conjunction or Imposi∣on one upon another. The whole mi∣stake seems to have proceeded from hence, That it was not known that the Urinary Membrane containing the Uri∣nary Liquor, lay hid between the Cho∣rion and the Amnion, and drew back, and was extended from the Chorion upon the flowing in of the Urine of the birth. Whence many question'd whether any Liquor could be contain'd in that place: which Cloud is now dispell'd by Need∣ham's late Discovery of the Urinary Membrane. XXXV. We have many times seenThe urin∣ceous Hu∣mour sep∣rated from the Liquor of the Am∣nios in Brutes, where it is collected i the Alan∣tois. the said Urinaceous Humour contain∣ed between the Chorion and the Uri∣naceous Membrane, manisestly sepa∣rated from the Liquor of the Amnios in such Brutes where it is collected in the Alantois: and in Bitches, the demonstration of the separation is easie to be made. For if you take a Puppy by the head, as yet wrapt up in its Mem∣branes, you shall see these Humours by the means of the Membranes of the Alan∣tois and Amnion separated one from ano∣ther,
and the serous and turbulent Ha∣mour inclos'd in the Alantois, and so to remain between the Chorion and the Am∣nion, but that the other milky Juice is contain'd within the Amnion. Then o∣pen the Chorion with the Alantois, pre∣sently the outermost milky Juice flows forth, but the other milky Juice re∣mains in the Amnion. And thus we must conclude that the serous Urinary Hu∣mour in Human Conceptions is collected and reserv'd between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, but that the other milky Juice is enclos'd within the Amni∣on. And that we lately demonstrated in a Woman that had almost gone out her time, suddainly choak'd with a Ca∣tarrh; finding the watery Urinary Li∣quor to a great quantity inclos'd between the Chorion and the thin Urinary Mem∣brane, which we then thought to be the Alantois; the other milky Juice re∣siding within the Amnion; tho' there was not so great a quantity of it. This was the first body where I thought I had seen any shadow of an Alantois, but after∣ward, by the preceding demonstration of Needham, I perceiv'd there was no Alantois in Women, like the Alantois in Beasts; but that the Urinary Mem∣brane supply'd its place. XXXVI. Now what this serousWhat the Serous Hu∣mour is? Humour is, contain'd between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, till our very times, both Physicians and Anatomists, have been in great doubt: And this in certainty begat 2 Opinions. According to the first, many believ'd that it was not some Excrement, but a kind of Humour like Butter-milk, less nou∣rishing than that contain'd in the Amnion; and that the purer part of it serv'd for the nourishment of the birth, and was carried to it through the little Fibres of the Umbilical Vessels extended thither according to Harvey's Observation: but that the more unprofitable part was re∣serv'd for the preservation of the birth till the Delivery; by its softness to de∣fend the birth from External Injuries, and to moisten and make slippery the privy parts in time of Travail. According to the other Opinion, others thought that this Humour was the Urine of the Child, discharg'd through the Urachus, and re∣ceiv'd by degrees between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, there to be reserv'd till the time of Delivery, to moi∣sten the Female parts, and render them slippery, for the more easie passage of the birth. For the latter of these Opi∣nions we give our voice; because it is al∣together necessary, that all the parts of the birth being form'd, the Kidneys should perform their duty, and separate the superfluous copious Serum from the blood. For the nutriment of the birth, that is the blood and the milky Juice, is very serous, that being the more liquid and fluid, they may pass with more ease to the birth, and be the better digested by the new-form'd Bowels. But it was requisite that superfluous Serum should be separated from the profitable Juice, to forward the growth of the parts, which would otherwise be altogether serous, and render the birth distended with an Anasarca. Now the Kidneys separate that serous Excrement, out of which it slides through the Ureters into the Blad∣der, wherein it is to be found in great quantity in Embryo's of five or six Months growth, wherein all things ap∣pear more clearly to the Eye. But it flows not out of the Bladder through its Orifice, because at that time the over∣straitned Sphincter does not transmit the Urine: For such was the Supream Creators pleasure, lest the Urine flow∣ing out of the Genitals, should be ming∣led with the milky Juice which the birth takes in at the Mouth, and defile, corrupt, and render it unfit for Nourishment. And therefore another passage was pro∣vided for it thorough the Urachus, rising from the bottom of the Bladder toward the Navel. Which tho' in Men born it be consolidated in the shape of a Liga∣ment, like the Umbilical Vein growing out of the liver of the birth; yet while the birth is included in the womb, it is always penetrable, and sufficiently con∣spicuous as far as the Navel; and con∣veys and pours forth the Urine out of the Bladder between the Chorion and the Urinary Membrane, there to be reserv'd till the time of Delivery. XXXVII. They that do not agreeThe mi∣stake of Deusingi∣us. with us in this Opinion, are wont to say, That this serous Humour is found very plentiful between the Membranes at the beginning of the Formation of the Birth. Even Deusingius himself following the Opinion of Harvey, writes▪ That then it exceeds in quantity a hundred times any other Humour contain'd in the Amnion, and therefore it cannot be U∣rine; but that of necessity it is a Humour very requisite for the nourishment and secu∣rity of the birth, tho' not so good as that other which is contain'd in the Amnion. But these are meer Figments altogether contrary to Experience. For in the be∣ginning of the Formation of the birth,
this Humour appears not at all, but a∣bout the fourth Month a very little is to be seen; and from that time forward, as the Birth and the Reins increase, and the Kidneys do their Office, so much the more it augments. But herein appears their mistake, that while they labour to defend their Opinion with great heat, they do not distinguish between the Se∣rous Humour excluded out of the Am∣nion, and the milky Juice abiding with∣in the Amnion; and by means of the Urinous Membrane, and the Tunicle of the Amnion it self, separated from the Serum it self. Moreover, they do not take notice that the milky Juice is that which from the beginning of the birth is most plentiful, neither unpleasing to the taste or smell; and is so consum'd for the most part in many Brutes, that there is nothing hardly remaining at the time of the birth. Whereas on the o∣ther side, the other Serous Humour is not to be seen at the beginning of the Formation; but afterwards appears in a small quantity, and so augments by de∣grees. Neither has it any thing of a whitish colour, but gains both colour, taste and smell, as it increases, and at length, at the time of Delivery, comes away in great quantity, and with a strong smell. Wherein if the birth had im∣mediately swam in the womb, the tender little body had suffer'd no small preju∣dice without side, by reason of its Acri∣mony; nor less within side, for that be∣ing continually swallow'd in at the Mouth down the Stomach, it must needs have extreamly afflicted the Em∣bryo. XXXVIII. The less attentive consi∣derationThe mi∣stake of Riolanus. of this Matter deceiv'd Rio∣lanus also, who did not observe that there were two and two plainly distinct Humours, of different Natures, con∣tain'd between the Membranes, but took 'em both together for one and the same Humour, which he thought resi∣ded within the Amnion. Which mistake of his is apparent by what has been said already. CHAP. XXXII. Of the Navel-string, its Use, and the Nourishment of the Birth. I. THE Membranes infoldingThe Name. the Birth being open'd, the Navel comes to be seen, so call'd from Umbo, signifying the Boss of a Shield, because it is in the middle of the Belly, or the Center of the lower Belly; by the Greeks call'd , and by Ari∣stotle , the root of the Belly. Some, with Galen, have asserted it to be the Center of the whole Body, which Vesalius places better in the joyning toge∣ther of the Share-bones. II. The Navel-string is a membra∣nousThe Nael, what it is? winding and unequal Chanel ri∣sing from the mediety of the Abdomen of the Birth toward the Uterine Li∣ver, conspicuously long, and when the Birth is fully mature three spans, rare∣ly half an Ell in length; and about a fingers breadth in thickness. Which longitude and laxity was requisite at first, to the end the Birth now become strong∣er in the womb, should not break the Navel with its tumbling and kicking; but come more easily into the World without breaking it, and the remaining Secundines sticking to it, be more easily drawn forth. III. It turns back for the most partIts Situ∣tion. above the Breast, and produces it self toward the left from the hinder part of the Head to the Forehead, and hence proceeding to the Uterine Liver, is joyn'd to it by the Vessels contain'd in it, and the Membranes. Some∣times it proceeds forward toward the right side, hence it winds about the Neck, and so descends to the Placenta. Sometimes I have observ'd it turn'd back above the Breast, toward the hin∣der Parts and Back, never coming at all to the Neck; for Nature wonderfully varies in its situation. Even very lately I found it above the Breast and Head, and evolv'd about the left Foot. Rarely as Skenkius observ'd in a difficult Labour of his own Wife, that the Navel should wind about the Neck of the Birth, with two or three Circumvolutions. More rare what Hoboken observes of a Birth,
whose Navel was wound four times a∣bout the Neck, the Head being next the Placenta; which Birth having bro∣ken the Membranes, came forth with the Secundine altogether. IV. The Navel-string consists ofIts Vessels. Vessels, and a little Pipe containing Vessels, call'd the Diminutive Gut. The Umbilical Vessels, which pro∣ceed from the Birth, are usually reckon'd to be four; one Vein, two Arteries, and the Urachus. But to these the milky Vessels are necessarily to be added, through which the milky Liquor is con∣veyed from the little Caverns of the womb into the hollow of the Amni∣on. V. A Vein larger than the ArteriesThe Umbi∣lical Vein. rises from the Liver of the Birth, out of the Cleft of which it goes forth to the foundation of the Vena Cava, of which it is a Sprig; and thence pas∣sing the Navel, it runs through the Navel-string to the Placenta, into which it is ingrafted with many roots. Harvey deduces its first Original from the Heart, but erroneously; for it comes not to the Heart, but by the means of the Vena Cava. And so its Original is rather to be deriv'd from the Vena Cava, and the Original of the Vena Cava from the Heart. VI. It has been hitherto the vulgarThe Use. Opinion, that the Blood flowing from the Placenta, is pour'd forth into the Liver of the Birth, and there farther concocted to the highest perfection of Blood. On the other side, Harvey writes, That there is no use of the Liver in the Embryo, and that therefore this Vein passes entirely through the Liver di∣rectly to the Vena Cava; and so that the Umbilical Blood suffers no alteration nei∣ther in the Liver, but flows directly through that into the Vena Cava, and thence to the Heart, there to be dilated into a more spirituous Blood. Riolanus asserts quite another thing, That the Umbilical Vein is twofold in the Liver, and equally commu∣nicates as well to the Porta, as the Cava, and that he learn'd it by manifold Experi∣ence. Dominic de Marchettis testifies al∣so, That he once saw the same thing: And Frederic Ruysch, That he discover'd and shew'd it in the Liver of a Calf newly calv'd. And so they believe that some part of the Umbilical Blood is emptied into the Liver, and the other half pour'd forth into the Vena Cava. At first sight Reason seems to perswade us to give great credit to Harvey. For that the Ferment, which in Men born, by reason of the harder Nourishments that are to be dissolv'd, ought to be more sowr and sharp, is made in the Liver and Spleen: But in the Birth, where in respect of the softer Nourishment it ought to be more mild, it is made in the Uterine Placenta, so that there is little or no use of the Li∣ver and Spleen; nor of the Lungs; but that those Vessels chiefly grow, and are reserv'd for future uses: and hence it may seem probable that the Blood passes di∣rectly through the Liver to the Vena Cava, without any remarkable altera∣tion, and thence directly to the Heart. This Glisson seems more strongly to con∣firm, who describes a certain veiny Cha∣nel in the Liver, which easily admits an indifferent Probe; open in Children new born, and Embryo's; in Men grown al∣ways shut; which tends directly to the Vena Cava, and is given to that end that it should bring the Stream of Blood flowing through the Umbilical Vein in∣to the Vena Cava. Which last cannot be true, seeing that all the Spermatic parts, of which one of the principal is the Liver, are delineated together; and that this Liver is first conspicuous among the rest of the Bowels, afterwards the Heart, long before the Umbilical Vein, and in a short time grows to a remarka∣ble and conspicuous bigness. But tho' the aforesaid Reasons seem very plausi∣ble for Harvey and Glisson's Opinion; yet that Riolanus and Ruysch were much more in the right, I could easily prove by my own Observation. For that I might understand this matter more cer∣tainly, I resolved to try an Experiment upon a Still▪born Infant: To that pur∣pose having open'd the Abdomen with the Breast, I blew through a Straw thrust into the Umbilical Vein, and observ'd that presently I blew the Heart and the Lungs, yet so that the Liver also receiv'd somewhat of the breath; without doubt through the lateral little Branch taken notice of by Riolanus and Ruysch, and inserted into the Liver or Vena Porta; which tho' in the first Months it be so slender, that it is hardly discernable, nevertheless 'tis most likely that after∣wards this little Vessel increases with the rest of the Parts, and contributes more Blood to the Liver, towards its swifter growth, the better to prepare and fit it for its future Office; which for some time it begins in the womb before Deli∣very, as is apparent from the Gall, which is found in the Gall-bladder of a Child born perfect, but in an Abortion
of six or seven Months, and in the Excre∣ments of Children newly born. For the Liver does not presently after the Deli∣livery, as it were, skip to its office of bi∣lious Fermentation, but is us'd to it by degrees in the womb. VII. The Umbilical Vein thereforeIts Valves. conveys the Blood prepar'd in the Pla∣centa to the Birth; the return of which into the Placenta is prevented by several Valves looking toward the Birth, and sustaining the violence of the Blood, endeavouring to flow back. Nevertheless these Valves, by reason of their extraordinary slenderness, can hard∣ly be demonstrated; but that they are there, we have just reason to conclude, because the Blood cannot be squeez'd with the finger from the Birth toward the Placenta, but may easily be squeez'd toward the Birth. Nicholas Hoboken writes, That he could find no genuine Valves in the Umbilical Vein, but that he observ'd several winding inequalities; and near the Placenta saw a Caruncle, or rather a little membranous separating fold, so situated according to the length and depth of the Vein, as to terminate the veiny spread∣ing forth of the Branches, and seem'd to supply the place of a little Valve; which he calls Analogous to the Valve. VIII. Here we are to take notice ofThe Error of Cour∣eus. the mistake of John Claudius de la Curvee, who believ'd there was no∣thing conveyed to the Birth through the Umbilical Vein from the Uterine Placenta, but that quite the contrary, the Blood flow'd from the Birth to the Placenta; because this Vein grows from the Birth first, and proceeds to the Placenta, therefore, says he, the Blood must first flow into the Pla∣centa, and so be carried toward its own End inserted into the Placenta. But not only the foresaid Valves plainly demonstrate Curveus's Error, but also the trial made by a Ligature, of which in due place. Besides, his Reason drawn from the Original of the Umbilical Vein, is of no moment; for the begin∣ning of the Production does not argue the beginning of the Use; but its apti∣tude for any farther use. Thus the Ve∣na Cava, according to Harvey, is pro∣duced from the Heart, nevertheless the Blood does not flow from the Heart, into the hollow Vena Cava, but out of the Vena Cava into the Heart: Thus the Roots of Plants grow downward into the Earth; nevertheless the Nourishment is con∣veyed from them out of the Earth to the Plants, and not out of the Plants into the Earth. IX. The Umbilical Vein does notThe Umbi∣lical Vein in Brutes. seem to be order'd after the same manner in Brutes as in Men. For Fabricius observes in a Bitch and a Cat, beside the Vein already mention'd, two other Umbilical Veins that pass away to the Mesenteric Veins, and open them∣selves into them. One near the Stomach, the other near the thick Guts. But Highmore writes that he has found in Cows an Umbilical Vein always double. Perhaps also there may be some diffe∣rence in other Creatures, which we leave for others to enquire. X. The Umbilical Arteries, beingThe Umbi∣lical Arte∣ries. two, derive their Original from the Internal Iliac Branches of the great Artery, at the beginning of the spread∣ing of the Branches; from which be∣ing stretched forth upward toward the sides of the Bladder, and having got the Vein in their Company, they enter the Navel-string, and pass through it with a much more winding and looser Chanel than the Vein, and so these three Vessels, sometimes in order light∣ly twisted, sometimes opposed one to another only like a Triangle, pass tho∣rough the milky Gelly contained in the Navel-string, pass to the Uterine Li∣ver, into which they are ingraffed with innumerable Roots, and form therein a most wonderful Texture, and Net∣like Fold, which Bartholine seeing, says that those Vessels close one among another in the Placenta, with a won∣derful Anastomosis; which neverthe∣less is not very probable, neither can any body demonstrate the truth of it. Neither Carpus nor Fabricius make any mention of any Anastomosis; but only they observe about a Spans distance from the Birth, a more confus'd contexture of these three Vessels, and a ruder Con∣torsion. I my self formerly more accu∣rately intent in the examination of the Navel, found and shew'd sometimes a certain slight, sometimes no Contorsion at all, but that these Vessels, as it were, placed in a Triangle, and almost at an equal distance, disjoyn'd one from ano∣ther, passed directly through the Gelly of the Pipe of the Navel-string, as has been said.
XI. Harvey writes, that these Ar∣teriesThese Ar∣teries hard to be found in the Em∣bryo for the first Months: yet form'd and grow toge∣ther. are hardly to be found in the Embryo for the first Months, but that the Umbilical Vein is conspicuous long before these; and hence he be∣lieves that these Arteries are form'd later, and sometimes after the Vein. But it is more probable that these three Vessels are form'd and grow together, seeing that the Parenchyma of the Ute∣rine Placenta cannot be sufficiently enli∣vened without these Arteries, and rows'd into action; and also that there could be no use of the Umbilical Vein, unless the Vital Blood were carried first through the Arteries to the Placenta. But the reason why they are later conspicuous, is this, because they are much less and slen∣derer; for which reason, in most other parts, the small Arteries are not so dis∣cernable as the Veins: but that the large∣ness of the said Arteries is not always a∣like, but narrower near the little Nodes of the Pipe of the Navel-string, so that they seem to knit themselves into little knots, is the Observation of Hobo∣ken. XII. Through these Arteries BloodThe Use. and Vital Spirit is conveyed, not from the Mother to the Birth, (as many with Galen believ'd,) but from the Birth, by the pressing forward of the Heart to the Uterine Liver, for the further Colliquation, after a more spe∣cific manner, of the Blood flowing from the Uterine Vessels, and to the end it may be concocted with it, that so Mat∣ter may be prepared and better fitted for the Nourishment of the Birth, which being carried through the Um∣bilical Vein to the Bowels of the Birth, may be more conveniently dilated in the heart of the Embryo, and ac∣quire new perfection of Blood. XIII. Ocular Inspection clearly de∣monstratesThe moti∣on of the Blood through the Navel. this motion of the Blood. For if the Navel of a living Embryo (as may be experimented in Beasts) be ty'd in the middle, the Pipe of the Navel-string being opened, presently the Arteries between the Embryo and the Liver, are seen to swell, and to be depriv'd of all motion; whereas on the other side the Vein swells between the Ligature and the Placenta, and flags toward the Birth: which shews that the Arterious Blood is forc'd from the Birth to the Placenta, and the Venal Blood from the Placenta to the Birth. Or the same thing may be try'd after another manner without a Li∣gature, if you squeez the Blood with your fingers through the Vein from the Placenta toward the Birth, for so it easi∣ly moves; but it cannot be forc'd the contrary way by reason of the resistance of the Valves: but the Blood is with great difficulty forc'd through the Arte∣ries to the Birth, whereas it flows rea∣dily, and of its own accord, to the Pla∣centa. XIV. Many there are that writeNo Anasto∣moses. several things of the Anastomoses of the Arteries with the Veins, and of the Veins with the Arteries, quite re∣pugnant to Ocular Inspection, seeing that no such Anastomoses can be found in the Placenta. Which Hoboken has accurately taken notice of, who by the injection of Liquor has per∣fectly examin'd this matter. XV. Now what is to be thought ofNo Union of the Um∣bilical Veins with the Arte∣ries. the union of the Umbilical Veins and Arteries with the Womb, let us briefly enquire. Ga'en and Aristotle teach us, That the Orifices of the Umbilical Ves∣sels are united with the Ends or Orifices of the Vessels of the Wombs. So that the Roots of the Umbilical Vein draw Blood from the Veins of the Womb, and the Arteries Spirit from the Arteries. To which Opinion Aquapendens, Sen∣nertus, and several other famous Men, have submitted their consent: Others, confirm'd by Ocular Inspection, deny this union of the Vessels, with whom we also agree. For there are several Ar∣guments to shew that there are no Uni∣on or Anastomoses of the Umbilical Ves∣sels and the Womb. 1. Because such a Union of the Ves∣sels would bind the Birth so strongly to the Womb, as not to be dissolv'd in time of Travail. Or if by the violent strain∣ings of the Woman in Labour, it should be violently torn away, there would happen so many and such pernicious Wounds by the rending of the several united Vessels, that the Effusion of Blood would soon be the death of the Woman in Travail. 2. Because the Blood may descend by degrees into the Placenta through the gaping Vessels of the Womb, to be pre∣pared therein for the growth and nou∣rishment of the Child. But never any Anatomist hitherto could observe any farther productions of the Vessels of the
Womb, either toward or into the Pla∣centa, so that whatever has been written concerning this matter, has been written by Conjecture. 3. Because that such a Union of the Vessels of the Womb and the Umbili∣cals being granted, there could be no use of the Uterine Placenta: for the Blood flowing through that continuity, nothing of it could either come into the Substance of the Placenta it self, or be elaborated therein. 4. Because the Umbilical Veins do not proceed to the Womb, but spread their Roots only through the Uterine Liver, and from thence, and not from the Womb, immediately assume the Alimentary Blood which is to be carried to the Womb; as Plants by means of their Roots suck up their Alimentary Juice out of the Earth. 5. Because the Arteries draw nothing from the Womb or its Arteries, but convey Vital Blood from the Birth to the Placenta, and end there in little Branches. 6. Because in the beating of the Um∣bilical Arteries, the measure is altogether different from the Pulse of the Mo∣ther. 7. Because it has sometimes happened, that the Mother being dead, the Birth has sometimes supervived in the Womb; which could never be, if the Birth should receive its Vital Blood from the Arteries of the Mother. For the Mothers Pulse failing, the Birth must dye either sooner, or at the same time. XVI. Hence the mistake of Vesali∣usThe Umbi∣lical Ves∣sels do not rise from the Uterines. and Columbus is apparent, who following Galen, thought that the Umbilical Vessels were not only joyn'd together with the Uterine Vessels, but also by continuation were deriv'd from them, and extended from the Womb to the Birth. Which Error is easily evinc'd by this, not to repeat what has been already said, That in the Abortive Embryo seen and describ'd by us, the be∣ginning of the Navel-string did not arise from the Womb, but from the Birth. Besides that, in Chickens the beginning of the Umbilical Vessels, manifestly a∣rises from the Chicken it self, which be∣ing separated into several Branches, are extended from the Chicken to the Yolk of the Egg. In like manner as in Vege∣tables the Roots are not extended out of the Earth into the Plants, but out of the Plants into the nourishing Earth: which is more apparent in Onions, which be∣ing hung up without the Earth, send forth Roots from themselves. XVII. From the foresaid OpinionWhether form'd be∣fore the Heart. proceeded another as absurd, That the Umbilical Veins and Arteries were generated and form'd before the rest of the Bowels, as Bauhinus endeavours to perswade by divers Reasons, as if the Bowels could not be form'd without blood conveyed from the Womb. Whereas among the more acute Phi∣losophers it is undoubtedly concluded that they are form'd of the Prolific part of the Seed, and that after their Forma∣tion already finish'd, the Nourishment of the said Vessels proceeds to the farther part from those Bowels, and hence they first grow to a greater length, and are ex∣tended to the Placenta. XVIII. But here some one will makeHow these Vessels p through the Mem∣branes. a Query, How those Vessels, when they have grown out to that length, from the Belly of the Birth, as to reach the Membranes, can penetrate through the Chorion and Amnion to the Uterine Liver. I answer; 'Tis done after the same manner as the Roots of Plants and Trees penetrate into the hard Earth, and sometimes enter Walls and Stones, which Water cannot penetrate. For so the sharp and slender ends of the Umbilical Vessels, insinuate themselves by degrees into the Pores of the Membranes, and pass through 'em, tho' the Humours contain'd within the Membranes cannot pass thorough. But afterwards, when those Vessels adhering to the Pores grow out more in length, the said Pores are also more and more dilated, to which the Vessels are already united and indis∣solubly joyn'd. XIX. Riolanus makes mention, outDorsal Roots. of Avicen and Varolius, before the Generation of the Veins and Umbili∣cal Arteries, of two Capillary Vessels, which he calls the Dorsal Roots of the Birth; which are from each horn of the Womb, inserted into the upper and hinder part of the coagulated Seed, through which necessary Blood is sup∣plied to the Formation of the Parts, in the mean while that the Umbilical Vessels are strengthened; and which afterwards vanish when the Foundati∣ons of the Parts are laid. But that these are mere Figments is apparent from hence; because the Birth is neither form'd nor generated out of the coagulated, but melted and dissolved Seed, and out of
the subtile part of that, which is call'd the Flower. Besides, these Dorsal Roots would be to no purpose, when the Parts ought to be delineated out of the Proli∣fic Flower only of the Male Seed, which is apparent from the Egg, wherein tho' there be no Blood contain'd, nor can be supply'd from any other place, yet the Parts are form'd, and being form'd ge∣nerate Blood out of the obvious Ali∣mentary Matter, wherewith all the deli∣neated Parts are nourish'd, increase and come to perfection. We should now speak of the milky Umbilical Vessels, but that we have so largely discoursed of 'em already, Cap. 30. However, this I add, or rather repeat, that Gualter Needham seems to acknowledge no mil∣ky Vessels in this place, for he assigns a∣nother way to this milky Liquor: For that being concocted in the Stomach of the Mother, and mix'd with the Blood, and circulated with it through the San∣guiferous Vessels, it is in that manner carried to the Womb, and there mix'd with the Blood of the Birth, and then that part of the Maternal Blood, that wants not any farther Concoction and Fermentation, is converted into the Blood of the Birth, but that the rest of the nutricious milky Juice, that wants a farther Concoction, is separated from it, and laid up in the Amnion, as matter of future Nourishment, to be carried through the Mouth into the Ventricle of the Stomach, and there to be dige∣sted. Which Opinion we have refuted more at large Cap. 30. XX. The fourth Umbilical VesselThe Ura∣chus, or U∣rinary Ves∣sel. manifestly conspicuous, is the Urachus or Urinary Vessel, a thin, membra∣nous round little Body, having a lit∣tle hollow passage quite through it, ri∣sing from the bottom of the Bladder to the Navel, in the midst between the Vein and the Arteries. XXI. This in most Brute AnimalsIt is pervi∣ous in large brute Ani∣mals. of the larger size, being manifestly pervious, and by the Observation of Hoboken, furnished with no Valves, is carried to the Urinary Membrane above describ'd (for in lesser Animals the Passage of it is hardly discernable) between which and the Chorion, the Urine of the Birth is emptied into it, there to be reserv'd till the Time of De∣livery. Hieronymus Fabricius writes, that this Vessel in most brute Animals, where it rises out of the bladder, is but only one Passage or Chanel; but where it farther extends it self without the Abdomen toward the Alantois, it is di∣vided into many small Fibres, which is the Reason that the Urine flows in∣to the Pipe of the Navel-string, but does not easily flow back into the Ura∣chus, tho' you endeavour to force it back. So likewise Needham observes, That in the Bladder of larger Beasts there is a Liquor found like to that which is contain'd in the Alantois, and that if a Pipe be adapted to the Blad∣der, the Wind will be blown into the Alantois. XXII. But in Man the ExtensionHow it is observed in Mankind. of the Urachus is observ'd no far∣ther than the Navel only, beyond which no farther progress of it was ever demonstrated by any Anatomists. And hence it has been concluded by most, That the Urachus is only extend∣ed to the Navel, and serves for the Li∣gament of the bottom of the Bladder, and that it is not pervious quite tho∣rough. Which Arantius asserts in down∣right terms: In my Opinion, says he, that which seems in the Human Bladder to bear the form of a Chanel or Ura∣chus, is no other than a Ligament of the Bladder, which being somewhat broader at the bottom, lessens by degrees, like an Awl: So that when it comes to the Navel, it vanishes quite away, ha∣ving no Cavity all the while; but only as I conjecture, appointed to bind the Bladder to the Peritonaeum, and to su∣stain it, lest when distended with Urine, it should compress the neck of it at the subjected Parts. So Pareus writes that he could find no passage of the Ura∣chus in Man by all the Art he could use. Thus also Needham reports that he could not find the least footstep of an Urachus in the Navel-string of a Man; much less any Cavity of it. But Reason teaches us that the Use of this Ligament is the less necessary, see∣ing that the Bladder is so closely joyn'd to the Region of the Share, that it needs no other Ligament, and there∣fore that this part is design'd for some more noble Use, of which Avicen, and Fabricius ab Aquapendente better per∣ceiv'd, who say that the Urachus does not terminate in the Navel, but pass through it, and go out of it, and pro∣ceeds farther together with the Umbilical Vein and Artery, and that is to the Mem∣branes enfolding the Birth, and that in Brutes it opens into the Alantois, and con∣veys the Urine out of the bladder of the Birth, and by consequence in Man it o∣pens
between the Chorion and the Urina∣ry Membrane. XXIII. But the Reason why it isWhy it is not conspi∣cuous with∣out the Abdomen. not conspicuous without the Abdomen is this, for that perhaps either no Body was sufficiently diligent in the farther search of its Progress: Or else that because of the extream thin∣ness and transparency of its Sub∣stance it is not visible; which is the reason also that the Chyliferous and Lymphatic Vessels, when they are emp∣tyed are hardly to be seen by any bo∣dy, and therefore by the most skil∣ful Anatomists hitherto overlook'd, whereas when they are full they are at this day easy to be found. Add to this that in Human Bodies when dead, so thin and slender a Vessel, tho∣rough which the serous Humour only passes, which never stays in it, may easily grow lank and flagg, and so by reason of its Transparency be hardly discernable from its neighbouring Parts. XXIV. Lately, when I was moreObserva∣tion. diligently examining the Navel of an Abortive Birth, of about seven Months gon or more, I observ'd a Vein and two umbilical Arteries not twisted one within another, but that a certain thick whitish Gelly, moderately con∣dens'd, was contain'd in the Pipe of the Navel String, carried thither, no question, through the milkie Um∣bilical Vessels, passing the Placenta out of the milkie Caverns of the Womb; and that the said Vessels as it were plac'd in a Triangle, pass'd directly through the Placenta, and was as it were supported by the Gel∣ly it self. I saw no other Vessels con∣spicuous in the said Pipe of the Navel∣string; but when I cut the Navel-string athwart, I observ'd in the middle of that Triangle, a little drop of Serous Liquor spurt out, and the String being a little more hardly squeez'd from the Birth outward, six or seven little drops follow'd: And these, as I perswaded my self, came out of the Urachus invi∣sibly crossing the white Gelly, together with the other Vessels. XXV. Now that the Urine flowsThe Urine flows from the Birth through the Urachus. from the Birth through the Urachus, the Examples of many grown to ripe Years sufficiently inform us, the Pas∣sage of whose Urine being stopp'd through the ordinary Channel, it eva∣cuated through the Navel, being as it were unlock'd again. Of which there are very remarkable Stories to be found in Fernelius, Laurentius, Cabro∣lius, Hildan, Highmore, and many o∣thers. If this happens in People that are of ripe Years, whose Urachus is dry'd up into a Ligament, how much rather may it be ascertain'd that the same thing happens in the Birth, in which this Vessel is more open, nor any way dry'd up. Moreover in an Embryo mis∣carried in the fifth, sixth, or seventh Month, the Bladder is always found swelling, and almost full of Urine, out of which, if the Urine were not emp∣tied the next following Month through the Urachus, the Bladder would of ne∣cessity burst in a short time. For eve∣ry day more or less of the Serum is se∣parated in the Kidneys from the Blood, and conveighed to the Bladder, and as the Birth increases, so much the more Serum is separated of necessity. XXVI. They who have not wellBartholin in an Er∣ror. considered these things, have sub∣scribed to an ancient Opinion, which they endeavoured to defend with ma∣ny Reasons. Among the rest Bar∣tholinus writes, that in the Dissecti∣on of a very young Birth he could not find the Urachus to be pervi∣ous, nor could he thrust in a Probe, which was a sufficient Demonstration that the Urachus was not pervious. But whoever has observ'd the Narrow∣ness of the Urachus in Men, will never wonder that a common Probe cannot be thrust into such a streight Vessel: And so much the rather, because at its exit out of the Bladder, it passes among the Membranes with a winding Chan∣nel. So that if any one could thrust in a sharper and smaller Probe, yet it would never pass directly along, but break out at the Sides of the thin Vessel. Besides Bartholin, Harvey also asserts that he never saw the Urachus pierc'd or con∣taining any Urine in it. So likewise An∣thony Everard observes that neither in Coneys, Doggs, or Hares, he ever saw the Urachus pierced, but always solid and impassable, and doing the Office of a suspensory Ligament. Upon which Regius relying, believes also the Ura∣chus not to be perforable. But these Mistakes are all refuted by what has been said before.The Opini∣on of Courveus. XXVII. Claudius Courveus obser∣ving
that of Necessity part of the Se∣rum must be separated from the Blood which is made in the Embryo, and that it does not flow through the Ge∣nitals into the milkie Iuice contain∣ed in the Amnion, with which the Birth is nourished, and believing with the rest that the Urachus was not perforable, he endeavours to prove that the Embryo, all the time that it is enclosed in the Womb, discharges no Urine out of the Bladder, but that the Bladder collects all the Urine, and is able to contain it till the Delivery. But how much Courveus was mistaken, this one thing informs us that in Mis∣carriages of four or five Months, the Bladder is then found swollen with Se∣rum, and always very full; which if it be so full in these first Months, in which by reason of the smallness and tender∣ness of the bowels there is less blood made, and consequently less Serum se∣parated, what shall become of that Se∣rum which is separated in the last Months when the bowels are stronger, and the Serum is separated in greater Quantity? Shall it be stuft into the bladder fill'd in the first Months? Sure∣ly the bladder must of necessity burst, before the Birth be come to be six Months in being. Beside the Infant being born, very often makes water, which is a Sign that the Serum flows in great abundance to the bladder, and hence also that of necessity it was eva∣cuated out of the bladder through the Urachus while it was detained in the womb, by reason of the Passage of the Genitals not being then open. This al∣so is demonstrated by the Effusion of the Serous Filth preceding the Birth, which is nothing else but this same U∣rine collected between the Chorion and the Urinous Membrane, which flows out upon the breaking of those Membranes by the kicking of the Birth. XXVIII. Alexander Maurocor∣datusThe Opini∣on of Mau∣rocorda∣tus. proposes quite another way for the Evacuation of the Serum, which abounds in the Birth. For he writes that it is not transmitted through the Urachus, which he asserts to be hi∣therto so falsly call'd, but through the Continuation of the Umbilical Vessels and the Womb, to be evacuated tho∣rough proper Places. But this Fig∣ment is grounded upon a salse Hypothe∣sis, that is, the Continuation of the Um∣bilical Veins and Arteries, and the womb; which we have refuted a little before. Moreover if there be no use, as he pre∣supposes, of the Urachus, through what Passages, I would fain know, shall the Urine come from the Bladder of the Birth to the Veins of the Mother? Shall it return out of the bladder through the Arteries to the Reins; and from thence shall it return through the Emulgent Veins, to the Vena Cava, and Liver, and so with a contrary Stream through the umbilical Vein fly back to the Mo∣ther? XXIX. For the Security of theThe Pipe of the Navel∣string. Umbilical Veins there is a Covering wrapt about 'em, which is call'd the little Gut, or the little Rope, or Pipe of the Navel-String; and many times the whole Production of the Navel-String together with its Vessels, is understood by the Words Intestinu∣lum, or Funiculus. This is a Mem∣branous hollow round part, of an indif∣ferent thickness, consisting of a double Tunicle (of which the innermost is thought to proceed from the Peritone∣um, the outermost from the fleshy Pan∣nicle) as well comprehending as cloath∣ing the umbilical Vessels (In which Ves∣sels, by reason of the blood contain'd, there are several Spots conspicuous with∣out side of the Tunicle, from the Vein broader and darker, from the Arteries red or black and blue) with which it is twisted like a Rope: Tho' this Con∣torsion be in some greater, in others lesser; and sometimes we have seen the whole Navel-String contorted or twist∣ed, the Vessels ascending directly tho∣rough the Gelly contain'd in its Hollow∣ness. In the hollowness of this Part there is a certain whitish Humour drawn from the little Caverns of the Womb through some little milky Vessels, and pour'd forth into this Cavity between the Umbilical Vessels, and is found dif∣fused round about 'em, and ready to descend from thence farther into the Amnion. XXX. It is thought to enjoy someSome few Nerves. very few Nerves like the Chorion and Amnios, for it is not altogether void of Feeling. XXXI. It has in several PlacesKnots like little Blad∣ders full of a whitish Iuice. little Knots, like little Bladders full of whitish Iuice, which Riolanus thinks to be generated from a Portion of the fleshy Covering, in that part thicker for the stronger binding to∣gether
of the Umbilical Vessels, by which means Nature took care, lest the Blood should flow to the Birth with too great Violence, and over∣whelm the tender Body. But Whar∣ton more judiciously observes, that those little Knots, are little Teats, through which the milkie Iuice flow∣ing into the Hollow of the Navel-String, distills into the Concavity of the Amnion. Others believe 'em to be Dilatations or Burstings of the Arte∣ries, but contrary to all Reason, when Dilatations of the Arteries are caused by some certain Violence, but these little Knots are generated of themselves; see∣ing also that in that part there can hard∣ly be so much Violence offered to the Arteries, by which they should be di∣lated into Burstings. Moreover seeing those Dilatations, call'd Aneurismata, are Diseases of deprav'd Conformation, therefore they would not be in the Na∣vel-String of all Births; whereas those Knots are in all Births, in some more, in some less, and are not preternatural Tumors, nor so loose as those Dilatati∣ons. Add to this, that they do not, like these, vanish or flagg, upon the Effusi∣on of the Blood, nor are they like them, sometimes greater, sometimes less, but always of an equal bigness; and by the conspicuous Spots, are equally distin∣guished from the Membrane of the Na∣vel-String, whereas those Dilatations are not to be discern'd from the rest of the Skin by any variety of the Colour. Some, but without any Ground, think those Knots to be raised by the Contorsion of the Umbilical Arteries. And Nicolas Hoboken, believes that these Knots may be observed not only in the Covering, but also in the Vessels included therein. And hence he asserts three sorts of Knots, some in the String, others in the Umbilical Vein, and others of the Ar∣teries themselves. The Knots of the Rope or Tunicle, he takes to be the Protuberances of the Membrane it self, caused by the Twistings of the Veins and Arteries. That the Knots of the Ar∣teries are round or orbicular, but the Knots of the Vein, sideways only. And he calls the Inequalities of the Largeness of the blood-bearing Vessels Knots. But commonly when we talk of the Nodes of the Funile, we mean only those which are conspicuous without in the Intestine, and presently obvious to the Sight. XXXII. From the Plenty of thesePredictions from thence. Knots, the superstitious Midwives are wont to foretel what number of Chil∣dren the married Couple shall have; and if there be very few Knots, then forsooth they pronounce Barrenness for the future. By their Distance one from another they judg of the Intervals between Child and Child, and by the variety of the Colour, of the Difference of the Sex, and foretel many things as to the Prosperity or ill Fortune of the In∣fant. Which is not only familiar a∣mong our modern Midwifes, but seems to have been formerly practised by Phy∣sicians themselves; for that Eucharius, Rhodion, and Avicen, make mention of these kind of Knots. XXXIII. The Navel, when the In∣fantThe cutting of the Na∣vel-string. is born, is ty'd with a strong Thread near the Abdomen, and a∣bout two or three Fingers breadths from the Ligature is cut off and so left, till what remains beyond the Li∣gature, being dry'd up or putrified, falls off of it self, and the Exit out of the Abdomen be closed up with a strong Skin drawn over it. From that time forward those Umbilical Vessels within the Abdomen of the Infant, de∣generate into Ligaments, tying those Parts from whence they proceed to the Navel. XXXIV. But as to the cutting ofWhen cut to be left of a just Length. the Navel-string aforesaid, Aristotle warns us that there is great Care to be taken, which consists in leaving a just Length. For the Navel-string being drawn too far out, and so ty'd ex∣actly near the Skin, and then cut off, many believe to be the cause in a Male Child of shortning the Yard; and in a Female, of difficult Labours when she comes to bring forth. But if too long a part of the Navel String be left, that the Caul will easily afterwards slip down into it, and so cause the Umbilical Burstenness. The Truth of the latter we have found by Experience; but as to the former, we cannot affirm any thing of Certainty. XXXV. Now seeing that the use ofThe Nou∣rishment of the Birth in the Womb. the Navel is to conveigh the Arteri∣ous Blood through the Arteries from the Birth to the Uterine Liver, and the same after Preparation, together with the Maternal Blood flowing thi∣ther, again to carry through the Vein to the Birth.
XXXVI. Hence it was a thingFirst Di∣gression. decreed among Philosophers and Physicians▪ that the Birth in the Womb was not nourished by any other Nourishment than the Blood brought through the Navel. Which Opinion seems to be confirm'd by the Autho∣rity of Hippocrates, who seems to be of the same Opinion. Others altogether reject this ancient Opinion, and in∣form, that the Birth in the Womb is not nourish'd by the Navel, but through the Mouth; and confirm their Opinion also by the Authority of Hippocrates who l. de princip. & de nat. puer. plainly writes, that the Birth in the Womb is nourish'd through the Mouth; And these believe that the Uterine Liver only prepares after a Specifick manner, that same Blood which forced thither through the Umbilical Arteries from the Birth it self, and so remits it through the Vein to the Birth, but that no Blood comes to the Navel Vein through the Womb. XXXVII. But to decide this Que∣stionThe Birth is nourish∣ed by the Mouth and Navel. so long controverted, my Iudg∣ment is, that these two Opinions are to be joyn'd together, and that we are to assert, that the Birth is nourish'd partly by Apposition, and by the Mouth, partly by the Navel. XXXVIII. At the beginning be∣foreNourish∣nt by Apposition. the perfect Formation of the Um∣bilical Vessels and the Uterine Liver, the parts delineated are increased and augmented first by Apposition out of the remaining Seminal Matter, now dis∣solv'd into a Colliquamen, upon which the little Embryo swims; in the same manner as Plants, when they first begin to germinate from the Seed, take their nourishment and growth from the remaining part of the Seed; as we see in Onions hung up in the Air, which send forth their Leaves upward, and cast forth their Roots downward; and the same thing we find to be done in Pease and Beans, germinating without the Earth in a moist Air: For this matter is already prepared for the nourishment of the Birth, neither has it need of any far∣ther concoction, as being most natural to the tender parts already delineated, Thus first of all the Birth is nourish'd by the Apposition alone of the Seminal Dissolution, after that, partly by Appo∣sition, and partly by some part of the Se∣minal Dissolution taken in at the Mouth, and first chang'd into Blood in and from the Heart. XXXIX. But afterwards, the Bow∣elsNutrition by the Mouth and Navel. being somewhat corroborated, and the Seminal Dissolution being for the most part consum'd, and the Uterine Liver being come to greater perfection, the Navel with it▪ Vessels being exten∣ded to it, and thence the milkie Iuice now largely flowing into the Amnion, the Birth is nourish'd by the Mouth and Navel. The three ways of the nourishment of the Birth, are prov'd by most solid Reasons. XL. Nutrition by Apposition whichThe proof of Nou∣ishment by Apposition. is the first of all, appears from the swift Increase of the parts, whereas as yet the Bowels are so tender and weak, that they cannot contribute so much Blood to so swift a Nourishment. XLI. Nourishment at the MouthProof of Nourish∣ment at the Mouth. is proved by six Reasons. 1. Because the Stomach of the Birth is never empty; but full of a Milkie whitish Liquor, and a Juice like to it is always contain'd in the Mouth of it; as is to be seen in Brutes. The same thing happens also in a Chicken while it sticks in the Egg, in the Mouth and Craw of which there is a certain matter like coa∣gulated Milk; that is, from the white of the Egg taken in at the Mouth. 2. Because there are Excrements con∣tain'd in the Gutts, which the Infant born evacuates at the Fundament. Which without doubt are the remainders of some nourishment taken in at the Mouth; whereas such Excrements could not a∣bound in the Guts from Blood alone; which some nevertheless have maintain'd contrary to reason, who are refuted by Riolanus. 3. Because the Stomach presently af∣ter delivery, could not so soon go about its Office of Concoction, had it not bin at all accustomed to it in the Womb. 4. Because the Birth could not under∣go so great a change without a manifest prejudice, as that having bin nourish'd in the Womb for so many months with Umbilical Blood alone, so soon as born, it should immediately, and as it were at a jump, be nourish'd by Milk taken in at the Mouth, and swallowed down into the Stomach. 5. Because an Infant is no sooner born, but it understands to suck the Nipples, which it could never do, had it not bin
accustomed in the Womb to take in something at the Mouth, either by suck∣ing or chewing. 6. For that not a few new-born In∣fants puke up a Milkie nourishment, be∣fore they have suckt the nipple, or taken in any thing at the Mouth forth of the Womb; which could not be in their Stomachs, unless they had taken it in at the Mouth of the Womb. A mani∣festObservati∣on. Example of this I saw in my youn∣gest Daughter Ioane, who an hour after she was born, puk'd up a great quantity of white Milk, to the Admiration of all the Women that were present; in regard the Infant had not then either suck'd the Nipple, or taken in any thing at the Mouth. XLII. Harvey de gener. provesAn Argu∣ment from sucking. this Nourishment by a strong Argu∣ment taken from sucking. The Birth, says he, so soon as, nay before, it is born, sucks, as if it had done it for sometime in the Womb. Having try'd it as yet sticking in the Birth before it could either cry or breath, it has ta∣ken hold of, and suckt the finger put to the Mouth of it. XLIII. This Nourishment is alsoConfirm'd by Hippo∣crates. confirm'd by the Authority of Hippo∣crates. lib. de Carn. where he shews it to be done, by Arguments drawn from the Dung, which Infants evacu∣ate as soon as born, and the first ta∣king of the Nipple. XLIV. If any one should ask withWith what matter it was nou∣rished at Mouth. what sort of Nourishment it was nou∣rish'd at the Mouth: We have said e∣nough already as to that point; that is to say, first of all with the dissolved Seminal Liquor, afterwards with the milkie Iuice contained in the Cavity of the Amnion. This milkie Juice Harvey found in the Stomach of an A∣bortion: And Olaus Rudbeck has this Observation concerning this matter. Ha∣ving dissected, saies he, all the Kittens of one Cat, we found in the Mouth, Sto∣mach and Gullets of every one a Muci∣lage and Viscousness like to that which was within the Body and the Amnion. XLV. Now this same Iuice is byTaken in by degrees and swal∣loed, not forc'd. degrees taken in at the Mouth by the Infant and swallowed, not forced in∣to it; for by that means such a quan∣tity would flow into the Mouth of it, that the Stomach would in a short time be distended, and prejudice the In∣fant. Not that there is any reason to fear with Hennigius Arniseus, lest the Birth should be choak'd by the copious Liquor wherein it swims, should it o∣pen its Mouth; for in regard that it does not breath in the Womb, it draws no∣thing within the Lungs; and if it should breath, it would be as soon stifled, with the Mouth shut as open. XLVI. Here Nicholas HobokenA Questi∣on. puts the Question, whether the Birth takes in that first Nourishment, by suck∣ing or only by swallowing, without any foregoing or joynt Act of sucking. But this is a doubt of no such great Moment to require a laborious Solution. For when any liquid thing is taken in at the Mouth to be swallowed, after the com∣mon manner of speaking, it is said to be taken in by sucking or supping, whereas many times it is done neither way, only it is pour'd into the Mouth, and so swal∣lowed. And so there is no question, but that the Alimentary Liquor slips into the Mouth of the Birth; In the mean time it is likewise as probable, that the time of delivery approaching, the same thing is done as it were by sipping, and so swallowing; whence it comes to pass, that the Birth being accustomed to that kind of sipping, as soon as it is born, striving to sip, easily learns the way, and manner of sucking. Which was Harvey's Opinion, de gen. Animal. If the Embryo, says he, swimming in the said Liquor, opens its Mouth, of necessi∣ty the water must enter its Iaws, and if it move other Muscles (which is known by its motion in the Womb, which may be felt without by the hand) what if we should think it to be the same use of the Or∣gans of the Iaws to sup up that Liquor? But that he may the better describe the same manner or Action of supping, and that it does not touch the Liquor, by drawing it toward the inner parts of the Mouth, he adds the manner how the new-born Infant begins the Action of sucking. Neither, says he, does the Infant suck, by compressing the Nipple with its Lips, as we by supping, but as if he would swallow it, he draws it all into his Chaps, and by the help of his Tongue and Pallate, as it were by chewing, fetches out the Milk. For while he endeavours as it were to chew, he sucks in the same man∣ner as he did in the Womb. And this is that manner of sucking which Hippo∣crates means, when he writes, that the Birth sucks in the Womb. Riolanus unwarily denies, that the whi∣tish Liquour contained in the Stomach
of the Birth, is the Chylous Juice, but says, it is an Excrement of the third Con∣coction of the Stomach: or a flegm that falls from the Head; neither of which it can be said to be. And therefore Clau∣dius de la Courve, well refutes him in these words, Lib. de Nutrit. Foet. If in the third Month, as he observes, this Nou∣rishment whatever it be, be generated in a certain Quantity, in how great abun∣dance shall it be generated in the sixth, seventh, and ninth Month? But how much, if that Mucous humour contained in the Stomach be the Excrement of all the Bellies? So much, as neither the Stomach of the Child, nor the Intestines would be able to contain. XLVII. The Nutrition of the Birth by the Umbilical Blood, these three Arguments chiefly prove. 1. The Insertions of the UmbilicalThe proof of Nutri∣tion by the Umbilical Blood. Vessels into the Placenta annexed to the Womb; into which out of the Body of the Womb, the Maternal Blood flows through the open'd Orifices of the Ves∣sels; and is therein prepared, and so con∣veighed through the Vein to the Birth. 2. The great quantity of Blood as∣cending through the Umbilical Vein to the Birth; within a living Animal, by tying the Navel string with a thread, and pricking the Vein between the Liga∣ture and the Placenta, is presently seen: Whereas but very little can be forced through the small Umbilical Arteries, from the Birth toward the Placenta, for that four times as much is drawn out of the Placenta through the Vein, as is carry'd through the Umbilical Arte∣ries. 3. Necessity: For the Birth encreasing wants much Nourishment; but its ten∣der and weak Bowels can concoct and prepare but Little; hence it requires some purer and already concocted Nou∣rishment, by which it may be speedily nourished, and by its admixture the Nourishment taken in at the Mouth, may be chang'd into Blood. More∣over in an Embryo the Chylus taken in at the Mouth, ought not to come alone to the Heart, but mixt with the Ve∣nal Blood, as in Men born it is carryed to the Subclavial Veins, and in them and the Vena Cava is mixt with the Ve∣nal Blood, endued with a fermentaceous Quality, and so comes to the Heart. XLVIII. This Nutrition seems to beIt is carry∣ed in the same man∣ner in a Chicken. carryed on in the same manner in a Chicken, whose bill adheres to the White; but its Navel string or its Ves∣sels enter principally the Yolk; which is instead of the Mothers Blood prepa∣red in the Uterine Liver. But the more the Pullet increases, so much the more the inner white abates, truly supplying the place of the Female Seed, which the Chicken consumes by little and little with its bill lying in it. Now that being for the most part consumed, the outward white is also consumed, sup∣plying the place of the Milkie Liquor. And then also the Yolk is manifestly wasted, as being that into which the Um∣bilical Vessels are inserted; the Vein of which is a Branch of the Porta. Which is an apparent sign, that the chicken at the beginning tender, and requiring less Nourishment, is nourished at first with the inner White only by appositi∣on, then by the Mouth. Afterwards when it wants more copious Nourish∣ment, then it is also nourish'd with the Exterior White at the Mouth, and also with the Juice of the Yolk by the Navel. And the like procedure and order of Nourishment, happens in Hu∣man Birth; which before the sufficient perfection of the Uterine Liver, and Umbilical Vessels, and while the parts are yet very tender, is nourished with the Seminal Colliquamen, remaining af∣ter the Delineation of its parts; after∣wards wanting a more copious quantity of Nourishment, the Uterine Liver now increasing, the Umbilical Vessels being perfected, and the Milkie Vessels exten∣ded to the pipe of the Navel-string, and the Amnion, it is Nourished with the milkie Juice at the Mouth, and with Blood by the Navel, and so at that time enjoys a double nourishment, out of which being mixt together, perfect Blood is made in the Heart. For at the first the Seminal Dissolution sufficiently nourishes the Embryo, as being most analogous to it, and nearest to its Ori∣ginal, and already prepared, and want∣ing little Concoction. But afterwards, when the Dissolution being consumed, the Birth comes to be nourish'd with the milkie Juice, which is less Analogous to it, and therefore has need of some Con∣coction in the Stomach and Heart, then of necessity, some other former Juice must be mixed with that Juice in the Bo∣dy of the Birth, endued with a certain fermentaceous Quality, which when it cannot be performed by the overweak Liver of the Birth it self, of necessity it must be drawn through the Navel from the Uterine Liver. This Nourishment proceeds in like manner in Plants. For Examples sake, throw a Branch of a Willow into a Pond, first it is nourish'd
with only Viscous water, in the mean time besides Leaves it casts forth Roots from it self to a certain length, so that at last they reach the Earth, and insi∣nuate themselves into it; and so from thence receive a firmer Alimentary Nourishment, which causes the Wil∣low to shoot out in bulk. Thus also the Embryo is for some time nourished with a Seminal Colliquamen, and a more se∣rous milkie Iuice taken in at the Mouth, in the mean time the Roots of the Um∣bilical Vessels from its Navel-string, put themselves forth till at length they ex∣tend themselves into the Placenta, as it were into the Earth, and so from thence receive a firmer Alimentary Juice, prepar'd therein, and conveigh it to the Birth, for its swifter and larger Growth. These things thus said enjoyn Silence to Riolanus, who concludes that the Birth is Nourish'd only by the Navel. But, says he, the Birth being every way surrounded with Waters, if it should take its Nourishment in at the Mouth, it could not be but that it must swallow its own Urine again together with its Nourishment. These more modern Authors have observed, that neither the Mouth nor Nostrils are open in an Embryo four Months gone. For which reason we acknowledge no other way of Nourishing the Birth, but by the Um∣bilical Vein, that conveighs Blood to the Liver. XLIX. But Riolanus together withRiolanus deceived. the Ancients was deceived in that, be∣cause he minded not the Difference of Substance and Place; between the milkie Iuice inclosed in the Amnion, and the Urine without the Amnion, contained between the Urinary Mem∣brane, and the Chorion. As also for that without any farther Inquisition, he admitted a false Proposition, groun∣ded only upon the Opinion and Relati∣on of others, as most true, that the Month of the Birth continu'd shut till the four Months end. What has been said, may suffice to convince Claudius Courveus also, who by many reasons endeavours to main∣tain, that the Birth is by no means Nourish'd with the Umbilical Blood, but only with the Liquor of the Amnion, whose vain labour in the Proof, any one may see that reads his Book. L. But before we leave the HistoryWhether Tapping i a Dropsie, may not more safely be done in the Navel it self. of the Navel-string, there is one thing to be inquired into that concerns Phy∣sical Practice, that is to say, seeing that Ascitic Dropsies are frequently cured (according to the Directions of Hippocrates and other Ancient Phy∣sicians, and the consent of Experience) by tapping which is usually done a little below the Navel, somewhat toward the Right or left side, the Question is, whe∣ther that tapping may not be more safely begun in the Navel it self, to the end the Serum included within it may flow out. Andrew Laurentius, with whom Bau∣hinus consents, maintains the affirmative with so much heat, that he prefers the opening of the Navel far before the other way of Tapping, and affirms that the included Serum may be easily evacuated through the Umbilical Veins. This Opinion of his he confirms with four Stories of Ascitic Patients, of which three were perfectly cur'd by the break∣ing of the Navel of its own accord, the fourth by the Artificial opening of it. Then he adds not only the manner of the Operation, but also divers reasons to uphold it; of which the first is this, Where Nature tends, there we must follow her, but many times she attempts that Evacuation of her own accord through the Navel, therefore, &c. But Laurentius mi∣stakes in speaking so generally of this Section of the Navel, as if it were con∣venient in every Ascitis: For we are in∣deed to follow where Nature tends; if she seeks passages that are Natural: But seeing that in an Ascitis, Nature seldom tends to the Navel, which swells in very few that are troubl'd with that distemper, therefore that Opera∣tion is not convenient generally in all, but only in some few. For in others whose Navel does not swell of its own accord, that Section would be not only unprofitable, but also prejudicial, since it would be dangerous to cut the Consoli∣dated Navel, where Nature intends no Evacation of the serous Humours that way, whence painful Convulsions must be expected, and a Gangrene greatly to be feared, especially in a Body Ascitic and full of ill Humours. Moreover if the Navel did not swell before of it self, being opened by Art, there will nothing of the Serum flow out that way from the Cavity of the Belly; because Na∣ture does not tend that way, and there∣fore such a section would be unprofitably, dangerously, and unadvisedly underta∣ken;
Lastly Laurentius judges errone∣ously that the Serum which flows out of a swollen Navel being open'd, flows out of the Umbilical Vessels; Seeing that the Serum contained in the Cavity of the Ab∣domen, cannot enter the Piss-bladder by any Passages, and to ascend through that and the Urachus to the Navel; nor can it enter the Heart, and so be forced through the Iliac and Umbilical Arte∣ries: nor can it enter the Liver it self, and be conveighed thither from thence through the Umbilical Vein, by reason of several little Valves that stop the as∣cent of all manner of liquor from the Li∣ver toward the Navel: Nor can it enter the Milky Umbilical Vessels, altogether dryed up, soon after the Birth. There∣fore that Evacuation cannot be made through any Umbilical Vessels, but from the Cavity it self of the Abdomen; out of which, in some Ascitics, the Serum collected in great Quantity, through the pressure of the Muscles of the Ab∣domen, sometimes insinuates it self into the Navel, taking the same way through which the Umbilical Vessels pass thither, by which means the Skin being loosned in the Navel, there happens a watery humour, which being opened, the wa∣tery Serum flows out, yet not without danger to the Patient, seeing that as Hippocrates witnesses, such a suddain Evacuation is very dangerous, and it is a hard matter for the Physicians to stop it in such a Case. Laurentius orders the Navel to be ty'd, or else to clap a Sil∣ver pipe to the hole of the Section; by which means the rapid Colours of the Serum may be stopped, and let out at the pleasure of the Surgeon. But this advice savours of unskilful Theory; Seeing that not only Reason but Experi∣ence teach us, how difficult a thing it is to tye the Navel, when grown flatted upon the flowing out of the Serum; or to thrust in a Silver Pipe, and keep it there; for if it be done with a Swath brought a∣bout the Loyns, it puts the Patient to more pain; if by a Ligature about the Pipe, then the part ty'd will suddainly dye and corrupt, and the Ligature will be unloosed. CHAP. XXXIII. In what parts the Birth in the Womb differs from a Man grown. I. THis Difference consists in theIn what the difference consists. diversity of Biggness, Figure, Situation, Number, Use, Colour, Ca∣vity, Hardness, Motion, Excre∣ments and Strength of the Parts. This Variety is conspicuous either in the whole Body, or in the Ventricles, or in the Joynts. II. For the whole Body is considera∣ble.Variety in the whole. 1. The small Bulk of all the Parts, 2. The ruddy Colour of the whole, 3. The softness of the Bones, of which many are as yet Cartilaginous and Flex∣ible, so much the more, by how much the Birth is distant from Maturity. III. In the Head there is a great Va∣rietyDifference in the Head. of Difference. 1. The Head, in proportion to the rest of the Body, is large, and the Figure of the Face nothing so well ordered. 2. The Bones of the Scull are softer, and the top of the Head is not covered with a Bone, but are spread over with a Membrane. 3. The Bone of the Forehead is divided, as also of the lower Jaw, and the Wedge-fashioned Bone, is quadripar∣tite. 4. The Bone of the Hinder part of the Head is divided into three, four, or five Bones. 5. The Brain is softer and more sluid, and the softness of the Nerves is extraor∣dinary. 6. The little Bones of the Hearing, are extreamly hard and large. 7. The Teeth lye hid within their Little Holes. IV. In the Breast there is no less dif∣ferenceDifference in the Breast. to be observed. 1. The Breasts swell out, and a serous kind of Milk flows from the Breasts of Newborn Infants, as well Male as Fe∣male, sometimes of its own accord, and sometimes being squeez'd though very gently. But no little Glandules appear conspicuous, only there is to be seen some sign of a little Teat. 2. The Vertebres want the Spiny Pro∣cesses, and are formed out of three di∣stinct little Bones, the mutual Con∣course▪ of which forms a hole, which
admits the descending Spinal Marrow. 3. The Heart is more conspicuous in biggness, and furnished with larger lit∣tle Ears. 4. There are two Unions of the Big∣ger Vessels, not conspicuous in grown People, viz. an Oval Hole through which there is a passage open out of the Vena cava into the Pulmonary Vein, for∣tified with a Valve by a part of this Vein, and a Channel extended from the Pul∣monary Artery into the Aorta. 5. The Glandule under the Channel∣bone adhering to the Vessels, appears of an extraordinary Bigness, and as it were with a threefold Little Glan∣dule. 6. The Lungs are ruddy, thick and bloody, and heavier than usually, so that being thrown into water, they pre∣sently sink. V. The difference in the lowerDifference in the low∣er Belly. Belly, consists in these things. 1. The Stomach is more contracted; though not empty, but full of a Milky Liquor. 2. The Umbilical Vessels go forth of the Abdomen. 3. The Cawle, hardly conspicuous looks like a Spiders Webb. 4. The Intestines equal or exceed the length of the little Body seven times. 5. In the Thin Guts are contained flegmatick and yellow Excrements; in the Thick Guts, hard and blackish; and sometimes Greenish. 6. The huge Bulk of the Liver not on∣ly fills the right Hypochondrium, but ex∣tends it self to the left side, and so covers all the Upper part of the Ventricle. 7. The Spleen is very small. 8. The Gall Bladder swells with the yellow or green Choler. 9. The Sweet-Bread shews it self re∣markably large and white. 10. The Kidneys are vaster in Bulk, and seem to be composed of a Cluster of many Kernels. 11. The Suppositious Kidneys are also very large, nor do they lye night the Kidneys, as in grown People, but rest upon the Kidneys, and encompass the upper part of them, as it were with a large bosom. 12. The Ureters are wide, and the Bladder distended with a great quantity of Urine. 13. In Females, the Womb is depressed, the Tubes longer, and the Stones con∣spicuous for their largeness. VI. In the Ioynts there are theseDifference in the Ioynts. differences to be observed. 1. In the tenderness and softness of the Bones. 2. Because the Little Bones of the Wrist and the Back of the Foot are grist∣ly, and not firmly joyned. CHAP XXXIV. Of the Situation of the Birth in the Womb. WHen I take out a mature Birth out of a dead Mother, I can∣not but admire how so large a Body should be contained within so small a Prison, and move it self, which being once drawn forth, no Art of Man can thrust in again. Now therefore let us observe how the Birth is contained in the Womb. I. The Situation of the Birth is notHow the Birth is contained in the Womb. always alike, but many times found to be various, which proceeds partly from the Birth it self, partly from the time that the Woman has gone, and her growing near the Time of her Delivery. The Head is contained in the upper part of the Womb, with the Arms and Thighs contracted together, the Knees nearest the Elbows, the Hands in some plac'd upon the Knees, in some upon the Breast; in others folded together; the Feet are turn'd back inward, so that they touch the Buttocks with the Soles, rare∣ly with the Heels. Whence it comes to pass, that the Legs of Newborn Infants are bow'd inward, and their Feet in the same manner, which fault is easily af∣terwards amended by swathing, by rea∣son of the softness of the parts. Some∣times the Birth lies toward the side, and assumes to it self an overth wart Situation, which is easily perceived by the Woman laying her hand upon her Belly, as al∣so by the swelling out of the side, and the weight falling that way. II. Sometimes, one, two, or threeThe Inver∣sion of the Birth. weeks before Delivery, the Birth turns it self with the Head downward, and lyes much more toward the Lower, pre∣paring for its Exit; which tumble is performed in a short time, though not without some trouble to the Mother, who takes that alteration for a certain Sign of her approaching Labour. III. About the time of Delivery theChange of Situation. Birth changes its Situation several ways; while by kicking and moving
it self to and fro, it seeks to come forth. Hence I believe it is that several excellent Anatomists, who perhaps have viewed such kinds of Births in Women at such times Deceasing, do not agree in the Manner of the Situation of the Womb in the Birth; while some describe the Arms, others the Thighs, or other parts after this or that manner situated in this or that place. IV. Fernelius asserts that there isThe Opini∣on of Fer∣nelius. a different Situation of Males and Females; affirming that Males lye with their faces toward the Abdomen or inner parts, and Females quite the contrary; and that hence it is, that the Bodies of drowned Women swim with their Bellies downward in the Water, and Men upon their Backs. Which Opinion Riolanns derides as ridiculous, and without reason. Charles Stephens reports, that Twins observe a contrary Situation; and that one looks toward the forepart, the other toward the hinder part. But this Rule is uncertain, as is apparent from hence; for that sometimes Twins have bin born with their Abdomens, Breasts, or Fore∣heads growing together, which could ne∣ver happen if they lay back to back. CHAP. XXXV. Of the Delivery. I. THe Birth being conceived inDigression. How long the Birth remains in the Womb. the Womb, abides within that dark Domicil, till it comes to Matu∣rity; that is, till it has acquir'd strength anough, so soon as it is set at Liberty, to endure the Violence of the Air and the Alteration of Nou∣rishment. But how long it is, before it acquire that Maturity, and how long it is before it ought to come into the World, is disputed among the Learned. That there is a certain time prescribed by Nature to all other Ani∣mals is vulgarly known; so that the Contest is only concerning Man. Hippocrates and Aristotle seem to as∣cribe no certain time to the Birth of Man; for they affirm that a Woman may bring forth from the Seventh to the Eleventh; with whom agrees the great∣est part of the Crowd of Physicians. But most commonly Human Births are detained in the Womb nine whole Months together, before they come to their just Maturity; which Maturity nevertheless may sometimes happen in seven Months: So that within both those times Women may be delivered of Sound and Mature Children. Such as are born before the seventh Month, are not ripe, neither can they be preserved alive; be∣cause they cannot brook the violence of the Air, nor Alteration of Nourishment: Wherefore, says Aristotle, The Birth that comes forth sooner than the seventh Month, is no way to be preserved alive. But because there has happen'd an Ex∣ception to this General Rule of Aristo∣tle's, I think that instead of by no means, he should have written very seldom. II. For that some have lived thatChildren born with∣in the sixth Month. have been born before the seventh Month, the Relations of Physicians testifie. Avicen reports, that he saw one born within the sixth Month, that lived well: Cardan writes that the Daughter of Peter Soranus, being born in the sixth Month grew up to Maturity. Spigelius writes, that in Zeland he knew a certain Letter-Carrier, who by the Publick Testimony of the City of Middle∣burgh, under the Certificate of the Ma∣gistracy, was born in the sixth Month, so small, so tender and weak, that he could not endure Swathing, but was wrapt up in Cotton to defend him from the Cold. We also knew a Girl that was born within the sixth Month, whose Head when she was born, was no bigger than a large Apple, and the whole Bo∣dy so small, that the Nurse could hard∣ly touch it, nor could it be Swathed according to the usual manner; which afterwards grew up to a just proportion, and is now at this time living about eigh∣teen years of Age. III. Montuus reports that he knewChildren born in the fifth Month. a Cupbearer to Henry King of France, who though he were born in the fifth Month, yet lived to a florid Age. Francis Vallesius tells us of a Girl born in the fifth Month, that he knew when she was entring into her twelfth year. In like manner Ferdinand Mena makes mention of two that were born in the fifth Month. But certainly this is to be understood of the end of the first Month. And so all these Ex∣amples quoted from Men of Credit, and confirm'd by their Testimonies, suffici∣ently demonstrate, that sometimes a Child born before its time, may be so
cherisht and hatched up by Care and Art, as to be preserved alive. But these are accidents that rarely happen, from whence no certain Conclusion can be drawn. For it's a wonder, when a Birth so immature, so tender, and so weak, happens to live any time. IV. Hippocrates also denies thatThey can∣not live that are born in the eighth Month, ac∣cording to Hippo∣crates. they can live who are born in the eighth Month: Perhaps because he of∣ten observed it so to fall out in Greece. For which Regius gives this Reason; because that the Birth being a certain Critical Evacuation, it cannot be done safely and soundly but in a Cri∣tical Month; such as is the seventh: So that if that Crisis of the Birth happen in the eighth Month, then of necessity some powerful preternatural Cause must intervene, so much to the prejudice of the Infant, that it cannot live. But if only the Critical Months, the seventh, fourteenth, &c. are only to be account∣ed wholesom, what shall we say to a Birth of nine Months, which however is no Critical Month, and yet most fre∣quent and most wholesom? What to the Tenth Month? Certainly there is no Effervescency of the Body of the Infant, as there is of the Humours, which boyl at certain times, and break forth Cri∣tically? And therefore since there is no solid Effervescency in the solid parts of the Birth, neither is there here any bad or good season of Critical Evacuations to be observed, and thence no reason that Children born in the eighth Month, should be thought less likely to live, than those that are born in the seventh; seeing that dayly Experience teaches us, how that Children born in the eighth Month, live as well as they that are born in the seventh. For if they are born in the seventh Month, and can be ripe so soon, why not in the eighth? why shall not the latter brook the Vio∣lence of the Air, and the change of Nourishment as well as the former? ra∣ther, why not better▪ seeing they are more mature. In vain do many here al∣ledge the great toil and tumbling of the Birth in the seventh Month more than in other Months, by which he is so weak∣ened and tvr'd, that he cannot brook the Labour of Expulsion in the Eighth: for these are idle Dreams refuted by the Women themselves, who assure us that they perceive that extraordinary Moti∣on no more in the seventh, than in the sixth or eighth, As vainly others fly to the numbers of Days, Hours, and Mi∣nutes, confining the Exit of the Child to certain numbers, when the incertain∣ty of the days of delivery frequently delude those Numbers. Lastly, the A∣strologers in vain endeavour to reconcile this matter by the benigne or malign as∣pects of Saturn, as if Saturn rul'd al∣ways; or at least that there were no Children born in the eighth Month, but under his Reign; whereas such Births frequently happen under the Dominion of other Benign Planets, which seem to be secured from Saturn's Injuries by their Clemency and Benignity. Besides, Asto the Influences of the Stars, how unknown and meerly conjectural they are, not only the fallacious, uncertain, and contrary Judgments of Astrologers so frequent in their Writings demon∣strate, and of what little Prevalency and Efficacy they are, experience teaches; so that whether they have any power over things here below, is not without reason questioned by many. And hence though many, in explaining the mean∣ing of Hippocrates, Concerning the Chil∣dren born in the eighth Month, by him pronounced short-liv'd, have laboured very much, and have studyed to un∣derprop and adorn his Sentence with ma∣ny fictions and pretences of Truth, yet not only frequent and daily Observation, but the Authority and Experience both of the Ancients and Moderns overturns all they have rear'd beyond the Limits of Greece. For Galen says, they are in a very great Errour, that will not acknow∣ledge the eighth Month for a due and natural time of delivery. In like man∣ner Aristotle asserts that Children born in the eighth Month live and grow up. Nevertheless he adds that the words of Hippocrates may be interpreted in the best Sence. But many dye in several pla∣ces of Greece, so that very few are preser∣ved: So that if any one there doth live, he is not thought to be born in the eighth Month, but that the Woman has mistaken her reckoning. Pliny writes that in E∣gypt and Italy, Children born in the eighth Month do live, contrary to the Opinion of the Ancients, and that Va∣stilia was happily brought to bed of Caeso∣nia, afterwards the Wife of Caius. Among our Modern Authors, Bonaventure saw three safe that were born in the eighth Month. So it is credibly reported, that the Learned Vincent Pinelli, together with his Sister, were born Twins in the eighth Month, as was also Cardinal Sfondrati, and both his Sons. Cardan brings five Examples of great Men all born in the eighth Month, who lived; and asserts moreover, that in Egypt ge∣nerally they live that are born in the eighth Month. Which if it has befallen
so many Princes, we may easily conje∣cture that the same as frequently hap∣pen among the ordinary People, who seldom reckon so exactly. Riolanus re∣lates that in the Iland Naxus the Women are usually brought to bed in the eighth Month: and Avicen gives the same Re∣lation of the Spanish Women. We find the same to be true in Holland; and that it is so likewise in France, England, Scot∣land, and all the Northern Countries, is very probable, because we never hear of any complaint against the eighth Month in any of those places. V. Now the reason why some areThe reason of the va∣riety in the time of Delivery. born in the seventh, some in the eighth, and others in the ninth Month, is to be ascribed to the difference of Re∣gions, Seasons, Dyet, Passions of the Mind, Temperament of the Seed, Womb, and Woman her self, by means whereof the heat of the Womb increa∣ses sometimes later, and sometimes sooner; So that sometimes there is need of a swifter, sometimes a slower Ventilation. Paulus Zachias seems toPaulus Zachias. accuse. Hippocrates and Aristotle of a Mi∣stake for appointing so many uncertain limits for sound Delivery: and believes that there is a certain time for the De∣livery of Men as well as of Beasts; that is to say, the end of the ninth, and beginning of the tenth, and that all other Births either on this side, or on that side, are all preternatural, occasion'd by some Morbifick Cause, which is the reason of so many weak and distempered Children. Which if it were true in those that are born before the nine Month Term, then certainly the Mother or the Child would be affected with some Morbifick cause, either before or after the Birth; whereas in Children that come in the seventh Month, which frequently happens, any such bad affection rarely happens, but that the Mother and the Child equally do well, as if the Birth had bin delay'd till the end of the ninth Month; nor is the Child more sickly or weaker, than those that are born at the end of the ninth Month, which are many times as sickly and weak, as those that are born in the seventh. Now as to those that are born beyond that Term, it has been con∣troverted among several, whether any such thing happen, and whether a Wo∣man bring forth after that time. In the mean while, it is a Rule hitherto held certain, environ'd with many proba∣ble reasons, and the Authority of great Men, that some Women may be brought to bed in the eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Month, and that the Children are duly born, by reason of the weakness of the Infant, or the Mother; the Coldness of the Womb, scarcity of Nourishment, or some such like cause, which may occasion Nature to delay the Appointed time of Birth, as many famous Philosophers have per∣swaded themselves and others: Hippo∣crates expresly asserts that Children are born in the eleventh Month. Aristotle ad∣mits the eleventh and no farther, They that lye longer than the eleventh Month, seem to lye hid; that is, that the Mother has mistaken her Reckoning. Petrus Aponensis, otherwise called the Conci∣liator, by the Report of Cardan, asserts himself to have been born in the eleventh Month; as if he had kept his Mother's reckoning in her Womb. Homer makes mention of one born in the twelfth Month. Pliny speaks of a certain Wo∣man that was brought to bed in her thirteenth Month; and Avicen of ano∣ther that was brought to bed in her four∣teenth. Of which we have another Ex∣ample in Alexander Benedict; I omit o∣ther Women that went two and twenty Months; nay some that went two, three, four whole years, of which Iohn Schenkius quotes Examples, I fear me too fictitious, out of several Authors. VI. But indeed these are all idleLearned Men too much de∣ceived by old Womens Tales. Stories without any grounds, and prov'd by no certain Experience, but taken up from the discourses of tatling Gossips, to whom some overcredulous Learned Men have given too much Credit, to the end they might under∣prop these Vanities with some supports of probability. For as I believe it to be most certain that the time of delivery may be for certain causes delay'd some few days beyond the Term of nine Months, so I believe it impossible that it should be put off one, much less many Months, seeing that in whatsoever Constitution of a Woman, the Increase of heat becomes so great in the Infant, that it requires Ventilation by Respirati∣on; and for that cause the Birth must seek relief without the narrow straits of the Womb. So that it is manifest those serious maintainers of that Opinion drew too hasty a Conclusion from the false Relations of silly Women. For if we narrowly prie into the Matter, there lies a Snake in the Grass; either wicked∣ness in the Woman, or simple Error in the Reckoning. Wickedness in the Wo∣man;
Who if she have no Children, upon the death of her Husband, that she may enjoy her Estate, leagues her self with another Man, and being by him got with Child, pretends to be deli∣vered, Eleven, twelve, thirteen Months after the death of her Husband, that so she may lay the Child to him in his Life∣time; which is a sort of wickedness so frequent, that the Courts are full of these Contentions: Which is the reason that these lateward Births seldom happen but among such kind of Widows, rarely among Women that live with their Husbands. There may be also a sim∣ple Error in the Reckoning, for that Women generally compute their Reck∣oning form the first suppression of their Flowers: though it may hap∣pen from other causes that their Flow∣ers may cease three or four Months before Conception. So that if a Woman begin her Reckoning from the first Sup∣pression, she must of necessity mistake, and through that Mistake the Child shall be said to be born in the eleventh or twelfth Month, that came at the ap∣pointed time of the end of the Ninth. Aristotle believes that Error may proceed from the swelling of the VVomb. Wo∣men, says he, are ignorant of the Time of their Conception, if when the Womb was swelled before, as it often happens, they afterwards lye with their Husbands and conceive, for they believe this to be the beginning of their Conception, because it gave such a Signal. VII. Through the same Error inError in Womens Recko∣nings. Reckoning, Children are said to be born in the fifth or sixth Month, which nevertheless are not born till the Ninth. For that some VVomen for the first two or three Months of their being with Child: have their Flowers upon them still at the set times; but afterwards they stop; and so they begin their Recko∣ning from that Suppression wherein they greatly err, beginning their account from thence, when they are three or four Months gone: and so a Child shall be said to come in the sixth Month, that was duly born in the ninth, and this Error is apparent from the just propor∣tion of the Child, and the strength of its parts. VIII. When a Woman draws nearWhat hap∣pens near the time of Delivery. her time, the Birth turns it self, and the Head declining, plants it self be∣fore the Privity, distending upwards the rest of the Body: Which turning happens a week or two before the delive∣ry. Then the Orifice of the VVomb, like a blowing Rose begins to open and dilate it self, and to prepare a passage for the Birth that is about to come forth; moreover the Infant kicking and spraw∣ling to and fro, breaks the Membranes wherein it is infolded, and so the hu∣mours included therein flow forth, which loosen the Privy parts, and render the Passages slippery; to make the passage easie for the Birth to pass thorough. For it rarely happens that the Child is born and comes into the VVorld with the Membranes whole and entire, which once I saw in an Infant that was ve∣ry weak. IX. This sprawling is painful toThe cause of Expul∣sion. the Womb, and this pain communica∣ted to the mind in the Brain, present∣ly the Animal Spirits are sent in great Quantity through the Nerves to the pursing Fibers of the Womb, and the Muscles of the Abdomen, which be∣ing contracted together, cause a strong Expulsion of the Birth. X. The Infant comes forth withA natural Birth. the Head formost according to Nature, says Hippocrates. Lib. de. nat. puer. XI. Whatever other manner it of∣fersUnnatural. it self to come forth in, that Birth cannot be said to be Natural; and the more hazardous it is, by how much the posture of the Child is more unusual. For if it offers one Thigh or one Arm, it makes a stop, unless that Member be thrust back and the Birth turn'd. If two Thighs be offered toge∣ther, the delivery may go forward, but with great difficulty, if the Buttocks offer themselves first, the delivery goes not forward, unless very seldom, some∣times the Birth comes forth doubled, but with great difficulty and great dan∣ger. If the Sides or Belly offer them∣selves first, the Delivery is impossible. How the mature and large Birth should be able to pass through the Straits of the Bones of the Pelvis, stuft with Muscles and other parts, Galen admires, but dares not explain. But it is done, by reason that the Bones of the Share, the Os Sacrum, and the Hip-Bone, their Cartilages being loosen'd, separate a little one from another, as we shall shew more at large. L. . c. 16. XII. However it be, or at what∣everNature expels the Birth out of the Womb through the Uterine Sheath. time the Delivery happens, Na∣ture expels the Birth out of the Womb through the Uterine Sheath, or at least endeavours to do it, and that is the only passage appointed for the Ex∣pulsion
of the Birth. I say, or at least endeavours to do it: for sometimes it hap∣pens, that that same passage being stopt, the Child cannot be expell'd by Nature, but must be drawn forth by the skill of the Surgeon; and that through the passage already mentioned by the hand, either of the Midwife or Surgeon, or by the Assistance of Hooks, which we have tryed with success in many Women, or else by Section made in the Womb and Abdomen, which is called the Caesarian Delivery, concerning which Francis Rous∣set has written a famous Treatise. But it is rarely seen that Nature her self at∣tempts Expulsion, through unwonted Passages. Of which nevertheless Bar∣tholin relates a most Remarkable Story, Lib. de insolit. part. viis. Of a Woman that evacuated several little Bones of a Human Birth, first of all out of her Navel swelling and dissected, next out of an Ulcer in her left Ilium, and this not all at once, which increases the won∣der, nor all together, but at several times, and at several years distance; and those so many, that it was thought they were enough now for the Bodies of Twins. To which Story he adds a long and splendid Explanation; and moreover out of several Authors brings many o∣ther Examples of corrupted Births, eva∣cuated out of the Navel, Hypochondri∣ums, Ilium's open'd, the Fundament, and other unusual Passages; for which we refer the Reader to Bartholin him∣self. XIII. In the mean time, there areSomethings admirable to be obser∣ved. the Admirable and Stupendious works of Nature, seeing that the Birth must of necessity slip into the Cavity of the Abdomen; through the broken, ul∣cerated, or any other way torn and lacerated Womb; or else the Concepti∣on in the Tube must have miscarryed thither, out of the Tube, being bro∣ken through the Thinness of the Mem∣brane of the Tube, before it could cause those Exulcerations by its cor∣ruption in the parts of the Abdomen. But because many such Women have been restored to their former health, this is most of all to be wondered at, that those inward Wounds and Ulcers of the Womb and Tube, should heal again of themselves, and that the Birth putrifying in that Place, should not with∣al putrify the Guts, Bladder, Mesen∣tery, and other Bowels of the Abdomen, and rather hasten the Death of those un∣fortunate Women, than such an unwon∣ted Delivery. XIV. We are now to return to theThe cause of the   of the . Causes of Delivery, among which in a natural Delivery we have reckoned the kicking and stirring of the Infant, which is assigned to three Causes, that is to say, the narrowness of the Place, the Corruption of the Nourishment, and the want of it. XV. The narrowness of the PlaceNot the narrowness of the place. signifies nothing to the purpose: For there are many Women, who having before brought forth very large Births, afterwards are delivered of a little one, and then a great one again. Now the Place was big enough for that same little one to have stay'd lon∣ger, and there was Nourishment suffici∣ent in it for its larger growth, where there had bin a great one before. More∣over as the Infant grows, so its Domi∣cel the Womb enlarges, which if any cause obstruct, the Birth dies before matur'd, and abortion happens. XVI. Nor can any such thing beNot the Corruption of Nou∣rishment. prov'd from the Corruption of Nou∣rishment; seeing there is no Corrupti∣on of it, but that it is as equally good at the end, as at the beginning. If any one affirm the Urine of the Birth to be mixed with the Nourishment, we shall remit him to the preceding 30, 31, 32. Chapters. Besides, the Birth could not be rendred more vigorous, by the corruption of the Nourishment, to kick and sprawl, but weaker and more infirm. Some there are who with Regius add o∣ver and above, that the Nourishment becomes unpleasant to the Birth by rea∣son of its Corruption, and therefore refusing such ungrateful Nourishment it kicks and spurns, and seeks to get forth. But there can be no Depravation of the Nourishment, and therefore this Opinion presupposes some acute Judg∣ment in the Birth, to distinguish be∣tween the goodness and badness, plea∣santness and ungratefulness of the Nou∣rishment. But what Judgment an Infant has, I leave to any one to consi∣der. For we find Children new born take Sack, Milk, Oyl of sweet Al∣monds, Ale, Syrups, powder of Be∣zoar, &c. without any Distinction, and therefore 'tis not likely it should be able to distinguish the taste of Nourishment in the Womb. XVII. Neither can it be defect ofNot defect of Nou∣rishment. Nourishment which causes this spraw∣ling; which would rather occasion weakness and immobility: for all li∣ving
things languish for want of Nou∣rishment; and motion ceasing by de∣grees, at length they dye. Moreover we see many Infants new born that are strong enough, and yet for the first two or three days, receive little Nourish∣ment, which if they had wanted in the Womb, they would not have been so strong, but weak and languishing, and would have been greedy of Nourishment when offered. And to this, that in ma∣ny Women with Child that have hard∣ly Bread to eat, the Birth doth not on∣ly sprawl, but is so weak, that its mo∣tion can hardly be felt in the Womb: but let the Mother feed heartily, the Birth is refreshed, and moves briskly in the Womb. Which is a certain sign that the stronger Motion of the In∣fant proceeds from a sufficient supply of Nourishment, and not from want of Nou∣rishment, which would rather retard than promote delivery. XVIII. Claudius Courveus find∣ingWhether a∣bundance of Excre∣ments. these causes, did not promote deli∣very, has contriv'd another, which is, redundancy of Excrement, which he says is sometimes so much, that the Birth constrained by necessity of Eva∣cuation, never leaves kicking till it get forth. Which fiction of Courveus is contrary to Reason and Experience. The one teaching us that there is no ob∣struction to hinder the Birth from Eva∣cuating in the Womb. And it is ap∣parent that very little Excrement can redound, in regard the Infant takes no solid Nourishment in the VVomb. Then Experience tells us, that a new born In∣fant does not piss all the first day, and for three days together many times ne∣ver evacuates by Stool, which it would do as soon as born, were the Opinion of Courveus true. XIX. Therefore there must be ano∣therThe true cause. cause of this strenuous kicking and ensuing Labour, which is the necessity of Breathing and Cooling. For at first the heat of the Embryo is but small, shewing it self like a little spark, that has no need of cooling but of Augmen∣tation. Now this heat encreasing; the Actions and Motions of the Birth en∣crease. At length this Heat encreases to that degree, that it wants Ventilation and cooling: which being deny'd the Infant begins to be more and more disturbed by the heat, and through that disturbance vehemently to move and kick, and by means of that motion to excite the Ute∣rine Humours to an Effervescency, and make way for it self into a freer Air. But that increase of heat happens also in a small Birth, which has stay'd its due time in the VVomb, as well as in a large Infant. So that the cause of Cal∣citration and delivery is the same in a small as in a large Infant if ripen'd in the VVomb. XX. Thus in very hard winterA Simili∣tude. Weather, suppose a Man almost num∣med and frozen to death, should be enclosed and shut up in a narrow close Chamber every way stopped up; and there should be a great Fire made in that Chamber. First the heat of that place would Excite and Augment the remaining heat of the enclosed Body. Hence the enclosed Body would begin to come to himself again, and the heat would extreamly refresh and revive him. And set at liberty his benumm'd and frozen Ioynts, so that he might be able to walk and eat. But after∣wards the heat of the Body encreasing beyond due Mediocrity, though he had the choicest and most plentiful Nourish∣ment by him, he would begin to be troubled and sweat. Lastly, Extremity of heat encreasing that anxiety: he be∣gins to turn himself every way, and vi∣olently breaks open the dore for more Air, afraid of being stifl'd. XXI. Thus in the Birth this sameThe  of Re∣freshment and Respi∣ration is the cause of Calcitrati∣on. necessity of Refreshment and Respirati∣on, is the only true and chief cause of Calcitration and Delivery. For when the heat of the Heart is so encreased, as to generate hotter Blood to be now twice dilated in both Ventricles, of neces∣sity, it must be cool'd by Respiration in the Lungs; which Respiration being deny'd, the Infant is Suffocated, as many times it happens when it sticks in hard Labours before it can be expell'd. Now that the necessity of breathing forces the Birth to Calcitration, is apparent from hence, for that as soon as it is born and enjoys a free Air, it presently breaths, and oftentimes cries; to which Respira∣tion it is not forc'd by the ambient Air, but by the necessity of Respiration, be∣sides which there can be no other cause imagined, that can compel the Infant to breath. XXII. Harvey believes this neces∣sityThe Opi∣on of Har∣vey, and two Que∣stions. of Respiration, is not the cause of Calcitration and delivery; for proof whereof he puts two Questions to be resolved by the Learned. First, How the Embryo comes to remain in the
Womb after the seventh Month; where∣as being expelled at that time it pre∣sently breaths; nay cannot live an hour without Respiration; but re∣maining in the Womb, it abides alive and healthy beyond the ninth Month without the help of Respiration? To which I answer what I have hint∣ed before, that according to the temper of the Woman, her Seed, her Womb, her Dyet, the heat augments in some Births sooner, in some later, which if they encrease to that bigness in the seventh Month, that refrigeration by Respirati∣on is necessary, then the Birth breaks its prison by Calcitration, and such a Birth, whatever Harvey thinks, can∣not abide alive and sound till the eighth or ninth Month; for the Birth that a∣bides so long in the VVomb, is not come to that degree of heat in the se∣venth Month, as to want Refrigeration. XXIII. Harvey's other QuestionHarvey's other Que∣stion. is, How it comes to pass, that a new born Child, covered with all its Mem∣branes, and as yet remaining in its water, shall live for some hours with∣out danger of Suffocation; but being stript of its Secundines, if once it has drawn the Air within its Lungs, cannot afterwards live a Moment with∣out it, but presently dies? To this Question of two Members I answer, that the first part perhaps may be true of an immature Birth thrown forth by Abortion, by reason of its small heat requiring little Refrigeration: but of a Mature Birth, brought forth in due time, it cannot be true; there be∣ing so much heat in it, as must of ne∣cessity be cool'd by Respiration; and therefore such a Birth being included within the Membranes, cannot live for some hours, as Harvey supposes, nor half an hour, no not a quarter of an hour; And this the Country People know by experience, that a Colt or a Mare, being once brought forth, if it remain included within its Membranes, I will not say an hour, or half an hour, but a very little while, half a quarter of an hour or less, is presently stifled, and therefore they take care that some body stand by, while the Dam has brought forth, to break the Membranes, which if no Body be present, the Dam often does with her Mouth: And which all o∣ther Creatures that bring forth living Conceptions generally do, else the Birth is stifled. But grant the Birth may live half an hour within the Mem∣branes, this makes not against us. For the external Air presently refrigerates the Air included in the Membranes; which being so refrigerated, the Birth for some time may enjoy the benefit of the cool Air: but not long, for that the hot Air sent from the Lungs with the vapourous Breath would in a short time fill the the whole Capacity of the Mem∣branes, and so the Birth for want of cooler Air must of necessity be stifled. XXIV. To the latter part of Har∣vey'sThat Birth may live a while with∣out Respi∣ration. Question I answer, that so long as no Air is admitted into the Lungs, the Birth may yet live without Respi∣ration, because a small quantity of Blood may be forced out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, into the thick Lungs; and hence the dilated Blood in the right Ventricle, is not carryed to the left; but through a Channel, by which the Pulmonary Artery is joyned to the Aorta in the Birth; it flows into the Aorta, into which for some time, as being less hot and spirituous, it may flow without Refrigeration, because it is not therein dilated again. But when by the Inspiring of the Air, the substance of the Lungs becomes to be dilated, then the Compressions of the Vessels being all taken away, the spiri∣tuous Blood in great quantity is forced from the right Ventricle of the Heart, into all the open Vessels of the Lungs, which unless it should be somewhat thickned by the Inspiration of the cold Air, could not flow to the left Ventricle, there to be again dilated, but would stuff up the whole Body of the Lungs, and so the Creature would be stifled. And this is the reason that when the Birth has once breathed, it cannot after∣wards live, though never so little a while without Respiration. And therefore that is certainly to be exploded which Bauschi∣us, the Writer of the German Meico∣physical Ephemerides, cites out of Patterson Hayn, written to him by Gerges, a certain Hungarian Shepherd. In Hungary, says he, a Woman near her time, in the year 1669. began to fall in labour, insomuch that the Child had already thrust forth his Head without the Womb. But the Birth having cry'd twice or thrice, was drawn back into the Womb, and there remained a fortnight longer, after which the Wo∣man was duly brought to bed. Now how far this idle story is from Truth, a blind Man may see. For when the Birth has once thrust forth its Head without the VVomb, unless either by
the force of the Womb; its own stri∣ving, or the hand of the Midwife, the whole Body either come forth or be drawn out, the Orifice of the Privity so strengthens it self about the neck of it, that it is presently killed. But by reason of the extraordinary narrowness of the Capacity of the Womb, it can never return back to the inner parts, especially after it has sent forth two or three Cries. This let who will believe, and let Patterson Hayn, and Gerges the Shepherd believe it as long as they please, who have suffered such a Fable to be imposed upon by Tattling Gossips, and ventured so slightly to divulge it for a Truth. XXV. Lastly it maybe objected a∣gainstAn Obje∣ction. our foresaid Opinion, that it is not probable that the necessity of Respiration forces the Birth to a stron∣ger Calcitration, when the Birth in the Womb breaths sufficiently, consider∣ing the Proportion of its heat. For Vessingius, resting upon the Authori∣ty of Hippocrates, writes that the Lungs of the Birth enclosed in the Womb, by a gentle dilation draws something of Air, and for proof of this, he alledges the Infants being often heard to cry in the Womb. Examples of which are produced by Albertus Magnus, Libavi∣us, Solin, Camerarius, Sennertus, Bartholin, and Deusingius. Also the Learned Velthusius believes, that in this case the Air penetrates to the places where the Infant lies, and that it is at∣tracted by the Infant by Inspiration. Nay the Honourable Robert Boyle, in Expe∣rim. Physic. Mathem. Exercit. 41. seems to confirm this crying by a most memo∣rable Example. I knew a certain Lady, says he, who was with Child some years since; at what time her friends bemoan'd her Condition to me, that she was very much terrified with the Crying of her lit∣tle Infant. XXVI. But whoever they were,All in an Error, who write of Respirati∣on and cry∣ing in the Womb. they were all in an Errour that wrote of the Respiration, and crying of the Birth in the Womb. For first the Relations of these things are taken from the vain stories of idle and unskilful Women and Men; who either conceive Whimsies of their own; or else on set purpose perswade others into a belief of these Vanities. Either to move the Rich to Pity (for generally the poor are they that only hear these Noises) or else to get themselves a name among the Vulgar, by establishing some Pro∣phecy upon these feigned wonders. But we shall hardly read of any person of Reputation, that ever heard this ima∣ginary Crying. Secondly, it is impossi∣ble there should be any breathing or cry∣ing in the Womb, without any Air; but which way shall it come thither. For the Mouth of the Womb is so close∣ly shut, by the Testimony of Galen or Hippocrates, that it will not admit the point of a Probe, nor the least Air or Water. Of which though some make a doubt, yet we found to be true, in the year 1649. When we opened the Body of a young Woman that was poy∣soned, in whose body we found the Womb swollen with a Birth above a hands length; and the Mouth of the Womb not only most closely contracted, but also stopped up with a glutinous, clam∣my, flegmatick Humour, that would not admit the sharp end of a Bodkin, un∣less it should have been forced through the Glewy substance. The same thing we found in December 1665. in a Wo∣man seven Months gone that dy'd sud∣dainly. Moreover besides this closing up the Mouth of the Womb, the Birth is also so exactly enclosed in its Mem∣branes, that no liquor contained within can distil forth, nor any external Air penetrate withinside. VVhich dif∣ficulty Gualter Needham observing after he has related a story as it was told him of a Child that was heard to cry in the Womb of a Noble Woman, L. de format. foet, writes, that the Air cannot come from without to the Birth, but that it may be there generated by the fer∣mentation of the Humours latent with∣in; as wind is bred in the Stomach, Guts and other parts. But this being in some measure granted, how is it possible that the Birth going about to cry, should draw in that or any other Air, when it swims upon the Milkie liquor of the Amnion, which would fill up the Mouth of it? For should it breath in the Air, it would be choaked, in re∣gard the Liquor in the Mouth would slide down into the Lungs, through the rough Artery, together with the Air, and fill up the middle Fistulous part of the Windpipe. Certainly tis a won∣der that those Learned Men who have written concerning this Uterine Crying, have not made this Observation upon it, that the sound which is heard in the Belly of a Woman with Child, which they that hear perhaps take for the cry∣ing of the Infant, proceeds only from the Wind that roars in the Guts, com∣pressed and straitned by the bulk and
weight of the Infant: as we hear some∣times a wonderful whistling of the wind, impetuously forcing it self through the narrow holes of windows, such a one as once I remember I heard my self, with several others, exactly resembling the sighs and groans of a Man in sorrow, or in some great danger; so that all that heard it were frighted, and talked of nothing but Spirits and Hobgoblins, that bewayl'd some terrible Misfortune that was to befal them; whereas after half an hours search we found the winding hole, through which the wind passing, made that lamentable noise, which cead upon stopping the Hole. And thus tis no wonder if the Vapours pas∣sing through the streights of the Com∣pressed Guts, sometimes make a whi∣ning noise like the crying of an Infant, as you shall hear in the lower Belly, noises of the wind resembling perfectly the croaking of Frogs, and the Hissing of Serpents. Therefore, says Aristotle, the Infant never cries till it be come forth out of the Womb. XXVII. Here perhaps an importantThe cause of  and dead Births. doubt will arise, if it be so that the Birth promotes its delivery by vehe∣ment kicking, occasioned by the necessi∣ty of Respiration, and so provokes nature to Expulsion, what's the Rea∣son, 1. That sometimes a very weak Birth, that wants no Respiration, is for∣ced out of the Womb in the fifth or sixth or seventh Month, (in which seventh Month however many mature Births sufficiently strong and lively, and wanting Respiration are born, though it may happen that many Births unripe, very weak, and unable to brook the change of Air and Nourishment, may be and are frequently born in that Month.) 2. That a Birth that dies in the VVomb, consequently requiring no Respiration, is cast forth by female Labour, seeing that in neither of these cases, there is any need of strong Calcitration to promote delivery. I an∣swer to the first, that sometimes a Birth may be sound in the Womb, according to the time that it abides there after For∣mation, though not ripe, that is so weak as not to be able to brook the changes of Air and Nourishment; and that of such a Birth a Woman miscar∣ries by Abortion, not through the ne∣cessity of Respiration, or provoked by sprawling, but by reason of a cause far different, either the flowing in of too much flegm, or too violent Agitation of the Womans Body, or through the rapid, disorderly and violent motion of Spirits and Humours, as in the pas∣sions of Anger or Fear, by all which cause the Placenta is loosned from the VVomb, or the Birth is killed; which then becomes heavy and troublesom to the VVomb, and provokes it to Ex∣pulsion, and to the end that trouble may be expelled, presently the Spirits are sent in great quantity to the Contract∣ing Fibers of the VVomb and Muscles of the Abdomen, which by drawing both the one and the other together expel the Birth. To the Second I say, that the Birth being dead, for some times the pains of Travel cease, because the kicking and motion of the Birth ceases: neither does the VVoman come to be in travail again, unless her pains are mov'd by Medi∣cines that procure a strong Fermentation in the Humours: Or by the Putrefacti∣on of the Birth, or the Dissolution of the Placenta, or that the sharp Humours bred by the retention of the Secundines sharply boyl among themselves, or that the weight and corruption of the dead Infant, give some particular trouble to the VVomb, and so by the means of a more copious flowing in of the Animal Spirits, excite it to new striving, and a more violent Expulsion. Of delivery that happens after the Death of VVomen with Child, or dying in Labour, enough has been said, C. 25. The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF ANATOMY. TREATING Of the Middle BELLY or BREAST. CHAP. I. Of the Breast in General. VVE come now to the Middle Belly, the Chambers or Throne of the Royal Bow∣el, to which the concocted and refin'd Nourishments are offered as junkets, to make out of them with its princely Blast a wholesom Nectar for the whole Miscro∣cosmical Commonwealth, and distri∣bute it to all the parts through the little Rivulets of the Arteries. I. The Middle Belly is vulgarlyThe Breast. called Thorax , to leap; be∣cause it contain the leaping Heart: and it is that Concavity, which is circumscribed above with the Clavi∣cles; before, which is placed the Ster∣non or Breast-Bone; behind, with the Bones of the Back; the fore parts of which are called the Sternum and Breast; the hinder parts the Back. II. The structure of it is partlyThe stru∣sture of it. Bony, partly Fleshy; It ought to be partly Bony, to the end the Breast may remain expanded; lest there should be a falling by Reason of the softness of the Fleshy parts, and so the most noble Bowel, the Heart, together with the Lungs, should be compressed and hindered in their Mo∣tion. It ought to be partly Fleshy, that it may be conveniently mov'd in Respi∣ration, which the Heart can by no means want. And for the preservati∣on of that Expansion, and the more convenient liberty of Motion together, it was requisite that it should be compo∣sed of several Bones; and that those should be joynted together with Gristles, and that there should be Muscles not on∣ly between each, but that they should be covered over with many. III. The shape of the Breast is almostThe Fi∣gure. round, somewhat depressed before and behind, and extended to a convenient length. IV. The largeness of it is differentThe large∣ness of it. according to the bulk and size of the Persons and difference of Sex, as be∣ing of less extent in Women, especial∣ly Virgins than in Men; for that Men having a hotter Heart and Blood, and more laboriously employed require a greater Respiration, and dilatation of the Lungs, that the hot Blood flow∣ing into the Lungs, into the right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, may be the sooner refrigerated therein. But the narrow∣ness
of the Breast is never well liked, for when the Lungs in Respiration have not sufficient Liberty to move in the hollow of the Breast, they often hit more ve∣hemently against the adjoyning Ribbs, and thence, because they are very soft parts of themselves, they become lan∣guid and feeble, and the Vessels being broken by that same bruising one against another, occasion spitting of Blood, and the corrupted Blood setling in the spungy Caverns breeds an Ulcer, whose companion is generally an Ulcer with a lingring Feaver. For this reason great care is to be taken of Infants, not to swathe their Breasts too close, which pre∣vents the growth of the Ribbs, and the Dilatation of the Breast. Sometimes it happens in young People, that Na∣ture being strong of it self, dilates the narrow hollowness of the Breast, by bow∣ing and removing some Ribs out of their natural Place, and causing a Gibbosity, makes more room for the motion and Respiration of the Lungs. But to avoid that deformity, there are some Artists that by the help of some convenient In∣struments, do by degrees compress those Gibbosities that they appear no more, which is a Cure frequent among us. But then I have observed that those Bunch∣back People being so cured, by reason of the Breasts, being reduced to its for∣mer streightness, become Asthmatick, and in a short time spit Blood, and so fall into an incurable Consumption. And there we advise the hunch-back'd never to seek for Cure, Life being more de∣sirable with the deformity, than Death with the Cure. V. This middle Venter consists ofIts Divi∣sion. parts containing, and parts contained. VI. The containing are either com∣monContaining parts. or proper. As for the Common, See l. 1. c. 3, & 4. VII. The proper containing are theThe proper. Muscles of the Breast, describ'd l. 5. several Bones, the Sternum, the Shoul∣der-Blades, the Clavicles, all described l. 9. The Breasts, the Diaphragma, the Pleura, or Membrane that encloses the Breasts and Entrails, the Mediastinum, or doubling of the Membrane of the sides. VIII. The Parts contained are theThe con∣tained parts. Heart, with its Pericardium, the Lungs, with a Portion of the Tra∣chea, or rough Artery, the Greater part of the Gullet, a Portion of the Trunks of the Aorta Artery, and the hollow Vein, the Thymus, or Glan∣dule in the Throat, with several other smaller Vessels. Moreover the Neck, because it is an Ap∣pendix to this Belly, is usually number'd among the parts of this Belly. CHAP. II. Of the Breasts, and the Milk. I. THe two Breasts, as well inTheir place. Men as in Women, are spread upon the middle of the Thorax, of each side one, above the Pectoral Muscle drawing the Shoulder, and co∣ver it, by that means perfecting the handsom shape of the Body. II. These by one general name theThe names. Greeks call , those of Women by a particular name : By the Latins they are called Mammillae, and Ubera, though some will have Mam∣mae to be proper to Women; Mam∣millae to Men; and Ubera to Beasts. III. They are but small in Men; butThe big∣ness. of a larger size in Women, for the Convenience of giving Suck. But a∣mong Women likewise there is a diffe∣rence in the Bigness; because that be∣fore the flowing of the monthly Courses, and in old VVomen they swell out very little or nothing. But in middle ag'd Women, they are lesser or bigger ac∣cording as the Women breed or give suck; or as they are such that neither breed nor give suck: for that the one re∣quire larger Breasts than the other. In several Parts of India, as in the Kingdom of Senega, the Women are reported to have such large Breasts, that they reach down to their Bellies, and being raised up, they can fling them over their Shoulders. Here at Utrecht we formerly saw a Nurse that had such large Breasts, that she could suck her self; and if the Child lay upon her Shoulders, she could conveniently give it the Nipple. Monstrous were those Breasts mentioned by Bartholine in his Hist. Anat. in these words: A Woman, says he, of note in Helsingore carryed about her, Breasts so large and ponderous, that they hung down to her Knees: and when she sat, she rested her weighty Burthen upon her Knees. IV. Now the bigness of the BreastsA conside∣ration of the bigness. is chiefly to be considered by the Physi∣cian, when he comes to the choice of
a Nurse. For this reason Moschius, an Ancient Physician writes, That a Nurse with moderate Breasts is al∣ways to be chosen, for that great Breasts do not breed Plenty of Milk, and too small denote fri∣gidity. But though it may be so ge∣nerally, yet experience tells us, 'tis no certain Rule. For we have known many Women that had very small Breasts; yet every time they were with Child, their Breasts swell'd to a mode∣rate Bigness, and so continued all the time they gave suck, yielding great store of Milk; but after the Child was weaned fell again. Others again we have seen, and those not a few, that having large Breasts, bred a great deal of Milk; and it is the common Opini∣on, that great Beasts breed more Milk than small ones. This in Cows the Country People pretend to know by Ex∣perience, who will therefore give more for a Cow that has a large Udder, than a small one. V. They were formed two in num∣ber,Their num∣ber. partly that there might be suffici∣ent Nourishment, for a double off-spring, partly that, if one should prove defe∣ctive through any distemper or any o∣ther accident, the other might sup∣ply the want. VI. They are seated in the middleTheir Si∣tuation. of the Breast, not in the Abdomen as in Brutes, for the Convenience of giving Suck, that they might be rea∣dy for the Infant in the Arms of the Mother. The Rabbins, by the Report of Buxtorf, feign other idle Reasons for their Situation where they are; Thus Rabbi Abba, that the upper Region of the Breast was ordained for the Breasts, that the Child might be discreet and prudent, and suck understanding from the Heart of the Mother. Rabbi Iehuda alledges it to be done, lest the Child should see the privities of the Mother; and R. Mathana, that he might not suck in a nasty Place. VII. The shape is Hemispherical, theThe shape and colour. substance soft and white in Women; in Cows and other Creatures not so white, and sometimes enclining to yellow. Riolanus notes, that the sub∣stance is ruddy under the Armpits in Women with Child, and such as give suck, which we could never observe. VIII. They are composed of manyGlandules. Glandulous Bodies different in big∣ness, little Pipes and Chanels meet∣ing together, joyn'd and compacted with a good quantity of fatt spread o∣ver them, which are also swath'd about with a fleshy Membrane, and knit with Muscles underneath. Riolan and Wharton, contrary to ocular Testi∣mony, deny this multitude of Glan∣dules, and aver that the whole Breast is composed of one sole Glandulous Body, divided into no distinct Globes; yet in the mean while they grant that in Breasts that are not sound, little Globes may be discerned; which certainly would not be perceived in Breasts unsound, unless they were really in sound Breasts, which are less tumid. IX. There is one large GlanduleA large Glandule. seated in the middle, which the rest that are lesser surround: also infi∣nite Folds of milky Vessels are scatter∣ed among the Glandules, by means of which the Milky juice is not only con∣veighed to all the said Glandules, but also the lesser pour forth their Milk into the great Glaudule. Moreover there are larger and copious Pores in the Glandules themselves, in which as in so many Cells the Milk is reserved till the time of giving Suck, unless it be so thin and so plentiful, as to flow out of it self. X. Over the great Glandule liesThe Teat. the Teat, which is a little, round spungy Body, cloathed with a thin Skin, and penetrable with many little Holes. XI. In this the Milky Channels ofWhere the Milky Chanels terminate. the Glandules terminate; and tho∣rough the little holes of it, as through a little pipe the Milk is poured by suck∣ing into the Mouth of the Infant. XII. It is endued with an ExquisiteThe exqui∣site sense of the Teat. sense of feeling; and the gentle hand∣ling of it is delightful, but a Boysterous rubbing of it painful; and besides by handling and sucking it falls and rises, like the nut of the Yard. XIII. The colour of it is red inIts Colour. Virgins, more livid in those that give suck; but in Women that are past Child-bearing it grows black. XIV. The bigness of it is various▪Its bigness. in some as big as a Mulberry, in most no bigger than a sweet Bryar berry; in others lesser: but more prominent at the time of giving suck, than at other times.
XV. The Circle that surrounds itThe A∣reola. is called Areola, pale in Virgins, in pregnant Women brown, in old Women black. XVI. The Breasts have five sorts ofVessels. Vessels: 1. Nerves, from the upperNerves. Intercostals, which being carryed to the Teat in great number, occasion itsArteries. quick sence of feeling. 2. Arteries for Nourishment, the innermost, from the Subclavial Branch of the great Artery; the outermost from the Axilla∣rie Branch. 3. Veins, to bring backVeins. the Blood remaining after Nourish∣ment; far bigger and more numerous than the Arteries; and those double, running out from the exterior and interior parts of the Breasts to the Subclavials and Axillary Branch of the Vena Cava, and dis∣charging themselves into it. Through these, in Nurses, sometimes a copious quantity of Milky matter is carryed from the Breasts to the Subclavial Veins, in like manner as the Chylus through the Chylifer Pectoral Channel, and for that reason chiefly these Veins are so large and numerous, because it is their busi∣ness to conveigh the Blood remaining after Nourishment, but also part of the milky Liquor redundant in Women giving suck, to the Subclavial Veins, which liquor also remaining after the Child is wean'd, is not corrupted in the Breasts, but is carry'd thither through these Veins. 4. Milky Vessels. 5. Lymphatick, Lympha∣ticks. Channels. One of the innermost Arteries and Veins descending from the Subclavials (which are called Mammarie) creeps on both sides toward the lower parts under the straight Muscles of the Abdomen: which are met by as many Arteries and Veins from the lower Belly, coming from the Epigastrics; which are said to close by Anastomoses with the former, under the middle of the said Muscles. by means of which, as it was formerly believed, there is a great Correspondence between the Womb and the Breasts, as also that the Blood is carryed from the Womb toward the Breasts to be turned into Milk. But the meeting of these Vessels is meerly fictitious, for we never could find it our selves, neither could any body else ever shew us any such thing. Sometimes indeed their ends ap∣proach nearer one to another, but they never unite. Besides that the Circulation of the Blood has long since refuted that Opinion. See more concerning this. L. 1. c. 5. & L. 6. c. 3. XVII. That there are LymphatickLympha∣tick Ves∣sels. Vessels in the Breasts, there is no rea∣son for any one to question; but whe∣ther so numerous as Wharton says he has observed them may be doubted. Probable it is, because the Milky Vessels contain a very watery Milky Liquor, that he thereby deceived took many Milky Vessels for Lymphaticks, which made him describe a great number of those Vessels. But those Milky Vessels are filled with a watery juice, when the Woman giving suck being a hungry, has taken much watery Nourishment, and then the Milk that is suckt out of the Breasts proves very watery. XVIII. The Milky Vessels, quiteThe Milky Vessels▪ different from the Veins and Arteries are for the most part observed to be intermixed with the Glandules of the Breasts, springing from the whole Cir∣cumference of the lower part, and closing together in the middle of the Breasts; which Communion and Continuity nevertheless with the Chylifer Channels absconding within the Trunk of the Body, could never be made manifest hitherto by all the diligent enquiry of Anatomists. Because that in dead Bo∣dies though but newly hang'd, these Ac∣cesses or small Channels of Communion lye hid in like manner as the Passages of the Stones into the Parastates, and out of the Seminary Vessels into the Urethra, and such like Passages, through which we find that Nature orders several Trans∣lations of humours in living Bodies. However there is no question to be made, but that in the inner parts, they pass no less through the Membranes and Mus∣cles to the Breasts, than through the Arteries and Veins. And therefore they are not conspicuous, but lye hid, be∣cause the Chylous juice abides not with∣in 'em, no more than Urine in the Ure∣ters, but by the Compression of the Muscles of Respiration, and the parts through which they pass, is presently and swiftly thrust forward and passes through them. In like manner as the Milky Vessels of the Mesentery, the Chylus being empty'd into the Recepta∣cle, swiftly vanish, and are no more seen, before new Chylus causes 'em to swell again, which because it stays not long within them, affords but a short view of them. Nor is it to be wondered at, that these small Milky Channels, being extended toward the Breast, should
escape the Eye, when the Pectoral Chyle-bearing Channel it self, running out indifferent large all the length of the Spine, could neither be seen nor found by the most curious and quick-sighted Anatomists of so many Ages, which nevertheless in our time, rather chance, than Art or Diligence discovered. Per∣haps some such accident may bring to light these Chyle-bearing Channels of the Breasts. For that they are there, Reason, Use, and the effects sufficiently demonstrate, and Hippocrates describes them under the name of little Veins, when he says, That in Women after De∣livery, the little Veins of the Breast be∣come larger, to draw the fat Chylus from the Belly, from whence the Milk is bred. However there is no question to be made, but that they are there, though the Ocu∣lar Testimony of some accurate Anato∣mists may be wanting for Proof. Yet Antonie Everard observes to us that he remarked a manifest deduction of the Milky Vessels to the Breasts: for says he, some of these Channels arising from the descending Trunk, running out above the Muscles of the Abdomen, under the Fat, afforded matter for the Milk to the Glandulous substance of the Breasts, which afterwards form'd little Pipes sufficiently conspicuous, out of which the Milk is carryed into the Common Channel, and suckt through the Nipple. Thus also Pecquet at Monpelier in the year 1654. before the most experienced Riverius, found out and demonstrated in a Bitch that gave suck, near the third upper Rib, a Milky Channel reaching to the Breasts, out of which a great quantity of Milk was pour'd forth. Which Experiment he often prov'd in Bitches that gave suck by the like Effusion, always of great store of Milk out of the Vessels being opened, as often as he began his disse∣ction from the outward parts near the first Ribs of the Breast. He had also before observed this little Branch to pro∣ceed from the forked Separations, which however was not inserted into the Sub∣clavial Channel, but turned away as it were by stealth toward the Armhole, be∣tween the Muscles of the Breast. Nor was it a lesser small Branch, which The∣odore Schenkius observed running with a direct course without the Abdomen, to the Teats in a dissected Bitch that gave suck, which being squeezed pour'd forth its juice into the Nipple. Ludovicus de Bills describes in his Belgic Apology, cer∣tain little Vessels descending from the Lymphatick Circle situated in the Neck toward the Glandules of the Breasts, which he thinks to be Milky Vessels but erroneously, not distinguishing between the Lymphatick and Milky. So that contrary to reason, the ocular Testi∣mony of the said Persons ascertains us of the Production of Milkie Vessels to the Breasts. As Antony Everard found out in Co∣neys little Pipes, extended from the Descending Trunk to the Breasts, which in those Creatures seem to be seated in a lower place; so in a Woman certain little Branches seem rather to be exten∣ded from the ascending Pectoral Trunk, to the Breasts seated in the Breast it self. This appeared in our Secretaries Wife four or five weeks gone, who hap∣pening into our practice while I was more accurately studying this point, was com∣plaining that she had very little Milk in her Breasts, and that if the Infant suckt any thing hard, she felt a pain very troublesom from her Breasts to her Back, about the middle Region between the Shoulder-blades, but somewhat lower; and that she had some slight sence of the same pain as far as her Loyns; but when the Child did not suck, she felt no pain at all. Without doubt these were some Im∣pediments, by reason of which the Milky Vessels had not free passage to the Breasts, and hence the Child draw∣ing in their upper part, and no suffici∣ent Chylus following out of the Pectoral Channel, that sucking occasioned some pain from the Breast to the Milky Pe∣ctoral Channel: as is more especially apparent from hence, that though this Woman were in pain upon the drawing of the Infant, yet she felt but very lit∣tle Milk in her Breasts, and so was for∣ced to provide another Nurse for the In∣fant. The same I observed in the Wife of a Collegue of mine, who being brought to bed in September 1664. com∣plained that she could not endure the drawing of the Infant, by reason of the pain she felt at that time, extending it self to her back between the Shoulder∣blades, and thence to the Loyns. After∣wards I observed several Examples of the same Nature. All which things make it probable that the Milky Mam∣marie Channels are derived from the Milky Pectoral Channel. XIX. From what has been said itWhether the Chylus be carryed through the Arteries to the Breasts. is apparent how much they are in the wrong, who affirm that the Chylus is carryed with the Blood through the Arteries to the Breasts, and out of them separated again from the Blood and changed into Milk. As Thomas
Consentinus, with whom Gualter Need∣ham agrees, asserts, that the Milk is separated from the Blood, which is carry'd through the Pectoral and Mam∣mary Arteries: Which he endeavours to prove, 1. By the manifold Ramifi∣cations of the Arteries, which are ob∣served in the Glandules of the Breasts. 2. By the Anastomoses of the Epigastrick Vessels, with the Mammary Vessels. 3. By the extraordinary bigness of the Mammary Arteries conspicuous in Wo∣men that give Suck. But these Argu∣ments are not so sinewy, as to sustain a new Opinion of so much weight; for that much more copious Ramifications of Arteries are conspicuous in the Brain and its Membranes, in the Lungs, and several other parts, and yet they shew no sign at all that I know, of any Mil∣ky or Chylous matter contained in the Arterious Blood. In like manner the Anastomoses of the Epigastrick Vessels with the Mammary, teach us nothing certain concerning this matter, which have been said to have been found by many▪ but were never by any yet demonstrated. As for the bigness of the Arteries, that does not proceed, as he supposes, from the plenty of Milk matter, but because the Glandules swel∣ling with Milk, somewhat compass the ends of the Arteries, so that the Blood flowing into them, cannot flow out a∣gain so freely and swiftly, as when a Woman does not give suck; and there∣fore being detained with them in great abundance, causes 'em to appear more turgid and swollen than at other times. But I wonder Consentine makes no men∣tion of the Veins, which in Women that give Suck, are much more nu∣merous and bigger than the Arteries. Se∣veral other Arguments of lesser note are urged by Consentine, but because they are diffused in the following discourses here and there, I say no more of them at present. And thus this new Opinion falls to the Ground; That besides the Blood the Chylus also, being actually such, is carryed and circulated through the Veins and Arteries, and afterwards separated again from it. XX. The Primary Office of theThe Office. Breast is to make Milk; the secun∣dary Office is to cover the Breast, and preserve it from the External Cold; and in Women to contribute toward the Beauty of their structure. XXI. Now the Milk is a whiteFirst di∣gression. Milk, what. and sweet Iuice, prepared in the Breasts for the Nourishment of the Infant. XXII. As to the matter of theThe mat∣ter of Milk. Milk, there are great disputes among the Learned. For seeing that the spirituous Blood is carryed through the Arteries, and the Chylus through the Child-bearing Vessels to the Breasts; and for that they are conspicuously full of Veins, a Question arises, Whe∣ther the Milk be bred out of the Ar∣terious or Veiny Blood, or Menstru∣ums; or out of the best or less pure Alementary Blood, or out of the Chy∣lus. XXIII. Aristotle and Galen af∣firmWhether out of Menstruous Blood. that the matter of Milk is the Blood that used to be evacuated at the monthly Purgations. Which O∣pinion they seem to have taken from an Aphorism of Hippocrates, If a Woman that is neither with Child, nor has brought forth have any Milk, her Flowers are stopp'd. And these are followed by all the Anci∣ent and Modern Physicians and Phi∣losophers, inforced with these Argu∣ments. 1. That upon the stopping of the Flowers, the Milk breeds not only in Women with Child, and delivered, but also in Virgins. Of which sort of Virgins breeding Milk, Vega, Gorrheus, Schenkius, and others produce various Examples. 2. Because Women that give suck, never have their Flowers; or if they flow in great quantity, the Milk de∣creases or dries up altogether. 3. Because they whose Flowers cease through Age, never have any Milk in their Breasts. XXIV. But from this Opinion sup∣portedAbsurdi∣ties from the former Opinions. by so many Arguments and Authorities, these five Absurdities follow, 1. That when Milk is bred, the Flow∣ers must of necessity stop. But quite the contrary, we have a thousand times seen Nurses and Mothers, that have had their Flowers in great quanti∣ty at fixed times, without any de∣crease of their wonted plenty of Milk, which all Phisicians in their Practice will testifie as well as my self. But the reason why the Cour∣ses stop in Women that give suck, is not, because Milk is generated out of them, but because a great quantity of Chylus daily flows to the Breasts, and more sparingly to the Heart of the Wo∣
that gives suck, whence it happens that there is Blood enough generated for the nourishment of the Body; but no redundancy that requires monthly Eva∣cuation. 2. That then the Milk would most abound, when there is most plenty of Men∣struous Blood that stops; least, when but little. And yet in the first Month, when that Blood most redounds in Wo∣men, and is least wasted by the Embryo, then is there no Milk bred: But in the last Months of a Womans time, when the grown Birth chiefly consumes the superfluous Blood, and there is least redundancy of it, then the Milk breeds in the Breast▪ Moreover in Childbed-Wo∣men when the Menstruums flow plenti∣fully, there is yet great store of Milk in their Breasts; and that increasing nevertheless the Menstrua do not stop. 3. That there should be so much Milk generated, as there is Redundancy of the said Blood. And yet there is no Man but easily observes the inequality of that proportion of a small quantity of Blood, that redounds every Month, and of the great quantity of Milk drawn from a Woman every day. And then again what shall we say of Sheep, Cows, Goats, and such like Animals, that never have any Menstruous Blood, and yet every day yield great quantities of Milk. 4. That Milk should only breed in Ripe Women, that either have or may have their Flowers. But new-born Infants not only Female but Male, evince the con∣trary. Out of whose Breasts we have seen Milk to flow for some days, nay, for some weeks together, or else easily squeezed out with a slight compression of the Finger. And the same thing Car∣dan observed, and Schenkius reports to have been seen by Camerarius; and in∣deed any body that will, may observe it in new-born Infants. Dry old Women also are an Argument to the contrary, whose courses generally stop by reason of their Age, of whom nevertheless the writers of Physical Observations, besides Aristotle, relate that several have had great store of Milk. Boden also, Henry ab Heers, and others give several exam∣ples of the same thing. 5. That Milk never breeds in Men, because they have no redundancy of menstruous Blood. But yet Aristotle and Avicen testifie the contrary. Who both teach us that Men many times give a great quantity of Milk. They that have travelled the new World, report that they have found some Countries there, where the Men had the greatest store of Milk, and gave the Children suck. Which Testimo∣nies of these Experiments Vesalius, Eu∣gubius, Alexander Benedict, Bartholine, Stantorellus, Cardan, Gemma and se∣veral others confirm by Examples. Nor will that distinction here avail, which Bauhinus, Spigelius, and Ludovicus Mer∣catus alledge, that the same Mens Milk is no true Milk, but a juice like to Milk, and therefore to be distin∣guished from Milk. For it is not pro∣bable that so many Eye-witnesses, all prudent Men, that understood what they did, could be so deceived, as not understand when they tasted Milk. Be∣sides that, it is bred in the Breasts, and differs nothing at all from Womens Milk, neither in colour, smell, taste or substance, and the Children are as▪ well nourished with it, as with Womens Milk, as the Histories testifie. XXV. Others to avoid all the a∣foresaidWhether out of Ali∣mentary Blood. difficulties, alledge that it is not necessarily bred out of the Men∣struous Blood, but out of some redundancy of the Alimentary Blood. But these Men while they endeavour to shun Carybdis fall into Scylla. For several Arguments altogether de∣stroy this Opinion. 1. It is impossible that a Woman that gives suck, should live with so much loss of Blood: For take but from any Man for a few days together, a pint or half a pint of Blood, it cannot be done without an extraordinary Emaciation of the Body, destruction of the strength, and vigour of the Body, and hazard of Life: Or if an excess happen in the flowing of Courses, it overweakens the Party to a high degree. Now is it pro∣bable that a Woman should yield so many pints of Milk bred out of the Blood every day, for whole Months and years together, without any emaciati∣on or decay of Strength or Health. If you answer that they are sometimes so weakned, that they are forced to wean the Child. I answer that does not hap∣pen by reason of the great quantity of Blood changed into Milk, but because the Chylus is carryed in too great quan∣tity to the Breasts, and there is changed into Milk, while the lesser Portion is carryed to the Heart, and passes into Blood, the consequence of which de∣fect must necessarily be Emaciation and weakness of the Body. 2. If the Seed which is generated out
of the Blood being evacuated in a mo∣derate quantity, debilitates the whole Body, shall not the Milk much more enervate the natural strength, being dai∣ly drawn out in great quantity? But this is not done. 3. If after any great and often itera∣ted Evacuation of the Blood, decay of strength, Cachexy, Dropsie, and o∣ther cold Distempers follow, shall Women that give suck, with whom this continual Evacuation of Milk lasts for whole years together, be free from those Dissempers, and enjoy a more sane habit of Body? 4. If every suddain alteration be dan∣gerous, why, when Women wean their Children, at what time plenty of Milk fails of a suddain, and by consequence also, the evacuation of Blood ceases, why I say do they not fall into some pernicious Plethora? Which however never happens. You will say perhaps that some, Women eat less at that time. I answer that they are not without an Appetite for all that, nay, and that most Women eat as well, and as much after weaning as before. If you say, that same superfluous Blood is evacua∣ted at the monthly Periods, that evacu∣ation is too thin and rare, in respect of the whole Quantity of Blood chan∣ged into Milk, which before was wa∣sted every day. 5. If the Blood, that flows into the parts in greater quantity through the Arteries, and distending the parts, cau∣ses stronger Pulses therein, why does not that happen in the swelling Milk∣bearing Vessels of Women; wherein nevertheless there is no stronger Pulsa∣tion perceived. 6. If the Blood flowing plentifully to the Breasts, should be extravasated there∣in, and tarry till changed into Milk, it would not be changed into Milk, but into Matter, and breed an Aposteme; as happens in Impostumations of the Breast. 7. By the Laws of nature, there is no return from Privation to Habit. Shall the Chylus alone be excepted from this general Rule? and lose its whiteness, and all its other qualities, so to pass in∣to Blood, afterwards to quit again the qualities of Blood, and reassume its former qualities of Blood? Whether the Blood now concocted for the nou∣rishment of the solid Part, shall lose its more perfect condition, and be changed into a Milky substance, to be again concocted into Blood by the Birth? Nature does nothing in vain, neither does she tread the same path backward and forward in any of her Operations▪ Neither does the motion of Concoction run retrograde to Crudity, but only advances to the greater perfection. Can a Ripe fruit grow green again, to be ri∣pen'd again? So the Blood made out of the Chylus, cannot run retrograde into a Milky Chyle, to be concocted again into Blood. Some one will say perhaps with Plato, That nature uses here deceit, to alienate Man from seed∣ing upon Blood, otherwise that Milk differs nothing from Blood, but in Co∣lour. But what need any such Artifice to delude new-born Infants, who while they suck, never see what colour the Milk is on: Or if they did, were not able to distinguish one from the other. Why is not the same abuse put upon Lyons, Wolves, Tygers and Leopards, to whom cruelty is natural? Neither let any Man object that while the Seed is generated, the Blood in the same manner passes into a substance, again to be changed. For then it is not changed into a Chylous, or any other Cruder or worser Substance, to be again redu∣ced into Blood, but into a far better, out of which not only some parts must be nourished, but the solid parts of the Birth are to be generated and for∣med. 8. Seeing that the nourishment swallow∣ed, requires several hours time to change it into Blood, how comes it to pass that Nurses presently after they have eat and drunk, presently after feel a copious quantity of Liquor flow to the Breasts, before any Blood could be generated out of the said Nourishment? What is the reason that the Milk attracts to its self immediately, and retains the faculty, quality and odour of what the Nurse swallows, whereas no such thing can be perceived in the Blood, nor in the parts nourished with the Blood; thus if you give a purge to the Nurse, the Phy∣sick sooner purges the Infant than the Nurse. Perhaps indeed by long Use and Time, and the many times repeated eating, concoction and preparation of the same thing, some such alteration or quality may be imprinted in the Blood, and the solid parts nourished by it; as in that beautiful Damosel fed with Poyson, that was offered to Alex∣ander, whose Body by long use and feeding upon Poysons, became so vene∣mous, that she infected and killed all that lay with her. Now that Milk easily imbibes the qualities of the meat which the Nurse swallows▪ Walter Charleton
proves admirably well; For, says he, Beyond all others, is that Experiment for the demonstration of the Milky Ways; For let the Nurse drink Milk but slightly tin∣ctur'd with Saffron, and within half an Hour after, more or less, the Milk that is milk'd out of her Breasts, shall have the Smell, Taste and Colour of Saffron. He also reports an Observation out of Prosperus Marinus, concerning a Ro∣man Woman, out of whose Nipple the Surgeon drew a little Branch of Succo∣ry, which she had eaten the day before, and so proves that not only the Chylus, but thicker Substances may sometimes also pass together with the Chyle to the Breasts. Thus Aristotle reports that some∣times swallow'd hairs come to the Breasts and Nipples, an Example of which Al∣saharavius reports that he saw in a cer∣tain Woman. 9. If a Woman go long without Meat or Drink till she be very hungry and dry, Milk will not breed in her Breasts, tho' there be no want of Blood in the Vessels. Which tho' Bartholine denies, from the Observation of Hoghe∣land: Yet I have osten seen it to be true with my own Eyes. And if at that time the Infant suck, it shall not draw any Milk, for want of Chyle in the Milky Vessels, but Blood from the Ends of the little Arteries and Veins, open'd at that time more then usually, by the vehe∣ment drawing of the Child, till the Wo∣man eats and drinks again, and new Chyle come to the Stomach. Of which we have a manifest Example in a Lady of this Town, who in the Year 1650 gave Suck, but not being able to eat or drink for three or four Days together, by reason that her Husband lay dange∣rously ill, she not only had no Milk in her Breasts, but upon the strong drawing of the Infant, it was found that pure Blood follow'd out of her Nipples. Af∣terwards when her Husband recover'd, and that her Grief abating, she began to eat and drink well, and good Chylus came again into her Stomach, she had immediately plenty of Milk in her Breasts. A certain Sign that that Milk was not generated out of the Blood; out of which however otherwise it might have been made before, when there was Chylus; which nevertheless was at that time suckt out of the Breasts pure and ruddy, and not chang'd into Milk. XXVI. To these Arguments it mayAn Obje∣ction. be perhaps Objected, That a Cow for the first days after it has Calv'd, sends forth a Bloody Milk; which is a Sign that Milk is generated out of the Blood. I answer, That at first, presently after the Birth, the Milky Pores of the Breasts are not yet so dilated that Chylus suffi∣cient may be able to flow through them to the Dugs, and then the little Veins of the Udders are open'd by the draw∣ing of the new Calv'd Creature, and a small quantity of Blood flowing out of those Veins, dyes the Milk of a Ruddy Colour; but when the Milky Pores are sufficiently open'd and dilated, and that the Chyle flows freely to the Dugs, there is no farther Violence done to the said Veins by drawing, and then that Mix∣ture of Blood ceases, and the Milk breeds in great quantity. XXVII. There seems one Difficul∣tyWhy the Veins swell in the Breast. more remaining, How it comes to pass, if the Milk be not made out of the Blood, that in Creatures which give Suck, the Arteries, but especi∣ally the Veins, are much larger and more swollen in the Breasts, than in those Creatures that do not give Suck. But to this we have answer'd already in the Question, Whether the Chylus be carry'd to the Breasts by the Arteries; and where the Vessels of the Breast are enume∣rated? XXVIII. Conringius, to avoidWhether made of crude Blood these Rocks without Shipwrack, af∣firms the Milk to be made of the more imperfect and crude Blood, which is not yet concocted to perfect Redness; nor very Spirituous; or much Circu∣lated through the Heart, by the evacu∣ation of which, the Natural Strength is not much injur'd; which, by rea∣son of its Serosity, easily slips to the Teats, and is quickly augmented by Drink. But there are five Difficul∣ties to be Objected against this. 1. That the Chylus assoon as it is di∣lated in the Heart, presently acquires perfect Redness; so that the Blood which is bred therein, may be said at first to be less Spirituous indeed, but not less red, than other Blood that has oftner circulated through the Heart; Of which, more, c. 12. 2. That the cruder part of the Blood, by reason it is more thick, cannot be carry'd so swiftly through the Vessels, and be separated from the more refin'd Blood, and flow to the Breasts alone, not being able to move it self apart, and separating it self from the rest of the Mass.
3. That in Nurses that feed upon wholesome Diet, the Milk is not very serous, but fat and thick; whereas other∣wise by reason of its Crudity, it would be always serous. 4. That upon suck the more spiritu∣ous and thinner parts would more easily follow, than the crude and thicker; and hence would arise a swift decay of the Strength. 5. That our Bodies are not truly nourish'd with serous and thin Blood, as is apparent in a Flegmatic Ca∣chexy and Anasarca, but with fat and well concocted Nourishment, such as Milk is, as is apparent from hence, for that Children so long as they suck, and are nourish'd with Milk-Diet, are bet∣ter nourish'd, and grow more than af∣ter they are wean'd: and for that Milk also greatly nourishes grown People, up∣on whom otherwise serous and crude Nourishment brings a Cachexy, or else they are evacuated for the most part by Urine and Sweat; nor do they contribute much to the strength of the Body. All which things instruct us, That no Blood, whether Menstruous, Alimenta∣ry, or Crude, can be the Matter of Milk. And therefore this Doctrine in∣culcated for so many Ages, is to be re∣jected, and we are to seek another Mat∣ter for its Generation. XXIX. This Matter, WhartonWhether out of the Arterious & Nervous Blood. and Charleton, the better to find out and describe, divide into two Parts, one Chylous, the other Sperma∣tic; and this they say is much less in quantity than the other. The one they say is transmitted to the Dugs through the Arteries of the Breast; but that this is carry'd thither through the Nerves. But here they are under a double Mistake. First, Because they do not consider that there is no Chyle nor Chylous Humor contain'd in the Arteries; because the Chylus, when it passes the Heart, there loses its own Form, and takes the Form of Blood, and never returns to Chylus again. Se∣condly, Because they think that the Vi∣sible and thick Alimentary Humors pass through the Invisible Pores of the Nerves: which we have at large refuted, l. 1. c. 16. and l. 8. c. 1. XXX. Hieronymus Barbatus de∣scribesWhether out of the Serum. a quite different Matter of the Milk, while he endeavors to prove by many Reasons, that Milk is neither made of Blood or Chylus, but only of the Serum, as being that wherewith he thinks that all the Spermatic Parts are nourish'd: for that the Serum swimming upon the Blood, by the heat of the Fire thickens into a Jelly, whence it is appa∣rent that it is not only chang'd into Milk, but agglutinated to the Parts that are to be nourish'd. Which last Assertion, which is the Foundation of the Learned Gentleman's Argument, is contrary to Experience. For that Serum swims up∣on the cold Blood drawn from the Vein, being set in the Sun, or to the Fire, will exhale to Dryness, but never turn to a Jelly, unless it be faulty. The Lympha∣tic Iuice, which as he thinks, differs no∣thing from the Serum, thickens to a Jelly, but how much that differs from the Serum, see l. 1. c. 13. Lastly, Tho' Milk be not made without Serum; yet that the Serum is only the Menstruum in which the Milky Particles are mingl'd together in Fusion, and not the Prima∣ry Matter of Milk, is so apparent from the Substance it self of Milk, as also from the Butter and Cheese that are made of it, and are far different from the Serum, that no man in his Wits can question it. XXXI. Malpighius writes, That itWhether out of Fat. may be doubted whether the Milk in the Breasts may not be made of Fat. 1. Because Nature heaps together a great quantity of Fat about the Glan dules of the Breasts in Nurses and Women that give Suck; which seems not meerly to be done for Ornaments sake. 2. Because in Milk when made, there is much Butter contain'd which may be separated from it. But this Opinion is levell'd by the sole Plenty of Milk, which is daily drawn from all Creatures that give Suck; as in Women, but more especially in Cows, Sheep and Swine. For this same Plen∣ty is so great, that if all the Fat of the Breasts should be dissolv'd into Milk in one day, it would not suffice for half the quantity that is drawn out, nor the Breasts remain in their perfect Conditi∣on. Besides if Milk were made of the clammy Fat of the Breasts in those that give Suck, why should not the same thing happen in Virgins, and such as do not give Suck; whose Breasts are ma∣ny times no less fat and tumid, than of those that are Nurses? As for the Milk's containing Butter in it, that proves nothing to the purpose, for that the Chylus contains Butter in it, and the Blood has Oyly Parts mixt with it,
when neither the one is made of any Fat in the Stomach, nor the other of any Fat in the Heart. XXXII. Martian, Ent, Giffart andThe Chyle is the Mat∣ter of Milk. Deusingius much more truly assert that the Chylus is the Matter of Milk: with whom We also concur, and affirm that the Milk as well in Men and Infants, as in Women, is made of the Chyle. The Truth of which is confirm'd by an exact Cosideration of the Substance of the Chylus and the Milk. For if the Milky Substance of the Chylus be narrowly lookt into, how very little does it differ from Milk? Between wa∣tery Milk and Chylus there is little or no difference in Colour, Taste, or Substance. Only the Serosity of the Chylus being somewhat separated and wasted in the Glandules of the Breasts, and there will be excellent Milk, and that so much the fatter and thicker, by how much the less of Serosity there is in the Milk, or more dissipated within the Glandules of the Breasts. But if that Serosity of the Chylus be not sufficiently separated, then the pure Chylous Liquor thin and white, and nothing different from the Chylus contain'd in the Chyliferous Pectoral Channel (distils out of the Breasts, as we see in new born Infants, as well Male as Female, in whom by reason of the loosness of the Pores and Chylifero's Channels, the Chylus flows freely to the Breasts; and because the tender and lan∣guid Glandu'es of the Breasts, are not sufficient for the farther preparation of that Chylus, hence the Chylus reaching thither, flows out of its own accord, or with a slight Compression. XXXIII. But why and how theHow the Chylus is chang'd in∣to Milk. Chylous Iuice is chang'd into Milk in these Glandules, has not been en∣quir'd into by any one that I know of. The Reason is this All the Glan∣dules through the whole Body, are de∣sign'd to separate out of the Blood any Lymphatic Liquor, Spittle in the Mouth, somewhat Bilious in the Li∣ver, Lixivious in the Spleen, &c. and to endue it with a certain slight, subacid Quality, and being so endu'd, to mix it with the Blood, Chylus, and other Humors, to the end they may separate 'em by means of a slight kind of Effervescency from other unprofita∣ble Humors, and somewhat coagulate and thicken 'em, to prevent the flight of the most subtle Sulphureous Spirit, and also so to operate, that the sweet Sulphury, Milky Spirits being some∣what more inspissated and clos'd toge∣ther in the fatty condensed Liquor, may be yet more sweet and white. XXXIV. For the same ReasonThe Milky Iuice made more per∣fect. also, the Milky Juice (with which in its passage through the inner Milky Ves∣sels something of the Lymphatic Juice is here and there intermix'd) comes to be more perfected in the Kernels of the Breasts; that in them its sweet Sulphury Spirits, through the mixture of a little never so slightly subacid, may be a lit∣tle more thicken'd or fix'd, and so be∣ing more united, may become fatter, whiter, and more fit for the nourish∣ment of the Infant, which, that it is so, appears from hence; for that when that Liquor of the Mammary Glan∣dules, which is to be mix'd with the Milky Juice infus'd into 'em, becomes vicious through any defect, or over∣acid, then also the Milk is corrupted in the Breasts, or grows sowre; nay and is sometimes coagulated to the hardness of Cheese, and causes both Inflammation and Exulceration of the Breasts. See more of this l. 1. c. 7. XXXV. Here a Question may arise,Why the Milk fails in Effusi∣ons of the Blood. if these things be true, and that the Milk is not made of the Blood, but Chylus, how it comes to pass that in a great Flux of Blood the Milk fails? I an∣swer, That it does not always fail for that Reason, if the Woman eat well: and if it do fail, the Reason is, be∣cause that Nature more intent to re∣lieve the greater Necessity, forces the whole Chylus, or the greatest part of it, and converts it into Blood, to repair the strength of the whole Body, trans∣mitting very little or none of it to the Breasts. To this we may add, That upon the failing of the Blood, there fails also a requisite Influx of Animal Spirits, by means of which the Breasts are loosen'd, and the Chyliferous Passages preserv'd o∣pen; and so the Breasts falling for want of those Spirits, or compressed by the weight or thickness of the adjacent parts, the passage of the Chylus into the Breasts is stopt up, which causes the Milk to fail. XXXVI. Neither does the foremen∣tion'dWhy Wo∣men that give Suck want their Courses. Aphorism of Hippocrates con∣tradict this Opinion of Ours; If a Wo∣man
that is neither with Child, nor has lain in, have Milk, her Flowers have left her. For she has not therefore Milk, because that Superfluity of Menstruous Blood flows to the Breasts, and is there turn'd into Blood; but be∣cause the Vessels being sufficiently fill'd with Blood, by means of some Lust∣ful Thought, or Libidinous handling of the Breasts, part of the Chyle, not necessary for the begetting of Blood, flows through the said Pas∣sages to the Breasts, and is there turn'd into Blood; and so that Su∣perfluity of Blood, that should have been evacuated by Menstruous Evacua∣tions, is prevented by Nature, to the exoneration of a good part of the Chylus in the Breasts, and turning it into Milk, before it be made Blood: as frequently it happens with Nurses, who have not their Cour∣ses for that reason for the most part, and yet are not burden'd with any re∣dundancy of Blood. Whereas if that Milk, in the Woman mention'd by Hippocrates, should be made by the Menstruous Blood restagnating, then all Women when their Courses stop'd or stay'd, would always have Milk in their Breasts; when it rarely happens but among salacious and prurient Wo∣men, excited by much lascivious Titil∣lation and venereal Thoughts, and con∣sequently the motion of the Animal Spirits, which loosen the Breasts, and open the Pores of the Chyliferous Pas∣sages, and so make free way for the Chylus to the Breasts. In like manner as by libidinous contrectation and suck∣ing the Chylus may be carry'd to the Breasts of some Men who can never be suspected of Menstruous Evacuation, and there be turn'd into Milk: and of such men giving Suck, there are vari∣ous Examples among the Physicians, of which Bartholine has collected some to∣gether, l. e. Anat. Reformat. c. 1. After the same manner is the Story ofMesue's Story. Mesue's Woman to be explain'd, who spit Blood, when the Milk fail'd in her Breast; which Blood was stopp'd when her Milk came again. Because the Chy∣lus that was wont to flow to the Breasts, flow'd to the Heart, where there hap∣pen'd to be too great a quantity of Blood, which for that reason burst out of the ves∣sels of the Head and Lungs, and was eva∣cuated at the Mouth. But afterwards, the greatest part of the Chylus flowing to the Breasts, and the Milk returning, then upon the ceasing of the Repletion, the spitting of Blood likewise ceas'd. Here also lastly may be objected the Example of Cows, who having been foddered all the Winter with Hay, at length coming to feed upon Grass, never∣theless their Milk does not alter and grow fat, till two or three Weeks after, and it contributes another somewhat ruddy colour and grateful Taste to the Butter, which would come to pass the first or second day, if the foresaid Pro∣position were true, seeing that the Chylus is altered at the beginning. I answer, First, That what is alledged is not true; for it is not three weeks time before the alteration of the Milk, but the first, second or third day; and it is manifestly apparent in the Colour and Taste of the Butter made the fourth day, tho it be not perfectly conspicuous at the begin∣ning; because the preceding Chylus was not then wholly wasted, but mixt with the latter. Besides the very Substance of the Udder cannot be so soon dispos'd to give such a sudden Alteration to the Milk: seeing that Disposition depends upon the Blood which nourishes that Substance: hence it follows that as that Nutrition, so the great Alteration of the Disposition proceeding from it, pro∣cures its Effect by degrees, but not in one or two days. XXXVIII. This Opinion of oursWhether the Animal Spirits be the Matter of Milk. concerning the Chylous Matter of Milk, Wharton seems to prove but in part; for he joyns to it another Mat∣ter, of which never any man hitherto makes mention. For he affirms the Milk to be made partly out of Chyle, and partly out of a certain Iuice flow∣ing from the Nerves, which is min∣gled with that Chylus. But seeing there is no such Cavity in the Nerves, through which such a manifest, thick, fatty, whitish Iuice can be thought to pass, but only invisible Porosities, through which no such plentiful Iuice, which is to be turn'd into Milk, can possibly flow to the Breasts of Women that give Suck, 'tis apparent that no Liquor can come from the Nerves for the Generation of Milk. Which is manifest from hence, for that through the copious Conflux of that Animal Liquor through the Nerves to the Breasts, there would be a great dissi∣pation and waste of Animal Spirits in
Women that gave Suck, and an extra∣ordinary decay of Strength; whereas Wo∣men are more chearful, & better in health when they give Suck than at other times. XXXIX. These things being thusA notable Question. affirmed, there remains a Notable Question to be examin'd, that has so deterr'd most Learned men, that they have rather chosen to pass it over in si∣lence, than to meddle with it. What it is that forces the Chylus (that was wont to flow to the Heart) through the Chyliferous Channels to the Breasts, for the Generation of Milk? Deusingius believes, That the Men∣struous Blood, through a certain singu∣lar Quality contracted from the Womb, rarefies, and as it were ferments all things in the Body, and causes a Dispo∣sition proper for the generation of Milk. This, he says, is communicated to In∣fants by the nourishing heat of the Womb. But that in Men and Virgins, it is occasion'd by the frequent handling of the Breasts, in like manner as in little Kids, whose Dugs being compress'd by the hands, there presently follows Milk. But these plausible Reasons fall upon the Rocks by me formerly propos'd, and suffer a total Shipwrack. Nor is that any thing truer which Deusingius adds, That the Chylus is forc'd toward the Breasts in Women with Child, by a compression of the Stomach and Sweet-bread made by the growing In∣fant. For which why does not the same thing happen in other Tumors without the Abdomen, and when the dead Birth sticks in the Womb, at what time there is the same compression. Some will say perhaps, That there is not the same Lactific Disposition infus'd by them in∣to the Breast. Which is of no moment, for if the aforesaid Compression of the Stomack were requisite to concur with such a Disposition, then such a Com∣pression ceasing from the Birth after Delivery, no Chylus would come to the Breasts, and so there would be no Milk generated therein; much less in Virgins and Men that give Milk, in whom such a Compression by the Birth, could ne∣ver happen. But these things being all contrary to Experience, fall without re∣futation. Some have recourse to the Provi∣dence of Nature; others to other inva∣lid Reasons: and thus this Mystery has hitherto remain'd in obscurity. But for the better discovery thereof, we are first to consider, That besides the Chylus and an apt Conformation of the Breasts, there is requir'd toward the Generation of Milk, a free passage of the Chylus to the Breasts, which we ea∣sily conceive in Infants newly born by reason of the softness and the loose Po∣rosities of the Parts. But what should open that Passage in People grown to maturity, which had been stopp'd up for many years, he that can tell this, unlooses the Gordion Knot. Suck or handle the Breasts of a hundred Men, Virgins and Women that do not give Suck, as long as you please, you shall not find the Milk come to all, perhaps not to any, or only to one or two. But why not to all? Because say you, the Breasts of the rest are not sufficiently loose or porous. But the same Women when afterwards with Child evince these rea∣sons, in whom there is then to be found a sufficient laxity of the Dugs. XL. Therefore there is another causeThe true Cause. to be sought after, which I take to be a strong Imagination, and an intent and frequent Cogitation of Milk, of the Breasts, and of their being suckt; which works wonders in our Bodies; not simply of it self, but by virtue of the appetitive Power, or of the Passions of the Mind, which occasion various motions of the Spirits and Humors. Thus the Imagination and Thought of an extraordinary Danger makes a man tremble, fall down, grow cold, and fall into a Fit, and sometimes occasions the Hair to grow grey on a sudden. Glad Thoughts revive and warm the Body. Obscene Thoughts occasion Blushing; and Thoughts of Terror occasion Paleness. Venereal Thoughts diffuse Heat through the whole Body, loosen the Genitals of Women, stiffen those of Men, and o∣pen the Seminary Passages, otherwise invisible, in such a manner, as to oc∣casion spontaneous nocturnal Polluti∣ons. This intent Imagination and desirous Thought of giving the Infant Suck, is the reason why the Chyliferous Passages to the Breasts are dilated and open'd, espe∣cially if some other external Causes contributing to the same purpose, che∣rish and excite those strong Imaginations, as lascivious Titillation of the Breasts, the stirring of the Child in the Womb, or sucking of the Nipples: For accord∣ing to the various Influx of the Animal Spirits, the parts are sometimes streight∣ned, sometimes loosen'd, as every body knows; and according to that various
Constriction or Dilatation, the Blood and other Humors flow more or less into the Parts: and are sometimes the occasion of Heat, Softness, Redness; sometimes of Constriction, Coldness and Paleness. Among these impuls'd Humors is the Chylus, which is conti∣nually thrust forward by the Muscles of the Abdomen, through some Lactiferous Vessels, and so through those Vessels that tend to the Breasts, provided that a special Influx of the Animal Spi∣rits have loosen'd those Parts through which those Vessels are carry'd, and has render'd those Vessels penetra∣ble, by removing all manner of Con∣striction. Now that this is the true Cause, is apparent from that man mention'd by Santorel, who, upon the Death of his Wife, when his Poverty would not give him leave to hire a Nurse, that he might still the Cries of the Infant, would often lay the Child to his Breasts (no doubt with an ardent desire to give it Suck) and so at length through that in∣tent, continual Cogitation, and often ite∣rated sucking of his Teats, the Chyli∣ferous Passages were loosned, and his Breasts afforded Milk sufficient for the nourishment of the Infant. The like Accident hapned at Viana, where the Woman of the Bores-Head was brought to Bed not long after the Death of her Husband, and soon after her Delivery dy'd, very poor her self, leaving the In∣fant sound and healthy; of which the Grandmother taking Compassion, and not able to hire a Nurse, by reason of her Poverty, undertook to bring it up by hand, in the 60th. Year of her Age; at what time putting the crying Infant to her Breasts, and giving it her Nip∣ples to suck, through that force of Imagi∣nation and eager desire to suckle the Child, her Breasts began to give Milk, and that in a few days so plentifully, that the Infant wanted little other Diet, to the great admiration of all that saw the Infant suckled with the Milk of an Old Woman, whose Breasts had been fallen for many years. Many such Ex∣amples of Old Women giving Suck, Bodin relates in his Theat. Natur. And the Truth of this Cause is no less evinc'd by lascivious and prurient Virgins, who are full of Libidinous Thoughts, and therefore often handling their Breasts, sometimes without the loss of their Vir∣ginity, come to have Milk in them; of which sort of Milk-bearing Virgins of undoubted Honesty, I happen'd to see two; Bartholin witnesses another seen by himself; and we find several Examples of Women yielding Milk in Vega, Schenkius, Caster, Castellus, and others, collected by Bauhinus. Neither will any man question but that such like lascivious Thoughts of their own Breasts, and handling 'em, has also produced Milk in the Breasts of Men. But in Wo∣men with Child, the stirring of the Birth in the Womb excites every day more and more those Thoughts of suck∣ling the Infant, and hence when the In∣fant begins to move sensibly, then the Milk begins to appear in the Breasts.An Obser∣vation. XLI. I shall add a manifest Domestic Example. My own Wife in March 1656. had in her lying in a sufficient quantity of Milk, according as she was wont to have; but the Infant for six or seven Weeks was so weak, that it could not suck, so that every one thought it would have died, and she not dreaming any more of suckling it, her Milk dry'd up: But when afterwards the Child re∣cover'd and was able to suck, and my Wife had no Milk in her Breasts, the Child was of necessity to be put out to Nurse: But the Nurse proving bad, my Wife, nine Months after her Delivery, sent for the Child home; and while an∣other Nurse could be found, would of∣ten lay the crying Infant to her Breast, wishing her self in a condition to suckle it. The next day the Child was sent to another Nurse; but that Evening, through that same strong Imagination and Thoughtfulness, her Breasts that had been dry'd up for above Eight Months, began to swell and be full of Milk, so that had not the Nurse been hir'd, she could have suckl'd the Child her self, which proves that strong Thoughts and Imaginations are the first Cause that move the Chylus to the Breasts. But some will say, if this were true, then in those Women that have no Milk in the Flower of their Age after being brought to Bed, such ardent De∣sires to give the Child Suck, would bring Milk into their Breast, but no such thing happens, tho' they desire to suckle the Infant. I Answer, That all Thoughts are not so intent and strong as to move the Affections of the Mind, without a vigorous stirring of which, the Animal Spirits are not so impetuously mov'd: and hence the Thoughts of Suckling the Infant, tho' they frequently occur to the Womans mind, yet if they do not happen with a violent and continual
Intentness, the Animal Spirits cannot be so copiously determin'd toward the Breasts, as to be able to dilate and re∣move the Impediments of the Vessels tending thither. Besides that many things may happen which may hinder the passage of the Chylus to the Breasts, notwithstanding the present ardent desire and strong imagination of suckling the Infant: as scarcity of Chylus, thickness of the Breasts, obstruction of the Ker∣nels by viscous Humors, by Exulcera∣tion, Fall, Blow, or other Mischance, or a natural Streightness of the Milky Vessels tending to the Breasts, or com∣pression from the neighbouring Parts; and then the Effects of Thought and I∣maginat on are frustrated. XLII. Hence it appears why Child-bea∣ringWhy the Milk in∣creases the fourth day after child∣birth. Women have such plenty of Milk the Third, Fourth or Fifth Day after Delivery: Because that being tir'd with their Labour, for the first Two or Three Days, they do not much employ their Thoughts upon any thing; and for want of Appetite, eat little, and breed less Chylus, but the next days following, when they eat more, and the Infant begins to cry more, then they also continually think of giv∣ing it nourishment, and desire to sa∣tisfie the Crying of the Child, and through this Affection, the Passages being loosen'd by the determin'd In∣flux of the Animal Spirits, the Chy∣lous Iuice that was formerly carry'd to the Womb, is now turn'd to the Breasts. XLIII. To conclude, I shall onlyA Questi∣on. add one Question worth Examina∣tion: Why upon the weaning of the Child, the Chylous Iuice is no longer carry'd to the Breasts, but the Milk is dry'd up? It is because the Wo∣man lays aside all thought of giving Suck, which the more speedily she does, the sooner and the better are her Breasts dry'd up; for that then the more copious Influx of the Animal Spi∣rits to the Breasts, fails; by which the Glandules of the Breasts, and the Chy∣liferous Vessels tending thither, were dilated; and hence the Glandules then fall and are contracted, and the said Chyliferous and Milky Vessels are com∣press'd by the weight of the adjacent parts; so that there can be nothing more through those convey'd to the Breasts, and then that part of the Chy∣lus that was wont to be convey'd thither, in Women with Child is convey'd to the Womb, in others to the Heart, there to be chang'd into Blood; which because the Body does not want in such abundance, hence it comes to pass that Women are less hungry and thirsty than when they gave Suck, and so they breed less Chylus, and what Blood is bred superfluous in the mean time in Wo∣men with Child, contributes to the Birth, in others is evacuated through the Womb. XLIV. But some will say, WhereWhy the Breasts are dry'd up upon wean∣ing. remains that Milk, which upon the first weaning remains in great plenty in the Breasts, and is not suckt out? Why is it not coagulated and corrup∣ted, and consequently does not breed In∣flammations and Apostemes? I answer, it is carry'd by degrees through the Mammary Veins, to the hollow Vein, and so to the Heart, in like manner as the Chylus pour'd forth out of the Chyliferous pectoral Channel into the subclavial Vein, flows together with the Veinal Blood to the Heart. But whether that Milky Juice be car∣ry'd to the Heart through the Mam∣mary Veins extraordinarily in Women giving Suck, especially such as abound with Milk, I leave to consideration; seeing that the remarkable Number and Bigness of the Veins, and the small Number and Bulk of the Arteries seem to perswade the contrary. XLV. In opposition to this OpinionWhat drives the Chylus to the Breasts in Beasts. of ours, one notable Doubt arises; How it comes to pass that in Cows, Mares, Ews, Goats, and other Creatures the Milky Chylous Iuice flows in such abundance, and so con∣stantly to the Udder, seeing that be∣ing depriv'd of Rational Souls, they are no way capable of Imagination, Thought, Intellect, Memory, Will, Iudgment, &c. True it is our Mo∣dern Philosophers that follow Cartesius, acknowledge no such noble Actions as these in Brutes; or if they seem to per∣form some Actions like to these, they believe they neither can nor ought to be number'd into the Rank of principal Actions, as not being perform'd by a Ra∣tional Soul, but affirm 'em to proceed only from a certain kind of Motion of the Spirits induc'd by the Objects, and flowing from the propriety of the Dispo∣sition of the Parts. And thus they alledge
that in Brutes certain Dispositions of the Spirits and the rest of the Parts are induced by the Objects, from which certain kind of Motions result, in refe∣rence to which the Pores sometimes of these, sometimes of those Parts are o∣pened and shut through the greater or lesser, slower or swifter, stronger or gentler Influx of the Spirits. And in this case now proposed by us they would thus argue, viz. In a Cow, by reason of the great Commotion of the Birth in the Womb, or the Pain of bringing forth, the Pores are opened about and toward the Udder, and so by the In∣flux of Animal Spirits the Passages be∣fore shut are dilated, so that the Chylous milky Juice is at liberty to flow thither more freely through its proper Vessels. Which Laxity of the milky Passages continues long after bringing forth, be∣cause of the continu'd opening of the Pores wider than usual toward the Ud∣der, and the more Copious Influx of the Animal Spirits, and continued by the tickling Motion about the Udder in∣duced by the grasping of the Calf that sucks, or the Hand of the Milkmaid. But in regard the Object cannot of it self induce any sensitive Motion, unless it be first known either as Good or E∣vil, and this Knowledg and Perception presupposes something knowing, far diffe∣rent from the Object to be known (for being taken without Knowledg and Preception, no Motion can be said to be made by its means; as in those that are troubled with a Catalepsie, into whose Organs both sensitive and moving, tho well form'd and furnished with Blood, Heat, and Spirits, tho the Objects fall, they cause no Motion, because they are not perceiv'd; and consequently there are no new Determinations of the Spi∣rits to various Parts, nor no alterations of Motion.) Furthermore seeing the Property of the Disposition of the Parts, necessarily presupposes some peculiar Disponent, which induces to that pro∣per Disposition, and alters it according to the nature of the Thing; and even the motion of the Spirits it self presup∣poses also some first mover, perceiving and knowing the Object (for nothing knows, moves, and disposes it self with∣out a Cause) it sufficiently appears, that such an Explanation neither suffices nor satisfies, especially if we consider over and above that most brute Animals per∣ceive and distinguish Pains, Smells, and Tastes, covet things grateful, perceive, know, and avoid things grateful as such, know their Friends from their E∣nemies, &c. Which most certainly are no Operations of the Disposition of the Parts mov'd by Objects; but of somthing perceiving the Objects, and so disposing the Parts to perform such and such Actions. As in Man a Brain well form'd and temper'd, and full of Animal Spirits is not the primary Cause of the principal Actions, but the Rational Soul, which makes use of the Brain and Spirits as Instruments, and so disposes the Brain, that sometimes these, some∣times other Pores are more or less open∣ed and shut, and fewer or more plenti∣ful Spirits sometimes determin'd after this or that certain manner through those open Pores; and consequently these, sometimes others, and many times se∣veral principal Functions operate toge∣ther. Or as an Organ sufficiently fur∣nished with Pipes, Bellows, and Wind, cannot by virtue of any Object, or by its own proper Disposition sing any mu∣sical Songs, unless by the Assistance of the Organist, who directing the Keys with his Fingers determines the Wind sometimes into these, sometimes into other Pipes, and so produces a grateful Harmony. Thus also in Brutes, besides the Objects and the proper Disposition of the Brain and other Parts▪ there must be of necessity something else over and above, which perceives the Objects, and produces such wonderful Operations out of those Parts. It is here in vain alledged that simple Natural Affections, as Hunger, Thirst, Joy, Sadness, want in Brutes no other Instructor, than the Instinct of Nature: Concerning which Tho. Willis writes many things, but lit∣tle to the Dilucidation of this matter. As if that same natural Instinct did not want an Instructor as well in Brutes as in Men: For as Man is never a hungry, but when he perceives that troublesome Vellication of the Stomach; who will believe that Brutes are sensible of Hun∣ger without that Vellication? Or if they perceive by Instinct without any other Teacher, let us know what that Instinct is which perceives without a Teacher, and how it operates that Perception? Which if it be not that rational Soul, of which Brutes are depriv'd, what is it? We will call it for the present something Analogous to the Rational Soul, which in Brutes operates a kind of Under∣standing, Memory, Knowledg, with something of obscure Judgment after their manner, or some such like thing. For Brutes are not mov'd, nor do they act like Engines mov'd by Clock-work, as most of our modern Philosophers
endeavour'd to inculcate, Regius, and Florentius Schuyl among the rest. For Engines mov'd by Clock-work neither feel Pain, nor hear, nor see, nor come when they are call'd, nor fly those that threaten 'em; all which Operations are observ'd in Beasts: And then says Isaiah, The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribb. And Ieremiah, The Kite knows his Time, the Turtle, the Swallow, and the Stork, know the Sea∣sons of their Coming. Thus a Dog knows his Master and the Servants from Strangers, fawns upon his Friends, barks at his Enemies, and after his manner understands and executes the Commands of his Master. He dreams in his Sleep, and barks in his Dream. In hunting also he seems after a manner to argue; for coming where three ways meet, af∣ter he has examined two, and finds the Game not gone either of them, he takes the third without farther Exami∣nation; as if he had thus reasoned with himself, The Game must be gon either that way, or that way, or this: But nei∣ther that way, nor that way, therefore this way. Thus Rocarius reports a no∣table Story of a Dog that belong'd to a peculiar Friend of his, which happened in the Court of Cardinal Alexander. This Friend of his went a hunting alone one time with his Dog, and following his Game with great heat in a solitary Wood, fell at length into a deep Pit, where he had perished inevitably but for his Dog: For the Dog having lost his Master return'd immediately home, fill'd all the House with his Howling and Whining, and by running out a doors and returning again, intimated a kind of eager desire that some body should follow him, which the Cardinal obser∣ving, and perceiving that the Owner of the Dog was missing, ordered some Persons to follow the Dog, and by him being led directly to the Pit, there they found his Master and drew him out. Who taught this Dog to leave his Ma∣ster to seek for human Help, to return home, to testify his Sadness by his whining, to urge the Servants to go a∣long with him, to carry them to the Pit, and to shew them his Master fallen into it? Only the Object: Oh the won∣derful force of Objects that reaches Beasts to reason in this manner. A Mare knows her Enemy the Wolf, and stout∣ly defends her Foal from his Seisure. Eagles being to encounter Harts as Ro∣carius testifies, first by their fluttering up and down gather the Dust into their Feathers, then flying over the Hart, they shake the Dust into the Eyes of the Stag, to the end that being blind he may run headlong and fall from the Precipice. A wild outragious Panther, by the Testimony of the same Author, whose Young accidentally fell into a Pit, from whence she knew that only Human Help could recover them, as it were guided by some kind of Reason, besets a Road leading three ways ex∣pecting some Man to pass by; at length lighting upon an unwary Traveller, she fawn'd upon him, and laying her Paws upon him, gently lead him, willing as he was to go, to the Pit; out of which, after he had taken her young ones, the cruel, yet grateful, wild Beast, for the Kindness done her, guarded the Travel∣ler through the midst of the Desart, back again to his Road, and dismissed him without the least harm. The cru∣el and hungry Lion in Gellius knew An∣droclus again that had formerly pull'd a Thorn out of his Foot, and was so far from tearing him, that by his outward Gestures he shewed him all the Kindness imaginable, walk'd about the City with him, and obey'd him as his Servant, for being formerly his Surgeon. The Doves carried out of Holland into England, and there kept Prisoners a while, flew back, when set at Liberty, into Holland, and in two days return to their old Dove∣house, as Monsieur Abeels, a Merchant, well known among us, can testify. A Stork makes cruel War with another Stork for having possessed her Nest, and in conclusion either wounds or kills her, and throws her Chickens and her Eggs out of the Nest: And the same Bird knows by the Constitution of the Air, when 'tis seasonable to fly into remote Regions, and when to return. The sin∣gular Subtlety of Apes is discovered by their Actions. The Elephant does ma∣ny things to a Miracle, as if endu'd with Reason. I omit the wonderful In∣dustry of Ants, or to tell with what Art Birds build their Nests, Spiders spin their Webs, and Bees build their Combs, and gather their Honey. All which things could never be done without some kind of Understanding, Knowledg, Memory, and Judgment, or at least something analogous thereto, tho they are not perform'd with equal Perfection in all Creatures; for as that same analogous Reason, is in some more Excellent and Vivacious, as the Organs are more or less fitted; so some Beasts differ from others in acuteness of Wit, in Under∣standing, Memory, Docilitie, and Stu∣pidity. Hence our Saviour himself a∣scribes
to some Creatures a sort of Know∣ledg or Understanding, where he says, Be wise as Serpents, but innocent as Doves. Now I would fain know how simplicity of Mind or Prudence can be in such Creatures without some kind of Understanding. Tho these Operations are more Imperfect in Brutes than in Men: In whom also they are some∣times sufficiently imperfect of them∣selves; as in Men that have been expo∣sed in Desarts, and bred up by wild Beasts; who being afterwards taken by the Hunters, have differed little from wild Beasts but in Shape, of which we have several Examples in Pliny, Goular∣tius, Dresser, Camerarius and others, who nevertheless by convenient Education and Exercise attain the highest Pinacle of Perfection; which slight Shadow only of Perfection, tho far different from rational Perfection, most mani∣festly appears in Brutes, which neverthe∣less ought of Necessity to have some Cause. And therefore it is apparent from the Reasons foregoing that no Motion can be raised up in Brutes, un∣less Good or Bad be perceiv'd, and if they be in such a manner perceiv'd, there must of necessity be within 'em some∣thing Perceiving and Knowing. Never∣theless it does not follow from hence (what our Adversaries inferr) that if there be any Understanding and Know∣ledg in Brutes, therefore they must have a Soul, and that no less immortal than the Soul of Man. For that they haveSee l. 1. c. 28, 29. a feeling and perceiving Soul must be granted, but that it is immortal like the Soul of Man we plainly deny. For the Difference of those Souls, and the Difference of the Original teach the contrary. Scripture therefore, Reason, and Experience teach us that there is something to be allow'd to Beasts which is Analogous to Reason, but mortal however. Which is perspicuous from this one thing, that some Creatures run Mad, as Apes intoxicated, Dogs and other Creatures distempered with a Hy∣dropholie; which Madness could not happen to Creatures that understood better in their natural Condition, for natural Ability and Impotency must be referred to the same Subject. And here that Inference is of no Value, That a Mad-man, is not mad according to his Rational Soul, but according to the inner Sences which the Beasts have com∣mon with him, which operate rightly or amiss, as the Organs are well or ill disposed; and so Brutes also run mad according to those Sences, and not ac∣cording to any Soul. This Objection does no way destroy the Existence of some kind of mortal Soul in Brutes, in some measure Analogous to the im∣mortal Mind, and as it were a kind of Shadow of it; but rather it proves in Man besides the rational incorruptible Soul, that there is yet within him ano∣ther corruptible Soul, common to Brutes, perfecting the Operations of the internal Senses, called the Vegetative and Sensitive, which of necessity must be in Man, as we have proved l. 1. c. 29. The learned Willis labours very much in discovering and explaining the Per∣cipient, and after he has largely un∣folded it, how the Images of Objects are form'd and imprinted in the Brain, by the running backward and forward, Motion, Repercussion. &c. of the Spi∣rits, at length altogether Doubtful, says he, However we are yet to enquire what kind of Power that is, which sees and knows such like Images delineated there, and also according to those Impressions there received chooses, desires, and exer∣cises the respective Acts of other Facul∣ties. But that he may disingage him∣self out of this Perplexity, he says, 1. That there is an Innate Knowledg in Brutes, infused by the supreme Crea∣tor, and implanted in their Principles or Natures from their first Formation, for certain Uses necessary for the Pro∣pagation of Life, which vulgarly uses to be call'd Natural Instinct. 2. That there is within 'em a certain acquir'd Knowledg by the Impressions of sensi∣ble things, by Imitation, Experience, human Teaching, and by other means learnt by degrees, and which arrives in some to a higher, in some to a lesser degree of Perfection. In the following Paragraphs he discourses at large con∣cerning both these sorts of Knowledg, and thus he believes he has sufficiently extricated himself out of his Labyrinth, when in the mean time he never does nor can explain, what or what sort of Being, or what thing that natural In∣stinct is, and whence that acquir'd Know∣ledg proceeds, which cannot proceed but from something Knowing, which some∣thing Knowing had he explain'd toge∣ther with natural Instinct, all this Cloud of Obscurity had been scattered: But now relying only upon Names and Words, he leaves his Readers as much in the Dark as they were before. All which things when Galen had excellently well consider'd, he writes, That Brutes are not altogether void of
Reason, capable of Affections: And believes that sme sort of Reason, tho to some less, to others more Liberally is to be allow'd to Brutes. Wherein Ga∣len agrees with Aristotle: In Men, says he, there is Wisdom, Prudence, and Art, so likewise in some Brutes there is a cer∣tain other Nature of this Sort: And in another place, There is in some Beasts Urbanity, Savageness, Clemency, Cruel∣ty, Fortitude, Sloth, Confidence, Anger, Malice, and an Image of Prudence. Thus also by the Report of Bodin, the most learned Philosophers, Chrysippus, Porphyrius, Dion, Solin, Plutarch, and others have confirm'd a sort of Rea∣son allow'd by Nature to Beasts. With whom Hugo Grotius assents, l. 1. de ve∣ritat. Relig. Even Beasts exercise some Actions so orderly and well directed, that they seem to proceed from a kind of Rea∣son which appears cheifly in Ants and Bees: but is manifest also in other Creatures, that fly things hurtful, and seek those things that are profitable. This sort of brutish Reason Aristotle calls Reason by Participation, or Passive Understand∣ing. Neither is this Opinion contradicted by that other Text of Scripture, Be not like the Horse and Mule that wanteth Understanding. For there, by Under∣standing is to be understood an acute and rational Understanding. Thus we usu∣ally say of Men that are Blockish, Fools or Mad-men, that they want Understanding; because their Intellects are not so acute; whereas nevertheless they know and distinguish Objects after their manner, as appears by their Acti∣ons. Moreover, seeing that both Men and Brutes do know, these perfectly, the other less perfectly, of necessity we must distinguish between the rational Intellect, which belongs only to Men; and the Intellect of Brutes, far inferior and more imperfect than the other, and which never can be brought up to the perfection of Rationality. XLVI. But what that Something A∣nalogousWhat is that some∣thing Ana∣logous to the Ration∣al Soul. to the Rational Soul, is, no man could hitherto sufficiently unfold. Iulius Caesar thinks he has discover'd a sufficient Explication, by calling it Com∣mon Sence, which is in the midst between all the external Senses, and collects their Multiplicity into one. Others think it to be nothing that subsists of it self, but only an Accident and Modi∣fication of Substance, that is to say, such a disposition of the Brain and Spi∣rits induc'd by Heat, which causes Beasts to live and feel after their man∣ner. But after that manner the Medi∣ums are only to be understood by which the Act of perceiving is perform'd nor does it teach us what that Medium is which perceives such Mediums in Brutes after their manner. For example, when a Man sees, he wants Heat (for a con∣geal'd Eye does not see) and a conve∣nient disposition both of the Brain and Eye: but there is some other thing which causes him to see visible things through these Mediums, that is, the Soul. But seeing Brutes also feel and perceive things visible, audible and tan∣gible, of Necessity also in them, be∣sides heat and convenient Organs, there must be something Percipient and Ana∣logous to Reason, by which the Act of perceiving is perform'd. Now whatever that is, it manifestly appears, that it is something singular in Brutes, which was created by the Supream God at the be∣ginning, together with the World, and infus'd and mix'd with the Matter of the World, which in Brutes is again ex∣tracted out of Matter, and proceeds into manifest Act: but in the mean time the most excellent of the Matter is produc'd exceeding the common Condi∣tion of the mixt Matter, which so ma∣nifestly operates those nobler Actions in Brutes, and frequently in some seems to imitate the Actions of the Mind. And this is that which we think is to be understood by Analogous to Reason, which we can better admire at than ex∣plain. XLVII. Yet no man in his WitsWhether Analogon be the same with the Rational Soul. will call this Analogon the Rational Incorruptible Soul, since it proceeded from Corporeal Corruptible Matter, and is propagated by Generation, and not only operates imperfectly, but is also corruptible, and perishes with the Body: whereas the Rational Soul did not proceed from the Matter of the Bo∣dy, but was created apart by God, and by him infus'd, operates perfect Actions, is incorruptible and immortal, and is separable from the Body, and not only extends its Actions much farther than that corruptible Analogon, but to Infi∣nity. According to that of the Hea∣then Prince of Philosophers, It remains that the Mind alone comes from without, that she is only Divine ▪ for no Corpo∣real Act communicates with her Actions. For she contemplates not only the Sub∣stances of Things, but Things also di∣vested of their Substances. She com∣prehends Knowledge, beholds the In∣visible God, reaches to the Seats of the
Blessed, dives into the Nature of Of∣fices of Angels with admiration; she con∣templates her self, and knows what she is joyn'd to the Body, and what ab∣stracted from it; views things long past as present; examines Futurity, and what will never be, Possibilities and Impossibilities, and endeavours to com∣prehend things innumerable and infinite. None of which Operations are per∣form'd by the Analogon. Which being Corporeal, contemplates only things Corporeal. Concerning this Matter has the Learn∣ed Willis written most elegantly; who after he has alledged the knowing Fa∣culty of the Corporeal Soul to be Fancy or Imagination, which compre∣hends corporeal things under an appear∣ing Image only, and not always under a true one, at length in these Words, But indeed, says he, the Intellect presiding over the Imagination, beholds all the Spe∣cies deposited in its self, discerns or cor∣rects their Obliquities or Hypocrisies, sub∣limes the Phancies thence drawn forth, and divesting it from Matter, forms uni∣versal Things from singular; moreover it frames out of those some other more sub∣lime Thoughts, not competent to the Cor∣poreal, so it speculates both the Nature of every Substance, and abstracted from the Individuals of Accident, viz. Humanity, Rationality, Temperance, Fortitude, Corporeity, Spirituality, Whiteness, and the like; besides being carry'd higher, it contemplates God, Angels, its Self, Infi∣nity, Eternity, and many other Notions far remote from Sence and Imagination. And so as our Intellect, in these kind of Me∣taphysical Conceptions, makes things al∣most wholly naked of Matter, or carrying it self beyond every visible Species of Matter, it considers them wholly immate∣rial: this argues certainly, that the Sub∣stance or Matter of the Rational Soul is immaterial and immortal. Because if this Aptness or Disposition were corporeal, as it can conceive nothing incorporeal by Sence, it should suspect there were no such thing in the World. XLVIII. Therefore the foresaid Ana∣logonThe said A∣nalogon is the more excellent Spirit. is the more excellent Spirit instru∣cted by Nature, produc'd out of corpo∣real Matter, far exceeding the Conditi∣on of other Spirits produc'd out of Mat∣ter, which Aristotle affirm'd to partici∣pate of the Nature of the Element of the Stars: alledging that there is con∣tain'd in every Seed a certain Spirit no∣bler than the Body, which in Nature and Value answers to the Element of the Stars, by which the Formation of the Birth in Brutes, and other Actions are perform'd. This is that Vivific Spirit, which no man hitherto could perfectly describe. Which being drawn forth out of the Matter by Heat dissolv∣ing the Matter, acts again upon the Matter, and variously disposes it, in such a manner, that besides many other Actions, it produces the Nobler Actions in Brutes. But this Disposition of the Parts, which is an Effect of this Spirit, or rather of Nature latent in the Spirit, and the Medium by which it operates, Modern Philosophers, contrary to Rea∣son, constituted to be the Efficient Cause of the said Operations; and so have made the Fabrick of Brutes like the Fabrick of Engines moving by Clock∣work; not considering that the appro∣priated disposition of Wheels and other parts in them, proceeded not either from the Engine it self, or from the Concoction, Blowing or Motion of the Air, Fire or other Matter, but from the Hand of some Artificer, who by that disposition carries on that Motion which he design'd in the Engine. For Example sake, the Wheels and other Parts of a Clock are so dispos'd as to show the Hours, yet will it be of no use as to that purpose unless the Artificer pulls up the Weight at prefix'd times, and makes the Clock go slower or faster, according as the Weights are either lighter or heavier, which he hangs on. So in Brutes, though the Parts be pro∣portionable and well dispos'd for the performance of Actions, yet unless there be something to change and ex∣cite those Parts to their design'd Opera∣tions, they will act nothing. So that Action proceeds neither from the innate disposition of the Parts, nor from the Objects; but from hence, that it knows and perceives the Objects and incites the dispos'd Parts to various Operations; which being but slightly consider'd by some, was the reason that they understood not that the Propriety of Parts in Brutes requir'd likewise some more noble Artificer to direct that dis∣position, and to be the Cause and Au∣thor of it, and of the foresaid nobler Actions. And by reason of these Operations of the Fancy in Brutes, as in Mankind, proceeds that more copious Influx of the Animal Spirits in Brutes, and con∣sequently their continu'd Generation of Milk. XLIX. Hence it appears how ill theyAn Object∣ion refuted. argue, who denying all Knowledge and Understanding in Brutes, alledge, 1. That
Brutes, seeing there can be no thinking Substance assign'd to 'em, are depriv'd of all Sences. 2. Every thinking Substance is immortal. 3. There is no Sence with∣out Conscience. 4. No Conscience with∣out the Thing thinking. 5. No Thing thinking without any Rationality. 6. No Rationality without Immortality. L. The first is to be contradicted byThe refut∣ation. every Ploughman; for who will pre∣sume to deny, That Beasts do excel some more, some less in all the five Sences? Who dares say, That their Organs of Sence were assign'd 'em to no purpose by the Supream Creator; or that they know not what is hurtful, and what is for their Benefit and Ad∣vantage. To the Second, we have al∣ready answered, That though such Acti∣ons cannot be perform'd without some thinking Substance, yet is it not requi∣site that that Substance should be Im∣mortal, but something Analogous. The Third and Fourth we grant to be true; yet we must distinguish in the mean time between the Thing Thinking, which is imperfect and mortal, &c. and the Thing Thinking, which is immortal and perfectly rational; of which, the first is but a certain Analogon, or slender Shadow; which proves the Falshood of the Fifth, when some Thinking Thing may be without perfect Ratio∣nality; though, as the Sixth says, no perfect Rationality can be without Im∣mortality. And so much for these Things; having been more prolix in the Examination of Lactification, by reason of the Ob∣scurity of the Subject. And here might be added a farther Discourse of Milk, as it consists of diverse Parts, Caseous, Butirous, and Serous; but I shall stop here, for fear of transgressing too far beyond my Bounds. CHAP. III. Of the Diaphragma. I. VVE now go to the In∣ner containing Parts of the Middle Belly, among which comes first to be consider'd that same remar∣kable Inclosure which the Greeks call Diaphragma, from , to di∣stinguish;The names. by the Latines, Septum Transversum, or the overthwart In∣closure, because it distinguishes the Trunk of the Body into two Bellies. Aristotle calls it , or the Girdling, , and : but Macrobius calls it Disseptum. By Hippocrates and many of the An cient Physicians, it is call'd  and , that is the Mind; because that being out of order, the Mind and Senses are disturb'd: and for that the Sences go beside themselves when it is inflam'd. II. It is a Muscle serving for the'Tis a Mus∣cle. Use of Respiration with other Mus∣cles of the Ribs, in shape almost circular, and much varying in Situa∣tion from the rest of the Muscles, an∣swering in bigness to the overthwart largeness of the Lower Breast. III. It consists of a fleshy Substance,The Sub∣stance. in the middle for the better streng∣thning of it, membranous and ner∣vous, to which Mediety run forth fleshy Fibres from the Periphery of the Breast, as to the Center; to which Center all Wounds that reach, are esteemed mortal. But Galen affirms, that Wounds in the fleshy part of it, are not mortal; which Holler, Iacoti∣us and Alexander Benedict confirm by Examples, and which we have also ex∣perienc'd in Practice. IV. It is invested with a doubleThe Mem∣branes. Membrane; the uppermost of which is the expansion of the Pleura, to which the Mediastinum and Pericar∣dium stick close, and sometimes, but very seldom the Lobes of the Lungs, by means of little Fibres. The lower Membrane joyns to the Peritonae∣um. V. Being fasten'd to the Ribs onThe site and connexion. both sides the lower part of the Ster∣non, and to the Cartilago Mucro∣nata, it is spred over the Thorax, and about the Vertebrae of the Loyns, it is stretched forth first into two Fleshy, then two Tendinous Portions, strongly fasten'd to the said Verte∣brae, and descending to the Os Sa∣crum, through which the Great Ar∣tery descends, with the Nerves of the Sixth Pair apply'd to the Ribs, and the Vein Azygos ascends.
From these Portions, many with Ga∣len, describe its Original; others from the Sword shap'd Gristle; others with Fallopius, from the Extremities of the Ribs; others, with Vesalius and Sylvius, from the middle membranous Center into which the Nerves enter. Which last Opinion displeases, to whom that Membranous Part seems rather to be one general Tendon of all the Fibres standing round about: but the Insertion of the Nerves into the Nervous Part, shews the contrary, as being always in∣serted into the Head of the Muscle. VI. It is penetrable about the mid∣dleThe Holes. on the right hand for the Passage of the Vena Cava, on the left hand for the Passage of the Gullet and Sto∣mach-Nerves. As for the Aorta, that does not penetrate the Diaphragma, but resting upon the Vertebrae, it is com∣prehended by it, as it were within a Se∣mi-circle. VII. It has two Arteries, call'dVessels. Phrenic Arteries, from the Trunk of the great Artery adjoyning to it: It has also two Veins, call'd Phrenic Veins, carrying back the Remainder of the Blood after Nourishment, which it inserts into the Trunk of the hollow Vein. It receives three remarkable Nerves, dispersed through the whole Substance of it; from the Fold of the Nerves of the Neck, and the Bran∣ches of the second Vertebral pair in Men, and the Brachial Nerves de∣scending through the Mediastinum, the principal Occasions of the Consent of the Diaphragma with the Head, and by reason of their Commixture with the small Nerves of the Iaws and Lips tending to the Muscles, the Authors also of Sardonic Laughter. To these from the lower Part little Nerves joyn themselves from the Co∣stal and Stomachical Nerve passing thither. All these Nerves are inserted near its middle membranous Part, which is not here the Tail, but the Head of this Muscle, as toward which the Cir∣cumference is drawn with the Ribs an∣nex'd. VIII. In breathing inward, it be∣comesIts Motion flat, and from a convex Laxity falls level, but is stretch'd out with any stress; but in fetching the Breath, it is as it were stretch'd out with violence, and attracting the Ribs by that same distention, it be∣gins and ends Expiration with some violence; which Ribs presently follow∣ing, the Tension ceases, and a Laxa∣tion ensues. For this Act of Breath∣ing is just as we see in a Casting-Net, which is thrown spread abroad into the Water; but being drawn up again, is contracted by the inner Ropes of its Circumference. Thus in breathing in∣ward, the Diaphragma spread abroad in Expiration, contracts its Circumference by its Fibres together with the Ribs an∣nex'd to it, and so returns to its loose Convexity. In like manner as in Ring∣ing, when the Bell goes up, the Rope is upon the full stretch, but coming down again, the Rope falls loose and to spare to the ground. But it is not necessary that the tension or stretching of the Di∣aphragma should last so long as Expi∣ration lasts; for the Ribs being drawn by one forcible violence, presently follow without any farther violence, and by the gentler contraction of the interco∣stal Muscles, the Sacrolmbal and Tri∣angular assisting, are reduced again near∣er one to another. Thus any one may try upon himself, that the first part of Expiration is done with some force, the rest follows more gently without a∣ny violence: which is remarkably ob∣serv'd in deep Sighs, and violent fetch∣ing the Breath. From whence it is apparent that the Diaphragma is the Primary Muscle that causes Expira∣tion. Iohn Swammerdam assigns to it a Use altogether contrary; I say contrary, nay and impossible too. For he writes that the Diaphragma by extending itself, di∣lates the Breast, and procures reathing inward, which Sylvius also inculates in his Praxis Medic. The same also Iohn de Bruyn, a most learned Professor of Philosophy in our Academy, and Iohn Mayo, an Englishman, in his Tract of Respiration, endeavours in a long Discourse to maintain the same thing, when as the Action of all Mus∣cles whatever, and consequently of the Diaphragma, is the same; that is, to contract themselves, and to bring the Part fasten'd to them, toward their Head, and hence also it is impossible▪ that among all the rest of the Muscles, the Diaphragma only should be able by extending, to dilate both it self, and the Ribs which are fasten'd to it, and that without the assistance of the other Muscles serving to Inspiration; for it is a thing unheard of and contrary to the
Nature of Musculous Fibres, to act by extending. If he meant, that the same dilatation of the Thorax was caus'd by the contraction of the Diaphragma, then he contradicts Reason and Experi∣ence in such a manner, that no man can excuse him any longer. For see∣ing that the Diaphragma must of neces∣sity bring the Ribs toward its Head, and the Head of it being the middle mem∣branous Part, and that situated in a higher Medium, and a more elevated Place, than the Ribs annex'd to it be∣low, of necessity while it contracts it self, it must bring the lower Ribs in∣ward towards its Head, and so must streighten, not dilate the Capacity of the Breast. Moreover, 'tis another Mistake of his to think that the Dia∣phragma in the act of drawing in the Breath, drives the Bowels of the Ab∣domen downward, whereas they are mov'd upward, as any one may find in himself, and find true in the Dissecti∣ons of living Animals. Reason also teaches us, that in the Act of Breath∣ing inward, the Convexity is reduc'd to a Flatness, because the sides of it to∣gether with the Ribs annex'd, are mov'd outward and upwards, and hence also the Muscles and Bowels annex'd to the Diaphragma, must of necessity ascend upward and outward. Moreover Swam∣merdam himself writes, that in Expira∣tion the Abdomen is forc'd inward and downward, and therefore in drawing the Breath inward, which is the contra∣ry motion, it heaves upward. Lastly, he adds; That in Expiration the Dia∣phragma ascends upward, whereas at that time in the middle, where it ad∣heres to the Mediastinum, which is an∣nex'd to the Sternum-Bone and the Ver∣tebrae of the Back, it is mov'd neither upward nor downward, but descends every way in compass downward, and then returns to its former Oven-like Convexity. IX. Riolanus disputes whether theWhether the Situa∣tion of it be Natural or Animal. Motion of the Diaphragma be Na∣tural or Animal; and seems to con∣clude, That the Motion of it is Na∣tural, because it does not depend upon our own Will, and follows the Condi∣tion of Respiration. But his Opinion is repugnant both to Truth and Ex∣perience, as we shall shew, Ch. 13. And seeing it is perform'd by the Mus∣cles of the Thorax, of which the great∣est part composes the Diaphragma, of necessity the Motion of the Dia∣phragma is Animal. In vain also does Riolanus distinguish between it free Motion, when it is mov'd of its self; and its violent Motion; when it fol∣lows the Motion of other Muscles: which Motion does not consist in acting alone, but in being able to act. And there∣fore when the Diaphragma, or any other Muscle ceases to act for a time, and for a while follows the Motion of other Muscles, we must not presently deny the Motion of it to be animal; for it is able to move its self at pleasure at any time: and if it cease from its Motion, or fol∣low the Motion of other Muscles, this also proceeds from its own Will, because it can do otherwise. CHAP. IV. Of the Pleura, Mediastinum, and Thymus, or Canel-Bone-Kernel. I. THE Pleura is a MembraneThe Pleu∣ra. hard, white and strong, spred under the Ribs and their Muscles, and girdling all the inner parts▪ of the Thorax. II. Lindan over-curiously enquiresThe Names into the Etymology of the Name, and thinks it to be call'd Pleura errone∣ously, seeing that  signifies a Rib, and not a Membrane; and therefore with Aretaeus and Ruffus he would rather have it call'd the Girding Membrane. Certainly 'tis a frivolous thingIts dupli∣city. to be so nice in Etymologies of this Nature, when we know what the Thing is, and what all Physicians for so many Ages have meant by the Pleura▪Membrane. But such Criticks as these seem more desirous to know the Bones, than taste the Kernels. III. It is thought to be double, which Doubling seems to be more con∣spicuous about the Vertebrae of the Back, and in the Mediastinum. However Riola∣nus denies any such doubling, with whom some others agree; because it is not ea∣sily demonstrated beyond the Mediasti∣num. On the inside, where it looks toward the Lungs, it is very smooth; but on the outside, being more rough, it sticks
fast to the Mid-Pleura Muscles, the Ribs, the Sternon, and the Vertebrae of the Back; but not immediatly to the Bones, but by means of the Periosteum, with which those Bones are most neatly cloath'd. IV. Inwards, sometimes in one,The little Fibres. sometimes in both sides, it often sends forth from its self nervous diminutive Fibres, by means whereof many times the Lungs (and that in healthy People) are annex'd to the Pleura, without any Inconvenience to Respiration. V. Both above and below it is per∣viousHoles. with several holes, for the Pas∣sage of the great Artery, the hollow Vein, the Gullet, and several other Vessels. VI. It is furnish'd with Arteries,Its Vessels. Veins and Nerves from the Interco∣stals. VII. It is said to have its Origi∣nalIts Origi∣nal. from the Bones of the Spine, from which it ascends on each side, through the sides to the Sternon; under which the Membrane of each side joins to∣gether, dividing the Lungs and the Capacity of the Breast into two parts, and constituting that Fence in the middle of the Breast, which is call'd Mediastinum; which conjunction ofThe Medi∣astinum. the Membranes of each side is then most conspicuous when the Sternum Bone is torn from it. VIII. Between these Membranes,Its Cavity. from the Clavicles to the Pericardium, some there are who assert a certain Ca∣vity, wherein vicious Humors fre∣quently gather'd together, occasion se∣veral Distempers, believing that Ca∣vity which they made by tearing the Membrane from the Sternum-Bone, to have been there before. Which is a perfect Mistake. For that, if you begin the dissection from the hinder part, the Ribs being loosen'd, then you shall find the doubl'd Pleura annex'd, without any Cavity between. IX. The Mediastinum receivesIts Vessels. Arteries from the innermost Mamma∣ry Arteries, and sends forth Veins to the mammary Veins, and the Vein without a Pair, which are seen upon removing the Sternum. Moreover it inserts a Vein call'd the Mediastin, into the subclavial Branch of the hollow Vein: which Vein is sometimes single and larger, and sometimes dou∣ble and slenderer. X. The Use of it is to sustain theIts Use. Heart as it hangs, and to defend it from Injuries, also to divide the Breast and Lungs into two Parts; that the one being endammag'd or out of order, the other may perform the Office of Respiration, also to contain the Diaphragma upward, lest the Bow∣els hanging from it, the Liver and Sto∣mach should draw it too much down∣ward with their weight. XI. To this same Mediastinum,The Ker∣nel under the Canel-Bone or Thymus. about the Throat in the uppermost part of the Breast, grows the Thymus, close joyn'd to the Divisions of the subclavial Arteries and Veins▪ which is a glandulous, soft, spongy and whitish Body, bigger in Women and moist Bodies, than in Men and dry Bodies. This Part in new born Infants is di∣stinguish'd with a small triple Kernel, and seems to have some Assinity of Substance with the Sweet-Bread: in Peo∣ple grown up, the Moisture being con∣sum'd, it is much thinner. Wharton saw in an Abortion in the sixth Month, the lower part of the Thymus grown to the Pericardium, and thence being bi∣fork'd as it was, under the Canel-Bone without the Breast, ascending the sides of the Weazand. So likewise in Calves, it adheres at the lower part to the Peri∣cardium; whence it increases into a big∣ger Bulk, and being divided, leaves the Thorax above, and ascending both sides of the Weazand, runs forth to the Maxillary Kernels, and sometimes to the Parotides. XII. And in these Creatures it isLactes. very great, call'd Lactes, and coveted as a dainty Bit. XIII. It has also little Arteries and Veins from the Iugulars, so small,Its Vessels▪ that they are hardly to be seen in Dis∣section. XIV. Wharton allows the Thy∣mus Nerves from the sixth Pair, andIts Iuice. the subclavial Contexture, which he thinks do empty into this Kernel their nutritive Liquor defil'd with some impurity and extraordinary a∣crimony, and resume it again when refin'd. But this is an erroneous Opi∣nion; for Wharton takes the Lacteal Vessels to be Nerves, and describes 'em as such: which in these Glandules are never more commodiously to be seen, than by inspection of a Calf newly,
calv'd, and fed with Milk, in the same manner with those that are scatter'd a∣mong the Kernels of Breasts that give Suck. Moreover Wharton does not observe what Juice is contain'd in the Thymus of a new-born Birth, that is to say, whether Chylous or Milky, such as Harvey found therein; and Deusingius saw plentifully flow out of it; and such as you shall find in sucking Calves kill'd an hour or two after they have suckt. Which Juice does not flow thither through the Nerves, but through the Lacteal Vessels, to be brought to more perfection therein, and so to be trans∣mitted through the subclavial Veins to the Hollow Vein and Heart. But be∣cause this Juice in grown People, by reason of the narrowness of the Lacteal Passages tending thither, as being dry'd up, flows in very small quantity, or not at all, into the Thymus, hence in such People, that part is very much dimi∣nish'd and contracted, in like manner as in Womens Breasts when they grow dry. Therefore there are no Nerves that are manifestly carry'd into the Thymus, as being of little use to this Part, nei∣ther sensible nor wanting the Sence of Feeling. Tho perhaps it may permit some invisible Branches of Nerves, to bring about some private Effervescency for its own Nourishment. XV. Wharton affirms that he hasLymphatic Vessels. often seen Lymphatic Vessels running through this part, and emptying them∣selves into the Subclavial Vein. Nor do they pass thither without reason; seeing that in the preparation of the milky Matter, that Lympha is requi∣site to raise a fermentaceous Efferve∣scency in the Heart. CHAP. V. Of the Pericardium and the Hu∣mour therein contain'd. I. THE Pericardium (as it were thrown about the Heart, which Hippocrates calls , the Sheath or little Capsule of the Heart) is a membranous Co∣vering, every way enfolding the Heart, whereby it is contain'd within its Seat, and defended from all exter∣nal Injuries. It is contiguous to the Heart, but so far distant from it as the Conveni∣ence of Pulse and Agitation requires. II. It arises at the bottom of theIts Origi∣nal. Heart from the common outward Tunicles taken from the Pleura, en∣folding the Vessels of the Heart, which being about to enter the Heart, leave it for the forming of the Pe∣ricardium. III. Riolanus allows it a doubleIts Mem∣branes. Membrane, the outermost of which he will have to be deriv'd from the Mediastinum, but the innermost from the Tunicle of the Vessels of the Heart. But it would be too great a Difficulty to demonstrate that Duplici∣ty. Moreover the outermost Tunicle of the Vessels of the Heart is derived from the Pleura, as is also the Mem∣brane of the Mediastinum. Besides that it would be absurd that from one single Pleura two Tunicles should meet toge∣ther toward the Forming of the Peri∣cardium; one from the Tunicle of the Vessels, and another from the Medi∣astinum, and that in the mean time the Mediastinum should remain a peculiar Membrane. The same Riolanus, incon∣stant to himself, writes in his Animad∣versions upon Laurentius, that the Pe∣ricardium rises from the Pleura, in the doubling of which it is contain'd; and in his Animadversions upon Bauhin, That there is not a double, but only one single Tunicle of the Pericardium: forgetting perhaps what he had written concerning their duplicity in his An∣thopograph. l. 3. c. 7. IV. The outermost part is ty'd toIts Con∣nexion. the Mediastinum with several little Fibres, and appears conjoin'd, and continuous to it about the bottom of the Heart, where it gives way for the greater Arteries and Veins to pass through. The lower part of it sticks to the Center of the Diaphragma. V. For Nourishment it has suchIts Vessels. slender Arteries, that they can hard∣ly be discern'd. It sends forth lit∣tle Veins to the Phrenic and Axil∣lary Veins. It also admits diminu∣tive Nerves from the left Branch that turns back, and the Sixth Pair passing to the Heart. VI. It contains within it a serousThe Liquor of the Pe∣ricardium.
Liquor, ruddy in Bodies naturally constituted, bred from the Vapours sent from the Heart, and somewhat condens'd in the Pericardium, to the quantity of one or two Spoonfuls. This is the true Cause of its Generati∣on; and therefore they are not to be heeded, who think it to be produced from Drink, Spittle, Fat of the Heart, or any other Causes. Nicholas Steno∣nis however believes it to be emptied out of certain Lymphatic Vessels into the Peritonaeum. VII. This Liquor moistning theIts Use. Heart withoutside, and rendring it slippery, makes its Motion also more easy, and prevents overmuch Dri∣ness. But the long want of it causes Driness, and many times a Consump∣tion. The want of it proceeds, when through some Wound of the Pericardi∣um, Exulceration, or some other Solu∣tion of Continuity that same Sweat of the Heart condens'd therein, flows out of it, and cannot be contain'd therein. Yet some Practitioners have observ'd then, when it has flow'd out through some Wound of the Pericardium, that Wound being cur'd, it has bred again, and the Patients have recovered their Health. Of which we have many Ex∣amples alledged by Galen, Cardan, Be∣niverius, Peter Salius, and others. This Liquor is found as well in the Living as Deceas'd, as appears by the Dissection of living Creatures; which clearly convinces Matthew Curtius, who will not allow it in living Animals. VIII. In diseased Bodies we haveWh such it is i di∣seased Bo∣dies. found it of a more watry Colour, sometimes like Urine, at other times like troubled Water, but much more in Quantity. For I have met with many Anatomies in our Hospital, in which I have found half a Pint of this Liquor at a time. In the Year 1651. in the Body of an English Man that had long fed upon ill Diet, and so fal∣ling into a Flegmatic Cachexy, at length died, we shew'd to the Spectators at least two Pints contain'd in a distended and very much loosen'd Pericardium, which was observ'd by several as an unusual Accident. This liquor I always found to be lessThe cause of the dif∣ference in Quantity. in Quantity, and more ruddy in Men of a hot Temper, in whom the Va∣pors exhaling from the Heart are more thin, and but a small Quantity con∣dens'd in the Pericardium, and such as were condens'd were sooner attenuated by the violent Heat of the Heart; and sooner exhale through the Pores of the Pericardium. On the other side I ob∣serv'd it more watery, more plentiful, and pale in colder Complexions, in whom through ill Diet, a diseased Constitution, or some other Causes, their Heat was less strenuous. For which reason thicker Vapors sent from the Substance of the Heart, and collected and condens'd in greater Quantity in the Pericardium, were not so soon dissi∣pated for want of sufficient Heat. Hence▪ Vesalius affirms it to be more plentiful in Women than in Men: And Riola∣nus observ'd it more plentiful in old Men than in young Men. X. Moreover we observ'd that aThe plenty of it does not cause Palpitation of the Heart. greater Quantity of this Liquor does not cause the Palpitation of the Heart; which is generally asserted however by most Physicians, from Galen's Opinion. For in all those, in whom after they were dead I found a greater quantity of this Liquor in the Pericardium, during all the time of their Sickness I observ'd no Palpitation of the Heart at all, not so much as in the Englishman before mentioned, but on the other side, a languid and weak Pulse. Neither does the Plenty of that Liquor cause such a Narrowness of the Pericardium, as is vulgarly believed, that the Heart can∣not move freely within it, and there∣fore palpitates. But on the other side we always found, that the Pericardium was thereby rendered so broad and loose, that the Heart might move more freely therein, than in lesser Li∣quor. So that the Plenty of this Li∣quor does not cause Palpitation, which is rather excited by any Liquor tho but small, which contrary to Custom suddenly and violently dilates, or by its Acrimony, Corruption, or griping Quality molests the Heart, and stirs it up to expel so troublesom an Enemy. CHAP. VI. Of the Heart in General. See Table 9. I. COR, the Heart, seems to take itsThe Names. Name from Currere to run; for which reason the Belgians call it Hart, or Hert, that signifies also
a Hart or Stag: because as that Beast excels all others in Swiftness and Motion, so does the Heart surpass all other parts of the Body in the same Qualities. Which Belgic word nevertheless seems to be deriv'd from Harden, which signifies Duration, or from Hard, which signifies Hard∣ness, either because its Motion lasts all a Mans Life-time; or else because it exceeds the Muscles, and other Parenchyma's in hardness of Sub∣stance. Riolanus deduces the word Cor from the Greek , contracted of , from  to burn, because from thence the Fire of our Body proceeds. And so the Belgic Hert, may be deriv'd from Heert, which signifies a Hearth. Menetis derives it from , to Shake, or Brandish. Chrysippus dedu∣ces it from  or  signifying Strength, or from  to be strong in Empire, because it performs most strenu∣ous Actions, and governs all the other parts of the Body. II. However it is the Principal ofIt is a prin∣cipal Part. all the Bowels, the Sun of the Mi∣crocosm, the Principle of the Actions of Life, the Fountain of Heat and Vital Spirit, and the Primum mo∣bile of our Body. Which being vi∣gorous and active, all the natural Functi∣ons of the Body continue in a vigo∣rous and flourishing Condition; when that languishes, they languish; and when that fails, they cease altogether. For in this is contain'd the Fuel and Flame of natural Heat; while all those parts of the Body grow stiff and numm'd with Cold, to which the Blood is hin∣dred from coming from the Heart; and that Blood grows cold that is absent longest from this Fountain of Heat, and the wast of natural Heat can be repair'd in no other part of the Body than in this. All which things are confirm'd by the Testimony of the Sences, for that if you put a Finger into the Heart of a dissected living Creature, so ex∣traordinary a Heat is felt therein, as the like is not to be felt in any other part of the Body. III. This Heat, tho so excellingThe Fuel of Heat. from the Principle of Heat it self, as it is, and tho it be implanted and fixed within it; yet certain it is, that it is maintained and augmented by the Humours infused into its Ven∣tricles, and there fermenting, and is continually fed by that continual Fer∣mentation or Effervescency of Humours discharged into it. Lime-stone burns through the mixture of Water, by rea∣son of its Fermentation or Effervescency; what wonder then if the Heat of the Heart be presently inflam'd by the Fer∣mentation of Humours flowing into it? and that Flame should be more or less according to the greater or lesser fermen∣taceous Effervescency, which greatly de∣pends upon the aptitude of the Matter to be fermented? For the innate hot Spirits of the Heart, act upon the Mat∣ter that flows in, and ferment it with its Heat, and cause it to boyl, and so renew the Flame that would ex∣tinguish by degrees, till it went quite out. IV. It is seated in the middle ofIts Si∣ation. the Breast, surrounded with the Pe∣ricardium and Mediastinum, some∣what reflexed with the Point toward the left, by reason of the Diaphrag∣ma, and fasten'd to it in none of the adjoyning parts, but hanging only from the Vessels going in and out at the bottom, to which it is united. But its Pulsation is felt most in the left side, below the Pap, because the Sinister Ventricle arises toward the fore-parts of the Thorax with the Aorta, which both together strike the left side. But the Right Ventricle lies deeply seated toward the right side, and therefore its Pulsation is less felt without upon the right side. It is very rare that the Heart changes this Situation, and that the right Ventricle lies in the left side, and the left Ventricle in the right Side, and beats in this. Yet Riolanus affirms he observ'd this Situation in a Man of forty Years of Age, and in the Queen Mother of Lewis the XIII. V. The Substance of it is firm,Its Sub∣stance. thick, compact; some thinner and softer in the right side, thicker and more compacted in the left side; clo∣ser and harder at the Point: Yet at the end of the point where the left Ventricle ends, thinner, as consisting of the Concourse of the inner and outer Membrane. VI. This Substance Galen affirmsIts Fibres. to be interwoven with a threefold sort of Fibres, whom most Anatomists follow. But if the Fibres of the Heart be diligently considered, and sunder'd by degrees (which may be done as well in a boyl'd Heart, as in one new∣ly
taken out) there are no transverse Fibres to be found, whatever Vesalius has imagin'd, but they seem all to be wound about with a periwincle Chanel, that is somewhat bowing and arch'd about the middle; yet they do not all reach the Point neither, but are turn'd upward with their Extremities. For those which first descend from the Orifices of the Ventricles are shorter, next to which are others somewhat longer, yet not reaching to a Cone. To these are joyn'd others somewhat longer: So that at length, the last, which are the longest, reach to a Cone, and contain the rest which are shorter and plac'd under them, and annexed to them. And be∣cause the shorter contain'd under the longer make the Heap the higher, it comes to pass that the upper and mid∣dle part of the Heart is somewhat more bunchy, when the longer, to whose Extremities the shorter cannot reach, end in a sharper Cone. Nevertheless according to the Observation of Nicho∣las Steno, this same Course of the Fi∣bres seems rather to be observed in the Region of the right than left Ventricle. He observ'd this Course in the right Ventricle to ascend the Fibres obliquely descending inwardly from the Septum toward the hinder Parts along the exte∣rior Superficies, and so to elevate a lit∣tle the bottom of the right Ventricle to∣ward the Basis; and hence it happens that in Contraction, the Heart in the right side comes to be not only shorter, but sometimes rounder and thicker, and by reason of this greater shortness and thickness of the right and left side of the Walls, of necessity the Hollowness of the Ventricles become narrower. VII. By reason of these Fibres,Whether the Heart be a Mus∣cle. and the Motion of Pulsation, Hip∣pocrates asserted the Heart to be a Muscle; which has hitherto been stif∣ly deny'd by all the Schools of Phy∣sicians who have generally asserted that it is the Chief Bowel in the Body. 1. Because therein is generated the most noble Humour together with its Spirit; viz. The spirituous Vital Blood; whereas there is no particular Humour or Spirit generated in any Muscle. 2. Because in hardness of Substance it exceeds the Substance of all Mus∣cles. 3. Because fleshy Fibres do not make a Muscle; for otherwise the Stomach and the Piss-bladder, by reason of their fleshy Fibres might easily be reckon'd into the number of Muscles: From which they are nevertheless exempted by common Consent. 4. Because the Heart has Ventricles and Valves, which are not to be found in any Muscle of the whole Body. 5. Because the Muscles are the Instru∣ments of voluntary Motion, which are mov'd at Pleasure and not perpetually but by Intervals, and are tir'd by long and vehement Motion; and so com∣pell'd to desist from Motion. Where on the contrary the Heart is mov'd not with an animal, but with a natural un∣wearied Motion, which cannot be alter'd, increas'd, lessen'd or stopt at plea∣sure; but continues from the beginning to the end of a Man's Life. Now tho these be very strong Ar∣guments, nevertheless Nicholas Steno goes on, and pronounces that the Heart is nothing else but a Muscle, because it has all those things that are allow'd to a Muscle, neither is there any thing found in the Heart which is deny'd a Muscle; and hence excuses it from the duty of sanguifying and generating na∣tural Spirits, and laies it up among the servile Muscles, despoyl'd of all the Privileges hitherto allow'd it, perhaps intending to write its Elegy in a short time, with the same Applause as Bar∣tholine makes his Epitaph upon the Li∣ver; as if I should say, because the Piss∣bladder has all those things which are allow'd the Stomach, as Membranes, Nerves, Arteries, and Veins, and a globous and hollow Form, therefore the Bladder is the Stomach, and appointed for the same Uses. VIII. The Heart resembles a Py∣ramidIts Figure. with the sharp end turn'd downward, or broad above and point∣ed below. To which purpose it is di∣vided into the Base, or upper part, and the Cone or sharp part, which termi∣nates below in a Point. IX. The Bigness of it varies ac∣cordingIts Bigness. to Age and Temper. Yet considering the Bulk of Body, it is big∣ger in Men, than in any other Crea∣tures. The ordinary length of it in Persons grown to ripe years, is about the depth of six Fingers, and four Fingers broad. It is also observ'd that in men of hot Constitutions, and Couragious, it is lesser and harder, but in cold Con∣stitutions, and Men that are timid, it is bigger and softer. In like manner in all other timorous and slothful Crea∣tures, according to the Proportion of the Body it is very large▪ but in such
as are bold and daring, small or of a moderate bigness. Bauschius however produces some Examples of Lyons dis∣sected, whose Hearts according to the proportion of the Bodies of those Crea∣tures, were much larger than in any o∣ther Creature. Sometimes, but very rarely, there has been observed a won∣derful Excess of the Heart in bigness. And so that Man had a monstrous Heart, which Dominic de Marchetti as∣serts to have dissected at Padua; which was of so vast a Magnitude, that the Lungs being very small, it possess'd the whole Concavity of the Breast, and de∣press'd the Diaphragma, having the Pe∣ricardium joyn'd to the Pleura at the sides, and its Ventricles so large, that they were able to contain the ordinary Heart of any other Man. No less mon∣strous was that of which Kerkringius writes, that being dissected out of a Wo∣man of forty years of age, weighed two and twenty Ounces, and whose right Ear only equalled an ordinary Heart of a Man. The Pulmonary Artery also, and the hollow Vein, were of an extraordinary Bigness. Many other Ex∣amples of Hearts of an extraordinary Bigness Bartholinus sets down in his Ob∣servations, as having been seen by him∣self. X. It is wrapt about on the sideIts Coats. with a proper and thin, but strong and compact Tunicle, and hardly se∣parable from it, for the Security of the Bowel; and such a Tunicle as this, is that same thin proper exterior Tunicle of the great Arteries: And as the thin Pellicle on the inside enfolding the Ven∣tricles is continuous and common with that same thin Pellicle, which like a smooth little Skin enfolds the greater Arteries on the inside; hence it is very likely, that the Arteries borrow these Tunicles from the Heart, as the Nerves borrow two Tunicles from the Menin∣ges of the Brain. XI. To this exterior Tunicle, aboutIts Fat. the bottom grows a hard sort of Fat, on purpose to moisten it, which Riola∣nus has observed to be more copious and yellower in Women than in Men. This Fat has been seen so abounding round about the Heart in Beasts, that formerly the Southsayers have been of∣ten deceiv'd thereby, and have thought the Beasts had no Hearts. Thus Spi∣gelius writes, that in an Eagle dissected at Padua, he found the Heart surround∣ed with such a quantity of Fat, that he could easily have perswaded many that were present that the Bird had no Heart. XII. It is a very rare thing to findIts Hairs. the Heart Hairy; which however has been observ'd in some Hearts. As in that of Hermogenes the Rhetorician, by the Report of Caelius Rodiginus. And in Leodina and Lisander the Lacedaemo∣nian, by the Testimony of Plutarch. Also in Aristomenes of Messina, as Vale∣rius Maximus witnesses. Of modern Au∣thors Beniverius, Amatus of Portugal, and Mretus affirm that they have ob∣served hairy Hearts. XIII. Through the outward parts ofIts ▪ the Parenchyma are scattered several Vessels call'd Coronary, because they encircle the bottom of the Heart like a Crown; and are both Arteries and Veins. XIV. There are two CoronaryCoronary Arteries. Arteries, arising from the beginning of the Aorta, before it goes forth from the Pericardium, which some think is furnished with a little Valve at its first rise, to hinder the return of the Blood. These Arteries encompass the Heart, and extend many little Branches from the Basis to the Cone, of which the most and largest are conspicuous in the left side. Their Use is to convey the spirituous Blood immediately issuing out of the left Ventricle, for the Nou∣rishment of the Parenchyma. Harvey believes that the Heart, by means of them, together with the Blood, receives both Heat and Life. Which Opinion Riolanus derides, who asserts it to be absurd for the Heart to receive Life and Heat from that Blood, since the Heart it self is the Fountain of Life and Heat, from whence arises the heat of that Blood, and hence concludes, that the outward parts of the Heart are only nourished by these Coronary Arteries, and the Fat preserv'd. To which he might have added that the Heart makes the Blood and causes it to be, and lives and is mov'd before there is any Blood. XV. The Coronary Veins alsoCoronary Veins. are two; Which like the Coronary Arteries encircle the Heart, and are in∣serted into the hollow Vein, and emp∣ty the Blood which remains after Nou∣rishment, and out of many lesser little Branches ascending from the Cone to the Base into the hollow Vein. To these, tho' very erroneously, Bauhinus, and Spigelius allow a Valve, by which they believe the Influx of the Blood out of the Coronary into the hollow Vein is prevented. Whereas of necessity that
Influx ought to be uninterrrupted and free, and if there be any little Valve there, it ought to be plac'd after such a manner, as to hinder the Influx of the Blood out of the hollow into the Coro∣nary Vein, in regard that to the same purpose there is a little Valve annex'd to the emulgent Jugular, and several other Veins which open into the hollow Vein. XVI. Besides the Coronary Vessels,Nerves. Galen asserts, That the Heart also re∣ceives small and invisible diminutive Nerves from the sixth conjugation or joyning together of the Nerves: but as Riolanus observes, it receives them from the fold of the stomachic nerves existing at the Basis of the Heart toward the Spine. Of these Nerves of the Heart Picolomini, Sylvius, Bauhinus, Bartho∣lin, and others make mention. And Dissection teaches us, that they are dif∣ficultly to be found, and not to be dis∣cern'd within the Substance it self of the Heart: and this Fallopius testifies, in these Words; Under the Basis of the Heart, says he, where the Arterial Vein be∣gins to turn to the left side, and where that remarkable Arterial Passage in the Em∣bryo is, which joyns the said Vein with the Aorta, is a certain Fold, or Nervous Com∣plication, strong and solid, from whence a great quantity of Nervous Matter em∣braces the whole Basis of the Heart, through which several Branches of little Nerves thence produc'd are scatter'd, and run through its whole Substance (which he adds by conjecture) though I cannot follow them exactly and particularly with my eye. Thus Galen could not exactly discern the insertion of the Nerves into the Substance. Only, saith he, its covering the Pericardium, seems to receive the Branches of slender Nerves, from which being divided, other conspicuous Branches, at least in Animals of larger Bulk, seem to be inserted into the Heart it self: but they are divided into the Substance, that cannot be perspicuously discover'd by the Senses. These Nerves by reason of their ex∣traordinary slenderness, are so extraor∣dinarily imperceptible, that it was que∣stion'd by many, and even by my self formerly, whether any little Nerves or no did enter the Heart. However at length, after a more diligent Search, I found several diminutive Nerves, like small Threads, extended from the Fold to the Basis of the Heart, and the Ori∣fices of the Ventricles, in the same man∣ner as Fallopius discovers them, which I found a most difficult thing to follow into the Substance it self of the Heart; for that being scatter'd in the Basis it self, and the exterior Tunicle, they seem'd presently to disappear, and only two somewhat of the larger size, seem'd to enter the substance of the Parenchy∣ma: whence I thought it probable, if any Branches ran any farther, that they are only extended like thin and invisi∣ble Threads into the substance, and be∣queath it a kind of dull sense of Feel∣ing. Fallopius attributes to the Heart a most acute sense of Feeling, but contra∣ry to experience: For its dull sense of Feeling is sufficiently apparent in every strong Pulse, which is not felt either in or by the Heart. Nay not in that same sick person mention'd by Fernelius, who consum'd away insensibly, in whose Heart, after he was dead, he found three Ulcers, and not a little hollow, and full of Matter, contracted long be∣fore; which must have occasion'd a most sharp pain in so sensible a Part: of which nevertheless Fernelius makes no mention (nor Dominic de Marchettis, in a Patient of the same Nature) with∣out doubt because the Patient never complain'd of any pain. And the same Experiment is added of a Person wound∣ed in the Heart, whom we saw our selves, who nevertheless complain'd of no pain in his Heart. Here perhaps it may be objected, That the Inconvenience of Palpitation is sufficiently felt. To which I answer, That it is not felt in the Heart, but in the Pericardium, the Mediastinum, the middle of the Diaphragma, and other adjoining Parts, which being of quick sense of feeling, are soon and violently pain'd by a strong motion of the Heart putting a force upon them. But what shall we say, when fetulent Vapors car∣ry'd from the Womb and other Parts to the Heart, put it to great Pain, does not that Pain proceed from its acute sense of feeling? I answer, if the Heart felt any twinging vellication, it would complain; but it does not complain: therefore. Whence I infer, That tho' we allow a kind of dull sense of feeling to the Heart, especially in its outward Tunicle, and the Orifices of the Ven∣tricles; nevertheless we must believe, that these Alterations and Pains what∣ever they are, especially the sharper sort, chiefly proceed from hence, either because the Heart has but a dull sense of feeling, or else, 1. Because that the Blood which ought to be dilated in the Heart, is thicken'd, coagulated, or o∣therwise
deprav'd by those corrupt and vicious Vapors and Humors, so that it cannot be dilated as it ought, or is usual for it to be in the Heart; whence pro∣ceeds its faster or slower, disorderly or otherwise discompos'd Motion. 2. Be∣cause the innate Spirit of the Heart, the principal Cause of Motion, is overmuch coagulated, refrigerated or dissipated by those Humors. 3. Because other more sensible Parts being pain'd and torment∣ed by those vicious Humors, are very much agitated, contracted and loosen'd; and for that reason they force the Blood from themselves toward the Heart after an unusual manner, whence it happens that the Blood is attenuated also in the Heart after an unusual manner, so that the Pulse being alter'd, it is not sent conveniently to the Brain, by which means it happens that the Animal Spi∣rits are generated out of order, and sent out of Order to the Nerves. Descartes observing no remarkable orThe Opini∣on of Des∣cartes. apparently manifest Nerves to be ex∣tended into the Substance it self of the Heart, was unwilling confidently to af∣fert it, but in the mean time, that he might the better explain the Passions of the Mind, affirms with Fallopius, that there are certain diminutive Nerves which reach to the Orifices of the Ven∣tricles of the Heart: for he says that there are particularly to be observ'd cer∣tain Nerves inserted into the Basis of the Heart, which serve to dilate and contract the Orifices of its Concavities; and upon this foundation he rear'd his Learn'd Treatise of the Passions of the Mind. XVII. These Animal Spirits there∣fore,The Use of the Animal Spirits in the Heart. as has been said, contribute a certain faint sense of feeling to the Heart; for it ought not to have a quick sense, lest it should be disturb'd and molested by its continual motion, and the Passage and Fermentation of sharp and corroding Humors. Besides, the Parts being altogether compleated, they contribute also a kind of fermentative power to the Nourishment of the Heart, of which, at the beginning, it had no need, because the sharp particles of the ingendring Seed collected together in the formation of the Heart, contain in them∣selves a sufficiently sharp fermenting qua∣lity, proportionable to the tenderness of the Matter wherein they operate. But afterwards when the Bulk of the Heart enlarging it self there is in need of stronger Matter, than there is requir'd the assistance of Spirits somewhat more fermentative. Lastly, These Spirits loo∣sen or contract the Orifices of the Heart, or its Ventricles; by which means there happens a freer Ingress and Egress of the Blood to the Heart, in the Passions of the Mind; and hence at the same time proceed alterations of the Blood. Hence in Fear, Palpitations of the Heart, in Grief, Contractions with a small Pulse, in Joy, a grateful and pleasing heat about the Heart, with a swift and strong Pulse. XVIII. The Heart then is the prin∣cipalThe Dig∣nity of the Heart. and sovereign Bowel from which is diffus'd the vital Liquor, with perpetual heat, the support of Life, to all Parts of the Body: of which when any of the Parts are never so little depriv'd, they fall and die. And there∣fore the Distempers that befal it, are chiefly dangerous, and the Wounds ofWounds of the Heart mortal. it altogether mortal, as Hippocrates pronounc'd; so that although some be∣ing wounded in the Heart, have lived for a time, yet they could never be cur'd. Nay, for the most part, so soon as the Wound enters the Ventricles, they fall like men Thunder-struck, which I have seen three or four times with my own Eyes; so that I have often stood in admiration, how a man could be so soon depriv'd of all Life, Sense and Motion. Nevertheless the Reason is plain; for that the Blood which ought to be forc'd into the Great Artery, and through that to the Brain and all other Parts, by reason of the Wound, is pour'd forth into the Concavity of the Breast. So that no Blood being carry'd to the Brain, presently the motion of the Animal Spirits ceases in the Brain, nor are they any longer convey'd through the Nerves to the several parts. Hence also there happens a Cessation of the principal Faculties and Senses; and of all motion of the Muscles, and among the rest of the Respiratory; which oc∣casions the suddenness of the Death. But if a small Wound do not penetrate into the Ventricles, then sometimes, but ve∣ry seldom, it happens that a man does not fall presently, but lives for some hours. Thus Paraeus saw a man wound∣ed in the Heart, that ran above two hundred Paces. Schenkius also makes mention of a Student, who having re∣ceiv'd a Wound through both his Ven∣tricles, yet ran the length of a whole Street, and was in perfect sense of Mind for an Hour. Sennertus, Iohnson, Mul∣ler, Heers and Tulpius produce several Examples of men that have liv'd after
they were wounded in the Heart for several hours; nav for one or two day. Says Fernelius, Wounds in the Heart, which do not penetrate far into the Ven∣tricles, do not presently kill; In a certain Person, who linger'd and consum'd away by degrees, and at length dy'd, I found three Ulcers in his Heart, hollow and foul, and long before contracted. Somewhat like this, concerning an Ulcer in the Heart, Dominic Marchettis relates, of a man who having been con∣suming a long time, dy'd: in the dissec∣tion of which person, he found a great Ulcer, which had eaten out not only the Capsula of the Heart, but also a great part of its Substance, till it had pene∣trated into the Cavity of the left Ven∣tricle, and then kill'd the man. But it is more wonderful that a great Wound in the Heart should be cur'd. Of which Ca∣brolius saw a President in the Dissection of a human Carcass in the Anatomical Theater. For he says he found in the Heart of a Thief that was hang'd, the remaining Scar of a Wound that had been cur'd, about two Fingers long, and about the thickness of a Sixpence. But though such Accidents are rare, never∣theless I never remember that ever I read so extraordinary an Example of a Heart wounded, as what I saw with my Eyes, a Story so remarkable that I thought fit to insert it in this place. In the Year 1660. April 5. I wasA rare Ob∣servation. sent for to Clenburgh together with some other Physicians and Surgeons, at the Request of the Magistracy of that Town, to view the Body of a Young Man, of about twenty years of Age, and very strong when he was alive, wounded with a Sword, and dying of his Wound; to the end we might give our Judgments whether he dy'd of his Wound, or by any other Disaster. Up∣on opening the Body my self, first we were inform'd that the young man after he had receiv'd the Wound, walk'd a∣bout fifty or sixty paces, and then fell down, and then falling into a Convulsi∣on, was carry'd home, and in a little time after, came to himself again. The Physicians and Surgeons who then lookt after him, affirm'd, that the first and se∣cond day very little Blood issu'd forth from his Wound, which was very nar∣row; but that afterwards, the Wound being somewhat dilated, such a quantity of Blood gush'd forth, that they were forc'd to stop the Flux of Blood by ty∣ing of his Body in several places. They added, That the Patient was all along very sensible, and never complain'd in the least of any inward pain, mov'd his Body of himself, and when he was ty'd, turn'd upon his side of his own accord, and cough'd freely to promote the efflux of Blood out of his Wound; that he eat and drank something every day, till at last his Strength failing, he dy'd, ha∣ving liv'd nine days and eight hours af∣ter he had receiv'd his Wound. Having heard this Relation, I went on to view the Body, and shew'd the Wound that was given him between the fifth and sixth Rib of the Right Side, about a Thumb's breadth before the Ribs run into Gristles. Removing the Sternum-Bone, I found the Cavity of the Breast upon the wounded Side, to the Mediastinum, fill'd with Blood; which being dry'd up with a Spunge, I perceiv'd where the Sword had gone in, without touching the Lungs, at the Heart, under the Sternum through the Mediastinum and Pericardium, and had penetrated directly into the upper part of the right Ventricle of the Heart, between the treble pointed little Valves, near the entrance of the hollow Vein, and had gone no farther: the Pericar∣dium also was full and distended with coagulated Blood. It will seem a won∣der to many how this man after such a Wound could live so many days and hours: however, I believe the Reason was this, because the Wound was very narrow, and in the upper part between the little Valves; so that in the contra∣ction of the Heart, all the Blood which flow'd out of the hollow Vein into the right Ventricle, by reason of the ob∣struction of the Treble-pointed Valves, could not be forc'd out of the Wound, but that the greatest part of it was forc'd into the Lungs through the pul∣monary Artery, which was much wi∣der than the Wound, and from thence to the Left Ventricle and the Aorta-Artery, so that but a very little at a time could be forc'd by the several Pulses out of the Wound into the Pe∣ricardium and Cavity of the Breast, which was the Reason it was so long be∣fore his Strength fail'd him.
CHAP. VII. Of the Motion of the Heart. I Have said in the preceding Chap∣ter, that the Heart is the principal and perpetual Mobile of our Body, from whence proceeds all the Natural Motion of the whole Boyd, and perpetually lasts so long as the Motion of the Heart lasts. But the Reason of its perpetual Motion is not so perspicuous; which is the Reason that Opinions vary concern∣ing it. I. Some say, That the Heart is mov'd by the Animal Spirits. II. Others believe that the Heart is mov'd by the dilatation of the Blood in the Ventricles of the Heart. III. Others are of Opinion, That it is mov'd partly by the dilatation of the Blood, and partly by the influx of Animal Spirits. IV. Others say, That it is mov'd by a Subtle or Ethereal Matter. V. Others hold, That it is mov'd by some certain Spirit in the Blood. VI. Some assert, That the Heart is mov'd by the Respiration of the Lungs. I. The first Opinion produces Three1. Whether the Heart is mov'd by the Animal Spirits. very specious Reasons for its Support. First, Because that in our Bodies all ap∣parent and violent Motions are made by the influx of the Animal Spirits, and that therefore the Motion of the Heart must proceed from the same In∣flux. Secondly, Because the several little Nerves are not in vain inserted into the Basis of the Heart: but rather to that end that they may convey the Animal Spirits to accomplish its Motion. Third∣ly, For that it is manifest in the Passions of the Mind, that the Heart is more or less mov'd by the greater or lesser In∣flux of those Spirits. But though these Arguments are pro∣pounded with some appearance of Pro∣bability, yet that this Opinion is far from Truth, several Reasons make ma∣nifest. 1. Because those Motions that pro∣ceed from the influx of Animal Spirits, are arbitrary, especially in the Muscles, of which number they assert the Heart to be; but the Motion of the Heart is not arbitrary, seeing it is not perform'd, nor can be perform'd or alter'd at our pleasure. 2. Because the Heart beats in a Hen-Egg, or other Conception, before the Brain is perfected, and begets Animal Spirits; or before any Animal Faculty is produc'd into Acts of moving and feeling. 3. Because the Nerves of the Heart are so small and slender, that they can∣not contribute a sufficient quantity of animal Spirits to perfect that same dura∣ble Motion. For to all the moving Parts are allow'd Nerves according to the swiftness or diuturnity of the Motion. The Eye that sees, and is mov'd all the Day, and rests all the Night, besides the visual Nerve, has another large moving Nerve. So the Muscles of the Legs and Arms, as they cause swifter or slower Motions, have greater or lesser Nerves; which happens also in all the other parts. Seeing then that all the o∣ther moving parts, which rest much longer than they are mov'd, require large and conspicuous Nerves, shall the Heart that moves with a continual motion day and night, all a man's Life long, and therefore requires a far larger quantity of Spirits, than any other part that is mov'd? is it possible, I say, that the Heart should be furnish'd with a suffici∣ent quantity of Spirits to maintain that continual Motion by the means of such slender and almost invisible Nerves? Besides, that it is as yet uncertain whe∣ther those diminutive Nerves, whose productions are seen to extend them∣selves to the Basis of the Heart, the Pericardium, the Orifices of the Ven∣tricles, and the external Tunicle, enter any farther into the substance it self of Parenchyma: many indeed assert it, but no body demonstrates it. Galen and Des Cartes very much scruple it; and so does Thomas Willis, an exact Search∣er into the Brain and Nerves, to whose Industry in that Particular we are very much beholding; who dares not assert any such thing positively, but says, That more Branches of Nerves and Fibres are distributed into the little Ears of the Heart and Vessels appendent, than into the Substance of it. We say that very few Nerves enter the Substance it self of the Heart, and that they are so small and few, that cannot afford or convey sufficient Animal Spirits to perpetuate the Motion of the Heart, but only con∣tribute some few which assist to the Nu∣trition of the Heart.
4. Because that to cause Motion there is required a great Quantity of Animal Spirits, but that for the Sence of Fee∣ling a very few suffice: And therefore all the Parts that are apt to feel, which re∣ceive many Spirits to perfect their Mo∣tion, have also a most accurate Sence of Feeling: But those which receive but few Spirits, they are not mov'd at all, and have but a dull sence of Feeling, as is apparent in Palsies of the lesser De∣gree. Nevertheless, That the Heart has Membranes proper for the Sence of Fee∣ling, as the outward and inward enfol∣ding Tunicle, treble pointed and miter∣like Valves and proper Fibres, and yet is endu'd but with a dull Sence of Fee∣ling, is manifest from what has been said in the preceding Chapter; and thence it is apparent, that it receives but few Animal Spirits: Which if it did admit in so great abundance, as to accomplish its perpetual Motion, they would with∣out all Question occasion a most acute Sence of Feeling therein. 5. Because the Hearts of several A∣nimals, as Frogs, Serpents, Eels, &c. be∣ing pull'd out of their Bodies, will beat a long time after, whereas all the Parts about it being cut away, as also all the neighbouring Nerves, there can be no Influx of Animal Spirits into them. To this purpose take a living Dog, and ha∣ving slit him all along from the Throat, take both Trunks of the Wandring Pair, through which the Spirits flow to the Heart, and either tie it hard, or cut it off, the Creature indeed will be∣come silent and stiff, but the Pulsation or Motion of the Heart will not fail for all that; nay he shall live so long, till his Strength failing by degrees for want of Food, he is famished to Death: For he refuses Meat, in regard there are no Animal Spirits which can come to the Stomach and increase Hunger. 6. Because that seeing the Heart is form'd and perfected before the Ware∣house of the Animal Spirits, the Brain, and proves conspicuous, beats, and is mov'd before any the least Foundations of the Brain at any time appear, as is apparent in an Egg set under a Hen, or any other Conception. If you say that nevertheless in the Egg or Bubble certain Delineaments of the Brain are in being, tho' not to be discern'd by the Eye, I answer that they are not yet come to any such Perfection as to operate, where∣as in the mean time the Heart both operates and is mov'd before it can have any Assistance from those Rudiments of the Brain. 7. Because the Animal Spirits are generated out of the Arterious Blood, which are generated by no other part besides the Heart. Seeing then that they cannot be generated out of any other Matter, and that this Matter cannot come to the Brain but by the impulse of the Heart, wherein this Matter is generated, of necessity it follows, that the Heart is mov'd of it self, before there are any Animal Spirits in any o∣ther part; and is the first that forces to the Brain Matter adapted for the Generation of those Spirits; that is to say, the Arterious Blood. Perhaps it may be objected that the Heart is mov'd at first by those animal Spirits which were mix'd in the Seed of the Parents, and from that time still are intermix'd with it; which is but a frivolous Eva∣sion. For the animal Spirit concurs in∣deed to the making of Seed, but loses its own Nature; and being mix'd, fer∣mented, and concocted with the vital Blood, becomes one Mass of another Nature with it; and so both together put on the Nature of the Seed, where∣in there is no longer either animal Spi∣rit or arterious Blood, but that Seed becomes a new Body, generated out of both being mix'd together, and changed by Concoction, which particularly con∣tains in it self, neither animal nor san∣guineous Spirit, but a new Spirit poten∣tially vial arising out of the Mixture and Concoction of both, which if at any time it be stirr'd up in the Womb, and proceed from Power to Action, will im∣mediately enliven, and form Vessels and Instruments that shall produce Spi∣rituous Blood and Animal Spirits. So that there are no Animal Spirits any longer in the Seed that are able to cause the first Motion of the Heart at the be∣ginning. For as no Man in his Wits will aver that there is any Blood real∣ly in a Bone, tho' the Blood, as a neces∣sary Matter concurs to its making Nu∣trition and Growth, so no Man will say of the Seed, that there is in it either Animal Spirit or Blood, tho' both con∣cur to its Composition. For as in the Generation of Bone, the Blood concur∣ring with the Animal Spirit, losing al∣together its Sanguineous Nature, becomes Bone, and is no longer Blood, as the Spirit is no longer Spirit, as it was be∣fore: so likewise in the making of Seed, the Animal Spirit and Blood remain no longer what they were before; whence it cannot be said, that animal Spirits remain in the Seed that should be able to begin the first Motion of the Heart.
8. Because the Motion of the Ani∣mal Spirits does not proceed from the Brain, but altogether from the Heart, and this Motion of the Heart ceasing, all Animal Motion ceases. As is apparent when Wounds penetrate the Ventricles of the Heart; for that the Blood not be∣ing forced into the great Artery and the Heart, but flowing out through the Wound of the Ventricles, presently at the very same instant the Brain rests, and the Animal Spirits are no longer sent through the Nerves to the moving Parts; neither are they moved in the Brain, which is the reason that a Man so wounded falls of a suddain, depriv'd of all his principal Faculties, and of all Sense and Motion. The same appears in Convulsions and Fitts of the Mother affecting the Heart, and such like Di∣stempers; in which frequently the noxi∣ous Vapours and Humours reach no farther than the Heart, but not as yet to the Brain, and so the Heart ceases to beat, the Brain remaining unenda∣maged; which nevertheless upon the ceasing of the Motion of the Heart, pre∣sently ceases to be mov'd, nor does it begin to move again, till first the Heart begins to move. But most manifestly of all does this appear in Wounds of the Head, that take away some part of the Scull, and the Brain it self, as we have seen in the Camp: For if the Pa∣tient fall into a Convulsion, presently we see the Motion of the Heart ceases; but if the Heart begin again to beat; which is easily perceived by the Pati∣ents Pulse, not before but presently af∣ter some Pulses; the Heart begins by little and little again to be mov'd; and after the Brain, by degrees, all the rest of the Members are mov'd. These are all certain Signs that the Heart is not mov'd by the Animal Spi∣rits, thrust forward into it from the Brain; but that the Brain, and by means of that the Animal Spirits are mov'd by the Blood sent upward. In the mean time I will not deny, but that by rea∣son of certain Nerves scarcely discern∣able, descending toward the Basis of the Heart, the Orifices of it are some∣what less, sometimes more loosen'd or contracted, as in the Passions of the Mind, and for this reason, that the Blood in the Ventricles is sometimes more difficultly, sometimes more easi∣ly expell'd, according to the various Determination of the Animal Spirits to those Orifices: Nevertheless the continual Motion of the Heart does not proceed from thence; tho' this be not the cause of any Impediments to hinder from performing its Motion free∣ly and equally; as in the respiratory Motion of the Breast, sometimes Impe∣diments arise from the Muscles of the Larynx, too much contracted by the help of the Animal Spirits flowing tho∣rough the Nerves, tho' those Muscles are no cause of Respiration. And thus I have sufficiently displayd the Errors of the first Opinion. II. The second Opinion believesWhether mov'd by the Dilata∣tion of the Blood. the Heart is mov'd by the Dilatati∣on of the Heart in its Ventricles. For the Blood falling into its Ventricles, becomes presently very much dilated, and distends the Sides of the Ventricles beyond their just Poise, which by the flowing forth of that dilated Blood tho∣rough the great Arteries, adjoyning to both Ventricles, are presently contract∣ed beyond their due Measure, and di∣stended by and by again upon the flow∣ing in of new Blood. As it happens in a Willow Twigg or other Tree; which if you pull down beyond its natural Si∣tuation, being let go suddainly, it will fly up again beyond its proper and na∣tural Poise, and for some time Waggs up and down, through the remaining Force of the Violent Motion. This is a spe∣cious Invention easily refuted. For if the Motion and Pulse of the Heart should proceed from the Dilatation of the Blood in the Ventricles, then the Influx of Blood failing, the Heart would not be mov'd; because there is no Blood there∣in to be dilated: But on the contrary, the Hearts of several Animals being taken out of the Body, and depriv'd of all the adjoyning Vessels and Blood, still move and beat for some time, when there is no Blood contain'd or dilated therein: Nay the Hearts of Eels, Li∣zards, and other Creatures being cut into pieces, the several Particles will move for some time. Deusingius relates that in a live Dog he cut off the Tip of the Heart, and for some time beheld strong Contractions in the Piece cut out, which could never have been, were this Opinion true. Charleton, that he might avoid these Rocks, chooses rather to joyn two Causes together, and to say, That the Heart is distended accidental∣ly by the Dilatation of the Blood flowing in; but that it is mov'd and contracted by its own Fibres, and of its own pro∣per Motion. But the Heart of an Eel cut in pieces, shews the contrary; see∣ing there is no Blood flows into that to be dilated, and for that the Fibres are
cut, while nevertheless alternate Con∣traction and Laxation remains. III. Others, to avoyd the RocksWhether  part ly by the ation of the Blood, and partly by the animal Spirits. both of the first and second Opinion, joyn'd the two preceding Opinions both together, and assert, That the Blood sliding into the Ventricles of the Heart, are inflam'd and rarify'd by the innate Fire it self, and through its expan∣sion wanting more room, widen the Walls of the Heart: and then the Parenchyma of the Heart being mo∣lested by that Expansion, calls the Animal Spirits to its Assistance, which coming in sufficient quantity, contract the Muscles which constitute the Pa∣renchyma of the Heart, and so by streightning the Ventricles, thrust forth the contain'd Blood into the Ar∣teries; and hence, that the dilatation of the Heaat caus'd by the Blood rare∣fying, is natural; but the contraction by the Muscles, absolute and obedient to the Will, is Animal. Certainly this Opinion is plausibly propounded, that at first sight there seems no doubt to remain; but upon better examination it will appear that the latter part does not well cohere with the former. For it supposes the whole Parenchyma of the Heart to be compos'd of Muscles; which if it be true, then the whole Heart is the Instrument of voluntary Motion, whose motion may be increas'd, diminish'd, stopp'd, or otherwise alter'd at pleasure. But who, I would fain know, can direct or alter the Motion of the Heart at his own Pleasure? Besides, the Muscles to per∣form a continual Motion, want larger Nerves, and a more copious supply of animal Spirits. But it is impossible there should flow into the Heart any other than a very few Spirits through Nerves almost invisible, not sufficient for a con∣tinual Motion lasting all a man's Life. And whence I pray shall those Spirits proceed and flow into the salient or jumping Point, which is observ'd to move first in the Bubble of an Egg, before there is any delineation either of Brain or Nerves perceptible? IV. Others, to avoid these Difficul∣ties,Whether ov'd by n Ethere∣l Matter. chuse rather to explain the thing, by giving it the Title of a Subtle and Ethereal Matter, which is continually agitated and mov'd, and variously moves other Bodies also upon which it lights; as it penetrates this way or that way, with ease or difficulty, through the Pores of these or those Bodies. This Matter, say they, lighting into the dilating Fibres of the Heart, and not able conveniently to penetrate their Pores, by reason of their Situation and Figure, is stopp'd therein, and filling, distends them: hence flowing out again, and lighting upon the contracting Fi∣bres, the first being already loosen'd▪ it fills and distends them likewise: and so they tell us that these Fibres are al∣ternately fill'd and distended. But this is a Cause far fetch'd indeed. For he that here flies to some general Cause of the Motion of all things, he concludes nothing in specie, concerning the Motion of one thing, nor of the Motion of the Heart: whereas in the Motion of the Heart, we are not to seek for the gene∣ral (which you may as well say is God) but for the special and next Cause. Be∣sides, no Reason can be given, why that subtle Matter should not light at one and the same time upon both the Fi∣bres, as well the contracting as the di∣lating; but should proceed in an alter∣nate order from one to t'other, as if guided by some peculiar Intelligence: nor wherefore in a Creature newly strangl'd, when the Heart and other Parts are yet warm, that Ethereal Matter does no longer move the Fibres of the Heart after the same manner. Should it be said, that there is no Blood that flows then into the Heart to be di∣lated, I shall answer, that the Heart is not mov'd by that dilatation of the Blood, as I have already prov'd: or if that be the Cause of the Motion, then not the Ethereal Matter; if it be an as∣sistance without which that Motion can∣not be perform'd, where is that assist∣ance in the Heart of an Eel newly pull'd out, and cut into peices, whose several particles beat, though there be no Blood therein to be dilated? V. The Fifth Opinion differs muchWhether mov'd by the Spirit of the Blood. from the former, as asserting, That the Motion of the Heart proceeds from a certain vivific Spirit, which is in the Blood it self, and generates it in it self; the refutation of which Opinion may be seen in the following 11th. Chapter. VI. These Five Opinions being setWhether mov'd by the Lungs. aside, Alexander Maurocordatus pro∣pounds a new and hitherto unheard of Opinion, That the Heart is mov'd by the respiring Lungs, and the Lungs by the Heart, and that these two parts give mutual assistance one to another. But this Opinion is by us refuted in the following Thirteenth Chapter, to which
we shall only add these few Things. 1. That if the Motion of the Heart proceeded from the respiring Lungs, whence does that Motion arise in the Birth which is included in the Womb, where the Lungs are idle, and never heave; and which are never to be found in the little jumping Point conspicuous to the Eyes in an Egg? 2. Whence that Motion proceeds in Fish, and other Creatures that have no Lungs, and but one Ventricle of the Heart? 3. By what is it occasion'd in the Hear of an Eel, which after all the adjoyning parts are cut away, sometimes beats after it is taken out of the Body? That, says Maurocordatus, is a Trembling Motion. Which we deny, because that for some time it observes the true measure of Beating, till the approach of Death, and then it comes indeed to be a trem∣bling Motion. Among all the foresaid six Sentences, the second approaches the nearest to Truth, but only it is to be explain'd a little more at large, and somewhat af∣ter another manner: For here are two things wanting; in the first place, what dilates the Blood; and secondly, it does not sufficiently explain how the Heart is mov'd when the Blood does not flow into the Ventricles. Which two things are to be more narrowly exa∣min'd for the discovery of the Truth. VII. In the first Conception, the Spi∣rituousThe true Cause of the Heart's Motion. Blossom, which is in the Seed, is collected and concluded in a little Bub∣ble, wherein there is a delineation made of all the parts by the vivific Seed that lies in the Blossom, which gives to all the Parts their Matter, Form and Being; and abides in all and singular the Parts being form'd, and variously operates therein according to their diversity. The most subtle and sharpest part of this is setl'd in the Heart, which by its extraordinary acrimony obtains an extraordinary pow∣er of Fermentation, by which the Hu∣mors pouring into the Heart, are there dilated, as Gunpowder is dilated and set afire by the heat of the Flame. And as Gunpowder has no actual heat in it self, but being kindled, receives a burn∣ing heat, so the Blood in the Heart be∣ing dilated by that same Spirit, waxes very hot and fiery. By reason of which heat Cartesius calls this Spirit a continual heat abiding in our Hearts as long as we live, which is a kind of Fire, which the Blood of the Veins nourishes, and is the corporal beginning of all the Motions of our Members. For that this Spirit by its continual agitation and dilatation, sup∣plies the heat with a continual fewel. But in regard it is much dissipated by this continual agitation, it has need of continual supply, to the end the dissipa∣ted Particles may be continually restor'd. This Supply is maintain'd by the most subtle Particles of the Blood attenuated in the Heart, entring the Pores of the Heart, and infus'd into it through the Coronal Arteries, which Blood, if it be good and sound, then this Spirit is rightly supply'd, and the Heart continues strong and vigorous; if otherwise, through bad Diet and deficiency of the Bowels, then this Spirit is ill supply'd, and the Heart becomes weak and infirm. Now this Spirit abiding in the whole substance of the Heart, forthwith dilates in the Heart, both the Blood and all other proper humors whatever. Which Action is sometimes swifter, some∣times slower, more vehement, or weaker, as the Matter to be dilated is fitted more or less for dilatation, by the fermentaceous Particles mix'd with it: and the Spirit it self is more or less vi∣gorously stirr'd up into Act by the greater or lesser heat: for these two things are the cause of all alterations of Pulses. Thus in Fevers, where there is more or less heat, and the Matter to be dilated is thinner and more volatile, there the Pulses beat thicker and swifter. But if that Matter, as is usual in putrid Fevers, has many unequal Particles, some more, some less easie to be dilated, then the Pulse becomes unequal: if the Blood be colder and thicker, the Pulse is slow and beats seldom. When it is cool'd, it diminishes at first, then ceases altogether: but being warm'd again with new Blood or warm Water, it pre∣sently begins to beat again. The said Spirit being stirr'd up by the heat, by and by dilates and ferments the Humors, and that two manner of ways. First, By fermenting those Hu∣mors that flow in great quantity through the hollow and Pulmonary Vein, into the Ventricles of the Heart, by the fer∣mentation and dilatation of which, and the rapid agitation of the least Particles between themselves, a great heat is kin∣dled in the Heart. This heat presently whets and sharpens the same Spirit abi∣ding in the innermost and thicker sub∣stance of the Heart and its Fibres, which so excited, presently somewhat dilates the subtle Blood infus'd into the Sub∣stance and Fibres for Nourishment; and hence it is, that the Fibres of the Heart are forthwith contracted, which causes an expulsion of the Blood in the
Cavity of the Ventricles. Then again new Blood flowing into the Ventricles, there happens a dilatation of the same, with a sharp Heat, and by that means a distension of the Ventricles at the same time, which by reason of the kin∣dled heat, presently follows dilatation of the same into the Pores of the Sub∣stance about the Fibres, and by that means there happens again a contraction of the whole Heart and Ventricles; which things proceed in a certain order so long as Life lasts. Now this Motion proves the more vehement, because the Fibres being dilated beyond their poise, presently when the Blood dilated in the Ventricles, easily breaks forth through the broad Arteries, they are as easily again contracted beyond their measure by the dilatation of the inner Blood; so that same distension and con∣traction beyond the due Aequilibrium, causes indeed the Pulses to be stronger, but yet they are not the first cause of the Motion, which is only an alternate dilatation of the Blood, sometimes in the Ventricles, sometimes in the Sub∣stance of the Heart. VIII. Hence it appears, why PulsationWhy the Heart of an Eel ta∣ken out of the Body beats. remains in the Hearts of Eels, and other vivacious Creatures, being taken out of the Body, though no Blood be then pout'd out of the great Vessels into the Ventricles; because the said Spirit abi∣ding in their hearts, is easily rais'd into Act by the small remaining heat; and acts upon the Blood abiding in the Sub∣stance it self, and by something dilating of it, contracts the Fibres. Afterwards that dilated Matter being somewhat dis∣pell'd, they are again relax'd. Which not only appears in hearts that are whole, but in the hearts of some after they are cut into pieces, and in the se∣veral pieces themselves. But because in such cases there is no new Blood dila∣ted in the Ventricles, and consequently no new heat nor any distension of the Fibres beyond their Position, hence in hearts that are taken out, and cut in pieces, the motion is weak, and quickly ceases. This I perswade my self to be the true cause of the Motion of the heart, till some body else shall shew me any other more probable. CHAP. VIII. Of the Pulse and Circulation of the Blood. I. THE Motion of the Heart isDigression▪ by the Greeks call'd , by the Latins, Pulsus; by which the Heart alternately rises and falls. It is perform'd by Dilatation and Contra∣ction, between which two Motions there is some little kind of Rest. II. In Dilatation, the sides of theDilatati∣on. Ventricles after they have expell'd the dilated Blood into the Arteries by the contraction of the Fibres, presently by the rarefaction of the Blood sliding in again, they are thrust from the middle Septum, and so rise again. In Contra∣ction Bauhinus and Harvey believe, that the heart is extended in length, the Tip receding from the Base; and so the sides of the Ventricles being thrust for∣ward toward the middle Septum, that the Blood is thereby expell'd: which also seems to be the Opinion of Ent. But the dissection of living Animals teaches us the contrary, by which it is manifest that the heart in Contraction is contracted every way together, that is to say, that the distended sides of the Ventricles are contracted every way to∣gether, and together ascend the Cone toward the Base, and so the heart be∣ing now swell'd by the dilated Blood, grows rounder and harder, and by that contraction of the whole that the Blood is forc'd out of the Ventricles. Which that it is so, not only Experience but Reason demonstrates; seeing that by the dilatation of the Blood contain'd in the interior Pores of the Substance, all the Fibres of the Heart are at the same time contracted every way together, as we have said already. III. Here arises a Question, WhetherWhen the Cavities are bro▪ est. the Cavities of the Vessels are larger and wider, when the Heart is con∣tracted into a rounder Figure, or when it is extended in Length. Har∣vey thinks the Cavities are larger when the heart is extended in length, but nar∣rower when the heart is contracted. 1. Because that in Contraction the heart becomes harder. 2. Because that in Frogs, and other Creatures that have little Blood, it is at that time whiter o
less red, than when it is extended in length. 3. Because if an Incision be made into the Cavity of the Ventricle, presently the Blood gushes out of the Wound, otherwise than as it happens when it is extended in length. Harvey might have also added this Experiment, by cutting away the Tip of the Heart in a living Dog, and thrusting a Finger into the Cavity of either Ventricle through the open'd Passage: for then he would have manifestly perceiv'd a pressure upon the Finger by the contra∣ction of the heart, and that compressure to cease upon its being extended. Car∣tesius being quite of another Opinion, tells us, That the Heart in Contraction becomes harder, but broader on the inside, by reason of the contain'd and suddenly dilated Blood, and for that it manifestly appears to the Eye, is not di∣minish'd in magnitude, but rather some∣what augmented, and that for this very reason at that instant time it becomes harder, and the Blood less red in Crea∣tures that have very little Blood; be∣cause by that dilatation the Fibres of the heart are extended, and by virtue of that distention, press forth in good part at that instant of time the Blood in the Pores of the heart, and renders it more ruddy. He confirms this by an Experiment, and says, That if you cut away the sharp end of a heart of a young Coney, then you may discern by the Eye, that the Cavities are made broader at the same moment that the heart is contracted, and becomes harder, and drives forth the Blood. Nay when all the Blood of the Body being almost exhausted, it squeezes forth only some few little drops, yet the Cavities at the time of expulsion retain the same breadth of dilatation: Lastly, he adds, That in Dogs and other stronger Ani∣mals, this is not so visible to the sight; because the Fibres of the heart are stronger in them, and possess a great part of the Cavities. But though these Reasons of Cartesius are very strenuous, I think however there is some distinction to be made as to the Time, that is to say, in the beginning and end of the Contraction, and the very instant when the Contraction first begins, the Cavi∣ties are wider, because of the dilated Blood contain'd therein: but when the Blood breaks forth out of them into the great Vessels, that they are at that very moment of time more narrow, the Fi∣bres being contracted every way toward the inner parts beyond their stretch: and that I believe may be observ'd by diligent inspection into a live heart. IV. Besides the Pulses, BartholineVicious Motions. makes mention of two other Motions of the Heart, Undation and Trembling Motion. But in regard that these are nothing else but certain Species of a vitious and diseased Pulse, they are to no purpose describ'd as new Motions. V. The Use of the Pulse is to forceThe vse of the Pulse. the Blood dilated in the Heart thro' the Arteries to all the Parts of the Body, to the end that all the Parts may be nourish'd thereby; and that the particular Parts may be able by virtue of a proper Faculty to concoct, alter and convert into a Substance like its own, some part of that Blood, and apply it to themselves, and re∣turn the remainder to the Heart a∣gain; there to be again dilated, spi∣ritualiz'd, and indu'd with new vi∣gor. VI. But seeing that by the daily re∣ciprocationCirculati∣on of the Blood. of the Pulse, there happens a daily expulsion of Blood from the heart, there is a necessity that the heart should continually draw from the hollow Vein, Blood sufficient to fill the Vessels as Nature requires. But because the hollow Vein is never exhausted, and moreover, because the Arteries, into which there is a continual expulsion, never swell to excess, it follows, That this Motion must proceed circularly, and that the Blood must be continually empty'd out of the Heart into the Arteries, and out of them into the Veins and Parts to be nourish'd, and thence return from the lesser Veins to the hollow Vein, and so at length to the Heart. This Circulation is confirm'd by three most strenuous Arguments. VII. The great Quantity of BloodFirst proof from the plenty of Blood. empty'd out of the Heart into the Ar∣tery. Which is so much, that the hundredth part of it cannot be supply'd by the receiv'd Nourishment; when that emptying proceeds and is carry'd on, as equally in a man that has fasted two or three days, as in one that has fed well. So that unless the Blood should return from the Arteries through the Veins to the heart, the heart in a short time would want Matter to empty: besides, all the Arteries would burst in a short time, and the Parts into which the Blood flows, would swell after a wonder∣ful manner. For the heart of a sound man in the strength of his Age, beats in one hour 3000 or somewhat more Pulses. Cardan reckons 4000. Bartho∣lin
4400. And Rolfinch has number'd in himself 4420. So that if by every par∣ticular Pulse only one scruple of Blood should be empty'd into the Aorta, it will be found by computation, that eight or nine pound Averdupois weight of Blood must pass through the Heart in one hour, and consequent∣ly thirty or forty pound in four hours: according to the greater or lesser num∣ber of the Pulses. I mention'd the least weight; for we find by ocular inspecti∣on, that two drams and more have been empty'd by every particular Pulse, in the dissections of live Dogs; and yet 'tis very probable, that there is not so much Blood to be empty'd in the whole Body of Man. Moreover, if in Blood∣letting we consider the quantity of Blood that immediately flows out, and consi∣der likewise how much in the mean while is circulated at the same time through Myriads of other Veins, where the progress of the Blood is hindred by no Ligature, all which Blood passes through the Heart; we shall easily ob∣serve, that in a man by each particular Pulse, not a few drops, not a scruple, not one or two drams, but much more, perhaps half an ounce or more are em∣ptied out of the Heart into the great Ar∣tery: which is yet much more apparent in Artery-cutting. When if we consider what is empty'd out of every small Artery cut, by every particular Pulse, and what is empty'd by all the rest by the same Pulses, we shall find a vast quantity pass through the Heart; since it is certain that there is as much Blood empty'd out of one Aorta-Artery, out of the left Ventricle of the Heart, as out of all and singular the Arteries deriv'd from the Aorta, if they were open'd. Seeing then that by so great a quantity, neither the Arteries are distended to excess, nor that any other parts swell, nor that the hollow or other Veins are empty'd; cer∣tain it is, that the Blood empty'd into and through the Arteries, flows back through the Veins to the Heart. VIII. The Situation of the ValvesThe Second Proof from the Situa∣tion of the Valves. in the Veins, which in all Men is such, that the Blood may flow freely through them to the Hollow Vein; but nothing from the hollow Vein to the lesser Veins: For if you blow into the hollow Veins with a Straw; nothing of that Breath will enter the lesser Veins: But if you blow the lesser Veins, the Breath will presently enter the greater, and so to the Hollow. IX. The Ligature in Bloodletting.The Third Proof from Ligature in Blood∣letting. For the Arm or Thigh being bound near the place where the Vein is to be o∣pen'd, the Ligature causes the Veins to swell underneath. Because the Blood being forc'd through the Arteries to∣ward the external Parts, returns tho∣rough the Veins and ascends upwards, and when it comes to the Ligature there it stops; which causes the Vein to swell below the Ligature, so▪ that the Blood not able to ascend any farther, flows out at the little Hole made with the Lancet. Again, the Ligature being un∣ty'd, the Efflux ceases, because the Blood can then ascend more easily through its little Pipe, which is sufficiently wide, than issue forth at the narrow Wound. Moreover, if that same Ligature be ty'd so hard, that the Blood cannot pass through the Arteries themselves toward the lower Parts, then nothing will issue forth neither; because the Blood is not forc'd through the Arteries toward the lower Parts, and consequently cannot ascend through the Veins to the upper Parts: But loosning that Ligature never so little, and the Pulse more freely pe∣netrating the Artery, presently the Blood will flow out of the open'd Vein. More∣over also, any Ligature or Compressi∣on of the Veins and Arteries in living Animals, is forc'd through the Arteries from the Heart, and through the Veins flows to the Heart. For above the Li∣gature, that is, toward the Heart, the ty'd Arteries swell, by reason of the Passage deny'd to the Blood; but the Veins fall, by reason of the free Efflux of the Blood to the Heart. The con∣trary to which happens below the Li∣gature. These Reasons alone are sufficient to prove the said Circulation: Besides which there are many others, apparent and probable, which here for brevities sake I pass over, concerning which Har∣vey, Riolanus, Conringius, Ent, High∣more, Deusingius and others, may be consulted, who have written whole Treatises particularly concerning the Circulation of the Blood. I shall add one thing concerning the manner of Circulation, wherein perhaps I shall differ from others. X. There are two Opinions concern∣ingThe man∣ner of Cir∣culation. the manner of Circulation, of which one is Riolanus's, approv'd by few: The other Common; which most Philoso∣phers maintain.
XI. Riolanus holds, That theRiolanus his manner Blood Circulates only through the lar∣ger Vessels; but that that which is pour'd forth to the lesser Branches, never returns to the wider Channels, but is consum'd in the Nourishment of the Parts; moreover, that the Blood of the first Region does not Circulate, but is consum'd likewise in the Nourishment of the Parts con∣ceal'd therein. But this Opinion at this day is utterly rejected by all learned Men; there being no Reason to be gi∣ven, why the Blood, forc'd through the Arteries in greater Quantity, than is requisite for the Nourishment of the Parts, should not with equal necessity cir∣culate through the smallest Veins, as if it were forc'd through the greater Arteries. Or why the Blood forc'd through the Coeliac and Mesenteric Ar∣teries in great quantity to the Stomach and Intestines, should not circulate tho∣rough the Veins of the same Parts. E∣specially seeing that Experience contra∣dicts him in both these Cases. For that if you cut the smallest Artery in the Extremity of the Hand or Foot, more Blood flows out in one hour, than is re∣quisite for the Nourishment of the whole Hand or Foot, a whole day to∣gether. And our own Eye-sight shews us, in the Dissections of Living Crea∣tures, that upon tying the Mesenteric Vessels, the Blood is forc'd through the Arteries to the Intestines, and that a suf∣ficient Quantity also flows back through the Veins to the Porevan. XII. The common Manner af∣firms,The com∣mon man∣ner. That the Circulation of the Blood is caus'd by the Anastomoses of the Veins and Arteries, by which the Orifices of the Arteries are uni∣ted with the Orifices of the Veins; and mutually open one into another: So that where-ever any such Ana∣stomoses are, there is also Circula∣tion. I thence conclude, that where those Anastomoses are not, there is no Cir∣culation. It would be a very difficult thing to uphold this Opinion; for that those A∣nastomoses are very few in the larger Ves∣sels, and tho' they may be more nume∣rous in the small Ends of the diminu∣tive Vessels, which however are not e∣very where discernable to the Eye; yet because of the extraordinary Narrow∣ness of such Passages, very little Blood can pass through them▪ not the sixth, no, not the tenth part of what is forc'd through the Arteries can enter the Veins. Besides, how shall the Parts be nourished by the Blood passing through those Anastomoses, to which there is no∣thing contributed in that Passage? Per∣haps you will say, there is as much al∣low'd 'em by Exhalation, as is sufficient. But hence it would follow, in regard the thin Serum is most apt for such an Exhalation, that all the Parts are nou∣rished by Serum; because the Blood be∣ing somewhat thicker, cannot easily ex∣hale through the Pores of the Vessels. But this is absurd; because the Serum is added to the Blood only for a Vehicle, and not for the Nourishment of the Parts, and that carries the Blood tho∣rough the Ends of the Arteries into the Pores of the Substance, from whence it then partly exhales insensibly, part∣ly returns with the remaining Blood in∣to the Veins. Lastly, granting that Circulation is only caused by the said Anastomoses, how comes it to pass then in a Dropsie, that Circulation shall pro∣ceed from the Substance of the Parts in∣to the Veins? For in the Dropsie the Serum is not concluded in the Vessels only, but of necessity abides in the Sub∣stance of the Parts. Shall then that Se∣rum, which in that Disease is more crude and thick, passing out of the Ar∣teries by Exhalation, enter into the Veins again by Inhalation, that so it may be circulated through the Heart, and thence flow to the Urinary Passa∣ges, and be empty'd through them? As the Observations of Physicians teach us, that that same Disease is sometimes cu∣red by a copious Flux of Urine. How should the large soft Tumours of the Parts fall in a short time, without any manifest Evacuation, if the Humours contain'd without the Vessels in the ve∣ry Substance it self of the Parts, never return into the Veins? How can they enter them united together with the Arteries to their Ends? All which things sufficiently demonstrate the Errors of the common Opinion. XIII. The true manner of Circulati∣onThe true manner of Circulati∣on. presently shews it self, upon the more accurate Consideration of what has been said. And it is apparent, That the Blood does not only Circulate through the said Anastomoses, but through the Substance it self of the Parts. For a great quantity of Blood is conveighed through the Arteries, of which a good Quantity flows through the Ends of the smallest Arteries, into the Pores of the Substance of the Parts, for the Nourishment of
which there is so much applied to eve∣ry part as is necessary, or fit to be ap∣ply'd and assimilated: The remainder proceeds farther, and enters the Orifi∣ces of the smallest Veins adhering to the Parts, and so proceeds farther still to the larger Veins: Now that the Blood flows into the Pores of the Parts, and returns through those into the Veins, is apparent from every slight Cut of the Skin, out of which, the Vessels being untouch'd, the Blood presently gushes. But because the Diminutive Arteries apparently ending in the Substance of the Parts, are very narrow; thence it comes to pass that they transmit more Blood than is needful for Nourishment; yet in the mean time the Blood which remains over and above, is no less, which cannot be emptied through them into the Pores of the Substance. Therefore that it should not settle and corrupt in the Arteries, the chief Creator allow'd these Anastomoses, that the Redundancy should pass through them into the Veins. Such is that remarkable Ana∣stomosis which we have observ'd at the Entrance into the Spleen, and two others in the Birth, one in the Heart through the Oval Hole, another in the Pulmi∣nary Artery, where it joyns with the Aorta. This Opinion of ours is con∣firm'd by Harvey, Plempius, Pecquet, and Charleton. Of which the latter two, not without reason, beleive that a grea∣ter part of the Blood returns through the substance of the Parts of the Veins, then through the Anastomoses, with whom Nicholas Hobken agrees. Rejecting any Anastomosis, saies he, I say it suffices, if the arteries are so inserted and joyn'd to the Parts that are enliven'd, as to penetrate deeply into their Substance, ending in a Branch of small Threads variously spread∣ing it self: And if they continually and aptly enjoy the Company of the Veins in like manner inserted into the Substance of the same Parts. There is no reason to fear Tumours, Inflammations, Apostemes, &c. because the Blood is poured forth without the Arteries into the Substance of the Parts: For by reason of the Narrow∣ness of the Arteries ending in the Sub∣stance, no more flows in than can pass conveniently through the Pores, and be again suckt in by the Orifices of the Veins. But some will say, that by la∣bourous Exercise and heating of the Blood, it is forc'd in more strongly, and in a greater Quantity, then at other times; therefore then at least too great a Quantity will flow into the Substance and produce those ill Effects. I answer, That the Blood then, by reason of its greater Heat is thinner, and the Pores also broader, and the Orifices of the little Veins more open for its Passage. But if the Pores become more narrow, either by Constitution or sudden Re∣frigeration, or by any other Accident, or that the Blood becomes thicker in the Parts, then to be able to enter the narrow Orifices of the little Veins; then indeed too great a Quantity of Blood would be gathered together in the Sub∣stance of the Parts, and beget the same Mischiefs. For this is the chiefest CauseThe Cause of Inflam∣mations. of the Pleurisie, Quinzey, Inflammation of the Lungs, &c. Of which Cause they were not aware, who thought the Cir∣culation ran only through the Anastomo∣ses of the Vessels only. For they teach us that by reason of the convenient Pas∣sage of the Blood deny'd, that the Ves∣sels are fill'd to the utmost; whence the Parts are distended into Tumovrs by the Vessels being over-fill'd; but because more Blood cannot be forc'd into the over-fill'd Vessels; hence the Blood which is collected within them, is de∣prived of a new Afflux of Arterious Blood, and so comes to be refrigerated, and not inflam'd, as Regius will have it. But they do not consider, that the whole Blood does not pass through the Anastomoses of the Vessels, but the grea∣ter Quantity of it is forc'd into the Pores of the Substance of the Parts; out of which if the redundant Quanti∣ty does not flow in due time into the Veins, then of necessity there happens a swelling of the Parts. And because the several particular drops of Arterious Blond, flowing to each Pulse, contribute their heat, hence by the overmuch in∣crease of the Blood in the Part, the Tumor increases, and there is at the same time an augmentation of heat, and this intense heat begets an effervescency of the collected Blood, and an inflam∣mation of the Part with a Tumor. Though I will not deny, but that Effer∣vescency may be occasion'd by a small quantity of Blood, but sharp, and prone to boil, when it overflows into any part; and then happens an Inflammation without a Tumor, as in St. Antony's Fire. For further illustration of this Matter, take a Spunge wrapt up loosly in a piece of Leather, and furnish'd in the lower side with three or four Leaden Pipes; then through a little hole cut in the Lea∣ther on the upper side, force in a quan∣tity of Water with a Syringe, it will
conveniently be distributed through the Pores of the Spunge, and there will re∣main in the Spunge as much Water as will serve to moisten it; the remainder passing through the Pores of it, and pass of its own accord through the Leathern Pipes at the bottom; but not with such an impulsive Motion, as it is forc'd in at the upper part out of the Syringe. I say, through the Pores, because there is no need of middle pipes to convey the Water into the lower Pipes: for that the Pores of the Spunge afford a suffi∣cient passage. But if these Pores are streightned, and the lower Pipes are contracted by any Accident, that the Water cannot pass equal in quantity and swiftness; then the Spunge receiving more than it can transmit, begins to swell, and consequently the loose piece of Leather wherein it is wrapt, becomes distended, hard and tumid. The same will happen if any viscous Matter be forc'd through the Syringe into the Spunge, by which the Pores and Pas∣sages are stopt up; for then receiving much more than it can well discharge, of necessity it will rise into a Tumor. He that will apply this Similitude to the Body of Man, will find the Circu∣lation of the Blood to be occasion'd in like manner through the Pores of the Substance, and hence perceive the Cause of most Swellings. XIV. There is an extraordinary andThe vse of Circulati∣on. manifold necessity of this Circula∣tion. 1. Seeing that the Blood being once discharg'd into the Parts, the farther off it flows from the Hearth of its Fire, is so much the more refrigerated, and less a part for nourishment; there is a necessity of its return to the Fountain of heat, the Heart, to be again new warm'd and attenuated therein, which return is oc∣casion'd by this Circulation. 2. Without this Circulation, neither could the Blood be forc'd to the Parts that are to be nourish'd, nor could that which remains after nourishment toge∣ther with the Chylus, be carry'd back to the Heart. 3. By means of this, all the Parti∣cles of the Blood are made fit for nou∣rishment by degrees, and according to a certain order. For there being no long Concoction in the Heart, but only a cer∣tain swift Dilatation, therefore the Chy∣lus upon its first passage through the Heart, does not acquire the absolute perfection of Blood, but at several pas∣sages, sometimes these, sometimes those Particles become more subtile and fit for nourishment. 4. By the help of this Circulation, the virtue of Medicines taken and apply'd, is carry'd through the whole Body, or the greatest part thereof. 5. By means of this the Blood is in continual motion; and preserv'd from congealing and putrifying. 6. By means of this we come to the knowledge of many Diseases; concern∣ing which in former time many Disputes have arisen among Physicians. 7. By means of this, Physicians also understand how to undertake the Cures of most Diseases; whereas formerly they only proceeded by uncertain Conje∣cture. There is no necessity that I should here refute in particular the vain Argu∣ments of Primrosius, Parisianus, and others, who stifly endeavour to oppose this Circulation, and uphold the dark∣ness of former Ages; remitting the Readers that desire to be more parti∣cularly inform'd of these things, to Ent, Highmore, and several others, who make it their Business to refute the Ar∣guments of such as uphold the contrary Opinion.Whether the Chylus and the Se∣rum cir∣culate. XV. But here remain two more Doubts; 1. Whether the Chylus circulates through the whole Body? 2. Whether the Serum circulates in like manner? I answer, That as to the Chylus, so long as it is not within the command of the Heart, and before it has enter'd the Veins, it is not forc'd by the beating of the Heart, and consequently does not circulate. Thus the Chylus contain'd in the Milky Mesenteric and Pectoral Vessels, is thrust forward by the com∣pressure of the Muscles and other parts, but is not mov'd further forward by the beating of the Heart, so long as it has not enter'd the Veins. So the Chylus falling out of the Milky Vessels into the Breasts, circulates no farther, but like Milk is either suckt, or flows of its own accord out of the Teats. But if any part of it there enter the Mamillary Veins, that same still retaining the form of Milk or Chylus, is convey'd together with the Vein-Blood to the Heart; wherein being dilated, presently it loses the form of Chylus or Milk, and assumes the form of Blood, at first more crude, or less spirituous; but afterwards to be more and more perfected by several passages' through the Heart. And so it does not circulate through the whole Body in the form of Chylus, but in the form of Blood, having no manner of simi∣litude
with the Chylus. Whence it comes to pass that there is no Chylus to be found, or that can be found in the Arteries. In like manner neither does the Chylus circulate in Women with Child toward the Cheese-cake or Amnion. As neither does it in some Women not with Child, but flowing likewise to theThe Cause of vterine Fluxes. Womb, is corrupted and putrefies about the Womb; and flows forth with more or less ill smell, according as its Cor∣ruption is more or less. Which is most probable to be the most obvious Cause of Uterine Fluxes. Also the Chylus, that sometimes flows to the Urinary Bladder, cannot circulate. All which things being consider'd, we must con∣clude at once, that the Chylus does not circulate through the whole Body, but that entring the Veins, it retains the form of Chylus only so far as the Heart, and there loses its form upon the dila∣tation. As for the Serum, this is also to be said, that it does not circulate, but when it enters the Blood-bearing Ves∣sels. For no Humors circulate by vir∣tue of the beating of the Heart, till af∣ter they have enter'd the Limits of the Heart's Command, and become subject to its Motion. But so long as they ac∣knowledge any other Mover, such as are the Peristaltic Motion of the Sto∣mach, Guts, and other parts, and the compressure of the Abdomen, &c. they never circulate. As the Serum, when having pass'd beyond the Bounds of the Heart's Empire, it falls into the Ureters and Bladder. And the Fleg∣matic Lympha, when separated from the Blood of the Choroidal Fold, it comes to be deposited in the Ventricles of the Brain, circulates no more; tho' it circulated before, when it was mix'd with the Blood. CHAP. IX. Of the Parts of the Heart. See the 9th. Table. I. IN the Heart are these Parts toThe Parts of the Heart. be specially consider'd: Two little Ears; two Ventricles with a middle Septum that distinguishes them; eleven Valves; and four large Vessels, of which, two adhere to the Right Ventricle; the hollow Vein of the Pulmonary Artery; and two adhere to the Left Ventricle, the Pulmonary Vein, and the A∣orta- Artery. Now let us us see in what Order the making of that enlivening Nectar pro∣ceeds in this Ware-house of Sanguifica∣tion: To which purpose we shall pro∣duce the several Parts in that Order, as Nature makes Use of 'em in the exe∣cution of this Office. II. The Little Ears are as it wereThe little Ears. Appendixes to the Heart, seated on both sides at the Basis of the Heart, before the Orifices of the Vessels, car∣rying the Matter to the Ventricles, and from some sort of likeness to the Ears call'd the Little Ears of the Heart. III. They are two in number, ofTheir num∣ber. which the Right and looser is plac'd next the Vena Cava; the Left, which is the lesser, thicker and firmer, joyns to the Pulmonary Vein. They are both remarkable for their more than ordinary bigness in the Em∣bryo. IV. They are compos'd of a peculiarTheir sub∣stance. Nervous Substance, though somewhat thin and soft, for more easie Dilata∣tion and Contraction. V. Their outward Superficies ap∣pearsThe Super∣ficies. to be full of Wrinkles; but smooth when fill'd and distended. VI. They are both concave, andTheir Ca∣vity. supported on the inside with strong and nervous Fibres, as with Pillars; between which are to be seen certain little Furrows, fewer on the Right side, more on the Left. VII. In the Birth and new-bornColour. Infants, they are of a ruddy Colour, in Persons of ripe years somewhat darker than the Heart; which never∣theless, in Dilatation, by reason of the Blood receiv'd, grows more rud∣dy; in Contraction, the Blood being discharg'd, becomes paler. VIII. They are dilated and con∣tracted,Motion. like the Ventricles of the Heart, but varying in Time. For al∣ways the dilatation of the Ventricles concurs with the contraction of the Ears; and the contraction of the Ven∣tricles concurs with the dilatation of the Ears: as appears by the Dissection of Living Creatures. Which teaches us
also, that they continue a weak palpita∣tion when the motion of the Heart sails, and are as it were the last parts that die. Hence Harvey and Ent were of opinion that they were first enliven'd, and that the beating little Vessel that appears first in the Egg, was the little Ear, and not the Heart: Which Deusingius opposes; and which seems to be an Error by the number it self; seeing the Heart has two little Ears, and only one jumping little Vessel appears in the Egg: which, in all probability seems rather to consti∣ture the Heart, which is single, than the Ears, that are two. IX. Their Use is to receive theTheir vse. The Ven∣tricles. Blood first of all from the Vessels that bring it in, slightly to ferment and prepare it, and so prepar'd to send it to the Ventricles. Walaeus be∣lieves 'em to be the Measures of the Blood carry'd to the Ventricles from the Vessels that bring it in: which O∣pinion Riolanus also approves. But Sen∣nertus, that they are appointed for the particular Attraction of Air for the ma∣king of Spirits. But how much he is deceiv'd, we have already told you, and shall further declare in the following Thirteenth Chapter. X. The Heart has two Cavities,Unnatural Things call'd Ventricles, distinguish'd by the Middle Septum, which is fleshy, close and thick, gibbous on the Right side, concave on the Left, a wonderful piece of Workmanship, wrought on both sides with little Pil∣lars or Sinews, and several little Caverns, but no where pervious. These Sinews some take for Muscles, and little Fibres proceeding from them, and extended as well to the treble-point∣ed as the Mitral Valves, and to be the Tendons of those Muscles conducing to the Contraction of the Valves of the Heart. Whence appears the Error of the Ancients, who wrote that the Blood pass'd through its broader pores from the Right to the Left Ventricle. Cer∣tainly if there were any such pores, di∣ligent Nature had in vain provided that Oval Hole in the Basis of the Heart, and that some middle Vessel, which joyns the Pulmonary Artery with the Aorta; for then there had been no need of these passages; if the Blood could have pass'd through the pores of the Septum from the Right into the Left Ventricle. And therefore Realdus Co∣lumbus deservedly opposes that ancient Opinion, and truly informs us that the Blood is thrust forward into the Lungs out of the Right Ventricle through the Pulmonary Artery; and from thence descends into the Left Ventricle through the Pulmonary Vein. Farther also he writes, That he had found that same Septum, by which the Ventricles are di∣stinguish'd, to be gristly in some Bo∣dies; a certain sign that the Blood could not pass through that, from the one to the other Ventricle. Let Riola∣nus therefore hold his peace, who so stif∣ly defends the passage of the Blood out of the Right Ventricle to the Left through the Septum, that he supposes Figments for Foundations, and affirms that the Septum is not only conspicuously pervious toward the Point, but also that there are certain little holes in it. Perhaps Riolanus might see these holes in his Sleep, which never could be found by any Anatomist that was awake, either in a raw or boyl'd Heart. Only Dominic de Marchettis writes, that he found once two holes in the upper part of the Sep∣tum, which were furnish'd with Valves in the Left Ventricle. But without doubt he was deceiv'd by one great oval hole, which in new-born Children is always to be seen, but afterwards is clos'd altogether, and this by reason of its extaordinary Breadth, he took to be two. XI. In the Ventricles sometimes vari∣ousbred in the Ventricles. Things are bred contrary to Na∣ture, though the Physician can hardly tell what the Patient ayls. Sometimes we have found little Gobbets of Fat, and as it were little soft whitish pieces of Flesh about the bigness of half an Egg, and sometimes bigger. In October 1663. we dissected a Virgin about three and twenty years of Age, who in her Life-time had often complain'd of an extraordinary heaviness and palpitation of her Heart, and had often fallen into swooning Fits, and so dy'd. In whose Body we found such a Gobbet of Fat, almost filling the Right Ventricle, and another little one in the Lest, and after a more dili∣gent Search, we found, that it was no kind of Body bred by the coagulation of Blood, but really a firm piece of Fat, not to be crumbl'd between the Fingers. And this we judg'd to be the Cause of her Death: for we could find no other in the whole Body. Neither did she complain in her Life of any other Di∣stemper than of that Anxiety, and those swooning Fits, which the igno∣rant People of the House took for Con∣vulsions or Fits of the Mother.
In Decemb. 1668. In another young Wench of the same Age, we found in the Right Ventricle such another Body of Fat about the bigness of half a Hen-Egg. And both Bauhinus and Riolanus write, That they have often met with such pieces of Fat. Smetius also tells us two Stories of a whitish Substance found in the Heart, about half a Fingers length, a Thumb's breadth, resembling the Marrow of the Leg of an Ox, fur∣nish'd with several Appendixes. Tulpius tells us of a Flegmatic Polypus, found by himself in the Left Ventricle. Vesalius writes, That he found in the Left Ven tricle of the Heart two pounds of a blackish Kernelly sort of Flesh (which seems to be an Error of the Printer, in∣stead of two Ounces:) the man, before his Death being very sad, very wake∣ful, and his Pulse beating very unequal∣ly. Beniverius tells us, That he found in one Body a piece of Flesh like a Med∣lar; and in another, a hard brawny Substance about the bigness of a Nut. Nicholas Massa met with a Mattery Aposteme, with an Exulceration of the whole little Ear. Matthias Cornax met with a corrupt Exulceration and much Matter. Salius, Horstius, and Antonius Sverinus met with Worms in the Ventricles. Hollerius, by the Re∣port of Laurentius, met with two little Stones, with several Apostemes. And Wierus has observ'd little Stones in the Heart. In Novemb. 1668. we dissected a Person in the public Theatre, of about five or six and thirty years of Age, who in his Life-time complain'd of many Heavinesses, and a long Asthma; in whose Heart we found an unusual sort of Body, white and firm, and truly ner∣vous, which could not be crumbl'd be∣tween the Fingers, about a short span long, and about the thickness of the little Finger, cover'd with a peculiar Mem∣brane, between which and the Body it self, were two Vessels swelling with Blood, reaching on the one side from the top to the bottom. The one, where it was larger and thicker, being solid without any hollowness, adher'd to the Ventricle it self. The other, forked, di∣vided as it were into two Legs, which were hollow, with little winding Cells. One of which Thighs extended to the Pulmonary Vein, the breadth of two or three Fingers; the other to the Aor∣ta-Attery. Such like, but lesser Polypus's we found in the Right & left Ventricle, in Feb. 1670. These Bodies hinder'd the free passage of the Blood through the Heart and Lungs, by which means the Lungs were very much swell'd; and when they were cut, a frothy kind of Liquor flow'd out of 'em. There were also in the Lungs little Veins, which in healthy People are hardly conspicuous, swell'd up in several places with Blood, to the thickness of a Lark's Quill. And such a sort of Polypus, Bartholine describes in his Anat. Hist. which was also found in a Heart: of the generation of which Polypus's, read Malpigius in a peculiar Treatise upon that Subject. XII. There are four large Vessels ad∣heringVessels. to the Ventricles of the Heart; the hollow Vein, the Pulmonary Artery, the Pulmonary Vein, and the Aorta. XIII. The Right Ventricle is thin∣ner,The Right Ventricle. larger and bigger, but not ex∣actly round, but almost Semi-circu∣lar, neither does it reach to the end of the Point. Therein the Veiny Blood, together with the Chylus brought from the Subclavial into the Hollow Vein, being admitted through the lit∣tle Ear, is forthwith attenuated, and rendred spirituous, and so converted into true spirituous Blood; Being first prepar'd, exactly mingled with the Chylus, and moderately dilated in the Auricle. XIV. This Veiny Blood, either withThe hollow Vein. or without the Chylus, the Ventricle re∣ceives out of the Hollow Vein, which is the largest Membranous Vessel in the whole Body, consisting of a simple and soft Tunicle, and in its progress, for its more security, wrapt about with the Coverings of the next parts. Into this Vessel, as all Rivers run into the Sea, so all the veins of the Body empty their Blood to be carry'd back to the Heart, to be there concocted and dilated a∣new. This Vein is inserted or joyn'd with a large open Orifice to the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, so that it cannot be separated whole from it. XV. To this Orifice grows a Mem∣branousThe Treble∣pointed Valves. Circle, which is presently di∣vided into three Membranous Valves, looking toward the inside, call'd vul∣garly Tricuspides, or Treble▪ pointed, and that from their triangular Form, as some think; though they are neither of that Form, neither are they extend∣ed into three Points. Rather the Name is giv'n 'em from hence, because they have each of 'em three Fibres, or three or four little strings, by which they are sasten'd to the fleshy little Columns of the Septum. These Valves being open
in the Dilatation of the Ventricle, ad∣mit the Blood out of the hollow Vein: but falling, and shutting in Contraction at the same moment, prevent the influx of new Blood out of the hollow Vein into the Ventricle. XV. Which Blood is then forc'd outThe Pul∣monaery Artery. of the Right Ventricle into the Lungs through the Pulmonary Artery, which is another large vessel annex'd to it at the upper part, which our Ancestors erroneoussy call'd the Arterious Vein, though it be nothing like a Vein: as is apparent, 1. From its Substance; being a dou∣ble, thick and firm Tunicle. 2. From its Use, which is to convey the spirituous and boiling Blood. 3. From its Motion▪ because it beats like the rest of the Arteries, as we find by the Dissections of living Animals. XVI. Close to this Orifice are fix'dSigmoid Valves. three membranous Valves, looking out∣wards, call'd Sigmoides, from their si∣militude to a Greek Sigma, which was anciently like a Roman C. These hin∣der, lest the Blood forc'd to the Lungs, should slide back again to the same Ven∣tricle, by the depression of the Lungs, and dilatation of the Heart. Through this Vessel therefore the Blood is largely discharg'd out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Right and Left part of the Lungs; of which the least part is expended in the Nourishment of the Lungs; but the greatest part being forc'd into the little Branches of the Pulmona∣ry Vein, which are joyn'd with the Branches of the Artery by Anastomoses, and dispers'd through both Lobes of the Lungs, like a Net, together with the Branches of the Artery, is convey'd to the Auricle and Left Ventricle of the Heart, through the Trunk of the Pul∣monary Vein. XVII. The Left Ventricle of theThe left Ventricle. Heart is narrower than the Right, but much more fleshy, thicker, harder and longer; having a Cavity somewhat round, and reaching to the Point. In this the Blood being refrigerated by the Inspiration of the Lungs, is again fer∣mented, dilated, boiles, and is render'd spirituous, and acquires its utmost per∣fection. XVIII. And the Ventricle receivesThe Pul∣monary Vein. this. Blood to be thus brought to fur∣ther perfection, through the Pulmonary Vein, which is a large Vessel descending from the Lungs, inserted into the upper part of the Ventricle, and continuous to it, which was formerly, though er∣roneously, call'd the Veiny Artery; whereas it is no Artery, but a Vein; as is apparent, 1. From its simple and soft Tunicle, which is like other Veins. 2. From its Use, which does not afford a spiritu∣ous and hot, but a refrigerated and temperate Blood. 3. For that it does not beat like the rest of the Arteries. XIX. To the Orifice of this Vein,The Mi∣tral Vves are joyn'd two membranous Valves, call'd Mitral, because that being joyn'd together, they seem to resemble a Bishop's Miter. These differ little or nothing in Matter and Form from the Tricuspid Valves, and looking toward the inner parts of the Ventricle, pre∣vent the reflux of the Blood out of that Ventricle into the Lungs. To that end, for their greater strengthening, they are ty'd to flat fleshy pieces, and long filaments, with two or three thick and fleshy small Sinews, or little Pillars, rising upwards from the lower part of the Septum, which some believe to be Muscles, and that the Filaments are Tendons. XX. The Blood perfected in thisThe Aor∣ta. Ventricle is discharg'd into the Aorta-Artery, inserted and continuous to it, being the Root of all the Arteries, ex∣cept the Pulmonary and Trachea, being of a more solid and harder Substance, and furnish'd with a double Tunicle, the innermost thicker, the outermost thinner, and a thin Mem∣brane of the neighbouring Parts for its further security. XXI. At the Rise of this ArteryThe Half-Moon Valves. stand three Valves, extended outward, by the Ancients call'd Semilunares, as resembling a Half-Moon, altoge∣ther like the Sigma form'd. These sustain the violence of the Blood, stri∣ving to flow back out of the Aorta. XXII. In some Brutes, especiallyThe Bone of the heart in Harts, there is bred of the Ori∣fice of the Aorta harden'd, a little Bone that sustains the Valves. Galen makes mention of this Bone in several places. Plempius writes, That he has sometimes taken such a Bone out of the Hearts of Oxen. But he does not be∣lieve it to be any part of the Aorta turn'd into Bone, but a peculiar Bone; because it is observ'd to be in the fleshy Substance it self of the Heart. Nicholas Stenonis writes, That he has not only observ'd it in larger Animals, but also in Sheep, and believes it to be nothing but a part of the tendonous Orifice
turn'd into a Boney hardness: Bartholine however met with one in the Heart of a Phthisical Person, and asserts, that an∣other was found in the Heart of Pope Urban the 8th. Riolanus reports, that there was a Stone found in the Heart of a President, and of the Queen Mother; and boldly asserts, That it is not only frequently to be met with in the Hearts of Old Men, in whom he had observ'd it himself above thirty times; perhaps, because Riolanus was more us'd to the Dissections of Old Men than other A∣natomists, who generally meet with the Younger sort. CHAP. X. Of the Union of the Vessels in the Heart of the Birth. See Figure 7. Tab. 9. HOW the Blood is mov'd through the Heart in its Vessels, in Men born, has been sufficiently explain'd; but because in the Birth, while it abides in the Womb, the Vessels ore some∣what otherwise dispos'd, let us examine how the Work of Sanguification pro∣ceeds there. I. In the Birth, the Blood doesThe Moti∣on of the Blood in the Birth. not pass out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart through the Lungs to the Left Ventricle, as in a Man born; neither is it fermented, concocted and dilated in both Ventricles, but in one. For that which is concocted and di∣lated in the Right, does not thence proceed to the Left, to be there dila∣ted; and that which is dilated in the Left, was not dilated before in the Right. II. To this purpose there are doubleDouble U∣nions of the Vessels. Unions of the Vessels in the Birth, through which that Passage of the Blood is made, which in grown persons are quite defac'd. III. The first Union is made in theThe Oval Hole. Heart by Anastomosis, being a large and wide hole of an Oval Form, seat∣ed under the right Auricle, near the Coronary, before the hollow Vein, di∣stinctly opens it self into the right Ven∣tricle: Hence call'd the Oval Hole, by which is made the Union of the hollow vein, call'd the Pulmonary Vein. IV. To this Hole next to the Pul∣monary Vein, is annex'd a membranous thin Valve, but firm and hard, bigger than the Hole, hindring the reflux of the Blood flowing into the left Ventricle out of the hollow Vein. V. The other Union is made aboutIts  two Fingers Breadth from the Basis, without the Heart, by a long Channel, by which the Pulmonary Artery is joyn'd to the Great Artery, which Channel has the Substance of an Arte∣ry, as also the same thickness and wide Cavity, and ascends with an oblique ascent from the pulmonary Artery to the great Artery, and discharges into the Aorta the Blood forc'd from the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Pulmonary, so that it should not fall into the Left Ventricle. But because the heat of the Birth isThe other Union. like a new Fire, which begins first to be kindled by a little Spark, and so increases to a bigger Fire; hence it come to pass that its Blood while it abides in the Womb, is not yet arriv'd to that de∣gree of Heat, as to want Refrigeration, and the double Concoction of the Heart: for it requires not as yet that Acrimony which is afterwards necessary for a firm∣er Nutrition of the Body. Which is the reason that the Birth does not breathe in the Womb, and that the Lungs are idle and useless for a time, and remain thicker: by reason of which Density, there is no free passage through the Lungs for the Blood con∣cocted in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and thence forc'd into the Pul∣monary Artery. For which nevertheless that there may be a way and passage open, the supream Creator ordain'd that Channel, through which that Blood should be discharg'd out of the Pulmo∣nary Artery into the Aorta, there being no more allow'd in the mean time to the Lungs, than what is requisite for their Nourishment. VI. But lest the Right ventricleThe Use of the Right Ventricle▪ of the Heart, wherein the more sub∣tle, and spirituous Blood is made, should remain idle for want of Mat∣ter; the Oval Hole is plac'd at the entrance into the hollow vein, to the end the Blood falling out of the hol∣low vein, should discharge it self, partly into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, partly through the said Hole
into the Pulmonary Vein, and so into the Left Ventricle. And thus the Blood in the Heart of the Birth, is concocted or dilated only simply and once in either of the Ven∣tricles, and that which is concocted and dilated in the Right Ventricle, is min∣gled in the great Artery with that which is dilated in the Left. VII. This Oval Hole which isThe Oval Hole is a∣bolish'd in Children, when born. wide in the Birth, being of no Use to Men born, becomes so clos'd and stopp'd up within a few weeks, that there is not the least Figure of it that appears. For it is a very rare thing to find it pervious in People of ripe years, as Pinaeus, Marchettus, Riolan, and Bartholin, and others have written that they have seen it: yet is it not to be seen in one of ten Thousand. And most commonly it is so closely stopp'd up, that you would swear there was never any hole there. For it is so stopp'd up and consolidated by the Valve afore∣said, in a short time after the Birth comes into the World, that there is no more passage to be seen, although in many people of ripe years, the same Valve, now fully corroborated, is so transparent, that it appears distinct from the rest of the Substance of the Septum. And therefore what Riolanus writes, is most absurd, and repugnant to Truth, That the Anastomosis frequently, nay almost at all times remains open by means of this Hole. VIII. In like manner the said Chan∣nel,The Chan∣nel also closes up. though it be very wide, and the Substance of it remarkably thick like that of the Aorta, yet after the Child is born, it dries and consumes away in such a manner, that there are not the least Footsteps of it in people of ripe years. The foresaid Unions of the Vessels, for want of humane Birth, may be conveniently demonstrated in Calves newly Calv'd, and Lambs newly yean'd. CHAP. XI. Of the Office or Action of the Heart. I. PLato, Galen, and several of theThe Opini∣ons of the Ancients concerning the Seat of the Soul in the Heart. Stoicks assert, That the Heart is the Seat of the Irascible Soul. But Chrysippus, Possidonius, and many of the Aristotelians, not only of the Irascible, but Concupiscible Soul. From whom Hippocrates does not very much differ, while he alledges, That the Soul abides in the hottest and strongest Fire; and plainly affirms moreover, That the Mind is seated in the Heart of Man. This was also the Sentiment of Dioge∣nes, as Plutarch witnesses; and of Zeno, according to Laertius. To which Opi∣nion Apollodorus also subscrib'd, as Ter∣tullian testifies; and which Gassendus like∣wise, among the modern Authors, en∣deavors to prove. Nor do the Sacred Scriptures a little contribute to the con∣firmation of this Doctrine. Where we read, That God is the Searcher of the Heart; That out of the Heart issue evil Thoughts; That Folly, Wisdom, Iudg∣ment, Counsel, Repentance proceed from the Heart. Whence the Prophet David thus prays, Psal. 119. Give me Wisdom, and I will keep thy Law, and observe it with my whole Heart. Incline my Heart to keep thy Testimonies. The Lord hates the Heart which imagines evil Thoughts. Besides this, they produce several Reasons. 1. Because the Heart first lives and moves, and last dies, and being wound∣ed, the whole Structure falls. 2. Because it is seated in the mid∣dle and most worthy part of the whole Body. 3. Because this Bowel only makes the Blood and vital Spirit, and nourishes and enlivens every Part of the Body: and that the Soul abides in the Blood, is apparent from the Sacred Text, The Soul of the Flesh is in the Blood. 4. Because the Heart being out of or∣der, the whole Body suffers with it; but when other Parts are vitiated, it does not necessarily die with them. 5. Because the Brain, to which most ascribe the Seat of the Soul, depends upon the Heart; and the Motion of the Brain proceeds from the Heart. 6. Because a Part of the Brain may be corrupted and taken away, the Life
and Soul remaining, but no part of the Heart, all whose Wounds are mor∣tal. 7. Because, although Perception, Thought, Imagination, Memory, and other principal Actions are perform'd in the Brain, it does not follow that the Seat of the Soul is in the Instrument by which those Actions are perform'd. The Workman by the Clock and Dy∣al which he makes, shews the whole City what time of the Day it is, and numbers the Hours by the striking the Bell; yet hence it does not follow, that he himself abides or has his fix'd resi∣dence in the Clock; 'tis sufficient he af∣fords the Clock what is requisite for the performance of the Action, though he live in another place. Thus the Soul may operate indeed in the Brain, as in the Instrument, but may have its Seat nevertheless in the Heart. Hence Pico∣lomini acutely alledges, That the Soul is ty'd to us upon a double Accompt. 1. By Nature, and so abides absolutely in the Heart. 2. By Operation, as it sends Faculties to the Instruments by means of the Spirits discharg'd out of the Heart; by the operation of which Faculties the Presence of the Soul is discern'd. In the same manner Avicen will have the Soul with its Faculties a∣bide in the Heart, as in the first Root, but that it gives its Light to all the Members. That is to say, that the Heart is the beginning of the Animal Faculties; but makes use of the Brain as the Instrument of Feeling; so that the Animal Faculty is radically in the Heart, but by way of Manifestation in the Brain. And these and some others, like these, are the Authorities and Reasons, where∣with some, going about to describe the Office of the Heart, endeavour to defend their opinion, which Cartesius nevertheless most strenuously opposes. But they seem to be all out of the way, who going about to describe the Office of the Heart, presently fall a quarrelling about the Seat of the Ratio∣nal Soul, and prosecute it with that heat, as if the whole Question depended upon that Hinge. But we are going about to examine the Office of the Mortal Heart, not the Seat of the Im∣mortal Soul. II. Now the Chief and PrimaryThe Office of the Heart. Action of the Heart in the whole Bo∣dy, is to make Blood, and by Pulsa∣tion to distribute it through the Ar∣teries to all the Parts, that all may be nourished thereby. This Office of Sanguification, the most ancient Philo∣sophers always ascrib'd to the Heart. Thus Hippocrates calls the Heart the Fountain of Blood. Plato, in his Ti∣maeus, asserts the Heart to be the Foun∣tain of Blood, flowing with a kind of violence. Aristotle asserts the Heart to be the beginning of the Veins, and to have the chief power of procreating Blood. But after them came Galen, the Introducer of a new Opinion, who ex∣cuses the Heart from the Function of Sanguification, and ascribes it some∣times to the Liver, sometimes to the Substance of the Veins, and sometimes to both. Vesalius, Iacobus de Partibus, Columbus, Picolomini, Carpus, Bauhinus, Ioubertus, and several others imitate Galen with great Applause, especially those who are meer Followers of the Flock that goes before; going not where they are to go, but where the Galenists go; and had rather admire Galen's Authority, than enquire any farther in∣to the Truth. But in this our Age, the ancient Truth, that lay long wrapt up in thick Clouds, again broke forth out of Darkness into Light. For ever since the Knowledge of Cir∣culation has illustrated the whole Body of Physick, it has been certainly found out, That the Office of Circulation a∣grees with the Heart alone, and that therein only this General Nutriment is made, by which all the Parts of the whole Body are to be nourish'd, and for that reason, that there is a perpe∣tual Pulse allow'd it on purpose to dis∣perse that Nourishment, and commu∣nicate it to all the Parts. This Sanguifying Duty the most Fa∣mous Philosophers at this day allow the Heart; so that there are very few left that uphold the Galenic Sentence of the Liver any longer. Though Swammer∣dam has promis'd to restore the Liver to its former Dignity, but upon what Grounds, and with what Applause we longingly expect. III. But Glisson revolts from bothGlisson's New Opi∣nion. Opinions, as well the Ancient one, concerning the Heart, as the Galenic Opinion, concerning the Liver. Who finding that the Seed being conceiv'd and alter'd by the Heat of the Womb, the Vital Spirit, that lay asleep, is rais'd up from power to act, and that then that Vital Spirit moves the Vital Juice in which it abides, every where; and also makes Channels and Passages for it self through the Seminal Matter; more∣over,
that Sanguineous Rudiments ap∣pear, before the Heart, Liver or other Bowels can be manifestly seen; from all these things he concludes, That the Blood is not generated and mov'd in the Heart, but that the Heart and Blood are generated by the Spirit, or vivific Juice which is in the Blood it self. To which, he adds an Axiom, Because, says he, the same, quatenus the same, always operates the same. And hence he concludes, That the Cause that made the first Blood in the first Conception, the same, or at least a Cause aequipollent to it, ought afterwards also to be esteem'd the Fountain of Sanguification. This Opinion he confirms with many specious Reasons, which I omit for Brevity's sake. IV. But we answer to the mostThe Reply to Glis∣son's Opi∣nion. Learned Glisson, That the Vivific Spi∣rit is the first Mover in the Seed; and that when it begins to rise into Act, and enliven the Seed, so disposes by its Motion the vital Iuice, to which it adheres as to its Subject, that out of some of its Particles are made the Heart, out of others the Liver, out of others, the Vessels, Membranes, &c. And so by that Motion they erect to themselves a Habitation; the several and particular parts of which, ac∣cording to the various Disposition of the least Principles, perform various and distinct Operations, over all which that Spirit presides, as General Presi∣dent. For enlivening all the Parts together, it excites every one to the Function pro∣perly allotted to them. Not that the Spirit performs the peculiar part of every one: but whatever Aptitude to act it bequeath'd to the several Parts in the first Confirmation, that Aptitude it preserves by its presence, without which they could perform no Operations at all. Therefore the Vivific Spirit, according to the Axiom fore-cited, always performs one and the same Action in the whole Body, that is to say, it enlivens. But it does not produce the Matter to be en∣livened, without which nevertheless it cannot subsist, when the Consump∣tion of its Subject, that is, the vital Juice requires daily reparation. There∣fore the several Parts enliven'd, generate that Matter by degrees, and by vertue of many and various Concoctions, and other preparatory Operations, which the Vivific Spirit cannot perform with∣out those Parts: For it could not Chy∣lifie without the Stomach, nor Sangui∣fie without the Heart. And hence, tho' that Spirit be the general Life of the whole Body, without which nothing can be done, and which is presuppos'd to abide and be in all and singular the Parts specially operating, nevertheless, because it cannot perform those Operations with∣out the said Parts, it cannot be said that it absolutely performs those peculiar Operations: but it is better, and indeed necessary to say, That they proceed from the Nature of the several living Parts. And so the Ventricle in respect of its proper Nature Chylifies, and the Heart only sanguifies, and no other Parts of the Body can perform the same Actions, because no others have the same Propriety of Nature. False therefore it is, what Glisson says, That it is not the Heart, but this vivific Spi∣rit, which he certainly presupposes to be in the Blood, that generates other new Blood in the Blood it self, and is the Cause of the Motion of the Blood. That the first is untrue, is apparent from hence; for that if the Blood were generated out of the Blood existing in the Blood, then the Blood being out of order, and distemper'd, there will be a stop to Sanguification. But the contrary appears in Persons Scorbutic, and labour∣ing under Cachexies; in whom Sangui∣fication nevertheless goes forward, nay the Corruptions of the Blood are mend∣ed and corrected by the benefit of the Heart; which otherwise could never be corrected by reason of the distemper of the Blood. On the other side, if the Heart be out of order, presently there is a stop to Sanguification, and the Blood it self is deprav'd. The latter is false, as appears by the Dissections of Living Animals: For if the beginning of the Aorta-Artery be ty'd with a string near the Heart, presently all Motion of the Blood ceases in the Arteries; which would still continue, if it contain'd within it such a Spirit-mover of it self, and had not its Motion from without: but cut the string, and presently the Motion of the Heart returns by virtue of the Pulse of the Heart. The same is also manifest in faint-hearted persons, who, at the time of letting Blood, fall into a Swoon upon the Surgeon's prick∣ing the Vein; nor can you hardly per∣ceive their Heart to beat; so that there is little or no Blood mov'd through the Vessels, nor will the Blood flow from the small Wound; but when the Patient comes again to himself, and that the Heart begins to beat, presently
the Blood moves again, and spins out at the little hole made by the Lancet. Whence it appears, that the Blood is not mov'd or generated by the Vivific Spirit which is in the Blood, but by the Heart; and that the Vivific Spirit abi∣ding in all the Parts of the Body, does only revive the Parts; and that those enliven'd Parts, according to the varie∣ty of their several Dispositions, act spe∣cially, and after various manners upon the Matter to be enliven'd. V. Moreover I think it requisite,Whether any vivific Spirit be in the Blood. more accurately to examin, Whe∣ther any Vivific Spirit, as Glisson presupposes, be in the Blood? I know indeed, That the Vital Spirit, generally so call'd, is generated in the Heart, that is to say, apt to be enliven'd, and to promote Sanguification by its Heat; yet I cannot believe, that this Vivific Spirit, that is already actually living and en∣livening, is mingl'd with the Blood, when that Spirit is of a higher Order, and only abides in the German, and Blos∣som of the Seed, and the necessary pri∣mogenial moisture of the Parts them∣selves of the Body, and must be rouz'd into Action, by the flowing in of the hot vital Spirit: in regard the Blood it self is not yet a Part of the Body, nor enliven'd, but to be enliven'd, when it shall be assimilated to the Parts. VI Thus an Artist, who has madeA Simili∣. a Clock, does not move the Wheels, nor shew the Hours, but he makes the Clock, which could never move the Wheels, nor tell the Hours, unless the Artist had made that Engine, and bequeath'd such an Aptitude to it, which afterwards he preserves to it also: So the Vivific Spirit, although at the first Creation of the Parts, it made the Heart, and endu'd it with a Sanguifying Aptness; which after∣ward it also preserves therein by its pre∣sence; yet is it not that Spirit, but the Heart which must be said to Sanguifie. As to the first Principles of the Blood, which, as Glisson says, are observ'd at the first time of Conception, before the Heart appears; I say, that those Rudi∣ments are also produc'd by the Heart; for these Rudiments are not to be seen till the leaping Bubble begins to move, which is the first beginning of the Heart: and although the whole Structure of a live Heart, does not appear to the Eye; yet that it is there, and generates the first Principles of the Blood, the Effect teaches us. I wonder indeed that Har∣vey, who asserts the Blood to be made before other things, did not take notice of this, especially writing as he does, That at the same time, that the Blood begins to be discern'd in the Egg, that its Receptacles, the Veins, and beating Pulse manifestly appear. Whence it is suf∣ficiently apparent, That the Blood is not to be discern'd, but with the beginning of the Heart; which assoon as it begins to act, makes the Blood; and then the same Cause acting that made the Blood, afterwards continually generates the Blood, as being the only Fountain from which the Blood perpetually springs. There remain Three other Argu∣ments of Glisson, which he thinks to be Herculean. First, says he, The Heart borrows all its vital Heat and Activity from the vital Blood contain'd in its Ven∣tricles, and distributed into its Sub∣stance through the Coronary Arteries, without which Heat and Vitality, it would grow num and languid. Hence he concludes, That the Heart is mov'd, nourish'd, and lives by the Blood; but that the Heart it self neither moves or generates; and this he demonstrates by the Example of a Heart pluck'd out of a Living Animal, into the Ventricles of which, as yet beating, if any Liquor be infus'd, it is not chang'd into Blood. An egregious Comparison of the Operation of a Heart contain'd in a sound and healthy Creature, with its Operation when pull'd out of an Animal, and utterly debilitated: And indeed as base a Comparison of any raw Li∣quor infus'd into the half dead Heart cut out of a Living Creature, with the Chylus prepar'd by various Concoctions, for Sanguification; and naturally dis∣charging it self into a sound beating Heart. But if the Heart borrows Heat and Activity from the Blood, what's the reason that the Heart being distem∣per'd by some malignant Vapour, and beating little or nothing, presently all the Sanguineous Parts are refrigerated; whereas there is a sufficient quantity of good Blood in the Vessels, able both to warm those Parts, and to flow into the Heart it self? But we find this sudden Refrigeration in the beginning of the Fits of Agues, in Frights and Syncopes, &c. Certainly no body will believe o∣therwise, but that this happens meerly because the Blood receives its Heat and Motion from the Heart; and when that ceases to move, then the Blood of the rest
of the Parts, becomes depriv'd of Heat and Motion, and consequently to be re∣frigerated. Besides, the Heart does not simply languish by reason of the failing Influx of the Blood into the Ventricles, which occasions a defect of Heat and Vital Spirits, but for want of conveni∣ent Matter, out of which to generate Vital Spirits; and so to make conveni∣ent Nourishment, both for it self, and the whole Body. His Second Argument is taken from the Colour: For he says, The Chylus cannot obtain a red Colour from the Heart, and consequently be chang'd by it into Blood; because the Blood it self is much redder than the Heart, or Substance of the Heart; and that therefore the Heart is not sufficiently Assimilar to the Blood, as to perform that Office; seeing that every Part that is apt for Sanguificati∣on, ought to be like the Blood. And Lastly, He adds, How should any thing act beyond the Sphere of his Activity, and communicate that to another, of which it is destitute it self? Therefore because the Heart, Liver and Veins, are paler than the Blood, how should they contribute to it a more lively Colour than their own? But here Glisson seems to have forgot himself: For a little before, he said, That frequently by Heat and Motion, Colours from white and pale, become more ruddy; which is apparent by the Boilings and Bakings of Fruit, Flesh, and by a Thousand other Experiments: And now he will not allow of a red Co∣lour from Motion and Specific Heat, but from a like Colour: Which how ill they cohere, is apparent. Fruits, Flesh and other Substances bak'd in an Oven, acquire a ruddy Substance. The Juice of the larger Consound, digested in Horse-dung for several days, puts on a ruddy Colour; whereas neither the Oven nor the Horse-dung are red. The Sto∣mach, by a Specific Concoction, gives a white Colour to the Chylus, which it has not it self. The Choler in its Ve∣sicle, acquires a green Colour by over∣much Concoction and stay therein, and is naturally of a yellow Colour; where∣as neither the Liver, or the Gall-Blad∣der, are green or yellow. Many times salt, sharp, and greenish Humors distil from the Brain, which is white it self, and without any Greenness, Saltness or Acrimony. In a virulent Gonorrhaea, greenish and yellowish Seed flows forth; whereas the Spermatick Vessels have no such Colour. Certainly they are migh∣tily out of the way, who attribute to Colour that same Efficacy which is to be ascrib'd to the Heat, and specifc Concoction and Mixture proceeding from the Propriety of the Part: which Colour does not proceed from the Simi∣litude of the acting Part wherein it is concocted, but from the Heat acting specifically in that Part, according to the specific Constitution, Temper, and Formation of the Parts. And hence it is, that the Heat of the Stomach ex∣tracts a white Chylus out of the Aliments, and why the Heart changes the Chylus into white Blood. Lastly, If the Chylus gain only a red Colour from the Red∣ness of the Blood, I would fain know what it is, that in the first Conception changes the white Seed into red Blood. His Third Argument is taken from Concoctions: For, says he, Natural Bodies, as much as in them lies, la∣bour to assimilate to themselves all other Bodies that are within the Sphere of of their Activity; and hence the Heart, should it betake it self to the Function of making Blood, would bring the Chylus to the similitude of its own Substance, and there stop, and never proceed to induce the Form of Blood. But wherefore does not Glisson say the same of the Stomach and Liver? Why do not these Bowels change the Ali∣ments into a Substance like themselves, and there stop; but rather into a Sub∣stance quite contrary, that is, white Chylus, or yellow and green Choler? Which, if it be allow'd them to do, for the common Good of the whole, why shall the Generation of a dissimilar Substance be allow'd the Heart for the benefit of the whole? But the Learned Glisson does not sufficiently distinguish between public and private Concocti∣ons; nor does he take notice, That in public Concoctions, the Matter is pre∣par'd for the Nourishment of the whole: in private Concoctions, the alteration of that prepar'd Matter, is made into the Substance of the several Parts. And hence it is necessary for those Bowels that serve for second Concoctions, that they should make the Nutritious Mat∣ter to be prepar'd for the whole, not like to themselves, but such out of which all and every the Parts may as∣sume and assimilate to themselves some∣thing
convenient and proper for them∣selves. And so likewise those Bowels themselves are nourish'd by a private Concoction, with that common Ali∣ment, which they have prepar'd for the whole Body, that is to say, the Spiritu∣ous Blood; and out of that assimilate to themselves convenient Particles, and then stop in that first Concoction, while in the mean time, they proceed farther in the publick Concoction. And thus the foresaid new Opinion seems to be sufficiently refuted, notwith∣standing Charleton has shew'd himself so obstinate in its Defence. But in regard that Glisson uses the same Words and Arguments, there is no need of any farther Refutation of him, although he assert the sole quantity of the Blood to be the occasion of its Motion, and therein seems to differ something from Glisson. CHAP. XII. Of the Blood, Vital Spirit, and Nutrition. I. THE Blood is call'd by theThe names. Greeks, , by the French, du Sangue, by the Italians, Sangue, by the Germans, Blut; by the En∣glish, Blood; and by the Low Dutch, Bloet; and which is chiefly to be ad∣mir'd at, there is no Synonimous Word by which that Humor may be absolutely signify'd. Among the La∣tins indeed the Word Cruor is fre∣quently us'd; but that Word does not absolutely signifie Blood, but only the Blood which flows from Wounds and Ulcers; or corrupted Blood, or such as remains in the Vessels after Death. So likewise  in the Greek, and Grumus in the Latin, signifies Clotted Blood. II. Now Blood is a red Iuice madeIts Defi∣nition. in the Heart, out of the Chylus, for the nourishment of the whole Body. III. Its Substance consists of twoIts Sub∣stance. several Iuices, by means of the Serum, so united in the Serum it self, through several Concoctions of the Bowels, as to become one Bloody Mass toge∣ther. IV. One of these Iuices is Sulphu∣ry,Its Iuices. though Malpigius, not dreaming of Sulphur, calls the same Iuice every where Fatness; the other, Salt: the one somewhat fatty, oyly and viscous; the other, altogether different from all manner of Fatness. I call 'em Juices, so far as Sulphur and Salt in Fu∣sion, concur to the Mass of Blood. And therefore in dissolution, they cannot be well mingl'd without loss and tumult, (for Fat with watery Salt never mixes well) unless some Mercury intervene, so familiar to the Nature of both, that both may be exactly mix'd as well with it, as in it. This Mercury is the Serum, as in which the more watery Particles of both the said Juices are dis∣solv'd and mix'd by Concoctions. And hence that is constituted, not only out of the Watery part of the Elements alone, but also out of some Sulphury and Salt particles melted therein by Concoction; and so it partakes of a certain middle Nature, so that therein there may be a convenient Mixture, and, as it were, a union of the Sulphury and Salt Juices. These Particles are discern'd by the Saltish Savour of the Sweat and Urine; the Sulphury, by the Smell of both: the one, by the Salt which is separated from the Urine by Chymistry; the other, for that stale Urine being heated at the Fire, the exhaling Vapour pre∣sently burns when it comes near the Fire. And therefore it is requisite that the said Serum be mix'd in a sufficient quantity, and well concocted with the rest of the Juices. For if it be too little, or none at all, the active Principles, that is to say, the Salt and Sulphury Juice, close too strictly together, and too vehemently exagitate and combat one with another, and in that mutual Conflict waste and corrupt one another: whence the Body, either depriv'd of Nourishment, consumes away, or else upon the corruption of the Blood, falls into Diseases, and dies. But if either a too watry Serum, or over-raw abound, then the said active Principles are too much eloin'd and separated one from another, and their Combination be∣comes too loose, so that they do not sufficiently agitate each other; and hence the Blood being over-moist, and subject to Corruption, the whole Body that is nourish'd with such Blood, grows weak and infirm.
Now that the Blood consists of these Principles, is easily demonstrated: For that ulphur is in it, the many oily, swet, at and sulphury Nourishments that we , sufficiently declare; out of which, nothing else but something Sul∣phury can be extracted by the Conco∣ctions of the Bowels, and mix'd with the Blood. And this farther also, for that we find, that the most fat and sulphu∣ry Parts of the Body are generated out of the Blood, which receive their Soft∣nes, Oiliness and Tenderness from Sul∣phur. That there is Salt likewise in it, is apparent from the Salt-Meats which we feed upon, from the Salt which is extracted out of the Blood by Chymi∣stry, and from the Salt which is in the Urine, and is separated from the Blood, together with the superfluous Serum. And that the Serum is in it, is visible to the Eye. There are some also that add Earth to the other Principles: but see∣ing that is nothing else, but the remain∣der of thick Salt, very crude, and hard to be dissolv'd, it ought not to be al∣low'd for a peculiar Principle, as being that which cannot be melted and dis∣solv'd by Concoction, but by a long and vehement Heat, like another crude, tartareous Salt: as is manifest in Bricks made of Earth, and bak'd in the Kiln; for the Bricks next the Fire, through the vehemence of a continu'd Fire, melt, and run like thick Glass. In this mixture of a Sulphury and Salt Juice in the Serum, the Sulphury Juice contributes a stronger and swifter Activity, but the Salt Juice constitutes the primary Mass: as that which being of a more fix'd Nature, hinders the easie dissolution of the Sulphury Juice, mix'd and blended with it, and so re∣tards the dissolving of the Sanguineous Mass, and resists Corruption, Stench, and Inflammation; and being prone to Fixation, thence it is the Cause that the Blood being inus'd into the Sub∣stance of the Parts, becomes a good part of it coagulated therein, and ad∣heres, and is assimilated to it. Here arises a notable Doubt toA Doubt. be consider'd: Seeing these fat or oily and sulphury Parts of the Blood, are hotter than the others, and so seem able to promote the Salt parts to a stronger Activity, how it comes to pass, that in fat People, in whom the sul∣phury, oily Parts abound in great quan∣tity, there happens less Agility of the whole Body, and less Activity of the Animal Spirits, but that they are ge∣nerally sloathful and sleepy, and more troubled with Drowsiness, Apoplexies, and short Breath than leaner People? This comes to pass, because that in such People the oily sulphury Particles of the Blood are too much abounding above the Salt, and too much enfold and blunt them with their greasie Oiliness, so that they cannot boil, be attenuated, and be made Spirituous; and hence they are less fit for the Generation of Animal Spirits in convenient and sufficient quan∣tity, so that the Animal Operations grow dull and heavy, and soporiferous Effects prevail. Moreover, the Heat of the Sulphury Particles themselves as∣swages, and loses its Vigor, unless there happen an Effervescency in the Blood by means of the sharp salt Particles, and through the stronger and smaller Parti∣cles among themselves, a fiercer Heat be rais'd. Which Fermentation is pre∣vented, if the oily Particles too much exceed the salt. Here it may be octject∣ed, That in Agues, the sulphury Heat predominates, and yet the Animal Acti∣ons are not always dull and numm'd in such Persons. Which comes to pass, because that in such Persons the sulphury and oily Particles of the Blood do not exceed nor stupifie the Salt, with their Oiliness and Quantity, but by their Heat and Motion stirring up their Acri∣mony to more vehement Action, pro∣duce an Effervescency either too strong, or vicious and Aguish. VI. But to return to the Business:Double Spirits. Out of the Sanguineous Mass, by con∣venient Concoctions and Fermentati∣ons of the Bowels, double Spirits are rais'd; that is to say, Sulphureous and Salt; the one sweetish, and the o∣ther sowr; both very subtil and thin, and confus'd together, and yet one more volatile than the other; like the Sulphury Spirits in Oils chymically extracted out of Vegetables; and the Salt Spirits Chymically drawn from Salts and salt things. But that the Sulphury Spirits are more thin and vo∣latile, is apparent in the Distillation of Vegetables; for they are first of all and most easily separated, and ascend the Alembick, unless too much perplex'd among the Salt, or being less attenuated by them, by reason of their Oiliness: but the salt Spirits ascend last, and with more difficulty; whose Acrimony the Taste distinguishes from the Sweetness of the Sulphur.
But the foresaid Spirits of the San∣guineous Mass, out of which they are rais'd by Fermentations, are mingled with it, and carry'd forthwith to the Heart, and there being often attenuated, and dilated, are so exactly united, that they wax as it were one Spirit, which we call Vital. VII. Now the Vital Spirit is theVital Spi∣rit. most subtil and efficacious Part of the Blood, generated out of its Sul∣phury and Salt Particles, dilated by the Fermentation of the Heart. I say, the most subtile and efficacious Part of the Blood, that is to say, that which is rais'd out of its Sulphury and Salt Particles: for every thin and vapo∣rous Substance, as that which is rais∣ed out of the serous part of the Blood, is not so be call'd a Spirit; because it is no efficacious part of the Blood, though sometimes less to be discern'd than the effectual Spirit it self: but that which through the copious admixture of it self, breaks the efficacy of its Spirits, and withstands their Agility. When the Blood slides into the Heart, presently the frame and composure of the whole Liquor is dissolv'd, and the Spirituous Particles, the Bond of mix∣ture being loosen'd, are exactly united together, and endeavour to expand themselves every way, but being re∣strain'd by the Vessels on the inside, they are mix'd with the other Liquor, and so burst forth into the open Tubes or Channels of the Arteries; through which, together with the Blood, they are pour∣ed forth over the whole Body, with the Blood and Effluviums of Heat. VIII. Now some there are, who withWhether this Spirit be diffe∣rent from the Blood. Argenterius, stifly deny this Spirit diffe∣rent from the Blood, to be in the Blood; though others with no less heat assert it. But this Contention seems easie to be compos'd, if we allow it to be the most subtile part of the Blood free'd from the thicker Matter, and exalted to an extra∣ordinary Thinness; mix'd indeed with the whole, but easily separable from it; for that the perfection of the Blood con∣sists in its Mixture, which without this Spirit would be only a crude and unpro∣fitable Humor. In like manner as in Wine, the Spirit gives the Wine its perfection, and is the subtilest part of it; and by how much the Spirit is better, by so much is the Wine better: Yet this is separable by Chymistry from the Wine; but then the remaining Sub∣stance of the Wine becomes a crude, watery and unprofitable Liquor. And therefore the foresaid Question may be thus decided: If we mean good and per∣fect Blood, then it may be well said, that the Vital Spirit is in the Blood, and that it is not different from it, as being the most subtile part of it rais'd out of it self, which by its presence constitutes the perfection of the Blood. But if we mean Blood simply so call'd, as being that which is dissipated from the Blood, the Blood remaining, such as is to be found in dead People, which is not per∣fect, because there is no volatile Spirit remaining therein; then the Spirit may be said to be different from the Blood, or to be generated in it, the Blood still existing; which moreover were it in it, would predominate in it, and agitate the thicker Particles of the Blood one with another. But when, as Aristotle witnesses, nothing is agitated or mov'd by it self, it may be well said, that the other thicker particles of the Blood are not mov'd by themselves, but by ano∣ther Mover, that is, the Spirit; which nevertheless is nothing else but a part of the Sanguineous Mass exalted to Spiri∣tuosity. Here perhaps some will object, If this Spirit agitates other Particles of the Blood one with another, then the Blood contains in it self the Cause of its own Motion, and is not mov'd by the Heart. I answer, That the Motion of the Blood is double; one circulatory, which with∣out doubt proceeds from the Heart; by which Motion, being in good part spi∣ritualiz'd, it is carry'd through the Ar∣teries to all the Parts of the Body. The other Fermentaceous, which is made by this Spirit, by which the least Particles of it are agitated one among another, while this Spirit passes through them like a Ferment, and divides 'em one from another; which vehement Fermen∣taceous Motion is observ'd in the Crisis's of Fevers, and the Emotion of the Flow∣ers. But this Motion also proceeds from the Heart, so far as it continually begets this Spirit, by dilating the Blood, mixes it with the Blood, and quickens it by its Motion into Act; so that the Motion of the Heart ceasing, this also ceases. IX. This Vital Spirit, while it al∣waysThe Heas of the Blood. endeavors to fly away by reason of its extraordinary Volatility, conti∣nually agitates the other thicker Par∣ticles of the Blood, that retard it, and re-assume its flight, and by them sha∣ken after a various manner, and by rea∣son
of way deny'd it, often beaten back again, by which means it divides them one from another, conquers, sub∣tilizes, and detains them in a continual Fermentative Motion; from which Motion and Agitation of the subtile Matter, proceeds Heat; which being moderate in a moderate Agitation, small in a small one, and violent in a violent Agitation; hence it happens, that the Blood, according to the varie∣ty of this Agitation, which may hap∣pen and alter upon divers Accidents, becomes more or less hot. By this Motion thus stirr'd up by the Spirit, the Blood is not only preserv'd in its Heat and perfect Soundness, that is, by the bond of exact Mixture; but is also render'd fluid, thin, and apt for Nourishment, which depriv'd of that Motion and Spirit, grows thick, cor∣rupts and grows unprofitable. The same Spirit also contributes such a Thin∣ness of Parts to the Blood, as to be able to pass the most narrow Passages, and to be convey'd to any Parts whatever; all which Parts this Spirit quickens to their several Functions; and by its continual Agitation and Heat thence proceeding, continually wastes and dissipates the more fluid Particles of the Parts, and continually repairs, and as often increases them by means of the Blood. X. But the Blood, as also the Vi∣talThe Tem∣per of the Blood. Spirit rais'd out of it, if it con∣sists of the two Principles, Sulphure∣ous and Salt mix'd together, and equally agreeing in Strength; then is the Blood best, and well temper'd ac∣cording to Nature. But as the Force of these Principles exceeds one another, it is colder or hotter, and its Temper varies according to the strength and pre∣valency of the Principle. I say, Colder, not that any cold Quality proceeds from Salt, or from a salt Spirit, as from its proper Subject; but because while that predominates, the Sulphury Spirit is more obtunded and fix'd; whence hap∣pens a weaker Agitation of the small Particles one among another, and con∣sequently a lesser actual Heat. And an∣other Reason, why Salt and its Spirit may be call'd Colder, is, because that being cast into the Fire, it only crackles; but does not flame out like Sulphur, or a Sulphureous Spirit. XI. Now out of the Blood thusThe quan∣tity and quality of compos'd of the said Principles, some∣times more, sometimes fewer Spiritsthe Spirits various. are rais'd. For if the Blood to be rarify'd in the Heart, be well concoct∣ed in the other Bowels, and prepar'd for Fermentation, and as I may say, brought to full Maturity; then there happens a right Fermentation or Di∣latation in the Heart, by which a convenient quantity of Spirits is rais'd up with a moderate Heat; but if ill prepar'd and raw, then is the Effervescency less, and the Dilatation more difficult; and fewer Spirits rise, and hence proceeds a cold Tem∣per of the Body. If over much concoct∣ed, and that the Particles either Salt, or Sulphureous, or both, are too much attenuated; then the Dilatation is overmuch in the Heart, and the Spi∣rits are over-sharp and hot; and hence proceeds a hot Temperature, Corruption of Humors, Inflammations and Fevers, especially if the Sulphury Spirits prevail above the other. XII. By the way, we must take no∣ticeAn Error concerning the Spirits. that they are in a very great Er∣ror, who besides the Principles con∣stituting the Essence of the Blood in Mixture, add another Spirit, and as∣sert a necessity for it to concur and be mix'd with the Salt and Sulphur in the Serum. Whereas this Spirit of which they speak, is not any thing pe∣culiar concurring to the making of the Blood; but only a thin and spirituous Vapour, attracted out of the Salt and Sulphur it self, by force of the Heat; as is perform'd by Chymistry in other Things: For though all Bodies are compos'd of Salt and Sulphur, as their Principles, united by the Assistance of Mercury; yet in regard that Salt and Sulphur are not Bodies altogether sim∣ple and equal, but compos'd of une∣qual Particles; hence the Bodies that are compos'd of those Principles, con∣sist of unequal Particles, some thicker, some thinner, others more or less fix'd, and others more or less fit for Fusion and Attenuation: For the Heat acting upon Bodies compos'd of these Princi∣ples, dissolves first of all and more easi∣ly the thinner and less fix'd Particles, attenuates and renders them Spirituous, frees them also from the thicker Parti∣cles, and by means of the thicker Parti∣cles, agitates and moves them; and those Spirituous Particles so attenuated, are call'd Spirits, as being endu'd with an
extraordinary Tenuity and Mobility. Not that they are any thing different from Salt or Sulphur, concurring to the composition of the Mixture; but only some thinner Substance melted, attenua∣ted and extracted by the Force of Heat, out of the same Mixture, which, upon the absence of that Heat, again condenses, and is quietly united as before, with the other thicker Particles not yet brought to Fusion. XIII. Nor are they less in an Er∣ror,An Error concerning Air. who hold, That there is a co∣pious Quantity of Air mix'd with the Blood, as being necessarily requisite to its Perfection. Which Air they pre∣tend, is mix'd four ways with the Blood. 1. As being mix'd and swallow'd with the Meat chaw'd in the Mouth: with which Nourishment it is so united in the Stomach, that at length entring the Re∣gion of the Heart, it is incorporated with the Blood. 2. By entring the Mass of Blood through the Pores of the Skin. 3. When it is not a little mix'd with the Blood by the drawing in of the Breath, hastning through the Lungs to the Left Ventricle of the Heart. 4. When by the same breathing in of the Air, it is carry'd to the Vessels and Ventricles of the Brain. But if the Air be neces∣sary to compleat the perfection of the Blood, then ought it always necessarily to be mix'd with it; but no Air can come at the Birth included in the Womb and its Membranes, and yet the Blood bred therein is no less sound and perfect, than in those that being born, both breath and suck in the Air. XIV. Here it may be question'd,The Ori∣ginal of the Prin∣ciples of the Blood. Out of what things the said Principles are extracted? I answer, From the Aliments which contain both Sulphur and Salt in themselves; and consist of them mix'd and concocted after a Speci∣fic manner. Yet some are more, others less Spirituous, and hence arise variety of Qualities; which is the Reason, that some Nourishments agree better with hot, others with cold Constitutions. But, to the end these Principles may be extracted out of the Aliments, and that Blood may be made out of 'em, it is re∣quisite that the Nourishments be pre∣par'd after another manner; that their first Mixture may be altogether dis∣solv'd, and the latent Sulphureous and Salt Particles be exalted to Fusion, and a more extraordinary Tenuity; so that being freed from their first Union, they may be again mingl'd after a new man∣ner. To this purpose, besides their Dissolution by Cookery and Dressing, being admitted into the Body, in the first place those things that are hard, are bruis'd and soften'd by the Teeth in the Mouth, and being prepar'd by the admixture of the Spittle, are swal∣low'd down into the Stomach. In the next place, they are farther fermented and dissolv'd after a specifical manner in the Stomach. 3. The more profita∣ble Chylus, and more dissolv'd Particles, are separated from the thicker Particles by another peculiar Effervescency, and are yet more dissolv'd and attenuated in the Milky Vessels, and many Kernels of the Mesenterium, and by the Com∣mixture of Lymphatic Juice; and these being mixt with the Veiny Blood, and carry'd to the Heart, are therein dilated; and so being united with the rest of the Blood, become perfect Blood. But when they are the first time dilated in the Heart, it is not a Spirituous Blood that is presently made out of 'em, but a thicker and cruder Blood, which is mix'd with the rest of the Blood several times circulated through the Heart, and by that means render'd very Spirituous, and by fre∣quent Circulations and Attenuations in the Heart, render'd still more Spiri∣tuous. XV. In the mean time, certainThe Chy∣lus pas∣sing thro' the Heart, ceases to be Chylus. it is, That the Chylus, passing through the Heart, and therein dilated, loses the Form of Chylus, and at the very same moment assumes another, that is to say, the Form of Blood. XI. But here arises a weightyWhether the whole Chylus be chang'd in∣to Blood. Question; Whether the whole Chy∣lus in its passage through the Heart, loses altogether the Form of Chylus, and assumes the Form of Blood in such a manner, as that no Part of it remains Chylus? This Doubt was started by Gualter Needham, who says, That the Chylus dilated in the Heart, remains a considerable part of it actu∣ally Chylus, and that it circulates through the whole Body, being mix'd with the Blood; and is again separated from the Blood in several Parts for pri∣vate Uses, especially in the Amnion and Breasts. XVII. This Opinion of his, heThe Proof of the for∣mer Opini∣on. proves from hence, For that fre∣quently crude and indigested Chylus has been drawn from the Arms of such as have been let Blood. The
same Opinion also, the Observances of other Physitians seem strongly to con∣firm; of which Bauschius has collected several in his Germanic Ephemerides. 1. Of a Girl, afflicted with a continual Fever, whose Blood, at three several Blood-lettings, appear'd Milky. 2. Of a sick Patient, out of all whose Veins, when open'd, there always issu'd forth white Blood. 3. Of a certain Virgin, who, upon a Suppression of her Courses, after she had eaten her Breakfast about Seven a Clock, was let Blood at Eleven, and the Blood that came from her, was purely white; and being warm'd upon the Fire, harden'd like the White of an Egg. 4. Of an Apothecary of Cam∣bray, who, being prick'd in the Arm, the Blood look'd red, as it came forth; but was white in the Porringer. 5. Of a certain Person troubl'd with the Itch. 6. Of a Woman that gave Suck, that lay ill of a Malignant Fever. 7. Of a Woman with Child, sick of a Fever. 8. Of another Woman with Child: And, 9. Of a Maid that was troubl'd with a Suppression of her Courses; from all which Persons, upon their being let Blood, there flow'd a white Liquor to∣gether with the Blood. And Regner de Graef mentions two Stories of white Blood seen by himself. XVIII. But though such a long SeriesIts Refu∣tation. of Observations seems to confirm Need∣ham's Opinion, yet because those Ex∣amples are quite from the Matter, it is impossible they should be able to sup∣port it: For all those Cases concern un∣healthy Bodies only, from whom a whitish Matter issu'd forth together with the Blood. Concerning which Matter, there has been a sharp Dispute between the Physicians to those Patients, whe∣ther it is to be call'd Flegm or Chylus; whether Milk or Matter; and many uncertain Conjectures have been made about it. When as it is well known by daily Practice, that by reason of some certain Infection of the Blood, proceed∣ing from the bad concoctions of the dis∣eased Bowels, many times upon opening a Vein, the Blood will look sometimes whitish or yellowish, and sometimes of an∣other Colour. Moreover, if any thing of a Chylus should be mix'd with it, and circulate with it, then would it sometimes be seen to flow out with the Blood upon opening a Vein; which was never yet seen by any Person. And in my own Practice, I have order'd in∣numerable Persons, both Men and Wo∣men, some with Child, and others that have given Suck, to be let Blood, but never could observe the least drop of Chylus in the Blood that has been drawn forth. Neither did any of those emi∣nent Physicians, with whom I discours'd this Point, ever see the same. Neither can any man produce an Example of a Man sound in Health, out of whose Veins, being open'd, Chyle ever flow'd with the Blood, or was ever separated from it. Perhaps it may be objected, That Reason shews us, and Experience confirms it, That in big-belly'd Wo∣men, and such as give Suck, if they are in perfect health, the Chylus is separated from the Blood, and pour'd forth into the Breasts of the one, and into the Am∣nion of the other; which could not flow thither, but out of the Sanguiferous Vessels carry'd toward those Parts. To which I answer, That the Chylus, that is carry'd to the Breasts and Amnion, as also that which flows through the Womb and Bladder, was never infus'd into Blood-bearing Vessels, or mix'd with the Blood, and so neither can be carry'd through the one, nor separated from the other; but flows to those Parts through other quite different con∣ceal'd Parts; of which Passages, we have sufficiently discours'd, l. 1. c. 18. & 31. & c. 2. of this Book. Besides all which, Reason is altogether repugnant to this Opinion. For when the Aliments and Alimentary Humors lose their first Forms, by reason of the Concoction of the Bowels, and assume another Form, the same thing cannot but happen to the Chylus concocted in the Heart. For Ex∣ample; An Apple being eaten, and con∣cocted in the Stomach, is altogether de∣priv'd of its Form, and is made into Chylus, which is no more an Apple, and of which no particles can be again re∣duc'd to the Form of an Apple. So the Chylus being dilated in the Heart, cannot but by its strong and sudden Effervescen∣cy, presently lose all its Form of Chyle, and receive the Form of Blood; which, though it be rawer at the beginning, than the rest of the Blood, frequently circulated and dilated in the Heart, yet is it Blood, wherein there is not the least Form of Chylus remaining. But some will say, That Crudity presupposes that some particles of that Chylus are not altogether chang'd into Blood, but still retain the Form of Chylus, and are so mix'd with the Blood. I deny it, for that is not call'd crude Blood, where∣in all the Particles of the Chylus are not sanguify'd; but that which is not reduc'd to a just Spirituosity and Maturity. And hence the Blood which is made first of
all out of the Chylus dilated in the Heart, though it be cruder, yet it is not a Chy∣lous and Flegmy part of the Blood: wherein there are no Particles of the Chylus remaining, only it wants as yet a just Spirituosity in some measure. In like manner, as the Seed, which is made of the Blood, becomes to be crude and unfruitful in Old Men, not that there are any Particles of Blood in it, that are not as yet chang'd into Seed; but because that Seed, by reason of the weakness of the Spermatic Parts, is not yet reduc'd to a just Spirituosity and Maturity. For no man, how quick∣sighted soever, observ'd any Particles of Blood in crude Seed, much less shall be able to separate any Blood from it. Thus an unripe Apple is call'd crude, not that any Earthy or Arboreous Particles are conspicuous in it, or any way separable from it; but because the Spirit latent therein, is not yet reduc'd to such a Thinness and Maturity, as to put forth it self; which Maturity it afterwards acquires by the Heat of the Sun, and thence a farther Concoction. However, seeing that the Serum, Cho∣ler, and sometimes other corrupt Hu∣mors contain'd in the Vessels, passing through the Heart together with the Blood, frequently retain their own form, and remain what they were before, why may not the same thing befal the Chylus? Because the Chylus is an Ali∣mentary Juice, grateful to Nature, by previous Concoctions, and Mixture with the Lymphatic fermentaceous Juice, in such a manner, and to that end prepar'd and made fit, that it may be presently dilated in the Heart, and be turn'd into Blood, no way able, be∣ing once dilated in the Heart, to retain the form of Blood. As Gunpowder is dilated of a sudden by the Fire, and loses its Form. But it is otherwise with the Serum, Choler, and other corrupt Hu∣mors mix'd with the Blood, which are neither prepar'd after a convenient man∣ner, nor to the same end, but unfit to make Blood, though passing with the Heart through the Blood; and hence it is, that they remain what they were be∣fore. Like a Clod of Earth impregna∣ted with Oil, and so thrown into the Fire, retains the Form of Earth; be∣cause its Substance is not so easily de∣priv'd of its Form by the Fire; though the Oil, with which it is impregnated, being dilated and kindl'd by the Fire, loses the Form of Oil in such a manner, that not a drop of it remains, nor can it ever be reduc'd to the Form of Oil. XIX. It is therefore another Que∣stion,W  part of the Chylus may not be mixd with the Blood. Whether if not always, and a considerable quantity, yet sometimes, and a small quantity of meer Chylus may not be mix'd with the Blood? This we altogether deny of Arterious Blood, but not always of the Veiny Blood; for that sometimes there is a Milky and Chylous Juice in the hollow Vein, as well infus'd out of the Milky Pectoral, into the Subclavial Veins, as in Women that give Suck, carry'd through the Mammary Veins, to the Hollow Vein it self. Perhaps it may so happen, that by reason of some Mix∣ture, the Colour of the Blood may be alter'd from Red to White; as Oil of Vitriol and Aqua-Fortis change the Red Colour of Cloth into White, but then that which appears white in the Blood, is not Chylus, but rather some Blood which is corrupted: Like that which sometimes in a certain Cacoch o the Body, and in some malignant Dis∣eases, appear'd dy'd of a whitish co∣lour. Of which Bauschius gives us an Example of a Priest that lay sick of a Malignant Fever, who, being three times let Blood, every time his Blood appear'd white; having an Ulcery Sub∣stance, like the White of an Egg. I shall add another remarkable Example, seen by my self at Nimmeghen; where, at that time, the Pestilential Fevers were very rie. In this Distemper, if the Patients were let Blood the two first days, they bled very well, and very good Blood; but they that were let Blood after the sixth o seventh day, their Blod came forth generally whi∣tish, and yet for want of Appetite, they had hardly eat or drank in all that time; for the Fever perplex'd the Patients more with its Malignity and extraordi∣nary Anxiety, than with its Heat and Drought. Thus, in many sick Peo∣ple, who, by reason of long Fasting, little Chylus happens to be in the Sto∣mach; and besides, what they do take, soon corrupts, by reason of some ill ha∣bit of Concoction; and in some Crazy People, in whom, by reason of vicious Concoctions, ill Humors increase in the Body, I have seen a whitish Film swim∣ming upon the Blood, when it has been cold; but quite different from Chylus; which doubtless deceiv'd Needham, and others, maintaining their Opinion. But as to what Needham adds in Confirma∣tion of his Error, That the Chylus may be separated from the Blood by Art, and that by strewing upon it a certain
Powder, I very much suspect the Truth of it, especially since he produces his Experiment from the far-fetch'd Rela∣tion of another Person unknown to him; from whom, as he says, one Schneiderus had it by Report. But I, that am not to be seduc'd by these little Histories, do say this, That I will undertake to change the red Colour of the Blood into white and milky, by Infusion of a certain Li∣quor; but thence it does not follow, that I am therefore able to separate by that means the Chylus from the Blood; but rather, that I corrupt the good Mix∣ture of the Blood. But omitting these Trifles, let us return to the Business. XX. From that Concoction andWhence the red Colour proceeds. Dilatation, which happens in the Heart, the Blood acquires a Redness, to which the Heart is not at all con∣tributary, as many think, because of its Redness; but by accident is caus'd by that Concoction which is made in the Heart: By which the Salt and Sub-acid Particles, now more exact∣ly mix'd with the Sulphury, in a short time produce that Colour from them∣selves. For Chymistry teaches us, That by the exact Mixture of Salt, and especially of Acid Particles, with Sul∣phury, a red Colour is produc'd, as ap∣pears by the Distillation of Salt-peter, that contains in it many Sulphury Par∣ticles. So never so little Oil of Vitriol, being mix'd with Liquors or Syrups of a pale Red, become of a deep red co∣lour, if there be any thing of Sulphur in those Liquors. Now these Salt and Sulphury Particles are carry'd with the Chylus it self, in which nevertheless they do not beget a red colour, because the Salt Particles do not as yet seem to have attain'd to any degree of Acidity, and hence are not sufficiently attenuated and mix'd with the Sulphury; but being as yet both crude, and too much incum∣ber'd in the viscous Particles, lie hid, out of which, they are at length set at Liberty, and grow Spirituous, by the singular Heat and Fermentation of the Heart: and then being equally mix'd in Spirituosity, and concurring with equal Vigor and Force, they produce that red colour. And 'tis known in Chymistry, that Sulphury Spirits rise with a smaller Heat; Salt, not without a brisker Fire; and so it happens in the Concoctions of the Bowels. By the Concoction of the Stomach, and the Fermentation rais'd by the Choleric and Pancreatic Juice, the Sulphury Particles are moderately dissolv'd and separated from the Aliments, and then enclos'd within the Salt Particles, which cannot be brought to such a perfect Dis∣solution by so soft a Heat, which pre∣vents the Dissipation of the Sulphury Particles, by reason of their extraordi∣nary Volatility. Now the Salt Parti∣cles, by their Mixture with the Sulphu∣ry, by degrees becoming more dissolv'd, and turn'd sub-acid, at length attenua∣ted by the intense Fermentaceous Heat of the Heart, burst forth more Spiritu∣ous; and then being exactly mix'd with the Sulphury Particles, with which they are dilated, become exactly red: But if the Heart afflicted with any Malignant Distemper, has not a Fermentative Power, so vigorous, as sufficiently to attenuate, dilate and unite the Salt with the Sulphury Particles, then the Blood is not altogether so red; but several pale Humors are found to be mix'd with it, as is seen upon Blood-letting in Malignant Fevers; which are no part of the Chylus, but only corrupt Hu∣mors. XXI. This is the true manner ofHow the Parts are nourish'd by the Blood. making the Blood which serves for the nourishment of all the Parts; and contains in it self Matter adapted for the nourishment of all and singu∣lar the Parts; out of which that is appropriated to every one, which is most convenient for their nourish∣ment; to some Particles more con∣cocted and subtile; to others, less concocted and thicker; to others, Particles equally mix'd of Salt and Sulphur, as in fat Bodies; to others, more Salt and Tartarous, as in Si∣newey and Boney People; and to others Particles are united and assimilated; some disposed one way, some ano∣ther. XXII. This Apposition proceedsThe Di∣versity of Figures. chiefly from the Diversity of Figures, which, as well the particular Particles of the Blood, as the Pores of the se∣veral Paris obtain. For hence it hap∣pens, that the Blood being forc'd into the Parts, some Particles more easily enter some sort of Pores, and others, another sort; and are figur'd one a∣mong another after various shapes and forms; and so are immediately united with the Substance of the Parts, and are converted into their Nature; and those which are not proper for such a Figure,
are carry'd to other Parts; till the re∣maining and improper portion is again transmitted back to the Heart, there to be concocted anew, and endu'd with an∣other more proper Aptitude. It is vul∣garly said, That the several Parts at∣tract from the Blood, and unite the Particles most similar to themselves. But there is no such Attraction allow'd in our Bodies; neither are the Parts en∣du'd with any Knowledge to distinguish between Particles similar or dissimilar. But the Blood, such as it is, is equally forc'd to all the Parts, but the Diversity of Figures, as well in the several Parti∣cles of the Blood, as in the Pores of the Parts, is the Reason that some Particles stick, and are united to these, and others to other Parts; to these, after one man∣ner; to those, after another. From which Diversity, the Diversity of Sub∣stances arises, some softer, some harder, some stronger, and some weaker. XXIII. This Nutrition by theThe Nou∣rishment from the Blood two∣fold. Blood, is caus'd two manner of ways. 1. Immediately, when the Particles of the Blood are immediately oppos'd, without any other previous or remark∣able Alteration; as is to be seen in the Fleshy and Fat Parts. 2. Mediately, when Apposition hap∣pens, after some remarkable Concoction or Alteration preceding; as in the Bones, to whose Nourishment, besides the Salt Tartareous Particles of the Blood, there concurs the Marrow, made before out of the Blood; as also in the Sinews, which are not nourished only by the Blood, communicated to their outward Tunicle, through invisible little Arteries, from the continuation of those Arteries that pass through both Membranes of the Brain and Spinal Marrow; but also by the Salter Sanguineous Particles, first prepar'd by the Concoction of the Brain. XXIV. But in this NutritionThe De∣grees of Nutrition. from the Blood, three Degrees are to be observ'd. 1. When the Body is so nourish'd, as to grow by that Nourish∣ment. 2. When it is nourish'd, and re∣mains in the same Condition. 3. When it is nourish'd and decays. XXV. Now that the Cause of thisFour Things ne∣cessary to Nutrition. Diversity may be more plainly known, we are to consider, That there are Four Things necessary to perfect Nu∣trition. 1. The Alimentary Juice it self. 2. The Apposition of this Juice. 3. Then its Agglutination. 4. And lastly, Its Assimilation. The Alimentary Juice is the Blood, which is forc'd by the Beating of the Heart, through the smallest Arteries, to the Parts that are to be nourish'd, and is thrust forward into their Pores; by which means the Substance of the Parts does as it were, drink it in. And be∣cause in these Pores, something of Hu∣mor, tending toward Assimilation, re∣mains over and above, hence it comes to pass, that the convenient Particles of the new-come Blood, more agreeable to that Humor, are mingl'd with that Humor sticking there before, and being there concocted by the convenient Heat and proper Temper of the Parts, are by degrees agglutinated, and more & more assimilated to the Substance of the Parts, and are so prepar'd and dispos'd by the Vital Spirit continually flowing into the Parts, together with the Arterious Blood, that they acquire Vitality, and become true Particles of the Parts, en∣du'd with Life and Soul, equally to the rest. XXVI. If now, while that Nutri∣tionGrowth. is made, the smaller Particles of the Parts, by reason of their moister Temperament, or cooler Heat stick but softly to each other, then upon their first Apposition, by reason of the great Plenty of Alimentary Hu∣mor flowing in by the impulse of the Heart, they easily separate from each other, and admit more Nutritive Humor than is requisite to their Nu∣trition; from the Plenty of which, be∣ing agglutinated and assimilated, hap∣pens the Growth of the Parts by de∣grees, because more is appos'd and ag∣glutinated than is wasted. But whenStay of Growth. by the increase of Heat, the smaller Particles are dry'd up, and become hard and firm, as in Manhood, then they no longer separate one from ano∣ther, by reason of the Alimentary Juice forc'd in, and the Juice that is pour'd into the Pores in great quantity, is vigorously discuss'd by the more vio∣lent and stronger Heat, that no more can be appos'd and assimilated than is dissipated; whence there follows a stay of Growth; wherein the Substance of the Parts will admit no Excess or Di∣minution of Quantity. Lastly, Those smaller Particles ofDecay. the Parts, are not only dry'd up by that same stronger Heat, and the Pores are streightn'd so as to admit less Alimenta∣ry Juice; but the Alimentary Juice it
self, by reason of the Heat dimimish'd by Time and Age, and consequently a worse Concoction of the Bowels, grows weaker, and less agreeable to the Sub∣stance of the Part it self; and then, as in Old Age, the Parts themselves de∣crease and diminish: For the unapt∣ness of the Pores in the Parts, and of the Nutritive Juice it self, as also of the concocting Heat, and the small Quan∣tity of the said Juice, are the reason that less is appos'd than is dissipated▪ Now his Decrease is chiefly and most manifestly observ'd in the softer Parts, whose smallest Particles are moister, and more easily dissipated, as the Flesh, the Fat, &c. But it is less observable in the Bones, and other harder Parts, whose smallest Particles are more fix'd, and not so easily dissipated. XXVII. Here, by way of Paren∣thesis,Whether Old Men grow shor∣ter. a Question may be propos'd; Whether Old Men grow shorter than they were in their Prime? This ma∣ny affirm, and confirm by Ocular Te∣stimony. Spigelius absolutely denies it: For, says he, That they grow shorter, I deny; but that they grow leaner, I grant. For the Bones, according to which the Length of the Body is extended, being hard and solid Bodies, are neither diminish'd by Age, nor the Force of any Disease: But the Flesh is wasted and consumed, as well by Age, as by many other Causes: So that if they seem to be shorter than Young Men it proceeds from hence, because that all their Ioynts are bow'd, as well by Muscles shrunk for want of Heat, as by the Liga∣ments dry'd up, and cover'd with Brawn. But though Spigelius brings these Rea∣sons for his Negative Opinion, yet the Affirmative seems the more plausible; seeing that Decrepit Old Men, not on∣ly by reason of the bowing of their Joynts and Body, seem shorter, but because of necessity they must be somewhat, though not much shorter, by reason of the Gristles between the Vertebrae of the Back-Bone, and the Joynts of the Thighs, and other Parts; which being softer and more tumid in Young Men, and consequently separate the Bones more at a distance one from the other, of necessity must extend the Body somewhat more in Length; but in Old Men, waxing drier and thinner by degrees, must of necessity, for the same Reason, shorten the Body: To which we add, That the Ligaments of the Joynts, being dry'd up, contract the Joynts closer one to another. And this is apparent in such Old Men, who being stronger, walk still upright; for if they measure with the same Measure where∣with they measur'd themselves in their Youth, you shall find 'em to want the breadth, some, of a Thumb, some, of half a Thumb, others, of two Thumbs of their Height in their youthful days: which we have known true by Experi∣ence.Two doubts XXVIII. From what has been al∣ready said concerning the making and Principles of the Blood, two obscure and doubtful Matters are brought to Light. First, That there are four Hu∣mors in the Blood, Flegm, pure Blood, Choler and Melancholy. Secondly, Whence proceed the Temperatures of Bodies. XXIX. Flegm is that part of theOf the four Humors of the Blood. Flegm. Blood, which being first made out of the Blood, and not much circulated or dilated in the Heart, becomes more crude, and less Spirituous. XXX. Pure Blood is that part ofBlood. the Sanguineous Mass, which being several times circulated and dilated in the Heart, attains to moderate Spiri∣tuosity. XXXI. Choler is that Part of it,Choler. which by frequent Circulations and Dilatations is exalted to a more ex∣traordinary Thinness, and becomes most Spirituous and boyling hot. XXXII. Melancholy is that Part,Melancho∣ly. out of which, by several Circulations and Attenuations made in the Heart, the Spirituous Particles are for the most part drawm out and wasted, and hence the Blood becomes colder, thick∣er, and more earthy. Here by the way take Notice, That we do not mean by Flegm, Choler and Melancholy, the Fermentaceous Humors which are bred in the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, as if the Mass of Blood con∣sisted of those Humors being mix'd toge∣ther; only that these Names are com∣paratively apply'd to the Blood, as the Parts of it are more or less, or over∣much concocted. XXXIII. But in regard, That be∣causeThe four Humors are always in the Blood. of the continual Waste and Con∣sumption of lost Spirits, there must be a Reparation of new ones, by means of fresh Nourishment, hence it follows, that these Four Humors are necessarily in the Blood, and that the Blood should consist of them. For out of the Ali∣ments
sufficiently prepar'd, and first di∣lated in the Heart, there comes a Fleg∣matic Juice, which by degrees, by means of several Circulations and Dilatations in the Heart, turns into pure and excel∣lently well tempe'd Blood But pro∣ceeding farther, above its just Temper of Heat, turns into Choleric Blood: And having lost its mre subtile Parti∣cles, turns into Melancholy. And thus all these four Juices, which consist all of Salt and Sulphuy Particles, nor differ one from another, ut only in their stronger or weaker Concoction and Spi∣rituosity, are mix'd together, and so by a certain Perpetuation of Qualities, the Excesses inspringing one upon another, as long as a man lives, they constitute the whole Mass of his Blood, united and render'd fluid by means of the Se∣rum. Which Serum, especially its Wa∣tery Part, is not assimilated to the Parts that are to be nourish'd; but to them conveys the nourishing Particles of the Blood, and by them, when once appo∣sited and assimilated, is evacuated and discuss'd by means of their Heat. Thus in the Gilding of Metals, the finest Gold is beaten into thin Leaves, and mingl'd with Quick-Silver, to make the Gold stick on, which could not be done with∣out the Mercury: afterwards, the Vessel being Gilded, and brought to the Fire, the Heat of the Fire discusses, and sends the Mercury packing, while the Gold sticks close to the Vessel on which it was laid; such a sort of Mercury is the Se∣rum in living Bodies, conveying and ap∣posing the Blood to the several Parts. XXXIV. As to the TemperaturesWhence the Tempera∣ments of the Body proceed. of our Bodies, they proceed from the various Mixture and Redundancy of the four foremention'd Iuices. XXXV. If the Chylus be madePhlegmatic Tempera∣ment. of cold and moist Iuices, wherein there is little subtile Spirit, or else sent out crude from the Stomach, or not sufficiently dissolv'd for want of convenient Ferment, such a Chylus produces a Flegmatic Sanguineous Iuice, which though frequently cir∣culated and dilated in the Heart, yet cannot be exalted by the Heart to a sufficient Spirituosity; and hence there is a greater Quantity of that, and a lesser Quantity of the rest of the Iuices; and because the whole Body then is nourish'd with a Flegmatic sort of Blood, thence the Constitution of the Parts is more moist and cold, and so there is a Flegmatic Tempera∣ture of the Body.. XXXVI. If the Chylus be well temper'd, well concocted, and made out of well temper'd Nourishment, or so made by a good Concoction of the Bowels, then happens a Redundancy of that Blood, and consequently a San∣guine Complexion, and a good Temper of Body.. XXXVII. If the Chylus be made of Nourishments hot and sharp, or sharply fermented through the more intense Heat of the Bowels, then af∣ter a few Circulations, it turns to a very hot and spirituous Iuice; which predominating, begets a Choleric Tem∣per.. XXXVIII. If the Chylus be made of thick Earthy Nourishments, abound∣ing with much crude and fix'd Salt, and those not well concocted and dis∣solv'd; then few Spirits are extracted out of it, by the Circulations and Di∣latations made in the Heart, and there remains only a thick Iuice, with∣out much Spirit; whence proceeds a Melancholic Temper. Now the vast Excesses of these Tem∣peratures, are call'd Distempers, and breed several Diseases, Hot, Cold, &c.Whether   and Spirits . XXXIX. After this Description of the Principles, and manner of making the Blood and Vital Spirits, before we come to their Use, let us say something of their Vitality; about which, Philo∣phers so much dispute, and Physicians disent. While the one in Defence of Vitality, say, 1. That the Blood and Spirits vari∣ously move themselves according to the Diversity of the Motions of the Mind and Imagination; in ear, toward the Heart; in Shame, toward the Cheeks; in Lust, toward the Genitals. 2. The Holy Scripture says, That the Soul of the Flesh remains in the Blood. 3. That the Seed being potentially animated, is made out of Blood and Spirits. 4. Because they are nourish'd, as Hippocrates witnesses; which could ne∣ver be, if they did not live. However▪ they who deny the Blood and Spirits Life, seem in our Judgment to be most
in the Right. 1. Because the Blood and Spirits have not within themselves the Principle of their own Motion, as be∣queath'd to them from the Soul; but because they have their Motion by force of the solid Parts, which are mov'd by the Soul, as the Heart, Brain, &c. By the Force of which, and that often according to the diversity of the Motions of the Mind, the Motion of the Chylus, Choler, and sometimes of the Excrements, and various other Humors, is promoted and excited, which no man however in his Wits, will affirm to be living. 2. That the Soul of the flesh is said to be in the Blood, so far as animated or enliven'd Flesh wants Blood, nay and Air too, as the next Support, without which his Life cannot subsist. To the Third, That Seed Potentially enliven'd, and living, is not generated out of the Blood and Spirits, because the Spirituous Blood, out of which it is made, is living, but by reason that by a new Specific Mix∣ture, and Disposition of the Sanguine∣ous Mixture, brought to Perfection by the Heat and Specific Property of the Seminifying Parts, a new and potenti∣ally Vital Form is introduc'd, which was not before in the Matter not Vital: as we see dead Bodies, rotten Wood: Cheese, Rain-water, and Vinegar long expos'd to the Heat of the Sun, will produce Worms alive, whereas there is no Life in any of these things. To the Fourth, That Hippocrates does not as∣cribe Nourishment, properly so call'd, to the Blood and Spirits, but only their continual Generation and Supply out of the Chylus. As we say the Flame of a Lamp is nourish'd with Oil, because the Oil is the next Matter with which the Flame is nourish'd. To these I add, That in an Animal, Life cannot be but in the Parts of the Body; out of which number, that the Blood and Spirits are manifestly excluded, we have sufficiently demonstrated, l. 1. c. 1. Here some one will urge, That the Seed is no Part of the Body, and yet it lives Potentially, and therefore why not the Blood? I answer, That though the Seed is a Part of the Body, as of Peter, being present; from whom it was cut off, and still perhaps remains in his Spermatic Vessels; nevertheless it is only Part of the Body of a future Animal which is to live; even such a Matter, as contains in it self the Ideas of all the Parts of the Animal that is to be form'd. But the Blood cannot be said to be a Part of Peter, or the Living Creature, but only a Humor or Juice next nourishing the Parts, and to be agglutinated and assi∣milated to the Substance by new Conco∣ction, and so to be enliven'd with it at the same time. XL. From what has been said, theThe Use of the Blood. Use of the Blood appears to be for the Nourishment of all the Parts; that is, not only to afford Matter to be assimilated to every Part; but to con∣vey a hot Vital Spirit, which excites the Actions and Concoctions of all and singular the Parts, and to cause the fit Matter for Assimilation to be assimilated, and supply'd in the room of that which is wasted and dissipated by the Heat. XLI. But seeing the Blood is car∣ry'dWhat Blood nourishes. as well through the Arteries, as Veins, the Question is, Whether the Parts are nourish'd by Veiny or Arte∣rious Blood? Anciently it was believ'd that the Parts were nourish'd by the Veiney Blood, because the Blood was thought to be made in the Liver, and thence to be carry'd through the Veins to the Parts. Which Error being dis∣cover'd by the Circulation of the Blood, since which time, it has been observ'd, that the Blood is made only in the Heart, and from thence forc'd through the Arteries to the Parts, and only car∣ry'd back from the Parts through the Veins; thence it has been apparently made clear, that the Body of Man is nourish'd chiefly by Arterious Blood. I say (chiefly) because though it cannot be deny'd, while the Blood returns through the Veins to the Heart, but that some small part of it sweating through the Pores of the Vessels or Tunicles, are fix'd up and down to various Parts, and nourish them; and that the Tuni∣cles of the Veins themselves are nourish'd by the Blood which they carry; and that the greatest part of the Liver re∣ceives its Nourishment from the Veiny Blood, as is apparent from the vast num∣ber of Veins, and small quantity of Arteries that creep through it; yet in some other places, where the Arteries accompany the Veins, it is manifest, that the Parts are chiefly nourish'd by Ar∣terious Blood, being more spirituous and concocted, and with greater vio∣lence forc'd through the Ends of the small Arteries into the Pores of the Parts. XLII. This ancient Opinion, re∣ceiv'dCharle∣ton's con∣trary Opi∣nion. by all the Physicians in the Schools, about the Nourishment of the
Parts by the Blood, has Gualter Charleton oppos'd with great Heat, and endeavors to destroy it with most Strenuous Arguments, as he believes, by shewing the unaptness of the Blood for Nutrition. The Sum of all his Arguments areHis Argu∣ments. these: 1. The Blood consists of Four Juices; which, by farther Concoction degene∣rate all into Melancholy; with which impure Juice all the Parts cannot be nou∣rish'd; yet all would be nourish'd with it, were they nourish'd by the Blood. 2. The Blood never comes to many Parts, as the Brain, the Bones, the Si∣news, the Ligaments, &c. 3. Lean men, who have most Blood, eat most, and are less nourish'd than fat People, who have nevertheless less Blood, whose Veins are narrower, and their Diet more sparing. 4. They that die famish'd, or of a Consumption, have a great quantity of Blood remaining in their Veins after their Decease, which therefore might have serv'd for farther Nourishment, and have prevented their Death. 5. The Blood in all parts preserves its Redness, neither does it lose its Co∣lour in those parts that encline to White; therefore it does not nourish them. 6. Hippocrates cur'd a Consumptive Person (whom Victuals did no good) by frequent Blood-letting. 7. The Blood is carry'd through the Arteries to the Parts, is mix'd therein with a copious Serum, and is there much less Fat and Oily, than in the Veins, through which it is carry'd back from the Parts. 8. The Blood is of a quite different Nature from many Parts of the Body, as the Brain, Bones, Membranes, &c. 9. The manner of Nutrition is the Progress of the Nourishment from a state of Crudity or Fixation, to a state of Fusion, by which its Spirits before fix'd, are exalted to a farther degree of Activity; which Spirits adhering to the Blood, and like a Glutton, devouring, dissolving and dissipating the Nutritive Substance of the Parts, render it unfit for the nourishment of the Parts, for the consolidating of which, a more fix'd nou∣rishment is requir'd. 10. The Blood it self is nourish'd by the Chylus, therefore it cannot nourish other Parts; because moreover there is contain'd in it a Heat that preys upon the Substance of the Parts. 11. All the several Parts ought to be nourish'd with a certain Juice of the same Nature with that out of which they were first form'd; but that is not the Blood, but the Colliquation of the Seed; and therefore their Growth and Nourishment cannot proceed from the Seed. All which being thus concluded, Charleton at last produces a Similitude between the Flame of a Lamp, and that Fermentaceous Flame which is rais'd in the Heart; and thence concludes the Use of the Blood to be the Food of the Lamp of the Flame of Life, and the next Matter for the Generation of the Spirits. To the First, That Charleton great∣lyThe Refu∣tation. mistakes, while he presupposes that all the Parts must be nourish'd with impure Melan holy, if they were nourish'd by the Blood. For it has been shew'd already, that the Nourishment must be various, according to the various Nature of the Parts, while some are nourish'd with a cruder, others a more temperate, others with a hotter and thicker part of the Blood, and all those Parts are always in the Blood, and if there be an Excess of the one or the other, then there hap∣pens either an Atrophy or a Cachexy. Besides, he does not consider, That the Melancholic part of the Blood is not call'd an impure Juice, but only a thick∣er Juice, and which upon the dissipati∣on of the more Spirituous Part, is not easily exalted again to a farther Spirituo∣sity, by reason of the weakness of the Bowels that concoct and prepare the Ferments. Which Bowels, if they hap∣pen to be restor'd to their former Sound∣ness by proper Remedies, then the Blood is reduc'd to a just Spirituosity, and in that manner the Hypochondriacal Affection, the Scurvey, and other Me∣lancholic Diseases are cur'd, by Reme∣dies corroborating the Bowels, dissolving the Fixedness of the Humors, and sub∣liming them to Spirituosity. Lastly, He does not consider, that there are se∣veral Parts that require this same thick∣er Parts of the Blood for their Nourish∣ment. To the Second, I say, That there are no Parts to which the Blood does not come In the middle of the Substance of the Brain, innumerable bloody Spots are to be seen budding forth. The Sinews admit Blood, which flows to them; through the continuation of the Vessels creeping through the Membranes of the Brain. Through the Bones pass Arte∣ries and Veins to the innermost Spungy Substance, and to the Marrow; and
their Periostia are wash'd on the outside every way by the Blood. To the Third, I say, That as for lean men, though they abound with Blood, yet the Bulk of their Bodies does not in∣crease so much by reason of the violent and sharp Heat of the Blood. For the violent Heat quickly dissipates whatever is assimilated, contrary to what befals fat Men, who have less Heat and Acri∣mony in their Blood, and therefore out of their less Quantity there is more ap∣pos'd than dissipated. To the Fourth, I answer, Men may be starv'd two ways to Death. First, When the Body is full of evil Iuice, and a great Quantity of vitiated Blood abounds in the Vessels. For in such there is a Ne∣cessity, that the Heart should be fre∣quently supply'd with new and good Juices to comfort and cherish i; so that it Famine be not the occasion of Death, yet the Blood becoming more hot, more sharp, or some other way more corrupt, the eart must be overwhelm'd with bad Humors, though there be store of Blood remaining in the Vessels; for it is not Quantity alone, but good Quali∣ty that is requir'd for the Support of Life. Secondly, Because that, as well in sound, as deprav'd Constitutions of Body, the Blood is wasted by long Fa∣mine; for though those that die fa∣mish'd, have much Blood remaining in their Vessels, yet it seems to be too little to suffice for the Nourishment of all the Parts, and hence all the Parts and Bowels being weaken'd, Death en∣sues. To this purpose, in Novemb. 1656. upon the dissection of a Person that had starv'd himself to Death, I could disco∣ver in him no Mesaraic, Intercostal, or other lesser Veins, because they were quite empty'd, so that there were hardly three Spoonfuls of Blood in the Hollow Vein, and the Great Artery was alto∣gether empty'd. In Novemb. 1660. we dissected ano∣ther Person, who by reason of a long want of Appetite, had wasted himself to Death; in whom we found the Veins and Arteries exhausted after a wonder∣ful manner, so that there were hardly two Spoonfuls in the hollow Vein, and nothing at all in the Aorta. To the Fifth, I affirm it to be an Un∣truth, That the Blood does not lose its Red∣ness in the Nourishment of Parts inclining to White: For the contrary appears in the Brain; which, that it is nourish'd by the Blood passing through its Pores, the innumerable Bloody Spots, every where conspicuous in a dissected Skull, do shew; and yet the Brain is white. Moreover, I say, That the Red Colour is easily perpetuated by the Specific Concoction of the Heart in the Circula∣ting Blood; because the Sulphury Parti∣cles readily concur with the Salt, and mixt with Spirituosity, are as easily uni∣ted: But in the Blood that already stops in the Parts for Nutrition, that Colour is easily chang'd again by another Spe∣cific Concoction of the Parts inclining to white; when the greatest part of the Sulphury Particles are again separated from the Salt, or mingl'd after another manner. Lastly, I add, That in the Blood, besides the Red Particles, there are many white, and other Particles of various Colours, which the intense Red∣ness does so conceal, that they are not to be discover'd but in the separation of the Particles of the Blood. In the same manner as in Red Wine there lies hid a most Limpid Spirit, and a watery pel∣lucid Part, whose Lympid Colour, how∣ever, is not conspicuous in the Wine, but presently appears upon Distilla∣tion. To the Sixth, I say, That the Blood of some Men is over-salt, sharp, thick, or corrupted, who therefore are not re∣liev'd by Med'cines, unless Nature be first reliev'd by letting out some conside∣rable Quantity of that Blood, that she may be the better able to digest the new Juices of Nourishments, and convert 'em into purer Blood, whereby the bet∣ter to nourish the Body in due manner; and such, no question, was that Person cur'd by Hippocrates, with frequent Blood-letting. To the Seventh, I say, That there is not always and necessarily requir'd an Unctuosity of Blood for the Nutrition of all Parts whatever; but such an Ap∣titude as agrees with all and every the Parts; which Aptitude does not consist in Unctuosity alone, as is before said. To the Eighth, I answer, That the Blood consider'd in the whole, seems in∣deed dissimilar from many Parts of the Body; but consider'd in its Particles, contains in it self what is like to every Part, there being no Parts which are not compos'd of Salt and Sulphur, by the Assistance of Mercury, variously mix'd, according to the Nature of the several Parts; which Salt and Sulphur are likewise the Principles of the Blood. Moreover, Similitude does not lie in the Colour, which may be easily alter'd by any new Concoction; but in the Parti∣cles that constitute the Substance, as
well of the Parts, as of the Blood. To the Ninth, I say, That Charleton confounds Nutrition with Sangnification, and that what he speaks here of Nutrition, belongs to Sanguification; between which there is a great Difference. For Aliment is not sublim'd to a greater Spirituosity, for the Benefit of Nutrition, but for the making of good Blood; which after∣wards undergoes another Change, for the procuring of Nutrition; which Nu∣trition does not consist in a farther Sub∣limation of the Spirits, but rather in a certain new Fixation. To which I far∣ther add, That the Vital Spirits do not, like Cormorants, consume the Substance of the Solid Parts, but preserve it in its Saneness, neither do they render the Blood unfit for Nutrition, but fit, and that those Spirits infus'd into the Parts with the Blood, excite them to their Functions, and as it were, force them to an Assimilation with the Nourishment brought; which Assimilation could ne∣ver be brought to pass without the As∣sistance of these Spirits. Now how the Spirituous Nourishment is again fix'd, see l. 3. c. 11. To the Tenth, I say, It is no fair Consequence; The Blood is nourish'd by the Chylus, therefore it cannot nourish other Parts. For so it would follow, Wheat is nourish'd by the Iuice of the Earth, therefore being eaten, ot cannot nourish the Chylus. So also I say of Heat; Wine, Wheat, and other Nourish∣ments contain in themselves a hot Spirit; therefore they cannot be chang'd into Chy∣lus and Blood, Why? Because a hot Spirit uses to pry upon the fluid Parts. What vain Conclusions these are! By reason of the Spirituous Heat of the Blood, without which the Blood is al∣together unprofitable for Nutrition, it is said that it cannot nourish the Parts; shall therefore any cold Body, or Hu∣mor void of all Heat, be Nourishment, or profitable for Nourishment? To the Eleventh, I say, That here Charleton altogether forgot himself: For before, out of Harvey, he had asserted, That the Blood was allow'd to be, be∣fore any other Part of the Body ap∣pear'd; and that out of that proceeded the Matter of which the Birth was form'd, and its Nourishment. If this Position of his were true, where's the Difficulty, but that the Parts which are made out of the Blood, should be nou∣rish'd with the Blood? Moreover, if the Colliquation of the Seed, be like the Parts that are to be nourish'd, and that again like to the Blood, then shall the Blood be like the Parts that are to be nourish'd? Nevertheless, we that do not believe the Parts to be fram'd out of the Blood, give this Answer to his Proposition, That the Parts are at first form'd out of the Spirituous Li∣quor of the Bubble, and nourish'd with the Colliquation of the Seed; but that the whole Substance of this Seed is ta∣ken out of the Arterious Blood, flowing through the Spermatic Arteries to the Stones, to which also the Animal Spi∣rits are also sent through several little Nerves, therefore the whole Matter of the Seed, Bubble and Colliquament is in the Blood, and being concocted special∣ly in the several Parts, acquires no less an Aptiude to nourish the several Parts, than being generally concocted in the Stones, it obtains an Aptness generally to form at first all those Parts; and so we must conclude, That all the Parts have their first Conformation, and their subse∣quent Growth and Nutrition, from a Juice altogether similar, which is pre∣par'd before the one in the Stones, be∣fore the other, in the several Parts; and so the Ancient Axiom is true; We are nourish'd with the same things of which we consist. And that other Oracle of A∣ristotle; The Matter is the same which augments the Growth of a Creature, with that out of which it was first form'd. Lastly, I answer to the Conclusion, That the Comparison was ill made be∣tween the Fermentation in the Heart, and the Flame of a Lamp: Which Comparison is easily endur'd among Poets and Orators, who only mind Or∣nament and Elegancy of Words; but not among Philosophers, that are en∣quiring after the Mysteries of Nature. For Flame does not only dissipate the Subject to which it adheres, but also de∣stroys it, and dissolves the whole Mix∣ture of it, and renders it useless; but the Fermentation of the Heart does not destroy the Blood, nor utterly dissolve its Mixture, but by means of the dila∣tation of the whole Mass, renders it more exact and strong, and so brings the Blood to a greater perfection, and ge∣nerates Spirits therein; which as they are thin, hot and pure, entring the whole Mass of the Blood, preserve it in its perfection, and together with the Blood, which is their own Subject, of which they are a part, being infus'd in∣to the Parts of the Body, by their ex∣traordinary Heat, raise into Act the drowsie Heat of all the Parts. True it is, that those Spirits, by reason of their extraordinary Subtility and Mobility,
continually exhale in great Quantity, and by dissolving them with their Heat, cause a Dissolution of many fluid Parti∣cles of the Body; but this is not because of any Destruction, but by reason of their extraordinary Subtility. I will give you a Similitude. Wine, when it is distill'd, the Spirit of Wine arising out of it, is not destroy'd by the Heat of the Fire that promotes the Distillati∣on, but is sublim'd to a greater Subtili∣ty and Perfection, there remaining all the while in it the Sulphury and Salt particles in a strict Union; the most part of whose Subtility therefore ex∣hales, and is dissipated in the Air. But the contrary happens in the Oil of a Lamp, which is indeed attenuated, but so far from being brought to a greater perfection, that it is totally destroy'd: For the Oil is not made the better, or more Spirituous, but the whole Com∣position of it is destroy'd; neither does it remain any longer Oil, nor is made Spirit of Oil: Like Wood, when it is burnt, is thereby reduc'd to Smoke and Ashes. Or if the Spirit of Wine should take Fire, it would not thereby be made more perfect, but wholly destroy'd. And thus it is with our Bodies as in Di∣stillation, and not as in the Flame: and therefore the Comparison of Fer∣mentation with Flame, is altogether absurd. I confess, Blood is the Matter and Subject of the Animal Spirits; but thence it does not follow, that it cannot nourish all the parts of the Body: Ra∣ther we are thence to infer, that it nou∣rishes all the parts, seeing it contains the Nutritive Matter, and the Vital Spirit that promotes that Nourishment. And thus falls this new Opinion, so obstinately by some defended, and by others as unwarily embrac'd. XLIII. N. Zas, In his DutchWhether the Lym∣pha be nu∣tritive. Treatise, Of the Dew of Animals, believes, That the Lymphatic Liquor only nourishes the Spermatic Parts; For this is that which he understands by his Dew: Of which Judgment also is Clemens Niloe. Which latter likewise writes, That the Blood is altogether unfit to nourish the Parts. 1. Because it is of an Earthy Sub∣stance. 2. Because neither the Blood nor the Chylus out of which it is generated in Distillation, are forc'd upward into the Alembic, into which only a Watery Liquor falls; and therefore the Blood is not subtil enough to come to all the parts, and afford 'em Nourishment. 3. Because such a Spirit as is extracted out of the Blood by Chymistry, is ex∣tracted also out of the Lympha, which is collected out of the Lymphatic Cir∣cle, plac'd near the Jugular Veins. 4. Because there are many Parts to which the Arteries and Veins that con∣vey the Blood, cannot reach. This O∣pinion of Clemens Niloe, differs from Charleton's and Glisson's in this, because they think Nutrition to be perform'd by a certain Juice flowing out of the Nerves; the other by the Lymphatic Juice. But Niloe's Arguments are of little mo∣ment. First, For that the Blood is compos'd as well of thicker and serous, as of spi∣rituous particles, which are both requi∣site for Nutrition; nor can one subsist or act without the other. The Consequence of the Second, is of no force; because the spirituous and serous parts ascend through the Alem∣bic, but not the terrestrial; for then it is apparent, that the Blood nourishes the better for that reason: For if it were volatile and spirituous in all its Particles, it would be too hastily dissipated, and could never be appos'd to the Parts for Nutrition. The Third is altogether as invalid; For he ought to have prov'd that Spirit altogether similar, was extracted out of the Blood and Lympha, whereas there is a manifest difference to be observ'd in the Acrimony. Then grant that such a similar Spirit be extracted out of both; yet I affirm, That ten times as much Spirit may be extracted out of one Pint of Blood, as out of two Pints of Lym∣pha. Then it is no wonder, that the Spirit of Blood should seem to have some likeness with the Spirit of Lym∣pha: seeing that the Lympha is continu∣ally mix'd with the Blood, and becomes a part of it, and is again generated by it, and separated from it in the Liver, Glandules and other parts, therein to acquie a new Fermentaceous Power, and returns with it into the Veins, and so prepares the Blood for dilatation and perfection in the Heart, and then again becomes a part of it. Can any man hence conclude, that only the preparing Lympha, and not the prepar'd Blood nourishes? Moreover, there is a sub∣tile and sharp Humor drawn out of U∣rine; nay frequently more subtile, or at least sharper than out of the Blood: Shall it thence be concluded, that not the Blood, but the Urine or Serum of the Blood nourishes the Parts, as that which penetrates with the Blood, no
less to all the Parts than the Blood it self. The Fourth is contrary to what we see with our Eyes, seeing there is no part of the Body, to which the Blood does not come, as we have already demon∣strated. And thus vanishes this new Opinion; and Aristotle's Maxim is restor'd, viz. Blood is the last Nourishment. To which Opinion, as formerly, so now the whole School of Physicians deservedly adheres. As for what Charleton, following Glisson, endeavors to perswade the World, That the Nutritious Humor is carry'd to the Parts through the Nerves only, that Fiction we shall refute, l. 8. c. 1. XLIV. From what has been said, are abundantly demonstrated the Generati∣on,Malpigius is Obser∣vations a∣out refri∣gerated blood. Nature and Use of the Blood in Man; now we shall add some Particu∣lars observ'd by the quick-sighted Mal∣pigius, which he has found out in the Blood extracted out of the Body by Blood-letting, and cool'd in the Air; which gives not a little Light to the more inward understanding the Consti∣tution of the Blood. If you desire to see, says he, a remarkable Sight, view this Blood with a Microscrope, and you shall behold a Fibrous Contexture, and a Net, compos'd, as it were, of Sinewy Fibres, in whose little Spaces, as in little Cells, stands a Ruddy Matter, which being wrp'd away, leaves this whitish Net-like Folding behind; which to the Eye resem∣bles a mucous or slimy Membrane. Now that this Net-like Portion of the Blood, with the Film swimming at the Top, con∣sists of the same Matter and Nature, per∣haps a diligent exploration of the sangui∣neous Film, will make out: For if the clotted Blood, which is cover'd with a white and thick Film, which, though it does not swell with a thicken'd Serum, yet seems to be skinny, soft, and easily folded, be slit along, and several times wash'd; you shall observe in the upper part of it a Film consisting of whitish little Skins, and hol∣low'd through with little Passages, and diminutive Bladders, which are full of transparent and less heavy Iuice; and prosecuting farther the Production of this Substance, by and by where the clotted Bulk of the Blood begins to look red, you shall sind it, being divided and slit downward, prolong'd into little Fibres, and within their elegant Contexture, shall observe se∣veral little Passages and Hollownesses, which swell and are dy'd with certain little red Atoms knit together, and in some larger Spaces, a yellowish Serum is com∣prehended or mix'd with the red Matter▪ Wherefore Sense seems to intimate to us; that this whitish and sanguineous Net-like Fold strengthens the Body of the whole clotted Matter, and endows it with a more able Corporature, and that same Divi∣sion at the bottom, which shews us so ma∣ny various Images of things, depends upon the various colouring Matter con∣tain'd in the small Hollownesses: for in the upper Superficies, where those bloody whi∣tish Threds are united, there arises a whi∣tsh and compacted Tunicle, but where the Pores are loos'd by degrees, it admits a portion of the yellowish lighter Serum, and folloms a Structure somewhat looser, and easily dissolv'd. At length, the Pas∣sages being more open, while they swell with a red Substance, presently that Film vanishes, and then comes a Contexture of Fibrous Blood, drawn out in length down∣ward; which because it contains those red Atoms, compress'd by the force of the su∣perior weight, it shews a new manner and colour of Substance; for there follows a Flaccidness from the last Productions of the Fibres being lan'd; and a black Co∣lour, the contain'd Particles being thick∣en'd, which deceives many with a shew of Melancholy; whereas upon the changing the situation, they become purple. Whence I thought to take notice of one thing by the way, that in the spaces of the Film, as also in the whole circuit of the Fibrous Blood, sometimes in some Diseases, the Serum therein contain'd grows thick; hence a pale Colour, and that Slimyness and manner of Substance as in the Gelly'd Serum, or White of an Egg. Sometimes we have observ'd certain Appendixes drawn out in length through the whole Blood, to which are affix'd lesser Folds, produc'd in the form of a Net, which are sometimes discernable without a Micro∣scope. This Blood being frequently wash'd with Water, and the half con∣geal'd Serum being wash'd of, which forms that conspicuous Net, certain Channels hollow'd in the Fibrous and White Portion of the Blood appear, which does not happen in the small Fi∣brous Folds above-mention'd, though wash'd a long time, but still new Folds, and a brisker Whiteness appears. From this accurate Observation of Malpigius, is perfectly discover'd what is generated by the various Concoctions of the several Bowels out of the Salt, Sulphur and Serum, concurring to the Generation of the Blood, and what lit∣tle Bodies are found out of 'em, of which rightly generated, mix'd and u∣nited, good Blood is made, or deprav'd by a filthy or vicios Fermentation.
XLV. And thus we have finish'd theThe Diffe∣rences of the Blood. whole Discourse of the Blood, only that some Differences of it, remain to be consider'd. 1. In respect of Quantity; the Blood is either very plentiful or scarce. And this Difference is consider'd not only a∣mong divers sorts of Animals, of which some have more, some less Blood; but also among Men themselves; among whom the Quantity of Blood is diffe∣rent according to the diversity of Age, Sex, Temperament, Diet, and Season of the Year, &c. 2. In respect of Quality, the Blood is either good or bad, hotter or colder, moister or drier; and that difference is consider'd according to the Varieties a∣foresaid, 3. In respect of Consistency, the Blood is either thick or thin, congeal'd or fluid. Spigelius observes, That those People who have a hard and thick Skin, breed a thicker sort of Blood that easily congeals; on the other side, where Peo∣ple have a soft thin Skin, their Blood does not so soon thicken. But Experi∣ence teaches us, that the good or bad, swift or slow Concretion of the Blood proceeds from the various Quality of the Blood. So that it is moderately thick, and congeals well in sound Peo∣ple; on the other side in Dropsical, Scor∣butical, Hypochondriacal, and other People, it is watery, and hard to thick∣en. 4. In respect of Colour, the Blood is either red and well colour'd, or pale, yellow, blackish, or dy'd of some other bad Hue. 5. In respect of the Humors mix'd with it, the Blood is either full of Choler, Flegm, Melancholy or Serum. 6. In respect of the Containing Ves∣sels, the Blood is either Arterious or Veiny. CHAP. XIII. Of the Lungs and Respiration. See Tab. 9, & 10. I. THE Lungs (in Greek,The Defi∣nition.  from , to Breath) is a Bowel in the Middle Belly, serv∣ing for Respiration, for the Refrigera∣tion of the Blood forc'd from the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and the Ex∣pulsion of many Vapors. II. It is of a remarkable Bigness;Its Bigness. so that being display'd and widen'd by the Breathing in of the Air, it fills the greatest Part of the Cavity of the Breast. III. Several Anatomists formerlyIts Sub∣stance. ascrib'd to it, though erroneously, a fleshy Substance, not unlike that of the Heart or Spleen; but Malpigius, an accurate Examiner of the Lungs, finds its Substance to be quite different; and by ocular Experience and Reasons, has clearly demonstrated, That the Lungs consist of a soft, spungy, loose and bladdery Parenchyma, interwoven with slight and thin small Membranes, conti∣nuous to the inner Tunicle of the rough Artery, which Membranes being extended and arch'd, form an infinite number of small orbicular and hollow Vesicles, con∣stituting the whole Substance of the Paren∣chyma, so plac'd, that there is a Passage open from the rough Artery, out of one Part into the other, and at length all ter∣minate in the Cloathing or Containing Membrane. These Vesicles in the Lungs of an Ox, Sheep, or other Animal, newly pluck'd out, and either cut or turn'd to the Light, are conspicuous by the help of Microscopes, and are observ'd to swell with Air, especially about the outward Superficies, though they are apparent enough in the inner parts upon blowing up of the Lungs, and in every part disse∣cted, appear form'd out of a slight Membrane extended. How these Ca∣vities are dispos'd, Malpigius declares in these Words: After the little Lobes, the Spaces are to be observ'd; not every way bare Cavities, and empty Spaces, for they have many extended Membranes, some∣times parallel, sometimes angular, which are propagated not only from the external Superficies of the Lobes laterally plac'd, but also from the internal Substance of the Lobes. Between these Membranes run forth several Vessels issuing out of the little Lobes, which enter those that are oppo∣site. By these Membranes the Air is re∣ceiv'd and ejected, as in the more spacious Hollownesses, which have a mutual Com∣munion together, that the Air may be compress'd out of one Part into another; so that the Spaces are the same Membra∣nous Vesicles of the Lungs, Diaphanous only and very Thin.
Therefore all the Vesicles are conti∣nuous with the inner Tunicle of the Aspera Arteria, and Gristles of the Wind-pipe; and hence there is an open passage out of the Aspera Arteria into the Bronchia, or fistulous part of the Wind∣pipe, transmitting the Air, that passes to and again. But whether the Vesicles are so dispos'd, that the Air may go in at one side, and out at the other; or whether it comes and goes through the same passages; or whether there be some that reserve the Air for some time, as we see in Frogs, the Air may be reserv'd in the Lungs, cannot be fully discern'd. However, that all the Air breath'd in, is not presently breath'd forth again, but remains for the greatest part in the Ves∣sels, and Winding-holes, which are never found empty, the Lungs of Dogs being open'd alive teach us; in which, after Expiration, there still remains very much Air. Also the Lungs of People de∣ceas'd, wherein is contain'd very much Air, which may be squeez'd out with the Finger. Hence Hippocrates calls the Lungs the Habtation of Air; and Galen, the Venitricle wherein the Air inhabits. This Air retain'd in the Lungs, con∣tributes to them an extraordinary Soft∣ness and Smoothness, which is chiefly necessary, lest the smallest Blood-bear∣ing Vessels should be oppress'd with weight; but that they may always re∣main passable; and that the Air within the Right Ventricle of the Heart, being attenuated into a subtile Vapour, can∣not so descend to the Left Ventricle out of the Lungs, passing, as it were, through the Middle Region of the Air, may be condens'd, and so more quickly pass through the Pulmonary Vein to the Left Ventricle of the Heart.Preterna∣tural things in the Lungs. IV. Now that the Substance of the Lungs is Bladdery, Reason, besides common Sight, instructs us; for ma∣ny times round, thick and stinking Spittle, impostumous Matter, little Bladders, Worms, little Stones, and other preternatural things are genera∣ted in the Lungs: Of which Accidents Bauschius has collected several Exam∣ples; and we, in our Practice have seen many strange Things spit out of the Lungs; and found other things as strange in Persons dissected, which certainly were not bred in the Blood-bearing Ves∣sels, nor in the fistulous part of the Pipe, which would have caus'd a Suffocation, violent Asthma, and perpetual Cough, but of necessity had been bred in the Vessels, and might, yea must have been contain'd there a long time. V. In the Year 1649. I dissected a Stone-CuttersObservati∣on. Boy that dy'd of an Asthma, in whose Lungs I found a great Quantity of Stone-dust suck'd in with the Air, and stuffing almost all the Vessels, insomuch that I seem'd to cut through a heap of Sand; so that the Vesicles being fill'd with Dust, could not admit the Air, which was the occasion of the poor Fel∣low's Death. The next Year, two like Cases hap∣pen'd of Stone-Cutters that dy'd after the same manner, and were by me dissect∣ed in our Hospital. At the same time, the Master Stone-Cutter reported to us, that while the Stones are cut, there flies into the Air such a subtile Powder from the Stones, as was able to penetrate the Pores of an Oxe's Bladder, that hung up blown and dry'd in his Shop, so that about the end of the Year, he found a handful of Dust at the bottom of the Bladder; which Powder was that which kill'd so many Stone-Cutters, that were not very careful how they preserv'd themselves from that Dust. So that if such a Quantity of Dust penetrates by drawing in the Breath into the Vesicles of the Lungs, there is no question but Air runs through all those Vesicles. We saw a Third that dy'd of an Asthma, who was wont to cleanse Feathers for Beds, whose Lungs were stuff'd full of the Dust that usually gathers among those Feathers. VI. The said Bladdery SubstanceThe Cloa∣thing Membrane is cloath'd on the outside with a thin and porous Membrane, which most Physicians and Anatomists believe to be deriv'd from the Pleura: But I am of Opinion, that it is deriv'd from the exterior Tunicle of the Vessels en∣tring the Parenchyma, and hence it is very dull of Sense. The Porosity of it easily appears, if the Lungs be strongly blown up with a pair of Bel∣lows; for by that means the Pores are often dilated so wide, that they may be manifestly discern'd by the Eye, though the Air blown through them, does not go out again; as appears from hence, for that the Lungs being distended by the blowing in of the Air, if you tie a convenient Knot at the upper part near the Aspera Arteria, it retains the Air till it become quite dry'd up. Hence we easily judge the Constitution of these Pores to be peculiar, that is, such, that they will permit nothing to pass forth from the inner Parenchyma; but such things as lie next the Lungs on the out∣side, in the capacity of the Breast, seem
rather probable to emer the inner parts of it, if they be not over-thick. But if this Distention by Wind, be violent, and such as 'tis probable never happen'd to any living; yet by that is the Porosi∣ty of the said Tunicle made manifest, though larger in some, in others lesser, and from that Diversity it comes to pass, that not in all such Empyics, or such as are troubl'd with Impostumes in the Lungs, the corrupt Matter enters the Lungs out of the Cavity of the Breast, and is evacuated by Spittle or Urine, without doubt; because in many, by reason of the thickness of the Matter, the Pores are not wide enough. I re∣member, at Nimmeghen I open'd the Breasts of six or seven Empyical Persons between the Ribs, for the evacuation of the filthy Matter, and having evacua∣ted the Matter, to some I us'd bitter abstersive Injections, which I Syring'd in to cleanse the Lungs; the bitter taste of which, they did not only perceive in their Mouths, but also spit out a good part of it; which was a certain Sign that the Pores of the Tunicle of the Lungs were so narrow in those diseased Per∣sons, that they could not admit any thicker Matter, but only thin Li∣quors. Riolanus considering these Pores, the better to explain the manner how the thick Matter is evacuated out of the Ca∣vity of the Breast by Spittle, pretends, that the Air freely insinuates it self into the Capacity of the Breast through the Spaces between the Gristles; and that through them the Steams and purulent Matter contain'd, returns, and yet no Air issues forth through the Pores of the ensolding Membrane into the Cavity of the Breast: Which Opinion Helmont maintains with many Arguments, and Bartholine refutes, l. De Pulmon. Sect. 4. For though Experience tells us, that many times Matter and injected Li∣quors are suck'd up through the Pores by the Lungs; yet the same Experience tells us, that the Air breath'd in, does not issue forth again through those Pores into the Cavity of the Breast: For ma∣ny times with a pair of Bellows we have blown up the Lungs taken out of a Beast newly kill'd; but we have observ'd, that the Vessels of the whole Parenchyma were very much distended by the Wind, but that no Air issu'd forth through the Pores, or would so much as stir the Flame of the Candle; but if the least Incision were made into the Tunicle, presently we found the Wind to operate upon the Flame. Which is a sign that those Pores are so plac'd, and as it were, fortify'd with Valves, as to admit some Liquors from without, but not to send forth any intrinsic Air. VII. The Colour of the Lungs inThe Colour sound People, is like that of Ashes, or Vary-colour'd; but in diseas'd Per∣sons, especially such as took too much foul Tabacco in their Life-time, I have found it of a blackish Colour. Also in one that was a Slave to Tabacco and Brandy, and afterwards dy'd of a long Asthma, I found all the Lungs not only of a blackish Colour, but dry'd up to an indifferent hardness, with some small Ulcers scatter'd here and there, full of Matter, not fluid, but thick and dry. In another great Tabacco-taker, I found the Lungs of the same black Colour, full of Ulcers, but not dry'd up. VIII. Most Anatomists write, thatThe Colour in a Child before it is born. the Lungs in the Birth are of a red Colour, and a thicker Substance, so that being cast into the Water, they sink; quite otherwise than in Men of ripe years, in whom they are altoge∣ther Spungy, and of an Ash-Colour, or Vary-colour'd, and somewhat encli∣ning to white. Which seems a thing so constant to Swammerdam, that he re∣ports, how that in the opening the Breast of the Birth, he always found the Lungs plainly contracted, and of a red Colour, and without any Air in the in∣side. The same thing Harvey also as∣serts; but Charleton absolutely denies; who writes, that he has many times try'd, but found no difference of Colour between the Lungs of the Birth and a Man born: But there is a Mistake on both sides; which is easily remov'd, if the times of the Birth be rightly distinguish'd; for I have observ'd by Ocular View, that till the Fifth Month and a half, or thereabout, the Lungs are red, and indifferently thick; but after∣wards somewhat soster, looser, and of a Colour somewhat palish, and variega∣ted, and that it is to be found such in dissected Births. In December 1665. I dissected a Wo∣man Seven Months gone, and found the Lungs of the Birth inclos'd in the Womb less turgid than in Men born, but different in Softness and Colour. In Novemb. 1666. In a mature Birth dead in the Womb, a little before De∣livery, a Colour somewhat redder than in grown People, but somewhat variega∣ted, and of an Ash-Colour, and such a
Softness and Sponginess of the Substance, that the Lungs swum when they were cast into the Water: But in regard that Lightness and Spunginess of the Lungs, which prevents its Swimming, and somewhat changes the Colour, arise from the Air contain'd in the Bladdery Sub∣stance, the Question is, How that Air enters the Lungs, the Birth not yet breathing? That Air is bred in the Lungs themselves, out of the most sub∣tile Vapors rais'd by the Heat out of the moist Substance of the Blood, and so acquiring an Airy Tenuity: After which manner likewise that same Air is generated, which possesses the Cavity of the Abdomen, and that which is found in the Guts of the Birth unborn. But this small Quantity of Air in the Lungs, which is neither sufficient in Quantity, nor sufficiently thick and cold, and can never suffice to refrigerate and condense the Blood which is forc'd from the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, can never serve for the Use of Respira∣tion; only by diminishing by degrees the thickness of the Lungs, it renders them so fit for Respiration, that the Infant may be able to breath assoon as born, which otherwise it would not be able to do of a sudden, unless the breath∣ing Organ were first prepar'd by de∣grees for its performance in that man∣ner. IX. The Lungs are divided intoThe Divi∣sion. the Right and Left Part, by the means of the intervening Mediastinum, each of which many have taken and de∣scrib'd for different Lungs, which is the reason they never use the Word Lung, but Lungs in the Plural Num∣ber. Some rather chuse to call the two several Parts the two Lobes of the Lungs; but there is no necessity of cavilling about the Plural or Singular Number, so we agree about the Thing it self. Every one of these Parts is again di∣vided into the upper Lobe, which is shorter, and the lower Lobe, which is larger; rarely into three Lobes: Yet in Dogs, especially Hounds, there are se∣veral Lobes. The several Parts resemble in shape the Hoof of an Ox; on the outside gibbous, where they look toward the Ribs: on the inside hollow, where they so tenderly embrace the Heart. X. Beside the foresaid DivisionTheir Di∣vision into little Lobes of the Lungs, Malpigius by accu∣rate Inspection has found out ano∣ther, That the whole Body of the Lungs consists of many little Lobes, mutually joyn'd together. I have ob∣serv'd, saith he, in his first Epistle to Borellus, a more wonderful and more re∣markable Division: For the whole Bulk of the Lungs consists of infinite little Lobes, enclos'd within a proper Membrane, fur∣nish'd with common Vessels growing to the Branches of the Rough Artery. Now these little Lobes may be discern'd, if the Lungs being half blown up, be held to the Light or Beams of the Sun; for then certain Spaces appear, as it were diapha∣nous, which if you follow with a slight Inci∣sion, you shall separate the little Lobes, adhe∣ring on both sides to the rough Artery and the Vessels, and shall find them involv'd in their proper Membrane, the Air being brea∣thed in through the rough Artery: which may be separated by diligent Incision, and shines against the Light. But these little Lobes will more clearly appear by an elaborate Dis∣section of the Spaces after a gentle boyling of the Lungs. XI. The Lungs are fasten'd in aThe Con∣nexion. hanging posture from the Rough Ar∣tery, insinuating it self into the mid∣dle of its Substance, and by means of that Artery, adheres to the Neck. Fallopius writes, That only in Man they are naturally fasten'd to the Clavicles and uppermost Ribs. But Riolanus has several times observ'd them altogether separated from the Ribs and Clavicles; which has been also more than once ob∣serv'd by me my self. But from the Pleura they are for the most part found to be free. I say, for the most part, because many times they are also fasten'd to it, sometimes in the whole Circumference, sometimes in some particular Parts, with fibrous Knittings; and in Dissections I find this ConnexionObservati∣on. in near the third part of Bodies open'd. For we meet with many Bodies, where∣in the Lungs are fasten'd to the Pleura with innumerable little Fibres. Nay, many Bodies wherein the outward Mem∣brane it self of the Lungs adheres the greatest part of it immediately to the Pleura. In our Hospital and Anatomy-Theatre, I have shewn many Bodies, Bodies, wherein the Lungs have stuck so close almost in every Part, to the Pleura, that they could not be separated without a forcible dilaceration, which Men neverthelefs in their Life-time ne∣ver  of any Difficulty or In∣convenience of Breathing. Whence it appears how little Truth there is in what Massa, Riolanus, Bartholinus, Lindan, and some others write, that for that
very reason Difficulty of Breathing becomes diuturnal and incurable. In Novemb. 1660. I dissected the Body of an arch Thief that was hang'd, who had liv'd in Health without any difficulty of Breathing, whose Lungs on both sides were so closely fasten'd every way not only to the Pleura, but to the whole Diaphragma and Mediastinum, that they could not be separated without much Dilaceration: But though such a Connexion of the Lungs happen to ma∣ny men after they are born (for I never heard that any man was born with it) and continue without any detriment to Health, yet in Beasts, especially those of the larger sort, as Horses, Cows, Sheep, Goats, &c. this Bowel uses to be free from the Pleura, and scarcely ever grows to it, unless the Pleurisie, Inflammation of the Lungs, or some other Disease with an Exulceration pre∣ceding; so that in whatever Beast that is kill'd, such a Connexion appears, such an Accident is suspected to have been the Effect of some such Disease. XII. In Practice I have observ'dSeveral Observati∣ons. this worthy taking notice of: 1. That those in whom I judg'd by certain Signs, that their Lungs stuck to the Pleura, more easily and frequently fell into the Pleurisie, than others; du∣ring which, if a Suppuration happen'd, they more readily and sooner spit up a Bloody Matter from the Side affected. But that in others, whose Lungs were free from the Pleura, they were less fre∣quently troubl'd with the Pleurisie; which if it came to Suppuration, was rately cur'd by spitting up of Matter, but for the most part turn'd into an Em∣pyema. The Reason is this; because that in the first case the Matter may imme∣diately flow out of the Aposteme of the Pleura, into the Substance it self of the Lungs annex'd to it, and together with the Pleura, perhaps by reason of its Vicinity and immediate Connexion, be somewhat also enflam'd, and so be spit forth. In the latter Case, it cannot but flow into the Cavity of the Thorax or Breast, out of which there is no easie Entrance into the Pores of the Lungs. 2. Moreover, I have observ'd the Falshood of the Doctrine of Platerus, Zecchius, and others, stifly maintaining, That in a Pleurisie, which is a com∣mon Disease, never, or very rarely the Pleura is enflam'd, but always  ou∣termost Membrane of the Lungs; in which, by reason of its exquisite Sense, such cruel Pains are felt; but that in a Peripneumony, the inner Substance of the Lungs is enflam'd; which being ob∣tuse of Sense, therefore the Pains there∣in are more obtuse and dull. For in the manifold Dissection of Bodies that dy'd of the Pleurisie, we have found it to be otherwise; that is, that in all Peo∣ple troubl'd with the Pleurisie, the Pleura was inflam'd, and that only, if the Lungs were free from its Connexi∣on. But if the Lungs stuck close to the Pleura, then that also the adhering part of the Lungs was inflam'd as well as the Pleura. 3. In Decemb. 1656. I dissected in our Hospital a Woman that dy'd of a Pleu∣risie, with which she was most cruelly tormented for the first fourteen days: afterwards, the Inflammation coming to Suppuration, the Disease grew more gentle for some few days, though at length she dy'd. In her we found the Lungs altogether free from the Pleura, and in the Right Side the whole Pleura from the Arm-pits to the Diaphragma inflam'd; but that the Aposteme was brok'n about the fifth and sixth Rib. Which two Ribs, by reason of the breaking of the Aposteme, were laid bare from the Pleura about the breadth of two Fingers; and that the Matter had flow'd to an indifferent quantity in∣to the Cavity of the Breast; but the Lungs were found without any Inflam∣mation, or any other ill Affection. 4. The like Accident I shew'd in a Man that dy'd of a Pleurisie, in the Year 1657. who being over-heated with Hay-making in the midst of Summer, drank a great Draught of cold Beer, by which he contracted a Pleurisie, and dy'd in a few days. In this Body the Lungs were altogether free from the Pleura, and never annex'd to it toward the Ribs, and the whole Pleura of the Right Side was inflam'd, without any dammage to the Lungs. 5. Hence it is apparent, That what Regius asserts, is not true; viz. That in all Pleurisies there is an Inflammati∣on of the outer part of the Lungs, as the Dissections of all Bodies deceas'd of the Pleurisie, teach us; in whom the Lungs are found affected, the Pleura always remaining untouch'd. But I be∣lieve this good Gentleman writes and teaches these things, out of an Opinion pre-conceiv'd or learn'd from others; as being one that assumes to himself the Writings and Sayings of others, and in∣serts them into his Books for his own; for he himself was never either any Practitioner nor Anatomist, nor ever dissected the Body of any one that dy'd
of a Pleurisie. For meer Inspection it self demonstrates the contrary, as ap∣pears by the manifold Dissections of Bo∣dies dying of the Pleurisie: in which we never found the Pleurisie to have hap∣pen'd without detriment to the Pleura. But in such Bodies where the Lungs were affix'd to the Pleura, in such we found the Lungs to be affected, in that Part where they stuck to the Pleura: in Bo∣dies where the Lungs were free from the Pleura, the Lungs were never endam∣mag'd in the least. In which particular, we rather trust to our own Eyes, than the Sayings of others, that never saw any such thing. If Platerus, who is to be credited, writes, That he observ'd some such thing, I do not wonder; in regard that among the many Bodies by him open'd, he never dissected any that dy'd of the Pleurisie; or in those few which he met with, the Lungs were ne∣ver fasten'd to the Pleura; but as for such, whose Lungs were free from the Pleura, he does not seem to have dis∣sected any: Of which sort, we have shewn many whose Pleura's have been highly inflam'd, without any detriment at all to the Lungs themselves. 6. Moreover, there can be no acute Pain in the Membrane enclosing the Lungs, from any Inflammation thereof, seeing that Experience teaches us, that it is very dull of feeling. We have met with two or three Bodies that dy'd of an Inflammation of the Lungs, in whom the whole Lobe of the Lungs of one side, together with the exterior Mem∣brane, was found inflam'd; and yet the Persons themselves, when alive▪ com∣plain'd of no acute, but only a dull, heavy kind of Pain; which must of ne∣cessity have been acute, were it true what Regius write, That a most sharp Pain proceeds from an Inflammation of the Membrane cloathing the Lungs. 7. Lastly, Wounds passing through the Lungs, though the Membrane be penetrated, cause no great Pain in the Lungs; and what Pain there is, the Pa∣tients only feel it in the Pleura and Mus∣cles. So likewise Ulcers caus'd by cor∣roding Humors in the Lungs, are little painful, though the outward Tunicle be also eaten away. Which I shew'd pub∣lickly in our Anatomy-Theater in the Years 1660, 1663. in two Bodies, whose Lungs were so ulcerated, that hardly half the Bowel remain'd; and yet those Men, while they lay sick in our Hospi∣tal, complain'd of little Pain in their Lungs. Which is also daily conspicu∣ous in Phthisical Persons, in whom we have found by Sight and Experience, not only the inner Substance, but also the outer Membrane of the Lungs corro∣ded and ulcerated, without any great Pain. 8. I shall add one more notable Ex∣ample. In the Year 1660. I was sent for to open the Body of a certain Coun∣trey-man, who about two and twenty Months before he dy'd, was stabb'd in the right side of the Breast, between the fifth and sixth Rib; which Wound I then said had pierc'd the Lungs; but being believ'd neither by the Patient, nor the Surgeons that had undertaken the Cure, my Advice was neglected: The Patient never complain'd of any inward Pain; the Bloody Purulent Matter, that flow'd in great Quantity out of the Wound, stunk very much. Six Months after the Man was wound∣ed, he went about his usual Occasions, and for half a Year held on his wonted Rioting and Drinking, the Wound still remaining open, and sending forth a stinking corrupted Matter in great Quan∣tity. Two or three Months before he dy'd, he was taken with a slight Fever, and waxing very lean, dy'd of a Con∣sumption. When his Breast was open'd, we found the Lobe of the Lungs of the wounded side, so consum'd with Sup∣puration, that not the least Bit of it re∣main'd on that side; nay, you would have sworn there never had been any Lungs on that side; which made us wonder how the Man could live in Health and Strength so long a time. Moreover, during the whole Course of the Distemper, the Patient complain'd of no Pain in his Lungs, which must have been very tedious, as well by rea∣son of the Wound, as the Inflammati∣on and Exulceration succeeding, had there been any acute Sense of Feeling in the Membrane enclosing the Lungs. XIII. Three large Vessels are in∣sertedThe Ves∣sels. into the Lungs. XIV. The First, which is the lar∣gestThe rough Atery. Vessel of all, appointed for con∣veying of Air and thick Vapors, is the Trachea, or Rough Artery, furnish'd with many Productions, call'd Bronchia. XV. The Second and Third, areThe Pul∣monary Vein and Artery. two large Blood-bearing Vessels, viz. the Pulmonary Artery and Vein; which being divided into small, and almost invisible Branches, hardly dis∣cernable, but by the help of a Micro∣scope,
and intermix'd one among another, run through the whole Blad∣der-like Substance, like an Artificial Net, opening one into another with innumerable mutual Anastomoses. Through the little Branches of the Artery, a Spirituous Blood dilated into Vapor, forc'd out of the Right Ven∣tricle of the Heart into the Lungs, and in them somewhat condens'd by the cold breath'd-in Air, passes into the little Branches of the Vein, and so distils into the Left Ventricle; neither in a Natural Condition of Health does any thing of Blood seem to flow into the Bronchia or Vesicles, so as to die them of a Bloody Colour. But if by the corrosion of any sharp Humor, a strong Cough, or any other violent Cause, there happen to be an opening of those Vessels at any time, then the Blood flowing out of them in∣to the Vesicles, out off those into the Bronchia, is cast forth by Spittle, and causes a spitting of Blood. In the mean time, in that same Passage of the Blood through these Vessels, the serous Va∣pors, which, together with the Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, are attenuated into a thin Exha∣lation, transpire in great Quanti∣ty through the thin Tunicles of the small Vessels, and mix'd in the small Vessels with the cold breath'd-in Air, and by that somewhat condens'd, are expell'd with the same by Expiration into the Bronchia, and so forth of the Body; by which means, the Blood is freed from a great part of the serous Vapors, of which, a remarkable Quan∣tity is chiefly conspicuous in cold Wea∣ther and Winter-time, when the Vapo∣rous Breath, proceeding from the Mouth, being condens'd by the exter∣nal Cold, occur to the Sight, and moi∣sten every thing upon which they light. XVI. However, here arises aWhether the Blood passes only through the Anasto∣moses. Doubt; Whether all the Blood passes through the Anastomoses of the said Vessels? Also, Whether many Ends of those Sanguiferous small Vessels end in the Substance it self of the Lungs; and whether the Arteries pour their Blood into it, and the Veins convey it out again as we have said that there is a Circulation in most other Parts? Which, that it is so, the Reasons al∣ledged in those Places, seem to confirm: but the Eye sight contradicts it in the Lungs; by which we find the whole Parenchyma to be almost altogether without any Blood; neither is there any thing of Blood worth speaking of, to be found in its Substance (though it transmit eight, nine or more Pints of Blood in the space of an hour) other∣wise than happens in the Liver, Mus∣cles, or other Parts that transmit much Blood; in which there is a great Quanti∣ty of Blood found without the Vessels. Moreover, should that Blood be pour∣ed forth without the Vessels into the Bladdery substance of the Blood, it would partly fill the Vessels appointed to re∣ceive the Air, and so render them unfit for Respiration; partly occasion fre∣quent Spittings of Blood, which never∣theless are very rare, and manifestly happen, when the Vessels being broken or corroded, the Blood bursts forth in∣to the Bladdery Substance, or the Bron∣chia, and never but upon the opening of those Vessels. Some perhaps may wonder, that I should say, that the Substance of the Parenchyma should be void of Blood, that is, that no remarkable Quantity of Blood should be seen therein, when it is nourish'd with Blood, like all the rest of the Parts; and seeing that Hippocrates writes, They who spit Blood, spit it out of the Lungs; and seeing there is also much Blood found in the Lungs of those that are hang'd. To the First, I answer, That the Lungs are nourish'd with Blood like the Arteries, Veins and Nerves; which Vessels take to them∣selves out of the Blood and Spirit that passes through them, what is conveni∣ent for their Nourishment, and also re∣ceive what is necessary for them, through invisible Passages, and little Arteries. Moreover, the Lungs, and that chiefly too, are nourish'd by that Blood which is convey'd through the Bronchial Arte∣ry. And then again, We must distin∣guish between a very little Blood, which serves for the Nourishment of the Lungs, and a great deal of Blood, requisite for the Nourishment of the whole Body: The one may be infus'd through invi∣sible Passages into the Bladdery Sub∣stance, and yet be hardly ever seen. The other, by reason of its extraordi∣nary Quantity, cannot pass, but through some conspicuous Conveyance; and it is of the former, not of the latter, that Anatomists speak, when they talk of the Passage of the Blood through the Lungs. To the Second, I say, That Hippocrates, in the fore-cited Aphorism, speaks of the whole Lungs in general, as it consists of its own Substance, Vessels,
and Membranes, and not particularly of the proper Substance of the Parenchy∣ma only. And so when he says that the Blood is spit from the Lungs, he means that Blood which is spit from some corroded or broken Blood bearing Vessels, running through the Substance of the Bowel. To the Third, I say, That the Blood which is found in the Lungs of such as are hang'd, did not flow out of the proper Substance, but in∣to the Vesicles out of the Vessels, broken by reason of the Obstruction of the Cir∣cular Passage. XVII. Frederic Ruysh, describes ano∣therThe Bron∣chial Ar∣tery. peculiar Artery, hitherto overseen by all the Anatomists, found out by his own singular Industry; which he calls the Bronchial Artery, which chiefly seems to convey the Blood to the Nourishment of the Lungs, or the Rough Artery, or the Bronchia. This, saith he, we thought fit to call the Bronchial Artery; for that creep∣ing above the Bronchia, it accompa∣nies them to the End. It takes its Rise from the hinder part of the great descending Artery, about a Finger's breadth more or less above the upper∣most Intercostal little Arteries, ari∣sing from the descending Aorta; and sometimes two Fingers breadth above the aforesaid Arteries: Sometimes al∣so I have found it to have its Original below those Arteries; for Nature de∣lights in Variety: Sometimes it rises single, sometimes double; so that oft-times the Great Artery being taken out of a Carkass, the Intercostals and Bronchials being cut away, the re∣maining little Trunks of the Bronchi∣als seem to counterfeit the Rise of the Intercostals. Hence it obliquely runs under the Lungs, and accompanies the Bronchia under the Veiny Artery, to the very End, till becoming no big∣ger than a Hair, it vanishes out of Sight. In the Lungs of Men I have frequently observ'd that Artery to creep through the fore-part of the Bronchia, which I have seldom seen in the Lungs of Brutes. XVIII. Besides the foremention'dLymphatic Vessels. Blood-bearing Vessels, by the Report of Bartholine, Olaus Rudbeck as∣res us, That he has observ'd certain diminutive Lymphatic Vessels, creep∣ing along the Superficies of the Lungs; which also Frederic Ruisch affirms he has seen; and farthr, that they empty their Liquor into the Subclavial, Axillary and Iugular Veins. XIX. Little diminutive NervesNerves. proceed from the Sixth Pair; which some will have to be dispers'd through the external Membrane only; but Ri∣olanus has observ'd to ted toward the inner Parts; and Brtholin has always observ'd them to accompany the Bron∣chia from the hinder Part; besides a little Branch that creeps through the outward Membrane from the fore-part. Thomas Willis asserts, That those little Nerves, together with the Blood-bear∣ing Vessels, are distributed through the whole Lungs, and each both the Chan∣nels of the Bronchia, the Veins and Ar∣teries, sending their Branches every way. But I cannot persuade my self, that there should be such a great Quan∣tity of Nerves dispers'd through, since Reason teaches us, they must be very few; and very small, by reason of the obtuse Feeling of that Bowel, as has been already said. Riolanus and Re∣gius indeed allow to its exterior Tuni∣cle, an exquisite Sense of Feeling, as deriv'd from the Pleura, contrary to Reason and Experience, as we have al∣ready demonstrated. XX. The Office of the Lungs is toOffice. be serviceable for Respiration. XXI. Now Respiration is an Al∣ternativeRespiration what! Dilatation and Contraction of the Breast, by which the cold exter∣nal Air is now forc'd into the Lungs, and then cast forth again, together with the Steams and Vapors, that by the Reception of the cold Air, and the Expulsion of it, together with the Se∣rous Vapors exhaling through the thin Tunicles of the Blood-bearing Vessels, from the Spirituous Blood driven forward into the Lungs, and collected together in the Windings of the Vesicles, that the hot Blood, spiri∣tuous, and dilated into a thin Breath, proceeding from the Right Ventricle of the Heart, may be refrigerated, and somewhat condens'd in the Lungs, and many Serous Vapors separated from it, that so it may more readily descend into the Left Ventricle of the Heart, and there be dilated and spiritualiz'd
anew, and be wrought to a greater Perfection. XXII. For because the Blood break∣ingIts End. forth from the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, is much dila∣ted, very light, and requires twenty times a larger Room than condens'd Blood, which the left Ventricle cannot afford, hence there is a necessity that that same Vapor seal'd up, be again condens'd into the Thickness of Blood, and so become heavier; partly, that by reason of its being more heavy, it may descend to the Left Ventricle; part∣ly, that being by that means more com∣pacted, it may more easily be compre∣hended by that Ventricle, and so be dilated anew. For, as in Chymical Stills, the Liquor being reduc'd into a thin Vapor, cannot be contain'd in so small a Room or Vessel, as it was con∣tain'd in before Attenuation; nor can∣not be gather'd together, and again di∣still'd to a greater Perfection of Spirit, till that Vapor lighting into a cold A∣lembic, be again condens'd into Wa∣ter, and flows through the Neck of the Alembic, to be receiv'd by another Ves∣sel, and after that, to be again distill'd. So the Blood in the Right Ventricle of the Heart being rarifyd, and become Spirituous, of necessity must be some what condens'd again by the Refrigera∣tion of the Air suck'd in, to the end that being so made more ponderous, and possessing less Room, it may flow to the left Ventricle, and refresh the fervent Heat of the Heart with a new Refresh∣ment. Moreover, beside the foresaid Refrigeration, the cool suck'd-in Air affords another Benefit; that it presses forth out of the small Pulmonary Arte∣ries, into the smaller little Veins, the Blood which is thrust forward into the Lungs, and by the said Refrigeration prepar'd for Defluxion, and now ready to go forth by means of the Distension of the whole Bowel, and consequently, the great Compression of the Vessels; and from these Arteries, drives it for∣ward through the great Pulmonary Vein, into the Left Ventricle of the Heart; which is the Reason that so lit∣tle Blood stays in the Lungs, and so lit∣tle is found therein when a man is dead. XXIII. Whence it is manifest whatWhat kills People that are strang∣led. it is that kills those that are hang'd or strangl'd. For besides that the Serous, or, as others say, Fuliginous Vapors, for defect of Respiration, are not dissi∣pated, the Spirituous and Boiling Blood forc'd into the Lungs, is not refrigera∣ted nor condens'd; whence the Lungs are over-fill'd and distended with an over-abounding vaporous Spirit, so that there can be nothing more supply'd out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart (as no more Air can be forc'd into a Blad∣der which is full already) and by reason of its extream Lightness, nothing, or very little can descend to the Left Ven∣tricle: so that it wants new Nourish∣ment, and has nothing to pour into the Aorta, and so the Circulation of the Blood is stopp'd, and the Heart faints away for a double Reason; and then the Blood not flowing to the Brain, by and by the Brain ceases its Function, and generates no more Animal Spirits, or forces them to the Parts; and so the Sence and Motion of all the Parts fail. And hence it is apparent, why in aCause of Swooning in Stoves. Stove that is over-heated, many times we fall into a Swoon; because the Air being suck'd in, cannot sufficiently con∣dense the vaporous Blood, for want of Cold; so that the Lungs become fill'd with that Blood, and afford but little or no condens'd Blood to the Left Ven∣tricle, to be dilated anew. XXIV. That this is the true Rea∣sonThe neces∣sity of Re∣spiration. of Respiration, it appears from hence; That Animals, which have but one Ventricle of the Heart, have no Lungs; and the Reason why the Birth does not breathe in the Womb, is, because the Blood is not mov'd by the Lungs, from the Right, to the Left Ven∣tricle; so that it wants no Condensation in the middle way, or Compression made by Inspiration; only the Lungs grow for future Uses. And then the Reason why we are constrain'd to fetch our Breath quicker, when the Blood is heated by Fevers, or Exercise, or any other Causes; as, when we suck in a hot∣ter Air, is this, to the end, that by frequent Respiration there may be a swifter, and more convenient Refrige∣ration and Condensation of the Blood. XXV. But the said RefrigerationHow the Blood is cool'd. does not come to pass in the Lungs, because the Air breath'd in, is mix'd with the hot blood forc'd from the heart into the Lungs, (as was the Opinion of Ent and Deusingius, and is still the Judgment of many other Phi∣losophers at this day;) but because the cool Air entring the Bronchia and Bladdery Substance of the Lungs, cools the whole Lungs, as also the Blood contain'd in its Blood-bearing
Vessels; as Wine contain'd in Glass-Bottles, and set in cold Water, or Snow, is cool'd without any Mixture either of the Snow or Water. Some indeed think, that though it be not much, yet there is some of the suck'd-in Air which is mix'd with the Blood (and among the rest, Malachias Truston defends this Opinion) and car∣ry'd with it to the Heart; to the end, that by its Mixture, the Blood may be made more Spirituous and thinner; for which they produce these Reasons. 1. Because there is some Air to be found in the Ventricles of the Heart, besides the Blood. 2. Because that in the Plague-time, the contagious Air infects the Heart. 3. Because they who fall into a Swoon, presently come to themselves upon the holding of Vinegar, Rose or Cinamon-Water, or any fragrant Spices to their Nostrils; because that Fragran∣cy entring their Lungs, together with the Air suck'd in, is presently mixt in the Air with the Blood, and presently carry'd to the Left Ventricle of the Heart. But this Fiction seems to be of no great weight: For, were it true, then ought the Air to be mix'd at all times with the Blood in the Lungs, nor could good Blood be generated with∣out its Admixture; but no Air can be mix'd with the Blood in the Birth en∣clos'd in the Womb; and yet the Blood which is then made, is as good and as perfect without any Mixture of the Air. And therefore I answer to the First, That the Air which is contain'd in the Ventricles of the Heart, cannot be said to be carry'd thither by any Inspiration, because it is equally as well in the Right, as in the Left Ventricle; whereas there can no Blood descend with Air to the Right, because of the Obstacles of the Semilunary Valves. Moreover, such a kind of Air is to be found in the Cavity of the Abdomen; which cannot be said to be carry'd thither by Inspiration: besides, that such a sort of Air is found in the Abdomen and Ventricles of the Heart of Births inclos'd in the Womb. To the Second and Third, I say, That the inspir'd malignant Air does not therefore infect the Heart, because it is mix'd with the Blood; but because the Blood passing through the Lungs, endues them with an evil Quality, which is thence communicated to the Blood con∣tain'd in the Vessels, and so to the Heart: For as the hot Air impresses a hot Quality, so a cold Air, a cold one; so a venomous or putrify'd Air, or a fragrant Air impresses a contagious or fragrant Quality to the Blood and Lungs therein contain'd. For, that a Quality be communicated to ano∣ther Body, there is no necessity that the Body from which that Quality flows, should be mix'd with the Body to which that Quality is communicated. For, that red-hot Iron should warm, there is no necessity that the Iron should enter the Body that is to be heated: 'Tis suf∣ficient that the small red-hot Particles of the heated Iron, by their vehement Agitation, violently also agitate the small Particles of the adjoyning Body to be heated, and so by that violent Motion cause Heat: As when a piece of Antimonial Glass, put into Wine, gives it a vomitive Quality, there is no neces∣sity the Antimony should be mix'd with the Wine; and so, when the Wine en∣ters the Body of Man, it suffices, that by its Quality (for it comes out exact∣ly the same weight as it was put in) it has so dispos'd the Substance of the Wine, as to make it vomitive. When Corn is grinding, there is no necessity that the Wind should enter the Wheels and Mill-stones; for by the Motion of the Sails the Wheels and Mill-stones will move, though the Wind, that gives the Motive Quality, do not enter the Flowr or Wheat. Lastly, if the Air inspir'd should be mix'd with the Blood, then if a man should blow into the Lungs, when fresh, with a pair of Bellows through the Rough the Artery, the Breath would break out through the pulmonary Artery toward the Left Ventricle of the Heart, which we could never observe in any Experi∣ments that ever we made. Moreover, if the Air should enter the Blood-bear∣ing Vessels, not only those Vessels, but the Parts themselves which are nou∣rish'd with the Blood, would be puft up with the Air, and be continually infest∣ed with flatulent Tumors. XXVI. Charleton utterly rejectsCharle∣ton's Er∣ror. this same Refrigeration of the Lungs, and the Use of Breathing; and op∣poses it with three or four Arguments, but so insipid, that they deserve no Refutation; and then he concludes, That the Air is suck'd in for the fi∣ner Subtilization of the Blood, and heating of the Vital Spirits. Which Willis also affirms in his Book against Highmore. But because it is an Opinion repugnant to the very Principles of Phi∣losophy, it needs no great Refutation. For it is a known thing in Philoshy,
That Cold condenses, but Heat attenu∣ates. The First is so true, that in the Instrument call'd a Thermometer, it is so conspicuous to the Eye, that it is ne∣ver to be contradicted. So that there cannot be a greater Subtilization of the Blood by the cold Air suck'd in by the Lungs, but without all question, a Con∣ensation rather. Now if those Learn∣ed Men before-mention'd, would have held, That there is a greater Subtiliza∣tion of the Blood by sucking in of the hot Air, we should have readily grant∣ed it; but then we must say too, that that Subtilization will soon be too much, unwholesom, and in a short time will prove deadly: And that it is not the End of Respiration, for the Blood to be subtiliz'd by it; but that being subtiliz'd, and forc'd out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, it should be there condens'd. But if for all this, they will still maintain the con∣trary, then of necessity they will run upon a hard Rock of Necessity: For then it will follow, that the hotter the Air is, that is suck'd in, so much the swifter and easier will the Blood be, and the Refreshment of the Heart greater; and Men that live in a hot Air, would have less need of Respiration. And by Con∣sequence also in a Fit, where there is present need of Refreshment, as in Burning Fevers, where the Spirits are ve∣ry much wasted, it would be requisite to lay the Patients (for the quicker re∣storing of their lost Spirits, and refresh∣ment of the Heart) in warm Beds, or expos'd to the roasting Heat of the Sun, lest the Blood should be too slowly sub∣tiliz'd in a cold Bed by the cold Air breath'd in, and so the Heart and Spi∣rits want their due and seasonable Re∣freshment. But how contrary these things are to Reason, and Experience, is obvious unto them, who have but so much as saluted Physical Practice at a distance. Which, when Gualter Need∣ham had throughly consider'd, he will not permit the Lungs any Faculty to heat or subtilize the Blood, and proves his Opinion by strong Arguments. XXVII. Alexander Maurocor∣datusThe new Opinion of Alexan∣der Mau∣rocorda∣tus. of Constantinople, opposes this Opinion of the Lungs having the Gift of Refrigeration, and brings several Arguments to uphold his Underta∣king: Of which, the chiefest are these; 1. Seeing that the cold Air, which is suck'd in, does not enter the Blood-bear∣ing Vessels of the Lungs, but is only circumfus'd about 'em in the Bowels, of necessity it can never diminish, but by Antiperistasis, will rather augment the Heat of the Blood in those Vessels. 2. Because that in the Birth, which is enclos'd in a hot place, there must be a greater Heat, and yet no such urgent Necessity of Respiration, but that the Lungs themselves lie idle. 3. Because those that are expiring, breath forth a colder Breath. To the First, I answer, That a mo∣derate Cold does not cause that same Antiperistasis; only that Antiperistasis happens in vehement and sudden Re∣frigeration. But such a vehement Cold cannot be occasion'd by Inspiration in the Breast, which is a hot Part▪ To the Second, I answer, That the Heat in the Birth, is not come to such a Perfection as to want the Refrigerati∣on of Breathing. To the Third, That the Air breath'd forth by dying Persons, does not feel so hot as that which is breath'd forth by healthy People, because that through the Weakness of the Heart, the Blood which is forc'd into the Lungs, is not so hot at that time; and for that the Bow∣el it self does not heat so much; for which reason also, the Air breath'd in, is less hot, and so the Breath seems to be colder to Healthy People that stand by, who are sufficiently warm; whereas that Breath of Dying Men does not come forth without some Heat, which it had acquir'd from the Lungs, though less than the Heat of the Skins of those that feel it. XXVIII. The same Author, afterWhether the Lungs wheel a∣bout the Blood. he has rejected the Refrigeration of the Lungs, concludes, That the Use of the Lungs is to carry about the Blood, and is a kind of a Vessel ap∣propriated to the Circulation of the Blood. Which, if it were true, then in the Birth inclos'd in the Womb, and not Breathing; as also in Fish, that are destitute of Lungs, there would be no Circulation of Blood, because that same Vessel is either wanting, or else lies idle. Which Opinion Iohn Majow refutes, by producing an admirable Experiment, in his Treatise of Respi∣ration. XXIX. Malpigius will have theMalpigi∣us his O∣pinion. Lungs to be created, not for Refrige∣ration, but for a Mixture of the San∣guineous Mass, that is to say, That all the smallest Particles of the Blood,
the VVhite, the Red, the Fix'd, the Liquid, Chylous, Sanguineous, Lym∣phatic, &c. should be mingl'd exactly into one Mass, which Mixture he sup∣poses to be but rudely order'd in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, but ex∣actly compleated in the Vessels of the Lungs; and for this he brings many Ar∣guments▪ which, however, are not so strong, as either to prove his own, or destroy the ancient Opinion. For the most exact Mixture of the Blood is oc∣casion'd by Fermentation; by which all the Particles are dilated into a Spi∣rit or thin Vapor; but this Fermenta∣tion is perform'd in the Heart, forbid in the Lungs where Fermentation is for∣bid, and the dilated Mass of the Blood is condens'd. Moreover, if the Blood expell'd out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, were necessitated to acquire an exact Mixture in the Heart, where must that have its exact Mixture, which is forc'd out of the Left Ventricle into the Aorta, or that same Blood, which neither in Fishes, nor in the Birth in∣clos'd in the Womb, ever enters the Lungs? Malachy Thruston, desirous toThruston his Opi∣nion. bring something of Novelty upon the Stage of this Dispute, excuses the Heart from the Office of Sanguificati∣on, and imposes that Office upon the Lungs; because that the Lungs being distempered, as in a Consumption, all the Parts being nourish'd with bad Blood, grow lean and consume. As if the same thing did not happen, when the Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Kidneys, Mesentery, and the like Bowels, which are known not to make Blood, are af∣fected with any Ulcer or very great Distemper. Afterwards he adds, That the Chylus is but rudely mix'd in the Heart with the Blood, but most exactly in the Lungs, and there ferments, boils, is subtiliz'd, and acquires its Fluidness, and is chang'd into true Blood: But these things are repugnant to Reason. For shall cold Air breath'd in, produce Effervescency and Subtility of the Blood in the Lungs, when Cold hinders Ef∣fervescency, and thickens the Blood, as daily Experience teaches us in the Cure of hot Distempers? And whence, I would fain know, has the Womb that Effervescency and Subtility of the Blood, where the Lungs lie idle? Then he pro∣duces two great Opinions, as he thinks; the one, from Phlebotomy, the other, from Sighs. By Phlebotomy, says he, Apoplectic Persons, and such as are hardly able to fetch their Breath, and are almost choak'd▪ feel great Ease: Because that by that means, the Blood which was hastning toward the Lungs, or else heap'd up there before, is drawn off another way; and so the Lungs by degrees are freed from that Burthen. But I shall not grant the Learned Man his Argument: True it is, that in such Distempers we let Blood freely, that the Heart may be weaken'd, and that that being weaken'd, less Blood may be forc'd to the other Parts; and so that Blood which sticks next to the Lungs or Brain, and stops up the little Passages, may have the more time to flow out, and empty it self; and so the Cause of Suffocation is remov'd from the Lungs. For Example, If many People are ga∣ther'd together in any Room, and would crowd altogether out at the door, they stop one another; but the less they that are behind press forward, the sooner they that are before get forth. Thus it happens in an Apoplexy, Asthma, or any such like Affection. For in these Di∣stempers, the stronger the Heart is, and the more Blood it sends from it self, the more are the Lungs, Brain, &c. obstructed and stuffed up; but the more the Heart is weaken'd by a moderate Abstraction of the Blood, and the less forcibly, and the less Blood it sends to the Parts obstructed, so much the more easily the Blood, which already stops up the Passages, being dissolv'd and attenu∣ated by the Heat of those Parts, flows farther, and the Obstruction is open'd, to the Ease of the Party griev'd. But this makes nothing for Thruston's Opi∣nion; as neither does his Argument ta∣ken from Sighs. For Sighs do not hap∣pen, as he thinks, by reason of the stron∣ger Effervescency of the Chylus in the Lungs, but by reason of the weaker and slower Respiration; which they who are thoughtful and sad, forget to exer∣cise so frequently as they ought, and consequently a Refrigeration not suffici∣ent of the Blood forc'd into the Lungs from the Right Ventricle of the Heart; so that the vaporous and dilated Blood, remaining in too great a Quantity, and therefore flowing more slowly into the Left Ventricle, and keeping the Lungs distended, perplexes the Patient, who is therefore constrain'd by deep Sighs, and the introducing a good Quantity of cold Air to condense that vaporous Blood, to the end that it may flow more swiftly out of the Lungs through the Pulmonary Vein to the Left Ventricle
of the Heart, and may be also more swiftly expell'd by reason of the larger distension of the whole Lungs, because of the great Quantity of Air suck'd in, oppressing its Vessels. To which, in the last place, we may add, That the Chy∣lus dilated in the Heart, presently loses the Form of Chylus, and becomes Blood; so that nothing of the Chylus enters the Lungs to be there fermented, but that the vaporous Blood enters the Lungs, made of the Chylus dilated in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, to be therein somewhat condens'd by the Cold of the Air suck'd in, and to be attenuated out of Vapour into Liquor. By the force of these Reasons, several other of Thur∣ston's Arguments may be easily confuted, which he deduces from Exercises, Asth∣ma's and the Boylean Engin, and seve∣ral other things, for the Confirmation of his Opinion. XXXI. Therefore it remains un∣questionable,The Con∣clusion. That Respiration no way conduces toward the making of Blood in the Lungs, nor for the Respiration, Mixture or Circumvolution of it; but only for its Refrigeration. Which is apparent farther from hence; for that if the Refrigeration requir'd in the Lungs, could be effected by any cool∣ing thing, or Cold coming any other way to the Lungs, Respiration were in vain, and ought to cease for a time; as is manifest by many Examples to be produc'd in the Question, Whether a man might live without Respiration? XXXII. The Secondary Use of theThe Secon∣dary Use of the Lungs. Lungs, is in Expiration to enable the Spirit to send forth Vocal Sounds, and to Cough. XXXIII. But the Motion of theThe Moti∣on is pas∣sive. Lungs, in reference to Dilatation and Constriction, which happens in Respi∣ration, is not Active, but Passive: (Hence Galen assigns no Action at all to it) because this Bowel is not mov'd of it self in its proper Breathing Moti∣on, but follows the Motion of the Breast; which is apparent from hence; for that the Lungs on both sides are firmly knit and fastn'd to the Pleura; for in such Men it would be hinder'd by its Connexion, in that Motion; whereas they feel no hindrance in Re∣spiration, because the Lungs are dilated and drawn together according to the Motion of the Breast. XXXIV. Platerus is of anotherContrary Opinions. Iudgment in this Matter; as also Riolanus; who believe the Lungs in moderate Respiration, to be mov'd by their own Motion, proceeding from their innate Force, without any ma∣nifest Motion of the Breast: Nay, in Apoplecticks, where the Motion of all the Muscles is abolish'd, the Lungs are not only mov'd of themselves, but also by their own Motion move the Breast; and in Dogs also, and in other Living Creatures, if the whole Thorax should be open'd of a sudden, so that the Muscles could conduce nothing to the Motion of the Lungs, yet the Lungs are to be seen moving violently upwards and downwards for all that. The same thing Averrhoes believ'd of old; who produces this Argument for its Confir∣mation. If Respiration, says he, which is perpetual, should follow the Motion of the Breast, then there would be a perpetual violent Motion in our Breasts; but the latter is absurd, and therefore the former. Sennertus also is of the same Opinion. The Lungs, says he, are mov'd by their proper Power, and the Lungs and Tho∣rax are mov'd together, because they con∣spire to one end. The Lungs are dilated by an innate Force; which that it may be done more conveniently, and find Room wherein to be dilated, when the Lungs are mov'd, the Animal Faculty also moves the Breast. XXXV. To these Difficulties IThe Refu∣tation. answer, That the two first Assertions are false, in regard that no man can breathe when the Motion of the Mus∣cles of the Thorax and Abdomen ceases altogether; neither could any such Disposition of the Parts of Man be found, wherein the Lungs do move, the Thorax remaining unmoveable. For the Truth of which, I appeal to the Experience of every Man: For though in Apoplectics, the Motion of the Muscles of the Thorax is not altogether abolish'd, but only impair'd, yet when it ceases al∣together, Respiration ceases, and the Party dies; as alway the Breathing Motion of the Lungs perishes, when the Motion of the Thorax ceases. Neither is that Motion of the Lungs, which is seen in Live Dogs, upon the sudden opening of the Thorax, a breathing Motion, which happens with the ex∣pansion of the Lungs, but an accidental Motion, rais'd by the Diaphragma, as drawing with it upward and downward the annex'd Mediastinum of the Lungs adhering to it; but without any Dila∣tation, without which there can be no
Respiration, nor any Air admitted. To the Argument of Averrhoes I an∣swer, That whatever follows the Motion of another Part, does not of necessity follow by violence; for then the natural and perpetual Motions of the Arteries and Brain, were to be said to be perpetual violent Motions, because they perpe∣tually proceed from, and follow the Motion of the Heart. Besides, that is no violent Motion that proceeds accord∣ing to the customary Course of Nature; although it follow the Motion of another Part; but that which is preternatural and disorderly, as happens in a Convul∣sion. Lastly, for a Conclusion, I add, That not only the firm Connexion of the Lungs with the Pleura, but also Ex∣perience it self teaches us, That the Breathing Motion of the Lungs is not spontaneous. For do but open the Tho∣rax of a living Animal on each side, the Breathing Motion in the Lungs of Di∣latation and Contraction ceases; there being a free Passage for the Air through the wound into the cavity of the Thorax; so that in the Dilatation of the Thorax, the Air does not necessarily enter into the Lungs through the Rough Artery, and distend it to fill the concavity of the Breast: which Cessation of Motion would not happen, if the Lungs should move of themselves; for there is no rea∣son to be given, why it should be less dilated upon the opening of the Breast, than when it is shut. Which sufficiently refutes the Opinion of Sennertus, who believes that the Lungs are fill'd like a pair of Bellows, because they are dila∣ted; for by the foresaid opening of the Breast, it is apparent, that the Lungs are not dilated of themselves; seeing that by the Dilatation of the Breast, the Air is compell'd for the prevention of a Vacuum, to enter the Rough Arte∣ry, and so to fill and dilate the Lungs. XXXVI. From this Opinion of A∣verrhois,Whether the Lungs be mov'd by the Head. and our own, Aristotle dissents; who teaches, That the Lungs are mov'd by the Heart; in which Particular Hoff∣man also agrees with him. This others as stifly deny, and others as badly in∣terpret of the Breathing Motion. But the Mistake of all sides proceeds from hence, That they do not sufficiently di∣stinguish between the Natural Motion which the Heart contributes to the Lungs, and the Breathing Motion, which does not proceed from the Heart. For that the Heart does contribute some certain small Motion to the Lungs, is most certain; for when the dilated Blood is forc'd through the Pulmonary Artery into the Lungs, out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart, Reason it self shews us, that the Lungs are mov'd and heave; as for the same Reason the Arteries are mov'd and swell; though this small Motion is so obscur'd by the forcibly Breathing Motion, that in live Lungs it can hardly be perceiv'd by O∣cular Inspection. And Aristotle is to be understood of this Motion. Yet is not that the Breathing Motion, of which the Anatomists generally discourse, when they talk of the Motion of the Lungs▪ which indeed neither proceed from the Heart nor the Lungs, but is accidental, and follows the Motion of the Breast. Moreover, If the breathing Motion should proceed from the Heart, the Pulses of the Heart and Respiration would of necessity keep exact time to∣gether, and the Lungs would equally swell upon every Pulsation of the Heart, as in the Arteries; and hence the Breast would be dilated, and when the Motion of the Heart stood still, the Lungs would also stand still. Moreover, the Inequa∣lity of Respiration would be a Sign of an unequal Pulse; but Experience tells us the contrary: For the Respirations are much less frequent than the Pulses of the Heart. Moreover, Respiration may be slower or quicker, more or less, according to the pleasure of him that breaths; whereas the Pulse cannot be alter'd at the Will of any Person. What has been said, sufficiently re∣futes Maurocordatus; who, ascribing the whole Motion of the Lungs to the Heart, says, That when the Heart con∣tracting the Sides, causes a Systole, then the Diaphragma is erected, and the Rings of the Rough Artery are con∣tracted, and so the Lungs exspire, or breathe outward: But when the Heart causes the Diastole, then the Diaphragma descending, draws down the Lungs, and dilates the Rings of it, which causes breathing inward. Which Opini∣on of his, he endeavours to confirm with many Arguments, which are de∣stroy'd however by the aforesaid Rea∣sons; as is also that Argument, That in an intermitting Pulse, Respiration does not stop upon the intermitting of the Motion of the Heart; which, if the Mover stopp'd, must of necessity stand still it self. And as for what he from hence con∣cludes, That the Blood is drawn out of the Vena Cava by Respiration, into the Right Ventricle, to supply Respiration, and from thence, into the Pulmonary Artery, &c. These things need no Re∣futation▪
since there is no such Attracti∣on to be allow'd in their Body, since all the Humors are mov'd by Impul∣sion. XXXVII. Therefore the Motion ofThe man∣ner of Re∣spiration. Respiration depends neither upon the Heart, nor the Muscles of the Breast, which when they dilate the Heart, pre∣sently the Air enters the Lungs through the Aspera Arteria, and dilates them; but when they contract the Breast, they expel it the same way, together with the Serous Vapors. But whether we say this Entrance of the Air be either to avoid a Vacuum, as some believe; or by the pressing forward of the external Air, by the dilated Breast, and by that means the Impulsion of it through the Aspera Arteria into the Lungs, as others assert, comes all to one pass; when both may be true, about which some men so idly quarrel. XXXVIII. In reference to this Mo∣tionWhat sort of Action it is. of Respiration, there is a Question debated among the Philosophers, what sort of Action it is? For some say it is Natural, others Animal, others mix'd of both. XXXIX. But it is apparent byIt is an A∣nimal A∣ction. what has been said, That Respiration is an Animal Action, because it is perform∣ed by Instruments that all serve to Ani∣mal Motion; that is to say, the Mus∣cles; and may be quicken'd or delay'd, augmented or decreas'd at our own Pleasure, as in those that sing, and sound any sort of Wind-Musick; and there may be some resolute Men that have held their Breath till they have dy'd; as Galen tells the Story of a Bar∣barian Slave, that kill'd himself by holding his Breath. And we find two other Examples in Valerius Maximus, of the same Nature. XL. If any one Object, That a vo∣luntaryAn Obje∣ction. Act is done with ones Con∣sent, and cannot be perpetual; and that all animal diuturnal Motion causes Lassitude, which Respiration does not; which moves continually Day and Night, even when we are asleep, and know nothing of it: I an∣swer, That those are truly to be call'd Animal and Voluntary Actions, which may be, or are done according to our own Will and Pleasure; so that al∣though Respiration go forward when we are asleep, and know nothing of it; nevertheless it is an Animal Action, when it may be guided by our own Will so soon as we are awake, and know any thing of it. They that walk and talk in their Sleep, though they know nothing of it, yet are talking and walking no less Animal Actions for all that. For the Animality of Actions does not con∣sist in Acting only, but in being able to Act by the management and dire∣ctions of the Will. And therefore we are to understand, that what Galen teaches us, That the Animal Actions, some are perform'd by Instinct, and are free, and that others serve ro the Affe∣ctions of the Mind; that the one pro∣ceeds perpetually, and without impedi∣ment, when we least think of it; yet might be otherwise directed by us, i we were aware; of which number is Respiration. Others are not perpetual; as Fighting, Running, Dancing, Wri∣ting, &c. In the one, according to Cu∣stom, there is a sufficient and continual Influx of Animal Spirits into the Mus∣cles; and for this reason, there is no Lassitude, though the Actions are diuturnal: But in the other, the Spirits, according to the determi∣nation made in the Brain, flow some∣times at this, sometimes at that time; sometimes in greater, sometimes in less Quantity; and thence proceeds Weari∣ness. XLI. There is one Doubt remain∣ing,Whether a man might live with∣out Respi∣ration. Whether a Man born, may live for any time without Respiration? Galen says it is impossible, but that a man that breaths, should live, and that a living man should breathe. And again, he says, Take away Respiration, and take away Life. And indeed all the Rea∣sons already brought for the necessity of Respiration, confirm Galen's Opi∣nion; and it is no more than what dai∣ly Experience confirms. Yet on the o∣ther side, it is a thing to be demon∣strated by sundry Examples, that some men have liv'd a long while without any Respiration. XLII. Those Divers in India, whoStories of of such as have liv'd long with out Breath∣ing. dive for Pearl and Corals to the Bot∣tom of the deepest Rivers, will stay for the most part half an hour and more under Water, without taking Breath. 2. A very stately Ship, being built at Amsterdam, for the King of France, by Misfortune was sunk near the Texel; in∣to which the Spanish Ambassador, ha∣ving put aboard a Chest full of Gold, he hir'd a Sea-man, that was a Diver, to go into the Ship as it lay under Wa∣ter, and to endeavour to get out this
Chest. This Diver staid half an hour under Water, and upon his Return, said he had found the Chest, but could not draw it out. 3. I saw my self two notable Exam∣ples at Nimeghen. In the Year 1636. a certain Country Fellow, who dy'd of the Plague, as 'twas thought, lay three days for dead, without any sign of Respiration, or any other Symptoms of Life. At length, when he was just rea∣dy to be carry'd to the Grave, he came to himself upon the Bier, and liv'd many years afterward. 4. In the Year 1638. a certain Wo∣man at the upper end of Nimeghen-City, fell into the River, where at that time rode the greatest part of our Navy, and carry'd away by the swiftness of the Tide, passed through the whole Fleet under Water; and within a quar∣ter of an hour after, when no body thought but that she had been dead, rose again at the lower end of the Fleet, and was taken up alive and safe by the Sea-men. 5. In the Year 1642. a Citizen of Nimeghen's Wife, sitting at the Brink of a Well, fell in backward, with her Head downward, and her Feet only a∣bove Water; in which condition she was above half an hour for want of due Help; but at length, being drawn out of the Well, and laid in her Bed for dead, after she had lain for two hours without any Signs of Respiration, or Symptoms of Life, she came by degrees to her self, and the next day coming to me, com∣mitted her self to my Care, and by Ad∣ministration of due Remedies, was resto∣red to her former Health. To these Testimonies of my own, lest they may not seem sufficient, I will add three more out of other Authors, which are of great moment. 6. The First is a Story out of Plate∣rus, of a Woman, who being condemn'd for killing her Child, was thrown into the Rhine bound hand and foot; who, after she had continu'd under Water a∣bove half an hour, was at length drawn out again with Ropes, and breathing a little at first, came to Life again; and being perfectly recover'd, was marry'd, and had several Children. To which Platerus adds two Stories more of the same Nature. 7. The Second, is a Story reported by Iohn Mattheus, from an Inscription upon a Stone in the Church of the Ho∣ly Apostles at Cologne; where it is rela∣ted, how that certain infamous Persons open'd the Grave at Midnight, of a certain Woman that was buried the Night before, for the lucre of her Rings and Bracelets which she carry'd with her to her Tomb; but when thy came to lay hands upon her, she came to her self, and revived; thereupon the Rob∣bers in a Terror fled: Upon which, the Woman making use of the Lanthorn which the Thieves had lest behind, went home. Now, no question, this Woman was not dead, but lying without Re∣spiration, was taken for dead. 8. A Third remarkable and sad Ex∣ample of a Woman that was buried for dead, and afterwards reviving again, is related by Dimed Cornarius and Mat∣thew Hessus, and by us from them reci∣ted, l. 1. at the end of the 25th. Chap∣ter. And several other Stories of this Na∣ture are to be found in Levinus Lemnius, Hildan, Iames Crastius, and several o∣thers. XLIII. Which are suffiient to con∣vince us, that a man may live some∣timesThe Reason of what has been said. for some time without Respirati∣on. There remains only to give an Ac∣count of the Reason of it. Galen, by many strong Arguments, drawn from Experience and Sence, tells us, That the Heat of the Heart is the Cause of the necessity of Respiration: For so long as the Heart by its Heat attenuates the Blood, and sends it dilated out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, there is a necessity for that Re∣frigeration which is occasion'd by Respi∣ration, that the hot attenuated Blood may be again condens'd. and so fall into the Left Ventricle. Which Reri∣geration being deny'd, the Vessels of the Lungs are presently fill'd with va∣porous Blood, and the Bladdery Sub∣stance with a serous Vapour; neither can any thing descend to the Left Ven∣tricle, so that a man is presently choak'd. Now from this Foundation there fol∣lows another; that is to say, as often as the Heart is overmuch cool'd, or the Heat and Motion of it is so oppress'd by Morbific Causes, that it begets no Ef∣fervescency o Dilatation of the Blood flowing in; then also there is no need of any Refrigeration (for the cause of the Necessity being taken away, the Ne∣cessity it self is taken away) and so long a man may live without Respiration. Now in all the aforesaid Stories and Ac∣cidents, even by the cold Water alone, the whole Body and the Lungs are so re∣frigerated, that that same Refrigerati∣on is sufficient to condense and cool the Blood, which is forc'd out of the Heart
into the Lungs; or else the Heart is so refrigerated and contracted by the extra∣ordinary Fear and Cold together, that it ceases almost to beat, and so a Fit comes, as seem'd to happen to those Women in the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Story. Or else the Heat of it is so op∣press'd by Malignant Vapors and Hu∣mors, that it absolutely gives over di∣lating the Blood, and driving it forth by Pulsation. Now the sending forth of Blood to the Lungs beating, there is no need of Respiration, so that a man may want it, and yet live, he not continuing long in that Condition, that is, till the innate Heat be quite extinguish'd. But then a man lives without Sence or Mo∣tion, like Flies, Frogs, Lizards, and other Beasts in the Winter, which lie for dead without Respiration, because the Heat of the Heart is oppress'd, and as it were extinguish'd, and wants no Refrigeration. Which being so, what shall we say to Galen's Words, cited in the beginning of this Question; who says, 'tis impossible for a living man to breath? But Galen himself foreseeing this Difficulty, flies to Transpiration, which is made through the Pores of the whole Body; and supposes that to be the lowest and meanest sort of Re∣spiration, or rather its Deputy, which in such Accidents he believes to be suffi∣cient to support Life. But this Subter∣fuge will not serve the Turn: For when the Heart and Humors are not stirr'd, then the whole Body is presently refri∣gerated, and neither is the hot Vapour expell'd, nor the cold Air admitted to the Heart: And therefore we must ra∣ther conclude, that the first Opinion of Galen is true of the common manner of living, but not of such rarely happen∣ing Accidents as those before mention'd, where Things fall out quite other∣wise. CHAP. XIV. Of the Trachea or Rough Ar∣tery. See Table 11. I. THE TRACHEA, orIts Defini∣tion. Rough Artery, by some call'd the PIPE or CANE of the Lungs, is a Channel which descends from the Iaws to the Lungs, and enters them with several Branches, through which the inspir'd Air is suckt in, and the same Air expir'd, is breath'd out again with the Serous Vapours and Steams, for the Refrige∣ration and Ventilation of the Vital Blood, and the Production of the Voice and Sounds. II. It is seated in the fore-part of theIts Situa∣tion. Neck, resting upon the Oesophagus, and so descending from the Mouth to the Lungs. III. About the Fourth Vertebra ofIts Divisi∣on. the Breast, it is divided into Two Branches, each of which enter the Lobe of the Lungs of their own side. These are again subdivided into two Branches, and those also into others, till at length they end in small Branches dispers'd among the Roots of the Pul∣monary Artery and Vein, and conti∣nuous with the Vesicles of the Lungs, and opening into the same. Which Branches, so long as they continue pret∣ty big, are call'd Bronchia.Bronchia. IV. The Bulk of the Artery dif∣fersBigness. according to the Variety of Sex, Age and Temperament. V. The Fore-part of it is of a Car∣tilaginousSubstance. Substance, that it should not close, but remain open always for the free passage to and again of the Air and Spirits. The Hinder-part is Membranous, lest the Dilatation of the Oesophagus should be hindred by the leaning of a harder Body upon it. VI. The Gristly part is not conti∣nuous,The Rings. but compacted as it were of se∣veral Rings, of which the uppermost are the biggest. These Rings are equi∣distant one from another, and behind, where they rest upon the Gullet, are de∣priv'd of the lower part of their Cir∣cumference, while a Membranous Sub∣stance supplies the Defect. The rest en∣tring the Parenchyma of the Lungs, re∣main whole, and cease to be semilunary, as in the upper part, but variously form'd, some round, some square, some triangular; and the deeper they enter the Parenchyma, the more Membra∣nous, and less hard like Arteries, and continuous they are to the Vessels of the Lungs. But all the aforesaid greater Rings are exactly joyn'd one to another by Fleshy Ligaments, the lesser are
joyn'd together only with Membranes. 7. This Rough Artery is cover'd with a double Membrane; one ex∣ternal, which is very thin, proceed∣ing from the Pleura, and firmly fast'nd with Ligaments of Muscles. The other internal, more contracted and thicker, and continuous to the Palate, exquisitely feeling, for the di∣stinguishing of all Annoyances. This is besmear'd with a fat slimy Humor, to prevent drying, and to sweeten the Voyce; which Humor being wasted by sharp Catarrhs, the Voyce grows hoarse, but being dry'd up by extraordinary Heat, as in Fevers, becomes shrill and acute. It has double Arteries, some from the Carotides, others from the Bronchial Artery, which accompany all its Rami∣fications. It sends forth Veins to the External Jugularies. It borrows Nerves from the Turning-back Nerves of the Sixth Pair, chiefly dispersed through the inner Membrane, to which they contribute a most exact Sense of Feel∣ing. Which Lindan not considering, will not allow it any Nerves at all. The Rough Artery is again dividedDivision. into the Bronchus and Larynx. The Bronchus is the lower and longer Part, display'd with several Branches into both parts of the Lungs. The Larynx is the upper Part, of which we are to treat in the next Chap∣ter. CHAP. XV. Of the Larynx and Voyce. THE Head of the Rough Ar∣tery, or the Beginning, conti∣nuous to the Mouth, is call'd the La∣rynx, from , to call with a wide Throat, and is the Organ of Speech, and fram'd of several Gristles and Muscles, for the forming and ex∣pressing of Words. I. The Figure of it is Circular, ex∣tuberantFigure. before, and somewhat de∣press'd behind, to give way to the Gullet in swallowing. II. It receives Arteries from theVessels. Carotides, which convey the Blood, and send that which remains after Nourishment, through the little Veins to the external Iugulars. And the animal Spirits are brought by the Turn-again Nerves of the sixt Pair. III. The Bulk of it varies accord∣ingIts Bulk. to the Age, Sex or Temper of the Person; and hence also the Variety of Sounds in Voyces, which in young People, and those that are of a dry Temper, is shrill, by reason of the narrowness of the Larynx; in those of riper years, by reason of its wideness, is deeper: Which Variety may also hap∣pen from the length or shortness of the Larynx; also a strong or weak expul∣sion of the Air, or plenty or want of it, in respect of which, the Voyce is some∣times shriller or deeper. IV. Besides the Membranes men∣tion'dSubstance. in the former Chapter, the La∣rynx is compounded of five Gristles, and thirteen Muscles. V. Columbus chuses rather toGristles. place the Gristles among the Bones, as approaching nearer to a Boney than Gristly Substance; and which some∣times in Old Men turn'd to absolute Bone, and more he affirms, that they contain a Marrowy Substance, like Bones. But he would have much ado to make out that Marrowy Substance. Moreover, although it turn to Bone in Old Men; yet they are not therefore to be numbred among Bones; for they may be at first for a long time Gristles, and yet afterwards turn to be Bones; as we have sometimes observ'd the Gristles between the Vertebers of the Ribs, and the Spine, have turn'd Boney; which, before that Alteration, no man could have said were Bones. VI. The first of these GristlesThe Scuti∣formis. is call'd Scutiformis, because of its Resemblance to a Buckler, being al∣most foursquare like the Bucklers of the Ancients, or rather like an Iron-Breastplate, Gibbous without; which Gibbosity, because it is more conspicuous in men than in Women; therefore in Men it is call'd Adam's Apple, because it is vulgarly believ'd, that part of that Fatal Apple stuck in Adam's Throat; for a punishment of his Transgression; and that for that Reason this Gristle grew Bunching out, and the Protubera∣tion became hereditary to his Posterity▪ But because it is distinguish'd in the Mid∣dle by a certain Line, therefore some
have describ'd it as double; whereas it was never found to be double in this World; or if ever any Body did live to see it so, it was a Wonder, and no com∣mon Accident. In its Angles it has Processes; above, two longer, by which it is joyn'd to the lower Sides of the Bone Hyoides, by the help of a Ligament; and two shorter below, by which it adheres to the lower Muscle. Fallopius writes, that he has met with the Thyroides Gristle Boney, not only in decrepit People, but in such as have been but newly entring into Old Age. Moreover, he adds, That when the Thyroides began to grow long, it hard∣ned first in the Sides. VI. The Second is call'd Anuula∣ry,The Annu∣lar. because it is round in form of a Ring, and encompasses the whole La∣rynx. VII. The Third and Fourth is call'dThe Gut∣tal. the Guttal, because the Processes be∣ing joyn'd together, resemble that part of an Earthen Pitcher, out of which the Water flows when we poure it forth. Fallopius writes, that he never found the Guttal Gristle Boney, which Riola∣nus affirms he has seen. VIII. The Fifth, Epiglottis, seat∣edThe Epi∣glottis. at the Root of the Tongue, and is the Covering of the little Chink or Glottis, lest the Meat and Drink should slip into the Aspera Arteria in swallowing; though it be not so exact∣ly joyn'd, but that some Moisture may slide in between the Junctures into the Trachea. This is softer than the rest of the Mus∣cles; resembling an Ivy-Leaf, or the Tongue it self, and therefore is call'd Lingula. Nicolaus Stenonis observes a certain piece of Flesh, compos'd of Glandulous Berries, in the upper part of a Calves Epiglottis, from which, he says, there are conspicuous Passages to be seen through the Gristle it self to the lower part. IX. These Gristles of the Larynx,Muscles. are furnish'd with thirteen Muscles, for the Motion and Modulation of the Voyce; by which the Chink is either dilated or contracted. Of these, there are Four which are Common, and Nine Peculiar; which are call'd the Vocal Nerves, proceeding from the Turn-again Branches of the Sixth Pair. The Common Nerves are they which are implanted into the Larynx; yet have not their Original from it. The Pecu∣liar are they which rise and end in the Larynx. Of which first, there are four; of the latter, eleven. X. The first Pair of Common ones,Common ones. which is the lowermost, call'd Sterno Thyroides, arising from the upper∣most and internal part of the Ster∣num, is inserted below into the sides of the Scuti-form'd Gristle, and while it draws down the Scutiform, it con∣tracts the Chink. XI. The other Pair, which is theHypothy∣roides. uppermost, call'd the Hypothyroides, arising from the lower Seat of the Hyoides-Bone, is inserted into the bottom of the Target-fashion'd, and by raising it up, dilates the Fissure. Riolanus believes that this Pair is parti∣cularly related to no Gristle; but that it raises up the whole Larynx. XII. The first Pair of Proper Mus∣cles,The Proper Muscles. which is very small, according to the Opinion of Veslingius, and most Anatomists, derives its Origi∣nal from the Annular Gristle, and ends in the sides of the Scutiform, or Target fashion'd Gristle; and hence is call'd Cricothyroides Anticum, and is thought to move the Gristle somewhat obliquely downward. On the other side, Bartholinus, from the Insertion of the Nerves, judges, that the foremost Pair arises from the lowest part of the Scutiform, and ends in the An∣nular Gristle, and draws it gently to the Scutiform, and is almost immoveable, that so they may be joyn'd, and so kept joyn'd; and therefore that this Part ought more properly to be call'd Thyrocricoides. But this Opinion of Bartholine, Rio∣lanus, according to his Custom, sharply derides, as one that will not easily fuf∣fer any man to dissent from himself, or to invent, or know any thing in A∣natomy, which he either saw not, or knew not before. XIII. The Second Pair proceedsThe hinder Cricoartae∣noides. with a Fleshy Beginning behind, from the Annular, and ends with a Nervous Substance in the lower part of the Guttal, or Artaenoides, and by the separation of the two Artaenoi∣des-Gristles, opens the Larynx. It is commonly call'd by Anatomists,
the hinder Cricoartaenoides, and by Cas∣serius, the Cuclar Pair. XIV. The Third Pair, call'd theThe Late∣ral Crico∣artaenoides. Crico-Artaenoides, arising above from the Sides of the Annular, is in∣serted into the Sides of the Guttal, at the Ioynt, opening the Larynx, by an oblique Separation of the Gris∣tles. XV. The Fourth Intrinsecal andThyro-Ar∣taenoides. Broad Pair, call'd Thyro-artaenoi∣des, both foremost and hindermost, arises from the Scutiform: Or as Riolanus suspects, from the Cricoides, and ends in the sides of the Guttal or Arsenoides, by closing which, it shuts up the Larynx in a right Channel. XVI. The Ninth Muscle (by o∣thers,The Ninth Muscle. the Fifth Pair, and call'd Arytaenoides) arises from the hin∣der Line of the Guttal, and carry'd on with Transverse Fibres, is insert∣ed into the Sides os the same, and binding the Artaenoides-Cartilage, closes up the Larynx. XVII. The Epiglottis in Men isThe Mus∣cle of the Epiglottis. furnish'd with no conspicuous Muscles, (though Iohn Van Horn writes, that by the Industry of the Anatomists, he found two small suspensory Mus∣cles) neither is it mov'd by any Ar∣bitrary Motion, but by the weight of swallow'd Victuals, and drawing the Tongue backward, seems only to be depress'd. In larger Animals that chew the Cud, and continually gape, through their perpetual devouring of Meat, and have a large Epiglottis, it is furnish'd with apparent Muscles; of which some rise from the Hyoides, and being inserted into the bottom of the Epiglottis, raise it up; others, being seated between the Tunicle, and the Cartilage of the Epi∣glottis, draw it down, and so close the Larynx. XVIII. The Larynx being form'dThe Ker∣nels. of the foresaid Parts, to the end that in the Modulation of the Voyce, it may conveniently perform its Office, wants continual moisture and smooth∣ing; to which purpose, there are fix'd to it several little Kernels. The most conspicuous of these are two great∣er, at the upper Seat of the Larynx, or the Root of the Tongue; seated at the Sides of the Uvula or Cover of the Larynx, upon each side one, call'd by the Latins, Tonsillae, and vulgarly, theThe Ton∣sillae. Almonds, though they nothing resemble the Form of Almonds, cover'd with the common Tunicle of the Mouth, and furnish'd with small Veins and Arteries, arising from the Carotides and Jugulars. These are loose and spungy, and full of little Hollownesses; one large and oval, opens into the Mouth, which in Cows and Oxen, easily admits the Top of the Little Finger, and several small ones, which receive the Spittle, and Moisture of the Brain, and with that continually moisten and make slippery the Larynx, the Jaws, the Tongue, and the Gullet; and so me think, that the Spittle is there made out of the Hu∣mors that fall from the Brain. Fallopius well observes, that some∣times the opening of the large Hollow∣ness, or Concavity, resembles a little Ulcer; and sometimes is handled for such a thing by unskilful Surgeons, espe∣cially when it gapes overmuch, by rea∣son of the copious falling of the Hu∣mors into the Kernel. Now how far it gapes sometimes, I saw in a certain Country-woman, who, in the Year 1652. being hungry, had eaten boyl'd Prunes, and by reason of her hasty swallowing, I know not by what Acci∣dent, one of the Stones enter'd into the Opening of the large Concavity. Pre∣sently the Kernel swell'd, and by its Compressure, shut up the Passage of Meat and Drink, in such a manner, that she could swallow neither Meat nor Drink, so that she was forc'd to seek my Advice. Upon my keeping down her Tongue, I saw the Kernel very much swell'd in the Right Side, but not inflam'd, and the Opening of it gaping at a more than usual rate; but I could not see the Stone. Present∣ly I gave the Woman to sup a little De∣coction of Barly mix'd with Syrup of Dialthea, and put my Hand without∣side upon the Region of the swell'd Kernel, and squeez'd it very hard, bid∣ding the Woman at the same time to endeavour with all her force to swallow the Liquor in her Mouth. The first time the Liquor burst forth at her Nostrils; but the second time, by reason of my hard squeezing with my Thumb, and by drawing back the Tongue toward the hinder parts, it came to pass that the Stone leapt out of the Kernel, into her Mouth, and then the Woman could presently swallow both Meat and Drink. In May 1664. another Prune-stone slipt into the same Kernel, and I cur'd
again the same way. In December 1661. I saw an Accident of the same nature, that happen'd to a Citizen of Utrecht, into whose Opening of the said Conca∣vity, there fell a piece of hard Cheese, and immediately stopp'd his swallowing of any Victuals. But his Cure was not so sudden as the former, but gave us the Trouble of some Days; so that we were forc'd to draw out the piece of Cheese with a crooked pair of Tongues, made for that purpose. Wharton, contrary to all Reason, be∣lievesWharton his Error. these Kernels, which are hardly endu'd with any remarkable Sense of Feeling, to be the true and primary Organs of Taste. Moreover, he be∣lieves, that the Spittle-Matter flows from the Brain to those Kernels through the Nerves; as if such a copious Quan∣tity of thick and viscous matter could flow through the narrow, and almost invisible Pores of the Nerves. The Re∣futation of which, see, l. 1. c. 16. and, lib 8. c. 1. Below the said Tonsils, are two other little Kernels, adjoyning to the lower Re∣gion of the Larynx, of each side one, near the sides of some of the first Rings of the Rough Artery. These, because they are furnish'd with several little Ar∣teries and Veins, have a more Blood∣like and solid Substance, than the other Kernels; and are not so easily cut with the Pen-knise. What their Use is, is much question'd: Some believe 'em to be fram'd on purpose to moisten the La∣rynx on the outside with a slimy and fat Moisture, and to render the Gristles more fit for Motion. But in regard there is little need of this Use, for that the Larynx does not require this Humecta∣tion on the outside, I rather think it fit to be enquir'd, Whether some Spittle-Vessels do not proceed from them? XX. Next to these, stand theParotides. Parotides, the Jugular and Maxillar Kernels, seated under the Tongue: Of all which, see l. 3. c. 24. And thus we have describ'd the Or∣gans that form the Voice. XXI. Now the Voice is the articu∣lateThe Voice. Sound of a Man, produc'd by the Tongue, through the Repercussion of the Air breath'd in, to express the Conceptions of the Mind. XXII. Scaliger, having a regard toA Digres∣sion. this End, not impertinently alledges out of Aristotle, That Reason is the Hand of the Intellect, as the Speech of Reason, and the Hand of Speech. For the Hand executes Commands, Commands obey Reason, and Reason is the Power of the Intellect. Also out of Cicero, That Nature hath arm'd Man with three As∣sistances; Wit for the Invention of Ne∣cessaries; Speech, for Succour; and Hands, to bring those things to perfection which the Wit has found out; or we have learn'd by Speech from others. For by the means of the Voice and Speech, we beg of others what we want, and learn what we know not. Moreover, by the same means, we command what we would have done, and declare what we desire to communicate. Therefore not every Sound, as, Coughing, or Hauking, &c. is a Voice; but only that which is made in the Tongue, and directed by the Mind, by the means of the Muscles of the Tongue. Hence most Brutes, though they have the Organs of Speech, as a Larynx with Muscles, Lungs, &c. yet they do not send forth an Articulate Sound; because the Air breathing outward, is not arti∣ficially directed, or articulated through the said Organs, by the Rational Soul, which they want; so that they either Low, or Neigh, or bark, or send forth some other inarticulate Sound, by the Instinct of Nature only. Nevertheless by Art, Sparrows, Mag-pies, Ravens, and some other Birds, are taught to speak and Sing articulately. CHAP. XVI. Of the Oesophagus, or Gullet. See Table 11. THE Oesophagus or Gullet, by the Greeks,  & , by the Latins, Gula; by the Arabians called Meri; is a round Channel, or Pipe, through which the Nourishment descends from the Mouth to the Stomach. I. Taking its Beginning from theIts Situa∣tion. Iaws, under the Rough Artery, it first descends downright; thence turn∣ing a little to the Right, to the Fifth Verteber of the Thorax, then winds again to the Left, toward the Ninth Verteber, and at length passing the Diaphragma at the Eleventh, it
grows continuous to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, and holds it, as it were, in a hanging posture. II. It is annex'd to the Iaws andIts Con∣nexion. the Larynx by the Tunicle of the Mouth, continuous to it self and the Stomach, but to the Rough Artery, the Vertebrae's, and other adjoyning Parts, it is joyn'd by Membranes arising from the Ligaments of the Back. III. It receives Arteries from theIts Vessels. Carotides, and the descending Trunk of the Aorta; many times also from the Intercostals and the Bronchial Artery, found out by Frederic Ru∣ysch. Sometimes also it sends forth some few Veins to the Vein that has no Pair, and sometimes to the Jugulars. And it has some little small Nerves from the Branches of the Sixth Pair. VII. It consists of a Fleshy andIts Sub∣stance. Membranous Substance, that it may be commodiously extended, and full again, and it is form'd of five Tunicles. The first of these is outermost; 'tis said to be also common to the Stomach: But there is a manifest Difference, when the Membrane of the Gullet rises from the Pleura, but that of the Stomach from the Peritonaeum. The second, which is the middlemost, and proper to it, is very thick, soft, and fleshy, like a Muscle boar'd through, interwo∣ven with round and transverse Fibres, obliquely meeting one another, as Op∣posites, and cutting each other like a St. Andrew's Cross. The Third, which is the innermost, and proper to it also, is continuous to the Membrane sur∣rounding the Mouth and Jaws, thin, hard and nervous. Which some af∣firm to be sprinkl'd with streight and long, others with transverse and circu∣lar Fibres; but indeed they are so small and tender, that it is not an easie thing to make any Judgment concerning them. V. For the moistning of the Gullet,Kernels. several Kernels are annex'd to it. That is to say above, next the sides of the Tongue and Larynx, two Tonsils, affording Moisture to smooth the inward Concavity; of which, in the foregoing Chapter. On the outside, the two inferior Glandules are said to moisten it, seated in the hinder part of the Gullet, near the first Vertebra of the Thorax (in the same place where the Gullet, giving way to the Trunk of the Aorta, turns a lit∣tle to the Right;) and many times lie so conceal'd between the Gullet and the Oesophagus, that they are nt to be found, but by diligent Search; and yet about the bigness of a French Bean, and resembling the shape of a Kidney; and adhering with the convex part to the Oesophagus, so that in their place, they seem like a Kidney divided in the mid∣dle. However, they happen sometimes to be less, and to exceed the number of Two; and then they vary also in their Shapes, being in number sometimes 3, 4, and 5. and they have also their Ves∣sels, diminutive Arteries from the Neighbouring Arteries, and Diminu∣tive Veins, which they send forth to the next Veins and Lymphatic Vessels, conveying Lympha to the Lymphatic and Pectoral Channel. Wharton also asserts, that they re∣ceive remarkable Nerves from the sixth Conjugation, as also from the twelfth Pair of the Vertebrae. But in regard they are neither sensible of feeling, nor are mov'd, I think it may be question'd, whether they have any remarkable and conspicuous Nerves or no? Or whe∣ther they receive any at all, or at least only such as are hardly visible? Per∣haps the Lymphatic Vessels, which pro∣ceed from 'em, deceiv'd Wharton, who took those for Nerves. Some there are who believe, that these Kernels not only moisten the Gullet without, but also withinside, to facili∣tate the swallowing of Nourishment. But in regard that outward Irrigation is no way necessary, and for that there is no Passage extended from the Kernels toward the outward Concavity of the Gullet, it is apparent, that that can be none of their Use; but that they rather collect the Lymphatic Liquor, or suck it from the neighbouring Parts, and mix it with the Chylus, through the Lymphatic Channels. These Kernels sometimes swell to that degree, by reason of the Afflux of Hu∣mors, that they compress and streighten the Gullet overmuch, and so obstruct the Passage of the Nourishment, and starve the Patient to Death; of which we have met with three or four Exam∣ples in our Practice. VI. The Gullet is mov'd with three Pair of Muscles, and a peculiar Sphincter. The first Pair, which is call'd Cepha∣lopharingaem, dismiss'd from the Con∣fines
of the Head and Neck, is expand∣ed with a large Fold of Fibres into the Tunicle of the Gullet, & by raising it up∣ward, streightens the Jaws in swallowing. The second Pair, call'd Sphaenopha∣ri, arising from the Cavity of the Inner Wing of the Wedge-like Bone, and being obliquely extended into the Sides of the Palat and Gullet, dilates the Gullet. To this, there are some who add another Pair, inserted into the Lateral and Hinder Part of the Jaws and Gullet, by drawing which Part down∣ward, they dilate the Cavity of the Jaws and Gullet. The third Pair, call'd Stylopharingae∣um, arising from an Appendix of the Pencil-fashion'd Bone, and reaching the Sides of the Gullet, dilates it with the first Pair. The Sphincter of the Gullet, call'd also the Oesophagan-Muscle, springing from both Gristles of the Wedge-like Bone, encompasses the Gullet like a Sphincter, and by streightning it, thrusts the Meat downward. VII. The Use of the Gullet, is to swal∣lowIts Us. the Meat taken in at the Mouth, which is perform'd by the Fibres of the Gullet, and chiefly by the Oeso∣phagus. Galen numbers this among the Natural Actions; but in regard that Swallowing is an Arbitrary Action, and perform'd by the Instruments serving to voluntary Motion, that is to say, the Muscles, it seems rather to be reckon'd among the Animal Motions. And tho' it serve to a Natural Use or Action, which is Nourishment; however, it is no less an Animal Action than Respira∣tion; which is assistant to Nourishment, yet is an Animal Action. CHAP. XVII. Of the Neck. THE Uppermost Appendix of the Middle Venter is the Neck, call'd Collum, à Colendo, to be worshipped; because it usually is most adorn'd. Which Etymology no way pleases Us, in regard the Neck was long before the Use of Jewels, and other Or∣naments; and therefore we rather de∣rive it from Collis, as rising like a Hill above the Shoulders. This Neck, do we, as most Anato∣mists do, reckon among the Parts of the Breast; as well by reason of the Verte∣brae's with the rest of the Vertebrae's of the Back, as by reason of their common Use, in regard they afford a common Passage with the rest to the Marrow of the Brain: Though Spigelius thinks that Office rather ought to be attributed to the Head. Upon this Part the Head is set, as upon a more eminent Hill, that from thence, as from a Watch-Tower, it may take a Prospect every way of what is to be desir'd, what avoyded, and be mov'd about with an easie Motion. I. The hinder Part of it, thoughCervix▪ it be generally comprehended under the Name of Collum, yet is more particularly call'd Cervix. The Neck consists of the common Coverings of the whole Body; as also of Arteries, Veins, Nerves, seven Verte∣brae's, and eight Muscles; of which more hereafter. II. The hinder Part of the NeckEpomis. descending, is properly call'd , by Aristotle, , as being seated a∣bove the Shoulders. III. Underneath this, stand theShoulders. Shoulders; by the Greeks call'd ; being those Parts which are seat∣ed at the Sides of the Neck, which give a beginning to the whole Arm, and are constituted by that Eminency which the Head of the Arm makes, when it is joyn'd to the broad Bone of the Scapula. IV. The contrary Part to this isAxilla or Arm-pit. hollow, seated under the Ioynt of the Arm, by the Greeks call'd , or ; by the Latins, Axilla; and for shortness sake, Ala. V. Hippocrates makes a Judgment ofIudgment of the Strength of a man's Body. the strength of a Man, by the Thick∣ness or Slenderness of his Neck; and says, that a slender Neck betokens Im∣becillity, and a thick Neck, Strength: Not without Reason, in regard that such as are the Vertebrae's of the Neck, such are generally the Vertebrae's of the Breast, the Loyns, and the Os Sacrum; nay, such indeed are all the rest of the Bones, and other Parts answering the Bigness of the Bones, as the Arteries, Nerves, Veins, Ligaments, &c. If there∣fore the Neck be slender and weak, all the other Parts of the whole Body an∣swerable to it, of necessity must be pro∣portionably such; but if thick and strong, the rest of the corresponding Parts of the Body must be proportion∣ably large and strong, unless some Mon∣strosity of the Neck occasion an Excep∣tion to the General Rule. The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF ANATOMY. TREATING Of the UPPER BELLY, or HEAD. CHAP. I. Of the Head in General. ORder and Method now re∣quires that we should sur∣vey the Upper Region of the Body, and enter the Royal Palace of Minerva, and that Superior Mansion of Hers, garrison'd with all her Lifeguard, where is the Seat of that most Noble Bowel, to which the Supream Architect subjected the Government of the whole Body. This uppermost Region, or upper∣most Venter, is the Head, wherein is contain'd the Chief Organ of the most Noble Functions of the Soul. I. It is call'd Caput, à capien∣do,Its denomi∣nation. from containing; either because it contains the Brain, which is the most Noble Bowel; or else because the Sences and Animal Actions derive their Beginning from it. By the Greeks it is call'd , as much as to say, , or , a Shell; because perhaps the Skull encloses the Noble Bowel like a Shell; whence it is call'd by the French, La Teste.Its Scitua∣tion. II. It is seated in the uppermost and most eminent Part of the Body; which the Platonics think was therefore done, because there was a necessity; and no more than what was just, that the Un∣derstanding, which is the Queen of all the Faculties, should be uppermost ex∣alted. But the Galenics think it there∣fore done, that from thence, as from a Watch-Tower, all things to be desir'd or avoided, might be discover'd by the Sight, Smell and Hearing. III. The Figure of it is Sphaerical,Its Shape and Big∣ness. somewhat flat on both sides; and in Man above all other Creatures remark∣able for its Bigness, to the end, the Brain, which is the most Noble Bowel of all, may the more safely abide in it, being incompass'd, besides other Coverings, with a Boney Scalp, on every side, which sustains and preserves the Shape and Figure of the whole Head. Concerning which, see more, L. 9. c. 3. Spigelius finds out the convenient Pro∣portion of the Shape and Bigness by the means of four Lines. To the end the Parts of the Head, says he, may be proportionable one to the other, it re∣quires four equal Lines. The First is, that which we shall call the Equal Line of the Héad, and reaches from the lower part of the Chin to the upper part of the Fore∣head. The next is that which we call the Line of the hinder part of the Head; and
reaches from the top of the Head to the first Vertebra of the Neck. The Fourth reaches from one Ear (in which place are the Mamillary Processes) extending to the highermost Part of the Fore-part of the Head. Now if these four Lines are equal one to another, it may be call'd a Proportionable Head; but if they decline to a certain Inequality, they may be said to want so much of a certain, just and na∣tural Constitution, as they approach or re∣cede from the foremention'd Proportion: For if the Face-Line prove the longest, it may be call'd a Long-Head; if shorter, a Short-Head. If the Forehead-Line be longer than the rest, it shall be call'd a Broad-Head; if the Line of the hinder Part of the Head be longer than the rest, then it shall be call'd a Coppid-Head: If all the Lines are equal, then Round and Natural; if all unequal, or some or most, then will the Head be of that Form which Galen and Hippocrates call , or like a Town-Top. IV. The Head is divided into theThe Divi∣sion. Hairy Part, and the Smooth Part. The one is call'd the Hairy Scalp, the other, the Face. The Hairy Scalp is divided into the Fore-part, the Hinder-part, and the Temples: The Face, into the Forehead, and the Parts beneath it; as, the Nose, the Cheeks, &c. which are usually comprehended under the Name of the Face. The Region of the Forehead extends it self from the Top of the Nose to the Hair. Hence the Fore-part of the Head proceeds to the Coronal Suture: Between which and the Lambdoidal Su∣ture, is comprehended the Bregma, or Top of the Head; to which adjoyn the Lateral Parts, or Temples, circumscrib'd by the Bones of the Temples between the Ears and the Eyes. The Hinder-part, from the beginning of the Lambdoidal Suture to the first Vertebra of the Neck, is call'd the Hinder-Part of the Head. CHAP. II. Of the Hair and its Generation. ACcording to the common Order, we shall first enquire into the Hairy Part of the Head, and discover many things concerning it, which have hitherto been conceal'd. In this Part, some are the Extream Parts, wrapt about the most Noble Bowel, both for Ornament and Safety: others internal. I. Among the External Parts, in theThe Desi∣nition. first place, we meet with the Hair; which are small, long, cold, dry and flexible Bodies, growing out of the Skin; I say, out of the Skin, because they are rarely seen to break out from any other Part; though they have been observ'd sometimes to grow in the Heart, as we have already related, l. 2. c. 6. And not many Years since, we saw in a Woman such a hideous Quan∣tity of Hair grow from a stinking nasty Ulcer in her Thigh, that it was a great hinderance to us in the Cure, and forc'd us to eat away the spungy, putrid, proud Flesh of the Inside of the Wound, that so fertilly produc'd those Hairs. II. They are call'd Pili, from theThe . Greek Word , which signifies any thing that is round and ob∣long. But Pili is the general Name for Hair, and signifies any sort of Hair in whatever Part of the Body it breaks forth. But besides the general Name, there is also a particular Name for the Hair of the Head, by the Latins call'd Capilli; by the Greeks, ; from , to shave; which the Ancients call'd , or Hairs in the Head. Also in both Sexes they are call'd Crines; and more especially in Men, , or Caesaries, from frequent cutting; in Women, , from , to adorn; by the Latines, Coma, from the extraordinary Care that is taken of it. Nature has produc'd a fruitful Crop of this Hair, not only in the upper part of the Head, but more especially in Men, about the Mouth and the adjoyn∣ing Parts, to preserve the more Noble Bowel from the Vehemence of Cold, and the Extremity of Heat; and more∣over, to the end that Divine Creature Man might shew more Graceful and Majestic, by means of this Ornament, deny'd to other Creatures: For, Turpe Pecus mutilum, turpis sine Gramine Campus; Et sine Fronde Frutex, & sine Crine Caput. III. Here some may Query, SinceWhy Wo∣men have no Beards. Hair was given for an Ornament to the Face of Men, why Men are more grac'd with the Ornament of Beards
than Women? This comes to pass, be∣cause that the first Architect, as he de∣sign'd a Distinction between their Instru∣ments of Generation, so was he pleas'd to distinguish between their Ornaments; and therefore he allotted to Man a Beard about his Mouth, which in Wo∣men would have been deformed and unhandsom: And to the end there might be no necessity to inspect the Ge∣nitals of either Sex, to find the Distin∣ction, which would have been unseemly and shameful: And therefore Boys, before they arrive at Man's estate, are destitute of Beards, till they are able to perform the Act of Manhood, which is Generation. Any other Natural Rea∣son can never be given; for that in both Sexes, the Parts about the Mouth are equally form'd, and yet in those Parts the Mark of Distinction is plac'd as an Ornament, at that very time when there is a necessity for that Distinction; that is, at the time when the Procreative Fa∣culty begins to move, when it is requi∣site that Boys should be distinguish'd from Maids by some external Mark ob∣vious to the Sight. IV. The Hair breaks through theThe Place where they break forth▪ Pores of the Skin, yet not through all the Pores, but only such as are endis'd with a certain Aptitude to suffer that Eruption: Which Aptitude not being in the Palm of the Hand, nor in the Soles of the Feet, nor in Scars, therefore no Hairs grow there. V. They are fix'd in the Skin withTheir Roots. certain little Roots; and in regard it was ordain'd, that they should be most plentiful in that same part of the Head which is call'd the Hairy part, therefore is the Skin much thicker there than in other Parts of the Body, from whence they give forth less numerous and smal∣ler. VI. The Hair is divided intoThe Divi∣sion. Hair brought forth with the Body, and growing afterward. The Hair with which we are born, is the Hair of the Head, the Eye-lids, and Eye-brows. The other Hair, is that which after∣wards appears upon the Face, Privi∣ties, Breast, under the Arm-pits, in the Nostrils, Ears, Arse-hole, Thighs, Legs, and other Parts of the Body. VII. The Hair is also a Heteroge∣neousThey are Heteroge∣neous Bo∣dies. Body, though it seems Homo∣geneous, as appears from hence, that they live and are nourish'd: For there is no Life in any Body which is homo∣geneous and simple; and the Concocti∣on and Preparation of Nourishment, Separation of useful from unuseful, as also Apposition and Assimilation, are necessarily perform'd by the diversity of the smaller Particles. And therefore though Aquapendens, and several others affirm this Part to be a Similar Part, yet that is only to be understood in the Gross; not that they are really Homo∣geneous and Similar, but seem to be so to the Sight. VIII. The Form of the Hair isThe Form. two-fold; the one Essential, and the other Accidental. The Essential Part is that which gives the Hair its Being and Life, which is its Soul. And be∣cause this Form is to us unknown, and the Presence of it only perceptible to the Mind, nor can well be express'd in Words. We, with other Physicians (who take their Temper from whence all their Action proceeds, for the Form of the Parts) will likewise agree, That their Essential Form is their cold and dry Tem∣per. The Accidental Form of the Hairs, is their Figures and Shape, whatever it be, long, crooked, straight, curl'd, round, square, &c. For the Hairs at first Sight, seem solid, and exactly round; yet upon a more narrow Inspe∣ction, you shall observe other things. Spigelius says they are square, and Rio∣lanus, that they are hollow. We also affirm, that the Hairs are porous, and that some are square, others triangular, and other round. For all these Figures manifestly appear, if the Hairs being cut small and short, and well view'd with a Microscope; but the Pores are chiefly extended according to their Length, as you may observe much bet∣ter in the Bristles of a Hog. IX. The Efficient Cause of Hair,The Effi∣cient Cause. is the same which perfects the Gene∣ration of other Bodies; that is, a convenient Heat acting upon apt Mat∣ter, and disposing it to an Animation proper for Hair. And though in dead Bodies, in which the Hair will grow for some time, there seems no Heat to re∣main; yet there is such a Heat, and so much, as is sufficient to promote the Generation of Hair, there being no ex∣traordinary Heat requir'd for that work. Hence the Heat forms, animates and pushes forth Hair out of fit Matter; which being thrust forth by the ambi∣ent Cold, become much drier and harder. And hence those Hairs that come into the World with us, because they have remain'd long in a moist place, in New-born Infants, are very
soft and moist; but the Child being born, they are soon dry'd by the Air. X. Concerning the first OriginalThe first Original. of Hair, there is some Dispute a∣mong the Philosophers; while some believe 'em form'd in the first Deli∣neation of the Parts, out of the Seed; others will not have 'em to proceed originally from the Seed. The for∣mer produce several Arguments to con∣firm their Opinion, and do not believe there can be any Question made, but that the Hair which comes into the World with us, is form'd out of the Terrestrial Part of the Seed, in regard that the Matter of Hair is chiefly Ana∣logous to the Seed; and hence the Sub∣stance of the Hair born into the World, as also the Form and Colour of it, re∣sembles the Substance, Form and Co∣lour of both Parents; and for that Men abounding with Seed, are more hairy, whereas either through much Use of Venery, or defect of Seed, they fall off, as in old Age. As to the Hairs that grow after the Birth, they say, that it grows from the same Seminal Matter sticking in the Parts which are to be co∣ver'd, and not yet stirr'd up into Act; but afterwards, in its own due time, swel∣ling through Heat. The latter sort, much more to the purpose, maintain, That the Hair is not form'd in the first Formation, out of the Seed with the rest of the Parts; but afterwards, when the Parts are already delineated, and somewhat grown, that in some of those Parts more proper, and more fit for this purpose, that same peculiar Matter fit for the generation of Hair, increases by the Nourishment which is brought, and at length out of that Matter agitated by the Heat, the Hair is form'd and stirr'd up, being en∣du'd with a particular Soul and Life di∣stinct from the rest of the Parts, because they are not stirr'd up, and endu'd with Life with the rest of the Parts out of the same Seed; but apart, out of other Matter afterwards generated. Now that they live by virtue of another pe∣culiar Vegetable Soul, that has no Com∣munion with the other animated Parts of the Body, is apparent from hence; for that they do live only while a man is alive, but after his Decease, are nou∣rish'd and encreas'd, after the same manner as Polypody-Moss, &c. grow upon old Trees, both before and after the Tree dies; because they have each a proper Soul, distinct from the Form and Soul of the Tree, out of which, and wherein they grow. XI. There is great Diversity ofThe Di∣versity. Hair, which though it be to be ob∣serv'd in all the Hairs of the Body, yet is chiefly observable in the Hairs of the Head for they differ, First, in Plenty. Hence some have very thin and small Heads of Hair; others are very hairy upon their Heads from their Births, or else after they are born; and that by reason of the great store or scarcity of the Matter convenient, which produces the Hair. But as for those who after∣wards become bald, that befals 'em not only from the small Quantity, but from the Defect; as in Leprous Persons, or the unaptness of the Matter, or the closeness of the Pores out of which they grow. Wonderful was the vast▪ Quan∣tity of Absolon's Hair, of whom the Scripture says, That when he shav'd his Head, which was but once a year, the Hair of his Head which he cut off, weigh'd two hundred Shekels; every She▪ kel, according to the publick weight of the Iews, weighing an Ounce. Secondly, In Thickness. Hence some Heads of Hair are thicker, others thin∣ner, by reason of the various bigness of the Pores through which they pass, or the Redundancy or Plenty of Mat∣ter. Thirdly, In Length. For some Hair grows shorter, other Hair grows longer; and generally Womens Hair grows lon∣ger than Mens, by reason of the Re∣dundancy of Matter, and the Wide∣ness and Narrowness of the Pores: For if the Pores are over-wide, the Hair falls off, before it grows to any Length; but if straighter, then the Roots stick faster, and plenty of Matter supply∣ing their Nourishment, they grow in Length. 4ly. In their external Quality. Hence some Hair is harder, some softer; some curls, some hangs lank, and sometimes dry or moist; partly from the various Disposition of the Pores through which they pass, either in streightness, or wind∣ing tortuosity, Hence also it is, that some∣times the Hair shoots forth in Bushes, and without Order; as upon the Head, Privities and Beard; in other places or∣derly, and as it were in a perfect Row, as in the Eye-lids. 5ly. In Colour. Hence some are red∣hair'd, others black, others white, o∣thers grey, and others of a midling Colour between both.
XII. This Variety of Colours pro∣ceedsThe reason of the Co∣lours. from the Variety of Humors that are mix'd with the Iuice with which the Hair is nourish'd; with which, if Flegm be mix'd, the Hair becomes white; and therefore Flegmatic Peo∣ple, who are of a cold Temperament from their Births, are generally white∣hair'd. If Smoaky Vapors, either through over-much Heat, and burnt with too much Concoction, are mix'd therewith, then the Hair becomes black. Hence those that are of a hot Constitu∣tion, and concoct their Meat well, and therefore breed those fuliginous Vapors in great abundance, are generally black∣haird; if yellow Choler be mix'd there∣with, then they become red-hair'd: If Flegm abounds in one part of the Skin, Fuliginous Vapors, or Choler in ano∣ther, the Hair will be of several Co∣lours; in one place white, in another black or yellow: And those Colours, proceeding from the same Humors, set∣led in the Skin, then also many times, as in Brutes, the same Colours are im∣printed in the Skin; whence Aristotle, not considering those Humors setl'd in the Skin, and giving it a Colour, af∣firm'd, That the Skin conduc'd to the co∣louring of the Hairs, and that they were of the same Colour with the Skin. Thus you shall see some grey in one part of the Head, in another black-hair'd; and in Dogs and Horses of several Colours, we see the same Colours, as well in the Skin, as in the Hair; because the same Colours were imprinted in the Skins of those Creatures, at their first coming in∣to the World; which Colours remain as long as the same Humors are setled in the Skin; with which, if afterwards other Colours happen to mix, then the Colour changes. Thus in Horses and Dogs of several Colours, when they grow old, by reason of the Increase of Flegm, and its more copious mixture, the Hairs grow white, and the Spots that were black before, grow grey. Hence also it is apparent, why the Egyptians, Arabians, Indians, Spaniards and Itali∣ans are generally black-hair'd; because they inhabit hot Countreys, and are us'd to strong Wines, and other hot Diets; by which Heat a greater Quan∣tity of burning Vapors are generated; which being mix'd with the Alimentary Juice of the Hair, imprint that Colour into it, which is thence also given to the Hair. Whereas the English, Hollanders, Scotch, Danes, and other Northern Countreys, are generally bright-hair'd; because they inhabit colder Countreys; whence there is great store of Flegm ge∣nerated in their Bodies, which gives a whitish Tincture to the alimentary Juice of the Hair; & thence it is that there are few People who are truly black-hair'd; but several, who, till they come to be middle-ag'd, are between a White and a Black. Add to this, that in those Coun∣treys, the greatest part sooner grow Grey; whereas in hotter Countreys the People are not Grey so soon. Now, that this is the true Cause of the variety of Colours, and change of the Colours of the Hair, is apparent from hence, for that the Hair does not always keep the same Colour which it was of in the Infancy of the Person; but changes according as the Temper of the Person changes, or as other Hu∣mors are generated in the Body. Thus Marcellus Donatus tells us a Story, of one that in the Declination of his years, at what time he was quite grey, by the mixture of great store of Choler a∣bounding in his Body, with his Blood, not only his Skin contracted a Gold-Colour, but that also all his grey Hairs lost their Greyness, and became of a Yellowish Colour inclining to Green. But hence I would not have it conclu∣ded, that the Hair is generated out of these Flegmatic, Sanguine, Choleric or Adust Humors, or that they are nou∣rish'd by them, as a proper Nourish∣ment: For they are generated, and re∣ceive their Nourishment from a Specific Juice, or Humor, prepar'd after a spe∣cial manner; which they take from the Part wherein they are setl'd, which prepares that Humor out of the Blood, or some other Humor flowing to it. But this is that which I mean, That the Colour of the Hair proceeds from the mixture of this or that Humor with the nourishing Juice. Hence it is that Hip∣pocrates has left it for a Maxim, That whatever Moisture the Skin has attract∣ed, whether white, red, or black, the Hair is always of the same Colour. In this Sence Alexander Aphrodisaeus writes, that sometimes the Hair will be al∣most of a Golden Colour, if yellow Co∣lour happens to be mix'd with Flegm; that is, when those two Humors are mix'd together with the Alimentary Juice of the Hair. Thus as a Man be∣gins to encline toward old Age, the Hair becomes more and more grey and white, not from the defect of Alimen∣tary Matter, but because of the colder Constitution, greater store of Flegm is generated in the Body, and mix'd with
that Juice wherewith the Hair is nou∣rish'd, and causes it to turn white. XIII. Hence it is manifest, why theWhy the Hair of the Head first grows grey. Hair of the Head sooner grows grey than upon the Privities, under the Arms, or upon the Thighs, &c. Be∣cause that in no Part of the Body, there is so much Flegm generated as in the Head; which being infus'd into its Skin, cannot chuse but settle more a∣bundantly in the Alimentary Juice of the Hair, in aged People, than in young Folks, who less concoct and dissipate more the crude Humor. From which Flegm more closely mix'd, the white Colour is given to the Matter, and by that to the Hair. But in the other Parts, as in the Privities, Arm-pits, &c. which are hotter, the Flegm happens to fix la∣ter, and for that reason the Hairs be∣come later grey in those Parts. XIV. The Galenists, from theSigns of the Temper of the Bo∣dy. Colour of the Hair, make several Iudgments of the Tempers not only of the Skin, but of the whole Body. Thus, a White colour indicate a Fleg∣matic; a Red, a Choleric; a mixt Co∣lour dentes a midling Temper. Nay, sometimes occult Diseases also, and the Conditions of the Mind are discover'd by the Colour and Constitution of the Hair. Thus the Disease and Cure of the Leprosie, which is describ'd in the Old Testament, was chiefly disclos'd by the Colour of the Hair. Long, slen∣der, and streight Hair denotes a mild and courteous Disposition; curl'd Hair an inconstant and testy Disposition, and Quickness and Chearfulness in underta∣king of Business: Soft Hair berokens Pusilanimity; harsh Hair, especially inclining to Black, Resolution of Mind, and Strength of Body. —Durae per brachia Setae Promittunt atrocem Animunt. After all these things, that there may be nothing wanting in reference to the Discourse of Hair, let us enquire what is the Matter out of which Hair is ge∣nerated, seeing that we have already shew'd, that it is not generated out of the Seed at the first Formation of the Birth. XV. This Matter then is a certainThe Mate∣rials of Hair. thick, terrestrial, viscid Iuice, bred out of the Blood, or some other Hu∣mor, and prepar'd after a Specific manner. That the Matter is thick and terrestrial, appears from hence; that is to say, from the hardness, the viscousness, from the firmness and flexi∣bleness of the Hair. XVI. Out of this Matter, or outThe man∣ner of its Generati∣on. of this Iuice, in the Parts adapted for the generation and fixing of the Hair, is the Hair generated, animated and shot forth by the agitated Heat, and afterwards nourish'd after the same manner. For this Juice is attracted by the Roots of the Body, and carry'd through the Pores to the Extremities, & so nourishes the Hair, and passes into its Substance, as we may observe in the Nourishment of Plants. This Juice, I say, is concocted and prepar'd in certain Parts, out of which the Hair shoots, and that at what time those Parts are become fit for the Prepa∣ration of this sort of Matter; which Ap∣titude, when some Parts obtain sooner, others later, hence it comes to pass, that the Hair grows sooner in some Parts; as upon the Head, Eye-lids, and Eye∣brows; in others, later; as upon the Chin, the Privities, the Breast, the Arm∣pits, &c. XVII. Riolanus's Judgment is other wise concerning this Matter; who thinksWhether the Ker∣nels afford Matter for the Hair. this Juice is not prepar'd in the Parts which are to be cover'd, but endea∣vors to prove, that the Matter of the Hair is afforded only from the Kernels. Besides the Aptitude of the Skin, says he, there is requir'd a certain Glandulous Substance, as well to moisten the Skin, and to afford Matter for the Ge∣neration and Nourishment of the Hair; wherefore where the Parts are slimy and moist, there are also Kernels; for proof of which, we find, that where there are Kernels, there is also Hair. The Hair therefore taking this Opportunity from the Kernels, grows and increases, collecting that which abounds and lows into the Ex∣tremities; but where the Body is dry, and no Glandules are, there grows no Hair Moreover, there are Kernels on both sides the Ears, near the Iugular Veins of the Neck, and Hair also in the same Place. Also under the Arm-pits on both sides, there are Kernels and Hair: But the Brain is bigger than all the rest of the Glandules, and therefore there is more Hair upon the Head. But though this be a specious Argu∣ment of Riolanus, as propounded ac∣cording to the Opinion of Hippocrates, yet it rests upon no solid Foundation. Rather the contrary will follow, should we thus argue; Where there are no Glan∣dules,
there is no Hair; which that it is false, many Proofs declare. For there are no manifest Glandules under the Skin of the Legs, which are neverthe∣less very hairy in most Men. Moreo∣ver, in Men they abound upon the Chin and Lips, where there are no Kernels of any moment to be found. And there∣fore Riolanus vainly endeavors, to force his Matter from remote Kernels near the Ears, and others under the Tongue, to create Hair upon the Lips and Chin. Moreover, Hair has been observ'd to grow in the Heart, where never any Glandules were yet known to be. It has also been found that Hair has grown upon dry'd Carkasses; for the Genera∣tion of which, the dry'd up Kernels can afford no Matter most certainly. More∣over, if the Kernels afforded that slimy Matter for Hair, and Riolanus's Rule were true, Where there are Kernels, there is also Hair; why does not Hair grow in the same Parts of Wo∣men, seeing they have as many Ker∣nels as Men? Why have they no hair upon their Chins and Lips, like Men? Why are not their Breasts hairy also like Men's; seeing their Breasts are full of such large Kernels, so that by that Reason they ought to have the most Hair in those Places? In the last place, Riolanus does very ill to number the Brain among the Glandules; as we shall shew in the Fifth Chapter following. XVIII. But Galen, and with him,  Matter of Hair be a Excre∣ment. many other Physicians and Philoso∣phers dissent from our Opinion first propounded, and the Doctrine of Ri∣olanus, who believe, and teach, That the Matter out of which Hair grows, and is generated, is no peculiar Iuice, to that end specifically prepar'd in the Parts to be cover'd, or supply'd from the Glandules, as Riolanus asserts, but that it is an Excrement of the third Concoction, moist, fuliginous, thick, and terrestrial, rais'd from the Fat which lies under the Skin, or from some slimy and viscous Humor, that lies in like manner under the Skin, and sticks to it; which being apply'd to the Roots of the Hair, shoots forth by degrees the preceding Parti∣cles, and causes 'em to grow long. From which Opinion of his, they thus conclude, That no Nutritive Matter passes through the Hair it self to its Ex∣tremities; but that their Growth is caus'd by the said Apposition to the Roots; which is the Reason that they do not grow all of an equal dimension Secondly, That the Hair is not to be numbred among the Parts of the Body, partly, because it is not nourish'd with alimentary Juice, but by fuliginous Va∣pors: partly, because they have not a Soul and Life common to the rest of the Parts. And hence the Hair being cut, or pull'd up by the Roots, a man is not deem'd to be depriv'd of any Part of his Body; and for that they live after a Man is dead, and depriv'd of his Soul, or at least for some time. XIX. But this Opinion is oppos'd byObjections. others, with many strong Arguments. 1. If the Hair were generated out of any such fuliginous Vapour, then in sane Bodies, full of good and wholsom Humors, where there is least of this sort of Excrement, there would little Hair grow; in Bodies full of peccant Hu∣mors, a great deal of Hair. Whereas Experience teaches us, that the Hair grows best in soundest Bodies, and sullest of good Juice; but that in Bodies full of peccant Humors, it grows very thinly, and falls off; which causes that Disease call'd Alopecia, or Falling of the Hair; which is cur'd by Med'cines that evacu∣ate peccant Humors; and by good Diet, that creates good Blood, and consumes fuliginous Excrements. 2. That the Hair is not nourish'd by any such Excrement, or increas'd by its Apposition, appears from hence; for that the Hair being cut, and conse∣quently made obtuse at the end, would remain obtuse; whereas the contrary is apparent; in regard the hair grows first at the Ends, and becomes sharp. 3. The same thing is also manifest from hence; That if you pluck up the hair by the Roots, you shall find many times something of Blood sticking to them, out of which, being concocted in the Skin it self, and prepar'd after a Specific manner in the hairy Parts, is made that same Juice which nourishes the Hair, and by degrees passes through the Cavities and Porosities of the Hair it self, to its extream Parts, for the Sup∣ply of Nourishment: Which is much more manifest in the Plia Polonica, a Disease so call'd; wherein, upon the cutting away the Hair, the Blood is said to flow out; questionless much more crude, as not being chang'd as yet into any such Juice in the Skin. Now con∣cerning the foresaid Cavities of the Hair, there is no question to be made of 'em; for that they are extended in∣wardly to the full length of the Hair, is
manifestly seen, if being cut into small pieces, they be well view'd with a Mi∣croscope; which may be easily dis∣cern'd in the Hair of a live Elk, as Ges∣ner observes. Moreover, the Hair is nourish'd after the same manner as the Feathers of Birds; for it is almost of the same Nature. Now the Quills con∣tain in themselves, and make an Ali∣mentary Juice, in a certain Cavity which extends to their Ends, and what if the Hair have such a Cavity? For this Juice seems to be made in the Quills out of the Blood, in regard that every Quill has a little Artery extended into the Cavity. And thus the Hair may have a peculiar Juice and Cavity, through which that Nourishment is carried to the Ends of it, whether it be generated out of the Blood, or other Humors. 4. If the Hairs growing grey through Sickness, afterwards return to their Na∣tural Colour, certain it is that they are not put forth by Apposition, but are really nourish'd through the whole Sub∣stance: As appears from hence, that when the Hairs begin to grow grey, they grow first white at the end, and so gra∣dually to their furthest extent toward the Head. Whereas otherwise, if they were nourish'd by Apposition, that Whiteness would begin at the Root, and that Blackness which was before in the Hair, would remain, and another white Part were to be appos'd by de∣grees. Nor is it less apparent from hence, that some Men have become grey in one Night, the nourishing Humors be∣ing chang'd of a sudden through the whole length of the Hair. 5. That the Hair is said not to grow forth according to all Dimensions, is not true; for though they chiefly grow in length, yet there is some growth and increase observ'd in breadth; for we find, that some slender and soft hairs be∣come afterwards thicker and harder; especially in the Beard. Thus in young Girls whose Hair is very slender and soft, yet afterwards, though they never cut their hair, it comes to its just Thick∣ness and Length; which Bounds of Thickness they never exceed, no more than the Teeth, Bones, Veins, and o∣ther Parts; which having receiv'd to their full Growth, make a full Stop, and grow no more: There being a certain Bound of Magnitude, and a certain Shape prescrib'd to every Part by the Supream Creator; whence it comes to pass, that the Hair does not grow so much in Breadth as in Length. 6. If the Hairs were nourish'd with a fuliginous Excrement of the Third Con∣coction, they would increase to an im∣mense Length, and would grow continu∣ally as long as a Man liv'd; for there is a continual Flux and Supply of that Excrement; and so being appos'd to the Roots, it would thrust forth the hair still farther and farther. But on the other side, we see that the hair, when it has attain'd to a certain Length, grows no farther, as we find in Women, who never cut their hair; as also by the hairs of the Legs, Breast, Privities, and other Parts. These Arguments have fix'd an O∣pinion in the Minds of many, That the Hair is really a Part of the Body, and enjoy the same Life and Nourish∣ment with the rest of the Parts. XX. But if the Reasons on both sides be well weigh'd and consider'd,The ∣lution. we shall find that the former Opinion is for the most part to be rejected; and yet there are some things desi∣cient in the latter, which is the truest. For, in the First Place, it is well al∣ledg'd, That the Hair is not thrust forth by the only Apposition of any Matter, but that they receive Nourishment through their whole Substance. But here they do not explain, how the Hair should turn grey of a sudden by such a Nourishment. Secondly, They do not shew, whether the Hair be to be call'd a Part of the Body or no. Neither do they unty this Knot, How any Part of the Body can live and grow after a Man is dead? And therefore these two Doubts are to be more clearly unfolded. XXI. As to the First, SometimesTurning Grey of a sudden. that Men, out of extream Terror or Fear of Death, in the space of a Night or a Day, have turn'd grey; is most certain: Which I was an Eye∣witness of, in a certain Captain taken by the Enemy, and fearing to be hang'd the next day. And Story is full of Ac∣cidents of the same Nature; as we may read in Suetonius, Nicolaus Florentinus, Crantzius, Scaliger, Adrianus Funius, and others; Collected by Marcellus Do∣natus. XXII. The Cause of this sudden Al∣teration,The Rea∣son. some have ascrib'd to a sud∣den Dryness; others, to a sudden Putrefaction of the Humor nourish∣ing
the Hair; but neither of these Causes can be the true one, since nei∣ther can happen so suddenly. There∣fore I judge this to be the Reason: Upon a great Fear and Terror con∣ceiv'd in the Mind, the Heart by ac∣cident is extreamly troubled and per∣plex'd; and hence there is a weak, or no Pulse at all; so that some Peo∣ple fall into a Swoon; now by reason of this weak Pulse, little or no Blood is carry'd to the extream parts, so that they grow cold, and shiver; then the Blood failing in the Heart, the Colour may be soon changed in the Iuice that nourishes the Hair, which was conveigh'd into it before by the hu∣mors mixed with the Blood. So that if by chance the Flegmatic Whitish hu∣mors were setled in the Skin before, they by the predominancy of their Tincture, give a Dye to the Juice that nourishes the Hair; which continually passing through, and nourishing the Hair to its utmost extremity, the Co∣lour of the Hair may be changed in a short space, and become gre or white, because the substance of the Hair is dia∣phanous, easily admitting all sorts of Colours, which are carried into it with the Nourishment. But if no Flegm stick at that time in the skin of the Head, but that some other fuliginous blackish Humor, or of any other Co∣lour be there more firmly setled, then no sudden greyness can be the conse∣quence of the greatest Terror imagina∣ble: And therefore because more fre∣quently fuliginous and choleric Vapors or other Humors are setled in the Skin, hence it comes to pass, that so few grow grey upon any sudden fright. But per∣haps it may be objected, That if this be the cause of suddenly growing grey, then when the Fear and Terror is over, and that other Humors have their free course to the Skin of the Head, that Greyness should suddenly vanish again, and the Hair would resume again its pristine colour. 'Tis granted, that if they could flow back in so great a quan∣tity, that they could with their own co∣lour out-tincture the white colour of the Flegm: But for the most part by reason of the extream scarcity of the Blood flowing in time of dismal Af∣fright, the pores of the Skin are so closed and contracted by the Flegm, that the more copious quantity of Blood afterwards flowing thither, or whether it be any other fuliginous, blackish or choleric Hmor cannot en∣ter to discolour the Flegmatic Humor; which is the reason that grey colou cannot afterwards be altered. Though if it should happen that there should be any persons in whom those forementi∣oned Humors should get the upper hand of the Flegmatic colour, which rarely falls out, the Hair, 'tis very pro∣bable might then regain its former Tincture. This I saw in the Captain before mentioned, whose Hair in one Nights imprisonment, from very black, became as white as Snow; but after∣wards that Whiteness in some measure, and by degrees lost its colour, so that in two years time, almost all his Hair was turn'd black again: I say almost, for that he could never recover all his former colour, but that still a fourth part of his Hair continu'd still grey. The same thing also happened to that person already cited, of whom Mar∣cellus Donatus reports, that he was all over grey; but that afterwards being overflown with Choler, his Hair be∣came of a colour between green and yel∣low. The same Accident has been observ∣ed up and down in others; in whom, by reason of the redundancy of Hu∣mors, that Greyness which before had whitened all their Locks, was changed into another colour. XXIII. As to the latter, Whe∣therWhether Hairs be Parts of the Body▪ the Hair be to be numbred among the Parts of the Body, there needs no great Dispute. For in several respects they may be called Parts of the Body, and sometimes not, according to the various Definitions of a Part. For if we put the Definition thus; A Part of the Body is any Corporeal Substance, ma∣king it compleat and entire with others, then Hair may be said to be a Part of the Body; for that really and indeed together with other Parts, compleats and perfets the Body of Man; as Leaves make a Tree, and Feathers a Bird. For as a Tree without Leaves, and a Bird without Feathers, can neither be said to be perfect, so a man without Hair, can∣not be said to have all his Accomplish∣ments, though he may live without it. But if we otherwise define a Part, A Part is a Body cohering with the whole, and conjoyned by common participation of Life, appropriated and ordained to its Function and Use, then Hair can hardly be said to be a Part of the Body; for though they live, yet they do not live
the common Life of the rest of the Parts, but a peculiar vegetable Life; as Moss or Polipody growing upon a Tree, lives a separate Life from the Tree, though it receive it's nourishment from the living Tree. Now the difference of its living appears from hence, because that though the Tree be dead, yet the Moss still lives, so long as it can re∣ceive any convenient Nourishment from the Tree, or elsewhere. In like manner, the Hair, so long as it receives convenient Nourishment from the Bo∣dy, either alive or dead, lives its own peculiar Life; which Life, that it is not common with the rest of the Parts, is prov'd from hence; for that Death is not common to the Hair with the rest of the Parts: For the Soul departing, all the Parts die that were enlivened with the same Soul; but not the Hair, as growing after the Death of Men, by virtue of that peculiar Soul wherewith they are endowed. Now because the Hair is nourished with the Blood in living men, this does not prove that they are Parts conjoyn'd by common Life; for they are not nourish'd immediately by the same Blood, but by a peculiar Juice, which in living Men is made out of the Blood; yet may be also prepar'd out of other Humors, as appears by the Woman before mention'd; out of whose Ulcer, filthy and stinking, there grew a great quantity of Hair: And as is also manifest in dead Bodies, in which a long time after they have been laid in their Graves, when there could be no Blood remaining, the Hair has been observ'd to grow. Which is a certain sign that that same Nourishing Juice was not generated out of the Blood, but out of some other Humor remain∣ing in the Body, which not being over∣much in dead Bodies, therefore the Hair does not grow so fast in them as in living Bodies. Moreover, as the Birth which is nourish'd by the Umbilical Blood through the Navel, by means of the Cheese-cake, adheres to the Mothers Womb, is nevertheless no part of the Mother, but rather a living Body by it self, begot in the Mother, which in the Womb enjoys the Maternal Blood as Nourishment, as also the Milky Juice; but afterwards being expell'd, the Womb shall be no less sufficiently nourish'd, and live without that Blood and Milky Juice, and all this while the Mother re∣mains entire, and undeprived of any Part that contributes to her Perfection, the same is to be thought of the Hair. So that the Question, Whether the Hair be a Part of the Body, is only a Question and Controversie about the Definition of the Part. XXIV. But because mention has been made concerning Hair growing in dead Bodies, we shall speak some∣thing to this Particular. Aristotle says, that the old Hair grows in dead Bodies, but that no new Hair comes again; so Plotin writes, that the Hair and Nails of dead Bodies, grows. We shall not trouble our selves to recite the several Disputes of several Physici∣ans and Philosophers upon this Subject; but only produce our own Judgment, confirm'd by the Testimonies and Ob∣servations of several Physicians. Among the rest, I must not omit Ambrose Pa∣raeus; who writes, that he kept the dead Body of a Thief that was hang'd, in his House, by him, embalm'd, and dry'd it, to preserve it from putrefacti∣on; whose Hair and Nails, being by him several times cut and par'd, he ob∣serv'd to grow again to their usual Length. But I need not the Testimony of Paraeus, tho a Person of great Cre∣dit, as having been a Witness of the same much nearer home. XXV. In the Year 1636▪ the PlagueAn Obser∣vation. raging at Nimeguen, where I then pa∣ctic'd, one of the chief Magistrates Children dying of the Distemper; which the Father, after all his other Vaults were fill'd with his Relations, was resolv'd to bury in a Third of his own, that had not been open'd in 78 years, for the Burial, as I think, of his Great Grandfather; at the opening of which Vault, he desir'd me to be pre∣sent, and to see whether the Body were dried up, as other Bodies bury'd in the same Church, were observ'd to be. Thereupon, opening the Coffin, we found the Body whole and entire, only the Cheeks were a little fallen; the rest of the Members lay in their natu∣ral position; and long hairs grew out of the Shoulders, of a pale yellowish Colour. A broad long Beard also reach'd down to his Navel, of the same colour with the hair; though by the Picture which was shew'd me, he wore the hair of his Head and Beard very short when he was alive. I also observ'd, that when I went to turn the Carkass with my hand, the whole Body, except the Bones, fell in∣to a thin dust, which after we had ta∣ken out the Bones, and caus'd 'em to be bury'd again, we likewise found to be
so small in quantity, that you might have grasp'd it all easily in one hand; though it were the whole Complement of the Carkass. XXVI. Lastly, By way of Corol∣lary,Whether store of Hair con∣tribute strength to the Body. I shall only add one thing more; Whether great store of Hair conduce to the Strength of the Body? Levinus Lemnius maintains the Affirmative; and therefore advises sound People never to shave their Hair to the Skin. For, says he, the Use of it, destroys the Strength, and renders Men soft and effeminate; be∣sides, it dissolves and extenuates the Spi∣rits and Natural Heat, and deprives the Heart of a great part of its Courage and daring Boldness to look danger in the face. And the Story of Sampson in Sacred Scripture, seems to favour Lemnius his Party; who lost his extraordinary Strength upon the shaving of his Hair, and recover'd it, upon the growing a∣gain of his Hair. On the other side, we find the Romans shav'd their Wrest∣lers to the very Skin, to render them more strong and lively. However, for my part, I am of opinion, that great store of Hair conduces little to the strength of the Body, but much to the health of the Body, while the Head is thereby cover'd and defended from many exter∣nal Injuries. But the Head, together with the Brain, being sound, great store of Animal Spirits are generated, which gives strength to the whole Body of the Nerves and Muscles, and so great store of Hair may seem to add to the strength of the Body. But this can be no universal and perpetual Rule; because there are many, in whom great store of Hair prevents the Transpiration of the Vapors, and consequently weakens the Brain. For this same Tower of Pallas, being darken'd by Clouds of Vapors, the generation of Animal Spirits is thereby obstructed, and thereby the Nerves and Sinews are weaken'd; be∣sides that it is many times the occasion of Catarrhs and other Diseases. For this reason, to quicken the Sight, Rua∣tes and Avicen commend Shaving of the Head; and Celsus, in great Defluxi∣ons of Rheum, orders the Head to be shav'd. For which Reason, Aristotle also was wont to shave the top of his Crown. And Galen reports, That the Physicians of his time were wont to shave to the Skin, for the Preservation of their Health. And besides, Wo∣men, by reason of their great store of Hair, are never accounted strong. To conclude therefore, we may say, that plenty of Hair is sometimes a sign of Strength, and sometimes the occasion of Weakness and Distempers, accord∣ing to the Constitution of the Body. Though they that have hairy Breasts, and Skins, are generally reputed strong; not that the Hair confers any Strength upon the Body; but 'tis a sign the Heart and other Bowels are sound and strong, and then the rest of the Body must be strong of course. CHAP. III. Of the External Coverings of the Head. AFter the Hair, follow the rest of the External Coverings of the Head: I. Of which, the first that offersThe Skin. it self, is the Cuticle, then the Skin, which in the Hairy part is of an ex∣traordinary thickness, to defend the Head from external Injuries, and that the Hair may have the deeper and firmer Rooting. II. Under the Skin lies a smallFat. quantity of Fat; but not too much, lest it should prevent the Transpiration of the Vapors. Riolanus will not allow of any Fat. III. Under the Fat, lies the fleshyFleshy Pannicle. Pannicle; and under that, several Muscles, to be treated of in another Place. IV. Next to these, lies the Peri∣cranium,The Peri∣cranium▪ which is a thin, soft, close, compacted and sensible Membrane, by reason of the Nerves dispersed through it and the Temples, to the hinder part of the Head. This en∣compasses the whole Skull, and is close∣ly joyned with Sutures and nervous Fibers▪ running down through the joyn∣ings of the Bones to the hard Meninx, and united with it, whence there is a great agreement of the Membrane with both; Insomuch that the Pericranium is vulgarly said to derive its original from the Meninx: from which Opinion Spigelius & Highmore, not without reason differ; who deny this original, and only acknowledg a connexion of both by
nervous Fibers. Lindan seems to de∣duce the original of the Pericranium from the Tendons of the Muscles of the Forehead, Temples, and hinder part of the Head, expanded about the Cranium; which seems less probable, seeing that the Pericranium is extended above the Muscles of the Temples, and their Tendons, and cannot be drawn off without their prejudice. Fallopius says, the Pericranium is twosold; and in some parts of the Head may be di∣vided into two parts; of which, the one sticks to the Skin, the other grows to the Bone. But Veslingius will not allow of this Duplicity, nor could we ever as yet observe any such thing. Above, before and behind, it encom∣passes the Cranium, only the Periostium between. Only descending to the sides, it parts a little from it, and passes over the Temporal Muscles, and comprehends 'em within it self, for their greater secu∣rity; not so far as their insertion, but as far as the Jugal Bones; and in those places it is thicker and harder. V. Under the Pericranium liesThe Peri∣ostium. the Periostium, which is a very thin nervous Membrane; by the benefit of which, the Skull becomes sensible, as all other Bones, except the Teeth, which have their sense of feeling partly from the Periostium, investing the Roots, and partly from an inner little Nerve. This as it is firmly fasten'd to the Cranium, so also it is so exactly joyn'd to the Pericranium, that it seems to make but one Membrane; which de∣ceiv'd Fallopius, who thought it to be but one; which made him write, that the Pericranium was the same in the Head as the Periostium in other Parts; forgetting that the Periostium never passes over the Muscles, as the Peri∣cranium mounts over the Temporal Muscles. But Anatomical Separation shews them to be two distinct Mem∣branes. To these exterior Membranes, the Vital Blood is carry'd through the ex∣ternal Branch of the Carotid Arteries, and that which remains after Nourish∣ment, through very small Veins is re∣mitted to the external Jugular. Some there are who believe these Arteries, passing through the little holes of the Cranium, penetrate and open into the large Cavity of the hard Meninx. Which however does not seem very likely, when they only tend to the Di∣plois, and there end, conveying the Blood thither, for the generation of the Spinal Marrow; but never return from the Bones again. VI. The Periostium adheres im∣mediatelyBones. to the Bones of the Head, which are either of the Skull, or of the Iaws, The Bones of the Cranium, are the Bones of the Forehead, forepart and hinder part of the Head, the Sphoenoides, and the Bones of the Temples. The Bones of the Iaws are many, and have most of them peculiar Names. Of which see l. 9. c. 3. &c. CHAP. IV. Of the Internal Coverings of the Brain: of the Scythe, and the Cavities. THE Cranium being taken off, the inner Parts are to be seen; among which are first to be met with two Membranes, most acute in feeling; by the Greeks call'd Meninges; by the Arabians, Mo∣thers, which careful Nature wrapt a∣bout next to the Brain, for the pre∣servation of that most Noble Bowel. I. The outermost, which does notDura Me∣ninx. enfold the Brain immediately, is from the Thickness and Hardness of the Substance, by Galen call'd , or ; the thick or hard Meninx, by Hippocrates, , by others, Dura Mater, or the Hard Mother, endu'd with a most exqui∣site sense of Feeling. This several Anatomists, together with Fallopius and Paulinus think to be twofold; but because the Duplicature is not easily discern'd, therefore Riola∣nus rejects it. It was fram'd by Nature, not only for the preservation of the Brain, Mar∣row, and Nerves, but also to distinguish the Brain into two parts, as also from the Cerebellum. It loosly wraps about the Brain, as far distant from it as the conveniency
of Motion will fuffer. It also surrounds the whole inner part of the Cranium with a looser Folding, so that in some places it may be remov'd from it, as is usual upon trepanning the Skull by a soft depression; but at the bottom it is most closely knit, that it cannot ea∣sily be separated from it, and is firmly fasten'd to the Sutures by Fibers, and a∣bout a Fingers breadth at the sides of the Sagiral Suture, and many times near its meeting with the Coronal, by the means of small Vessels, which it sends forth toward the , it sticks in two, three, or four places; in which places, when the Cranium is pull'd off, certain little drops of Blood start out of the broken Vessels. Once Varolius saw one growing to the whole Skull, which is very rare; though twice ob∣serv'd by Hildan also. II It is pervious with many Holes,Its Holes. for the passage of the Vessels, and one large one, for the descent of the Mar∣row; and one more as large toward the Spittle-Kernel. But where it sticks to the Sieve-like Bone, it is perfo∣rated like a Sieve, or rather sends lit∣tle Pipes to the Nostrils through the small Holes of the Bone, manifestly conspicuous in the Head of a Calf. On the out-side it is rougher and harder, encompassing the Cranium and its Cavities, and with several Fibers transmitted through the Saw-like Su∣tures, sticks to it; of which Fibers ex∣panded on the out side, about the Cra∣nium, some believe the Pericranium to be made. On the in-side, it is smooth and slippery, bedew'd with a watery Humor; and by means of the Vessels, it sticks in many places to the thin Me∣ninx. III. It receives Arteries from theIts Vessels. larger Branch of the Carotid Artery, passing through the holes of the Wedg∣like Bone, and the Bone of the Fore∣head, which, in some places, especi∣ally in the Region of the Crown, start∣ing out of this Membrane, supply the thin Meninx with Branches; by means of which, these Membranes stick one to another. It also sends store of Veins to the Cavities, and the Branch of the Iugular Vein. IV. It is doubled at the Crown ofIts Dupli∣cature. the Head; where descending toward the inward Parts, it divides the Brain into the right and left Part. This uppermost doubl'd part, because it is broader toward the hinder parts, and contracted toward the fore-parts, and so seems to represent the shape of a Mower's Scy the, is call'd Fal, or the Scy the. V. The Falx, or Scy the, with theThe  or Scy the. fore-part of it runs to the top of the Nostrils, and grows to the Cocks∣comb, or the Bony Enclosure, distin∣guishing the Papillary Processes. But the hinder and broad part of it, be∣ing parted in the hinder part of the Head, descencis toward the right and left side, and distinguishes the Cere∣bel from the Brain. In which place, there is a Bone sticks out in Dogs, that supports the Brain, left the Cerebel should be comprest by it. Riolanus will allow no Duplicature of the Meninx in the Falx, nor in the Enclosure between the strain and the Cerebel, which nevertheless the Cavities form'd in the said Duplicature, suffci∣ently prove. VI. In the said Duplicature, areThe Cavi∣ties. four Cavities, three larger, and one small one; the inward Hollownesses of which larger Cavities are not large alike; but by reason of the many Ves∣sels that open into them, are some∣what unequal; as being broader in some places, in some places somewhat narrower. The first of these Hollownesses, be∣ing the uppermost and longest, runs a∣long the upper part of the Falx, from the top of the Nostrils, the whole length of the Head toward the hinder parts, where it is divided into two lateral hollownesses at the bottom of the hin∣der part of the Head descending near the sides of the Lambdoides, and conti∣nu'd with the inner Branch of the Jugu∣lar Vein. VII. Where these Hollownesses meet,Torcular Hierophili: there is that which is vulgarly call'd Herophilus's Wine-Press, or the Torcular Herophili. But although these Hollownesses meet equally, yet sometimes their meeting is found to be unequal; so that one of the inferior lateral ones enters the streight one a little higher, and the other a little lower.
Besides the foresaid Hollownesses, Sylvius, and some other Anatomists have observ'd three other Hollownesses, though not in all Bodies: One of which is carry'd along the lower part of the Scythe, and is very narrow, & ends and opens into the fourth before-mention'd. The other two Lateral, lesser and short∣er, on each side one, in the hard Mem∣brane distinguishing the Brain from the Cerebel, lie distant from the larger about a Thumbs breadth, into which some∣times they empty themselves, and sometimes run out as far as Hierophi∣lus's Wine-press. Riolanus laughs at these lesser Hol∣lownesses; perhaps, because he never saw them, or else, because, according to his usual Custom, he takes it ill, that he was not the first Discoverer; and therefore would deprive the first Inventers of the Honour. VIII. Into these Hollownesses, be∣sidesThe Use of the Cavi∣ties. the Branch of the hindermost Carotis, several little Arteries run∣ning through the Meninx, make their Terminations; the innumerable small Orifices of which are manifestly con∣spicuous in the uppermost larger Hol∣lowness. Which abundantly refutes Fallopius, who asserts, That there is no Artery which reaches these Hollow∣nesses. Moreover, many Veins of the Meninxes open into the same, pouring forth Blood into them; which Willis and Wepfer have taught us by certain Experience: For when they spurted in any black Liquor with a Syringe into the Root of the Carotid Artery, they observ'd that black Liquor to pass through innumerable Arterious & Vei∣ny Branches, till it flow'd at length in∣to those Hollownesses, and out of them into the Jugular Veins. Bauhinus and Veslingius also write,Whether a∣ny small Pipes in the Hol∣lownesses. That certain little Pipes belonging to the Hollownesses, run out between the Veins and Arteries, into the Sub∣stance of the Meninxes and the Brain. Walaeus also observing the wider Ori∣fices of certain small Vessels open into the Hollownesses, and that the ends of the small Arteries could not possibly be so wide, believes that these small Pipes meet by Anastomosis with the Extremi∣ties of the Arteries dispersed through the Meninxes and the Brain, and so re∣ceive from them the Blood remaining after nourishment of the Parts, and empty it into the Hollownesses. Which Anastomosis Highmore figures out with egregious big Lines in his 18th. Table of his 3d. Book. But Walaeus does not consider, that the Orifices of the little Arteries gaping into the Hollownesses, are not wide, but very small; and that the Vessels which open into them with wider Orifices, are Veins; which run∣ning large and numerous through the Meninx, empty themselves into the Hol∣lownesses. So that there is no necessity to feign any small Pipes produc'd from the Hollownesses; when our Eye-sight plain∣ly tells us, that those Arteries and Veins reach with their Extremities, and open into the Hollownesses without the help of any small Pipes. Into these Hollownesses therefore, the Blood which remains after nou∣rishment of the Meninxes and Brain, empties it self through the Vein; and that which seeks to flow in greater quantity into those parts, through the Arteries; and thither also flows the Blood redundant in the Choroides Fold, through the Vein, which sometimes streight, sometimes forked, runs between the middle Fold, in the third Ventri∣cle, above the Pine-Apple-Kernel, (which Vein Galen calls the Vein that rises from no other Vein) and ascends through the fourth Hollowness into the upper large Hollowness, and thence by and by into the two lateral Hollow∣nesses, toward the Mastoides Excrescen∣cies, or the Basis of the hinder part of the Head, to return from thence into the innermost Branches of the Jugular Vein, immediately united and conti∣nuous to them, and so to the Heart: Now by means of that Blood being forc'd through the Orifices of the small Arteries, into the Hollownesses, it comes to pass that in the Cranium of a living Animal, there is observ'd to be a ma∣nifest Pulsation in the uppermost large Hollowness; which may be easily try'd in the Head of a Calf or Pig newly calv'd or farrow'd. But because those Hollownesses are very wide, hence the Blood which is pour'd into them, and forc'd forward by the pulsations of the small Arteries, by and by flows to the lower parts; which is the reason that the uppermost larger Hollowness, toge∣ther with the two lateral Hollownesses, are found for the most part empty, without any Blood, or containing very little, and very seldom full of Blood; which nevertheless we have frequently observ'd in People that were hang'd. Hence it appears how grosly Lautenber∣gius is mistaken, who believes the Ani∣mal
Spirits to be generated in those Hollownesses; as also Kypr, who writes, That the Blood is ventilated and refri∣gerated in them, for the more commo∣dious Uses of the Brain, and more com∣modious Generation of Animal Spi∣rits. X. The other Membrane endu'dTenuis Meninx. with an exquisite Sense of Feeling, and furnish'd with several small Ar∣teries and Veins, is . Te∣nuis Meninx and Pia Mater, or the Thin Meninx and Holy Mother; so call'd, because it is extream thin and slender, and like a tender and pious Mother, immediately and softly en∣folds the Brain and its Parts, and prevents them from spreading abroad, and also more profoundly involves and mantles its Cells and Turnings, and so renders the exterior Superficies of the Brain as it were plain and smooth. Which upper Connexion being loos∣ned, the Windings and Meanders, as being cloath'd with this Meninx, might be easily unfolded and separa∣ted. From this thin Meninx proceeds also an extraordinary thin Membrane, investing the innermost Ventricles of the Brain. IX. This Membrane is interwovenThe Fells of the . wih wonderful and numerous Folds of small Vessels or little Nets, pene∣trating to the innermost of the Ker∣nels of the Rind of the Brain, and rising from the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, joyn'd together to and a∣gain with mutual Closures, to the end that for the better nourishment of the great Bowel the Brain, and the Con∣fection of Animal Spirits, plenty of Blood might flow from all parts through these innumerable Conduits. Willis writes, that he has observ'd several little Kernels interspac'd between these Folds of the Vessels, which, he says, may be easily perceiv'd in a moi∣ster or Hydropic Brain, though hardly visible in others. But without doubt, those Glandules here observ'd by Wil∣lis, were some Kernels of the Rind it self of the Brain, which swelling with serous Liquor, and rising outward, seem'd to him to be peculiar Kernels interspac'd between the Folds. The Marrow or Pith of the Brain extended to the end of the Back-bone, and all the Nerves proceeding from it, receive a double Tunicle from these Meinxes, which being defended and preserv'd, they run forward to the se∣veral Parts for which they are ap∣pointed CHAP. V. Of the Brain. I. THE Coverings being takenThe Brain. off, we come to the Brain, in Latin, CEREBRUM; by the Greeks call'd , which is the general Organ of Sence; by means whereof the Soul, which is the Prin∣cess and Governess of the Body, per∣forms all the Functions of the inward and outward Senses, and voluntary Motion. For here she sits and judges of the Sensations of the sensitive Parts; and from hence, as from a Fountain, she communicates to all the sensitive Parts of the Body, the Rays of all her Benignity, the Animal Spirits begot in the Brai, through the Channels or Ri∣vulets of the Nerves, and by them sup∣plies to every one a Faculty to perform the Animal Actions. II. Here in the first place, someWhether the Brain be a Bow∣el or a re∣al Kernel? there are who raise a Question, Whether the Brain be a Bowel or a Real Kernel? And whether to be reckon'd among the number of the Bowels? Hippocrates seems to have reckon'd it among the Kernels: For, says he, the Brain is bigger than the rest of the Kernels; as if he meant, that the Brain were the biggest Kernel. Whar∣ton says, it is a difficult thing to allow it any proportion common to the rest of the Bowels, and therefore excludes it out of the number. With Wharton also Malpigius seems to agree. Others, with Plato, have plac'd it among the Marrows, by reason of its Friability, its Softness, and its being surrounded with Bones; though it differ from the Marrow of the Bones; neither does it take fire as that does. But they are all under Mistake, who number it among the Kernels or the Marrow; seeing that both the diversity of the Substance and Structure plainly shew that it has no resemblance either with the one or the other. But some will say that the whole
Cortex or Rind is nothing but a heap of Kernels: But because any part con∣tains several Kernels, although they make toward the necessary comple∣ment of the Part, it cannot be thence concluded that the Part is a Kernel, for then the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys, because they contain many Kernels in∣terspac'd within their Substance, were to be call'd Kernels, and excluded out of the Society of Bowels. The Nose also, the Tongue, the Eye-lids, by reason of the Kernels allow'd 'em, and the Roof of the Mouth were to be call'd Kernels. Besides the Dignity of the Brain it self, and the Nobleness of the principal Operations which it performs, clearly demonstrate, that it is really a Bowel, no less than the Heart, Liver, &c. and performs its own and those the principal Actions, and generates the most noble Spirits of the whole Body, that is to say, the Animal; and therefore most deservedly call'd a Bow∣el by Galen, and also by Aristotle. III. The Brain is form'd out ofThe for∣mation of it. the Blossom of the Seed, at the same time with the rest of the Parts. And therefore those Fictions are to be reject∣ed, which Ludovicus de la Forge, fol∣lowing Carnesius, has feign'd, That the Brain is form'd out of the thicker Parti∣cles passing through the Pores of the Ar∣teries, & thence by reason of the narrow∣ness of the Pores extending themselves into long Threds, and so making the sub∣stance of the Brain, as it were compos'd of Strings; and through the force of the Spirits bursting forth out of the Pineal Artery and the Arteries adjoyning, hol∣lowing the inside of it by accident with various Cavities or Ventricles: A Ficti∣on easily refuted; for the Brain is not form'd out of the thicker or harder Particles of the Seed passing through the Pores of the Arteries; for besides that the Seed does not flow through the Arteries, there are no Arteries that ap∣pear before the Brain in the first forma∣tion; but all the parts are delineated and form'd together out of the Blos∣som of the Seed, and not one after ano∣ther, or by another. Nor could the Ventricles of it be hollow'd by any vio∣lence of the Spirits breaking out of the Pineal Artery or Arteries adjoyning, seeing there could be no such Violence in the first Formation. Nor could that Violence be caus'd by an Instrument (the Brain) not yet perfectly form'd; (for such de la Forge supposes it to be at the beginning) whereas the Pineal Ker∣nel it self shews the contrary, that the Brain was form'd before that or any other Violence could be; for seeing that Kernel could be in no other place, but either in the third or middle Ven∣tricle, of necessity that place could not be made by the Thing plac'd, or after the Thing plac'd, but either together with the Thing plac'd, or before it. IV. Sometimes the Brain in aThe Divi∣sion of the Name. strict signification, is taken for that greater Part which is properly call'd the Brain; and is distinguish'd from the Cerebel and Marrow. V. The Bigness of the Brain ofThe Big∣ness. Man, according to the Proportion of the whole Body, is bigger than the Brain of any other Creature; as be∣ing that which exceeds the Brain of an Elephant in quantity; and the Brain of an Ox double the weight, for it weighs four or five pounds. Tho' Lynden affirms, That according to the Proportion of the Body, a Sparrow's Brain exceeds that of a Man. Ferneli∣us, Veslingius, Riolanus, Bartholine, Highmore and Lindan, following Fallo∣pius, tell us, that according to the Wane or Increase of the Moon, the Brain of man diminishes or increases. But no certain Alteration of the Ani∣mal Actions ever made out any such change in this most Noble Bowel. Nor can this Opinion ground it self upon any Experience; because that the Brain of one and the same Animal can never be inspected and weigh'd at the two diffe∣rent Seasons of the Moon: And from different Inspections at different Seasons of the Moon, nothing of Certainty can be gather'd; for the Quantity of the Brain, though in Animals of the same kind, is not always alike; for that the Brain-pans of some are bigger, in some less; so that the quantity of the Brain, less or more, is not to be attri∣buted to the Moon or her Seasons; but to the form and bigness of the Part con∣taining. In April and May 1661. I attended the Cure of a Sayler dange∣rously wounded with a Stone in the right Bone of the fore-part of the Head, with a Fracture and Depression of the Cranium; we took out the broken Bones about the breadth of a large Doller; Afterwards, the Dura Mater, very much endamag'd by the Contusion, being separated of its own accord, was taken out to the same breadth, the thin Meninx remaining untouch'd. The
Brain in that place remain'd depress'd about the breadth of half a Finger; and for two Months together that the Cure lasted, we could not observe the least decrease or increase of the Brain, notwithstanding all our diligent obser∣vation upon all the Changes of the Moon. At length, the Flesh growing largely out of the thin Meninx (which was never seen, read, or hard of before) and contrary to all expectation, sup∣plying the place of the hard Meninx, and closing with the Flesh rising from the Diplois, the despairing Patient, who had already agreed with Charon for his Passage, recover'd and was cur'd. VI. As equally uncertain it is whatWhether immode∣rate Vene∣ry dimi∣nishes the Brain? Horstius writes, That he saw the Sub∣stance of the Brain diminish'd by im∣moderate Use of Venery. For how could he know whether the Person he spake of, had any more Brain before? Did he see and weigh it? Immoderate Venery weakens the Brain, 'tis true; but whether it diminishes it or no, there's no man can certainly tell. VII. As frivolous also is that whichWhether Men or Women have most Brains? some deliver upon Aristotle's Reputa∣tion, That the Brain of a Man ex∣ceeds a Woman's in quantity. For most certain it is, there can be no re∣markable difference discern'd: For as Men have more or less Brains accord∣ing to the Capaciousness of the Skull, so it is with Women. If a Man com∣pare a Man's greater Head with a Wo∣man's lesser, no wonder if he find more Brains in the Man's than the Woman's Head; but alter the Comparison, and he shall find more in the Woman's Head than in the Man's; but to find two Heads exactly proportionable in both Sexes, and so to judge exactly of the Quantity, is impossible. VIII. The Shape of the Brain isThe Shape. somewhat round, bunching out toward the Forehead; the external Superficies full of Windings and Meanders, and twining like the Guts, which Wind∣ings being cloath'd with a thin Me∣ninx, furnish'd with several little Caps of Arteries and Branches of Veins, descend very deep, and some almost equal the depth of the Brawny Body; but above are all collected and bound together by the same Meninx. In Coneys and other small four-footed Beasts, the Superficies of the Brain is not so full of Windings, but is more smooth; so that the Windings hardly descend at all. But in most Birds, the external Superficies of the Brain ap∣pear almost altogether equal, without any Meander-like Turnings. IX. The Brain consists of a peculiarThe Sub∣stance▪ Substance, white, moist, soft, melt∣ing like Fat, rather than flowing, though it be not Fat. X. The Colour and Softness of theThe Co∣lour and Softness. Substance is not all alike; for in the outward part, so far as the crooked Passages descend among the Windings and Turnings, the Softness is more, and the Colour more resembling Ashes; but in all the rest of the inner part alto∣gether white, and the Substance more solid. XI. Des Cartes by many probableThe Fibers Conjectures maintains, That this Substance must be altogether Fibrous, as being compos'd of Thousands of little Strings; which Strings Willis calls little Channels or Plaights. And what Des Cartes perceiv'd with the Eyes of his Mind, Malpigius demonstrates by Ocular Inspection; for he writes, That by the help of his Microscope, he has often observ'd in the Brain of an Ox and other Cattel as well raw as boild, that all the white Portion of the Brain seem'd to be divided into little Fibers flatly round, which were so ma∣nifestly conspicuous in the Brains of Fish, that if they were held against the Light, they represented an Ivory Comb, or a Church-Organ. The Extremities of these Fibers, he says are thrust into the Cortex, or outward Ash colour'd part of the Brain, as if they were to take their Alimentary Matter from thence; into which Cortex a vast num∣ber of Blood-bearing Vessels branch themselves. Lastly, He adds, That 'tis probable that the Sanguineous Juice, or something like it, being carry'd from the Arteries, is, as it were, filter'd by this Flesh of the Cortex, and grafted in∣to the Fibers, as into Rots. Which he endeavors to prove by this Experi∣ment: For, says he, when the Order of Nature is at any time interrupted by any Sickness or sickly Habit, we may often observe a copious Collection of this Serum, being out of its Road, in the Ventricles, the Substance of the Brain, and under the Meninxes. And to prove this, he brings several Stories of sick People, who have had a great quantity of such Serum gather'd toge∣ther
in the Head. Tracassatus also writes, That he has observ'd the same things in the Head of a Dog, and shews the manner of discovering it. He also af∣firms the Brain and Marrow to be a great Spunge, consisting of Threds twisted every and all manner of ways one within another. Moreover, he is of opinion with Malpigius, that the whitish Marrowy Substance borrows something from the said Cortex, as into which the Marrowy Fibers are inserted, and therefore seem to take something from thence. Very probable it is, that the thinnest salt Particles of the Blood are separated from the rest in that Glandulous Substance, and so pre∣par'd, as to be receiv'd by the small Fi∣bers, as invisible Pipes, to be there con∣verted into Animal Spirits. Tracassatus calls those thin Particles, which I call salt, Concrescibile Serum and Nerveous Iuice; which he says is separated in the Cortex, and so infus'd into the Fi∣bers. XII. Picolhomini calls the out∣wardThe Cor∣tex, and Pith, or Marrow. Ash-colour'd Substance, the Brain, and the inner whitish Sub∣stance, the Marrow; and so distin∣guishes the whole Substance into the Rind and the Marrow; and Bau∣hine and Bartholine seem to do the like. That same Ash-colour'd Substance, Rind or Shell, is not only spred about the outside of the Brain, and descends into its Windings and Meanders, but appears also in some places in the in∣ner whitish Substance, and somewhat encompasses the Spinal Marrow, and by the observation of Malpigius, en∣ters a little way into the inner parts of it. XIII. Now though from what hasHow the Matter of the Ani∣mal Spirit is separa∣ted from the Brain. been said, a great Light is given for the deeper knowledge of the Brain, yet there is one thing yet wanting to be discuss'd, that is to say, how the salt, spirituous Matter is separated from the Blood, to be turn'd into A∣nimal Spirits. We have already said that the Choleric Particles are separated from the Blood in the Liver, by means of the glandulous Berries; so the subacid in the Spleen, and the serous Particles in the Kidneys. Which Office is here al∣so performed by certain small Kernels, hardly visible to the Eyes of Anato∣mists; for the discovery of which Ker∣nels, we are beholding to the quick∣sighted Malpigius, who by his Micro∣scopes discover'd that the whole Ash co∣lour'd Rind was a heap of small Kernels of an oval figure, and form'd out o that heap. Which said Kernels being dispos'd in Wrinkles and Kernels, compos'd the outward Meanders of the Brain, and that into the outward portion of those Kernels the Blood-bearing Vessels en∣ter'd that pass'd through the Meninx; but that from the inner white portion there sprung out a white Fiber, as a pro∣per Vessel, and so to each Fiber there belong'd a little Kernel, that wheresoe∣ver the Meanders were cross'd, a solid and determinate Heap of Kernels might be pour'd upon the Marrow; and so he observ'd, that the Marrowy Substance of the Brain was compos'd of a Con∣texture and Bundle of many small Fi∣bers. He adds the Opinion of Fracas∣satus, That the Glandulous Rind a∣rises from the Concrescible Serum, and the Marrowy Fibrous Substance, from the purer Salts that light in those places. Lastly, He adds the way how to find out those Kernels of the Cortex. He says, they are hardly to be discern'd in the raw Head, though of a large Ani∣mal, because they are torn by rending off the Pia Mater; and the intervening Spaces, by reason of the Softness, are not so easily distinguish'd; but they ap∣pear more conspicuous in a boyl'd Head: For their Substance growing thick in the boyling, renders the spaces between more open; which upon ta∣king off the Pia Mater, become more apparent; especially when the Head is warm, and then being sprinkl'd with Ink, and that suck'd up again with a little Cotton, they become conspicuous; for the Spaces between being blacken'd by the Ink, more easily shew the Ker∣nels that lie round. In the same man∣ner, he says, the said Kernels may be discern'd in the Heads of Fish and Fowl. Certainly we are highly beholding to Malpigius for this Discovery; whereby we may be the more able to judge of the Constitution, Office and Manner of the Brains acting. XIV. From this Observation ofWhether the Shell be separable from the Marrow▪ Malpigius, now manifestly appears the great Mistake of Picolhomini, who alledges, that in a Body newly deceas'd, the Marrow is to be distin∣guish'd from the Cortex or Shell, with certain Lines, and may be exactly se∣parated from it. Which Bauhinus af∣ter him, averr'd; and Bartholine tran∣scrib'd out of him; whereas there is no
Line between the white Marrow of the Brain and the Shell, nor are those parts to be disjoyn'd; but the Medul∣lary Fibers enter the Kernels of the Shell, and are so fasten'd to them, that they can be no way separated one from the other without manifest prejudice. XV. The Substance of the Brain,The Tem∣per of the Brain. because compacted out of several Par∣ticles of melted Salt, and few of Sul∣phur, being compar'd with the rest of the Bowels, is moister and less hot; and therefore its Temperament is con∣cluded to be cold and moist; though it have less Heat, yet such a Heat as is manifest enough; for that being eve∣ry where sprinkl'd with Arterious blood, it cannot but from thence partake of heat. XVI. It receives Blood, for the nourishment and making of the Ani∣malIts Arte∣ries. Spirits, through the Arteries which are drawn from the Carotides and Arteries of the Neck: Of which, the latter being divided into several small Branches, pour store of Blood into the Substance of the Cerebel, the o∣ther into the Substance of the Brain it self both above and below; which passes not only through those invisible Bran∣ches, but also, like Dew, through the Pores of it; of which, innumerable small Drops, upon dissection of the Substance, appear starting out of its small Vessels and Pores. As to these Arteries, Franciscus de le Boe Sylvius observes, that while they penetrate the thick Meninx, they leave the other Tunicle, and are scatter'd together with the thin Meninx, through all the Wind∣ings and Turnings of the Brain, ac∣company'd with very few Veins. Tho∣mas Willis moreover, prosecuting their winding Ingress more diligently, writes, that being to enter on both sides the proper Channel, hollow'd in the Wedg∣like Bone, for their better Defence, they assume an additional Tunicle; which after they have passed the Wedg∣like Bone, and coming to stay within the Cranium, they again leave off, and then near the sides of the Turkish Saddle, with a winding Channel they creep for∣ward till they come to the Head of the Turkish Saddle; where again fetching another winding Compass, they ascend directly, and penetrating the Hard Mo∣ther, they are carry'd toward the Brain, before their entrance, sending forth se∣veral little Branches woven artificially and wonderfully together, forming a kind of Net in most four-footed Beasts, to stop the too impetuous influx of Blood through those innumerable Windings and Turnings, which influx, because in Man that carries his Head upright, it cannot be so impetuous, therefore in Man this wonderful Net is but small, and but little conspicuous. XVII. That the Blood is carry'dWhether the Arte∣ries enter the Sub∣stance of the Brain. to the Brain through these Arteries, is without doubt; but the manner how it is done, is much controverted by Anatomists. For some believe, that the little Arteries do enter the Substance of the Brain: Others, that they do not enter the Substance; but only pour the Blood into its Pores. The first Opinion is maintain'd by Fallopius, Baukinus, Spigelius, Highmore, and several others, and among the rest of late, by Willis and Wepfer; and they endeavour to prove it, partly from the little Drops of Blood which spout out of the dissect∣ed Substance of the Brain; partly from the swelling of the Carotid Artery, up∣on the putting in of a little Pipe, and blowing into it; by which means, the Blood being forc'd inward, dies the dis∣sected Substance with innumerable lit∣tle red Spots; or else by the injection of Ink into the Substance of the Caroti∣des, by which means innumerable black Spots appear in the Substance it self of the Brain. The Patrons of the latter Opinion, prove that the Blood is pou'd into the Pores only of the Sub∣stance of the Brain, and so is distribu∣ted through the whole Substance by the motion of the Brain; because that ne∣ver any Arteries could be seen or dis∣cern'd by the Eye in the Substance of the Brain; besides, that by reason of the softness of the Part, the Arteries would be compress'd and clos'd up for the most part. Which Aristotle also asserts, when he writes, That the Sub∣stance of the Brain contains neither Vein nor any Blood-bearing Vessel within it self; and besides, that it is not so firm, that Arteries and Veins should be dis∣pers'd through it, as in other Parts of the Body. But this difference may be easily reconcil'd upon the joyning of these two Opinions together, and assert∣ing, that the Blood partly enters the brain together with the little Arteries, and that partly being pour'd into the Pores, it moves forward through the Substance of the Brain, in the same manner as the blood in the Li∣ver is thrust forward through the
Veins, and in the circulation of the blood, passes through the Substance of the Parts. For if the subtle Arteries should not penetrate the Substance of the brain, a sufficient supply of blood could not be pour'd into it; and again, if the blood should not pass through the Pores of the Substance, but that the innumerable little Spots of blood, which are to be seen in the Dissection of the Substance, should flow out of the small Vessel being wounded, cer∣tainly Myriads of small Vessels must be contain'd in the Substance; nay, the whole Substance would seem to be wo∣ven and compacted together out of that sort of small Vessels, which however seems less probable. XVIII. The remainder of the BloodThe Veins. which is infus'd through the said Ar∣teries into the Brain, and there con∣cocted, is empty'd into the Veins and Hollownesses of the Meninxes, to be carry'd to the Branches of the Iugu∣lar Veins, and thence to the Heart. XIX. As to these Blood bearingThe Ana∣stomoses of the Ves∣sels. Vessels, together with the Arterious and Veiny Vessels, Willis has observ'd, that while they ascend upwards to the Brain, they are various, and in seve∣ral places close & meet together about the thick and thin Meninx; not on∣ly Arteries with Veins, but Arteries with Arteries; that is to say, the Ca∣rotides of the one side, with the Ca∣rotides of the other: moreover the Vertebrals of both sides one with ano∣ther; as also with the hinder Bran∣ches of the Carotides, and that the mutual Closures of the Carotides are about the Basis of the Skull under the hard Meninx and between it. To the knowledge of which Closures, and as it were mutual Kissings of each other, he attain'd by this Experiment. As of∣ten, says he, as I injected any Liquor dy'd with Ink into either of the Caroti∣des, presently the Branches of each side, and the chief Disseminations of the Verte∣bral Arteries, were colour'd with the same Tincture: Moreover, if the same injecti∣on were repeated several times through the same Passage, the Vessels creeping through every Angle and Corner of the Brain and Cerebel, will be dy'd with the same Colour. And in those Parts which are overspread with that miraculous Net, the Tincture injected of one side, will pe∣netrate the Net-resembling Folds in both sides: Whence it is apparent that there is a Communication between all the Vessels that water the whole Brain. At length he adds, That several small Kernels are interspac'd between the diminutive Nets of the Vessels kis∣sing each other, easily discern'd in a moist and hydropic brain, though in o∣thers hardly to be discern'd. XX. The Brain has no Nerves inIts Nerves its own Substance; for in regard the Organ of Feeling is general, and judges of all the Senses and Animal Motions, it ought to be void of Sence and Animal Motion; for being endu'd with one Sence or Motion, it could not have rightly judg'd of others, because the several Sences are mov'd but by one object only; as the Sight by the visible object; and Feeling by the object of Feeling, &c. If therefore the brain were endu'd with any one Sence or Motion, the Soul could not by means of that organ make a true Judgment of any Sence or Motion; and therefore being fram'd void of Sence and Animal Mo∣tion, it is neither in its own Substance endu'd with any Nerves, though it contain some certain Fibers, but so small, as hardly to be discern'd without the help of a Microscope, and which are the originals of the Nerves, and be form'd and compos'd of them, being woven together, and from their oblong Marrow give birth to all the Nerves. Hence also Galen says, That the Brain was made not to feel; but to confer the Faculty of Feeling: For which Reason he calls it the Organ that has no Feel∣ing. XXI. The Brain properly taken,Its Divisi∣on. is divided into the Right and Left Region; the Scythe-like Duplicature of the hard Meninx going between: which Division extends it self howe∣ver no farther than the Brawny Bo∣dy. But being taken for the whole Bowel which is included in the Cra∣nium, it is divided into the Brain and little Brain, as being separated for the greater part, by the intercession of the hard Meninx. XXII. That the Brain is mov'd,Its Motion. is a thing not to be question'd, as be∣ing obvious to Inspection. But con∣cerning this Motion, there are great Disputes among Anatomists, Whether it be mov'd by its own proper Motion, not Animal, but Natural; or else, whe∣ther
by another Mover? Laurentius, Picolhomini and Bauhinus maintain the first, and endeavour to confirm it by several specious Reasons. Of the latter Opinion, are Fallopius, Vesalius and o∣thers; with whom we likewise concur: For the Brain is immoveable of it self; but is continually mov'd by another by Accident, that is to say, the Heart, and that not by any Animal Motion, but by the Natural Motion of Systole and Diastole; and follows exactly the Mo∣tion of the Arteries. For the boyling Arterious Blood being forc'd out of the Heart through the Arteries into its Sub∣stance, it is presently dilated; and when the same Blood is once cool'd in its Sub∣stance, it falls again▪ This Motion is apparent in Wounds of the Head; where I have observ'd it several times, at what time the Substance of the Brain after taking away the Bones and Me∣ninxes, is easily conspicuous. For then, as the Pulse in the Wrist is to be per∣ceiv'd quick or slow; after the same manner was the Motion of the Brain to be discern'd, and its Motion upon the failing of the Pulse in the Wrist in a Fit, ceas'd at the same time, as also did the Animal Motion of all the Parts; and when the Patient came to himself, with the Motion of the Pulses the Mo∣tion also of the Brain returns, and an∣swered altogether to the Motion of the Heart. Which is a certain Sign that the Brain is not mov'd by its self, but accidentally by the Heart, and that its Animal Spirits flow into the Marrow and Nerves, meerly by the impulse of the Heart. Moreover, if the Brain were mov'd by the Animal Spirits flow∣ing into the Heart out of the Brain, then the Motion of the Brain must pre∣cede and cause that Motion, but if the Motion of the Heart precedes that Motion of the Brain, then it cannot be that the first Motion of the Heart should be produc'd by the Animal Spi∣rits flowing in after the first Motion of the Heart. Lastly, That the Head cannot be movable of it self, Reason it self teaches us, seeing that to the Work of Dilatation and Contraction, are re∣quir'd Muscles, or at least Fibers so strong, as to contract themselves; both which it wants; and thus it appears that the Brain is not mov'd of it self, but by the Motion of the Heart. But here arises another Question; Whether this Motion of the Heart happen at the same time and instant, with an equal Motion? Columbus be∣lieves, that the Motion of the Brain keeps exact time with the Motion of the Heart; and that both Parts swell and fall exactly together. Which if Columbus had said concerning the Mo∣tion of the Brain and Arteries, then he had spoken true; but as to the Motion of the Heart, it cannot be true: For when the Heart is contracted and falls, then by reason of the Blood impetu∣ously forc'd into them, the Arteries swell, and as they swell, the Brain is dilated; therefore it is dilated at the same moment with the Arteries when the Heart falls, and falls when the Heart is dilated. Hence Riolanus more truly judges, that the Motion of the Brain is contrary to the motion of the Heart, so that when the Brain is compress'd by Systole, the Heart is elevated by Diastole. XXIII. Hence it is evident howWhether the Brain move by its own proper motion? strangely Fernelius was out of the way, who consenting with Galen, avers, that the Body of the Brain is mov'd of it self, and of its own accord, with a constant agitation. Of the same opinion are also Vesalius, Fallopius, Bauhinus, Riolanus, Sennertus, Plem∣pius and others. But Andreas Laurentius observes a Mean between both these Opinions; for he says, the Heart is mov'd partly of its own motion, and partly by the motion of the Arteries. Highmore will not allow the Brain any Motion at all, either accidental or pro∣per; and asserts, that that same Mo∣tion which is seen and felt upon taking off the Cranium, is a Motion of the Membranes, happening by accident; by reason of the Arteries inserted into them; For proof of which, he alledges, that the Spinal Marrow is immovable, and has no Pulse at all. But had he seen so many Wounds of the Brain, after taking away part of the Substance it self, as Plempius, Hildan and my self have done, and observ'd the Moti∣on of the Brain laid bare, he would readily subscribe to my opinion. For the immobility of the Marrow extend∣ed in length, proves nothing, in regard the Brain may beat or be mov'd, and the Spirits thrust forward out of it into the Marrow, though the Marrow be not manifestly mov'd; perhaps as one Wave pushes forward another, so the Spirits are push'd forward through that into the Nerves. As we find the like to happen in the Veins through which the Blood is mov'd and passes without their Pulsation; whereas it flows into them through the Pulsation of the Ar∣teries; and the Pulsation of the Arte∣ries
ceasing, it ceases to be mov'd; which is many times observ'd in let∣ting blood in the Arm, when the Liga∣ture binds the Arteries too hard, or that the Patient fals into a Fit; for the Pulse of the Arteries of the Arm ceas∣ing, nothing of blood will flow out at the Incision made in the Vein; but up∣on untying the Ligature, or upon the Patient's coming to himself again, and the Arteries consequently beating again, the blood flows forth again. And in this manner the Spirits may be mov'd out of the Brain through the Marrow without any manifest Motion of the Marrow. Besides, who knows but that the Marrow may be mov'd after the same manner as the brain? That this may be certainly known, first, the Skull of a living Creature is to be o∣pen'd, then the Vertebers must be laid open, and the long extended Marrow to be laid bare, that a Judgment may be made upon the inspection both of the Marrow and the Brain; but before any true observation could be made, the Creature would die, and the inspection of a dead Carcass would signifie lit∣tle: And therefore Plempius, upon pro∣bable Grounds believes, that the Mar∣row or Pith is likewise mov'd, because it is a kind of production from the brain, which therefore should be mov'd with the brain, to the end that the A∣nimal Spirits being admitted by Dila∣tation, may press them out again by its Contraction. XXIV. The necessity of the saidThe neces∣sity of the said Moti∣on. Motion, though accidental, is chiefly necessary, that while it is dilated, it may receive the Arterious Blood out of the Arteries, and by its falling a∣gain, may be able to force the Animal Spirits made out of that Blood to∣ward the Nerves, and the remainder of the Blood to the Hollownesses and Veins of the Meninx; neither of which Actions can be perform'd with∣out that Motion. XXV. The Brain then, as hathWhat Or∣gan it is. been said, is the Organ wherein, and by the help of which, the Ani∣mal Faculties, by the assistance of the Animal Spirits generated therein, are made. XXVI. But in regard the AnimalThe Seat of the A∣nimal Fa∣culties. Faculties both feel, desire and move, there is a Question arises, In what part of the Brain they every one inha∣bit? Fernelius believes, that the feeling Faculty resides in the Meninxes of the Brain, because they feel and are not mov'd. That the moving Faculty is seated in the Marrow of the brain, be∣cause that is mov'd, yet has no feeling: Which opinion Plempius refutes, and rightly informs us, that both Faculties are generated and dwell in the Sub∣stance it self of the brain, and are thence communicated to the rest of the Parts. Then again, as to the principal Fa∣culties, the Imagination and Memory, the Controversie runs high, whether they are in the whole Substance of the brain? whether all in one part of it, or all distinct in distinct places? Aetius and some others that follow the Arabi∣ans, affirm, that they abide in distinct Seats, and allow to the Fancy the fore∣part, to the Reason the middlemost, and to the Memory the hindmost part of the Head; induc'd by these Rea∣sons. 1. Because it rarely happens, that one Faculty being deprav'd, the other remains sound. 2. Because the fore-part of the Head receiving a Wound, the Phansie is di∣sturb'd and impair'd; and the hinder part of the Head being hurt, proves detrimental to the Memory. Others affirm these Actions to be exercis'd in the whole brain, and only differ in the manner of their operation, and that the brain is variously employ'd about them. Which opinion Sennertus and Plempius uphold by strong Reasons. But Ludovicus Mercatus seems to unite both these opinions together; For, says he, though all the Faculties are in the brain, however we must believe that one Faculty is more predominant in this or that Cavity than another, as the Spirits are more thin, more per∣fect, and more elaborate in this Cavity, and the Temperature more proper for this or that operation. But Experience acknowledges all these opinions to be very uncertain, and that nothing can be positively deter∣min'd either as to the Place where, or the Manner how these operations are perform'd. For there are many Ex∣amples produc'd by Massa, Carpus, Fallopius, Arcaeus, Augenius, Andreas à Croce, Peter de Marchetois and others, of Patients, who having been wounded in their Heads, have had considerable portions of their brains which have ei∣ther dropt or been taken out, while the principal Faculties have remain'd safe and sound; which seems not very pos∣sible,
if these operations are perform'd in the whole Brain, or any part of it, seeing that the operating Organ being grievously wounded, and some part of it taken away, surely those most Noble Actions must be very much impair'd. I produce an Example a little lower of a certain young Person, who had a large Impostume that grew in his Brain, and penetrated to the upper Ventricles, who nevertheless liv'd for 7 weeks together in perfect soundness of his Senses. Another remarkable Example I met with Ian. 1670. in a young Girl, upon whose Head by Misfortune had fallen a Stone that weigh'd near thirty Pound weight, and broke all the right side of her Head with a Fracture of the Skull and Forehead about the Coronal Suture, and the Brain wounded and much endamaged withal. Which Brain, two days after the taking out of fourteen pieces of broken Bones with∣out any covering of the Meinxes, be∣gan to shoot upward from the broad Wound, and that by degrees to such a height, that it came out without the Skull, first as big as a Pigeon's, next, as big as a Hen's, and lastly, as big as a Goose Egg; which protubeant part being cut away with a filthy Stench, another like it shot up again, and so se∣veral putrify'd parts fell off of them∣selves, so that during the Cure, the quantity of the putrid Brain that was separated from the rest, amounted to the bigness of a Man's Fist, in which condition the Patient liv'd six and thir∣ty days with a perfect soundness of Mind and Memory, and all the Animal A∣ctions performing their Duties, though she were in that time taken with three Convulsion Fits and a Hickup. After she was dead, the Skull being taken off, we found a large hollowness in the right side of her Brain, by reason of the wae of so much of her putrify'd Brain, which extended it self all along the up∣per Ventricle of the same side, and side∣ways passing the third or middle Ven∣tricle as far as the Sphoenoides Bone. This memorable Accident shews us how uncertain all things are which are con∣jectur'd concerning the Seats of the Fa∣culties, either distinct, or ascrib'd to the whole Brain, seeing that in this Maid all the operations of Life and In∣tellectuals remain'd in their full force, and no way impeded by that putrefacti∣on of the Brain which was empty'd out of her Skull. But this may seem little, if compar'd with what Theodore Kerckringius relates of a total deficiency of the Brain; for he writes that he dissected a Boy that had lain five Months and a half sick o a Dropsie in his Head, in whose Skull he found no Brain, but only a little slimy Water, which was a thing never before, as he says, taken notice o by any Ana∣tomist: Though many years before him Zacutus Lusitanus tells us of a ad that was cur'd of a Wound in his Head, and three years after dy'd of a Dropsie in his Head; which being open'd, there was nothing to be found but only a pure Water, that was no way offensive to the Smell, nor insipid to the Taste. Something like this Costers relates of a Boy born without a Brain, which Boy Fontanus and Carpus asse us, that they saw the 26th. of Decemb. 1629. Now in these Children where were the Animal Spirits made? Where was the Seat of the principal Faculties and the common Sensory? We must answer, that these Observations contain a ma∣nifest Error, not out of wilul Mistake, but the more sleight & careless inspecti∣on, of Kerckringius, Zacutus, Costerus, and the rest. For sst, the Brain might not have been altogether defective, as they thought, but only through the ex∣traordinary redundance of the Serum was so soften'd that it seem'd to be a perfect Slime, which was the reason that few Animal Spirits were generated and that the operations of the principal Faculties were weakly perform'd, and so at length the Children dy'd. Second∣ly, Kerckringius, Zacutus and Coster, through their over-hasty inspection, might not observe whether there were not something remaining of a more so∣lid Brain by which the foresaid opera∣tions might be perform'd. Vesalius in the Ventricles of the Brain of one that dy'd of the same Distemper, found nine pints of Serum, by which means the up∣per part of the Brain to the thickness of a Membrane, by means of its extensi∣on, was become very thin. However, all this while the Cerebel, and all the bottom of the Brain, as also the Pro∣ductions of the Nerves were all in their natural condition. In like manner, in all the former Examples produc'd by Kerckringius, the upper part of the Brain might be extended, thin and soft; for which reason they examining no farther, too rashly gave their Judg∣ment, that the Brain was altogether wanting. Moreover, what Kerckringius adds, to confirm his Opinion from the Relation of an ignorant Butcher, of certain silly Sheep that had no Brains at
all, is a meer Fable, which Kerckringi∣us ought not to have believ'd; be∣cause no Creature of all those that bring forth living Creatures, can live without a Brain, and the sooner the Heart and Brain are form'd in such Creatures at the beginning of the for∣mation, the sooner and the more all the other parts of the Body encrease; as also all the Actions as well Natural as Animal: So that these operations prove nothing of any operations per∣form'd without the assistance of the Brain. But as to the Seats of the Ani∣mal Functions, and after what manner they operate, there lies the main Que∣stion undetermin'd. And these Mists a certain Observa∣tion in the Brain of an Ox still renders more obscure, which Bauschius tran∣scribes out of Iames de Negroponte; how that the Bendictine Monks having a De∣sign to fat an Ox at Padua, put him up; but observing that the Ox did not grow fat, though he eat greedily, they kill'd him, with a resolution to enquire into the Cause of his continu'd Lean∣ness; to which purpose the Ox was cut up by Sebastian Scarabeccio, Anatomy Professor at Padua; When, says he, we came to the Brain, we found it altogether like a Stone; which all the standers by wondring at, some thought it might have been congeal'd by some extremity of Col: and therefore laying the Head in a Plat∣ter before the Fire, they powr'd hot Wa∣ter upon it, and boyld it for some time; then taking it from the Fire again, they found the Brain harder than before, so that they could not get it out of the Skull. Having told this Story, he proposes two Doubts; If the Brain, says he, be the original of all the Animal Functi∣ons, of Motion and Sence, and this is suppos'd to be petrify'd, how was it ca∣pable of admitting any Faculty to im∣part Motion, Sence and Appetite to the Ox? Or since this Ox had an Appe∣tite to eat, how came he not to grow fat? Not less miraculous was that Brain which was seen in a Swedish Ox, de∣scrib'd by Bartholine, which was wholly turn'd into a Stone, bor'd through with many holes; and now preserv'd in a Farm belonging to the Count of Oxen∣stern, where that Ox was kill'd. Truly such observations more deeply consi∣der'd, command us to suspend our Judgments in determining the Seats of the Animal Faculties, and their manner of operating, till other things more certain are discover'd, to render the truth of these things more evident. XXVII. The Brain is the mostThe Pr∣minency of the Brain. Noble Bowel, which together with the Heart, rules and governs the whole Body, as its Actions plainly demonstrate. For it is the only Or∣gan by which, and in which the Animal Spirits are made, without which, be∣sides that Life cannot subsist, no Ani∣mal Actions are perform'd which flow themselves out of this Fountain. Whence it is manifest, that the Wounds which it receives must be very dangerous; for which reason Hippocrates truly pro∣nounc'd all Wounds penetrating into its Ventricls to be mortal; nay, the least Wounds which it receives, are to be accounted dangerous and mortal. For though monstrous things, as Avr∣rhoes calls them, have happen'd in the Cure of Wounds in the Brain, and some have with great difficulty escap'd, that have had a considerable portion of the Meninxes and the Substance of the Brain taken from them, yet a slight Wound of the Meninxes and Brain uses to be the Death of the greatest part, and it rarely happens that any one so wounded escapes. XXVIII. By the way we are to takeSnakes ta∣ken out of the Brain. notice of what Pliny writes of Snakes that have bred in the putrify'd Brains of Men. Of which we have an Exam∣ple cited by Plutarch, in the Life of Cleomenes, who was crucify'd by Ptolo∣my, about whose Head in a few days af∣ter, a huge Serpent twi'd her self in folds; which the Doctors affirm'd to have brd out of the putrify'd Marrow of the Brain, and related it as wonder∣ful to be admir'd at by all men. Thus Rolfinch tells us a Story fron Gerard the Divine, of a certain Nobleman, whose Body being digg'd up again a Month af∣ter it had been buried, two great Ser∣pents were found creeping out of the putrify'd Corners of his Eyes. Cer∣tainly Nature seems by this Generation of Serpents out of Human Carkasses, to shew the Author of all our Calamities, and of our swift Corruption.
CHAP. VI. Of the Brawny Body; the light Enclosure, the three Ventri∣cles, the Choroid Fold, the For∣nix, the Buttocks, the Testi∣cles, and the Pineal Kernel. IN the Demonstration of the Parts of the Brain, some begin from the upper part of the Brain, some from the lower; the one following the Ancient, the others the Modern way of Dissecti∣on. For our parts, we shall first pro∣ceed according to the Ancient and most familiar way, and after that briefly ac∣cording to the Modern way. I. The Brain being a little separa∣tedThe Braw∣ny Body. at the upper part, where it is di∣vided by the interceding Scythe, more below, beneath the Division appears the Brawny Body, or Corpus Cal∣losum; call'd also Psalloides: Which Anatomists do commonly alledg to be a Portion of the Brain harder than the rest of the Substance. Nor is it any peculiar Body added to the Brain, but only a Connexion of both sides of the Brain, or rather a Continuation of the Substance. In this Body Willis affirms, That he has observ'd certain oblique Plaits or Furrows which he describes in his Tables. These Strings or Fibers Malpigius has also observ'd by the help of his Microscope; and says, they are so apparent in the brains of Fish, that if they be held up against the Light, they resemble an Ivory Comb; and al∣so that there may be seen bloody Vessels running between them. II. The inferior part of the Braw∣nyThe Lucid Septum. Body constitutes the Lucid En∣closure, or Looking-Glass, and the Fornix, next to which, on the upper side lie the two upper Ventricles. III. Above, two remarkable VeinsVeins. rest upon the Brawny Body, one of each side, which open into the fourth Hollowness. Into these the Blood of most part of the small Vessels of the thin Meninx is empty'd, to be again conveigh'd through them into the said Sinus or Hollowness. Franciscus de le boe Sylvius describes another Orifice observ'd by himself in the Lucid Enclosure. The Brawny Bo∣dy, says he, where it begins to grow thin, toward the Lucid Enclosure, we have ob∣serv'd, and there we found about a year since that the Enclosure it self has a nar∣row gaping sometimes divided into two parts, to our great Admiration. IV. There are also several Cells toVentricles. be observ'd in the Brain, closing to∣gether one with another. For though the Cavities contain'd in this noble Bow∣el are continuous, nevertheless because at first sight, this Continuity seems car∣ry'd on through narrower passages, hence the Anatomists divide those Ca∣vities into four Ventricles or Hollow∣nesses; of which three are seated in the Brain, the fourth is common to the Cerebel and the extended Marrow. But all on the inside are fac'd with a most thin Membrane, to which Erastus, not without reason, allows an obscure Sence of Feeling. V. The Brain being taken away asThe two upper Ven∣tricles. far as the Brawny Body, presently ap∣pear the two Upper Ventricles, vul∣garly call'd the Foremost, by others, the Lateral; of which the one is the Right, and the other the Left. They resemble in some manner a Crescent Moon, and about the middle where they meet, they are distinguish'd one from the other with a white Inter∣stitium, from the Substance it self of the Brain, and transparent being held to the Light; hence call'd the Septum Lucidum, and by others, the Looking-Glass. And this by the observation of Malpigius, is furnish'd with streight Fibers extended in length from the fore to the hinder Parts. These Ventricles are alike both for Use and in Form; much larger and longer than the rest, overcast with a most thin Membrane, wherewith the inner parts of the other two are invest∣ed. At the upper part▪ from a begin∣ning somewhat broad and obtuse, they grow somewhat narrow toward the third Ventricle, and of each side, with a Channel sufficiently wide, descend in∣to the Papillary Processes, by which way they discharge the Flegm therein collected, through the Ethmoidean Bone into the Nostrils and Mouth. This Passage in the Brain of a Calf, will admit a Goose Quill; but in Men, is much narrower. These Passages the several Modern Anatomists never ob∣serv'd, and some have assum'd to them∣selves the Discovery thereof; yet are they at large describ'd by Galen, in his Treatise of the Use of the Parts. At the hinder part which unfolds it
self more circularly, and bends like a Scyth, they are carry'd downward to the bottom of the Brain, and end near the original of the Optic Nerves. In which place they are both enter'd by a Branch of the Carotid Artery, which forms the Choroid Fold. VI. At the lower and hinder partThe For∣nix. of these Ventricles, where they wind back to the former Parts, in the mid∣dle of the Brain underneath the Cal∣lous Body, and common to both Parts of the Brain, appear the Fornix or Arch, gibbous without, but hollow within, constituted by a most white marrowy Substance of the Brain, fur∣nish'd with arch'd Fibers toward the sides, and overcast with a most thin Membrane. It is also call'd TESTUDO or the Tortoise; for that like a vault∣ed Roof or an Arch in a Building, it seems to sustain the burden and weight of the Brain resting upon it. Of which more when we come to treat of the Op∣tic Nerves. From all the hindermost Thighs to the Arteries, in all the middlemost space, it is not fasten'd to the Brain, but remains free. The hinder Thighs Hip∣pocrates calls Pedes Hippocampi. Riola∣nus, guided by Aranteus, believes these Thighs to be Branches of the optic Nerves, turn'd upwards, and that the optic Spirits issue from thence as from a Fountain: hence, that they meet toward the fore-parts, to unite the visi∣ble Species's within the Brain. VII. In these two upper Ventricles,The Cho∣roid Fold. the Choroid Fold is to be met with, a wonderful and elegant Piece of Work, form'd out of a most thin and dimi∣nutive Membrane, produc'd from the Pia Mater, several small Kernels, and small Branches of little Vessels variously complicated together. Which little Branches come from the Twigs of the Carotid Artery, with which others think the small Branches of the Cervi∣cal Artery to be intermix'd. With these small Arteries twice or thrice we ob∣serv'd an apparent little Vein to run along all the whole Length of the Fold, and to pour forth its Blood into the third Ventricle into the Vein always in that place running through the middle of the Fold, and emptying it self into the fourth Hollowness; and so to be continuous with it. Bauhinus and seve∣ral others, contrary to all Reason and Sight, will have the Branch of the fourth Hollowness intermix'd. Riolanus as∣serts it to consist of Veins only, without any Arteries; as on the other side, he believes the wonderful Net to consist only of Arteries; though both the one and the other are for the most part constituted of Arteries, and have very few Veins, insomuch that for that very reason some question'd whether there were any Veins at all. VIII. This Fold arises from theIts Rise & Progress. lowermost hinder part of these Ventri∣cles, each of which parts a Branch of the Carotid Artery enters, which af∣terwards constitutes the wonderful Net, near the Spittle-Kernel, and wrapt about with a tender Membrane, ascends upward into these Ventricles; where being divided into innumerable Branches, it forms this Fold expand∣ed through the said Ventricles. Which when it has reacht the foremost Tube∣rosities of the Ventricles on both sides, round about the foremost Thigh of the Arch, or Fornix, passes into the third Ventricle latent underneath, to the sides of which Ventricle it is every way fast∣ned, as also to the Substance of the Fornix it self, resting upon that Ventri∣cle, with little Branches, which it sends forth into the Marrowy Substance of the Brain. The Fastning and Ingress of these little Branches is presently seen, when the Fornix is lightly rais'd up and turn'd back, and so the third Ven∣tricle is discover'd. IX. Through this Fold the Arteri∣ousIts Use. Blood is conveigh'd for making of Animal Spirits, out of which thro' small diminutive Kernels hardly con∣spicuous and scatter'd among the little Arteries of the Fold, the more serous part, not fit for the making of Spirits, is separated, suckt out and collected to∣gether in the Ventricles, not as an un∣profitable Excrement, but as a useful Humor, and there to be prepar'd for a necessary Use, which is threefold. 1. By its Coolness, to temper the boyling Heat of the Blood passing a∣long the Fold; for the Fold swims up∣on it; and so to prepare it for the ma∣king of Animal Spirits. 2. By flowing to the Glandules of the Tonsils and Mouth, to moisten the Larynx and Gullet. 3. That in the Mouth, in which to∣gether with the Liquor flowing through the Spitly Channels, it begets the Spit∣tle, and in the Stomach it may be mixt with the chew'd Nourishment, and help their Concoction by a peculiar Fermen∣tation,
In the same manner as the Lympha flowing to the Chyle-bearing Channels, prepares the Chylus after a specific manner, that so coming to the Heart, it may be the more easly dila∣ted therein, and converted into Blood. X. But when by reason of the cold∣nessSlime or Snot. of the Brain, or some other Weakness, that Liquor is not suffici∣ently prepar'd, then becoming more crude and viscous, it is gather'd to∣gether in the Ventricle in greater a∣bundance, and from thence not only flows more copiously to the Parts afore∣said; but many times the greater part of it, not able to fall down to the Iaws through the ordinary nar∣row Channels, a great quantity of it descends through other Passages to the Nose and Mouth, and thence as a su∣perfluous Excrement, vulgarly call'd Flegm, or Snot, is evacuated at the Mouth and Nostrils. And that this is the true Use of the Pituitous Humor, many Reasons de∣monstrate. 1. For that in an extraordinary heat, the Head being very hot and dry, and consequently this Liquor being much wasted, and but little of it falling down to the Mouth and Tonsils, it causes a great drought of the Jaws and Mouth, and thence Thirst; which also happens for the same reason, in Fevers and other hot Distempers. 2. For that upon longing after any pleasing Food that a man sees, this Li∣quor, together with the Spitly Humor flowing through the Spittle-Vessels, flows no less from the Brain through the widened Passages, to the Mouth and Tongue, than the Animal Spirits, that are determin'd and sent by the Mind to the Parts that require Motion. 3. Because that in Persons of a hotter and drier Temper, in whom the serous and flegmatic part of the Blood does not so copiously abound, and the said Liquor is collected in a lesser quantity in the Ventricles, and is better concocted, and the thinner part much more dissi∣pated, there are none or very few Excre∣ments evacuated from the Nose and Pa∣late, neither do they spit so much, but they are more thirsty. 4. Because that in moister Na∣tures a great Quantity of this Liquor is collected in the Ventricles of the Brain, and hence a greater quanti∣ty of Spittle flows into the Kernels of the Jaws and Mouth, and the Spittle∣channels, and frequently more crude to the Mouth and Stomach; ay, sometimes in so great a quantity as in a Day and a Night to fill whe  full, if the cld and moist Temper of the Brain send the Humor down in great Quantity; and sometimes descending in greater Quantity to the Stomach, it so relaxes and debilitates by its quanti∣ty, its Coldness and its Moisture, that it vitiates the fermentaceous Humors growing there; and by that means, takes away the Patient's Stomach, and hinders Concoction. 5. Because that for want of Spittle, the Act of Swallowing is render'd diffi∣cult, and the Concoction of the Sto∣mach is ill perform'd; as is apparent in many that are troubl'd with Fevers.The Pro∣gress of the superfluous Blood from the Fold. XI. After this serous Humor being separated from the Arterious Blood of the Fold, and that a sufficient quantity of that Arterious Blood is transmitted into the Brain and Marrow, for the making of Animal Spirits, that Blood which remains over and above  the Fold, flows to the Vein, sometimes single, sometimes double in the Ven∣tricle, running between the middle of the Fold, above the Pineal Kernel, and through that is carry'd to the great Hollowness of the Scythe. This Vein, Galen affirms to be deriv'd from no o∣ther Vein, because there is no ion or Conjunction of it with any other Vein to be observ'd. However Bauhi∣nus believes it to be a Branch of the great Hollowness. Which Mistake is sufficiently refell'd by what we have said in the Fourth Chapter. XII. From what has been said, weRolfinch's Mistake concerning the Cause of a Ca∣tarrh. are to take notice of the Grand Mi∣stake of Rolfinch, who in a long Dis∣course seeking for a new Cause of Ca∣tarrhs, never before found out, and re∣jecting the Opinions of all others, tho' too inconsiderately, concludes, that the Carotid Arteries are the Fountains of all Catarrhs. For, he says, that they dis∣charge their flegmatic Humors partly into the wonderful Net, and that from thence these Excrements ascend higher into the Choroid Fold and the Ventri∣cles of the Brain, from whence they flow down to the Pituary Kernel, and there are insensibly wasted▪ Moreover, that the said flegmatic Humors are partly purged forth through the outer∣most Branch of the inner Propagation into all the spungy parts of the Nostrils, Mouth, Jaws and Palate, and are thence discharged as altogether unprofitable. Which they are faulty either in Quan∣tity▪
Quality, Manner, Time or Place of Excretion, then Catarrhs are there∣by bred. But the Learned Gentleman did not consider how easily those fleg∣matic Humors stop up the narrow Pas∣sages of the slender Net and Fold, and what terrible Diseases thence arise, as, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Carus's, &c. to which men would be most frequent∣ly obnoxious, if that Proposition were true. Nor does he take notice that the Arteries equally convey the Blood to all Parts without any Choice; nor do they particulatly convey the Choleric parts to the Liver, the Melancholy to the Spleen, or the Flegmatic to the Head, and discharge those Humors in∣to those Bowels; which nevertheless he will have to be so done; whereas there is not in the Arteries any power of separating, any judgment to make choice; nor can those Bowels do it by any particular virtue of Attraction; but that the various alteration of one and the same Blood, and the separation of the smallest Particles is order'd ac∣cording to the diversity of the Kernels, conformation and diversity of the parts into which it flows. He alledges many Arguments for the proof of his Opini∣on; but so contrary to Reason and Experience, that they are not worth a Refutation. XIII. Moreover, the Arch beingThe third Ventricle. turn'd backward, the Third or Mid∣dle Ventricle, which is the Concourse or Meeting of the two uppermost or foremost, as it were form'd in the Center of the Marrow of the Brain. Wherein are several things to be consi∣der'd. 1. Two Passages: The first of which with an eminent Process, which Veslin∣gius calls the Womb, is carry'd down∣ward to the Funnel, and pituitary Ker∣nel, through which the Flegmatic Ex∣crements of the Brain are vulgarly said to be evacuated, but erroneously. The other, which is call'd the Arse, or the hole of the Arse, passes to the fourth Ventricle, and is nothing else, than a hole form'd by the conjunction and closure of little fibrous Mountains, and two Buttocks and Testicles. This Chan∣nel being wrapt about with a slender Membrane, Sylvius calls by the name of Alveus. 2. Two remarkable little long Moun∣tains, prominent upwards, consisting of a Substance compos'd of several little Strings or Fibers, and therefore call'd by some Corpora striata. These consti∣tute the foremost upper part of the ob∣long Marrow conjoyn'd with the Brain and Pith (which is not observ'd by some, who think them to be parts of the Brain, and not the Marrow) but of a peculiar Substance, and as it were impos'd upon the Marrow, yet united and continuous with it, cloath'd with an extraordinary white Membrane, but fibrous within, less white, and more porous than the rest of the Marrow. This Part seems only to be serviceable to the Sight, as from whence the Op∣tic Nerves proceed; whence Galen calls the said Monticles Thalamos Nervorum Opticorum, or the Nuptial Chambers of the Optic Nerves (where by Thala∣mi, some think, though erroneously, that they are the two hinder Legs of the Arch;) and Riolanus reproves Bauhinus, for asserting, that all the Nerves within the Cranium, arise from the Spinal Mar∣row; whereas the Optic Nerves are wound about their own Chambers. By which Words, he plainly denotes, that these Monticles consist of a Substance altogether different from the rest of the Marrow, and that they are serviceable only to the Eyes. In the mean time, he does ill to reprove Bauhinus, for say∣ing, that all the Nerves arose out of the Pith, in regard the Chambers of the Optic Nerves are the upper part of the Pith, and consequently the Optic Nerves proceed from the Pith, which Riolanus does not seem to have taken any notice of. XIV. 3. Four Protuberancies, ofThe But∣tocks. which the uppermost, or foremost and largest, from their Resemblance, are call'd the Buttocks, or Nates; be∣tween which and the fibrous Protube∣rances, there is a conspicuous Chink, by Columbus call'd the Womb, containing the hole of the Arse. XV. The lowermost and least, areThe Testi∣cles. call'd the Testicles, and are as it were two flat Prominencies growing and continuous underneath to the Buttocks. But that same Difference between the bigness of the Buttocks and Testicles, is more remarkable in Brutes than in Men, in whom these four Pro∣tuberancies are seldom of an equal Mag∣nitude. Now these four Protuberancies, to∣gether with the Fibrous Protuberancies impos'd upon them, are the beginnings of the long Marrow, continuous below
with the Brain, above and upon the sides overspread with a slender Mem∣brane from the Pia Mater; having a Substance compacted of innumerable slender Fibers, as is seen by the Micro∣scope. As to the Fibrous Protuberancies, this is to be observ'd, that though they be cover'd with an extraordinary white Membrane, yet they consist of peculiar Substance within, stringy, fibrous, less white than the rest of the Pith, so that they seem to constitute some peculiar part, as it were united to the long Pith, at the beginning in the uppermost part; and continuous with the Pith of the Brain. Now the Use of these two Pro∣tuberancies, is to be serviceable to the most noble Sence, which is Sight; be∣cause that the Visual Nerves only, and no other proceed from them. XVI. 4. The Kernel seated be∣tweenThe Pineal Kernel. the Stones and the Arse, near the Hole of the Arse, which leads to∣ward the Fourth Ventricle, call'd the Pineal Kernel, because it somewhat re∣sembles a Pine-Apple, fashion'd like a Top: By others call'd the Yard of the Brain. This Kernel is but small in Men; but much larger in Sheep and Calves. It consists of a Substance somewhat hard, which nevertheless suddenly flags, and being melted in stale Carkasses of Men, seldom appears. It is cover'd with a slender Membrane of a Ash∣colour. It is oblong, looking upward, or ra∣ther forward with its Point, but with its bottom resting upon the Substance of the Brain. Above it is cover'd with the Choroid Fold, and the Vein there running thro' the middle of the Fold, to which it is fasten'd, that in Man it is easily pull'd off with them, because it sticks so little to the Substance of the Brain, that Bau∣hinus will not allow it to stick to it at all; though it appear in Brutes more manifestly to be united to the Brain. Sylvius allows it also certain little nervous Strings; Wharton also writes, that it is enter'd by two Nerves, on each side one, arising from the beginning of the Spinal Pith, but very small. But it would be a difficult thing to shew these Nerves; neither will any man easily perceive any Nerves in that place. Yet this, upon more diligent inspection, I have observ'd, that the Choroid-Fold in the third Ventricle, sends forth every way several Branches of small Arte∣ries, like small white diminutive Fibers, into the incumbent Cavities of the Arch, the Buttocks and Stones, and the Substance of the stringy Protube∣rancies, and of the Pineal Kernel, so that the Fold adheres every way to the said Parts, by means of these little si∣brous Branches, and pour sorth into the said Substance the Arterious Blood prepar'd therein, and in some measure clear'd from the flegmatic Serum. Which little Branches, not so duly consider'd by Sylvius and Wharton, their Inadvertency occasion'd their Mi∣stake, and so they took them for Nerves, because of their whitish colour, as do also the small Arteries of other Parts. Neither is there any Blood to be seen in them, because only the thin∣nest and most vaporous part of the Blood flows swiftly through them, nei∣ther does it stay long in them, the more thick Particles flowing through the Vein that is mix'd with the Fold. XVII. In this Kernel, saith Sylvius,Sand and Gravel in the Ker∣nel. he has several times sound Sand and a little small round Stone, about the big∣ness of the fourth part of a Pea. Reyner de Graeff also writes of Stones found in this Kernel by himself: We believe, says he, that Stones are generated in all parts of the Body, more especially in the Pineal Kernel, because that we have above twenty times found Stones therein upon the Dis∣section of Bodies as well wasted by a lin∣gring Disease, as by violent Sickness; which however happens more frequently in France than in Holland. Certainly these Stones should very much obstruct those Functions which are attributed to the Pineal Kernel; yet the Discove∣rers of those Stones did never observe that the Persons in whose Pineal Ker∣nels Stones were found, were ever di∣sturb'd in their Animal Operations. XVIII. Various are the OpinionsThe Use of this Ker∣nel. concerning the Use of this Kernel. Some think it ordain'd for the strengthning the Choroid-Fold. Others with Galen, ascribe to it the Use of a Valve, to close the Hole of the Buttocks. Others shut up the Soul in those Streights, as in a Box, and believe it plac'd there, as in the Center of the Brain, where it collects the Ideas of the five Sensories, apprehends and discerns them, and from that place sends forth the Animal Spi∣rits to the determin'd parts through these certain Nerves. Which last O∣pinion many at this day stifly oppose, and others as stifly defend. Cartesius grants indeed that the Soul is joyn'd to the whole body; but says, that it ex∣ercises its Functions more particularly
and immediately in this Glandule, than in other Parts. Regius will have it to be the common Sensory, and that the Soul exists in that and in no other part of the Body. Thus also de la Forge asserts it to be the principal Seat of the Soul, and the real Organ of Imagina∣tion and common Sence, and that the breeding of Stones in it, is no obstructi∣on to it in its Operations; no, though it be all Stone, provided there be Pores wide enough for the passage of the Spi∣rits. He adds, that though the Kernel should be wanting, and only the void place left for the Arteries of the choroid Fold to empty themselves; yet that place would be a sufficient Seat for the Soul, the Imagination and common Sence. Certainly with the same Rea∣son he might have said, that though the Heart were wanting, yet if its place were left for the large Vessels to exo∣nerate themselves, it would be a suffici∣ent Fountain for the support of all the vital Actions; that is to say, that in absence of the agent Organ, the place of the Organ would suffice to perform the Actions of the Organ. But for my part, I must ingenuously confess that these  are more subtil than Sub∣tility it . On the other side, War∣ton as vainly conceives, that it only at tracts the excrementitious Moisture from the upper Thighs of the begin∣ning of the Spinal Marrow. And thus the Use of this Kernel is still undeter∣min'd. XIX. 5. The Choroid Fold, whichThe Cho∣roid Fold. descending from the upper Ventricles in this middlemost, is expanded thro' it with a much broader and thicker Contexture than in the former, and has a Vein sometimes streight, and some∣times double interwoven in the middle, and running as far as the large Bay of the Scythe, into which the small Arte∣ries exonerate the remainder of the Blood which is to be carry'd to the Hollowness. Now this Fold, sends orth into the Arch the fibrous Protuberan∣cies, the Testicles and Buttocks, several small Branches like diminutive Fibers; by means of which it is joyn'd to them every way; and it wraps and enfolds the Pineal Glandule in such a manner that it cannot be seen, unless the Fold be broken and taken off. Malpigius, together with Mbius, be∣lieves, that the Ventricles were form'd by Nature, for no Use, but only by Accident; but how erroneous this O∣pinion is, sufficiently appears by what has already been said. For the service of the three Ventricles of the Brain is very necessary to afford a loose and am∣ple passage to the Choroid Fold, and de∣fend it from compressure; as also to receive and collect the serous and fleg∣matic Humors separated by the small Kernels out of the inner Substance of the Brain, and especially out of the Ves∣sels of the Fold. CHAP. VII. Of the Cerebel, the Fourth Ven∣tricle and the long Pith or Mar∣row. I. IN the hinder and lowermost partThe Cere∣bel. of the Skull, that is between the large Hollownesses of the Bone of the hinder part of the Head, lies the Ce∣rebellum, by the Greeks call d , and , containing the second part of the Brain, as it were a little and peculiar Brain, because it is much less than the Brain; and be∣ing cover'd with both the Meninxes, is separated from it, and on both side united to the long Pith for a lit∣tle space, and continuous with it; but in the middlemost lower Seat it is joyn'd to the Spinal Marrow upon the hinder part, by the intervening of the thin Meninx; and lest the Fourth Ventricle should gape there, it is wrapt about with the thin Meninx expand∣ed as far as the Buttocks. II. The Form of it is somewhatIts . broad, and something flat upon both the Lateral parts, representing the Fi∣gure of a broader sort of Globe. III. The Bulk of it is much biggerIts  in Men than in Brutes. IV. The Substance of it differs notIts Sub∣stance. much from the Substance of the Brain, only that it seems not to be so soft, but much firmer. V. It is divided into innumerable . small thin Plates, representing the Leaves and Boughs of Trees, and cloath'd with the thin Membrane in∣terwoven with several Capillary Bran∣ches
of the cervical Arteries, and of which the inward and middle part are of a white, the external Compass of a darker Colour. Through those little Arteries the Blood flows to it in great quantity; the remaining part of which after nourishment, runs into the lateral Hollownesses. VI. It has two Processes, call'dThe Ver∣micular Processes. the Worm-like Processes, which consist of many transverse, and as it were twisted Particles joyn'd toge∣ther with a thin Membrane, like Worms that lie in rotten Wood. Of these the foremost prominent into the fourth Ventricle, adjoyns to the But∣tocks and Stones; the hindermost is not altogether so prominent, but vanishes with a point into the Substance of the Cerebel. Some also think that these Processes are distended and contracted in the elevation and compression of the Cerebel. VII. About the hinder part of theVarolius's Bridge. Trunk of the long Marrow, is to be seen Varolius's Bridge, which con∣sists of two, and sometimes three gib∣bous Processes on both sides, protube∣rating from the Cerebel to the Circum∣ference of the fourth Ventricle; of which, they that are seated near the Worm-like Process are larger, the rest lesser. VIII. The Cerebel has no Cavities,The Cis∣tern, but only a wide Hollowness in the middle, yet not very deep; which by some is call'd the Cistern; and this constitutes the higher part of the fourth Ventricle. The Substance of the Cerebel differs little or nothing from that of the Brain, and is cloath'd in the same manner with Membranes and a Shell, and also has deep Windings and Meanders, overcast with the thin Meninx to the lowest Depths, and furnish'd with Net-work Folds of small Arteries and Veins, whence the Office and Use of the Brain and Cerebel is thought to be the same. Willis therefore observing no certain∣ty in ascribing this Office to the Cere∣bel, has found out another, which he thinks to be more true and genuine. And thus, he ays, that the Cerebel, which he takes to be a peculiar Bowel, is a pe∣culiar Fountain and Magazine of certain Animal Spirits design'd for peculiar Uses; and distinct from the Brain. The Office of the Brain he assigns to be, to afford and supply those Animal Spirits wherewith the Imagination,  , Discourse and other supream  of the Animal Function are perform'd; and by which all the voluntary Motions are brought to pass. But that the Du∣ty of the Cerebel seems to be to pro∣create Animal Spirits apart, and diffe∣rent from those generated in the Brain; and to send them to some particular Nerves; by which unvoluntary Acti∣ons, as Pulsation of the Heart, Protru∣sion of the Chylus, Concoction of the Nourishment, and many others, which unknown to us, and without our con∣sent, are transacted. This new Fiction he endeavors to confirm by many Ar∣guments, which being examin'd, are not strong enough to establish his Opi∣nion. However, I deem his Diligence to be highly praise-worthy; for having undertaken to illustrate so obscure a Mystery with a new and ingenious In∣vention. For which Fracassatus greatly admires him, and believes there by the hard Questions about natural Motions which are done with the privity of the Brain, are excellently well resolv'd, and that thereby many hidden things, whose Causes and Reasons the Nature and Propriety of the Parts challeng'd to her self, may be unfolded; provided the Hypothesis be true, which is sup∣pos'd, of the truth of the difference be∣tween the Spirits of the Brain and the Cerebel, and their various influx into the several Nerves: But the incertainty of this Hypothesis appears from hence; for that Birds and several other Crea∣tures have no Cerebel, and yet have the same motion of the Heart, the same Respiration and thrusting forward of the Chylus, &c. Lastly, he adds, that if peculiar Spirits serving to unvoluntary Motions, were generated in the Brain, they cannot possibly pass from thence into the Nerves of the sixth pair, ari∣sing out of the long Pith much below the Cerebel: which nevertheless afford Animal Spirits to several parts of the Breast and Abdomen, to accomplish the said motions. He might have added, that though it should be granted, that the said Spirits of the Cerebel should flow through the Nerves of the sixth pair, how then should it be possible for the Spirits of the Brain serving to volun∣tary Motions, to flow through the same Nerves; which Motions however are perform'd in the Muscles of the Hyois, the Larynx, the Jaws and several other
Muscles, by the help of the Spirits flow∣ing through these Nerves. IX. The Arabians, by reason that theWhere the Seat of the Memo∣ry. Cerebel is somewhat more hard and dry than the Brain, have made it the Seat of the Memory, and hence, as they say, it comes to pass that the hin∣der part of the Head being hurt, the Memory becomes prejudic'd. Whom the Observation of Benevenius seems to favour; who relates the Story of a Thief, who being taken and punish'd, never remembred what he had done before: In which Thief, after his death, they found the hinder part of his Head so short, that it could hardly contain the least portion of his Cerebel. But whether this Opinion of the Arabians be true or no, may be judg'd by what has been said already concerning the Seats of the principal Faculties. As to the Parts of the Cerebel, An∣drewIts Parts. Laurentius and Riolan believe, that the fore part shuts and opens the En∣trance into the fourth Ventricle, like a Valve. But in regard that of its self, like the Brain, it is void of proper motion, it seems hardly capable of that Functi∣on; and therefore the Varolian Bridge is thought to close the extream Circles of the Cerebel, and to defend the noble Ventricle like a Bulwark. XI. The lower part of the CerebelThe fourth Ventricle. being rais'd up, the hinder part, or the fourth Ventricle discloses it self less than the rest. Which is form'd out of the Trunks of the Spinal Mar∣row, descending from the Cerebel, and the third Ventricle of the Brain, and somewhat distant one from another, be∣fore they are all together united; be∣cause the higher and lesser part of it is made by the Bosom of the Cerebel, overcast with a slender Membrane; but the lower and bigger part seems to be as it were in-laid into the long Pith, ha∣ving a hollowness resembling a Pen, where it is shap'd for writing, andCalamus Scriptori∣us. therefore call'd Calamus Scriptorius. Arantius calls this Ventricle the Ci∣sern. Herophilus calls it the most prin∣cipal and noble Ventricle, and affirms that the Animal Spirits prepar'd in the upper Ventricles, obtain there their chief Perfection, and thence flow thro' the Pores into the Marrow and Nerves. But in regard these Spirits are neither made nor contain'd in the upper Ven∣tricles, it is apparent that the Function of generating and perfecting Animal Spi∣rits, belongs as little to this Ventricle as to the other three, especially seeing that neither the Matter out of which those Spirits are generated, nor the Spirits made in the other Ventricles, and to be perfected farther in this, can be supply'd to this fourth Ventricle. XII. The long Marrow, whichThe long Marrow. falling down without the Cranium, to distinguish it from the Marrow of the Bones, properly so call'd, is call'd the Spinal Marrow, and is the hard∣er part of the Brain and Cerebel, close and white, consisting partly within the Cranium, about the length of four fingers Breadth, and partly with∣out in the Pipe of the Bones of the Spine, extended to the end of the Os Sacrum. XIII. Though it be improperly call'dThe diffe∣rence be∣tween this and the Marrow of the Bones. Marrow from a kind of resemblance which it has, yet it differs in many things from the real Marrow of the Bones. 1. In Substance; as being neither so fat nor so moist as this, which is like to Fat, and subject to run, will melt with the Fire, and takes Fire like Oyl, where∣as the other will neither melt with Fire, nor flame out. 2. In Colour; the one being whiter than the other. 3. In the Coverings; the one having two Membranes and the Bones to en∣close it, whereas this is cloath'd with no Membranes, and is contain'd only in the Cavities and Porosities of the Bones. 4. In the Use; for that the one does not nourish the Bones, as the other does; but stretches out the Nerves which are the Channels of the Spirits, to the Parts; whereas the other has no Nerves that derive themselves from it. And therefore, for distinction's sake, the one is call'd , or Spinal; by others, , or Dorsal; by others, ; by others, , as descend∣ing through the Neck; Back and Loyns, and filling the whole Spine. Upon these Considerations, the great Hippo∣crates distinguishes the Spinal Marrow from the Marrow of the Bones. For, says he, the Marrow which is call'd the Dorsal Marrow, descends from the Brain; but has not in its self much of Fat, or gluti∣nous, as neither has the Brain, & therefore neither is the name of Marrow proper for it; for it is not like the other Marrow con∣tain'd in the Bones, which has Tunicles also, which the other has not. And Galen
treading the Footsteps of Hippocrates, af∣firms that the Spinal Marrow is not rightly and properly call'd Marrow. But all this Dispute is sav'd by the En∣glish, who call it Pith. XIV. It is mov'd also according toIts Moti∣n. the motion of the Brain, ot of it self; but by the motion of the Arteries, which keeps time with the motion of the Brain, but is weaker, in regard that part is stronger, and neither so soft nor moist. XV. The Substance of it is fibrous,Its Sub∣stance. as may be seen by the help of a Micro∣scope, compacted as it were with innu∣merable long strings, softer above; but when it has reach'd the middle of the Breast, somewhat harder by degrees But whether those little Bodies, as well of the Brain as of the Pith, be hollow or no, and so transmit any Spirits thro' their Cavities, has been diligently exa∣mined by the Physicians of this Age; but nothing has been concluded on but only by Conjectures, by reason of the weakness of our Sight and difficulty of Demonstration. XVI. In the dissected SubstanceIts Vessels. innumerable Bloody Drops appear up and down, in like manner as in the dissected Brain; but the Blood-bear∣ing Vessels passing through the Sub∣stance it self, are so very minute, that they can hardly be discern'd by the Eye. The Original also of these little Ves∣sels, by reason of their subtility, is no less obscure. But in this quick-sighted Age, by more quick-sighted Anato∣mists, this has been observ'd, that much about that place where the Trunk of the Aorta is dispers'd into the Subclavi∣als, a vertebral Artery is sent forth through the holes wrought through the transverse Processes of the Cervical Vertebers, and that from thence two little Branches proceed to the Spinal Pith; and that from thence, down∣ward among the several knots of the Vertebers from the descending Trunk of the Aorta, where it rests upon the Spine, immediately two Arteries of each side one, run along to the said Pith. Which two Arteries of each of the sides, meeting together, and inter∣mixing one among another, form a won∣derful piece of Net-work in the Me∣ninxes, that they also clasp one ano∣ther like a Chain of Rings; and so hold each other with a winding course, by and by they are seen to send certain Ca∣pillary Branches toward the inner parts of the Pith, as Willis observes. Which last is manifest▪ from the little bloody Spots conspicuous in a dissected Sub∣stance. From the Conjunction of these little Arteries on both sides, above the middle fissure of the Pith, is form'd a more conspicuous Artery, running the whole length of the Pith; also two other Arteries of each side one, com∣mon alike, but less creep into the sides of the same Pith. The Veins that carry back the blood remaining after Nutrition, from the Pith, and its Coverings toward the Heart, arising from scarce visible Ori∣ginals, by degrees joyn together, and form a Fold like the arterious Fold, and mixt with it. From this Fold the Blood carry'd farther, flows into two larger Veins, which Willis calls the les∣ser Hollownesses; of which one of each side is extended within the Cavity of the Bone as far as the Os Sacrum. Out of these the Blood is yet pour'd into a larger Vein (which Willis calls the large Hollowness) running all along the whole length of the Spine, and receiv∣ing the Blood of both lateral Veins, as into a common Receptacle, and thro' the lateral holes of the Vertebers, con∣veying it to the next Veins, that is to say, the Azygos and the Vertebral Veins, ascending through the Neck, carries it from those to the hollow Vein; in like manner as in the Head the lar∣ger Bosom of the hard Meninx runs out above the Division of the Brain, and receives the Blood of surrounding Ves∣sels to be deliver'd up to the Jugular Veins. From this Pith all the Nerves of the whole Body derive their Original; nei∣ther do any proceed from any other part, either Brain, Cerebel, or what∣ever it be. However, the Pith is not a part se∣parated from the Brain, but a producti∣on of the same and the Cerebel, from whence, like a Stalk it springs with four Roots: For before or rather above it springs from two protuberancies of the third Ventricle, by which it is chiefly fasten'd to the Brain; behind or rather before, from the Buttocks and Stones, by means of which it more adheres to the Cerebel. Now as I call this Pith a production of the Brain, others have design'd it out by other Appellations; for Ruffus affirms it to be no peculiar body of the Brain, but the purging of the Brain. Theophilus calls it the Brain drawn out in length; and so doth also Peter Borel∣lus▪
Others have nam'd it the Apophy∣sis; others the Process of the Brain; because it extends it self from the Brain as from a thick Root or Trunk, and obtains continuous Fibers with it. Yet Protagoras and Philotinus of old, seem'd to be of a contrary Opinion; who as Lindan reports, affirm'd this Pith to be no production of the Brain; but that the Brain was the redundancy of the Spinal Pith. Whose Footsteps Bartho∣line treading, affirms likewise, that the Pith is not extended from the Brain, but that the Brain rather proceeds from the Pith; from whence, as from its Root it rises and shoots forth, and that it is a certain process of this Pith; de∣ducing his Argument from certain Fishes, the Pith of whose Head and Tail is of a vast bigness, but their Brains very small in quantity. To Bartholine's Opinion Malpigius subscribes, and ex∣tending it farther, writes, that all the Fibers disperc'd through the Brain and Cerebel, proceed from the Trunk of the Spinal Pith contain'd within the Skull, as from an extraordinary col∣lection of Fibers; in like manner as in Cabbages the Fibers of the Root breaking forth, are dispers'd through the Leaves, which being wound and folded about, form the Head, by acci∣dent furnish'd with a certain hollowness within, like a Ventricle; and hence it is, that he will allow the Ventricles to be of no use, as being made hollow by accident. Then whether the same Fi∣bers in number, which are rooted in the Brain, be extended into the Spinal Pith, and there being closely united, make a more solid Trunk, or whether the Pith be a part proceeding from the Brain, the same Malpigius examins, and adds, that being taught by the dis∣section of some Fish, he thinks it pro∣bable that the prolong'd Fibers of the Spinal Pith, the Brain and Cerebel are the same in number; and thence he be∣lieves that the Brain is an Appendix of the Spinal Pith; or else that the Trunk of Nerves contain'd in the Spine, pro∣pagates the Roots crookedly crawling through the Brain and Cerebel, in the surrounding Ash-colour'd rind or shell; but that the Branches proceeding from the Head are dispers'd through the whole Body. This is also the Judg∣ment of Fracassatus; which he proves from hence; for that if you take a Chic∣ken but newly form'd in the Egg, when it is but just cover'd with its Film or Cawl, and prick it with a small Nee∣dle, it presently contracts, though at that time nothing possess the Seat of the brain but the Lympha, not yet fix'd into brains, and thence he infers, that the Brain and Cerebel are Appendixes of the Spinal Pith. But he considerately weighs what we have said already, l. 1. c. 29. will find that neither the Brain owes its original to the Pith, nor the Pith to the Brain, seeing that all the parts are delineated together in the first formation, and are the immediate Works of Nature, which depend in such a manner one upon ano∣ther, that the one can neither act or live without the other. If any one a∣ver, that the Fibers ascend from the Pith into the Brain, with the same pri∣viledge I may say, that they descend from the Brain into the Pith; neither is it any argument against me, that the brain is not sufficiently harden'd at the beginning; for that then neither is the Pith sufficiently coagulated, but appears like a moist Slime. Besides the per∣ception of the Senses proceeds from the brain, as being the beginning of all the nervous Fibers, and not in the Pith; for it is not the wound of the pith, but the wound of the brain that hinders and obstructs the Perception. Nor does the Argument brought from a Chicken prove any thing to the contrary: For if at the first formation of the Chicken, the Film contract it self upon the prick∣ing of the Needle, that is rather a sign that then the brain, which is the begin∣ning of all sensation, and without which no sensation can be, was no less form'd than the Pith. XVII. The Shape of the Pith isThe Cove∣rings. various; nor is it the same in all Creatures, nevertheless in Men it is oblong and almost round. Vesalius, Laurentius, Picolhomini and Spigelius assert, that it is larger and thicker at the beginning, and thinner toward the end; and so describes it in his Table af∣fix'd: Which is deservedly found fault with by Fallopius, who excellently well observes, that about the lower Verte∣bers of the Neck, and the first of the Thorax, where the great Nerves ex∣tend themselves to the Arms, as also in the Lons, where large Nerves run out to the Thighs, it is fuller and thick∣er than in the upper, middle or lower parts; but that in all the rest of the parts it is every where for the most part, of an equal thickness, unless it be the end that lies hid in the Os Sacrum.
XVIII. From the seventh Verte∣her Divisi∣on. of the Breast to the lower parts, it is separated as it were into several small strings, being the Productions of the Nerves in the pith of a newly deceas'd Body dippd in Water, and stirr'd about therein so conspicuous, so that toward the end that same vast quantity of little Strings seems in some manner to represent the Figure of a Horses Tayl. Which Riolanus, who did not understand that the whole constitution of the Pith was fibrous, as∣serts to have been so created by God, lest the Pith of the Back being soft and juicy, as it is observ'd in the Neck and Back, should be bruis'd and broken by th continual moion of the Loins. The said divarication of the Pith toward the end into small Ropes or Strings, the learned Tulpius questions; For, says he, near the Os Sacrum, we have exa∣min'd very diligently, but never could find those hairy strings, which Andrew Laurentius describes in his Tables, tho' otherwise a most credible Writer; We met indeed in that place with Nerves more loose than in other places, but yet compact, and so closely united, that no hot Water would separate their twisted Body, as that other asserts; unless he meant by Strings those Nerves into which the extream part of this Spinal Marrow is evidently di∣stracted. But ocular view opposes and resolves this Doubt; by which it manifestly ap∣pears, that the lower part of the Pith, especially that which is contain'd in the Loins and Os Sacrum, being beaten and stir'd in the Water, will separate into several strings. Now the Reason why Tulpius did not observe that dissolution, might be, because he let the Pith lie in the Water, but never stirr'd and shook it sufficiently. XIX. The Pith within the SkullIts Cavity. has a Hollowness like a Pen shap'd for writing, constituting the lower part of the fourth Ventricle, and so far, to the midst of its thickness it is mani∣festly divided into the Right and Left part, in the same manner as the Brain is divided in the upper part: And hence the Palsie sometimes in the Right, sometimes in the Left side. But this Division in the outside of the Cra∣num, in the Cavity of the Spine, is not conspicuous to the Eyes, because of the exterior Tunicle or hard Meninx, which enfolds it round about, for which Reason the whole Pith being view'd without, seems round and simple, with∣out any division to the end of the Os Sacrum; though if that Tunicle be ta∣ken away, there is in reality such a di∣vision found by the intervening thin Film, and may be shew'd by neat and curious Dissection; and not only by Dissection, but by the blowing in of Wind the same division may be disco∣ver'd. Thus Bartholine, after a tedious Examination, by putting a Pipe into the Hollowness bove the separation, easily brought the Wind to the extream parts, so that the whole Body of the Pith, where the Division ran along, seem'd to be rais'd up. But this Division descends no farther than about half way of the Substance: Nor is there any other manifest Disco∣very to be found in any part of the Pith. XX. It is lapt about with twoThe Cove∣rings. Membranes; of which the first, that enfolds it immediately, arises from the Pia Mater, which being sprinkl'd with innumerable small Arteries en∣tring the Substance of the Pith, washes and nourishes it with Vital Blood, the remaining part of which Blood, in∣termix'd with little Arteries, suck up and convey back to the heart. The other Membrane sticking to the first by the means of small tender Fibers, pro∣ceeds from the thick Meninx. Gerard Blasius observes a third between these two, which as resembling a Spider's Web, he calls the Arachnoides, and al∣ledges that it sticks to the thin Meninx, and may be easily separated from it ei∣ther with a Bodkin or by blowing. A∣bout these Tunicles is wrapt a strong and nervous Membrane by a strong Ligament, that binds the fore-parts of the Vertebers, which perserves the Pith of the Spine from damage in the bending and extension of the Back. O∣ver this a thick and viscous Humor spreads it self, to moisten and smooth it, that it may be more easie to prevent pain in motion upon its being over-dry. With which Humor all the Joynts are moisten'd for their more easie Motion. Lindan and Blasius erroneously number this Membrane with the containing parts of the Pith, in regard it rather serves to bind the Vertebers withinside, than to enfold the Pith. Besides the foremention'd Coverings, the Pith is also included within a Bony Sheath, for its better preservation, the upper part of which is cover'd with the Skull.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Mamillary Processes, the Pituary Kernel, the Funnel, the wonderful Net, and the Nerves proceeding from the Pith within the Skull. See Table 12, and 13. HAving gone thus far in Demon∣stration, the Brain is to be rais'd up in the fore-part, that the Parts which lie underneath may be more easily seen. I. Among the Parts that lie hidThe Ma∣millary Processes. under the Bulk of the Brain, the first that occur to the Eye are the Mamilla∣ry or Papillary Processes, so call'd from their Figure, which is round at the end like a Teat. These were not reckon'd by the Ancients among the Nerves, by reason of the softness of their Substance, and because they never exceed the thick Meninx and the Cavity of the Skull, neither have productions like other Nerves, and therefore erroneously by most Modern Anatomists added to the Number of the Nerves, and said to proceed from the Pith, when ocular View evinces the contrary. II. These Processes are two in num∣ber;Their Number. white, soft, long, round at the end, hollow within; in men thinner and less, but bigger in Calves, Sheep and other Brutes. III. Being propagated from theTheir Ori∣ginal. globous Pith, and the foremost Ven∣tricles (for Willis errs in saying they rise from the Thighs of the long Marrow, and clad with the thin Meninx) they are carry'd be∣tween the Brain, the Os Sphoenois, and the Bone of the Forehead, to the Hollowness of the Sieve-like Bone, en∣velopp'd with the thick Meninx, into which they insinuate themselves, the Bony Process, call'd the Cocks-comb, intervening between and distinguish∣ing them one from another. IV. The thick Meninx investingLittle Pipes. these Hollownesses of the Sieve-like Bone, is not only bor'd through with many little Holes, but also with many little Pipes extended through the Holes of the Sieve-like Bone, and so opens into the Spungy Flesh of the No∣strils adhering to the Spungy Bones, and through those little Pipes trans∣mits the Flegm out of the Ventricles of the Brain, and brings it into the said Spungy Flesh and Spungy Bones of the Nostrils, adhering to the Ven∣tricles above, and full of the said Spungy Flesh. Which is the Reason that something may flow down from the Brain, but nothing can ascend back from the Nostrils; for that if any thing do ascend upward, it stops there; part∣ly by reason of the contrary situation of the Pores of the fungous Flesh, and partly from the winding of the slender Pipes about the Extremities. These Pipes are easily discover'd in the Head of an Ox or a Calf, if the Bones of the upper part of the Nostrils be so taken away, that their whole Ca∣vity may appear; for then those little Pipes are manifestly to be seen pendu∣lous through the holes of the Ethmoi∣des-Bone and extending themselves in∣to the Spungy Flesh of the Nostrils. V. From each of these ProcessesThe Chan∣nels for the Flegm. there passes a Channel from the upper Ventricles, all their full length, run∣ning out to the Ethmoides-Bone, so large in the Brain of an Ox, Calf or Sheep, as to admit a Goose-Quill. But in a dead man so very narrow as hardly it will admit the point of a Bod∣kin; and therefore not to be seen but in Bodies newly deceas'd; for if the Carkasses be kept for any time, the Sub∣stance of these Processes grows so lank, that the said Channel is never to be found; which is the Reason that these Channels are by many Modern Ana∣tomists overseen and not observ'd. And among that Number is Vesalius, who affirms, that no Flegm falls down thro' those Processes, and that there is no Passage within them, neither can be by reason of their slenderness. To his Au∣thority Riolanus also subscribing, avers that the flegmatic Filth does not distil through the Mamillary Process and the Holes of the Sieve-like Bones; for that it would infect the pure Air which is re∣quir'd in those parts. Upon the same Foundations Rolfinch asserts, that he never could find any Cavity in these
Processes; because perhaps he never examin'd other than stale and long kept Carkasses. But let us hear what Fallopius says concerning these Pro∣cesses. It is hard, says he, to observe these Channels in Men, because they are too slender and diminutively small; but in Brutes, as Oxen, Goats, Sheep, and the like, it is easie to see, that these Pro∣cesses arise from the foremost Ventricles, and that a manifest Hole reaches. They have a Passage from the Hole to the Colaterium or Sieve-like Bone, which Passage is big∣ger or less according to the proportion of the Process: For in the Process of an Ox it is very large; in a Man so narrow, that unless it be in a Carkass newly deceas'd it is hardly to be discover'd. Which per∣haps is the Reason that these Processes have been so little known to several Anato∣mists. VI. This innermost Cavity of theTheir Coats. Processes is very white, and envelop'd with a thin Film, common and con∣tinuous with that which overspreads the upper Ventricles withinside. It is seldom empty, but for the most part full of a slimy and limpid Juice. VII. It is the Opinion of Sneider andThe Use of them. other Anatomists, that these Papillary Processes are the real Nerves proper to the Sence of Smelling; but Galen as∣signs them a double Use; first, to serve for the Smell; and partly for evacuati∣on of the Flegmatic Excrements out of the Ventricles of the Brain. As to their first Use, Avicen, Hali, Fucksius, Bauhinus, Epigelius, Casser and several others subscribe to his Opinion, affirm∣ing these Processes. But as to their evacuating Function, few of them make any mention of it, though indeed it be their primary and only Office. VIII. For that they are no Odora∣toryNot Odo∣ratory Nerves. Nerves, there are many Reasons to prove. 1. They have no Resemblance with the Nerves. 2. They have a large Cavity, which is not to be found in any Nerves. 3. They do not rise from the Pith, which is the Original of all the Nerves. 4. They do not proceed from the thick Meninx and the Cranium, nor send forth any nervous strings into the Mem∣branes of the Nostrils, which is the Seat of Smelling; but only empty Flegm through the little Holes of the Ethmo∣is-Bone into the spungy Bones of the Nostrils. Besides, a Nervous Organ full of Excrements, would be impro∣per for that Use; as it happens also in all other Nerves, whose Office is pre∣judic'd by the Moisture and Obstructi∣on of Flegm. But in these Channels Flegmatic Humors are always stagnant, either in a greater or lesser Quantity; and that also in Dogs, which are Crea∣tures endu'd with a most exquisite sense of Smelling, and yet receive not any impediment in their Smell from thence▪ Neither in Man is the Sense of Smel∣ling prejudic'd by a moderate Quantity of Flegm sticking in these parts; but if so great a Quantity be gather'd toge∣ther in the spungy part of the Nostrils, so as to make it swell like a Spunge, by which the Nerves of the Nostrils and Membranes are compress'd, and free Respiration hinder'd, then the Smell is diminish'd and hinder'd, as is known to happen in a Pose. Manifest it is therefore that these Processes are no Odoratory Nerves, but only Channels through which the Fleg∣matic Excrements flow from the fore∣most Ventricles of the Brain; which slip out at their Extremities through the Porosities of the thick Meninx, and the Sieve-like and spungy Bones, to the Nostrils and Mouth; which Porosities are so small, that the Flegm more rare∣ly flows out of it self, only when it is very thin; but for the most part is squeez'd out through the compressure of the Brain; which is done, lest the cold Air breath'd in, should enter the Cavities of the Brain, & so that most no∣ble Bowel be overmuch refrigerated. To which purpose the ruddy spungy pieces of Flesh are so constituted, that they give a passage, 'tis true, to these fleg∣matic Excrements, but permit no in∣gress of the ascending Air to the Sieve∣like Bone; because upon breathing in the Air, by reason of their softness, they fall down and shut, and hence they allow no passage for the Odour-bear∣ing Vapour to the Papillary Processes; but exclude and drive it out. From hence it is manifest how greatly Rol∣finch is mistaken, who writes that the Air breath'd in, partly enters the Ven∣tricles of the Brain through the Papil∣lary Processes, and partly through the sides of it reaches the thin Membrane; neither of which can be, seeing that the spungy Flesh of the Nostrils hin∣ders the entrance of any Air to the Pa∣pillary Processes. Therefore the flegmatic Humors collected in the Ventricles of the Brain, are evacuated through these Processes; which, when they have passed, a good
part descends to the Jaws and their Glandules, to moisten the Jaws, La∣rynx and Gullet, and to afford plenty of Spittle for the better concoction and passage of the Meat in swallowing. But that which remains of these flegmatic Humors and is most superfluous, flows toward the Nostrils and Palate, partly to moisten the inside of the Mouth and Chaps, and partly to mix a sermentace∣ous quality with the Meat when chew'd, and partly for the remainder to be eva∣cuated forth. These Vapors upon the too much refrigeration of the Head, are collected many times more crude and copious, in regard the Vapours ascend∣ing from the inferior parts, for want of sufficient heat, are not dissipated nor sufficiantly concoed; but being con∣densed, turn nto slimy Sot, which when by reason of its viscosity and re∣dundancy, it cannot pass through the streight passages of the Sieve-like Bones, and the spungy Porosities of the upper part of the inside of the Nostrils, can∣not be either suddenly or conveniently enough evacuated, occasion an Obstru∣ction in those Passages, which is call'd Gravedo or the Pose, which the immis∣sion of Errhines, by their incision and attenuation of the Humors diminish, and Sternutories evacuate; when the Membranes o the Brain, the Mem∣branes of the interior Nostrils being twing'd by their Acrimony▪ and irrita∣ted by Sympathy, strongly and forci∣bly contract themselves, and so by compressing the Brain, squeeze out the flegmatic Humor contain'd in the Brain through the obstructed Passages, by a kind of violence. IX. After these Processes, you pre∣sentlyNerves within the Cranium. come to the Nerves, which proceed all from the Pith, some while it is yet included in the Brain, and other while when it is fallen down out of it. X. Of the first Primary Nerves, ac∣cordingThe seven Pairs. to Galen, there are reckon'd seven Pairs, or Yoaklings together. Which Number the more Modern have augmented to eight, nine and ten, or more Pairs; reckoning in not only the Larger and Primary Nerves, but also all the Little Nerves, which Galen takes only for the Strings of the Larger, and dividing them into Pairs. These seven Pairs are usually com∣prehended in these Verses; Optica prima, Oculos movet altera, tertia gstat; Quartaque, quinta audit; Vaga sexta est, septima Lingua. But because these Pairs proceeding out of the Pith, before it falls out of the Cranium, use to be shewn, after the De∣monstration of the Brain, we shall ob∣serve the same Method in this Chap∣ter, leaving the rest of the Nerves pro∣ceeding from the Pith of the Back to another Place. XI. The Papillary Processes beingThe first Pair. remov'd, presently comes in sight the first pair of Nerves, call'd the OpticOptic. Pair; conveying Animal Spirits con∣ducing to the Faculty of seeing, to the Eye, and reverberating back the Beams of Visible things to the com∣mon Sensory; which is the chiefest among all the Pairs, but softer and more porous than the rest. This Pair is said to rise more behind, from the beginning of the Pith, where the two Thighs of the Arch are stretch'd forth. But if its production be more diligent∣ly examin'd, beginning from the Eyes themselves, it will appear, that that pair takes its original from the stringy protuberances seated in the third Ven∣tricle; for it moves forward from the Eyes to mutual conjunction; hence be∣ing separated again, it runs directly to the stringy Protuberances; nay it grows and cleaves on both sides to their sides, and putting off its inward enfolding Tu∣nicle upon the inner side, next toward their substance, is immediately united with them, and so intermix'd with their Substance, that Reason seems to per∣swade us that it has its own Fibers con∣tinuous with their Fibers. And so it proceeds all along the outside of these Protuberances, to the Hole of the Arse, in which place the outward Face of both the Optic Nerves concurs in the middle of those Protuberances, and turns back again upwards, and so joint∣ly ascends as far as the top of those Protuberances; and there again they seem to be turn'd backward again, and spread forth, and so form an Arch; which Riolanus observes, though he sets not forth their whole Course so exact∣ly. The Optic Nerves in the middle way are joyn'd above the Saddle of the Sphoenoides-Bone; which Conjunction Bauhinus, Mercatus, Sennertus and many others believe to be not only a
bare Touching, but an absolute Con∣fusion of Substances together, that there may be a more easie passage of the Spirits from one Eye to the other, not only to augment the Sight in sound people, but also in those that have but one Eye, whose single Eye requires to equal the Sight of two. Which Opini∣on Baptista Porta defends with several plausible Reasons. Others believe these Nerves not to be confounded together, but to cut each other in the form of a Cross, so that the Right Nerve runs to the Left Eye, and the Left to the Right; but this Sentence no Demon∣stration confirms. Riolanus tells us, that these Nerves are joyn'd only by bare Contaction, by means of a little Swath or small Channel cast between in the form of an H. For my part, I rather think that without any Band put between, these Nerves at their Meeting grow to their Membranes firmly and mutually: Which not only ocular View seems to teach us, but it is that also which has been confirm'd by seve∣ral Observations of Anatomists. For Vesalius, Aquapondens and Valpenda write, that they have sometimes ob∣serv'd these Nerves separated through their whole Course, but commonly u∣nited to the Membranes, when they meet. And Lindan transcribes a perti∣nent History to this Matter out of Ce∣salpinus. Once, at a Dissection, one of the Visory Nerves, says he, was found lank and fall'n, the other full; but the Sight was weak in that Eye to which the extenuated Nerve was carry'd; for the Party was wounded in his Head near that part; but the extenuated Nerve did not proceed to the opposite part, but was turn'd back to it. This was seen at Pisa, in the Year 1590. from whence all the Spectators inferr'd, that the Visory Nerves did not cross one another, but meet and return back to the same place. Vesalius also tells us of a Woman that was hang'd, who had lost her right Eye from her youth; in which Carkass the right Nerve was seen to be thinner all the length of its Course and redder than the left. Now such Observations as these, wholly destroy all these Opinions of intersection and intermixture of the Substance. After these Nerves are separated from their Conjunction, prepar'd on both sides through the Hole of the Wedge∣resembling-Bone, the one runs forward to the right, the other to the left Eye, and enters the very Center in Men, but in Brutes the more lateral part. XII. This Pair within the Skull, isTheir Coats. overlaid only with a thin Membrane or Film, but coming forth of the Skull, it assumes a thick Membrane also from the Holes of the Bones through which it passes, to the very Eyes; out of which Membranes and the middle Marrowy Substance, spread in order together about the bulbous part of the Eye, are form'd the three Coats or Tunicles of the Eye. Galen, following the Opinion of He∣orphilus, affirms, that the Optic Nerves are hollow, and that they have a ma∣nifest hole; and Plempius prescribes the manner of Discovery. But I must in∣genuoussy confess, that I never observ'd this Hollowness yet; though I have made use of Plempius's Method; nor could Carpus, Vesalius, Fallopius, Co∣lumbus, Valverda, Aquapendens, nor several other most excellent Anatomists. For their Substance seems to be thick and close, which though like that of other Nerves, it be constituted of seve∣ral strings by the Benefit of a Mem∣brane growing together, as Coiter well observes; yet is it in this different from other Nerves, that it is somewhat porous in the middle, and seems to contain something of a Marrowy Substance in those Pores. For in a Carkass newly deceas'd and full of Juice, if dissected athwart, the Optic Nerve be press'd with the Fingers, there will come forth a little conspicuous Moisture; but it is a difficult thing for any man to imagine any such conspicuous Cavity as Galen speaks of. See more of this, l. 8. c. 1. XIII. Rolfinch advances some∣thingThe Course or Sub∣stance of the Strings new concerning the Course of those Threads. For he writes, that the Threds in other Nerves run forth with a direct Course all the length of the Nerves, but in the Optics are crook∣edly twisted one with another. He adds, that he read with admiration in Euka∣chius, and found it to be so in the Op∣tic, that it was folded like a thin Ma∣tron's Kercher, into innumerable wrin∣kles, distributed in the same order, and bound about with a Tunicle enclosing those Pleights, and that the whole might be unfolded into a large Mem∣brane. Something like this Malpigius saw and describes in the Sword-Fish; but he adds, that he could not discover those Foldings in the Optic neither of an Ox, a Goat, or a Hog, though slight∣ly boil'd, for the more distinct discern∣ing them by his Microscope; but as it
were a bundle of little Twigs, which being squeez'd with a round orifice, e∣jected the soft Substance of the Brain, and cloath with their proper Tunicle deriv'd from the Pia Mater, carry along with them certain bloody Vessels, and that out of these, if the Optic were squeez'd in a new kill'd Creature, drops of Blood would burst forth from the Spaces of those Bodies; but that the said Threds are as it were bundl'd up toge∣ther by the hard and thin Meninx enve∣loping the whole Nerve. Fracassatus believes, that the said Threds of the Optics which he calls Fibers, arise by continuation, as from Roots, from the small Fibers of the Brain, and only differ in this one thing, that their Origi∣nals are to be deriv'd from the smallest, and consequently the weakest begin∣nings. This he not improbably con∣jectures, though by reason of the extra∣ordinary slenderness of the small Fi∣bers of the Brain, and the weakness of our Sight, that which Reason seems to dictate, cannot be discern'd. As to those complications of the Threds of which Rolfinch seems to write in general, with out any distinction of Creatures, as if they were in all Animals, I believe 'tis a thing to be deny'd, that they are to be discern'd in all Creatures, since that besides my self, many others never ob∣serv'd them either in Man, Sheep or Oxen; and for that the Optic, like all the other Nerves in the said Ani∣mals are compos'd of streight Threds. If by chance it be otherwise in some Fish, it may be so; and Malpigius's diligence has clear'd that Point; but from thence no general Rule can be de∣duc'd. XIV. This Pair being taken away,The Pitui∣tary Ker∣nel. the Pituitary Kernel comes in sight, so call'd from its Use, which is to receive the flegmatic Humors collect∣ed in the third or middle Ventricle, and to send them down to the Iaws and Palate through the neighbouring Holes. Or which our modern Ana∣tomists conceive to be the better Opi∣nion through the Veiny or perhaps Lymphatic Vessels, to pour them not into the Jaws and Palate, but into other Veins, and there to mix them with the Veiny Blood; in like manner as it hap∣pens in most other Kernels, whose col∣lected Humors are suckt up and carry'd off through peculiar Lymphatic and Salival, or other Vessels, and remix'd with the sanguineous Mass. And so this Kernel call'd the Pituitary Kernel, is so call'd from this Function assign'd it, which whether it be its true Function or no, we shall afterwards enquire. XV. It borrows small slender Ar∣teriesIts Vessels. from the Carotides, and sends little Veins to the Iugulars. The In∣sertion of the Arteries appears by the injection of Ink into the Carotis; for then the exterior part of the Kernel be∣ing furnish'd with several small Vessels, will be dy'd of a black colour. And because the Liquor continually flowing into it through the small Arteries, can∣not all be contain'd nor spent within it, therefore the superfluous part is again evacuated through other passages, and as is now adays thought flows down thro' little Veins to the Jugulars. Besides these Blood-bearing Vessels, Wharton assigns to this Kernel, Nerves from the Net-resembling Fold; of which never∣theless there does not seem to be any need at all in this Kernel. XVI. It is seated under the Me∣ninxes,Its Situa∣tion. in the Cavity of the Spoenoi∣des-Bone, which is generally call'd the Horses-Saddle; as representing in some measure the figure of a Saddle; for it is depress'd, above somewhat concave; below gibbous and almost foursquare. XVII. The Substance of it is hard∣erIts Sub∣stance. and more compacted than that of other Glandules; and next it is over∣cast with a thin Film proceeding from the Funnel, expanded round about it, which a portion of the hard Meninx covers, by which this Kernel is fast∣ned to the Saddle, not only in Men, but in Hogs, Calves and Oxen. Which Connexion however in other Creatures is not alike close and firm; for in Cats, Conies and Dogs it is so loose, that upon removing the Funnel, it often comes away with it.Its Divis∣on. XVIII. The Bulk of the Substance in Men and Calves seems to be united and individual; but in Cats and Dogs it seems to be compos'd of two easily separable and distinct Ker∣nels. XIX. With this Kernel not onlyIts Big∣ness. Men, but all perfect Creatures are fur∣nish'd; but the proportion of its quan∣tity varies according to the Bulk of the Creature. For many times it is
Serum can by no means flow out of it▪ sideways or if it should flow out, whi∣ther should it pass? For there is no Part near to which it can safely de∣scend without an extream prejudice to the Part. If you'l say, that the Flegm not so large in larger Creatures as in lesser. And where it is largest, there most Branches of the Carotid Arteries enter into it, and the wonderful Net is very large, as in Oxen and Sheep. Where it is less, there fewer Arteries approach it, and the Net is thin and narrow, as in Men and Horses; and hence it seems probable, that either through the greater quantity of Arte∣ries, or through the greater necessity of its Use, that in some Creatures it is big∣ger, and for contrary Cause less. XX. Into this Kernel the Choana or Infundibulum or Funnel termi∣nates; so call'd from its resemblance: first is an orbicular Cavity with a wide Orifice (therefore by some call'd Pel∣vis or the Bason) beginning from the middle hole of the third Ventricle, and ending with a long and narrow channel inserted into the Pituitary Kernel. It is form'd out of the Pia Mater, where it enfolds the Basis of the Brain, and is of a dark colour, and uses to be found full of Flegm; which it was thought to transmit to the Kernel. XXI. Round about the Pituitary Kernel at the sides▪ of the Saddle is spread the wonderful Net; by others call'd the Net-resembling Fold, so call'd from its artificial and admira∣ble Net-work Contexture. It is chiefly constituted by the Caro∣tid Arteries, ascending the sides of the Neck to the Head, and through the Gapings of the Cranium, entring the Cranium near the optic Nerves; with which at the lower part some few Branches are mix'd from the Cervicals; for both the Carotides meeting toge∣ther at the bottom of the Brain near the Saddle of the Sphoenoides, are wonder∣fully interwoven with Branches toge∣ther with some few Branches of the Cervicals, form this Fold. Wolaeus thinks that some Branches of the Jugular Veins are intermix'd with this Fold, which carry back the superfluous Blood; deny'd by Rolfinch, who will not allow it to consist of any thing but Arteries. Reason supports Walaeus; but Ocular View backs Rol∣finch, in regard no notable Veins can be discern'd to be interwoven with the Arteries, and these so few, that they are not to be compar'd in number with the Arteries, This Fold is manifestly to be seen in Calves and many other brute Crea∣tures, and shews in them as it were a contexture of many Nets woven toge∣ther, but so joyn'd together in a conti∣nu'd Series, that they cannot be separa∣ted: But in Man it is slender and obscure∣ly discern'd, so that oftentimes it seems to be missing; which was the Reason that Vesalius, Fucksius, Ialverda, Car∣pus, Ingraffius and Wepfer asserted that it was not to be found in Man. Never∣theless Varolius, Picolhomini, Massa, Sylvius, Riolanus and others allow this Fold to be really in Man, and tell us the way how to discover it. For my part, I have frequently found it in new∣ly deceas'd Bodies, full of Blood, and not emaciated with long Sickness, but very slender, and in nothing so conspicu∣ous as in a Calf or a Sheep. XXII. The Use of this Net is to stop the impetuous influx of the Blood of the Brain, and to break the Cur∣rent of it by these innumerable Wind∣ings and Turnings. Which Influx being more impetuous in Brutes that look downwards, than in Man that walks with his Head upright, there this Net is more useful to them than to men. From this Net the Branches of the Carotid Artery ascending yet farther, enter the upper Ventricles at the lower hindermost part, and form in them the Choroid Fold. XXIII. Now to return from the wonderful Net to the Pituitary Ker∣nel, which seems to be fram'd for the sake of this Net, we have already told you the common Opinions of the Use of it; but whether true or no, we shall now enquire. And I think one Argument may do the Work; for if it receive the Flegm continually flow∣ing through the Funnel from the third Ventricle of the Brain, of necessity it must discharge it again through other Passages and to send it to other parts; but there are no other passages through which, nor no other parts that evacua∣tion can be made, ergo, &c. The Ma∣jor is unquestionably true: The Minor is prov'd, because the Horses Saddle con∣sists of a solid and thick Bone, no where bor'd through or pervious. The Ker∣nel also it self is cover'd with a hard Meninx or Membrane, and firmly fasten'd to the Saddle, which Mem∣brane no where lies open, but only in that place where the Funnel approaches to the Kernel; so that the Flegmatic
may be evacuated out of the Bony Sad∣dle or hard Meninx, that's to assert that a Camel may pass through the eye of a Needle For if we were talking of the most subtle Spirits, something might be allow'd; but that this visible and thick Liquor should pass through invi∣sible pores, is beyond all Belief. As to the Veins and Lymphatic Vessels suck∣ing up that Flegmatic Serum, and pouring it into the larger veins, there was never any Anatomist yet so quick-sighted as to demonstrate any such Conveyance of a Vessel. And therefore of necessity that Opinion must fall to the ground. Now then we must find out another more pro∣bable use of this Kernel; which is not to receive the Flegm falling out of the mid∣dle Ventricle of the Brain, but rather to separate a part of the Flegmatic Serum from the Arteries of the wonderful Net, and transmit it to the middle Ventricle through the Funnel that lies above it, that so ascending to the superior Ventri∣cles, it may flow through the Papillary Processes to the Nostrils and Roof of the Mouth. It is well known that the Choroid Fold has several small Kernels intermix'd between the divarications of the little Arteries, which we grant to be appointed to drain out the serous Flegm from the Blood of their Ves∣sels, and then to empty it into the Ca∣vities of the Ventricles. But the won∣derful Net, which consists of many more little Arteries, has none of these small Kernels to drain out the Serum; yet be∣cause the Arterious Blood was to be there prepar'd for the making of Spirits, and freed from some part of the serous Flegm, the Chief Creator in∣stead of those small Kernels, has al∣low'd it one large Kernel in the middle of it, that is to say, in the Cavity of the Bone of the Horses Saddle, and in such a place where the separated Li∣quor may conveniently be discharg'd into the Ventricles of the Brain, and so be empty'd through the common pas∣sages which are the Papillary Processes. Then that certain Arteries enter the Kernel, as it were to discharge some∣thing into it, is apparent from the Ex∣periment of Injection recited. Nor let any man think the ascent of the Humor to the middle Ventricle seated above the Kernel to be difficult; for the Brain by its alternate heaving and falling, by degrees gently draws upward whatever Humors are contain'd within the Cra∣nium, through the Passages appointed for every one, and among the rest of the Humors, the Flegmatic Serum flow∣ing out of the said Kernel into the Fun∣nel; and hence it is, that the Funnel below continually receiving as much as it empties into the Ventricle above, is never empty, but is always found full of Flegmatic Serum. And that this is the true Office of this Kernel, is appa∣rent from hence, that it is lesser or bigger as the necessity of its Use requires; big∣ger in those Creatures that have a larger wonderful Net, and to which more little Arteries come; lesser in those that have but a small Net, and where fewer Ar∣teries encompass and enter the Kernel, which afford a less quantity of Flegma∣tic Serum. XXIV. After the DemonstrationThe second Pair mov∣ing the Eyes. of these, the second Pair of Nerves comes in view, which lies next to the first Pair, but much less and harder. This rising near the first at the in∣nermost part of the Pith, where it be∣gins is united, and by and by separated, is carry'd on both sides through the se∣cond Hole of the Spoenois-Bone, and as∣signs Branches to the Muscles of the up∣per Eye-lid and Eye. Moreover, Fallo∣pius observes, that some certain slender Fibers of this Pair, accompanying the Visory Pair, are disseminated into the exterior Membranes of the Eye. XXV. The third Pair adjoyningThe Third Pair. to the foregoing Pair, arises from the side of the beginning of the Pith, with a small Nerve (erroneously thought to be the Root of the second Pair, with which it has no communi∣on or conjunction) and thence is carry'd under the bottom of the Brain directly forward, and being alone, perforates the thick Meninx on both sides, and then joyn'd to the second, and proceeding forth with it through the common Hole, it enters the Path leading to the Eye, where it is dis∣pers'd into four little Branches. The first of these is carry'd through the Fat of the Eye, and comes to the Fifth or Troclear Muscle, the Skin of the Fore∣head and the upper Eye-lid. The Se∣cond, through the proper Hole bor'd through the Bone of the Jaw, and proceeds to the Lip and its Muscles, and some Muscles of the Nose. The Third, partly through the Hole of the upper Jaw seated under the Path of the Eye; partly passing through the Holes of the Wedg-resembling Bone, is dispers'd through the Tunicles cloathing the Ca∣vity of the Nostrils, and the spungy Flesh, conferring the Sence of Smelling to them, and stretches out a little Branch to the Muscle contracting the Wing of the Nose. The Fourth is inserted into
the inner part of the Temporal Muscle; whence it comes to pass that the Fore∣head, Eyes and outward part of the Nose contract themselves by consent upon any ungrateful Smell: But no part of this Pair comes to the Tongue, or to its Tunicles, so that 'tis a wonder that the ancient Physicians and some of their modern Admirers should think this Pair to be serviceable to the Taste; which it neither is nor can be, but only conduces to the Smell, as not entring the Tunicles of the Tongue, but of the Nostrils; which was the Sence of Galen; with whom Vesalius agrees, when he writes, that the inner Tunicle of the Nostrils is form'd by the foresaid third little Branch of this Pair. And there∣fore I think the old Verses that ascribe the Tasting Faculty to the third Pair, should be thus mended; Optica prima, oculos movet altera, tertia odorat; Quarta est quae gustat; quinta audit; sed vaga sexta; Septima laxatas Linguae moderatur habe∣nas. Veslingius adds a little Nerve to this Third Pair, which rising from the bot∣tom of the Brain and entring the Path of the Eye, is carry'd to its Trochle∣ar Muscle; but this seems rather to be the first Branch of the second Muscle already describ'd. XXVI. The Fourth Pair follows,The fourth Pair serv∣ing to the Taste. which is Bartholine's Fifth; and thought to be the thicker Root of the Third Conjugation. This, with the foregoing Pair, ari∣sing from the sides of the Pith, but a little more to the fore-part, sends forth first of all a small Branch to the Cavi∣ty of the Ears, which obliquely enters the Tympanum. Then on both sides it de∣scends through the third hole of the Wedge-resembling Bone; and then af∣ter it has dispers'd its Branches to the Muscles of the Temples, the Face, the Cheeks, the Skin of the Face, the Teeth of the upper Jaw and the Gums, is car∣ry'd to the inner hole of the lower Jaw, and affords little Branches to the Roots of the lower Teeth, and then passing out at the outward hole of the same Jaw, seated below, it is dispers'd into the lower Lip and the Skin of it. The remarkable Branch of this Pair that re∣mains, passing through the Muscles that lie hid in the Mouth, is dispers'd into the sides of the Tongue and through its Tunicle. To this fourth Pair there joyn two slender and hard Pairs, though generally excluded out of the number by reason of their slenderness; of which the first; which others think to be the slender Root of the Fourth Couple, has its O∣riginal next to the former Pair, is∣suing out with it through the common hole, yet not united, is carry'd to the Palate, and conduces to the Sence of Tasting. The latter rises a little before the Fifth Pair, whence by many it is said to be the Root of the Fifth Pair, from the middle of the Pith, and pas∣sing over the third pair, and issues out through the common hole together with the second and third pair, and wastes it self into the Muscle that draws the Eye on one side. XXVII. Next follows the FifthThe fifth Pair serv∣ing to the Hearing. Pair, call'd , or Auditorium, conducing to the Sence of Hearing. This rises from the lateral parts of the Pith, to which the Bridges of the Cerebel are opposite, next to the sides of the former, a little lower. Coming of each side to the Stony Bone, it is di∣vided into two Branches; of which the greater and softer enters the proper Channel of the Stony Bone, or the first hole of the Bone of the Temples, and provides for the Organ of Hearing. The lesser, which is the harder, is carry'd downward, and sliding through the Hole, call'd the Blind Hole by the An∣cients, without the Skull, between the Teat-resembling process and the Stytoi∣des Appendix, dispences little Branches to the Temporal Muscle, as also to the Muscles of the Jaw and Larynx, to the Chaps and Skin of the outward Ear. Rolfinch however affirms, that he has not always found that distribu∣tion to the Larynx always constant & or∣dinary; neither does Vesalius seem wil∣ling to admit it. Riolanus observes that the same Nerve issuing out of the Cranium, not only provides for the a∣foresaid Muscles, but also sends some little Branches into the Nostrils and Cheeks, and from thence the greatest part of it is carry'd to the Roots of the Teeth, the Larynx and the Tongue. Nevertheless he adds, Hence it is that deafish people are somewhat hoarse, and that a violent and close stopping of the Ears stops great Fluxes of Blood. Hence the Teeth are set on edge with grating sounds, and that naturally dumb People are deaf, and deaf People subject to pant; that People that dig in their Ears very hard, cough; and that the Ears of Peripneumo∣nics
are always moist; all which things happen by reason of the Communication of the Nerves of the Fifth Pair with these Parts. This brief Description of the fifth Pair is obvious in Demonstrations; but they who endeavour to deliver a more exquisite Description of it, and its far∣ther Distribution through the Organs of Hearing, do not all agree one with another; neither in Dissections do the Distributions of the Nerves occur alike in all Bodies, Nature sporting and va∣rying as well in these as in several other parts of the Body. Eustachius, concerning this Matter thus writes; The Fifth Pair of the Nerves of the Brain does not consist of two Nerves as others believe: but has two unequal stalks, on each side, of which the biggest is neatly hollow'd to the full length like a Semicircle, and kindly embraces the less; and so being both joyn'd together, proceed obliquely to the foremost and exterior part, as far off the extream part of the Hollowness, bor'd through in the Stone-like Bone for their sakes; where the lesser stalk separating from the big∣ger, finds a little hole prepar'd for it, and enters it, and with a wonderful wind∣ing course shoots forth without the Skull. The bigger stalk seems to be divided into three portions little distant one from the other, of which the principal is Caps, a little hole pervious into the Cochlear-Bone; but whether it cover it like a Pot-lid, or pierce any deeper, and be twin'd about within the Snaky Curles of that Bone, I could not well examin, because of the dif∣ficulty of handling those Parts. Fallopius explains the same thing somewhat otherwise. The first Pair, says he, assists the Hearing, consisting of two Nerves; the one, than which there is no Nerve more soft except the Visory, design'd to the Sence of Hearing; the other, which is also assign'd to the fifth Pair, because it arises from the same place with the softer, and reaches together with the same to the Stone-like Bone; but in∣deed it is a distinct Nerve, and harder than the former, and equally as hard as the rest of the Nerves which form ihe rest of the Pairs; nor will any Reason allow it to be a part of the soft one. The other portion of the fifth Pair, which is soft and by me call'd the Hearing-Nerve, coming together with the hard one to the extremity of that Den by the means of certain very narrow middle holes, is di∣stributed into two Cavities; of which the one is by me call'd the Labyrinth; the other, the Spoon, or Spoon-like Portion; neither does it proceed any farther, or send any Nerve from its self to the exterior Parts. And Coiter testifies, that he has often found it, as Fallopius describes it. Vesalius differing from Fallopius, thus answers, That Difference by thee observ'd in the hard and soft Original of the fifth Pair, or of its being carry'd to its proper hole, I have not as yet discover'd: For there is no nearer way whereby the foremost Portion of the Nerve of the fifth Pair can be carry'd or distributed to the begin∣ning of the Den, which I compare to the Chamber of a Mine. And though you describe the hard Portion of the fifth Pair, as if it were of no Use to the Organ of Hearing; yet you must take notice that it produces a stalk that runs through the hole, beculiar to the vaulted Den. Besides, when I observe the Hole admitting the fifth Pair, and see that there is a passage to be met with in the foremost Seat of it, which ends at length, I cannot understand, how you, while you divide the fifth Pair into soft and hard, and assert the hard Portion to be slender∣est, and seated behind the other, can ex∣pect it should enter the said Passage with∣out some kind of crossing and running a∣thwart, which would prove the course and situation of your hard Portion above and soft one below: For to my sight, the for∣mer and not the hinder part seems to en∣ter the said Passage, which ceases in the Blind Hole under the Ear toward the hinder parts. Here Vesalius describes an exact Distribution of the fifth Pair of the Nerves, though it be a difficult thing to demonstrate it so exactly in a dead Body, especially for those that are o∣ver-hasty in Dissection; so that it is on∣ly a Labour to be perform'd by sharp∣sighted, dextrous and patient Anato∣mists. XXVIII. The Sixth Pair, whichThe Va∣gous Pair. provides for many Parts in the mid∣dle and lower Belly, and thence call'd the Vagous or Wandring Pair, a∣rises a little below the fifth Pair, co∣ver'd over with strong Membranes, by reason of its longer Course, and connex'd to the neighbouring Parts. At the Beginning it is compos'd of several little Nerves and Fibers, which Fibers are presently so united and co∣ver'd over with the same Membrane, that they seem to constitute one Nerve.
Between these little Nerves collected together by this Union, in each of the vagous Nerves there is one, which a∣rises not from the Pith within the Cra∣nium, but from the Pith of the Neck (for which Discovery we are beholden to Willis) from which place along the sides of the Pith, into which it is never all the way inserted, but only fasten'd by thin Fibers, it ascends upward to∣ward the Head, and increases in Bulk; hence carry'd to the inside of the Crani∣um, it is fasten'd to the Fibers of the fifth Pair, and with those issues forth at the same hole, so that you would think they grew together into one Trunk. After their Egress, being again sepa∣rated from the Trunk of the vagous Nerve, it reflects back and afterward im∣parts certain little Branches to the Mus∣cles of the Neck and Shoulders, descends to the Scapular Muscle, and in that is almost all consum'd; pouring Animal Spirits into it for the motion of the Arms in Men, the Fore-feet in Beasts, tho Wings in Fowl and the Fins in Fish; for in these Creatures also has Willis observ'd Productions of the said Nerve. And therefore because the Motions of the Arm require strong Muscles, it is requisite that it should arise from the Pith within and not without the Brain. This vagous Pair being compos'd of the said little Nerves concurring toge∣ther, issues out of the Cranium through the third hole common with the hinder part of the Head to the Bone of the Temples (through which also passes the bigger Branch of the inner Jugular Vein) and not far from its Egress sends little Branches to the Muscles of the Neck and the Cowl-resembling Muscle. From hence in Man it associates to its self a Branch of the intercostal Nerve, and sends forth another remarkable Branch to the Larynx, which runs for∣ward to the Throat and the exterior Muscles of the Larynx, and running under the Shield-resembling Muscle, proceeds to the point of the Turn-again Nerve, and is united to it. At this place where the Intercostal is joyn'd to it, and the other sent forth toward the Larynx, the stalk of the vagous Nerve is exalted into a long Tumor, and con∣stitutes the Nervous Fold, call'd the Contorted Fold, and by Fallopius, Cor∣pus Olivare; which Fold is also found in the Intercostal adjoyning, constituted by its concourse with the Nerve of the last Pair within the Cranium. Both these Folds are discover'd when the Ca∣rotid Arteries are laid open on both sides between the Muscles of the Neck; for then by tracking them, they are presently to be seen about the insertion of the lower Jaw. Besides this Fold, Willis has observ'd another lesser Fold, seated a little distance from it, which is form'd out of a small Twig of the foresaid Fold, wound about the Pneu∣monic Artery, and with the Branch descending from the Trunk of the right vagous Pair, as also with another Nerve design'd for the hinder Region of the Heart; and from this Fold he farther observes little Nerves to be sent to the right side of the fore-part of the Heart.The Turn-again Nerves▪ XXIX. After it has form'd these Folds, the Trunk of the vagous Pair descending between the Carotis and the Iugular to the side of the Rough Artery, above the Throat is divided on both sides into the inward and out∣ward Branch. Both the outward Branches present∣ly after their separation provide for the Breast, proceeding from the Sternon and the Clavicle, and then there issue forth from it the Nerves call'd Vocal; because they constitute the Instrument of Speech, and the cutting off the one, renders a man half dumb, the cutting off of both renders him perfectly dumb. The said Vocal Nerves are also call'd the Turn-again Nerves? by the Greeks , because they first descend and then ascend, the right being wound about the right Subclavial Artery, a∣bout the Trunk of the Great Artery, where it bows it self toward its De∣scent, that so they may run back to the Muscles of the Larynx, into whose Head, looking downwards, they enter with numerous Branches. Now why the Nerves were not sent from above or out of the Neck into the Muscles of the Larynx, but are forc'd to turn upward again, Galen makes a long examination, but resolves nothing; but the true Reason is this; for that the Muscles of the Larynx cause the Voice and move the Air in mea∣sure as it goes out of the Lungs, there∣fore there is a necessity that their Head should be turn'd downward and their Tail upward. For to the end there may be a Modulation of the Air going out of the Lungs, the Supremities of the Larynx ought to be contracted from a∣bove toward the lower parts, to resist the egress of the Air at pleasure; yet not so as to be quite shut. Now in regard all
the Muscles draw the parts sticking to their Tails, toward their Beginnings or Heads, therefore ought the Heads of the Muscles of the Larynx be lower∣most; and when the Nerves are to be inserted in them, of necessity they must ascend from the lower parts to these Heads; but if the Heads of these Mus∣cles were plac'd above, and the Nerves fix'd in them from above, then by the contraction of these Muscles and expi∣ration happening at the same time, an absolute closure of the Larynx would follow, and consequently suffocation of the Person. Now if any body ask me, why the Muscles of the Larynx from the second Pair rather run back, which may be brought from the next Nerves of the Spinal Pith? Galen an∣swers them, that the Arteries and o∣ther parts which are to be more vio∣lently mov'd, require harder Nerves, as are those which proceed from the Pith lying hid within the Cranium; but that to those which are not so violently to be mov'd, softer Nerves are suffici∣ent; such as are those that proceed from the Pith without the Cranium, among which the sixth pair is one, whose Turn∣again Branches come to the Muscles of the Larynx, which are to be gently mov'd. The Turn-again Nerves being thus constituted, this pair descends by and by under the Throat, and at the bot∣tom of the Heart toward the Spine, con∣stitutes a certain Fold of Nerves, which some call the Cardiac Fold; from whence Branches are distributed to the Pleura, to the Tunicle of the Lungs, the Peri∣cranium, the Heart, the Gullet and several other parts within the Tho∣rax. Fallopius making an exact Descrip∣tion of this Fold, This Nervous Fold, says he, derives its Original from the five Stocks of the Nerves, which although they are sometimes only four, yet for the most part they are found to be five. The first of these is that which rises from the sinister Branch of the sixth pair, a little below the Rise of the Turn-again Nerves and afterwards reflecting to the sinister Arterial Vein, ascends into the said Ner∣vous Fold. The second and third Stock is in the same left side, and rises from that Fold which I have call'd the Fold of the sixth pair in the Neck, seated near the Olive Body. From this Fold in the left side two little Nerves arise, which de∣scending to the bottom of the Heart, are distributed through the said Fold. The fourth Stock and sinister too, is that which is said by others to rise from the Turn-again Nerve of that side; which descending with the third and second, is dispers'd into the said Fold. The fifth and last Stock, seated in the right side, has a twofold beginning; from the right Fold of the sixth pair, which runs directly to the Heart; and likewise from the Cardiac Fold it self; but these Cardiac Branches from the intercostal Nerve, as also the Cer∣vical Fold from which they proceed, are peculiar to Man, there being no such thing in Beasts. From these last Words it is appa∣rent, that Willis describes the Cardiac Fold somewhat after another manner than Fallopius; only the chiefest diffe∣rence consists in the diversity of the Names of the Nerves. XXX. The Intercostal Trunk fromThe inter∣costal Fold. the Cervical Fold, admits the Cervi∣cal Artery, and so descending into the Breast, admits three or four Branches from the Vertebral Nerves next above, and with them makes a∣nother remarkable Fold in Men; for it is otherwise in Beasts. This Fold Willis calls the Intercostal and Tho∣racic. XXXI. Moreover the IntercostalThe Me∣senteric Folds. Trunk descending through the Cavity of the Breast, extends a Branch from it self all along the lower and hollow part of both sides; then three separate Branches descend to the Os Sacrum, which being themselves here and there united with other Nerves, and again separated from them, make several other Mesenteric Folds, which Wil∣lis reckons up to be seven in all. But lest a too particular Description of each of these should breed Confusion, we shall only insist upon three of those Branches. The first of these is carry'd to the Cawl, the bottom of the Sto∣mach, the Tunicle of the Liver and Spleen, the Substance it self of the Spleen and the Colon-Gut; which as it is thought, occasions hoarsness after a tedious Cho∣lic. The second tends to the Spleen, which exagitating the Stomach by con∣sent, in Nephritic Pains, causes Vomit∣ing. The third and largest proceeds to the Mesentery, the Guts, the Bladder and of the Womb.Why the Bowels have their Nerves from the 6th. Pair. XXXII. Now why the Bowels re∣ceive their Nerves from the sixth Pair, and not from the Vertebral
Pith, Bauhinus explains out of Ga∣len; because that not having any voluntary motion, they do not require the harder Nerves proceeding from the Spinal Pith; but lest they should be altogether void of Sence and some slight Motion, and lest they should be destitute of Animal Spirits necessary for Nourishment, they require only the softer Nerves, such as proceed from the Pith while it is yet in the Brain. XXXIII. The seventh Pair, mov∣ingThe 7th. Pair, mov∣ing the Tongue. the Tongue, much harder than the rest, arises with various Heads soon united in the hinder part of the Head from the Pith, ready to fall in∣to the Spine, and through an oblique and proper Hole bor'd through in the hinder part of the Head, issues forth of the Cranium, and for Preserva∣tion sake, is ty'd to the sixth Pair with very strong Membranes, but not intermix'd; then again being separa∣ted, the greatest part of it goes to the Tongue, to all whose Muscles it im∣parts Branches for Motion; but the lesser portion of it proceeds to the Mus∣cles of the Hyois and Larynx, and those which rise from the Stytoides Appendix. Some think the Substance and Com∣positionWhether these nervs differ from others in substance and compo∣sition. of the said Nerves within the Brain proceeding from the Pith, to be quite different from that of other Nerves, when ocular Inspection teaches us, that they consist in the same man∣ner as other Nerves, of several strings bound together with a strong Mem∣brane, and as it were united into one, and differ nothing from other Nerves, but only that they are softer. CHAP. IX. Of the order to be observ'd in shewing the Parts of the Brain in the foresaid Dissection, and of another manner of Disse∣ction. I. ACcording to the Method of dis∣section already mention'd, the thick and thin Meninx are first of all to be demonstrated, with the four Hollownesses of the hard Meninx, the division of the Brain, the Scythe or Falx interpos'd between; with the Fence continuous to it, which separates the Cerebel from the Brain; as also the Brawny Body that lies un∣der it. Thnce the upper parts of the Brain being taken away, the two up∣per Ventricles are to be shewn, the Lucid Fence, the Choroid Fold, the Channel of the Flegm to the Nostrils and the Fornix. Then the third Ven∣tricle, and in that, the Choroid Fold, the middle Hole reaching to the Fun∣nel, the pleighted little Hillocks, with the Hole of the Anus reaching to the fourth Ventricle, the Vein that runs through the Fold, discharging it self through the fourth Hollowness into the wide Hollowness; also the Pineal Kernal, the Buttocks and Stones. Afterwards the Cerebel with its Mem∣branes and Processes, and that being taken away, the fourth Ventricle and the long Pith. Lastly, the Brain being rais'd up before, shews the Ma∣millary Process, the wonderful Net, the Spitly Kernel, the Funnel, with the pair of Nerves, proceeding from the Pith within the Skull. II. If any one have a desire to ob∣serve another Method of Demonstra∣tion, it may be done after this man∣ner; First, Shew the Meninxes a∣bove, the Division of the Brain, the Scythe, together with the Hollownesses, and the Brawny Body. Then the Brain being rais'd up before, shew the Mamillary Processes, the Optic Nerves, the Nerves that move the Eyes, the wonderful Net, and the Spitly Kernel. Then the Brain be∣ing rais'd up on the side, the other Pairs of the Nerves are to be shewn; and with the same labour, the Brain, together with the Cerebel and long Pith, is to be taken out of the Skull and turn'd. Then the remaining part of the Demonstration is to be compleated from the lower part. And first the Pith being rais'd up, the fourth Ventricle is to be shewn, and then the Cerebel with its Processes. After that, the wonderful Net with
the Funnel, and so dissecting down to the Funnel, the third or middle Ventricle is to be shewn; where you are to search for the furrow'd Hil∣locks, the Buttocks, the Stones, the Pineal Kernel, the Hole of the Anus, and the Fold of the Arteries; from hence you must proceed to the two up∣per Ventricles, where you must seek out the Choroid Fold, together with the Lucid Fence and the Channels conveying the Flegm and Spittle to the Papillary Processes. However, observe by the way, that this Method of Dissection is perform'd with better success in the Brains of Sheep and Calves than of Men, by rea∣son of its extraordinary Bulk: For un∣less it be very new, all the Parts fall, by reason of their Flaccidity; so that nothing can be conveniently demon∣strated. Another Method of dissecting the Brain, but very laborious, the Inven∣tion of Constantine Varolius, which Bau∣hinus describes, l. 3. Theat. Anat. c. 28. And another Method between both, of Francis Silvius, describ'd by Bartholine, l. 3. Anat. Reformat. c. 6. to which I refer the Reader. CHAP. X. Of the Function of the Brain. AFter Demonstration of the Brain and all its Parts, it remains that we speak in brief concerning the Office or Function, Actions and Use of so considerable a Bowel. I. From the Soundness of the Brain, it is confessd by all, that the Sound∣ness of all the Animal Actions pro∣ceed; it being granted that those Or∣gans in the Body, by which those Acti∣ons are to be perform'd, be well consti∣tuted; though let them be never so well dispos'd, no Animal Action can be duly and rightly perform'd if the Brain be amiss. II. Now because the Animal Acti∣ons are or may be perform'd not only by the Brain alone, but also by the Rational Soul; hence many are per∣swaded that the Seat of the Soul is to be assign'd to that Part from whence the Animal Actions proceed; that is to say, the Brain in general, according to the Arabians and Moschio, or, as o∣thers believe, some particular part of it. Thus Hierophilus seats it at the bottom; Xenophon in the top of the Head; Era∣sistratus in the Membranes. From which Opinions however many of the Mo∣dern Philosophers vary, who assign for its Seat the smallest Particle of the Brain in the third or middle Ventricle, that is to say, the Pineal Kernel; where∣in they endeavour by many probable Arguments and Conjectures to prove the Residence of the Soul and the Acti∣ons of common Sence to be perform'd. This last Opinion much displeases o∣thers, and more especially seems very hard to many Divines, who cannot apprehend, neither will suffer themselves to be perswaded, that so small and nar∣row a Domicile ought to be thought sufficient for an incorporeal Soul, in∣fus'd by God, and governing all the A∣nimal Actions of the whole Body, and yet be able to perceive all those things which are done in the extream parts in the least space of a moment, even in the very point of time they are acted. Moreover, they do not believe the Seat of the Rational Soul to be so small in Man; and yet in Brutes, which are destitute of that Soul, to be three times as big. Furthermore, they cannot ap∣prehend why the Seat of the Soul should not be ascrib'd as well to the Heart, as to the Brain; seeing that all the Mo∣tions of the Animal Spirits and the Brain it self proceed from the Heart; which when it ceases to beat, all the A∣nimal Actions fail, as it happens in a Syncope, and in Wounds of the Ven∣tricles of the Heart. Concerning this Matter, in our Age sharp and furious have been the Contests on both sides, as if they were contending for the safety of their Country, and daily most terrible Paper-Disputes arise, eager indeed and vehement, but vain and frivolous; by which the Minds of young People are more disturb'd than taught. But set∣ting aside these unprofitable Contests, let us enquire into the more sensible Action of the Brain it self. III. Aristotle teaches us, that the Office ofThe Office of the Brain. the Brain is to temper the heat of the Heart. Which Opinion, though most reject, Spigelius nevertheless endeavors to assert it for Rational. Galen attri∣butes to the Brain the Office of genera∣ting and making Animal Spirits. With whom most of the Modern Philoso∣phers
agree: For this is most certain, that the Animal Actions are not at the first hand perform'd by the Brain it self, but by the Animal Spirits made in the Brain, by means of which the Soul in well dispos'd Organs executes its Actions, and so the Brain is the In∣strument which generates those Spi∣rits. These Spirits Zabarel, Argenterius, Helmont, Deusingius and some others, as well Physitians as Philosophers, con∣found with the vital Spirits; and affirm that they differ from them not in Specie, but only in certain Accidents; and there∣fore it is that Spigelius says, Not that there is here a certain mutation of the vi∣tal Spirits, which destroys their whole na∣ture, but only a certain alteration of the Temperament▪ Et agrees with Spigeli∣us, and supports his Opinion with these three Arguments. 1. The Birth both feels and is mov'd in the Womb without the aid of any Animal Spirit, in regard that no Mater∣nal Nerve runs to the Birth. 2. A most subtil Spirit cannot be made in a cold Brain and full of mu∣cous Filth; for Cold stupifies the Spi∣ris, and hinders their Actions. 3. The Nerves themselves derive their Life and Hea from the Arteries, which are conspicuously diffus'd through them. To these Arguments others add one more; that the most subtil Spirits never descend to the lower parts; but always tend upwards and exhale; and hence although there should be allow'd any Animal Spirits to be so subtil, they would never descend into the Nerves, but would always fly upwards through the Pores. But though these things seem specious enough at a distance, yet they neither prove nor confirm the said Sentence. To the First I answer, That the Birth in the Womb is neither mov'd with an Animal Motion, nor feels, un∣til the first delineaments of the Brains and Nerves are arriv'd and increas'd to such a Bulk, Firmness and Perfection, that the Brain may be able to generate Animal Spirits sufficient, and that those Spirits may be conveniently convey'd to the sensitive and moving parts; and because it requires some Months to at∣tain that perfection, therefore the Birth does not move it self, until the Woman have gone out half her time; that is, about the fourth Month and a half. For what Spirits are generated before that time, are very few and weak; and the rest of the Parts themselves of the Bo∣dy unapt for Motion or Sence. Nor does the Motion of the Birth proceed, nor is it perform'd by the Spirits or Maternal Nerves running to it; of which there are none that enter the Birth, but by the Spirits and Nerves generated in it self. To the Second, I say, that there is no considerable Magnitude requir'd for the making of Animal Spirits, but rather a Mediocrity of Heat, such as is suffi∣cient in the Brain, though it be much less than in the other parts. And there is a necessity for that lesser Heat, which they call Cold, to asswage the Heat of the Arterious Blood, and in some mea∣sure to thicken its Volatile sulphurous Spirits, that so the Animal Spirit may separate it self more pure from the salt Particles, and may flow into the Nerves, no longer beset with superfluity of vis∣cous Vapors. Moreover, it is to be understood that although the Brain be said to be colder than other parts, yet that it is not absolutely cold, only that the Temper of it is less hot than of many other parts; and that the proper confirmation of it is such as is most fit for the generation of Spirits. Lastly, the natural Temper of the Brain incli∣ning to Cold, is not such as stupifies the Spirits, nor renders them unap to per∣form their Actions in the Parts; but its preternatural cold Temper excluding the Blood and natural Heat by a too close constriction of the Pores, is the cause that for want of convenient Mat∣ter, few Spirits are generated therein, and that those already generated with great difficulty, and in small quantity flow through the streightned Pores and Nerves. Which is the Reason that then the Actions fail by degrees; not because the Actions are stupify'd, as is vulgarly believ'd; but because very few are generated & flow into the parts. For the Spirits endure no Stupefaction; for Drowsiness is nothing else but a rest of the Actions in the Sensory Organs, by reason of the scarcity of the A∣nimal Spirits. To the Third, I an∣swer, that although the Brain and Nerves are nourish'd with Arterious Blood, it does not thence follow, that the Animal Spirits generated in the Brain, are nothing different from the Blood and Vital Spirits generated in the Heart, and carry'd through the Arte∣ries, for the nourishment of the Parts▪ for this is as much as if a man should say, The Stomach is nourish'd by the Arterious Blood generated out of the Chylus, therefore the Chylus concocted
therein, is nothing different from the Blood. Or thus, The Heart changes the Chylus into Blood, therefore the Blood which is generated therein, is nothing different from the Chylus. Or thus; The Bread is turn'd into Chylus, and the Chylus into Blood; therefore the bread differs nothing either from the Chylus or the Blood. To the Last I say, That the Animal Spirits would easily exhale out of the Brain and Pith, unless they were there with-held in their cool Work-house, which hinders their sudden Exhalati∣on, and would flow into the Nerves which are of a firmer Substance; and thus all Chymical Spirits are best kept close in cool Vessels and hinder'd from exhaling. Moreover, that they would not descend into the Nerves, unless be∣ing squeez'd out of the Brain and Pith by the alternate dilatation and falling of the Brain, the hinder parts pressing the fore-parts, as one Wave drives for∣ward another, is apparent from hence, for that the motion of the Brain ceas∣ing through a Syncope, or depression of the Cranium, &c. no more Spirits flow into the Nerves, but all the parts fall without Motion. Thus in an Organ we see that the thin Air, which would never of it self descend violently down∣ward into the Pipes, by the falling of the dilated Bellows, is easily forc'd into them. Upon this Subject read more in Sennertus's Institutes, l. 1. c. 6. and his Prax. Med. p. 2. c. 33. where he re∣futes and destroys the foresaid Argu∣ment with most convincing Reasons. This Opinion therefore being altoge∣ther rejected, we must hold it for cer∣tain and unquestionable, with the con∣sent of the greater part of the Philoso∣phers, that there are Animal Spirits, bred indeed out of the Vital, but actu∣ally very much differing from them, as the Bread differs from the Chylus, the Chylus from the Blood, and the Blood from the Substance of the Parts; for as the Chylus, coming into the heart, loses its first Constitution, and assumes a quite different, which has nothing of similitude with the former, and so is turn'd into Blood; so the most subtil part of the Vital Blood assumes in the Brain a new and altogether different Species, together with a new and alto∣gether different strength and efficacy. Here, if any one will object, that the same Spirits were before in the Blood, so far as they are afterwards produc'd out of the Blood, and cannot be pro∣duc'd out of the Blood unless they were in it before; I will not contend with him, if he mean that the Matter of these Spirits was in it before: For those Animal Spirits, such as they are made in the Brain, are not actually contain'd in the blood; but the Matter out of which they are to be made is contain'd therein. In the same manner the spiritu∣ous Blood is not contain'd in the Meat and Nourishment; but the Matter out of which such Blood is generated by the concoctions of the Bowels. Or as the Herb or the Tree is not contain'd in the Earth, but the Matter out of which the Herb or the Tree is to spring and be rais'd up by the heat of the Sun. Or, as the Vessel is not contain'd in the Clay, but the Matter out of which the Vessel is to be made; which is so diffe∣rent from the Vessel, that a Child would account him a Fool that should call the formless Clay a Vessel. IV. But now 'tis the unanimousThe Acti∣on of the Brain. Opinion of all Physicians, that it is the proper Office of the Brain to ge∣nerate the Animal Spirits; and that those Spirits flow through the Nerves out of that Work-House wherein they are generated into the Parts, and may be sent forth every way in greater plenty by the Soul, with a certain de∣termination, as Assistants and Con∣veyers of the Powers which she dif∣fuses from her self. But in what part of the Brain these Spirits are generated, is greatly disputed; and what they are, is altogether unknown; and therefore they both require a larger Discourse. V. Peter Laurembergius believ'dWhether generated in the Ca∣vities of the Falx. these Animal Spirits to be generated in the Hollownesses of the Falx. From whose Opinion Daniel Sennertus does not differ much. But this Opinion pro∣ceeds from their not knowing the Use of the Sinus's or Hollownesses of the Falx, and therefore they are easily re∣futed by what we have already said concerning those Hollownesses, c. 4. Andreas Laurentius, Riolanus, Lud. Mercator and many others, with whom Regius also consents, believe these Spi∣rits to be generated in the Cavities of the Ventricles, out of the hottest Arte∣rious Blood exhaling from the Choroi∣dal Fold (with which some think the Air to be intermix'd by inspiration) and that they are forc'd out of these Ventricles through invisible Pores into the Nerves, and so through them flow to the rest of the Parts. Some, according
to the Opinion of the Arabians, affirm, that they are generated not in all the Ventricles, but only in the fourth Ven∣tricle; which for that reason, they call the most principal. Both these Opini∣ons Galen also profess'd, as also Hippo∣crates and Plato. But both Reason and Experience evince this Opinion concern∣ing the Cavity of the Ventricles. For if the Vital Spirits should exhale out of the Choroidal Fold into the Cavities of the Ventricles, there to be turn'd into Animal Spirits, I would fain know, how the Animal Spirits already generated out of those Vital Spirits shall enter into the Nerves, which have no continuity with the Ventricles? Shall the Vital Spirits, which exhal'd out of the Fold, being become Animal again, breath in∣to the Nerves which lie at a distance from the Nerves? Or can the Soul dis∣pose at pleasure of the Spirits generated and contain'd here and there beyond the Bounds of its Jurisdiction, that is to say, in the Ventricles? Besides, if the place be consider'd, it will be found no way proper for the generation of the Animal Spirits. For in the Ventricles are gather'd together snotty Excre∣ments, which are found therein, some∣times in greater, sometimes in lesser quantity, as well in those that are sound, as those that are sickly. Thus it would come to pass, that these thin and most impure Spirits would be generated with∣out the Vessels in the Cavities of these Ventricles, among the most impure and cold Excrements of the Brain, and thence, notwithstanding their being thicken'd by the cold Excrements, must flow out again together with the thick∣er Excrements through most narrow and almost invisible Pores, rather into the Nerves far enough seated from the Ventricles, then through the broad and open Channels of the Papillary Pro∣cesses and the Sieve-like Bone; which how absurd it is, there's no body but may easily perceive. Besides, in the watery Disease of the Head, call'd Hy∣drocephalus, in which many times there is a great quantity of serous Humour collected in the Ventricles, sometimes several pounds; as also in an Apostem of the Brain, at what time the purulent Matter is pour'd forth into these Ves∣sels, I say in these cases, neither could these Spirits be generated, nor the Ani∣mal Actions proceed; of which the contrary is manifest from Experience: For in a Patient that I dissected in March 1653. whose distended Ventri∣cles containd above half a pound of thick stinking green Pus, from the large A∣postem of the upper part of the Brain, penetrating as far as the upper Ventri∣cles, I observ'd that all the time of his Sickness for seven Weeks together, he was no way disturb'd in his Intellects, nor depriv'd of Motion till the time of his Death. Besides, that if they did not flow through the already mention'd Vessels evacuating the Flegm, yet would those Spirits fly out at the Wounds of the Ventricles, and for want of them the Person would be depriv'd of all Ani∣mal Action. Yet Galen tells us a Story of a young Man, who at Smyrna in Io∣nia, receiv'd a Wound in one of the upper Ventricles, yet liv'd for all that. I my self here in Utrecht, in the Year 1648. inspected the Body of a young Nobleman of Over-Yssel, a Student in the Law, who dy'd of a wound in his Head, in whom the Cranium being first open'd, it was first found that the Sword had enter'd the bigger or innermost Corner of one Eye, without any harm to the Eye it self, and had penerated through the upper right Ventricles, and lighting upon the upper part of the Cranium on the inside toward the top of the Lambdoidal Suture, had almost pierced that also; yet this young Gen∣tleman was depriv'd of none of his A∣nimal Actions (a certain Sign that the Spirits had not flow'd out of the Ven∣tricle through the broad Wound) but sound in Mind, Seeing, Hearing, Tast∣ing, and well moving all his Parts, walking and judiciously discoursing with his Companions that came to see him, upon any Discourse, liv'd ten days, and then being seiz'd with a vio∣lent Fever, dy'd in two days. Thus Lindan makes mention of a certain Pa∣tient that was wounded, whose Surgeon for fourteen days together before his Death, put in a Probe as far as the Ventricle of his Brain, whither the Wound had reach'd, without any feel∣ing. Yet he further adds, that the same Person walk'd every day about the Ci∣ty, unless it were the last four days, at the end of which he dy'd. In these Cases, certainly the most subtle Spirits had either flow'd out of their own ac∣cord, or had been expell'd out of the Ventricles by the alternate dilatation and compression of the Brain, and so the person must have dy'd depriv'd of his Animal Actions, if the place of their Generation had been in the Ven∣tricles. From all which Examples the weak Supports of the said Opinion are sufficiently evident; though Webfer re∣futes
the same Opinion more clearly by other Reasons, l. de Apoplexia. VI. Cartesius differs not veryWhether generated in the Pi∣neal Ker∣nel. much from the said Opinion, who teaches us, that these Spirits are not generated in the Ventricles, but says, that they are separated in the Pineal Kernel, by the narrow Passages of the little Arteries of the Choroid Fold, and from thence infus'd into the Ventricles, and no other way dif∣fer from the Vital Spirits, only that they are the thinest Parts separated from them, and only call'd by ano∣ther Name. To which he adds, that there is no probability that the separa∣tion of these Spirits is perform'd in the Pineal Kernel, as well by reason of the smalness of the Kernel, as the vast quantity of Animal Spirits, which can never be so swiftly strain'd through so diminutive a particle. Besides that this Kernel being obstructed and compress'd, yet it is found that these Spirits are gene∣rated in great quantity; as was apparent in the forecited persons, in whose Ven∣tricles the Pus and Serum that was col∣lected in great quantity, could not but compress the Kernel and obstruct it in its Office; as is also apparent in such Men in whom you shall find Sand and Stones oppressing more than half the Kernel. As to that which follows, where Cartesius says, that these Spirits are col∣lected in the Ventricles, that is already refuted; as also that other, that they differ nothing from the Vital Spirits, but only in their separation. VII. Many others believe, that theWhether generated in the Cho∣roid Fold. Animal Spirits are elaborated in the Choroid Fold, and that the Vital Blood in its passage through the Fold, is alter'd into these Spirits by a sin∣gular propriety of the Brain. Which Opinion, as the Liver, many embrace at this day, and I was of the same mind once, though now I have good reason to think the contrary. For upon more mature consideration, three Arguments utterly subvert it. First, Because the Blood contain'd in that Fold, is altogether ruddy, neither is it observ'd to undergo any alteration therein, neither at any time, whatever part of the Fold you inspect, is it of any other colour than red and Blood∣colour; whereas the Animal Spirits are pellucid and invisible by reason of their extraordinary subtility. Secondly, Because the Fold is not continuous with any of the Nerves, and therefore no Spirits can be transfus'd out of it into the Nerves. 3ly. Because the Blood flows into the Pithy Substance of the Brain out of the Fold, partly through innumerable di∣minutive branches, partly by the order of circulation, flows to the Vein that runs between the middle Fold above the Kernel, and thence is carry'd to the inferior Hollownesses of the hard Me∣ninx or Scythe, and from them to the Jugular Veins. Through which Pas∣sages the Animal Spirits also, if any were made in the Fold, would flow forth together with the Blood, nor would any reach to the Nerves which are seated without the Fold, and no way continuous to them. VIII. Francis de le Boe Sylvius sus∣pectsWhether generated in the ex∣terior Ar∣teries. them to be elaborated in the Ar∣teries running forth all along the Su∣perficies of the Brain and Cerebel, which he thinks to be distributed thro' the Superficies for that public, and not for any private Use, and that out of those Arteries they penetrate into the Cortex of the Brain and Cerebel, and thence into the middle whitish Sub∣stance, and in this Passage are freed from its watery part that sticks most closely to it. But this Opinion is overthrown by these three Arguments. 1. Because that in the Arteries of the Head there is no other Humour con∣tain'd than in other Arteries, that is to say, Blood; and those Arteries are on∣ly assisting Parts conveying the Blood, not altering it into Animal Spirits, or making any other Humor or Spirit out of it. 2. Because the innumerable bloody Specks which every way occur to the Sight in the dissected Substance, teach us, that not the Animal Spirits, but the arterious blood it self is thrust for∣ward as well through the Ash-colour'd Cortex of the Brain, as through the whitish Substance out of the Arteries; which bloody Specks would not appear, if that blood were only chang'd into invisible Animal Spirits in the said Ar∣teries. 3. Because the several remarkable Mutations of Humors require some particular Bowel to make that altera∣tion; as appears in the Stomach, which turns the Nourishment into Chylus; in
the Heart, which changes the Chylus into Blood; in the Liver, which alters the blood into a choleric Ferment, and therefore we must certainly conclude, that the making of Animal Spirits out of Blood cannot be perform'd in the Arteries, which only carry the Matter out of which they are to be generated; but that of necessity it must be perform∣ed in that most noble Bowel the Brain, and not in the Arteries encompassing the Brain and Cerebel, but in the Sub∣stance it self. IX. Thus also Galen, and withWhether generated in the Sub∣stance it self of the Brain. him Bauhinus and Sennertus, Hoff∣man, Emilius, Parisanus & Plempius believethem to be elaborated in the Substance it self of the Brain. Whose Opinion we are also willing to embrace, as being that of which the Truth ap∣pears from hence, because the arteri∣ous blood is driven from all Parts in greater quantity to the Substance of the brain, than is requisite for the nourish∣ment of it. For on the outside Thou∣sands of little branches of Arteries emp∣ty a great quantity of blood, partly in∣to the Ash-colour'd Cortex enfolding the brain, in whose little Kernels apt Particles are separated for the Genera∣tion of Spirits from those that are unapt, and suckt up by the extre∣mities of the little Fibers of the brain extended into the Cortex, partly enter the Substance of the brain it self. More∣over, on the inside also in the third Ventricle that there are infinite slender branches inserted from the Choroid Fold, into the white Pithy Substance, and which stick and cling to it, will ea∣sily appear to those who have prudent∣ly examin'd that Ventricle, and gent∣ly lifted up the Fornix or Arch; for then they may perceive innumerable little branches of the Choroid Fold sticking to, and entring the Substance of the Fornix, the furrow'd Monticles, the Stones and Buttocks, and pouring into the Pores of it the thinner blood freed by the little Kernels of the Fold from a great part of its viscous Serum, which in the dissection of the Substance is seen to start as well out of the invi∣sible Vessels as out of the Pores. More∣over, it is requisite that the Animal Spirits should be generated in that part out of which they may most convenient∣ly either flow or be thrust forward into the Nerves. But such a part is the Sub∣stance of the brain and pith, which as being altogether fibrous and continuous with the Nerves, has also Pory Fibers continuous with them, into which, by the compression of the brain, which follows its dilatation, those Spirits may commodiously be squeez'd forward. Lastly, the Soul makes use of the Mi∣nistry of these Spirits, and therefore they ought to be generated and con∣tain'd in that part where the Soul re∣sides. But the Soul does not reside in empty Cavities or Ventricles in the midst of excrementitious Filth, but in solid living Parts. Therefore as it re∣sides in the Substance of other Parts, so likewise in that of the brain, where it lays the foundations of the Animal Spi∣rits, which from thence it sends every way at her own pleasure through the Nerves. X. This Opinion two great Diffi∣cultiesTwo Obje∣ctions. seem to oppose. 1. Because the Apoplexy, and o∣ther heavy Drowsinesses proceed, ac∣cording to the Iudgment of most emi∣nent Physicians from a stoppage of the Animal Spirits, which hinders their Influx out of the Ventricles of the Brain into the Pith, by reason of some obstruction of the beginning of the Pith, or its compression happening through some other Cause. Which Obstruction or Compression would not be the Cause of the Apoplexy or that same Lethargic Drowsiness, if the Spirits were not generated in the Ven∣tricles or the Choroid Fold, but in the Substance of the Brain it self. 2. Because the Disposal of the Spi∣rits determinated by the Mind, would not be compleated in the Substance of the Brain it self, but in the common Sensory, which is seated in the Brain it self. This the Catalepsis plainly shews us, wherein the Spirits flow in great quantity into the Nerves, but no new determination of them follows, because of the Obstruction of the com∣mon Sensory. XI. The first Difficulty is easilyThe Cause of the Mo∣tion of the Brain. remov'd, if the Cause of the Motion of the Brain be more narrowly pry'd into. In the Fifth Chapter we have at large inform'd you, that the Brain is mov'd by the perpetual & first Mo∣ver of our Body, that is to say, the Heart; and that the Heart dilates the whole Brain by forcing through the Arteries the Spirituous Blood into
its Substance, which upon the cessati∣on of that Impulse, presently falls a∣gain, and so by compression forces the Spirits contain'd in it further into the Nerves. XII. Now, if through any Cause,The Rea∣son of the Apoplexy. as Obstruction or Compression, &c. the Arteries happen to be streighten'd, through which the Blood is push'd forward and flows into the Brain, by which means the free access of the Blood forc'd through the Arteries to the Brain, is foreslow'd or obstructed, then there is a great diminution of the Matter proper for the generation of Spirits, and the motion of the Brain is very small; whence happens not only a generation of very few Spirits, and a weaker Impulse of them into the Nerves. Now in regard that few Spi∣rits, and those weakly impuls'd, are not sufficient to perform the Actions of the Sensory Organs, whose Actions are also perform'd by the continual and sufficing motion of the Spirits, of necessity there follows a deep Drowsi∣ness or Rest of the Animal Actions, which Drowsiness is either more or less, as the streightness of the Arte∣ries is either more or less. But if those Arteries through which the Blood flows toward the inner parts of the Brain, that is to say, the Arte∣ries of the wonderful Net and the Choroid Fold, nay, the Carotid Ar∣teries themselves be of a sudden strong∣ly compress'd and obstructed by the sudden falling of thick Flegm collect∣ed in the Brain, upon them, or the depression of the Skull and Brain, pre∣sently the Motion of the Blood toward the Brain is obstructed; and hence also the generation of the Animal Spi∣rits, and their motion and impulse in∣to and through the Nerves is obstruct∣ed, which is the Cause of the Apoplexy. Which Physicians hitherto have ab∣surdly affirm'd to happen from the ob∣struction or streightning of the begin∣ning of the Nerves, when it altogether proceeds from the obstruction or com∣pression of the Arteries. Which Hip∣pocrates most clearly teaches us, where he asserts the Cause of the Apoplexy to be the standing of the Blood, more especially in the Arteries of the Neck, that is to say, the Carotides, and others deriv'd from thence, such as those which compose the wonderful Net and Choroid Fold: Seeing that thereby the Motion and Action of the Spirits is destroy'd; which Moion being ob∣structed, the body must of necessity rest. Let us hear the most acute Fernelius, who confirms this Matter most elegant∣ly by Experiments and Reasons. Seeing upon a time, says he, a lusty sane man fall to the ground upon a despe∣rate Blow upon the Left Eye, and pre∣sently depriv'd of Sence and Motion, to∣gether with a difficulty of Breathing and Snoaring, and other strong Symptoms of an Apoplexy, and that he could neither be preserv'd by Blood-letting, nor any o∣ther way, but that he dy'd within twelve hours, I thought it worth my while to search into the Cause of his Death. To that purpose, having dissected and open'd his Brain, and finding no Contusion of the Bone or Meninxes, or Substance of the Brain, but only that the inner Veins of the Eye were broken by the violence of the Contusion, I observ'd that from thence about two Spoonfuls of Blood had lighted upon the Basis of the Brain, which being clotted together, had bound up those Arte∣ries which form the Net-like Contexture, and which being thence propagated into the Ventricles of the Brain constitute the other Choroid Fold. But the Ventricles of the Brain were altogether untouch'd with∣out any Damage. Being thus far satis∣fy'd, I thought good to dissect another, who dy'd without any external Cause to be seen; in whom there was found a thick and viscous Humor resting upon the Net like contexture, the Ventricles of the Brain being neither fill'd nor obstructed. Hence reasoning with my Self, I judg'd it con∣sentaneous to Reason, that the Apoplexy was generated in the Arteries either ob∣structed or compress'd; for that then the Brain receiv'd no Spirits from the Heart, through the adjoyning Arteries; which oc∣casion'd an absolute necessity of its Motion and Sence. And a certain Person ob∣serving these things, as I suppose, af∣firm'd, that the Apoplexy was caus'd by the intercepting the Passages that are common to the Heart and Brain. Thus if the Cause of the Disease of all Apoplectics were more diligently en∣quir'd into, it would be found to pro∣ceed not from the compression or ob∣struction of the beginning of the Nerves in the third or middle Ventricle, but solely from the compression or streight∣ning of the Arteries tending to the Brain; even then when the Apoplexy
is caus'd by a rammassment of serous Matter collected in the substance of the Brain it self, or between the Meninxes. Which Webfer affirms that he has found to be true by experience upon several Diffections. Who erroneous however, conjectures this to happen by reason of the deny'd entrance of the Animal Spi∣rits, when it is manifest that the stoppage of the Arteries is the cause of it; for seeing that in an Aposteme of the Brain the O∣rifices of the nerves are not clos'd by the quantity of Serum or Pus collected in the ventricles, much less will it happen through any far slighter Collection. A∣gain, that it does not happen through any Flegm that fills the Vessels of a sudden, occular view teaches us in the Dissections of Apoplectics; in whose Ventricles never so great a quantity of Flegm is to be found in the Ventricles; and moreover, because the Apoplexy is caus'd by the sole compression of the little Arteries of the wonderful Net without any detriment to the Brain, much less to the Ventricles, as appears by the foresaid Relations of Fernelius, and the Story of Webfer, of the Wo∣man that was hang'd, and yet came a∣gain to her self. In which Particular Martian also agrees with us. I find, says he, three Differences of the Apoplexy, according to the Doctrine of Hippocrates. Of which though there be various preceding Causes, yet in reali∣ty they are all the same, as consisting in the standing of the Blood, by which means all Motion and Action of the Spirits are taken away. For as the same Author ob∣serves, when the Blood is not mov'd, it is impossible but that the Motion of the Bo∣dy must cease. Therefore when the Blood is depriv'd of Motion, not only the Moti∣on of the Spirits is intercepted, which is caus'd by the Blood; but at the same time and together, the generation of the Animal Spirits, which is perform'd in the Brain, is vitiated and interrupted for want of Matter, the Veins or Arteries being inter∣cepted; for it is well known that the Ani∣mal Spirits are generated out of the Vi∣tal. As to that Cause of the Apoplexy, which Malpigius and Fracassatus pro∣pound, when they alledge this Distem∣per to proceed from the stoppage of the straining through of the Serum growing in the Cortex of the Brain; this Opini∣on, if rightly explain'd, will agree with the former already laid down: For if the concrescible Serum, as they call it, that is to say, if the Saltish Particles of the Blood, being stopp'd in the Cortex of the Brain, through the depression of the Cranium, stuffing up of Flegm, or any other Cause, cannot be separated by straining through, then also is the ingress of the Vital Spirits or Arterious blood into the brain, put to a stop; and thence for want of Matter for generati∣on of the Spirits, and defect of the Cause that pushes them forward when genera∣ted, any farther Generation ceases, as also the pushing forward of the Animal Spirits into the Nerves, and thence the Apoplexy or any other Lethargic Drow∣siness, though the Passage of the same Spirits out of the brain it self into the Nerves, may be free at the same time. XIII. As to the second Difficulty,The second Objection answered. there is a great difference between the Generation of Animal Spirits, of which we here discourse, and their Determination; and the Place where∣in or from whence the Determination is made. For because the Mind de∣termines from the common Sensory, the Spirits adhering to the Substance of the brain, this does not hinder but that those Spirits may be generated in the Substance of the brain, and thence be determin'd by the superior Command and Power of the Mind to these or those Parts: Nor is it consequential from hence, that the Spirits should be generated in that place from whence the Determination of the Mind sends them away at pleasure. A Prince, sitting in his Throne, appoints his Subjects to these or these Offices or Places; but thence it does not follow, that the com∣manded Subjects should be born in the King's Palace, or reside in his Throne; for that the Beams of his Command extend themselves to the utmost Limits of his Empire. He therefore that shall to the pur∣pose explain the manner how the Ap∣pointment of the Spirits is transacted by the Soul, will light a fair Flambeau for the discovery of greater Mysteries. In the mean while this second Objectson makes nothing against our Opinion; and therefore as most probable, we con∣clude, that the Animal Spirits are ge∣nerated in the Substance of the brain it self.
CHAP. XI. Of the Animal Spirits. IN the foregoing Chapter it has been declar'd, that the Office or Acti∣on of the Brain is to generate Animal Spirits; and that they are elaborated in the Substance of the Brain it self: now it remains that we enquire of what sort and what those Noble Spi∣rits are; and how they are genera∣ted. However, by the way observe, that when we discourse of Spirits, as here, and l. 2. c. 12. we do not speak of cer∣tain incorporeal Spirits, or of the gene∣ral Spirit of the whole World, by which the Platonics alledge that all things have their Being, but of a cer∣tain most subtil Vapour which is pro∣duc'd out of Sulphur and Salt by the Concoctions of the Bowels, and varies, according to the variety of the Matter out of which it is extracted, and the various manner of extraction, which endow it with different Qualities. I. The Animal Spirits are invisi∣bleThe Defi∣nition of Spirits. Vapours, most thin and volatile, chiefly elaborated out of the Salt Par∣ticles of the Blood, and some few Sulphury, chiefly volatile, and that in the Brain, serving partly for the Natural, partly for the Animal Acti∣ons. As for those that deny that any Ani∣mal Spirits are to be allow'd specifically different from the Vital, as Huffman, Deusingius and several others endeavour to uphold, we think it an Opinion not worth refuting, and therefore to be re∣jected; seeing that the one is com∣pounded of Salt and many Sulphu∣ry Spirits dilated together and ex∣actly mix'd in the Heart: the other consists of very few Sulphury, but chief∣ly Salt Spirits, and differ not in respect of their Substance only and Compositi∣on, but also in their Use; and are made in a peculiar bowel, the brain, every way different from the Heart. Lastly, seeing also that from them the Animal Actions proceed, very much different from the Natural; as the Phansie, the Imagination, Ratiocination, the Me∣mory, Judgment, Feeling, Seeing, Motion of the Muscles, &c. and that from their being vitiated, peculiar Af∣fections and Diseases arise; as is appa∣rent in Vertigo's, Apoplexies, Night∣mares, Madness, Phrensie, Convulsi∣ons, and other Accidents proceeding from their deprav'd Motion, too copi∣ous influx or deficiency; the like to which cannot proceed from the defects of the Animal Spirits. All which is clearly made out by Galen, l. de Placit. Hipp. & Plat. c. 6. as also l. 7. c. 3. de usu Partium. As to the Matter out of which theseThe Opi∣nion of Glisson concerning the Mat∣ter. Spirits are generated, Glisson and Charlton have endeavour'd to intro∣duce lately something of Novelty; who both maintain these Spirits to be generated of some portion of the Chy∣lus, which is suck'd up by the Nerves, out of which partly these Spirits pro∣duc'd, partly some Iuice, rawer than the Blood is generated, which flows through the Nerves to the nourishment of all the Spermatic Parts. But this absurd Opinion we have already refu∣ted, l. 1. c. 16. And Deusingius also destroys it in a large Discourse, l. de Nutritii Suc∣ci novo Comment. The most ancient and truest Opinion is, that they are ge∣nerated out of the arterious blood; but after what manner they are generated, has never hitherto been certainly de∣scrib'd. Cartesius, with whom most at thisThe Opini∣on of Car∣tesius. day agree, discourses thus concerning this Matter. It is to be consider'd, says he, that all the more vivacious and subtil parts of the Blood, which the heat rarifies in the Heart, immediately and in great quantity enter the Cavities; and therefore they rather muster thither than to any other part, because that all the Blood which goes out of the Blood through the great Artery, directs its course in a di∣rect Line to that part; and when it can∣not all enter, because the Passages are ve∣ry narrow, the more agitated and subtil parts of it pass through alone, while the rest diffuse themselves through all the parts of the Body. Now these most subtil parts of the Blood compound the Animal Spirits; neither do they to that end want any other alteration in the Brain, only that there they are separated from the other less sub∣til parts of the Blood. For those which I call here Spirits are nothing but Bodies, and have no other Propriety, only that they are most subtil Bodies, and are mo∣ved with an extraordinary celerity,
By these Words it appears, that Cartesius did not differ much from the Opinion of those who believe the Ani∣mal Spirits nothing distinct in Specie from the Vital, which is already refu∣ted. And this he openly seems to sig∣nifie, l. 2. de hom. Artic. 10. Where he speaks thus; That portion of Blood, says he, which rises up as high as the Brain, not only helps the nourishment and pre servation of the Substance of the Brain, but also in the first place generates there∣in a subtil Vapour, or rather active and pure Flame, which we call the Animal Spirits. A little after he adds. And thus the more subtil Particles of the Arte∣rious Blood without any preparation or mutation, other than that by which they are separated from the thicker Particles, and are agitated with that vehement cele∣rity which the heat of the Heart has en∣du'd them with, lose the form of Blood, and come under the name of Animal Spirits. Moreover, he asserts a certain won∣derful Separation of the thinner parts of the Blood from the thicker, whereas the arterious Blood, altogether such as it is, is equally thrust forward through the Arteries upward and downward, neither is there any reason why the more subtil parts should be more spe∣cially carry'd upward toward the Head, and the thicker flow to the rest of the Body. As to the narrowness of the pas∣sages, that proves nothing; for the Ca∣rotid and Cervical Arteries are wide and large enough; so that the thicker blood mix'd together with the more spirituous, may as well flow through them as the other Arteries. Neither does the directness of the passage to such a separation of the most subtil particles from the thicker, make any thing to the purpose; for the blood being vio∣lently thrust forward out of the Heart, rushes forth where it finds way given, without any separation of the particles. For the Spirits are not separated from it by degrees, as the Spirits of Wine or any other Liquor containing Spirits, in a Chymical Distillation, where by the force of the Fire the Spirits are dis∣solv'd by degrees without any other impetuous compulsion, and ascend di∣rectly upward, and if any such be al∣low'd them, fly away through any di∣rect narrow passages, the watery parts flowing out at the lateral passages. But here is a rapid propulsion of the whole dissolv'd sanguineous mass into the great Artery, and all its wide, narrow, streight, crooked, upper & lower productions, & that so swift & sudden, that in that small moment of time that the Heart makes that propulsion, so sudden and rapid a separation of the thinner from the thicker, can neither be done nor taught by reason, nor apprehended by Imagi∣nation. If the blood attenuated and render'd vaporous in the Ventricles of the Heart, did ascend upwards into the Arteries of its own accord without any impulse, then perchance by reason of its slow progress some such thing might be imagin'd by us; but in regard that the Heart by a sudden contraction im∣petuously and rapidly expels, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye whatever is in its Ventricles, such a separation can ne∣ver be made. Thus if any one with a Syringe shall force red Wine boyling hot into a Tube crooked toward the sides, and bor'd through at the upper part with three or four Holes, it will fly forth equally such as it is, at all the holes at the top or sides, whether crook∣ed, wide or narrow, nor will the vio∣lence of the force, or shortness of the time allow any separation of the thic∣ker parts from the thinner, much less a particular passage of the thinner thro' the uppermost direct little holes without the thicker. And so it is with the blood forc'd out of the Heart. Besides, the quickest Eye in the world could never observe any difference either in thick∣ness or thinness between the blood as∣cending upward to the Head through the wide and direct passages, or the blood descending downward through the crooked and broad passages: For that which is taken out of any Animal from the Carotid, differs not a tittle from that which descends out of the A∣orta, or is drawn out of the Iliac Vein by a small Prick; as neither the returning re∣mainder of the blood which descends through the Jugular Veins, differs any thing from that which ascends through the Basilic Vein of the Arm, or the Iliac Veins of the Thighs, unless it pass through any diseased part, but is alto∣gether equal. And yet there would be some difference to be observ'd if the Doctrine of Cartesius were true. Lastly, says the most acute Philosoper, the more subtil parts of the blood, com∣pounding these Spirits, want no other alteration but the separation of the most thin parts from the less thin; yet in the mean time he never lets us know what those most thin parts are. 2. Nor how the Brain orders that separation from the rest of the parts of the blood. 3. Nor wherefore, nor how they are mov'd.
As to the first I have spoken in the definition, that is to say, that all the most subtil parts of the blood, but chiefly the volatile Salt parts conduce to the making of these Spirits; of which we shall now more at large discourse, as also of their separation and motion. IV. The Matter therefore out ofThe Mat∣ter out of which the Animal Spirits are generated. which these Spirits are generated is the arterious Blood (consisting of a Salt, Sulphureous and Serous Iuice) of which not equally all the Parts or Particles, but chiefly the Salt, which by a peculiar quality of the Kernels of the Cortex of the Brain are for the greatest part dissolv'd and separated from the sulphury Particles; and be∣ing depriv'd of their Serosity, are rendred most thin and altogether vo∣latile, so that they are able with ease to penetrate through the diminutive Fibers of the pithy Brain. V. Vesalius, Laurentius, Columbus,Whether Air con∣curs with the Mat∣ter. Sennertus, Plempius, Fracassarius and many others, are of Opinion, that be∣sides the blood, Air necessarily con∣curs as the Matter è qua, or out of which, to the generation of these Spirits, and that by its transpiration through the Sieve-like breathing holes of the Ethmoid Bone, it penetrates into the Ventricles of the Brain. Which was formerly also the Opinion of Erasi∣stratus and Galen: But that it is far di∣stant from Truth, we find partly, for that those things which have been said concerning the situation of the spungy Bones, and the spungy Flesh stopping the upper part of the Nostrils, partly what has been said concerning the place of the Generation of the Animal Spirits, plainly demonstrate that the inspir'd Air cannot penetrate into the Ventricles of the Brain; and then again, that the Animal Spirits are not generated in those Ventricles. Moreover, the Ani∣mal Spirits are always generated out of the same and like Matter of which, if inspir'd Air were a necessary part, they could never be generated without in∣spir'd Air. But on the other side, they are generated in those persons, who be∣ing troubl'd with the Pose, have their Nostrils obstructed with so great a quan∣tity of Flegm, that by respiration no Air can pass through them. They are also generated in the Birth while it lies shut up in the Womb infolded in its own Membranes, at what time the Birth does not breath, nor can receive in any Air. They are also generated in Fish, which though they do not breath in the Air, yet abound with these Spirits, as appears by their seeing, feeling and nimble motion. Lastly, they are generated in Birds before they are hatch'd, while they are inclos'd within the shell, and cannot receive in any Air. From all which it is easily concluded, that inspir'd Air does not concur to constitute the Matter out of which these Spirits are made. VI. Now the Blood is forc'd inThe separa∣tion of the Spirituous salt part. great quantity through the Carotid and Cervical Arteries, not only into the Membranes of the Head, but into Substance it self of the Brain, Cere∣bel and Pith; and in its Passage first through the Cortex, thence through the Pithy Substance, the more subtil salt Particles therein are separated for the most part from the sulphury or oily and serous. Particles; of which again the thicker Particles serve to the nourishment of the Bowel it self; but the thinner are still more volati∣liz'd, and for the greatest part be∣ing freed from the sulphury, are chan∣ged into a most subtil Spirit call'd Animal, which flows out of the Fi∣bers of the Brain and Cerebel into the Nerves, and through them to the rest of the Parts of the Body.The sepa∣ration of the salt part from the sulphu∣ry. VII. But after what manner, or by what force that separation and thsir attenuation and volatilization is per∣form'd, cannot easily be explain'd, but seems to be peculiar to the Substance it self of the Brain and Kernels of the Cortex, as being a Substance which is chiefly form'd out of such a salt Mat∣ter, with which some few oily Parti∣cles being mixt, make up the some∣what fatty constitution thereof; and hence through the conformity of that like Matter, it has an affinity with that other saltish Matter, and easily imbibes it, after it has quitted the rest of the sulphury and serous Matter, and alters it within its little Fibers to greater per∣fection. Thus Fracassarius writes that the Cortex of the Brain is more salt and softer than the Marrow; because the Cortex consists more of melted Salt, but the Pith of Salt strain'd through the Cortex, and consequently less serous, and thence more firmly con∣creted, which he says he has often ex∣perimented,
and adds an experimen∣tal Observation not improbable. Now this Separation happens first in the Cortex, as into whose innumerable diminutive Kernels, through infinite blood-bearing Vessels the blood is plen∣tifully infus'd, out of which in those Kernels there is made a separation of the salter and most spirituous part, which flows into the diminutive Fibers of the Brain inserted at the lower part into the several Kernels, and so in the pithy Substance of the lower part of the Brain compos'd of those little Fi∣bers, is brought to the last persection, the remaining portion of the blood re∣turning to the Heart through the little Veins. For as it is the Office of all the Kernels to separate some humor from the blood, so the same thing comes to pass in these Kernels of the Cortex. And as in the Sweet-bread the subacid humor is separated, the bilious humor in the Liver by virtue of its little Ker∣nels and Bunches; the serous humor in the Kidneys, the Lymphatic in the Kernels of many other parts, or any other humor according to the various constitution of the Kernels and the Parts themselves; so likewise in the Kernels of the Cortex of the Brain endu'd with a property peculiar to themselves, there is a peculiar, most spirituous saltish invisible humor sepa∣rated from the blood, which growing more spirituous in the little Fibers of the pithy Brain, has gain'd the Name of Animal Spirit, as being that which obeys the Soul in most of its Actions. VIII. Now that in the separationAffinity of Particles. of any Liquor, the Affinity of the Par∣ticles is of extraordinary prevalency, appears from hence, for that in the nourishment of all the other Parts whatever, the same thing is observ'd; as for example, that such Particles of the blood as have the greatest affinity to the Parts, adhere to them, and are assimilated into their Substance, where∣as the rest are separated from them and forc'd farther. As in other things also we find those things mix most easily which have most Affinity. Thus if Oil and Water be mix'd together, and one end of a long woollen Cloth dipp'd in Water be put into the said Mixture, the other end hanging forth without the Pot, all the Water in the Pot will drip out of the Pot all the length of the Cloth, but the Oil will remain in the Pot. Which Affinity our new modern Philosophy, not with∣out reason, attributes to the agreement of the small Particles and the Pores. As for example, if the smallest Particles to be receiv'd be round, and the receiv∣ing Pores be round, then are those ea∣sily receiv'd by these, because of their Affinity. Also if the Pores and Parti∣cles are triangular or any other way a∣like agreeable; but if the Pores are round, but the Particles to be receiv'd triangular or quadrangular, then would the one with difficulty receive the other, nor would there be any Affinity. And thus it is in the Brain; for the Salt or Saltish Particles of the blood by reason of the Affinity of the Substance and the conveniency of the Pores, are easily suck'd in by the Kernels of the Cortex, and therein are separated from the rest, as it were by a fermentaceous Motion; and being separated, are easily imbib'd by the little Fibers of the Pithy Sub∣stance, of which this Substance is chief∣ly constituted, and are more subtiliz'd; but the sulphureous not so easily. And therefore only a very small and thin part of the sulphury Particles, having the least Oyliness, is mix'd with the Animal Spirits, but the rest together with the serous Particles, partly goes in∣to Excrement, which is then collected in the hollownesses of the Ventricles, or is dissipated in Vapour through the Pores; partly together with the remain∣ing blood being thrust forward to the extream parts of the Brain, is there suck'd up by the Orifices of the smallest Veins, and so circulated farther. How∣ever, this is to be observ'd by the way, that in that same passage not all the salt Particles are separated in the Kernels of the Cortex, and imbib'd by the Brain; for so there would happen a dissolution of the Composition of the blood, but only the more fluid and volatile; but that the thicker remain mix'd with the blood, and are circulated with it; in the same manner as in the Kidneys, not the whole Serum is separated from the Mass of the blood, only the thinner part which has most affinity with the Pores of the Kidney-Kernels, the rest continues mix'd with the blood, and is carry'd with it to the hollow Vein. IX. By what has been said, we un∣derstandThe separa∣tion of the Spirituous from the thick part. how the salt Particles of the Blood are separated in the Brain from the sulphury and serous. But be∣cause their most subtil and most vo∣latile parts only are proper for the ge∣neration of Animal Spirits, the other thicker Particles serving partly to
the nourishment of the Brain, partly going into Exerement, now we are to see how the separation of the most spirituous and volatile Particles from the thicker is perform'd. This is done after the same manner as happens in distillation of Wine, when the Orifice of the Alembic is exactly clos'd with a large Sponge: For the Chymists, to the end they may extract and separate more powerful Spirits, or more clari∣fy'd and purg'd from its Flegm, out of the Wine which is to be distill'd, put a Sponge to the Alembic; for so thro' the intricate passages of the Sponge the Spirits only are wheel'd and contorted, while the more impure and thicker are not able to pass through; and so those Parts which are not cleans'd from their Dregs, but are very watery, are sepa∣rated and set aside, while the more subtil Spirits go forth and through the Beak of the Alembic fall into the Re∣ceptacle. In like manner, in the Cor∣tex of the Brain, the separated salt vo∣latile Parts of the blood are suck'd up by the diminutive Fibers which are en∣dow'd with most obscure narrow Ca∣vities. Through which narrow Pas∣sages while those Spirits are wriggl'd and contorted, whatever are lesser pu∣rify'd and thicker, and more and more cast away and thrown off, as the other are exalted into an incorporeal tenuity, and flow into the Pith, as into the next Beak of the Alembic, and thence into the Nerves, as being the lesser Beaks deriv'd from the greatest; while in the mean time the thicker Salt less volatile Particles of the blood serve for the nou∣rishment of the Bowel it self; but the rest which are yet more fix'd remain∣ing in the mixture of the sanguineous Mass, flow back to the blood-bearing Vessels through the wider Pores, and are sent back for Circulation. Now this expulsion of the Spirits out of the small pory Fibers of the Brain and Pith to the Nerves, is forc'd by one and the same Cause, that is to say, the al∣ternate falling of the Brain after dilata∣tion, by which, as by a certain com∣pression, the Spirits and Humors which are in the Brain, are excited to flow forth. And thus by the Cortex of the Brain and the Medullary Substance the Salt is separated from the Sulphury and Se∣ros, the pure from the impure, the subtil from the thick, and that Subtility by the proper force already demonstra∣ted of the said Substance, proceeding from the volatil Salt which abounds in it, is exalted to the height of volatility. And hence also flowing out of the Sub∣stance and little Fibers of the Brain and Pith, it ought not to be contain'd in loose Vessels hollow'd like a Pipe; for out of such it would easily fly away; but in such firm and more solid Re∣ceptacles or Channels, in which there are the smallest and most invisible Pores, and such Channels are the Nerves, as through which they may pass freely to their height of volatility and tenuity. X. However we are to take notice,The diver∣sity of Spi∣rits in thinness & thickness. that although the Animal Spirits are made after this manner out of the said Matter, nevertheless they are not ex∣alted to an equal degree of Volatility in all men. For in some they are thin∣ner and more active, in others thicker and of a slower Motion, according to the vulgar Phrase, either purer or im∣purer▪ because the salt particles of the blood out of which they are generated, are in some more, in others less visible. And the Brain it self in some is impreg∣nated with a more copious, in others, with a lesser quantity of volatil Spirit; and being hotter in some, volatizes the Spirits more; being colder in others, thickens and fixes them more. And therefore in Melancholy Spirits and such as continually feed upon thick, hard, salt and raw Food, and whose Concoctions are for that reason worse, thicker and less spirituous Humors are generated; and among the rest the salt ones are less volatiliz'd; whence the Animal Spirits are thicker and less active; as in Country people, and poor people, and such as inhabit the cold po∣lar Regions, and use such a sort of Di∣et for want of a thinner; who are there∣fore slower to all manner of Animal Actions, and of dull Wits. Whereas on the other side, they who live in hot∣ter Regions, abounding with plenty of all sorts of wholesom Diet, and sel∣dom feed upon salt or smoak'd Meats, but accustom themselves to a thinner and more wholesom sort of Diet, and consequently are serv'd by their Bowels with better Concoctions, their Humors and Spirits are thinner and more vola∣tile, and their Bodies and Wits more nimble and active. Aristotle indeed says, that Melancholy People are in∣genious; but this is not to be understood of such as are altogether melancholy, and together with a thicker blood have
thicker Spirits; but of such as incline to Melancholy, and consequently whose Spirits are neither too thin and volatil (for such are too movable and incon∣stant) nor too thick (for they are stu∣pid) but in a middle temper between both. And therefore such People are neither too quick nor too redious in the transaction of Business, but prudently weigh and judge of things before they proceed to Execution. XI. Perhaps it may seem strangeThe Pas∣sage thro' the Pores of the Nerves. to some People, that the salt Parti∣cles should be made so subtil and spiri∣tuous, as to be able to pass freely thro' the invisible Pores of the Nerves. But they will cease to wonder, when they observe in Chymistry the extraor∣dinary Subtility and Volatility of Vo∣latile Salt; and how swiftly the Spirits of Salt will pass through the invisible Pores of the earthen Vessels. Nay, if they only consider how common Salt without any mixture of Water or Moisture being dissolv'd into Pickle, will penetrate through the thick sides of wooden Vessels, and sweat through Stone Pots overcast both within and without with a Glassie Crust, as we find in those Vessels where we salt our Beef, or keep our pickl'd Fish. If then fix'd Salt only melted, passes through the Pores of the Vessels, how much more easily will the most subtil Spirit of volatil Salt pierce through the Pores of the Nerves? XII. Here some will object, ThatWhy these Spirits do  corrode by reason of their A∣crimony. Salts and Acids are sharp and corro∣ding, so that if the Animal Spirits were generated out of the salt Parti∣cles of the Blood, and consequently participated of any Saltness they would corrode all Parts whatever by reason of their Acrimony, which would occa∣sion Pains and many Inconveniencos. I answer, That it is certain that the A∣nimal Spirits are indu'd with some slight Acrimony, but not so much as to oc∣casion any sensible molestation; because that exceeding Acrimony which is in fix'd Salt, by reason of the sharp pun∣gent Particles conjoyn'd with it, be∣comes mild in that volatil and vaporous Spirit, because the small sharp Particles being dissolv'd, are more remote one from another, and their Force is bro∣ken by the intervening Air or some steamy Vapour. For example, if any one go into a Cellar, and draw in the Air that is all intermix'd with a most subtil exhaling Spirit, or if he snuff up into his Nostrils the spirituous Va∣por of Wine heated at the Fire, yet shall he not feel the least grievance, nor perceive any Acrimony, which he would do if he snuft up into his No∣strils the Spirit it self fix'd in the Liquor. So in our great Salt-Works, where the Sea-Salt is boyl'd and depurated, the exhaling Vapors being impregnated with the volatil Salt, if they be taken in at the Mouth or Nostrils, little or no Salt-Savour shall be perceiv'd therein, whenas the fix'd Salt is most sharp. And this comes to pass, because the Forces which are conjoyn'd in the fix'd and thick Body, and for that Reason are very powerful, in the dissolv'd and vaporous Body are separated, and there∣by render'd weak and of no strength. And this is the Cause why the Animal Spirits do not corrode, because that be∣ing dissolv'd into a most subtil Vapor, they have not so much Acrimony in them as can be troublelom to any Part. To this we add, that they have a most thin and subtil serous Vapor, together with so much sulphury Spirit joyn'd with them for a Vehicle, which does not a little weaken and temper the A∣crimony. Moreover, the Parts them∣selves through which they pass, and in∣to which they flow, partake of some other Moisture, which also much wea∣kens and diminishes their Acrimony. XIII. From what has been said, itThe Diffe∣rence be∣tween the Animal & Vital Spi∣rits. is sussiciently apparent that the gene∣ration of the Animal Spirits is not Animal, but meerly Natural, and that they differ not only in some Ac∣cidents or Qualities, but in their whole Kind from the Vital. For in these the sulphury Juice mixt with the salt, is far more prevalent; in those there is very little sulphury or any o∣ther Juice apt to take Fire. These are extracted out of the Chylus and veiny Blood; those only out of the salt part of the arterious blood. These flow visi∣ble through the large Arteries and Veins; those invisible through the in∣visible Pores of the Nerves. Over those the Soul has no power, over these it has. And therefore there is a vast diffe∣rence between the Animal and Vital Spirits. But now the Question is, whe∣ther the Animal Spirits themselves do not differ one from another, in Sub∣stance, in Manner and Place of Genera∣tion and in Use? Whether some are not generated out of the Blood, others
out of the Lympha or some other Mat∣ter? Also, whether some are not ge∣nerated in the foremost, others in the middle, others in the hindmost Ven∣tricle? Or, as Willis lately tells us, whether some are not made in the Sub∣stance of the Brain, others of the Ce∣rebel? Lastly, whether some peculiar and differing from the rest, do not cause the Sight, others the Feeling, others the Hearing, others the arbitra∣ry Motion, and others the spontaneous Motion? I answer, That the Animal Spirits are not generated out of a diffe∣rent Matter, nor in various Parts (for we take the Brain and Cerebel for one part) neither do they differ one from another, but are all of the same Nature, Composition and Condition; but that the diversity of their Operations arises from the diversity of the nature & con∣dition of the Parts into which they flow; as those which flow into the parts adapt∣ed for feeling, as the Membrane & Skin, those cause the Feeling; those that flow into the Eye, cause the Sight; those that flow into the Ear, cause the Hear∣ing; those that flow into the Muscles, Fibers and other Parts, ordain'd for Motion, cause Motion; though they be the same and no way different; as every Instrument is adapted to this or that proper Action. In the same man∣ner as the Beams of the Sun, which though they be always the same, and proceed from one Sun, neither confer any other Light, or other Strength, or any other thing to any other Things, yet produce most different effects accord∣ing to the difference of the Constituti∣ons of the things into which they flow. For here they produce Barly, there Trees, in another place Stones, here Worms or Fish, sometimes Insects or other things. Here they extinguish Life, there they are the cause of it; here they soften, there they harden. As to the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves, see the fore∣going Chapter. XIV. To these Animal Spirits hi∣thertoThe two∣fold Use of these Spi∣rits. no other Use was attributed, only that they are serviceable to the Animal Actions, that is to say, the principal Faculties, the Senses and the Animal Motions; which is not to be deny'd: but besides this, there seems to be another natural Use to be assign'd them, which is, that they conduce in a high measure to the nou∣rishment of the Parts, especially the spermatical. This is chiefly apparent from hence, because that as the blood continually flows out of the Heart thro' the Arteries, so likewise these Animal Spirits continually flow from the Brain through the Nerves to the Parts, and that naturally, without the determina∣tion or appointment of the Soul, even when the Mind makes no appointment at all, as in Sleep and in soporiferous Diseases. But altho' besides this natural Motion perpetually proceeding, they are fre∣quently mov'd by another determina∣ted Motion proceeding from the Mind; yet that detracts nothing from the con∣tinual natural Motion, but that these Spirits by virtue of that, may be ser∣viceable to the Action of Nutrition, as they are thereby serviceable to the A∣nimal Actions. For the blood when the Body is at rest, is forc'd out of the Heart through the Arteries by a setled continual Motion to the nourishment of the Parts; shall it therefore when by reason of any extraordinary Exercises or heating of the Body, it is ten times swifter and more rapidly mov'd and forc'd out, be no longer proper for the nourishment of the Parts? Certainly no man of Reason will say, that that same second rapid Motion despoyls the blood of its nutritive Quality. And so likewise the more rapid determina∣tive motion of the Spirits, often altering the first continual Motion, cannot be said to deprive them of their Quality necessary to the Assistance of Nutri∣tion. XV. But some will say, How can theObjection. Work of Nutrition equally proceed in the Parts, when sometimes more, sometimes fewer Animal Spirits flow into these or those Parts? For it seems that those into which fewer Spirits flow, should be less, those into which more Spirits pass, should be more nou∣rish'd. I answer, that the same thing befalls these Spirits as befalls the blood, which though it be more rapidly and in greater quantity thrust forward into the Parts upon extraordinary Exercises and Heats of the Body, yet does it not nou∣rish them ever a jot the more, push'd on by its ordinary continual Motion, in regard that rapid Motion of it is caus'd by the great Heat; by Motion and Heat the blood becomes more thin and subtil, and the Pores of the Parts more loose; so that the blood may not be able to stick so close to the Parts, but that a great quantity of it may be
dissipated. So also these Spirits, when they are frequently determin'd in great∣er quantity to these or those parts, en∣due them indeed with a firmer solidity, but no larger augmentation; because the chiefest part of them, by reason of their tenuity, is dissipated; and what is not serviceable for nourishment, or is not dissipated, that, being pour'd forth according to custom, into the Substance of the Parts, and being somewhat thick∣ned, enters the extremity of the Veins, together with the remainder of the Blood, and is mixt and circulated to∣gether with it, and carry'd to the heart. Of which Circulation Rolfincius and Deusingius take notice. XVI. Now we are to take noticeWhat these Spirits con∣tribute to nourish∣ment. what these Spirits afford or contribute to Nourishment. It has been said, l. 2. c. 12. that the blood consists of a sulphu∣ry, salt and serous Juice, and that it is forc'd forward every way for the nou∣rishment of the Parts. Therefore in its Mass there are two sorts of Substances, serving to the nourishment of the Parts, Sulphur and Salt. Mercury is a third, for the most part unprofitable indeed for nourishment, but altogether necessary for the conjunction, mixture, and as a Vehicle of the former. But of the two former, some serve for the nourishment of the fleshy and fat parts; others to the nourishment of the Spermatic parts. The fleshy and fat parts are chiefly nourish'd by the sulphury particles of the blood, which serve to endue them with an Oily soft∣ness and something of sweetness. Ne∣vertheless there are some salt particles, to render the parts more firm and solid. But when that in those parts the sul∣phury particles predominate above the salt, then are they softer and fatter; where less prevalent, more fleshy and firm. The Spermatic parts are nou∣rish'd by the salt particles of the blood, which render them more solid and hard: yet have some sulphury parti∣cles mix'd with them; according to whose lesser or greater proportion and dissolution, some parts are softer, as the Membranes, Veins and Arteries; others harder, as the Bones and Gri∣stles. XVII. But to the end this nourish∣mentThe pro∣gress of Nutrition. may be carry'd on without any ob struction, there is of necessity requir'd some kind of separation of the salt par∣ticles from the sulphury, that the one may the better be enabled to adhere to the Spermatic, the other to the Fleshy and Fat Particles, and be assimilated to them. This Separation is caus'd by the Ani∣mal Spirit; which by its influx, which as it were coagulating by a slight kind of effervescency and peculiar , the salt particles, separates them from the sulphury, to the end they may be affix'd to the spermatic parts, and by the means of the heat and a small sul∣phureous Vapor, be assimilated to them; and as the spermatic parts are more or less dry or moist, and more or less of the sulphury particles are mix'd with them, so the salter particles of the blood are more or less harden'd in them. Thus they become altogether dry and hard in the Bones, but softer in the Membranes and Fibers, &c. These sal∣ter particles being thus moderately sepa∣rated out of the remaining more sulphu∣ry Mass of the blood, that which is proper goes to the nourishment of the fleshy and fat parts. So that the Animal Spirits supply the place of a subacid Rennet or Coagulum, which is extracted out of Salt and salt things. For that such a sowr Ferment or Coa∣gulum causes the separation of salt and sulphury particles is most evidently apparent in Chymistry. For if you mingle Spirit of Wine, wherein there is ten times a greater proportion of sul∣phury than salt particles, with Spirit or Water of Tartar, which consists of Salt Tartarous particles thinly dissolv'd and melted, the Mixture will be exact; in∣to which Mixture if you pour in never so little Spirit of acid Salt or Vitriol, there will be presently an Effervescency, by which the salt particles will be sepa∣rated from the sulphury and watery, and being coagulated, they will fix and precipitate to the bottom. Thus also, by the mixture of A∣nimal Spirits, which are endu'd with a gentle subacidish quality, the salt par∣ticles of the blood flowing into the parts, are in a moderate quantity gently sepa∣rated from the rest, and are somewhat fix'd and coagulated with the Spirit it self and by that means are agglutina∣ted, grown to, and plainly assimilated with the spermatic parts; but those which are less salt, and more sulphury, adhere to the fleshy and fat parts, and are united with them. But those par∣ticles which are for the most part de∣priv'd of Spirits, and less proper for nourishment, flow back through the Veins together with the remaining part of the blood, to be impregnated with a
new ermentaceous Humor, proceeding from the Liver and Spleen, and to be spiritualiz'd anew in the Heart, either with new Chylus, or alone without it. But if such a separation of salt and sulphury particles from the Animal Spi∣rits flowing through the Nerves, be re∣quir'd in the Parts for the carrying on of the nourishment, the Question will be, how far this Affair shall be carry'd on in such parts into which there are no Nerves inserted, as in the Bones and the like? As also in those which admit but very few Nerves, and yet in respect of their Largeness and their Use, re∣quire much nourishment. I answer, that there are no parts to which Nerves do not reach, only to some more and larger, to others fewer and less, as some require a greater, others a less proportion of Animal Spirits for the Duties of Sence and Motion, and also Nourishment; which is the Reason that in some there is a greater, in o∣thers a lesser separation of the salt from the sulphury particles. The Bones, be∣cause they are nourish'd chiefly by the Salt and Tartarous Spirits of the Blood, want many Animal Spirits, to cause a strong separation of the salt particles from the sulphury, and therefore they are all invelopp'd with a Periostium, in∣to which these Spirits flow in great quantity through the Nerves, and from thence penetrating into the Pores of the Nerves, efficaciously perform their Of∣fice; and though no manifest Nerves seem to enter the Bones, yet that they enter into some, is apparent by the Teeth; and 'tis probable that they en∣ter many other Bones, though so small, as not to be discern'd by the Eye. And such Bones into which they do not en∣ter, there the Periostium receiving the Spirits from the Nerves, supplies the Office of the Nerves. But where there is neither Nerve nor Periositum, they have their just magnitude from the be∣ginning, conjoyn'd with a peculiar hard∣ness, and afterwards neither wear nor increase, as the little Bones of the Ears, as the Mallet, the Anvil and the Stir∣rup. The Heart which is fleshy, be∣cause it requires not so great a quanti∣ty of Salt for its nourishment, nor is to be mov'd by a voluntary Motion, and because it makes and contains within it self a sharper sort of Spirits, needs very few Animal Spirits, and therefore is fur∣nish'd with very slender Branches of little Nerves. The Liver and Lungs, because they are furnish'd with fermen∣taceous and sowr Juices from other parts in sufficient quantity, the one from the Heart, the other from the Spleen, re∣ceive very small Nerves dispers'd chief∣ly through the involving Membrane, and hardly entring the Parenhyma or body of the Bowel. The Spleen ad∣mits a greater number of Nerves and Animal Spirits; for that making the Matter of the Ferment out of the Ar∣terious Blood, the acid salt particles of the blood are to be more strongly se∣parated therein from the sulphury. And thus it is in the rest of the Parts; among which, the more solid always require more, the softer fewer Animal Spirits; and of the softer, those that are water'd with more Animal Spirits, are harder than other softer parts, as we shall make out when we treat of the Muscles. Now that such a kind of Quality is most necessary in the Animal Spirits to promote the Nutrition of the Parts, sundry Arguments demonstrate. 1. Because those Parts which are ex∣ercis'd most and oftenest by the volun∣tary animal motion, and into which, to cause that motion, of a necessity a greater proportion of Spirits flows, than into such Parts as are less exercis'd; be∣cause I say those Parts, for the better separation and coagulation of the salt particles of the blood from the sulphu∣ry, are nourish'd with a more solid Nourishment, and consequently become much more hard and strong than other parts which are exercis'd less, and into which those Spirits for that reason are not so copiously determin'd, but only flow into them according to their ordi∣nary course. This we find in most men, whose right Arm and Hand is much stronger than the left, because of custom the one is ten times more made use of than the other, as being the Instrument of most of our Actions; for which reason a greater proportion of Spirits is determin'd to the one than to the other; in which, because there is not so plenti∣ful a mixture of Animal Spirits, there is not so great a separation and fixa∣tion of the salt and sulphury Spirits; and consequently less firm Nourish∣ment, though sometimes the Bulk and Thickness may seem greater. But that which is oppos'd, in regard that by rea∣son of the less coagulating Effervescency, it is less freed from the sulphury Spi∣rits, it becomes soft, pappy and fat, and affords less strength to the Mem∣ber. 2. Because in such persons that walk much and frequently, their Thighs are much firmer and stronger, than in such
who being given to Laziness, seldom walk, and yet their Thighs are fatter, more fleshy, softer and thicker. And then again, those that walk much are much stronger in their Thighs than in any other parts of their Body, which they exercise less, and therefore they are fit for walking and running, but not for any other Labour. 3. Because for the same reason it is, that Women and lazy people are fat and soft, but weak; because there is no other than only the ordinary influx of Animal Spirits into the Parts; and hence a greater quantity of the sulphury par∣ticles of the blood mixt with salt, and less separated from them, are appos'd to∣gether with the Salt, which renders the Nourishment less firm. 4. Because that in Paralytic Persons, in whom very few Spirits or none at all flow into the Members that suffer, first the suffering parts for some time are languid and somewhat swelling with an Impostume-like Tumor, and at length grow lean and wither'd, though much blood is forc'd to them through the Arteries. 5. Because that such as use immode∣rate Venery waste away, by reason of the great consumption and waste of A∣nimal Spirits, which for that cause flow∣ing in a lesser quantity to the nourish∣ment of the Parts, Nutrition is obstruct∣ed, and thence follows a leanness and wasting of the whole body. 6. Because in an ill temper of the Brain and upon several Diseases an A∣trophy follows, either because of the consumption of these Spirits, or because few are generated, or those that are ge∣nerated are vicious. Thus Malpigius frequently observes, that such as have receiv'd any Wound in the Brain, at length die of a Con∣sumption. 7. Because such an Atrophy caus'd by the ill temper of the Brain and Spirits, has been often cur'd by Reme∣dies apply'd to the Head alone; by which the Animal Spirits being restor'd to their former Sanity, Nutrition has had its usual Course. 8. Because upon the cutting of any Nerve, that Part to which the Nerve was carry'd, shall consume and perish for want of Animal Spirits. Of which Riolanus gives us an elegant Example. Nicephorus Gregorius, saith he, saw a young Boy once, that being shot with an Arrow into the Neck, the Arrow had cut the Nerve; upon which the contrary Foot was seiz'd with a Numness, and the Disease remain'd incurable: and though the other Foot grew as the Boy grew, the other Leg retain'd its first exility and Shortness, hanging loose and useless. Up∣on which many that understood not the Causes and Reasons of things, were strange∣ly amaz'd how it came to pass, that the Hand which was much nearer the Wound was altogether insensible of the Hart, when the Foot so far distant, was so deeply af∣fected with it. But by reason Anatomy was not so well understood in that Age, the cause of that Accident was not so well dis∣cern'd by the Physicians of that time, which was certainly this, because the Arrow had not struck the Nerve after its separation from the Pith, and its starting out through the Side-holes of the Spiny Fistula; for there is no Nerve that slides through the Vertebers of the Neck, which descends to the Thigh and Foot, but penetrating within the Spiny Fistula, had cut the Nervy Strings in the Pith it self which descends to the Loins and the holy Bone, and thence to the Foot, and for that reason the influx of Spirits into the Foot, fail∣ing, the Foot dry'd up and ceas'd its growth. So that which way soever we consider the Matter, it will appear that the A∣nimal Spirits necessarily concur to the Office of Nutrition. And moreover, that in the Spleen they separate the Matter of Ferment out of the arterious Blood, necessary for the preparation of the Blood and the Chylus. These things Glisson and Wharton seem in some measure to have smelt out, and Lambert Velhussus treading their Footsteps. Only in this they were deceiv'd, that besides the Animal Spi∣rits, they thought there flow'd through the Nerves some other sort of Nutri∣tive Juice, which of it self nourish'd the Spermatic Parts. Which Error proceeded from that whitish Juice re∣sembling the White of an Egg, which when the Nerves are hurt, is often ga∣ther'd together in the Nerves or about them, vulgarly call'd Aqua Articularis. Which Humor however, doesnot di∣stil from the Nerves when hurt; for such a slimy Juice could never pass through the invisible Pores, but is a Humor that usually setles about the Joints to render them  and slippery, which upon a too copious mixture with the Animal Spirits flowing out of the endamag'd Nerves, grows thick and coagulated, many times to the Consist∣ence of the White of an Egg. Which
loss of Spirits causes a debility and A∣trophy in the Part. I thought good to insert this para∣doxical Opinion of mine into these A∣natomical Exercises in few words; up∣on which others may comment more at large, because that from this founda∣tion the Use and Nature of many other parts may be gather'd. There remain two things more to be unfolded. First, Whether the Animal Spirits are the next Instrument of the Soul; concern∣ing which thing Plempius accurately discourses l. 2. Fund. Med. sect. 4. c. 1. The next, How these Spirits being ge∣nerated in the Brain, and flowing with a continual and natural Motion to per∣fect the Nourishment of the parts, are mov'd by the Mind by another design∣ing Motion, and are sent sometimes in a larger, sometimes in a lesser proporti∣on to sundry parts. But these things which chiefly concern the Actions of the Soul, seem not to be the proper Subject of our Discourse, wherein we have design'd to write not of the Soul, but only of the Body of Man; and therefore as for those that are covetous of Satisfaction in this particular, I think fit to send them to the Philosophers, who have on purpose set forth whole Treatises of the Soul and its Actions; which how∣ever I advise to be read with great Judgment, since not a few of them have feign'd many and wonderful idle Dreams in that particular. CHAP. XII. Of the Face. IN the foregoing Chapters we have endeavour'd to display what is to be found in the Hairy Part of the Head; now we come to the smooth Part, which is call'd the Countenance, or Vultus, a Voluntatis judicio, from the Iudgment of the Will, be∣cause it discovers the Will. It is also call'd Facies, by the Greeks , because it distinguishes Men from Brutes, and shews that there is a Ce∣lestial Spirit contain'd in them. For if we more seriously consider the structure of the Face, its singular Beau∣ty and Splendor, we cannot but discern something that is wonderful and divine therein. Whence Aristotle very well observes, that the whole man is com∣prehended in his Face as in the Com∣pendium of a little Picture. For the Wisdom of the supream Architect more than sufficiently appears in the several parts of human Body; yet both the Beauty of the Face alone, and its wonderful agreement with the Soul, draws the Elegancy and Dignity of all the rest of the Parts as it were into a Compendium, and seems to shew therein the Affections of all the rest of the Parts as in a Looking-glass. For from thence we gather not only the Marks and Symptoms of Health, Dis∣eases and approaching Death, but also make shrewd Conjectures of the Inge∣nuity, Dispositions and Manners of Men. For as in the Cheeks Bashful∣ness and Terror, in the Eyes Anger, Joy, Sadness, Hatred, and chiefly Love display themselves; in the Forehead, Gravity and Humility; in the Eye∣brows, Pride; in the Chin, Majesty; so by the Nose, Sagacity or Stupidity; by the Motion of the Face, Wisdom or Folly, Honesty or Knavery, Civi∣lity or Rusticity, Reverence or Con∣tempt, good or ill Will; by the Co∣lour we discover the Temperaments of the whole Body. Moreover, by the Face we distinguish of Sex, Age, Life, and Birth. Therefore it is the most certain Image of the Mind, and a clear Mirror reflecting back those things which lie conceal'd, wherein both the external and internal Sences discover themselves, and all the Motions and Perturbations of the internal Faculties are display'd. I. The Face consists of Parts con∣tainingThe Parts of the Face. and Parts contain'd. The containing Parts are common or proper. The common are the Cuticle, the Skin, which is here very thin; the Fat, of which there is none either in the Eye-brows or Nose, and very lit∣tle in the Lips and Region of the Chaps, where it is so interwoven with Muscles, that it cannot be separated from the Parts annext to it. The Fleshy Pannicle, which below the Eyes is so thin, that Riolanus thought it to be altogether wanting in that Part. In the Forehead it is much more fleshy, and sticks so close to the Skin, that it can hardly be separated from it; and is also ruddy in that Part, because of
the frontal Muscles interwoven with it. The proper Parts are Muscles, Bones, Gristles, and other Parts to be describ'd in their due Places. The Face is divided into the upper and lower Part. The upper Part from the Hair to the Eye-brows, is call'd Frons, the Forehead; and in this part in a Body entire is referr'd to the Face, whereas in a Skeleton it belongs to the Skull. The lower Part extended from the Eye-brows to the extremity of the Chin, contains the Eyes, the Nose, the Cheeks, and other Parts especially to be describ'd, and in Men, round a∣bout the Mouth is adorn'd with a Beard. II. Frons, the Forehead, is soThe Fore∣head. call'd a ferendo, because it carries th Signs of Gravity, Sadness, Mirth, Morosity, &c. The Greeks call it , as much as to say, . the Part above the Eyes. III. The Shin of this Part is moveable,The Mus∣cles of the forehead. because it is furnish'd with two large Muscles, which Riolan calls the fleshy musculous Membrane; on each side one▪ rising from the Scalp, near the Coronal Sutre, and sticking closely to it, which at the sides are knit to the Temple Muscles, and above are somewhat distinguish'd in the middle, but below so closely joyn'd together, that they seem one Muscle. They terminate at the Eye-brows, which they lift up, and contract the Flesh which sticks close to them, into Folds and Wrinkles.  writes, that he observ'd in a Person that had a large Nose, an Appendix of these Muscles extended even to the Gristles of the Nose. These Wrinkles Physiognomist ob∣serve, and take from thence the Signs of the Nature and Fortune of Men, and often foretel Wonders concern∣ing future Events that shall happen to them. And the better to perswade the credulous of the certainty of their Pre∣dictions, distinguish the Wrinkles into streight and transverse; and of these they make seven in number, consecra∣ted to the seven Planets; all which they confess do not appear in all men, but that some are wanting in some Peo∣ple; only that they are for the most part conspicuous, which are appropria∣ted to Mercury, Vnus and Iupiter, especially if the Eye-brow be lifted up, which happens to those that are under dep Meditation; or that the Skin of the Forehead be contracted, as when men are angry, which causes a corru∣gation both of the streight and trans∣verse Wrinkles. But how frivolous and uncertain these Predictions are, be∣sides daily Experience, what we have discours'd at large concerning the In∣fluences of the Planets, I. de Peste, plain∣ly demonstrate. The said Frontal Muscles derive lit∣tle Nerves from the Branch of the third Pair, proceeding from the hole of the Orbit of the Eye. They are furnish'd with little Arteries from the external Carotides; and send forth little Veis to the Jugulars. They have streight Fibers, by which they draw the Skin streight up, not transverse or oblique, as Columbus and Aquapendens assert contrary to ocular Demonstration and Reason. IV. Here by the way we must ob∣serveMuscles of the hinder part of the Head. without the Face, that two Mus∣cles very slender, seldom remarkable, are to be found in the hinder part of the Head, which being short, thin and broad, arise from the transverse line of the hinder part of the Head, in which the Muscles moving the Head end; and being furnish'd with streight Fibers ascending upwards, terminate in a broad Tendon, and touch the Muscles of the Ears at the sides. By these Fibers, which belong to those more remarkable Muscles, the Skin of the Head is drawn toward the hinder parts, which Iohn Schenckius testifies of himself, and Columbus of his Master. Under the Forehead are contain'd the Domicils of the four Sences, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling and Tasting. The fifth Sence of Feeling, has no particular habitation in the Face, but is dispers'd over the whole Body.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Eyes in general. THE Eyes in Latin, Oculi; in Greek,  & , are the Organs of Sight, form'd and consisting of several similar Parts for the sake of seeing. These, like the Stars and Lumina∣ries of our Bodies, are plac'd by the Supream Creator in the upper part of our Body, that as Sentinels from a high Watch-Tower, they may be able to discover fortuitous Accidents, what to avoid and what to entertain, and thro' the admirable Construction, Elegancy and variety of visible Objects, to evince us of the Omnipotency of the invisible God. For they are the Tapers of the Bodies, which like the Sun, give light to Man: For as the shining Sun illumi∣nates the wide World, but withdraw∣ing his Beams, is the cause of Dark∣ness; so the Eyes being perfect and o∣pen, illustrate the Microcosm, and dis∣play the wonderful Works of God; but being blinded, involve the little World in darkness, and compel mise∣rable Man to live perpetually as in an obscure Prison in perpetual Darkness; for that being depriv'd of those Win∣dows, he is also depriv'd of all Light, his first and chiefest Pleasure. Now if the Structure of the Eye be but more narrowly consider'd, certainly there is no man living, whom the im∣mense Wisdom of the Supream God will not ravish into Admiration and A∣mazement, who in the framing these Organs, was so much the more exqui∣site in his Workmanship, by how much the Sight excels all the rest of the Sences in Excellency and Dignity. I. The Eyes are in number two;The Num∣ber. partly for the greater perfection of the Sight; partly that if the one should happen to be hurt, the other might sup∣ply the Office and Duty common to both. In Man they are distant but a small space the one from the other, in Brutes their distance one from t'other is far greater. II. If you look upon the Ball itThe Fi∣gure. self, their Figure is round and spheri∣cal, to render them the more apt for Motion, and more fit to receive the visible Rays. But if you consider the Eyes together with their Muscles an∣nex'd to the hinder part, then their shape is somewhat oblong, like the Root of a Tulip. III. Their Colour in Men is some∣whatTheir Co∣lour. various; in some blewish, in o∣thers yellowish, in others black; which Variety is most conspicuous about the Apple of the Eye in the Rainbow, and proceeds from the colour of the Uveous Coat. In the Kindom of China, by the report of Travellers, the Inha∣bitants have black Eyes; but in Tartary, green. In Brutes of the same kind there is not observ'd so great a Variety. The Causes of these Colours are at large set down by Aristotle, Simon Portius and Montaltus, to whom I refer the Rea∣der. IV. The Bigness of the Eye inThe Big∣ness. Men is but indifferent, not in all Men exactly equal; yet such as suf∣fices to receive the Rayes of visible Things. However that small diffe∣rence in the Bigness, does not a little contribute to the greater or less perfecti∣on and strength of the Sight. For large and Goggle Eyes are much duller of sight than those which are less, and more retir'd within the Head, the rea∣son of which is to be seen among the Optic Writers. V. There is a wonderful SympathyTheir Con∣sent. and Agreement of the Eyes one be∣tween the other, by reason of the Op∣tic Nerves adhering to them in the middle at the top of the Pith; as also by reason of the moving Nerves ari∣sing from one and the same Original. And hence if the one be afflicted by a∣ny external Accidents, the other lan∣guishes immediately, and the one can hardly be preserv'd from the detriment of the other. VI. They have a certain Light inThe Light of the Eye. themselves which accompanies their first Formation; less in Man, who is chiefly employ'd in the day-time; greater in those Creatures that prey in the Night; as Dormice, Owls and Cats, whose glittering Eyes dis∣pel the Darkness round about them. And Laurentius Bauschius reports upon his own View, that he has seen the Eyes of Lions so brightly shining after Death, that you might discover the bottom of the Choroid through the hole of the Uveous Coat, as it were of a Gold-colour.
Now because there is a great conflu∣ence of Animal Spirits to the Eyes, hence they manifestly discover the Signs of Health or Sickness. In a healthy Per∣son a proper and convenient conflux of these Spirits renders them full, glitter∣ing and lively. But in persons that are sick, the smaller quantity of those Spi∣rits flowing into the Eyes, makes them look fall'n, sad, troubl'd and obscure; till at the last endeavours of fading Na∣ture, at length the dazl'd and broken Sight foretels the utter Ruine both of Strength and Life. VII. That these Spirits being en∣du'dWhether diseas'd Eyes be contagious with evil Qualities, and dart∣ing from the Eyes, defile Looking-Glasses, and by contagion infect o∣thers with an Ophthalmy, formerly Aristotle, Galen, Alexander, and many modern eminent Physicians have erroneously believ'd. For the Animal Spirits generated in the Brain are not all equally good; and if those which flow to the Eyes were endu'd with bad Qualities, also those which flow to other parts, would partake of the same bad Qualities, and would badly affect other parts likewise, and obstruct their Performances; for there is no reason that worse should flow to the Eyes, and better to other parts: ne∣vertheless in most Ophthalmics, no other parts are endamag'd unless the Eyes. Besides, there can be no such emission of Spirits from the eyes at a distance, as to defile a Looking-Glass, or infect the eyes of another person at a distance. And therefore the defilement of the Looking-Glass proceeds not from the contamina∣ted Spirits issuing from the Eyes, but from the corrupt Vapors proceeding from the Mouth, or some other exter∣nal Cause. Thus Blear-eyedness caus'd by looking upon Blear Eyes, whether at a near or farther distance, is to be attributed, not to the emission of conta∣minated Spirits from the Eyes, but to the conturbation of the Spirits of the other Person, caus'd by the abhorr'd Spectacle of Blear-Eyedness; as being that by which the Spirits are not only mov'd disorderly; but also the Pores being dilated by the unwonted Influx of Spirits more than usual, the Blood and Humors are hasten'd away in great∣er quantity to those Parts upon which the thoughts of the Mind are most in∣tent, that is to say, the Eyes. In the same manner as when a Person sees a∣nother vomiting, many times his Ab∣horrency and Squeamishness is such, that he is thereby provok'd to vomit; or else beholding with horror and ter∣ror the outragious Motions of Epilep∣tics in their Convulsions, falls himself into an Epilepsie; of which there are several Examples among the Physici∣ans; neither of which can be ascrib'd to Contagion, but to the disorderly Motion of the Spirits, by which the vi∣cious Humors are also hurry'd to the Parts intently thought upon; especially in such persons where such Humors were already collected and prepar'd in the Body, as the Milky Juice has been brought to the empty Breasts of Wo∣men and sometimes of Men by Con∣ceit; according to what we have said, l. 2. c. 2. But in regard this horrible Impression of abominating Conceit is not alike in all People, nor troubles all People actually; besides that, it does not happen to such Persons where these sharp and vicious Humors are collected in their Bodies, hence it falls out that the Eyes of some are affected with the sight of Blear-Ey'dness, when others are nothing concern'd at a nearer di∣stance, and why some vomit to see another vomit, others are nothing mov'd. VIII. Some observing these Diffi∣cultiesNo Inqui∣nations issue from the Eyes. concerning the Spirits, and yet willing obstinately to defend Contagion in Lippitude, seek another Evasion, and affirm that this Contagion does not consist in the Spirits so much as in certain thin Exhalations and con∣tagious Impurities issuing from the Eyes of a Blear-ey'd Person; as the Pestilence is got by contagious Conta∣minations; and so by reason of this sort of Contagion Lippitude has been known to be epidemic, as they report; and further, that Mirrors have been altoge∣ther contaminated and corrupted by the very Looks of some who have had those Vapors issuing from the Eyes very ma∣lignant; insomuch that Hoffman tells a Story of a florid young Virgin, who during the time of her Flowers, so in∣fected the Glass where she drest her self, that the Quicksilver dropt off from behind. But these People do not consi∣der, that very few Exhalations can is∣sue from the Eye, which is a colder Part; that besides its conjunctive Coat, is cover'd with another hard and thick Coat, able to shoot themselves three, much less twenty paces; at which di∣stance Lippitude has sometimes been
contracted at the sight of a Blear-ey'd Person; for if there should be such a continual Emission, though of the most thin Vapors from the Eye, certainly they would be totally dry'd up in a few hours time, nor would that Moi∣sture which is afforded hy the small and almost invisible Arteries, suffice to sup∣ply so great an Inanition. Moreover, if any one troubl'd with a deform'd Lippitude, should enter into any spaci∣ous Court, and another beholding him at a distance, should presently grow blear ey'd (as we have known it some∣times happen) shall that come by Con∣tagion? Then must the Patient have sent the Contagion before him; else it is not likely that the Contagion should spread it self from his Eyes through all the Court in a moment of Time. Several People have contracted Oph∣thalmies from looking upon blear-ey'd persons, even in the open Air and against a strong Wind; and yet no Man can well believe, that such a subtile Conta∣gion should be carry'd against the force of the Wind. But in the Pestilence it is quite otherwise, where a great quan∣tity of contagious Exhalations are ge∣nerated out of the moist, hot and po∣rous parts of the Body, also out of cer∣tain contaminated and copious Humors contain'd in the Body it self; from which by reason of the extream Heat and Moisture Exhalations are rais'd in great quantity; and by reason of that great quantity, and the force of the great Heat that makes a strong Expul∣sion, there's no body but will grant that they may be carry'd to a great distance. As to Epidemic Ophthalmies; they generally spread themselves, by reason of the common Cause proceed∣ing from the Air or Diet, but not by reason of any Contagion issuing from the Eyes; or if contracted by looking upon the Person affected, it proceeds from the conturbation of the Spirits a∣foresaid. So that if ever any Looking-Glasses were defil'd and spoyl'd by any contaminations issuing from the Eyes, creat Iudaeus Apella, for I will not. Neither does the Story of Hoffman prove it; for it is beyond all Belief, that a hard and polish'd Looking-Glass, which neither Oyl of Vitriol nor Aqua fortis can penetrate, should be corrupt∣ed and spoil'd by a few Exhalations proceeding from the Eyes of a Virgin; nay, that those Exhalations should so penetrate the Pores of the Glass, that the Quicksilver should fall off from the Back-side, when those Glasses will not admit the most subtil and sharp Spirits to pass through their sides. Perhaps that Looking-Glass might be corrupted by the great quantity of viscous and foul Vapors exhaling from the Mouth of the Virgin and the rest of her Bo∣dy; which contamination also might have been easily wip'd out with a Clout; so that the Quicksilver did not fall off for that reason. Rather it is most like∣ly, that Hoffman being over-credulous, was deceiv'd by the pratling Gossips that told him the Story and shew'd him the Looking-Glass, which was not spoil'd by that Cause, but by the Moi∣sture of the Wall, against which the Glass had hung long; only it happen'd that the Quicksilver fell off at the time that the Virgin lookt in it. By way of Corollary, I shall add one thing: If any Contagion issu'd from the Eyes of blear-ey'd Men, it would be no less catching in the Dark than in the Light, as it happens in the Pestilence and Itch; but let any one lie with an Ophthalmic person, sleep and converse with him all Night not know∣ing him to be so, his Eyes shall never come to any hurt thereby, though he shall presently catch the Distemper by conversing and seeing him by the Light. Which is a certain Sign that it does not proceed from any Contagion, but from the Conturbation aforesaid. A certain German Student going into a Brothel-house about Night, and ask∣ing for a Whore, was carry'd, as she made him believe, to a very fair Bedfel∣low, without a Candle in the Dark, pretending that she would by no means be known, because she was another man's Wife; with whom he lay all that Night and several other Nights after∣wards; which not sufficing, he would often boast among his Companions what a lovely Mistress he had got to himself. His Associates, understanding that he was gone one Night to the same Bawdy-House, in the middle of the Night came a great Cluster of them to∣gether, and whether the Bawd would or no, lighting up several Candles, went up in search of their Fellow-Stu∣dent, and broke open the Chamber-Door. He, seeing his Companions en∣tred, skipp'd out of the Bed, and put on his Cloaths; and soon after the Wench was dragg'd out of her Bed to the Light; at what time they found her to be an ugly blear-ey'd Jade, and thereupon jeer'd their Companion, who had never seen her before by the Light, almost to Death, for bragging as he had
done of the Beauty of his unknown Harlot. On the other side, the poor Scholar who was ignorant of that De∣formity in her before, after he had lookt more accurately upon the Strum∣pet by the Candle-Light, became so troubl'd and disturb'd through his a∣version to the Deformity of the Specta∣cle which he beheld, that he was sud∣denly tak'n with a desperate Ophthal∣my, of which he could hardly be cur'd in a Month's time. Whence it is ap∣parent, that the young Man contract∣ed that Blear-Ey'dness through the Conturbation of his Spirits only, and not by Contagion; which otherwise he had caught by lying with the deform'd Beast so many Nights before. IX. In the Eyes there are two sortsTwo sorts of parts of the eyes. of Parts to be consider'd; some that contain, others that constitute and form them. The containing Parts are various. The Pits of the Eyes call'd Orbits, the Eye lids, with the Brows both lower and uppermost, the Caruncles in the Corners▪ and the Kernels. The constituting Parts are the Fat, the Vessels, the Muscles, the Tuni∣cles and Humors. CHAP. XIV. Of the Parts containing the Eyes. See Table 14. I. AMong the Domicils of theThe Orbits Eyes, which are allow'd 'em for Security and Convenience, two great Cavities are first to be consi∣der'd, which are vulgarly call'd Or∣bits, hollow'd on both sides the No∣strils under the Forehead in the Bones of the Cranium, wherein the Su∣pream Architect would have the Eyes to be contain'd, that in these Bony Seats they might reside more safe from all external Injuries. Which Bones either hanging over or plac'd under the Eyes, the Greeks call  & , as much as to say, Sub-ocular. II. The Figure of the Orbits isThe Fi∣gure and Largeness. round and somewhat oblong; the Largeness but moderate, no more than sufficient for the Eyes with their Ker∣nels, Fat and Muscles to be contain'd therein, and mov'd with freedom. III. They are cloath'd withinsideThe Coats. with the Pericranium, which Riola∣nus denies, contrary to Ocular Te∣stimony, to which the Fat and Be∣ginnings of the Muscles closely ad∣here. IV. In each there are three Holes;Their holes two behind, and those the biggest; and one upon the side, which is less. The innermost of those behind affords a passage to the Optic Nerve. The outermost plac'd at the side of it, is an oblong Fissure, through which the mo∣ving Nerves with the Arteries and Veins proceeds to the Eye. The Lateral Hole, which is less, is seated in the inward Angle. This under the Sieve-like Bone, is bor'd through to the inner parts of the Nostrils, and sends forth Tears; therefore vulgarly call'd the Weeping-Hole. Concerning this Hole Spigelius makes this Observation, that it is big∣ger in Women, who are apt to shed Tears, than in Men, and in such as are not subject to weep. Now that the Tears may not flow continually through these Weeping-Holes, the Supream Architect has plac'd on each side a soft and kernelly Caruncle furnish'd with small sanguine∣ous Vessels and Nerves almost invisi∣ble, as also with two small little Ves∣sels carrying the Lympha, proceeding from the inner part of the Glandulous Flesh, and insensibly pouring forth Li∣quor continually to moisten the Eyes. This Glandulous Flesh covers the weep∣ing-hole; hence by some call'd the La∣chrymal Caruncle, and so prevents the continual Efflux of the internal Liquor; till press'd by its over-abounding quan∣tity, it gives way a little, and so affords a Passage to the Liquor, which is the Tears. This Caruncle being overmuch contracted by the cold Air, or eaten away, or exulcerated by some sharp Humor, it happens that the said Hole is not exactly shut; whence happens a continual and unvoluntary emission of Tears. At length, between the Ball of the Eve, cover'd with the Eye lids, and the lower Region of the Eye-brows and the upper Region of the Cheeks, two semi∣lunary
Cavities come to be consider'd; of which the uppermost by the Greeks is call'd , by the Latins, Oculi Ca∣vum, or the Hollow of the Eye. Both these Cavities, upon much watching and Ophthalmic Distempers, but more es∣pecially in a Flegmatic Cachexy and the Dropsie, are wont to swell, and to look somewhat black and blew. Which Colour if it be pale and remarkablyA Sign of the French Disease. The Eye∣lids. shining, is a certain Sign of the French Disease. V. The Eyes contain'd within these Orbits or strong Dens, for their bet∣ter preservation are cover'd with the Eye-lids, as with Curtains, to keep out Dust, troublesome Smoak and Vapors, as also the Excess of Light and the Injuries of the Air, and is moisten'd, wip'd and cleans'd by the Corneous Tunicle to render the Sight more bright and clear. They consist withoutside of a thick Skin, under which there is no Fat; withinside they are invelopp'd with a thin and slender Pericranium, to faci∣litate their Motion. Between these Parts runs a Fleshy Membrane, which is here very thin. VI. They receive very small Bran∣chesThe Vessels of Arteries from the Carotides, and send forth diminutive Veins to the Iugulars, and are furnish'd with little Nerves from the second Pair. In each Eye there are Two; one lower and lesser, whose Motion is slow∣er in Man; this in Birds is bigger than the uppermost; and in most seems to be mov'd for the most part alone. VII. The other, which is uppermost,Muscles. is indu'd with a most swift Motion, which it derives from two Muscles. Of which the first, which is streight, seated in the upper Region of the Orbit, ri∣sing with a slender and gristly begin∣ning within the Chamber of the Eye, above and close by the Ele∣vator of the Eye about the Hole of the Optic Nerve, is extended with a broad and subtil Tendon to the brim of the Eye-lid, and raising it up, opens the Eye. The other, call'd the Orbicular Muscle, is seated between the Fleshy Membrane, and that which is drawn forth from the Pericranium. This by most Anatomists is describ'd as one Muscle, orbicularly encompassing the Eye; which about the breadth of a fin∣ger, arises in the larger Angle or Cor∣ner, at the Root of the Nose, and thence proceeds under the lower Eye-lid, and runs back with orbicular Fi∣bers through the outer Canthos, and re∣turns above the upper Eye-lids to the same place of the inner Canthus, where it ends, and by contraction shuts the Eye-lids. But Spegelius and Riolanus more truly aver, that this orbicular Muscle is not single but double; because that in Persons that are full of Muscles, two slender semicircular Muscles are com∣monly observ'd; of which the upper∣most and largest is seated in the upper Eye-brow, and rising with an acute be∣ginning out of the inner Corner of the Eye, and that part of the Eye brow next the Nose, and so carry'd transvers∣ly on to the outermost Corner, and in∣serted into it, takes up all that space which lies between the Eye-brow and the extream part of the Gristle out of which the Hairs grow: The lower and lesser, arising from the side of the Nose with an acute be inning, and carry'd athwart through the lower Eye-lid, and somewhat ascending to the outer Cor∣ner, is inserted into the upper Eye-lid with a broad end. And thus both these Muscles have their distinct Insertions and Beginnings, though their circular Fibers touch one another, and stick so close together, so that upon a slight view, they seem to be but one Muscle; though it be apparent that they are two, not only by accurate separation and de∣monstration, but also from hence, that each of them receive distinct Nerves from distinct places, that is to say, the uppermost, a little Nerve from the moving Nerve that breaks forth thro' the Hole of the upper Orbit. The lower∣most, another little Nerve from that Nerve which extends it self through the Hole of the lower part of the Orbit. The same also appears from hence, that Physicians have observ'd in the Cynic Convulsion of the Face, that the lower Eye-lid has remain'd immoveable, and as it were drawn downward, while in the mean time the upper has mov'd natu∣rally; which could never be if both Eye-lids were mov'd by one Muscle. VIII. To these Muscles aforesaid,The Ciliar Muscle. some add a Ciliar Muscle; which girdling the Hairs of the Eye-brows, assists in the exquisite joyning of them together. But this Muscle is not ea∣sily demonstrated by any Man; for which reason many deservedly question whether there be any such Muscle or no? IX. As to the Motion of the Eye∣brows,What is  Motion. there is some Dispute between Aristotle and Galen, while the one
affirms their Motion to be natural, the other voluntary. But Aristotle err'd out of his Ignorance of those Muscles: the other knowing the Muscles, rightly ascribes a voluntary Motion to them. Iulius Casserius, observing that the Mus∣cles of the Eye-lids are extreamly slender, yet though so slender, that they are not wearied by continual Motion, grants that the Motion of the Eye-lids is voluntary, but somewhat different from the com∣mon voluntary Motion, as if he thought that they were partly mov'd by a volun∣tary Motion; or that their Motion was composed of natural and animal. But had he seriously considered the lightness of of the weight of the Eye-lids, he would have been convinc'd that those thin Muscles were sufficient to perform their voluntary Motion. X. Iulius Casserius takes also these Ob∣servationsObservati∣ons taken from the Eye-brows. from the Eye-lids: for Exam∣ple, that such as have their uper Eye-lid elevated, are proud and fierce; but that such as have it depressed, shutting al∣most half the Eye, so that they seem to look down upon the Ground, are hum∣ble and mild. But Hippocrates takes a very bad Prognostic from Eye-lids, ill joyned in Sleep. Consider, says he, what is to be seen in the Eye in time of Sleep; for if any thing of the White ap∣pear, the Eye-lids being not closs'd (if it do not happen from loosness, or the drink∣ing of some Potion, or that the Patient were not wont to sleep so) 'tis an ill Sign, and deadly. XI. The Eye-lids open from two An∣gles,Canthi. which are vulgarly called Canthi, which the Greeks call  Of these two, the outward Cor∣ner is less, to which there also joyns a remarkable Kernel within the Orbit of the Eye, which they call the Kernel without a Name, which is seated in the upper Re∣gion of that Corner, thicker above, thinner▪ below, and as it were neatly distinguish'd into certain Lobes, and sending forth small Lymphatic Vessels between those Lobes, which running forward within the inner Tunicle of the Eye-lids, pierce it through with small Holes, at a small distance from the Hairs. These little Vessels Nicholas Stenonis first discovered in the Head of a Sheep and Calf; and it is probable that it is so in the Eyes of a Man, though not discernable to the Eye, by reason of their Exiguity. He also tells us the way how to find out those Vessels. The Mouth of those Rivers, saith he, are easily discovered, if you extend never so little the whole Eye-lid in the outer∣most Corner. For then about half a Thumbs breadth from the outward Limbus, you shall meet with three in the Angle it self, four below, and six, sometimes seven above, through which a Bristle being thrust in without Dissection, you shall ea∣sily find a Passage into the Kernel it self. The last year discovered these Vessels to me, when holding to the Light of a Can∣dle the Eye-lid of a Sheep, after I had pluck'd out the Eye out of the Orbit, to se whether it were transparent or no; at what time the shining Rivulets of the LymphaThe inner Canthus. clearly betray'd themselves. XII. The innermost Canthus is bigger (particularly called by the Greeks , and by Hesychius  a Fountain, as seeming to be the Fountain from whence the Tears issue) in which the Glandulous Caruncle a∣foresaid, lyes upon the Lacrymal Hole. Which being corroded away by the Acrimony of sharp Humors, then the Eye weeps without any constrait; which is the cause of that Distemper which the Physitians call the Lachrymal Fistula, the Greeks In the Eye of an Ox, besides this Caruncle, there is to be found a certain brawny hard Particle, smooth toward the Eye, on the outward part some∣what rough, affording a more easie Motion to the Membrane, by which the Eye twinkles. XIII. Little soft Gristles lace theThe Cilia▪ Extremities of the Eye-lids, which the Greeks call , the Latins Cilia, for the more ready Expansion and exact Closure of the Eye-lids. Of which, the uppermost is much broader than the lower.The La∣chrymal Points. XIV. Within these Grisly Limbus's, about the larger Corner two small Holes are obvious in each Eye, called the Lachrymal Points, admitting a Hoggs Bristle within the Membranes of the Eye-lids, more conspicuous in Oxen, and other large Animals than in Men. These close together into one Channel near the Lachrymal Hole, which running forth towards the Fore∣parts, opens with a manifest Hole about the Extremity of the Nostrils, through which that thin Liquor distils, especial∣ly in cold Weather, when Men drop at the Nose before they are aware. And sometimes through these Lachrymal Points, some small quantity of the Lymphatic Liquor, squeez'd out of the
Kernels, flows forth like Tears without any compulsion, which gave them the Name of Lachrymal Holes, though they are not really the Fountains of the Tears. In the Extremities of the Eye-lids, under the upper, is inserted a row of streight Hairs, turning somewhat up∣ward; by Hippocrates call'd  which Casserius and others call particu∣larly Cilia, which grow to a certain length, set thin by Natures Law, which they never exceed. They are always also black, and never grow grey, like the rest of the Hairs of the Body; nor do they ever shed but in virulent Di∣stempers of the Part, as the Elephanti∣asis, or the Pox. Yet Aristotle affirms, that they fall off from Men that are ex∣treamly addicted to Venery. These keep off from the Eyes little Bodies flying in the Air, and render the Sight more perfect, by slightly darkening the Eye; for that if they be wanting through any Distemper, or o∣ther Cause, the Eye never discerns so ex∣actly at a distance: but if by any Acci∣dent they are turn'd toward the inside of the Eye, they become cruelly trouble∣some and hinder the Sight. In Oxen, besides the Eye-lids, there is yet another Membrane under the Eye∣lids, which both Men and most Ani∣mals want, which is govern'd by a pe∣culiar voluntary Motion. For it is drawn with a double String to the oppo∣site Corner, the one lying hid above, the other below, which arises from a certain Muscle plac'd in the outer Cor∣ner; which Muscle, by Fallopius, is taken for part of that which draws the whole Eye to the outward Parts. By the benefit of this Muscle Oxen twinkle, and can shut their Eyes, the Eye-lid be∣ing still open, when they lear, least any thing should fall into the Eye. XV. For more security, above,The Eye∣brows.  upon the Confines of the Fore-head and Eyes, the Eye-brows are placed, hanging over like a Bow, with a thicker Skin, and rough, with the Hair lying pressed down toward the outward Parts, to receive Sweat, Dust and other things that fall from the Head, least they should slip into the Eyes. These Eye-brows, by the Greeks call'd , Ruffus. calls the hairy Ex∣tremities of the Fore-head, and that part of them which looks toward the Nose, is call'd , the Head of the Eye-brows; the other regarding the Temples , the Tail of the Eye∣brows. The middle space between both Eye-brows, in Greek , by the Latins, because it is smooth and void of Hair, is call'd Glabella: Though sometimes that part be also hairy; the Eye-brows meeting together at the Ex∣tremity of the Nose, which Aristotle ob∣serves to be the Sight of a Person , austere and morose, and such a Man is therefore by him call'd . CHAP. XV. Of the Tears. I. HAving made mention in the former Chapter, of the Passa∣ges through which the Hairs flow, in regard the Tears themselves, together with their true Fountain, have been but obscurely hitherto describ'd by the Phi∣losophers; we thought it would not be time ill spent, by making a short Di∣gression to insert into these Anatomical Exercises a more exact Discourse con∣cerning them, that whence those serous Drops distil, and what they are, may be the better understood. As to the original Causes and matter of Tears, Opinions are very various. II. Empedocles, as Galen testifies, ima∣gined that Tears were generated out of attenuated and melted Blood. But in regard that many men can weep of a suddain, and when they please, it is not probable that the Blood can be so sud∣denly melted. III. Iohn Baptista Scortias, will have Tears to be generated in the Corner of the Eye, from the Animal Spirits, which being composed by the Apprehension of something sad, is melted, and distils in∣to Tears. Of the same Opinion Iacobus Tappias seems to be, who writes, that as Urine and Sweat are Excrements of the veiny and arterious Blood, so Tears are the Excrement of the nervous Blood, that is to say, the Animal Spi∣rits. But in regard that only invisible Animal Spirits, and no visible serous Hu∣mors can pass through the narrow Pores of the Nerves; seeing also that Tears flow out at times of great Joy and Laughter, when there is no sence of any Saddess; lastly, seeing that so great a quantity of Tears, as in a short time is∣sues forth in extraordinary Grief, would destroy the whole Frame of Man, If so
vast a quantity of Animal Spirits should be wasted in their supply; it is apparent that Opinion can no way be defended, as being far from Truth. IV. Georgius Nyssenus and Moletius thought Tears to be generated out of many Vapors carried to the Head through some Conturbation of the Bow∣els, and there condensed into Water by the coldness of the Brain, which is af∣terwards expell'd forth as an unprofita∣ble Excrement. Neither does Coringi∣us seem to differ much from their Opi∣nion. But in regard that many shed Tears in great abundance, upon the sight of a sad Accident, no Conturbati∣on of the Bowels preceding. Nay, seeing that many times Tears proceed from riding against the cold Air, or by looking and gazing suddenly upon the Sun, without any Conturbation of the Mind or Bowels; seeing that others weep when they please, and that Va∣pors cannot so suddenly ascend to the Head, and be condens'd so soon, and in so great a quantity, seeing that the Heart being troubled and possessed with extra∣ordinary Grief, together with the Brain and other Bowels, and yet the Person grieved never sheds any Tears; seeing that Tears flow as well in Joy as Sad∣ness, but the Vapors cannot be carried to the Head in the same equal manner and quantity, nor with the same swift∣ness in these contrary Affections of the Mind, it is plain that this cannot be the Original of Tears. Aristotle alledges Tears to be a cer∣tain Sweat or Vapour: But what sort of Sweat, and where generated, Cartesius more at large explains. For, saith he, That their Original may be the better un∣derstood, it is to be observed, that though many Vapors continually exhale from all Parts of our Body, yet there is part, out of which more issue forth than out of the Eyes, by reason of the Bigness of the Optic Nerves, and the multitude of the small Arteries, through which they come thi∣ther. VI. But these things are to be exa∣min'd a little more strictly; Cartesius says, there is no part out of which the Vapors issue forth in more abundance than out of the Eyes. But it is possible that more Vapors should issue forth from those parts which are enclosed and enfolded, besides other Membranes with a scherotic hard and thick Tunicle, and so compact and void of Pores, that there is not the like in the whole Body; I say, Is it possible that more Vapors should issue forth from this than from any other parts, among which there are a thousand ten times hotter, moister and more Porous? Is it because of the largeness of the Optic Nerves that there is such a Conflux of Vapors to the Eyes, and yet the Sight no way darkned thereby, nor the Ingress of the Animal Spirits no way obstructed? Whatever flows through their larger innermost Po∣rosities, must be deposited in the inner∣most Cavity of the Ball between the Hu∣mors, and so of necessity the Balls of the Eyes could not chuse but swell, and the Sight be very much endamaged. As to the multitude of diminutive Ar∣teries, that is not observ'd to be more numerous in the Eyes than in many o∣ther parts, for few small Arteries run to the Eyes, and those so slender, that they are scarce to be discern'd; so that so great a quantity of serous Humors cannot be pour'd forth out of those in∣visible Vessels, to moisten a whole Nap∣kin with Tears in the space of one hour. If any one ask why that Vapour does not always and continually flow and beget Tears, Cartesius answers, That the Vapors of the Body are only charg'd and condens'd into Water, when they are less stir'd than is usual, though they are not so copious; or when they are more co∣pious, so that they be not excessively agi∣tated. VII. Now let this most famous Per∣son tell me, where is the less motion of the Vapors, or the greater quantity; whether in the Man that sheds them for Joy or for Sorrow. If he says, that in Sorrow their Motion is less, I will aver that in Joy there is not a greater quanti∣ty; because these Affections in the shortest Interval then befall the same Man, whereas in Gladness, at the same time, it ought to be occasion'd by a greater quantity; for he himself tells us it cannot be done by the greater Motion, which happens in Gladness. If on the other side, he affirms that there is a less quantity of them in Sadness, I will assure him that the Motion is greater in Gladness, which according to the Words of Cartesius, obstructs the shed∣ding of Tears; nevertheless in the mean time, there is not a greater abundance of Vapors to be so suddenly encreas'd in the same Person, and yet that very same Person, in a short interval of time, sheds Tears during both these contrary Affections of the Mind, and therefore not from the Causes already related. These Difficulties Cartesius espying afar off, chooses rather to add other Causes of this Accident. Moreover, says he▪
I cannot observe any more than two Cau∣ses, why the Vapors that proceed from the Eyes should be changed into Tears. The first, when the Figure of the Pores, through which they pass, is alter'd, by some Ac∣cident, &c. The other is Sadness, suc∣ceeded by Love and Ioy, &c. VIII. Shall there be then the same Figure of the Pores in these same contra∣ry Affections, Sorrow, Love, and Joy? I may add in Laughter also, swift Rid∣ing, or when Dust, or any other thing falls into the Eyes; also in Infants, grown People, or aged Persons? Or would Cartesius rather distinguish between the next Causes, that the certain Figure of the Pores should be one thing, Sadness another, Love another? These things are very repugnant one to another; for thus, one next Cause of Tears is divid∣ed into several, and those contrary to each other. He that more attentively weighs these things, shall find that the most acute Cartesius, in his Discourse of Tears, as well as other Men, was in a great Doubt, and very far from the Mark. Which however was no Fault in the chief Philosopher of our Age, seeing there is no Man so perspicuous that may not ert in some things. IX. From the aforesaid Opinion, A∣quapendens and Casserius very much dif∣fer, who affirm Tears to be a thin Ex∣crement of the Eyes themselves, gene∣rated out of the remainder of the pro∣per Concoction, gathered together in the Fat and little Kernels. With these Septalius agrees, writing, that Tears are a serous Humor diligently generated in the Eyes, and collected together in their four Kernels. But neither do the Eyes discharge such a quantity of Ex∣crement, nor generate so much serous Humor. Neither can so large a quanti∣ty be gathered together in small dimi∣nutive Kernels, not able to contain a∣bove eight or ten Drops, nor in a small quantity of Fat, which by reason of its oyliness will not imbibe any Serum, so as to moisten whole Handkerchiefs with Tears. Neither can such a quantity be collected without a visible Tumor and Inconvenience to the Sight, in the small Kernels and Fat before mention'd: whereas before the shedding of the Tears, there is no swelling of the Ker∣nels or Fat to be perceiv'd. Besides, there is no reason why that Excrement should be generated in Grief and sud∣den Sorrow so speedily, or such a quanti∣ty be collected together, to burst forth into Tears. X. Some few were of Opinion, that Tears were a Portion of the Potulent Humors contain'd in the Brain and Veins of the Eyes, and more especially in the Veins of the Corners of each Eye, which bursts forth upon the Compressi∣on or Dilation of those Veins, occasi∣on'd by much Joy or Sorrow. But the narrowness and small number of those Veins hereby discernable, contradict this Opinion, together with the vast quantity of the Lachrimal Humors, which cannot be collected to that A∣bundance in those diminutive Vessels, and flow forth in so large a quantity; nor can it be so suddenly transmitted to them, nor pass through them. Add to this, that the little Veins of the Eyes, take in at their Extremities the super∣fluous bloody Humors, and carry them to the Jugulars, but pour none out from themselves, because there is no passage for that potulent Matter to come to the Eye. XI. Nor do they differ much from the foregoing Opinion, who believes the Tears to be nothing else but the Se∣rum which is separated from the Blood, which is carried to the Head, when the Pores are so disposed by a certain Mo∣tion of the Spirits, that it may be able to burst forth. But they neither tell us what that Disposition is, nor that same certain Motion of the Spirits; which two things, in regard they are so ex∣treamly different and multi-cacious, and cannot be naturally the same, as well in Constriction as Dilatatin, in Sadness as in Joy, in which contrary Accidents, however Tears must flow from one and the same next Cause, and not from diverse and contrary, there is nothing remains that can desend that Opinion. XII. At this day many ascribe the Flux of Tears only to the Lymphatic Vessels carry'd to the Eyes. Yet never any Person that I know of has hitherto demonstrated that manner of Lachry∣mation, nor those Vessels themselves; besides Nicholas Stenonis, that most ac∣curate Describer of Kernels, who late∣ly going about to explain that Opinion more at large, not without reason, af∣firms them to be a Serous sort of Li∣quor, chiefly separated from the Arte∣rious Blood, but as to the manner and place of Separation, his Opinion is quite different from what any body has hi∣therto propounded. For he believes that the Blood is carried through the Arteries into the Glandules of the Eyes, and that the Superfluity of it is suckt up by the Veins. But that the Veins, if
they be squeez'd together by any Cause, do not perform that Office sufficiently, and then by reason of the long stay of the abounding Blood in the Glandules, the Serum is separated from it in greater quantity, and flows in the form of Tears through the Lymphatic Vessels proceeding from the Kernels. Then he believes the Veins to be compress'd by the swelling of the Glandules, caused by a more copious Influx of Animal Spirits, which creeping into the Glan∣dules through the diminutive Nerves, at the disposal of the Mind, as in Grief, Anger, Joy, Sadness, flow sometimes more, sometimes fewer into the Ker∣nels, more than after a various manner, and streighten them more or less. To this cause he refers those Tears that are shed contrary to Inclination, as also those which proceed from Fumes and sharp Vapors, or break forth upon any vio∣lent motion of the Body; and farther, believes his Opinion to be mainly con∣firmed by the bursting forth of bloody Tears, which are sometimes observ'd. Certainly this new Opinion is pro∣pounded very speciously, but in the mean time it does not sufficiently disco∣ver the Fountain of Tears. For if we compare the great quantity of Tears so swiftly bursting forth with the diminu∣tive Blood-bearing Vessels of those Kernels, presently this Opinion will fall to the Ground at the very Threshold. For how few, and how small are those little Arteries which are carried to the Kernels of the Eyes? The most of them are invisible. Therefore, though in the time of Sadness, all the Veins of those Kernels which would carry back the Blood, should be altogether ob∣structed, and all their little Arteries o∣pen'd by a Solution of the Continuum, and out of these, not only the Serous Part of the Blood, but all the Blood that was contain'd therin and carried through them should burst forth, they would not be able to pour forth the hun∣dredth part of such a quantity of Li∣quor in a whole hour, as often in great Sadness is wept out in Tears in the space of one single quarter of an hour. If it be answered, that in the time of Sadness the Blood is carried in greater quantity to the Eyes, and that the said Kernels swell and are more compress'd, and the Veins streightned, Reason will teach us the contrary. For in Sadness the Pulse of the Heart and Arteries is little and contracted, and the exterior Parts wax cold; because the Heart sends from it self much less Blood into any of the Ar∣teries, much less into those of the Head. Neither is there any reason why in Sad∣ness it should be carried in greater quantity, and more serous to the Ker∣nels of the Eyes than to any other Parts. Moreover, the little Arteries of those small Kernels, are too few and too narrow for so great a quantity of Blood and Serum to pass through them in so short a time, as is so swiftly wept out in Tears. Last∣ly, there is nothing to cause those little Kernels more to swell or be compressed in time of Grief, than at other times. For as to those Animal Spirits, which as Nicholas Stenonis asserts, How forth at the Disposal of the Mind. Sometimes more, sometimes fewer, as in Grief, Anger, Joy, &c. and move the Ker∣nels after a various manner, we grant that they enter the Kernels in a small quantity, through those diminutive, few, and for the most part, invisible Nerves, moderately to separate the saltish sym∣phatic Liquor from the Arterious Blood, and pour it forth through the small Vessels describ'd in the foregoing Chap∣ter, for the necessary moistning and smoothing of the Eyes; but not in so great a quantity as to move the Eyes, and cause them so swiftly to swell, or to com∣press them, and so to squeeze out such a quantity of Tears. For by the Influx of those Animal Spirits, hardly any o∣ther Parts are mov'd, at the disposal of the Mind, then the Muscles, and such parts as are mov'd by the Muscles. Add to this, that in Sadness the Animal Spi∣rits flow in lesser quantity than is usual, to any parts whatsoever, which is the reason that the Joynts often tremble, and the Sight of the Eys is darkened. For the Heart contracting it self, and beat∣ing but weakly, as in Sadness, little Blood is sent to the Brain to encrease their Generation, and withal, the Mo∣tion of the Brain it self being thereby weakned, it sends forth fewer Animal Spirits to the rest of the Parts. Lastly, though we should grant what that Fa∣mous Gentleman asserts, his Opinion is not thereby confirm'd, but quite over∣turn'd. For thence it follows, that the more copi us those Animal Spirits are that flow into those Kernels, so much the more would be their Swelling and the Compression of the Veins, and thence a greater Effussion of Tears; but in Joy, the said Spirits flow in great plenty to the Parts, and yet in Joys, Tears are very rarely shed, or if they do burst forth, 'tis but in a very small quantity. Contrary to this, in Sadness, fewer Animal Spirits flow into
the Parts, whence there must a be less Swelling and Pressure, and yet Tears burst forth in greater quantity. Last∣ly, if it be objected that the Salival Li∣quor may be separated in sufficient quantity, out of the Arteries through the Kernels, and therefore the Lachry∣mal Juice. I answer, that the Parotides and Kernels of the Jaws are remarkably large and very numerous, and furnish∣ed with many and more remarkable Arteries, so that a more plentiful sepa∣ration may more easily be made through them, then through the slender and in∣comparably fewer Glandules of the Eyes, endued with few and almost in∣visible little Arteries. He therefore that more considerately weighs these things, will easily observe, that the O∣pinion of Nicholas Stenonis does not con∣tain the true Cause of Tears, and that unwilling Tears can never be deduc'd from it; nor those which are occasion'd by swift Running, Smoak and Dust, &c. nor bloody Tears, which proceed ra∣ther from some Corrosion of the little Arteries and Veins, which by reason of the narrowness of the Vessels. can burst forth but in small quantity. XIII. Thus have many Men strang∣ly mistaken the Fountain of this same Lympha, and while they endeavour'd to discover it, have fill'd much Paper with Conjectures. Now let us try whe∣ther we can contribute any Light to a thing that lies veil'd under so much Ob∣scurity. Which before we undertake to per∣form, we think it necessary to distin∣guish between the Lachrymal Humors and that same Lymphatic Humor which is poured forth out of the Glandules through the Diminutive Lymphatic Ves∣sels for the moistning of the Eyes and smoothing of the Parts. For this is the difference between them, 1. This is more lympid and thinner than the o∣ther. 2. This flows out of the Lym∣phatic Vessels of the Glandules, the o∣ther from the Ventricles of the Brain. 3. This is neither so sharp nor so salt as Tears are found to be, both by the Tast and their Corrosion. 4. There is but a small quantity of this, nor does the quantity of it offend the Eyes, as Tears does, which bursting forth in great quantity, many times very much prejudice the Eyes. 5. This does not corrode at all, but is grateful to the Eyes, whereas many times Tears cor∣rode the Cheeks, and many times con∣sume the Glandulous Lachrymal Ca∣runcles themselves, seated in the Cor∣ners of the Eyes, which being eaten quite away with their little Vessels, the Flux of Tears would cease or stop, if the foremention'd Opinion of Stenonis were true, whereas on the Contrary, the Flux is then more unvoluntary, and in greater quantity not to be stop'd. XIV. This Distinction thus premis'd, we come to speak of the Tears them∣selves, beginning with their Definiti∣on. Tears are the more thin and se∣rous Particles of the Flegmatic Hu∣mors Collected in the Brain, flow∣ing from the innermost Parts of the Eyes. The Causes of the Expulsion of those Serous Particles through the Lachrymal Holes are five. 1. The Plenty of Flegmatic Serous Humors collected in the Brain. 2. Their suddain Colloquation, or violent Agitation. 3. The Contraction of the Brain and its Membranes. 4. The insufficient Covering of the Lachrymal Hole by the Glandulous Caruncle. 5. The Obstruction of the Spungy Bones in the Nostrils. And of these Causes, for the most part, two or three concur; and there∣fore we must particularly explain how those Tears burst forth in divers ca∣ses. XV. In Sadness, the MembranesTears in Sadness. of the Brain, together with the Brain it self, are contracted, and hence the Serous Humors of the Arterious Blood, which gain something of Viscosity from the Humid and Viscous Bowel, are pressed forth out of the Kernels of the Cortex and the Substance of the Brain it self, and Pituitous Kernel, and the small Glandules interwoven with the Choroid Fold, into the Ven∣tricles, and out of them through the Papillary Processes, and the Narrow∣nesses of the five representing Bones, into the spongy Parts of the inside of the Nostrils; which not being able to pass through them, by reason of their quantity and viscousness, the more thin and serous Particles burst forth through the narrow lateral Lachrymal Holes into the larger Corners of the Eyes, and washing the Bodies of the Eyes, and breaking forth, make Tears. But the thicker and more viscous
Particles, causing an Obstruction in the Spungy Bones of the upper Parts of the Nostrils, are evacuated by de∣grees, as well through the Nostrils as through the Palate. And the less that Obstruction of the Nostrils grows, the less becomes the Flux of Tears; for that be∣ing remov'd, the thinner and more se∣rous Humors descend directly to the Palate and Nostrils, neither is there any necessity, that then they should be prest forth through the Lachrymal Holes, by reason of the Passage being stopt, so that then the Flux of Tears ceases, till by reason of new plenty of descending Humors, a new Obstruction happens. XVI. By reason of the same Ob∣structionIn the Murr and Sneezing. Tears frequently burst forth in the Murr, and sometimes upon vio∣lent Sneezing. XVII. There is the same reasonIn Laugh∣ter. for Tears that break forth in violent Laughter: for from that alternate Contraction of the Muscles of the Head, as also of the Brain and its Membranes, the aforesaid serous Humors burst forth in great quantity out of the Brain and Kernels aforesaid into the Ventricles, and out of them into the Mamillary Processes; which Humors flow down to the Nostrils and Palate, and by rea∣of their thicker Particles, cause an Ob∣struction in the fungous part of the No∣strils. Which is the reason that then the thinner and more serous Particles, their free Descent being stopp'd, burst∣ing forth through the Lachrymal Holes, flow from the Eyes, and that so much the more easily, by how much those Holes are so much the less exactly shut by the Glandulous Caruncles that lye over them. Hence it comes to pass, that according to the closer or looser shutting up of those Holes, and the more or less plenty of Flegmy Humors a∣bounding in the Brain; some People shed Tears when they laugh, and o∣thers not; and because that Concussion of the Body, or alternate Contraction does not last long, hence it comes to pass, that People do not shed many Tears when they laugh. There is the same reason why young and stout Men, who are not easily di∣sturb'd with Grief, nor have their Brain contracted, besides that, the Glandu∣lous Caruncle that covers both Lachry∣mal Holes is stronger and larger, sel∣dom or never weep. On the other side, Old People, Infants and Children, ea∣sily shed Tears, because that in the one, the Glandulous Caruncle is drier, more unequal, and more contracted; in the other softer and less firm, and so weakly covering the Lachrymal Hole, that it gives way to the least violence of the Internal Serous Humors, and so procures an immediate Passage for the said Lachrymal Humors. To which we may add another Humor, that both the one and the other are subject to Grief, that arises from Irksomness, Love, or Anger; by reason whereof the Brain contracting its self with its Membranes, presses forth the petuitous and serous Humors, and expels them through the Sieve-representing Bones. Cartesius al∣ledges another Cause of this Matter, but not so true, for he ascribes the whole thing to the plenty of Blood, from whence several Vapors are carried to the Eyes. But this Opinion has been sufficiently refuted already. Now to tell you how it comes to pass, that some weep upon vehement Motion, or the riding of swift Race-Horses, of this there are three Causes. 1. Because the Glandulous Kernels being mov'd from their Places by the violent Moti∣on, do not exactly cover the Lachry∣mal Holes. 2. Because those Caruncles are contracted by the troublesome Re∣verberation of the cold Air. 3. Be∣cause those pituitous Humors through violent Agitation flow easily from the Head, and descend in a greater quanti∣ty than usually through the Sieve-like narrow Passages. And the same thing also happens when the Glandulous Ca∣runcles of each Canthus being contract∣ed by the greater Cold of the Air alone, especially if suddain, the Lachrymal Holes are not well covered, and there∣fore give a free Passage to the Tears. XVIII. Onions, Mustard, Er∣rhines,Onyons Mustard, &c. and Sternutories provoke Tears, by reason that through their at∣tenuating and cutting Acrimony, the Humors in the Head are properly atte∣nuated, and rendred more fluid. Pro∣perly the Brain, with its Membranes, contracts it self, by reason of the trou∣blesome Vellication that twinges the Eyes and Nostrils; and by that means presses forth and expels the pituitous Humors contain'd therein, which glide the more easily through the Lachrymal Holes, because the annate Tunicle of the Eye, and the Glandulous Caruncles that cover the Holes, being twing'd by the same Acrimony, are also contract∣ed, and so give free passage to the de∣scending Humors.
XIX. Dust, Straws, Smoak, &c.From Pain in the Eye. that pain the Eye, are also the Cause of shedding. Tears; because that upon the twinging of the Conjunctive Tunicle, which is the most sensible, the Glandu∣lous Lachrymal Kernel adjoyning to it is contracted in both Eyes, but chiefly in that which is most afflicted, and so the Hole is uncovered. Also the Brain with its Membranes is contracted, by reason of that same sad Sensation, and by means of that same Contraction pres∣sing forth the serous and pituitous Hu∣mors contain'd in its self and its Ventri∣cles, expels them through the Mamilla∣ry Processes toward the Sive-like Bone and the Nostrils; of which, the thicker Particles flow forth through the Nostrils, the thinner and more fluid through the Lachrvmal Holes. XX. Now to tell you why TearsWhenee the great quantity of Tears. continue so plentiful in Grief, so that many People weep for several days together; that happens for this reason, for that▪ the Brain being con∣tracted with Sadness, is refrigerated, and cannot duly perform its Work of Con∣coction, so that a great quantity of se∣rous Humors are separated in this Glandulous Bowel from the Blood, which is carried thither for its Nourish∣ment, and many crude Humors are al∣so generated at the same time, which are continually press'd forth by that Contraction, and expell'd out of the Ventricles toward the Nostrils. But when the Mind refrains from thinking of the sad Accident, and the Contraction hereupon relaxes, that Effussion of Tears ceases; but upon the return of sad Thoughts, the Tears burst forth again, by reason of the same pressing and squeezing as before. But because so large and moist a Bowel has humid Nourishment in great quantity, hence it is certain, that many and moist Excre∣ments cannot but be generated therein, of which there is a long and most plen∣tiful Increase, as in Catarrs and the Pose; as we found in a Woman dis∣sected by Us in the Year 1663. who had long liv'd in a great deal of Grief and Sorrow, and had a thousand times complain'd of a Heaviness in her Head, and was very apt to weep and shed Tears in abundance, whose Brain was so moist, that a viscous Serum distill'd out of the Substance of it, squeez'd by our Hand, as out of a Spunge dipp'd in Water, be∣sides that, the Ventricles were also suffi∣ciently fill'd with it. To this we may add, that the Vapors carried from the lower Parts of the Body to the Head, and so wont to be expell'd through the Pores of the Body, when it comes to pass that the Pores are streightned by that Refrigeration and Contraction of the Brain and its Membranes, cannot be expell'd, but being thickned, are squeezed toward the Nostrils, together with the rest of the Humors which greatly encreases the quantity of Tears. By reason of the same bad Concoction of the Brain, it comes to pass that many times the Tears are salt and sharp, and corrode the Cheeks, and for the same reason it is that sharp and salt Catarrhs happen, which by their Acrimony cor∣rode the Teeth, and exulcerate the Chaps and other Parts, because that by reason of their Crudity the salt Parti∣cles are more fix'd, and not sufficiently dissolved, nor exactly mix'd with the rest of the serous Particles. Which being so, four Doubts remain to be unfolded. 1. How it comes to pass that People in sorrow receive great ease from weep∣ing, and that they find themselves al∣most choak'd through sorrow of Mind, and are oppressed with Heaviness in their Heads, upon the shedding of Tears are very much reliev'd? The reason is, because that in heavy Sorrow, the Brain is many times so contracted, that the Evacuatory Passages are streightned, so that neither the pituitous and serous Humors can flow out, nor the Arterious Blood conveniently flow in, whence it appears that fewer Spirits are generated therein, and fewer Animal Spirits consequently flow out from thence to the rest of the Parts. Through the scarcity of which, the detention of the Excrements with all in the Brain, several inconveniences happen to Persons in those doleful Conditions; their Heads grow heavy, their Ratiocination and Judgment grow benum'd, most parts tremble, the Sight grows dim, the Respiration becomes slow, with deep Sighs and profound Sobs, difficulty of Swallowing, and the Orifices of the Heart are streightned, so that they can neither, expel nor receive the Blood; hence an extream Anxiety, which with all the other Inconveniences diminishes again, and the sorrowful are extreamly eas'd, when the Evacuatory Vessels being loosned, the serous and pituitous Humors flow through the Eyes, like Tears in great quantity, from the Brain, and also are evacuated through the No∣strils, Palate and Mouth, which conse∣quently gives a freer access of Arterious
Blood to the Brain, a more plentiful Generation of Animal Spirits, and a larger Influx into the Parts. XXI. 2. How it comes to passWhy Men in great Sadness cannot weep? that in extraordinary Sadness a Man cannot weep, yet perceives the fore∣said Anxiety with Heaviness of the Head; but after he is somewhat come to himself, he pours forth Tears in great quantity with Relief. Thus Historians tell us of Psammenitus, who wept and beat his Head at the Death of his Friend, but when he saw his Chil∣dren lead to Execution, beheld the Spectacle without shedding a Tear. Hence the ancient Proverb, Light Sor∣rows talk and weep, vast Sorrows stupifie. The cause of this is no other than the extream Contraction of the Brain; for in an extraordinary Consternation, a Man is as it were astonished, and the Brain as it were stupified, is every way more strangely contracted, which cau∣ses the Humors to be coagulated and thickned to stop and settle therein. How∣ever, this extraordinary Contraction, when the griev'd Person recollects and comes to himself, and begins to bear his Grief with more Patience, is very much diminished, so that the serous and pituitous Humors are more liberally expell'd out of the Brain, to the Relief of the Person, and Tears burst forth more plentifully through the Evacuato∣ry Passages, overstreightned before, and now again open'd and loosen'd. And hence it is apparent, wherefore upon the giving of Wine freely to those that are in Sorrow, the Tears that before stopp'd, in a short time will burst forth in great quantity: Because Wine re∣freshes the Heart and the Brain, en∣creases Courage, and mitigates Sadness, whence that extraordinary Contraction of the Brain is somewhat diminished, and the Evacuatory Passages are again let loose. 3. Why those that weep, weep in a shrill Tone, those that laugh, make a deep Noise. This is a Question pro∣pounded by Aristotle, and the reason is, because that at the time when Men are weeping and sad, their Vocal Organs are streightned and extended: but when People laugh, those Organs are more extended and loose, and most certain it is, that the Air causes a shriller Sound in narrow than in wide Pipes. Now the Vocal Organs are streightned by the Cold; the Orifices of the Heart be∣ing contracted in great Grief, and con∣sequently little Blood and Heat is com∣municated from thence to the Parts, which causes the whole Body to shake with Cold. XXII. 4. Why Man among all o∣therWherefore only Man weeps? Creatures, chiefly sheds Tears? Because he of all Creatures being endu∣ed with reason, is only sensible, with great attention of Mind, of Sorrow, Mourning, Grief, &c. which is the reason that he alone suffers those Con∣tractions of the Brain, and Pressings forth of the Humors. As for the Cro∣codiles, Harts, and if there be any other Beasts that may be said to weep, they shed very few Tears, and they chiefly seem to flow forth, partly by reason of the great quantity of serous Humors a∣bounding in the Head, partly by reason of the uncovering of the Lachrymal Hole, the Contraction of the Caruncle of the bigger Canthus, caused by the cold Air, or some other Cause, which are two Causes sometimes of Tears, also in Men, without any Agitation of the Mind or Fault in the Organ. As to the end of Tears, Philosophers generally alledge it to be on purpose to declare the Affections of the Mind, and to exonerate the Brain of its superfluous Moisture. And thus we hope we have described the true Original of Tears, confirm'd not by Reason only, but Experience. CHAP. XVI. Of the Vessels and Muscles of the Eye. THE Eyes which are the OrgansThe Arte∣ries. of Sight, consist of three Parts; of which, some serve for Nourish∣ment, as the Arteries and Veins; others to cause and facilitate Motion, as Muscles, Fat, Kernels and Lym∣phatic Vessels; others contribute to the Sight it self, as Optic Nerves, Tuni∣cles and Humors. I. The Arteries which carry the Vital Blood to the Nourishment of the Eyes, Muscles, Kernels and Fat, are properly external, from the Ex∣ternal Branch of the Carotis; partly internal, from the inner Branch of the same Carotis, which
constitutes the Nett-Resembling Fold. II. In like manner there are alsoVeins. External Veins, so visible in the White of the Eye, which run forth to the External Branch of the Iugular, as internal accompanying the Optic Nerve, running along to the Inner Branch of the same Iugular Ar∣tery. Of the Kernels and Lymphatic Ves∣sels has already been spoken, Chap. 14. III. The Eyes of Men are mov'dMuscles. every way by the Assistance of six Muscles, surrounding the Eyes below the Cavity of the Orbit. Of these, the four greater being streight, cause a streight Motion, upward, downward and sideway. The two much the les∣ser, cause an oblique Motion. Between all which, there is interlay'd a sufficient quantity of Fat to facilitate the Motion; as also to moisten, warm and smooth the Eye. IV. All these arise with an accuteTheir Ori∣ginal. beginning from the deepest part of the Orbit, near the Hole through which the Optic Nerve enters the Or∣bit, to the Membrane of which they adhere, and end in a most slender Tendon, sticking to the Horny Tuni∣cle; in which all the Tendons being joyned together in a Circle, make a kind of a Tendonny Tunicle, vulgarly call'd the Innominate, which is joyn'dThe Inno∣minate Tu∣nicle. to the Eye like a broader Circle, only it does not encompass it. V. The first of the Right Muscles,The upper Muscle. which is the uppermost and thickest, raises the Eye; which being a Motion usual among haughty People, is thence called the Proud Muscle. VI. The second, which is lesserThe Hum∣ble Muscle. and opposite to the first, from its lower or more humble Seat where it is placed, is called the Humble. VII. The third, which stands inThe Bibito∣ry Muscle. the inner Corner, brings the Eye in∣ward toward the Nose; which because it is familiar with those that drink, while they look in the Glass, is called the Bibitory Muscle. VIII. The fourth, which movesThe Indig∣nabund. the Eye toward the outer Parts to the little Corner, is call'd the Indigna∣bund, because it expresses the lateral Aspect of disdainful and scornful People. IX. The first of the Oblique Mus∣cles,The first Oblique Muscle. which is slender, round and short, seated in a lower Place, and in the Extream Part of the lower Or∣bit, that is to say; at the joyning of the first Bone of the Iaw, with the fourth Bone, ascends toward the outer Corner of the Eye-lid, and there em∣bracing the Eye transversly, with a short Tendon toward the upper Parts meets the Tendon of the other Eye, and moving the Eye downward, turns it and brings it to the outer Corner. X. The other of the Oblique Mus∣cles,The second Oblique Muscle. which is thinner, longer, and seated above, rising from the common Beginning, together with the third of the streight Muscles, is carried direct∣ly to the inner Corner of the Eye, where passing the Grisly Winding with a slender Body (hence called the Trochlear Muscle) proceeds with an Oblique turning through the upper Parts of the Eye, and terminates near the End of the Oblique Tendon of the lower Muscle. XI. Now the Trochlear GristleThe Troch∣lear. is a perforated Gristle, hanging for∣ward to the Bone of the upper Iaw, near the inner Corner of the Eye; the first finding out of which Spigelius attributes to Fallopius, but Riolanus as∣cribs to Rondeletius. These two Oblique Muscles, because of the secret Allurements of Lovers Glances, are called Amatorious; but from their rowling Motion, Circumactors. XII. In Brutes, that feed withA seventh Muscle in Brutes. their Heads toward the Earth, be∣sides these six Muscles, there is also a seventh, which is sometimes observed to be divided into two, but rarely into three Muscles. This being short and fleshy, encompasses the Eye, and is in∣serted into the hinder part of the Horny Tunicle, and sustains the looking down continually upon the Ground, and draws it back when its own weight car∣ries it farther out. XIII. The Muscles are endued withThe Nerves a moving Power by the little Branches of the second Pair of Nerves, which are chiefly inserted into the streight Muscles. For the innermost Ob∣lique Muscle receives a little Branch from the fifth Pair; the outermost Ob∣lique receives a little Branch from the
slender Pair that stands next before the Fifth. XIV. Here arises a Question, whenWhy the Eyes move together? each Eye has distinct and proper Muscles, why they do not move with various Motions, but are always mov'd together with the same Motion? Aristotle ascribes the Cause to the Co∣ition of the Optic Nerves, and Ga∣len and Avicen seem to be of the same Opinion. But in regard the Optic Nerves are only visory, and contribute nothing to Motion, nor enter the Mus∣cles, they cannot be the cause of this thing. Besides, Anatomists have now found it out, that this Conjunction of the Optics is wanting in several men, and yet the motion of their Eyes, while they liv'd, was the same as in other men, so equal always, that the Sight of both was always directed to one Point. Andrew Laurentius says, that such an equal Motion is requisite for the perfection of the Sense; and so he only proposes the end of the Motion, but does not explain the Cause. Others alledg that this equal Motion proceeds from hence, that the moving Nerves are mov'd together at their beginning. But it appears from this Conjunction, that the Spirits indeed may flow to the Muscles of each Eye, however it is not manifest, why the Spirits flow more e∣specially in greater quantity into these or those Muscles of the Eyes, and not into the same, external and internal of both Eyes. For Example's sake, suppose a Man would look for something upon his Right-Side, presently the Spirits are de∣termined toward the external Muscle of the Right-Eye, and the internal Muscle of the Left-eye, and so the Sight is turn∣ed to one Point through the two various Muscles of each Eye. But if the Uni∣on of the Beginning of the Nerves of the second Pair should any way contri∣bute to this, in regard of that Union, it would be requisite that the Spirits should flow at the same time into the same Muscles of both Eyes, as well external as Internal, and so by vertue of that Mo∣tion, both Eyes would look several ways upon several things, and not up on the same. And therefore the true Reason pro∣ceeds from the Mind; for when the Mind intends to behold any thing; one Eye is not to be turn'd to this, another to that thing, for so there would happen a Confusion of the Rays and Perception in common Sence; but both Eyes are of necessity to be turn'd toward the same thing; and hence the Spirits are always determin'd to those Muscles that can draw both the Eyes toward the same Object, but not to such Muscles as draw each Eye several ways. Because the Mind always intends to behold one Object apart; and though it may often intend to behold several things, yet it observes a certain Order, and beholds one thing after another, which may be done with a speedy Motion, if the Ob∣jects are so near and large that they may be easily perceiv'd. But if the Object be remote and small, then both Eyes must of necessity be longer fix'd upon the Object, and a greater quantity of Rays are requisite to flow into the Eyes, for the better Perception of what the Mind is intent to behold. CHAP. XVII. Of the Bulb of the Eye. THE Bulb of the Eye consists of Membranes and Humors. The Membranes are either common or proper. The Common Membranes are two∣fold, Adnate and Innominate. I. The first next the Bone, orThe Adnate Tunicle. White Adnate, by the Greeks call'd , because it adheres to other Membranes of the Eyes, by Galen and Hippocrates call'd, the White of the Eye, is a thin Expansion of the Pericranium above the Sclerotic, as far as the Circle of the Iris, joyning the Eye to the Orbit and inner Bones, whence it is called the Conjunctive. It is endued with an exquisite Sence of Feeling, being sprinkled with many di∣minutive Arteries and Veins. Through which little Arteries, when there is a greater Afflux of hotter Blood, then a Reflux through the diminutive Veins, then happens an Ophthalmy, of whichThe reason of an Oph∣thalmy. The Inno∣minate Tu∣nicle. Distemper, this Membrane is the Seat. II. The other, by Columbus call'd the Innominate, is nothing else than a thin Expansion of the Tendons of the Muscles concurring to the Corne∣ous Tunicle, produc'd to the very Cir∣cumference of the Iris, to which it adheres, like a small broad Ring,
which causes the White of the Adnate Tunicle to look more bright. Bauhi∣, Riolans, and Casserius will not al∣low this Tunicle to be number'd among the Tunicles, but rather among the Muscles of whose Tendons it consists. However Galea makes mention of it among the Tunicles of the Eye, but gives it no Name, and therefore perhaps by Columbus call'd the Nameless or In∣ominate. III. Besides these two common    and Oxen. Membranes, in an Oxe there is ano∣ther Membrane, which is the outer∣most of all, not sticking close to the Eye, but endued with Motion and a Muscle. By means of which, Cows and Oxen close and twinkle with their les, et their Eye-lids remain open all the while. IV. The Proper Membranes orProper Mem∣branes. Tunicles are three, of which, the first and outermost is said to proceed from the Dura Mater, and expands it selfSclrotic. about the Bulb of the Eye. It is call'd the Sclrotic from its hardness; though Fallopius will not allow the former, be∣lieving it to differ very much from the Dura Mater, both in substance and thickness. The Sclerotic enolds the whole Eye, and is thick, hard, tough, equal, opacous behind, before transpa∣rent like a bright Horn, and polish'd, whence it had the Name of the Horny Tunicle. Which Name however ma∣ny times is given to the whole Sclerotic, by reason of its horny thickness and hardness: Though it be thick and hard, yet it is generally thought to be single; though Bauinus will have it to consist of several Rinds, or four, as it were thin Plates, and affirms that from hence it was that Avicen alledg'd it to be four fold. But this same Quadruplicity is more easily to be conceiv'd and ima∣gin'd from the thickness and hardness of it then to be demonstrated. V. The second and middle Tuni∣cle,The Cho∣roides. which is much thinner than the former, arising from a thin Film, and sprinkled with several diminitive Vessels, because it enfolds the Humors, of the Eye, as the Chorion does the Birth, is call'd Choroides; only the forepart of it, where it is thicker and doubled, and perforated in the middle for the Transmission of the Rays, is call'd Ragoides, or Uveous, from the Colour of a Grape, which Name is also given to the whole Tunicle. VI. This on the inside is endued withThe Co∣lours of it. several Colours; nevertheless in Man it is usually more obscure, in Cows and other Creatures that see in the Night, of a bright Green, or else Brown or Yellow. Hence Aquapendens believes that those Creatures only see in the Night, whose innermost Colour of the Uveous Tunicle is very bright, which if it happen in a Man, he shall also see in the Night; as it was natural for Ti∣berius Caesar to do. The outermost part which touches the Horny Tunicle, is overshadowed with a kind of dark Colour, which dyes the Fingers of those that touch it of a black Hew. It is endued with this black Colour, chiefly necessary for the Per∣fection of Sight, in the first delineation of the Parts, and hence it comes to pass, that in a new shap'd Embrio, it shews it self through the Filmy Cover∣ings of the Eye-lids, and the Sclerotic Tunicle it self. In this same blackish Colour of this Tunicle, the Rays and Species of things visible are stopt, as in a Looking-Glass, which to that end is overlaid behind with Quicksilver, that they may not pass any farther, but that being reverberated, they may be the better offered to the common Sensory, and represented to the Mind. VII. Some Portion of this trans∣parentThe Iris. through the Corneous Tunicle, carries a mixture of Colours, and hence, as representing the Rain∣bow, is call'd Iris, in some blacker, in some blewer, in others greener, in others browner, which Colours are not only to be observ'd in individual Per∣sons, but in whole Nations, as the black Colour is most usual among the Ethiopians and Chineses, the Green a∣mong the Tartars, the Blewish among the Belgians and Northern People, the Dusky among the Italians and neigh∣bouring Nations. The Circumference of this Portion is firmly fastned to the hard Tunicle, Riolanus writes, that it may be separa∣ted circularly with the Edg of a Pen∣knif, and that this same Crown of the Uveous Tunicle is to be found altoge∣ther separated in the Eye of a Cow, when parboyl'd, and therefore he be∣lieves it to be a Membrane distinct from the Uveous Tunicle; having peculiar Fibers, and a proper Motion in the Di∣lation and Contraction of the Sight of the Eye. However at this day the said Portion is by Anatomists, generally ta∣ken
for the Continuous Part of the Uveous Tunicle it self. VIII. Now the Uveous Tunicle isThe Apple of the Eye. perferated in the middle Part before, in men with a round hole, in Brutes with an Oblong or Oval hole which the Latins call Pupilla, the Greeks , Ruffus  and Hippo∣crates , by means of which the Rays of Visible things, being re∣ceiv'd by the Chrystalline Humors lying upon that hole, enter the Eye. This hole is sometimes dilated, sometimes contracted, as the Animal Spirits flow into the Eye in a greater or lesser quantity. Here Aquapendens and Sennertus are under a great mistake, who believe this dilatation and con∣traction to proceed from a stronger o weaker Light. Certainly Light it self introduces nothing into the Eye for the Expansion or Contraction of it, but it is the cause that more or fewer Spirits flow into the Eye: so that by their in flux the Apple of the Eye, becomes sometimes wider and sometimes nar∣rower, according to which diversity we see better or worse: for a moderate contraction causes a quicker sight, a dilatation too wide causes a weaker sight: for that in the one the Spirits are more collected together, and the visible Rays are more easily gathered to a point; in this not so well. IX. From the Circumference of theThe Ciliar Ligament. Nervous Tunicle, in the forepart where it rests upon the Chrystaline humor, arises a Ligament, call'd the Ciliar Ligament, which consists of thin strings or ibres, like diminutive black Lines (which are like the hairs of the Eye-brows) running forth from this Circumference toward the prominent Crystaline humor, girding it about and fastning it to the Uveous Tunicle. Veslingius and Cartesius not without some probability affirm that by the Assistance of this Ligament, the Con∣traction and Dilatation of the hole in the Uveous Tunicle is perform'd, fre∣quently as the Man pleases himself; and moreover that it causes a gentle Motion of the Crystalline humor it self, toward the fore and hinder Parts, as the necessity of sight variously re∣quires. Though others ascribe this Dilatation and Contraction to the small slender Fibers or Strings dispierc'd through the Net resembling Tunicle, as into which they say that the Animal spirits flow in greater or lesser quantity, according to the various qualities of the Objects, and by that means more or less dilate the sight of the Eye. X. The Third Membrane orThe Re∣tina. Tunicle because it resembles a Casting-Net, is therefore call'd Retina, or Retiform'd, by the Greeks , from Embracing or Ensolding. The Substance of it is sot and slimy, wherein as well certain slender, small Strings, or diminutive little Vessels, deriving themselves from the Choroid Fold and the wonderful Net, are mani∣festly to be discover'd conveighing Blood for the nourishment of it. Which nevertheless Platerus does not seem to have observ'd, nor Riolanus to have seen. This Tunicle call'd the Net-form'd is commonly deliver'd to be the Expan∣sion of the inner narrower substance of the Optic Nerve, or Brain, about the Vitreous humor, as far as the clear Ligament. But in regard the sub∣stance of this Tunicle has little or no resemblance to the pithy substance of the Brain, seeing it receives small Blood∣bearing-Vessels, which are manifestly conspicuous to the sight, which are not to be found in the substance of the Brain, it does not seem to be any Ex∣pansion of the Medullary substance of the Brain, but rather a certain peculiar part, constituting the primary part of the Organ of sight, wherein the Colors of visible Rays are depainted, and thence by means of the Optic Nerve and Spirits communicated to the Mind, and so perceiv'd: as we find such ano∣ther peculiar substance under the Mem∣brane of the Nostrils and Tongue, which constitutes the primary part of the Organs of Smelling and Tast. XI. Besides these three proper Tu∣nicles necessary to the whole Eye there are two other which particularly en∣fold the Chrystalline and Vitreous humor. XI. The Humors belonging to theThe Hu∣mors of the Eye. Eye are threefold, the Watry, Glassy and Chrystaline, distinct from one another, all transparent and all void of Colour. Partly to prevent the visible Rays from stopping in them; partly that the Rays of visible things colour'd, being alter'd by no colour of the Eye, may be able to pass to the Net-form'd Tunicle, to be thence offer'd to the common Sensory such as they are. For in regard the judgment of colours must be made in the Brain
by the Eye, of necessity those parts of it that receive and transmit the Ras of things colour'd, must be void of all colour. XII. The Watry Humor, thin, pellu∣cid,The Watry . void of all colour, moderately co∣pious and fluid, washes the foremost space between the Corneous Tunicle, and the seat of the Chrystaline Humor having no proper Tunicle belonging to it, but is comprehended between the Horny and Grape-like Tunicle before the Apple of the Eye. By some this Humor is call'd, , or Albugoneius, though irrone∣ously, there being no resembance between the White of an Egg and this Humor, nor any such Viscosity; but a thin and fluid Liquor. XIII. Here arises a doubt, whetherThe hea of i. it possess the forepart of the Eye, and be only placed against the Chrystaline humor, or whether it be spread about the Vitreous humor. Riolanus believes it not only to be contained in the forepart, but to be spread about the Vitreous humor, be∣cause that if the Corney and Uveous Tu∣nicle be open'd in the hinder part, there will flow forth a watry humor through the wound. Plempius reproves Riolanus, and says he has found the contrary by experience, as having per∣forated the hinder part of the ball of the Eye with a Needle, and yet no watry Humor issu'd forth. And thence concludes that it was the vitreous Hu∣mors which Riolanus saw distilling forth by reason of some prick in the vitrious Tunicle. But it may be reply'd to Plempius that that Experience little makes for the proof of his Opinion, for that upon the drawing forth of the Needle most certain it is, that the little hole made in the corneous Tunicle will suck it self to a closure so suddainly that no Liquor can issue forth; as we find in the couching of Cataracts; for that the Needle being drawn out again, no water distills from that small wound, by reason the wound presently sucks it self close again. But if we examin this difference more exactly we shall find, that the watry Humor contained about the Apple of the Eye is different from that which flows from the hinder part of the sight, and that this is not only the thinner but also is contain'd and fix'd before the sight, not running any far∣ther, toward the hinder parts of the Eye; but that the hindermost Liquor is clammy and thicker than the other, and that it is nothing else but a certain watry Juice, separated from the Vitre∣ous Humor, the proper Vitreous Tu∣nicle being hurt, and grown thin for want of Spirits, or admission of the colder Air; for if you hold the Vitreous Humor in your Hand in the Air never so short a while, a kind of a clammy Liquor will distil from it in low drops. XIV. Some question whether thisWhether a Part of the Body? Humor be a part of the Body? as Laurentius and Mercatus, and they that accompt Blood to be a part of the Body. These Casserius and Plempius oppose, and that not without reason, for that not being circumscribed within its own Limits, nor united in continuity to the Body, but many times in Wounds of the Eyes being wholly lost, is restor∣ed again, therefore it seems not proper to be reckoned among the animated Parts. Now that it is restored when lost, appears cut of Galen, who relates the Example of a Boy, who was so prickt in the Sight of the Eye with a Pen-knife, that all the Watry Humor was let out of his Eye. Nevertheless, in a short time after, so soon as the Watry Humor was again recruited and collected together, the Boy reco∣vered his Sight: and Hildan also re∣lates two more Examples of the same Nature. XV. This difficulty others observing,Whether an Excre∣ment? rather choose to assert, that it was an Excrement of the Crystallan Humor; for which reason it came to pass, that being evacuated and lost, it was fre∣quently restored again. But this Ar∣gument convinces them, that all Excre∣ments of the Body daily increase anew, and therefore of necessity they must have ways and means, by which they be a∣gain evacuated, whereas there are no ways for the Evacuation of this Humor. If therefore this Humor being evacua∣ted, could be regenerated in a very short space, there ought to be manifest Passages allowed, through which the redundancy of it may be again evacua∣ted; for they say, that being evacua∣ted by the pricking of the Eye in a Chicken, it will renew again within the space of fifteen days. But no Man e∣ver found out those Passages in the Horny Tunicle, nor ever can find them out if there be none, therefore this Hu∣mor, by its continual increase, must di∣stend the Eye to an immense proportion, at least in aged Persons, it must of ne∣cessity be very copious, by reason of the Collection of many years; but in In∣fants
very little would be found, whereas Experience tells us quite the contrary in both. Therefore we must conclude that this Humor is no part of the Body; not so much as an Excrement, but a certain Liquor ordain'd for the Perfecti∣on of the Sight, no less than the Blood for Nourishment, and generated out of the most lympid Particles of the Blood, and that as the Blood is no part of the Body, not so much as an Excrement, but a Humor necessary for Nourish∣ment, and the support of Life, so the watry Humor of the Eye is neither an enliven'd Part of the Body, nor any Excrement, but a Liquor to maintain the Eye, and perhaps ordain'd for the Nourishment of the Crystalline and Vi∣treous Humor. XVI. The use of this Humor is toThe use of the watry Humor. water and make slippery, and perhaps to nourish the other two thicker Hu∣mors, together with the Uvious and Net-like Tunicle, and to distend the horny Tunicle to prevent its growing wrinkel'd and opacous, to darken the too much Splendor of the Light, and dilate the visible Rays. But if it recede from its Purity, and become thicker, then the Sight of the Eye becomes dull. If there be any thicker Particles that swim within it, then Gnats, Flys, Straws, Spiders Webbs and the like, seem to pester the Sight, and to hang always before the Eyes. If those thicker Parti∣cles so meet and stick together, as to ge∣nerate a Film, that covers the Hole of the Apple of the Eye, then the Sight is lost, by reason that the Entrance of the visible Rays into the Chrystalline Humor is prevented, The beginning of which Defect, is by the Greeks call'd , by the Latins Suffusio, and when it is come to a Head Cataracta. XVII. The Vitreous Humor, likeThe Vitre∣ous Humor. melted Glass, much more fluid than the watry Humor, and much softer than the Chrystalline, and in quantity exceeding the Watry three times, the Chrystalline four or five times, pos∣sesses the whole hinder Part of the Eye. In the hinder part, where it joyns to the Net-form'd Tunicle, it is round, in the former part, though plain and flat, yet somewhat hollow in the middle where it receives the Chrystalline Hu∣mor. It is surrounded with a most thin pellucid Tunicle, call'd the Vitreous, byThe Vitre∣ous Tuni∣cle. which it is separated from the other two Humors. XVIII. The use of it is to dilate theIts use. Rays of visible things receiv'd from the Chrystalline, and being so dilated to re∣present them to the Net-form'd Tuni∣cle. Others, who believe the Sight to be in the Optic Nerve, affirm the use of it to be to this purpose, that the Rays being refracted in it, after they have pass'd the Chrystalline Humor, may come together in one Point, to the end the Image may be represented to the Sight. XIX. The Crystalline Humor, byThe Cry∣stalline Humor. the Greeks call'd  from its clear Transparency, as also Glacialis, resembling the clearest Icicle that may be, is more solid and bright than the other two Humors, generated out of the most transparent and purest part of the Seed. Before it possesses the Hole of the Uveous Tunicle, behind it is received into a Hollowness fram'd in the Vitre∣ous Humor, and sticks close to it. In the forepart it is a little more flat, be∣hind a little more round, though this Figure seems often to vary according to the various Affections of the Eye. XX. This Humor is surrounded orThe Cob∣web Tuni cle. enclosed with its own proper Tunicle, extreamly thin and transparent, there∣fore call'd Chrystalloidaea, and from the form of its Contexture, the Cob∣web Tunicle. By means of this Tuni∣cle it is separated from the other Hu∣mors; to which also, in the hollowness of the vicious Humor, the vicious Tu∣nicle sticks very close, but yet is distinct from it. Riolanus will not allow of this Tunicle, not so much as in the forepart, as being that which he be∣lieves to be very finely polish'd, by reason of the thickness of the Crystal∣line. But the Sight it self evinces this Error: For it is plain, that that same Tunicle, though very slender, may be in some measure separated, and that that being endamag'd, the exterior part of the Humor it self does but very little trickle forth. Thus says Iulius Casserius, in these Words, Nay, I have shown this Tunicle visibly separated from the Crystalline Humor it self. XXI. The Rays of visible thingsThe use of the Cry∣stalline Humor. being dilated in the Watry Humor, are first received by this Crystalline Humor, and hence pass throgh the Vitreous Humor to the Net-form'd Tunicle, and so are presented to the Common Sensory. Therefore in co∣deration
of the first Reception or Col∣lection, the Crystalline Humor is the first Instrument of Sight; but in consi∣deration of Perception, the Net form'd Tunicle, as being that by means where∣of the Rays receiv'd, are offer'd to the common Sensory where they are per∣ceived. In the mean time all the Con∣junction of all the Parts of the Eye is so close and so necessary, to the end that one may not act without the other, while the Defect of the meanest part, even of the aqueous Humor, puts a stop to the primary Operation of the whole Organ. XXII. Here arises another Doubt,Whether Parts of the Body? whether the Crystalline or Watry Hu∣mor are Parts of the Body? As for the Crystalline, we must conclude, that it is really a Part of the Body, because it is enfolded in its proper Cob-web-Tu∣nicle, perfects the Act of Seeing, toge∣ther with the other Parts, lives, is nou∣rish'd, is generated in the Womb, has its proper Circumscription, is a Body adhering to the whole, and filling it to∣gether with other Parts, conjoyned by common Life, and ordain'd to its Fun∣ction and Use. And if its Substance be more narrowly considered, it is not truly a Humor, though vulgarly so call'd, but a Body sufficiently firm and solid; which being boyl'd in Fish, may be divided into little Fibers, and is much more firm than Fat, the Brain, or the Marrow. Hence Galen deserv∣edly reckons it among the Parts of the Body, and those the similar Parts too, because it is divided into Parts like to its self; as also the Organic Parts, be∣cause it is ordain'd to perfect the Act of Seeing, and to that end has a certain determin'd and sensible Formation. The same Question concerning the Vitreous Humor is resolv'd by the same Reasons. And though some af∣firm the Crystalline Humor to be nou∣rish'd by this Vitreous Humor, that however is improperly said; perhaps, because there are some who think it prepares Nourishment for the other; though indeed it no more nourishes the Crystalline Humor, than the Heart nourishes the Arm: besides, that there is no need of so bright and large a part for the Nourishment of the Crystalline Humor; neither is it less proper for it to be nourished by the Blood, then the Nerves, Marrow, Brain, or any otherWhether these Hu∣mors are sensible? whitish parts of the Body. XXIII. Iulius Casserius of Placentia, was the first that brought another Que∣stion upon the Stage concerning these Humors, Whether they are endued with the Sence of feeling? As for himself, he al∣lows them a most exact Sence of feeling. For my part, I allow this Sence to their Membranes, but not to the substance of the Humors it self, in regard that the Membrane alone is the Organ of Feeling. In like manner as the Teeth and Bones, whose proper Substance, though it be destitute of the Sence of Feeling, yet the Periostium's are sensible, and so they are allowed the Sence of Feeling. Now the Animal Spirits contribute the Power of Seeing to the Eye, being framed of all these Parts; which Spi∣rits flow into it in great quantity through the Optic Nerve. But they flow into it sometime in greater, sometimes in les∣ser quantity; and hence it is that the Eyes swell sometimes more, sometimes less, sometimes are more quick sighted, and sometimes less. Thus they are more Tumid in young Persons, Ple∣thoric, People that are angry, and given to drink. They are less turgid in aged Folks, such as are given to Venereal Exercises, those that are Sad, or emaci∣ated for want of Food. They are also said to be more turgid in Virgins then those that have known Man. But though a moderate Swelling of the Eye caused by the Spirits, renders the Sight more quick, yet it does not follow, that upon every Swelling of the Eye, the Sight should be more quick; for we find the contrary in People intoxicated with Drink, whose Sight is but dull, by rea∣son of the turbulent and disorderly In∣flux of the Spirits. XXIV. The Action of the Eye isThe Action of the Eye. manifest and known to all Men to be Seeing. XXV. Now this Seeing is aDefinition of Sight. Sence, whereby from the various Motion of the visible Rays, col∣lected in the Crystalline and Glassie Humors, and striking upon the Net-form'd-Tunicle, Colours are perceiv'd with their light Situati∣on, Distance, Magnitude, Figure and Number. As to the Manner, Medium and Object of Sight, and many other things thereto belonging, those Philosophers are to be consulted, who have made it their business to write altogether upon that Sub∣ject, and therefore to avoid unnecessary Prolixity, are here omitted; since they cannot with a sufficient Accurateness be briefly run over, but require a whole Treaties of themselves, such a one, as
among others. Descartes has written, Lib. dioptric. & Lib. de Hom. artic. 18, 19, 20. as also Iulius Casserius, de Org. Vi∣sus; and Plempius in his Ophthalmogra∣phia. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Organs of Hearing, and Hearing it self. I. AS the Eyes, the Beholder of the wonderful Works of the Supream Deity, and the Discoverers of what is to be desired or avoided, are placed in the upper part of the Body, so for the understanding of Wisdom andThe Organ of Hear∣ing. all sorts of Knowledge, the Organs of Hearing are placed on each side not far from them, in Latin Aures, by the Greek  and , to give us notice of imminent Good or Evil, which cannot be dis∣cern'd by the Eye, either in the Dark, or through the Interposition of thicker Bodies, or the distance of the Place; seated in a high part of the Body, the more easily to receive, the Twirlings and Circulations of the Air, in Motion diffuss'd through the upper Parts of the wide Concavity. II. The Supream Architect createdTheir Number. two, perhaps, that if any Defect should befall the one, the other might supply its Office; or else be placed one on each side of the Temples, for the bet∣ter distinguishing of Sounds on the Right or Left Side of the Body. The outward Part expanded like a win∣now, which is not primary, but an as∣sisting Organ of Hearing; first, col∣lecting and receiving Sounds, is by the Greeks properly call'd , by the La∣tins Auris, the upper parts of which are call'd Wings, by the Greeks , but the lower and soft Lobe of the lower Auricle, retains the ancient Name of Lobus still. III. The Ears of Men are but small,Their Magni∣tude and Figure. semicircular and neatly fram'd and fashion'd with various Protuberances and Concavities, in which the sound being receiv'd together with the Air, it does not presently slip out again, but stops a little, and is somewhat broken, to the end that thence it may the  directly, and with less Violence, enter the inner most Caverns of the Ear. Insomuch, that they who are depriv'd of this part by any unfortunate Wound, hear much less distinctly, and with more confusion, receiving the Sounds of Words like the Murmuring of a Stream. Hence it is that they who are Deafish clap the Hollow of their Hands to receive a louder Sound of the Air in Motion, for the greater benefit of their Hearing. IV. Of these Protuberances, the out∣ermost, by reason of its winding and turning Figure is called Helix, and theHelix. Anthelix. other opposite to it Anthelex; that which looks toward the Temples, be∣cause it is hairy in some People like aTragus. Goats Beard, is call'd Tragus, or Hircus, and the Part opposite to it, to which the lower Auricle is appendent, is call'd Antitragus, which is also hairy in someAntitra∣gus. People. V. The innermost of the Cavities,Alveari∣um. which is as it were the Porch of the Auditory Passage it self, by reason of the yellow Excrement therein con∣tracted, is by some call'd Alvearium; the outermost, which is the bigger from its winding and turning Concha, by theConcha. Greeks ; the third, which is com∣prehended between the Helix, and An∣thelix, has hitherto no peculiar Name allow'd it. VI. From the Shape and Bigness ofIndicati∣ons. the outward Ear, the Ancients have drawn several Observations. Aristotle and Galen makes Ears of a moderate bigness, and arrected to be a Sign of the best sort of Men. Polemon, Loxus, A∣damantius, and Albert asserts, that Quadrangular and Simicircular Ears of a moderate Magnitude declare a Man Stout, Honest and of great Parts. Large Ears denote Sotrishness, Imprudence, and Talkativeness, but a great Memo∣ry, and moreover they presage a long Life, as Rases and Pliny relate out of Aristotle. Very small Ears testifie a Fool, a Person of ill Condition, thie∣vish and Libidinous, as Aristotle, Galen, and Polemon relate. Short and ex∣tended Ears, as in Dogs, as also short and compressed, both are Signs of Fol∣ly, according to Polemon, Adamantius, and Albert out of Loxus. Long and narrow Ears shew a Man envious and wicked, according to Polemon, Albert, and Conciliator. Ears over-round, and not well hollowed, betoken a Man Indo∣cible; but when hollowed exactly, a Person docible, as the same Authors testifie. When the inferior Lobe of the Ear is joyn'd to the Flesh of the
Jaw-bone, it signifies a vain Fool, by the Testimony of Avicen. VII. The Ear consists of variousThe Parts of the Ear. Parts, of which some are common, others proper. The common Parts are the Cuticle, a very thin Skin, and a nervous Mem∣brane under it, and a little Fat in the Inferior Lobe. The proper Parts are a Gristle, Mus∣cles and Vessels. VIII. The Gristle constituting theThe Gri∣stle. upper and larger Part of the Ear, to keep the Ear expanded and open, sticks fast to the Stony-bone, by means of a strong Ligament arising from the Pericranium. For this reason, in Men it is almost immovable, and there are few Men can move their Ears at Pleasure; though Schenkius brings some few Examples out of others, which Motion is perform'd by the benefit of four Muscles, only Casserius talks of six, which are very slen∣der, and being hardly conspicuous, rest upon this Gristle, which Galen, by rea∣son of their extraordinary slenderness calls the Lineaments of the Muscles. IX. The first of these Muscles com∣monThe Mus∣cles. to the Ear and both Lips, drawing the Ear downward to the side, is implanted in the Root of it under the Lobe, and is part of the slender four∣square Muscle moving the Cheeks and Skin of the Face. The second lying upon the Temple Muscle, and moving the Ear upward and forward, descends near the begin∣ning of the Muscle of the Front, and being made narrower by degrees, is inserted into the upper part of the Ear. The third raising the Ear, though very little toward the hinder Parts, rises above the Mamillary Process, with a narrow beginning from the hinder part of the Head, and then becoming broa∣der, sometimes with two, sometimes with three Tendons, enters the Root of the hinder Gristle. The Fourth, being of the same use with the former, and proceeding with a broad Original from the Mamillary Process, vanishes into a Tendon, of which there are some that make three Insertions into the Root of the Gri∣stle. In Cows, Horses, and several other Brutes, these Muscles are large, and frequently more, which is the reason those Creatures move their Ears very strongly, and are able, by that means, to shake of Flies and whatever else proves troublesome to those Parts. X. The Vessels belonging to theThe Vessels. Ear are threefold. 1. Little Arteries from the Caroti∣des, of which, one that is bigger than the rest creeping through the Tragus and Anthelix, and ascending the up∣per part of the Iaw, affords vital Blood to each of the Teeth, with which sharp Humors sometimes flow∣ing down, are the cause of most cruel Pains in the Teeth, which we have seen wonderfully cur'd by an actual Cautery to this shooting forth of the Arteries in the Anthelix; which is ob∣serv'd by Bauhinus. And Riolanus re∣ports, that he saw a Person at Paris, who got a great deal of Money by this way of Cure, as we observed another, who practised the same Cure in Gelder∣land. 2. Very small diminutive Veins that run from the Ear to the Jugulars. 3. Two little Nerves, that creep from the second Pair of the Pith of the Neck along the sides, and hinder Region of the Ear; to which is joyned a small Branch from the harder Porti∣on of the fifth Pair, proceeding through the Blind-hole. XI. Without side there stands ad∣joyningThe Paro∣tid Glands. to the Ears, various little Kernels, thick and remarkable, call'd Parotides, not only behind the Ears, but also under the Ears, and upon each side. Between these, two of a considerable bigness, resting almost one upon another. Of which, the lesser, by Sylvius and Stenonis is called Conglo∣bata; the larger, composed of many glandulous Fragments, is called Con∣glomerata, and both manifestly demon∣strated by Stenonis in the Head of a Calf. These Kernels support the as∣cending Vessels, and because they re∣ceive the serous Humors, separated from the Arterious Blood, and send them down through certain lymphatic and salival Vessels, and sometimes heap together a great quantity of fleg∣matic Filth; hence they are vulgarly called the Emunctories of the Brain. Besides these, in the Space below the lower Jaw, there are several other Ker∣nels, wherein several Distempers breed, which however are not described under the Name of Parotides, but by Whar∣ton are called Iugulars. Of these there is a great number, but all very small. Nor are they seated only in the Neck,
but descend to the Thorax from the Pen-resembling Process, along the low∣er Seat of the Jaw, by the sides of the Thyroides, between the Spine and the Pectoral Vessels, and are so far conspi∣cuous in new born Infants, but scarce visible in Persons of mature Age. Of these Steno discourses very accurately in his Anatomic Observations. XII. The inner Part of the OrganThe inner Organ of Hearing. of hearing is contain'd in the Process of the Bone of the Temples; partly for the safer Defence, to prevent the Inju∣ries of accidental Violence, by reason of the hardness of the Place; partly, for the better preservation of the Sound, for which, this place is most proper, by reason of its hardness and dryness. In this lower part there are several things that occur to be considered; that is to say, several Cavities, of which four are called by peculiar Names, The Au∣ditory Passage, the Tympanum or Drum, the Labyrinth, and the Cochlea; also the Membrane of the Tympanum, two Muscles, four little Bones, the Air contain'd, and the Vessels. XIII. The Auditory Passage is saidThe Audi∣tory Pas∣sage. to be that same Den, which beginning from the Shell of the extream part of the Ear, tends toward the inner Parts, and is cloathed with a slender Skin and Pericranium to the very Brinks of the Tympanum. It ascends somewhat upward with a winding Course, partly to prevent any thing from crouding from without into the Air, and to hinder these things which are slipt in, or gathered together, withinside, from being carried easily downward. Partly, that the more ve∣hement Impulse of the mov'd Air may be somewhat broken, and so strike the Tympanum with less sorce. XIV. In this Passage some yellowEar-wax. choleric, bitter, thick, viscous Hu∣mors happen to be gathered together, resembling the softer sort of Wax, by the Ancients call'd Cerumina, and by the Greeks , from the Co∣lour of which resembling Wax, the Passage is call'd the Bee-hive, orThe Bee∣hive. Alveare, and by the Greeks . XV. Withinside, toward the end ofThe Mem∣brane of the Drum. the Auditory Passage, a certain nervous Membrane, orbicular and pellucid, is observed; as to its Situation, obliquely looking downward, like the inner Co∣vering of the Ear, which by reason of the little Nerves that it receives, and which proceed under it, feels most ex∣actly, and is thin and very dry, to the end it may sound the better, yet some∣what thick and sufficiently frm, to the end it may not easily suffer damage from the Air crouding in. XVI. This Membrane is by Hip∣pocrates called the Pellicle or little Skin of the Auditory Passage; by A∣ristotle the Meninx; by Galen, the Covering; but by the Neoterics, by reason of the Cavity under it, the Membrane of the Tympanum. XVII. Iulius Casserius believes thisIts Rise. Membrane arises from the Pericranium; others ascribe its Original to the Pia, others the Dura Mater, others to the lit∣tle nervous Pair of the fifth Conjugation expanded; Bauhinus thinks it consists of its own proper Substance, different from other Membranes, and therefore that it derives its Original from no other, but is generated out of the Seed in the first formation of the Parts. Or if it must be said to proceed from any other part, that then it ought to be deduced from the Periosteum, to which in the Head of an Infant it is seen to stick very close. For which reason, it seems to Veslingius to be a certain Expansion of the Periostium, who likewise reports the same to be sometimes observed double, and to be frequently covered with a lit∣tle Crust from the Excrements condens∣ed about it. XVIII. It adheres to the Orbit or sur∣rowIts Con∣nexion. of the bony Ring; that lyes under it, though in the upper Region of the auditory passage, there be a broader connexion, whence it happens to be somewhat bow'd in the middle, to the end the sound may be the better and more perfectly receiv'd in that kind of Concavity. XIX. But to the end it may moreThe String. loudly resound, there is stretched over the back of a certain strike like the strings that goes cross a Drum. This the Anatomists generally report to be transversly annexed to it. But Iulius Casserius has well observ'd, that this same string is neither annexed to it, or extended under all of it, but scarce∣ly under a Third Part. XX. Anatomists are at varianceIts . about the Nature of this string; Bau∣hinus thinks it to be either a Nerve or a Ligament, or else a mixture of both. Eustachius says it is a little Nerve from both the small branches of the fourth
Paire. Vesalius affirms it to be a Ner∣vous Body. Volcherus Coiter agrees with Bauhinus; with Vesalius accords Fallopius and Casserius; from whom Rol∣fincius seems not to vary. XXI. It is indu'd with two slenderIt's Mus∣cles. little Muscles, for the motion of the small Bones. Or as Riolanus will ra∣ther have it, to limit the bending back∣ward and forward of the Membrane of the Tympanum. Which motion is manefestly perceiv'd, when the Ears are erected to hearken more attentively after any thing. Of these, one which is external, arising with a broader beginning from the upper and more inward Cavity of the Auditory Passage, and by degrees becoming more contracted, and con∣tiguous with a most slender Tendon to the Membrane of the Tympanum, is carry'd as far as the little Hammer, extending the Membrane together with the Hammer upward and outward. The way to find this out Eustachius describes in these words. Cut the Stony-bone in that place, where it is mark'd with a Line that penetrates not very deep, and rises somewhat more toward the slenderer seat of the Bone of the Temples next the Inner Part, and open the Scale of it, which having done, presently the Muscle will shew it self; which though it be the least of all, for its construction gives place to none. It arises from a Substance like to Liga∣ments, where the Wedg-like-bone is joyn'd with the Bone of the Temples: thence passing beyond the Flesh, it be∣comes by degrees somewhat broader as far as the middle; but then growing narrower it produces a most slender Tendon, which is inserted into the larger Apophysis of the Hammer, over against the lesser Apophysis of the same. The other Muscle is internal, seated in the Stony-bone, and rising about the Conjunction of the Stony-process with the Wedg-like-bone, proceeds sometimes with a single, sometimes with a double Tendon to the little Hammer, and higher then one Pro∣cess of it, is inserted into the other Neck of it, obliquely drawing forward the Head of the Hammer, and bring∣ing it from the Anvil to the inner Parts. These two Muscles then chiefly draw the Membrane with the little Bones upward and downward when we desire to excite these Parts to hear a thing more distinctly. XXII. This Membrane being mov'dThe use of the Mem∣brane. and stirr'd by things sonorous moves the Air included within, which is the Internal Medium of hearing, without the motion of which there can be no Hearing. Which Membrane, if either from the Birth it were so, or by any distemper become thicker, or be co∣ver'd with the slime of Excrements, so that it cannot be commodiously mov'd, causes thickness of hearing, or if it be immoveable from the Birth, causes incurable deafness. XXIII. The foresaid Membrane be∣ingThe Tym∣panum or ▪ Drum. taken away, that large Cavity lies open, which the Modern Anatomists call the Tympanum or Drum, whose inner superficies is unequal with seve∣ral small risings and cavitys. XXIV. In this four small, hard,The four little Bones thick, little Bones offer themselves to our Consideration. The Hammer, the Anvil, the Stirrup, and the Or∣bicular Bone, which though they are destitute of Membranes and Perio∣steums, yet about the Extremities where they are joyn'd together, to strenghthen the Knots, they are bound about▪ with a slender Ligament pro∣ceeding from that Ligament, which is extended thwart the Tympanum, like the Cats Guts under the bottom of a Drum; whence it obtain'd the Name of a String or Thread. These little Bones were unknown toBy whom discover'd. the Ancients, the two first being disco∣ver'd by Iacobus Carpus, the third by Ingrassias, Eustachius and Columbus; and the fourth by Franciscus Syl∣vius. Concerning these, this farther has been observ'd by Anatomists, worthy notice; that in all Ages they differ no∣thing in situation or bigness, not less in new born Infants than in grown People. Only the hearing is not so quick in Children, by reason of the extraordina∣ry moisture of the rest of the Parts of the Organ: perhaps also, for that although the little Bones have attain'd their just Magnitude, yet they are less solid and hard in Infants, and somewhat spungy and marrowy, as Collumbus and Casserius witness them then to be. XXV. The first little Bone, whichThe Ham∣mer. either from some resemblance of the shape or else from it's use they call the Hammer, is rivitted with a little round head into the Cavity of the
Anvil with a looser Ligament, and thence is tap'd into the Neck. But in its farther progress it sticks close like a Tayl revers'd, to the Mem∣brane of the Tympanum beyond the middle of it, and about the middle it is furnished with two Processes: the one a short one, to which the Tendon of the inner Mus∣cle is fastn'd: the other longer but thinner, which rests upon the Orbit of the Tympanum, and is ty'd to the Tendon of the inner Muscle of the Ear. XXVI. The second little Bone,The Anvil. from the use of it called the Anvil, and resembling one of the Grinding Teeth with two Roots, lyes under the Hammer, and receives the head of it toward the upper part of it with a smoth Cavity, in the lower part it has two Processes: one a short one resting upon the hinder Ca∣vity of the Tympanum. The other longer, bound to the small head of the Stirrup with a Ligament somewhat broad, but strong. XXVII. The other little Bone calledThe Stir∣rup. the Stirrup from its resemblance, and an∣swering to an Oval window both for shape and compass rests upon the Cochlea, to which it is fastned throughout the whole Compass with a slender and loose Ligament, so that it cannot be forc'd within the hollowness, nor rais'd up or brought forth without violence. In the upper part it is convex like a Bow, the two minute Leggs of which, being some∣what writh'd, are inserted into the Trans∣verse Basis. But upon the Top of the Vertex stands a Minute little Head plain and round, where it is fasten'd to the A∣pophysis of the Anvil, with a Ligament somewhat Broad. XXVIII. The fourth little Bone is veryThe Orbicu∣lar Bone. small and round; and thence call'd the Orbicular Bone; This is fasten'd with a slender Ligament, to the Stirrup, at the side, where it is joyn'd to the Anvil. Lindan calls it Cochlear, and allows it three Processes. XXIX. Below towards the fore∣parts,The passage from the Tympa∣num to the Iaws. appears a round passage from the Tympanum to the Pallate, which being carry'd down, between the two Muscles of the Iaws, partly is inserted into the thick Tunicle of the Palate, near the Root of the Uvala, where the Mouth of the up∣per Palate ends; partly enters the Cavity of the Nostril of its own side, with a large and grisly end, covered with the slimy Tunicle of the Nostrils, like a kind of a Door-keeper; or as Riolanus believes, with the Liga∣mental Membrane enfolding the Ton∣silla. Through this the preternatu∣ral moisture collected in the Tympa∣num, flows to the Palate, and the sound rais'd in the the mouth in some mea∣sure enters the Ear. For which reason, men that are thick of Hear∣ing, opening their Mouths and holding their breath, hear better. Aquapendens testifies that he has frequently observ'd, especially in Children, the Inner Ca∣vity fill'd with a great quantity of slime. Fallopius and Laurentius hold that there is a little Skin or valve added to this passage more inwardly, look∣ing toward the Palate and the Nostrils, and hindring the assent of vapors from the Palate and Nostrils to the Windings of the Ears; though Riola∣nus denys there is any such thing to be found. But this by reason of it's ex∣tream smallness and tenderness by bet∣ter being discern'd by Fallopius and Lau∣rentius upon the score of Reason, than seen by Riolanus, for reason teaches us that there must be some Obstruction to the assent of Vapors in that Chan∣nel, to prevent the Organ of hearing from being fully'd by them: but whe∣ther it be a valve or not, I dare not assert. The muscous Tunicle of the Nostrils, and the Inner soft Tunicle of the Palate seem to be sufficient for that Office: for that it affords an easie Exit to the humors descending from the Ear, but to those ascending from the Jaws or Nostrils, it gives no entrance, because it falls and is wrinkl'd into folds. XXX. If at any time crude ex∣crementitiousAn Obser∣vation. humors chance to stop in this Cavity of the Tympanum, the said Channel being obstructed by their clam∣miness, and be gather'd together in too great a Quantity, as happens some∣times in great Colds of the Head, the hearing is endamag'd, and ex∣tream pain ensues by reason of the ex∣tention of the Membrane of the Tuni∣cle, which is often asswag'd by a vio∣lent snuffing the Air up the Nostrils, and frequent hawking: the Channel toward the Ears and Palate by that means being somewhat open'd, and the humors latent within, drawn away by a kind of sucking. Somtimes also those Humors are attenuated by the applica∣tion of discussive Topics, or only by the proper heat of the adjacent Parts,
and are reduc'd into vapors and wind, whence tingling and noises in the Ears, and so are easily expell'd out of the said Channel. But if they have tarry'd there over long, they break forth after they have burst the inner Tunicle, en∣folding the Auditory Passage within side, to the great Ease of the Party in pain, and for many days together flow from the said Rupture, till the Channel be free from the obstruct∣ing humors, which done, they return to that way. But in distempers of the Ears, this Channel is well to be observ'd by the Physitian; for that the thick humors are successfully drawn out of it by Masticatories, and sometimes forc'd out by sneezing Powders, which not only Reason but Experience tells us. XXXI. In the middle of the Cavity ofThe Holes. the Tympanum are two holes, of the bigger and uppermost of which, seated about the middlemost Part, and shut up by the Ba∣sis of the Stirrup; from its oval Figure, is called the Oval Window, and at theThe Oval-Window. hinder part opens it self into the Laby∣rinth with a remarkable broadness. The other hole which is less, lower and round, is call'd the round Window. ThisThe Round Window. always remains open, neither is it cover'd by any other Body, and is divided into two Channels, parted by a Bony Scale, of which the one together with the little Oval Window runs toward the Cochlea, the other toward the Labyrinth. XXXII. The Labyrinth is a Ca∣vityThe Laby∣rinth. much less than the Tympanum, by reason of the bony hollowed Se∣micircles, covered with a thin Mem∣brane circularly returning into the same Cavity, was by Fallopius first of all called the Labyrinth; though Platerus calls it the Mine. Into this Cavity the little Oval Window opens it self; besides which, it has three other Holes makes it pervious; the one of which opens it self into the end of the turning of the broader Cochlea, through the rest, which are so very small, that they will hardly admit a small Hair, the diminutive little Fibres of the Hearing-Nerve to the inner en∣folding Membrane. XXXIII. The Cochlea, so calledThe Coch∣lea. from its resemblance to the Periwincle Shell, less than the Labyrinth. Yet is it a remarkable Cavity, concocted sometimes twice, and sometimes three or four times, like a Periwincle-shell, and covered with a most slender Film, into which, as in the former, through three or four little Holes, little dimi∣nutive Fibers of the Nerve of the fifth Pair, make their Entrance. This Cavity by Fallopius, is called the Blind-cavity, because it has no Ter∣mination. Yet Casserius says, that from thence there is a Channel extend∣ed into the Passage of the Auditory Nerve. Of which Riolanus and Rol∣finch takes notice, of which two, the one questions whether the Choleric Ex∣crement of the Brain do not empty it self through that Passage into the Ear. These Hollownesses, Labyrinth and Periwincle, says Riolanus, are infolded neither with any small Membrane, nor so much as any Periosteum; however the Mouths of those Holes are open, to render them the more sonorous. But in regard that bare Bones cannot be sensible of any Sound, there is a necessi∣ty for that little Membrane that deceives it self from the Expansion of the Nerve which enfolds it, and by means of which, the Motion of the Air is felt. Which diminutive Membrane, Fallopius has observ'd to be most slender and soft. Whether it be an expanded Nerve, or a∣ny thing else, it matters not, says he, but 'tis very probable, that this little Nerve derives its Original from the Branches of the Nerves. Moreover, the same Riolanus writes, that these Cavities in new born Infants are very narrow, and that the Laby∣rinth is not to be discern'd as in Persons of mature Age. On the other side, Ve∣slingius writes, that the Tympanum, the Labyrinth and the Periwincle in new born Infants, observing the Simmetry of Proportion, want nothing of their Perfection, for the greater Expedition of hearing in a Creature born for all manner of Instruction. But in the de∣termination of this Controversie, we must thus far hold with Riolanus; for though the three little Bones, the Ham∣mer, Anvil and Stirrup are duly pro∣portioned from the Birth, yet the La∣byrinth is not so perfectly hollowed in Infants as in grown People, the Cavity of it being very small. XXXIV. In these hidden Cavities,The In∣nate-Air. is contained a pure and subtil Air, which many are of Opinion is gene∣rated out of the Seed, and enters the Ear as soon as the Child is near the Birth, and therefore call it the Coin-gendered Air. But in regard the Restoration of the Spermatic Parts is a ve∣ry
difficult thing, and for that this Air is continually dissipated by the heat of the adjacent Parts, and therefore stands in need of continual Restoration, and whereas this Air has no continuous Co∣herence with any of the solid Parts, as the Spermatic Parts all cohere one with another, it can never be said that this Air is detain'd in that Part as any Sper∣matic Part, or that it is generated out of the Seed, or put in before the Birth. And therefore some think it dilers no∣thing from the external Air, only that it is more pure and thinner. Then what if we should suppose it to be the Animal Spirit poured forth into the Nerve through the said Cavities; for it is aereal, pure and subtil, like that Spirit; There is the same reason for the Generation, Preservation and Restoration of both, both are succes∣sively generated and dissipated, the Spi∣rit failing, the hearing grows dull, as being the internal Medium of hearing, without which, nothing can be heard. Nevertheless, there are some who affirm this Air not to be the Medium, but the primary Instrument of Hearing But this is far from Truth, for that the primary Instrument must of neces∣sity be a living Part of the Body; see∣ing all Actions are perfected by the Help of Living Bodies. Therefore, be∣cause this Air is not enlivened, nor can be numbred among the Parts of the Body, with which it has no continuous Adheence, it cannot be call'd the pri∣mary Instrument, but only the Medi∣um of Hearing; and that as there is no Seeing without Air, so there is no Hear∣ing without it. XXXV. There are several smallVels. Arteries and little Veins which are distributed through the inner Organ of Hearing, for the Nourishment of the Parts proceeding from the inner, and foremost Branches of the Carotis, and Jugular Vein, of which, sundry Branches creep through the hidden parts of those Cavities. XXXVI. To procure Feeling, thereNerve. are also Nerves. The softer Portion of the Nerve of the fifth Pair, being carried into the hinder Passage of the Stony-Bone, proceeds to the Periwin∣kle and the Circles of the Labyrinth, to perfect the Office of Hearing. Moreover, there comes a Branch from the fourth Conjugation of Nerves, which is ex∣tended into the Tympanum, from which it receives the Sence of Feeling, and the Muscles the Power to move it. XXXVII. The use of all these PartsUse. is to perfect the Hearing. XXXVIII. Hearing is a Sence,The Defi∣nition. whereby from the various tremu∣lous Motion of the ambient Air, striking the Drum of the Ear, and together moving the internal Air with the little Fibers of the Audi∣tory Nerve, communicated to the Common Sensory, Sounds are un∣derstood. XXXIX. It is a Question amongWhether Hearing be an Acti∣on? some, whether Hearing be an Action or a Passion? The more numerous Par∣ty believes it to be a Passion. Whom Iulius Casserius opposing, affirms it to be an Action. But in regard there are two things necessary to perfect the Hear∣ing, Reception of the Object, and un∣derstanding the Object receiv'd, in re∣spect both of the one and the other, we believe Hearing to be both an Action and a Passion. For the Reception of audible Objects is a real Passion; but the judging of them is an Animal Acti∣on. XL. The Object of Hearing isSo▪ Sound, which is nothing else but a Quality arising from Air or Water, repercussed and broken by a suddain and vehement Concussion, and moving the Auditory Nerve, by the means of the implanted Air. XLI. To the Generation of Sound,The Gene∣ration of Sound. two things are necessary, a Medium, and something vehemently to stir the Medium. The Medium must be flu∣id, either Air or Water, for Fishes al∣so Hear; but no solid Body can be the Medium of Hearing. The vehement stirring Medium is twofold; either a Solid or Fluid Body. Solid, when two solid Bodies, by vehement Percussion, croud up the Air or Water together, swiftly condense, rapidly drive it for∣ward and break it. I say vehemently and swiftly, for Bodies that joyn slowly and by degrees, do not break the Air or Water so forcibly, as to bege a Sound. Fluid, when fluid things, stirr'd with a rapid Motion, being forcibly and strongly condensed, strike one a∣gainst the other, and are broken, and so may be said to be both the efficient Sound, as the Medium. Such a sono∣rous Motion of the Air we may observe in Whistling, Thunder, and Shooting off of Guns, of Water, in great Show∣ers and Rivers falling from Moun∣tains.
XLII. There are sundry differencesDifferen∣ces of Sound. of Sound, of which, these are the chief, Shrill, Deep, Direct, Reflex, as in an Eccho, natural, violent; from solid or fluid things; as also caused by things A∣nimate or Inanimate. The diversity and loudness of Sounds are distinguished by the four little Bones adjoyning to the Tympanum. For as the Membrane of the Tympanum is thrust forward toward the Hammer, the Hammer upon the Anvil, the An∣vil upon the Stirrup, by the Impulse of the external Sonorous Air, more or less violent, Smooth or Rough, so upon the wider or narrower opening of the Oval-Window, by the Stirrup and Or∣bicular Bone, there happens a freer or narrower Passage of the Air included within into the Labyrinth and Periwin∣kle; in which Windings and Turnings, it is variously broken, which causes the several sorts of Sounds, and those ac∣cording to various Impulses of the Ex∣ternal Air, sometimes shrill, sometimes full, sometimes harsh, sometimes sweet: The Idea of every one of which Sort, is carried to the Common Sensory, by the Acustic Nerve, enfolding those Ca∣vities with its Expansion, and so repre∣sented to the Mind. CHAP. XIX. Of the Organ of Smelling, and Smelling it self. THE Organ of Smelling is the Nose, placed in the upper PartThe Organ of smell∣ing. of the Body, the better to receive the Invisible Fumes and Vapors, and to conveigh their Qualities through the Odoratory Nerves, inserted in the in∣ner Tunicle to the common Sensory, and represent them to the Judgment of the Mind, though some Men may be able to judge of things to be desired or avoid∣ed, which are not to be perceived either by the Sight or Hearing. The upper Bone, part of it is im∣moveable, the lower Gristle, part move∣able. The Ridg is call'd , or the Back; the Top , or the Strainer, because that there the Snivel is strained forth through the Sive-like Bones. The Extremity is call'd Orbi∣culus, the lower lateral Parts the Wings, the two larger lower Holes, Nares or the Nostrils; the Partition of the two Holes, Columna, or the Pillar. II. The Nose is a protuberant PartThe De∣scription of the Nose. of the Face, serving for the Sence of Smelling, and in Respiration afford∣ing Passage to the Air, and letting down the Excrements of the Brain, flowing through the Sive-like Bones. The Shape and Bigness are wellFigure and Bigness. known, yet there is some variety in both, in respect of thickness, thinness, length and flatness, &c. But the bet∣ter shap'd it is, the more it conduces to the Beauty of the Face; wherefore it is vulgarly call'd the Sun of the Face; for that as the Sun gives Beauty to the Macrocosm, so the Nose, especially if it be a red one, illuminates the Face. The Nose consists of a Cuticle, a Skin, Gristles, Muscles, Membranes and Vessels. III. The Skin is much thinner andIts Skin. harder than in any other Part of the Face, under which there lies no Fat. And hence it adheres so firmly to the Gristles and Muscles, that it cannot be parted without mangling. But under the middle Partition, it is much thicker and more spungy, and is hairy within side, to prevent the drawing in of Gnats, Feathers, and such other In∣conveniences to the Brain, in the Act of Respiration. Hence this Skin reflex'd within side, passes into a Membrane, which cloaths the minor Parts of the Nose; to which, in the upper part of the Nose, some part of the hard Me∣ninx passing through the Ethmoids Bone, is conjoyn'd, as Casserius, with many others believe, in regard that Membrane feels more exquisitely at the upper part of the Nostril, than at the Entrance. IV. The upper and immoveableBones. Part of the Nose is supported by Bones, and those either proper, that is to say, two external lateral ones, and one with∣inside in the middle, which divides the Nose into two parts, or else common; of all which, see more, Lib. 9. c. 7. &c. V. In these upper bony Caverns ofSpungy Bones. the Nostrils on each side, there is yet another certain bony spungy Sub∣stance to be seen, pendulous from the upper part of the Sive-like Bone, and adhering to the sides of the Nose, within fill'd with ruddy and spungy Flesh, which being endamaged and growing too big, are the cause of the Polipus.
VI. These spungy Substances possessThe Use of the spongy Bones. the upper Cavity, to the end they may be able to stop and alter the cold Air breathed in, and prevent its ascent to the Sive-like Bone. As also to retard the continual and sudden Flux of the Snivel descending, which would else be much more troublesome than it is. Lastly, in some measure to help the Voice, for they that have lost these Bones by Ex∣ulceration, or if they be too much swell'd, or lengthened by the Polypus, these People all snuffle in the Nose; for that the Sonorous Air ascending through the Holes of the Nostrils, either lights upon the Inequalities of the exulcera∣ted Bones, or upon their extraordinary Protuberances, and so by the altered Motion of the Air going forth, the Voice also is altered and vitiated. VII. In the French Distemper, theseFilling of the Nose. spungy Parts are frequently corroded by the malignant and sharp Humors sticking thereto, and to come away by blowing the Nose, with bloody and sli∣my Matter; and hence their Malignity spreading it self, to the next tender middle and lateral Bones, which being also eaten away, drop out by degrees, and so the Nose falls, and sometimes the Corrosion gaining Ground, lays the whole Nose level, to the great De∣formity of many a good Face. VIII. Five Gristles constitute theGristles. lower moveable Part, of which, the two uppermost stick to the Bones of the Nose, in the lower part, where they are more broad and rugged, and thence being twisted together, bend toward the top of the Nose, and the farther they are carried, so much the softer they grow, and in the extream part of the Nose, terminate, as it were in a Grisly Ligament. The third, in the middle, between these two, is a grisly Partition, which hangs forward from the Bony Partition, and grows in length close to the two foresaid Gristles, in the forepart, in the inner Region. The fourth and fifth are two inferior lateral Gristles, joyned to the two upper Gri∣stles with a Membranous Ligament; of which, one of each side sticks to the lower part of the Nose; and because they stand like Wings on each side the Nostrils, and move with a voluntary Motion, upward, downward, inward and outward, by the ancient Anatomists were called the Wings of the No∣strils. IX. Their Motion is perform'd byMuscles. the assistance of eight Muscles, into every one of which, two Wings are inserted. The first, from the upper part of the Nose, near the Lachrymal Hole, arises with an acute and fleshy Beginning, descending to the sides of it in a Trian∣gular Form, is expanded over the Wing that lies under it, and divides it by raising it upward. The Second, carried down from the upper Bone near to the Jaw, proceeds for∣ward, partly into the Wing of the Nose outward, partly into the upper Seat of the Wing that lies underneath, and so moves both parts upward. The Third, which is very small, ris∣ing near the Root of the Wing, and carried athwart above the Wing, is in∣serted into the Corner of the Wing, and dilates it, as Veslingius well ob∣serves, though others say it contracts it. The Fourth, like the former in big∣ness, and opposite to it, lies hid under the Tunicle of the Nostrils in the in∣ner part. This rising from the Extre∣mity of the Bone of the Nose, is ex∣panded into the Wing, and draws it to∣gether. This is much less than all the rest, and is hardly to be discern'd, but in such as have very large Noses, in whom all these Muscles are much thicker and more apparently to be seen. Besides these Muscles, Bartholinus writes, that he has found a fleshy thin Muscle, extended in a streight Line from the frontal Muscle, with a broader Basis, and by and by terminating more narrow about the Gristle of the Nose. X. Withinside, by the Benefit ofThe No∣strils. the foresaid Partition, the Nose is divided into two Holes, or Hollow∣nesses, which they call the No∣strils. Each of these, about the middle of the Nose, is divided into two parts; of which, one ascends upward to the spungy Bone, the other descends above the Palate to the Chaps, through which, all Errhines snuft up into the Nostrils descend to the Mouth and Chaps, and the Snot flows out some∣times through the Nostrils, and the slimy Excrements of the Brain descend∣ing through the Spungy Bones, by the more vehement Attraction of the Air through the Nostrils, are brought down to the Palate, and spit out, or being swallow'd, descend to the Stomach. XI. The inner large Space of theThe inner Membrane Nostrils is lin'd with a thin Membrane, which is said to rise from the thick
Meninx, through the holes of the Sive∣like-bones; or as Riolanus will have it, through the little holes of the Palate, and is said to be common to the Tuni∣cle of the Palate, Tongue, Larynx and Gullet. This Membrane, where it adheres to the Sive-like-bones, is bor'd through with little holes for the Passage of the Excrements of the Brain. XII. Under the Membrane lyes hid a certain peice of flesh thin, soft, and as it were compos'd of several little Teats, which is hard to be dis∣cern'd in Men, but somewhat more easily found in Calves and Cows, though not without some difficulty. The little Teats of this peice of flesh in the fore part are less, but toward the hinder parts bunch out much bigger, and are observ'd by few Anatomists, being by some taken for small Kernels. XIII. For the nourishment of theVessels con∣veighing Blood. Nose, there are allotted to it Arteries from the Carotides; Veins also run out from it to the External Iugu∣lars. XIV. Nicholas Stenonis, besides theseLymphatics. Blood-beaing-Vessels in Sheep and Doggs has frequently observ'd in each Nostril a Lymphatic Vessel, arising a∣far off from the Kernels seated under the Tunicle of the Nostrils above the Region of the Genders, then joyning together into one Channel, which runs downward almost to the extream Parts of the Nostrils, and exonerates its self in the hollowness conspicuous between the Grisly protuberancy of the Wings. He is also of opinion that Flegmatic humors flow from the Nostrils through the hole which is made through the Palate into the Mouth from the fore∣most Parts of the Nostrils; which to me does not seem very probable. XV. To endue it with Feeling, andNerves. to give it motion, one Nerve of each side runs along from the fourth pair through the common hole to the larger corner of the Eye, and so proceeds to the inner Tunicle of the Nose, and the Teat-resembling-Flesh, into which it powrs forth the Animal Spirits to per∣fect the Sense of Smelling, and thence runs on farther to the Muscles of the same. XVI. Smelling is a Sense, byThe defini∣tion of Smelling. which things that have any Scent being carry'd to the Nostrils are understood by a Specific motion of the odoratory Organ. Here three things are to be consi∣der'd; the Object, the Organ it self, and the manner of Sensation. XVII. The Object of Smelling isScent. Scent, which is a certain Spirituous Va∣por exhaling into the Nostrils from the Thing endu'd with scent, and moving the odoratory Organ this or that way. XVIII. Senertus labours to prove thatWhether Smells are Substances▪ Smells are no Substances, nor real Qua∣lities, but only Species's of them. But in answer to Senertus we say, that no Qualities or Species's can subsist without any Body, and therefore none can be allow'd; nay there are no Odora∣ble Species's impress'd upon no Corporeal substance that can be conceiv'd in the I∣magination. This in the Sight is notori∣ous; where the visible Species's are certain Modifications of the Air, de∣painted therein by things visible and im∣printed therein, which without the Air are nothing; for Species's without Sub∣stance cannot subsist, and therefore are nothing. Thus in Smells the odora∣tive qualities necessarily are inherent in some Substances, and because they cannot subsist without 'em, hence they are properly call'd Smells, because they are Substances endued with odorable qualities. Philosophers commonly constituteThe effici∣ent Cause of Smells. Scent in dry predominating above moist. However we are to understand, that there is no Scent without Moisture, nay that it is generated out of Moisture, attenuated and rais'd by Heat. I say by Heat, because Heat is the efficient Cause which acts upon the subject con∣taining Smell or Scent in Potentia; and by raising therein Fumes that are endu'd with Scent, excites Smell, out of Power into Act: And therefore Bodies endu'd with Scent smell when they are cha'd; but growing cold they send forth no Scent, for Scent is not in act unless it exhale forth: which it cannot do nor be sent forth; while the astrin∣gent Cold binds up the Pores of the Substance containing the Scent. Here it will perhaps be objected, that Scent is something subsisting of it self, and therefore Moisture and Heat can∣not be the Cause of it. I answer that Scent or Odour is an accident subsisting in the Subject, and Latent therein, nor able to breath out of it, unless both in and with some part of its subject ac∣companying it; for without the Sub∣ject it is a moist vapor which cannot be rais'd, unless by Heat: and hence both Moisture and Heat of necessity con∣cur,
the first as the Subject without which it cannot be, and be perceiv'd, the other as the agent Cause without which it cannot be excited into Act. But here some one may say, that according to this Opinion, Odor of it self will prove to be nothing, and so there will be no knowledge of Odor, since there can be no knowledge of a Non-Entity. We grant that Odor separately consi∣der'd, is nothing, neither does it fall under Sence; but when we consider it in and with Fume, it peirces the Sence and falls under knowledge; so far as the Accident by the Subject, and the Sub∣ject by the Accident in a mutual Or∣der come to be perceptible. Here a∣gain some one will oppose me and urge, if Odor actually exist only in Fumes, how comes the Fish in the Water to be sensible of Odors, where there are no Fumes? I answer: 1. It may be questi∣on'd whether Fish are sensible of Odors, and whether they approach or avoid things, that carry an Odor, but are not rather lead by a grateful or unplea∣sing quality, perceiv'd by Savour, Sight or Feeling from other qualities diffus'd into the Water from things that carry a Scent. 2. But grant they are sensible of Odors, there is no doubt but that in the Water it self, some Fumes may be rais'd by a subtil Aethereal matter, penetrating the Water some way or other, and by its Motion causing a Heat in it: in which Fume Odorous qualities may be excited from Power into Act, and so the Fish may be made sensible of Odor, if they are sensible of Odors as they are Odors. XX. There are several sorts andDifference of Odors. differences of Odors, some are sharp, some sweet, some acid, some odorife∣rous, others stinking, some grateful, others loathsome, and many Odors are apply'd to the difference of Savors. Moreover Smells some are simple and natural, some by nature are in the Bo∣dies. Others are Compounded and Artificial, such as the Perfumers make for Luxury and Delight: Others are preternatural which arise from Corrup∣tion and Putrefaction. XXI. The Organ of Smelling is theThe Organ of Smelling Nose. Which being constituted of many and various parts, which since they can∣not all officiate that particular function, it is a great question, in what part of the Nose the Smelling faculty has it's seat. That it is not in the Blood-con∣veighing or Lymphatic-Vessels, nor in the Bones or Grisles is confess'd by all. XXII. Some are of Opinion, thatWhether by the Nerves. the Sense of Smelling proceeds from some certain Nerves peculiar and of another Nature, inserted in∣to the Nose, and some Specific Ani∣mal Spirits flowing through those Nerves. But they did not observe, that all the Nerves of the whole Body both in their Composition and Con∣struction, hardly difer in any thing else, but that some are bigger, others less; some longer, some shorter, some thicker, some thinner, some softer and some harder, but that let them be what they will, their Office is the same; as being the Passages through which the Animal Spirits are conveigh'd. Moreover they did not consider that those Spirits, car∣ry'd through whatsoever Nerves, are no way different, but of the same sub∣stance and nature, through whatsoever Nerves, and to whatsoever places or parts they are conveigh'd. Lastly, They did not observe, that the diversi∣ty of Operations, which are perform'd by their assistance, does not proceed from the diversity of them, or the Nerves that conveigh them, but from the diversity of the Parts into which they flow. Thus in the Eye they are the cause of sight, in the Muscles of mo∣tion, in the Flesh they cause the sence of Feeling. Therefore as they are the cause of Smelling in the Nostrils, there must be also in the Nostrils some spe∣cific Parts, in which by the means of those Spirits, not only the feeling, but the smell of sweet, stincking, rosy Camphory, is perceiv'd and distin∣guish'd. XXIII. Formerly Galen, and after himWhether by the Papil∣lary Pro∣cess. most Anatomists and Philosophers con∣cluded that the Papillary Processes are the true Odoratory Nerves, and the immediate Organs of Smelling. But we have al∣ready refuted that Opinion Chap. 8. where we have shewn that those Pro∣cesse sare no Nerves, but Channels ser∣ving for the Evacuation of Excrements. Vallesius also opposes and confutes this Opinion. But Sneider and Rolfinch, finding no reason why the smelling Sence should lye in the Papillary Processes, add to their assistance Nerves deriv'd from the third Pair to the Nostrils. But from what has been said it is appa∣rent that the Sence of Smelling does not lye in any particular Nerves, but in some certain specific Parts, into
which the Nerves infuse their Animal Spirits. Which cannot be the Papillary Processes, which neither carry Spirits, nor admit those Nerves into their Body. XXIV. Others were of opinion thatWhether in the Mem∣branes. the Sence of Smelling lyes in the Membrane over-spreading the Inner part of the Nostrils, and ascribe to it a Specific Constitution above other Membranes, by reason of which it di∣stinguishes Odors. But in regard that Membranes are the Organs of Feeling, not of Smelling, and that Feeling con∣tributes to the perfection of the Organ of Smelling, which being depriv'd of Feeling can never smell, as the Eye depriv'd of Feeling can never See; and for that it is one thing to feel, another thing to distinguish the Odor of Roses, Musk, Amber, &c. another thing to feel rough, smooth, hard, hot, cold, &c. it is apparent that a Membrane which is the Organ of Feeling can never be an adequate Organ of Smelling. Nor is the Jugdment of some Persons to be valu'd, who say, that the Membrane which over-spreads the Nostrils is of another Temper and Constitution then the rest of the Membranes. For if this were true, which is first to be prov'd, for then it might be endu'd with a more quick or dull Sence of Feeling, never∣theless it could never distinguish or judge of Odors. Lastly if this were the Smelling Membrane, being of the same common Substance with the Mem∣brane of the Palate, Mouth, Tongue, &c. why does it not preserve the same quality of Smelling in those Parts, which they ascribe to it in the No∣strils? Casserius thus describes the Speci∣fic Constitution of this Membrane. The inner Superficies of the Nostrils is over-spread with a Membrane rising from the Dura Mater, much different from the Nature and Temper of the other Mem∣branes. But notwithstanding this Speci∣fic Constitution, he does not seat the Sence of Smelling in it, but a faculty of judging more distinctly of the first Qualities, heat, cold, and before they come to the Brain: for he says the Sence of Smelling lyes in the Mamil∣lary Processes. XXV. After all to add our ownThe true Organ of Smelling. Opinion, we believe the true and immediate Organ of Smelling to be that thin Teat-resembling-flesh, seated under the inner Tunicle of the Nostrils, to which there is no other that is like it in the whole Body, be∣sides that the ends of the Odoratory Nerves enter the little Teats, of which it is compos'd, in the manner as the immediate Organs of Tast are those little Duggs which are seated under the Membrane of the Tongue; and the immoderate Organ of Sight is the Net-like-Tunicle. Not that I believe the Objects of each are perceiv'd in these Organs, but that the motion or alteration induc'd into the particular Organs by their own proper Objects, by means of the Nerves and Spirits are concern'd in the Brain and judg'd by the Mind. XXVI. Aristotle makes the MediumThe Medi∣um of Smel∣ling. of Smelling to be the Air and Water, with whom most Philosophers agree. But Casserius dissents, and endeavours to prove that Water cannot be the Medi∣um of Smelling, giving many reasons to uphold his Opinion. But if it be true that Fish smell, as Aristotle affirms, without doubt Casserius's Opinion falls to the Ground: but if that may be que∣stioned, it may be also doubted whe∣ther Water be the Medium of Smel∣ling. For though Odoriferous qualities may be infus'd into water, and so the water be made Odoriferous, yet the Smell is not perceiv'd but by means of the Air, while the fumes of that Water being rais'd into the Air, strike the Odoratory Organs by means of that Air. For if the scented Water should be drawn up into the Nostrils, without the intervening Air, the scent of it would not be perceiv'd. Therefore it is plain that in Creatures that breath, the Air is the Medium of Smelling, and that without that Me∣dium no scent could be perceiv'd. Whether among Fish the Water be the like Medium, and whether Crea∣tures that do breath in Air be en∣du'd with Smell, we leave to Aristotle to prove. Now the Sence of Smelling or the preception and distinguishing of Smells is thus perform'd. XXVII. The Air being inpregnatedThe man∣ner of Smelling: with Odors or a Spirituous exhala∣tion of things that have a Scent, is receiv'd by the Nose like a certain Chimney, but is not perceiv'd by the Smell, unless it be drawn toward the inner Parts by Inspiration. For without breathing in the Air, scarce any Smell is perceiv'd by the Nostrils, though the Odors themselves be clapp'd near to the Nostrils. Therefore this motion of In-breathing is requisite; as
being that by which partly the Pores of the inner Membrane of the Nostrils are open'd; partly the odorous va∣pors and exhalations, according to the more or less violent Motion, more ea∣sily passing through those Pores, strike more forcibly upon those Teat-like pretuberances of the Dug-like flesh, and alter them after some specific manner. According to which diver∣sity of alteration, being communicated to the common Sensory by the little fibers of the Nerves of the third Pair inserted into them, the Species of the Smell is form'd, and distinguish'd by the Mind, and hence the stronger the in-breathing is, the better the Scent is perceiv'd. Which is the reason that they who would take the pleasure of any grateful smell, snuff up the Air with more vehemence into the Nostrils. And they that would avoid an ill smell, stop their Noses and forbear breathing. Casserius endeavors to prove that respira∣tion signifies nothing to the Sence of Smelling; but because it is contrary to Experience, we forbear to refute him, so much the rather, because that the Experiment of Gualter Needham utterly overthrows his Opinion. For he cut∣ing the rough Artery of a Dog in the Throat turn'd the same outward, so that the wound being cur'd, he could neither breath through the Mouth or Nostrils, but only through that open∣ing in the Throat: by which means the Dog could neither Bark nor Smell the most nauseous Scents that were held to his Nose. XXVIII. Hence it is apparent thatSmelling is only in breathing Creatures. no Creatures can smell that do not breath. Thomas Bauhinus supposes the contrary: because they fly the smell of Brimstone, Gun-powder, &c. But he never consider'd, that many Insects breath, though we cannot perceive it. And such Animals avoid ungrateful Odors because offensive, and covet o∣thers because delightful, as we see Flys and Wasps covet dead Carcases, and other small Insects whose respiration is not perceptible, guided by their smell, swarm so far and near to the Scent of Corruption. Moreover he did not ob∣serve that those Insects that do not breath are likewise destitute of the Or∣gans not only of Respiration but of Smelling, without which smells can never be perceiv'd: and therefore they do not fly the smell for the smells sake, but by reason of some offensive quality which burning Brimston, and other strong smells diffuse into the Air, which corrode or otherwise torment the Bodys of those Animals. Now why one smell is grateful, ano∣therWhy a Scent is grateful or ingrateful. displeasing, or why one smell is pleasing to one, and abominated by another; see what we have written c. 24. following. CHAP. XX. Of the Lips, Mouth, and the other Parts of the Face in general. THE Parts of the Face ex∣pandedThe Chees. under the Eyes, be∣tween the Nose, Ears and Chin, by the ancients were call'd Genae, , because Hair grows upon them. These Genae or Cheeks, are divided into the upper and lower Part. II. The upper Part under the EyesThe Apple of the face. gently rising and ruddy between the Nose and the Ears is by Hyppocrates call'd , the Circle of of the Face, and , or the Apple of the Face, in Latin Malum or Po∣mum faciei, from the resemblance it has to Apples both for Colour and form. Hence Pliny calls it the Seat of Mo∣desty, because People asham'd generally blush in that Part. III. The lower and broader, be∣causeThe Bucca. it swells upon retention of the Breath is call'd Bucca. In this Part when some People laugh, there ap∣pears a Dimple, in others a large Fur∣row, which Martial calls Gellasinum, or Laughter from the Greek word . The Cavity in the Upper Lip, under the Partition of the No∣strils is call'd . But the rising part on each side the Cavity is call'd , or the Mustachio's. IV. The Brims of the Mouth areThe Lips. call'd Labra or Labia, the Lips. Some Grammarians distinguish Labra from Labia, signifying by Labra Lipps of moderate size, by Labia Lips of an unreasonable bigness. But this is no∣thing at all to Anatomists. V. There are two Lips, the cliftPro labiae. between which closes up the Mouth. The extram prominent Parts of these are called  or Prolabia, and the Ruddy parts where they close toge∣ther, are call'd . But the Part
which under the lower Lip extends it self till it end in a kind of blunt Point, is call'd Mentum or the Chin, and theMentum or the Chin. sleshy Prominency below the Chin, by the Ancients was call'd Buccula, by Us the Double Chin. The Hairs first ap∣pearing about this place is call'd Lango, by Us Down; in Persons of more Ma∣turity Barba, or the Beard. VI. The Lips consists of a soft andThe Sub∣stance of the Lips. spungy Substance, where the Skin is so exactly mixt with Muscles, that it may be thought to be either a Muscly-Skin, or a skinny-Muscle. Now this Flesh is outwardly covered by that same Skin, inwardly by the Membrane con∣tinuous to the Mouth, Gullet and Ven∣tricle. VII. The Branchings forth of theThe Ves∣sels. Nerves contribute an exquisite Sence of Feeling to the Lips. And the Ar∣teries dispersed from the Neighbouring Places between the Skin and the fleshy Membrane, afford the nutritive Blood, to which the Lips are beholding for their splendid and rosie Colour, the certain sign of Beauty and Health, with the Arteries are intermix'd little Veins, conveighing the superfluous Blood to the next Veins. VIII. Lips were given to Men, asThe Use. well for the Convenience of Eating and Drinking, as for the Formation of the Voice, the Retention of Spittle, the Closing of the Mouth, and de∣fending it from External Injuries, as also for Ornaments Sake; for which reason, in Men they are covered with a Beard. And because there was a ne∣cessity, that for the Performance of the said Offices they should be endued with a voluntary Motion, therefore they are also furnished with several Muscles, of which, more in the next Chap∣ter. IX. The Mouth, by the GreeksThe Mouth call'd , is sometimes taken only for that same Cleft between the Lips, sometimes for the whole Cavity, con∣spicuous as far as the Chaps. It is placed in an upper Region, that is in the middle of the Face under the Nose, to the end that whatever it re∣ceives, may not only be distinguished by the Taste, but by the Smell, and what is swallowed may more easily de∣scend into the Stomach. The Parts of it some constitute the Mouth it self, others are contain'd in the Cavity of it. The Mouth it self consists partly of bony Parts, as the lower and upper Jaw, together with the Teeth; partly, of the fleshy Parts, as the Lips, the Muscles of the Lips, Cheeks, and low∣er Jaw. The whole inner Concavity of the Mouth is overspread with a Tunicle; which in the Hollowness within the Teeth is thicker, and full of Wrinkles in the Palate; without the Teeth, in the Gums and Lips much thinner, and it is continuous to the Tunicle of the Throat and Ventricle, though in the Tongue and Palate, the Constitution of it is pe∣culiar and different from other Tu∣nicles. X. The primary Use of it is, thatThe Use. the Nourishment being received into it, as into a Funnel, may be there chew'd and prepar'd, so as to descend without interruption through the Gul∣let into the Stomach, there to be the more easily digested. The secundary Use of it is to afford a Passage in Respiration to the Air pas∣sing to the Lungs, and Evacuation of the Excrements of the Head, Lungs and Stomach, by hawking, spitting and vomiting; also to assist the Sound of the Voice. CHAP. XXI. Of the Muscles of the Cheeks, Lips and lower Iaw. THE Muscles of the Cheeks and Lips, are either common to both Parts, or proper only to the Lips. I. The Common Muscles are four,Common Muscles. two of each side; the first lying hid under the Skin of the Neck, from the Shape is call'd the Square Muscle, being thin and membranous, sticking very close to the Skin, so that the An∣cients never distinguished it from the Skin. Thus also Vestingius calls it the Membrane lying under the Fat, and here furnished with a Contexture of fleshy Fibers. It rises with a broad beginning aboutThe square Muscle. the Clavicles, Shoulders, and hinder part of the Neck, and with oblique Fi∣bers, is inserted into the Chin, Lips and Root of the Nose, which Parts it ob∣liquely
draws downward, and because it most coheres with the Chin, therefore it is thought to contribute much to the opening of the Mouth. Sometimes it proceeds to the Root of the Ear, and where such an Insertion happens, those Persons can move their Ears by the Be∣nefit of this Muscle. It receives several Branches of Nerves from the Nerves of the Neck. There∣fore upon the Convulsion and Tension of this Nerve, the Cynic Cramp is oc∣casion'd, which Riolanus rather attri∣butes to the Convulsion of the Buccina∣tor. The Fibers of it ought to be exactly known to all Chyrurgeons, as Bauhinus rightly admonishes; because of Incisions frequently required to be made in those Parts, for some, ignorant of the course of these Fibers, and dividing them with a large transverse Section, have drawn the Chaps sometimes one way, sometimes another. II. The second Muscle that consti∣tutesThe Bucci∣nator. the Chap, and is therefore call'd the Buccinator, lies under the fore∣said Square Muscle, and takes up the whole Seat of the Chaps. This is round like a Circle, and rising almost from the whole length of the upper Jaw, is inserted into the Length of the lower Jaw at the Root of the Gums; or rather circulates from the upper Gums of one Jaw, into the upper Gums of the other. For it is thin and Mem∣branous, interwoven with various Fibers, so closely growing to the Tunicle, that overspreads the inner Parts of the Mouth, that it cannot be separated from it without tearing. The use of this Muscle is not only to move the Chaps with the Lips, but to streighten them, and to force again to the Teeth, the Meat oftentimes sliping from the Mouth into the Cheeks, for the more exact chewing of it, as also to cause Inflation, as the Chaps by their Constriction send forth with more or less force, the Air flowing from the Lungs, through the Lips more or less open. The Variety of all which Moti∣tions toward the lower, upper, outer or inner Parts, proceeds from the mani∣fold Variety of the Fibers, wherewith it is interwoven. In the Center of this Muscle, is to be found a strong Ligament, as Placentius reports, which growing outward, and creeping through the Mouth of the Gums, ends in a small slender Mus∣cle, directly opposite to the Chap, which Ligament however Riolanus will not allow of. III. Of Muscles proper only to theMuscles proper to the Lips. Lips, there are five Pair, and one or∣bicular Muscle. The First Pair, rising with a broad and fleshie Original from the upper Jaw, where it causes the Cavity of the Cheeks, and furnish'd with several Fibers, is carried obliquely downward to the foremost Parts, and inserted on both sides into the side of the upper Lip, and moves it upward and out∣ward. The Second Pair, rising with a fleshie, but slender and thin Original, and wrap'd about with much Fat, is inserted into the Bridle, where the Lips meet, and assist the Motion of the Former. The Third Pair, by Riolanus call'd the Zugomatic, fleshie and round, rising outward from the Jugal Process, and ob∣liquely descending along the Cheeks, terminates in the Confines of both Cheeks, which it draws away to the Sides upwards. The Fourth Pair, arising with a fleshie and broad Original from the low∣er part of the lower Jaw, at the Sides of the Chin, is inserted into the middle of the lower Lip, and moves it downward and outward. The Fifth Pair, rising with a fleshy and broad beginning from the sides of the lower Jaw in a lower place, and sometimes extended to the middle of the Chin, proceeds upward, and nar∣rowing himself by degrees, is obliquely inserted into the lower Lip near the end, and draws it obliquely downward and outward. The Orbicular Muscle, called also the Constrictor, which is common to both Lips, is that which constitutes the pro∣per Figure and soft Substance of the Lips, and forms both Lips in the Circuit of the Mouth, and encompassing the whole Mouth like a Sphincter, and drawing the Lips mutually to its self, purses up the Mouth with orbicular Fibers, and sticks close to the Cherry Flesh. Now all the Muscles of the Lips are intermix'd alike, with Fibers cutting themselves like a St. Andrews Cross; whence proceeds various and sun∣dry Motions of the Lips. IV. The Muscles of the lower Iaw,The Mus∣cles of the lower Iaw. for the other is immoveable, causing a strong Motion in the chewing of Food, are called Masticatory, Molary or Grinders, and Mansory or Eaters;
of which there are reckoned five Pair. V. The First Pair, being the strong∣estThe Tem∣ple Muscle. and bigest, are call'd Crotaphytes or Temple Muscle; rising with a fleshy be∣ginning, about the Bone of the hinder part of the Head and Temples, is co∣ver'd with the Pericranium. The Fi∣bers of this, the farther they remove from the Middle, the more obliquely they are carried toward their Tendon; and hence the more it descends, the nar∣rower and thicker it is; and at length embraces the acute Process of the low∣er Jaw with a short and strong Tendon, and strongly elevates it together with the Jaw. It receives three Nerves of each side, one from the Third, another from the Fourth, and a third from the Fifth Pair; by reason of which, this Muscle being bruised or wounded, great danger of Convulsion and Death en∣sues, especially if the Wound happen about the lower or nervous part. VI. The Scond, call'd the Digastric,The Diga∣stric. or double Belly'd, because that be∣ing hollowed in the Middle, it seems to have two Bellies, rises near the Mam∣my-form Process, and about the middle where it is bow'd correspondent to the winding of the lower Jaw, it is narrow∣ed into a tendonous Body; and thence becoming fleshy again, it is fastned more withinside to the fore and middle part of the Chin, and by drawing the Jaw downward, opens the Mouth; the too extraordinary falling of which Jaw, is also prevented by the Ligament an∣nex'd. VII. The Third Pair, which is lateral,The First Mansory. call'd the First Mansory, or Eating Pair, and proceeding partly with a fleshy, partly with a nervous Original, from the upper Jaw, and the Jugal Bone is joyned with a broad and strong Connexion to the lower Jaw, and through the Diversity of the Fibers, moves it forward, backward and side∣ways, and as it were, turns it round. VIII. The Fourth Pair, call'd theThe second Mansory. other Mansory and Pterygoides, or Wing-like, and the Internal Wing-like, which is thick and short, is produced nervous from the inner Wing-like Pro∣cesses of the Sphoenoides Bone, and be∣coming fleshy, large and thicker, is carried with a broad and strong Ten∣don to the lower and hinder part of the inner side of the lower Jaw, which by drawing upward, assists the Action of the Temple-Muscle; also it brings the Jaw backward when turn'd out∣ward. IX. The Fifth Pair, Pterygoides, orThe exter∣nal Wing∣like. External Wing-like, and seated in the lower Cavity of the Bones of the Tem∣ples, proceeds with a double Original, partly nervous, partly fleshy from the Sphoenoides and external Wing-like Pro∣cess, and after a short Course is inserted into the Neck of the lower Jaw, and the inner Seat of its Head, and moves and brings the Face forward. Besides the foresaid Muscles, the Pair of square Muscles is properly referr'd to the Muscles of the lower Jaw, drawing the Jaw downward, which we have already described among the Muscles common to the Chaps and Lips. CHAP. XXII. Of the Gums, Palate, Uvula and Chaps. I. THE Parts contain'd in theThe Gums. Hollow of the Mouth are various, among which, first occur two Gums, consisting of a sort of Flesh somewhat hard and immoveable, en∣compassing the Teeth like a Breast∣work, and fixing them in their like Trenches. Hence the Gum is called by the Greeks  from , to include or involve, as being that which wraps up and enfolds the Teeth. Hence also a Swelling in the Gums is by the Phy∣sitians call'd . II. The Palate, which is as itThe Palate were fortified with Teeth, by the Greeks called  and , as it were the Heaven of the Mouth, is the upper part of the Mouth, slightly con∣cave like an Arch, hence called Te∣studo Oris, or the Tortois-shell of the Mouth, form'd in the Sphoenoi∣des-Bone, and extended from the Chaps to the Teeth. It consists of Bones and a peculiar glandulous Flesh, or of small Kernels conglomerated toge∣ther, and a thick Tunicle, furnished with many small diminutive Holes, sending forth the Spitly Liquor from the Glandulous Substance of the Palate, in some places full of wrinkles, continu∣ous with the Tunicle that covers the o∣ther parts of the Mouth, whence it is vulgarly said to be common to the Throat and Ventricle, though it has a peculiar Constitution different from o∣ther
Tunicles, in respect of which, it perfects the Sence of Taste, together with the Tongue, and to that purpose is furnished with Nerves from the fourth Pair. The use of the Palate is to perfectIts Use: the Sence of Tasting, with the Assis∣tance of the Tongue; as also to break the Voice and render it more perfect; whence it comes to pass, that those Peo∣ple who have this part eaten away by some unhappy Ulcer, taste but imper∣fectly, and speak with a hoarse and un∣grateful Voice. III. The Uvula, by others call'dThe Uvula Uva, Gurgulio, Columna, Co∣lumella, and Gargareon, is a little ruddy piece of Flesh, spungy, somewhat long, broad above, and ob∣tusely acute below, hanging forward like a Grape from the middle of the Palate near the Passages of the No∣strils into the Mouth. This Bauhinus and some other Anatomists think to be nothing else but the twice doubled Membrane, covering the inner Parts of the Mouth. It is over-spread with a very soft and loose little Skin, and swells and grows longer upon Flegmatic Defluxions, which Distemper is called the Falling of the Uvula. To this Riolanus and Veslingius attri∣bute two Pairs of Muscles, the Internal and External, by which it hangs, and obtains a slight Motion. But that their Opinion is only conjecture; the Sight it self informs us, it being a most diffi∣cult thing to shew any such Muscle in that Part; and for that the Uvula does not want them to hang by, nor for vo∣luntary Motion, which is never observ∣ed in that Part. Moreover Riolanus following Aretaeus ascribes to the Uvula two broad Liga∣ments, not unlike the expanded Wings of Bats, call'd by the Arabians Galsa∣mach. But these, like the foresaid Muscles, are prov'd rather by conje∣cture than demonstration, unless they take the hinder membranous part of the Palate, from whence the Uvula hangs for Ligaments. IV. The use of it is manifold.Its Use. 1. To break in some measure the force of the cold Air breath'd in, from rushing in too suddenly upon the Lungs, to their great dammage. 2. To prevent, least the Humors descending through the upper Parts of the Palate, should fall directly in too great a quantity into the Larynx; but that only when the Uvula is forc'd back by swallowing, that then they should be turn'd toward the Gullet and fall into it. 3. To hinder the Drink from running back into the Nostrils. 4. It contributes also something to the Tone of the Voice, though Fallopi∣us and others deny it: For though the Modulation of the Voice be ordered in the Larynx, yet the wider or narrower Exit of that modulated Voice, contri∣butes very much to the Tone of it. Which is apparent from hence, that if a Man sing with his Spectacles upon his Nose, the Voice will be another thing, then when he sings with Nostrils open. So also if the Uvula by missing the Voice grows harsh and ungrateful, as is apparent in such as have had their U∣vulas eaten away by Ulcers. 5. Fallopius believes the primary use of it is to moisten the Epiglottis and the Larynx, by distilling upon them some certain lympid Liquor. V. The Chaps are improperly takenThe . for the whole Gaping of the Mouth; properly they denote the hinder most and lower space, where the Extremi∣ties of the Tongue and rough Artery, and the Holes of the Nostrils descend∣ing through the hinder Parts of the Palate, meet together, which is con∣spicuous upon opening the Mouth and depressing the Tongue, and by the Greeks is call'd , by Galen al∣so , and by Hippocrates, , by a Metaphor from the Narrowness; because an Isthmus properly signifies a narrow Tract of Land between two Seas: and so the Uvula in the Chaps, like a Neck of Land hangs in the mid∣dle gaping of the Chaps; however they do not call the Uvula the Isthmus, but the gaping of the Chaps it self; whereas the Name ought to belong to the Uvula. Nicholas Stenonis has observ'd in a Calves Head under the Tunicle, a lit∣tle piece of Flesh composed of glandu∣lous Bunches, full of Lmphatic Vessels. VI. The use of the Chaps, is toThe Use. transmit and swallow those things which are taken in at the Mouth, which is perform'd oy three Pair of Muscles, common to the Pharynx with the Gullet, and described in the Description of the Gullet,
CHAP. XXIII. Of the Hyoides-Bone. BEfore we enter upon the Description of the Tongue, we are to say some∣thing of the Hyoides-Bone, which is laid under it as a Prop, for the firmer Structure of the Tongue, and to facili∣tate its Motion. I. The Hyoides-Bone consists ofThe Hyoi∣des-Bone. several Bones, which being joyn'd to∣gether, resemble the Greek Letter V. or A. and hence also is called the Upsi∣loides, or the Lambdoides, though it be more like an Upsilon than a Lambda, in regard it is not carried about with an acute, but an obtuse and somewhat round Semicircle. It consista chiefly of three Bones, very eldom of Five, Seven, Nine or Eleven, of which, the middlemost exceeding the rest in bigness, large, broad, with∣outside gibbous, withinside somewhat hollowed, to which the other two are joyned like Horns. But if it consist of more then three Bones, those are Gristly. Riolanus has these Observations touching the Hyoides-Bone. But the Hy∣oides-Bone, says he, in Women appears more slender and thin, and consists of fewer Bones, whose room the Suspensory Pro∣ductory Ligaments supply. Then you shall observe that only the Epiglottis is received into the Cavity of the Hyoides, and that the Tongue rests upon the upper side of the Basis. To these little Bones are joyned four small Gristles, which prove sometimes bony themselves. Two of these joyn to the Basis of the middle Bone, re∣sembling both in form and bigness a Grain of Wheat. Two others are pla∣ced near the side Bones or Horns, and are fastned with a nervous Ligament to the Pen-resembling Appendix. And so the Hyoides, upon the sides, adheres to that Appendix, on the forepart to the Target-form'd Gristle of the Larynx, but chiefly to the Tongue, and receives the Epiglottis into its Cavity. II. When the Tongue moves, thisMuscles. Bone also moves, and that by the as∣sistance of eight Muscles, which it has in common with the Tongue. The first Pair call'd Sternothyoides, moves it downward and backward, and rises with a round and fleshy Original from the upper inner Seat of the Bone of the Sternum, and forward ends in the Basis of the Hyoides. The second Pair called the long Co∣racohyoides by the Ancients, rises from the upper side of the Shoulder, near the Coracoides Process, and in the midst of its Body grown slender like a Ten∣don, is carry'd along obliquely under the seventh Muscle of the Head, to the sides of the Hyoides, and draws them obliquely downward. The third Pair slender and round, seated under the Chin, proceeds from the extream Process of the Styliform, with a round Belly, therefore call'd Styloceratoides, and being inserted into the Horns of the Hyoides, moves ob∣liquely upward. The fourth Pair call'd Geniohyoides, drawing directly upward, and some∣what forward, arising with a large and fleshy Original from the inner and lower Seat of the Chin, extends it self to the middlemost Seat of the Hyoi∣des. To these Pairs Fallopius adds two more; viz. A fifth which rising with streight Fibers from the middle and in∣ner part of the Chin, is inserted into the Hyoides. This Pair many confound with the preceeding fourth, and look upon it to be the same; but others number it among the Muscles of the Tongue. The Sixth, which he says constitutes two little pieces of Flesh, bearing the Resemblance of Muscles, which rising from the same Chin, seem to be some part of them intermix'd with the first that moves the Tongue; but proceed∣ing farther to the lower Parts, are in∣serted into the sides of the Hyoides, and draw that Bone to the Chin. CHAP. XXIV. Of the Tongue, the Salival Chan∣nels, the Spittle, Tast and Sa∣vor. See Table XVI. THE Tongue, by the Greeks call'd  or , by the Latins Lingua, is an Organic Part, the In∣strument both of Tast and Speech, and the assistant for the swallowing of Meat
and drink, seated in the Mouth under the Palate. I. It is oblong, broad, of a Mode∣rateThe Shape. bigness answerable to the Mouth, and toward the Root of a remarkable thickness, but somewhat thinner to∣ward the Lip. II. The Substance of it is peculiar toIts Sub∣stance. its self, fleshy and soft cover'd with a double Membrane; the one outermost and thick, the other innermost and thin. III. The Exterior Membrane thatThe Exte∣rior Mem∣brane. overspreads the upper Surface of the Tongue, very porous, and in Men moderately smooth, but in most Brutes, especially fourfooted Beasts, very rough, and in the Superficies, divided as it were into two Parts, with a small running along in the middle all the length of it. This Membrane is thought to pro∣ceed from the thick Meninx, and is said to be common, to the Mouth, the Palate, the Gullet and the Larynx. But in regard it does not overspread the whole Tongue every way, but only ex∣tends it self along the Superficies, as far as the Root and Jaws, and does not reach either to the lower part of the Tongue, nor to the Gullet, but is only united to the inner Tunicle, and that it is apparent that it is a thicker Sub∣stance of another nature in the Tongue and the Palate; it is clearly evident, that it has no community with the Membrane of the Gullet and Larynx. For though it has not that thickness and roughness in Men, which is seen in Brutes, however it is thicker, and differs much from that which enfolds the La∣rinx and Gullet withinside, which diffe∣rence is apparent, for then when it is dry'd up in burning Fevers and other Distempers, or by excess of Drought, and afterwards comes to be moistned again, it is separated and falls off three times thicker then the Membranes of the Larynx and Gullet. Moreover, as the Tunicles of the Eyes, Ears and No∣strils differ very much from other Mem∣branes, nay, from one another, though we believe they proceed from the Me∣nix's; so this Tunicle of the Tongue, together with the Tongue and nervous little Paps, being to contribute some Service to the Organ of Tast, ought of necessity to have some Constitution be∣yond other Membranes, in respect of which it may be enabled to contribute some specific Service to the Tast. Nei∣ther is it that we think the specific Ser∣vice here requir'd is due to any specific Nerves, or specific Spirits, in regard we have already prov'd that there is nothing of Specific perform'd in the Parts upon that ground. This Membrane is very Porous, and such it ought to be, to the end it may be able to send through the said Pores in some part of it, to the nervous little Paps that lye under it, those things which being to be tasted are laid upon it, and stir'd by the Motion of the Tongue. The Tast of which things, by reason of its obtuse Sence of Feel∣ing, least it should be injur'd by sharp and acrimonious Gustables and Tacti∣bles, it does not of it self so quickly perceive. The very same Membrane in Cows, Sheep, and other such like Brutes, much thicker than in Men, is rough in the upper Region; out of which grow forth several little sharp pointed Bodies somewhat grisly, of an unequal length, disposed in a kind of order, moderately bow'd, and extended to∣ward the Root, covered with a slender Tunicle taken from the Membrane from whence they proceed, which cause that Roughness. Which little Bodies, however in the more rising part of the Tongue toward the Root, are much fewer, much less, and in some none at all to be seen. Such little Bodies of so large a bigness are not to be found in the Tongues of Men, which is the reason they are not so rough. Yet in the Year 1660. upon the Dissection of one, who in his Life-time had been a Cap∣tain of High-way-Men, I found that Roughness very observable. For the upper Superficies of his Tongue, was as it were stuck with little Strings, that look'd like a kind of Down. Now the reason why in Brutes these Grisly Bo∣dies are longer and much bigger than in Men, and why they stand with their Points towards the Chaps, seems to be, because the Nourishment which they take with their Heads down upon the Earth, may be the more easily retain'd, and not easily slip out of their Mouths, while Man that stands upright, may without trouble hold his Food in his Mouth; and therefore a mo∣derate roughness is sufficient for the retention of his Food. IV. But the foresaid use of theseThe seun∣dary Use. small Grisly bodys, it seems to be only the Secundary use, as that which does not require so large a furniture
of little Bodies; but what is the primary use is much disputed among the Learned. For in regard they are not hollow like Straws, which could never be discover'd by any Microscope, they cannot discharge either Spittle or any o∣ther humor either into the Tongue or the exterior Parts of the Tongue, as some have imagin'd, the most acute Malpi∣gius believes that these Bodies, by the motion of the Tongue, make a certain Compression upon the Kernels in the Palate observ'd by Stenonis, and that so Spittle and Slime is squeez'd out of them, to moisten the Tongue and the Mouth; and therefore that Nature has gi∣ven to Brutes that feed upon hard and raw food, not only a thicker covering of the Palate, but has also order'd these grisly bodies growing in the Tongue to be harder and longer, that by continual rub∣bing the upper Parts they may more strenuously squeeze out the moisture; but in men has made the same Bodies more lank and flexible, where the Stru∣cture of the Palate is more loose and soft, and therefore requiring a slighter Compression to squeeze and force out the Moisture. Moreover, he thinks it may be questioned, and that not with∣out reason, whether the glutinous roots of these Bodies, lying under a thick covering, which are to be in∣serted in the holes already menti∣oned, while standing there side ways they force the little Paps, do not cause a Compression of the humid Body inward, to the end the velli∣cation and motion may be more vio∣lent. V. Under the said thick Mem∣braneThe gluti∣nous sub∣stance. a certain glutinous substance shews it self, like a thick Net cheifly extended through the upper part of the Tongue, full of conspicuous holes, a∣mong which innumerable little Passages of various Figures, gaping toward the outer Parts are discover'd with a Mi∣croscope. Which holes answer to sin∣gular grisly horns, resting upon the said Exterior Membrane. Malpigius also has observ'd the traces of the same glutinous Substance in the Palate and lower Cheeks. Some have imagin'd that the Sense of Tasting lyes in this glutinous substance; as the Sight in the Net-like-Tunicle; others that a certain Spitly moisture is collected in it, and sent forth through the Pores of the thick covering, into the Tongue to moisten it. For my Part I believe it conduces to receive the Savoury Moi∣sture, and to retain it for the same time, that it may stick the closer to the little Paps, and more conveniently alter them by their Asperity, to the end they may be the better distingui∣shed. VI. Next to the said Gluti∣nousThe Pap∣like-Body. substance, lying hid under the covering of the Tongue, a certain Body appears, which Laurentius Bellinus has call'd the Fleshy crust, but has given it no peculiar Name, for that it has no similitude either to a Membrane, or a Muscle, or a Nerve, or a Kernel, either in color, structure, or substance. This Body, as it appears in a Cows Tongue, Malpigius has accu∣rately describ'd. After due examination, says he, of this glutinous substance, there appears a Nervous Pap-like Body, yellowish and whitish, running chiely along the whole Portion of the upper superficies, like a Membrane, and of a considerable height. In this inner superficies, where it is fa∣sten'd to the Flesh under the Tongue, it seems smooth and equal, besides certain Nervous connexious strew'd between the Fleshy fibers of the Tongue, to which it grows; in the outer part it is unequal, for it bunches forth with Nervous little Paps dispos'd in wonderful Order. These in a Cow, a Goat and a Sheep, and also in Men, as to shape and bigness differ three maner of ways; some are bigger, chiely seated at the sides of the top of the Tongue between those that are below: in the superficies of the upper part of the Tongue, they are dispos'd in a Square: In the upper Region where the Tongue looks white, they are observ'd to be very few: in the sides of the Basis there are some and more remarkable. These in Substance and Shape seem to resemble the Horns which Snails thrust out and pull in. Only they have a higher Body, which having past the Slimy Substance, termi∣nate in a round little head which is plac'd in a certain Cavity of the exterior Mem∣brane where it grows thin. They take their rise from a nervous and Pap-like Body, observing the same Continuity, the same accidents, and manner of Substance in both: only this they have peculiar to themselves, that in the basis, there is a Nervous shooting forth, to which they grow. Next to these succeed more nume∣rous little Paps of another Order; for as many horns as cover the Tongue without side, so many Nervous little Paps of this sort are to be found within side. These
arising from the common Papillary Body, raise themselves to a moderate height, and send forth farther Nervous out-lets from the extream part of the head; which enter the Cavities cut out for them, and meet the roots of the horns: round about these innumerable Paps are to be discern'd, rising from the same place, and of the same height, but more slender, and re∣sembling the shape of a Cone, entring their proper Cavities, form'd in the mu∣cous substance already prepar'd, and ter∣minating at length toward the outermost Membrane. About the root of the Basis, the Nervous little Paps bunching forth where the horns are seated, alter their shape, and being more obtuse, by and by more round and flat, the most remark∣able of which are not much unlike those which are observ'd at the root of the Teeth withinside of the Cheeks. You must understand however, that the same Papillary Body, and both the Coverings underneath, though very slender, are to be form'd in the Palate, and inside of the Cheeks; with this difference that in these places the little Dugs bunch forth langer, and resembling a Conic figure: Near which are observ'd Spittle-evacuating Vessels inserted into the Kernels under∣neath, between which are scatter'd very small and Nervous little Duggs. VII. Thus far Malpigius, who conclud∣ing writes, that the Original of this Teat-like Body is very uncertain. Columbus believes that it comes from the hard Meninx, after it has pass'd the Scull, together with the rest of the Membranes of the inner part of the Mouth: But Malpigius conjectures that it takes it's source from the Ner∣vous shootings forth, dilated into the Membrane, as it happens in other Sen∣sory Organs. The Substance of the Tongue, espe∣ciallyFibers. in Men is full of slender fibers; so that because of their slenderness some ignorant Anatomists have ima∣gin'd that the Tongue has no fibers at all. In the Tongues of Cows, Sheep and ma∣ny other Bruits of the larger size, these fibers are very conspicuous; which we have also seen in the Tongues of Men, as well raw as boyl'd. Toward the root of the Tongue these fibers are in∣terlarded with something of Fat; and in the sides of the Basis, Malpigius has observ'd small Kernels like Millet-seed to be intermix'd with them. These fibers are intermix'd one a∣mong another after so various and obscure a manner, that it is a diffi∣cult thing to demonstrate their order in situation. Riolanus observing them so con∣trary one to another and so variously in∣terwoven; nevertheless these two Bodies, says he, seem to be furnish'd with oblique, transverse and streight fibers, which are so mingl'd one among another, that it is impossible to find out what sort of fibers they are. But what Riolanus could not find out Stenonis believes he has attain'd. Front the Top to the Basis, we may, says he, distinctly demonstrate the whole Order of the Fibers, if heed be taken. The outer∣most fibers, next the upper Superficies, ob∣serve a direct course of the Fibers all the length of the Tongue: of the rest that are in the middle of the Body, there are only two sorts. One descending from the up∣per superficies of the Tongue: another in men run back from the middle towards the sides. These two sorts are dispos'd into two Orders, receiving each other alternately: of which two Orders one scarce amounts to the thickness of one Fiber. Thus far Stenonis: but for my part, to confess the truth, I have long Study'd these Fibers, but impatient of the Labour I'gave it over. VIII. But because the Tongue isThe Moti∣on of the Tongue. interwoven with these innumerable Fibers, and is furnish'd with va∣rious Muscles, there arises a questi∣on, by what manner of motion the Tongue, whether by its own Fibers, or Muscles or by both. The last O∣pinion pleases most Anatomists. Casse∣rius calls the Tongue not a Muscle, but a Musculous part. It cannot be says he, but that the Tongue must move by its own proper motion, and that vo∣luntary too, for it is mov'd after so many manners, and so many parts, that to as∣sert its whole motion to be perform'd by Muscles alone is very ridiculous. There∣fore I do not call it a Muscle, but a Mus∣culous flesh, as participating something of the nature of Flesh, and being between a Muscle and a glandulous Flesh. Laurentius Bellinus, considering its wonderful variety and rapidness of Mo∣tion, says that it is a Contexture of Muscles meeting together, besides Fi∣bers. Riolanus following the Opinion of Averrhois, besides the Motion by Muscles, ascribes to it another proper Motion, and reproves Andreas Lau∣rentius, for not observing it. For that the Tongue in swift and continual Speech is mov'd of it self, and that
the Motion of the extremity so ex∣treamly swift is not caus'd by the Muscles, after so many varieties, but only that the Muscles make the Mo∣tion more violent. Spigelius observing such a vast number of Fibers absolute∣ly pronounces it to be a Muscle. But not one of these famous Men seems to have observ'd, that so many several, variously overlay'd one upon another, and interwoven Fibers, with so many contrary courses can supply the action of the Muscles, which is attraction seeing that the drawing of one Fiber, would be hindred by the operation of the o∣ther; nor that in such a contrariety of oppositions and impositions, there can be any, that can do the Tongue the service of a Muscle. Since therefore Fi∣bers only do not shew any part to be a Muscle, for that the Stomack, Guts, Urine and Gall-bladders are furnish'd with all sorts of Fibers conspicuous and numerous, yet are not to be accounted among the number of Fibers. The swiftness and variety of motion does not prove the Tongue to be a Muscle, but rather to be rapidly mov'd by Muscles, which appears from hence, because the motion is voluntary. Which sort of motion is only perform'd by the Muscles, in that part which is no Mus∣cle of it self. We move the extremity of the Tongue at pleasure, but it is by the help of Muscles, whose Tendons send out their little Fibers to that part. Nor does the swiftness of Motion prove any thing for the contrary Party; forwe may move our Fingers as swift as our Tongue, and yet no man will question the motion of the Fingers by Muscles. 1. No Muscle is made for it self, but for another part of it self immove∣able, but if the Tongue were a Mus∣cle, it ought to be made for it self, seeing it is inserted into no Body to move it. 2. No Muscle is inserted into another Muscle to move it, but other Muscles are inserted into the Tongue, therefore it cannot be a Muscle. IX. Arantius will needs have theNo Kernel. Tongue to be a Kernel, but his proofs are not worth refuting. However Riolanus seems in some measure to agree with him, taking it from Galen, who says that the Nature of the Tongue is glanda∣lous, and almost of the same temper. But in regard the shape, temper and use of the Tongue has nothing in common with a Kernel, this Opinion is so rejected X. The hinder Part of the TongueThe Con∣nexion. is joyn'd to the Hyodes, the Larynx, the Chaps, the Tonsile and the Top of the Gullet, the fore Part being free from all Connexion. In the lower Superficies it has Muscles fasten'd to it by means of which it is ty'd to the lower Jaw. And least it should move beyond it's bounds, it is joyn'd to the Parts underneath it with a strong Liga∣ment. The extremity of this Liga∣ment, being somewhat loose, is call'd Frenulum or the Little Bridle; the over shortness whereof hinders the free and convenient motion of the Tongue, espe∣cially in Infants. For which reason the Physitians are forc'd to order the cut∣ting of it betimes; which Section though it be easy, yet great care is to be taken of cutting the adjoyning Nerves that lye under the Tongue, which may cause a suddain Convulsion of the Tongue. XI. It Entertains two large Arte∣riesIts Vessels. from the Carotides, and sends forth two Veins to the inner Branch of the external Iugulars, called the Frog Veins, remarkably conspicuous under the Tongue, from whence we often take away Blood in Distempers of the Chaps. XII. It admits two Pairs ofNerves. Nerves. Of which the thinnest that proceeds from the fourth Pair, is car∣ry'd along quite through the Substance of the Tongue, and thrusts its extre∣mities into the Nervous little Dugs, affording also some little branches to the Nerves, powring forth Spirits to per∣fect the Sence of Tasting. The others, which is thicker, proceeding from the Seventh Pair, enters the Muscles of it, and by means of the Animal spirits gives it the faculty of Motion. Note here, that besides that the Tongue is divided into the right and left side, by a Line running through the middle of it, none of these Vessels are carry'd from the right to the left, nor from the left to the right side of the Tongue. Whence Galen pronounces this Instrument to be twofold like the Organs of Sence and Hearing. This Duplicity of the Tongue is chiefly conspicuous in Serpents, Vipers, Lizards, Sea-Calves, and other such little Crea∣tures, whose Tongues seem to be di∣vided into two or three Parts, there∣fore call'd sometimes double, some∣times treble Tongu'd.
XIII. Upon the hinder part ofThe Epi∣gloits. the Tongue, rests the Epiglottis Grisle, otherwise call'd Lingula or the little Tongue. vid. l. 2. cap. 15. XIV. At the Root of the TongueThe Tonsils. appear two small Kernels call'd Tonsillae of which, vid. l. 2. cap. 15. Also a peice of Flesh consisting of seve∣ral small Kernels and Fat, seated un∣der the Chin and Tongue, between the Hyoides and the Muscles of the Tongue; a glandulous piece of Flesh like which takes up the whole Region of the inside of the Cheeks; which small Kernels or Kernelly-pieces of Flesh gather together the Spittly Humor to moisten the Tongue and Mouth, and discharge it as well through the Lymphatic or Sa∣lival Vessels, as through the small Holes of the thicker Membrane of the Mouth, especially when the Mouth and Tongue move. And therefore when the Nourishment is chew'd in the Mouth, the Liquor press'd out of these small Kernels by the masticated food partly of its own accord flows in greater quantity into the Mouth, to be mix'd with the Nourishment toward Fermen∣taceous preparation, and to render the swallowing more easie. But in time of sleep when the Mouth does not move, it ceases: which is the reason that they who sleep with their Mouths open are generally a dry for want of this Li∣quor. XV. The Tongue is mov'd everyIts Mus∣cles. way, partly by the assistance of those Muscles, which it has in common with the Hyoides; partly by Five proper Pairs of Muscles. The first by the Ancients call'd Styloglossum, from it's Pen-resembling Appendix, arising with a narrow and ten∣dinous Original, is inserted about the middle into both sides of the Tongue, and both raises it and carries it inward. But about the Root of the Tongue it so intermixes its Fibers with the Fibers of the Muscles, moving the Tongue downward, that you would think the Pair to be united with them. This Pair in Men is slender, but in Cows double, fleshy and thick. The Second Pair call'd Basioglossum, and Upsitoglossum proceeding from the Basis of the Hyoides ends in the middle of the Tongue, and depresses it by draw∣ing it in a streight Line inward. XVI. The Third Pair which is call'dGenioglos∣sum. Genioglossum, rises in the inner seat, about the middle of the Chin, and being inserted into the lower part of the middle of the Tongue, thrusts it forth. This, as also the preceeding Pair has several little Lines in it, as if they were several small Muscles. Ve∣slingius reckons this Pair among the Muscles of the Hyoides, and asserts them to be inserted into the Basis of that Bone. XVII. The Fourth Pair rising fromCerato∣glossum. the Horns of the Hyoides, and thence call'd Ceratoglossum, is inserted into the sides of the Tongue, where it mixes its Fibers, with the Fibers of the First Pair, and moves the Tongue if both act together, directly down∣ward toward the inner Parts: but on∣ly one or the other act at a time, it moves the Tongue to the right or left side. XVIII. The First Pair call'd My∣loglossum,Myloglos∣sum. rises at the sides of the lower Jaw, at the Roots of the hin∣der Grinding Teeth, and is inser∣ted under the Tongue into the Liga∣ment of the Tongue, and draws it downward. XIX. The Muscles being remov'd,The little Kernels. besides the two oblong and round little Glandules lying near the be∣gining of the Gullet, several other little fleshy Kernels, as it were a knot of several little Kernels, furnish'd with Lympatic Vessels, small Arteries and Veins, and diminutive Fibers of Nerves, which are seated under the Tongue about the Bridle, affording continual moisture to the Tongue, from the small Lymphatic Vessels. XX. Moreover on each side, fromThe Spittle Channels under the Tongue. a great and remarkable Kernel, re∣sembling the Sweet-bread of a Man, seated above the middle Tendon be∣tween the Flesh of the double belly'd Muscle, proceeds a certain Channel, from its use call'd the Salivary Chan∣nel. This Channel, though not unknown to the Ancients, was lost again for many Ages, till of late again discover'd by Glisson and Wharton; whence Mo∣dern Anatomists ascribe the Discovery of it to them. But that these Channels were known to the Ancients, appears out of Avicent, who thus describes them; Under the Tongue are two Orifices, both which a small Bodkin enters, and they are the Fountains of Spittle, which reach to the Glandulous Flesh, which is in the Root of it, and are call'd the Generatives of the Spittle; and those two Fountains are call'd the
Powrers forth of the Spittle, and preserve the Dew that moistens the Tongue. The same is apparent from Galen in these Words. Because the Tongue being dry, becomes more slow in its Motion, therefore Nature wonderfully provides for it, to prevent its being injur'd by any such An∣noyance. For she has placed two fleshy little Kernels in the Larynx, like a Spunge, one of each side, which she has also done in the Tongue. From those Kernels adjoyning to the Larynx, certain Channels discharge the Spitly Humor through the oblique and lower Passages into the Parts under the Tongue, moistning the Tongue it self: Which Haly also and Carpus both ob∣serve. XXI. Both these Channels, in formSubstance and big∣ness. and substance are not altogether unlike the Veins, but somewhat more trans∣parent, with a Hollowness, which in Men and Calves admits a small Bod∣kin, but in Dogs is very streight, though in some larger, in some nar∣rower. XXII. One of each side rises fromSituation and Origi∣nal. the said Kernel, with many small Be∣ginnings meeting together in one Channel. Ascending obliquely upward from the Kernel, it is carried almost as far as the middle of the Jaw, between two small Kernels there seated; which having passed by it proceeds streight forward near the Nerve of the seventh Pair, which at length it passes by, and so terminates somewhat toward the fore∣parts, distant about a Fingers breadth from the Teeth, and opens into a pe∣culiar Kernel (called the Frog-Kernel, or Hypoglottis) covered with a thin and porous Membrane, which is seated un∣der the Tongue, one upon each side of the Bridle, near the Frogg veins be∣tween the Flesh, which joyns the Tongue to the neighbouring Parts, and the Kernels under the Root of the Tongue. These two Kernels, are as it were two soft small Spunges, sucking in the spitly Humor from the first Channel. In Brutes, by reason of the length of the Jaw, the Chan∣nel is longer. XXIII. If in Men it happen that theThe Frogg∣distemper. Pores of the Membrane under the Tongue are too much close, or that the Spitly Liquor be so condensed, that it cannot pass through the Pores, and flow into the Mouth, then the Collect on of much Spittle causes a Swelling un∣der the Tongue, which the Physitians call the Frogg-Distemper, which in∣creasing, causes a great Obstruction in Speech and Swallowing, but is easily cured by Incision of the Membrane under the Tongue. XXIV. Besides, the said Spittle-Chan∣nels,Stenonis's Ducts. there are yet other two of each side, one shew'd in the Anatomy-Theatre at Leyden, by Io. Van-Horn, Anno 1661. which he then call'd the Stenonic Chan∣nels from Nicholas Stenonis the Dane, the first Discoverer. XXV. They derive their OriginalTheir Ori∣ginal. from a large Kernel, seated at the Root of each Ear, which Stenonis calls the conglomerated Parotides; from which, being dissected many little Branches spring forth, and are discerned running forth into these Channels. In these Channels, Stenonis observes, besides the proper Tunicle, several ner∣vous Strings embracing the middle Channel. Sometimes it happens that these Sali∣valA Physical Observati∣on. Vessels about the Cheeks being bruised, the Lymphatic Salival Liquor flowing in great abundance from the Wound, hinders the closing of it. Thus a Noble-man of Nimmeghen being wounded in the middle of his Cheek with a Drinking-Glass, thrown at his Head, the Wound was almost closed by the Chyrurgion, but for a long time a Lymphatic Salival Humor, weeping from a little Hole in the middle of the Cheek, by reason that the Salival Channel, then unknown to the Chy∣rurgion, was burst by the Blow, kept the Wound open for two Years, which at length was cur'd by my Advice, up∣on the Application of an actual Caute∣ry, which stopt the flowing of the Sali∣val Humor. Aquapendens also tells us of an Accident of the same nature, which we also saw in a certain Cook at Utrecht. XXVI. These Salival Vessels al∣readyOther Sa∣lival Ves∣sels. describ'd, are more conspicuous. But besides these, there are a great many others of lesser note in the Mouth, especially in the Palate and Cheeks, which have hitherto lain hid invisible; but the Passage of the Spit∣tle from those Parts teaches Us, that the Spittle distils from several small Kernels seated within the Mem∣brane through some such little Vessels, or the Pores of the surrounding Mem∣brane. Through the closing of which Pores, the Salival Liquor being detain∣ed within the Membrane, many times little Swellings arise without Pain. Sometimes in the inside of the Cheeks, sometimes in the Palate of the Mouth,
which either break of themselves, with much Spitting, or else are opened with a Chyrurgions Instrument. XXVIII. Des Cartes seems to haveDes Car∣tes his O∣pinion. been ignorant of these Vessels, and therefore deduces the Original of Spitle from the Stomach, and says, that cer∣tain Particles of Arterious Blood fall into the Stomach and Guts, where they do the Office of Aqua-fortis, in assiting the Concoction of the Nourishment, from which, because they are very hot, certain Vapors ascending through the Gullet into the Mouth, thicken there into Spittle. But in regard that the Sa∣lival Juice manifestly descends from the Head and Kernels, and whereas in a great Heat of the Body, hot Blood flows to the Stomach and intestines in greater quantity, and yet the Mouth is not for all that the more moistned, when dry and parch'd up, when at that time the greater quantity of Vapors ascending to the Mouth, should cause the more moisture in the Mouth; whereas also, whatever ascends from the Stomach, causes rather Puking and Vomiting, which never happen in the increase of Spittle; and lastly, seeing that in cold and flegmatic Persons, in whom the Arterious Blood is colder, and flows in less quantity to all the Parts, and con∣sequently into the Stomach, which is the reason that fewer Vapors ascend from the Stomach to the Mouth, and yet such Persons abound in Spittle, all these things fully demonstrate, that the Opinion of Des Cartes touching Spittle, is but a Fiction. XXIX. It remains therefore unque∣stionable,The true Original of the Sa∣liva. that the Salival Liquor does not ascend through the Oesophagus; but is discharg'd into the Mouth through the aforesaid Salival Vessels. But in regard the Liquor of those Vessels is carry'd in a very great quantity to the Mouth; the Question is, out of what Vessel that Moisture is separated and carry'd to the said Kernels of the Paro∣tides and small Kernels, from thence to be discharged through the Salival Ves∣sels into the Mouth? Wharton asserts, that it flows out of the Nerves. But in regard they are not hollow enough to give Passage to so great a quantity o Liquor, this Opinion cannot be true. Some would bring it from the Chyle∣bearing-Vessels. But in regard those Vessels do not run out so far; and be∣cause that the Chylus were it carried thither, might be concocted to a grea∣ter Perfection, but not be chang'd into another less nourishing, or more fer∣mentaceous Humor; this Opinion also stands upon no ottom. Deusingius be∣lieves it is discharg'd out of the Lym∣phatic Vessels, and so comes into the Mouth. Which Opinion, though some∣thing more probable; but because the Lymphatic Vessels do not pour their Juice into the Kernels, but draw it from thence to be carry'd to other Parts, neither can this Opinion be true. Be∣sides, there is no question, but that the Lymha and the Spittle, though they differ in thickness, have the same Ori∣ginal both from the Blood; and there∣fore seeing this Liquor cannot be sepa∣rated from the veiny Blood, as  that which flows from the Kernels and other Parts, it remains, that it must be separated from the Arterious Blood; for that the Arteries, as they pour forth nourishing Blood into all the Parts, so likewise into the Kernels; the more saltish Salival Part of which, apt for the Nourishment of the Kernels, through the mixture of the Animal Spirits flowing through the little Nerves, is separated from the rest of the Parti∣cles, and in them is concocted some∣what after a specifical manner, and far∣ther prepar'd, and the Overplus of their Nourishment having obtain'd a kind of slight sowrish Quality in the Glan∣dules, flows through the Salival Vessels into the Mouth. And indeed you may discern certain Arteries in these Kernels gaping into the Kernels with small di∣minutive Holes, and through those dis∣charging a serous Liquor into the Glan∣dules. And this Opinion is confirm'd by great Salivations, whether spontane∣ous or provok'd at what time such a vast quantity of Spittle is discharg'd, which could never be supplied by the Nerves, or any other Vessels, but the Arteries. XXX. Now then Spittle is a Li∣quorThe  of Spittle. slightly Fermentaceous, Serous and Lympid, separated from the Ar∣terious Blood in the Parotides, and various Kernels and glandulous Ca∣runcles, and discharged into the Mouth through the Salival Vessels and other Salival Passages. XXXI. Concerning the QualitiesThe Qua∣lities of Spittle. of Spittle, we find but little written by others, which nevertheless if dili∣gently considered, sufficiently demon∣strate, that it is not a simple Body, but compounded and slippery, less flu∣id than Water, but thicker and more viscous. It derives not its Forthines,
from its self, but from the Air and Tongue. In sound People, it has nei∣ther Savour nor Taste of it self, which in sick People it sometimes acquires, from the bad Temper of the Humors it self, or the mixture of other ill Hu∣mors, and sometimes from the Savor and Taste of the Nourishment re∣ceived. XXXII. It would be a difficultIts strange Compositi∣on. thing to give an exact Accompt of its Composition, which is very wonderful. For it is easily mix'd with all sorts of Nourishment, dry, moist, oyly, salt, sulphury, &c. For it mixes with all things received into the Mouth. And when out of our Bodies, it will mix with Quick-silver; whereas other more simple Heterogeneous Humors, Water, Spirits, Oyls, Salts, and other mixed Humors will not associate, which Salt will do, and not only mix with, but unite them all together. So that it seems to be the universal Internal Men∣struum, by means of which, all things receiv'd into the Mouth, are united to∣gether, and descend with it to the Sto∣mach, to promote a more exact disso∣lution of the swallowed Substances. Whence Francis de le Boe Sylvius con∣jectures, that it contains in it self much Water, somewhat of volatil Spirit, least of Laxivious Salt, with a very small quantity of Oyl and Acid Spirit, mixed and tempered one with ano∣ther. XXXIII. As to its Use, it isIts Use. manifold and very remarkable. 1. Being mixed with the Meat chew∣ed in the Mouth, by its slippriness it facilitates Swallowing, which can hard∣ly be done without it, as is apparent in dry Fevers, and other Accidents that cause Drought. 2. It draws from the drier sorts of Meat a sapid Salt, which could never be drawn forth without moisture. 3. It quenches Thirst, which is the reason that they who spit much, are seldom adry. 4. It renders slippery, the inner parts of the Mouth, the Chaps, the Organs of Speech, and the Gullet. 5. In the Stomach it promotes the Fermentation of the Nourishment re∣ceiv'd; nay, it is their primary Ferment, containing all things in it self to perfect that Fermentation, that is to say, some slight Acidity tempered with a volatil Spirit in a great quantity of Water. Which fermenting power appears from hence, for that if a piece of White-bread chewed and moistned with much Spit∣tle, be mixed with Dow kneaded with Luke-warm-Water, it will cause it to ferment. XXXIV. However, there is someThe Diffe∣rence be∣tween the Saliva and Sputum. difference to be observ'd between Spu∣tum and Salivam; by Sputum, the Phy∣sitians mean that tenacious Humor, the Superfluity of which, becomes trouble∣some in the Mouth, as happens in De∣fluxions of Catarhs, or such as is ge∣nerated by some Corruption of the Spittle, or is coughed up by the Lungs. By Saliva, they understand the natural Liquor, not superfluous in healthy Peo∣ple, nor to be spit out, but necessary for the moistning the Mouth, the Mix∣ture of the Nourishment, and its Pre∣paration and Fermentation for Con∣coction. There is also some difference between Spittle & that Snot which falls down from the Brain through the Sive-like-Bone, and is partly discharged through the Nostrils, partly descends to the Chaps, through the hinder Parts of the Palate. Not that these Humors differ in respect of their Original; but for that the Snot, by reason of its longer stay by the way, obtains another quality besides it, be∣fore it comes to the Mouth, and hence it becomes thicker, more tenacious, yel∣lowish, and sometimes otherwise▪ ill colour'd. Which Qualities neverthe∣less, when it has not, then it differs lit∣tle from the Salival Humor, and moi∣stens, and renders slippety the Chaps, Gullet, and adjoyning Part and being mixed with the Nourishment in the Sto∣mach, promotes Fermentation in like manner as the Spittle. This Liquor, when a Man is in Health, is fluid and thin in the Ventricles of the Brain, not like the Spittle in the Mouth, but al∣most like the Lymphatic Humor con∣tained in the Lymphatic Vessels, and by reason of its being so thin, easily slides down through the small Holes of the Sive-like-Bone, into the spungy Bones of the Nostrils, wherein, if it stay long, by reason of the Passage of the cold Air breath'd in and out, it frequently becomes thick, colour'd and endu'd with other Qualities; as the Lympha gathers out of Lymphatic Vessels near the Liver, and other Vessels near the Cochlear, grow into Gelly through the cold Air, and sometimes becomes yellow, sometimes of another Colour. So that these two Liquors differ little or nothing from the Lympha, and this same Snivel and Spittle may well be call'd the Lympha carried to the Mouth.
XXXV. The primary Action ofThe Action of the Tongue. the Tongue is to taste, for which it seems to be chiefly form'd; the secun∣darv end is for Speech and Swallowing. XXXVI. Tasting, is a Sence byDefinition of Taste. which the gustable or relishing Qua∣lities of relishable Bodies are distin∣guish'd in Moisture by the Organ of Taste, through the Motion of the Tongue and the adjoyning Parts. XXXVII. This Sence many con∣foundDistincti∣on between Taste and Feeling. with Feeling; following the Opinion of Plato, and make it a Spe∣cies of Feeling, but erroneously; for though Feeling conduces to the Organ of Taste, yet Taste and Feeling differ, both as to the Organ and the Object. For the Organ of Feeling is a Mem∣brane; the Organs of Taste are certain nervous little Teats, sprouting out from the second thin Membrane of the Tongue, the like to which are not to be found in the whole Body beside. The Objects of Feeling are all manner of tangible Qualities, hard, soft, cold, hot, &c. The Objects of Tastes, are Relishes. Moreover, the Taste may be lost, yet the Feeling remain entire; thus many sick People can relish nothing of Savour, but they can at the same time feel a Prick or a Burn, or Cold, or the like. For which reason we must conclude, that the Sence of Tasting is a Sence pe∣culiarly distinct from that of Feeling; as the Sence of Sight is perform'd by the Eye, which is endued with the Sence of Feeling, and yet sight is al∣together distinct from Feeling. XXXVIII. From what has been said,No Medi∣um of Taste it is also apparent, that there is no Medium of Tasting: Seeing that Tast∣ing is performed when the relishable Bodies immediately touch the relishing Organ, and hit upon it. XXXIX. The primary Organ ofThe Organ of Taste. Taste, is the Tongue, or some parts of the Tongue. But being composed of various Parts, Flesh, Membranes, Nerves, Kernels, nervous Teats, &c. the Que∣stion is, in which of these the Sence of Taste is seated? XL. The Aristotelics, whom Bau∣hinus,Whether in the Flesh of the Tongue? Veslingius, Deusingius, Bar∣tholine and others follow, affirm it to lye in the fleshy part of the Tongue, which is therefore Spungy and Porous. Partly for the more easie entrance of the tastable Moistures; partly to con∣tain a Specific Liquor for the Perfecti∣on of the Taste. As to perfect the Hearing, there is required an Air with∣in, and an Air without. But in regard the fleshy Parts over the whole Body only feel and distinguish tactible Ob∣jects, never gustable Objects, as bitter Salt, &c. nor so much as feel them as such, shall the Tongue alone, by means of its fleshy Particles, endued with Nerves and Membranes, be able to judg of Tastes likewise? But you will say the Tongue is more spungy then the Heart, Reins, Muscles, and other spungy Parts, and therefore more easily admits the Gustable Humors within its Pores, which the thickness of the other fleshy Parts will not admit: to which I an∣swer, let them view the Tongue more considerately, and they will find the Tongue less spungy than the muscly Flesh. Besides, there is no Sense in the Pores, but in the Substance it self of the fleshy Parts that are sensible. Hence▪ when a salt or bitter Sweat, as in the Jaundice, passes the Pores, and twitches their Substance more or less, they feel it indeed in their Substance, as soft or painful, but not as salt or bitter. The Reins and Lungs are also loose and spungy, wherefore are not they also endued with the Gift of Tasting? XLI. Others, with Laurentius,Whether in the Mem∣branes or Nerves? seat the Sense of Tasting in the Mem∣branes of the Tongue. But the Mem∣branes of the Tongue, like all other Membranes, only perceive by feeling what is hard or soft, hot or cold, &c. but they distinguish Savours no more then the Membranes of the Eyes or Ears. And the same reason there is to be given for the Nerves. To say the Nerves and Membranes of the Tongue are of another Nature and Constructi∣on then others, signifies nothing; for that the difference of Construction can produce nothing else, but a more obtuse or quicker Sence of Feeling, but no∣thing of Taste or Judgment of Savors. As to the Blood-bearing Vessels, there is no thought that the Taste should lye in them. XLII. Wharton believes it lies inWhether in the Ker∣nels? the Tonsils, others, in all the Ker∣nels seated in the Mouth and round about the Tongue. But in regard the Taste is most accurate at the Tip of the Tongue, remote from the Tonsils and other Kernels, and more dull at the Root of the Tongue, where the Ton∣sils and many other Kernels lye; and seeing that the Taste is a peculiar acute Sence, requiring an acute Specific Sen∣sory,
whereas the Glandules are dull of Sence, and contain nothing for the per∣fection of Taste, nor ever were observ'd to distinguish Savors, I see not how this Opinion can be defended. XLIII. The last things to be consi∣dered,Whether in the Ner∣vous Teats? are the nervous little Paps, into which several small Branches of Nerves, rising out of the Sub∣stance of the Tongue it self, are in∣serted and covered with a thin Porous Film, and being endued with a peculi∣ar Substance, I believe the Sence of Taste to be brought to Perfection, by the help of the foresaid porous Pellicle, or slimy fleshy Crust, environing them like a Net, and absolutely affirm it to be true. 1. Because in what part of the Tongue these little nervous fleshy Bags are most numerous, as at the Tip, in the Sides, and upon the Superficies, there the Sence of Tasting is most swift, most acute, and most exact; where they appear less numerous, the Sence of Tasting is more dull; and where there are none at all, as underneath be∣tween the Tip and the Bridle, there is no Taste at all. 2. Because in those parts of the Palate where those Flesh∣baggs lye hid under the thick Mem∣brane, the Taste has its Operation. Which is easily made out, laying a lit∣tle Aloes or Salt, now to one, now to another part of the Tongue, by which you shall easily discern the Difference of the Taste; in one place more quick, in another duller, in another no Taste at all, according as the Places are more or less furnished with Flesh-bags, or want them all together. Besides, if we more diligently inspect the Substance of the Flesh-bags it self, we shall find in it something absolutely specific, which we may admire, but never be able to ex∣plain. XLIV. Nor are we less unable toThe man∣ner of per∣ception of Savors. unfold by what means the Perception and Distinction of Savors is per∣form'd by those little nervous Flesh-Bags, then how their Sight or Hear∣ing are caused by their particular Or∣gans. But then another Question arises, how it comes to pass that one and the same Taste, for Example, Sweet, or Bitter, always offers it self in the same manner. This happens, because the Tastable Salt strikes into the Pores of the little Fibers of those small Flesh∣bags, with its Particles constituted after the same manner, and in the same form, which Impulse, by means of the Nerves, is presently communicated to the Mind. So that as long as those Particles of Salt have the same Propor∣tion of Measure to the little Pores of the small Flesh-bags, they communicate the same Savors. But if the Consti∣tution of the Particles of Salt be alter'd by the Mixture of some sulphury or other Humor, so that the Particles which before were stiff, hard, and pointed, become flexible, soft or round, then the little Flesh-bags and Nerves come to be otherwise affected, whence the Alteration of the Relish, and ano∣ther perception of the Taste. Now the Agitation and Motion of the Tongue, is that which chiefly strikes the Gustable Bodies into the little Flesh-bags, by which Motion being forced into the Flesh-bags, they alter them after a Spe∣cific manner, and imprint the Species of the Relish into them with their sharp Points and slender Asperities, to be com∣municated to the Mind by means of the Nerves. Which Species sometimes fixes within them, when the said Bodies being more violently forced into them, and by reason of the unequal Proporti∣on of the Particles of Salt to the figure of the Pores, cannot be got out or wash∣ed away by the Spittle. XLV. As to the great Disputes whatVarious Opinions about Sa∣vors. Savor is, and wherein it consists, Aristo∣tle affirms it to be nothing else but a certain Quality in determin'd Com∣pounds, arising from the Mixture of the Elements; but what that Savory Qua∣lity is, he leaves in the Dark. In ano∣ther place, he believes it to be something arising from Water and Earth, being mixt together, the Heat of Fire con∣curring. For though Water be of it self insipid, yet it is capable to receive any Relish, and so, as the Fire vari∣ously acts upon that and the Water, the diversity of Savors arises. But in regard that Fire contributes to Water only Heat, Attenuation and Discussion, and Driness and Hardness to the Earth, this Opinion must fall to the Ground. Nor does Galen determine any thing certain concerning this Matter, when he says that Savor is a Water intermix∣ed with some dry Body by the Opera∣tion of Heat. In which Sence, Alste∣dius will have it to be a Mixture of the Watry Humid, with the dry Terrestri∣al. Others alledg that the Stupid qua∣lity is the certain Figure, Magnitude and Motion of the smallest Particles. But seeing they never explain in what things that Figure, Magnitude and Mo∣tion ought to be considered, and how
Savor proceeds from them, they leave the Matter as obscure as they found it. XLVI. Now therefore to deliverWhat Sa∣vor is? our own thoughts, 'tis our Opinion that Savour is not any Specific flow∣ing out of any things, but a certain Specific suffering imprinted by the Asperities of certain things into the Organs of Taste, the Perception and Iudgment of which suffering is the Taste. XLVII. Now we believe, that theWhence the Asperities come? foresaid Asperities and their diver∣sities are to be fetch'd from the Prin∣ciples of the things themselves, as, Salt, Sulphur, Mercury, &c. concern∣ing which, See l. 2. c. 12. XLVIII. The Asperities causing Sa∣vorThe sapi Asperities. consist in Salt, which as it is vari∣ously mix'd, concocted and united with Sulphur or Mercury, the Asperities are greater or lesser, more pointed, stiff, hard, pricking, or more flexible, soft, or smooth: which diversity begets the manifold variety of Savors as the suf∣fering of the Tongue, according to the Asperities of the Salt becomes pleasing or ungrateful. Which is the Opinion of Fracassarus in these Words. Let us conclue, says he, that savors owe their effects to the Figures which are only taken from the corporeal Principles, which in mixt things is chiefly the Salt it self, and from the observ'd figures in Salts we collect this, that Salt is the Fi∣gurative Principle of Savor. XLIX. The differences of Savors fromDifference of Savors. the various figures of salt Atoms Gas∣sendus endeavours thus to demonstrate. By which it comes to pass, says he, that he will not incongruously determine the matter, that round Atoms of a just proportion cause a sweet Savor; the great Figure produces sowre; those of many Angles not orbicular, sharp, acute, conic, bow'd, not thin nor round, prick∣ing; thin and orbicular, with corners and bow'd, biting; with corners bow'd unequal in their sides, salt; round smooth, writh'd, equal in their sides bit∣ter; thin, round and small, fat. L. Now that Savor proceeds onlySavor from Salt. from Salt is apparent by Chimistry. For if Carduus Benedictus, which is bitter, be burnt to Ashes, and a Salt extracted out of them, those Ashes will be alto∣gether insipid; but restore their Salt to them and they will recover their Sa∣vor; but not the bitter Savor which the Carduus had before it was burnt, because the Sulphury particles were consum'd by the fire, and thence the Asperities of the Salt were al∣ter'd. LI. If any one ask me, if Savor. be caus'd by Salt, whence comes the insipidness of any thing which is also perceiv'd by the last? I answer'd, that insippidness is not any thing positive which moves the Taste, being nothing else but a privation of the Salt and con∣sequently of the Savor, and it is vul∣garly said to be perceiv'd by the Taste, as Silence is said to be heard; or dark∣ness to be seen, when there is no light to peirce the Eye. LII. But the Savor which proceedsSavor i communi∣cated by humidity. from Salt is communicated to the fleshy Teats by the means of Humids. For whatsoever things are dry, unless they deposite their salt Asperities in something Humid, loose their savor. This Humid is either the Soporiserous Bodies themselves, Wine, Honey, juices of Herbs and Flowers, &c. Or Water, Ptisans, Broth, Spittle, or any other Liquor, wherein dry things being bruis'd, dissolv'd, boyl'd or macerated, dissolve and discharge themselves of Savory Salt, which then by means of that Hu∣mid may be imprinted into the little fleshy Teats of the Tongue, and per∣ceiv'd by the Taste. LIII. When things Tastable are putHow the Species of Savors are caus'd? into the Mouth and mov'd therein upon the Tongue, then their salt Asperities being prest into the humid, through the Pores of the Tongue fall into the little fleshy Teats, and alter after a Specific manner so or so, ac∣cording to the variety of the figures of the salt particles, and so the seve∣ral sorts of Savor come to be pro∣duc'd, the Idea of which being carry'd to the common Sensory through the little Fibers of the Nerves of the Fourth Pair, inserted into the Tongue, and commicated to the Mind. Thus if the Particles of the Salt are long, hard, pricking or ctting, and fall into the round Pores of the Tongue, then by reason of the disparity of the Figures of the Pores and the Salt difficultly getting in, they cause a pricking trouble, as in acid, bitter and sharp things. But if the Particles of the Salt are soft, flexible or round, then they easily enter the Pores of the little fleshy Teats, and of the
Tongue, and delighting the Tongue cause a grateful relish; as in Sugar, Honey, &c. In the same sence Lucretius says, that the little Atoms of sweet things are smooth and round: of bit∣ter and acid things, poynted and fork∣ed. LIV. The Agitation or stirring ofWhat the Agitation signifies. the Mouth is requisite, to the end the Savor may the better be perceiv'd; though Liquids require a less motion, dry things more vehement, and a longer Agitation. For in the Liquids the savory Salt already dissolv'd, glides more suddainly through the Membrane covering the Tongue into the nervous Teats: But in dry things the salt Par∣ticles adhering to the thicker substance, require longer time for this dissolution and mixture with the Spittle before they can be felt. Besides that by the same stirring the Pores of the Mem∣brane of the Tongue are open'd and dilated, by which means the said salt Particles now adhering to the Liquor, are forc'd upon them by a kind of violence. For without stirring the Mouth the Savor is not so perceptible in liquids as in dry things. For if Salt, Sugar, or Ashes be put upon the Tongue continuing motionless the the Taste will not be so quick; but upon stirring the Tongue the Taste is presently perceiv'd, and the difference proceeding from the diversity of the figures of the Salt, is judg'd of by the Mind. LV. Yet the various figure of theDiversity of the Pores al∣ters the Sa∣vor. Salt alone is not always the Reason of the different sorts of Tastes, seeing that sometimes the different Constitution of the Organ conduces much to it. For the Pores of it in all men, are not al∣ways of the same Figure; but those which are round in some, shall be ob∣long in others, or quadrangular, which will admit the smooth round Particles with some difficulty, but the long and pointed without any trouble. Which is the reason that sweet things are not grateful to all, nor bitter things nause∣ous to others. LVI. But notwithstanding all thatImaginati∣on  the . has been said, we must understand, that the Imagination contributes very much to the gratefulness or dispeasing Relish of the Taste. In regard that some imagin more pleasure from Tastes that please their fancy by pleasing the Organs of Taste, others from such things as strike the Organs of Taste with a kind of sharpness. Thus we see many Peo∣ple delighted with the Taste of Worm∣wood-wine, Vinegar, salted Herrings, though they cause some trouble in the Organs of Taste; others abhor sweet things, not but they that perceive the Tastes such as they are sweet or bitter, &c. but because a moderate sharpness plea∣ses their fancy more than the pleasant∣ness of sweet things. Concerning Speech and Voice, so which the Tongue also mainly contri∣butes, See l. 2. cap. 15.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concering the JOYNTS. CHAP. I. Of the HAND. THE Limbs, by the Greeks call'd , are Members growing to the Bellys, and distinguish'd with Joynts. These are twofold, the upermost commonly call'd Manus the Hands, in Greek , and the lowermost, Pedes or the feet, in Greek . I. Between these Limbs there is requir'dThe propor∣tion be∣tween the Limbs. a convenient Proportion in Men well shap'd; that is, that there should be almost the same Proportion from the Share-bone to the extremity of the Heel, as from the Arm-hole to the top of the middle Finger, I say almost, for that for the most part the Thighs are somewhat longer than the Arms. And the length of the Thighs ought to be the length of the Trunk, measuring from the Share-boe to the top of the Fore∣head. Here Spigelius observes, that they who have long Feet, are most commonly loose in their Body, and therefore strong Purgations are never to be given to such Persons. II. The hands were given to ManThe Hands. for grasping, that being a naked and un∣arm'd Creature, by the assistance of his Reason, he might be able by the help of these Instruments to provide himself not only with one sort of Weapons, Garments and Habitations, but with infinite numbers; and by that means subdue all manner of Beasts, though never so fierce and untam'd. Moreover to the end so divine a Crea∣ture might be enabl'd to commit to writing the Laws of God, the Histories and Transactions of worthy Hero's, the Miracles of God and Wonders of Na∣ture, to paint forth the Ornaments of Heaven and Earth, the Delineations of Arts and Sciences, and other Monu∣ments of his Divinity, therefore two Hands were given him that if the one fail'd, the other might be serviceable to him. III. Now the Hand is an OrganicThe Defi∣nition of the Hand. Part extending from the uper part of the Shoulders to the Extremities of the Fingers. IV. It is divided into the Arm andThe Arm. extream Hand. The Arm Brachium, in Greek  is divided into the Arm strictly so taken and the Elbow. The one reaching from the top of the Shoulder, to the bending of the Elbow; the other from the bnding of the Elbow to the Wrist. V. The hollow under the IoyntThe Arm∣pit.
of the Shoulder is call'd Axilla, or Ala, the Arm-hole covered with Hair. Which hair prevents the Skin from gauling through the continual motion of the Arm. VI. In this Cavity, under a littleThe Axil∣lary Glands Panicle lye conceal'd three considera∣ble Kernels, joyn'd to the divarica∣tion of the Vessels, which being clos'd together seem to make one. These the ancient Physitians thought to be E∣munctories of the Heart. VII. The Elbow, in Latin Cubi∣tus,The Elbow. or Ulna, by Tully is call'd Lacertus, and by the Greeks . VIII. The Hand at the end, beingThe Hands. expanded is simply called Manus, be∣ing clutch'd Pugnus, and the Ioynts of the inner part of the Fingers are call'd Internodia: but being shut the protuberances of the Ioynts are call'd Conditi. The Hand is divided into the Wrist, the space between the Wrist, and the Fingers. IX. The Wrists in Latin Carpus,The Wrist. in the Greek , being next ad∣joyning to the Elbow, consists of eight Bones dispos'd in a double Order, which want their proper Names. X. The space between the Wrists,Meta Car∣pium. call'd Meta Carpium consists of four Bones connex'd with a close and strong Ioynt. XI. The inner part composing theVola & Palma. hollow of the Hand, in Latin Vola Manus or Palma, and the external Part by the Greeks , by the Latins is call'd Dorsum Manus, or the back of the Hand. In the hollow of the Hand several Particulars are to be taken notice of: chiefly the little Mounts, in Greek pro∣perly call'd  and the Lines. XII. The little Mounts are theThe Mounts. more prominent and fleshy Parts of the Hand. The little Mount un∣der the Thumb is call'd the Mount of Mars. That next the Fore-finger, the Mount of Iupiter. That next the Mid∣dle finger, the Mount of Saturn. That next the Ring-finger, the Mount of the Sun: and that next the Little-finger, the Mount of the Moon. XIII. There are many and variousThe Lines. Lines in the hollow of the Hand, not the same nor alike in all men. From whence they that study Palmistry, leaning upon ridiculous and vain Conjecture, are wont to tell the Fortunes of many People, prosperous Matrimony, long Life, numerous Off-spring, Riches and the like, milking the Purses of the cre∣dulous and deceiving their Expecta∣tions. By these People there are chiefly ob∣serv'd fourteen Lines; from the Meet∣ings Inter-sections, crookedness or streightness, &c. of which they gather their Presages. But three they look upon more considerable than all the rest. The Line of Life; the Second running athwart through the middle of the hollow of the Hand, to the Mount of the Moon, and call'd the Liver-line: and the Third call'd the Table-line, or the Line of Venus. XIV. The Fingers, Digiti in theThe Fi∣gures. Greek , are five in number upon each Hand, differing in length and thickness. The first which is the thickest, and equals all the rest for strength, is call'd Pollex, or the Thumb. The Second is the Fore-finger from the use, call'd the Index, or Demonstrator, the Pointer, because it is us'd in the demonstration of things. The Third, or Middle-finger, is call'd Impudicus, Famosus and Obscoe∣nus, the Obsence and Inamous, because it is usually held forth at men pointed at for Infamy, and in derision. The Fourth, the Ring-finger, or Annularis and Medicus, the Physitian's-finger; because that Persons formerly admit∣ted Doctors of Physic were wont to wear a Gold Ring upon that Finger. The Fifth call'd the Little-finger, in Latin Auricularis, or the Ear-finger, for that men generally pick their Ears with it. Every Finger is furnish'd with three Bones knit together with the Gynglymus, to which are joyn'd the Sesamina. As to the length of the Fingers, Rases and Avicen notably observe, that the short∣ness of the Fingers denotes the smalness of the Liver, and consequently from the length of the Finger, the bigness of the Liver. Whether it be true or no, I have not try'd my self, neither have I met with any Anatomists that con∣firm it, however certain it is, that Avi∣cen rejects it as an uncertain Observa∣tion. XV. At the end of the FingersThe Nails. on the outside, grow the Nails, by the Greeks call'd ; of which the hin∣der whitish part is call'd the Root of the
the white Spots are call'd Mendacia, or Lyes, and the hidden Parts under the Nails Cruptae. The Nails are hard, to defend the tender Extremities of the Fingers, which are endued with a most exact Sence of Feeling, and for the Conveni∣ency of Scratching, they are also flex∣ible by nature, to the end they may not easily be broken; and as to their Shape, they are somewhat convex. They are transparent, so that according to the Colour of the Flesh and the Blood underneath, they are either Black and Blew, Red, Pale, Yellow, &c. from which Colors, the Physitians make many Conjectures of Health, or a bad Constitution. The Skin grows about them on the out-side, under lye the Tendons of the Muscles. For which reason, because of the exquisite Sence of the Place, upon any Bruise, the Pain becomes terrible under the Nail. The whole Arm, together with the Hand, consists of Coverings, Mem∣branes, Bones, Ligaments, Muscles, Arteries, Veins and Nerves, which are common to all the Parts of the Body. Such are likewise the inner Cover∣ings, Skin, Cuticles and Fat. The Membranes are Periostiums, Membranes of the Muscles, and Ten∣dons, &c. The Bones are many and various, fasted together with Ligaments, of which, see Lib. 9. C. 17. &c. The Arteries proceed from the Ax∣illary Artery, the banchings forth of which are described, Lib. 6. Chap. 3. There are many Veins in the Hand and Arm, which meet however all to∣gether at the Axillary Vein, and dis∣charge their Blood into it. Of these, three are chiefly remarkable by peculiar Names at the Bending of the Elbow, the Cephalic, Basilic, and Median; which are often opened in letting Blood. Moreover, in the outer part of the Extremity of the Hand, there is one between the Middle and Ring Fin∣ger, call'd by a private Name Salva∣tlla, the opening of which in melan∣choly Distempers, and Quartan Agues, is very much commended, especially in the Left-hand. But this is only a meer Supposition, (grounded upon nothing of Reason) of those that being ignorant of the Circulation of the Blood, believe this Vein more especially to discharge the Melancholy Blood of the Spleen. Six Pair of Nerves enter the Arm, the Productions of which, see Lib. 8. C. 3. CHAP. II. Of the Foot. I. THE Foot, call'd in LatinThe Foot. Pes, in Greek , is an Organic Part, beginning from the Ioynt of the Hip, and extending to the Extremities of the Toes. It is divided into the Thigh, Leg and small Foot. The Thigh, Femur, , proceedsThe Thigh. from the Joynt of the Hip, to the first lower Joynt, which in the Fore-part is call'd the Knee, in the hinder-part the Ham. II. The inner part of the Thigh, isIschion. call'd, Femur, the outer Protuberance about the upper Joynt, the Hip, the Space to the Buttocks between the two Thighs, the Perinaeum. III. At the top, near the Bending,The Groin. is the Groin, where lyes a remarkable Kernel, composed of eight lesser Ker∣nels, which was firmly said to be the Emunctory of the Liver. Of the use of which, see Lib. 1. Chap. 17. IV. The Leg, by the Greeks call'dThe Leg. , beginning at the Knee, reaches down to the Heel, of which, the fore-part is called Tibia, the Shin, and the hinder part Sura the Calf; but the two inferior latter Prominences are called Malleoli, or the Ancles. The Physiognomists observe, that they who have large Heels are Envious, they that have flat Heels are Slothful; but I can∣not believe there is any Credit to be gi∣ven to these Indications. V. The Foot Pes, , which forThe Foot. distinction sake they call the small Foot, is the Foundation upon which the Body stands, and is divided into the Foot, the Metapedium, and the Toes. The Foot, of which the hinder part is called Calx, or the Heel, consists of seven Bones, the Metapedium of five, the Toes consist of three Bones, except the great Toe, which has but two, to which are also added the Se∣samina. The upper part of the Foot, which is ruddy, is called the Top of the Foot, and the lower part the Sole of the Foot, which if it be so flat as to press the Ground without any Hollow∣ness,
denotes the Person to be Cunning and Fraudulent. VI. At the end of the Toes grow Nails of the same Substance and Na∣ture with those of the Hands. The whole Leg is composed of Mem∣branes, Bones, Ligaments, Muscles, Arteries, Veins and Nerves, common to all the rest of the Body. The Membranes are Periosteum's, Membranes of the Muscles, and their Tendons. The Bones are many and various, fastned together with Ligaments. Of which, Lib. 9. Of the Muscles, some extend the Thigh, some the Leg, others the Foot, and others the Toes. Of which, Lib. 5. The Arteries proceed from the Cru∣ral Artery, and are dispersed through all the Parts of the Leg with several Ramifactions. In like manner a great number of Veins are dispersed through all parts of the Leg, following, for the most part, in their Assent, the Colours of the de∣scending Arteries. Of which, more Lib. 7. Four remarkable Nerves also for the Faculties of Feeling and Motion, are distributed through the whole Leg. Of which, three proceed from the low∣er Pairs of the Loyns, and the fourth takes its Original from the four upper Pairs of the Os Sacrum. Of which more, Lib. 8.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the MUSCLES. WITH AN APPENDIX Concerning the MEMBRANES and FIBRES. CHAP. I. Of the MUSCLES in General. A Muscle is called Musculus in La∣tin, by the Greeks  from , to Contract, or from its Resemblance; for that some Muscles seem to resemble a flead Mouse slender at the Head and Tail, and large in the Middle; by the Latins also called Lacrtus, from its Resemblance to a Lizard. I. A Muscle is an Organic Part,Definiti∣on. the Instrument of voluntary Moti∣on. II. A Muscle is composed of Dissi∣mularCompositi∣on. Parts, as Fibres, Flesh, Veins, Nerves, a Tendon, a Covering Mem∣brane, and in fat People, with some Fat to moisten it. Through the Arteries, the Vital Blood is conveighed for Nourishment, and the Residue returns through the Veins to its Fountain. Through the Nerves the Animal Spirits flow into it, contri∣buting Feeling and Motion, and doing their Duty in the Act of Nutrition. The fleshy Substance abounds with Fi∣bres for Strength and Bulk, and these Fibres are for the most part streight. Sometimes where they proceed to their Tendon, somewhat bow'd, as in the Muscles of the Temples, sometimes Orbicular, as in the Sphincters; seldom one Muscle has two Fibres. It is en∣folded
with a Membrane to strengthen and cover it, and to separate the Mus∣cles one from another, and from the adjoyning Parts. It includes these Fi∣bres, and in the whole Circuit sticks to them Rolfinch, Bauhinus, and Ste∣nonis believes it also admits the Prrodu∣ctions and Fastnings to the inner Sub∣stance of the Muscle, by which the Fi∣bres are knit together. III. Andreas Laurentius was in an Er∣ror,Laurenti∣us's Error. to assert that there is a Power of acting in the Muscles, which only pro∣ceeds from the Fibres and Tendony Strings, as is apparent in Persons lan∣guishing with Hectic-Fevers and Con∣sumptions, who still retain their Faculty of Motion, though the Fleshy Parts are consumed away. IV. The Muscles are two-fold, someMuscles are two∣fold. which draw no Parts, as the Orbicular Sphincters of the Fundament and Blad∣der, which are orbicularly and equally contracted within themselves, every way like a Ring without any manifest Be∣ginning, Middle or End. To which the muscly Membranes are to be reckon∣ed, which only move the Skin upward and downward, as are the Muscles of the Forehead and hinder part of the Head, in which there is no manifest Distinction to be observed. Others, which more violently move the Bones and other Parts, may be distinguish∣ed into Beginning, Middle and End, or else, as others will have it, into the Head, Belly and Tail. V. The Beginning, or Head, isThe Head. that part of the Muscle, toward which the Motion is made; for this is a perpetual Rule, every Muscle is moved toward its Beginning. This Head is sometimes fleshy, often mem∣branous, in others longer, in others shorter, sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner. VI. Every Muscle has a Nerve in∣sertedThe Inser∣tion of the Nerve. into its Head, or else about the Middle; sometimes one, some∣times more, as the Diaphragma, which has two that are remarkable, and the Muscle of the Temples, which receives three Nerves. Whence Galen makes it a certain Rule, where the Nerve is in∣serted, there is the Head of the Muscle. Which Rule, however Bartholin, fol∣lowing Walaeus, seems to reject, affirm∣ing that sometimes the Nerve is inserted into the End of the Muscle, and that there is no necessity that the Nerve should be inserted rather into the Head than the Tail of the Muscle; and that it happens only by accident, that the Nerve is inserted into the Head of the Muscle, for that the Nerves, while the descend, are more easily inserted into the Heads, which are higher, then into the Tails that lye lower. But Ex∣perience overthrows the main Prop of this Opinion, by which we find that never any Nerve was inserted into the Tail of any Muscle, or if it may seem to enter it by chance, 'tis only through the Error of the Anatomist, who mis∣takes the Head for the Tail. Thus hi∣therto the middle Membranous Part of the Diaphragma, into which the Nerves are inserted, has been taken for the Tendon or Tail of that Muscle, where∣as really it is the Beginning of it. The second Argument, Reason evinces, which teaches us, that of necessity the Nerve ought to enter that Part from which the Swelling of it ought to be∣gin from the Entrance of the Spirits; which when it ought to begin from that part toward which the Motion must be made, of necessity it must be inserted into the Head. For if the Swelling should begin from the end of the Mus∣cle, then the Beginning would be drawn toward the Tail. Then Experience or common Sight destroys the third Argu∣ment, seeing that in Nerves which turn back, though they tend upward, ne∣vertheless one inserted into the Heads of the Muscles of the Larynx, as looking upward. VII. The Middle or Belly of theThe Belly of the Mus∣cle. Muscle is the thicker and more fleshy Part, and is for the most part continu∣ous, sometimes, but rarely separated, with Tendonous Intersections, as in the streight Muscles of the Abdomen, and the Digastricks opening the lower Jaw, and some few others, concerning which Intersections, however, some are of this Opinion, that another Muscle begins at each, and that the intersected Muscles are not one, but several Muscles con∣joyned together, for the more conveni∣ency of use. VIII. The End or Tail of the Muscle,The Tendo. is that which is fastned to the Part which is to be moved. This is called a Tendon, in Latin Tendo, because it may be stretched, and therefore by some called Chorda, or a String. Which Name of Tendon, is by some also trans∣lated to the Membranous Beginnings of some Muscles, as also to the Tendonous Separations of the middle Muscle, such as are in the streight Muscles of the Ab∣domen.
IX. Now a Tendon is a part con∣tinuousIts Defini∣tion. to a Muscle, extended through the whole length of the Mus∣cle. Many formerly thought that a Ten∣don was only the Extremity of the Muscle, which is fastned to the other part, whereas indeed the Strings of it are extended through the whole length of the Muscle. Hence Lindan says, that a Muscle is nothing else but a Ten∣don cloathed with Flesh, and that they are deceived, who think that a Tendon begins beyond the Flesh; not considering that Experience teaches us, that it is ex∣tended through the whole length of the Muscle, and that it is as well in the Be∣ginning as in the Middle. Which Extention of the Fibres through the whole Muscle, Riolanus al∣so confirms. The Continuity of the Ten∣don through the whole Muscle, to the ve∣ry End, manifestly appears in the Legs of feathered Fowl, and which is a wonder, is many times observed to be grisly. And in an accurate Dissection, you may observe the Continuity of the Fibres from the Head of the Muscle to the End, in a ram or boyl'd Muscle. X. 'Tis a Doubt, whether all Mus∣clesWhether all Mus∣cles have Tendons. have Tendons? Bauhinus says, that the Tendons were not ordained barely for Motion, but to cause the more violent Motions, and to move the more heavy Members, and to strengthen the Muscles to prevent their bursting, and therefore the Muscles do not all end in Tendons. But this is on∣ly true in those Muscles where the Ten∣don is stretched beyond the Flesh, not in general as to all: For they which never move other Parts, but are con∣tracted into themselves as the Sphincters of the Fundament and Bladder, do not end in Tendons extended beyond the Flesh, but have tendonous Strings interlaced between their Fibres; as in the Muscles of the Forehead, hinder part of the Head, and several Muscles of the Face that stick close to the Skin. But the Muscles that move other Parts, extend their Tendons into them beyond the Flesh, for lower Motions thin and less discernible; for more violent Moti∣ons, stronger and thicker. Therefore we must conclude in opposition to Bau∣hinus, that all Muscles have Tendons, some stronger and more conspicuous, extended beyond the Flesh, others slen∣der and not discernible, either lying hid under their Flesh, or interlaced with their Fibres. This Tendon, according to the weak or strong Motion of the Parts, various in Bigness and Form, sometimes round, sometimes broad, sometimes long, sometimes short, sometimes slender, sometimes strong, and sometimes fixed to the Part to be moved with several Ends. XI. Bauhinus with Aquapendens as∣serts,Whether a similar part? that a Tendon is a similar Body, continuous from the beginning to the end of the Muscle, simple, of a Kind by its self, and produced out of the Seed like the other seminal Parts. Which is the Opinion of many at this time. But Vesalius, Laurentius, Silvi∣us, and others, with Galen, will have it to be a dissimilar Part, composed of a Concourse of Fibres, Ligaments, and slender Nerves, by degrees uniting to∣gether into one Body. They will have the Nerve, so soon as it has entered the Muscle, to be divided into many small Branches or diminutive Fibres, which are met by a Ligament divided in the same manner, and that those lit∣tle Branches, traversing to and from, and by that means intermixing with the interlaced Fibres, and united to the end of the Muscle, constitute the Ten∣don, and that the more bulky part pro∣ceeds from the Ligament, the lesser part from the Nerves and Fibres; and be∣cause of necessity there must be some empty Spaces between the Fibres, Na∣ture has fill'd them up with Flesh, to assist those little Fibrous Branches in Contraction and Relaxation, and to de∣fend them from external Injuries. This latter Opinion Bartholinus rejects, but does not sufficiently refute; only he al∣ledges, that Production of the Nerve, through the middle of the Nerve to the Tendon, could never be discovered either by them or any body else; which is no Argument there is no such thing. For the Chylifer Pectoral Channel, Lymphatic Vessels have lain hid for many Ages, which were at length dis∣covered, and the same may be said as to the Production of the Nerve; for the exact feeling of the Tendon shews, it cannot be without a Nerve, though not to be discern'd; and though a Ten∣don be not a Nerve, yet it may have Fibres and a Membrane intermixed with it, together with a Ligament. Hence perhaps it may be concluded, that a Tendon is the most necessary part of a Muscle, and extended through the whole Muscle, but that it is most conspicuous at the end. I answer, that though the Tendons of many Muscles
are covered with much Flesh, the rea∣son why the Tendonous Substance is less conspicuous, it does not follow that it is altogether absent, for in fat People, the Mesenterium sometimes is so covered with Fat, that no Vessels can be dis∣cern'd in it; and thus it happens in the fleshy Tendons of some Muscles. The Muscles vary many ways. 1. In respect of their Substance, Fleshy, Membranous, or half Ner∣vous. 2. In respect of their Quantity, Thick, Thin, Long, Short, Round, Broad. 3. In respect of their Shape, Round, Flat, Delta-like, or resembling a Monks Hood, &c. 4. In respect of their Situation; withinside, oblique, orbicular, trans∣verse; also some in the Head, some in the Trunk, some in the Joynts, &c. 5. In respect of their Original, some from the Bones, others from the Gri∣stles or Tendons. 6. In respect of their Insertion; some with one, others with a double, others with a threefold Tendon. 7. In respect of their Colour; Red, White, or Livid. 8. In respect of their Closing toge∣ther, some in one part, some with ano∣ther, or with one or more Mus∣cles. 9. In respect of their Use, some bending, others stretching forth, draw∣ing to, drawing from, lifting up, pull∣ing down, and some wheeling. XII. The Use of the Muscles is toThe Use. contribute to voluntary Motion; Which is performed by these Instru∣ments alone: for no Part moves with that motion which is not a Muscle it self or mov'd by a Muscle. And this mo∣tion is call'd Animal or Voluntary be∣ing perform'd at the will of the Crea∣ture. Here Picolhomini and some othersWhether the Motion of the Muscles be voluntary? start a Question, Whether the motion of the Muscles can be said to be Voluntary? Since it is common to Beasts, which have no Reason, and consequently no Will, and therefore believe Spontaneous to be more proper. Nor can it be called Voluntary, as being performed in the Womb by the Birth without Will; as also when it sucks before it knows what the Breast or Milk is; also the Pulmonary Muscles move the Breast when Men are asleep, and consequently cannot be said to Will. To the first I answer, that there is a sort of Will in Brutes, arising from something analo∣gous to the Rational Soul, and proceed∣ing from Natural Appetite, and there∣fore they may be said to have a volun∣tary Motion. As to the Motion of the Birth, and Breathing of those that are asleep, I say that Animal Motion is not always directed by the Will; but it is sufficient in Persons healthy, a sleep or waking, that it be performed accord∣ing to the Will. Moreover, the Will is twofold, either by Election or by In∣stinct, as in Men sleeping, or the Birth in the Womb. Galen upon this Subject writes, that of those things which are mov'd by voluntary Motion, some are free, others are serviceable to the seve∣ral Affections of the Body. And that every Creature knows to what Uses the Faculties of his Soul are ordained, with∣out an Instructor. Therefore the Mo∣tion of the Muscles is Voluntary, and not Spontaneous; in regard that Spon∣taneous Motion, such as that of the Heart, is truly Natural, as not depen∣ding upon the Will of the Crea∣ture. Seeing then the Motion of the Mus∣cle is an Animal Action, and that the Muscle it self is the Instrument of Vo∣luntary Motion; it is a certain Rule, that where-ever there is a Muscle, there, in the same part may be Action, and that what part cannot be moved at plea∣sure, that is neither a Muscle, nor mov'd by a Muscle, though the Stru∣cture of it may seem to resemble that of a Muscle. Therefore the Heart is no Muscle, nor moved by a Muscle. On the contrary, Stenonis affirms, that there are several Muscles of the Larynx, Tongue and Back, which are never mov'd at the Will of the Mind. Though it is never to be prov'd that there is any of them, but what may be mov'd at pleasure; and to confirm his Opinion, he maintains the Heart to be a Mus∣cle. XIV. Whatever Part, says he,Whether the Heart be a Mus∣cle? neither requires any Part necessary for a Muscle, nor possesses any Part de∣ny'd to a Muscle, yet in Structure is like a Muscle, cannot but deserve the Name of a Muscle, though it be not subject to the Power of the Will. But the Heart, &c. Which way of Ar∣guing, were it allowable, I might argue thus. Whatever Part, neither requires any part necessary for the Stomach, nor possesses any part deny'd the Stomach, yet in Structure and Composition, is like the Stomach, cannot but deserve the Name of the Stomach, though it
do not concoct the Nourishment; but all these things requisite, are found in the Urinary Bladder; Figure, Shape, Substance, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, &c. therefore the Urinary Bladder deserves the Name of the Stomach. Then says Stenonis, nor possesses any part deny'd to a Muscle; where as 'tis obvious, that there are in the Heart two little Ears, two wide Ventricles, and eleven large Valves, the like to which, were never seen in any Muscle. So that the Heart possessing many Parts deny'd to a Mus∣cle, the Structure of it cannot be like to that of a Muscle. Then the Action of the Heart is to make Blood, which no Muscle in the whole Body can pre∣tend to do. If he draws his Argument from the Contraction of the Fibers in the Motion of the Pulse, which is a voluntary Motion, and hence we prove the Heart to be a Muscle; he may as well prove the Ventricle to be a Mus∣cle, which offended by corroding things, contracts it self by the Help of the Mus∣cles, to expel the offending Matter by Vomit or Hickup; or the Gall-blad∣der, which does the same, when offend∣ed with boiling Choler; or the Womb contracting it self for the Expulsion of the Birth. Nay, the very Membranes of the Brain, which in Sneezing, con∣tract themselves, would come to be Muscles; which being all Absurdities, prove the Certainty of our Axiom before mentioned. XV. There is but one Action ofThe Action of the Muscle. the Muscle, which is to draw; which is performed by the Animal Spi∣rits determined into the Muscle, and flowing into the Fiber, which causes the swelling Muscle to contract it self according to its Length. For so the Tendon is drawn toward the Head; which Determination, and copious In∣flux of the Spirits, so long as i lasts, so long the Muscle remains contract∣ed. While this Muscle is contracted, the opposite Muscle relaxes, because the Spirits, before determined into that, flow into another, which causes it to grow languid, so that the Swelling and Contraction ceases; because the Altera∣tion of the Determination of the Ani∣mal Spirits may happen in a moment; though how it is done, we cannot so well explain. XVI. But this Relaxation of theRelaxation  Action. Muscle is no Action, but a ceasing from Action; and therefore they are in an Error, who think it so to be. Which Galen seems to assert in one Place, though in another, he says, that Contraction is more proper to the Bo∣dy of the Muscle then Extension; and so he seems to make Relaxation a kind of secundary Action. But if we right∣ly consider it, it is no Action, either primary or secundary, but only a Mo∣tion by Accident. XVII. Another Question is, WhetherThe Tonic Motion. there be any Action in the Tonic Motion, when the Muscles being every way con∣tracted together, the Parts to be mov'd are never bent, but are at rest; nor do the Muscles themselves seem to be mov∣ed? I answer, there is a manifest Moti∣on in that case; for the Muscles act every way with equal Strie, and that which is thought to be the motionless rest of any Part, is caused by the Op∣posite Muscles acting together at the same time, and at the same time draw∣ing every way the Part to be mov'd. XVIII. Riolanus seems to make someNo diffe∣rence be∣tween Con∣traction and Tensi∣on. Difference between Contraction and Tension, and this he calls the Conser∣vation of the Thing contracted. But in regard this Tension is nothing else but the Continuation of Contraction, it cannot be separated from Contraction. But, says Riolanus, many things are extended which are not contracted. As the Yard is extended by a distensive Fa∣culty, but then it is not contracted like a Muscle. Worms are distended, but not contracted; but the Muscles are both distended and contracted. But all this signifies nothing to the Muscles, which by their own ordinary voluntary Motion contract and relax; but by some pre∣ternatural Cause are hindered from that Motion, and many times distend∣ed, when voluntarily they ought to be relaxed, as in Convulsions, and relax and flax when they ought to be con∣tracted, as in the Palsie. XIX. The Action of the Muscle isThe Action is perform∣ed by Fi∣bres. performed by its Fibres, Tendons and Nerves. The Fibres cause Contracti∣on, by which the Tendon is drawn to, together with the Part which is fastned to it. Through the Nerves, the Ani∣mal Spirits flow in, causing Feeling, Swelling and Contraction. But if one of these three be wanting, or hindered, the Action cannot be perform'd. For if the Nerve be obstructed or cut, then the Animal Spirits not flowing into it, there can be no Swelling or Contracti∣on of the Muscle. If the Fibres are cut athwart, their Contraction is made toward two several Parts, upward and downward, and so the Part to be mov∣ed is not brought to. If the Tendon
be wanting, though the Muscles swell, because it is not fastned to the Part that is to be moved, it does not draw it. As to the Flesh that is interlarded a∣mong the Fibers that contributes no∣thing to the Motion, but only strength∣ens the Fibers, and by its Heat che∣rishes and renders them nimble, and defends them against the Injuries of Heat and Cold; but is unfit for the Motion of Contraction, by reason of its Softness and Loosness, which renders it unable to contract it self, or raise o∣ther Parts. Which Vesalius, Erastus and Laurentius not aware of erroneous∣ly affirming this Flesh to be the chief Instrument of Motion; the Absurdi∣ties of which is apparent, for that the Muscles of meager Men are stronger than the Muscles of those who are more fleshy. If any one object that the Mus∣cles of the Calves of the Legs and Arms draw with more force, by reason of their Carnosity; I answer, that their Carnosity is not the reason, but because they are furnished with stronger, and more numerous Fibers than others. XX. The Operations of the Mus∣clesThe diffe∣rence of Operation. are various, according to the Vari∣ety of the Muscles, to which they are fastned. In the Breast they dilate and contract, in the Gullet they facilitate Swallowing; in the Larinx, they cause the Modulation of the Voice, &c. XXI. But how the Animal SpiritsDetermi∣nation of the Spirus. causing the Operation of the Muscle, flow, and are determined in greater quantity at the pleasure of the Mind, sometimes into these, sometimes into those Muscles, is a difficult Question: some will have them conveighed through Imaginary Valves, which they ascribe to the Nerves. Others, not sa∣tisfied with this Fiction, have invented double Tubes, so placed from one Mus∣cle to the other, that in the Contraction of the Muscle, the Orifice, guarded by a peculiar Valve, opens; and that through that same Passage, the Spirits flow out of the relaxed Muscle, into that which is to be contracted, the Valve of the other Closing at the same mo∣ment; so that they cannot flow forth again, but of necessity must distend the Muscle, until the Situation of the Parts being again altered, that Valve opens, and the other shuts, by which means there is a Passage opened for the con∣tracting the other Muscle. This is in∣deed ingenious, but little to the pur∣pose. 1. Because the Muscles that move the Part to the opposite Part, are most commonly too far distant from the former, so that those little Pipes must be very long, as in those Muscles that move the Part forward and backward. 2. These little Pipes, if not every where, yet would be some where visi∣ble, seeing that the small little Nerves, through which the Spirits flow, are visi∣ble. 3. For that in Wounds, the Muscles are many times divided one from another, and yet notwithstanding their Separation, their Motion proceeds in good order every way. Which could not be if there were any such in∣tervening Pipes in those Places cut, and then cicatrized. For by reason of their smallness, they must of necessity be quite closed up by the Scar. 4. The altered Situation of the Parts, cannot cause an opening and shutting of the Valves. For it is supposed that the Si∣tuation of the Parts alters, as the Spi∣rits flow into this or that Muscle, and so the thing caused would precede the Cause, and the Influx of the Spirits must be before the Cause of the In∣flux. XXII. Cartesius seems to favour thisDes Car∣tes his O∣pinion. Opinion of the little Pipes. For, says he, there are little gapings in every one of these Muscles, through which those Spirits may slow out of one into the other, and which are so disposed, that when the Spirits come from the Brain toward one of those, they have somewhat a greater force than those that go toward the other, and together close up all those Passages, through which the Spirits of this may pass into the other. By which means, all the Spirits before contained in these two Muscles, immediately slow into one of them, and so swell and contract it, while the other relaxes. This seems a fpecious Fiction, and needs no other Refutation than the Sto∣ry of the little Pipes. Add to this, that when a Body is bended forward and backward, who can imagine such Gap∣ings can be extended from the Muscles before, to those behind? Shall those Gapings and the Spirits pass in a streight Line through all the other Parts that lye between? To this De la Forge an∣swers, that those Spirits do not pass through all the Parts that lye between, but from the Tendon of the whole Muscle, through the Pores and invisi∣ble Channels, into the Tendon of the other, for though the Muscles are re∣mote one from another, the Muscles lye close together. This specious Ficti∣on pretends that the Spirits flow rapidly from the Tendon of the acting Muscle, through those supposed Channels, in
the Tendon and Belly of the Muscle which is to act: but what if the oppo∣site Muscle should not act but lye still, wherefore then, the action of the acting Muscle ceasing, do not those spirits flow into the opposite that rests, when the Passages are open, and the Muscle is capable to receive them. If it be im∣possible they should be so soon dissipa∣ted through the Pores of the Muscle, or return into the Veins or Arteries, where do they then remain? Since they do not enter any other from the acting Muscle surceasing its action so suddainly? Or if they cannot enter the Muscle that is to act by reason of the length of the distance; What hinders their entrance into the next adjoyning Muscles or Tendon? This the Valves occasion adjoyning to the Channels, says de la Forge. But wherefore are they not sufficiently open when the vi∣olent rushing of the Spirits into the acting Muscle and it's Tendon is suffici∣ent to open the Valves of the Channels, tending toward the other opposite, and so to make a free passage for its self from that into this: Besides that all Valves give passage to one Part, but still prevent the flowing back. So that those Valves that open to transmit the Spirits from the right acting Muscle to the left, which never permit the same spirits to pass back from the left to the right. Besides, if those spirits enter the Muscle, which is to act through the Tendon, then the Tayl of the Muscle will swell sooner then the Head, and so the Tayl shall be drawn toward the Head, and not the Head toward the Tayl. Then if the Muscles that are to act, could not swell so soon as they ought, unless they borrow'd spi∣rits from the neighbouring Muscles ceasing to act, nor fall again, unless they discharg'd their spirits into the adjoyning Muscles, what shall we think of the Sphincters that rise and fall, act and surcease to act, yet neither receive any spirits, nor discharge any into any opposite Muscles, as having no such. Or else as if the spirits were endu'd with reason, and knew when to open or when to shut the Valves, or when to pass through and when not: Certainly such Philosophers seek rather to wrest Nature to their conceits, then to direct their conceits according to the Laws of Nature. See more of this l. 8. c. 1. CHAP. II. Of the Muscles of the Head. THE Muscles of the Head, either move the whole Head, or some parts belonging to the Head. The whole Head is mov'd either Secundarily, as it follows the Muscles of the Neck, caus'd by the Muscles of the Neck; or Primarily, as it is turn'd by its proper Muscles above the First Verteber, upon which it is immediately placed, either forward, backward or sideways: also as it is turn'd above the Tooth-resembling Process of the Se∣cond Verteber, as upon an Axle. The First Motion is perform'd by Nine pair of Muscles. I. The First Pair, call'd Sple∣nium,The Spleny Muscles. oblong, thick, fleshy and spread over both Vertebers. It rises from a Nervous beginning, part∣ly from the Spines of the five upper Vertebers of the Breast; partly from the lower Spines of the Vertebers of the Neck, and ascending upwards inserted with a broad end into the hinder part of the Head; and draws the head directly to the hinder Parts: or if one only act, it draws the head backward toward the side. II. The Second Pair, call'd theThe com∣plex Pair. Complex Pair, because every Muscle seems to consist of three Muscles, as having various beginnings and many Tendonous and Fleshy parts. This Pair arises at the seventh Verteber of the Neck, and the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth Vertebers of the Breast, and is most firmly fasten'd to the hinder part of the Head, some∣times with a single, sometimes with a treble Tendon. Whence Galen affirms these Muscles to be three fold. Never∣theless that they are single is apparent, because there is no separation of any Membrane, but are included within their own Membrane only, which could not be, if they were divided in∣to many Muscles. For then they would have every one their proper Membrane, by means whereof it might be separted from the other.
III. The Third Pair call'd the smallThe small and thick Pair. and thick Pair, eated under the Second Pair, rises with a Nervous beginning from the transverse Processes of the first Vertebers of the Neck, rarely from the Five Pairs of the upper Vertebers of of the Breast, and growing fleshy, ex∣tends it self obliquely upward and in∣ward, and is inserted with a Nervous end into the hindermost root of the Mamillary Process, and lighty draws the head backward; but if one only act, it bends it backward toward the side. Riolanus believes this Pair to be no∣thing else, but a production of the Spina∣tic Muscle, reaching to the head near the Mamillary Process. IV. The fourth Pair, call'd theThe bigger streight Pair. bigger, streight Pair, is small, fleshy and slener, and rises from the top of the Spine of the Second Verteber of the Neck, and ending in the middle of the hinder part of the Head, assists the motion of the Third Pair. V. The Fifth Pair, call'd the lesserThe lesser streight Pair. streight Pair, lyes under the former, and resembles it in substance, shape and course. It rises from the hinder part of the first Verteber, and being inserted in∣to the hinder part of the Head, assists the motion of the Third and the preceding Muscle. VI. The sixth Pair, call'd theThe upper oblique Pair. Upper Oblique Pair, is seated under the right Pairs, and resembles them in substance and shape. It is small and rises from the Process of the first Verteber of the Neck, and ends in the hinder part of the Head, near the outward side of the right Pair. Bauhinus says it rises in the hinder part of the Head, and ends at the lateral Processes of the first Ver∣teber of the Neck. This acting we nod slightly streight forward: if either act, it inclines the Head backward to one side. VII. The Seventh is the LowerThe lower oblique Pair. Oblique Pair, oblong, fleshly and round, rising from the Spine of the Second Verteber of the Neck, and inserted into the transverse Process of the first Verte∣ber, and turns it round with the Head annex'd to it, to the sides. VIII. The eighth, call'd Mastoides,The Masto∣ides Pair. seated in the fore-part of the Neck, strong, long and round, which by rea∣son of its two beginings, some assert to be two-fold. It rises Nervous and broad from the upper part of the Sternon and Clavicle, and with a fleshy Tayl is inserted into the Mamillary Process and the hinder part of the Head; this Pair bends the Head forward and downward, and if one act at a time turns it ob∣liquely to the side. IX. The Ninth Pair, discover'd byThe inner streight Pair. Fallopius, which may be call'd the Inner Streight Pair, seated under the Gullet in the fore-part of the Neck, joyns to the First Pair of the Neck. It rises with a Nervous beginning from the Li∣gaments of almost all the Vertebers of the Neck, and with a Fleshy tayl is in∣serted into the Basis of the Head, between both Processes, where it is joynted with the first Verteber, and bends the Head forward, when we nod. X. The Muscles which move theThe mo∣vers of the Parts in the Head. Parts contain'd in the Head are ma∣ny and various: two in the Forehead four belonging to the Eye-lids; twelve to the Eyes; eight to the Ears; four to the Membranes of the Tympanum; eight to the Nose; fifteen to the Cheeks and Lips; ten to the lower Jaw; ten to the Tongue; eight to the Hyoides bone; the form, beginning, insertion, situation and use of all which we have describ'd, l. 3. So that the Muscles of the Head in all are Ninety and Nine. CHAP. III. Of the Muscles of the Neck. THE Muscles which primarily move the Neck, and secondarily the Head, are four on each side, which move the Neck forward, backward and sideways. I. Two Long, which lye hid underThe long Muscles. the Gullet. These rise fleshy from the fifth and sixth Verteber of the Breast, and ascending upward, with a sharp Tendon are inserted together into the extuberant Processes of the first Verte∣ber of the Neck: sometimes they are fasten'd to the hinder part of the Head near the Great hole. By the benefit of these Muscles, the Neck together with the Head is bent directly toward the the fore Parts; but sideways, by the single motion of one.
II. Two Scalen's, (these some reckonThe Sca∣len-Mus∣cle. among the Muscles of the Breast) which are more properly seated in the Sides, and proceeding from the first Rib with a fleshy Beginning, are inserted within side into all the trans∣verse Processes of the Vertebers of the Neck, the first and second sometimes excepted, and assist the Motion of those already mentioned. These Muscles have a peculiar Hole, through which the Arteries descending to the Arm, and the Veins ascending thence, find their Passage. III. Two Transversals, seated in theThe Trans∣versal Muscle. Back; These arising from the Roots of the Processes of the six superior Vertebers, and insensibly becoming more fleshy, are fastned to all the Transverse Processes of the Vertebers of the Neck without-side, and bend the Neck to the hinder Parts, or by the single Motion of one, obliquely backward. Between these Muscles the Nerves of the Spinal Pith are carried, arising from the Vertebers of the Neck. IV. Two called Spinati, which be∣ingThe Spi∣nati Mus∣cles. long and broad, possesses the whole Neck between the Spines. They arise from seven Spines of the Breast, and five of the Vertebers of the Neck, lying one upon another, and distinguished only by the Spines, and are implanted into the whole inferior Seat of the second Spine of the Verteber of the Neck. and toge∣ther with the Transversals move the Neck obliquely toward the hinder Parts. To these eight Muscles of the Neck,The num∣ber of the Muscles of the Neck. if you reckon the thirteen Muscles of the Larynx, seven of the Gullet, the eight of the Hyoides-bone, and ten of the Tongue, which are all seated in the Neck, the Muscles of the Neck will amount to forty six. CHAP. IV. Of the Muscles of the Arms or Shoulders. THE upper Part of the Arm, reach∣ing from the Top of the Shoulder to the Elbow, which they call the Shoulder, is moved by various Moti∣ons; five in the first place, forward, backward, upward, downward and cir∣cular. Which Motions are performed by nine Muscles. I. The first, by reason of its Situa∣tion,The Pecto∣ral Mus∣cl. is called the Pectoral; which being of a fleshy Substance, and incum∣bent upon the Breast, which arises with a membranous Beginning from the mid∣dle Clavicle, and the whole Sternon Bone, as also from the Muscles of the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Rib; as if it were composed of several Muscles, and be∣ing streightned toward the End, is im∣planted with a streight and narrow Ten∣don into the Bone of the Shoulder, a little below the Head of it, and brings the Arm forward before the Breast, and that either in a streight Line, or some∣what upward or downward, as some∣times all, sometimes the middlemost or uppermost, or lowermost Fibers are con∣tracted. This may be manifestly di∣vided into two Muscles, but not into three or four, as Bauhinus was of Opinion. II. The Second, from the FigureThe trian∣gular hu∣meral Mus∣cle. of the Greek Delta, is called Delto∣ides, and the Triangular Humeral. This proceeds with a broad and nervous Beginning from the middle Part of the Clavicle, to the Top of the Shoulder, and the whole Spine of the Scapula, and with a strong Tendon, fleshy without, nervous within, is extended to the mid∣dle of the Shoulder-bone, and raises the Arm upward, sometimes before, sometimes backward, according to the various Contraction of the foremost, hin∣dermost, middlemost, or all the Fibres. In the middle Part of this, Unskilful Chyrurgeons make little Issues; but ve∣ry erroneously; for that upon Con∣traction of the Muscle, the Hole of the Fontanel must be contracted, by which means, the Pea or Pellet is forced out with Violence and Pain, and the Fon∣tanel suddenly closes up again. Which Mistake is easily avoided, by making the Issue between this and the Biceps Muscle, four or five Fingers Breadth be∣low the Joynt of the Shoulder; in which Place, while the Arm is bent, this Space between the two Muscles is present∣ly perceived. III. The Third, from the Use ofThe Ani∣scalptor Muscle. it, Aniscalptor, or Buttock-Scratcher, because it draws the Arm downward behind; but by reason of its Largeness, it is called Latissimus, or the Broadest; because, that together with its llow Muscle, it covers the whole Back. It arises with a membranous and broad Original from the Tops of
the Vertebers of the Spine, which are seated between the Os Sacrum and the sixth Verteber of the Breast; as also from the upper part of the Hion-Bone; from thence, being become fleshy, it approaches the Basis of the Scapula, from whence sometimes it receives se∣veral fleshy Fibers, and at length, with a short, but strong and broad Tendon, it is inserted between the Pectoral and the Round Muscle, and draws the Arm downward behind; sometimes more to the upper, sometimes more toward the lower Parts, according as these or those Fibres are contracted, of which it has many, by reason of its large Begin∣ning. IV. The Fourth, called the biggerThe bigger round Muscle. Round Muscle, which being fleshy, is seated behind uder the Arm-pit, arises with a fleshy Beginning from the whole lower Rib of the Scapula, and with a short, broad and strong Tendon, ends in the Bone of the Arm, a little below the Neck, and draws the Arm down∣ward behind. V. The Fifth, from its Situation,The lesser round Muscle. called the Shorter Transversal Mus∣cle, from its Form, the Lesser Round Muscle, rises from the lower Corner of the Scapula, and being ex∣tended to the Neck of the Arm, assists the Motion of the fourth Muscle, of which, some think it to be a Por∣tion. VI. The Sixth, is called SupraThe Infra Spinatus. Scapularis Inferior, by others, Infra Spinatus, because it covers the whole Exterior Part of the Scapula, that lies under the Spine. This arising from the Basis of the Scapula, below the Spine, is inserted with a short and broad Tendon into the Ligament of the Shoulder, which fastens the Joynt, as into a Semicircle, and winds the Arm to the hinder Parts. VII. The Seventh, is called SuperThe Supra Spinatus. Scapularis, Superior, by others, Su∣pra Spinatus. It arises from the Basis of the Scapula, and filling the whole Cavity between the Spine and the up∣per Rib of the Scapula, is inserted ob∣liquely into the Neck with a broad and strong Tendon that passes beyond the Joynt, and together with the former, causes the circular Motion of the Arm; though others believe, that together with the Deltoides, it moves the Arm upward. VIII. The Eighth, which is calledThe Sub∣scapular Muscle. the Subscapulary or the Immers'd, is very fleshy, and being seated between the Scapula and the Ribs, possesses the inner Part of the Scapula, and is inser∣ted with a broad Tendon withinside into the Second Ligament of the Shoul∣der, and brings about the Arm toward the inner Parts. The Tendons of these three Muscles, sixth, seventh, and eighth, that bring about the Arm, as it were orbicularly enfold the whole Ligament of the Joynt. Nevertheless we are to understand, that this same circumacting Motion is very much assisted by the rest of the Mus∣cles, acting successively. IX. The Ninth, is called Perfo∣ratusThe Per∣forate Muscle. Coracoides, and Coracobra∣chiaeus, which rises with a short and nervous beginning from the Process of the Scapula, and with a strong Tendon runs almost to the middle of the Arm before, and together with the Pectoral, brings it forward toward the Breast. The Belly of this is boar'd through, and af∣fords a Passage to the Nerves, which are distributed to the Muscles of the Elbow. Riolanus believes this Muscle to be a Portion of the Biceps, or first Muscle of the Elbow. CHAP. V. Of the Muscles of the Scapula. THE Scapula, (which is joynted with the Bone of the Shoulder, by means of a most thick Ligament, and a large Nerve) besides that, it is mov∣ed by accident by the foresaid Muscles of the Shoulder, has also four peculiar Motions, which are performed by the benefit of the four following Mus∣cles. I. The Lesser Serratus, which lyingThe Serra∣tus minor. under the Pectoral Muscle, arises, as it were, like so many Fingers, from the four uppermost Ribs, the first excepted, and is inserted into the Scapula, at the Corocoides Process, and brings forward toward the Breast. II. The Trapezius, or Cucullaris,The Tra∣pezius▪ because that together with its Pair co∣vering the Back, it has some kind of Resemblance to a Monks Hood. It takes its beginning from the hinder part of the Head, and the Top of the five Spines of the Neck, and the upper eight or nine of the Breast; thence growing more narrow, it proceeds toward the
Scapula, is inserted into the whole Spine of it, the Top of the Shoulder, and the broader Part of the Clavicle, and moves the Scapula, by reason of its va∣rious Original, and several Fibres, up∣ward, downward, right forward, ob∣lique, according to the Contraction of these or those Fibres. III. The Rhomboides, which isThe Rhom∣boides. thin, broad and quadrangular, lying hid under the Skin, and arises with a fleshy Original, from the Spines of the three lower Vertebers of the Neck, and the three uppermost of the Breast, and is inserted into the External Basis of the Scapula, and draws it somewhat up∣ward toward the hinder Parts, and brings it to the Back. IV. The Levator, which proceedingThe bigger and round Muscle. from the transverse Processes of the se∣cond, third and fourth Verteber of the Neck (the diverse Heads uniting about the Middle) is by a broad and fleshy Tendon inserted into the upper and lower Angle of the Scapula, and draws it up forwards, and raises it with the Shoulder. To these Muscles of the Shoulders,The Leva∣tor. some there are who add the larger Ser∣ratus and the Deltoides; but erroneous∣ly, when the one belongs properly to the Breast, and the other is a Muscle of the Shoulder. CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles assisting Respi∣ration. SEeing that the Blood which rarified in the right Ventricle of the Heart, ought to be refrigerated and condensed, before it comes to the left Ventricle, there is a necessity for Respiration, that by the Alternate Dilatation and Con∣traction of the Breast, the cold Air may be received into the Lungs, and again expell'd from thence, together with the Vapors; and there is so great a necessi∣ty of this, that without it, it is impossible for Man, after he is born to live, but that he must dye upon the Suffocation of the Heat. Now this Motion of Respiration, not being a Natural, but an Animal Moti∣on, it must be performed by Instru∣ments that serve the Animal Motion, that is to say, the Muscles, of which, though the Lungs are destitute, yet to the end, this Motion may continually go forward, the Supream Creator has added to the Breast seven and fifty Mus∣cles for the Service of Respiration, to dilate and contract it by continual Al∣ternation, and after the same manner, by accident to move the Lungs. I. The broadest and biggest of theseThe Dia∣phragma. Muscles, which more inwardly sepa∣rates the Breast from the lower Belly, is called the Diaphragma. The rest are interwoven with the Ribs, or else are spread upon them. II. Those that are interwoven withThe Inter∣costal Mus∣cles. the Ribs, are the Intercostals, forty four in all, on each side twenty two, eleven external, and as many in∣ternal; all short and fleshy, sprinkled with oblique Fibres, carried from one Rib to that which is next, and mutually cutting each other like the Greek Let∣ter χ. Of which, these arise from the lower Parts of the upper Ribs; and descending obliquely toward the hinder Parts, are inserted into the lower Parts of the upper Ribs; the other are carri∣ed a contrary Course, these end in the Gristles, the other fill the Spaces of the Ribs and Gristles. Here Nicholas Stenonis well observes, that there are some Muscles besides the Intercostals, which are vulgarly num∣bred among the Intercostals, whereas they are Muscles quite different from them; that is to say, Those which from the transverse Processes of the Ver∣tebers terminate in the upper side of the lower Ribs, and properly to be called the Lifters of the Ribs. Moreo∣ver, he adds this Caution, that neither that same Part of the exterior Interco∣stals is to be pass'd slightly over, which fastens the bony Extremity of the up∣per Rib, with the Gristle of the lower. III. The Intercostals receive ArteriesThe Vessel. of the In∣tercostals. from each Intercostal Artery, and send forth Veins to the Azygon, and upper Intercostal. They receive Nerves from the sixth Pair, to which are joyn∣ed those which proceed from the Pith of the Back. IV. As to the Action of the Inter∣costals,The Action of the In∣tercostals. Anatomists are in dispute about it. Iohn Mayo, an English Man, as∣cribes to these Muscles, the Office of dilating the Ribs in Respiration, or of removing them one from another, and adds also, that the Diaphragma dilates the Breast. But the first is impossible,
seeing that the Office of the Muscles, is by contracting themselves to draw with them the Parts fastned to them, and so the Intercostals would draw the Ribs which are fastned to them, and streigh∣ten the Brea. The latter, concerning the Diaphragma, we have refuted al▪ ready. Some believe that the Internal dilate, and the External contract the Breast; others assert quite the contrary, both erroneously, for the reason last alledged. Others believe they act no∣thing in Respiration; but that in Expira∣tion they contract the Ribs together, and help the Motion of the Diaphragma; which is our Opinion also, because their Actions cannot be different, but that they must conspire to one end, which is to draw the Ribs to themselves, and contract the Breast. By reason of the smallness and thin∣ness of these Muscles, Fallopius was of Opinion, that they were not Muscles, but only fleshy Ligaments of the Ribs. Which were it true, the Ribs had not wanted Fibres cross-wise cutting one ano∣ther, as we observe in these Muscles. The Respiratory Muscles which are spread upon the Ribs, are six of each side. I. The Subclavial, seated under theThe Sub∣clavius. Clavicle, arises fleshy from the inner Clavicle near the Acromium, and carried forward with oblique Fibers, for the most part transverse, is inserted into the first Rib near the Sternon, and by drawing it upward and outward, dilates the Breast. II. The bigger Serratus, seated inThe Serra∣tus Major. the side of the Breast, and remarkable for its singular broadness and Carnosity, reaches from the inner Basis of the Sca∣pula to six or seven Ribs, and with five unequal Extremities, is inserted into five true, and two or three spurious Ribs, before they termi∣nate in the Gristles; though Riola∣nus will have it arise from the two up∣per Ribs, and extend it self to the Cla∣vicle. However Spigelius and Vestingius, ascribe an Original and Use quite contra∣ry, but erroneously. The Motion of this Muscle is much assisted by the oblique descending Muscle of the Abdomen, and the Motion of this by that. And hence it is that the Extremities of the one are interposed into the Extremities of the other, Finger-wise, and so they both together form a serrate Joynture, like the lower Serratus Posticus. III. The upper Serratus Posticus,The upper Serratus Posticus. which being small, is seated in the Back under the Rhomboides, between both Scapulas, and above the first Pair of the Muscles of the Head, and rises with a membrany Substance from the Spines of the three inferior Vertebres of the Neck, and of the first of the Breast, and is in∣serted into the Intervals of the three or four uppermost Ribs, and by lifting them upward dilates the Breast. IV. The lower serratus Posticus,The lower Serratus posticus. broad and Membranous, seated almost in the middle of the Back, under the third broadest Muscle of the Back, or the Aniscalpter, proceeds from the Spines of the three inferior Muscles of the Back; and of the first of the Loins; and terminates in the three or four lower spurious Ribs, by drawing which outward, it dilates the lower part of the Breast. V. The Sacrolumbus, spread underThe Sacro∣lumbus. the preceeding, which arising from the Brim of the Ilion Bone, the hinder part of the Os Sacrum, and the Spiny Apophysis of the Loins, ascends with a fleshy portion even to the Ribs, into all and every one of which it is inser∣ted in the lower part; and about three fingers distance from the Spines, in the place where the Ribs begin to bow fa∣stens to a Tendon, concerning which Tendon Anatomists have been much mistaken, some with Laurentius, were of opinion that this Muscle sent forth a double Tendon, one upward to the inferior part of the Ribs; another downward toward their upper part, and that so by the means of these va∣rious Tendons, (which are manifest by seven about the Ribs) the Ribs were lifted up in fetching breath, and drawn downward in expiration. But in re∣gard such contrary Actions cannot be performed by one and the same mo∣tion, I thought it probable that the de∣scending Tendons proceed from some other peculiar Muscle, and therefore upon diligent search I found, that they proceeded from a certain Muscle, that lyes spread under the Sacrolumbus, and sticks so close to it, that it can hardly be parted. This I perceived ow'd its Original to the three, four, five, six, sea∣ven Vertebers of the Neck (and there∣fore I call'd it the descending Cervical) and that it rose from them with a fleshy substance and sent forth Ten∣dons downward to the upper part of all the Ribs, directly opposite to the Tendons of the Sacrolumbus, and that the Ten∣dons of these two Muscles mutual inter∣cut one another crose-wise, and that they did not act together but alternately.
For that the Tendons of the descending Cervical draw the Ribs upward in fetch∣ing breath, so that they may not be remov'd or dilated in the middle spaces one by another; but the Tendons of the Sacrolumbus in expiration draw the Ribs downward; so that they may not be contracted to themselves. As to the insertion of the Tendons of the Sacrolum∣bus, Nicholas Stenonis makes this Obser∣vation. The Fibres saith he, are not present∣ly carry'd from the lower Rib to the next inferior, but some pass over three, others more that lye in the middle; neither are those which one Fibre sends forth inserted into one Fibre only, but some provide for three, others five, others seven Ribs. By the same reason, every conspicuous Tendon, not contented with that flesh which one Rib affords, in some places muster Fibres together from four or five Ribs together. Neither are these things so confus'd, but that in a Carkass of any reasonable bigness they may be easily de∣monstrated and shown; as well by streight dissection from a Tendon descending back ward; as in a transverse dissection, pro∣ceeding upward from the intercepted space between the Ribs; to the end the Number of the Tendons of one Belly may be seen. In regard that every entire Belly affords its part to each: so that every entire Tendon proceeding from several Bellys, receives its Portion from every one in par∣ticular. VI. The Triangular, vulgarly soThe Trian∣gular. call'd, though it does not form a true Triangle. This being very small and slender proceeds from the middle Line of the Sternon, and sends forth on each side four small Projections to the Bony Extremities, of the three, four, five and six true Ribs, (where they are joyn'd to the Grisles) by lifting up which Ribs they streighten the Breast, and depress the fore-part of it. To these six Muscles Fallopius adds three others seated in the Neck, which Vesalius with more reason judges to be part of the Muscles of the Neck and Back. These Respiratory Muscles are se∣cundarily assisted in their duty by the Muscles of the Abdomen, Scapula's, and Arms. CHAP. VII. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loyns. BY reason of the various motions of the Back, and especially of the Loyns, forwards, backward and side∣ways, Tendons of Muscles are inserted into every one of the Vertebers; as if there were many Muscles there; which nevertheless some Anatomists refer to one great Muscle, from which they hold all those Tendons are produc'd. Which Opinion seems to have been grounded upon this, that the Muscles of the Back and Loyns in many places stick so close one to another, that they can hardly be separated, but an exact and curious Dissection will shew four Pairs of Muscles, in the Back and Loyns, by means of which the violent motions of those Parts are perform'd, especially about the last Verteber of the Breast, and first of the Loyns, as being those which stick less close together then the rest. I. The first Pair consists of twoThe Qua∣drati Mus∣cles. Triangular Muscles, which being joyn'd together make a kind of a square, vulgarly call'd Par Quadra∣tum. These being broad and thick internally proceed from the hindermost upper Cavity of the Ilion Bone, and the lateral part of the Os Sacrum; and are inserted into the transverse Extube∣rances of the lumbal Vertebers, as far as the last Ribs, being of a fleshy sub∣stance, and bend the Vertebers of the Loyns foward, or one or other acting obliquely forward toward the sides. II. The Second and Primary Pair,The longest Muscles▪ consist of the Longest Muscles, which are extended from the Extremity of the Os Sacrum and Illum to the Mamillary Processes, near the Tem∣ple bones; and afford Tendons to the several Processes of the lumbal Vertebers and Back; and for the most part are confus'd with the Sa∣crolumb s, and semi-Spinatus as far as the lowermost Verteber of the Back; being separated from it toward the up∣per Parts which is the reason that many mistake these three for one Mus∣cle, in regard it is so hard a matter to separate them. Some have divided this Pair, into as many Pairs as there
are Muscles; but Galen rightly de∣scribes it for one Pair affording Ten∣dons to all the Muscles. III. The Third Pair of the SacredThe Sacred Muscles. Muscles, which rise with a sharp and fleshy beginning from the hinder part of the Os Sacrum, and terminate with several Tendons in the Spine of the twelsth Verteber of the Breast, and for the most part in the Spines and ob∣lique Processes of the lumbal Verte∣bers also, and assist the action of the former. IV. The Fourth Pair is compos'dThe Semi-Spinati. of the Semi Spinati, which rising with a Nervous beginning from all the Spines of the Os Sacrum and Loins, in the Processes of the Loins, and lower trans∣verse ones of the Breast; and lift up the Breast. All these Muscles acting together the Spine is lifted up, and so upheld or bow'd. But when those that are in ei∣ther side act alone, it is writh'd to the sides. But the Muscles of the Abdomen, especially the streight ones, mainly assist the bowing of the Loins and the whole Spine toward the fore-parts. For while they are contracted they depress the Abdomen and Breast, and withal bow the Spine, which he who lying upon his back, and would raise himself without the help of his hands, shall manifestly perceive. CHAP. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Abdomen and the Parts contain'd in the lower Belly. I. THE Abdomen is furnish'dThe Mus∣cles of the Abdomen. with ten Muscles, for squeezing down the Nourishment and violent expulsion of the Excrements and Birth. Two obliquely ascending, and as many obliquely descending; two streight, and as many Pyramidical, these adhereing together in the lower Part; and two transverse. The Podex has three Muscles one Sphincter and two Lifters up. l. 1. cap. 8. The Bladder is purs'd together with one Sphincter. l. 1. cap. 21. The Testicles of Men hang by two Muscles call'd Free-masters. l. 1. cap. 22. The Yard has four Muscles. l. 1. cap. 23. The Clitoris in Women is furnish'd with four Muscles. l. 1. cap. 25. CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the Elbow. THE Elbow consists of two Bones, which as they are knit together with various Articulations, so have they their Motions somewhat va∣rious. The Bone of the Elbow directs bending and extention. The Radius turns the Palm and back of the Hand either upward or downward; and therefore they have their proper Mus∣cles to direct their different Moti∣ons. I. The Bone of the Elbow is mov'dThe Mus∣cles of the Elbow. with four Muscles, two bending, sea∣ted in the fore-part of the Arm, and two extending, which possesses the hin∣der part of the Arm. The first are call'd Biceps and Brachioeus, the latter Long and Short. II. That call'd Biceps, rises with aThe Biceps. double and strong beginning, the one Nervous, from the Acetabula of the Scapula it self. The other partly Fleshy, partly Nervous, from the Coracoides Excrescence of the Scapula. Which Beginnings being afterwards united, it takes up with its Body the inner seat of the Arm, and is inserted with a thick Tendon into the innermost Promi∣nency, somewhat fasten'd to the Liga∣ment of the Joynt. III. The Brachiaeus is lay'd or spreadThe Bra∣chiaeus. underneath the former, and is altoge∣ther fleshy, proceeding from the mid∣dle part of the Bone of the Arm, and terminating between the Radius and the Elbow, in the place where they are fasten'd together, this with the former most rightly bends the Elbow. IV. The Long Muscle shews it selfThe ▪ with a strong, broad, but double be∣ginning, the higher, from the lower Rib of the Omoplate; the other lower, which being joyn'd together, under the head of the Shoulder-bone terminates in the Olicrane or top of the Elbow. V. The Short one, arising from theThe Short. hinder Neck of the Arm, terminates in
that part of the Olicrane, where the former ends, and upon which it rests. This together with the former makes a strong and sinewy Tendon, by which the Arm is extended. To these four Muscles the two former are added by latter Anato∣mists. VI. 6. The Externai Brachiaeus,The exter∣nal Brachi∣aeus. by Riolane so call'd, which is a Fleshy lump, confounded with the Long and the Short, and inserted into the same Part. VII. The Aconaeus, which being butThe Aconae∣us. of a small bulk, rises from the lower part of the Shoulder behind, and run∣ing along between the two Bones of the Elbow obliquely descends to the side of the Arm. These if they are to be accounted particular Muscles, must assist the Extension of the Long and the Short. CHAP. X. Of the Muscles of the Radius. FOur Muscles move the Radius, of which the two innermost, which move it inward, are call'd Pronators. The two outermost which turn it out∣ward are call'd Supinators. I. The first of the Pronatores, fromThe round Muscle. its round form is call'd Rotundus; which being produc'd from the inner part of the little swelling of the Shoulder runs with a Membranous Tehdon, al∣most to the middle of the Radius. II. The Second, which is the low∣ermost,The Qua∣dratus. and is call'd Quadratus; being extended from the inner side of the Arm athawrt, proceeds above the Ligament, which fastens the Radius to the Elbow, and is joyn'd to the inner part of the Radius. III. The first of the Supinators,The longer Supinator. which is the Longer, arising from the Extream little Bunch of the Shoulder, descends to the lowermost top of the Radius. IV. The other proceeding fromThe Shor∣ter. the External Apophysis of the Arm, terminates near the middle of the Radius. Note, That although the Descrip∣tions of the Muscles of the Radius follow next in order to that of the Mus∣cles of the Elbow, however in de∣monstrations the Muscles of the Fin∣gers, Thumb and Wrist are first to be shewn; afterwards the Muscles of the Radius, as being more commodiously to be seen, when the others are taken away. CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Wrist, and Hollow of the Hand. THE Wrist is extended, bended, and moved sideways by the bene∣fit of four Muscles, two external, and as many Internal. I. Nevertheless, before these, theThe Pal∣mary Mus∣cle. Palmary Muscle is in the first place to be demonstrated, which is spread under almost all the Muscles of the in∣ner part of the Hand. It derives its Original from the inner little Bunch of the Shoulder, fleshy at the beginning, afterwards attenuated into a slender Tendon, which passing beyond the An∣nulary Ligament of the Wrist, is dila∣ted into the sinewy Membrane through the Hollow of the Hand, expanded to the Confines of the Fingers, so closely adhering to the Skin, that it can hard∣ly be separated from it. This by wrinkling the Skin, strengthens the force of Grasping, and endues the Hollow of the Hand with an extraordinary Sence of Feeling. Next to the Palmary Muscle, lies a certain piece of Flesh at the beginning of the inner part of the Hand, in the low∣er part of the Mount of the Moon, close by the eighth little Bone of the Wrist, some∣times divided into two, sometimes into three, outwardly representing the form of two sometimes three Muscles, and is carried into the inner and middle part of the Hollow of the Hand, stretched under, and folded into, the Palmary Muscle. This, by bringing the fleshy Eminency lying under the Articular Finger to the Tenar, renders the Hand hollow, and forms a Diogenes's Dish. II. The first of the inner MusclesThe inner Cubitaeus. of the Wrist, called by the Name of the inner Cubitaeus, rises from the inner Apophysis of the Arm, and being fastned to the Elbow, is inserted with a thick Tendon into the fifth Bone of the Wrist. III. The Second, called RadiaeusThe inner Radiaeus. internus, being produced from the
same place, is extended through the Radius, and terminates in the Bone which sustains the Index of the Metacar∣pus. These two clutch the Hand. The first of the external Mufcles of the Wrist, called the External Radiae∣us, or Double-horned, proceeding with a broad and two-fold Original from the bony Sharpness of the Arm, rests with a fleshy Substance upon the Radius, and with a double Tendon is inserted into the first and second Bone of the Meta∣carpus. This, by reason of its double Beginning, and double Insertion, by some is described as double. IV. The other called the ExternalThe Ex∣ternal Cu∣bitaeus. Cubitaeus, rises from the External A∣pophysis of the Arm, and being carried through the Elbow, is inserted with one Tendon into the fourth Bone of the Metacarpus, lying under the Little-fin∣ger. If only one or two of these four Muscles act on one side, then the Hand is moved sideways, and that either up∣ward or downward, or in the middle, as either the External or Internal only, or both move together. CHAP. XII. Of the Muscles of the Fingers and Thumb. THE Fingers have several strong Muscles allotted them, as well to strengthen them, as for the Performance of their various Motions; by which they are bended, extended, or moved side-ways. The Sublimae, the Profound, and the Lumbrical bend. I. The Sublime, which is also call'dThe Sub lime Mus∣cle. the Perforated, arises from the inner Bunch of the Shoulder-bone, and is di∣vided about the Wrist into four Ten∣dons, being as it were slit toward the end like a Chink, through which the Tendon of the following Muscle passes, which are inserted into the second In∣ternode of the Fingers. II. The Profound, called also theThe Pro∣found Muscle. Boaring-Muscle, rises from the upper Parts of the Elbow and Radius a little below the Joynt, and passing in four Divisions, with strong Tendons through the Chinks and Clefts of the former, is inserted into the third Bone of the Fin∣gers. III. Now that there may be a directThe Chan∣nel of the Tendons. bending of the Fingers, and that the contracted Tendons may not rise and lift up the Fingers, they are en∣closed in a Channel composed of strong Membranes, and fat and oyly within∣side, running the whole length of the inner part of the Hand, wherein they have a free Course. IV. Those which are called theThe Lum∣bricals. Lumbricals, rising with a slender Sub∣stance from the Tendons of the Pro∣found Muscle, terminate in the first In∣ternode with a round Tendon, inter∣mix'd with the Tendons of the Inter∣bone Muscles. Sometimes mixing themselves farther with the Inter-bone Muscles, they run along the sides of the Fingers, as far as the third Inter∣node, and bend the Fingers side-ways. V. Muscles of two sorts extendThe Ex∣tenders. the Fingers, some Common, others Proper. VI. The Common ones, whichThe com∣mon Ex∣tenders. serve to all the four Fingers, are two, rising from the Extream Part of the Shoulder-bunch, which in their Pro∣gress unite together, and are firmly knit with united Tendons to the second and third Bone of the Fingers. Whence Sylvius and Riolanus describe them for one Muscle, which they call by the Name of the Great Extender, or Magni Tensoris. VII. Those called Proper, beingThe Pro∣per. such as extend one Finger only, are of two sorts. VIII. The First, the proper Exten∣derThe Ex∣tender of the Fore∣finger. of the Fore-finger, which it has besides the Common one, by Riolanus and Veslingius called the Indicator, ris∣ing from the middle and extream Regi∣on of the Elbow, and is inserted with a forked Tendon into the second Articu∣lation; of which two Tendons, the o∣ther unites with the Tendon of the Com∣mon Extensor. IX. The other is the proper Exten∣derThe Ex∣tender of Little-fin∣ger. of the Little-finger, which rising from the upper Part of the Radius, and running between the Elbow and the Radius, is externally inserted with a double Tendon into the auricular Fin∣ger, one of which intermixes with the Tendon of the common Extensor. X. The Fingers are drawn side∣ways,The Inter∣ossei. either toward the Thumb, or from it, by the Assistance of the eight Inter-bone Muscles; of which, the four innermost obtain the Interval
between the Bones of the Metacarp; the four outermost being placed in the Palm of the Hand, rest upon the upper side of the former. They rise from the upper Part of the Metacarp near the Wrist; thence sometimes alone, some∣times united with the Lumbricals, with their Tendons, creep along the sides of the three Bones of the Fingers, to the very Root of the Nails, where the Tendons uniting above and below, ter∣minate. From these the middle and Ring-finger receive two Tendons, the Fore-finger and Little-finger one; Galen believes the hinder Bones of the Fingers to be extended also by these Muscles. Besides the Lumbricals aforesaid, these are two proper Muscles that move side-ways. XI. The first is the proper AductorThe Ad∣ductor of the Fore∣finger. of the Fore-finger, by some confound∣ed with the proper Extensor of the Fore-finger, which rises from the first internal Internode of the Thumb, ter∣minates in the Bones of the Fore-finger, and brings the Fore-finger toward the Thumb. XII. The other, called the properThe Ad∣ductor of the Little∣finger. Adductor of the Little-finger, and which Riolanus believes may be slit in two, takes its rise in the Hollow of the Hand, from the third and second Bone of the Wrist, of the second Order, and is inserted into the side of the first joynt of the Little-finger, and draws it from the rest of the Fingers. XIII. The Thumb, which is equal inThe Ex∣tenders of the Thumb. strength to all the rest of the Fingers, is extended by the Benefit of two long Muscles, which arise from the exterior side of the Elbow; of which, the one reaches to the third Internode. The o∣ther carried beyond the Wrist, is inser∣ted withoutside with a double Tendon, into the first and second Joynt of the Thumb. XIV. It is bended by two Muscles,The Ben∣ders of the Thumb. the one a strong one, which rising from the upper part of the Radius, runs forth to the first and second Internode of the Thumb; the other of a lesser Bulk, which proceeding from the Bone of the Wrist, is spread underneath the other, and extended to the middle of the Thumb. Riolanus will not acknow∣ledge this latter for a Bender, but believes the Muscles rising from the Bones of the Wrist and Metacarp, to be the Ad∣ductors and Abductors. XV. It is drawn to the other Fin∣gersThe Ad∣ductors of the Thumb. by three Muscles, proceeding from the three lower Bones of the Meta∣carp, and inserted into the second Bone of the Thumb. XVI. It is drawn outward by twoThe Ab∣ductors. Muscles, of which, the one arising from the inner Bone of the Wrist, which sustains the Thumb, is inserted into the second Internode of the Thumb, with a membranous Tendon. The other pos∣sessing the Space between the Thumb and Fore-finger, rises from the hinder Seat of the Bone of the Metacarp that lies under the Fore-finger, and with a fleshy Substance, is inserted into the In∣ternode of the Thumb, all along the outermost side, whence it sends a mem∣branous Tendon to the second. CHAP. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Thigh. IN regard the Office of the Foot is to walk and stand, which consists in Fixation and Motion, for that in walk∣ing, while one Foot is set to the Ground, the other still moves forward; for the Performance of both these Offi∣ces, there is a necessity of various Mus∣cles, of which, some move the Thigh, others the Leg, others the Feet, toge∣ther with the Toes. The Thigh is ex∣tended, bended, brought forward, car∣ried backward, and turned about. Three Muscles therefore bend the Thigh. I. First, the Lumbar Muscle,The Lum∣bar Mus∣cle. which is for the most part round, thick, and livid, and seated in the hollow Capacity of the Abdomen. It arises with a fleshy Beginning about the two lower Vertebers of the Breast, and the three upper Vertebers of the Loyns, and descending along the inner Superficies of the Ilion Bone is inserted with a round and strong Tendon into the lesser little Wheel of the Thigh, in the higher part before, and strongly draws the Thigh upward. But because the Reins lye up∣on this Muscle, being endued with a remarkable Sinew, in the same place where the Sinew enters them; hence it comes to pass, that if any Stone be in the Kidneys, there happens a Numness in the Thigh on that Side, by reason of its Compression. Over this, sometimes is spread the other small Muscle, called the small
Lumbal, which where it begins for a∣bout a Fingers length, being carried o∣ver the Lumbal it self, fleshy, slender, and with a flat Tendon, terminates to∣gether with the Lumbal and Iliac, close∣ly embraces it and keeps it firm in its Seat. This Riolanus reports is not to be found in Women. Bartholine also writes, that in the Year 1651. he saw another Psoa, somewhat bigger than this, about the breadth of three Fingers, which bending outwards more to the sides, lay partly under the great Lumbal, and lastly, was inserted with a fleshy Substance into the upper edge of the Iliac Bone, where the inner Iliac Mus∣cle rises. II. 2. The Internal Iliacus, whichThe inner Iliacus. with a slender and fleshy beginning rising in the inner Conavity of the Ilian Bone, unites with its Tendon to the Lumbal, and terminates forward between the greater and the lesser Trochanter. III. 3. The Pectineus, which isThe Pecti∣neus. of a livid Colour; this rising broad and fleshy from the upper part of the Share-bone, near the Commissure, close by its Gristle, is inserted with a short and broad Tendon into the inner side of the Thigh, and starts out to the hinder Parts, where the Thigh bends strongly upward and inward, and by that means one Thigh is laid upon another. And there∣fore not without reason, it is by Bartho∣lin referred to the Adducting Muscles. Three Muscles extend the Thigh, which are called Glutaei, and consti∣tute the Buttocks, and are besides ser∣viceable to the Act of Walking. IV. 1. The larger Glutaeus, whichThe larger Glutaeus. rising very fleshy from the Coccyx, the Spine of the Os Sacrum, and the Rib of the Ilion Bone, terminates with a strong Tendon four Fingers below the great Trochanther. V. 2. The middle Glutaeus, bothThe middle Glutaeus. for situation and bigness, is for the most part spread under the former. This springing forth with a fleshy Beginning from the Rib and Back of the Ilion Bone, in the Forepart, and possessing al∣most the whole Region of the Ilion Bone, is inserted with a broad Tendon into the foremost and higher part of the bigger Trochanter, girdling it every way. VI. 3. The lesser Glutaeus, which liesThe lesser Glutaeus. altogether hidden under the second; this comes out of a fleshy Substance from the back of the Ilion Bone, and from the hinder and lower Seat of it, and is inserted with a strong and robust Ten∣don into the inner Part and Top of the larger Trochanter or Extuberance of the Thigh. VII. The three-headed MuscleThe Tri∣ceps Ad∣ductor. draws the Thigh inward, which from its fourfold Beginning, according to Fallopius, Bauhinus and Riolanus, more truly deserves to be called the Four∣headed Muscle. This is the thickest of all the Muscles in the whole Body, of which, the several Parts, as they vary in their rise and Insertion, so also in their Fibers, and somewhat as to their use. For which Reason, Bartholinus di∣vides it into three Muscles, though he had done better to have made it four. The first part rises with a sinewy Be∣ginning from the upper Line of the Share Bone, and is inserted into the rough Line of the Thigh. The second comes out from the lowest Commissure of the Share-bone, and terminates in the sharp Line of the Thigh, at the upper Part. The third Part arises from the whole lower part of the Hip, and is inserted into the hinder rough Line of the Thigh under the lesser Rotator. The fourth Part proceeding from the Top of the Hip with a round Tendon, which unites with a slender Tendon of a Portion of the first Part, terminates in the inner and inferior Extuberance of the Thigh. Riolanuus writes, that the first part is inserted into the middle of the Thigh, the second below the Neck, and that the third extends it self with a most ro∣bust Tendon to the Extremity of the Thigh. They who allow but three begin∣nings to this Muscle, instead of a fourth beginning, add to it a peculiar Muscle, which Riolanus calls the Pectineus, Ve∣slingius the Livid Muscle, which indeed is but the forth part of the Three head∣ed Muscle. VIII. Four small Muscles bringThe Qua∣drigemi∣ni. the Thigh to the outer side, called Quadrigemini, because they are al∣most alike one to another, and alter∣nately placed in the Part behind, a∣bove the Articulation of the Thigh. The first and uppermost Quadrigemi∣nus, from its Pear-like Shape, call'd Py∣riformis, from its Situation, the external Iliacus, comes out from the lowermost Part of the Os Sacrum. The second from the Extuberance of the Thigh∣bone. The third contiguous to it from the same place. The fourth called
Quadratus, broader and more fleshy than the rest, and about two Fingers breadth distant from the Third arises from the inner part of the Protube∣rancy of the Ischion, and terminates in the External part of the great Trochan∣ter. IX. Two Muscles wheel the ThighThe Obtu∣ratores: obliquely, call'd the Coverers or Ob∣turators, which possess an open hole between the Share-bone and the Thigh∣bone, and assist the Thigh in going backward; one Internal, the other Ex∣ternal. The Internal which is the stronger, proceeding fleshy and broad from the inner Circumference of the said Hole, and being carry'd transversly outward above the Hip, with a three headed Tendon, passing through a Purse for securities sake, enters the Concavity of the great Trochanter, and there causes external Rotation. The External, which lyes under the Pectineus, beginning from the outward Circumference of the said Hole, with a fleshy substance, and winding through the neck of the Thigh, like a Periwincle shell is inserted into the Concavity of the Great Trochanter with a large and strong Tendon, and directs Internal Ro∣tation. Note, that although the Muscles of the Thigh, in the order of Demon∣stration hold the first place, yet in dis∣section they cannot so commodiously be shewn unless the Muscles of the Leg be first remov'd. Which are therefore in demonstrations first to be shew'd. CHAP. XIV. Of the Muscles of the Leg. THE Leg is mov'd three ways, bent, extended and mov'd obliquely. Five Muscles bend the Leg. I. 1. The Longest, also called Fa∣scialis,The longest or the Swath-band Muscle, pre∣sently occuring before, under the Skin rises with a Sinewy and fleshy beginning from the inner Extuberance of the Illion-bone, and being spread, slender as it is, like a Swath-band over other Muscles, is carry'd through the inner Parts of the Thigh, and terminates near the Knee, in a Tendon, which is inserted into the fore-part of the Shin∣bone, in an acute Line; and therefore Riolans not without reason justifies, that this Muscle rather extends the Leg than brings it inward. II. 2. Call'd Gracilis, or Slender,The Slen∣der. resting toward the inside upon the Longest, rises at the Commissure of the Share-bone, with a large and Sinewy beginning, and running out into the inner Parts of the Thigh, is inserted into the inner part of the Leg with a round Tendon. III. 3. Call'd the Seminervous,The Semi∣nervous. rising from the Extuberancy of the Ischion, with a nervous and slender beginning, obliquely descends through the hinder and inner Parts of the Thigh, and terminates with a round Tendon, in the hinder and inner Part of the Leg, and its Tendon runs out into the middle of the Leg. IV. 4. The Fourth call'd the Semi∣membranous,The Semi∣membra∣nous. rises from the same place and extends it self to the hinder part of the Leg with a Tendon some∣what broader. V. 5. The Two-Headed Muscle,The two∣headed. proceeds from the same Extuberancy of the Hip, and in being carry'd through the External Part of the Thigh, and about the middle of the Thigh as∣suming a new fleshy Lump, as it were a new Muscle, and so descending down∣ward, is inserted with a remarkable Tendon, into the Process of the Bone of the Button in the lower Part. This Muscle has been observ'd, to have a double Rise and Termination: for that Reason by Vesalius call'd the double Muscle. To the Extention of the Leg belong five or six Muscles. VI. 1. The Membranous proceedingThe Mem∣branous. accute and spiny from the upper Spine of the Ilion bone; in the outer Part, near the larger Process of the Thigh it alters into a very long and broad Mem∣brane, which like a transverse Liga∣ment, therefore call'd the broad swath∣band enfolds all the Muscles of the Leg and Thigh, and by that means keeps them fix'd in their seat, running out to the extream Part of the Thigh. It is intermixt, about its insertion with the Tendons of the following Muscles, and is inserted into the fore Part of the Leg and Button, toward the outer side; and extends the Leg right for∣ward, and draws it, as others affirm, somewhat outward.
VII. 2. The Long Muscle, by Riola∣nusThe long. call'd Sutorius, by Veslingius Fas∣cialis, rises from the foremost Appen∣dix of the Ilion-bone, and carry'd with an oblique course through the inner Parts of the Thigh, descends under the Knee to the Leg, within side, and ex∣tending it, brings it to, and lays one upon the other, after the manner of Shoo-makers. VIII. 3. The Streight Muscle, grow∣ingThe streight. from the lower Spine of the Ilion∣bone, runs along with a fleshy and round Belly all the length of the Thigh, and with a strong and round Tendon in∣cluding the little dish, terminates under it in the Leg. IX. 4. The Internal vast Muscle,The inter∣nal vast. arising from the Neck and lesser Rotator of the Thigh, is inserted into the Leg with inside a little below the small Cup. X. 5. The External vast Muscle,The exter∣nal vast. taking its rise more outwardly from the lesser Rotator of the Thigh, termi∣nates a little below the small Cup, with a large Tendon in the outer part of the Leg. XI. To these five Extensory MusclesThe Crure∣us. some there are who add a sixth Muscle adhering to the Thigh, which they call Crureus; whose Original they place between the two Rotators of the Thigh, and give it the same ending with the Vast Muscles. The four last of these Extensory Mus∣cles uniting together about the Knee, from one common broad and strong Tendon, wherewith they involve the Cup, and strongly bind together the Bones of the Thigh and Leg. XII. The Poplitan or Ham-Mus∣cle,The Popli∣taeus. brings the Leg obliquely to, lying hid in the hollow of the Ham, and rising from the lower and exterior Extube∣rance of the Thigh, and carry'd ob∣liquely through the hinder and inner part of the upper Appendix of the Leg, is inserted therein, with a square body. This Muscle Riolanus asserts, that he has seen double. CHAP. XV. Of the Muscles of the Foot or Ball of the Foot. THE Foot is bent, extended, and mov'd sideways. Two Muscles before bend the Foot upward. I. 1. The Tibial before, arising fromThe Tibi∣lis antius. the upper part of the Leg and Button, adheres to the whole Leg upon the out∣side. Thence running out under the annular Ligament of the Foot, termi∣nates in the Bone of the Ball under the great Toe. Sometimes it is divided under the Ligament of the Foot into two Tendons. Of which the one is inserted into the first nameless Bone, the other is inserted into the Bone of the Metatarsus just before the great Toe. This Muscle, where it winds back un∣der the Ball, is furnish'd with a Gristle and a little Sessamoides Bone. II. 2. The Peronaeus before, whichThe Pero∣naeus an∣ticus. all along its whole Progress is joyn'd to the side of the Preceding Muscle, and terminates in the outer side of the Leg. This beginning fleshy and nervous from the upper part of the Button, and pas∣sing the fissure of the External part of the Heel, with a strong Tendon, sometimes parted into two, is fix'd into the Bone of the Metatarsus, which sustains the little Toe. When the Muscle is parted in two, then the bigger part of it run∣ing obliquely under the Sole of the Foot, is inserted into the Bone of the Pe∣dion just against the great Toe. But when the Tendon is divided, then the beginning of it uses to be double; that is one from the upper part of the Button, the other from the middle of the Heel: And hence it is that some Anatomists make two Buttons of it. Three Muscles extend the Foot; call'd by the Names of Gastrocne∣mius, Soleus, and Plantaris; of which the two first by means of their thick∣ness and bulk, constitute the belly of the Calf. III. The Gastrocnemius, rises with aThe Ga∣strocnemi∣us. twofold beginning from the Internal and External head of the inside of the Thigh, under the Ham; and by reason of its dou∣ble beginning is taken for two Muscles. This, growing out into a tumid belly, at the lower part by means of a strong
Tendon united with the Tendon of the Selos, is inserted into the Heel. IV. The Soleus, so call'd from a FishThe Soleus. nam'd a Sole, is a Muscle broad and thick, which rising from the hinder and uppermost Commissure of the Leg and Button, and uniting a little above the Heel, with the Tendon of the Gastroc∣nemus is inserted into the hinder part of the Bone of the Heel. V. The Plantaris lyes hid amongThe Plan∣taris. the rest in the Ham, and proceeds with a small and fleshy body, from the outermost head of the lower part of the Thigh, and then terminates under the Knee into a long and slender Ten∣don: which being close united with the Tendons of the Gastrocnemius and Soleus is fix'd into the Heel, and ex∣tends it self half way to the bottom of the Foot. These three Muscles toward the end are intermix'd together, and form one strong Tendon inserted into the hinder part of the Heel, which by reason of its extraordinary strength, is call'd the Great Cord, the wounds of which are very dangerous causing Fevers, Hic∣kups and Convulsions. Veslingius be∣lieves this Tendon not only to be in∣serted into the Heel, but also to extend it self to the very confines of the Toes. However, that before its insertion, by reason of the Prominency of the Heel∣bone, it separates somewhat from the Leg, and forms that space, where A∣chilles so luckily hit Hector when he slew him. VI. The hinder Tibial MuscleThe Tibi∣alis posti∣cus. moves the Foot inward, which rising between the Leg and the Button and assix'd to the whole Leg, runs out underneath to the Bone of the Ball, which is fasten'd to the Cube∣form'd bone. Sometimes it produces double Tendons, of which one is in∣serted into the Navicular-bone, the other into the first Nameless-bone. VII. The hinder Peronaeus drawsThe Pero∣naeus po∣sticus. the Foot outward, which being produc'd from the upper and hindermost part of the Button, and carry'd through the fis∣sure of the external part of the Malleoles, together with the foremost Peronaeus, with a hard and round Tendon, separated from the Tendon of the Antic Peronaeus, winds towards the lower Parts of the Feet, about the Region of the cube-form'd∣bone, and carry'd below the Pedion, is inserted into the Root of the large cube∣form'd-bone, which is plac'd before the Thumb. Riolanus numbers this Postic Pe∣ronaeus among the Benders, perhaps be∣cause it bends the Foot at the same time it carrys it away. VIII. Sometimes, though very rare∣lyThe third Peronaeus. a Third Peronaeus is found, very slender, which runs forth together with the Postic, through the lower Parts of the Foot, nothing different either in its insertion or use, though much in∣feriour in strength. CHAP. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Toes and great Toe. THE Toes have several Muscles, which bend, extend and move them obliquely. The four lesser Toes are extended by two Muscles which are call'd Ten∣sors. I. 1. The long Tensor, which beingThe long Tensor. hid under the fore-part of the Leg, rises from the fore-part and inner part of the Leg, where it is joyn'd to the Button under the Knee. Hence it de∣scends in a streight Line all along the length of the Button, and separated into four Tendons, passes beyond the Anu∣lary Ligaments, and is inserted into the three Articulations of the four fin∣gers at the upper part. II. 2. The short Tensor, rising notThe short Tensor. far from the Bone call'd Astragalus at the upper part, and spread under the long Tensor, thrusts it self into all the Joynts of the first Internode with its Tendons, which are cross'd like an X with other long Tendons above the Meta-Tarsus. The four lesser Toes are bent by six little Muscles call'd Flexores or Ben∣ders. III. 1. The long Bender or broad,The long Bender. and sublime, which together with the following short lyes hid behind under the Muscles that constitute the Calf. This derives its Original from the up∣per part of the Muscle behind, and about the inside of the Malleolus creeping un∣der the Ligament of the Leg and Heel, in the Sole of the Foot is shiver'd into four Tendons, which passing through the Holes of the short Flexor is inser∣ted into the third Articulation of the four Toes.
IV. 2. The short Flexor whichThe short Bender. is also call'd the Bor'd and Deep pro∣ceeds more below, and more inwardly from the Heel, and sending forth four Tendons, divided toward the end with a cleft at the passage of the Tendons of the preceding Muscle, runs forth into the second internode of the Toes. V. 3, 4, 5, 6. Call'd the four Lum∣bricalThe Lum∣brical. Muscles, proceeding from the Tendons of the long and short Tensor, or rather from the Ligament enfolding them, and augmented by a certain piece of flesh rising from the Heel, are inserted with their Tendons into the first Internode of the four lesser Toes, with their several Tendons. Bartholinus, writes that he has obser∣ved another Flexor of the little Toe, rising from the head of the Leg, and divided into two Tendons about its in∣sertion into the Toe. VI. The oblique Motion of the ToeThe inte∣rossei. is perform'd by ten Inter-bone Muscles, seated both in and between the Bones of the Metatarsus, and springing from a fleshy mass; of which the External ter∣minate in the first Internode of the Toes; the innermost run forth to the second Internode, by the first the Toes are drawn outward, by the second they are bent inward; and when both act together, they are extended. VII. The litle Toe has a peculiarThe Abdu∣ctor of the little Toe. Abductor proceeding from the Heel, and fix'd without side to the fifth Bone of the Metatarsus; which is inserted into the outmost side of the first Inter∣node. The great Toe has several Muscles. VIII. 1. The Flexor, joyning toThe Flexor of the great Toe. the long Tensor of the Toes, which ri∣ses more behind with a Fleshy substance from the upper part of the Button, and following the Boaring Muscle, is fasten'd with a strong Tendon to the third Bone of the great Toe. Some∣times it is divided under the Sole of Foot into two Tendons, of which one goes to the great, the other to the second Toe; and then the long Flexor sends but three Tendons to the other Toes. IX. 2. The Extensor rising fromThe Ex∣tensor. the outer side of the Leg, where the Button goes back, and creeping through the upper Parts of the Foot, is inserted into the whole great Toe on the upper part. Sometimes it sends forth a dou∣ble Tendon, one to the last joynt of the great Toe, the other to the Bone of the Metatarsus, that lyes under the great Toe. X. 3. The Abductor proceedingThe Abdu∣ctor. from the inner part of the Heel, and being fasten'd to the inner side of the Foot all the length of it, is fasten'd without side into the first Bone of the Thumb. XI. 4. The Abductor Major ari∣singThe Abdu∣ctor Major. from the Ligament of the Bone of the Metatarsus, which lyes under the little Toe and the next to it, termi∣nates with a short and strong Tendon, in the first Joynt of the great Toe in the inner Part. XII. 5. Abductor Minor, by Casseri∣usThe Abdu∣ctor Minor. call'd the Transversal proceeding from the Ligament of the little Toe, which binds the first Internode, is carry'd transverse and fleshy, and stretches it self more inwardly to the first Bone of the great Toe, with a short and broad Tendon. To this some ascribe another Use, believing it there apply'd to ga∣ther together the first Bones of the Toes. Riolanus believes that it serves only for a Pillow, least the Tendons should be injur'd by the hardness of the ground and the Bones. Casserius, who is said to be the first Discoverer of this Muscle, will have it assign'd to bring the great Toe toward the little Toe, thereby to make the foot hollow, for the more easie walking in Stony and unequal places, by the more firm ta∣king hold of the step. XIII. In the flat of the Foot, whichThe Vesti∣gium. is called Vestigium, or the Footstep, there is to be observ'd a Fleshy mass, which like a Cushion, lyes under the Muscles and Tendons. Which some confound with the Universal Muscle.
AN APPENDIX Concerning the MEMBRANES and FIBRES. CHAP. I. Of the Membranes in General. I. A Membrane is a white simi∣larDefinition. part, broad, flat, thick, and extensible, produc'd out of the clammy and vis∣cous part of the Seed, preserving, containing, gathering together, cor∣roborating and disterminating the Parts that lye under it or contained within it. II. It was call'd by the Antient ,The Names. and . All which words at that time signify'd one and the same thing. Afterwards these words became particular, and were attributed to par∣ticular Membranes. For now Hymen properly signifies that Membrane which resides in the Neck of the Womb, vulgarly called Claustrum Virginita∣tis, the Fence of Virginity. Menina, signifies that Membrane that enfolds the Brain. And  or Tnica, is the general Name for all Membranes that cover the Veins, Arteries, Ure∣ters, &c. At this day Membrane is a general word, signifying any Membrane that enfolds a fleshy Part, the Pericar∣dium, Periosteum, Peritonaeum, the Mem∣brane of the Muscles, &c. III. There can be hardly any certainOriginal. Original of the Membranes describ'd; as being Parts subsisting of themselves, form'd out of Seed, and every where conspicuous in the Body. Many have with probability enough deriv'd them from the Menines. Lindan writes, that the Substance of the Heart is wrapt about with a very transparent and very thick Membrane, which he be∣lieves to grow from the dilated Extre∣mities of the Fibres of the Heart, and thence would have us consider whether all the rest of the Membranes do not arise by a certain Propagation from this Membrane of the Heart. But these are mere Conjectures, hardly credible; ra∣ther it is to be said, that the Membranes are Spermatic Parts, form'd with other Spermatic Parts, out of the Seed at the first formation of the Embryo, and that therefore they have no other Ori∣ginal than the Seed. IV. The Membranes are nourish'dTheir Nou∣rishment. like the rest of the Parts by Arterious blood, flowing out of the Arteries into their Substance, and fermented therein, by the mixture of Animal Spirits, the residue of which either unapt for Nou∣rishment or superfluous, is carry'd back through the Tubes of the Veins, into the hollow Vein. V. Now the Membranes are theThe office. Organs of Feeling, for all the sensible Parts, even the Nerves themselves, feel by the help of the Membranes only: which those Parts that want are desti∣tute of sence, as the Bones, Gristles, the fleshy Parts of many Bowels, wherein the Sence of Feeling no farther extends it self then to the Membrane that en∣folds it. This Faculty of Feeling is bequeath∣ed to them by the Animal Spirits con∣tinually flowing into them through the
Nerves, which influx ceasing, the Sence of Feeling also fails, as in Apoplexies, Pal∣sies, &c. Such Membranes also into which few Spirits flow, are dull of Feeling. Thus Veins and Arteries are said to be void of Sence, because they feel but dully. VI. The Differences of MembranesThe diffe∣rences. are many. In respect of their Substance; some thin, some thick, some legitimate, as the Pleura, Periosteum, &c. Others il∣legitimate, as being rather Membranous Bodies, such are membranous Liga∣ments, Tendons, the Stomac, Intestines, Bladder, &c. In respect of their Figure, some broad, some long, some triangu∣lar, &c. In respect of their Situation, some inward, some outward. VII. The number of the Mem∣branesThe num∣ber. is almost infinite, but the most considerable are these that follow. In the Birth, the Chorion, Amnios, the Urinary Membrane, and in Brutes, the Alantois. In the whole Body of Man, the Cu∣ticle, the Skin, the fleshy Pannicle, the Membranes of the Muscles, the Periostea, and the Membranes of the Vessels. In the Head without, the Pericranium, more inward, both the Meninxes, which descend from the Cranium into the Spi∣nal Concavity, involving the Spinal Pith, and extends themselves the whole length of the Nerves. In the Eye, seven Tunicles, the Nameless, the Conjunctive, the Horny, Uveous, Net-like, Spiders Web, and Vi∣treous. In the Ear, the Membrane of the Tympanum. In the Mouth, the Tunicle proper to the Tongue and Palate, as also that which is common to the Mouth, the Chaps, the Gullet and Stomach. In the Breast, the Pleura, the Medi∣astinum, the Pericardium, the Tunicle investing the Lungs and Heart, and the Valves of the Heart. In the lower Belly, the Peritonaeum, Epiploon, the Mesenterie, and the Mem∣branes that enfold the several Bowels; as also those of which the Intestines, the Bladder, and other Parts are com∣posed. Of all which primary Membranes, mention has been already made in their proper Places. Besides these, there is an infinite number of thin Membranes that have no Names. CHAP. II. Of the Fibres. FIbres are white similar Parts, so∣lid, oblong, like little Strings, designed for the Motion of some, and the Preservation of other Parts. I. They are Parts which are notTheir Ori∣ginal. derived from others, but existing of themselves, for the Complement of those Parts where they are required. And therefore they mistake, who be∣lieve them to be produced from the Brain, or from the Spinal Marrow, as are also they who think them the Pro∣ductions of the Nerves, it being impos∣sible that the Nerves should be expand∣ed into so many Strings. For Example, a small Nerve, which shall consist of twenty fibrous Strings, is inserted into some larger Muscle, consisting of a hundred fibrous Strings, much bigger and stronger than those in the Nerve. Thus the whole Body of the Heart is fibrous, whereas it has very few, and those very small Nerves. The Fibres indeed communicate with the Nerves, so far as they receive Animal Spirits from them, yet they are no more Pro∣ductions from them, then the Veins are Productions of the Arteries, from whence they receive Blood. Therefore they are Parts existing of themselves, united to others for com∣mon use. II. Their Action is, to be contract∣edTheir Ac∣tion. into one another. Though Riola∣nus believes, that rather Use than Acti∣on is to be attributed to them. All the Muscles are moved by Fibres, which being cut or wounded, their Mo∣tion ceases. Therefore the wonderful Contexture of the Fibres of the Heart, is the reason that it is able to endure such a continual Motion. The Sto∣mach, Intestines, Womb, Bladder, and the like Parts are furnished with Fibres, the more to strengthen them in Retention and Expulsion. Lastly, all the Parts that are appointed for actual Perfor∣mance, are full of Fibres. However, some do question whether there be any such things as the little Fibres of the Brain, Lungs and Liver, and Fallopius positively denies them; but now adays there is no Body doubts of them, more than that the Arteries and Veins are not without Fibres; though Fallopius and Vesalius will hardly admit them,
because they are so very small: howe∣ver Fernelius Brisot, Fuchsius, and other eminent Men allow them, for the Strength and Preservation of the Vein, and teach us that their streightness is to be observed in Blood-letting. And this Experience teaches us in Warts, when the orbicular and oblique Fibres being broken, the Tunicle of the Veins will be extended after a strange manner, nor can ever be again contracted or reduc'd to its first Condition. III. Vulgarly there is a threefoldDiffe∣rence. difference observed from their Situati∣on. Some are streight, which are ex∣tended at full length; some are trans∣verse, which intercut the streight ones; others oblique, which mutually cut both. But to these three differences we must add orbicular Fibres, as in the Sphincter Muscle, unless you will reckon them among the transverse ones. The streight ones, are vulgar∣ly said to attract, the Oblique to retain, the Transverse to expel; which three Distinctions, Fallopius, not unde∣servedly derides, and teaches us how that all the Fibres expel, but that none in re∣spect of themselves either attract or re∣tain. But the Parts that perform one single Action, have single Fibres, as several Muscles whose Action is single, that is to say, Contraction. But they that perform many Actions, are furnished with various Fibers, as the Intestines which retain and expel, to which the streight ones are added to strengthen and corroborate. But the Membranes which ought to be every way fitted and prepared for Action, have Fibres so in∣termixed, that their whole Substance seems to be but a Contexture of Fibres joyned together.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Treating of the ARTERIES. CHAP. I. Of the Arteries in General. IN the Body of Man there are three Vessels that go under the Name of Arteries. 1. The Aspera or Trachea, Lib. 2. Cap. 16. 2. The Pulmonary, by some errone∣ously called the Arterious Vein, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. 3. The Great Artery, or Aorta, to be discoursed of in this Book. I. This great Artery is an Orga∣nicDesinition. Similar Part, oblong, round, hollow, appointed for conveighing the Spirituous Blood. It is called Organic, because it is ap∣pointed for a certain Use, that is, to conveigh the Blood. It is called Similar, not in a strict, but profunctory sence. For though it be thought to be composed of Fibres and Membranes, yet because it is every where compacted after the same man∣ner, the Artery in the Hand not differ∣ing from the Artery in the Foot, or in any other Part, hence it is reckoned a∣mong the similar Parts. It is said to be appointed to carry or convey the Spirituous Blood. II. Not that the Arterious BloodThe Arte∣ious Blood, what it is? is altogether spirituous, but the great∣er Part of it is such, from which greater Part the Denomination is taken. For some Parts of it are more, others less Spirituous. For when the Chylus being mixt with the Blood of the hollow Vein, enters the Heart the first time, it does not presently obtain so great a Subtilty, Attenuation, and Spirituosity, as those Particles of the Blood mixed with the Chylus, have ob∣tain'd, which have passed many times through the Heart by Circulation, and have been many times dilated therein. For as in the Distillation of Wine, the oftner it is distilled, the more subtil, the more pure and efficacious the Spirit is, which is drawn off from it; so the Blood, the oftner it is dilated, the Spi∣rituous Particles are the better separated from the thick Mass, and the more at∣tenuated, and what is not yet so per∣fectly attenuated, and consequently less fit for Nourishment, returns through the Heart again, to be therein more perfectly dilated.
And therefore, I admire at the Learned Ent, who says that the Arteri∣ous Blood is worse than the Veiny Blood, whereas the first is far more spi∣tuous than the latter. But, says he, it is much thinner and more serous than the veiny. However it is much more spirituous; whence that thinness, which seems to be Serosity, though it be not so. Thus Spirit of Wine is thinner and more fluid than Wine, is it therefore more serous and worse? But, says he, the Arterious Blood has left much of its oyl in the Lap of Life, the Heart. I deny it, for there is no Comparison to be made betwen a light∣ed Lamp and the Spiritification of the Heart, Vid. Lib. 2. C. 13. Besides the Blood, the Arteries some∣times by Accident, carry depraved and corrupt Humors mixt with the Blood, though there be no mention made of this in the Definition, because it is not their designed use. III. Andreas, Laurentius, Emilius,Whether they at∣tract Air? Parisanus and others, believe, that the Arteries attract Air through their Ends and invisible Pores to cool and venti∣late the Blood. But then there would be two contrary Motions at the same time in the same Arteries, of the Blood push'd forth to the Exterior Parts, and of the Air entring the inner Parts, which can never be. Besides, there being a necessity that the Vital Spirits should be conveighed through the Heart through all Parts of the Body, it would be a dan∣gerous thing to cool that Heat so ne∣cessary to Life, especially in cold and phlegmatic People. IV. Rolfinch believes the ArteriesWhether they dissi∣pate Va∣pors? serve for the Dissipation of Vapors. But the thickness of their Substance de∣clares this to be false, that nothing, or very little of spirituous and serous Li∣quor can exhale through it, but less what is thick and earthy as adust Va∣pors, therefore those adust Vapors are dissipated and separated from the Blood, when the Blood is poured forth out of the Arteries into the Sub∣stance of the Parts, whose larger Pores are proper to evacuate those adust Va∣pors, either insensibly or by Heat. More absurd are they, who believe the Blood to be carried through certain Arteries to the right Ventricle of the Liver, and through certain others from the Spleen to the left Ventricle of the Heart, and as ridiculous are they, who think they carry nothing but Vital Spirits, and no Alimentary Blood. Baertholin believes the Limpha to be carried through the Arteries, and with him Rolfinch. For that the Lympha be∣ing mixed with the Chylus and veiny Blood, when the whole Mass is dilated in the Heart, it ceases to be Lympha any more. Nor do any Lymphatic Vessels open into the Arteries in the Mid∣way; neither do the Arterious Blood, when sufficiently spirituous, stand in need of that fermentaceous Liquor. The great Artery, from whence the lesser Branches spring, derives its Ori∣ginal from the left Ventricle of the Heart, as from its local Principle, but not as its material Beginning, or Principle of Generation, for that as Hippocrates says, no Part arises from another. V. The Substance of the ArteriesThe Sub∣stance. is Membranous, for the more easie Contraction and Dilatation. They also consist of a double proper Tunicle, the one external, the other internal. Which least they should be pain'd with continual Pulsation, are endued but with an ordi∣nary Sence of Feeling, and are therefore vulgarly thought to be quite void of Sence. VI. The outward Tunicle is thinThe outer Tunicle. and soft, endowed with many streight, and some few oblique Figures; which seems to be derived from the Ex∣terior Tunicle of the Heart, and to be continuous with it. VII. The Innermost, harder andThe inner Tunicle. much thicker, to conveigh the Spiritu∣ous and vaporous Blood with more Se∣curity; which thickness and hardness is more conspicuous in the great Arteries next the Heart, which first receive the boiling Blood from the Heart, both Thickness and Hardness abating, the farther off they recede from the Heart, and as the Blood by the way relaxes of its Heat and Subtilty, so that toward the Ends it is very thin and soft; very little differing from the Substance of the Veins, only in the Whiteness of their Colour. VIII. Vulgarly this Tunicle is saidFibres. to have many transverse Fibres, few oblique. But Rolfinch denis any Fibres proper to the Arteries. But the con∣trary appears in the great Arteries being boil'd, where the Fibres are manifestly to be discern'd. Besides that, unless the Arteries were strengthened by transverse Fibres, they would be two much dilated by violent Pulsation, and would so re∣main, as being destitute of contracting Fibres, which is the reason of the
Tumor called Aneurisma, for that this Tunicle being burst, together with its Fibres, the Blood slips into the first soft Tunicle, and presently swells it up. IX. The inner Tunicle, as Galen ob∣serves,The third Tunicle. is overcast with a very thin little Skin within side, like a broad Cobweb, which may be said to be a third pro∣per Tunicle. Riolanus writes, that he never could find it; but for all that it is sufficiently conspicuous in the greater Arteries, and therefore probable to be in the lesser, and appears continuous with the Tunicle ensolding the inner Ventricles of the Heart, when it is ma∣nifest, that the Arteries borrow this in∣ner Tunicle, as well as the outermost, from the Heart, as the Nerves borrow two Tunicles from the Brain. X. Besides the foresaid Tunicles, aThe fourth Tunicle. certain improper or common Tunicle enfolds the Aorta with its Branches lying hid in the Trunk of the Body; in the Breast, proceeding from the Pleura, in the lower Belly, from the Peritonaeum, by means of which it feels more sensibly, and is fastned to the neighbouring Parts; but this Tunicle it puts off when it enters the fleshy Parts of the Bowels. And so in other Parts, the Arteries which do not enter the Muscles, borrow an outer Tunicle from the neighbouring Membranes. For the Substance of the Arteries ought to be very strong, for fear of being burst by the violent Impulse of the spi∣rituous Blood, and to enable them to endure the strongest Pulsations without prejudice. XI. We lately made mention of aThe breed∣ing of an Aneurisma. preternatural Tumor in the Arteries, called Aneurisma, which happens when the second harder Tunicle of the Arte∣rie comes to be burst by any Accident with its Fibres, by which means, the Blood flowing upon the soft external Tunicle, dilates it, and gathered toge∣ther therein, as in a little Bag, causes a Swelling, wherein there is many times a very painful Pulsation and Reciproca∣tion of Dilation and Contraction; which Tumor, if it be burst or opened by an unskilful Chyrurgion, the Pati∣ent presently dies of a violent Bleed∣ing not to be stopt. Regius opposing this Opinion of the best and most fa∣mous Chyrurgions, attributes the Cause of an Aneurisma, to the flowing of the Blood into the Muscles, out of an Ar∣tery burst or wounded; which Blood wraps it self about with a little Pellicle, generated out of its own more viscous Particles. Led into this Opinion by Iames de Back, a Physitian of Rotter∣dam, who told him the Accident of a Man wounded in the Arm, to the Dammage of an Artery; in which Arm, being open, a great quantity of Arterious Blood was found among the Muscles, wrapt about with a Pellicle. Upon this, Regius arrogantly grounds his Opinion, and makes it his own; not considering, that the Blood con∣tained in an Aneurisma, is never cor∣rupted, nor ever apostemates, nor en∣genders Inflammations, and that extra∣vasated Blood never generate investing Membranes, but presently putrifies: and lastly, that in such a Tumor, caused by extravasated Blood, there is never any remarkable Pulsation per∣ceived, as is continually to be felt in an Aneurisma. Regius writes farther, that in that same Wound of his Patient, almost brought to a Cicatrice, there ap∣peared a Tumor that beat very much about the place affected, and which en∣creased more and more every day; but this which is related of Back's Patient and not his, has not one word of Truth. For neither was the Wound cicatrized before my coming, which was within eight or ten Hours after the Man was wounded, neither was there any Pulsation to be perceived in the Arm, very much swell'd by reason of the extravasated Blood poured forth a∣mong the Muscles; neither was there a∣ny Pellicle to be found afterwards upon Incision. XII. As to the Substance of theThe Sub∣stance. Arteries, there is a great Duspute, whether it be nervous or gristly. Aristotle asserts the Aorta to be nervous, and calls it in many places , the Nervous Vein. Others be∣lieve it rather of a gristly Nature, by reason of the Heat and Hardness of the Arteries; of which Opinion, Galen seems to be. But Fallopius believes them to be of a middle Nature, be∣tween Nervous and gristly, but most gristly, and hence it has been observed, that the Arteries near the Heart have been observed to be sometimes gristly and bony in old Beasts of the larger Sort, as also in Man himself. Of which Gemma, Solenander, Riolanus, Harvey and others, produce several Examples. But Reason evinces the Mistake of these three Opinions. For that the Substance of the Arteries is not nervous, their most obtuse Sence evin∣ces, whereas all nervous Parts seel most exactly. Nor gristly, because of its
Fibres, which Gristles and gristly Parts want: Lastly, not of a middle Nature for the same Reasons. It remains then that the Substance of the Arteries is membranous, proper, and of a Na∣ture peculiar to its self. XIII. The Arteries are nourished byTheir Nu∣triment. the Spirituous Blood passing through them, wherein, because there are many salt, volatil and dissolv'd Particles, a good part of which grows to its Tuni∣cles, hence their Substance becomes more firm and thick. XIV. The Bulk of the Arteries va∣riesThe Big∣ness. very much. The bigness and thickness of the Aorta is very remarka∣ble, but the Part of it ascending from the Heart, is less; the other descending larger, by reason of the greater Bulk and number of the lower Parts to be nourished. The rest vary in bigness, according to their Use, as they are re∣quired to stretch themselves shorter or longer, as they are required to supply the Arteries derived from them with more or less Blood, and the farther they are from the Heart, the narrower they are, and of a thinner and softer Substance: For that the Blood, the more remote it is from the Heart, loos∣es much of its Spirituousity, and conse∣quently less salt Particles grow to the Tunicles, there not being so much strength required in these remote Vessels, as in those which are nearer the Heart, in regard the less spirituous Blood may be contained in weaker Vessels. XV. Some assert the Number of theTheir Number. Arteries to be less than that of the Veins; which however cannot be cer∣tainly determined, seeing that the little Arteries are much more white and pel∣lucid, and consequently less discernable. Others make the Number equal, o∣thers, that of the Arteries more, in re∣gard there is a greater quantity of Blood thrust forth through the Arte∣ries, for the Nourishment of the Parts then is carried back through the Veins, seeing that a good Part of it is consum'd in Nourishment, and no less dissipated through the Pores before it comes to the Veins. But then you'l say, how comes a greater quantity of Blood to be contained in the Veins then in the Arteries, and a more conspicuous Swelling of the Veins, by reason of the Blood? The reason is, because the Mo∣tion of the Blood is more rapid through the Arteries than through the Veins; for there passes more through the Arte∣ries in the space of one moment, then through the Veins in ten, by reason of the greater force by which the Blood is expelled by the Heart into the Arte∣ries; whereas the motion of the Blood is remiss and weak in the Veins, and consequently there is more Blood stays in the Veins than in the Arteries. XVI. The Arteries lye hid in mostSituation. places under the Veins, partly for secu∣rities sake, partly to stir the Blood re∣siding in the Veins forward, by their Neighbouring Pulsation. Sometimes they separate from the Veins, but rare∣ly cross over them; only in the lower Belly about the Os Sacrum, where the great Artery surmounts the hollow Vein. XVII. The Arteries differ, eitherThe diffe∣rences. in respect of their Magnitude, some be∣ing very large, as the Aorta and the Pulmonary; some indifferent, as the Carotides, Emulgent, and Iliac; others lesser, as those that creep through the Joynts and Head; others least of all, as the Capellaries dispierced through the whole Habit of the Body, and the substance of the Bowels. In respect of their Progression, some streight, others winding like Vine-twigs: In respect of their Situation in the Breast, in the Head, in the lower Belly, in the Joynts; others in the Superficies, others deeper in the Body. In respect to their Con∣nexion; some to the Veins, others to the Nerves; some to the Membranes, some to other Parts. XVIII. The Arteries run alongTheir Pro∣gression. through all parts of the Body, there being no part to which Arterious Blood is not conveighed for Nourishment. Yet Ent and Glisson seem to affirm, that all the Parts of the Body are not nourish∣ed with Blood. But this difficulty is easily resolved by distinguishing between those Parts that are immediately nou∣rished with the Blood, as the Flesh of the Muscles, the Parenchym's of the Heart, Liver and Kidneys; others mediately, as when another sort of Juice is first made out of the Blood for the Nourishment of some Parts. As when for the Nourishment of the Nerves, not only arterious Blood is re∣quired, but also there is a necessity that a good part of it be first turned into Animal Spirits, for the Nourishment of the Bones, the Arteries are extend∣ed to their inner Parts, and powr forth Blood into their Concavities and Poro∣sities, for the generating of Marrow; also, that the Arteries themselves and
Veins may be nourish'd with the Blood which passes through them: the one with the saltish Particles of the Blood and nearest to fixation, which renders their substance thicker and more so∣lid: the other with the Sulphury and more humid Particles, whence the substance becomes more moist and languid. The manner of nou∣rishment Fernelius thus describes. The Veins and Arteries says he, are nou∣rish'd much after the the same manner, which though they contain in themselves, the Blood which is the next cause of their nourishment, yet cannot in a moment al∣ter it into their own Substance. But the Portion which lyes next the Tunicles, and being first alter'd grows whitish, like dew, is hurry'd away into the little holes or Pores of the Veins and Arteries, to which when once oppos'd and made thic∣ker, it is first fasten'd, and then assimila∣ted. XIX. The Blood is carry'd toThe Pulse. the several Parts by the means of the beating of the Heart, which at every stroak contracting it self, and squeezing the Blood into the Arteries, causes the Arteries at the same time to be dilated and to beat: for as the Heart beats when it contracts it self and expels the Blood, so on the contrary the Arteries beat, when they receive the Blood, and are fill'd and dilated by it. XIX. The reason of this many withWhether a a Pulsific faculty in in the Ar∣teries? Praxagorus and Galen assert to be a Pulsific and proper faculty, which causes all the Arteries to be distended and beat at the same time that the Heart is contracted. To confirm which Plater asserts, the Arteries tobe form'd and beat, before the Heart. The Arteries, says he, are form'd and beat, and car∣ry Spirits, before the Heart perceives any motion, which is a mistaken Opini∣on. For first, upon all alterations of the Pulse of the Heart, presently the Pulse of the Arteries is changed, whether weak, strong, swift, slow, or interrupt∣ed, &c. which would not happen if the Arteries had a proper Pulsific faculty. Secondly, Let an Artery be bound in a living Creature, at the very same mo∣ment the Motion shall cease beyond the Ligature; which certainly would remain a small while, if the faculty of moving were innate. But you'l say, that the Tunicle of the Artery being com∣press'd by the Ligature the Irradiation of the Heart, which should excite the Motive faculty to act, cannot pass be∣yond the Ligature. In opposition to which I shall make use of the Experi∣ment of Plembius. In a living Ani∣mal, compress with your Finger the Aorta, or any other bigger Artery near the Heart, and below the pressure make an Incision, and thrust a little Cotton into the hole, only to a slight obstruction of the Artery, then take off your Finger from above the Incision, and then it will appear, that the Artery below the Cotton will not move at all, though the Tunicles be neither com∣pressed nor bound. As to Platerus's opinion we have already answer'd it, l. 1. cap. 23. XX. Therefore the Cause of theThe cause of the Pulse in the Ar∣teries. Pulsation of the Arteries is only re∣pletion, and the violent impulse of the Blood into them from the Heart. Which Walaeus, Bartholin and others think impossible, because the Blood fills the Arteries successively, and one Part is mov'd after the other, and therefore they believe one Artery beats after another and not altogether. Not considering that the Arterious blood is rarify'd, hot, thin and easily mov'd, and that it is forc'd into the Arteries full of the same Blood before; so that upon the forcing of never so little into the great Artery from the Heart, the whole is forc'd forward into all the rest of the Arteries, and so all the Arteries must of necessity be distended at the same time. Thus if you lay a Circle of contiguous Balls upon a Pewter-plate, and thrust forward but one, that moves first, then the second, then the third, and so all move at the same time. And thus it is in the Areries, where one part of the Blood being mov'd, all the rest of the Parts of it must of necessity give way, by reason of its contiguity. In∣deed the Heart might fill and cause the Heart to beat successvely, were they empty, but not in Arteries full before. These reasons Experience confirms, which teaches us, that so soon as the Heart cea∣ses to force Blood into the great Artery presently the Pulse of all the Arteries ceases. Thus at Nimmeghen I saw a Man in a Duel thrust through the left Ven∣tricle of the Heart, as afterward it ap∣pear'd upon opening the Body: Pre∣sently the wounded Person fell down like a Man Thunder-strook and dy'd: so soon as he fell, I made up to him and sought for his Pulse in his Wrist and Temples, but could not perceive the least motion; because the Blood
flowing through the Wound into the cavity of the Breast, could not be forc'd into the Aorta, which rendred the Blood of all the rest of the Arteries immoveable without the least Pulsation. The like I saw at Leyden and Utrecht. Also in such as dye of a Syncope, when the motion of the Heart ceases, the Pulse of the Arteries fails, or at least as the Pulse of the Heart grows weaker and weaker, so does the Pulse of the Arteries answerably. Therefore all Phy∣sitians agree, that the beating of the Arteries is the most certain Indication of the Constitution of the Heart. But if the Arteries had an innate Pulsific Fa∣culty, the Pulse would indicate the Constitution of the Arteries, and so all the Physitians had been in an Error from Hippocrates till this time: there∣fore we must conclude that the Motion of the Arteries proceeds only from the Motion of the Heart. Which motion is somewhat help'd in the depression of the Arteries, by their transverse Fi∣bres. Tho' those Fibres are not mov'd of themselves, unless there be a distention first by the Blood expell'd from the Heart; for they only contract to their first Estate, the Arteries distended be∣yond their usual rest, wherein they re∣main till again distended. Some put the Question, whether the Heart beating all the Arteries beat to their utmost Extremities, I answer, That if the Pulses of the Heart be very violent, then it is sensibly per∣ceiv'd; but if weak and languid the Motion is not so sensibly perceiv'd in their Extremities. Hence says Har∣vey, not without good Reason, The Impulse of the Heart diminishes by Parts according to the several divisions of the Arteries; so that in their Extream di∣visions the Arteries becoming plainly Ca∣pillary, are like the Veins not only in their Constitution and Tunicles, but also in their rest; while no sensible Pulse or none at all is performed by them, unless the Heart beat violently, or the Heart be over dilated. And this is the Reason why at the Fingers ends we sometimes feel a Pulse and sometimes none; and why Harvey knew those Children in a Fever, if the Pulse sensibly beat at the Tops of their Fingers. Of the Motion of the Arteries, Read the Epistle of Descartes to the Lovain Physitian. Tom. 1. Epist. 78. CHAP. II. Of the great Artery, or Trunk of the Aorta. THE great Artery from whence all the Arteries of the Body, ex∣cept the Rough, and Pulmonary, pro∣ceed, very much exceeds all the rest of the Arteries in thickness and length of Course. Nevertheless in substance and largeness it is not much different from the great Pulmonary Artery, extended from the right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs, which is vulgarly though erroneously call'd the right Ar∣terious Vein. I. Now it is requisite that theThe Sub∣stance. Aorta should have such a solid Sub∣stance, least the hot and spiritous Blood, forc'd into it from the very Furnace it self, should be dissipated; and large∣ness is moreover required, to the end it may contain a sufficient quantity of Blood to be distributed to all the other Arteries proceeding from it. II. The Orifice of the Heart beingIt's rise. laid open, it adheres continuous to the left Ventricle; at it's very rise being furnish'd with three remarkable Valves, fashion'd like a Sigma prominent from the Heart toward the outward Parts, and hindring the return of the Blood from the Artery into the Ventricle of the Heart. Before it issues forth from the Peri∣cardium it emits from it's self the Coro∣nary Artery, sometimes single, some∣times double, encircling the Basis of the Heart like a Crown, and thence scattering branches the whole length of it, accompany'd with the Coronary Veins, with which some affirm it to be united by Anatomists, which however would be a very difficult thing to de∣monstrate. Near the Orifice of this Coronary Artery stands a Valve, so order'd, that the Blood may easily flow back out of the great Artery into the Coro∣nary. This will not admit a slender Bodkin thrust into it, from the Part next the Heart into the great Artery; but from the Part next the great Artery a Bod∣kin will easily enter the Coronary; by which means we find where the Valve
is, which otherwise is hardly discerni∣ble. The Aorta having left the Piricar∣dium, constitutes a Trunk, the smaller Part of which ascends upward, the lar∣ger Part slides down toward the lower Parts. CHAP. III. Of the Branches proceeding from the Subclavial Arteries. THE lesser ascending Part of the Aorta, spread between the inner separating Membranes of the hollow Vein, rests upon the Aspera Arteria. I. Rising from the Heart, it isThe Subcla∣vial bran∣ches. presently divided into two Subclavial Branches; the right being the higher and the larger, which proceeds from the same place where the Aorta is lit into the Carotides: the left more low and nar∣row, which rises where the Aorta winds downward, and with a more oblique Channel then the other is carry'd to the Arm. From both these Branches several Subclavials proceed; some before it falls into the concavity of the Breast; o∣thers, after it has left the Breast. II. While both the Subclavials lyeThe upper Intercostal. hid in the Breast, it sends forth from the lower Part the upper Intercostal, which being fasten'd on each side to the Roots of the Ribs, communicates se∣veral branches to three or four spaces of the upper Ribs of its own side, from which other little branches are imparted to the adjoyning Muscles and the Pith of the Back. However sometimes these Intercostals are derived from the Cer∣vical Arteries, passing thence through the holes of the Vertebers. From the upper Part of both the Subclavials proceed these three Arte∣ries. III. 1. The Mammary, which descendsThe Ma∣mary Arte∣ry. through the Muscles possessing the Spa∣ces of the Gristles of the true Ribs, and proceeding to the side of the Mucro∣nated Gristle, is divided into several branches under the streight Muscles of the Abdomen, which till of late most Ana∣tomists would have to be united at their ends by Anastomosis, with the ascending Extremities of the branches of the Epigastric Artery. But I could never observe that conjunction, nor does it stand with Reason, seeing that the Ar∣terious Blood redundant in the Artery, cannot be transfus'd into another Arte∣ry annex'd to its ending; for the Blood is forc'd from the Heart through both the Arteries to the end, and therefore can neither be receiv'd nor carry'd to the Heart by the end of either Artery. So that if there were any Anastomosis under the said Muscles, it ought to be of the Mammary Artery with the Epi∣gastic Veins, and the Epigastic Artery with the Mammary Veins. Which con∣junction however I could never observe. IV. 2. The Cervical, which contri∣butingThe Cervi∣cal. little branches to the Verte∣bers and Muscles of the Neck, passes to the seventh Verteber of the Neck, through the holes of the tranverse Apo∣physes, and under the Pith uniting with the branch of the opposite side, is shat∣ter'd into an Infinite number of diminu∣tive branches, which running along with the little branches of the Cervical of the opposite side, intermix'd and in several places as it were ingrafted into one ano∣ther from the wonderful Net-like-fold in the thin Meninx belonging to the Cere∣bel. Which little branches partly creep through the substance of the Cerebel invisibly; partly gaping toward the inner Parts of it, pour forth a great quantity of the most pure and subtil Blood into the pores of the Cerebel; the little drops of which are seen to weep out of the dissected substance. More∣over little branches run out toward the Horses Saddle, which are intermix'd with the innumerable branches of the Carotides, at the lower Part of the Wonderful Net, and so seem to con∣tribute toward the compleating of the Net, though the cheifest Part of it be made by the Carotides. V. 3. The Muscula, which im∣partsThe Mus∣cula. little branches to the Muscles resting upon the Neck, and sometimes to the Muscles of the Arm. VI. When the Subclavial has for∣sakenThe Axil∣lary and Humerary the Breast it changes it's name for that of Axillaris, because it runs to the Arm-hole, and before it descends to the Arm, sends forth from its up∣per Part the Humerary Artery to the Muscles covering the Shoulder and the Gibbous Part of the Scapula.
From the lower Part it casts orth three Arteries. VII. 1. The Upper Pectoral,The upper Pectoral. which runs forth with several little branches to the Muscles spread under the Breast. VIII. 2. The Lower Pectoral,The lower Pectoral. which runs downward by the side of the Breast, but is chiefly carry'd through the broad Muscle. IX. 3. The Scapulary, which en∣tersThe Scapu∣lary. the Muscles possessing the Concavi∣ty of the Scapula. X. These branches sent forth, the restThe Arte∣ries of the Arm and Hand. of the Axillary Artery, after it hath communicated the little branches to the Kernels, seated under the Arm-holes, goes away to the Arm, call'd therefore by some the Brachial Artery, through the inner Part of which descending between the Muscles, together with the Basilic Vein, distributes on both sides slender little branches to the Muscles embracing the inner Seat of the Shoulder: There rising outward with a deep branch of the Basilic Vein, it runs to the outer Parts of the Elbow, and affords bran∣ches to the Joynt and Neighbouring Parts, but then descending inward, un∣der the bending of the Elbow, is di∣vided into two remarkable Branches, of which the uppermost carrying along the Radius, goes to the Wrist, where the Physitians feel the Pulse, and thence proceeding under the Annulary Liga∣ment, sends forth the following bran∣ches. 1. Between the Bone of the Thumb, and Metacarpus to the Muscles of the outer Part of the Hand. Nor has the outer part of the Hand any other Ar∣teries but these discernible. 2. A double branch, to the inner Parts of the Thumb. 3. A double branch to the inner seat of the Fore-finger. 4. One to the Middle-finger. The lower branch runs along the lower Arm to the Wrist, from whence the following branches proceed. 1. To the Muscles seated next the Little-finger. 2. To the Middle-finger. 3. A double branch to the Middle∣finger. 4. A double branch to the Little∣finger. CHAP. IV. Of the Carotides and their Branches. I. THE Subclavials being sentThe Caro∣tid Arteries forth, presently the Caroti∣des start out from the ascending Aor∣ta; of which the left arises from its upper Trunck, then proceeds from the beginning of the right Subclavial, sirmounting the Clavicula; though many by mistake will have it to rise from the same Trunck with the for∣mer. These two Corotides, near the upper Part of the Sternon, being supported with the Thymis Glandule about the beginning, take their course upward, and with their External and Internal branch ascend to the Head. For after they have distributed branches to the Larynx, Tongue, the Hyoides Muscles, and the neighbouring Glandules, they ascend on both sides along the Aspera Artera, together with the Jugular Vein to the Chaps, and there are parted into the inner and outer branches. II. The outer Branch, which is theThe outer branch of the Carotid. slenderest is dispeirs'd with a vast number of scarce discernible sprigs through the Face and Cheeks, and waters the Forehead and Pericranium; partly crawling to the Ears, sends forth the fol∣lowing Branches. 1. One branch forward toward the Temples, which is perceiv'd in that place by the Pulse, and sometimes is open'd, in obdurate pains of the Head. 2. A Branch to the hinder place of Ear. 3. A Branch to the lower Jaw; the small boughs of which are inserted into the lower Lip; and entring the Bone of the lower Jaw, run with a little branch to the Roots of all the Teeth. From this branch, little small Twigs pene∣trate the external Table of the Cranium through diminitive holes, and enter the Deploids, to which they convey Blood for the making the Medullary juice. The innermost branch which is theThe inner∣most branch. larger, is carry'd first to the Chaps, where it affords branches to the Larynx, the Paristhmii and the Tongue, and sends little branches to the Kernels
behind the Ears, and the spungy Parts of the Palate and Nose. Then it en∣ters the upper Jaw, and affords a little Branch to every Tooth, through which when sharp Humors descend, they cause the Tooth-ach; with the remain∣ing Part ascending the Skull, toward the bottom of it, it is divided into two Branches of an unequal bigness. One of these, which is the lesser, and the hindermost, affords a little Branch to the inner Muscle of the Neck, and having sent another through the Hole of the upper Verteber into the hard Meninx, involving the Pith of the Spine, ascending farther, it enters the Cranium through the Hole in the Va∣gous Nerve, and creeps through the hard Meninx, and about the Hollow of the thick Meninx, into which it seems to open it self with slender little Branches, the end of it vanishes. IV. The other, which is bigger andThe Rete Mirabile. almost equal to the Trunk; tending upward, through the bony Channel in the Wedg like-bone, near the Fore-side of the auditory Passage, is carried with a winding Course to the Mares Saddle. At the bottom of which, after it has sent a Branch on both sides into the side of the thick Meninx, expands it self into several minute Tendons, which in∣serted into the little Branches of the Cervical Artery, form the Wonderful Net, conspicuous in Calves, Cows and Sheep, but more obscure in Men, un∣less upon the Dissection of a Body but newly deceased. V. Nevertheless, the said Branch does not terminate in those Tendrils, but making way through the hard Me∣ninx, enters the thin Meninx with two remarkable Branches, which inter∣mix infinite little Strings, with the little Branches of the Cervical Artery fastned to the Marrow; and also with∣out the Skull, accompany the Spinal Pith to the Loyns. This done, it sends another lesser Branch through the se∣cond Hole of the Wedg-like-bone, to∣gether with the Optic Nerve without side the Skull to the Eye. Also it stretches out another Branch through a torn Hole, not far from the Infundibi∣lum, which is lit into two Stocks at the side of the Spittle Kernel; the inner∣most of which being united with the inner Artery of the opposite side, and shivered into diminutive Arteries, is scattered all over a thin Membrane, at the beginning of the Optic Nerves, and partly with innumerable visible Tendrils passes through the Bulk of the Brain, partly discharges the Spirituous Blood through the gaping Orifices into the Pores of the Substance of the Brain. The other more outward, more reflex and wrapt about with a thin Membrane, and united to its own little Branches, with the diminutive Ar∣teries carried from the Cervical to that Seat, is partly disseminated through the thin Meninx, partly ascends upward to the foremost Ventricles of the Brain, wherein it constitutes the Choroide Fold. From the same larger Branch of theThe Plex∣us choroi∣des. Carotis, another Artery proceeds, which after it has passed the Skull through the second Hole of the Temple, is presently parted into two Stocks, of which the Exterior runs through the eight Hole of the Wedg-like-bone, into the larger Concavity, winding a little Branch to the Extremity of the Nose. The innermost, which is bipartited at first, sends a slender Branch to the thick Meninx. CHAP. V. Of the Arteries proceeding from the descending Trunk of the Aorta, before it comes to be divided. THE descending Part of the Trunk of the Aorta, which is larger at the upper Part, adheres to the Gullet. Hence some vainly believe, that a Man overheated with violent Ex∣ercise, or the Rays of the Sun, per∣ceives such a remarkable Refrigeration from a large drought of cold Water; the Gullet being thereby cold, and by that means the Blood being also cold that is contain'd in the Trunk of the great contiguous Artery; and that some in the same cases sound away, upon drinking cold Water too freely, be∣cause, as they say, that which is con∣tain'd in the adjoyning great Artery, be∣ing too suddenly cool'd by the cold Water passing through the Gullet, is somewhat thickned, and the Motion of it thereby interrupted. I. This descending Part of theThe lower Interco∣stals. Trunk, before it passes the Dia∣phragma, sends forth the lower Inter∣costals, which are sent from the hinder
Seat of it on both sides, to eight or nine Intervals of the lower Ribs, and com∣municate little Tendrils to the Muscles of the Back and Breast, through the Holes in the Nerves. II. Moreover, about the Diaphrag∣ma,The Phre∣nic. from the Trunk comes forth the Phrenic, from hence the Right, from thence the Left, which is carried to the Diaphragma, the Mediastinum, and sometimes to the Pericardium. The Remainder of the Trunk of the Aorta penetrating the Diaphragma, scat∣ters Branches every way through the lower Parts of the Body. Some before it is parted into the Iliac Arteries, others after it is divided from them. The Branches which proceed from it before division, some accompany the Vena Porta, others the Branches of the hollow Vein. The Branches that accompany the Vena Porta, are two, the Coeliac and Mesenteric. III. The Coeliac, which some alsoThe Coeli∣ac. call the Stomachic, proceeds from the Body of the Aorta before, at the first Verteber of the Loyns, and descending under the Hollow of the Liver, is di∣vided above the Trunk of the Vena Porta into two Branches, which adhere to the Sweet-bread under the hinder Seat of the Stomac. IV. Of these, that on the Right∣hand,The right Gastric. and the more slender, produces the Dexter Gastric, which approaches the Pylorus, and by Spigelius is called the Pylorie; also the double Cystic's, be∣ing very small, dispeirsed through the Gall-bladder with several Branches. But in the lower Part, these three following, have their Original, and proceed. V. 1. The Right-hand Epiplois,The Right Epiplois. to the Right-hand Seat of the lower Caul, and the Colon annexed to it. VI. 2. The Intestinal, to the Duo∣denum,The Inte∣stinal. and beginning of the Iejunum. VII. 3. The Right-hand Gastro-Epiplois,The Right Gastro E∣piplois. to the bottom and middle of the Stomach. VIII. 4. Two small Hepatic Arte∣ries,The Hepa∣ticks. concerning which there is some dispute. For as Galen says, they en∣ter the Parenchyma of the Liver, and so betake themselves for the greatest part into the Hollow of it. Rolfinch af∣firms, that he has observed them very numerous in the Convex Part. Glis∣son affirms, that they do not enter the Parenchyma of the Liver, but only insinuate themselves into the common Capsula, and therewith are divided into the Capillary Vessels, and communi∣cate several Branches to the Gall-blad∣der, and Bilary Pores. The remaining Portion of this Right-hand Branch enters the Mesente∣ry, and waters it with many Sprigs. IX. The Left-hand Branch of theThe Sple∣nic. Coeliac, which is called the Splenic, larger than that on the Right-hand, and somewhat swollen, with a winding course proceeds above the Sweet-bread to the Spleen, at the upper Part sends forth the Larger Gastric, which after∣wards bestows a little Branch upon the higher and middle Seat of the Ventricle, and throws out two stocks of Arteries, noted with particular Names, to the Stomach. X. 1. The Coronary Stomachic,The Coro∣nary Sto∣machic. which girds the upper Orifice of the Ventricle like a Crown; and affords se∣veral little Branches to the Body it self of the Stomach. XI. 2. The Left-hand Gastric,The Left Gastric. which is carried toward the Right-hand to the upper Parts of the Ventricle, and to the Pylorus. Besides these, there proceed also from the Splenic Branch, but at the lower Part. XII. 1. The Postic Epiplois,The hinder Epiplois. to the lower Part of the Caul, and an∣nexed to the Colon it self. XIII. 2. The Sinister Epiplois,The Left Epiplois. to the Lower and Left-side of the Caul. XIV. The remainder of the SplenicThe Vas breve ar∣teriorum, and the left Ga∣stro-epi∣plois. Branch approaching the Spleen, enters its Parenchyma, after that, a little be∣fore its entrance at the upper Part, it has sent forth a Short Arterious Vessel to the Left-side of the bottom of the Sto∣mach, and the Left-hand Gastro-epiplois, which being supported by the upper Part of the Caul, crawls along the Left∣side of the bottom of the Stomach, af∣fording little Branches to the fore and hinder Part of it, as also to the Caul; this Branch entring the Spleen, is distri∣buted through the Substance of it with several Divarications. XV. The Mesenteric Artery,The mesen∣teric Arte∣ry. which also accompanies the Roots of the Vena Porta, proceeds from the forepart of the Trunk, sometimes single, some∣times divided into two Branches, pre∣sently after its Exit. Of these, the uppermost, rising below the Coeliac, is extended through the whole upper part of the Mesentery (where it constitutes the Mesaraics) as also into the Jejunum,
Ileon, and part of the Colon, to the Right-hand Kidney. XVI. The lower, rising below theThe inner Hemorrho∣idal. Spermatics, near the Holy-bone, en∣ters the lower Region of the Mesentery, and is distributed with several Branches into the Lest part of the Colon, and the streight Gut, and lastly, descending to the Podex, constitutes the Inner Hemor∣rhoidal Arteries. Through the said Branches, proceed∣ing from the Mesenteric, the Arterious Blood is caried for the Nourishment of the Intestines and the Mesentery it self. Nor are they to be credited, who upon Galens Authority, affirm that the Me∣senteric Arteries suck in the thinner part of the Chylus. For the Heart continu∣ally forces the Blood through the Arte∣ries from its self to the Parts, but re∣ceives nothing through them from the Parts. Nor can the two contrary Mo∣tions of Expulsion and Reception be al∣lowed at the same time in the Arteries. Which Mistake proceeded from hence, that Galen did not understand the mil∣ky Vessels, but judg'd them from their white Colour to be Arteries. The Branches proceeding from the Trunk of the Aorta before its Division, which follow the Stocks of the Vena Ca∣va, are several. XVII. 1. The Emulgent Artery,The E∣mulgent Artery. of each side one, rarely more, to each Kidney, which begins about the Con∣junction of the first and second Verte∣ber of the Loyns. The Right a little lower, the Left a little higher, and slit into two; three or four Branches enters the Kidneys of its own side. Rolfinch writes, that the Extremities of this u∣nites after many Fashions, with the Extremity of the Emulgent Vein, by Anastomose's, which is no way probable. Vide l. 2. c. 18. XVIII. 2. The Spermatics, bothThe Sper∣matic. proceeding from contiguous beginnings, of which, the Right surmounts the Trunk of the hollow Vein; rarely the Right-hand One proceeds from the E∣mulgent, though the Left, in Women, has been observed so to do. Each of these uniting with the Vein of its own Side, presently after their Rise, scarce two Fingers breadth from the Emul∣gent, in Men, descend through the Process of the Peritonaeum to the Testi∣cles; in Women, so soon as they ap∣proach the Testicles, they are divided into three little Branches, of which, the first is inserted into the Testi∣cles; the second enters the bottom of the Womb with many little Sprigs, and the third is distributed into the Tube and Ligament of the Womb. XIX. 3. The Lumbars, which areThe Lum∣bars. not only distributed to the Muscles ad∣joyning to the Loyns and Peritonaeum; but in the hinder Part, where the Trunk of the great Artery rests upon the Verte∣bers, are carryed through the holes of the Vertebers of the Loyns to the Spinal Mar∣row; which some think thence ascend to the Brain, all the whole length of the Pith, together with the Veins ad∣joyning. XX. 4. The Upper Muscula, ofThe upper Muscula. each side one, which runs out to the sides of the Abdomen and its Mus∣cles. CHAP. VI. Of the Arteries rising from the de∣scending Trunk of the Aorta, after its Division within the Peritonaeum. I. THE Trunk of the Aorta, descend∣ingThe Iliaca. and Sacra Arteria. when it comes to the Region of the fifth Verteber of the Loyns, as∣cends the hollow Vein, and is divided into two Branches called Iliac. Now at the Division it self comes forth the sa∣cred Artery which passing the Holes of the Os Sacrum with little Sprigs, opens it self into its Marrow. Every Branch, not far from its Bifor∣cation, is again divided into the inner and outer Branch. From the inner Ili∣ac Branch, which is the lesser, proceed three Stocks. II. 1. The Inferior Muscula, whichThe infe∣rior Mus∣cula. proceeds to the Muscles called Glutei, constituting the Buttocs, as also to the Extremity of the Iliac Muscle, and Psoa. About the first beginning of this Artery, sometimes from each Trunk, a Branch runs out to the skinny Parts of the Pubes, Ilion and Abdomen. III. 2. The Hypogastric, which isThe Hypo∣gastric  external Hemorrho∣idal. large, and at the lower Seat of the Os Sacrum, proceeds to the Bladder, and the Neck of it, and the Muscles cover∣ing the Share-bone, and with some Root-strings, runs to the Podex, where it constitutes the External Hemor∣rhoidals. But in Men it is carried through the two hollow Bodies of the Yard to the Nut. In Women, it is
distributed through the bottom of the Womb, and the Neck of it, with a numerous attendance of Root∣strings. IV. 3. The Umbilical Artery,The Umbi∣lical. which ascending near the sides of the Bladder, and inserted into the doub∣ling of the Peritonaeum, proceeds to the Navel, from whence it passes forth again, while the Birth is in the Womb, and runs into the Uterine Cheeskake. But in a Man born, after the Navel∣string is cut, it ceases any more the conveyance of Blood; and therefore becomes more solid and harder, and is extended like a string from both the Iliac Arteries to the Navel. The remainder of the inner Branch, assuming a Scien or Graft of the External Branch is dispeirsed into the Muscle possessing the hole of the Share-bone and the Muscles adjoyn∣ing. From the outer Iliac branch two sprigs go forth. V. 1. The Epigastric, which wind∣ingThe Epi∣gastrick. upward without the Peritonaeum ascends the streight Muscle of the Ab∣domen in the inner Part, and is met above the Region of the Navel by the descending Mammary, and with the Extremities of which it is thought to unite by Anatomists: which is a mistake: as is prov'd already, cap. 3. and lib. 1. cap. 5. VI. 2. The Pudenda Arteria,The Puden∣da. which sends forth on each side a re∣markable Artery into the Sinewy or Fungous Bodies of the Yard, and in Women into the Clitoris. Hence it is carry'd inward along the Commissure of the Share-bone, to the Privities and Groins, and their Kernels, and is lost in the Skin of those Parts and of the Yard. These Branches being sent forth, the Iliacs forsake the Peritonaeum, and are carry'd to the Thighs, and then changing their Name, are called Cru∣ral. CHAP. VII. Of the Crural Arteries. I. THE Crural Artery, whichThe Cru∣ral Artery. is less then the true Crural, descending towards the lower Parts of the Thigh, sends forth some branches above, and others below the Ham. Above the Ham three branches issue from it. II. 1. The Exterior Crural Mus∣cula,The Exte∣rior or Cru∣ral Mus∣cula. from the Exterior Part of the Crural Trunk. III. 2. The inner Crural Mus∣cula,The inner. from the innner Part of the Trunk. IV. 3. The Poplitea, or Ham-Artery,The Popli∣tea. which descending through the hinder Muscles of the Thigh, runs out as far as the Ham, whence it de∣rives its Name. V. Below the Ham the SuralThe Sural proceeds from it, which lying hid a while under the Ham, sends forth on each side, a deep sprig to the Knee and the Muscles constituting the Calf. Thence descending toward the small of the Leg, it is divided into the Tibiaean Arteries. VI. 1. The Exterior Tibiaean,The Exte∣rior Tibi∣aean. which descending along the Button is consumed in the Muscles of the Leg. VII. 2. The hinder Tibiaean,The hinder Tibiaean. which runs to the Commissure of the Tendons of the Muscles of the Calf. VIII. 3. The lowermost hinder Ti∣biaean,The lower∣most hinder Tibiaean. which passes through the Mem∣branous Ligaments of the Button joyn∣ing the Muscles of the Leg, and is distributed into the upper Parts of the Foot, and the Muscles carrying the Toes outward. IX. The remainder of the CruralThe Arte∣ries of the Feet. Artery, descends directly streight between the second and third Muscle of the Toes, and proceeds between the Heel and the Malleolus to the lower Parts of the Foot, sending forth a little branch from the side not far from the Mal∣leolus, to the Muscle of the great Toe, and the upper Parts of the Foot. What remains is divided between the Ten∣dons
of the Muscles of the Toes into two little Branches. Of which the in∣nermost affords two little sprigs to the great Toe, to the next Toe two, and to the Middle-toe one. The outer∣most affords two little sprigs to the Little-toe, two to the next, and one to the Middle-toe. Note, That in the Description of the Arteries all Anatomists mention, only those which are manifestly conspicuous; the rest, as not so apparent or not dis∣cernible they omit; the Nutrition shews, they are in the Parts. Thus we see the Skin is nourish'd by the Arterious blood, though we can find no conspi∣cuous Arteries therein: and the same may be said of other Parts.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the VEINS. CHAP. I. Of the Veins in General. I. A Vein is an Organic simi∣larThe Defi∣nition. Part, membranous, long, round, hollow, con∣taining the less spirituous Blood, and carrying it to the Heart. It is call'd Organic, as design'd for a certain Use, which is to carry the Blood. It is call'd Similar, in the same manner as the Arteries are said to be. The Form is expressed in the words long, round and hollow, for that it re∣sembles a Pipe. The Use is declar'd in the last words. Containing the less spirituous Blood, &c. for that the Blood is the primary Humor which is carry'd through them. I say less Spirituous, to distinguish it from the Arterious Blood which is much more Spirituous, and comes not to the Veins till it has lost a great Part of its spirituosity. I say containing; not because such Blood is contained in the Veins only, for there is sufficient found in the substance of many Parts; but because the greatest quantity is carry'd in these Vessels, and as much as may be pre∣serv'd from Putrifaction, which other∣wise being so great a quantity would be soon corrupted. I say, carrying to the Heart; be∣cause this appears to be their primary Office. lib. 2. cap. 8. But the Blood is carry'd through the Veins without pulsation; but flows only and is push'd forward as one Wave pushes forward another. The Antients ascrib'd two other Uses to the Veins. 1. Distribution of the Blood. For they thought the Blood flow'd out of the hollow Vein into the lesser Veins which is now disprov'd by the Circu∣lation of the Blood. 2. The Concoction and making of the Blood. Which was Galens Opinion, who affirms that the Veins were made for the generating and conveighing the Blood into all the Parts; and farther least the Nourishment should loose time, while they were busied only in conveighing
the Blood; moreover, he says that the Distempers of the Veins oft-times hin∣der the Generation of profitable Blood. And among the Moderns, Spigelius a∣grees with Galen. The Veins, saith he, which boyl and concoct the Blood, and have in themselves an innate sangulfying Faculty. And a little after, If we con∣clude that the Brain is the Domicel of Reason, because that being injured, we find our Understanding craz'd; we may justly call the Veins the Work-house of Blood, because that they being injured, we find depraved and bad Blood to be gene∣rated. Vesalius, Ioubertus, Laurentius, Schen∣kius, and others, consent with Galen. However, this Operation belongs not to the Veins, but to the Heart, as being the only sanguifying Bowel, from which, the farther the Blood departs, so much the more imperfect it becomes and ne∣ver is restored or elaborated to a better Condition in the Veins; and therefore for that very reason, there is a necessity for the Blood to be return'd again to the Heart, there to be a new concocted and wrought to perfection. Which Highmore considered, and therefore sig∣nally refutes this Opinion. Vide lib. 2. cap. 11, and 12. II. The Vein is of a MembranousThe Sub∣stance. Substance, indifferently soft, to the end it may the more easily be di∣stended, and grow languid again. III. It consists of one proper Tuni∣cle,Its Tuni∣cles. soft and dull of feeling, so that it is vulgarly said to have no feeling at all. It is also thought to be inter∣woven with a threefold sort of Fibres. Concerning which, there is a great Dis∣pute among the Anatomists. Fallopius and Vesalius very much question, whe∣ther there be any or no? because with all their Industry they could never ob∣serve any. Scaliger also denies them strenuously. On the other side Brissot and Fernelius admits Fibres in the Veins; telling us, that the Fibres of the Veins are to be observed in letting blood, with whom Fuchsius and Dunius agree. To give our own Judgment in this case, we think, that though no Anatomist can manifestly demonstrate Fibres in the Veins, yet that they are easily to be imagined by any one that considers their necessary Use, which is to preserve the Veins in their due State, and to bring them to their Natural Condition, after being distended with too great a quanti∣ty of Blood, by Contraction. Which is manifestly apparent in Warts, when the transverse and oblique Fibres being burst, the Tunicle of the Veins is very much relaxed, nor can ever be reduced to its first Estate. Which Lindan seems not to have considered, wonders that Physitians should admit such a multi∣tude of Fibres in the Veins, when the streight ones are only requisite. Which was Lindans Mistake, for if the streight ones are to be admitted, much more the Transverse and Oblique. Spigelius and Plempius observe that these Fibres may be demonstrated by boyling the Trunks of remarkable Veins in large Animals. Deusingius believes, that by means of these Fibres, the Veins attract the Blood, and carry it to the Heart; and affirms, that the Meseraics also draw the Chylus. But these are meer Imagi∣nations, contrary to Reason and Ex∣perience. IV. That the Tunicle of the VeinsSense. has little or no Sence of Feeling▪ ap∣pears by the opening of it in Blood-let∣ting, at what time, if there be any Pain, it proceeds from the Skin, and other ad∣joyning sensible Parts, that adhere to the Vein. Riolanus reproves Bauhinus, for say∣ing the Veins do not feel; citing out of Plutarch, that Marius felt an extream Pain upon the cutting his Warts; and farther, that the swelling of the He∣morrhoids causes a most sharp Pain. But this Pain was felt in the Skin and adjacent Parts, not in the Vein. We have also ordered Warts to be cut, which have been very painful till the Vein has been freed from the Incum∣bent Membranes, but no longer. V. Besides the foresaid proper Tu∣nicle,The impro∣per Coat. a Vein has also another impro∣per and common, with the neighbour∣ing Parts, in the Breast from the Pleura, in the Abdomen from the Peritoneum, in other Parts from the next Mem∣brane, the more to secure it, being an∣nexed to the neighbouring Parts in the length of its Progress. This Tunicle it puts off, when it enters the Perenchymas of the Bowels, and the Substance of the Muscles or other Parts. VI. The Vein is nourished withIts Nou∣rishment. the Blood which flows through it, with which, by reason few salt Spirits are mixed, there being nourished with a moister Juice, the Substance of it be∣comes more soft. The manner of its Nourishment, see l. 6. c. 1. VII. Here arises a Question, whyWhy the Veins  not beat? the Veins do not beat? seeing they re∣ceive
the Blood from the Arteries, and carry it back to the Heart. I answer, that the Motion of Pulsation in the Ar∣teries, is continued to their very Extre∣mities. But by reason of their Divari∣cations, the violence of it is diminish∣ed more and more by degrees, and to∣ward the ends is but very weak; if it does not cease altogether, so that there can be no Pulsation in the Veins. Be∣sides, the Blood gently gliding out of the small ends of the diminutive Arte∣ries, and entring the narrow Orifices of the Veins, presently flows into the broader Veins; so that then all vio∣lent Motion ceases, and consequently all Pulsation. See the Comparison con∣cerning this Matter, l. 2. c. 8. The Veins more inwardly are fur∣nished with several Valves Membranous and thin, however close and compact, and are sometimes single like a little Half-moon; or double, two opposite one to another, as is observed in some of the larger Vessels. Sometimes three∣fold, triangularly opposed one to ano∣ther. These are all so situated, as to give free passage to the Blood flowing through them to the Heart, but pre∣venting its Reflux from the Heart. And therefore the Valves of the Veins of the Head look downward, but the Val∣ves of the lower Parts look upwards. VIII. The Number of the ValvesValves. is infinite, neither can they be all dis∣covered by the Anatomists. Yet some have taken an accompt of the most con∣spicuous, which they reckon to be a hundred and eight. But that is nothing, in the lesser Veins there are Myriads of Veins not to be discovered; but that they are there, is apparent, for that the Blood is so restrained by those Valves, that you cannot force it back with your Finger into those Parts from whence it flow'd. IX. The Bigness of the Veins isThe big∣ness. very various. In general, the soft, hot, and most moving Parts, have the bigest Veins, because the most Blood is required from them; the hard, colder, and less moving Parts have smaller Veins for the contrary reason. The biggest of all, by reason of its remarka∣ble Hollowness, is call'd Vena Cava, which is, as it were, the main River of the Blood, into which, the lesser Veins, like lesser Streams discharge their Blood. The bigger sort are by Hippo∣crates called Blood-powrers, because that being broken or cut, they powre forth a great deal of Blood; the lesser he calls Capillaries, as resembling so many Hairs. Some few Veins proceed unaccompa∣nied, but most have an Artery that runs along with them; frequently jigg by jowl, rarely spread under it, but more frequently by resting upon it. Many at their Extremities unite with the ends of the Arteries, by Anastomasis, but the Capillary ends of most vanish in the substance of the Parts. X. The Veins differ, 1. In respectThe Diffe∣rence. of their Substance, some having a thicker, some a thinner Tunicle. 2. In respect of the Bigness, some large, some indif∣ferent, some Capillry▪ 3. In respect of the Figure; some streight, some arch'd, others winding. 4. In respect of their Situation; some in the Head, some in the Breast, others in the Abdomen or Joynts. 5. Others in respect of their Connexion; some to the Flesh, some to the Arteries, others to the Nerves, Bones, and other Parts. But in regard there is but one use of the Veins to carry Blood to the Heart, there can be no difference observed from hence. XI. The Number of the Veins,The Num∣ber. some think to be greater than that of the Arteries, others equal, which is a hard thing to determine; seeing it is impossible to discern all the Productions, either of the Veins or Arteries. If you mean the main Trunks, then they are equal. Three main Arteries▪ and three primary Veins, the Porta, Cava, and Pulmonary. To which, if we add the Umbilical, then we may the umbilical Arteries to their Number. And as the latter are the Productions of the Iliac Arteries, so is the former the Product of the Vena Porta. XII. No Man questions but thatTheir Ori∣ginal. the Veins have their material Begin∣ning from the Seed. But whether they first proceed from the Liver or the Heart, is much disputed. Most affirm that they rise from the Heart. Hence Epigelius, The Veins, saith he, are so inter∣mixed with its Parenchyma, that hardly any Anatomist could be hitherto perswaded, but that they arise from the Liver. But these Disputants are all out of the way, for e∣very Part is said to spring from another three manner of ways. Either by way of Generation, Radication, or Distributi∣on. In respect of Generation, a Vein can∣not be said to spring from another Part, seeing that all the solid Parts, Heart, Liver and Veins, &c. are all formed at the beginning out of the Seed, one before another, not one by
another. Not in respect of Radication, seeing that a Vein has no Roots to con∣veigh alimentary Juice for the Nourish∣ment of its Parts drawn from Matter forreign from the Body of Man, nor the ends of the Veins be said to be Roots, but only their beginnings, through which the Blood, which has lost its Spirituosity, and is become useless for Nourishment is conveighed back to the Heart to be new concocted and re∣stored to its first Purity. Nor in re∣spect of Distribution; seeing the Blood is not distributed to the Parts through the Veins, or by any of their Producti∣ons, but rather taken away from the Parts to be carried back to the Heart; whence it is apparent, that the Veins a∣rise from no Part. With much more Reason they might be derived from the Substance of the Parts, from whence they seem to rise with little Roots, and grow into a Stalk, such as the Vena Ca∣va, like a Tree, whose Root receives the Juice of the Earth, and conveighs it to the Trunk, as the Veins receive the Blood from the Parts themselves, and from the Arteries therein contain'd. But this is easily disproved by what has been said before, so that we must con∣clude the Veins to be Parts subsisting of themselves, formed with other Sperma∣ticks out of the Seed. As to any far∣ther Enquiry, Hippocrates said well, The Veins diffused through the Body, and many springing from one, but whence that one derives its self, or where it terminates, I do not know; for the Circle being made, there is no end to be found. In the mean time, as the Rivolets, which are the first Receptacles of the Water flowing from Springs and Moun∣tains, do not derive their beginning from the Channel of the River: So the small Veins cannot be said to rise from the great ones, or the Bowels thereto annexed, but are the first Springs that suck in the Blood, and carry it to the larger Vessels; otherwise than in the Nerves and Arteries, wherein there is a Progress of the Blood and Spirits from the primary Bowels to the larger Vessels, and from them to the lesser; and con∣sequently the primary and larger Vessels are first to be described. But in the Description of the Veins, we must be∣gin with the Capillaries, which are the least, to the end we may understand more easily, how, from whence, and whither the Blood is conveighed. Which is the reason we make use of this Me∣thod, quite contrary to what has hi∣ther been observed in the beginning, with the Springs and Fountains and smallest Roots of the Veins. As to the Umbilical Vein, see l. 1. c. 32. Concerning the Pulmonary we have sufficiently discoursed, l. 2. c. 9. and 13. Here therefore we shall only treat of the Porta and Cava, and the lesser Rivolets that discharge themselves into them. CHAP. II. Of the Vena Porta, and the Veins united to it. I. THE Vena Porta enters theThe Vena Porta. Hollow Part of the Liver between the two Eminences, which Hippocrates calls , or Gates with a broad, but short Trunk, seat∣ed under the Duodenum. II. The beginning of this Vein, isIts Rise. by some derived from the Liver, by others from the Mesentery. But the Doubt is easily resolved, by saying that it takes its Rise from the Intestines and the Mesentery both. For that from those Parts through its Roots, it receives the Blood remaining after Nou∣rishment, and conveighs it to the Liver, being poured forth into its Trunk through its Ramification expanded into the Liver; to the end it may be there∣in converted into bilous Ferment, as in l. 1. c. 14. But to prevent the Blood from slipping back from whence it came, it has many Valves both in the Roots and little Branches, none in the Trunk to withstand the force of the retiring Blood. Into this Vena Porta several lesser Veins discharge the Blood as into a Channel, thence to be carried to the Liver, into which it is inserted in with an extraordinary Ramification. But how those little Branches are intermix∣ed in the Liver with the Roots of the Vena Cava, and Porus Bilarus, has been already said in the forementioned place. These following Veins enter into the Ve∣na Porta. III. 1. The Umbilical Vein, pro∣ceedingThe Umbi∣lical Vein. from the Navel, and uterine Cheeskake. IV. 2. The Suspensory Vein, observedThe Sus∣pensory. by Fallopius and Eustachius, which de∣scends from the Septum to the Porta.
V. 3. The double Cystics, whichThe double Cystics. are two small Veins running forth from the bilary Bladder to the left part of the Porta. VI. 4. The Right-hand Gastric,The right Gastric. which proceeding from the hinder part of the Ventricle and Pylorus, from the Right-hand, enters the Trunk of the Porta, somewhat lower than the Cy∣stic. VII. 5. The Branch or SplenicThe Sple∣nic Branch. Channel, which being very large, and supported by the membranous Body of the Caul, is carried from the Spleen, transverse to the Vena Porta, and opens its self into its Trunk in the higher and left Part. VIII. 6. The Mesenteric Vein,The Mesen∣teric Vein. which is larger than the former, and proceeds from the Mesentery to the lower and right Part of the Porta. But because that by the means of these two larger Veins, the Splenic and the Mesenteric, the Blood of many Parts seated in the lower Belly, is carri∣ed to the Porta, we must enquire what lesser Veins, and whence they come to these greater. Many Veins terminate in the Splenic Channel; some at its double beginning above and below, where it first issues out of the Spleen; others, after the be∣ginning unite into one Channel. Into the lower beginning these Veins open themselves. IX. 1. An innumerable NumberThe Splenic Veins. of diminutive Veins dispiersed through the Spleen, and at length unites into one Trunk, continuous with the Sple∣nic Branch, to which it gives its Name. X. 2. The Left Epiplois, whichThe left Epiplois. crawls from the Interior Membrane of the Caul, with a double Sprig. Yet Vesalius and Bauhinus tells us, that this is not always to be found. XI. 3. The Left Gastro-epiplois,The left Gastro-Epiplois. which is sufficiently remarkable, starting from the left Part of the bottom of the Ventricle, together with the Branches ascending from the upper Membrane of the Caul, proceeds thither. XII. Into the upper beginning of theThe short veiny Ves∣sel. Splenic Channel, sometimes two, some∣times three, sometimes more short Branches descend from the Stomach; frequently one, which they call the Short Veiny Vessel, which is many times as big as a Goos-quil. After these two beginnings are united, the Trunk of the Splenic Channel is formed, into which they descend at the upper Part. XIII. 1. The lesser Gastric, fromThe lesser Gastric. the hinder gibbous Part of the Ventri∣cle. XIV. 2. The larger Gastric, intoThe great∣er. which, several Branches are united from the larger Part of the whole Ven∣tricle, and the upper Part of the Ori∣fice it self, wherein is constituted the Stomachic Coronary, and sometimes from the lower Part. XV. At the lower Part enter theThe right and hinder Epiplois, and Pan∣creatic Veins. Dexter Epiplois, which is lesser, from the lower Membrane of the Caul, and the place annexed to it; and the Postic Epiplois, which is the bigger; also the Sweet-bread Vein, from the Pancreas, carried between both the Epiplois's. XVI. Several lesser Veins enter theThe Mese∣raic Veins. Meseraic, which exceeds the Splenic Channel in bigness, and those either at its double beginning, or at the Right or Left Mesenteric, or into the Trunk of it. In the Mesenteric, on the Right Side, meet an innumerable company of Veins, called Mesaraic Veins, ascending from the Iejunum, Ileon, blind Gut, and Right-hand Part of the Colon, suppor∣ted with many Kernels interspeirsed, re∣ceiving the Milky Vessels, which never∣theless they do not enter. These, at first uniting into fourteen Branches for the most part terminate at length in the said Mesenteraic. XVII. Several Mesaraic Veins termi∣nateThe inter∣nal Hemor∣rhoidal. also in the left Mesenteric, ascend∣ing from the left and middle Part of the Mesentery. Among which, the most remarkable is the Inner Hemorrhoidal, which at its beginning orbicularly em∣braces the Podex with slender Roots, and thence ascending under the Right Intestine, receives little Sprigs from the whole Colon, till it enter the Mesenteric with the rest. However, in some Bo∣dies it has been observed that this Vein runs directly to the Splenic Branch, and opens into it. But into the Trunk of the Mesente∣ric, which the Veins meeting both on the Right and Left Side, two Veins enter. XVIII. 1. The other Right handThe other right Epi∣plois. Epiplois, rising from the bottom of the Ventricle and the upper part of the Caul, and this sometimes, but very sel∣dom enters the Left Mesenteric, after it comes to be divided. In Dogs, this sometimes proceeds to the Intestinal,
sometimes is wanting, and then the left supplys the place of both, XIX. 2. The Intestinal proceedingThe Intesti∣nal. from the middle of the Duodenum, and the beginning of the Iejunum, as also from the upper part of the Caul and Sweat-bread. XX. The Vena Porta by the Phy∣sitiansThe use of the Vena Porta. The first O∣pinion. is assign'd to several Uses. For the Ancients asserted that their Veins and the Mesaraics the Blood flow'd for the Nourishment of the In∣testines and other Parts contained in the Abdomen; that the Chylus also ascends through the same passages to the Liver; moreover that the more feculent Part of the Chylus was carry'd through the Splenic Channel to the Spleen, and was there concocted into a certain acid Juice, afterwards for the stimulating of Hunger to be con∣veigh'd into the Stomach through the Short▪ veiny Vessel. But Dr. Harvey's dis∣covery of the Circulation of the Blood has scatter'd all these Mists of Error; So that now adays there is no man vers'd in Dissection but will deride these Vanities. For in the Dissection of a living Animal, the short Veiny ves∣sel being ty'd, presently by the swelling between the Ventricle and the Liga∣ture, and the falling on the other side, it is apparent that the Blood flows from the Ventricle to the Splenic Chan∣nel, but nothing from the Spleen or Channel to the Ventricle. Also bind the Splenic Channel, and by the swel∣ling between the Ligature and the Spleen, and the falling toward the Porta Vein, 'tis manifest that the Blood is carry'd from the Spleen to the Porta Trunck, but not the Chylus from the Porta Vein to the Spleen. As to the Motion of the Chylus and the Blood moving upward and downward though the Mesaraics 'tis contrary to sence; since such a contrary Motion of two different humors can never be at the same time in those Vessels so extream∣ly narrow. Nor will the similitude signi∣fie any thing of shavings of Iron and Straw mix'd together in one Pipe, and putting a Load-stone at one end to draw the Iron, and a piece of Amber at the other to draw the Straw. For two dry bodies of that Nature do not unite like two moist bodies. Nor are there any two such different Magnets belong∣ing to the Mesaraics, to draw the Chy∣lus upward and the Blood downward, but in the whole Body of Man a sin∣gle propulsion of the Blood from the Heart. XXI. Others affirm the Blood andThe second Opinion. Chylus to pass through by turns; as if there were a certain Contract be∣tween the Blood and the Chylus, that when the Chylus is coming, the Blood should go back or stop in the Liver, and cease to flow for that time to the Bowels, which is ridicu∣lous. XXII. Others will have the ChylusThe Third Opinion. only ascend to the Liver through these Veins, and that they have a pro∣per faculty to die the Chylus of a red Color. But neither is there any such faculty in the Veins, nor could the Blood remaining after Nourishment return to the Heart, if the Misaraic Veins were only design'd to carry the Chylus. Plempius, says, that the ArteriousThe fourth Opinion. blood remaining after Nourishment flows back to the Porta through the Mesaraics, and that the Chylus from the Intestines is mix'd with it. But he should have shew'd us which way the Chylus enters the Veins: which ought somewhere to open into the Intestines, to receive the Chylus: rather why does not the Blood which is thinner and more spirituous then the Chylus flow through those Openings into the Intestines? Why should the thicker Chylus en∣ter, rather then the thinner Blood go forth? If Plempius plead attraction in those Veins, there is no such thing to be allow'd in our Bodies, as you may see more at large. lib. 1. cap. 12. and lib. 2. cap. 8. If he fly to the diversity of the Pores or Mouths of the Vessels; I answer that through whatever Pores the thicker Chylus can pass, with more ease the thinner Blood may go through. Besides that never any man could hitherto observe any thing so much as like the Chylus in the Misaraics, which is always to be found in the Milky and other Chylifer Vessels. XXIV. These last Assertions of mineThe fifth Opinion. perhaps Lewis de Bills may oppose, a∣greeing with Plempius; to which end he has feigned certain Valves at the ends of the Misaraics to withstand the Exit of the Blood, but admitting the Chylus, in his Epistle to D. Iordaen Physitian at Dort, wherein he endea∣vours to prove the entrance of the Chylus into the Mesaraics by this Ex∣periment. Dissect the Abdomen of a living Dog, separate the Arteries and Mesaraic Veins one from another, and tye strings about all the Arteries, to prevent any more Blood from running into the Veins; then sow up the Abdo∣men
again and keep the Dog alive for three or four hours, till the Meat given him before Dissection be turned into Chylus; then opening the Abdomen a∣gain, and you shall find the Arteries quite empty, but the Veins full of a muddy Liquor, of a dark Ash Co∣lour. This Experiment the Bilsianists ad∣mire; but if we consider the thing more narrowly, we shall find that nei∣ther the Colour, Consistence or Quanti∣ty of the Blood contained in the Veins, can perswade us that the Chylus runs through those Passages. For the Blood contained in the Meseraic Veins, consi∣dering the Part may be more feculent than that contained in other Parts. And perhaps the Blood mentioned in the Ex∣periment might be of a bad Colour, by reason of the Arterious Blood, because the Ligatures could not come to purifie it; but this does not prove that Fecu∣lency doth proceed from any Mixture of the Chylus. Now why the Blood is better and more pure at the same time in some Parts of the same Person than in other Parts, where it is more feculent and dissolved; Fernelius tells us, l. 4. Potholog c. 6. which Experience also confirms; for that upon opening a Vein, the first Blood shall be more feculent and discoloured than the last, and ma∣ny times out of the Arm the Blood shall be fresh and good, and at the same time taken from the Foot feculent and livid, and yet no Man will believe that the Chylus comes to the Foot to change the Colour of the Blood. But this proceeds from the deprav'd consti∣tution or specific Temper of the Foot. Thus, by reason of the specific Tem∣per of the Mesentery, the Blood pas∣sing through it may be more feculent and discoloured by passing through a muddy Channel, then that which passes through the fleshy and well tempered Parts, which Feculency vanishes when concocted by the Liver, it acquires a fermentaceous Quality, and comes to be again dilated by the Heart. And this is the reason, that in the Vena Por∣ta and the Meseraic Branches, some∣times more thick and impure Blood is found, than in the Hollow and other Veins. I say sometimes, because that for the most part it does not differ from the Blood in other Parts, or other san∣guiferous Vessels. We our selves also have taken Blood out of the Meseraics of Beasts, at the same time, when all the Lacteous Channels swell'd with milky Juice, and have compared it with the Blood of other Veins, but could find no manifest difference either in Colour, Substance or Coagulation. The same has also been observed by Nicholas Stenonis, I observed, saith he, Bilsius's Method, bound the Arteries, kept the Dog alive, the first time three Hours, the next four, and then cut open his Abdomen again, and exposed the Blood separately taken out of the Porta and Aorta to the Air, but they coa∣gulated with equal swiftness, glisten'd both alike, and blackened both alike. And therefore Clement Niloe frivolously as∣serts, that the Blood taken under the Porta from the Meseraics coagulates otherwise than the Blood of other Veins; nay, that it coagulates into a glassie hardness. Nor do I admire that L. de Bils found all the Meseraics full. For what should force the Blood farther out of them, when all the Arteries were bound? And therefore if you bind the Arm too hard, before you prick the Vein, by which means the Arteries are compressed after the Wound is made, the Blood will never come forth; for the Impulse of the Arteries ceasing, the Blood ceases to flow through the Veins. But yet still to perswade us that the Chylus passes through the Meseraics, Lewis de Bils tells us, that these Veins about the Intestines, exceed the Lacteous Veins in bigness and capaciousness. Which is contrary to Sight it self, the Lacteous Swelling with Chylus being no less conspicuous about the Meseraics, then the other Swelling with Blood: though indeed when the Lacteous Veins are empty, the Meseraic are more apparent, because of the ruddy Blood contained therein. So that this is but a weak Argument of Bils to prove his Assertion. Besides that, that Iames Henry Pauli, Professor at Cop∣penhagen, writes, that he has observed the milky Vessels to be larger at their Insertion into the Intestines than the Meseraics; and that the milky Vessels passed directly into the Tunicles of the Intestines, gaped toward their inner Parts, and being squeez'd, poured forth Chylus, whereas the Meseraics being squeez'd, did not pour forth Blood un∣til the inner Tunicle of the Intestine were scraped away. But though these things might be sufficient, yet some were so curious to invent the following Experiment to put all things out of
doubt. They take the Iejunum with part of the Ilium and Mesentery an∣next to it, out of the live Animal, and tye it strongly to both ends. Then be∣fore the Knot, they pour in a certain Liquor blackned with Ink, and gently squeezing the Intestine Swelling with that Liquor, they find that nothing of the black Liquor enters the Meseraics, but that very much enters the milky Vessels. Much more of this, see l. 1. c. 11, 12. XXV. Now then the true use ofThe true use of the Vena Por∣ta. the Vena Porta is threefold. 1. To receive the Blood of the Birth included in the Womb, the sanguinous alimentary Juice out of the Uterine Cheescake, through the Umbilical Vein, and deliver it to the Liver or the Hollow Vein. 2. To conveigh to the Liver and Hollow Vein the Blood which is forced to the Intestines and other various Bow∣els of the Abdomen, and remaining af∣ter Nourishment, and carried thither through the Meseraics and other lesser Veins. 3. To conveigh to the same place, the Arterious Blood concocted after a specific manner, and endued with a subacidish, fermentaceous Qua∣lity. Therefore in its Use, the Vena Porta differs very little from the Vena Cava, and other Productions of the Cava, for all the Veins of the Body return the Blood to the Heart, which the Arte∣ries took away from it. There is in∣deed some little difference in the thick∣ness of the Tunicle from the hollow Vein, and the darkness of the Colour; but for any difference in Substance, as Bauhinus and some others assert, 'tis a meer Notion. CHAP. III. Of the Hollow Vein, and the Veins united to it above the Dia∣phragma. I. THE Hollow Vein is the larg∣estThe Hollow Vein. of all the Veins in the Body, and the River into which all the other Blood-bearing Vessels like so many little Streams discharge their Blood. II. It is seated all along the SpineThe Situa∣tion. of the Back, from the Os Sacrum to the Jugulum, and so is carried with a streight Course through the middle and lower Belly, there immediately fastned to the Heart, here to the Li∣ver. Several Veins enter this Vein, some above and some below the Dia∣phragma. Above the Diaphragma, these that follow. II. 1. The Phrenic or Diaphrag∣matic,The Phre∣nic or Dia∣phragma∣tic. of each side one, the Roots of which, adhere to the Mediastinum, Dia∣phragma and Pericardium; some write, that it has a Valve at its entrance into the Hollow Vein, preventing the sliding back of the Blood from the Hollow Vein, which is very probable, both in this and many other Veins gaping into the Hollow Vein. III. 2. The Pneumonic, whichThe Pneu∣monic. proceeding out of the Lungs, not far from the Phrenic, opens it self into the Trunk. This, by reason of its slen∣derness, is not easie to be found, but has been observed by Sammichelius, whom Aquapendens, Castius and Mongius cite. IV. 3. The Coronary of theThe Coro∣nary of the Heart. Heart, sometimes double, into which many lesser Veins ascending from the Point to the Basis of the Heart, and girding it like a Crown, assemble toge∣ther. At its ingress into the Hollow Vein, Eustachius first discovered a Valve like a little Half-moon. This, Bauhi∣nus says, is so seated, that it hinders the flowing back of the Blood from the Heart to the Hollow Vein, wherein he is grosly mistaken; for it is to hinder
an Influx of the Blood out of the Hol∣low into the Coronary Vein. V. 4. The Vein without a Pair orThe Azy∣gos. , because in Men it is single, hav∣ing no Fellow on the opposite Side. Yet Fallopius and Bauhinus have sometimes observed in Men another Vein like to it on the opposite side, and inserted into the left Branch of the Subclavial, and some∣times into the Hollow Vein it self on the left Side, about the Region of the third Verteber of the Breast, which supplies the Office of the Azygos, and receives the Blood some spaces distant from the Intercostals, and then, about the sixth or seventh Verteber of the Breast united with the Azygos. However, this rarely happens in the Body of Man, though Bauhinus asserts it to be frequent in Goats and Hogs, and many Creatures chewing the Cud, wherein it is many times double, one on the Left, the other on the Right Side. Riolanus derides this second Vein, or if it be found, declares it preternatural, as all things are which he discovers not himself. In Man, the Azygos enters the Hol∣low Vein about the fourth and fifth Verteber of the Breast, a little above the Heart, on the hinder and right side, but in Sheep and many other Animals it enters it on the Left-hand. It receives Blood from the Intercostal Veins, possessing the Intervals of the ten inferior Ribs, rarely of the uppermost; sometimes also from the Mediastinum, the Vertebers, the Gullet, the Inter∣costal Muscles, and those of the Abdo∣men, and some other Parts from whence Branches ascend to it. Sometimes also a Branch from the sinister Emulgent, and sometimes another Branch from the Trunk of the Hollow Vein above the Emulgent, ascending upwards and pas∣sing the Diaphragma, is united above the Spine with the Roots of the Azygos, and then the Blood not only flows through the Trunk of the Azygos, but also through these Passages out of the Intercostal Spaces, and the Parts ad∣joyning to the Hollow Vein. By Ver∣tue of the Communion of these Passa∣ges, Aquapendens asserted for a certain, that Snivel and purulent Matter in those that are troubled with much Spitting, may be easily purged out of the Hollow of the Breast, by the Urinary Passages, not considering that such an Evacuation can never pass by these Ways. First, because these Veins in the Breast being enveloped with the Pleura Membrane, can by no means receive that Matter. Secondly, that they must of necessity open to receive it; but being opened, the fluid Blood may easily flow into the Cavity of the Breast, but that it would be a difficult thing for the slimy Flegm to flow through the narrow Passages of these Veins. Thirdly, because the Valves stand in the way, preventing the Efflux of any Liquor out of the Breast to the Kidneys. For at the Root of the Azi∣gos, many times three Valves are ob∣served, one at its entrance into the Hollow Vein, two in the middle of the Trunk, by which the Influx of the Blood out of the Hollow Vein into the Azygos is prevented, but free Egress out of the Azygos into the hollow Vein is allowed. Bauhinus writes, that he ne∣ver observed these Valves, either in Men or Beasts. Riolanus avers, that he has shewn them in all sorts of Car∣kasses; but both seem to speak over ab∣solutely. For I have diligently sought for them, both in publique and private, as well in Men as in Brutes, but never found them all in every one; only in some I have observed one Valve at the Entrance of the hollow Vein, in some none at all, so that there is no certain Determination to be given. VI. 5. The upper Intercostal,The upper Intercostal▪ of each side one, which oft-times how∣ever enters the Subclavial Branch, near the beginnings of the Jugular Veins. Sometimes the Right-hand Intercostal is inserted into the Trunk of the Hollow Vein, the Left into the Subclavial Branch; but at the entrance, fortified with a Valve to hinder the Relaps of the Blood. The Roots of it rises from three or four Intervals of the Superior Ribs, and are frequently mixed with the mammary Roots, creeping through the Gristles. Sometimes it happens that Veins are carried from all the Spaces of the Ribs to the Azygos, and then this upper Intercostal is want∣ing. 6. Two Subclavials, of which, in the next Chapter.
CHAP. IV. Of the Subclavial Veins, and Veins of the Head. TWO Subclavial Veins, the Right and Left enter the Su∣pream Part of the Trunk of the Cava, and while they stay within the Breast, are called Subclavial; but having for∣saken the Cavity of the Breast, are call∣ed Axillary. Many lesser Veins carry the Blood to these Subclavials, some of which, o∣pen themselves into them at the lower Part, others at the upper part. At the lower Part, five Veins enter each Subclavial. I. 1. The upper Intercostal, risingThe upper Intercostal. from the Intervals of the three upper Ribs. But this frequently enters the Trunk of the Hollow Vein also. II. 2. The Mammary, which how∣everThe Mam∣mary. is not always inserted into the Sub∣clavial, but sometimes into the Trunk of the Hollow Vein. The Roots of it are both Internal and External. The In∣ternal arises from the gristly Extremities of the Ribs, and their Intercostal Spa∣ces, as also from the Glandules of the Paps: The External, from the streight Muscles of the Abdomen, the Glan∣dules of the Teats, the Skin, and the Muscles spread over the Breast. III. 3. The Mediastine, whichThe Medi∣astinum. carries Blood from the Mediastinum, the Pericardium, and the Thymus Ker∣nel: Though neither doth this always enter the Subclavial, but sometimes the Trunk of the Hollow Vein. IV. 4. The Cervical, which ad∣heresThe Cer∣vical. partly to the slender Roots passing the lateral Holes of the Vertebers, the Pith of the Neck, or rather the Mem∣branes wrapt about it; partly to the Muscles next incumbent upon the Ver∣tebers. V. 5. The Inferior Muscula, whichThe lower Muscula. proceed from the Superior Muscles of the Breast, and the lower of the Neck. This also sometimes opens into the Ex∣terior Jugular. At the upper Part, three Veins enter the Subclavial. VI. 1. The Superior Muscula,The upper Muscula. rising from the Skin and the Muscles of the Neck. VII. 2. and 3. The External andThe Iugu∣lar. Internal Iugular, whose Entrance is guarded by one thin Valve only, though there are two, looking from above to∣ward the Subclavial, and preventing the Ascent of the Blood cut of the Subcla∣vial to the upper Parts. Riolanus de∣nies any Valve to the External, and boasts himself the Discoverer of the Valve in the Internal, though there be no reason why the External should want a Valve more than the Internal, since there is the same necessity of stopping the Reflux of the Blood out of the Sub∣clavial into the one as well as the o∣ther. These Jugulars are seated in the sides of the Neck, and adhere to the neigh∣bouring Parts. They descend from the Head, and the Blood of the whole Head remaining after Nourishment, slides into them through several lesser Veins and Hollownesses of the hard Meninx; for several Veins open into each Jugu∣lar with many Valves, hindring the Re∣flux of the descending Blood. VIII. The External Jugulars admitsThe Vena Frontis, Vena Pup∣pis, and the Ranariae. two Veins, of which, the Exterior ad∣heres with its Roots to the skinny Parts of the Head, Face, Top of the Head, Temples, hinder part of the Head, Cheeks, Nostrils, the Muscles adjoyn∣ing, and the Bones of the Jaws; and receives thin Fibres from the Menix's themselves through their Sutures. Into this also the Forehead Vein seated in the Forehead, exhonerates it self, arising from the Concourse of the Vein on each side. Also the Vena Puppis, seated in the hinder part of the Head; the open∣ing of which Veins is highly extolled in Distempers of the fore-part and hinder∣part of the Head, as the Distemper lies. The Roots of the inner Vein are inserted partly into the Mouth, that is, the Muscles of the Chaps, Larynx, Hyoides, Palate and Tongue, under which they constitute the Ranaries or Hypoglottides, wont to be opened in In∣flammations of the Chaps; partly into the inner Membrane of the Nose. Some little diminutive Veins proceed also hither from the Seith, through the Hole of the Temple Bone. The Internal Jugular Vein receives two Veins of each side, through the Holes of the Cranium; of which, the first which is the bigest, being produced from the Bosom of the thick Meninx, lying under the Lamdoidal Suture, and is continued with its Vein, which passes through the Bone of the hinder part of the Head in the sixth Pair of the Nerves,
and admits an ascending Root from the Pith of the Spine. The other which is lesser proceeding partly from the thick Meninx passes through the holes of the second, third and fourth Pair of the Nerves; partly from the Or∣gan of Hearing through the hole of the Bone of the Temples. CHAP. V. Of the Axillaries and Veins of the Arm. I. THE Axillary Veins areThe Axil∣lary Veins. Continuous with the Sub∣clavials, and indeed the same, only changing their Names according to the Diversity of Situation. For where it lyes under the Clavicles, it is call'd Subclavial; when it ex∣tends it self to the Arm-pits, it is call'd Axillaris. II. To the Axillary, at its firstThe Scapu∣lar Veins. issuing forth from the Breast there come two lesser Veins; The Internal and External Scapularis; of which the one proceeds from the Muscles oc∣cupying the hollow of the Scapula, the other from the Muscles covering the Scapula's. A little farther, at the very beginning of the Axillary, two larger Veins are continu'd with it, which pour forth the Veiny Blood of the whole Arm into the Axillary, of which the upper is called the Cephalic, and the lower the Basilic. III. The Cephalic (which is also call'dThe Cephae∣lic Vein. Humeraria, and the outer Part of the Elbow) so call'd, because the ignorant Anatomists in former times thought this Vein descended directly from the Head to the Arm, and brought its Blood along with it, and therefore in Distempers of the Head prescrib'd it to be open'd before any other Vein, whereas this Vein ascends from the Arm to the Axillary, and neither receives from, nor carrys any thing to the Head; but only empties the Blood ascending from the lower Part of the Hand into the hollow Vein through the Axillary. Now this Cephalic in Human Bodies enters the Axillary at the upper Part, and sometimes but rarely runs forth with a little Branch toward the Exter∣nal Jugular, for in many Four-foted Beasts it is inserted into the External Jugular. IV. It receives Blood from the Hand,The Salva∣tella. and Parts adjoyning to the Arm, into which the Roots of it are inserted. For from the outer seat of the Hand, af∣ter the Salvatella or Suele of the Ara∣bians is form'd between the Ring and Little-finger, several Branches arise, making a Conflux into this Cephalic a∣bout the Elbow; which Cephalic as∣cends from the Elbow along the super∣ficies of the Elbow, to the Shoulder, between the fleshy Membrane, and the Tunicle of the Muscles; receiving as it runs little small Veins from the Muscles of the Arm and Shoulder. V. The Basilic Vein, which moreThe Basilic. below and more inward enters the Ax∣illary, exceeds the Cephalic in Mag∣nitude; and in the Right Arm is call'd the Hepatic, in the Left the Spleen Vein, for the Distempers of which the Ignorance of former times order'd them to be opened as the Distempers lay. The Basilic receives Blood from the lower and adjoyning Parts. From each Finger two, from the Skin of the hand as well outward as inward several Ra∣mifications grow, which first unite into four, and those about the Joynt of the Elbow into two Veins. Of which the one lyes very deep conceal'd; the other under the Skin. These both ascend up∣ward from the bending of the Elbow. The prfound one along the Bone of the Radius and Elbow; the other a∣long the outer Parts; and both receive several branches from the adjacent Parts, as well Exterior as Interior. When they come to the Shoulder they unite together in one Vein. Into which two other Veins Insinuate themselves besides the Cutaneous Vein of the Shoulder and Breast. VI. 1. The Upper Thoracy, whichThe upper Thoracy. rises from the Skin, and the Inner Part of the Pectoral Muscle, and the Hand. VII. 2. The Inferior Thoracy,The lower. adhereing with its Roots to the broad Muscle and the whole side of the Breast, and some affirm that it unites with the Orifices of three or four of the Intercostal Roots of the Azy∣gos.
VIII. Out of the Basilic and Ce∣phalicThe Me∣dian or com∣mon Vein. is made a third Vein, of which that Part which is in the midst between the said Veins is call'd Mediana, or the Common Vein, as being made of both concurring a lit∣tle below the bending of the Elbow. This is double; the one conspicuous under the Skin; the other, lying deep; but both inserted with many Roots into the Hand and Fingers, as also into the Membranes and Muscles of the Hand and Elbow. It would be a difficult thing to de∣scribe all the divarications of the small Veins belonging to the hand, though some have in vain attempted it. So frequent are the Conjunctions, Inter∣mixtures and Distributions. And there∣fore we leave those exact investiga∣tions to such as have more patience and more leasure. And what I say of the Hand is also to be said of the Feet. CHAP. VI. Of that Part of the Vena Cava below the Diaphragma, and the Veins discharging themselves into it. AS all the Parts seated above the Diaphragma transmit the resi∣due of the Blood remaining after Nu∣trition through the lesser Vein to the Vena Cava, so do all the Parts below the Diaphragma. I. 1. Through the broad Orifice,The Veins of the Liver where it adheres to the Liver innu∣merable little Veins discharge them∣selves out of the Liver into the Vena Cava. Between which and the Vena Porta, there is said to be a great com∣munication. Riolanus mentions a Valve within the Trunk of the hollow Vein near the Liver, to let in the Blood out of the Liver into the hollow Vein, but to prevent its egress into the Liver. This he says was discover'd by Stephanus and Silvius and found in Cows, but whether in Men or no, he knows not. II. 2. The Adipous or Fatty Vein,The Adipo∣sa. both right and left. The left proceed∣ing with its Roots from the Exterior Membrane of the Kidney, the Fat of it, and the Kernel laid upon it, is in∣serted into the Left side of the Trunk of the hollow Vein a little below the Emulgent. The Right, proceeding from the same Parts most commonly approaches the higher and middle Emulgent Channel, but seldom both enter the Emulgent, and more rarely the hollow Vein. III. 3. The Emulgent, large, butThe Emul∣gent. short, and both right and left. These each of them adhere with their stringy Roots to the Kidney of it's own side, which meeting at length a∣bout the middle and hollow Part of the Kidney, break forth out of it some∣times with one, two, three, and some∣times more Branches, after their egress concurring into one short and broad Channel, which descending somewhat obliquely opens with a broad Orifice into the Trunk of the hollow Vein, the Left in a place somewhat higher then the Right. At the Orifice of the Emulgent gaping into the hol∣low Vein stands a remarkable Valve, looking upward from the Inferior Part of the Orifice and granting a free In∣flux of the Blood out of the Kidney into the hollow Vein, but prevent∣ing the reflux of it into the Emul∣gent. There is great variety in the Num∣ber of the Emulgents; which though most commonly are from each Kid∣ney, yet sometimes two, many times single by themselves, many times meeting half way, fall into the Vena Cava; and only one rises from one Kidney, and two from the other. Sometimes a Branch descends from the Breast to the Emulgent, which is believed in this place to intermix with the Roots of the Azygos, and here and there to unite. Sometimes a Branch slides down to the Emulgent from the Loins and Spinal Pith. Seldom any Branch is extended thither from the Succenturiated Kernel. Sometimes also little Branches gape into it from the Neighbouring Parts; for Nature often varys in these particulars. IV. 4. The Spermatic or Semi∣nal,The Sper∣matic or Se∣minal. of each side one, a Right and Left. Riolanus writes, that sometimes in Lustful Persons that have been hang'd for Adultery, he has often found these Veins double especially on the Right side. But there is no certain Reason why men should be more Lustful for
that; and therefore I question his As∣sertion. The Right-hand Vein enters the higher Part of the Trunk it self, be∣low the Emulgent of the same side, which has been often observ'd by Galen and Vesalius. At its enterance into the hollow Vein, it bunches forth with somewhat a thick Prominence; which Riolanus believes to proceed from the Valve distended by the ascending Blood, and looking toward the hollow Vein. This Valve by reason of its extream smallness and slenderness can hardly be shewn, but reason perswades us it must be there; there being a necessity of some obstacle to prevent the Blood from flowing back from the hol∣low into the Spermatic Vein. To which end 'tis probable that all the Veins gaping into the Vena Cava are so furnish'd, unless the Iliac and Sub clavial, whose Valves are more re∣mote. The Left Seminal enters the middle Left Emulgent, at the lower Part, guarded with a Valve at the Orifice. From this another Branch is some∣times sent forth to the Trunk of the Cava. But Nature varies in the Spermatic Veins: for that their ends sometimes enter the Cava on both sides, some∣times the Emulgent on both sides; and the Left enters the Cava, and some∣times though rare the Emulgent and Cava on both sides with a forked end. These Veins rise in Men without the Abdomen from the Testicles them∣selves, and the Warty substance, from which they carry back the Blood re∣maining after nourishment of the Parts, and generation of Seed to the hollow Vein, In Women they rise within the Abdomen, partly from the bottom of the Womb and neighbouring Mem∣branes, with innumerable stringy Roots; partly they rise up from the Testicles. Besides, it has been observ'd by some that three or four Roots are extended further from the Spinal Pih. V. 5. The Lumbaries, two, three orThe Lum∣bary. four, which enter the Trunk of the Cava, at the hinder seat looking to∣ward the Vertebres, so that their in∣gress cannot be perceiv'd but by rai∣sing the Cava. They proceed from the Lumbary Muscles and the Spinal Pith, between four Vrtebres of the Loyns through the holes of the Nerves perforated on each side, and receive on each side a little Branch inserted into the involvings of the Marrow, and de∣scending all along the whole length of it, through those Mninx's that enfold it. This Riolanus believes at its beginning to be united by Anastomosis with the beginning of the Root of the ascending Jugular; which seems not probable. VI. 6. The two Illiacs, largeThe Iliacs. Veins, which about the fifth Verte∣ber of the Loyns, and the beginning of the Os Sacrum, enter the end of Trunk of the Cava; so that the Ca∣va seems to rest upon these two Veins as upon two Thighs. A little above their Ingress into the lower Belly, be∣forethey are united with the Cava, they are guarded with a large Valve looking upward, which transmits the ascending, but stops the descending Blood. These Iliacs discharge into the Cava the Blood of all the Inferior Parts, brought to them out of the lesser Veins which are under them. CHAP. VII. Of the Veins which open into the Iliacs. I. TO Each of the Iliacs, about theThe upper Muscula and the Sa∣cra. same place, where it ap∣proaches the Cava, The Upper Muscle extends it self, which proceeds from the Peritonaeum and Muscles as well as of the Loyns and Abdomen. Hither al∣so reaches the Sacred Vein sometimes single, sometimes double, which uns forth from the Membranes investing the Marrow through the Holes of the Os Sacrum. II. A little lower a large Vein butThe lower Iliaca. short enters the Iliac call'd the Lower Iliac, into which only two lesser Veins enter. III. 1. The middle Muscula, at theThe middle Muscula. outer Seat, which with its Roots adheres to the Inferior Muscles of the Thigh, possessing the Seat of the Hip; as also to the Skin of the Buttocks and the Adjacent Parts.
IV. 2. At the inner Seat the Hypo∣gastric;The Hy∣pogastric. which is larger then the first, sometimes double to which most of the Veins of the Hypogastrium are carry'd. 1. In Men, several little Branches from the Yard and Bladder. 2. In Women, several Branches from the Bladder, but more from the Bottom and Neck of the Womb. 3. The External Haemorrhoi∣dals,The exter∣nal Hae∣morrhoi∣dais. from the Streight Gut, or the Po∣dex. 4. A Branch from the Parts ad∣hereing to the Hole of the Share-bone, which perforating the Tenth Muscles of the Thigh, and Peritonaeum, reaches hither. V. Where the Iliac admits thisThe Epi∣gastric. Inferior Branch, in a place somewhat lower it receives from above the Epi gastric, adhereing with its Roots to the Womb, Skin of the Groins, and Muscles of the Epigastrion, especially the streight ones. To the Roots of these are joyn'd the two Mammary Roots under the Muscles of the Ab∣domen, near about the Navel; thence ascending to the Teats, but not United with the Epigastrics by Anastomosis, whatever Laurentius, Fallopius, Bauhi∣nus, and other Anatomists Write, vid. l. 1. c. 5. & l. 6. c. 3. A little below the Peritonaeum, two more Veins open into the Iliac. VI. 1. The Pudenda, whichThe Pu∣denda. enters the inner Seat, before the Iliac Branch enters into the Peritonaeum; rising in Men from the Scrotum and Skin of the Yard; in Women, from the sinus Muliebris, the Lips of the Privities, the Nympha, and Parts ad∣joyning. VII. 2. The Inferior Muscula,The lower Muscula. which adheres with its Roots to the Skin and Muscles possessing the Hip, and the Muscles adjoyning. CHAP. VIII. Of the Crural Veins, and Veins of the Foot. I. THE Crural Vein in bothThe Crural Vein. Thighs is continuous and the same with the Iliac, and only changes its Name according to it's Situation; for that rising from the Foot it is call'd Crural, as far as the Groin, but when it is goes about to enter the Peritonaeum it is call'd the Iliac. This Crural is a great Vein, into which the lesser Veins of the whole Thigh dis∣charge the Blood remaining after Nu∣trition, to be conveigh'd to the Cava. But in the folding of the Thigh where it is accompany'd with Nerves and Ar∣teries, it is underpropt with several Kernels. Besides many other small Veins, the Crural receives from the neighbouring and lower Parts six remarkable Veins, 1. The Saphaena. 2. The lesser Ischias. 3. The Muscula. 4. The Poplite. 5. The Sural. 6. The larger Muscula. II. The Saphaena, is the longest,The Sa∣phaena. and most remarkable unaccompany'd by any Artery, adhereing to the Foot and Toes with its lowest Roots, of which some uniting at the upper Part of the great Toe, make the Vein vulgarly call'd the Cephalic; and this proceeding farther, and meeting again with other Veins in the inner Part of Malleolus, constitutes the said Saphaena, which is usually open'd in Distempers of the Womb; which ascending hence between the Skin and the fleshy Panni∣cle through the inner Parts of the Thigh in the mid-way admits several little Veins into the Leg, Thigh and Knee. The Roots of which adhere to the Skin, Muscles and other neighbour∣ing Parts, and so at length it enters the Crural Vein near the Groin. III. The lesser Ischias, proceedingThe lesser Ischias. from the fore-part of the Hip, and the Muscles of that Place, at the Exterior seat approaches the Crural, right a∣gainst the Saphaena. IV. The Muscula being double,The Mus∣cula. the Exterior which is the lesser arises from the second and fourth Muscle ex∣tending the Leg; and from the Skin. The innermost, which is the larger and
deep, proceeds from the Knee and al∣most all the Muscles of the Thigh, especially from the fifth, and the third extending the Leg. These two, direct∣ly opposite one to another, enter the Crural within the Groins. V. The Poplite Vein, adheres withThe Popli∣tea. its Roots to the Heel, and sometimes to the Malleolus. Then ascending up∣wards, it admits from the Skin and Muscles of the Calf, oblique and trans∣verse Branches; and so perambulating the Muscle of the Ham, is divided in∣to two Branches, which being parted a little above the Ham, not far from one another, sometimes one enters the Cru∣ral, and another the Saphaena. The opening of this Vein was very frequent among the Ancients in Distempers of the Kidneys, and prescribed by Hippo∣crates. VI. The Sural, is a larger Vein,The Sural. which about the bending of the Leg, and a little above, is joyned continuous to the Crural. It is formed out of the two Branches meeting above the Regi∣on of the Ham; of which, the Exteri∣or rises from the Toes and Extremity of the Foot (wherein meeting and con∣curring with the Roots of the Poplite, it forms that various Fold of Veins, con∣spicuous under the Skin) the outer part of the Malleolus, and the Muscles ly∣ing hid betwen the Button. The lower rises from the great Toe, the Heel, and the Muscle constituting the Calf. VII. The larger Ischias, approachesThe larger Ischias. the Crural, being deeply hid, a little below the Entrance of the Sural. This rises from the Musculous Substance of the Teeth and Toes, and so ascending, penetrates the Exterior Part of the Malleolus, and in its farther Progress, admits several Branches from the fore∣part of the Leg to the Muscle of the Calf and the Parts adjoyning, till at length it reaches the Crural, and opens its self into it.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the NERVES. CHAP. I. Of the Nerves in General. A Nerve is called by the Greeks  from , to bend, and  from  to stretch. For that the Nerves give to the Muscles a Power to bend and ex∣tend the Parts. Some of which, Galen is the chief, divide the Nerves into three sorts, Li∣gamentous, Tendonous, and Nervous. But only the last is a true Nerve, proceed∣ing from the Marrow of the Brain. The other two rather Nervous Bodies, so called from their Resemblance of hard∣ness and driness; for that they neither proceed from the Marrow, neither are they similar Bodies, but composed of Membranes and Nerves, and concur∣ring little Arteries and Veins. But here we shall treat only of the true Nerves, proceeding from the Marrow. I. A Nerve is an Organic similarThe Defi∣nition. Part, white, long and round, ap∣pointed to conveigh the Animal Spi∣rit. II. The Substance of it is white,Its Sub∣stance. thick, and consisting of many slender Threads, growing together by the means of little Membranes, with no conspicuous Hollowness, but endued with most suttle Pores, for the Pas∣sage of the Animal Spirits; which that they are present within them, and diffused through them, both Wounds, and the Obstructions wherewith they are afflicted, abundantly argue. III. As to what I say, that theyWhether hollow? are endued with no manifest Hollow∣ness, the Authority of Galen is oppos∣ed against me, who writes, that the Op∣tic Nerves are hollow; and where he says, That the Influx of the Animal Fa∣culty is hindered, when the Nerve which has a Passage, is either obstructed or com∣pressed. From which Words of Galen, Bauhinus, Riolanus, Gemma, Spigelius, and others conclude, that the Nerves are hollow. Nay, some have asserted, that they have observed a manifest Hol∣lowness in the larger Nerves, as in the Optics, and in the Trunk of the Nerve near the Hips. To which purpose they propose certain Conditions out of Galen and Plempius. 1. To make a Dissection in a larger Creature. 2. To
make use of a clear Light, and a sharp Knife, for fear of compressing or ex∣tending the Nerve. 3. That it be di∣vided beyond its Coition. These Con∣ditions observed, Bartholin writes, that he has both seen and shewn a Cavity in the Optics, which I will believe when I see it; for with all my Industry I could never find any. Their middle Substance is more Porous indeed, but never discern'd to be hollow, which Vesalius, Fallopius, Coiter, Aquapendens and Columbus assert to be true. Nor could we by any Art or Help of Micro∣scopes perceive any Cavity in any o∣ther of the Nerves. And therefore I believe those Assertors of Cavity in the Nerves to be in an Error. And Bar∣tholinus himself, who admits Cavity in the Optics, condemns the Opinion in general. As for the Mamillary Proces∣ses, they are no Nerves, Vid. l. 3. c. 8. Nor are the spungy Bodies of the Yard Nerves, though erroneously so called; besides that, Hollowness in the Nerves is against Reason: For they carry in∣visible Spirits through the invisible Pores of their Strings, but no conspicu∣ous Liquor, there being no such thing ever known to flow from them, either upon Wounds or Dissections. More∣over, seeing the Spinal Marrow, from whence they derive their Original, has no Cavities, much less the hard and dry Nerves that proceed from it. Now that the long Marrow is not hollow, we have often try'd, by means of a long Pipe, through which we could never make any Breath to pass, though the Pipe being thrust into the Division, ea∣sily went to the end of it. Nor do Galens Words contradict my Opinion, who does not speak of any sensible Ca∣vity, but of an insensible Hollowness, meaning the Pores, in which respect they may be said to be insensibly hol∣low. Therefore says Nellianus Glancanus, Though the Nerves do not appear sensibly perforated, yet they are esteemed capable to conveigh the Animal Spirits: For that the Spirits is most subtil, and the Marrow of the Nerves so spungy, as to be easily pene∣trated by a subtil Spirit, Vid. l. 3. c. 11. IV. The Substance of the NervesThe Sub∣stance is threefold. is thought to be threefold. The first the Internal Medullary Substance, pro∣ceeding from the Marrow of the Brain. The second and third is the double Membrane, investing the inner Sub∣stance; of which, the one thinner and more inward, is the Production of the Pi Meninx; the other thicker and more outward, the Production of the hard Meninx: But this threefold Sub∣stance; though perhaps it may be con∣spicuous in the Optic Nerves, in the rest is rather to be distinguished by Rea∣son than Sense: Seeing all the Nerves are only long Threads, wherein there is no Pith or Medullary Substance to be seen, whence some deny that there is any Marrow at all in the Nerves. And hence it is, that that the Nerves which seem to be composed of Threads only, are numbred among the similar Parts; not that they are simply so, but seem to be so, and are all alike in all Parts. V. How the Nerves are nourished,Their Nou∣rishment. is hard to judge. Vesingius allows them Veins and Arteries for Nourish∣ment and vital Heat: For which rea∣son, Hossman will have them hollow. Lindan says, that all the Nerves are not only hollow, but admit a little Capil∣lary Artery. Stenonis also believes, that he has observed Blood-bearing Vessels between the Strings of the Nerves. We have our selves observed in the Optics some slight Foot-steps of a Blood-bear∣ing Vessel, passing and expanding it self into the Net-resembling-Tunicle, for the Nourishment of the Humors and Tunicles of the Eye; but never in any other of the Nerves. And therefore I hold the Opinion that extends to all the Nerves, to be groundless. 1. Because never any such little Arteries were ever discernible in any of the largest Nerves, except the Optics; and what Stenonis observed among the Threads, I should rather think might be found in the en∣folding Tunicles, if there were any such thing. 2. Because the narrowness of the Pores is not only extreamly streight, but plainly invisible, not able to admit a small Hair, much less a Capillary Artery. 3. Because the Pulsation of the Arteries would be a hindrance to the Passage of the Animal Spirits, espe∣cially the Passage of the Nerve being streightned by the Swelling of the Arte∣ry in a violent Pulsation of the Heart. 4. Because that upon the Dissection of any Nerve, not the least drop of Blood appears to flow out of any Artery, sup∣posed to be within side. Glisson writes, that the Nerves, byWhether they con∣veigh the nutritious Iuice? Glisson's Opinion. conveighing the Animal Spirits, are not only serviceable to Sense and Motion, but also carry a certain nutritive Humor for the Nourishment of themselves and the Parts which they enter, and that they do not receive this Humor from the Muscles, Bones, Heart, Lungs and
Kidneys, but from the Spleen, Stomach and Intestines, and partly also mediate∣ly from the Brain. But the narrowness of the Nerves is sufficient to refute this vain Opinion; and we see that the least Humor getting into them, ob∣structs the Spirits and causes the Palsie. Besides that, no Juice can be squeez'd out of the Nerve when hurt at any time; nor does the Nerve, being ty'd with any Ligature, either swell or grow languid in any Part; nor is there the least Tumor to be observed, either a∣bout or beyond the Ligature. To this add the Experiment of Regner de Graef; We laid bare, says he, the remarkable Nerve tending to the hinder Part of the Thighs, and slit it athwart through the Middle, and being freed from the Lym∣phatic Vessels, put it into a glass Viol, such as wherein we used to collect the Pancreatic Iuice; the Neck of which was so narrow, that the thickness of the dissected Nerve gently closed the Orifice of it, least any Spirit, or whatever passes more suttle through the Nerves, might exhale into the Air. This Viol we fixed to the Skin, in hopes, that if any thing of liquid pas∣sed through the Skin, we should by that means preserve it; but all in vain. For during the space of four or five Hours, not a drop came forth; nor could we perceive any sticking of the Animal Spirits to the Sides of the Glass by Condensation. Moreover, what Glisson propounds in the last place, is remote from Truth; for if any Liquor were received by the Nerves, it must necessarily flow into their Beginnings; but there are no Be∣ginnings of the Nerves that open either into the Stomach, Intestines or Spleen; but they all proceed without Exception, from the long Pith of the Brain. Read what we have discoursed upon this Point, l. 3. c. 11. and a farther Refutation, see l. 1. c. 16. VII. Wharton and Charlton admitsWharton and Charl∣ton's Opi∣nion. this nutritious Juice, but will have it prepared and made in the Glandules, seated up and down in the Body, and appointed for this use. But in regard that only thick and visible Juices are prepared in the Kernels, no way possi∣ble to enter the Nerves, and that Juice ought to flow with a contrary Stream to the Animal Spirits, and for that ei∣ther none at all, or at least no precep∣tible Nerves reach to the Glandules, most certainly it cannot be the Office of the Glandules to carry nutritious Hu∣mors. VIII. Malpigius believes some nota∣bleMalpigius his Opini∣on. Juice to be conveighed through the Fibres of the Nerves; but that it is de∣rived from the Glandulous Cortex of the Brain, and for this reason he numbers the nervous Fibres among the Vessels. The nervous Fibres, saith he, are to be reckoned among the Sorts of Vessels, which being cut, I have observed a certain Iuice like the White of an Egg, and thickning before the Fire, to flow forth in a considerable quantity. But still what has been already said concerning the streightness of the Nerves, sufficiently evinces the Falshood of this Opini∣on; the Cavity of their Fibres being such, as not able to transmit the thin∣nest Juice. IX. Therefore it is most probable,The Nou∣rishment of the Nerves. that the Nerves are nourished by the Arterious Blood, but chiefly by the Animal Spirits. For though they ad∣mit no Blood-bearing Vessels into their inner Parts, yet they are nourished like the thin and thick Meninx in the Head by the Arterious Blood; the Exterior Tunicles of the Nerves, which are de∣rived from the Menixes, receiving through their invisible Arteries, some little Portion of Blood for their Nou∣rishment, and communicating some∣thing of the same Blood by Exhalati∣on to the inner Substance. In the mean time it is unquestionable that these Tuni∣cles, but chiefly the inner Fibres are more especially nourished by the Ani∣mal Spirits passing through them (vid. l. 3. c. 11) of which, the more fixed Particles growing to their Substance, turn to Nourishment. The Arteries and Veins are nourished with the same Blood which they carry, and therefore why not the Nerves? which may be the reason also that they have such a quick Sense of Feeling, and have their peculiar hardness and driness; in re∣gard the Spirits, with which they are nourished, are like a most volatil and dry Salt, or like a dry and subtil Ex∣halation. And then, that besides these Spirits, there is something of Arterious Blood which concur to the Nourish∣ment of the Exterior Tunicles, and communicates something by exhalati∣on to the interior Tunicles, is appa∣rent from hence, that the Nerves being obstructed, though they are deprived of Sense and grow languid, yet they are not deprived of Life, nor dry up for want of Nourishment, for the Ob∣struction being removed, they shall, af∣ter many Years, be restored to their pristine Sanity. I knew a Woman so paralytic, on one side, for thirty years
together, that she had no use either of her Left-Arm or Thigh, besides that, all that side of her was num, till at length, the Fright of a most hideous Tempest, with Thunder and Light∣ning, having expell'd the Obstructing Matter from the Nerves, she was free'd from her Palsie, and walked abroad the next Day, to the Admiration of all that behld her. Which could not have been, if the Nerves had been all that time without Nourishment; for they must have been dried up in so many years time; which they must have been, had they been only nou∣rished by the Animal Spirits, which could not flow into the Nerve while ob∣structed. A Story much like to this, Valleriola reports of one that had been paralytic for several years, but suddenly freed from his Distemper by the Fright of a House on Fite. However those little Arteries are only derived from those that crawl through the Menixes of the Brain. X. The Nerves vary in bigness,Their big∣ness. according to the variety and necessity of their Use, the Organs to which they run forth, and the importance of the Actions which they are to per∣form. XI. The Original of the Nerves isTheir Ori∣ginal. twofold, in respect of Generation and Administration. In respect of the first, they are generated from the Seed, as are all the solid Parts. In respect of the latter, from the Brain, or its appen∣dent Matter. For, to reject the Opi∣nion of Aristotle and others, that the Nerves arise from the Heart, or partly from the Heart, and partly from the Brain; we say that all the Nerves rise from the long Pith of the Brain, con∣tained as well within the Brain, as the Cavity of the Spine. Which Varolius, Picholhominus, Bauhinus and others te∣stifie upon orbicular View. XII. From that Pith they proceedTheir Pas∣sage out of the Pith. all through the Holes of the Pith and Vertebres, but not all after the same manner. For some pass through the Holes nearest the Place where they make their Exit; some pass by two, three or four Holes before they make their Egress. For the more the Mar∣row tends to the lower Parts, the more Holes the Nerves pass by, before they transmit themselves. XIII. The Nerves, some are softerSoftness and hard∣ess. and some are harder, according to the Variety of the Use, and Diffe∣rence of Length and Situation, as also in respect of the Parts which they enter. Galen writes, that their softer Parts are the only Parts that are sensible of feeling; but that those which both feel and move, are the har∣der. XIV. The use of the Nerves is toThe Use. conveigh Animal Spirits to the Parts, that by their ordinary Influx, Nutrition may go forward, and by their determi∣native Motion, that the Parts destin'd for Sense and Mtion, may be made more sensible and more vigorous, Vi. l. 3. c. 11. To which purpose they are inserted into the sensible and mov∣ing Parts with wonderful Artifice. And those that move the Muscles are inser∣ted into their Heads, or a little below or at least not beyond the Middle, of which Insertion see the Reason, Lib. 5. Cap 1. XV. Hence some conclude, thatWhy they be Instru∣ments of Sense a Motion. they are the Instruments of Sense and Motion; whereas they are rather the Channels to which the Animal Spirits are conveighed to the Instruments of Sense and Motion. The Instruments of Feeling, are the Membranes, which the more Nerves they receive, the more acutely they feel; the fewer they admit the more dully. And this appears in Palsies; for though the Nerve be pre∣sent, yet the absence of the obstructed Spirit causes the Defect of Sense. Now be∣cause the Nerves are furnished with Membranes, 'tis no wonder their Sense of Feeling is so quick; more especially, since they contain a greater quantity of Animal Spirits, which are the immedi∣ate Causes of the Senses. The Mus∣cles are the Instruments of voluntary Motion, which the Nerves do not move by contracting themselves; but only by infusing into them store of Animal Spi∣rits which cause the Motion. Fernelius, Laurentius, Mercurialis andWhether the Sensory and Moto∣ry Nerves are diffe∣rent? others, observing in the Palsie, the Sense sometimes stupified, sometimes the Mo∣tion to cease, and sometimes both lost, thought the Motory and Sensory Nerves to be distinct, and that as the one or the other come to be obstructed, it cau∣ses a Variety in the Distemper. But there is no more diversity of the Nerves than of the Animal Spirits, only the diversity of Operations proceed from the diversity of the Parts which they enter. Thus they infuse into the Eyes, the Faculty of Seeing, into the Ears, the Faculties of Hearing, &c. Nay,
sometimes one and the same Nerve in∣serted into several Parts, contributes to one Sence only, to another both Sence and Motion. Thus the Pleura, Medi∣astinum, Stomach, and several other Parts, feel by means of the Nerves of the sixth Conjunction, and by means of the same Nerves and Muscles of the Neck, the Hyoides, Larynx, and other Parts, both feel and move. But Willis observing that the Stomach, Ventricle, Intestines, and many other Parts, had a Spontaneous Motion, though not arbitra∣ry, believed there were two sorts of Nerves, and two sorts of Animal Spirits. One that assisted spontaneous Motion, by means of the Spirits generated in the Cerebel; the other voluntary or arbitrary Motion, by means of the Spirits generated in the Brain. To which, what has been said already will serve for Answer, that the diversity of Motion does not proceed from the vari∣ety of Nerves or Spirits, but the diver∣sity of the Parts to which the Spirits are conveighed. Thus carried to the Mus∣cles, they cause arbitrary Motion; to places wanting Muscles, but endued with moveable Fibres, they cause spontane∣ous Motion. XVII. Note by the way, that noWhile Mo∣tion lasts there is al∣ways Sence. Muscle is moved which is not sensible at the same time, and that the Motion of the Muscle may fail, and yet the Sence remain, but not the contrary; few Spirits being requisite for the Sence of Feeling, but many to cause and per∣form Motion. And therefore it is a false Notion, that the Sence may fail in the same Member, and yet the Motion remain. For common Practice tells us, that sometimes the feeling may fail in the Skin, so as not to feel the Heat of a burning Coal; but pierce the Skin with a Needle, and you shall find a most acute Sence in the Muscles, moving underneath, which would not feel, if this Hypothesis were true. As frivolous is the Example produced by Regius, of a young Man, who had lost the Sence of feeling in his Hand, the Motion remaining; for I can never believe any Perforations were made to the Muscles in that Hand, which had they been done, Regius must have been of another Opinion; but Persons as ignorant as himself will believe any thing. But these Physitians seem not to have observed, that this Stupidity of the Sence is not in the Muscles, but only in the Skin, or perhaps in the cutaneous Pannicle, which being vitiated, they thought the inner Parts of the Member to have lost the Sence of Feeling. So that the Mistake proceeds from hence, that because the Sence of Feeling failed in the Skin, which might happen through vitious Humors obstructing or contracting the Pores of the Skin, or else Extremity of benumming Cold, the Physitian never minded the Mus∣cles, which had they diligently inspect∣ed, they had found by them, that the Sence never fails in them while the Mo∣tion remains. XVIII. I shall clear this by some Ex∣amples.Observati∣ons. A Woman came to me for Advice, she mov'd all her Limbs indif∣ferent well; but her Skin, that was wrinkled and somewhat cold, had no feeling in it, though prick'd with a Needle, or held to the Fire; but if you thrust the Needle deep into any Muscle that lay underneath, she was presently sensible of the Pain of the inner Mus∣cle. In like manner I met with a Sea∣men, returning Scorbutic from the East Indies, who had no more feeling in his Skin than a Stone, though you held his Hand to a scorching Fire. But if you thrust a Needle more deeply in∣to the Muscles, he was presently sensi∣ble of Pain. The same Story I could tell of a Tobacco Merchant, whose Skin had quite lost its Feeling; but when you pricked him to the Muscles, he was presently sensible of the Pain. So that most certain it is, that in the moving Parts the Sence never fails, un∣less at the same time the Motion also fail. XIX. They that imprudently main∣tainThe Error of Philo∣sophers. this Argument, assert, that Sence is contributed to the Parts by the little Fi∣bres of the Nerves; but Motion by the Animal Spirits, which flow into the Muscles through their little Pipes in great quantity, and so that the Fibres may be obstructed, though the Passage of the Animal Spirits may be free; by which means the Sence fails, the Moti∣on remaining. On the other side, that the lower Cavity may be obstructed, the Fibres remaining free and entire, and then the Motion fails, the Sence remaining perfect. True it is, that the Nerves feel by reason of the Fibres and Tunicles proceeding from the Me∣ninx; but that they contribute Sence to all the feeling Parts by means of their little Fibres, is altogether false. For they are not the little Fibres, but the Animal Spirits flowing through the Po∣rosities of the Nerves that cause the Fa∣culty of Feeling in all the membranous Parts; without the Influx of which, the
little Fibres never feel, as appears in the Palsie. And hence it appears, how absurd it is to say, That the inner Porosi∣ty being obstructed, and the Passage of the Spirits by that means hindred, the Motion fails, but the Sence remains, seeing that the Sence proceeds from the Influx, and fails without it. But it may be objected, that though the in∣ner Porosity of the Nerve be obstruct∣ed, yet a sufficient Quantity of Spirits may pass through the Substance of the Fibres to create Motion. But in the same manner it may as well be said, that the Artery being obstructed within side, and the Passage of the Blood be∣ing hindred, suffcient vivific Heat and Spirit may pass through its Substance to preserve the natural Heat of the Parts; whereas the Preservation of the Heat proceeds from the due Influx of the Blood, and that failing, the Heat also fails in the upper Substance of the Artery, which is warmed and nourished by the Substance that passes through it. Besides, how can the in∣ner Cavity of a Nerve or Artery be obstructed without the Compression of the little Fibres and the Substance it self? For that if the obstructing Matter exactly close up the inner Cavity, so that the most subtil and invisible Spirit cannot pass, of necessity it must more closely compress the Substance of the Vessel and the little Fibres, seeing that without such an exact Compression, the Stoppage cannot be; but the Substance being compressed with the little Fibres, the Pores therein, and the Fibres are quite stopped up, and they being stop∣ped, how shall the Spirits pass, either through the Fibres or the Substance? Then again, seeing that in the Motion of the Muscles their Fibres and Mem∣branes must require a greater quantity of Animal Spirits, which Spirits cause a quick Sence of feeling in the Fibres and Membranes, how is it possible, that a great quantity of Spirits being employed toward Motion, which the Fibres and Membranes necessarily supply at the same time with the same Spirits, should be deprived of Sence, which requires much fewer Spirits than Motion? Is not the Feeling granted, by granting the necessary Means of Feeling? But this Axiom they seem to reject, who say, that the Feeling is lost in the Muscle, yet grant that many Spirits flow thither to compleat the Motion. Lastly, they should prove that there is an inner Cavi∣ty in the Nerves, which could never yet be made out by any Person in the World. XX. But there arising another    by the Spi∣rits. Question, while many believe Sensa∣tion to be communicated to the Brain by the Animal Spirits contained in the little Tubes and Membranous Substance of the Nerves; others by the little Fibres of the Nerves. The first Opinion seems less proba∣ble, because the Animal Spirits are con∣tinually pressed away from the Brain through the Nerves, but never ascend or return from the Nerves to the Brain; and this seems strange again, that the Ideas imprinted in the Spirits should in a moment of time be carried from the remotest Members of the Body, against the Stream of the Spirits, to the Brain, to be there offered to the Mind. Ne∣vertheless Gassndus describes a single way, by which he believes, this return of the Spirits to the Brain may be ef∣fected. For, saith he, a Nerve, or little Nerve cannot be touched, but it must be compressed; nor can it be compressed, but the Spirit contained must be provoked by Di∣stention, and being stirred, it must push for∣ward, or rather repel the next to it, and by the same reason, the Spirit coming from the Brain; nor can that be repelled, but the whole Series, by reason of Repletion and Continuity being repelled, the Spirit at the beginning of the Nerve flies back to the Brain. And therefore it is that the Faculty of Sence residig in the Brain, is moved by this flying back, and presently perceives and apprehends the Touch which is made. And afterwards he adds, That nothing is sent, but rather seems to be remitie and repelled; that is to say, the Spirit contained in the Nerves; neither does  appear that any thing else can touch the Brain. But after this manner the Nerve being compressed, the Spirit flowing into it, being by that Pressure hindred from any farther Passage, may be stopp'd indeed, but no way repel∣led to the Brain, or any Idea-carrying Motion be made from thence to the Brain, because the continual Pressure, or impulsive Motion of the Brain it self, is an Obstacle to hinder the Spirits from being so strongly provoked toward the Nerves or their Ends, that no con∣trary Motion can repel them to the Brain; and that so much the less, for that granting a stopping Cause, yet there is no other repelling Cause. Therefore it is with the Nerves, as with the Arteries; for the Arteries being squeezed, the Blood is stopped from passing, but does not flow back to the Heart, because the Pulsation drives it
so strongly from it, that it cannot by any outward Pressure, return again through the Arteries to the Heart: And thus, seeing the Brain with the same force expels the Spirits from it in∣to the Nerves; and seeing also that when any contract is made in any of the re∣motest Parts of the Body, it is perceiv'd at the very same moment in the Head; and in regard so rapid a Motion of the Spirits from the Foot to the Head can∣not be compehended by thought; neither by reason of Repletion or Con∣tinuity, the Spirits being prohibited farther, passes through the Pressure of the Nerve, can those Spirits which are at the Original of the Nerve fly back to the Brain, because of the Propulsion aforesaid, by which, the Brain by its own proper Motion urges the Spirits continually toward the Nerves, not per∣mitting any to fly back. Lastly, seeing that by that Stoppage of Spirits, no Idea of feeling, whether soft or hard, &c. can be carryed to the Brain from the thing felt, and there be represented to the Mind, it is manifest that Gassendus's Opinion is but a Fiction. XXI. The latter Opinion, thatWhether Sense be made by the little Fibres of the Nerves. Sensation is caused in the little Fibres constituting the Body of the Nerve, though more plausible, yet it is hard to understand, how in a moment of time the specific Image of Sensation can be carried from the Thigh to the Brain, through the solid Substance of little Fibres and Nerves to be there ap∣prehended by the Mind. I know that some would make this out by the Simi∣litude of the Strings in a musical Instru∣ment, which being touch'd at the lower end, will tremble at the same time at the top. But in the Bodies of Men, there is not so strong a Tension of the Nerves, not that streightness of Situati∣on, as in Strings pegg'd up; but a great Laxity and Contortedness, and a mani∣fold Connexion every where with the Parts, that such a continued Trembling should happen in the little Fibres of the Nerves. Which Gassendus observes, where he says, That it is not the Spirit contained, but the containing Tunicle, which by reason of its Continuation and Distention to the Brain, carries the Affe∣ction thither. But because the Nerves are not extended in a streight Line, like the Strings of a Lute, but contorted and re∣laxed, they cannot repress the Motion which is made at one End in the other Extremity. Lewis de la Forge opposing these Words of Gassendus, proves in∣deed, that the Perception of Sense is caused by the Spirits flowing from the Part felt to the Brain; but does not sufficiently convince us, that this Perception is caused by the Motion communicated to the Brain. His whole Argument rests upon the Influx of the Animal Spirits into the little Fibres of the Nerves, which are thereby kept continually stretched. But that loose Tension is not sufficient to enable a small Nerve that has so many Windings from the Foot to the Head, and inter∣vening Connexions to extend its Moti∣on; being lightly touched in the Foot, so suddenly to the Brain. The Noise of a Gun does not presently reach the Ear, through the Air, which is a yielding Body; consequently there is a longer space of time required in the solid Body of a Nerve, passing through so many intricate and various Turn∣ings, and yet at the very individual point of time that the Foot is touched, the Idea of the Touch is felt in the Brain. So that the Touch and the Perception seem to be both at the same Instant, which could not be, if the Mo∣tion of the Fibres were to extend it self to the Brain before the Touch could be perceived in the Brain. If it be object∣ed, that this is done by the Continui∣ty of the Nerve: I answer, that it may be done in hard extended things, but not in soft and languid. Thus, if you set a Stick twenty foot long to the Ear, and slightly strike the t'other end, the Ear will presently perceive the Percussi∣on; but take the Gut of any large Beast, and put it to the Ear blown up with Wind, and hld it to the Ear, and strike at the other end, the Moti∣on shall never extend it self much above a Span, much less will it reach the end next the Ear. And so it is with any Motion made in a soft, languid and contorted Nerve, at a distance from the Head. Besides the Nerve is com∣posed of innumerable Nerves so strong∣ly adhering together, that they can∣not be parted asunder but by force. Now if any small Fibre be moved in the Foot, how shall that Motion reach the Brain, when none of the rest which are annext to it, never so much as stir? If you say, the first being moved, the rest move, and so the whole Nerve moves, then the Perception of the Brain will be uncer∣tain, not being able to judge whether the first Motion were in the Toe, or a∣ny other Part of the Foot.
Des Cartes makes mention of this Question, and the better, as he thinks, to explain it, We are to understand, says he, that those little Threads, which, as I said, arise from the innermost Recesses of the Brain, and compose the Marrow of those Nerves, are in all the Parts of the Body, which serve for the Organ of any Sense, and these Strings may be most easily mov'd by the Objects of those Senses. But when they are mov'd never so little, presently they attract the Parts of the Brain from whence they derive their Original, and at the same time open the Passages of some Pores in the foremost Superficies of the Brain. Whence the Animal Spirits tak∣ing their Course, and carried through the same into the Nerves and Muscles, stir up Motions altogether like to those with which we also are excited, our Senses being af∣fected after the same manner. Here the two former Opinions seem to be joyned together by the most ex∣cellent Philosophers of our Age, to ex∣tract the Perception of the Senses out of this Conjunction. For he believes that the Idea of the Object is to be carri∣ed through the small Fibres to the Brain, and that then in the Brain, cer∣tain Pores being opened, the Animal Spirits flow through the Porosities of their Fibres into the Nerves and Mus∣cles, and so excite a Motion which cau∣ses the Perception. But still I wish that this ingenious Invention would teach us, how at the same instant of time, that Motion of the Fibres can be carried from the Toes to the Head, and at the same Instant, the Influx of the Spirits from the Brain to the Feet. Mecha∣nics here will not serve turn. Pull a Rope, says he, at one end, and the Bell at the other end of the Rope will present∣ly sound: But the Parallel will not hold. For in Man there is a rational Soul and Life: Now the Soul perceives, and moves the Parts without any external Object. 'Tis otherwise with a Bell, which is void of Life and Soul, nor can be moved but by some external A∣gent, and consequently has need of other Organs than a living Body. For Ex∣ample; the Rope does not move the Bell, unless pulled by some external Mover; but there is no such Mover, or pulling in the Nerves or their little Fibres, much less in the soft and mar∣rowy Substance of the Nerves. When a Man lyes crumpled up several ways in his Bed, there is neither Sreightness nor Tension, but many times a Com∣pression of the Nerves, and yet he feels the least Prick in his little Toe. Is the soft Medullary Fibre of the Nerve, notwithstanding the crooked Posture of the Body moved through so many Windings and Turnings to the Innermost Recesses of the Brain? Is there then any Tension of the Fibres and Nerves? Rather will there not be some Pressure to intercept and stop that Motion? No, says Des Cartes, because these Fibres are included in those lit∣tle Tubes through which the Animal Spirits are carried into the Muscles, which always swelling, those little Tubes prevent the little Threads from being too much compressed. As if, when the Nerves are up and down compressed by that crooked Posture of the Body, those fictitious Tubes remained open and distnded, to prevent the Compres∣sion of those little Strings. Now com∣pare the two Sentences of Des Cartes, from his Similitude of a Bell-rope, he says, the more extended the Nerves are, the more easily and suddainly those Threads are moved to the innermost Recesses of the Brain. On the other side, in another place he says, that the Filaments that serve the Organs of Taste, are more easily mov'd than those that officiate for the Sense of Feelling, because they are more relaxed. Shall then the more relaxed String more sud∣dainly and easily be moved, than ano∣ther more distended? Lastly, I would fain know, whether that thin invisible Fibres being mov'd, has any Faculty to open in the Brain any Pores for the In∣flux of Spirits. This is an Action of the Mind, not of any Nerves or Fi∣bres: For the Mind can open or shut the Pores, sometimes of these, some∣times of those Nerves, and has power to appoint the Spirit to these or those Parts, in greater or lesser quantity, vid. l. 3. c. 5. XXII. No less difficult it seems toThe Deter∣mination of the Spi∣rits by the Nerves. explain, how the determinative Motion of the Spirits through the Nerves pro∣ceeds, and how they come to flow and cease to flow, sometimes into these, sometimes into those Muscles so sudden∣ly, in a moment of time. A Question which the Ancients, by reason of its diffi∣culty, car'd not to meddle with. But lately, Regius has undertook the Point, and tells us there are many Valves in the Nerves, for the opening and shut∣ting of which, the Animal Spirits flow and re-flow, sometimes to these, some∣times to those Parts, according to the determination of the Mind. But not to believe any thing rashly, no man
shall perswade me that there are any Valves in the Nerves, the opening or shut∣ting of which, either admits or restrains the flowing or reflux of the Animal Spi∣rits, according to the determination of the Mind, the least shadow of which could never be demonstrated by any Anatomist that ever I heard of, so that this Opinion falls to the Ground. First, Because that if the determinated Influx of the Spirits should take effect, the Soul while it finishes those determi∣nations, would only be employ'd in the opening and shutting of those Valves, but not in the Emission of Spirits (for those flow continually and spontaneously through the Impulse of the Heart and Brain) like an Organist; who laying his Fingers upon these or those Keys, causes the wind to enter these or those Pipes from the Bellows according to his own determination, and as he opens or shuts the Valves of the Pipes with his Fingers, so the several strings in the Brain, from whence the Operations of the Mind proceed, ought to be extend∣ded, like the conveyances of an Organ, to the several Valves of the Nerves by which they may be shut or opened at pleasure. But in regard that many times one Nerve sends it Branches to many Muscles; as the Turning-back Nerve, sends its Branches to many Muscles, Hyoides, Neck and other Parts, and several to the Diaphragma, consequently there ought to be Valves belonging to every Branch, from each of which peculiar strings ought to be ex∣tended to the Brain, and so should ascend of-times through one Nerve, which runs out to various Parts, though very slender, like the Vagous Nerve of the sixth Conjunction, a hundred, two hundred, or more according to the Number of the Valves; but that there are such Filaments, there is no Man of reason but may easily con∣ceive. Secondly, Seeing that as those Valves are open'd and shut, the motion of the Parts is said to be swifter or slower, and for the same reason by the determi∣nation of the Mind, the Sense of Feeling would move more or less acute at plea∣sure nay some times would intermit; which that it never happens is known to all Men. Any Man may either move or not move his hand as he pleases, but he can never so move it at his pleasure, but the Skin of the Hand shall be more or less sensible of it, which he might do if those Valves were allow'd in the Nerves, and were mov'd at the determination of the Mind. Thirdly, Perhaps you'l say these Valves are not mov'd like the Valves of an Organ by the help of Keys, but that they are open and shut by the Influx of the Animal spirits. But this is easily refuted: for that the Animal spirits flowing into the Nerves from the Brain and Pith, always proceed di∣rectly, but that they never return, is apparent from the continual expulsion of the Brain, but repelling of nothing. Now in their progress, their passage is always open through the Valves, so seated, as to give free egress. But what is that which in the various de∣termination of the Spirits shuts and opens them again in a moment of time? The Spirits flowing in, only open the Valves; and there is no Spirit allowed to return, because there is nothing that can expel it; nor can the Soul do it; for what is already flow'd into the Nerves, out of the Brain, is without the Instruction of the Determiner; ha∣ving already perform'd the Commands of the Mind by its Efflux, neither can it in a moment of time recal it at Libitum back from the Part, because the Blood and Spirits are always mov'd forward in the Bodys by Impulsion, but never repell'd by the same ways. Fourthly, Valves are allow'd in Bo∣dies that have a manifest Cavity, as the Milky, Lymphatic Vessels and Veins; where there is only a space for Expan∣sion; but in the Nerves there is no Ca∣vity to be discerned; besides that in the Cure of a wounded Nerve, we have seen those Filaments which were cut off, to the great pain of the Patient, as long as a Mans Hand separated from the rest not cut off, the rest remaining entire about the half way of the Nerve, and the Cure being perfected, offi∣ciating as before; and yet in such rare accidents could we observe any hol∣lowness in the Nerves: and had there been any Valves therein, they must have been dilacerated upon taking away half the length of the Nerve, nor could the Nerves have afterward, as they did, perform their duty. Des Cartes and his Followers, to a∣void these Rocks, tells us, that▪ the Valves are only in those places of the Nerves, where being divided into Branches they enter several Muscles. And so they write, that one Muscle being dilated by the Spirits more impe∣tuously flowing into it from the Brain, and swelling at its full breadth, and
contracted at its full length, by the compression made by the dilated Mus∣cle, the Spirits are repell'd upward, and forc'd into that Valve seated at the Bi∣forcation of the Nerve. So that when they cannot pass it, they presently flow into the other Branch of the Biforca∣tion to contract and encrease the swel∣ling of another adjoyning or opposite Muscle. But this is easily refuted, for that the Ramifications of the same Nerve are inserted into the Mus∣cles, either adjoyning or opposite, and moving the Members by contrary motions, so that there can be no such regress of the Spirits to the Valve seat∣ed next the Biforcation, there being ma∣ny times no such Biforcation, but only several Muscles receiving several Nerves. XXIII. The Nerves differ in re∣spectThe diffe∣rence of the Nerves. of their substance and quality; some are thicker, some thinner; some softer; as those which proceed from the Marrow within the Cranium, as also those which extend but a short way to the Sensitive Parts, or require but little Mo∣tion, and proceed from the Pith without the Brain. 2. In respect of their Quan∣tity, some are large, some small, o∣thers long, others short. 3. In respect of their rise, some from the Pith within, others from the Pith without the Cranium. 4. In respect of the Pairs; some more Porous, as the Ceptics, some less, as the rest of the lesser Nerves. XXIV. The Pairs or ConjunctionsThe num∣bers of the Nerves. of the Nerves are reckon'd to be Thirty Nine, with one Nerve that is not Pair'd. That is to say Nine pair arising from the Pith of the Brain, within the Cranium; and Thirty with∣out side of the Cranium, proceeding from the Spinal Pith through the holes of the Vertebres, eight Pairs of the Neck, twelve of the Breast, five of the Loyns, and five of the Os Sacrum. To this number is to be added the Nerve that has no Pair, going forth at the end of the Spinal Pith, which Fernelius will have to be rather number'd among the Ligaments. But this Number dif∣fers from the Computation of those who will have but only Seven Pair of Nerves within the Cranium according to Galen, whereas there are rather Nine, (See lib. 3. cap. 8) and so they number Thirty Seven Pairs, with one odd Pair. As to the Devarications of the Nerves, they are innumerable, not to be described by all the Art of Ana∣tomists, and therefore we shall only mention those which are most remark∣able. CHAP. II. Of the Nerves of the Neck. OF the Nerves proceeding from the long Pith of the Brain, with∣in the Cranium we have discover'd suffi∣ciently, lib. 3. cap. 8. But from the Pith of the Spine se∣veral Nerves proceed, of which more at large lib. 3. cap. 7. of which Ana∣tomists number so many Conjunctions, as there are wholes in the Vertebres out of which they proceed. The Nerves proceeding from the Spi∣nalThe Coats of the Nerves. Marrow, consist of several little Strings, which tack'd together from the thin Meninx, make one Nerve, which the thicker it is, into so many the more little Threads it is divided, which appears upon the Diffection of the Membrane. But least the said little strings, at their first egress, should be parted one from another, first they are wrapt above with the thin Meninx call'd the Dura Mater, and no sooner have they made their egress through the holes of the Vertebres, but they are bound about with a strong fleshy substance, like a Ligament. The Nerves proceeding from the Marrow descending into the Spine, (where it uses to be call'd the Spinal, or the Dorsal Morrow) according to the Order in which they descend from the Marrow, and divided into the Nerves of the Neck, the Back or Breast, the Loyns, and of the Os Sacrum. From the Pith passing through the Vertebres of the Neck, proceed Eight Pairs; though others count but Seven, numbring the lowermos Pair among the Nerves of the II. The first and second Pair, springing out from the fore-part of the Marrow, not from the side, least they should be prejudic'd by the peculiar Articulation of the first and second Vertebre, arise with a double begin∣ning; the one between the hinder part
of the Head of the first Vertebre; the other between the first and second Ver∣tebre, at the sides of the Denti-form'd Process. But the first beginning of the Pair is distributed into the Muscles resting upon the Neck, and lying under the Oesophagus or Benders of the Neck. The hinder beginning of it proceeds with a double dissemination. Of which the slendrest is distributed into the lesser streight Muscles, and the upper oblique Extenders of the Head; the other is inserted into the Beginning of the Muscle rasing up the Scapula. But the First, and most slender beginning of the second Pair, making its egress at the side of the Denti-form'd Process, is distributed into the Muscles of the Neck, and wasts it self in the Skin of the Face. The Hinder Beginning, burst∣ing forth at the sides of the Process of the hinder Vertebre, is presently after divided into two unequal Branches. Of which the thicker, tending toward the hinder Parts, and joyning its self with the third Branch of the third Pair of the Nerves, crawls over all the hin∣der Muscles of the Neck, and partly communicated to the Ears, ascends the very Top of the Head, and there wasts it self into the Skin. The Other which is more Thin, is distributed into the larger streight and oblique Muscles of the lower Part of the Head. III. The third Pair, rises in each side, between the Lateral hole, between the second Vertebre, immediately after its egress is divided into two Branches. The foremost of these is again subdivid∣ed into four Stocks of which the First runs out to the first Muscle, of those that bend the Neck, call'd the long Muscle The Second, descending, and united with a Sprig of the Fourth Pair, ends in the Muscles lying under the Gullet. The Third ascending, and concurring with the thicker Branch of the Second Pair, vanishes in the Skinny Parts of the hinder Part of the Head. The Fourth, sending forth Branches to the Muscle. extending the Neck, in the Transverse Processes at the end of the Neck and the raiser of the Scapula, seated at the begin∣ning of the Neck, terminates in the four square Muscle, drawing down the Cheeks. The hinder Branch of this Pair is inser∣ted into the second Pair of the Muscles extending the Breast. IV. The fourth Pair, rising between the third and fourth Vertebre, is pre∣sently divided into two unequal Bran∣ches. Of these, the foremost and biggest is again tripartited into three little Sprigs. Of which the First being joyn'd with another Branch of the Third, enters the first and long Pair of the Muscles bending the Neck; the other is carry'd to the transversal Mus∣cle, extending the Neck, and the first of the Scapula, called the Cucular. The third, slenderer then the rest, being joyn'd with a little Sprig descending close by the Mediastinum and Pericar∣dium, together with those little Sprigs constitutes the Diaphramatic Nerve. The hindermost and least, proceeding backward toward the Spine, affords several Branches, to the Muscles of that place, and thence is carry'd between the four square Muscle drawing down the Cheeks. V. The fifth Pair, rising between the fourth and fifth Vertebre, is also divided into two Branches, the fore∣most and the hindermost. The fore∣most sends forth four little Sprigs; of which the first is carry'd to the Ben∣ders of the Neck; The second, toge∣ther with the Stocks of the fourth and sixth Pair, and somtimes the seventh, when the Branch of the seventh is wanting, descending by the sides of the Vertebres, along the fore-parts of the Vertebres, is inserted into the middle of the Diaphragma, and therein con∣stitutes the Phrenic Nerve. The third proceeds to the Deltoides, or Muscle that raises the Shoulder, through the upper and outer-most seat of the Shoul∣der, and thence sends forth little Bran∣ches to the Cucular, and Muscle rearing the Scapula. The fourth, approaching the Neck of the Scapula, is divided in∣to two Branches; of which the one is carry'd to the Deltoides, where it parts from the Scapula; the other which is somewhat thicker, is contorted toward the Spine, and is distributed in the same manner as the hinder part of the fourth Pair. VI. The Sixth Pair, breaking forth under the fifth Vertebre, and being divided also into two Branches, when it has sent forth a little Sprig to con∣stitute the Phrenic Nerve, which be∣ing joyn'd with a little Branch of the fourth and fifth Pair, it forms, pro∣ceeding farther, is united with the seventh of the Neck, and the first Pair of the Breast, and then parts from them, but being again United, forms the Net-resembling Fold, from whence the Nerves proceed which are carry'd to the Arm. The hindermost is carry'd to the hinder Muscles exten∣ding the Head and Neck.
VII. The seventh Pair makes its Passage through the Common Hole of the sixth and seventh Vertebres. The foremost and biggest Branch of this Pair, is united presently after its Egress with the sixth of the Neck, and first of the Breast, which we reckon the eighth of the Neck, and with the rest, is carried the greatest part of it to the Arm. The hindermost and lesser Branch goes away to the Muscles resting upon the Neck, and the foursquare Muscle drawing down the Cheeks. VIII. The eighth Pair, which some call the first of the Breast, coming forth between the last of the Neck and the first Vertebre of the Breast, is pre∣sently slit into two Branches. The foremost and biggest is united with the seventh of the Neck, and the first Nerve of the Breast, and so is afterwards alto∣gether dispersed into the Arms. Ex∣cept one Stock, which rising at the be∣ginning of it, is united with the Nerves aforesaid, and carried into the Fore∣parts as far as the Sternon, all the length of the first Rib of the Breast; afford∣ing also a little Sprig to the Subclavial Muscle; then winding back upwards, terminates in the Muscles rising from the upper part of the Sternon, that is to say, the Mastoides, Sternon hyoides, and Hyoides; into which, nevertheless some Branches are transmitted from the sixth Conjugation of the Brain, and the third of the Breast. However, from the same Branch ready to go into the Arm, another Ramification proceeds at the hinder Part, which enters the Muscle possessing the Cavity of the Sca∣pula. The hindermost and the lesser, lyes hid under the Muscles which grow to the Vertebres; from whence it sends some Ramifications into the second Muscle bending the Neck, as also into those which extend the Head and Neck; but descending about the Spine of the seventh Vertebre, it sends forth little Sprigs into the lower Part of the first Muscle of the Scapula, that is to say, the Cucullar, and of the third, or Rhamboides, and the Upper Postic Ser∣ratus. CHAP. III. Of the Nerves of the Breast o Back. TWelve Pair arise out of the Dor∣sal Marrow, all which Nerves, after their Egress, are divided into two Branches, of which, the biggest is con∣torted toward the Fore-parts, the lesser toward the hinder Parts. I. The first Pair, rising between the first and second Vertebre of the Breast, is presently divided into two Branches: Of which the foremost and biggest is united with the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Pair of the Neck, and with them forms the Net-resem∣bling Contexture, from whence all the Nerves arise that are to descend to the Arm. This also sends forth a Branch all along the Course of the first Rib, to the Sternon-bone, which constitutes the first Intercostal Nerve, and distri∣butes little Twigs into the Muscles, resting upon the Breast. The hindermost and lesser Branch is disseminated into the same manner as the hinder Branch of the eighth Pair of the Neck. II. The ten following Pairs, are like∣wise divided into the foremost bigger Branch, and the hindermost lesser: Of which, the foremost Branches being ac∣companied with as many Branches de∣scending under the Plera from the In∣ner Branch of the Nerve of the sixth Pair, constitute the Intercostals; which, together with the Intercostal Arteries and Veins, are carried all the length of the Rib toward the fore-parts, through the Cavity in the lower and innermost Seat of the Ribs. But those which be∣long to the true Ribs, proceed as far as the Sternon. But those which belong to the spurious Ribs, are carried to the fore-parts of the Abdomen above the Peritonaeum. From these several little Branches run out to several Muscles; as to the External and Internal In∣tercostals, the two Antic Serrati, the broad Withdrawer of the Shoul∣der, and the Pectoral, which brings the Shoulder to; also to the first Pair of the Muscles of the Abdomen, and the whole Skin of the Breast, and the Nipples of the Breast, to which they impart a most acute Sense. The latter Branches hasten toward the Spine between the Muscles growing to the
Vertebres, and send Branches both to them, the Muscles rising from the tops of the Vertebres, and the Skin of the Back. Galen observes, that the Nerves which issue from the bastard Ribs, are bigger than those which proceed from the Superior Ribs, and are always bi∣partited about the middle of the Ribs, make their Egress at one Part, and at the other crawl through the inner Rib. But we have observed that Division not about the middle of the Rib, but pre∣sently after they have made their Egress out of the Holes of the Vertebres. III. The twelfth Pair, which others reckon to be the first of the Loyns, breaks forth between the last of the Breast, and the first of the Loyns, and is presently divided into two Branches; of which, the foremost, which is the biggest, is inserted into the fleshy Appen∣dix's of the Diaphragma, the obliquely descending Muscles of the Abdomen, and the first of the bending Muscles called the Psoas; the Compression of which, by the Stone in the Kidneys, causes a Numness in the Thigh on that side. From this Branch, that little Sprig de∣rives is Original, which, together with the preparing Artery is carried to the Testicles. l. 1. c. 22. Which Vesalius, Plater and Laurentius affirm to proceed from the first Pair of the Loyns, being our twelfth Pair of the Breast. The Hindermost enters the Muscles of the Loyns, resting upon the hinder Part of the Vertebres; that is to say, the longest, the Sacrolumbus, and the broad∣est withdrawer of the Shoulder. CHAP. IV. Of the Nerves of the Loins. FRom the Spinal Marrow contained in the Vertebres of the Loyns, pro∣ceed five Pairs, which are bigger than the Dorsals, and divided into two Bran∣ches; of which, the four Branches are carried to the Muscles of the Abdomen; the hindermost to the Muscles of the Vertebres, resting upon the Spines and nameless Bones, and afford some little Branches to the Skin investing the Loyns. The foremost being united at some di∣stance, constitute that Fold from whence the Nerves proceed, that are to be sent to the Thighs. I. The first Pair makes its Egress between the first and second Vertebre of the Loyns, under the Psoas or Ploas Muscle, and is carried with its foremost Branch to the second Muscle bending the Thigh, and the first Fascial bend∣ing the Leg, as also to the Skin of the Thigh. With the latter, going forth from the Abdomen, it provides for the three Glutaei extending the Thigh, and the Membranous Extensor of the Leg. II. The second Pair proceeds be∣tween the first and second Vertebre un∣der the first Muscle bending the Thigh. The Fore-branch of this passing near the Ileon Bones, sends forth two Stalks; one to the Knee and its Skin; the o∣ther long, which accompanies the Sa∣phaena. The other turns backward and enters the Muscles that cover the Loyns. III. The third Pair, which is the biggest of the Lumbal Nerves carried under the said Muscle bending the Thigh and the Share-Bone, accompa∣nies the Crural Vein and and Artery. Columbus writes, that there is a Branch extended from it to the Groin, Scrotum and Skin of the Yard; which Bauhinus however derives from the Pith of the Os Sacrum. IV. The fourth Pair rises between the fourth and fifth Vertebre; and its foremost Branch passes through the Hole between the Bone of the Hip, the Share∣bone, and the Ileon, and sends forth Branches to the two Muscles that fling the Thigh about; as also to the Muscles second and third that send the Thigh and others to the Muscles of the Yard; some believe that it sends other Bran∣ches to the Neck of the Womb and Bladder. The hinder most goes away into the Muscles and Skin that covers the Vertebres. V. The fifth Pair, which some will have to be the first of the Os Sacrum, rising between the last Vertebre of the Loyns, and the upper part of the Os Sacrum, is divided into two Branches; of which, the foremost is intermixed for the most part with the Nerves going to the Thigh, and sends forth a little Branch near the inner Region of the Ile∣on-bone, to the Muscles of the Abdomen, and the second of the Thigh-benders. The latter is disseminated into the Muscles growing from the Ileon bone,
chiefly the greater Gluteus, and the Skin of the Bottocks. CHAP. V. Of the Nerves proceeding from the Pith of the Os Sacrum. FRom the Marrow contained in the Cavity of the Os Sacrum, five Pairs proceed; which Nerves, before they take their Progress through the Holes of this Bone, are divided each into an inner and outer Branch, which go forth before and behind through the trans∣verse Hole. The three inner and uppermost go away to the Thigh; the two lowermost to the Vessels of the Bladder and Podex, also to the Perinaeum, the Yard and Scrotum, and the Neck of the Womb. The hindermost are distributed to the Muscles possessing the hinder Seat of the Ileum and Os Sacrum; the first and se∣cond Extenders of the Breast, the long∣est Muscle of the Back and Sacrolumbus; the Bender of the Loyns, called the Ho∣ly Muscle, the broad Muscle withdraw∣ing the Shoulder, and the three Glutaei which constitute the Buttocks. The End of the Spinal Marrow, penetrating into the Coccyx-bone, sends forth one Stock, therefore called the Pairless, which is first divided into two, then more Branches running forth to the Buttocks, Podex, and certain Mus∣cles of the Thigh. This Pairless Nerve, Fernelius reckons among the Ligaments. CHAP. VI. Of the Nerves of the Arm and Hand. FRom the Spinal Marrow throughThe Plex∣us retifor∣mis. the Holes of the Vertebres, five Nerves are carried into each Arm, that is to say, from the fifth, sixth, se∣venth and eighth Pair of the Neck, and the first of the Breast. These Nerves presently after their Egress are united with the foremost and larger Branches, which are presently parted again, and again united, are a second time sepa∣rated, and so form a certain Net-re∣sembling Fold, which proceeds under the Clavicle, at the Egress of the Axil∣lary Vein and Artery. From which Fold, having at length freed themselves, they descend to the Arm of their own side; yet so, that the true Original of either is uncertain, by reason of the foresaid reiterated Implication and Ex∣trication; nor can the Anatomists de∣cribe it otherwise than by Conje∣cture. I. The first Pair is produced with a double Branch from the fifth Pair; of which, the one is carried to the second Deltoides Muscle of the Shoulder, and the Skin that covers it. The other to∣ward the Neck of the Scapula, and there is cleft into two Branches, of which, the first is inserted into the Deltoides, where it rises from the Cla∣vicle. The latter enters the fourth Pair of Muscles of the Hyoides-bone, or Coracohyoides; the other affords a Branch to the upper Scapulary and Deltoides, in the same place where the Spine of the Scapula rises. This is car∣ried through the upper part of the Shoulder, as the rest of the Nerves are carried through the Ala to the Arm, and there are slit into many Branches. II. The Second, which is the thick∣er, and carried through the fore-part and middle part of the Arm, under the two-headed Muscle, and affording little Branches to the two Heads of the same, as also to the Head of the longer Muscle depressing the Hand, is divided below the bending of the Elbow into two Branches: Of which, the Exter∣nal and the slenderest being carried along, together with a Branch of the Cephalic, through the External Seat of
the Elbow, enters the first and second Internode of the Thumb. The larger Internal is divided under the median Vein into two Branches; of which, the Exterior proceeding obliquely under the Skin, after it has left the Vein, runs to∣ward the Radius as far as the Wrist. The innermost being fastned to the inner Branch of the Basilic, and taking an oblique Course, is divided about the Elbow into two principal Branches; of which, one goes away to the Wrist through the Region of the Radius; the other through the Region of the El∣bow, and having passed beyond that, vanishes in the Skin of the inside of the Hand. III. The Third, before it comes to the Arm, throws forth a little Branch between the Muscle, withdrawing the Shoulder and the Deltoides; thence pro∣ceeding to the Arm under the two∣headed Muscle, sends forth a little Sprig into the Head of the second, bending the Elbow. From hence de∣scending with a Branch of the second Nerve, it approaches the inner Tubercle of the Bone of the Shoulder in the bending of the Elbow on the fore-side, which having past, it casts forth seve∣ral little Branches, which being united with other little Branches from the fifth Nerve, carried through the hinder Re∣gion of the said eminency, are distri∣buted into the Muscles possessing the in∣ner Seat of the Elbow, and springing from the Internal Eminency of the Shoulder, viz. into the two Muscles of the Fingers, bending the External In∣ternodes, and another that bends the third Joynt of the Thumb. From thence it casts forth another Stock, which descends between the said Mus∣cles through the Radius toward the Wrist, and passing under the Trans∣verse Ligament, sends forth certain▪ lit∣tle Sprigs to the withdrawing Muscle of the Thumb, and the other two bend∣ing the first Joynt of it. Afterwards, coming to the Hollow of the Hand, it is divided into three Branches; of which, the first gives two little Sprigs to the Thumb; the second, two to the Fore∣finger; the third, one to the Middle∣finger about the inner side. IV. The Fourth, three times as thick as the rest, is carried through the Arm, deeply concealed among the Muscles, together with the Axillary Ar∣tery and the Basilic Vein. But en∣tring the Arm, it sends forth upward and downward several little Sprigs into the Heads of the Muscles extending the Elbow, and the Skin investing the Internal Seat of the Elbow. Hence through the inner Hollowness in the Eminency of the Shoulder-bone, pro∣ceeding toward the hinder Parts, there it goes away into the Skin of the Arm, and descends from thence to the Wrist. Now the Joynt of the Elbow, it is di∣vided into two Branches, which descend between the Muscles to the Wrist. Of which, the External being produced all the length of the Radius, and at the Wrist, on the outer side, passing the Transverse Ligament, is there divided into two Branches, of which, one is in∣serted with a double Sprig into the ex∣ternal Seat of the Thumb; the other partly into the Fore-finger, and partly into the Middle-finger. The Internal, stretch'd out all the length of the Elbow, sends forth several Ramifications. 1. In∣to the first Muscle, extending the Fin∣gers. 2. Into the second Muscle, ex∣tending the Fingers. 3. Into the inner Muscle, extending the Wrist; hence it affords several Stalks in its Progress, to the three beginnings of the Muscles, de∣riving their Original from the Bone of the Elbow. What remains, termi∣minates in the Wrist. V. The Fifth, proceeding from the Inferior Part of the foresaid Net-resem∣bling Fold, and joyned to the fourth, descends between the Muscles bending and extending the Elbow, and proceeds entire to the Internal Eminency of the Shoulder, and there, together with the third Nerve, sends forth Branches to the Muscles springing from that Emi∣nency, and possessing the inner Seat of the Elbow. It also throws forth some∣what farther, between the Muscles bending the second and third Internodes of the Fingers, a little Sprig to the Hollow of the Hand, where it brings forth three Branches: Of which, the first being bipartited, enters the inner Part of the Little-finger; the second, being bipartited, enters the Ring-finger; the third proceeds to the External Seat of the inner side of the Middle-finger. Besides this fifth Nerve casts forth another little Sprig from the outer side, all along the middle of the length of the Radius; which Sprig be∣ing again divided into three Branches, enters the External Part of the Middle, Ring, and Little-finger. VI. The Sixth, which is sometimes added to the preceeding five, arises from the inner Part of the Net-resem∣bling
fold descends through the inner seat of the Shoulder and Elbow, with many little Sprigs dispers'd by the way to the neighbouring Skin. But when it touches the Internal Eminency of the Shoulder Bone, it is divided into several Stalks, which being accompani∣ed with the branches of the Basilic Vein, when they come to the Wrist vanish under the Skin. CHAP. VII. Of the Nerves of the Thighs and Feet. THere are four Pair of Nerves that descend to the Thighs, which rise from the seven Pairs de∣scending from the Spinal Marrow; that is, the four lower Pairs of the Loyns, the three upper Pair of the O Sacrum which being all inter∣mix'd at their beginning from the Net∣resembling fold, from which on each side the four aforesaid Nerves issue dif∣fering both in thickness and course. The first and third, because they do not stir out of the Thigh, are shorter and more slender, the second longer and thicker is carried through the middle of the Thigh and extended to to the Leg. The fourth much thick∣er and longer then the former, is carry'd through the Thigh and Legs to the Tops of the Fingers. Of those the three foremost appear before the Fourth behind. I. The First, rises from the upper part of the Net-resembling fold, where the Second Nerve of the Loyns unites with the Third, and enters the two Mus∣cles extending the Thigh, and its Skin; distributing little Branches to the first of the Leg-benders, and to the second and third extending it, and terminates above the joynt of the Knee. II. The Second, rising from the same Fountain, next under the first, goes a∣way with the Crural Arteries and Vein through the Groyns to the Thigh, and enters its inner and foremost Muscles, distributing little Branches also to the adjoyning Membranes and Skin, and sending one remarkable Branch to the Foot. Laurentius Spigelius, and others erroneously assert, that this Nerve is united with the Saphena Vein, for which reason it is somewhat dangerous to o∣pen this Vein; whereas it takes its course all alone without any Companion. The Third, rising from the Fold pre∣sently under the Second, and carry'd about the second Muscle bending the Thigh. IV. The Fourth, which Bartholin has observ'd double both at its beginning and Progress, and which is the thickest, dryest and strongest of all the Nerves in the whole Body, form'd out of the lowest of the Loyns; and the three up∣per Pairs of the Os Sacrum, after it has provided for the Thigh and the Skin of the Buttocks, sends forth little Bran∣ches to some Muscles of the Thigh, Leg and Foot. Thence descending farther with its Trunk, at the bend∣ing of the Knee in the Ham, it is di∣vided into an outer and inner Branch. Of which the outermost, which is the slenderest, is produc'd to the Ham, the outer Parts of the Foot, Perinaean Muscles and the Internal part of the Malleolus by the way affording many little Sprigs to the Skin; The innermost, which is the bigger, all a∣long the length of the Leg dispatches other Sprigs to the Muscles of the Feet and Toes, to the great Toe, the Sole of the Foot, and the Skin of the Calf, and to both the lower sides of the Toes. Wherefore all the Nerves, carry'd be∣low the Knee to the Nerves, proceed from this Crural Trunk except that Branch which descends from the se∣cond Pair next the Heel. We have not given any particular description of the Cutaneous Nerves, which are only little Branches sent to the Skin from the Nerves adjoyning, whose productions are only conspicuous, but their particular Descriptions are impossible, and therefore never under∣taken.
THE NINTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the BONES. CHAP. I. Of the Bones in General. MAny Anatomists begin their Anatomical Descriptions from the Bones, in imita∣tion of Galen; because the Bones are the Establishment of the whole Body, without which the rest of the Parts could not subsist. For Nature says Galen imitates the building of Ships; adapting the Vertebres in the place of the Keel, to which she after∣wards fits the Ribs, Beams, Planks, and sides, and the rest of the Wood-work. And therefore Galen begins with the Bones presupposing them to be found before the other Parts as being the Ground-work upon which all the other Parts must subsist. But we dislike that method for more pregnant reasons. 1. Be∣cause the Bones are not form'd before the other Parts, but at the same times, lib. 1. cap. 29. 2. Because they are later compleated then the other Parts. 3. Because the Bones are not the ne∣cessary basis for a Ground▪work at the beginning, until they have obtain'd a convenient hardness, which they have not at the beginning, but some Months after Conception and the Formation of the whole, nay many are wanting till after the Birth. 4. Because the Bones cannot be shown, till all the Parts an∣nexed are remov'd, and the Bones be laid bare. 5. Because all the softer Parts, are lyable to Putrefaction, which the Bones are not, and therefore ne∣cessarily the soft Parts are first to be de∣monstrated; as leading the nearest way to instruction and dueness of Method. And therefore we have observed this course; adding in the last place the Gristles and Ligaments which fasten the Bones together. But here you'l say, that the Know∣ledge of the Bones is beneath a Phy∣sitian, and only fit for Chyrurgions whose manual Operations are only proper, in Fractures and Luxations of the Bones. But in regard it is necessa∣ry for a Physitian to understand the whole Body of Physic which consists but of two Parts, knowing, and curing, and that Curation is perform'd by Dyet, Chyrurgery and Pharmacy, a Physitian certainly ought to have the perfect knowledg not only of the whole Body of Man, it's health and distempers, but also of the Reme∣dies, and consequently of Chyrurgery, which is certainly the most Noble and Antient Part of Medicinal Cure;
And although a Physitian taken up with more profound Speculations, may not practise Chyrurgery, yet the Know∣ledge of it is absolutely necessary for him, that he may be able to perform the Office of a Chyrurgion, where a Chyrurgeon is not to be had; and that he may be able many times to direct a Chyrurgeon in his Operation, to which purpose, the Knowledg of the Bones is of great importance. For which reason, Hippocrates, the Father of all Physitians, recommends it to his Son Tessalus. And for the same reason, Ga∣len would have all that read Hippocra∣tes's Books of Fractures and Luxa∣tions, to be perfectly skill'd in the Ske∣leton. I. The Bones, by the Greeks calledThe Name.  from  to stand, because the whole Structure of the Body stands by means of Bones; according to that of Hippocrates, the Bones af∣ford Stability, Streightness, and Form to the whole Body. II. The Bones are similar Parts, ve∣ryDesinition. hard, very dry, and destitute of Sense, colder than all the rest of the Parts, framed for the support of the whole Body. They are called similar, not that they are absolutely, but because they appear so to the Sense, nor can be easi∣ly divided into other Parts. For the clearer Explanation of which, Sigelius distinguishes between Simile and Simi∣lare, which he says differ as much as the Denominative from the thing from whence the Denomination is de∣rived. III. The Bones are generated inGenerati∣on. the Womb out of the thicker and more tartareous, or earthly Part of the Seed, nourished with the tartareous Particles of the Blood, and moistned with the marrowie Fat. IV. But the marrowy Fat calledMarrow. Marrow, is not of the same sort in all the Bones; for that in the large Hol∣lownesses of the larger Bones, it is ve∣ry oyly and Fat, yet of a Colour somewhat inclining to red; but in the Cavities of the lesser Bones it is white. But in the spungy Bones the Marrow is less thick and unctuous. The Marrow is generated out of the Blood thrust forward into the inner Parts f the Bones through the little Arteries, of which, more by and by. Two things are here to be noted. 1. That the Marrow is plainly destitute of feeling; though formerly Paraeus thought otherwise. 2. That it is not en∣veloped with any Membrane in the Ca∣vity of the Bones. By which Mark, Hippocrates distinguishes it from the Spi∣nal Marrow. The Spinal Marrow, says he, is not like the Mrrow which is in the other Bones, for only this has Mem∣branes, which the other Marrow has not. This Marrow is very useful to the Bones, for that the tartareous Particles, when they are near to fixation, quickly congeal into an Icy Hardness; so that the Bones would become very brittle, and never grow to their due Magnitude, unless that marrowy Fat penetrating the whole Bone, did not temper and sften the extream Hardness of the tartareous Particles, and so provide that in the Growth of the whole Body that the tartareous Particles do not separate, but still continue new Intermixtures with fresh Particles, till the Bone have attained its Perfection. Which growth surceases, when by reason of the in∣creasing Heat of the Body, these Par∣ticles are so drved up, that they can no longer be mollified by the marrowy Fat; nor extend themselves. Whence it comes to pass, that the more the heat of the Body encreases, the less the Body shoots out in length; because the bones which are the Basis's and Props of the Body become more and more dry and harded, and the Mar∣row grows thicker and less moist. Hence it comes to pass, that Insants grow much in a short time, Children less, and Youth less than they, and aged Persons never grow at all, by reason their Marrow is less in quantity, and less moist and oyly; and their dryness of their Bones causes them to be more brittle and easily broken. Now the Tartareous Particles are se∣parated from the Arterious Blood by the mixture of the Animal Spirits, which that they flow in great quantity to the Periostea, the quick Sense of the Periostea testifies, Vid. l. 3. c. 11. After which separation, the Particles are op∣posed to the Bones by the help of the marrowy Fat which moistens them. V. But the Blood▪ flows to the Pe∣riosteaThe Ves∣sels. and inner Parts, through the Arteries, and the less useful remain∣der flows back again through the Veins. To which purpose, those Vessels not only terminate with their Extremities in the Periostea, but also penetrate the
Bones themselves, and pour forth Blood into their innermost Concavities, to be changed into Marrow, which is the proper Nourishment for the Bones. And though their Ingress is not discer∣nable in all, yet in the larger Bones of the Shoulder and thigh, it is apparent, where the Cavities are perspicuously pervious, as far as the Marrow, afford∣ing passage to the Arteries. Besides, their Ingress into the Bones, appears by the Sanguinous Juice which is form'd in the Deplois, the middle spungy Ta∣ble of the Skull, and in the inner spun∣gy Substance of the Ribs of Infants, and many other Bones, which could never come thither through any other Channels. To this, add the Observa∣tion of Spigelius, who at Padua, in a great Rottenness of the Shin-bone, saw the substance of the Bone perforated by the Arteries, at what time, Plempius was present by his own report. I my self, in the Year 1665. had a young Man in cure, whose Shin-bone in the Fore-part was corroded with an extra∣ordinary Rottenness. After I had ta∣ken away the Flesh about it with the Periosteum. I perceived in the inner Ca∣vity, which reached to the Marrow, a little Artery beating very quick; where∣as no Man could dream of an Artery in the hardest Place of all the Bone; nor was the Artery continuous with the Flesh, for that was taken away, and yet the Pulse remained for many days in the inner rotten Cavity of the Bone. Which makes me believe that these Arteries are seldom conspicuous in the hard Part of the Bone, when Men are at their full Maturity; perhaps because the Arteries being pressed by the hardness of the growing Bone, at length vanish all together; and where they are some∣what bigger than ordinary, those Peo∣ple, by reason of some ill Humors in their Bodies, are easily subject to Rot∣tenness in their Bones, by reason of the sharp and corrupt Blood poured into them through the Arteries, which by the Infusion of good Blood, when Bones are broken, afford Matter for Callosity. However, this shews Platerus's Error, denying that the Arteries never enter the Bones; and how much Galen was in the Right, who allows to every Bone a Blood-bearing Vessel, bigger or lesser, according to the Proportion of the Bone. Now that the Bones harden by rea∣son of the increasing Heat, is plain from those Men who are born and bred in hot Countries; for by reason of the great external Heat, and the Internal sooner increasing within, they are gene∣rally shorter, dryer and leaner, the Hu∣midity of the Body being sooner wast∣ed. On the other side, they who in∣habit cold and most Countries; and eat and drink plentifully, they grow tall, by reason of the flower increase of their Heat and Drought; as we find by the Danes, Norwegians, Muscovites, &c. Now that Growth is hindred from the Increase of Heat and Drought, is appa∣rent from hence, that Ladies, to prevent their Lap-dog Puppies from growing, take away their Milk and moist Food, and feed them with Wine or Spirit of Wine, which causes a quicker increase of the natural Heat, and renders the Alimentary Blood more dry and sharp; by which means, the Bones being dry'd more suddenly, the Puppies cease to grow. VI. The officient Cause of theThe effici∣ent Cause. Bones, is the vivific Spirit seated in the Seed, which Galen calls the Ossi∣fic Faculty, disposing the more Tarta∣reous Parts of the Seed, for the Mate∣rials of Bones. These Spirits there∣fore may be said to be the Essential form of the Bones, which some Physi∣tians will have to be their cold and dry Temper; but Aristotle will have it to be the same. Rolsinch finding that the Bones were still the same in dead Bo∣dies as in living, believes the formal Cause of the Bones to be no more known than the formal Cause of a Stone. But what if we say, that the vi∣vific Spirit is the Form of living Bones, and their cold and dry Temper, toge∣ther with their own Conformation the Form of living Bones. As for their accidental Form it is their Shape and Figure, whether round, flat, streight, or crooked, according to their various use. VII. As to the Time of their For∣mation,The time of their Formati∣on. Aquapendens believes, that the Bones are first generated among the o∣ther Parts, resting upon Galens Argu∣ment at the beginning of the Chapter. Harvey believes them not to be sooner generated than other Parts, of which, many turn into Bones of the Birth, as in the Teeth. Neither is there any thing to be seen in the first Principles and Beginnings of Formation, but a soft, slimy, gluteous Substance, that approaches no way to the Constitution or Nature of Bones, which Constituti∣on it acquires afterwards by degrees.
VIII. The end of the Bones, whenTheir Use. arrived at their just Hardness is no Action but a Use, for no Bone exer∣cises any Action. This end is either common or particular; common to be the Props and Supports of all the Parts. Their particular Use is various, to defend many principal Parts and Bowels from external Injuries, to af∣ford a secure Passage for others, as in the Spine; to bind the Laxity of the Joynts, as in the Knee-pan, &c. IX. The Differences between theThe Diffe∣rence. Bones, according to Galen, are three. In respect of their Bulk, some larger, some little; in respect of their Cavity, some hollow, others solid; in respect of what they contain, some containing Marrow, others none. The other dif∣ferences we shall shew as we go a∣long. X. Their Substance is whitish andTheir Sub∣stance. hard, though harder or softer ac∣cording to the difference of Age, not altogether dry in living Creatures, but bespread with a certain Fat and viscous Moisture, which the more plen∣tifully it abounds in the Bones, the more tenacious they are, and the less brittle, and being broken, they the sooner unite together again, by means of the brawny Callosity. XI. I say that they unite by meansCallus. of the brawny Callosity; for that the Bones being taken away, never grow a∣gain, according to that Maxim of Hip∣pocrates, A perfect Bone, or Gristle, or Nerve, or any thin Particle of the Pre∣putium, neither grows again nor unites. That is, it does not unite without a Heterogeneous Medium. But the Callosi∣ty, by means of which, broken Bones unite, by degrees hardens and becomes bony in such a manner, as if it were a real Bone. This Lindan seems to have observed, where he says, that in Chil∣dren some Bones are consolidated toge∣ther without the help of any Callosity; for proof of which, he produces the Example of a Boy of six years old, that broke his Thigh-bone, the Fragments of which, being sequestred by Art and Na∣ture, there happens in the middle of the Bone, a boneless Space of about four Thumbs breadth. This was at length so filled up by the rest of the Parts of the Bone insensibly increased, and at last uni∣ted together, that you could not tell where the Bone had been wanting, or that the Fracture had done any harm. I remem∣ber something like this Story in a Per∣son full grown. In the Year 1655. a Miller of Nimmeghen falling from his Mill, broke his Leg with a Button in the middle, with that violence, that the upper Part-of the Bone boaring the Flesh, stuck in the Ground, which not only deprived it of the Flesh, but of the Periosteum. My self, with three Chyrurgeons more, were of Opinion, the Leg was to be cut off, there being no hopes of Cure: But one of the Chyrurgions being old and experienced, resolved first to cut of that part of the Bone which was bereft of its Periosteum, about the breadth of two Fingers: So said, so done, and then the Chyrurgi∣on extended the Leg to its first length, and splintered it up all alike, dressing and cleansing the Wound every day; in a short time there grew a Callus from each end of the Bone, which at length uniting, grew into a bony hardness, and the Wound being cured, retained its due length, so that you could not per∣ceive the Bone to have been taken a∣way by any limping of the Patient af∣terward; which Cure proved the more successful, because there was no great Artery or Vein broken, and the Blood which flowed out of the small ones easi∣ly stopped by the first Ligature. From whence it is apparent, that broken Bones do not unite but by means of the Callus. As for the Bones of Infants, that unite and consolidate without the help of any Heterogeneous Medium, this is to be said, that in New-born In∣fants, many Bones have not attained their due hardness, but are as yet soft and flexible like Membranes, whereas really they appear to be such as when they have acquired their Hardness; and such are the Bones of the Bregma in Infants, of the hinder Part of the Head, and the nameless Bones, which are still Bones, though they have not attained their due hardness, which be∣ing afterwards acquired, they become absolute Bones. XII. Many Bones, as those of theCavities. Thigh, Shoulder, Leg, &c. have a remarkable Concavity, the Domicel of much Marrow. Others, as of the Cranium and Ribs, &c. have only small and obscure little Cells, fill'd with a san∣guineous and marrowy Juice, necessary for their Nourishment. But these Cavities are so small, that they can either be hardly, or not very plainly discerned, and then those Bones are said to be sol∣lid, as the Bones of the Nose, the little Bones of the Wrist and Foot, &c.
which without question are furnished however with some small Porosities, though not manifestly conspicuous. In the Superficies of the Bones are to be considered Cavities and Promi∣nences, made for the Convenience of the Joyntings, the Insertion of the Ten∣dons, of the Muscles, Ligaments, &c. The Cavity, if it be deep, and receive the Head of another Bone, as in the Ischion-bone, is called ; if super∣ficiary, as in the Knee,  and Sinus, or a Hollowness. The Processes which occur at the top of the Hollownesses like Lips, and most conspicuous in deep Hollownesses, are called , in Latin, Labra and Supercilia, Lips and Brains. XIII. A Prominence is eitherA Promi∣nence. round, as in the Head of the Thigh∣bone; or long, as in the Stytoides; or hollow, as in the Scapula-bone. The round Prominence is called the Head, and if it be low and depressed, is called Condilus. A Prominency is twofold, Apophysis and Epiphysis. XIV. Apophysis, in Latin Pro∣cessusApophy∣sis. or Process, is the continuous Part of a Bone, manifestly bunching out beyond the flat Superficies, for the more commodious Insertion of the Muscles, Tendons, and other Parts; of which Processes, there are many in the Vertebres of the Back, also in the lower Jaw and Scapula. There is another short Apophysis, as in the Bones of the Fingers; and ano∣ther long, and that either sharp pointed, or simply long, variously named, ac∣cording to the Figure which it resem∣bles, as Styloides, Coracoides, Odontoi∣des, &c. XV. Epiphysis, or Appendix, isEpiphysis. a Bone growing to a Bone, like an Addition, by simple and immediate Contiguity, and that by the Inlet of small Heads or Bosoms, like a Gyngly∣nos, though without Motion. The Substance of the Epiphysis in Infants new Born, is thin and gristly, in Men of ripe Years it hardens into a thin and spungy Bone, and so in pro∣gress of time, is united with the Bone, as if it were an Apophysis, and were one continuous Bone, so that it cannot be separated again, unless by long macera∣tion and boiling, if the Party were young. But it is no where more soft and weak than about its Connexion, for there as spungy as a Pumice Stone, it is furnished with many little Cels: But it has no remarkable Cavity con∣taining Marrow; only a certain mar∣rowy Juice in its porous little Cells, for its own Nourishment. But it is broader than the Bone it self, and for that reason, renders the Articulation the stronger. XVI. The Bones are destitute ofWhether Bones have Sense? the Sense of Feeling; neither are they furnished with any conspicuous Nerves, except the grinding Teeth; but without side they are wrapt about with a thin Membrane very quick of feeling, that is to say, a Periosteum, which because it immediately adheres to the Bones, and is cruelly pain'd upon any Distemper, hence that painful Sensation is impro∣perly attributed to the Bones; not that the Bones are affected, but the Periostea that lye next the Bones and the adjoyn∣ing Membranes. However the Teeth are destitute of Periosteums, after they make their Egress out of their proper Seats; as also the little sesamoid Bones, the four little Bones of the Ears, and the ends of the Bones constituting the Joynts, to prevent their being pain'd by overmuch Motion and Collision. Nicholas Massa relates an unusual acci∣dent, that he saw an ulcer'd Thigh the Bone of which, after the Periosteum, was scraped off, felt an extraordinary Pain, that it would hardly endure to be touch'd; nay, that he boar'd the Bone, and that there was within a most cruel Sense of Pain, which, as he says, he therefore set down in Writing, that A∣natomists might observe whether any Sensation of the Nerves penetrated to the Bones: From which Observation, some conclude, that some of the Bones, if not all, are endued with the Sense of Feeling: But rather we must believe, that that same Corruption of the Bone being freed from its Periosteum, extend∣ed it self farther to those Parts of the Bone which were not yet covered with a Periosteum; and thence, by the Motion of the Bone laid bare, there might be some Pain in the Parts adjoyning to the Periosteum, still remaining covered; which Pains, I have often observed in my Practise, which were caused by the Motion of the Particles without Sense, but really proceeded from the next ad∣joyning sensible Parts. Against this Opinion of ours, there is an Objection raised from the Words of Avenzoa, who argues thus. The Bones participate of the Rational Soul, and are nourished, therefore they are sensi∣ble; for there is, according to Aristotle,
both a vigitative and a sensible Faculty in every thing that is rational, as in a Pentagon, a Triangle and a Square; therefore there must be either two Souls in the Bones, or of necessity they must be sen∣sible. Moreover, if they were not endu∣ed with the Sense of Feeling, the greatest Part of Animals would not differ from Plants. Lastly, if the vital Spirits could slow into their Substance without the help of the Arteries, much more easily the Animal, which is much more spiritu∣ous, without the assistance of the Nerve. Which Arguments, some have im∣proved so far, as to deny any Obtuse∣ness of Sense, but all quickness of feel∣ing to the Bones. But these Arguments fall to the Ground, being seriously ex∣amined. For the consequence of the first does not follow, where there is a Soul and Nutrition, there is Sense: for there is a rational Soul and Nutrition in the Carotides, in Cataleptics and Apo∣plectics, but no Sense. Nay, the contrary to this is manifest in Brutes, which are quick of Sense, though destitute of a Rational Soul. Moreover, a Rational Soul operates variously, according to the diversity of the Organs; in the Eyes, it causes Sight; in the Membranes, Feeling; in the Muscles, Motion; and there all the Parts that want the Sense of Feeling, are not to be proscribed out of the Ju∣risdiction of the Soul; otherwise the Parenchyma's of the Bowels, the Fat, and other Parts must be exil'd. A Man differs from Plants, in that he feels both Pain and Pleasure; but hence it does not follow, that all his Parts must of necessity be sensible; it is enough that a Man has those sensible Parts which the Plants have not. For because a Man differs from Plants in seeing, does it follow that all his Parts must see? But lastly, Experi∣ence teaches us, that all the Bones are not sensible of feeling. For we have often trepann'd and fil'd the Skull and Bones, and burnt them with red hot Instruments, without any Sense of Pain; so that if you blind-folded the Patient, he knew nothing of the Ope∣ration. Thus Scaliger writes, that he has pulled Bones out of his own gaping Wounds without any pain. XVII. The Number of the BonesThe Num∣ber. is not the same in all Ages. For in Infants and Children they are more, which as the Heat encreases, unite and become fewer, as the Bones of the Ster∣non unite into one or three; the Share∣bones, Hip-bones, and Ilion-bones into one, &c. Nor is there always the same Number at the same Age. For some∣times one Rib is either superfluous or wanting of each side: Sometimes the Vertebres of the Neck and Back; as also the Bones of the Thighs unite into one. Sometimes you shall find one Vertebre added to the Vertebres of the Loyns. As was observed in a Skeleton preserved by Antony Polt of Utrecht, wherein there were six Vertebres of the Loyns. Lastly, Anatomists vary in the Computation of the Bones. Some computing Epiphyses among Bones, and others reckoning in the Sesamoids. XVIII. The Qualities of the BonesThe Qua∣lities. consist in their Substance, in those things which follow the Substance, and in the Accidents. Their proper Temper compleats the Substance of the Bones, as being that which gives them their Being. Hardness and Colour follow Substance. The Accidents, are Bigness, Figure, Number, Situation and Con∣nexion. From these three Qualities, proceed the Judgment of the Constitu∣tion of the Bones, whether entire and well, or endamaged and ill constituted. Bones in living Creatures, sound and well constituted, ought to be hard, wrapt about with a Periosteum, whitish, not absolutely dry, but somewhat unctu∣ous; their Substance also ought to be equal and continuous, and their Figure proper; otherwise they are diseased and out of order. CHAP. II. Of the Conjunction of the Bones. THE Bones are fastned one to a∣nother,Symphisis. either for Rest or Mo∣tion. Connexion for Rest is called Coalition, and is a firm Natural Connexion of the Bones without Mo∣tion, when two Bones are so united one within another, that they seem to be one Bone. I. Symphysis is twofold, real, and not real. Real, is when two Bones harden and unite without any manifest Heterogeneous Medium; thus the Chin or lower Jaw consists of two Bones, united without any manifest Heteroge∣neous
Medium, and this is done three manner of ways. II. 1. By Syneurosin, when theSyneuro∣sis. Bones are joyned by a Medium that seems to be nervous or membranous, as in Infants, the Bones of the Skull, the name-less Bones, and Bodies of the Vertebres cohere together. I say, seems to be; because that Medium is not re∣ally nervous or membranous, but is truly bony; but such as has not yet ac∣quir'd a perfect hardness; such as are many Bones of the Birth in the Womb, till the fourth Month after the first for∣mation. III. 2. By Synchondrosin, bySynchon∣drosis. the means of some Gristly interceeding Medium, as the Share-bones are united one with another, and the Os Sacrum with the Bones of the Hip. IV. 3. By Sysarcosin, when theSysarcosis. Conjunction is made by means of the Flesh, as that of the Teeth in the Gums. Spigelius rejects Syneurosis, and instead thereof, sets up three other sorts of Co∣alition: Syndesmosis, when the Bones are bound together by means of a Li∣gament. Syntenosis, when they are knit together by means of a Tendon; and Synemeusis, when the Conjunction hap∣pens by means of a membrane. Now the reason why some Bones u∣nite without a Medium, and some not, is given by Galen. Bones that are hard, solid and thick, require a Medium to to unite them. For those things which differ much one from another, as hard and soft, cannot be united but by a Me∣dium; soft with soft easily unites, but hard with hard cannot unite, unless something intervene to bind both toge∣ther. V. For Motion, Bones are joynedArticula∣tion. together by Articulation; which Com∣position consists in Contiguity, and the Connexion is for the most Part made by the Ligaments, and either it is to cause a conspicuous or a less violent Moti∣on. VI. In order to a violent Motion,Diarthro∣sis. the Bones are joyned by Diarthrosis, that is, by a loose Articulation that has an evident Motion. And this is three∣fold. VII. Enarthrosis, when the greatEnarthro∣sis. Head of the Bone, protuberant from the long Neck, enters the profound Cavity or Cotyle, as in the Articulation of the Thigh Bone, with the Ischion. VIII. Arthrodia, when the lesserArthro∣dia. Head of the Muscle protuberant from the Neck, which is not so large, is in∣serted into the superficiary Cavity, and such is the Articulation of the Shoulder∣bone with the Scapula. IX. Ginglymus, when one BoneGingly∣mus. with one or two Protuberances enters the Cavity of another Bone, and also possesses the Cavity into which it receives the Protuberances of the other Bones, as in the Bone of the Arm and Shoul∣der. Gynglism happens three manner of ways. 1. When the Bone is received by one Bone, and receives the other. 2. When one Bone receives, and is re∣ceived by another which it does not re∣ceive, as in the Vertebres. 3. When Articulation is made after the same manner as of a Wheel to the Axle; as is the Articulation of the first Vertebre of the Neck, with the se∣cond. IX. For slow Motion or Rest,Synarthro∣sis. the Bones are joyned by Synar∣throsis, which Articulation, has but lit∣tle Motion, or none at all, unless upon necessity. The Conjunction of the Bones for slow Motion, is threefold. 1. Enarthrosis in Synarthrosis, as be∣tween the Bone of the Heel and the Astragalus. 2. Arthrodia in Synarthrosis, as be∣tween the Cyboid-bone, and the Bone of the Heel; the Bone of the Wrist and Matacarpus. 3. Gynglymus in Synarthrosis, as be∣tween the Bone of the Heel and the An∣cle. Synarthrosis is not moved of it self to rest, unless great necessity require, which moves the Parts not subject to arbitrary Motion, without drawing them one or t'other way. XI. 1. The Suture, when the BonesSuture. are so unequally joyned together, as if they were sowed on. XII. 2. Harmonia, which is aHarmonia. Conjunction of the Bones by a simple streight, oblique or circular Line, as in the Bones of the upper Jaw and Nose. XIII. Gomphosis, when the BonesGomphosis. seem to be driven in like a Nail, as the Teeth into the Jaws.
CHAP. III. Of the Cranium in General. I. THE whole Frame of all theSkeleton. Bones in the Body of Man adhering together, is called a Skele∣ton, from the Greek,  to dry up, because in dry'd Bones such a Conjunction is made by Art. This Conjunction is either of the Bones of grown Persons, or of In∣fants. The Skeleton of grown Persons is divided into the Head, Trunk and Joynts. The Head is all that which is set up∣on the Neck, and is divided into the Cranium and Face. II. The Cranium is globous andThe Cra∣nium. round, withinside the Concave bony Part of the Head, containing the Brain; by some called Calva and Calvaria, the Skull or Scalp. III. The Face is that Part of theThe Face. Head which is extended between the Fore-head, Ears and Chin. IV. The Figure of the Skull is ob∣long,The Figure of the Skull. protuberant before and behind, and depressed on both sides. What∣ever Figure deviates from this is vitious, and the more it deviates, the more viti∣ous it is. But here arises a Doubt, whether the Head shapes the Brain, or the Brain the Head? Hippocrates says, the Bones give the Shape to the Body. Galen writes, that Nature, in imitation of the Bones, forms all the other Parts in a living Creature. Others add, that the House is first built and form'd for the Person that is to inhabit it, and that the softer is more easily shaped by the hard, than the hard by the soft. Which Reasons so far prevailed with Arnold Senguerdius, that he subscribed to it. On the other side, Galen teaches us in several Places, that the Brain shapes the Cranium, not the Cranium the Brain, which seems to us the more rational Opinion. 1. Because the Brain was not made for the Cranium, but the Cra∣nium for the Brain. 2. Because the House is never made before the Person, for whom it is designed, but is generally built by the Person that is to inhabit it. Thus the Heart is conspicuous before its Domicil the Breast; in the salient Point, in the Bubble of an Egg, after the He has sate some few days. 3. Because the Brain in an Embrio is as soft as the Brain it self, as being altgether Mem∣branous, so that it is easily and natural∣ly shaped according to the Figure of the Brain, as the Membranes take their Shapes in other places from the Parts contained; nor is there any necessity that the Hard should be shap'd by the Soft, because that when it is figur'd, it is not soft, but after it is shap'd, it grows hard by degrees. 4. Because the Wrinkles which are imprinted into the insides of the Skull, and which receive the more eminent Veins of the hard Meninx and other protuberances of the Brain sufficiently shew, that they were not furrowed in the harden'd Brain, but while the Birth was in the Womb, by the Protuberances of the Brain and Veins, making an Impression in the soft and membranous Substance of the Skull. V. The Substance of the Skull inThe Sub∣stance. the Embryo, is altogether Membra∣nous, and in new-born Infants, for the most part bony, but so soft, that it will yield to compression, especially at the upper part of the Head about the Sutures, where at that time it has hardly attained its due bony hardness, but is extraordinary thin, to the end the plentiful Moisture of the Brain abounding in Children, may the more commodiously exhale. Afterwards, for the greater security of the Brain, it grows hard by degrees, like other Bones, but in the middle, remains spungy, for the more easie passage of the Vapors. VI. The thickness of it is various,The Thick∣ness. according to the variety of Ages; nor is it always the same in the same Age. For the diversity of Regions al∣so causes a great difference. Thus He∣rodotus relates, that the Skulls of the Persians are very thin and brittle, and easily crack'd; those of the gyptians very strong and thick, hardly to be broken with the fall of a large Stone. Moreover the Skulls of tender People, are less thick and hard than in labour∣ing Folks, enur'd to Hardship. The cause of which Carpus believes to be, for that tender People always keep their Heads cover'd from heat and cold; but Husband-men, Sea-men and the like are used to go bare-headed Winter and
Summer, for which reason, he advises not to cover over much the Heads of Children, which are strengthened by being left bare, and rendred more sit to endure external Injuries. VII. The Cranium consists of twoThe Tables. Tables or Slates, the External and Internal, thinner in Women than in Men. Of which, the one is thicker and smoother, the other harder, hol∣lowed with several Furrows, to give way to the Vessels creeping through the hard Meninx, from which Meninx, some remarkable Vessels insinuate themselves near the Ears into the Plates of the Skull, and moisten the space be∣tween. And the Reason why the Cra∣nium is made of a double Table, least any Conusion of the Head should easily penetrate the whole Cranium, by which means, sometimes one Table is on∣ly broken, the other remaining en∣tire. VIII. In the middle, between theseThe Di∣plo. Tables, lies hid a certain spungy and ca∣vernous Substance, containing a mar∣rowy Juice, somewhat bloody, for the Nourishment of the Cranium, which is made out of the Blood flowing through the small Arteries, which pass through the little Holes of the Tables. And this is that Blood, which when the Skull is trepann'd, when you come to the Diplois, flows forth somewhat ruddy. Concerning this Blood, Riolanus has  worthy to be observed by all Practitioners. From these Caruncles, says he, (that is, the spungy little Ca∣verns, seated between each Table) being very much contus'd, the Blood being squez'd and putrifying, ulcerates the Bone, outwardly appearing entire; but the matter▪ sweating forth from the inner Ta∣ble, putrifies the Brain it self. Wherefore, if in scraping the Cranium, you perceive the Blood to distil forth, never think for that reason that the Blood penetrates the second Table, because the Blood flows from the foresaid middle Space. This middle Spungy space between the double Tablature of the Cranium, by Hippocrates and the Anatomists is call'd Diploe, though Galen rather chooses to call the External and In∣ternal Table, both taken together Diploe. This middle space is sometime bigger, sometimes less, sometimes scarcely dis∣cernable, where both Tables seem to unite and constitute the simple and pe∣lucid Cranium. Bartholinus reports that he dissected a Cranium wherein this middle Space was altogether want∣ing; and all the Cranium seem to con∣sist all of one Table: perhaps, because the Bones being dryed and contracted through Age, it did not manifestly appear: or else, because the Cranium was only dissected in that Part by Bar∣tholin, where both the Tables unite together, and left the other spungy Part untouch'd. For Anatomists rarely cut the whole Cranium into small Parts. Hippocrates making mention of some certain Caruncles, means that middle spungy Substance of the Cra∣nium, which Fallopius not perceiving, seeks after other particular Caruncles in that spungy Substance; but erro∣ncously; for Hippocrates by those Ca∣runcles, means no other than that spungy Substance; for that there are no other Caruncles in that Sub∣stance. But sometimes it happens, that in Wounds and grievous Con∣tusions of the Head, that a spungy Hyposarcosis grows out from that middle space; which nevertheless was no more in that spunginess before, than the flesh in the Pyramidical Bo∣dy near the Testicle before the Sarco∣cele Burstness. In this spungy middle Space, espe∣cially where the Persons are infect∣ed with the French Disease, a cer∣tain vitious Humor gathers together, which in time growing more sharp and virulent, corrodes the Tables themselves, but more frequently the exterior, as being less hard, and cau∣ses dreadful Pains in the Perioseum and Pericranium: sometimes we have seen both the Interior and Exte∣rior corroded, and so the whole Crani∣um perforated. Which Palmarius, Ri∣olanus and Benivenius confirm by their own Observation.
CHAP. IV. Of the Commissures of the Bones of the Cranium. THE Bones of the Cranium are joyned together with various Com∣missures, which some call generally Sutures: Others more properly distin∣guish into Sutures and Harmonies. I. A Suture is a certain Compo∣sureThe Su∣tures. of the Bones, like things sow'd with Seams, distinguishing and con∣joyning the Bones. Which in the up∣per part of the Head resembles two Saws with their Teeth clapt together. In the Cranium there are many Su∣tures, alike both for Number and Situ∣ation, both in Men and Women, con trary to Aristotles Opinion. The Skull is seldom seen without Sutures. And probable it is, that in young People it is never without Sutures, for that such a Skull as it would be less apt to resist ex∣ternal Injuries, and it would hinder the Growth and Distention of the Head, with the rest of the Body. Yet Aristo∣tle tells of Skulls that have been seen without Sutures; and among the Neo∣terics, Vesalius, Fallopius, Coiter, Io∣hannes à Cruce, Alexander Benedictus, and others assert the same, and as is shewn at Helmstadt, and the Monastery of the French at Heidelbergh; which were perhaps the Skulls of old Men, in which those Sutures were dry'd up; such as I have two by me at this present, and as have been many times seen in o∣ther places. And thus we are to un∣derstand Herodotus, Arrianus, and Ar∣rian concerning the Heads of the Moors and Ethiopians, by them reported to be without Sutures, not that they were without Sutures when they were young, but were afterwards so hardned by the extream Heat of the Air, and driness of Age, that the Sutures united. II. These Sutures are twofold;Sutures are two∣fold. some proper to the Skull, others call'd Illegitimate. III. The real Sutures resemblingThe Real. the Teeth of two Saws clapp'd one in∣to another, and hence call'd Serratae. These, I say, will sometimes part a∣sunder and give way to Humors and Vapors molesting the Brain, as in those Hydrocephalics troubled with re∣dundancy of erous Humors. IV. The Illegitimate Sutures lyingThe Illegi∣timate. upon the Bone like Scales, are there∣fore call'd Squamous. But these Commissures are rather to be referred to Harmony than Suture, or else to the middle between both, and therefore are not unduly called Harmonical Su∣tures. The real Sutures are three. V. The first, which is foremost, isThe Coro∣nal. the Coronal, because it surrounds the Fore-part of the Head like a Crown. This runs forth from one Temple to the other Transverse above the Fore∣head, and joyns the Bones of the Fore∣head with the Bones of the hinder Part of the Head. VI. The Second, which is the hin∣dermost,The Lamb∣doidal. opposed to this, resembling a Greek  and therefore call'd Lam∣doidalis, by others, from the Figure of a Ypsilon, Hysiloides, and by others, the Suture of the Prow. This rises from the Basis of the hinder Part of the Head, about the Roots of the Mammary Processes, and ascending obliquely to both Ears, terminates in a Cone at the Sa∣gittale, and distinguishes the Bone of the hinder Part of the Head, from that of the Temples and Fore-part of the Head. But in the Bone of the hinder Part of the Head, frequent in Children, especi∣ally such as have large Skulls behind, Nature seems to sport her self. For sometimes it is separated with a Trans∣verse Suture, sometimes bounded with a double Suture, as if the lesser Triangle were included in the greater, and some∣times with a triple Suture, the greater Triangle including two lesser. Which included Bones, are called by the Ana∣tomists Triangulars and Triqueters. For which reason, sometimes, but very rarely, certain other little triangular, oblong, oval Bones are there found, as well in the right as left side of the Bone; many times two, three, or four, conjoyn'd with their Sutures, first ob∣serv'd by Olaus Worm, and more con∣spicuous in the Concave Part of the Head, than in the Convex, of which, the biggest does not exceed a Thumb∣nail. But notwithstanding all this mul∣tiformity, the whole Bone of the Head, even in young People, is one continu'd Bone, but such whose other Parts have already acquired a bony Hardness, others not, which when they have once at∣tained, then they differ nothing from the rest of the Particles of the Bone.
VII. The third, which is the mid∣dlemost,The Sagit∣tal. is called the Sagittal, be∣cause that like an Arrow it is carried from the top of the Lambdoidal all the length of the upper Part of the Head to the middle of the Coronal in grown People. This distinguishes and joyns the Bone of the Bregma; and in In∣fants, for the first two or three years, and in some Children, to the eight or ninth year, passing the middle of the Coronal, runs forth to the upper Part of the Nose, dividing the Bone of the Forehead into two. Which Suture of the Forehead, in grown People, unites by true Symphosis, in such a manner, that no Foot-steps are to be seen. Yet I have by me the Skull of a certain Per∣son fity years of age, wherein this Su∣ture is altogether entire, the Sagittal be∣tween the Bones of the Bregma, and the Lambdoidal being hardly conspicuous. Galen, Vesalius and Sylvius have also observed the Sgittal Suture in Infants reaching through the middle Bone of the hider part of the Head to the be∣ginning of the Spinal Marrow. Which Fallopius utterly denies to have ever been. VIII. The Illegitimate Sutures areThe Illegi∣timate Su∣tures. two. IX. The first carried upward withThe Squ∣moides. a circular Course from the Root of the Mammilary Process, surrounds the Temple-bone on each side of the Head, and proceeds downwards to the Basis of the Ear, joyning the Bones of the hinder and fore-part of the Head and the Sphenoides with the Temples, with a scalie Contexture, therefore call'd the Squamoides Su∣ture; which loose Conjunction is most commodious for this Part, in regard of some Motion of the Temple-bone, which it performs, together with its Muscle in Mastication. The Second is carried downwards at the sids, from the top of the Scalie Conjunction, obliquely toward the Or∣bit of the Eye to the beginning of the First common Suture, and this joyns the upper Bones of the fore-part of the Head, and the lower Bone, with the Bone of the Forehead. X. Besides these Suturs, there areThe four Commis∣sures. also four other Sutures proper to the Cranium, to be referred to Harmony, though Bauhinus will have them to be Sutures. The first proceeds from the Extre∣mity of the Lambdoidal Suture, at the Root of the stony Bones, obliquely to the Basis of the Head toward the inner Parts, and is as it were an addition to the Lambdoidal Suture. The second is a Line in the middle Basis, which is carried on both sides with a short Course to the Chink or Cleft which is common to the Sphoenoi∣des with the Bone of the Temples. The third, more inwardly conspicu∣ous in the Fore-seat of the Skull, is car∣ry'd to the lower Corners of the Sphe∣noides, and the hinder Part of the Or∣bits of the Eyes. The fourth proceeds under the Spun∣gy Bones of the Nostrils, with an ob∣lique Course to the Hole of the Spheno∣ides-bone. Besides the foresaid Sutures, some de∣scribe several others which are only the Parts of the said Sutures extended farther, and only various Harmo∣nies. XI. The Commissures common toThe com∣mon Com∣missures. the Skull and the Iaw, are reckoned to be five; which being of a middle sort, between Suture and Harmony, are to be called Harmonial Su∣tures. The first, in the right Seat of the Orbit of the Eye, proceeds outward from the end of the fifth Suture, and imitates the Real Suture, and is com∣mon to the Bone of the Forehead, and the first Bone of the upper Jaw. The second appears in the lateral and lower Seat of the Eye. The third ascends from the inner and latteral Seat of the Eye, ob∣liquely to the upper Part of the Nose. The fourth proceeds obliquely through the middle of the Jugal-bone, and joyns it with the Temple-bone, and imitates a Real Suture. The fifth below, tends forward in the spaciousness of the Nostrils from the hinder Parts. These Sutures Riolanus describes somewhat otherwise, and adds five more to these, which we believe to be only the Productions or Appendixes of the other. XII. The use of these Sutures isThe use of the Com∣missures. partly to afford a more easie Passage to the Vapors, partly to prevent any con∣tusions in the Skull from going any far∣ther than one Bone. Add to this, that the small Fibres pass through these
from the hard Menix, arnexed to the Pericranium, by which, the hard Me∣ninx, together with the Brain, are kept tite, to prevent their being mov'd out of their place by any violent Mo∣tion, which might cause the falling of the Ventricles of the Brain. There∣fore, said Hippocrates, and that truly, that they have soundest Heads who have most Sutures, and that heads without Sutures are continually distempered with many and various Vapors, which cause the Head-ach, Epilepsie and seve∣ral other grievous Diseases; besides that, by any Blow or Fall, their Skulls are easily broken, and contract long Fis∣sures. XIII. This occasions the mentioningWhether there can be a Con∣tra-fissure. of Fissures in the Skull, which we have said are not extended farther than one Bone, but stop at the next Suture, and gives us an opportunity to enquire, how that decry'd Contra-fissure happens, when the Skull is split in the opposite Part, to that where the Blow is given? Which Hippocrates is thought to de∣scribe in these Words. The Bone is broken under the Wound in another part of the Head than where the Ulcer is, and the Bone is laid bare. Many have taken this place for a Confirmation of a Con∣tra-fissure, and has drawn Galen, Avi∣cen, Celsus, Soranus, Iohannes de Cruce, Iohannes de Vigo, and others, into the same Opinion; and which Fontanus endeavours to maintain, by the Exam∣ple of a Boy that fell from a Wall fif∣teen foot high, in whose Head there was a Fracture with many Fissures, a∣bout the Temporal Muscle, but the Skull being opened after his Death, two other Counter-fractures were found in the opposite side. But Fallopius stre∣nuously denies these Counter-fractures, not only from the Authorities of Galen, Paulus and others, but by his own Expe∣rience, and writes, that he has an hun∣dred times seen Persons bruised in the Head, but never could find any Coun∣ter-fractures. To which, we add our own Practise, who in the Field, have above two hundred times seen Soldiers, especially Horse-men, whose Skulls have been broken, but never could see any Counter-fractures; sometimes in∣deed we have seen Fissures on both sides, but it was only where the Persons were wounded on both sides their Heads. And so, without doubt, it was with that Boy, mentioned by Fontanus; though it was not known how he came to be hurt on the other side. So that we are clearly for denying Counter-fis∣sures. As for Hippocrates, he speaks nothing of any Counter-fissures; only he says that Matter is gathered together on the opposite side of the Skull to that which was broken, which we have also seen, but cannot allow it for any proof of a Counter-fissure. CHAP. V. Of the Bones of the whole Head in general. THE Bones of the Head, some be∣long to the Cranium, others to the Jaws. I. The Skull is cast about the BrainThe Skull. like a Head-piece for its Security, as we have said before. Now the Bones of the Skull are ei∣ther proper or Common. II. The Proper are either contain∣ing,The proper Bones. or contain'd. The containing Bones that constitute the outward Scutel of the Skull, are six or seven. 1. The Bone of the Forehead, which in young Lads, rarely in those that are of mature Age, is di∣vided into two. 2. Two Bones of the fore-part of the Head. 3. One Bone of the hinder part of the Head. 4. Two Bones of the Temples. The Contained Bones, are eight little Bones lying hid, in every stony Bone four, and serving for the Sense of Hear∣ing, the Anvil, little Hammer, Stirrup and orbicular Bone. To these Bauhi∣nus adds two Bones of the Labirinth, and two nameless Bones. III. The Bones common to theThe com∣mon Bones. Skull with the upper Iaw, are two; the Wedg-resembling-bone, and the Sieve-like-bone, with the spungy Ap∣pendix. And thus the Bones of the Cranium are reckon'd to be sometimes more, sometimes fewer, according to the di∣versity of Age, Sutures and Computa∣tion. The Bones of the Jaws constitute the chiefest Part of the Face, and these are the Bones either of the upper or lower Jaws. IV. The Bones of the upper IawsThe Iaw Bones. are reckoned to be five; two of the
lower Jaw in Children, which after∣wards unite together, and in grown People become one Bone. In these Jaws are twenty or thirty Teeth. V. Now in these forementionedThe Cavi∣ties. Bones of the Head, are several occult Cavities, concerning the use of which there is great dispute amongst the Ana∣tomists. Riolanus describes them joynt∣ly together in these Words. In the Head, says he, are many remarkable Ca∣vities. There are four of each side, the Maxillary lying hid between the upper Iaws. The Frontal plac'd near the Eye-brows in the Forehead. The Sphe∣noidean, latent under the Seat of the Sphenoides. The Mastoidean, contain∣ed within the Mastoides. Only the Ma∣stoidean is hollow and empty; but distin∣guished into seven, eight, or nine little Cells like a Hony-comb. The Entrance of the Frontal Cavity is discerned at the top and inner Parts of the Nostrils. The In∣gress into the Maxillary Cavity, appears within the Cavity of the Nostrils, at the side of the spungy Bone. The Entrance into the Sphenoidean Cavity yes more deep within the Nostrils, the Spungy Bones being taken away. The Entrance into the Maxillary Cavity is evident without Incision of the Bones. The En∣trance of the Frontal Cavity is seen, the Frontal Cavity being cut away above the Eye-brows. The Entrance of the Sphe∣noides, appears upon taking away the in∣ner Table of the Sphenoides. The En∣trance into the Mastoidean, is contained in the left side of the Concha, near the Mastoidean Apophysis, nor does it ap∣pear without breaking the Arch of the Concha, or tearing the Auditory Porus. VI. Besides these Cavities, thereThe Holes. are several Holes in the Bones of the Skull, and some Furrows. Of which Riolanus thus writes. The Holes are inward and outward. The inner Holes are often twenty five, sometimes twenty seven, of each side twelve or thirteen, and one without a Pair, which affords a Pas∣sage to the Spinal Marrow. The first, is the Ethmoides; the second, the Sphenoi∣des; the third, the Optic; the fourth, the Orbitane Sissure; the fifth, the Temple∣hole, for the Nerve of the third Conjuncti∣on passing into the Temporal Muscle. The sixth, the Gustative; the seventh, the second Gustative; the eighth, the Iugular; the ninth, the Carotic; the tenth, the Auditory; the eleventh, the Igular; the twelfth, the Ligous; the thirteenth, the last uneven Cervical. The External, according to Sylvius, are ten on each side; to which, I add the ele∣venth, i. e. the External Hole of the Ear. Also at the Root of the Styloides, at the Extremity of the Auricular Apophysis, without-side there is a Hole bipartited withinside, and divided with a thin Scale, which appears, and looks into the begin∣ning of the Hollowness. Of the exter∣nal Holes, the first is the Superciliar; the second, the Lachrymal; the third, the External Orbitary; the fourth, the Eth∣moids Orbitary; the fifth, above the Palate; the sixth, In the Extremity of the Palate; the seventh, the Scissure under the Zygoma; the eighth and ninth, with∣in the Gaping above the Wing-resembling Apophysis; the tenth, the Mastoides; the eleventh, the External Auditory Hole. VII. The Furrows or Moats, are Ex∣ternalThe Fossae. and Internal. The Internal six in the Basis of the inner Part of the Skull. Two Frontals, two Temple Furrows, and two Occipitals. The External are seven on each side; to which I add an eight, which is the Cavity of the Nostrils. 1. The Ocular. 2. The Nasal. 3. The Zygomatic. 4. Above the Palate. 5. The Wing-resembling. 6, 7. The Auditory of the lower Iaw. 8. In the Hole of the sixth Conjunction. Thus far Roilanus, now we shall see the difference between him and us in the following Descriptions. CHAP. VI. Of the Proper Bones of the Skull in Specie. THE Bones of the Skull are se∣veral, the Bones of the Fore∣head, fore and hinder Part of the Head and Temples. I. The Fore-head Bone, by othersThe Fore-head Bone. call'd Os Puppis, in Infants at the up∣per part is soft and double, as being divided by the Sagittal Suture, run∣ning out to the top of the Nose, which uniting and vanishing in grown People, becomes one, and that so exactly, as if it had never been divided. In old Men it is rarely seen divided by a Suture. II. It possesses the fore-part of theThe Cell of the Fore-head Bone. Head, and is of a semicircular Fi∣gure between both Tables, distin∣guished with a little Cell, and bony Scales, and girt with a most slender Membrane, sometimes empty, some∣times
full of a slimy juice, which in In∣fants especially flat fac'd, or that have a divided Forehead is hardly conspicu∣ous. This is not very large in Men, but in Oxen, Horses, Sheep and the like, it has a remarkable large Cavity, which breeds Worms as some say in the Summer time which makes those Animals run Mad; which make ex∣pert Farriers, for the Cure of that Di∣sease, open the Head about that place and take out the Worms. The Exterior Table making this Moat, forms the upper flat Part of the Orbit of the Eye. The other constitutes the Gibbous Extuberance with many Prominences as if it were an Arch on each side above the Eyes. This Furrow or Moat is furnish'd with several little holes terminating in the spaciousness of the Nose; to which little holes is added one little hole ending within the Skull above the Fence of the Sphenoides-bone: which nevertheless for the most part is not found to be previous; because per∣haps it consolidates in Persons of ma∣ture Age. Riolanus believes that it assists the long Adhesion of the hard Meninx. III. Concerning the Use of thisThe use of the Cell. little Cell, there are various Opinions. Some think it serves for the prepara∣tion of the Air in the Generation of Animal Spirits: others for the longer preservation of the Odoriferous Air, others for the reception of the Flegmatic Excrement, others to render the Voice sonorous. But these are all groundless conjectures. For neither can any Air meet here to compleat the Generation of Animal Spirits; nor is there any need of the preservation of Odoriferous Airs in this place; besides that the ven∣tricles of the Brain are appointed fort he receptacles of Flegmatic Excrements, which are rarely found here, and then but in small quantities: nor does it give any sound to the Voice, which proceeds from the Larynx and passage of the Nose, so that we are still at a loss what the use of this Cavity is, neverthe∣less, we believe so remarkable a Ca∣vity, especially in Brutes was not grant∣ed for nothing. IV. There are small Processes be∣longingThe Pro∣cesses. to this Bone of the Forehead prominent on both sides at the cor∣ners of the Eyes, constituting the up∣per part of the Orbit. V. Withinside also it has a furrowThe Fur∣row. not very deep, hollow'd upwards through the middle, affording room to the large hollowness of the hard Meninx. VI. It has also holes, sometimes oneThe Holes. oblong or found, sometime two at the middle of each Eyebrow, and terminat∣ing into the Orbit of the Eye; through which a Nerve of the third Conjunction ascends from the seat of the Eye to the Eye-lids, the Muscles of the Forehead and Skin. To this we may add a third hole seated about the Crested Bone, and ending in the foresaid fur∣row; which is often observed not to be perforated. VII. The Bones of the Mold ofThe Bones of the Breg∣ma. the Head, or top of the Head, or Bregma, are two, placed in the upper part of the Head, and joyn'd toge∣ther by a real Suture, as also to the Bones of the Forehead and hinder Part of the Head, and adhering to the Temples by a Bastard Su∣ture. VIII. Being joyned together theyTheir Fi∣gure. form a Convex and Semicircular fi∣gure. IX. The Substance is hard in grownSubstance. Persons, but thinner and more po∣rous then the rest of the Bones; for the more easie passage of the Vapours: In Infants by reason of their redundant Moisture they are Membranous and soft, but begin to harden when they begin to speak, seldom that softness remains to perfect Age; yet I observed it once in a Lady of forty Years of Age; and Bauhinus writes, that it was so with his first Wife. And Lyndan relates Laxi∣ties and softness in the Skull of a Woman thirty years old, that if her Head ak'd, or that she fell in labour, the Coronal Suture would gape the breadth of four Thumbs, and shew the Motion of the Thumb conspicuous. X. The use of this gaping is,The use of Gaping. 1. For the Exhalation of thick and vis∣cous humors, that redound in the moist Brain of Children. 2. To the end that in the delivery these upper Bones closing by compression may af∣ford the more easie passage to the In∣fant through the streights of the Hupo∣gastrion-Bone. These Bones of the Fore-part of the Head, though they are generally two, yet in Old men the Suture being clos'd up, they become one solid Bone.
XI. Without side they are smooth,The Fur∣rows. within side rough, having several furrows in the inner Part long and winding and receiving the Veins of the hard Meninx; two also, and sometimes three or four at the sides of the Sagittal Suture, as it were imprinted with the Top of the Finger, and furnish'd with several little holes penetrating to the Delplois, to which furrows the Dura Mater firmly adheres, so that it often tears it taking away the Skull. Through those little holes certain Diminutive Arteries enter the Diplois out of the Dura Mater, and divers little Veins go from the Diplois to the Dura Mater, which Vessels being broken in taking off the Skull discovers a great many little drops of Blood in those places, at the Top of the Menynx. XII. The Bone of the hinder PartThe Bone of the Occi∣put. of the Head, call'd the Basillary, the Prow and Box-bone, constitutes the hinder and lower Part of the Head. This is all one in grown People, very seldom divided into several Bones: but in Children frequently into three or four, or according to some into five, six or seven Bones. But Fallopius never observ'd more then four, with whom Eisson agrees. XIII. The Figure of it is Triangu∣lar,Shape. hollow within, convex with∣out. XIV. The Substance of it is thickSubstance. and hard, stronger then the rest of the Bones of the Skull to preserve the hinder Part of the Head from ex∣ternal injuries. Yet is it not in all pla∣ces of an equal thickness, but in some Parts thicker, in some Parts thinner. It is fastened to the Bones of the fore-part of the Head and Temples, and to the Wedg-like Bone. XV. There are nine Cavities in it,Cavities. which Riolanus calls Ditches; two withoutside, in the lower Part of the sides of the great hole. Seven within, of which the lowest and biggest receive the Protuberances of the Cerebel. To which are joyn'd two others, one of each side, which ascend obliquely from the Bones of the Temples, and proceed transversly through the Bones of the hinder Part of the Head, unite in the middle of it and receive the lateral Cavities of the hard Meninx. From these a third ascends in a streight line to the Bones of the Bregma, and admit the upper and large Cavity of the same Meninx. XVI. Two larger Processes standProcesses. at the side of the large hole of the Marrow, looking toward the inner Parts of the Mouth: to which two othes somewhat less and plain, are joyned toward the hinder Parts, which being all covered with a slippery Gristle, are received by the Cavities of the first, and serve for the Articulation of the Head. To these within side two other Eminencies are oppos'd; so that in the same place the Bone bunches forth both inward and outward. There is also a fifth to be added, which is the biggest Process contributing great strength to this Bone at the lower end, where it is slenderer, which ascending within side directly from the great hole, distingui∣shes the Protuberances of the Cerebel. In Dogs the transverse Process rests up∣on this at the upper Part, dividing the Brain from the Cerebel. XVII. It hath five holes; oneHol. which is the largest below, through which the long Marrow slides into the Cavity of the Vertebres. To which at the sides two more holes joyn, for the passage of the seventh Pair of the Nerves, and Artery and a Vein. At the sides of these on both sides, between the little Head of the hinder Part of the Head, and the Styloides Appendix, there is a large long hole to be seen, common to the Bone of the Temples, affording passage to the sixth Pair of the Nerves, as also to a Branch of the Carotis Artery and the Iugular Vein. Besides this hole, some Anatomstis ob∣serve sometime though very seldome in the outward Capital seat of this Bone on each side, a proper hole, not very large, which also transmits an Artery and a Vein. XVIII. The Bones of the Temples,The Bones of the Tem∣ples. possess the lateral Regions of the Head, on each side one, of which the Exte∣rior and Superior Part is called the Scaly Bone, by reason of the flat thin∣ness of the Scale, the lower is called the Stony Bone, which hardness it requires to render it more fit for the repercussion of sound. All these particular Bones of the Tem∣ples, in Persons of mature Age, are one continuous Bone; but in Infants the Scaly Part is divided from the Bo∣ny; also in Children till the seventh year, the foremost Circle of the Audi∣tory
passage is divided from it by an interceding Gristle; the Foot-steps of which Division, in Persons grown up are in some measure to be seen remain∣ing at the beginning of that passage. XIX. The figure of it more upwardShpe. is Semicircular and equal, more below and more inward, rough and unequal with many Protuberances, like the jetting forth of the Rocks. The substance also of it at the sides is thinner; below and within side much thicker. XX. There are two Cavities in thisCavities. Bone to be considered. The more outward larger, overcast with a Gristle, between the Auditory passage and the Process of the Jugal Bone, which re∣ceives the long Head of the lower Jaw. The inner most is less, common to the Bone of the hinder part of the Head, seated at the said Process behind. XXI. Close by those Cavities standsThe Stylo∣ides. a long Appendix, sharp-pointed and slender, called the Styloides or Bod∣kin-bone, which in Infants appears Gristly, in Men grown is Bony. This in boyl'd Carkasses is easily distin∣guished. XXII. Also there are two other Ex∣ternalThe Ma∣millary Processes. Processes to be observed. The first obtuse, thick and short, with∣inside somewhat concave from the like of a Cows Teat, call'd the Mamillary Process; which Fallopius and Bauhinus deny to be in Children, but that it grows afterwards. XXIII. The Second is carry'd for∣wardThe Os ju∣gal. from the passage of the Ear, and by a long Suture is joyned with the Bone of the upper Jaw, and so by the means of two Apophysis concurring and united together is form'd the Bone of the Zygoma or Jugal, so called, because it resembles an Oxes Yoke, and extends it self like a Bridg from the Eye to the Ear; and is very hard and olid, con∣trary to what Columbus thought, who would have it to be hollow. Proceeding on both sides with thick Roots, it grows slender in the middle. It is made for the Security of the Temple Muscle, and the rise of the Master Muscle; also to the end the Tendon of the Crata∣phyte Muscle may be fortify'd with a kind of Stony Bulwark, and the Pro∣tuberant Bone of the Cheeks under∣propt with a sort of strong Joynt. The Third, bunching out in length to the inner Basis of the Skull, from its singular hardness and inequality call'd the Rocky, proceeds with a broad be∣ginning from the Bone of the Temples and ends by degrees in a sharp point, without side somewhat rough, within side altogether smooth, but unequal with many Tubercles, by reason of the Cavities which are to be form'd therein. This has two holes within the Skull, through the foremost and least of which a small Artery; through the other which is bigger and looks towards the hinder Parts, the Auditory Nerve en∣ters the inner Cavity and Caverns, which presently after its Ingress being divided into two Branches, goes away through two inner different holes into the upper and lower Cavity, the Laby∣rinth, and the Periwinckle. Without side of the Skull it has three holes. The first is the Auditory Passage, with which a broad passage opens into it, and carr'd from the hinder Part ob∣liquely forward and upward, grows narrow by degrees, to collect the rever∣berated Air; entring at a larger passage within that narrow streight, for the more perfection of the hearing. Moreover to the end that in that oblique Tortuo∣sity the violence of the Airs may be somewhat broken, and so strike upon the Tympanum with less force. The Orifice of this passage in Children new born is altother Gristly, but in a short time it grows Bony by degrees; and after seven or eight Months by means of the Gristle is still distinguished from the rest of the Bone, and is separated by boyling, but afterwards it is dry'd to that degree, that it can never more be separated tho there may some ap∣pearance of the first separtion remain in the Skulls of Men perfectly grown up. Adjoyning to this passage, near the passage of the Sphenoides Bone stands the Second hole, narrow, short and ob∣lique, through which a Vein runs to the Jugulars through the inner Cavity. The Third hole is seated between the Mamillary Process, and the Stloides Appendix; and terminates in the pas∣sage that goes from the Ear to the Mouth. In this Process or Rocky Bone is com∣prehended the Organ of hearing, and theein lye hid the Tympanum, Laby∣rinth and Periwincle; as also four Bones, the Anvile, Hammer, Stirrup, and Or∣bicular-bone. Of which lib. 3. cap. 18.
CHAP. VII. Of the Bones common to the Skull, with the upper Iaw. THere are two Bones common to the Skull, with the upper Jaw, the Wedge-like, and the Sieve-like Bones. I. The Wedge-like, by the GreeksThe Wedg-like Bone. , not that it resembles a Wedge in Shape, but is as it were wedg'd in among the rest of the Bones. But because it is of various Figures, it is therefore called the Multiform Bone, and be∣cause it constitutes the Basis of the Skull is the Basilar Bone. In Infants it consists of several Bones united by a Gristle, of which, the first is said to separate scarce a Fingers breadth from the Crowns of the hinder Part of the Head. The second com∣prehends the Horses Saddle, and the Processes design'd for the Visory Nerves. The third and fourth are the winged and flat Processes. On the other side, Riolanus writes that the Wedge-bone in Children, till the twelfth year, consists of a double Bone only. But if the Wedge-bone in Infants be but more ac∣curately observed, you shall find it to consist of three Bones, the biggest in the middle, which constitutes the Basis, forms the Saddle, and spreads forth two Wings forward toward the Sides, and two less, constituting the Batts Wings. In progress of years, all these three Bones are joyned and united into one Bone. To these some add the Bone called the Plough-share Bone, or Os Vo∣mer, as a part of the Sphenoides, because it is fixed to it below. Which however dislikes Fallopius and Riolanus, who de∣scribe that Bone distinct and sepa∣rate. II. It is seated in the middle Basis ofThe Situa∣tion. the Head, and adjoyning to it on every side, stands the proper Bones of the Cranium, as also the Bones of the upper Jaw, and are fasten'd to it by bastard Sutures and Harmonies, which in the Perfection of Age are quite oblite∣rated. III. The Substance of it in theThe Sub∣stance. middle is thick, but in the lateral Ex∣pansions thinner, hard and scaly, which in Children till twelve years of age seems to be solid, but in Men grown, consists of two Tables, and a middle spungy Cavity, which appears under the Saddle. IV. It is furnished with various Pro∣cesses,Its Pro∣cesses. External and Internal. The External are four; of which, two are conspicuous near the bony Fence of the Nostrils and Palate, where it coheres with the upper Jaw; from their Figure call'd , or Wing-resembling, by others call'd the Batts-wings. The other two occurring behind, are extended toward the Styloi∣des, with double Tops or Points. The Internal are also four opposite to each other, and call'd , be∣cause they resemble the four Legs of a Bed or Table. Of these, the two fore∣most and bigest are taper'd by degrees, from a broad Basis to a sharp Point. The two hindermost in some never jet out, but resemble a Wall, and are account∣ed as one. However, most commonly being stretched out in breadth, they ta∣per into two Points, omewhat hollowed in the middle, and these Processes, together with the Spaces between them, from the likeness of a Turkish Saddle, is called Sella Equina, Sella Turcica, Sella Sphenoidis, and in one Word, E∣phippion. V. Galen writes, that the Sieve-like BoneWhether the Saddle be perfora∣ted. is perforated with many Holes, for the passage of the Flegm collected in the Kernel; which Opinion is applauded by I. Sylvius, Riolanus, Casser, Hffman, and de le Boe Sylvius. Puteus also writes, that he saw these Holes in an Anatomy at Versailles; and Laurentius reports, that he has found them in some dry'd Skulls, but that they are not to be found in a fresh Carkass, as being stuft up with Flegm. But as Galen was deceived, so were all his Followers. For the Cavi∣ty of the Bone of the Saddle is overcast with a continuous hard and thick Seat, never perforated with any Holes; which Vesalius also observes; with whom Fal∣lopius, Columbus, Valverda, and Baubi∣nus agree. But which way the Flegm is evacuated, ee Lib. 3. Cap. 8. VI. There are many Cavities inThe Cavi∣ties. this Bone; without side, in each wing-like Process, one long and deep, afford∣ing a Seat to the inner Wing-like Muscle. Within side, one in the middle of the Ephippium, remarkable above the rest, and almost round, underpropping the Pituitary Kernel, upon which another transverse and long one rests at the sore and upper part, affording room for the
Conjunction of the Optic Nerves, and at the sides there is another to be seen less deep of each side. VII. There are numbered sevenHoles. Bones in both sides of the Sphoeno∣ides. The first, which is round, and afords a Passage for the Optic Nerve to the Eye, near the foremost Processes of the Ephippion. The second, which is long and large, and transmits the second Pair of Nerves to the Muscles of the Eye, and a Branch of the third Pair to the Fore∣head, Cheeks and Nostrils, as also a large Branch of the Carotis Artery and Temple Vein. Ingrassias and other Ana∣tomists assert, that through the first, second and third Neck, the pituitous Matter flows out of the Spitly Kernel, into the Spaciousness of the Nostrils, and thence proceeds forth into the Muscles of the Eyes, and that Tears are also generated by them. But this Opinion has been already refuted, Lib. 3. c. 15. and Lib. 3. c. 6. and 8. The third, which is small and round, lies under the second, and carries a Branch of the third and fifth Pair of the Nerves to the Temple Muscle and Pterygoides, as also to the inner Mem∣brane of the Nostrils, and the upper Fore-Teeth. The fourth, called the Torn-Hole, which is large, long and unequal, like a Ditch, seated in the outer side of the Orbit of the Eye, and is common to the Sphoenoides, with the Bone of the Jaw, and sends forth a Branch of the fourth and preceding third Pair of the Nerves to the Temple▪ muscle and Palate. The fifth, which is long, but obvious to the hinder Process of the Ephippion, admits a remarkable Branch of the Carotis Artery. Vesalius also believes, that it sends forth a Branch also of the Jugular Vein. The sixth, which is Oval, joyns to the sides of the Preceding, and grants a Passage to the fourth Pair of the Nerves. The seventh, next to the preceding, small and round, sends forth a Root of the Jugular Vein from the hard Meninx. VIII. The Sieve-like Bone, or Eth∣moids,The Sieve-like Bone. seated in the middle Basis of the Front between the Convex Part o each Eye, lies upon the Top of the Nostrils, and is joyned with slight Harmonies to the Bone of the Forehead, the second of the upper Jaw, and the Sphoenoides, which riper years frequently abolishes altogether. This is perforated like a Sieve, with many little Holes like a Sieve, some streight, some winding and oblique, among which, the biggest are those which joyn to the Cocks-comb. It is covered with the hard Meninx, which is vulgarly said to be very porous in this part, and pervious with many little Holes, which is not altogether true: For the Meninx, through those little Holes, sends forth several little Pipes towards the spungy Bones, filling the upper Parts of the Nostrils through whch the Flegm descending from the Ventricles of the Brain may flow, but nothing can ascend upwards from the Nostrils. Vid. l. 3. c. 8. IX. At the middle of this Bone standsThe Cocks-comb. an oblong, triangular, and sharp pointed Process, which from its resemblance, is called the Cocks-comb; by Fernlius, the Hard Wart, and by Sneider, the Fence of the Spungy Bne; and this divides the Sieve-like Bone like a Hedg into two parts, and distinguishes the Mamillary Processes of the Brain. Therefore some Anatomists will have the Sieve-like Bone to be double, and reckon the Cocks-comb for a Bone. This Cocks-comb in the upper Part, has a Protu∣berance somewhat unequal, with a certain hollow Asperity, to which, the upper Hollowness of the Scithe is strongly fastned. In new born Infants this Cocks-comb is not to be found. To the Cocks-comb on the other Part another Process is opposed, thin and hard, distinguishing the Nostrils at the upper part, whence it is called the Plough-Share, or the Diaphragma of the Nostrils, or the Interstitium. X. To the upper Cavity of the No∣strilsThe Spun∣gy Bones. the spungy Bones adhere, resembling a Pumice stone, furnished with innumerable Labyrinthy Caverns, and winding little Holes fill'd with a very spungy sort of Flesh. Of which, Hippocrates, In the Nostrils there is n Hole, says he, but somewhat as spungy as a Spunge. However Hippocrates, Galen, and other Anatomists, oft-times confound these with the Sieve-like Bones, and when they name Bones, oft times mean the Sieve-like. But we believe them to be distinct Bones, of which, the spungy sort are pendulous, and adhere to the sides of the Bones of the Nose, but yet are different from both.
XI. Galen, with others, will have theTheir vse. use of these spungy Sieve-like Bones to be for the Evacuation of the flegmatic Excrements out of the Brain; partly to carry the Exhalations to be smelt to the Mamillary Processes; partly to stop the too sudden ingress of the cold Air, or any ill Smell to the Brain. But this Opinion is refuted also at large, l. 3. c. 8. and 19. CHAP. VIII. Of the upper Iaw. THE Jaws are two, the upper and the lower, constituting the outer part of the Face. I. The upper comprehends the lowerThe upper Iaw. and lateral Parts of the Orbit of the Eyes, the Nostrils, Cheeks, Palate and the whole Order of the upper Teeth. This in Men is short and semicircular for handsomeness sake. In Brutes long. Moreover it is immoveable in Man, as it is in most other Creatures, unless Parrots, Phoenicopters and Crocodiles, unless there be any other Creatures un∣known to us that move the upper Jaw. II. The Substance of it is solid,Its Sub∣stance. but cavernous within, especially to∣ward the Teeth; in which place, in Children the Marrowy Juice is contain∣ed for the Nourishment, but that being consumed by Age, the cavernous Bones remains. Highmore having diligently scarched into this Cavernosity, found on each side, under the lower Seat of the Eye, where the Bone jets forth for the Guard of the Eye, a certain Den, seated at the lower sides of the Nose, remark∣ably hollow, spherical and somewhat oblong, and covered with a thin bony Scale, in the bottom of which, certain Protuberances rise up, wherein the slender Points of the Roots of the Teeth are included. This Den is frequently empty, but sometimes found full of Sime, which he believes distils through a certain Cavity from the little Caverns of the Fore-head Bone and the Eth∣moids. III. It receives Blood for Nourish∣mentIts Vessels. through the Branches of the Soporal Arteries, and the remainder after Nourishment, it sends through little Veins to the External Jugular. It is composed of twelve Bones, six on each side, all joyned together by Har∣monies, rather than thin Sutures. The First, almost triangular, is seated at the outer Corner of the Eye. This by means of its Apophysis, joyned with the foremost Process of the Temporal Bone, by an oblique Suture, forms the Iugal Bone, which being gibbous with∣out, and hollow within, covers the Temple Muscle. The second, which is small, thin, pellucid and brittle, constitutes the Cor∣ner of the Eye, and in this the La∣chrymal Hole is pervious to the Nostrils, through which the serous Humor distil∣ling from the Ventricles of the Brain, causes Tears in the Eyes, Vid. Lib. 3. Cap. 14. But to stop their continual flowing, there is a little Caruncle which lies upon this Hole, which hinders the ordinary Efflux, but gives way to it when more violent. Sometimes near this tender Bone, about the Top of the Nose, and the bigger Corner of the Eye, certain Abscesses happen, which the Greeks call Aegylopas, which if neglected, corrode the Bone it self, and cause a La∣chrymal Fistula. The Third is thin and pellucid, within the inner side of the Orbit of the Eye, interposed between the rest, and more inward continuous to the spungy Bones of the Nostrils. The Fourth is the least Bone of all, which constitutes the most porous Parts of the Cheeks and Palate, and receives the upper Row of the Teeth into its Caverns. It has a conspicuous Hole, seated under the Orbit of the Eye, producing a Branch of the third Pair of the Nerves to the Face; also another Hole at the hinder Part of the cutting Teeth, in the middle bony Fence, again divided into two Holes toward the up∣per Parts. Of which, one tends to each Nostril, and rmits a little Vein thither out of it. Some think that the Spitly Humors, descending this way to the Nostrils, flow into the Mouth; which is not probable. Moreover, under the Orbit of the Eye, at the lower side of the Nose, there is a remarkable Hollowness, which however in Children is not easily found, but is hollowed by Age.
The Fifth, which is thin, little, long, and almost quadrangular, with its Pair, constitutes the more eminent Part of the Bones of the Nose. The Sixth, which is broad and thin, with its Pair, forms the Palate. To these Fallopius adds one more, as does also Columbus and Laurentius, inter∣posed between the innermost Part of the Palate and the Sphenoides, separating the lower Part of the Nostrils like a Fence, and thence called the Plough Share. To which Vesalius adds the spungy Bones already described. CHAP. IX. Of the lower Iaw. THE lower Jaw in Man is moveable. This in Children till about seven years old, according to Laurentius and Bartholine, but not beyond the second year according to Riolanus, consists of two Bones, joyned in the Chin by Syn∣chondrosin, which afterwards in riper years unite into one Bone, thick, hard and strong. This Conjunction, as Galen writes, is afterwards dissolved, as was also ob∣served by the French Chyrurgions, as Riolanus reports, and that the Jaw be∣ing broken by a Stone, was often cut away in that Part where the Bones united together. But notwithstanding all this, the said Coalescency has been observed in Men grown to be firmer than the rest of the Bones of the Jaw, and that the Jaw is sooner broken at the sides than in that Coalescency. Eisson observes, that he has some∣times found another Division in Infants on both sides, almost in the middle place of each side, where the Bone ac∣quires a thicker Protuberance, and en∣deavors to enlarge it self. I. This Iaw is shorter in MenIts Figure. and almost semicircular, thick and broad before, behind divided like a Greek Hypsylon, or as Platerus will have it resembling a Fork, for handsomness sake. II. On both sides at the end, it ad∣vancesProcesses. two Processes, by some called Horns. The first of which being thin and broad, terminates in a sharp Point, called in Greek ; to this also a Tendon of the Temple Muscle is strongly knit, and therefore the Laxati∣on of this Jaw is accounted dangerous. The hinder Process is obtuse, furnished with a Neck and a long little Head, called Condylus, wrapt about with a Gristle for the more easie Motion, by which it is joyned into the Cavity of the Rocky Bone, smooth'd with a Gristle also, and is ty'd to it with a common Membranous Ligament. III. More inward it has a CavityCavity. containing a marrowy Iuice for the Nourishment of the Bone. Which in Men appears chiefly in the Fore-part toward the Region of the Chin. IV. It is furnished with four Holes,Holes. of which, there is one internal on both sides, seated at the beginnings of the said Processes, which admits a Nerve of the fourth Conjunction to be distri∣buted to the Teeth, together with a small Artery, and sends forth a little Vein. So likewise the two other, which are lesser and round, are both placed at the sides of the Chin on each side, and sends forth little Branches of the foresaid Nerve outward to the lower Lip, its Muscles and Skin. In the Fore-part it is somewhat rough, having an unequal Excrescence in the inner and middle Seat of the Chin, for the faster Insertion of the Nerves. It has also superficial Cavities, both External and Internal, about the beginnings of the Processes, for the In∣sertion of the Muscles. It is also full of little Holes for the Insertion of the Teeth, of which there is no certain number, in regard the number of the Teeth is not alike in all Persons, but in some more, in some fewer. These Holes sometimes perish, some∣times grow again. For upon the pulling out of a Tooth, if another does not presently succeed, the Hole closes up so hard, that it is able to supply the Of∣fice of a Tooth. On the other side, when the Teeth of Wisdom break forth at fifty or threescore years of age, as sometimes they do, you shall have new Holes made. In Children also, when they shed a Tooth, it often hap∣pens that a new Hole is made, the other being quite stopp'd up. Below the lower Jaw, under the Tongue, the Hyoides Bone is seaed, of which, Lib. 3. Cap. 23.
CHAP. X. Of the Teeth. I. THE Teeth, by the GreeksThe Desi∣nition. call'd  are small Bones, hard, white, fixed into the Holes of the Iaws, by the way call'd Gomphosis, appointed for the chewing of Food and serving also for Pronunciation. I say they are Bones: though it hasWhether they be Bones? been greatly disputed whether they are Bones or no. But for the Affirmative, Riolanus produces these Reasons. 1. Be∣cause they were form'd out of the Seed with the rest of the Bones. 2. Because they are nourished by the Blood; as the rest of the Bones. 3. Because they are hard like the rest of the Bones. 4. Because they do not feel in their own Substance, but only by the Periosteums of their Roots, and by means of the little Nerves that enter into them, no otherwise than all the rest of the Bones are sensible. III. Now for the chewing of hardTheir Sub∣stance. things, the Substance of the Teeth is also very hard, and where they appear above their Holes smooth and naked, without any Periosteu, but within their Holes rough, and enfolded with a thin Pellicle of a most quick Sense, having a Cavity withinside, which is manifest in the grinding Teeth when broken, but invisible in the Dog-teeth and Nibbling∣teeth, whereby they receive through the little Holes in the Roots, besides a little Artery from the Roots, a little Nerve also from the Branch of the fourth Pair, expanded through a most thin little Membrane, which enfolds the said Ca∣vity; by means of which, and the Pe∣riosteum investing the Roots, the Teeth are so sensible of Pain, though their bony Substance, which is destitute of the inner little Membrane and Nerve, is altogether insensible. IV. Now these three Vessels, Ar∣tery,Vessels. Nerve and Vein, being first united, and wreath as it were into one small Chard, begirt with a small Membrane, enter the inner Part of the Iaw, and in a peculiar Channel different from the Caverns of the Marrow, run under the Teeth, though how they enter the Teeth in Men, we must confess is not discernible to the Sight; for that although the small Holes of the Roots, though they are somewhat conspicuous in Infants, and seem to penetrate to the slimy Substance of the Roots, yet in Men of riper years become so narrow, that they are not to be discern'd by the Eye. But Reason tells us however, that there must be some ways, by means of which, those Vessels enter the inner Parts of the Teeth; which is apparent by their con∣tinual Nourishment from the Arteries and Veins; besides that, the inner Ca∣vity of the grinding Teeth, especially the first mucous Substance is seen to be somewhat discoloured with Blood, and many times there follows a Flux of Blood upon drawing the Tooth. That there is some little Nerve that enters, is apparent by the quick Sense of the Tooth. Moreover, though the Ingress of these Vessels in the Teeth cannot be so well demonstrated in Men; yet if you open the lower Jaw of an Ox at the inside, presently the Cavity con∣taining the Marrow, and the Artery, Nerve and Vein, enfolded with their peculiar Membrane, appear in their proper Channel. The Membrane be∣ing cut, the little Nerve appears, con∣sisting of several small Threads, be∣tween which, the Veins and Arteries are carried, and the Membrane being re∣moved, certain Fibres like Cobwebs are seen to be stretched from thence to the Roots of the Teeth. And upon the drawing of a Grinder or a cutting Tooth, you shall perceive small Fibres sticking to the Root of the Teeth, which are extended from the Hollowness of the Jaw. But this is to be wondered at, that the Dogs Teeth and cutting Teeth, which are less and fix'd with one Root, should have large and conspicuous Branches openly coming to them, and that the Grinders, which are larger, and fix'd with four Snaggs, should only have capillary Branches to attend them, and that in a kind of hugger mugger. Which, no question, is no otherwise in Men, were it discernible to the Sight. V. The Principles or Beginnings ofTheir Prin∣ciples. the Teeth, generated with the rest of the Parts in the Womb, lye latent be∣tween the Jaws and the Gums, within whose Enclosures they are brought to Perfection by degrees, wherein are first observed the Follicle, the bony Part, and the mucous Part.
VI. The white little Bladder, not ex∣actlyThe Folli∣culus. membranous, but somewhat sli∣my, covers the whole Teeth, as the Cortex of the Seed covers the Pith of a Plant, but never inseparably unites to the Plant. This by degrees is perfora∣ted upwards and downwards, and then the Tooth it self buds forth; in which beginning of it, two Substances are to be observed, the one bony, the other slimy. VII. The bony Part is the Basis ofThe Bony part. the Tooth, which by degrees is hard∣ned into a firm and white Substance, and thrust forth without the Gums. The beginnings are more conspicuous in the new born Infants in the cutting Teeth, less in the Dog-teeth, but in the Dog∣teeth, 'tis long before they appear. Vesalius, Columbus and Sylvius thought this Basis to be an Epiphysis; which Eustachius, Riolanus, and Fallopius with good reason denies. The slimy Part is the Root of the Tooth which is fixed in the Jaw, and consists of a thin Pellicle less white, which contains that pellucid Slime, somewhat hard, of a Colour betwixt White and Red, wherein you may perceive the small Rudiments of the Vessels to be intermix'd. Which Slime being enfolded within that Pellicle, con∣tinues so till the Age of two years, more or less, and is so soft, that being squeez∣ed with the Fingers, the Root of the Tooth sweats forth Blood in the same manner as the Quills of Chickens or Pigeons Feathers; of which the up∣per Part is hard, and as it were solid, the lower hollow and mucous, and sweats forth Blood, being more vehe∣mently squeez'd. In progress of time, this Mucous or Slime is first more and more hardned, and grows bony in the Circum∣ference, then by degrees it hardens in the middle, yet so that there is a certain Cavity remaining at the middle of its thickness at the Root, in the Grinders conspicuous enough, in others not; as being hardly extended to that Part of the Tooth, eminent beyond the Gum; and is encompassed with a most thin Membrane of an acute Sense, constitu∣ted by the Expansion of a small Nerve. Thus this Slime being hardned by de∣grees, the Root encreases, perforates the little Bladder, and is fix'd into the Jaw it self. Then the little Bladder changing its use, becomes a Binding, or rather Soder to the Tooth; by means of which, it sticks as it were glew'd and plaistered to the Gums. VIII. In this manner are theThe time of cutting. Teeth perfected that lye hid under the Gums; out of which they do not break forth till some Months after the Birth, at the time which is call'd the Toothing-time. First break forth the upper and lower cutting Teeth, as of which, there is greatest use; afterwards the Dog-teeth, and lastly the Grinders, and that with a great deal of Pain, in regard they perforate the Flesh of the Gums; which if it be hard, makes the Passage more troublesome, and causes Convulsions and Loosness of the Belly, especially when the Dog-teeth cut the Gums. Now why the cutting Teeth break forth first, the Dog-teeth after∣wards, Aristole gives us the Reason. Because their Office is the first, for that the Food must first be bitten, before it can be chew'd; besides that, a lesser thing is sooner brought to perfection, than a greater, and the Fore-teeth are less than the Cheek-teeth. After the twenty Teeth are come forth above and below, then the Grin∣ders follow more lisurely, and that not before the fifth, sixth, or seventh year, till which time, they lye hid like small Points within the Jaws. Probably, be∣cause the Jaws before were not grown to a sufficient bigness, so that it had not room for twenty eight or thirty Teeth. IX. About the seventh or eightThe Shed∣ding. year, the foremost Teeth shed, and others come in their Place. However all the Teeth do not always shed; but for the most part the Cutters and Dog∣teeth, and of the Grinders those that stand next the Dog-teeth. Nay, I have observed that some have only shed their Cutting-teeth, and no other, and some only two or three of the Cutters, the rest remaining; so that there is no∣thing of certainty in this Matter. This shedding of the Teeth never happens but once, or very seldom. Thus once in forty years I have known a Grinder to have shed, and another come in its room; and I have observed some Children to have shed their Fore∣teeth twice, which have come again. Which Variety Eustachius observes, where he tells us, That some renew their Teeth in the thirteenth and four∣teenth Year; others at certain times, once after the seventh, and again after the fourteenth; and some have had a Tooth come again at twenty years of age, instead of another pull'd out. And sometimes young Men, well temper'd and lusty, have had their Cheek-teeth grown again, and sup∣ply
the Room of that which was pull'd out before. X. This Change of the Teeth hasA Contro∣versie a∣bout shed∣ding the Teeth. caused a great Dispute, whether the first Teeth are true Teeth? and whe∣ther those that succeed are new Teeth, or only new Branches from the same Root? It being absurd to avouch a new Generation of the Parts after the first Formation. For which reason, some aver that the first Teeth are no true Parts of the Body, but only various Particles generated from superfluous Matter, and doing the Office of Teeth till the true Teeth come to perfection. Others say that the first and last Teeth are both generated in the Womb; but that the first Teeth being soonest per∣fected, are soonest come forth; the lat∣ter, being more slowly perfected, come out afterward, and thrust the former out of their Holes. It being visible in Anatomy, that those Teeth which one shed in the seventh year, are separated but a little way from those which break forth in the seventh, and that there is no communion between them. But neither of these Opinions come to the Point. For the first Teeth, a∣bout the seventh year first grow loose, and afterwards shed. Only it is to be observed, that the Root it self does not shed, but the upper Part that is next the Root. For we find by Experience, that if the Teeth be drawn Root and all, 'tis very seldom that another comes in the Room, or if another Tooth doth come, then 'tis certain that the Root was not wholy drawn; but that the lower Part being broken, remained in the Gum. And therefore great care is to be taken, that in pulling out loose Teeth, you do not pull out Root and all, for then you can never expect a new Tooth. For this Rolfinch reproves Co∣lumbus, avouching that the Tooth sheds Root and all, and renews Root and all, which is contrary to Reason and Expe∣rience, and therefore let it go. We have observed in a tame Deer, every year or half year, a certain soft and slimy Substance under the Founda∣tion of the Horns, to rise like a Stool∣ball from the Root of the Horns, upon which the loose Horns insisted, which, as might be observed by the restlesness of the Beast, caused either Pain or some extream Itching in those Parts, till the Horns fell off, and that then, from the same Root, new Horns grew again by degrees. So it is with the Teeth, in which that mucous Substance rises from the Root under the Basis of the Tooth, and loosens it with Pain, so that you may easily pull it out with your Fin∣gers; and that unless it be pull'd out in time, the soft Substance being afterwards dry'd and hardened, it becomes strong∣ly fixed again, and another Tooth grows to the side of it from the same Root, which however is no new Tooth, but a new Branch proceeding from the same Root. So that 'tis no wonder the former Tooth is separated at some distance from the latter Branch, because it has no other communion with it, than by one Root common to both. This deceived Eustachius and Riolanus, who perceiving the beginning of the second Branch sprouting forth under the for∣mer, write that they saw new Teeth ly∣ing hid under the first. Now the Rea∣son why the latter Branch thrusts out the former, is by reason that the Hole is so narrow that it will not admit two Branches together, which however sometimes it does, and then the latter Branch is joyned to the former at its beginning. Only because the first Branch grows out of order, and defaces the Beauty of the Mouth, therefore gene∣rally it is either drawn or fil'd away. In the same manner it has sometimes happen'd, that old Men have had new Teeth spring up from the remaining Roots of the old ones. Of which, Iou∣bert produces an Example in a toothless Lady of seventy years of age, most of whose Teeth came again, but small and weak. And Sennertus also relates ano∣ther Story, upon the Authority of George Tithscard, a Silesian Physitian, of an old Matron almost seventy years of age, who bred twenty new Teeth with the same Pain, and the same Symp∣toms as happen in young Children. At Utrecht, there lives an old Woman at this time, of fourscore years of age, who having lost all her Teeth, had four of her cutting Teeth grew again, but two years since. And you shall find many other Examples of this na∣ture in Pliny, Naevisanus, and Alexander Benedictus. However it is to be understood, that in these ancient People, the Roots of the Teeth remain entire, though the Basis of the Teeth that advances it self above the Gums, were quite eaten away and perished. XI. About one, or six and twenty,The Den∣tes Sapi∣entiae. or thirty years of age, the two far∣thest Cheek-teeth break forth with great Pain, the Materials of which,
remain so long hidden in the little Holes of the Jaw imperfect, before it could acquire Perfection of Substance. These are generally call'd Double Teeth, or the Teeth of Understanding, because they shoot forth at the time when a Man arrives to his most solid Under∣standing. XII. The Teeth have also this pecu∣liarContinual Growth. above the Nature of other Bones, that their Growth and Increase is not prefixed, but grow continually all a Man's Life-time, so that what is dayly worn away by Mastication and Chew∣ing, renews again, which is apparent, if the Tooth, to which the opposite Tooth being drawn, upon which it usu∣ally lights, be not worn away, for then it grows to such a length, as to fill the opposite Hole. Or if the Tooth shoot∣ing forth out of its Hole transversly to∣ward the foremost or hinder Parts, ex∣ceeds the Row of the Teeth. For then if it shoot forward, the Tooth will perfo∣rate the Lip it self, if backward, it will hinder the Motion of the Tongue. Thus I knew two young Ladies, who had each a sharp Tooth which shot forth from the inner Root of the upper Cutting-tooth, and grew to that length, that it perforated the Tongue with an extraordinary Pain, and hindred the Speech; for which Reason, I caused them both be to drawn. And thus Pliny, Eustachius, and Alexander Benedict are to be understood, when they write that they saw Teeth growing out of the Pa∣late, as Meaning-teeth, which shooting forth from the Root of some upper Cutting-teeth through the Membrane of the Palate, extend themselves toward the inner Parts of the Mouth. However there are certain Limits, be∣yond which the Teeth never grow; notwithstanding that they are some∣times longer than ordinary. XIII. The Teeth are placed in theThe Order. Iaws in one single Row: Seldom two Rows are seen, as Pliny reports of La∣odice, the Daughter of Mithridates, and Trimarchus the Son of Nicholes. But more rarely three Rows, which Rhodiginus reports of Hercules, and Co∣lumbus observes in his own Son Phaebus. In Tigers and Elephants, three Rows are common. In like manner the Mon∣ster call'd a Manticora, and the Fish call'd a Moraxus, are said to have three Rows of Teeth. Sometimes indeed it happens in Men that here and there one of the Fore-Teeth may stand in a double Row; which comes to pass when the Teeth shed, and that a new Spring grows from the same Root, which growing upward, fixes it self before another Tooth, either not shed or not pull'd out. XIV. The Bigness of the Teeth is  of a moderate Size; yet some are broader, some narrower, some longer, some shorter. XV. The Number in all PeopleNumber. is not the same; someimes fifteen or sixteen in each Jaw; yet some have more, some fewer, and they that have fewest, have generally the broadest. Hippocrates, Galen, and Aristotle pre∣fer the greater Number before the small∣er, as betokening long Life; perhaps denoting the Plenty of the first Matter, and the Strength of the forming Facul∣ty; or else because the Nourishment is better prepared for Concoction, by the Mastication of more, then few Teeth. It rarely happens, what Plutarch testifies of Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, and Pliny, concerning the Son of Prusias King of Bithynia, and what others write of Eryptolemus King of Cyprus, the Poet Pherecrates and Sicinius, that instead of Teeth, they had one conti∣nu'd Bone, distinguished only with Lines, such a one as Bartholin testifies he saw in a certain Barbarian; and Melanthon, in a certain Virgin, at the Court of Prince Ernest of Luneburgh. The Teeth differ both in Shape and Use. XVI. Some are broad, sharp andThe Inci∣sorii. cutting, therefore call'd Incisorii; by the Greeks , from  to cut, the first that appear, seated in the fore∣part of the Mouth, and furnished with one single Root, ending in a sharp Point. These are four above and be∣low, sometimes three, seldom two, where they are very broad, so that they fill the whole Space between the Dog-Teeth. XVII. Others are very sharp andThe Cani∣ni. strong, and deeply rooted, called Ca∣nini, or Dog-teeth, by Aristotle and Galen , two in each Jaw, next to the Cutting-teeth on each side, which break what the other cannot cut. These the Vulgar call the Eye-teeth, and ac∣count it a dangerous thing to draw them, believing that their Roots reach to the Eyes, whereas the uppermost hardly pass beyond the lower Brim of the Wings of the Nose, with their Roots, and the lowermost are far distant from the Eyes. Others, with Lauren∣tius
and Riolanus believe that some portion of the Nerve moving the Eye is carryed to these Teeth, which is nothing so. Riolanus and Spigelius ob∣serve, that the Roots of the Fore-teeth and Dog-teeth, are frequently obser∣ved to be crooked, and that such Teeth cannot be drawn without pulling away some Part of the Case. XVIII. Others are obtuse and largeThe Grin∣ders. as the Grinders, called Mollares and Molitores, which grind the Meat like Grindstones. The Germans (and the English too) call them the Cheek∣teeth. The number of which is not in all People the same; generally ten in each Jaw; five of a side; to which if you add the Wisdom-teeth, their Number will be increased. The two foremost that stand next to the Dog∣teeth, are less than the rest, and pro∣minent with two little Excrescences, the three hindermost are bigger, and unequal with four Extuberances being broad at the upper Part and almost four square. They are fixed with two three or four Roots; for herein Na∣ture sports her self. The two that stand next the Dog-teeth are also furnished for the most Part with two, behind with three or four, and above with more then below. XIX. Concerning the use of theTheir use. Teeth we have already spoken. But their use in Pronunciation is chiefly performed by the Fore-teeth, which they that want have a defect in their Speech, and pronounce but badly some Letters, as C. D. L. T. X. Z. Hence it is that Pliny rightly observes that the two Fore-teeth govern the Voice and Speech, by a certain concert receiving the strook of the Tongue; and according to their structure and bigness, maim, sosten and dull the Pronunciation, so that being lost, Men lose their Pronunciation. Ga∣len, ascribes them a third use, to di∣stinguish Savours and assist the relish of the Tongue; but the Bony Sub∣stance of the Teeth alone is altogether insensible, only by means of the Peri∣osteum and little Membrane that invests the inner Cavity; but whether the Teeth relish Savours by that means is much to be questioned; because there is a great difference between the sense of Feeling and Tasting. vid. lib. 3. cap. 14. and so the Teeth seem to be sensible of heat, cold, austerity, and other tangible Qualities, but not to distinguish Savors. CHAP. XI. Of the Spine and its Vertebres in General. IN the Second Part of the Skeleton are to be considered, the Vertebres or the Spine, the Bones Sacrum and of the Coccyx, the Ribs, the Sternon, the Clavicles, the Scapularies, and the Nameless Bones. This latter Structure of the Trunk,The Spine. like a Pillar sustains the Bulk of the Body, and extending it self from the Head to the Huckle Bone, compos'd of Vertebres or Spondils, the Os Sacrum and Huckle-bone, fixed one upon ano∣ther, and firmly fastned by Ligaments, is vulgarly called the Spine, as being in the hinder Part furnished with Thorny or prickly Extuberances. The Greeks call it the Sacred Pipe, because it is hol∣low'd like a Pipe, and contains and de∣fends the Principle Part. It is also cal∣led  from  to break, because it seems to be a Bone Pillar broken in∣to many Parts. Now it behov'd this support not to consist of one but of many Bones, to the end the Body might bend every way. However in Old men it happens, that the Moisture of the Gristles being dry'd up, and the intervening Liga∣ments being hardned, that many Ver∣tebres unite into one Bone. Of which I have an Example at home in the Skeleton of a certain hunch-back'd Person in which seven Vertebres are grown together in one. Which Coali∣tion Pavius and other Anatomists have observed. II. Each Vertebre in grown PeopleThe Sub∣stance. consists of one Bone, and their Sub∣stance is thicker and more spungy, and where they are joynted, invested with a Gristle, for easiness of moti∣on: in their Processes their Substance is harder and more solid. In Children every Vertebre consists of several Bones. Which Fallopius has accurately observed. In these Vertebres, says he, I have observed one thing, that they consist of three Bony Parts; of which one is the Body it self, the other two from the sides of the hole of the Marrow. These are fastened with a Gristle to the sides of the Body on the right and left side, and
where the Spine is, one to another, which afterwards becoming Bony, expunges the Ioyntures, this is true in all except the Second, and the two hinder Parts which consist of four Parts, the Body, which constitute the sides, and a fourth Tooth, which though called a Process by all Ana∣tomists, is really an Appendix resembling a Nut, which is so fastned at length, all the Gristles being turned into a Bone, that it seems to be a Part of the Vertebre, and rather a Process than an Appendix. Beside the First, the Second is also to be expected, as being compos'd not of three but two lateral Bones, wherein are certain hollownesses that compre∣hend the Head, which is bound toge∣ther before with a Gristle, near the Tooth of the Second Vertebre, and be∣hind extended from the one to the other Bone. For that the first Vertebre in the new born Birth is destitute of that middle bony Body, granted to the rest of the Vertebres, and in the stead of it has the said Gristle which afterwards in ripe Age become bony. However that substance which divides the several Vertebres into diverse little Bones, ra∣ther seems to be a true Gristle then that it is so; but a bony Part which has not yet acquired a Bony hardness. III. The Vertebres above and belowThe Figure. are flat, within convex, behind un∣equal with many Processes. IV. In the middle they are hol∣low'dThe Holes with a great hole provided for the safe descent of the Spinal Marrow. At the sides of this on each side lye two Cavities; of which the upper are less and the lowermost bigger; which con∣curring between the two Vertebres set one upon another, form those holes on both sides, through which the Nerves proceed from the Marrow, which are so broad as the thickness of the Nerve passing through requires. To the forming of these holes in the Neck both these Vertebres equally contri∣bute. But in the Back and chiefly in the Loyns, all the holes are bor'd in the lower Part of every Vertebre. Be∣sides innumerable little holes conveigh∣ing the small Arteries carrying the Nutritive Blood to the inner Substance of the Bone. V. It has seven Processes. TwoThe Pro∣ceses. upper ascending and as many lower de∣scending; Two transverse, and one Postic, which is the biggest of all, and which all the Vertebres have, except the uppermost which is next to the Neck. In new born Infants, the ascending and descending Processes have not yet attain∣ed a Bony hardness, but are small, soft, and almost altogether wanting at that time. And hence a certain Division or Cleft appears between every two Verte∣bres, fill'd with a Gristle that conglu∣tinates the two Gristles. The Vertebres are knit together be∣hindConnexio. by Gynglism; before, by harmo∣ny, and without side by the hard Mem∣brane; withinside by a hard and strong Membranous Ligament, extending it self from the upper Vertebre of the Neck to the Os Sacrum; which many think to arise from the Gristles of the Ver∣tebres. Moreover they are congluti∣nated together with an interceding Gristle. The Spine being fram'd by the stru∣cture of these Vertebres, has a Figure commodious for the Internal Parts and their Functions, and therefore it has a streightness, that somtimes bends somewhat backward, sometimes bows forward. From the first Vertebre of the Neck to the seventh it bows for∣ward; for the more commodious sup∣port of the Gullet and Asperia Arteria. From the first of the Back to the twelth it protuberates backward to render the Domicils of the Heart and Lungs more capacious. The Loyns bend inward, the better to support the Trunk of the descending Aorta and hollow Vein. The Os Sacrum protuberates outward to make the Hypogastrion more roomy, which is necessary for the Distention of the Bladder, but more especially of the Womb. CHAP. XII. Of the Vertebres in Specie, of the Os Sacrum and the Cuckow∣bell or Huckle Bone. THE Vertebres, by the Greeks are called Spondyls, by reason of their continual Motion in bending the Bo∣dy. The Vertebres of the whole Spine areNumber. numbred twenty four, seven of the Neck, twelve of the Back, and five of the Loyns, which are plac'd upon the Os Sacrum as a Basis, with its Appendix the Coccyx-bone.
The Vertebres of the Neck differThe Verte∣bres of the Neck. one from another, and the rest of the Spine Vertebres, and their transverse Processes are perforated, for the more commodious Passage of the Arteries and cervical Veins and they are seated in the Extremities, at the Exit of the soft Nerve. But the hinder Spines are bipartited for the more firm con∣nexion of the Muscles and Ligaments. Their Substance is harder, thinner and less porous then that of the rest of the Vertebres; within side also they are less gibbous and less in bulk then the rest. The two uppermost are fasten'd to the Head with strong Liga∣ments. III. The first is call'd Atlas,Atlas. bearing up the head like a little World, and strongly fasten'd to it. It is thinner and tougher then the rest, and wants the hinder Spine, instead of which there appears a Protuberant Semicircular Ine∣quality. It has two Apophyses ascend∣ing upwards, with two lateral some∣what descending and perforated. On the fore-side it shews a Protuberancy very solid and hard, from the sides of which two upper and as many oblique Eminencies bunch forth. More in∣ward at the fore-side of the great Hole, there is a Semicircular Cavity co∣vered with a Gristle, wherein it receives the Tooth of the following Verte∣bre. IV. The Second, call'd  fromDentata. Turning, sends upward from the middle of it a hard and round Process, long like a Tooth, about which the head is turned with the first Vertebre. Whence by Hyppocrates the whole Vertebre is called Dens, by others the Toothed Vertebre, by us the Axle. This tooth∣ed Process is tyed with a particular Li∣gament, and fastened to the hinder Part of the Head. Note that this Tooth in new born Infants is not firmly united, but seems▪ to be separated from the rest of the Bone, and placed upon it. But is af∣terwards so united to it, as if it had never been parted from it; so that in grown People it seems rather to resemble a Process than an Appendix. On both sides the Tooth there is a small, smooth, flat place, under which lyes the lateral Apophysis perforated. In the fore Part a broad descending Apophysis is received by the Cavity of the Inferior Vertebre. At the hin∣der Part on both sides descends an Apophysis, which the third Vertebre receives. The hindermost Spine descending is bipartited. The Third is by the Greeks errone∣ously called , being a Name more proper for the second Vertebre, whose Tooth resembles an Axle both for its use and form. This on each side from the sides backward sends a hollow Apophy∣sis upward, where it receives the des∣cending Apophysis of the second Ver∣tebre, under this descends another, and to that another small one ascend∣ing upward adheres, thrusting it self into the Cavity of the second Verte∣bre. Below it has a Cavity, whereinto it admits the following Vertebre; and the Spine growing forked is divided into two Extremities. The Fourth is like the third, but wants a peculiar Name. The Fifth differs little from the two former. The Sixth somewhat bigger in Bulk, differs very little from the former, only that it has two upper Apophy more ascending, and a larger Spine. The Seventh which is the biggest of all, and its Spine longer and thicker, but not divided, is obtuse with a round Head. The lateral Apophysis of this wants the Eminency extended inward, with which the fourth, fifth and sixth are provided. Besides these Seven, Spigelius avouches, that there is sometimes, though sel∣dom an eight allowed, especially in those that have long Necks; but then they have one Vertebre wanting in the breast, which for that reason is shor∣ter. V. The Vertebres of the Back areThe Verte∣bres of the Back. reckon'd to be twelve; rarely one o∣ver or one under. These surpass the Vertebres of the Neck in bigness and thickness, but are less solid, and per∣forated with many holes for the passage of the Muscles; they are like one to another, and provided with solid and continuous Apophyses. The Bodies of these are Orbicular,Their fi∣gure. slightly hollow'd within side and be∣hind, to the end the Ligaments may be more strongly knit, least the Ver∣tebres should slip out of their places. The nine uppermost are almost e∣qualGreatness. in bigness, which decreases by de∣grees in the four lowermost. In like manner the Spines of the nine upper∣most are large, pointed at the upper part; below somewhat broad; and the upper obliquely descend above the
lower. But in the three lowermost the Spines are streight, and carry'd out∣ward, and become more obtuse: the lowermost being hollow'd at the end with a slight superficial Furrow. These Vertebres of the Back at this day are distinguished by no peculiar Names; though Antiquity had several Apellations for them. They are distinguished from the Ver∣tebres of the Neck, for that the Dorsal Spines are almost thick, long, solid and single, nor divided at the ends, as are most of the Vertebres of the Neck: as also for that they have a Cavity on each side, into which the Head of the Ribs is joynted; which the Vertebres of the Neck want, though they have their tranverse perforated Processes which the Dorsals have not. The Vertebres of the Loyns also are destitute of those hollownesses. Besides those Cavities in the Vertebres of the Back, there are two other Cavities in the transverse Processes, not deep but superficial, appointed to strengthen the Articulations of the Ribs, which nevertheless are hardly conspicu∣ous in the eleventh and twelth Vertebre. VIII. The Dorsal Vertebres areProcesses. provided with seven Processes; four oblique, two lateral or transverse, and one pointed, which is called the Spine. Of the oblique, two ascend and as many descend. They thrust themselves into the descending Processes of the upper Vertebres. These jet not forth very much, and are receiv'd by the small Heads of the ascending Pro∣cesses of the inferiour Vertebres. The transverse Processes of the three infe∣riour Vertebres, the tenth, eleventh and twelfth grow lesser by degrees, and the Processes of the eleventh and twelfth are somewhat forked. Riolanus writes, that the eleventh and twelfth Vertebres differ from the rest in the joynting, & are knit to the first Ver∣tebres by Arthrody, whereas the rest are articulated by Gynglism, which is a manifest Error; seeing that these are no less connexed by Gynglismus then the rest, though the Articulation of these be broader then that of the others, be∣cause that the Motion of the Spine in bending Extention and Obliquation is first to be performed in that place. In these Vertebres of the Back, we are to take notice of certain Cavities invested with a Gristle which are wanting in the rest; two in the transverse Processes, which the eleventh and twelfth how∣ever want; and two in the Body it self, to receive the Processes of the Ribbs. IX. The Vertebres of the Loyns areThe Verte∣bres of the Loys. five; seldom more or less. Fallopius writes, that he has many times obser∣ved that the number of the Vertebres of the Loyns varies according to the number of the Vertebres of the Back. So that if there be eleven Vertebres of the Back, there are six of the Loyns; if thirteen in the Back, then only four in the Loyns; if twelve, which is usual, then no more then these five. But that this is no constant Rule ap∣pears by a Skeleton in the Custody of Dr. Pelt in Utrecht, wherein there are twelve Vertebres of the Back, and six of the Loyns of a considerable big∣ness. These Vertebres surpass in thick∣ness and bigness all the rest; and are provided with many little holes for the ingress and exit of small Arteries and Veins, and they are joynted together with an intervening glutinous Gristle, yet so that the conjunction of these is looser then of those of the Breast, for the more easie bending the Body. They have hinder Processes shorter and less pointed but broader and thicker then those of the Breast, and ascending somewhat upwards; but the lateral Pro∣cesses are somewhat longer. In the mean time they differ somewhat in joynting from the Vertebres of the Breast; for that these are carried up∣wards with ascending Processes into the Cavities of the upper Vertebres; those are joynted with lower Processes at the side somewhat lower into the Processes of the next Vertebre. But the twelfth Vertebre is not joynted into the upper Processes, as the other Vertebres of the Breast; but into the lower, as the Ver∣tebres of the Loyns. X. Certain Hebrew Writers haveThe Bone Lus. feign'd a certain Bone between the last Vertebre of the Loyns and the Os Sacrum, which they call Lus, of which they scribble Wonders; which Bau∣hinus has Epitomiz'd in these Words. The Hebrew Writers, saith he, Assert, that there is in the Body of Man below the Eight Rib a certain Bone, which cannot be corrupted or annihilated either by Water, Fire, or any other Element, nor can it be broken by any external force; which Bone God will at the last Iudg∣ment water with Celestial dew, and then the rest of the Members shall unite to∣gether into one Body, which being inspi∣red with the Breath of. God, shall be a∣gain enlivened. This Bone they call Lus, not Luz; which they say is seated in the Spine of the Back, behind the
eight Vertebre at the Bone of the Thigh. The Author of this Fable is Rabi Us∣kaija, who liv'd in the Year of our Lord 210. who wrote a Book entitled Be Res∣chite Rabba, being a Comment upon the Pentateuch. But these are all Fictions and Fables, though Agrippa seems to fa∣vour them in his Occult Philoso∣phy. XI. The Os Sacrum, remarkableThe Os Sa∣crum. for its thickness and strength, stands immoveable under the Vertebres, and like a Basis supports the stru∣cture of the Vertebres impos'd upon it. Within-side it is smooth and hollow, without-side convex and hollow, of a Triangular figure. Upon each side, at the upper Part, it has a plany place rough and unequal, where it is fastened to the Illion Bones by means of a Gristle. It consists of five or six Bones, resem∣bling the Vertebres, which being broad at the beginning, grow narrow by de∣grees; and though in Infants and Chil∣dren they may be easily separated, in men grown they unite into one Bone. Fallopius observes in Children new Born, that the Parts of this Bone consists of three Particles, like the rest of the Vertebres, which are afterwards so united, that there is no more Divi∣sion to be seen. It is perforated with holes, not late∣ral, as the Vertebres, but transverse, seated at the Exit of the Nerves for∣ward and backward on both sides, to the Conjunctions of the Parts, of which this Bone consists, which within are much larger and bigger then with∣out. It has small Processes, and Spines for the most Part looking upwards, so that the lowermost hardly appears. XII. The Bone of the Coccyx, soThe Coccyx Bones. called, because it resembles the Cuc∣kows-bill, consists of three or four little Bones, from a larger Base tend∣ing donward in a point by degrees, and bending within for the conve∣niency of sitting. Fallopius observes that this consists of three Bones, whereas the Os Sacrum consists of six; but when the Sacrum consists but of five, then the Coccyx consists but of four. In Children it is altogether Gristly, till the seventh year: afterwards it be∣gins to be consolidated into a Spungy substance, and of four Particles to be united into one Bone. This Coccyx adheres to the Os Sacrum like an Appendix, and is joyned to it with a loose Connexion by means of a glutinous Gristle; that it may be able to give way in the delivery and the exoneration of thick and hard Ex∣crements, and to prevent its being in∣jur'd by any violent Concussion. Spi∣gelius and Riolanus believe, that if the said knot happen to be over loose, it causes a falling of the Fundament in Children; of which nevertheless there may be a more usual and manifest reason given. The use of it is to support the streight Gut, and the Sheath of the Womb in Women, which is fasten∣ed to that Intestine. A Pendulous Gristle grows to the Joynt of it. This Coccyx Bone, it being bent out∣ward in length it grows dry, becomes a Tayl, as we saw it in the Year 1638. in an Infant new born half an Ell long, like the Tayl of an Ape; which was occasi∣oned by the Mothers being frighted by an Ape with a Tayl, after she had gone but three Months. Thus Pliny tells us of some men that have woolly Tayls in some Parts of India. And Paulus Venetus, that in the Kingdom of Lam∣bri, there are a sort of Savage Peo∣ple, with Tayls like Dogs above a handful long. These Testimonies Har∣vey very much confirms by the follow∣ing Story. A Chyrurgion says he, a very honest Man my Friend, returning from the East-Indies, told me that in the Island of Bornea in the Mountanous Parts remote from the Sea, there are a sort of Men with Tayls, of which number he saw a Virgin that was taken with great difficulty, with a fleshy thick Tayl about a Span long, which she clapt be∣tween her Buttocks, and covered therewith her Podex and Privities. CHAP. XIII. Of the Ribs. TO the Spine above, adhere the Ribs, the Os Sternon, the Clavicles and Scapula's; below the nameless Bones. I. The Ribs, that fortifie theThe Ribs. Breast, are by the Greeks call'd Pleura.
II. These are reckoned to be twelveTheir Number. on each side, seldom more or less. Galen writes, that a thirteenth is very rarely to be found, and more unusual∣ly eleven; which Number, Columbus once observed. Also in the year 1641. we observed eleven in a certain French Souldier that was slain with a Sword. Riolanus avouches that he has seen sometimes eleven, sometimes thirteen of a side. Bartholine, eleven on the one side, and twelve on the other. Fallopi∣us has seen thirteen of a side, which Picolhomini saw twice; once Bauhinus, and once Frederic de Ruysch. I have a Skeleton by me, which wants the twelfth Rib almost, on both sides, I say almost, for that it is so small, that it hardly ex∣ceeds a Thumbs breadth. III. For their greater Strength, theTheir Sub∣stance. Ribs for the most part, where they are carried along the Back and Sides, are bony, and within spungy; which is the reason that broken, they are more easi∣ly consolidated by means of a Callus, then any other Bones. But in the foremost and least part, where they proceed to∣ward the Sternon, they are gristly, for the more easie Motion of the Breast. These foremost gristly Productions in Women, sometimes are harder, and as it were grow into Bones, perhaps the better to sustain the Weight of the Breasts, for in Men there is no such thing. In new born Infants, the Extremities, by means of which, they are joyned with the Vertebres, are gristly, but in a short time harden into Solidities and bony Firmness. IV. They are bent like a Bow, toFigure. give the Breast more room; which Arching of the Ribs is more in these above than below. Their outward Superficies is some∣what unequal, especially about the Ver∣tebres, where the Ligaments are fasten'd but the inner Superficies where the Membranes adhere to the Pelura is more smooth. V. As to their Length and Breadth,Greatness. there is great Variety. The middle∣most are longer and broader, except the first, which is broadest of all. More∣over they are sometimes broader in one Man of the same Age than in another, though both of an equal Tallness. I my self have two Skeletons, the one of a Man that was very tall, because he had narrow and streight Ribs. The o∣ther of a Person of low Stature, whose Ribs are broad, thick and very firm. At their first Rise they are all nar∣row, and somewhat round, and the nearer they approach to the Breast, the broader they are. They are thicker above than below, but in the lower Part flat. In the lower inner Part there is some∣thing of a Cavity, wherein they re∣ceive a Nerve, an Artery, and an Inter∣costal Vein. VI. This Cavity is considerable inCutting for an Empyma. the Incision of Empyics, for special care must be taken, least the said Inter∣costal Vessels be injured, which as Bartholin directs, may be avoided if the Incision, which is usually perform'd between the fifth and sixth, or between the sixth and seventh Rib, be made from the top to the bottom. Thus al∣so Otto Heurnius taught us, who for that Incision requir'd a Knife with a keen Edge, but a flat Back; which he would have so held in operation, that the Back should be toward the lower Part of the upper Rib, that is, the fore∣said Cavity, but the Edge-work down∣ward toward the top of the lower Rib. But experience tells us, that all this is one Imaginary Theory. For the Ribs in a living Man, are not so sar distant, that a Knife can well be thrust in from the lower part of the upper, to the top of the lower Rib. And therefore to avoid injuring those Vessels, I order the Chyrurgions to make the Incision in the upper part of the sixth or seventh Rib, at the full length of it, not ascending to the Rib next above it. Some will say that this is the way to cut the Fi∣bres of the Intercostal Muscles athwart, as if they could scape by the first Incision. The Fibres of those Muscles are all ob∣lique, and the inner thwart the outer∣most like a St. Andrews Cross. So that which way soever the Incision be made, there's no way to avoid the hurting of the Fibres; neither is it much to be fear'd, for that the Wound in this Case is not great, and as Experience teaches us, easily consolidated again. VII. The Ribs are joyned behindArticulati∣on. into the Vertebres, by the means of some intervening Gristle, and are fast∣ned to them with strong Ligaments, of which, some proceed to the Sternon Bone, others not. VIII. The former are call'd trueThe true Ribs. Ribs, of which, the gristly Producti∣ons are immediately fastned to the Ster∣non, and are seven Superior, of which,
the two first are call'd Retorted, the two next solid, and three lower call'd Pe∣ctorals. IX. The hinder and lowermost areThe Spu∣rious Ribs. call'd the Spurious Ribs, of which, the first four, with their Cartilages winding backward, and mutually cohering toge∣ther, are fastned below to the seventh Gristle of the true Ribs. But the last, which is the least, sometimes grows to the Diaphragma, sometimes to the right Muscle of the Abdomen; in which Connexion, it sometimes associates with it the last Rib, save one. X. The Use of the Ribs are,Their Use. 1. To keep the Breast dilated, and the upper Part of the lower Belly; least in the one, the Heart, together with the Lungs; in the other, Liver, Spleen and Ventricle should be oppressed by the Weight of the Incumbent Parts. 2. To defend both them and other Parts therein contained from external Injuries. 3. To support the Respiratory Mus∣cles, and assist their Motions; for which reason, the Breast ought not to consist of one Bone, as which would then have been immoveable; nor could the Act of Respiration have been conveni∣ently perform'd, which is the reason that the Ribs very rarely grow together, which Pausanias reports of Protopha∣nes the Magnesian, in whose Carcass all the true Ribs were found con∣nexed. This Protophanes was a fa∣mous Wrestler in the Olympic Games. Now because a good Wind is ne∣cessary in Wrestling, which could not be by reason of that Connexion of the Ribs; 'tis very probable, that when he grew old, his Ribs stuck together, after he had left off Wrestling. As many times some Vertebres of the Back, Bones of the Skull, and other Bones become continuous when Men grow aged. CHAP. XIV. Of the Bone of the Breast and Sternon. THE Bone of the Breast, in Greek , in Latin Sternum, is placed before the Fore-part of the Breast, like a Bulwark, to which the gristly Productions of the true Ribs are fast∣ned. I. The Substance of it is spungyThe Sub∣stance. and less white than the rest of the Bones, which in Infants seems to be al∣together gristly, except the upper Part, which is sometimes more bony. Per∣haps because the Articulation of the Clavicle is there to be fastned. II. In new born Infants, it seemsIts Parts. to be compacted of seven or eight Bones, joyned together with a Gristle; to the lowest of which, the Sword re∣sembling-Gristle, the single Pairs of the true Ribs are knit. But these after the Age of eight or ten years, unite toge∣ther into fewer Bones by Synchondrosis. So that in People grown up, only three are to be found, rarely four, distinguished with transverse Lines; and these also when Men grow into years, become one solid Bone. Riolanus saw at Rome this Bone in a Girl of seven years old, con∣sisting of eleven Bones; and the Sternon was divided into six Bones; but the five lower Bones appear'd every one divided into two Bones, from the bottom to the top, all the length of the Bone. This Scissure in the middle of all the Bones, except the uppermost and lowermost, is frequently to be observed, as Eustachius, Bauhinus, and Bartholine avouch. The upper Bone, surpassing the rest in largeness and thickness, resembles the Pummel of the Handle of a Sword, having in the upper and middle Part, a Furrow like a Half-moon, call'd the little Fork or Iugulum. At the Side of which, on each side, stands another lit∣tle Hollowness, to receive the Extremi∣ties of the Clavicles, and to be fastned by a Gristle. In the inner Part there is another Cavity, giving free Passage to the descending Trachea. The second, or middle Bone, annex'd to the first by means of a Gristle, is nar∣rower, but very long, and has five or six Cavities on both sides, at unequal di∣stances one from another, and receiving the Gristles of the Ribs. III. The third Bone, which is lowestThe Car∣tilagious Mucrona∣ta. and least, ends in a Gristle, which re∣sembling the Point of a Sword, is call'd Cartilago Mucronata, by the Greeks, the Sword-resembling, and vulgarly the Buck∣lar-like. This Gristle is oblong and triangular, equal in the breadth of the Thumb in length, and is seldom found double, but most commonly single; sometimes forked, for the Convenience of the Ves∣sels passing through; sometimes round and thin, being perforated, it affords a free Passage to an Artery and a Vein.
But if both the Biforcation and the Hole be wanting, then the Sternon is perfora∣ted in the middle, which is chiefly ob∣served in Women, according to Riola∣lanus, who found in a Hole in a certain Woman, so broad in the inner Part of the Sternon, as to admit his little Fin∣ger. But the Breast of that Woman was fortified with thirteen Ribs of a Side. Thus Eustachius and Sylvius observe, that the Sternon is sometimes pervious in the middle, with a broad Hole for the Passage of the Vessels. Massa a∣scribes to himself the Discovery of this Hole. Frequently this Gristle is bowed back, sometimes outward, sometimes inward, not without great prejudice to the Sto∣mach and neighbouring Parts, which causes the Hickopping, and an Acro∣phy, the Source of several Diseases. Sometimes in old Men it turns to a Bone, which Pavius observed in one that had been long troubled with a Shortness of Breath. But it most rare∣ly happens what Veslingius observes, that this Muscle in a certain Person extend∣ed it self a whole Fingers length to the Navel, and became stiff, to the great Inconvenience of the Body in bending, and Prejudice to the Concoction of the Stomach, and Distribution of the Chylus. Folius takes notice of two small Mus∣cles placed at the side, and moving this Gristle outward and inward; which I could never as yet find out. IV. Without side, in the Region ofThe Scro∣bicle Cor∣dis. this Gristle, here is a Cavity to be seen, which the Greeks call , the Latins the little Scrobicle, or Hole of the Heart, because that the Heart adjoyns to it within side, with its Bone includ∣ed in the Pericardium, and annexed to the nervous Center of the Diaphrag∣ma. Riolanus sometimes found in fat Wo∣men with great Breasts, the Bone of the Sternon acuminated by the weight of the Breasts; which has streightned the Breast, and caused a Difficulty of Breathing in the Persons themselves. CHAP. XV. Of the Clavicles and Scapulas. THE Clavicles and Scapula's some refer to the Shoulder and Hand, because the Arm is joynted to them; for which Articulation they seem to have been chiefly fram'd; whereas they afford no remarkable use to the Breast. But others, by reason of their situation, with more reason, num∣ber them among the Bones of the Breast, which method we shall fol∣low. I. The Clavicles, so called, becauseThe Cla∣vicles. that like a Lock, they fasten the Sca∣pula to the Sternon, by the Greeks are call'd , because they lock up the Breast. Celsus calls them Iugula, or little Yoaks, as resembling the Yoaks of Oxen; and others call them Ligulae, or little Tongues. II. These are two Bones, of which,Number. one of each side hangs athwart over the upper Part of the Breast, between the Ioynt of the Shoulder, and the Top of the Sternon Bone. III. Their Substance is thick andSubstance. Spungy, easily broken by the violent Shogs of external Bodies; but by reason of its Laxity, the Callus soon unites it together again. IV. The Shape of it is long, andFigure. something like a great S; but more wreath'd in Men than in Women, for the stronger Motion of the Arm. V. With one of their ExtremitiesConnexion. which is round, they adhere to the top of the Sternon Bone; with the other which is flatter, they are knit to the Process of the Scapula, where they produce the top of the Shoulder. Each extremity is covered with a Muscle, and by means of that unctuous Gristle, they are both joyned after a loose manner with strong Ligaments by Diarthrosis. They have both a Protuberancy, and two Superficial Cavities, from whence the Subclavial Muscle, and part of the Pectoral Muscle derive their Original. And on both sides near the ends they grow rough, that the Liga∣ments thence proceeding may more
firmly take hold of them. The move∣able Gristle, called Clausura, there con∣spicuous, does not grow to them, but is held fast with Ligaments embracing the Joynt, the more easily to yield to the Motions of the Scapula and Arm. VI. The Clavicles seem to be foundThe Use. to render certain Motions of the Arm more strong and easie; which is the reason that most brute Beasts are desti∣ture of them. But they are to be found in Apes, Squerrels, &c. that make use of their Fore-feet as of Hands. VII. The Scapula, by the Greeks Homo∣plate,The Sca∣pula. of each side one, lies upon the Dorsal Ribs like a Target, and is a broad thin Bone, in some measure tri∣angular, somewhat hollow within, gib∣bous without, design'd not so much for the safety of the hinder Part of the Breast, as for the secure Articulation of the Shoulder with the Clavicle, and the Insertion of the Muscles. It is seated between the first and fifth Vertebre of the Breast, seldom reaches to the sixth. Part of it being extended all the length of the Back, is called the Basis; of which, there are two Extremities called the Angles, one above, the other below. The Basis is called the sides of the Ribs, of which, the uppermost is the shorter and thinner, the lowermost the longer and thicker. The whole breadth of the Scapula is called the Table; of which, the External Part is Gibbous, the Internal Concave, to receive the Muscle that dives into it. VIII. Three Processes belonging toThe Pro∣cesses. the Scapula. The first, extended through the mid∣dle of its Body, and reaching the top of the Shoulder, by reason it some∣thing resembles a Thorn, called the Spine of the Scapula, and the Crest; the Extremity of which being connexed with the Scapula, by the Modern Ana∣tomists is call'd Acromion, or the Point of the Shoulder. I say, the Mo∣derns, for that the Ancients seem to dif∣fer something in the Description of the Acromion. For Rufus Ephesius says, that the Acromion is the coupling it self of the Iugular and Scapula-bone. Eudemus says, that it is a small little Bone, which in Children is altogether gristly, and though this Gristle hardens in time into a Bone, yet till the eigh∣teenth year, contrary to the Custom of other Bones, it retains much of its Gristly Substance, and sometimes grows so slightly together with the Spine of the Scapula, that in the middle Age it may be easily separated, as Galen reports, happened to himself, and that he was a Witness of in another Person. Hippo∣crates also takes notice of this Bone, and of its Luxation, in which place he adds, that in the Acromion there is some∣thing in Man which is different from o∣ther Creatures. From both Parts of the said Spine, a little Furrow extends it self, by Riola∣nus called the Interscapulim, the one a∣bove, the other below. The second is lower, less and sharp, not unlike a Crows-bill, and hence call∣ed Coracoides; by others from its Form Sigmoides; keeps the Bone of the Shoul∣der in its Place, and prevents it from sliping toward the Fore-Parts. For the Actions of the Hand tending all toward the Fore-parts, the Shoulder would soon be dislocated, unless the Bone were re∣tain'd by the Coracoides; which contri∣butes so much security to this Joynt, that there rarely happens any Disloca∣tion in the Fore-part of the Shoulder; which Hippocrates observed once, and Galen testifies, that he saw four times at Rome, and which I saw some years in an old Man, that put his Shoulder out of joint by a fall, which I set again. The third is the shortest of all, call∣ed  or the Neck within its own Cavity, strengthened with a Muscle, receives the Extremity of the Shulder∣bone, being enlarged with a thick gristly Brim, encompassing the Lips. This in new born Infants consists of a more obtuse and shorter, but gristly Bone, which grows longer, as the Child grows in years. To these there are some proper Additions, as well as some peculiar Ligaments, with which the Scapula is fastned to the Clavicle and Shoulder-bone. According to the large or lesser Bulk of the Scapulas, the Shoulders are ei∣ther broader or narrower. Broad∣shouldered Men are thought to beget more lusty Children. The narrow∣shouldered, more weakly. The un∣certainty of which Opinion, dayly Ex∣perience teaches us. Therefore, says Pe∣ter Forestus, This is an Observation a∣mong the Women, that broad-shoulder'd Men beget a great many Children. And therefore my Sister-in-law, who had twen∣ty Children by her Husband, would ne∣ver marry her Daughters to broad-shoul∣der'd Men.
Riolanus reports, that the French Vir∣gins have generally the right Omoplate higher than the Left; for which he says it is a hard thing to give a Reason. In our Low-Countries, I observe, that they who in their Childhood and Youth most violently exercise their Right-arm, their Right-Scapula stands more out from the Ribs than the Left. CHAP. XVI. Of the Nameless Bones. TO the Spine, at the lower Part, adhere the Anonymous or Name∣less Bone; of which, one of each side is knit to the sides of the Os Sacrum by the means of a Gristle with a strong Ligament. They are called Nameless, because they alone want a Name, whereas all the rest have Names given them. I. Each of these are constituted ofTheir Con∣struction. three Bones; the Ilion, the Hip-bone and Share-bone, firmly knit together with Gristles; which in Infants may be parted with a thin Knife, and the bounds of those Divisions remain con∣spicuous till seven years of Age; after∣wards the Gristle drying up, they unite into one Bone; which being joyn'd on both sides with the Os Sacrum, makes the Bason, or that Cavity, wherein the Womb, Bladder and part of the Inte∣stines is contain'd. II. The Ileon-bone, so called from theThe Os Ile∣on. Intestine next to it, is the upper and broadest Part of the Nameless Bone. It has a remarkable Spaciousness, and some∣what concave, taking its Name from the Rib. It is semicircular, but une∣ven, whose extream Parts, before and behind, are by some called Spines, Brows and Lips; but the outermost Part of the Bone is called the Back. This Bone, besides the foregoing Gristle, is fastned with a strong Ligament, mem∣branous and common to the Os Sa∣crum. III. The Hip-bone, or Ischium, is theThe Os Coxendi∣cis. lower and outer Part of the Nameless∣bone, thick and firm. In this there is a large, profound and smooth Cavity co∣ver'd with a Gristle, call'd the Aceta∣bulum and Pyxis, into which the Glo∣bous Extremity of the Thigh-bone is fixed, out of which if it happen to slip, it causes a Dislocation; which Nature willing to avoid, has sasten'd these Bones with a double Ligament proceeding from the Os Sacrum. The Gristly Process of this Cavity, enlarg∣ing the Acetabulum, is called the Eye∣brow, which is bigger behind than be∣fore; to the end that when we sit, the Thigh may be the more commodious∣ly bent into an acute Angle. But it fails where the Cavity looks toward the Share-bone, by reason of a Blood-bear∣ing Vessel passing that way, which brings Nourishment to the Joynt. But in the inner Cavity, there is a Hollowness somewhat rough and unequal, to which that Ligament obstinately adheres, which binds the Head of the Thigh∣bone to the inner Part of the Acetabu∣lum. Also two Protuberances are to be observed; one, internal, from whence the second or Right Muscle extending the Leg derives its beginning: The o∣ther External, which is sharp, and into which the Ligament is inserted, which rises from the fifth Process of the Os Sacrum. IV. The Share-bone, called Os PubisThe Os Pubis. and Pectinis, is the foremost and thinner Part of the Nameless Bone, which is per∣vious with a large Hole seated between the Hollowness of the Hip, and its own Fore-parts; and by means of a Gristle, is firmly knit with its own Pare, and hol∣low'd above for the Descent of the Crural Vessels. This Hole affords a Seat to two Muscles of the Thigh; withoutside to the External, withinside to the Internal Obturator, or to the se∣cond and third circumvolving Muscles, which are distinguished one from ano∣ther by a strong Ligament, that stretches under the Hole; which Connexion a∣foresaid of the Share-bones between themselves, with a Membranous Liga∣ment, Veslingius affirms, and Riolanus denies. Now as to these inferior Bones, there is a difference to be observed between them in Men and Women. 1. The Os Sacrum, in Women is hollowed much more outward, to give more room for the Birth in time of delivery, for which reason the Huckle Bone adheres to it with a looser Con∣nexion then in Men. 2. The lower Parts of the Hip-Bones and Share bones in Women are pro∣duced farther outward, and make the Bason larger.
3. The Ilium Bones are much larger and more hollowed, and their Spine more advanced to the Sides in Women than in Men. 4. The Gristle that fastens the Share∣bones, to the end it may be the better distended, in Women is twice as thick and twice as loose as it is in Men, espe∣cially if they have brought forth Chil∣dren; moreover the Line by which the Share-bones are joyned, is shorter in Women than in Men. Here two Questions arise: The first, Whether the Share-bones are moved? The second, How it is possible a mature and large Birth should come forth in delivery through the narrow Passages of the Bason, every way beset and stuft with Muscles and other Parts? V. As to the first Question, Spigeli∣us,Whether the Share∣bone parts? Cajus and Riolanus maintain the Af∣firmative, who avouch these Bones to be moved upwards and downwards by the help of the Muscles, which they say is apparent in venereal Congress and Leaping. But they should have said that these Bones are moved either of themselves, by the help of the Mus∣cles inserted into them, or by accident, as in some measure they follow the Mo∣tion of the adjoyning Parts. The first is false; seeing these Bones are immove∣ably joyned together by Symphysis, ex∣cept only at the time of Delivery, at what time the Gristles being moistned and loosned, they become somewhat moveable, and give way a little one from the other. The latter is true, for upon the Motion of the Thigh, Back and Loyns, it is certain that these Bones move with the whole Nameless Bone, but not separately by themselves. VI. As to the second Question, if theHow the Birth gets out of the Pelvis? Birth be but small, it may pass through those narrow Passages without any great Trouble, as daily Experience evinces. For at the time of Delivery, the gene∣ral Parts through the plentiful Afflux of Humors, become so loose, soft and slippery, that they will admit the whole Hand of the Midwife or Chyrurgion. But if the Birth be large, and that the Womans Parts are naturally streight of themselves, then the Delivery proves tedious and painful, and the Share-bones, the Ligaments and Gristles being moist∣ned will open somewhat wider; nay, the Gristly Connexion of the Os Sacrum, with the Bones of the Ilium, will be so loosned, that they manifestly give way one to another; which Dehiscen∣cy of the said Bones, the first that ob∣served among the Ancients, were Hip∣pocrates, Avicen and Aetius; among the Moderns, Pineus, and several other eminent Physitians. Alexander Bene∣dictus writes, that if the Birth be large, those Bones open of themselves, and the Pecten and the Os Sacrum consent to the Expulsion; also that those Bones after Delivery, return by degrees to their natural Place, and that the resistance of one or more of these is the cause of difficult Labour, though the rest answer the whole. Fernelius, among the Cau∣ses of difficult Labour, reckons the firm Compaction of the Share-bones. Gor∣theus asserts, that the very Hips of Wo∣men in Travel are divided, which causes violent Pains in the Loyns and Hips. However, though these Bones are divided and gape, yet they are not dislocated, for they would never recover their Pristine Estate. But this confirm∣ed Opinion of the Ancients and Mo∣derns, Columbus, Rodricus a Castro, Volcher, Fuchsius, C. Stephanus, Cordeus, but chiefly Laurentius endeavours to refel, contrary to all the Documents of Experience, the most certain Mistress and Instructress in all things. Pareus professes, he thought the Bones of the Ilion and Share-bones could not possibly be divided in Delivery; but he was convinc'd by the Dissection of a Wo∣man hang'd fourteen Days after she was brought to Bed, in whom he found the Ilion divided from the Os Sacrum, and the Share-bones distant half a Fingers breadth from one another. Bauhinus produces two remarkable Observations concerning this Matter. And Riolanus reports, that he has thirty times observed in Women that have dy'd in Child-bed, that the Gristle which binds the Share-bone, has been divided the breadth of the Little-finger, and that you might by handling feel the Gaping of the Share-bones, and that before Dissection, he has perceiv'd the Share-bones moveable by lifting up one Thigh; and observed that one advanced it self above the other. Says Harvey, Upon my own Experience I assert, that the Share-bones are oft loosened in Labour, their Gristly Connexion being softned, and the whole Region of the Hypo∣gastrion enlarged, to a Miracle; not from the Effusion of any Watry Substance, but of their own accord, as the Baggs open to shed the ripe Seeds in Plants. Spigelius asserts the same, upon the Experience of several Dissections. And upon the Dissection of a Woman that dy'd in Child-bed, I my self publickly shew'd the Share-bones so far divided one from
the other, that you might put your little Finger between them. Which is the reason that Women in Labour fre∣quently complain of sharp pains about their Share-bone and the Os Sacrum, and that the said Gristles are thicker then ordinary in Women that have often lain in; and that old Virgins in whom these Gristles are dry'd if they happen to Marry and bear Chil∣dren, have hard Labours: Lastly, because that although the rest of the Gristles of the Body grow dry, and in many Parts become Bony, yet in Wo∣men they never grow dry nor harden into Bones. Riolanus writes, that this deduction of the Ilion, Os Sacrum and Share-bone not only happens in difficult but also in the most easie Labours; which however I believe is much to be question'd. For that I have observ'd more then once, Women that have been suddainly brought to Bed of little Children yet mature Births with little or no pain, either in their Beds or sitting in their usual Chairs, and that without the help of a Mid-wife, in whom I could not perceive the least Divulsion of the said Bones; which otherwise by the Distension of the ad∣joyning Membranes, must have caus'd great Pains, nor is it probable, that these Bones can be parted asunder but by some strong and violent Effect of a large Birth striving for Passage. For that same Gristly Connexion is too strongly knit to be easily distended. CHAP. XVII. Of the Bones of the Arm, that is to say, of the Shoulder and Elbow. THE Bones of the Hand belong either to the Shoulder, the El∣bow, or the External Part of the Hand. I. The Shoulder-bone is one BoneThe Shoul∣der-bone. great, strong, round and uneven, in the hinder Part toward the Elbow somewhat depress'd, and flat. The upper Part of the Bone has a great and Globous Head, fortified with a Muscle, by means of which it is joynted with the Scapula by that sort of Diarthrosis, which is call Arthrodie; but because the Cavity is not conve∣niently proportionated to receive the Head; hence the Lips of it are en∣larg'd with a surrounding Gristle. A little lower round about the Head are several manifest Holes, through which the Blood-bearing Vessels pene∣trate inwardly for the Nourishment of the Marrow. Riolanus writes, that there is a wide Hole in the Shoulder∣bone in all Men about the middle and inner Part, penetrating the Substance of the Bone for the Passage of the Vessels. But I do not find this Hole in any of my Skeletons; and therefore I do not believe it to be in all, but only in some few. The foresaid head of the Soulder∣bone is an Epiphysis or an Appendix, which in Men grown bomes a Part of the Bone, or else a Process of it. This Shoulder-bone is fastened to the Scapula by the means of a thick and nervous Ligament, which embraces the whole Joynt. Moreover there are three Muscles, the Spine above, the Spine be∣low, and the Subscapulary, which with their broad Tendons surround the Articula∣tion: and under the Deltoides there is a broad and remarkable Ligament which is extended from the Deltoides to the Acromium, to prevent the Brain above from being dislocated into the upper Part. At the head of the Shoulder-bone in the hinder Part stand two Protuberan∣ces rough and unequal, to which very strong Ligaments are fastened: also two Cavities, one Internal and orbiculated, the other at the side of the Head being the Original of the Ligament: The other External and Oblong, distin∣guishing the said Protuberances, and being the seat of the beginning of the two-headed Muscle. More below it is articulated with the Elbow by Ginglymus; which Articula∣tion, because it ought to be made with the harder Bones the Ulna and Radius; hence in its Extremity which is covered with a Gristle, it has three Processes, the upper indifferent, the second less, and the lowest, the largest of all; be∣tween which there are two Cavities, so that together they resemble a little Wheel for the twisting of Ropes; and about this Extremity of the Elbow the Bones are rouled. At the lowerside of the bigger Pro∣cess, there is another large Process, di∣stinguished from it by an intervening
Cavity, which in living People is easily apprehended by External feel∣ing, from whence the Muscles are produc'd. Next to that Wheel-resembling Ex∣tremity, in the hinder seat, there is one large and deep, in the foremost seat two larger Cavities appear, which re∣ceive and curb the Bones of the Elbow, while they are moved forward and backward. It has two little holes about the Heads, especially about the upper Head, to give passage to the Vessels for the Nourishment of the Bone. II. The Elbow is compos'd of twoThe Elbow. Bones mutually resting one upon another, so that they are joyned at the Extremities, but in the middle are separated one from another, though coupled with a Membranous Ligament. Partly for the more expeditious moti∣on of the Member, partly for a place of security for the manifold Muscles of the hand. III. The first of these Bones, whichThe Ulna. is the lower and longest is called Ulna; by the Greek Pechys; by the Antients Cubitus and Os Cu∣biti. In the upper Part it is more large and thick; and toward the Hand by degrees it is attenuated into an Edge; and to the end of it there grows a round protuberance, with a lesser pro∣cess somewhat sharp-pointed, which is called Styloides, where it is knit by Arthrody with Ligaments, to the little Bones of the Wrist, having a Gristle going between. Above it is joynted to the Bone of the Shoulder by Glyngly∣mus, and to that end it has two Pro∣cesses; of which the foremost, which is the less enters the inner Cavity of the Shoulder Bone; the hindermost which is the bigger, longer and obtuse, enters the hinder Cavity of the Shoul∣der bone, and is stopped therein, so that the Arm cannot be extended be∣yond streightness, nor moved back∣ward. Both these Processes in new born Infants are Gristly, however the foremost soonest becomes Bony, the hindermost not till seven years old. To these approach two Cavities covered with a Gristle of which the lateral and lesser, receives the Head of the Radi∣us, the other which is the hindermost and larger, is roul'd about the Wheel of the Shoulder like a Semicircle. IV. The other Bone of the ElbowThe Radi∣us. called the Radius. The upper Ex∣tremity of this is less, and being pro∣vided with a round Head, is admitted by the Ulna at the side. But at the top it has a round Cavity, which admits the head of the Shoulder, and is ar∣ticulated with it by Diarthrosis. The lower extremity which is the thicker, receives the Ulna, at the side with a small Cavity fortified with a Gristle; and more be∣low, with a double Cavity covered like∣wise with a Gristle it admits the two first, and uppermost little Bones of the Wrist. V. These several Bones have allTheir vse. their several uses. The Elbow, by the help of the Muscles causes bending and extention; bending in an acute Angle, and extention only in streight Line, which it does not exceed. The Radius turns the hollow of the Hand either upward or downward. VI. These Bones are knit one amongTheir Con∣nexion. another with a different Articulation; for the Elbow at the upper Part where it is broadest receives the Radius; and so they are bound together with a long Ligament which separates the External from the Internal Muscles, and rises from two acute Lines that mutually look one toward the other; the one being in the inner side of the Elbow, the other in the inner Part of the Ra∣dius. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Bones of the lower Part of the Hand. THE Hand is all that which de∣pends upon the Elbow and the Radius, and is distinguished into three Parts, the Carpus, Meta-carpus, and Fingers. I. The Carpus, which is the up∣perThe Car∣pus. Part of the Hand consists of eight little Bones differing somewhat in bigness and Figure, dispos'd in a double order; which in new born In∣fants not having yet acquired a Bony hardness, seem to be Gristles; but af∣terwards harden into Bones somewhat Spungy, fastened together with a
strong Ligament as well Spungy as Gristly; as also with another com∣mon Ligament, appointed for the bind∣ing of these Bones, and for the preserva∣tion and stretching of the Tendons of the Muscles to the Fingers. II. Of these little Bones the threeThe Arti∣culation. uppermost are fastned to the Elbow and Radius by Arthrody▪ The fourth out of its order, stands outward next the Third; the other four placed more below, are joyned with so many Bones of the Meta-carpium by Synar∣throsis. They have two surfaces covered with a slippery Gristle. One outward which is gibbous; whereunto they are ad∣mitted by the Cavities of the Neigh∣bouring Bones. The other inward and hollow, into which they receive the Protuberances of the adjoyning Bones. Sometimes near the connexion of the Eight Bone of the Wrist, with the Bone of the Metacarpium, sustaining the Little-finger, there is found a little Bone, which fills up the empty space in that Part. Which Vesalius seems to number among the Sesamoides. III. The Metacarpium consists ofThe Meta∣carps. four long Bones, slender, hollow with∣in, full of Marrow, parted in the middle region for the more secure a∣boad of the Inter-bony Muscles. The first of these is annexed to the Fore∣finger, being the longest and thickest, the rest by degrees become thin and shorter. They have pretty broad upper Ap∣pendixes, the Cavities of which re∣ceive the little Bones of the Wrist, and the lower which tack them to the Cavities of the Fingers. IV. The Phalanx of the Fingers,The Fin∣gers. the Thumb being numbred in, consists of fifteen Bones; for that three com∣pleat every Finger, different in big∣ness of which the first and largest is covered with the second, the second with the third, and the third with the Nail. It is gibbous without, plain within, and somewhat hollowed, for the more commodious comprehending the solid Bones. They have Processes above and be∣low. The uppermost are round, and have one round hollowness, in each of the first four Bones, receiving the Bone of the Meta-carpium. The rest are pro∣vided as it were with a double Cavity distinguished with a small Protube∣rance. The lower Processes put forth as it were a double head, distinguished by a Cavity, with which they enter the double Cavity of the imposed Bone; except the third and last Bone, which is only fenced with the Nail. All these Cavities and Processes to facilitate mo∣tion are covered with a Gristle. CHAP. XIX. Of the Bone of the Thigh and Leg. THere are three Parts of the Foot, the Thigh, Leg and extream Part of the Foot. I. The Thigh called Femur, in GreekThe Thigh. , consists of one strong Bone, in length and bigness exceeding all the rest of the Bones of the Body, round and somewhat gibbous before; behind somewhat depressed and hollow, mark∣ed with a rough Line obliquely de∣scending toward the Knee. II. The upper Part has a thick Pro∣cessThe Head of the Thigh. prominent toward the Hip bone, with a round and large Epiphysis im∣posed upon it, and so composes the gibbous head of the Thigh, under∣propt with a strong Neck, which being overcast with a Gristle is hid up in the Acetabulum of the Hip, and there fasten∣ed with two strong Ligaments; one broad, thick and Membranous which encompasses the whole Joynt; the other round, which being produc'd from the Cavity it self of the Acetabulum is insert∣ed into the received head of the Thigh, and fastens it most firmly to the Aceta∣bulum; and thus this Articulation is perfected by Enarthosis. III. Concerning this Epiphysis, RolfinchAn Obser∣vation. observes, that it adheres with a very loose connexion to the Bone of the Thigh; so that being boyl'd in Water it sud∣dainly becomes soft, and is easily sepa∣rated from the Bone, especially in young Animals; for which reason it is in Infants and Children easily sepa∣rated from the Bone, upon any slight occasion; as when Children are set to go too soon by their Nurses and then it is taken for a Dislocation, and that Error prevents the Cure. This
brings to my Memory that once or twice I saw this Recess of this Epiphysis from the Thigh Bone, which the Chy∣rurgions took for a Luxation, though the head could by no means be per∣ceived to be slipt out of the Acetabulum. Only the Thigh-bone was turn'd back toward the hinder Parts, and the upper Part was perceived to ascend without a head, and so one Thigh became shor∣ter than the other. But no body then thought of the Recess of the Epi∣physis, which now I find was the cause. Below the Neck, where the Bone begins to grow broader, two Processes are produced, provided with their Epi∣physis's, which are manifestly conspicu∣ous in Children, but afterwards be∣come Bony, and are united inseparably to the Leg, without any seeming di∣versity of the Substance. One of these Processes, the upper and bigger, bend upward towards the Exterior Parts: The other lower and far less, having the figure of an obtuse Tubercle, looks backward toward the inward Parts; which Riolanus believes to be rather an Apophysis, then an Epiphysis. That is called the bigger Trochanter; this the lesser Trochanter: To this lesser for the most part there joyns toward the outer Parts, another lesser Tubercle in a place somewhat lower. These Processes afford Insertion and rise to several strong Muscles. Below where the Thigh-bone grows thicker, by degrees with its Appendix, it forms two large Heads, of which the outermost is thicker then the inner∣most: These being overcast with a Muscle it enters the double Cavities un∣der the Leg, which are fortify'd like∣wise with a Muscle. Between those Heads it has another Cavity, small be∣fore, large behind, through which re∣markable Vessels are carry'd to the Legs together with the fourth Nerve of the vast Pair. Between these Cavities the Protuberancy of the Leg is admit∣ted, and so that Articulation is com∣pleated by Gynglymus, while they al∣so receive these two heads of the Leg. Moreover there are two other little Cavities at the side of each Head, into which the Tendons of several Muscles are inserted. IV. More behind in the Ham, theThe Sesa∣mina Po∣plitis. two Sesamoides Bones are plac'd to the lower Appendixes of the Thigh, which grow to the Heads of the two first Muscles moving the foot; whereas otherwise the rest of the Sesamines stick to the Tendons of the Muscles. V. But because the Articulation of theThe Pa∣tella. Knee was not yet strong enough, but that through the motion of the Leg or by any external violence the Bones might slip out of their place, therefore there is a round and broad Bone placed upon the Joynt, like a Circular Platter, by the Latines call'd Molae, Patella, and by others Rotulae, of a Gristly sub∣stance in Children, which afterwards becomes Bony, and to facilitate its motions is overcast within-side with a Gristle. This Bone adheres to the Tendons of the Muscles, with a looser connexion, it being requisite that it should not be two streight ty'd, to prevent an easie Luxation, and yet not hinder the Motion of the Mus∣cles. The necessity of this Office Galen observed in a certain Young Wrestler, whose little Platter being dislocated, ascended toward his Thigh; whence happened a dangerous bending in the Knee, so that he could not walk down a Hill without the help of a Staff. The same thing I have also observed in my Practice upon the like Accident. And though Paraeus asserts that he never saw any Man halt, who had broken that Bone; yet I knew a Young Ger∣man Nobleman, whose Platter was shot away with a Musket Bullet, so that he could not so much as go. Yet a Bone-setter here in Utrecht fitted a certain Iron Instrument to his Knee, which bending the Thigh-bone in Conjunction with the Leg, in some measure supply'd the loss of the Knee∣pan, so that with the help of that Instrument he could walk indifferently, but when that was off he could not move his Foot, nor stand a moment. VI. To the Thigh is annexed theThe Leg. Crus; being that Part which ex∣tends it self from the Knee to the Heel. This is compos'd of two Bones very much differing in thickness and big∣ness, cohering together above and be∣low; but parted in the middle, by reason of the Muscles of the Feet, yet connexed with a strong interceding Ligament. VII. The first of these is by theThe Tibia. Greeks called , by the Latines Tibia; vulgarly Focile Majus; and is a large and strong Bone, in some measure Triangular, in the Fore-part at
its full length forming an acute Spine with the point of its foremost Angle; in which Part it is also void of Flesh, only is covered with a Periosteum, a fleshy Membrane, with a little Fat scarce visible, and the Skin. And this is the reason that Contusions of the inside of the Skin, are painful in the Cure, be∣cause of the wound in the Fleshy Pan∣nicle and Periosteum, cover'd neither with Flesh nor Fat to any considerable measure. At each end it has a thick and re∣markable Appendix. The upper remarkable for its bigness, is divided behind with two heads; and at the Top being hollow'd with two long Cavities, fortified with a slippery Gristle, receives the lower Heads of the Thigh; which said Cavities are surrounded with a Gristle, thick, move∣able and almost semicircular Limbus for the strengthning of the Articula∣tion. Between these Cavities rises a little Hillock, as 'twere a Fence which is re∣ceived by the Cavity of the Thigh∣bone, from the rough and hollow top of which Hillock proceeds a strong Liga∣ment, which is fasten'd to the hollow∣ness of the Thigh, and strengthens the Joynt above all the other Liga∣ments VIII. The lower Appendix is lessThe Mal∣lectus in∣ternus. then the other, Protuberating with a remarkable Process to the inner side of the Foot, which is covered with no Flesh, and called the Internal Malleo∣lus. This is provided with two Cavities: one lateral and lesser, to which the But∣to joyns; the other lower, but large distinguished with a slight Protuberan∣cy into two Cavities; and overcast with a Gristle, which receives the Heel-bone or Talus that lyes under, which re∣ceives the Shin-bone into its Cavity, and thus Articulation is compleated by Gynglimus. IX. The other Bone of the Leg isThe Fibu∣la. called Fibula, the Button, and is fa∣stened outward to the Shin-bone, not inferior to it in length, but much slen∣derer and weaker; hollowed all the length of it with various Cavities for the Insertion of the Muscles, and rough with many Prominent acute Lines. It has two Heads, one above, the other beneath, to which the Appendix grows, and they terminate in a Process acute and somewhat rough. With the upper Part it does not rise so high as the Knee but stops below the Appendix of the Shin-bone, and re∣ceives it into a slight hollowness. More below the Button is receivedThe Mal∣leolus ex∣ternus. by the hollowness of the Shin-bone, and sends forth a Tuberous head with a Process to the side of the Talus, conspi∣cuous without, where it is called the External Malleolus; and is lower then the Internal. CHAP. XX. Of the Bones of the Extream Foot. THere are three Classes of the Bones of the Extream Foot; the Bones of the Tarsus, or Pedion, of the Meta-Tarsus, or Meta-Pedion, and of the Toes. I. The Tarsus consists of sevenThe Tar∣sus. Bones differing in shape and bigness. II. First, the Astragalus or Ta∣lus,The Talus which enters the lower hollowness of the Leg, with a Head somewhat convex by the Process of which consti∣tuting the inner Malleolus, it is compre∣hended within, as by the Button with∣out, and consists of six sides. It looses its Prominency before, where it joyns to the Bone of the Heel. Moreover it has a large Cavity in the lower middle hollowness, to which a like Cavity of the Heel is oppositely placed. In these little Cells an unctu∣ous slime is preserv'd, to moisten the Ligaments and Gristles. III. The Second Bone is calledThe Calx. Calx or Calcaneus, the biggest Bone of the Tarsus, oblong toward the hinder Parts for the more firm fixing the Foot, and to keep a man from falling back∣ward. To the hinder Part is fastened to a most strong Chord, made of the Tendons of the three Muscles that extend the Feet. More upward it enters with a large and flat Head into the hollowness of the Talus; and more forward admits the Protube∣rances of the Talus into its own hollow∣ness. At the inner side it has a large hollowness through which the Tendons and large Vessels descend securely to the lower Parts of the Foot. At the outer side it is uneven with little swel∣lings
here and there, for the firmer Collection of the Ligaments and Ten∣dons. IV. This is the Navicular BoneThe Os Na∣viculare. or Boat-resembling Bone, called . This behind receives the Talus into a large hollowness; before with the flat Heads of three little Bones, it enters the hollowness of the Talus, a thin Gristle going between these Con∣junctions. V. The fourth is called the Cuboi∣desThe Os Cu∣boides. Bone, also Os Tessera, by the Greeks Polymorphus. This being bigger then the rest of the lateral Bones, is placed before the Heel, and is joyned to it with an uneven superficies: on the other side it is joyned to the third Wedg-like Bone; but toward the Toes, it is fastened to the fourth and fifth Bone of the Matatarsus. The other three had no Names gi∣ven them by the Antients. However Fallopius gives them the Names of Sphenoides, Calcoides, and Cuniform. The first of these is bigger then the third; and the middlemost is the least. Many times at the External side of the Articulation of the Wedg-form'd Bone with the fifth Bone of the Meta-Pedion supporting the little Toe, a little Bone is observed at the Insertion of the Ten∣don of the eighth Muscle of the Foot: as also sometimes a bony Particle, joyn∣ed to the Cube-fashioned Bone, some∣what before, and filling up its Cavity, and adhereing to the Tendon of the seventh Muscle of the Foot; which being both present at a time seem to strengthen the Foot exceedingly. But Bauhinus reckons this among the Sesa∣moides Bones. All those Bones of the Tarsus in new born Infants, are rather Gristly than Bony: but in time require a solid Substance like a Pumice-stone, full of little holes; which hardness some ac∣quire sooner some later; and are joyn∣ed together and to the Neigbouring Bones, with strong Ligaments, and strengthened with Gristles for their Connexions. VI. The Metatarsus, called by theThe Me∣tatarsus. Greeks Pedion, by Celsus and others Planta and Pecten, consists of five strong fistulous Bones, differing in length and thickness, separated from each other in the middle, to make room for the Interbone Muscles. Above and below they protuberate forth with their Heads: Of which those that are thicker and next the Pedium receive the four lower Bones of the Tarsus into their hollownesses: the other, which are provided with round Protuberances, are admitted into the hollownesses of the Toes. VII. The Bones of the Toes areThe Bones of the Toes. numbered to be fourteen, among which the two Bones of the Great Toe ex∣cell the rest in bigness. The rest of the Toes consist each of them of three Bones, whose form and conexion agree with the Bones of the Hand, only that they are less. All these Bones of the Metatarsus and Toes, for the facilitating of their Motion are overspread with a Gristle, about the Extremities where they are joynted. CHAP. XXI. Of the Sesamoides Bones and the Number of all the Bones. THE Sesamoides Bones, resembling the Grains of Indian Wheat, are certain very round small Bones, some∣what flat and spungy within. They adhere at the Joynts to theTheir Situ∣ation. Tendons of the Muscles that move the Fingers and Toes, and with them in the boyling of dead Carkasses, and the Purgation and Denudation of the Bones are utterly lost, un∣less great care be taken to preserve them. In Infants they are Gristly, after∣wards by increase of years they grow bony, and being overspread with a Gristle reaches to the seat of another Bone. I. Their bigness varies, accord∣ingBigness. to the difference of the Bones to which they stick. In the Hands they are bigger then in the Feet; except in the great Toe, to which the biggest is fastened at the head of the Metapedion Bone, which lyes under the Tendon of the Muscle moving the first Bone of the great Toe, having another much less joyned to it. But this biggest of all, which resembles the half part of a Pea, both for shape and bigness, is by the Arabians called Albadaran. Of which the Iews fain many Fables, as they do of the Bone Lus.
III. The Number of these Bones isNumber. not always the same; for sometimes twelve are found in each Hand and Foot; sometimes fewer, sometimes more. Neither is it probable that their Number is alike in all People; but rather that they are not all to be found, being so very small, in all Carkases. To these are to be added the Sesa∣moides lying hid in the Ham; of which this is peculiarly to be observed, that they do not grow to the Tendons of the Muscles as the other Sesamoides do, but to the Heads of the two first Muscles moving the Feet. IV. Now for the satisfaction of theThe Num∣ber of all the Bones. curious, as to the number of all the Bones as they are found in People of ripe Years, they are reckon'd to be Two Hundred Fifty Six. Seven of the Skull; two Sieve-like Bones; eight of the Ears; eleven of the upper Jaw; thirty two Teeth; in the whole Spine, twenty eight; Twenty four Ribs; Three of the Sternon; Two Clavicles; two Omo∣plates; Three Hyoides Bones; Two Nameless Bones; Six of the Shoulder and Elbow; Twenty four of the Hands; Eight of the Thigh and Leg; Four little Bones in each Ham; Fifty two of the Feet, and four great Sesa∣moides in each great Toe. To which if you add the prefixed Number of the lesser Sesamoides twenty four in the Hands and as many in the Feet; as also the little Bone in each Hand, which is found at the connexion of the Bone of the Wrist, with the Bone of the Metacarp; and the little Bone in each Foot, at the side of the Cube-form'd Bone; as also the two Spungy Bones of the Nostrils, the Number of all the Bones will amount to Three Hundred and Ten. For I omit the subdivisions of the Bones, which are rarely to be found in People of ripe years. CHAP. XXII. Of the difference of the Bones of Men and VVomen. THE Bones of both Sexes agree in most particulars; in some few things they differ. I. Generally the Bones of Women areThe general difference. less then those of Men, as well in their weight and thickness, as in their length, breadth, solidity and hard∣ness. II. In the head the Sagittal SutureIn the head. more frequently extends to the top of the Nose in Women then in Men. The Larynx is lesser in them, and the Thyroides Gristle Protuberares less. III. The fore-part of the Thorax inIn the Breast. Women is somewhat flat, not raised as in Men; for the more convenient seat of the Breasts. In Women that have large Breasts, the Thorax is often more narrow, and for the most part accuminated by rea∣son of the weight and bulk of the Breasts. Womens Ribs are less broad, less hard, and less strong then in Men. The Clavicles in Women are less Arched then in Men for the Beauty o the Neck and Breast. The Sternon Bone at the lower Part is also broader then in Men, and the lower Bone which is somewhat split, together with the Sword resem∣bling Gristle fastened to it, forms a large hole for the egress of the outer Mammary Veins VI. The Os Sacrum in Women is more bow'd to the Exterior Parts, and shorter, but broader then in Men. The Huckle-bone is more movea∣ble, and more loosly connexed, and sometimes bowed more backwards. The Ileon Bones are for the most Part larger, and more hollowed with∣out-side, for the Womb big with the Birth to rest upon; and this larg∣ness of these Bones is the reason of the largness of the Womans But∣tocks.
Both Oval holes in the Share∣bone are narrower, and a Part of the Share-bone near the Simphysis is broa∣der. The Spine of the Share-bone near the Simphysis with the other of the same kind is more produc'd in Women, and bends outward. The Tuberosities of the Ischion stand at a farther distance one from ano∣ther. The Commissure of the Share∣bone in Women, is filled with a Gristle three times thicker and softer; and it is also made with a shorter Line, to the end that the delivery approaching, the intervening Gri∣stle being softened and loosened, the Share-bones may the more easily open. In the Joynts the Structure of the Bones is alike in both Sexes. Nevertheless these differences are not always to be found, nor in all People. For sometimes effeminate or ill-shap'd Men have many Bones like those in Women; and the Bones of a strong Virago differ very little from those of Men. However this rarely happening does not overturn the general Rule. CHAP. XXIII. Of the Constitution of the Bones in Infants. I. IN Infants all the Bones of theThe Consti∣tution of the Bones of the Head. Skull are very thin and soft, so that a slight Compressure will make them give way, nor are the two Tables with the Middlemost Di∣plois, to be discerned in them till after the first year. The Saw-toothed Sutures are not seen in them, but appear like loose Harmonies. In the Top of the Head at the meeting of the Sagittal and Coronel Suture, there is a gaping, which in∣stead of Bones is closed with a thick and tough Membrane, which is after∣wards dry'd up to a bony hard∣ness. In this Part, the Pusation of the Brain is both seen and felt. vid. cap. 6. The Bones of the Fore-head are thicker then the rest; and are two, pro∣vided with no Cavities. The Bone of the hinder Part of the Head is extreamly thin, contrary to what it is in Persons grown up, and may be separated into many Parts; vid. cap. 4. and 6. In the Temple-bone, a lineal Har∣mony discriminates the Scaly from the Rocky Part, being drawn beyond the hole of the Ear, between the Mastoides Apophysis. The Auditory Passage, is Gristly till the sixth Month; afterwards grows bony; however it's fore-circle cannot be divided from the rest of the Bone, till the seventh Year. But at the Basis it is found Gaping, and as it were, like a Window, till thirteen years of Age and more. The Cavity of the Ears are very narrow, and the wonderful Structure of the Labyrinth hardly appears. The inner Circle of the Tympanum, to which the Membrane is affixed is easily divided from the rest of the Bone. The Sphoenoides is manifestly distin∣guished into three or four Bones; vid. cap. 7. The Ethmoides is very slender, and almost gristly; and hardly any per∣forated holes are to be discerned there∣in. The Cocks-comb in Infants is not con∣spicuous. The upper Fence of the Nostrils is very soft, and hardens long after the rest of the Parts. A certain Suture runs through the Orbit of the Eye, and remains dis∣cernable therein to the tenth Year. In the beginning of the Palate a Transverse Line appears, which is extended from one Dog-tooth to the other, and comprehends the four Cut∣ting Teeth. No Teeth appear in the Mouth, vid. cap. 10. The lower Jaw consists of two Bones, joyned together in the Chin by Har∣mony. The Hyoides Bones are gristly. All the Vertebres of the Spine, except the first and second of the Neck, con∣sist of three Parts. vid. cap. 11. and their transverse Processes, together with the Postic, are gristly, and so lit∣tle that they can hardly be seen; the ascending and descending very small and gristly, but more conspi∣cuous.
The Os Sacrum consists of five Bones, as Cap. 12. and each of those divisible into three Parts, as are all the Spines of the Vertebres. These five Bones are separated one from the other by an intervening Gristle, and the Postic spiny Sharpness is alto∣gether gristly. The Ribs at the Articulations of the Vertebres are gristly and quickly har∣den'd. The Sternon-bone, except the upper∣most Particle, is altogether gristly and continuous, and seems undivided; first, the upper Parts become bony, then the rest by degrees, and then it consists of eight Parts, which in a short time are reduced to seven, the last two uniting into one Bone. Afterwards they be∣come fewer, and six only appear till the seventh year, after which Age, they unite by degrees, till only three or four remain. In the Omoplate, the Epiphyses and Apophyses are gristly. The Neck also with the glenoides Gristle is of the same Nature. The Coracoides Eminency is an Epiphysis. The Acromium is first an Epiphysis, consisting of much Gristle, which after three or four years, degenerates into an Apophy∣sis. II. The upper and lower Appendix∣esOf the Arms and Hands. of the Shoulder are gristly, and af∣terwards grow bony. The upper Part of the Elbow is an Epiphysis, which after one year hardens, and is united to the Bone. The Bones of the Wrist seem to consist of an undivided Gristle. These at first being spungy, and divided one from another, then harden by degrees, and grow firm. The Extremities of the Bones of the Metacarp and Fingers are gristly, and within a year grow bony. III. All the Nameless Bones, tillOf the Legs and Feet. the seventh year, consist of three Bones, v. c. 16. The little Pan of the Hip-bone is gristly, and so remains for several months, but then hardens into Bone. The upper and lower Processes of the Thigh-bone for some time remain gristly. The Knee-pan continues a long time gristly. The upper and lower Appendixes of the Shin-bone and Button are gristly, and when they are hardned, cannot be parted till the tenth year. The Bones of the Tarsus remain gristly for some months, except the Bone of the Heel, which is bony within and gristly without. The Sesamoids remain gristly till years of Maturity. Whence it appears, that the Bones of Infants differ very much in Number from the Bones of grown People. But what has been said is chiefly to be understood of Infants newly born: For as for the Condition of the Bones in the Womb, their Genera∣tion, and the Progress of their For∣mation Month by Month, &c. See Theodore Keckringius, Lib. de Osteoge∣nia faetuum, accurately describ'd with Cuts. CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nails. THough the Bones are not Nails, yet by reason of their Remark∣able hardness, and consequently Similitude to the softer Bones or harder Gristles, we shall add them to this Discourse of the Bones. I. The Nails are horny Parts fix'dThe Defi∣nition. at the Extremities of the Fingers and Toes. II. By the Greeks they are calledTheir Names. ; the Root of the Nail ; the upper white Part, or little whitish Half-moon ; the Pellicle growing over the Root III. Iulius Pollux divides the NailsParts. into the Parts under the Nail, the upper Parts, the Parts on both sides, the Parts next to them, the White next the Roots of the Nails; the Clouds in the Nails, and the Ends within the Fingers. IV. Their Substance is indifferentSubstance. hard, and without any Sense of Feeling; in the middle between a Bone and a Gristle, which is the reason they are flexible.
V. Their Colour is transparent,Colour. or else, according to the Disposition of the Flesh that lies underneath, some∣times ruddy, sometimes pale, sometimes livid, or of any other Colour. From Hippocrates and several other Physitians they take their Indications of Sickness and Health. VI. They grow very fast to theConnexi∣on. Flesh that lies underneath and about the Roots, are bound with a strong Ligament, to the end they may stick the firmer, and the Skin embraces them in their full Compass, in the same manner as the Gums environ the Teeth. VII. There is one at the ExtremityUse. of each Finger and Toe, for the Security of the Sensible Parts that lye under them; for that Nerves and Tendons are carried to their very utmost Extremities, and are dilated under the Nails, and contribute a most acute Sense to those Places; so that unless those extream Parts were guarded by the Nails, the general Uses to which they are put, would cause a continual Extremity of Pain, and render the ends of the Fingers altogether useless, and this is their primary Office, their secondary use is for scratching, and several other Employments. VIII. Vulgarly they are said to beWhether they be Parts of the Body? produced from the thicker and more viscous Excrements of the third Con∣coction, and are numbred among the Parts of the Body: Which Opinion Galen seems to favour, who says that no Vessels are bequeath'd to the Nails, but that they take their Encrease from the Roots like the Hair; though in another place he asserts, that there is a Vein, an Artery and a Nerve extended to the Roots of the Nails, from whence they receive Life and Nourishment. But to resolve this Doubt in short▪ three things are to be considered. First, that the Spots in the Nails are never obliterated, until the Part in which they appear growing beyond the Flesh, come to be par'd off with the rest of the Nail. Secondly, that though the Colour of the Nails seems to be changed in several Distempers of the Body, yet that is no real Change of the Colour in their Substance, but only of the Humors that lye under; for that the Nails are transparent, so that the Colour of the Blood or any other Humors underneath appears through them. And therefore in a Syncope, or the beginning of a Quartan Ague, by reason of the little Blood that comes to those Parts, they look pale. In Plethories, by reason of the great quantity of Blood, they look red; and in Cacochymies they look of an ill Colour. Thirdly, the Nails live and grow after Death; which as Aristotle asserts, so is it not to be questioned upon common Experience. Which Considerations being premis∣ed, it will sufficiently appear. 1. That they do not live a Life common with the Animate Parts of the same Body; but a peculiar vigitable Life. 2. That they are not nourished by the Blood alone, but by other Nourish∣ments, which remain after the Decease of the Body, after the Blood has been long wasted and putrified, therefore it is not probable that any Arteries or Veins enter their Substance, though perhaps they may extend to their Roots, to be distributed to the Parts under∣neath. 3. Thirdly, that they do not grow in their whole Substance but only by Apposition of Parts to the Root, which the Parts before by degrees thrust for∣ward to the Root. From whence we must conclude, that they are to be call'd Parts of the Body, as they make toward the Perfection of the Whole, for no man can be perfect without his Nails, but not as they en∣joy a common Life with the rest of the Parts, for that we find they live a pecu∣liar Life after the Death of all the rest of the Parts, Vid. l. 3. c. 2. IX. But then there is another que∣stion,The ma∣ner of their growth. whether they grow in length, breadth and depth; which Spigelius denies. But Bauhinus and Hoffman will have them to grow rather in length, than in breadth and depth. Lindan admits them all the Dimensions of Growth, and confirms it by that of a Woman at Enchysen, so careless of her self, that she let her Nails grow to that prodigious length, that she could not go. A Chyrurgion was sent for to pair them, and my Father, says he, carried away the Parings along with him. The Paring of the Thumb was two Thumbs long, a Fi∣ngers breadth thick, solid about the Roots, and thence compacted of several Slates. The pairing of the middle Finger was as
long as the first, but not so thick, yet very thick. None shorter than a Thumbs length; that of the little Toe, thicker than usually the thickest Nail of the great Toe. What grew in breadth, was seen to be crooked within. Platrus tells a Story not unlike this, of a Girl whose Finger Nails were a Fingers breadth in thickness, and jetted forth extreamly, so that they rather look'd like Hoofs than Nails. So I knew a Man, the Nail of whose second Toe of his Right Foot was grown to the thickness of a Finger, solid about the Root, but to∣ward the Fore-part consisting of so ma∣ny Slates, like so many Hoofs, which very much hindred his Going, though the same Deformity were not in the rest of his Nails.
THE TENTH BOOK OF ANATOMY. Concerning the GRISTLES and LIGAMENTS. CHAP. I. Of the Gristles. I. A Gristle is a similar coldDefinition. Part, moderately dry and void of Sense, generated out of the glutinous and earthy Part of the Seed, for the strength∣ening of many soft Parts, and frustrate the violent Attacks of outward Acci∣dents. II. To this end their Substance isSubstance. smooth, polite and flexible, harder than a Ligament, softer than a Bone; which when the earthy Particles exceed the glutinous, acquire a greater hardness, and easily become bony. But when the glutinous exceed the earthy Parti∣cles, sometimes become bony, as in the Joynts of the Arms and Thighs, &c. But the Particles are equally mixed, if any remarkable dryness happen by Age or dyet, sometimes they become bony, beyond the common Custom, and as in the Buckler-like Gristle, and that of the rough Artery. And therefore Car∣dan cites an Example of a Thief that could not be hang'd at Millan, because his rough Artery was become bony. The Gristles have three remarkable Cavities like the Bones; neither are they nourished with Marrow, but their Nourishment easily penetrates their sof∣ter Substance, and broader Pores. They differ in Bigness, Shape Situation, Connexion, Use and Hardness of Sub∣stance, some make the Heads of the Bones slippery; others constitute the Parts, as in the Ear and Nose; others are spread over the principal Parts, as in the Gristles of the Ribs and Sternon-bone. III. The use of the Gristles is va∣riousTheir vse. and singular. 1. To render the Motion of the joynted Parts easie, for that in living Creatures they abound with plenty of slippery Humors. 2. To joyn several Bones by Syn∣chondrosis. 3. To withstand the violent Pushes of solid Bodies. 4. To defend the various Parts from External Injuries; such are the Gristles of the Ribs annexed to the Ster∣non. 5. To make several Parts either pro∣minent or hollow, as the Ears, the Nose and rough Artery. 6. To enlarge the Cavities of the big∣ger Joynts. To these we may add the peculiar use of the Epiglottis, which serves in∣stead of a Cover, and the Gristles of the Eye-lids, to which they serve as Props.
All Bones that are Joynted are over∣spread in the Joynts with a Gristle, and they are more slippery which perform nimble and violent Motions; those more viscous that perform slow and easie Motions. CHAP. II. Of the Ligaments in General. I. A Ligament, in Greek ,Definition. in Latin, Vinculum, is a cold Similar Part, dry and firm, but loose and flexible, appointed for the fastning together of several Parts. II. They are said to be generatedSubstance. out of the clammy and tenacious sort of the Seed, which is the reason their Substance is both solid and white, be∣tween a Membrane and a Gristle, least they should easily burst; softer than a Gristle, to be more pliant to the Motion of the Muscles. And as they approach nearer to the Nature of one than the other, , hence a Ligament is said to be either Gristly or Membranous. Besides these Differences taken from the Sub∣stance, many more are taken from their Rise, their Insertion, their Strength, their Shape and Hard∣ness. Those that bind the Bones are void of Sense, that they should not make the Life of Man uneasie by continual Pains through the Motion of the Parts; yet some that rise from the Periosteums, and are therefore somewhat Membra∣nous, are thought to be something sen∣sible, as are also some other Membra∣nous Ligaments, that fasten the Liver, Womb and Bladder to the adjoyning Parts. III. The Ligaments are nourishedNourish∣ment. with Blood, not Marrow, as Columbus believes, which passes to them through the undiscernable Capillary Arte∣ries. IV. Their Figure is broader andFigure. narrower, round, flat, shorter or longer, according to the variety of the Parts that are to be bound, their Situation outward or inward, and the Conveniency of their Use. V. They rise from a Bone, a Gristle,Their rise▪ or a Membrane, and are inserted in∣to the same. VI. The Ligaments fasten the Partsvse. after a twofold manner; either for Conveniency of Motion, and to pre∣vent their slipping out of their Places; or else to keep the Parts fix'd in their Stations, without any Violent Moti∣on. Their first Connexion is common to all Joynts, according to the swifter or slower Motion of which, some are fastned with slenderer and looser, some with thicker and stronger Ligaments, and those environ the whole Joynt, and grow either to the Bones that constitute the Joynt, or to the Bones of the Cavities and Circumferences of the Heads, or to the Gristles run∣ning between the Joynt. If more Joynts meet together, then they are over∣spread with more Gristles outward. Besides that, they environ the whole Joynts, there are also peculiar Liga∣ments that belong to some Parts which require a stronger Connexion, thick, thin, round and broad, of which, some proceed transverse from one Bone to another, others run between the Joynts, as between the Vertebres, and be∣tween the Interstitium of the Thigh∣bone and Acetable of the Hip; and these are called gristly Muscles. The hinder Connexion, which only keeps the Parts fixed in their places, without any remarkable Motion, is con∣spicuous in the Ligaments of the Liver, Bladder and Womb, and the Annu∣lary Ligaments which environ or∣bicularly, the Tendons of the Mus∣cles of the Hands and Feet; as also in those that fasten the Radius to the Elbow, and the Button to the Shin∣bone, &c.
CHAP. III. Of the Ligaments of the Head, Iaws, Hyoides-Bone and Tongue. THE Head being fixed upon the first Vertebre, in regard it moves over that and the second Vertebre, requires to be fastned with very strong Bonds, and here three very strong Li∣gaments fasten these Parts.The Liga∣ments of the Head. I. The first, which is the biggest and broader, orbicularly environs the whole External Ioynt, and ex∣tends it self to the Internal Mem∣branous Portion of the Vertebre. This fastens to the Head the first Ver∣tebre in the hinder Part of the Head, from whose Basis it arises, and to the end it may take the better hold, the hinder Part of the Head is rough in that place▪ and in Children sunder'd in∣to many Divisions. The Second, which fastens the se∣cond Vertebre to the Head, is round and very strong, and growing partly from the External Seat of the Tooth, partly from the top of it, is fastned to the Bone of the hinder Part of the Head, at the great Hole, and so, together with the Tooth, forms an Axle, about which the Head is turned. The Third, which is of a gristly Nature, is spread over the Tooth it∣self, transverse, and environs the Ca∣vity which receives the Tooth. It proceeds from the side of the first Ver∣tebre, and is fastned to the other side of the same Vertebre, thereby pre∣venting the Tooth from slipping out of its Cavity, which would cause a Luxation and Compression of the Spinal Marrow. II. The Ligaments of the Iaw,Of the up∣per Iaw. between Sutures and Harmonies, are thin and Membranous, provided for the Insertion of the Muscles. The whole Joynt of the lower Jaw, with the Bone of the Temples, is wrapt about with a common Membranous Li∣gament. Various Ligaments belong to theOf the O Hyoides and the Tongue. Hyoides-bone and the Tongue. Two from the larger Processes of the Hyoi∣des, to which the lowest part of the Tongue is fastned. Two adhere to the Horns of the said Bones, and are fastned to the Apophyses of the Styloides, which keep the whole Bone with its Muscles mixed, for the Tongue to rest more securely upon it. One strong Ligament under the Tongue, and proper to it, extends it self to the Fore-teeth; which if it bind the Tongue too hard in the lower Part toward the Teeth, is a hindrance to the Sucking of Infants, and the Speech; and therefore is usually clipt with a Pair of Scissars. CHAP. IV. Of the Ligaments of the whole Trunk. BY reason of the various Motions  the Spine, it was necessary that the Vertebres should be fastned with strong Ligaments, which are of three sorts. I. The Bodies of the VertebresThe Liga∣ments of the Verte∣bres. themselves, chiefly before and at the sides, are fastned with Ligaments resembling a Half-moon, thick, fi∣brous and strong; which environ the Vertebres, and knit them strongly toge∣ther all the whole length of the Back, so that they may the more easily endure violent Motions. II. The Bodies of the Vertebres, where they are joyned, strongly cohere by a gristly, fibrous and slimy Liga∣ment, thick without side, and thin to∣ward the middle, answerable to the largeness of the Vertebres, and resem∣bling them in Shape, and detaining a Gristle in the middle between the Ver∣tebres, from whence a Ligament is thought to arise. III. The Processes of the Verte∣bres, as well transverse as acute, are fastned by common Membranous Li∣gaments; which in pointed Processes
arising from a certain middle Chan∣nel of the upper Spine, and inserted in a certain kind of Line of the Spine, underneath, and uniting with the following Spines, in order from one Ligament, drawn all the length of the Species, and so continue the Ver∣tebres together, as if they were but one Bone. II. The Ribs are coupled to theOf the Ribs. Vertebres by strong and almost Gristly Ligaments, which rise from the trans∣verse Ligaments of the Vertebres; but are joyned to the Sternon by slender Ligaments, the Gristles going be∣tween. III. The Bones of the Sternon are ve∣ryOf the Sternon. tough, by means of a Gristle going between, and being enveloped with a double Periosteum, are most firmly bound together. IV. The Ilion-bone, besides that, it ad∣heresOf the Os Ilion. most obstinately to the Os Sacrum, by means of a tenacious Gristle inter∣posed, is also fastned by a common, broad and strong Ligament. V. The Os Sacrum is fastned to theOf the Os Sacrum. Ilion-bone with a thick Gristle, and by a double and round Ligament, which springing from one Part of the Os Sacrum with one end, is in∣serted into the pointed Process of the Hip, with the other into its hinder Appendix, and so not only firmly binds these Bones, but also sustains the Right Intestine, with its Mus∣cles. VI. The Share-Bones are fastned to∣gether,Of the Os Pubis. partly by an intervening Gristle, partly by a double Ligament, of which, the first circularly environs them; the other, which is membranous, possesses the Hole it self, and sustains the Muscles of that Place. The other Ligaments, see in their proper Places. CHAP. V. Of the Ligaments of the Scapu∣lar Arm and Hand. THE Scapula is joned to the Shoulder-bone and the Clavicle with five Ligaments, which chiefly seem to consist of the Tendons of the Muscles of the Omoplate, environing the Head and Neck of the Shoulder∣bone, and so united, that they constitute one strong orbicular Ligament. Of which, The First, which is broad and membranous, rising from the Brows of the Neck of the Scapula, environs the whole Joynt, and is inserted into the foremost and inner Region of the Head of the Shoulder. The Second, which is round like a Nerve, but thicker and bigger than the preceding, rising from the top of the inner Process of the Scapula, is fixed into the interior Parts of the Head of the Shoulder. The Third, which is round and thicker and bigger than the preceding, rising from the Coracoides Process, ter∣minates in the Head of the Shoulder on the outer Part. The Fourth, which proceeds with a large beginning from the same Place with the former, is implanted into the hinder and outer Seat of the Head of the Shoulder. The Fifth, which rises from the inner Seat of the Scapula, and proceeds obliquely upward to the top of the Shoulder. I. The Ligaments of the Elbow areThe Li∣gaments. double, of which, the one is strong and membranous, the other is encom∣passed with all the Muscles, all the length of the Shoulder, and keeps them fixed in their Seat, to which, the proper Membranes of the Muscles stick very close. The rest of the Ligaments bind the Bones together. For the Ulna and the Radius are fastned to the Shoulder by common and strong Membranous Li∣gaments; to the Wrist, not only by common, but also by two peculiar and
round Ligaments. Of which, the first, which is more gristly, proceeds from the Styloides Process, to the fourth Bone of the Wrist, and joyns the lower Arm-bone, called the Ulna to the Wrist; the other growing from the top of the Radius, receives the Wrist, and joyns the Radius to the Wrist, which is yet more strength∣ened by the nervous Ligament environ∣ing the whole Joynt. The Ulna-bone is fastned to the Ra∣dius above and below by a common Ligament; as also by another pecu∣liar and strong membranous Liga∣ment, seated between the Intervals of the Bones all their full length; which rising from the sharp Line of the Ul∣na, is implanted into the Line of the Radius. II. In the Wrist there are twoOf the Wrist. Ligaments; of which, one only joyns the Bones together; and both together strengthen the two Tendons that are to be transmitted far∣ther. The first rising from the lower Process of the Radius and Elbow, en∣folds the Bones of the Wrist, and binds them tely together, terminating in the Appendix of the Bone of the Meta∣carp. The two others are carried from the Bone of the Wrist, looking to∣ward the Thumb, reaching to the Little-finger transversly, the one out∣ward, the other inward like a Ring; and therefore by those that take these two for one Ligament, called the Annular Ligament, and contain the Tendons of the Muscles extending and bending the Fingers. Laurentius and Bauhinus believes the Exterior may be conveniently divided into six Liga∣ments. III. The Bones of the MetacarpOf the Metacar∣pium. are joyned to one another, and to the Bones of the Wrist by common Li∣gaments. The Internodes or Knuckles of the Fingers are fastned by common Li∣gaments. But in the Hollow of the Hand the Phalanxes of the Fingers are fastned to the Bones of the Me∣tacarp with a transverse Ligament. Moreover, every single Finger has a Ligament running out at the full length of the Fingers, and rising from the Internal Part of the Bones, which resembles a Chan∣nel, and keeps the Tendons bend∣ing the Fingers firm in their Pla∣ces. To these may be added a slimy Membrane, which is overcast with Tendons, transmitted to the Hand and Fingers instead of a Liga∣ment. CHAP. VI. Of the Ligaments of the Leg and Foot. THE Thigh is fastned to theThe Liga∣ments of the Thigh. Isehion with two Ligaments. One which is the Exteri∣or, environs the whole Joynt, and is broad, hard, thick and strong. The other, which is more inward, and cannot be seen, unless the other be cut away, proceeding from the bot∣tom of the Acetable, is inserted soon after into the middle Head of the Thigh, and is oblong, round and hard, and hence by some called the Gristly Nerve. II. These Ligaments, if they be overmuch loosned by the DefluxionsThe Luxa∣tion of the Hip. of Phlegmatic Humors, cause a Luxation of this Ioynt, which upon returning the Bone into its Place, is cured by drying and corrobora∣ting Medicaments, and commodious Swathings. But if they happen to be corroded by any sharp Defluxion, the Cure is not to be hoped for. Or if the Luxation happen by any outward Violence, then the inner round Ligament is for the most part burst, for that the hardness of it will not suffer Extension, which is the reason that such a Luxation is in∣curable. For though the Bone may be reduced into the Acetable, yet it will slip out again for want of the burst Ligament. And therefore Chy∣rurgeons are to be careful how they attempt the reducing such a Dislo∣cation, which will cost the Patient a vast deal of Torment to no pur∣pose.
III. Six Ligaments fasten to theOf the Ti∣bia. Shin-bone and Button to the Thigh; Of which, The First, is Membranous and common, which environs the whole Joynt, except the Region of the Knee∣pan. The Second strong and Nervous seat∣ed in the inner Part of the Knee, rising from the Process of the Leg, is inserted with two heads into the Head of the Thigh. The Third, which is gristly and strong rising out of the higher Part of the Shin-bone, among its Cavities, enters the middle Cavity, which is behind within the heads of the Thigh. The Fourth which is thick and al∣most round, adheres to the outer side of the Knee, and binds the Bones of the Thigh, Shin-bone and Button. The Fifth, somewhat more slender and softer then the former, grow∣ing to the Inner-side, is carry'd ob∣liquely into the Fore-parts of the Thigh. The Sixth, which is slender and soft, is found in the middle of the Joynt of the Knee, and carry'd from the Shin-bone into the Thigh. How∣ever this is not always to be found with the two preceding; and there∣fore some acknowledg only three Li∣gaments in this place one common, and two interpos'd, and those bloo∣dy. The Shin-bone is fastened to theOf the Ti∣bula. Button with three Ligaments. The First and Second are common Membranous Ligaments; One which at the upper and outer Part enfolds the Connexion of the Bones: the other which proceeding at the lower Part from the Shin-bone, approaches the Button. The Third is the peculiar Membranous Ligament, which growing all its length to the Shin-bone, is carry'd to the Button, and expanded through the Interval between the two Bones, and so conjoyns the Bones, and also distin∣guishes the Muscles of that Place, and to some of them gives their O∣riginal. VI. The Ligaments of the FootOf the Feet are twofold; some that fasten the Tendons from slipping out of their places: others which bind the Bones together. Those are three; of which, The First is seated before at the joynting of the Shin-bone with the foot. The Second proceeds from the Inner Melleolus to the Bone of the Heel, and constitutes as it were three lit∣tle Rings for the Tendons to pass through; because there are three Ca∣vities there. The Third, springing from the outer Mallelous, is implanted into the Bone of the Heel, and is spread over two Hol∣nesses. Besides these already mentioned in the inner Region of the Toes, you meet with transverse Ligaments, as in the Hand, which fasten the Tendons binding the first and second Internode of the Toes. VI. Those that fasten the Bones,Of the Ta∣lus. are either of the Talus, or Pe∣don, or Metapedon or of the Toes. Three Ligaments fasten the Talus of which, The First, which wraps about the Bone of the Shin and the Talus, is Membranous, whereas the rest are gristly. The Second, springing from the inner Part of the Talus, is implanted into the Bone of the Shin looking toward the Talus. The Third, fastens the Exterior of the Talus to the Button. Five Ligaments fasten the Talus to the Pedion. The First is common, which wraps about the Joynt of the Heel and Ta∣lus; this is Membranous whereas the rest are gristly. The Second, proceeds from the low∣er Seat of the Talus to the Heel. The Third rising from the Neck of the Talus, is implanted in the Navi∣cular Bone. The Fourth, joyns the Bone of the Tessara, with the Neck of the Talus. The Fifth couples the Bone of the Heel with the Tessara Bone, and en∣virons the Joynt.
VII. The Bones of the PedionOf the Pe∣dion. are fastened one to another, and to the neighbouring Bones, with very hard and gristly Ligaments; to which at the lower Part for the more strenuous Coroboration, is added a strong peculiar Ligament, which binds the middle Parts of the Bones toge∣ther. The Ligaments of the Metapedion andOf the Me∣tapedion of the Toes. Toes differ little or nothing, either in Structure, Insertion, and Form from the Ligaments of the Hand. Under the Sole of the Foot, the Skin and Fat being taken away, occurs a broad and strong Ligament, which fastens the the Bones of the First Phalanx, and comprehends its Sesamoide Bones. THE END.
AN INDEX OF THE Chief Matters IN THE TEN BOOKS OF ANATOMY. A. ABortion, the Causes of it, 279 The Alantoides or Pudding Mem∣brane, &c. 244. Whether in Women. ibid. The Amnios, 246. It's Original, 247. In Twins how dispos'd, 247. A Mikie Liquor within it, 250 Analogon to the Rational Soul, what it is, 298. Whether the same with the Rational Soul, ibid. Anatomy defined, 2 The Subject of it, ibid. Animal Spirits how separated from the Brain, 390. Where generated, 422, &c. Of the Animal Spirits, 428, &c. Difference between them and Vital, 433. Twofold use, 434. What they contribute to nou∣rishment. 435 Annate Tunicle, 457 The Anthelix, 463 The Anvil of the Ear, 467 Aorta Artery, 326 Apoplexy, the cause of it, 426 Appetite decay'd, the causes, 35 Apple of the Eye, 459 Architectory Vertue what, 222, &c. The vegetative Soul, 229 The Arm, 493, 525 Arm-pits, 372 Arteries, whether they enter the Substance of the Brain, 391. Of the Arteries in ge∣neral, 522. Arteries proceeding from the Aorta, 530 Artenoides Muscle, 369 Ascites, Dropsi the cause of it, 77 The Aspera Arteria, 355, 366 The Auditory passage, 464 The Axillary Veins 543 B. Bartholines Error, 262 The Bee-hive, 465 Birth, whether it may be form'd ont of the Womb, 170. How form'd, 216. How nourish'd in the Womb, 264, &c. Birth natural, unnatural, 174. Expulsion of the Birth, the Cause of it. ibid. Blood defin'd, it's substance, juices, &c. 333 How the Parts are nourished by the Blood, 341. Whether it lives, 343. What
Blood nourishes, 344. Differences of it. 350 Bodies Human, 2 Their Differences, ibid. Bones in general, 564. Their Conjuction, 569. Bones of the Cranium, 571. Of the whole Head, 575. Of the Skull, 576 Common to the Skull and upper Iaw, 580 Of the upper Iaw, 582. Of the lower Iaw, 583. Of the Arm, Shoulder, El∣bow, 599. Of the lower Part of the Hand, 600. Of the Thigh and Leg, 601 Of the Extream Foot, 603 A Bone in the Heart. 326 Bones, four small  in the Eur,  by whom discovered, 466 Bottom of the Womb, 174 Brain, whether a Bowel, 387. It's forma∣tion, shape, substance, fibres, &c. 388, 389. It's Arteries, 391. Vein, 392 It's Motion, 425. The Breast in general, 280. In particular, 281 The Bridle of the , 152 The Bronchial Artery, 357 Bubble Christaline, 218. Observations con∣cerning it, 219, &c. It proceeds from the Man and Womans seed, 220 Bus of the Eye, 457 C. The Carotides, 527 Catarrh, Rolfinch's mistake concerning the Cause of it, 399 Cavities of the Brain, 385. Their use 386 Cavities of the Ear, 463 The Caul, 22, &c. The Cerebel, 402. It's Vermicular proces∣ses, 403 The Chaps, 479 Charlton's opinion of the Blood, 344 Re∣futed, 345 Cheescake, see Utrine Liver. Children, how born after the death of the Mother, 173. Whether they can pro∣create, 197. In the Womb, whether they sleep or wake, 222. Born the sixth and fifth Months, 271 Choler, whether generated in the Stomach, 38 Choler defined, 342 Choler, whether two sorts, 89. What it is, 92. Color and taste, 95. It's motion, 88, 89. The Choler Vessels, 86. It's use, 108 The Chorion, 245. It's Original, 247 In twins how, 247 The Christiline humor of the Eye, 461. It's use, ibid. Chylification, 33 The Chylus, 27. whether it enter the Ga∣stric Veins, 41. Whether any parts nou∣rished by it, 16. It's recepticle, 61. The Chyle-bearing Channel of the Creas, 16. How to discover it, 63. Whether all the Chylus ascend to the Subclavial, 67. Whether through the Mesariac Veins to the Liver, 68. Whether carry'd through the Arteries to the Breasts, 284. How changed into Milk, 290. What forces it to the Breasts, 292. Whether it circulate, 322. Whether the whole Chylus be changed into Blood, 337. Circulation of the Blood, 317. The Cause, 318. The manner, 319. The se 322 The  of the Cerebel, 403, 404 The Cvicles, 506 Cleft of the female Pudendum, 181 Clitoris, 181. It's Substance, Muscles, Ves∣sels, ibid, Its Bigness, 182. Irregularities, 183. Whether the Seed pass through it, 183 The Cobweb , 461 Commissures of the Craninum, 573 Conception and the progress of it, 208, &c. The Concha of the Fare, 463 Copulation, whence the pleasure of it, 163 Coroides Tunicle, 456 Ctytedons; what, 240 Coverings external of the Head, 383. Inter∣nal, 384 Crico-thyrodes Muscle, 368 Crico-Artenoides Muscle, 369 The Crural Arteries 531 Crying in the Womb, all in an Error that have wrote concerning it, 278 Curveus's mistake, 253, 258 D. The different Vessels belonging to Generation. 140, Whether they communicate with the Seminary Vessels, 141. Their pro∣gress, 142. Their Substance, &c. 143. Experiment of Reyner de Graef, 140. Rejected by Swammerdam, 140. In Women called Tubes, 159 Of Delivery, 271. Reason of the variety of the time, 273. What happens near the time of it, 274. Some things admirable to be observed in delivery. 275 Deusingius mistken, 255 The Diaphragma, its Substance, Membranes, Vessels, motion, &c. 300, 301, &c. Difference of Scens, 473. Difference be∣tween the Bones of Men and Women, 605 Dorsal roots of the Birth 260 The Drum of the Ear, 466 Dura Mater, vid. Meninx. Dwarfs, 3
E. Little Ears of the Heart, 323 Eggs in Women for Conception, their Matter, 158. Their Membranes, ibid. Three things to be considered in them, 163 Emulgent Arteries 118 Emulgent Veins 118 Emunctories of the Serum, 116 Dr. Ent his Opinion refuted 253 Epididymes's, vid. Parastates, The Epiglottis, 368. No conspicuous Mus∣cles in it, 369 Epomos, vid. Neck Error in Womans reckonings, 274 Eyes in general, 442. Whether contagious if Diseased, 443. Their holes, 445 Their Vessels, Muscles, 446, 455 The Eye-brows, 448 F. The Face, 440 Fat, 13 Fat folke less fit for Venery, 207. Why less active, 334 The Feet and the Parts of them, 493 Females, whether begot by the Left Stone, 148 Fermentation, 27 The Fibres in general, Flowers in Women, the cause of them, 168 The Tendril Fold, 132. The Net-resembling Fold in the Womb, 176. The Choroides Fold, 398. Its progress and use, ibid. The Forehead, 441 The Fornix, 397, 398 The Frog-Distemper, 486 Frontal Muscles, 441 Function of the Brain, 420 Function of the Parts, 3 G. Gel Animals grow fat, 207 Genitals of Men and Women how they differ, 185 Glandules of the Kidneys, 120. Of the Mesentery, 49. How passed by the Mil∣ky Vessels, 59. Of the Breasts, 282. Of the Larynx, 369. Of the Gullet, ibid, Of the Tongue, 483 Glissons Experiment, 82 Gonorrhea, the Cause of it, 143. Gono∣rhea simplex, the Cause of it, 192 The Gristles in general, 610 Gristle Scutiform of the Larynx, 367 Angular and Guttal of the same, 368 The Gristle of the Ear, 464 Growth, 341 The Gullet, its Connexion, Vessels, Substance, 370, &c. Its Motion, 371 Gums, 478 The Guts, 42 H. Hare of the Eye-lids, 447 Hair, its generation, 374. The roots of it, a Heterogeneous Body; its form, efficient Cause, 375. First Original, 376. Va∣riety of Colours, whence, 377. Whether part of the Body, 381. Whether it con∣tributes to the strength of the Body, 383 Hang'd People how kill'd, 358 The Hand, 493. And the Parts of it, 494 Dr. Harvey's Opinion touching Conception, 213, 215, 217. Concerning the Uterine Liver, 236. His Opinion and two questions concern∣ing the Birth, 276 The Head in general, 373 Heart in general, 305. &c. Its motion, 312, &c. The true Cause, 316. Un∣natural things bred therein, 324. The Office of the Heart, 329. Glissons new Opi∣nion, ibid. The Helix, 463 Heat of the Blood, 335 Hermophradites, 183 Hernia varicosa & Carnosa, 133 Herophiius's Wine-press, or the Forular 385 Histories of Conception, 217, &c. The hollow Vein, and Veins united to it above the Diaphragma, 540. Below the Dia∣phragma, 54 The Horny Tuincle, 45 The Huckle-bone, 589 Humors, whether Parts of the Body, 4. The four Humors always in the Blood, 342 Humors of the Eye, 459. Whether sen∣sible, 462 Hunger, what and whence it proceeds, 29 The Hymen, whether or no? 177. Whe∣ther a sign of Virginity, 178 The Hyoides-bone, 480 Hypothyroides Muscle, 368 I. Ideas, how imprinted in the Seed by Imagina∣tion, 197 Jejunum Gut why Empty 110 Imagination of the Face of it, 292 Indications of the Ancients taken from the Ear, 463 Infants Bones, how constituted, 606
The Infundibulum or Funnel. 413 Jugular Kernels, 376 K. The Kidneys, 116. Their Vessels, 117 Their Substance, 119. Malpigius's Dis∣coveries, ibid. Their use, 120. Obser∣vations three, 121. Whether they con∣coct Blood, 125. Whether Wounds in the Kidneys be Mortal, 126. Deputy Kidneys what, 127 Kicking of the Infant in the Womb, the Cause of it, 275, 276 L. The Labyrinth, 468 The Lachrymal Kernel, 415 The Lachrymal points, 417 Larynx, its Figure, Vessels, Bulk, Substance, Gristles, 367 Laurentius Bellinus's fleshy Crust, 482 Learned men deceived by Old womens tales, 273 Ligament Ciliar, 459 Ligaments in general, 611. Of the Head, of the Iaws, Hyoides Bone and Tongue, 612. Of the whole Trunk, ibid. Of the Scapula's, Arm and Hand, 613. Of the Leg and Foot, 614 Likeness of Features whence, 198 Liquor in the Amnion, what it is, 250, &c. The Liver, 78. Whether a Bowel, 79. Worms and Stones in it, 85. The fun∣ctions of it, 108, 109, 112. The Office of the Liver, 83. Sometimes joyned with the Lungs, 185. Glisson's Experi∣ment, 82 The Long Marrow, 406. Its difference from The Spinal Marrow, ibid. The Lucid Enclosure 397 Lungs their bigness, substance, &c. 350. Pre∣ternatural things in them, 351. The colour in a Child before it is born, 352 Division, Lobes, 353. Several Observa∣tions concerning them, 354. Their mo∣tion, 362, &c. Lympha, what, 74, 75. Difference between it and the Serum, 76. Whether nutri∣tive, 348 Lymphatic Vessels, 69. Of the Liver, 81. Lymphatic Iuice, the use of it, ibid. Lymphatic Vessels in the Testicles, 137 Of the Lungs, 357 M. Males, whether begot by the Right Stone, 148 Malpigius's Observations of Blood, 349 Materials of the Hair, 378 Maxillary Kernels, 376. Processes, 408 The Mediastinum, 303 Melancholly, 342 Membranes in general, 519 Membrane of the Muscles, 17. Of the Drum, 465 Meninxes of the Brain, Dura Mater, its Holes, Vessels, &c. 384, 385. Pia Mater, 387, 407 The Mesentery, 48 The Mesenteric Milkie Vessels, 58 Milk what, 285, &c. Whether Animal Spi∣rits, the matter of it, 291▪ Mesue's Story concerning Milk, ibid. Observation concerning it, 293. Why dry'd up upon Weaning, 294 Milkie Vessels to the Bladder of the Womb, 122. To the Vice-Kidneys, 123. Milkie Utrine Vessels, a question concerning them, 252. Milkie Vessels of the Breasts, 283 Monstrous Births, the reason, 247 Mother Fits, the cause of them, 171 Whether from the Sweetbread juice, 172 The Mount of Venus, 179 Muscles, 17. &c. Of the Eur, 464, 466. Of the Cheeks, Lips and lower Iaw, 477. Muscles in general, 497. Of the Head, 503. Of the Arms and Shoulders, 505. Of the Scapula, 506. Assisting respira∣tion, 507. Of the Back and Loins, 509. Of the Abdomen, 510. Of the Radius, 511. Of the Wrist and hollow of the hand, ibid. Of the Fingers and Thumb, 512. Of the Thigh, 513. Of the Leg, 515. Of the Foot, 516. Of the Toes, 517 The Mirtle-form'd Caruncles in Womens Pri∣vities, 178 N. The Nails, 607 The Nameless Bones, 597 The Nameless Tunicle, 457 Navel string what? Its Situation, 256. Its use, 257 The Neck, 372. Strength of the Body judg∣ed by it, 372 The Nerves in general, 548, &c. Of the Neck, 557. Of the Breast and Bok, 559. Of the Loins, 560. Proceeding from the
Os Sacrum, 561. Of the Arm and Hand, 561. Of the Thighs and Feet, 563 Nerves within the Cranium, 410. Second, third, fourth, fifth Pair, 414, 415. Turn-again Nerves, ibid. Of the Nostrils. 472 Net. The wonderful Net. 413 Nose. Its Figure, Bigness, Bones and spongy Bones. 470 Nostrils. 471 The Nut of the Yard, 151. Of the Clitoris, 181 The Netform'd Tunicle. 459 The Nymphe. Their Substance, Vessels, Use, and Observation concerning them. 180 O. Oesophagus, vid. Gullet. Old Men, whether they grow shorter? 342 The Orbicular Bone in the Ear. 467 Order▪ to be observed in Dissecting the Brain. 419 Organs of Hearing. 463 Organs of Smelling. 470 Original of the Principles of the Blood. 337 The Os Sacrum. 589 Oval Hole in the Heart▪ 327 The Oval Window in the Ear. 468 Ovaries in Women first discovered, 156. How the Eggs descend from them to the Womb, 159. Womens Stones to be rather called Ovaries. 158 P. The Palate. 478 The Perastates. 139 Pannicle fleshy. 16. 383 Parenchyma of the Liver. 84 Part of the Body, what. 3 Net Organs. 4 Principal, which. ibid. Subservient, which. 8 Noble, which, ibid. Ignoble, which. ibid. Parts containing. 17 Parts contained. 21 Parts of the Face in general. 475 Parts serving for Generation in Men. 130 Parts adjoyning to the Yard. 154 Parts secret of Women. 154 Parts of the Body, in what Order form'd. 220 Parts of the Birth in the Womb, how they differ from a Man grown? 269 Parotides Kernels. 376. 464 Particles Salt of the Arterial Blood, how se∣parated from the White particles in the Stones. 137 Passage from the Tympanum to the Jaws. 467 The Pericardium. 304 Pericranium. 383 Periostium. 384 The Periwincle or Cochlea of the Ear. 468 Pia Mater, vid. Meninx. The Pincal Kernel. 401 The Pipe of the Navel-String. 263 The Pituitary Kernel. 412 The Pleura. 302 The Porta Vein, 536. And Veins united to it. 537 The Preputium. 152 Pre-eminency of the Brain. 398 The Prostates, 143. Their Liquor, and how to be discerned, 144. Their Use. 145 Psalloides, or the Brawny Body. 397 The Pudendum of Women; the Lips of it. 179 Pulmonary Artery and Vein. 326▪ 355 Pulses, 317. Their Use. 318 Q. Quality of the Blood. 336 Qualities of Spittle. 487 Quantity of the Blood. 336 R. The Rainbow of the Eye. 458 Refrigeration of the Lungs; Mauro Corda∣tus, Malpigius and Thraston's Opinion concerning it. 360, 361 Respiration in the Womb, all deceived that have wrote of it, 278. What it is, 357. Charltons Error concerning it, 359. Whether a Man might live without it. 364. Stories relating to the Question. 365 The Ribs. 592 Riolanus Mistaken. 256, 268 S. The Salival Channels, 485. Other Salival Vessels. 486 Of Savours. 290, &c. Sclerotic Tunicle. 456 Scapula Bones. 596 The Scyth or Falx. 385
The Scrotum, 138. Signs of Health taken from it. ibid. The Seed, 138. Whether threefold, 146. How it passes the invisible Pores, 146, 149. The Matter of it, 188, &c. When well made, 191. Two Parts of it, 193, &c. Seed-bearing Vessels. 135 Seed of Women, various Errors concerning it. 159 The Serum, what. 115 Seminal Vessels, 142. Their Substance, &c. 143 Serous Humors between the Chorion and U∣rinary Membrane. 255 Sesamoides Bones. 664 Sheath of the Womb, 175. Its Use▪ 176 Shoulders. 372 Sight defined. 462 Skin defined. 11 Its Substance, Difference, Temper, Figure, Motion, Nourishment, Vessels, Pores, Hair, Colour, Use, ibid. Whether the Instru∣ment of Feeling. 11 Smelling defined, 472. The Cause, ibid. Where it lies. 473 Snakes taken out of the Brain. 398 Soul, whether in the Womans Seed, or in the Mans only, 225, &c. Not ex traduce, 226. Not present at the first Delineation of the Parts, 227. A vegitable Soul in Men as well as in Beasts, 228. The Seat of it, 229. What it is, 231. Whe∣ther the Soul be nourished, 234. We are all at a loss concerning the Soul. 235 Sound, the Generation of it. 469 Spermatic Vessels, 131. Their Progress, 132. Error of Anatomists concerning them, 133 Spermatic Vessels in Women. 155 Spirits, whether Parts of the Body. 4 Double Spirits raised out of the Blood. 334, &c. Spittle defined, 487. Its strange Composition, 488. Its Use. ibid. Spleen, 97. Its Vessels, 99. Why not quick of Feeling, 102. Its Substance, ibid. Unusual things found in it, 103. Whether it separate Melancholy from the Chylus, 104. Malpigius's Experiment, 105. The true Action of it, 106. The Functions of it. 108 The Sternon Bone. 594 Sternothyroides Muscle. 368 The Stirrup of the Ear. 467 The Stomach. 23 Stones in the Stomach. 27 The String of the Drum. 465 Subclavial Arteries. 526 Subclavial Veins. 542 The Sweet-bread, 51. Three Observations, 49. Its Office. 53 Sweet-bread Iuice, the Use of it, 54. The Generation of it, 57. Its Effervescency, 58 T. Taste defined, 489. The primary Organ of it, ibid. Where Taste lies. 189 Tears discoursed of. 448, &c. Teats in Women, their exquisite Sence. 282 The Teeth. 584 Temper of the Blood. 336 Temperaments of the Body, whence they pro∣ceed. 343 Temper of the Body judged by the Hair. 378 The Testicles in Men, 134. Their Vessels, 135. Their Use, 136. Their Tunicles, 137. Their Action. 146 Testicles in Women, 156. Their Figure, Tu∣nicles, Difference from Mens, their Sub∣stance, 157. Preternatural things there∣in. ibid. The Thymus. 303 Thyro-artenoides Muscle. 369 The Tongue, 480, &c. Its Motion, 483. Its Vessels, Nerves, Muscles. 482, 483 The Tonsils. 369. 485 The Torcular. 385 Tubes in Women, what? 159. Their Mem∣branes, Figure, Vessels, Valves, 160. Births conceived and formed in them, 162. The same demonstrated▪ by Obser∣vations. 163 V. Valves treble pointed, 325. Valves Sigmoi∣des, 326. Half-moon Valves. ibid. Varolius's Bridge. 403 The Veins in General, 533. Veins of the Head, 542. Of the Arms, 543. O∣pening into the Iliacs, 545. Of the Thigh and Foot. 546 Venters three. 8 Venter Lowermost. 9 Ventricles of the Brain. 397 Ventricle, vid. Stomach. Ventricles of the Heart, 325. Their Vessels, 325. Right Ventricle of the Heart. ibid. The Use of it, 327. Left Ventricle of the Heart. 326 The Vertebres in Specie. 589 Vessels of the Ear, 464. For sundry uses of Hearing. 469 Vital Spirit. 335 The Vitrious Humor of the Eyes. 461 The Vitrious Timicle. ibid. Vivific Spirits, whether in the Blood. 331
Umbilical Arteries, their Use. 259 Umbilical Vein, its Use. 257 Union of the Vessels in the Heart of the Birth. 327 The Urachus, 261. Observation concerning it, 262. The Urine flows from the Birth through it. 262 The Ureters. 128 The Urethra, 150. Its Nervous Bodies. 151 Urinary Membrane in Women. 247 Urinary Passage in Women. 182 The Urine Bladder. 129 Urine Ferment, what it is. 168 The Uterine Liver or Cheeskake, 235. Its Substance, Colour, Shape, Vessels, &c. 237, &c. Use, 242 The Uveous Tunicle. 458 The Uvula, 479. Its Use. ibid. W. The Watry Humor of the Eyes, 460. The Use of it. 461 Wharton's Error concerning the Tonsils of the Larynx. 370 The White Line. 18 Willis's Opinion of the Soul, 232, &c. His Absurdity. 234 Wind-Eggs in Women, a Question concerning them, 161. The Opinion of Wind-Eggs confirmed. 162 The Wirtzungian Channel. 52 The Womb and its Motion, 164. Situation, Substance, Membranes, ibid. Bigness, Weight, Shape, Hollowness, Horns, 165. Connexion, Ligaments, whether it can fall, 166. Whether inverted in the Fall, 167. Its Vessels, ibid. Its Office, 169. Its Moti∣on. 170, 173 Women that have Conceived without Immission of the Yard, 153. Whether they may be turned into Men? 185. Observations upon this Question, ibid. and 186. Whe∣ther they have Seed, 189. Whether they Cause Formation, 201. Whether ne∣cessary for Generation. 204, &c. Women, whether they may be castrated. 164 The Writing-Pen within the Skull. 407 Y. The Yard, 149. Whether a living Crea∣ture, ibid. Its Vessels. 152 FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE SMALL-POX AND MEASLES.
A TREATISE OF THE SMALL-POX AND MEASLES. CHAP. I. Of the Small Pox and Measles in General. FOrmerly the Arabians and most famous Physitians annexed to their Discourses of the Pestilence and other Conta∣gious and Epidemic Diseases their Treatises of the Small Pox and Measles; we therefore led by their Authority are of opinion that the Small Pox and Measles are Contagious Di∣seases. But in this first Chapter before we speak in Particular of these Diseases, it will be necessary by way of Pre∣face to say something in General of the Names, Original, Nature, Subjects and differences of both Diseases. As to the Names, we meet with some variety among the Writers of Physic. Among the Greeks, the words  and  were most in use (both which the Latins compre∣hend under the single Name of Papulae; and Alzaravius in his own Language calls Algigram, and Alasmom, and Mercurialis, Efflorescencies) by which they did not always understand two di∣stinct Diseases, but frequently one and the same. Others make two sorts of ; The one when the Wheals break through the Skin and rise up in Powks; the other, when the Colour of the Skin is only chang'd. The First of these some call more particularly , and the Latins have called Variolae, as it were little Warts; to which some have added the other Name of Papulae, small Teats or Pushes. The latter are by the Greeks called , and by the Latins Exanthemata and Morbilli. We are to take notice however by the way, that Exanthemata are properly those little Purple spots, called the Tokens, which appear upon the Skin of the Persons in∣fected with the Plague (of which we have spoken in our Treatise of the Plague) but afterwards this word was by many Physitians given to the Morbilli Measles. However it were, at this day there is no question to be made of the Signification or Ambiguity of the
Words, seeing that by  and Variolae, all Physitians generally under∣stand those Wheals or Powks that break forth through the Skin and Sup∣purate, being conspicuous over all the the Body: and by Exanthemata or Morbilli, those little red Spots which do somewhat corrde the Skin, and are sometimes full of small Pimples like Millet Seed. As to the Original of these Diseases there is great variety of Opinions a∣mong the Physitians. For some will have them to have been as ancient as the Original of the World; and that they were well known to Hippocrates, Ga∣len and others of the Antient Greeks. But Mercurialis, Liddelius and others affirm, that they were altogether unknown to the Greeks in former times, and were first discovered in the Age of the Ara∣bians, and that therefore their first de∣scription was set forth by them; where∣as the Greeks have left behind them no∣thing in particular written about those Distempers. But the latter Opinion seems to be less probable, seeing that the Descriptions of the Greek Ecthyma∣a, and Exanthemata differ very little from our Variolae or Pox, as appears out of Hippocrates, lib. 3. Epid. in his Cure of Silenus. And because the Ara∣bians also do not describe those Disea∣ses, as new ones, which they would have done, had they either known or thought to be unknown to the Greeks. Add to this that though the Greeks in their Writings do not treat particularly of these Diseases, as the Arabians do, but intermix them in the Description of those Epidemic Disea∣ses, which are understood by the man∣ner of their Crisis, yet it cannot thence be concluded, that they were to them unknown; in regard the contrary to that appears from hence, that they write many things common among us, as well in reference the Nture, as to the Cure of those Diseases. These Diseases are not one and the same, but of a distinct Nature: For they are the Diseases of an ill Temper, which is known by a Preternatural heat and Fever; as also Diseases of a deprav'd Conformation, as being ac∣companied with Tumors, and a dividing of the Continuum. They are referred to acute Malig∣nant, Contagious, Epidemic and Pesti∣lent Fevers (though not so deadly as the Pestilence) because they are de∣termined for the most part within four∣teen days, or at least never surpass the fortieth. They participate of Maligni∣ty, are propagated by Contagion, like the Pestilence, and are frequently Rise and Epidemical. They only wage War with Mankind, in regard it has not been observed by any Physician, that ever any other Crea∣tures are afflicted with these Distempers. Moreover they are not only com∣mon to Men, but to all Mankind; insomuch, that there are very few Men or Women living, that hath them not at one time or other. Hence it was the saying of Avenzoar, that it was a Miracle, if any living Mortal escaped these Diseases, and that it was rather to be ascribed to the goodness of God, then to any other cause. Which Thomas Willis also seems to intimate, lib. de Feb. cap. 16. where he says, It is no more then what every man is to expect once to be afflicted with the Small Pox or Measles: if by chance any one live free from them all his Life, or if another have them more then once▪ they are rare and unusual Events of Nature, that no way contradict common Observa∣tion. For it is certain that all Mankind and only Mankind is Subject to the small Pocks and Measles, and if they scape them once, they never have them again. The Parts which are affected in these Distempers, is either the whole Body in respect of the Fever, or the Exter∣nal Parts in respect of the Wheals and Spots conspicuous in it: or sometimes the Internal Parts, as the Stomac, Guts, Lungs, Liver and Kidneys; for that those Parts are many times full of the Pox, is frequently seen by the Disse∣ctions of Bodies cary'd of by that Di∣stemper. But these Diseases though they share of the same Malignity yet they differ in these things. 1. That in regard there is a double Excrement of the Blood infected with that Malignity, of which the one is thick, the other thin; the Pocks proceeds from the thicker Ex∣crement, and from the thinner the Measles. 2. That in these by reason of the Diversity of the Matter, there rises up Wheals which are full of Matter; in the other only Spots appear, with a small elevation of the Skin, but with∣out any Mattery Substance. 3. That the first after the Patient is cured, leaves Pits and Scars behind them; the other cause no Deformity. But because that Spots also break forth in a Pestilential Fever, by which a Physitian may be lead into an Error▪ we are to observe the difference be∣tween
those Spots, and the other which break for at the beginning of the Small Pox and Measles. 1. That the Spots which first appear at the beginning of the Small Pox and Measles, are of a flo∣rid red Color, and very small, but after∣wards dilate, and chiefly appear in the Face and Hands. But the Spots in Pestilent Fevers are of a more dark Red, oft-times inclining to a Purple, and at the beginning somewhat broad∣er, but exactly round, and never ap∣pear upon the Face and Hands, but up∣on the Breast and Back. 2. That the Spots in the Small Pox and Measles, appear by way of Crisis much about the third or fourth day after the seiz∣ing of the Fever, and with ease to the Patient; whereas the Spots in Pesti∣lential Fevers, that appear about the seventh day, are Symtomatical for the most Part, and render the Patient worse. 3. That the Fever-spots, appear first like the Bitings of Fleas, but the Spots of the Small Poxs and Measles have not the least resemblance to Flea-bites. CHAP. II. Of the Small Pox in Specie. THE Small Pox are little Wheals full of Matter, breaking forth in the upper Part of the Skin, and con∣spicuous (seldom seizing the inner Parts) accompany'd with a continual Fever, and proceeding from a Peculiar Malig∣nant, Fermentaceous Effervescency of Humors. They are most common to Children; Young men have them not so often; and Old men are seldom troubled with them. They subsist for the most Part in the Skin only; and break forth upon the Jaws and Nostrils, Nature thrust∣ing forth the Malignant Humor from the Center to the Periphery. In which Operation, if she be hin∣dered or hesitate either by reason of her own weakness, either through the abundance of the Morbific Matter, or the insufficient or two slow Progress of the Specific Fermentation; then not on∣ly the Gullet, Stomac, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, Womb, and other internal wels are beset with filthy little Ulcers like the Skin, as we have seen in several dead Bodies after Dissection, and appears by the Writings and Testi∣monies of Paraeus, Fernelius, and many others. In the mean time, as to the Skin, we are to take Notice by the way, that although the Wheals are dispeirs'd up and down in several Parts of it, yet they do not break forth in all places equal in quantity: for that many times they are more abounding and bigger in the Face, Hands and Feet then in other Parts. The Reason of which effect Lazarus Riverius ascribes very plausi∣bly to the Liver, by whose more fiery temper occasioned by this malignant ebullition, he believes the corrupted and putrid Humors are driven with greater violence to these Parts, which he calls the Emunctories of the Liver, than to any other Parts. In the same manner as they who have a hot Liver, are us'd to be troubled with red and pimp∣led Faces; and feel a glowing heat in the Soles of their Feet, and the Palms of their Hands. Mercurialis brings other Reasons for this Effect, but much farther fetch'd. lib. de Morb. puer. But the foresaid Reason of Ri∣verius seems to be very probable. Ne∣vertheless we are to understand, that sometimes it may happen, that the Pox may be thought to come out in greater abundance in those Parts then in others by mistake, as not being really so, but because in those Parts they are continually in view, and more troublesome then in other Parts. No Age can be assured to scape them, but Children are more frequent∣ly troubled with them then People of riper Years. Because her weaker Con∣stitutions are less able to resist the Speci∣fic malignant Matter, and seems more apt to that peculiar Ebullition which happens in that Disease. Old Age chal∣lenges a greater immunity from them, then other Ages. Moreover those Bodies are more easily infected which have any Analogy with the Bodies which are infected: and therefore Kindred more easily infect one another, which we have already observed in our Book de Peste. They are very rife all Seasons of the Year, but more especially in Spring and Autumn, chiefly if the preceding Winter was warm and moist, or the Summer rainy, and the Wind Souther∣ly, attended with plenty of early Fruit. Sometimes the Disease dispeirses it self, sometimes it is Epidemic, and sometimes it ceases for a time: But when it is Epidemical, then it hap∣pens to be accompanied with other
Distempers, in such as never had the Small Pox before. They arise from the thicker or more viscous Matter, to which that Maligni∣ty adheres, with the Blood fermenting after a Specifc Manner, and hence they rise up into large, mattery Pu∣sles. Thomas Willis believes that in this Fermentation, some Portions of the Blood, are coagulated with the Poy∣son, and so expelled forth together with it. But this does not seem so very probable, for though they are cor∣rupted, yet they are not coagulated; seeing that portions so coagulated, would not so easily be expelled forth, by reason of their extraordinary thickness. But this Ebullition is performed after the same manner as in Beer that works; wherein there is no coagulation of the Humor; but many spirituous Particles being strongly agitated in the Ale by the Fer∣mentaceous Effervescency, and involv'd and intermix'd with more viscous Par∣ticles tend upward and swim upon the top of the Ale, or else burst forth in froth out of the Vessel, but are not coagu∣lated; for they are very subtle and spiri∣tuous; as appears not only by their strong Savor, but also by this, that out of that same strong flower of Ale being distilled, are drawn Spirits al∣most as strong as the Spirits of Wine. A Fever alwaies accompanies the Small Pox, sometimes gentle, some∣times higher, sometimes more remiss, and that Putrid also, as appears by the critical Evacuation by Wheals, which could never be done without a putrid Ebullition. For where corrupt and putrid Humors are separated from the good, there of necessity must be either some Putrefaction, or putrid Effervescency: Some there are who write that the Small Pox may come without a Fever, but it is not true. And their mistake proceeds from hence, because in Infants and little Children, that Fever is so gentle before the Pox come out, that it hardly does them any observable Prejudice. For if they appear a little more froward then ordinary, or sleepy, or refuse their meat, or are less chearful then they use to be, the Nurses readily ascribe that to their Breeding their Teeth, or to the Worms; so that when the Small Pox comes out, they are apt to say, they came out without any Fever attending them: whereas that small Fever was not sufficiently taken notice of by themselves. Which sort of Fever can be re∣ferred to no sort of Fever more truly then to that purtrid continual Fever, called Synoche. For during that sort of Fever there is a putrid Ebullition of the Blood in the Vessels with an equal heat through the whole course of the Disease, and at length a Cri∣tical Expulsion of the Vitious Hu∣mors. There are different sorts of the Small Pox, of which few Physitians have taken notice. For some are bigger and more full of Matter, and come out thick, which the Dutch call , de Pocken. Others Less, which the sam Dutch call de Steen Pocken. And these are certain small Wheals without much matter, that come out in the Skin scat∣teringly, and in no extraordinary quan∣tity, without any grievous or violent Symptoms. The others are clear and large, transparent like Water or Chry∣stal, and containing a certain Watry kind of Liquor, which the Dutch call Wint-Pocken, and some Water-Pocken. Besides these there are other diffe∣rences of the Pox, as they are either great or small, thick or few, deep or superficial, contiguous or disjoyn'd, white or ruddy, livid, violet or other colored, soft or hard, high or low, quick or slowly coming forth, External or Internal. CHAP. III. Of the Causes of the Small Pox. THE Causes of the Small Pox are External or Internal. Concern∣ing which there are various and great Contentions among the most Eminent Physitians, so much the more vainly eager, because of little or no use; in regard that whatsoever be the cause of the Distempers, the cure is still the same. Avicen and most of the Arabians, the first most accurate Describers of these Diseases, refer the material Cause to the Impurity of the Mothers Blood, slagnant in the Woman with
Child, and with which the Birth was nourished in the Womb. Which Corruption, they write, lyes dormant so long in the Body, till by vertue of some specific efficient Cause, it be pro∣voked to a fermentaceous Effervescen∣cy, and being powred forth into the Mass of the Blood, it sets it all in a boiling Condition, and by that means separates that Defilment, adhering from the Birth to some minute Parti∣cles of the Body, and being so separa∣ted, pushes it forward, together with the Particles of the Blood so defiled by it, to the Extream Parts of the Body, and there raises up those Wheals, as in new Wine the Heterogeneal Parts are sepa∣rated from the Homogeneal Parts of the Wine by Fermentaceous Ebullition. Avenzoar seems to differ somewhat from Avicen; for observing that the Birth in the Womb; without hazard of Life, can hardly be nourished by the impure menstruous Blood restagnant therein; but with some other Blood good of it self, only by reason of its Fellowship with the menstruous Blood, defiled by its Superior Corruption; and farther, that Men in the Womb must be nourished either with some such menstruous Blood, or some other im∣pure Blood, and for that reason con∣tracted that Impurity from the first Nutrition of the Parts. Hence it was that the Arabians believed, that all Men were subject to the Small-Pox, in regard that Impurity was again to be separated from the Parts. So that if that Specific Fermentaceous Efferve∣scency be strongly and efficiently per∣formed at the first coming of the Small-Pox, then that Impurity be∣comes totally evacuated; and then the Person to whom that Disease hap∣pens, lives free from that Distemper all the rest of his Life (as when Butter is once by a strong Churming separa∣ted from Milk, turning sowr, no Churming, how violent soever, can se∣parate any more Butter from it.) But if that Effervescency be not violent e∣nough, that Impurity happens not to be totally expelled, and so the same Person, when the Reliques of that De∣filement ferment again, upon some o∣ther Cause, may happen to have the same Distemper a second and third time, but rarely a fourth. Duncanus Liddelius stoutly defends the Opinion of the Arabians; which is also followed by Fracastorius, Amatus, Forestus and several other Physitians, and among the rest, by Thomas Willis, Lib. de. Feb. c. 15. Where, among o∣ther Reasons, for greater Confirmation, he adds these Words. In the Womb of Woman, says he, as in most other Creatures, there is generated a certain Ferment, which being commu∣nicated to the Mass of Blood, gives it Vigor and Spirit, and causes it to swell at certain Periods of Time, and pro∣cures an Expulsion of the Superstous Blood. But at the time of Conception, when the Flowers cease to low, the chief∣est Part of this Ferment is expended upon the Birth, and the Particles of it hetero∣geneous from some of the rest, as it were somewhat of foreign Substance, are con∣fused with the Mass of the Blood and Humors, where they lye dormant a long time. Afterwards, being stirred and provoked by some evident Cause, they ferment with the Blood, and make it first boyl, and then congeal, from whence various Symptoms of this Disease a∣rise. Gentilis rejects this Opinion of the Arabians, not believing the Birth to be nourished in the Womb with any Impure Blood; nor that so much Impurity could abide for so many years in Men grown up, and old People, when they are seized with the Small-Pox, after so many Purgations by Sweat, Fevers, Itches, and other intervening Diseases, besides the Cure of the Great Pox; nor can he think but that Women must be cleared of those Impurities in so long a time by their monthly Evacuati∣ons. Mercurialis complies with Gentilis, who also asserts, that the Small Pox is a Hereditary Disease, and consequently, that there is hardly any Man who can escape them, because all Men are born of Parents vitiated by this Di∣stemper; and he endeavours to con∣firm this Opinion of his by several si∣newy Reasons, which however Daniel Sennnertus overthrows by others much the stronger. Fernelius observing something occult in the Productions of the Small Pox, besides the various Reasons propounded by Gentilis and others, affirms, that they are produced by sme Celestial and hidden Causes, which when Infants and Children, are less able to withstand than People grown up: Hence he says it happens that the one are much more Subject to this Disease than the other. But this Opinion of Fernelius, is notably refuted by Mercurialis, Lib. de Morb. Puer.
Sennertus grants the Small Pox to rise and be thrust forth by some certain and determined putrid Ebullition of the Humors, but he will have this Ebulli∣tion to arise from three Causes; from the Malignant Air, from the Mo∣thers Blood, and vitious Nourish∣ment; and labours in a large Expla∣nation of his, this his own, and the Opinion, of the Arabians, and Ferne∣lius. But to speak the truth, none of these Opinions please me. Not that of the Arabians, because besides the Reasons alledged by Gentilis, there is this one more. For that seeing that Defilement contracted from the Mothers Blood, is asserted to be common to all Men, there would be no Man excused from this Disease; which is contrary to Ex∣perience, when several that have liv'd to an extream old Age, never had the Small-Pox in their Lives, as we have known several in our own Family. Besides, if the Impurity of the Menstru∣ous Blood communicated to the Birth, were the Cause of the Small-Pox, why are not those Women themselves sub∣ject to it, whose Flowers stop beyond the Course of Nature; especially they who never had their Courses in all their Lives, yet for all that were fruit∣ful and had several Children; of which Women, there are several Examples to be found in Trincavellius, Guai∣nerius, Bertinus, Marcellus, Donatus, Iou∣bert, Fabricius, and several others. Be∣sides, that private Defilement of every Woman could very hardly infect o∣thers by Contagion, or excite a latent Contamination in the Bodies of others to a like Ebullition. If you say it may, then give me a Reason, why all they that fit by and attend upon People when the Pox is come forth, and endure their Stenches, are not infected with the Small Pox, though they never had them before? Why has not that Con∣tagion infected me, that am near seven∣ty years of Age, who have visited thou∣sands in the height of that Distemper, endured their Stenches, and handled their Ulcers? Why some, upon the Sight at a distance of a Person that has newly had the Small-Pox, are present∣ly seized by the Distemper? It being a thing almost incredible, that the Con∣tagion or infecting Contamination flow∣ing from the Sick Patient, should fly at such a distance from the Sick to the Sound and Healthy, and so infect him, and leave those untouch'd that are al∣ways conversant in the Room. Nor do I understand that which Thomas Wil∣lis adds for the Confirmation of his Opinion, that that same private Con∣tamination being provoked by some Cause, serments with the Blood, and makes it first boyl, and then coagulate. For since Ebullition always causes a greater Attenuation, I do not compre∣hend how that can cause Coagulation. Moreover, if such a spontaneous Coa∣gulation were necessary after Ebullition, Physitians at the beginning of the Di∣stemper would ill apply attenuating Diaphoretics, as being a hindrance to that Coagulation, and afterwards they would as erroneously prescribe thick∣ning things, as Lentils, Tragacanth, Figgs, &c. which would cause too great a Coagulation. Both which are repugnant to Experience, when both the one and the other are successfully made use of in the Cure of this Di∣stemper. Nor does the Opinion of Fernelius please me; for he, according to his Custom, deduces occult Celestial Cau∣ses in occult Diseases from the Influen∣ces of the Stars. But how uncertain and how frivolous all those things are which are deduced from those Influxes, either by Astrologers or Physitians is apparent from what we have wrote in our Treatise De Peste, Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Neither can I approve the Opinion of Sennertus. For he proposes three Causes of vitious Fermentation, yet by means of that Specific Malignancy which remains in the Small-Pox cannot be explained; and why, by vertue of that vitious Fermentation, procured by those three Causes, the Small-Pox should be occasioned, rather than o∣ther malignant, putrid and pestilent Fe∣vers, or the Itch, St. Anthonies-Fire, Cancers, or such like Diseases. As to the External and Primary Causes of the Small-Pox, by which the Internal Humors are moved, Physitians agree the chief of them to be. 1. A peculiar Disposition and depraved Qua∣lity of the Air, to which belong the more remarkable Mutations of the Sea∣sons, as the hot and moist Constitution of the Spring and Autumn, the Sou∣thern Winds, and warm Constitution of the Winter. 2. The Perturbation of the Blood and Humors; to which belong immoderate Exercise, frequent Bathings, Anger, Fear, and Over-eating, &c. 3. Contagion; for Experience tells us, that this Disease is caught by Contagion: For out of an infected Body continual Steams flow forth,
which being received by other Bodies, presently like Poyson ferment with the Blood, and excite the latent and homogeneal Seeds of the same Distem∣per, and dispose them into the Idea of this Disease, and thus those Contami∣nations flowing forth, are not only communicated by immediate touch, but at a Distance. But by all these Causes, whether good or bad Disposition or Quality of the Air, perturbation of the Humors or Contagion, that Ma∣lignant Specific which we observe in the Small-Pox, is not sufficiently made out, nor wherefore it operates more in these, than upon those Subjects, and in these, than at those Seasons. For many times we have observed hot or moist, and hot with moist Seasons and Constitutions of the Air; many times bad Diet, as in Famines and Sieges, which has occasi∣oned a vast Corruption of Humors in the Body; many we find continually indulging their Appetites; which Willis numbers among the Primary Causes of this Distemper, and yet no Small-Pox ensued. On the other side, in tempe∣rate Seasons, and in cold Winters, they have raged Epidemically among those who have used moderate Diet, and fed upon the best of every thing, and have seized upon Bodies replenished with good Humors, and that many times first of all, before any other Body has been ill to communicate the Contagion, merely upon some Fright, and by the Force of Imagination. Seeing then that notwithstanding all the Causes propounded by Physitians, the true and Specific Essence of the Ma∣lignity which is in the Small-Pox, nor the peculiar and determinate Corrupti∣on of the Blood, nor the Cause and Manner of Specific Fermentation can be explained, I think we are rather to conclude, that the next Causes of the Small-Pox, as well the Internal as the External, which move the Internal, are occult (as are also the Causes of the Pestilence it self) and cannot be unfold∣ed by Us. And therefore it is better to acknowledge the Weakness of our Knowledge, then to betray our Igno∣rance by so many Disputes and various Conjectures, that are grounded upon no Foundation. For who can pretend to give a true and perceptible Reason of so great a Matter? For these are in the Number of those Mysteries, which the Chief Creator is not pleased to let us know exactly. CHAP. IV. Of the Didgnostic Signs. THE Small-Pox are not easily dis∣cerned before the Wheals them∣selves betray the Distemper. But they appearing never so little, then the Sight is easily Judge of the Disease. Seeing therefore it is of great moment in re∣ference to the Cure, to know before the breaking out of the Wheals, whether it be the Small-Pox or no, the Signs of their coming out are first to be in∣quired into and observed. The Signs foretelling the Small-Pox to be at hand, are various. A Fever sometimes more intense, sometimes more remise, with a low Pulse, quick, unequal, and a Heat for the most part not very violent. An Oppression of the Heart, with Melancholy; and a Palpitation often returning, and some∣times a fainting Fit, Head-ach, Deleri∣ums or Ravings; sometimes Epileptic Convulsions, frequent Sneezing, Sleep more heavy than usual and unquiet, Dreams of Thunder, Fire and Flames, Waking with a Fright, difficult Respi∣ration, with frequent Sighs; continual Gaping, Pain in the Back and Loyns, and Pulsation in the Spine, Heaviness and Weariness of the whole Body, a Pricking, and as it were Itching in the Skin and in the Nostrils; a Red Face, Dimness of Sight, yet Brightness and Itching of the Eyes, Tears without any force, sometimes Bleeding at the Nose, Swelling of the Face, Driness of the Mouth, Hoarsness, with a little dry Cough; trembling of the Extream Parts, small Red Spots in the Skin. But these Signs are the more certain, the more rife the Small-Pox are, or if there be any suspition of having caught them; as if the Person has been to visit any one that was Sick of that Disease, or had been frighted with the Sight of any one newly recovered: But there is no certain Sign of the Small-Pox at hand to be taken from the Urine. For that in this Distemper, the Urine for the most part resembles that of sound People. If the Small-Pox, besides the out∣ward Skin, have seized the Inner Parts, then you must judge which Parts they are, by the Disturbance of those Parts. For if the Stomach be infected, it will
appear by Vomit and Pain in the Heart. If the Guts, by their being griped, and a purulent Loosness withal: if the Lungs, by difficulty of Breathing; if the Kidneys, then the Urine will be bloody, and so of the rest. CHAP. V. Of the Prognostic Signs. THE Small-Pox, because they are reckon'd in the Number of acute Diseases, have their four Times like other more acute Diseases. For if the Course of the Disease proceed con∣veniently, they are determined within fourteen days; which if they exceed, it is a Sign either of the Weakness of Nature, or of a great quantity of Mor∣bific Matter; or both. Of these Days, the first is the Beginning, the second the Augmentation, the third the State or Condition, and the fourth, the be∣ginning of the Declination, at what time the Fever and Symptoms are wont to remit. The same fourth Day, which is the Declination of the Ebullition, uses to be the beginning of the coming out of the Small-Pox. The Augmentati∣on continues till the seventh Day; the State and Vigor of the Distemper ap∣pears upon the eleventh Day; from which till the fourteenth, is the Decli∣nation, and at that time the Pox are dryed up, which Exsiccation of the Matter sometimes continues till the twentieth Day. If the Disease proceed without Interruption, according to this Order, we may hope for a good Issue, but if it do not observe this Order, there is no reason to expect other than the worst. But the Event of the Disease, whether Death or Recovery is con∣jectured, by comparing the Strength of the Patient, with the greatness of the Distemper. The Strength of the Patient is collected by his bearing the Oppression of the Disease, and by the Actions of his Body. The Greatness of the Distemper is gathered from the Greatness of the Fever and the Symp∣toms, and the Pustles themselves. If the Strength of the Patient be such as to weather all the four Times of the Disease, he is happy: But if his Strength be vanquished by the force of the Fever and the Symptoms, that it will hardly suffice to grapple with the State and Vi∣gor of the Disease, the Event will prove very dubious. Therefore we are to judge of the Event by those things which accompany and follow the Small-Pox. Such as are the Quality, Big∣ness, Number, Figure and Colour of the Pustles, the time of their coming forth and Place, the Violence of the Fever, the various Symptoms, and the easiness or difficulty of the Patience to undergo the Disease. The good Prognostic Signs are these. At the beginning, before the coming forth of any Spots, Bleeding at the Nose, a speedy coming forth, and soon after, a Remission of the Fever and other Symptoms. The Pox them∣selves at first red, then whitish, soft, high rais'd, round, moderately full of Matter, distinct and not contiguous; a free Speech, and Easie Respiration. From these two latter, Eustachius Ru∣dius promises much toward Recovery. That we may be able, says he, to con∣jecture Life or Death, it behoves us to consider well the Voice and Respiration. For while those two things are in a good Condition, all is safe. For they demon∣strate the Matter to be expell'd far from the Noble Parts, especially from the Vi∣tals. The bad Prognostics are these. A Fever, with grievous Symptoms re∣maining after the breaking forth of the Small-Pox. The Pox slowly coming forth and slowly ripening. Small and few, hard, depressed, and vanishing or sinking again after coming forth: Livid. Violet Colour, Purple, Blackish, dou∣ble in the middle, marked with a black Spot, and seated within the Flesh. And these presages of great Evil, are much augmented and ascertained, by a great failing of the Strength, Pain in the Heart, Vomiting, Hickoping, extream Drought, great Sadness and Disturbance of Mind, with frequent Faintings, Rav∣ing, dead Sleeps, or too much Watch∣ing, Epileptic Convusions; a streight∣ning of the Breast and Chaps, difficulty of Breathing, Hoarsness, a Loathing of Food, Inability to Swallow, Loosness and Pains in the Belly, a Flux of the Courses out of order, bloody Urine, the Extream Parts cold. To which we may add two things more. 1. If ma∣ny have dy'd of the Small-Pox out of the same Family. 2. If they were old when they caught the Distemper. Now they that dye of the Small-Pox, for the most part are suffocated, the Passage of the Spirits being shut up by the Pustles, or else go away in a faint∣ing
Fit, or else are carried off with a Loosness of the Belly, either bloody or without Blood. If the Small-Pox have seized the in∣ner Bowels, they cause a Peripneumonie, Consumption, pernicious Exulcerations of the Liver and Kidneys, and other deadly Mischiefs. If they have seized the Eyes, they frequently cause a lasting Ophthalmy, a Lachrymal Fistula, corrosion of the corner Caruncles, Dimness and Mist, a white Film, and many times Blind∣ness. If after the breaking of the Pox in the Ears or Nostrils, there happens a Hyposarcosis, the Patient frequently looses his Hearing and Smelling. In the Face, if they cause an entire Crust like a Vizor, 'tis a Sign, that when they fall off, they will leave behind them Spots of an ill Co∣lour, and deformed Pits withal. CHAP. VI. Of Prophylactic or Preservative Physic. IN this Disease, as well as in the Plague, there is required a double Cure; Prophylactic, and Therapeutic. Of the Prophylactic Cure, but few Physitians have wrote, either because perhaps they thought it not so necessary, or because so very few consult the Physitian when they are in Health. Nevertheless, since that famous Physitian Avenzoar, not without good reason, adjudged it no less necessary than in the Plague, and for that there are several who are so terribly afraid of this Distemper, as well for that it hazards their Lives, as for the Pits and Deformed Scars it leaves behind, we shall here say something briefly of the Prophylactic Cure, before we proceed to the Therapeutic, in ingard it is more safe and more noble to keep off a Disease, than to expel it out of Pos∣session; and therefore Preservation is very necessary, more especially since Contagion and Corruption of the Air are two of the chiefest Spreaders of this Disease. In the Method of Preservation, the Constitution of the Air is chiefly to be observed, the Corruption of which, ex∣treamly conduces to the Propagation of this Distemper, as being many times the Medium to conveigh contagious Contamination to others. This Air, if it be vitious, is not to be corrected by great Fires, as is usual in the Plague, (for fear of overheating the Body,) but by Fumigations of Juniper-berries, Fran∣kincense, Mastick, Benjamin, Amber, Rosemary, Citron and Orange-peels, Juniper-wood, Laurel, and the like. But nothing is more conducible than to sprinkle the Chambers with Vinegar, or Oximel, and to receive the Fume of them into the Head, by powring them upon a red hot Prick; or often to smell to a Spunge dipp'd in Vinegar, and carried about in a perforated Ivory Box. For as all sweet Smells that are very fragrant, so neither are all stink∣ing Smells to be here admitted, only Vinegar is to be preferred before all Suffumigations, because it not only cor∣rects the Corruptions of the Air, and extinguishes the Contaminations that adhere to it. Moreover, to the end the contagious Contaminations flying about in the Air may be the better a∣voided, Children and others that never had the Small-Pox; are to be warned from visiting, not only People that lye sick of the Small-Pox or Measles, but also those that attend them in their Sickness, or converse with them upon any occasion whatever, nor will it be safe to come near the Houses where they lye sick. The next thing requisite is a good Diet, and Meats of wholsome Juices and easie of Digestion: to which are most agreeable for Sallets and Sauses, Sorrel, Vinegar, Juices of Limons and Oranges, green Grapes pickled, red Goosberries, sowr Cherries, and the like. But on the otherside, abstain from Meats of hard Digestion, and bad Nourishment, from tart Meats and much seasoned with Spice, Salt, and dry'd in the Smoak, Garlic, Onyons, early Fruit; also use Moderation in Eating, Overfulness being no less pre∣judicial than too much Fasting. For Drink, use Ptisans, or small Ale, and for them that drink Wine, they must be allowed to drink small Wines moderately. To the more Delicate, it will not be amiss now and then to give Juleps of Decoctions of Barly, Juice of Citron, Sirrup of sowr Cherries, Vio∣lets, Limons, and such like things, that have a pleasing and acceptable Taste. On the other side, abstain from strong Wine, Brandy, strong Hull and Margaret-Ales, and from
all other strong and spirituous Drinks. Let the Exercises of the Body be mo∣derate, avoiding those that are too la∣borious and overheat the Body, and such as are too easie. Sleep moderately likewise. The next thing to be considered, is going to Stool, in which respect, be∣sides the usual goings to Stool, Care should be taken to purge the Body gently from superfluous Humors, at least once a Week, and that with Pillulae Russi, or Pills of Aloes Rosatum, Leaves of Senna, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, and such like Medicaments, for grown People; but let Children take Syrup of Cychory cum Rheo, or laxative Syr∣rup of Corrents, and the like; but avoid strong Purges, which disturb the Humors and the whole Body. Care also must be taken that the monthly Evacuations of Virgins and Women that are not with Child, ob∣serve their exact Periods; and that there be no Stoppage of the Blood, as to those who are troubled with Hemorrhoids at certain Intervals, take care that such Blood have its due Eva∣cuation. As to Plethorics, and such who have an abundance of Blood, Blood-letting will be very requisite, if the Age of the Person will bear it, and there be no other reason to forbid it. Tranquility of Mind and Courage are also in this Case of great Impor∣tance. More especially, let a Man take care to avoid violent Commoti∣ons of Mind, as Anger, Fear, Frights, and fixing the Thoughts upon the Small-Pox and it's Deformi∣ty. CHAP. VII. Of Therapeutic Cure, and first of Dyet. IN the Cure of those that are sick of the Small-Pox, the Physitian must aim chiefly at two things. The first is to assist Nature in the Expulsion of the Morbific Matter, and to remove all Impediments that hinder her Operati∣ons in that Particular. The other is to remove Accidents, and to take care, least by that Expulsion, the Internal or External Parts receive no prejudice; and for the obtaining of these Ends, we must have recourse to the three Instru∣ments of Physic, Dyet, Chyrurgery, and Pharmacy. There is a most exact Dyet to be ob∣served in this Disease, in regard that many times by that alone the Cure is effected, and Errors committed in that, are often punished with Death. Here also the Air is greatly to be considered; let the Patient lye in a little Chamber close shut, and free from any Wind, to the end he may the more easily breath, and that the stink∣ing Vapors being the more easily dis∣cussed, may the less offend him. Let the Air be tepid, and as little of Cold come in as may be; if it be Winter or a cold Season, the Air is to be correct∣ed with lusty Fires. More especially, take care that no Cold get into the Pati∣ents Bed. For should the least Cold come to him while he is in a Sweat or a moist Breathing, or if the Patient himself, by tossing and tumbling should throw of the Cloaths and check his Sweat, it frequently happens that the Pox fall in again and vanish, or sink into the Skin, to the great Hazard of Life. For which reason, the Patient must not be shifted till after the four∣teenth Day, for fear of striking in the Pox again, to the irrecoverable Ruine of the Patient. Far better it is to suffer the Shifts of the Patient, moist with Sweat, to dry of themselves with the Heat of the Bed, and for the Patient for some Days to bear with the Stench of the Sweat, and the Pustles coming forth, than to change his Linnen and be the Cause of his own Death. But if there be an urgent Necessity for the Patient to change his Linnen, then let him have the same fowl Linnen that he put off just before he fell sick, or that have been worn before by some other sound Body. For I have often observ∣ed clean and newly washed Linnen to have been very prejudicial to sick Peo∣ple, which I am apt to believe proceeds from the Smell of the Soap, which the Linnen in some measure retains. More∣over great Care is to be taken that the Shift be well warmed by the Fire, and that no Cold comes to the Patient while he puts it on. However, this is certain, 'tis better not to change Linnen at all; but to change before the four∣teenth Day is a thing not to be done without extream Hazard. Nor is there any reason for any Man to be afraid of
any bad Smell which the Linnen con∣tracts from the Sweat and broken Pustles, for that we never found it to be prejudicial to any that were ever sick of the Distemper. Lastly, we thought fit to observe here that the Heads of those that are sick of the Small-Pox are not to be bound and wraped up in Linnen Caps, either too hard or too warm; for from thence a∣rise two Inconveniences. 1. Because the Heat of the Head being thus increased, the Pox break out thicker in the Face and Head, than if it be more slightly covered. 2. Because that under Caps bound hard to the Head, the Pox rise larger, flatter, and very broad, nay, many times under those streight Caps, they are so ulcerated, that after a trou∣blesome Cure they leave very ill-favour∣ed Scars behind. For which reason, I always order the Head to be slightly covered, with just Linnen enough to keep it from the Cold, and by no means to bind it on hard. Convenient Administration of Dyet avails also very much to the Cure of the Distemper. At first a very slender Dyet, more especially from the begin∣ning of the Disease to the seventh or fourteenth Day, chiefly of a little Barly-broth, or an Emulsion of Sweet Almonds, and the four cold Seeds boyl∣ed in Barly-water, or slender Chicken or Mutton-broths, endued with a cool∣ing Quality, by the Addition of Lettice, Endive or Purslain, &c. But let him abstain from all manner of Flesh, as al∣so from Eggs and Fish, and all other Meats of ill Juice or hard Concoction; also from all acid, salt, sharp things; from all Spices, Garlic, Onions, and all such things as are very hot. If the Patient be a sucking Infant, then the same Dyet is to be prescribed to the Nurse. But after the Pox are come out, that the Fever ceases, and that the Pustles are ripe, and the Scabs begin to fall, then more solid Dyet is to be al∣lowed; as Chickens, Lamb, Veal, Potch'd Eggs, &c. For Drink, the Patient must make use of Ptisans, or else a Decoction of rasp'd Hearts-horn; let him abstain from Wine, unless in case of fainting Fits, and from all other strong, hot, and heady Drinks. Now how prejudicial it is for such a Patient to drink Wine, Forestus observes, Some idle and unskil∣ful Women and Nurses, says he, there are, who will give Claret to Children lying ill of the Small-Pox and Measles, though at the same time having a violent Fever, vainly perswading themselves that such Drink will bring out the Pox with more ease. Whence it comes to pass, that many after they have drank that Astringent Wine dye of a sudden, the Motion of Nature being check'd, and She thereby disabled to exel the Distemper forth. Others, the Fever being heightned, have been tormented with Head-ach, and fallen into raving Fits, and soon after dye Mad; very few, and they not without great hazard, escape. Here by the way, let us take notice what Mercurialis observes, concerning sweet things in Dyet. But, says he, more especially take care to abstain from all sweet things in Meat and Drink. To which he adds, what Avenzoar writes, that they who use sweet things at that time, are hardly to be recovered. But this Opinion does not agree with com∣mon Practise, by which we are taught, that Licorice, Figs, Jujubs, Raisons, Su∣gar, common Syrrup, and such like sweet things, do the soonest concoct and expel the Morbific Matter to the outward Parts, and therefore sweet things cannot be hurtful in this Distem∣per. Only sweet Wines are to be ex∣cepted, which being strong, offend the Head, augment the Heat, and encrease the Fever. Besides that, Mercurialis at another time confesses, that he was wont to prescribe dry Figs for one sort of Dyet in this Distemper. Moderate Sleep will suffice, and let the Patient lye quiet in his Bed. If he void his Excrements freely and naturally, 'tis very well. But if his Bel∣ly be hard bound, and full of Excre∣ment, it will not be proper to move his Belly before the seventh Day, and not then neither, unless upon some extra∣ordinary and urgent necessity. For the Belly being bound, does not hinder the coming forth of the Small-Pox; but if it be provok'd, there may easily ensue a pernicious Loosness. Avoid all careful and anxious thoughts, and all vehement Perturba∣tions of the Mind, as Fear, a Fright, Sadness and Anger. Though as for Anger, Mercurialis seems to be of ano∣ther Opinion, and believes it may be profitable, For, says he, Nor is it a thing to be regarded, if Patients in this Distemper are sometimes angry, for An∣ger many times is useful to expel noxious Humors to the Superficies of the Body. But I wish it may not contribute to in∣crease the Heat and the Fever.
CHAP. VIII. Of Chyrurgical Helps. THE Primary Assistance of Chyrur∣gery is Blood-letting: concerning which there arises a notable Question among the most Eminent Physitians; whether it be convenient in the Cure of this Distemper or no? Avicen perswades Blood-letting before the Pustles come forth, as also after they are come forth if they be very full. Rases allows it only before they are come forth; before they break forth, the Physitian may let Blood, if there be no other reason to the contrary, either by opening a Vein, or by means of a Cupping-glass with Scarification. For the Quantity is of necessity to be dimi∣nished. Forestus writes, that this Reme∣dy is of wounderful use, especially in a Plethory, so it be made use of at the beginning and before the Pustles begin to rise; and farther he writes, that such as are let Blood in Season, are soonest cured. Amatus the Portugueze produces several Examples of Children that scap'd by seasonable Blood-letting and Cupping, when others dy'd, that would not admit that way of Cure. Nicholas Fontanus writes, that he has alwaies let Blood with success in the Small Pox. Sennertus believes that Blood-letting is not to be used in Children; for that their strength will not bear it. But where the Persons are of maturity, so that they be very Plethoric, he deems it proper to be used, at the beginning and before the fourth day, or at least before the Pustles come out; while the Party is yet in full strength; to the end that Nature being eased of some Part of her bur▪ then she may with more ease overcome the rest. But after the fourth day, or when the Spots begin to appear, then he believes it ought to be altogether let alone. With this Opinion of Senner∣tus the Learned Willis agrees. Never∣theless there are some Eminent Modern Practitioners, who judge Blood-letting proper not only before but after the coming of the Pox, especially in Ple∣thorics; and this, in some measure to check the Ebullition of the Blood. To decide this Controversie, in the first place, there are two times of this Disease to be observed, the first be∣fore, the second after the coming forth of the Pox. In the second place we are to consider with what success Nature operates of her self at both those times by spontaneous evacuation of the Blood, to the end that the Physitian who is but Natures Minister in the Artificial evacu∣ation by Phlebotomy, may be able to follow her in her successful Actions, and avoid her improsperous Efforts. Now this is most evident to all Physitians by long Experience, that if there happens a free and spontaneous bleeding at the Nose before the Pox come forth, it proves fortunate, and to the great ease of the Patient; for that then the Fe∣ver remits, and the Pox come forth with more ease and in lesser number. But if such a spontaneous Bleeding happen after the coming forth of the Pox, it generally proves unfortunate and pernicious to the Patient. The reason is because that before their com∣ing forth, Nature being eased of Part of her burthen, more easily expels what re∣mains. And thus by this Operation of Nature the Physitian is taught what to do in Artificial evacuation, that is to say, that Blood-letting may be advan∣tageous before the coming forth, but of ill consequence after the coming forth of the Distemper: And thus I have observed for the most part that by a seasonable opening a Vein in Plethoric Persons, the Pox come forth not only more easily and with less trouble, but are also more suddenly ripened, which Forestus has also observ'd long before us. But if Phlebotomy be made use of after the Pox come forth, na∣ture being then employed in concoct∣ing and expelling the Morbific matter, is very much debilitated and called off from that Employment, with so much prejudice to the Patient, that I have observed that most People have dy'd who have been thus let blood. For which reason 'tis always my custom to inculcate into my Schollars, that if they be called in time to any Patient, before any signs of the coming forth of the Distemper, that if it be necessary they may open a Vein: But after the least signs thereof appear, and that the red Spots begin in the least to shew themselves, that they forbear to let Blood, and endeavour to help Nature in her expulsion begun, by Antidotes, Diaphoretics and other proper Medi∣cines.
This Blood-letting also I am willing to admit if there be a necessity in Per∣sons of grown years, and that are able to bear it; but in Children, before the seventeenth or eighteenth year, I do not approve Blood-letting notwithstand∣ing that Avenzoar, and Averroes boast their successes in that sort of Practice, and and that many Italian, French, Spaniards, and among the rest Amatus the Por∣tugueise are of the same Opinion. For though in those hot Countries of Italy, France and Portugal such Practice may have proved successful, I do not think it so safe to let Children Blood in our cold Countries. In like manner neither does Trinca∣vellus approve of this letting Children Blood, in regard the event proves often Fatal; or if it succeed, it is rather to be attributed to Fortune then Rea∣son. Eustachius Rudius, Duncan Liddelius and Bauderon order that if the Small Pox do not suddainly break out in Children, to lay House Swallows to the Back, Buttocs and Hips of such Children, or else to apply Cupping-Glasses with a slight Scarification to the same Parts, the first or second day. But this ad∣vice I do not like for two Reasons. First, Because 'tis very prejudicial to lay the Body open the first days (which must of necessity be done in the application of Swallows and Cupping-Glasses) and so give admittance to the cold Air, which checks the coming forth of the Small Pox. Secondly, Because it is very dan∣gerous to wast the strength of Children, which is apt enough to decay of it self, by drawing away the Blood. CHAP. IX. Of Pharmaceutic Remedies, and first of Purgations. PHarmaceutic Remedies are twofold, either Purgative or Expulsive. As to Purgatives, there is not a lit∣tle dispute among Practitioners, whe∣ther they ought not to be first prescrib∣ed in the Cure, and whether at the be∣ginning, part of the Matter ought not to be evacuated, that Nature being eased of part, may more readily expel the rest. These Purgations many approve, and many reject. They that approve them, unanimously consent in this; that all strong Purgatives are to be forborn. But milder Purgatives they hold may be safely made use of, As Pill. Ruffi. Sena-leaves, Aloes Pills, Manna, Cassia, Tamarinds, and such other things as gently move the Belly, more especially such as are somewhat cooling. Others with Averroes will allow no Lenitives to be taken at the Mouth; but only that the Body may be gently mov'd upon urgent necessity with Glysters and Suppositories. These therefore differ but little from the Opinion of the other, who are absolute∣ly against purging the Belly; of which number is Nicolaus the Florentine, who by the Appearance of the Pox, denys the use of Glysters. On the other side, Willis, I know not upon what grounds, is not contented with Purgatives on∣ly, but adventures to proceed to Eme∣tics. To decide this Controversie, we say, that a Physitian in this particular ought to be guided by Reason and Ex∣perience. Reason teaches us, that Na∣ture when she has once begun her work well, ought not to be disturbed, nor to be hindred by any other contrary Mo∣tion, or to be called away from the bu∣siness, which would be done, if that Motion which Nature endeavours from the Center to the Periphery, should be inverted by Purgatives from the Peri∣phery to the Center. Experience tells us, that always in this Distemper, the Morbific Matter moves with success from the Center to the Periphery, (but where Nature tends, thither we ought to lead by the common ways agreeable to the Law of Nature) and that a Motion con∣trary to this is very unfortunate, whether voluntary or artificial, and that all Per∣turbations of the Belly whatever, and Vomitings are greatly prejudicial, nay for the most part pernicious; for that they presently check the Expulsion of the Pox, and strike those in again that were expelled; So that the Patients over∣whelmed with pains and miseries, upon the failing of their strength, are brought to the period of their lives in a short time. It teaches us also, that all Leni∣tive Medicaments whatever though ne∣ver so gentle, in this Disease procure a pernicious loosness (as we have observed in the Plague) and that the Small Pox is sooner expelled, if there is little or no Motion to Stool for the first day, then if there should be a loosness either Spontaneous or Artificial, and a fre∣quent dejection. Therefore Avicen or∣ders
that in the Progress and end of the Distemper, the Belly should be stopt with moderate Astringents. Of the same Opinion also are Rases and Aven∣zoar, and among the Moderns Fracasto∣rius, Mercurialis, Holler and Lazarus Riverius, who thus writes upon this Sub∣ject. When the Small Pox begin to ap∣pear, says he, ensuing Purgation is per∣nicious; especially if the Malignity be in its full vigor, and at an Epidemic conjun∣cture, when most Children dye of the Di∣stemper. And therefore it is better to for∣bear all manner of Purgation; for that in Malignant and Pestilential Diseases, Purgation at the beginning is extreamly prejudicial. And therefore I would ad∣vise Physitians, that for the first few days they would think no more of loosening the Belly. Or if they judge it necessary for some extraordinary cause, that they give no Purgatives or Lenitives at the Mouth, but for grown People make use of Emollient Glysters, and for Children and Infants of Suppo∣sitories only made of Honey. For long practice has taught me that this is the safest way of Cure; and that others, who pretended another way of Cure, have unfortunately killed several, nay the most of their Patients. CHAP. X. Of Medicines Diaphoretic, and Expellers of the Small Pox. OMitting therefore Purgation for a time, and using Phlebotomy with great caution upon urgent necessity, the next thing for a Physitian to consi∣der, is whether Nature do her duty in Expulsion sufficiently or no? In the first Case there is no necessity to assist her with much Physic, especi∣ally if there be no grievous Symptoms, for slight ones will easily vanish of them∣selves, and the Small Pox will come forth sufficiently, if there be care taken against the External cold, and keep the Patient in a gentle Sweat for the first three or four days. But if the Patient hap∣pen to be of the Number of the great Per∣sonages, or one of their Children, who will not be satisfy'd with such plain and ordinary words of the Physitian, then you may prescribe a small quantity of Bezoar Stone, with Magistry of Pearls, or Crabs Eyes, or Essence of Corral, ad∣ding thereto some few Grains of Saf∣fron, or some such thing that will not disturb Nature in her work and sa∣tisfie the importunity of Friends or Parents. But if Nature seem insufficient in the performance of her Duty, so that she requires Assistance, we must have re∣course to other remedys, that may suc∣cour Nature in her Endeavors. Now among those Expulsives, that are to be prescribed upon the first com∣ing of the Physician, are most of those Diaphoretics and Antidotes, which we have said are to be prescrib'd at the beginning of the Pestilence. lib. 3. cap. 5. out of which the Physician may choose those that he thinks most proper for his Patient. For some are most proper for Infants and Children, others for grown People, others for the robust, some for the feeble, others for such as have but slight Fevers, and others for those whose Fevers are more vio∣lent. For the robust, the most gene∣rous Medicins are Treacle and Diascor∣dium, with Salts of Wormwood, Car∣duus Benedictus and the like. For Children and Nice Persons make choice of such things as have a grateful Taste, compos'd of the Species of Hearts∣horn, coral, Pearls, Saffron, Alkermes, Hyacinth and such like. But above all the rest I never found any thing more effectual then our Treacle-wa∣ter, which we have describ'd in our Treatise of the Pestilence. lib. 3. cap. 5. which has no ungrateful Taste, and therefore may be given alone, or with some pleasing Syrup to Children and In∣fants. If the Small Pox do not come forth freely, in the first place let the Patient take some Sudorific, prescrib'd after the following manners. ℞. Treacle of Andromachus ʒj. Salt of Carduus Benedict. ℈j. s. Water of Car∣duus. Benedict. ℥ij. Mix them for a draught. ℞. Diascordium of Fracastorius, Treacle, of each ʒ s. Extract of Carduus Ben. Salt of Wormwood, of each ℈j. De∣coction of Carduus Ben. q. s. Mix them for a draught. ℞. Diascordium ʒj. Hearts-horn burn, red Coral prepared of each ℈j. of our Treacle-water ℥j. s. Syrup of dry Roses
℥ s. mix them for a draught, if there be any fear of a looseness. ℞. Of our Treacle water ℥j. or ℥j. s. double refined Sugar ʒj. mix them for a draught for very nice Children. ℞. Confect. Hyacinth, Diascordium, Harts-horn burnt of each ℈j. Mix them for a Bolus. ℞. Pulv. Liberants ℈ij. Saffron gr. iiij. Harts-horn burnt ℈j. Mix them for a Powder. ℞. Pearls, red Coral prepared, Harts∣horn burnt of each ʒj. Mans Christi ℈j. Mix them for a Powder to be taken in some Cordial Liquor. ℞. Seed of Columbines and Turnip-seed an. ℈ j. s. of Nosesmart seed ℈ j. make a Powder for ordinary People. ℞. New Sheeps dung ʒ vj. or ℥ j. small VVhite-wine, Decoction of Barley an. ℥ j. s. Mingle them together, and let them stand two or three hours, then strain them gently, and give the Liquor strain∣ed for one draught, which powerfully expels the small Pox. After these and such like other forms, Sudorifics may be conveniently prescrib∣ed and exhibited. There is it requisite in this Case to prescribe many laborious Compositions as the same Physitians (especially the Scholars of Paracelsus) with great Ostentation will be studying to do: in regard that a few are sufficient for this Indication. When the Patient has taken his Su∣dorific, he is to be well cover'd with Blankets and other Coverings, and so be provoked to Sweat. Nevertheless care is to be taken, least being covered too hot, or lying in a hot Stove, he do not fall into a Swoon, for as in all other things, so there is a Moderation to be observed in this sort of swoond∣ing. Here by the way we are to take no∣tice, that Fracastorius, Io Paschalis, Fo∣restus, Riverius, and many others re∣commend for the better provoking of Sweat, that the Patient should be cover∣ed with red Coverlets; whether they believe that there is something of a Singular property in red, which contributes very much to the Expulsion of the Small Pox; or that a Sweat provoked by such red Coverlets, is more Efficacious to bring out the Small Pox; or that the looking upon red provokes the Colours outward, as Velescus de Taranta and Duncan Lid∣delius write. But they all seem to be under a great mistake, who expect any thing particular from the red Colour of the Coverlets. For it is not the Colour, but the heat provoked by the Coverlets which causes the Expulsion of the Small Pox. But this same Errour seems to have derived its Original from hence, that formerly in the time of our great Grand-Fathers, the best and thickest Coverlets were dy'd of a red Colour, the thinner and courser Sort were dy'd of other Colours; and hence it was that when the Physitians of those times, saw it necessary for their Patients to be well covered, they ordered them to be covered with the best and thickest Blankets, which the suc∣ceeding Physitians not really observing, thought the preceding Physitians had ordered their Patients to be covered with red Coverlets, as if they had Experienced something more notable and singular in a red, that in any o∣ther Colour to provoke the Small Pox. After the Patient has Sweat well, according to the proportion of his strength, the Cloaths may be somewhat lighten'd, to relieve him in his great Sweat. However he is to be kept still in a moisture, or gentle Breathing Sweat for a day or two, till the Pox are well come forward; taking great care nevertheless that his strength be not wasted with two much heat. Thus Forestus orders the Patient to be kept in an Air moderately warm, and to keep him so covered with Cloaths and Co∣verlets, that he may still lye in a kind of Breathing Sweat, taking care above all things that the heat of the Body be not too much augmented by heaps of Coverings, or heat of Stones, and so the Fever getting strength, the Patient come to be stifled with a Syncope. This Duncan Liddelius also rightly admo∣nishes. Now to the end that during this same Breathing-Sweat the Expulsion of the Pox may have the more swift and better success, our Country Folks are wont to boyl sliced Figgs in small Ale, and give the Decoction lukewarm to the Patient with good success. And Forestus highly extolls this Simple De∣coction of Figs, and gives it all Children. However Leonellus does not boil the Figs
in small Ale but in Whey, and very properly ues that Decoction. Some will give the more sprightly sort of Children Figs to eat: nor do they do amiss, so that their Stomacs will bear them. For Figs, which way soever they are used, are very wholsom in this Distemper. And this is the reason, why being boil∣ed and mixed in Cataplasms, and laid upon Tumors to ripen them, as they concoct crude Humors and hasten Suppuration, so being taken in De∣coctions or eaten, they drive out the Small Pox, and cause a swift Matura∣tion of them, as daily Experience tells us. Only when you use them, this one thing is to be observed, that neither they, nor their Decoctions must be gi∣ven to them, whose Bellies are Laxa∣tive or over-loose, or where a Loos∣ness is feared; for they may excite a pernicious Flux, where the Patient is subject already to Loosness. Frequent∣ly therefore Physitians will not pre∣scribe the simple Decoction of Figs, but a Composition for the same purpose, somewhat of this nature. ℞. French Barley cleansed ℥j. Licorice sli∣ced ʒij. Red Vetches ℥ j. s. Turnep-seed, Fennel-seed an. ʒ ij. Figs no. xvij. Water q. s. Make a Decoction accord∣ing to Art to two Pints. To this Decoction some add Cardu∣us, and Water Germander, others Lentils and Raisins of the Sun, Parsley∣seed, Culumbine-seed, Turnep, and o∣thers other Ingredients These two Decoctions are taken from Avicen and Rases, much used and ap∣proved by succeeding Physitians. ℞. Lacca washed ʒ v. Lentils peel ʒvj. Gum Tragacanth ʒ iij. Water q. s. make a Decoction to a Pint and half. ℞. Figs ʒ vij. Lentils peel'd ʒiij. Lacca. ʒij s. Tragacanth, Fennel-seed an. ʒ ij. Water lb s. Boil this to the remainder of the third Part. Such a Decoction also may be some∣what otherwise prescribed. ℞. Raisins of the Sun stoned ℥ij. dry Figs no. x. entils peel'd ℥iiij. Lacca ʒ j. s. Fennel-seed ʒiij. Parsley-seed ʒ j. s. Saf∣fron ℈ j. VVater lb iij. Boil them to two Pints. Garcias Lopez prescribes a Deco∣ction of the same nature after this man∣ner ℞. Dry Figs no. x. Iujubes without Ker∣nels no. xv. Lentils peel'd ℥ ij. Seeds of Fennel, Dill, Parsley, Quinces an. ʒij. Lacca, Tragacanth, Roses, Saunders an. ʒ ij. VVater q. s. Boil them according to Art; and to the strained Liquor add Saffron powdered ʒ s. But Cardan, Io. Baptist. Sylvaticus, Amatus of Portugal, Septalius, and some others disallow Lentils and Tragacanth. Sennertus approves those compounded Decoctions only upon the score of Ex∣perience, because many Physitians have been successful in the use of them, not that he gives any reason for it. But I will give my reason which is this, be∣cause they somewhat thicken the Boiling Blood, and dispose it to a quicker Ma∣turation of the Blood: and therefore I think them fit to be made use of, not only at the beginning of the Distemper, to drive out the Pox, but a little after the beginning to hasten their Expulsion and Maturation as we said, but now concern∣ing Figs. There are some who distill these De∣coctions, and give the distilled Water to the Patients. But these are Fools in Chymistry, not knowing that Lac, Figs, Lentils, Tragacanth, and such other pri∣mary viscous and sweet Ingredients, do not pass through the Lembec in Distilla∣tion, whence of a good and effectual De∣coction they make a Water altogether ineffectual. If the Heat be not very intense, you may to very good purpose add to the Decoction of Figs the Roots of Elecampane, which prosperously pro∣mote Expulsion. Others add the Flowers of Marigolds. Instead of these Decoctions, when the strength of the Disease, and great necessity does not urge them, these pleasing Emulsions may be aptly pre∣scrib'd for nice and curious Palates. ℞. Sweet Almonds peel'd ℥j. of the four Cold seeds peel'd an. ʒj. s. Seed of Na∣vews, Columbines, Carduus Benedict. an. ʒj. Barley water q. s. make an Emusion to a pint; to which add re∣fin'd Sugar, or for the richer sort Manus Christi very clear ℥ s. or q. s. to render
it gratefully sweet. Mingle all toge∣ther and make an Emulsion. ℞. Seed of Carduus Benedictus peel'd, of Columbines, of Navews an. ʒij. Melons ℥iij. Fennel and Carduus VVaters an ℥iij. adding of Manus Christi q. s. for sweetness, mingle all together for Infants and Children. All the Germans make these Emulsi∣ons with the Distill'd Waters of Sorrel, Borage, Carduus, and Scabious, &c. But we ascribe little strength to them, and value more the Decoction of Bar∣ley, which may in some manner pro∣mote Maturation. If there be any who with more dis∣cretion think fit to use Sweet-meats, they may be prescrib'd after this manner. ℞. Root of Elecampane Condited, Con∣serve of Borage and Violets an. ℥j. Sy∣rup of Elecampane q. s. mix them and make an Electuary. ℞. The pulp of large Raisins of the Sun, and Figs, preserv'd Orange-peel, Conserve of Roses an. ʒvj. Syrup of Orangs q. s. mix them for an Electuary. ℞. Pulvis Liberans ʒj. Harts-horn burnt ʒ s. Citron rind condited, Wallnuts preserv'd, Conserve of Marigold slowers an. ʒvj. Syrup of Wallnuts q. s. mix them for an Electuary. The Chymists applaud their dissoluti∣ons, Magistery's and Essences of Pearls, Coral, Harts-horn, and the like, rather to be magnified for their hard Names then the benefit of their Operation: as by which great effects are promis'd to be done, but very little perform'd, and which seem rather to aim at the gain of the Seller's, then the Recovery of the Pa∣tient. To all the foresaid Medicines, if there be any Intense heat of a Fever, some cooling things may be added; as if you should add to the Decoctions Borage, Succory, Lettice, Violet leaves, Endive, Bugloss, Roses, the four Cold seeds, &c. or to the Electuaries, Con∣serve of Violets, Roses, Water Lillies Powder of Diatragacanth, or Cold Dia∣margarit, Trochises of Spodium or I∣vory calcin'd, and the like. Besides Internal Medicaments, Bau∣deron prescribes for the quick driving out the Pox and provoking of Sweats, Epithemes which are a sort of Decocti∣ons, Fomentations, Emplasters, Oyls to a∣noint the Pulses, and the like to be out∣wardly applyed. But these do all more harm then good, and by means of the Ventilation of the Air, rather hin∣der then promote the provocation of Sweat. However in the use of all these things a common Error of many Physitians is here to be taken Notice of, who inter∣mix with their Medicaments Sorrel, green Grapes, Barberies, Ribes, Apples, Juice and Syrup of Limons, Tamarinds and such kind of sowr things, and this as they say to mitigate the heat, and stop the Ebullition. Certainly these Gentlemen are altogether out of the way. Let them if they please, by means of Acids mitigate the heat in Inflama∣tions, burning and tertian Fevers, and such like Vitious Fermentations of the Blood; but not in this Distemper, which is to be brought to a Crisis and Expulsion and ripening of the morbific matter by some excess of heat and E∣bullition, and so to throw off the Disease. For Acids, because they quell the heat and Sulphureous Ebullition which at∣tends this Disease and hinder the neces∣sary Concoction as also the Expulsion and Maturation of the morbific matter, and are hurtful to the Breast, are so prejudicial, that hardly any thing can be prescrib'd more dangerous. CHAP. XI. Of the Cure of the Parts of the Body more Afflicted then o∣thers, and first of the Inter∣nal. AFter General Curation which re∣gards in the first place the Preservation and Life of the whole Body, some few things are to be said concern∣ing the special Cure of some parts, which in this Disease are more Afflicted then others. Because that the Morbific matter either is more especially trouble∣som to them, or falls upon them with greater force and in greater abun∣dance.
Now the Parts more then others Af∣flicted are either Internal or Exter∣nal. The principal Internal Parts are the Lungs, the Stomach, the Guts, the Liver and the Reins: and that they are Affected and greivously Prejudic'd is discern'd by the bad Performance of their Functions. But although when these Parts, whe∣ther one or more be particularly afflicted, the danger of the Patients is so great, that very few so seiz'd, recover from the Disease and escape, nevertheless because all do not dye but some are sav'd, it behoves the Physitian to De∣vise what Cure may be done in these desperate Cases, and as much as may be to lessen the cause of the Disease, and asswage the Symptoms, that so he may either restore the Patient to Health, or procure him a more easie Death. In General the Decoctions of Lentils, Lack, and Tragacanth relieve all these Parts and Bowels so Afflicted. For Lack preserves the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys; Lentils Corroborate the In∣testines, and Tragacanth defends the spi∣ritual Parts. Particularly sweet things are proper for the Lungs, Labouring under Sick∣ness, as being those things which pro∣mote Maturation, asswage Coughing, and facilitate Spitting. Such are Syrup of Colts-foot, Lico∣rice, Jujubes, Wild Poppies, Violets, Roses, cold Diatragacanth, Diapendium, Powder and Juice of Licorice, Conserves of Roses, Borage, Violets, and the like, of which as occasion requires, some∣times Loches, sometimes Trochischs, sometimes Electuaries are made. Or else Pectoral Decoctions of Barley cleans'd, Colts-foot, Althea, Violet Leaves, Figs, Raisins, Jujubes, &c. are sweeten'd by their mixture. Treacle at the beginning powerfully asswages Vomiting of the Stomach and Pains of the Heart. Afterwards some such kind of Emulsion is to be Ad∣minister'd. ℞. Sweet Almonds cleans'd ℥j. four greater Cold seeds an. ʒj. s. Lettice and Co∣lumbine seed an. ʒj. s. White Poppy seed ʒij. s. Barley water q. s. make an Emulsion for one pint. To which add Syrup of Poppies ʒij. Syrup of Borage ℥s. Mix them. Outwardly a Fomentation may be applyed to the Region of the Stomach, of a Decoction of Mallows, Althea, Mint, Sage, Thyme, Marjoram, Flowers of Roses, Camomil and Melilot, seeds of Anise and Cumin. After Fomenta∣tion for the greater Corroboration of the Part, anoint with this Liniments. ℞. Oyl of Mint and Anise. an. ℥j. Ex∣pression of Nutmegs ʒj. s. Oyl of Spike and Bricks an. ʒj. Mix them for a Liniment. After Unction, let this little Bag be lay'd on, sprinkled with hot Wine, or else boyl'd a little in Wine, and gently squeez'd. ℞. Ledves of Majoram, Rosemary, Sage, Flowers of Melilot and Roses an. half  handful, Seeds of Dill, Lovage, Cu∣min, Nutmegs an. ʒj. Clove Gilliflowers ℈ij. make a gross Powder▪ and sow it in a little Linnen bag according to Art. Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium, Hart's-horn burnt Crabes, Eyes Powdred, Terra Sigellata or sealed Earth, red Coral, conserve of red Roses, or else the first Decoction of Avicen in the foregoing Chapter asswage the Gripings of the Guts, and stop the Flux of the Belly. Or else some such kind of Almond Composition. ℞. White Poppy seed ʒiij. Sweet Almonds cleansed ℥ij. Decoction of Barley, q. s. make an Emulsion to a Pint, to which add, Syrup of Poppies and dry Roses an. ʒiij. mix them together for an Almond composition. When the Liver is affected the same Amygdalate will be very proper, ad∣ding the four cold Seeds. Or else a Decoction of Barley with red Roses and red Saunders sweetned with Syrup of wild Poppies, Roses and Violets. Or else an Electuary of Citron Rinds condited, Conserve of Roses, Borage, Violets, and Powder of the three Saun∣ders, with an addition of Syrup of wild Poppies.
For the Kindneys, if the Patient makes Bloody Water, the following Emulsion is to be prescribed. ℞. Sweet Almonds cleansed ℥j. s. the four cold Seeds an. ʒj. White Poppy seed ʒiij. Decoction of Barley q. s. make an Emulsion to a Pint. In which dissolve Tragacanth powdered ℈ij. Syrups of Wild Poppy, dryed Roses and Cumphry an. ℥ s. Mix them together for an Almond composi∣tion. Liddelius in this case commends powder of Amber Trochischs of Yellow Am∣ber, or Alkakengy, with an Emulsion of the four greater cold Seeds. These are the primary and cheif things which can be prescribed and administred in these most dangerous cases when the inner Bowels are grei∣vously affected, according to which method Physiclans may and ought to devise many others of the same Na∣ture. For a Patient is not presently to be abandond as uttterly lost in the pangs of extremity and danger of Death (which would be an uncharitable act in Christanity) but it behoves a Phy∣sitian to try his utmost and leave the rest to God, who has many times re∣stored to Health such as have lain in a desperate condition. CHAP. XII. Of the Cure of the External Parts. THE External Parts which are usu∣ally most afflicted by this Distem∣per are the Hands and Feet, the Mouth and Chaps, the Nose, the Ears, the Eyes and Face. At the coming forth of the small-Pox, or when they begin to ripen, many times an extraordinary Pain and Itching afflicts the Persons diseased, in the hollow of their Hands, and the Soles of their Feet, because the thick∣ness of the Skin in those Parts prevents their coming forth. You shall cure this symptom by somenting those Parts in warm water, or in warm water mixt with Sweet Milk, or in a molli∣fying Decoction. If the small Pox are come out very thick about the Mouth and Chaps, they cause a difficulty of Respiration and swallowing. In this case the Mouth is frequently to be washed, and the Throat also frequently gargl'd with the simple Decoction of Figgs, or if there be any Inflammation or violent heat, the same Decoction may be thus prescribed. ℞. Barley cleansed ℥j. s. sliced Figs no. xvij. Raisins of the Sun stoned ℥j. s. Leaves of Althea, Violets, Endive, Lettice, an. one handful and a half, flowers of pale Roses one handful, of Elder one handful, Water q. s. make a Decoction of two pints to wash the Mouth. When the Pox are ripe, to render the act of swallowing more easie, and cause a swifter breaking of the Pox, let the Patient frequently swallow a Pill about the biggness of a filbeard, of new Butter without any Salt, wrapt up in Sugar, for this wonderfully dis∣solves the Swelling Pox of the Jaws. But if this happen to fail, and that the Pox remain whol, and that the difficulty of Breathing and Swallow∣ing still increases, then take a small Spunge fastened to a little stick, and having dipped it in Syrup of Violets, squeeze it strongly against the Jaws, to the end thereby the Pox may be forcibly broken, and the narrowness of the Passage open'd. So soon as the Pox are broken, gargle with a Decoction of Barley, Plantain, and Red Roses, sweetened with Honey of Roses and Syrup of Cumfrey. To defend the Nostrils from the Pox, let the Patient very often smell to Venegar. Thus also Forestus writes, that Benedict. Fa∣ventinus, before breaking of the Pox, ordered their Patients to smell to Vi∣negar, wherein they had boil'd a quan∣tity of Roses. Liddelius, also and Ri∣verius approve the smelling to Vine∣gar. But if the Pox happen to be very thick in the Nostrils, annoint them of∣ten with a Feather dipped in Oyl of Sweet Almonds. But if they are grown into hard Scabs, and obstruct the No∣strils, and so procure a difficulty of Breathing, then stuff into the Nostrils new Butter without Salt, by which means the Scabs being softned, fall off, and the Obstruction ceases The advice of others is, that the Patients should snuff up into their Nostrils these and the other Decoctions; but that Children cannot do; nor can grown
People do it by reason of the Obstru∣ction. Only Butter thrust up often in∣to the Nostrils does the business, so that there is no need of other troublesom Remedies. But if there be any Exul∣ceration in the Nostrils, that is to be cured with a Liniment made of the Oyl of the Yolks of Eggs and juice of Plantain well mixt together in a Mor∣tar. To which, if there be an occasion of drying up the Matter more than or∣dinary, you may add a little Tutia Oyntment. If the Ears ake and itch; let not the Patient handle them with his Hands: or if they run, let the Matter go, and take care that they continue open. But if the Pain be very much, dip a Spunge in the Decoction of the Leaves of Althea, Flowers of amomil, Melilot, and Roses, Seeds of Fengreek, Dill and Cumin, and drop it lukewarm into the Ear. The Medicinal Part that concerns the Eyes, consists partly in Preservation, partly in the Cure. To preserve the Eyes from being over-run with the Pox, some wash the Eye-lids with Plantain and Rose water, wherein a little prepa∣red Tutia has been infused, or mixed with a little white Self and Camphire. Bauderon prescribes to this purpose the following Collyrium. ℞. Leaves of Black-thron-Bush, Plantain, red Roses an half a handful, Boyl them in Smiths water to ℥iij. In the strain∣ing dissolve Saffron ℈j. Camphire gr. v. The white of one Egg, and mix them together. Of this drop some few drops into the Eyes every hour, and lay little Rags dipped in the same upon the Eye∣lids, and keep the Patient dark. Liddle prescribes this, ℞. Rose-water ℥ij. Plantain-water ℥j. Powder of the Seed of Sumach ʒij. warm them over a gentle Fire, and strain them with a good force. Add to the straining Camphir ℈ j. Saffron gr. v. Mix them for a Collyrium, and let the Eyes be often moistened with a Lin∣nen cloth dipped therein. Mercurialis administers this, ℞. Rose-water, Plantain-water an. ℥j Sumac ℥ s. let them steep a whole night, and make a mixture with as much white of an Egg as suffices. Or else he takes halybeat, Milk mixt with Rose-water; with which sometimes he mingles a little Mirrh, to assawge the pain and itching. For my part I find nothing better then Saffron pow∣dered and mixt with Cream of sweet Milk. With which mixture let the Eyes be anointed with a Feather, touch∣ing with the same now and then the Caruncles in the larger corner, which I use with success; when the Eyes are damnified, only adding thereto a little white Sief. If the Eye-lids cannot be preserved from the Small Pox, then it frequently happens, that they swell very much; so that the Eyes are closed by reason of the swelling. In this case observe, that the Eye-lids, notwithstanding that swel∣ling, are to be opened with the Fingers once or twice every day, to the end the humour abiding therein may be let out, which otherwise thickning within the Eye-brows begits a Whitshot. But if by reason of the largeness of the swel∣ling the Eye-lids cannot be conveniently opened, they are first to be fomented with a soft Spung dipt in Mutton broth; or a lukewarm Decction of Leaves of Althea, Flowers of pale Roses, and Melilot, and Seed of Fengreek, and after the use of this Fomentation for some time, then try again to sunder the Eye-lids with your Fingers. If after the swelling is abated, and consequent∣ly the Eye-lids freely open, any white Clouds like the white of an Egg, appear in the Eyes, dimming the sight, blow a little white Sugar Candy finely powdered, through a quill into the Eye; with which and nothing else I have suc∣cessfully removed those little Clouds. But if they chance to grow harder, and ab∣solutely blind the sight, then add to the said Sugar Candy a fourth or sixth part of Lapis Calaminaris finely powdred together with the Sugar Candy. That powder wonderfully takes away those Clouds and restores the sight. But if the Eyes are Ulcerated by the Pox, they must be cured with this Colly∣rium. ℞. Ceruse washed ʒiij Sarcocol. ʒj. Gum Tragacanth ℈ j. Opium gr. ij. make Trochischs of this with Muscilage of Tragacanth extracted in Plantain-wa∣ter, which when use requires, are to be dissolved in Womans milk, or Rose∣water.
The care of the Face, like that of the Eyes, consists partly in Preservation partly in Cure. Preservation is not intended, to prevent the breaking forth of the Pox in the Face (for if that should be hindred, the Distemper would seize the inner Parts, as the Brain, Meninx's, Eyes, and other Parts which would be a greater preju∣dice) but that the Small Pox being dried and falling off, may leave as few Scars and Pits as may be. To which pur∣pose several Topics have been invent∣ed. Some, while the Pox are coming forth, frequently foment the Face with a Decoction wherein Pease have been boyl'd to an Extraordinary softness, as we say to mash. Others anoint the Face twice a day with a Feather dipp'd in Oyl of Navews with great success. Forestus recommends Oyl of Sweet Almonds, Riverius Oyl of Nuts. Others Bacon tosted at a hot Fire, and the dripping receiv'd into Rose∣water, and so made into a soft Oynt∣ment, which does well; and was gene∣rally used by that great Practitioner Timannus Gesselius. Others roast the Caul of a Boar-Pig at the Fire upon a Spit, letting the Fat drop into a Re∣ceptacle fill'd with Rose-water, and smear the Face all over with that mix∣ture, and then cover all the Face with the Fat of the same Hog cut into thin slices. This they do twice a day, taking off the Old, and laying on fresh, till perfect Maturation of the Pox which happens sooner by that means, till they fall off: and this is a great secret among the Court Lady's. Cer∣tainly none of these ways are to be contemn'd, but excellent in their kind; and I believe they are many times to be made use of. Especially among the Richer sort and great People, that think the Physitians care do them more good by some notable Exploit, then Nature, by her own endeavours. How∣ever I generally give this advice to my Patients, that at the beginning they a∣noint the Face with a Spunge dipped in Mutton Broth after the Mutton is boil∣ed from the Bones, having first taken away the fat which discolours the Face, and to use this several times in a day, till the Maturation of the Wheals; but after that to leave the rest to Nature. Nay I perswade many not to tamper at all but to leave the whole to Nature, especially if the Pox do not come out very thick. Moreover I chiefly re∣commend this to their care, that the Patient do not scratch and dig off the Wheals with his Nails. For Experi∣ence teaches us, that where the Pustles dry and fall off of themselves, without opening, they escape with sewest Pits or Scars: Which Gracias Lopez and Forestus also observe. But here the Custom of the Courtiers may not improperly be examined, who more solicitous to preserve their Beauty then others, use to open the Wheals with a Golden Bodkin to let out the Matter, before it corrode, as they pretend, more deep into the Skin, and so make deeper Scars and Pits; which the Arabians and many Mo∣dern Physitians also prescribe. But we must tell them that we have alwaies found this opening very prejudicial, and that the Pits and Scars have been the deeper for that Operation; and Rive∣rius is of the same Opinion. And this Experience is supported by two Reasons. First, That Perforation ought not to be attempted, but when the Wheals are ripe and white: But in regard that when the Matter is white and concocted, it is a sign that all that sharp servour, and power of corroding the Flesh or Skin is quite gone, especially the Wheals drying up of themselves, that Operati∣on of the Golden Needle is altogether superfluous, seeing there is no fear of any farther Corrosion. Secondly, The matter being drawn forth by that same opening Operation, the Cavities are presently dried up by the ambient Air and grow hard; whence it comes to pass that the Flesh that lyes underneath, cannot grow up to fill the vacances. On the other side, if the Wheals are not opened, but the matter be permitted to dry up of its self, then the Flesh underneath is preserved soft, and so much grows up again, that before the Matter is fully dried up, the place of the Wheals are filled up again, so that when the Scabs fall off, there are hard∣ly any Pits to be seen. This latter Reason therefore teaches us, that great care is to be taken to prevent the Pa∣tients from scratching off the itching Scabs with their Fingers, or pulling them off before they are dry'd. For certain experience tells us, that nothing causes deeper Pits or Scars than that un∣ruliness. And therefore as to Infants and Children I alwaies advise that their Hands be so ty'd and swath'd up, that they may not be able to lift them to their Faces, and scratch off the Wheals that are upon it. And this is the Ad∣vice of the Author of the Book Enti∣tuled; Of the property of things, For,
saith he, let the Nurse or Physitian take care, whether they be Children or grown People, that the little Bladders of the Pustles be not broken, either because they itch, or for any other Reason; nor opened, specially those about the Face: For if the Wheals are once perforated and pricked, the Scars will be deep and lasting. And this is confirmed by the Experience of Fo∣restus also. The Arabians were wont to wash the opened Wheals with Salt-water, which Paschal, Rudius and others approve. And many, with a Decoction of Saun∣ders, red Roses, Plantain, Myrtils and Sanicle. But such Lotions are to be re∣jected; because they dry up too quick∣ly the Pits of the Pox, and so hinder the Flesh from growing up, so that the Pits remain as deep as they were before. Sometimes it happens that the Small Pox leave behind filthy Exulcerations which corrode the Skin; but these Ama∣tus washes first with this Decoction. ℞. Flowers of Red Roses and Myrtils, Leaves of Lentisc, Oaken tops, and Tamirish an▪ equal Parts. Water q. s. make a Decoction to wash the Ulcers, and after you have wiped them with a Cloth strow on this powder. ℞. Frankincense, Mastick, red Roses, Sar∣cocoll. an. equal Parts, make them into a very fine Powder. Forestus in the same Case, besides the Camphire Oyntment, uses also the fol∣lowing Oyntment of Lead, which Dun∣can Liddelius highly commends. ℞. Burnt Lead ℥ij. Litharge ℥j. Ceruse washed, vinegar an. ℥ s. Oyl of Roses ℥iij. Honey of Roses ℥j. Yolks of Eggs no. iij. Mirrh ℥. s. Wax q. s. make an Oyntment according to Art. After the Small Pox is cured, some∣times red Spots remain; for the more speedy taking away of which, some there are that wash them twice or thrice a day with a Decoction of Lu∣pines and Beans, wherein some also boyl the Roots of Bull-rushes, and Southern∣wood leaves. Others use the distilled Water of Flowers of Beans and Solo∣mons Seal, mixing therein a little juice of Limons. Others wash the Spots with Water of Cows-dung Io. Paschal commends the Lotion of Water of Rosemary. Mercurialis extolls the the Distilled Water of two Calves-Feet, as many Limons, and a small quantity of Dragons. Others anoint them with the Oyl of Roses or Pomatum mixt with Tartar. But I have observ'd by long Practise that they wear away sooner, if nothing at all be done to them, for the External Air, after the Exulcerations of the Small Pox is over, drys and hardens by degrees the new Skin, by which means the Colour of those Spots wears off, and at length wholly vanishes, when the new Skin has acquir'd an equal hardness with the former. And therefore I never prescribe any Lotions or Oyntments to that purpose, in regard they do but retard the hardning of the Skin, and removal of the Spots; and for that I find the External Air to be the only Remedy against those Spots. But If I meet with any Court Ladys that will not be satisfy'd without a Topic remedy, I recommend to them a Lotion of Bean Water, mixed with a little Water of Tartar and juice of Limons, or else a Lotion of Virgins Milk. To take away the Pits and other Foot Steeps of the disease many use Man's Grease, or Mutton Suet; and many prescribe several other Oynt∣ments and Linements. Bauderon in his prescriptions, to this purpose says he, very much conduces Wa∣ter of Honey distill'd with Turpen∣tine. Also Asses Fat melted with Oyl of Lillies: as also Oyl of Eggs and Bricks. The Blood of a Hair or Bull apply'd hot fills up the Pits. Also that which they call the Sword or Rind of Pork or Bacon if the Pits be rub'd therewith, smooth the Skin and fill up the Pits. Goose, Ducks, and Hens Grease work the same effect, as also the Ashes of a Rams or Goats Hoof, if it may be so call'd, or of Egg-shells serve to the same purpose; and to smooth the little risings in the Skin he prescribes. ℞. Oyl of Lillys, Goose Grease, and Asses Grease an. ℥j. Citrine Oyntment ℥ s. mix them and anoint the Tubercles going to Bed for several Nights together. The next day wash the Face with their Decoction.
℞. Roots of white Lillyes ℥ij. Cuckow pint or Dragons ℥i. One Citron, thin Bran one Handful, Water q. s. Boyl them for a Lukewarm Lotion every day. Forestus among other things excels the following Oyntment. ℞. Oyl of Sweet Almonds, white Lillyes an. ℥j. Capons Grease ℥iij. Powder of Pyony, and Florence, Oice Root, Lithurge of Gold an. ℈. s. Sugar Candy ℈j. All these being well mixed in a hot Mortar, and press'd through a Linnen Cloth, anoint the Places Morning and Evening, afterwards wash with Distill'd Water of Calves-Feet, or Water of Cow-dung. But all these things signifies little, for when once the Pits of the Small Pox are dry'd, and that the Scars are either too hollow or too high raised, the Skin is fixed, then all Topics are in vain. But if the Colour of them be too red and unseemly, the Colour perhaps may be taken off by Virgins Milk, or else some of those other prescripti∣ons for taking away the Spots; but as to the filling up of the Pits, there is nothing to be done. Add to this that Grease of Men, sheep, Asses, Geese and the like do so darken and smut the Skin, that they cause a greater defor∣mity, then the Pits and Scars them∣selves. CHAP. XIII. Of the Measles. THE Measles are Spots or small red Tubercles, breaking forth in the Skin, but never suppurating, arising from a peculiar Fermentation of the Blood. They differ accidentally, or accor∣ding to the more or the less from Small Pox; Because the Small Pox rise up high and suppurate; but the rising of the Measles is hardly con∣spicuous, and never suppurate: And therefore they sooner go off and with less danger then the small Pox; and most frequently seize Children, very rarely People of ripe Years or Old Men, or such as have had the Small Pox before: For they that have had the Small Pox, are generally if not always, exempted from the Measles, though 'tis true they can Challenge no, absolute Immunity. They generally seize the Skin and the Epidermis, where they come forth and are seen. But whether like the Small Pox, they seize the Internal Parts or no, is much to be Questioned, nor do I indeed believe it, in regard I do not find that hitherto any Phy∣sitian has ever found it to be so. They rise from the more subtil, hotter, and dryer Sanguineous Humour, inclining to Choler, fermenting after a Specific Manner, which is the reason that they quickly come forth, and never rise into Wheals, like the Small Pox, nor into any other considerable swellings, but coming forth small at the beginning, they become red, broad Spots, with a slight roughness of the Skin. After the Seventh day, and many times sooner, they vanish with∣out any Exulceration, not the least Foot-steps remaining nor any deformity left behind. The cause of them is the same as the cause of the Small Pox; but the difference of the two Diseases consists in this, that the matter out of which they are generated, in the Small Pox is thick, Sanguineous and moist, which is the reason why they rise into Whealks: but in the Measles thin, dryer and somewhat Choleric. For the most Part they seldom seize the same Person above once; nor do they so frequently as the Small Pox return Twice or Thrice, because the matter of these being much thinner, upon the first seizure is generally dissipated and consumed. They are accompany'd with a Fever, like the Small Pox; nay, they arise from a Fever, of which they are a kind of critical Evacuation. The Diagnostic Signs that shew the Measles to be at Hand, are the same which portend the approach of the Small Pox, and when they are come forth, the Sight is the Judge. The Prognostics are, if they quickly appear, with a Diminution of the Fever, Anxiety and other Symptoms, and persisting in their height for Three or Four days, afterwards vanish by degrees. The Evil Prognostics, if they
come forth slowly, are accompany'd with bad Symptoms and disappear again the first day. Moreover they have many other Prognostics com∣mon with the Small Pox which are described. cap. 5. before. The Cure at the Beginning differs nothing from the Small Pox, for that the Patients are to be put into a Sweat by the Sudorifics prescribed cap. 10. before, and kept in a gentle Breathing Sweat till they are wholly come forth: No cold must come to them; but the Decoction of Barley, Licorice, Vetches and Figs is frequently to be given them; for that expels the Measles as successfully as the Small Pox; and their Method is to be ob∣serv'd till they disappear again of their own accord, and with all the Signs of Health. There is no need of Topics here. However sometimes it falls out, that there will be a vehement, most trou∣blesom and intollerable Itching and Prickings in the Soles of the Feet, and Palms of the Hands; for the mitiga∣tion of which Symptom, then to hold the Hands and Feet for some time in cold Water; For by that means that Pricking is asswag'd, and the Measles in the Soles of the Feet and the Palms of the Hands break out more easily. This Experiment was formerly a Secret of Nicolas the Flo∣rentine, from whom Basius Astarius of Pavia borrow'd it. Concerning this matter Forestus has a Singular Observa∣tion. lib 6. Observ. 42. Next akin to the Measles is that Di∣stemper, which arising from the same Cause, and requiring the same Cure, is call'd the Purples. Of which Haly Abbas thus speaks, There is, says he, a sort of Distemper called Rubeola, which a∣rises from a hot, subtil, and not very much bad blood; and this sort when it comes to its height, is like the Grains of Millet, or somewhat bigger, and the Co∣lor of it Red; nor are the Pustles to be opened, but insensibly dissipate and va∣nish. In this Distemper red, and as it were fiery Spots, intermixed with small Tu∣bercles like Millet seed, with a swelling hardly worth speaking of, break forth over all the Body at the beginning of the Disease, as it were a kind of St. Anthonies fire, that is the first, second, third, or fourth day. In the height of the Distemper the whole Body seems to be red, as if it were un∣der a general St. Anothonies Fire. But in the Declination the redness is dimi∣nished, and the broad Spots, as at the beginning again appear, which at length upon the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth or ninth day vanish, the upper Skin peeling off like little Scales. This Disease for the most part infests Infants and Children, very rarely People of ripe years, and like the Measles for the most part seize upon the Skin and Epidermis, and is easily cured, if you take care of keeping the Patient warm. Nevertheless it happens that sometimes the Internal Parts are seiz'd by this Distemper, to the great hazard of the Patients Life. Thence an Intense Fever, violent heat and extraordinary thirst; many times Inflamations of the Chaps, Lungs and other Bowels, with diffculty of Breathing, extream heaviness, de∣liriums, tension of the Hypochon∣driums, and other evil Symptoms. In reference to which Subject Sennertus tells a remarkable Story of such a Patient, l. 4. de Feb. c. 12.
A TREA▪TISE OF THE SMALL-POX AND MEASLES. FOR the greater Perfection and more solid Confirmation of what has been said before, we will add the Histories of some Patients, which we have met within our Practise, not com∣mon, but such wherein there may be something singular observed. HISTORY I. IN the Year 1640. After a moist and warm Winter, followed a hot and moderately dry Summer, wherein Fevers Tertian, Quotidian and Intermitting seized abundance of People. About the middle of Iuly the Small Pox and Measles began to be very rife. In August they greatly increased, especially the Small Pox: and so continuing to the end of that Year carry'd off a great many to their Graves. More then that, they who in those two Months fell sick of other Diseases, were also in a short time after seized by the Measles, but chiefly by the Small Pox. At that time we saw several, who having had the Small Pox very thick, have afterwards had them a second time; and that second time
they break forth in greater quantity than the first. Nay, it has been known, that some have had the Small Pox, and been very full too, three times within the space of six Months. Though it be a thing that rarely uses to happen, especially in so short a time. These Diseases took their Rise from a continual Fever, which in some is more intense, in others more remiss, with a Pulse for the most part oppressed, weak, thick and unequal. For the most part the Symp∣toms were very bad; an extream heaviness, oppression of the Heart, dryness of the Mouth, tremblings of the extream Parts, Deliri∣ums, &c. In many the Small Pox come forth after the first or second, but in most not before the third fourth or fifth days; where they appeared later the Patients were in great danger, and many dy'd; for oft-times the strength of the Patient was so wasted by the violence of th i∣stemper, that at length, when the red Spots, the Harbingers o e Small Pox appeared, Nature was so feeble that she could not expel them with that vigour as she ought to have done. They that vomited or coughed up Blood, or Piss'd bloody, they generally dy'd, not one in six hundred escaping. For their internal Bowels being seized with the Small Pox, were so corrupted that they could never be restored to Health. Such as had the Small Pox very thick in their Mouths, Tongues, Pa∣late, Chaps, Asperia Arteria, and Gullet were very much troubled to fetch their Breaths, and to swallow before the maturation and breaking of the Wheals; which was the reason that many were stiffled. They who were Purged by unskilful Physitians at the beginning for the most part died; In regard the Small Pox come forth more Natu∣rally, when the Belly is bound then when it is loose. Our Treacle water was much more prevalent to provoke Sweat in Children, then any other Diaphoretic. After breaking, the Decoction of Figs drank very much assisted to expel the Pox, especially if Sycory, Carduus Benedict. Scabious, red Vetches, and other such things were added. However it was not to be administred if the Belly were loose. The common People and Country folk, steeped Sheeps dung and Horse dung in Wine or Ale, and then straining it through a Linnen Cloath, gave it lukewarm with good success to their Patients. But the greatest part of the Cure consisted in keeping all manner of Cold from the Patients. ANNOTATIONS. 1. OF the Use and Vertue of Figs, and their Benefit in the Cure of these Diseases, and the Decoctions usu∣ally made of them, we have discoursed at large cap. 10. before. Avicen also thus speaks of their Vertues. The water of Figs, says he, is good; for Figs are vehe∣ment expellers to the outward Parts, and that is one way to escape the Disaster of the Small Pox. 2. This very advice concerning Cold has Avicen also taken notice of, when says he the Small Pox begin to appear, then the catching Cold will be the occa∣sion of a great mistake, for that it de∣tains the superfluity within, and carrys it to the Principal Members, and for that it is impossible for the Small Pox to come out and appear; thence pro∣ceeds restlesness, narrowness of the Throat, and sometimes swoonding Therefore the superfluities are to be assisted with such things as make them boyl, and open Oppellations, as Fennel and Parsley with Sugar and their Juices, or some Decoction of their Roots and Seeds.
HISTORY. II. THE Daughter of Iohn Crasselt eight Years of Age, fell sick of the Small Pox; which for the first three days came out very thick over the Skin of the whole Body. The fourth day she had a Hoarsness with a little Cough and pain in her Belly. The Fever al∣so from the beginning till this time continued in the same degree. The sixth day a purulent Diarrhea, with griping of the estines fol∣lowed, and she coughed up much purulent bloody Matter. No Remedies availing, and her strength being wasted, she dy'd the Eighth day. ANNOTATIONS. IN this Patient, there is no question to be made but that the Small Pox had seized the Internal Bowels, the Guts and Lungs, and perhaps the Liver, and other Bowels, the affections of which in this Distemper are Mortal. Now that the Internal Bowels may be seized by the Small Pox, our own Eyes will convince us, as Fernelius tells us. It is often found saies he, tha several who have been Dissected after their Deaths have had their Liver, Spleen, Lungs, and all their inner Bow∣els all over covered with Mattry Pustles like the Skin. Paraeus also observes the same thing. This says he, Richard Hubert the Chyrurgion and I saw in two Girles the one four the other seventeen years of Age; who both dying of the Small Pox were both Dissected, at what time their internal Bowels appear'd co∣vered over with Scabby Pustles like those upon the Skin. HISTORY III. THE Wife of Iames de Clear, a Woman of thirty years of Age, was taken with a Fever not very violent, together with a kind of Drowsiness, pain at the Heart, a heaviness of the Head, and a light intermitting Delyrium. Now because the Small Pox were then very rife, I suspected the Small Pox would follow these Symptoms, because she had never had them before. For the Cure therefore having first loosened her Belly with a Glister, I gave her this Sudorific. ℞. Treacle, Diascordium of Fracastorius an. ʒ s. Salt of Worm∣wood ℈ j. Treacle water ℥ij. mix them for a Potion. This taken she fell into a good Sweat; but the Disease continuing in the same state, the same was given her again the next day, with like success, for all that sweating would not move the Disease. Then I prescribed her to drink this Decoction; and ordered her to be kept three days in a gentle breathing Sweat, which she easily endured; as being a Woman of good discretion, and very obedient to her Physi∣tian. ℞. Barly cleansed, Fennel Roots an. ℥ j. Elecampane Roots ℥ s. sliced Licorice ʒij. red Vetches ℥ j. s. Scabious half a handful, Fennel seed ʒ j. s. Figs nō. xvij. Water q. s. make a Decoction to two Pints. When still no signs of the Small Pox appeared, again I loosened her Belly with a Glyster, and the next day ordered a Vein to be opened in her Arm, the third, taking the Decoction she sweat moderately, and so continued for ten days using the said Decoction; afterwards because
the Fever and Heaviness seemed again to increase, and for that she waxed more drowsy and restless, I again gave her the Diaphoretic above mentioned, adding, Extract of Carduus Benedict. ℥ s. which when she had taken and sweat violently, the forerunners of the Small Pox began to appear up and down upon her Skin, that is to say, the red Spots: then she continued in a gentle breathing Sweat for two days, still drink∣ing the Decoction before mentioned, and in that time the Small Pox were very much risen, and the Fever with other Symptoms vanished by degrees. All the time of the Disease she took no other Food then thin Broths; and every other day she had once a day a Stool voluntarily. ANNOTATIONS. IN this Patient I almost despair'd of any coming forth of the Small Pox, and thought I had been deceived in my judgment, for I could not believe they would have come forth so late, that is to say upon the twentieth day; neither did I ever see them break forth so late in any other Person▪ Hence it appeared that Hippocrates was in the Right, where he says, that Remedies when they are truly admi∣nister'd are not to be changed, so long as there is no other urgent Indication that requires an Alteration. HISTORY. IV. THE Son of Edward Wilmer ten Years of Age, so soon as the Fever had seized him, and that the Small Pox began to appear in several Parts of his Body, one Edmund an English Chyrurgeon was sent for, who to free the Patient from the Heaviness that oppressed him, gave him some Purging Medicine; this in a short time encreased his drowsiness; a terrible Loosness followed, together with an extraordinary wast of the natural strength. Presently the Pox fell, and the Child died the next Night. ANNOTATIONS. HIppocrates says thus, Where Nature leads, there we ought to follow, if she lead by ways agreeable to the Law of Nature. But in the Small Pox Na∣ture leads from the Center to the Peri∣phery, and that this is the most conve∣nient way for the Evacuation of the Malignant Matter fermenting and boyl∣ing, the Experience of many Ages has taught us; therefore in the Cure of this Disease, a Physitian ought in the first place to observe Nature, either to let her do her own work of her own ac∣cord, or if she be feeble, to assist her in her Action: But he must not disturb her true Motion, with a Motion con∣trary to it, and when the Malignant Matter is wholsomly and regularly driving to the Exterior Parts recal it back to the Innermost and more Noble Bowels. For, says Hippocrates, such things are to be fetch'd out of the Body, which coming forth of themselves are conducible to Health; but those things that come forth violently are to be re∣strain'd, stopp'd and retain'd. But such things as we ought to fetch out are not brought forth by Evacua∣tion through the Guts, neither do they come forth according to the regular Motion of Nature, nor by ways agree∣able to the Laws of Nature; therefore in this Disease Evacuation by Glysters is not to be provoked through the In∣testins by Glysters, or if it come forth of its own accord it is to be stop'd as soon as may be. Hence, says Rhases, great care is to be taken, after the coming forth of the Pustles whether high or broad, least the Belly be loosened with Medicaments; for they presently cause a Disentery, especially where the Pustles are very high; thus also Avenzoar never prescribes any Purging Medicaments to those that are Sick of the Small Pox, and forbids the Belly to be loosened,
unless by the help of a Suppository, if the Patient be to hard bound. This Eg∣mund the Chyrugeon never understood; and so by his Ignorance kill'd the Pa∣tient; as it happens to several others, who slighting the Learned Physitians, had rather purchase Death with Gold from ignorant Mountebanks and Homi∣cides then buy Health with Copper from prudent and knowing Physitians. HISTORY. V. TWO Sisters, Young Gentlewomen both, the one of Twenty Four, the other of Twenty Six Years, at a Season when the Small Pox were very rife, were extreamly afraid of the Disease. It fell out by accident, as they were going to Church, a Young Lad, newly cured of the Small Pox was got abroad, and coming along in the Street, at least thirty Paces distant from them, having his Face all spotted with red Spots, the remainders of the Footsteps of the Disease; with which sight they were so scared that they thought themselves in∣fected already: Thereupon I being sent for to visit the Young Ladies, endeavour'd by many Arguments to dispel these idle fears; and for the better satisfaction of both, prescribed them a gentle Purge, which after they had taken▪ the next day but one, I ordered a Vein to be open∣ed in the Arm, and desired them to pluck up a good heart; and to the end they might believe themselves to be the more certainly secured from the Distemper, I forbid them the eating of all such dyet as might contribute the procuring of this Disease, prescribed them certain Apozems of Succory and other cooling things to Drink; and ordered them to walk abroad, visit their Friends, and by pleasant Discourse and Conversation, and all other ways imaginable to drive those vain conceits out of their Minds. But all that I could do signified nothing, so deeply had this conceit rooted it self in their Imagination; For after fourteen days of Health, wherein they continually walked abroad and were merry with their Friends and Acquaintance, yet all the while the Small Pox ran in their Minds; at length, without any occasion of Infe∣ction, they were both together seized with a Fever, and the next day the small red Spots appeared in their Face and Hands, which after I had given them the Decoction of Figs, in a short time after coming farther out, terminated in the Small Pox, which came forth very thick as well upon the Body as the Face, and so the Fever, the Heaviness, and other Symptoms ceased by degrees, and they themselves, forbearing to shift their foul Linnen in fourteen days, and committing no Error in their Diet, but observing my Prescriptions exactly, without scratching off the Pox with their Nails, were both cured with very little or no preju∣dice to their Beauty. ANNOTATIONS. HOw wonderful the Strength of Imagination is, we have experi∣ence in many Persons, for that by the Motions of the Mind it frequently works Miracles. And thus in these two Gentlewomen through a continual and constant Cogitation caused by the Preceding Fear, that Idea of the Small Pox so strongly Imprinted in their Minds, and thence in the Spirits and Humours, begat therein a disposition and Aptitude to receive the Small Pox. I remember the same Year, I went to Visit a Noble German, who Dream that he was drawn against his Will to visit one that was Sick of the Small Pox, and was very much Disfigur'd; which Dream made such an Impression in his Mind, that he could by no means drive it out of his thoughts. He lived free for three Weeks, but then falling into a Fever was pepper'd with the Small Pox.
HISTORY VI. A Certain Apothecary that was a strong Man about Thirty Years of Age, going into a Citizens House, when he found and saw of a suddain his Patient all over covered with the Small Pox upon his Face, he trembled a little at the sight of so much deformity, and so departed. A little after to drive the Whimsey out of his Head he drank very hard; nevertheless all he could do could not put that Fan∣cy out of his thoughts, which the sight of such an Object had imprinted in his Mind; though he were otherwise, a Man of an undaunted Cou∣rage: So that the sixth day a Fever seized him with an extream Hea∣viness, a restless sleep, and a kind of slight Delirium; which after twice taking of a Sudorific Decoction, was attended with the red Spots that usu∣ally fore-run the Small Pox, which within the space of twenty four hours came forth very thick, upon which eruption the Fever and all the Symptoms vanished, and the Patient being restor'd to his Health, went abroad again in three weeks. ANNOTATIONS. I would not advise any Persons that are timorous to come near those that are Sick of the Pestilence or Small Pox; for if the Sight of one that lay Ill of the Small Pox, could move a Man of that courage as this Apothecary was, how much more would it have affected a timorous Person, now it may be questi∣oned whether this Apothecary might not be touched with any Infection, or whether he might not contract the Di∣stemper from some other cause? Now that there could not be any thing of Contagi∣on appears from hence, that the same Person was of such an undaunted Spirit that he Visited at other times, several Persons that had lay Sick of the same Distemper, without any prejudice; and therefore the cause seems rather to be that suddain conturbation of his Mind and Spirits, with which he was stricken upon the unexpected Sight of this same Sick Person, and which continually ran in his thoughts; from which Idea such a disposition arose in his Body, which at length produced the Small Pox. Now if any man can more clearly unfold how such an Accident should happen, he shall be my great Apollo. HISTORY. VII. A Young Maid of two and twenty Years of Age, full body'd, fresh colour'd, and somewhat fat, being seized with a mild Fever, besides extream Heaviness and some sleight interveneing Deliriums, suf∣fered under frequent and strong Epileptic Convulsions, and very terrible swooning Fits, so that the standers▪ by thought she had been troubled with the Mother, and that she would presently dye. I being sent for, when I understood that she had had her Monthly Evacu∣ations eight days before, loosened her Belly with a Glyster, and the same day order'd her to be let blood in the Arm; about the Evening I gave her this Sudorific ℞. Theriac. Androm. ʒ j. Harts-horn burnt, Extract of Carduus Benedictus, Salt of the same an. ℈j. Treacle-water and Carduus∣water an. ℥ j. Oyl of Amber three drops. Mix them for one draught. Having taken this, she sweat soundly that Night with great relief, neither did her swooning Fits, nor her Convulsions return: The next day
the red Spots, fore-runners of the Small Pox began to appear up and down all over her Body. Thereupon we gave her this Decoction to drink. ℞. Elecampane Root, Licorice sliced an. ʒ iij. Barley cleansed ℥ j. Red Vetches ℥ j. s. Fennel Seed ʒij. Figs no. xvj. Raisins stoned ℥ j. s. Water q. s. Make a Decoction to two Pints. Upon this the Small Pox broke out very thick; and all the Symptoms presently ceasing with the Fever, she was restored to her health in four Weeks, and as it were rescu'd from the Jaws of Death, went abroad again about her business. ANNOTATIONS. IN this Disease such Epileptic Con∣vulsions and Swoonings are very band presages; and unless the Small Pox appears very quickly, the greatest danger is to be feared; for that they may be easily the Death of the Patient before the Pox break forth. Nor is it any wonder, in regard this malignant Mischeif grievously effects the Heart, as appears by the Fever, the Swoonings, and the heaviness of the Mind, and there∣fore greater danger is to be expected, if the Brain the Primary Bowel of Life, be equally afflicted. HISTORY VIII. RUtger Schorer a Lad of Fourteen Years of Age, and Eldest Son of Isaac Schorer a Lodger of mine, was taken in September with a Fever and Small Pox, and had them very thick, when he began to grow well about the fourteenth day, his Brother Isaac Schorer was ta∣ken in the same manner. When he had lain sixteen days, his Sister Mary Schorer about Ten Years of Age, fell sick of the same Distemper; and when she was pretty well at the fourteenth day, the other and Youngest Daughter Maud Schorer, had the Small Pox come out very thick upon her. In the mean time, the two Sons that were first seiz'd, were recovered and went abroad. But when the Youngest Sister Maud Schorer had kept her Bed about twenty days, Rutger Schorer was taken again with a Fever and the Small Pox, and he being reco∣vered, Isaac Schorer took his Bed again upon the same account; and being almost cured, Mary Schorer was taken a second time, and the third week after Maud Schorer was again seized as the rest had been. And as the first time the Disease had descended in order from the Eldest to the Youngest, so likewise in so short a space of time, it observed the same order a second time; and yet two at once were never seiz'd with the Disease. And which is to be wondered at, all these four were so little prejudiced by the Distemper, that not one of them happened to be disfigured in the Face either with Pits or Scars, which is in great part to be attributed to the great care which we took in the Cure, in regard we were all of one Family; so that we had the opportunity to see them every hour. ANNOTATIONS. THe Small Pox seldom seize the same Person twice or thrice; for that generally upon the first sei∣zure all that Specific Malignant Con∣tamination, inherent in the Blood and several Parts, being seperated by the Fermentaceous Ebullition, is quite expelled; which Effervescency, if it
be not strong enough, then it hap∣pens that the Blood is not sufficiently purify'd from that defilement, and hence that after some Years, the Small Pox comes again by reason that the Old remainders are by some new oc∣casion provoked to Action. But that the Small Pox should seize in such an Order four Children of the same Man, and that in so short a distance of time, and every time come out so thick, is that which never before we knew in all our Practise. If perchance some few had only come forth the first time, it might have been probable, that some of the Relics of the Con∣tamination not sufficiently seperated through weak Fermentation, might break forth again; but in regard that Conjecture vanishes by reason of the great quantity coming out over the whole Body, both the first and second time, I would fain know to what other cause we can at∣tribute such an accident as this, then to some occult and unexpressible cause, that lies no less latent in the Small Pox then in the Pestilence: and how it should come to pass, that I my self, who am now about seventy Years of Age, and was not only conversant with these but a Thousand others, yet never should have the Small Pox, since that contagion does so easily infect others. HISTORY IX. A Virgin of Three and Twenty Years of Age, Plethoric and Strong, being taken of a suddain with a Fever, accompanied with an extraordinary heaviness, of her own head took a Dram of Treacle in a little Wine, which causing her to Sweat soundly, presently the Small Pox came out very thick over all the Body; but her Fever and heaviness were so far from slackning, that they grew more violent. Then my advice, but too late, was asked; for the strength of the Maid was so far spent, that there was hardly any thing to be given her. However I gave her twice a Dram of Crabs-Eyes, prepared with a little Decoction of Barley, and prescribed her a pleasing Julep. But the sixth day, her Monthly Evacuations came from her, out of the Order of time, and the same day the Pox that continued high raised till then, suck down again; So that the Fever and heaviness increasing, the Maid, all her strength failing her, dy'd the next Night. ANNOTATIONS. AT the same time, two other Young Maids, their Evacuations bursting out unexpectedly, and unseasonably, in a short time dy'd. And this has been observed by us several times in this disease, when there is a violent Ebullition of the Blood, and that the Small Pox come out thick, without any Diminution of the Fever and Symp∣toms, then it is a very bad if not a mortal Sign; if the Monthly Evacuati∣ons break forth out of Season. For such Patients seldom or never escape, though that Eruption happens upon the Seventh or any other Critical day. Moreover we have observed this, that if during the Ebullition of the Blood in the Small Pox, the Monthly Eva∣cuations also break forth, at the usual Period of time, such Patients are then also in great danger, and many of them dye, though some ease might be expected from such an Evacua∣tion. HISTORY X. ANN of Durenburch, a Young Maid of Twenty Years of Age, was taken with a Fever and Heaviness, accompanied with a Dosiness of the Head, and an inclination to sleep, and oft-times a slight interveneing Delirium, affrightment in her sleep, and a moderate Thirst. Having taken a Diaphoretic, and Sweat soundly, soon after the Small
Pox appeared. Afterwards she drank of this Decoction four, five, or six times a day. ℞. Barley cleansed ℥ s. Root of Elacampane ʒ v. sliced Licorice ʒij. Orange-peels ʒiij. Scabious a handful and a half, Fennel seed ʒj. four greater Cold seeds an. ℈iiij. Fat Figs no. xv▪ Raisins stoned ℥ j. s. VVater q. s. for an Apozem of two Pints. When the Small Pox were now sufficiently expelled by the use of this Decoction, I ordered that her face should be often fomented with a soft Spunge dipped in lukewarm Mutton Broth: but because it fell out that the Broth could not be had, and she was importunate for some Topic to preserve her Face, I ordered her Face to be anointed twice a day, with old Oyl of Turneps, which done the Pox in her Face were not so big as those over the rest of her Body, they ripened also sooner, and the Scabs at length falling off, no Pits at all remained in her Face: Only the Oyntment was continued till she was perfectly cured. ANNOTATIONS. IF the Small Pox are not large and Contiguous, for the most part we administer nothing to prevent Piting, but leave Nature to do her own busi∣ness, in regard she does it better of her own accord then the Physitians can do by Art, so that the Patients themselves do not dig off the Scabs with their Nails, but suffer them to dry and fall off of their own accord. This daily Experience tells us: For that Thousands are better Cured with∣out Pits or Marks left behind, to whom no Topics are administer'd: and many to whom Topics have been admini∣ster'd without Judgment, have had deeper Pits, then if they had left the Work to Nature without Topics. But if the Pox are very large and Con∣tiguous in the Face, or if they be such Patients that will not be satisfy'd, un∣less the Physitian ascribe them Topics, which is frequent among Young Ladys that are afraid of their Beauty; then such things are to be prescrib'd, as mollifie the Scabs of the Pustles, and bring the matter therein contain'd to quickest Maturation. To that purpose I have frequently prescribed the Oyl of Turneps with good success; by which means very few or no Footsteps of the Small Pox have been seen; which was once imparted to me as a great Secret by on Harscamp, a Famous Practitioner. Forestus anoints the Scabs with Oyl of Sweet Almonds till they are dryed up, which prevents, as he says, all Piting and Scars, and so highly approves that remedy, that he cannot think of any better, as being that which has no Smell, and is no way noisom either to Children or grown People. How∣ever great care is to be taken of making use of dryers at the Beginning; for these prevent the farther Maturation of the matter, and by drying up the Scabs and Pits, hinder the Generation of new Flesh; of which Errour committed, Forestus gives us a terrible Example. For, says he, when a Young Gentleman of Thirty Years of Age, having had the Small Pox, by the advice of his Nurse made use of Butter Fryed to Black∣ness in a Frying-Pan, and besmeared all his Face over with it, the Scab be∣came so very nasty, exulcerating all his Face, that he lost one of his Eyes, and but for the application of timely remedies, had lost the other too. And therefore it is that we so often inculcate, that many People scape better that use no applications at all; so that what∣ever Authors write that Maturing Medi∣cines are to be applyed, I say, it is to be done with great Caution. HISTORY XI. A Noble Lady of Eighteeen Years of Age, finding her self not well, ordered me to be sent for: She had a slight Fever and complained of Melancholly at her Heart (which caused her frequent∣ly
to sigh) and heaviness of her Head, with an inclination to sleep. Now in regard the Small Pox was then very rife, I had presently a suspition of her Distemper. Thereupon when she told me that she had been at Stool that day, and that it was a good while before her Monthly Period would be up, presently I let her Blood in the Arm, and took away eight Ounces of Blood; for she was Plethoric: after which she found her self as she said somewhat better. Ten hours after Blood-letting, certain red Spots began to appear upon her Breasts and Hands, but few and small: Thereupon about the Evening I pre∣scribed her this Diaphoretic ℞. Treacle of Andromachus, Diascordium of Fracastorius an. ʒ s. Salt of Wormwood, Confection of Hyacith an. ℈ j. Treacle∣water, and VVater of Carduus Benedict. an. ℥ j. Mix them for a draught. When this had caused her to Sweat moderately all Night, the next day the Pustles came forth higher, and the Fever together with the anxiety vanished altogether: Thereupon we gave her a Decoction of Figs in Ale to drink; and thus in a few days she reovered with these few Remedies, not having had above three or four in her Face, and very few upon the rest of her Body. ANNOTATIONS. WHat is to be thought of Blood∣letting in this Disease and when it is to be made use of, we have suf∣ficiently Explained. cap. 8. And I have particularly observed, that if in Ple∣thorics it be timely made use of, be∣fore any Eruption of the Small Pox, then it comes forth more easily and not so thick, and the Patient recovers sooner. And therefore when you meet with Young Girls that are nice of their Beauty, I think it very beneficial to let Blood in time, seeing that then fewer and lesser Pox come out in the Face: But because the Physitian is seldom sent for till the Pox begin to come forth, hence it is that Blood-let∣ting cannot be made use of. HISTORY XII. A Little Son of Nicholas ab Harvelt, began to grow ill in August; but in regard that I was sent for at the beginning, and had pre∣sently a suspicion of the Small Pox; I gave him a little Treacle-water, with a little Bezoar-stone and Saffron (for the Child was not above three Years old, and other ungrateful Tastes would not have gone down:) and to preserve his Eyes, I ordered his Eye-lids to be anointed with Saffron mixed with Womans Milk. The Aunt who had the care of the Child, in my absence mixes a greater quantity then is usual with the Milk, and not only anointed his Eyes but all his Face twice a day. Which caus'd a strange Disfigurement of the Child, whose Face was all over yellow with the Saffron: In the mean while the Child sweat very well, and still took now and then three spoonfuls of Treacle-water, which preserved him in a moderate heat, and drank for his drink the simple Decoction of Figs. The next day some very small Spots began to appear here and there upon his Skin; but the third day the Small Pox came out very thick over all his Body, except his Face; where none at all, nor the least sign of any were to be seen; yet the Child was never the worse in regard they came out so thick over all the rest of his
Body. The Fever then went off, and so the Child was perfectly re∣covered, without having his Face so much as touched. ANNOTATIONS. The Saffron gently astringent repels and drys, but whether being outwardly applied it hinders the coming out of the Pox; or whether through any other Specific and occult quality it has that effect, I am uncertain, and much que∣stion. But we saw the effect of it not only in this Child, but also in three or four more: For the Childs Aunt, when she had told what had happened up and down to other Women, there were several that would needs try the Experiment with the same good success. And whether it will have the same success always at other times, when occasion offers we shall try our selves? HISTORY XIII. THE most Noble the Lady Lucas, an English Woman, bred up in her House a Young Lady, her Brothers daughter, about six or seven Years of Age: So soon as she began to be Fevourish, anxious and drosie, by my advice she had given her a little Powder Liberans, Harts-horn burnt, Bezoar-stone and Saffron, with an ounce of Treacle∣water, which caused her to Sweat well with some ease. For her drink, she drank the Decoction of raw Harts-horn, as it is prepared for Gel∣lies, and frequently the simple Decoction of Figs: In the mean time the Lady Lucas, every day twice or thrice washed the Face of our Patient with that same sort of Cinnamon-water which our Apothecaries generally sell, which is made of Cinnamon distilled in Borrage-water, and diligently kept the Young Lady in a continual breathing heat. The second day toward Evening the red Spots began to appear, the third day the Small Pox came out very thick, every where except upon her Face, where there was not one to be seen: So that the Lady continued the Lotion of the Childs face for some days. In the mean while the Fever going off, our Patient was perfectly cured, with∣out the least Sign of the Small Pox upon her Face. ANNOTATIONS. THe same Lady gave the same ad∣vice also to the Lady Couper, who having washed the Faces of three of her Children that lay Sick of the Small Pox with Cinnamon-water, not one of them had any Sign of them in their Faces. Whether the same success will always attend upon others, will be manifest by the frequent Tryal upon others. In the mean time it is to be considered, whether upon hindering the Small Pox from breaking out in the Face, there may not be some danger least the Menixe's and Brain should re∣ceive some prejudice. HISTORY XIV. THE Lady Ruchabor, about twenty four Years of Age, so Beauti∣ful, that she was the Admiration of many, in the Month of August was taken with a Fever and the Small Pox, so that her Head was wonderfully swell'd; when she had made use of several Reme∣dies by my Advice, and the Small Pox came out very thick over all her Body, and had pepper'd her Face, at length after the Fever went off, and that the Swelling of her Head was quite fallen, I ordered her Face to be frequently fomented with Mutton Broth.
But she not contented with that, to preserve her Beauty, by the advice of some Ignorant Women, caused the ripe Pustles to be open∣ed with a Golden Needle, and the Matter to be squeezed out; but mark the Event, she that perswaded her self, she should have no Pits, when she recovered, had her Face so disfigured with Scars and Pits, that of one that was most Beautiful she became very deformed, and a Thousand times bewayl'd that Foolish act of pricking the Wheals. ANNOTATIONS. THo many Physitians to preserve the Face from Scars and Pits, order the ripe Wheals to be prick't with a Golden Needle, yet we have found a Thousand times by Experi∣ence, that it occasions the leaving of several Pits, and that it is fat more con∣ducing to the Cure not to touch them either with Needle or Hand. Hence Senertus, The safest way, says he, when the matter appears white and consequently Concocted, is to commit the whole manage∣ment to Nature, since Experience teaches us, that where the Pox dry up and open of themselves, those People scape with less Disfigurement, and less Footsteps of the Disease. But how dangerous it is to make use of the hands, and Topics, Forestus tells us, by the Example of a Young Maid. When the Distemper says he, was going off, and I was desired to prescribe dry∣ing Liniments to the Face, I advised the Patient to forbear them and commit the whole Cure to Nature, when a white Concocted Matter ran out of the broken Pox, and I ordered her not to touch the Scabs with her Fingers, though they Itched never so much. But because she could forbear Scratching the Wheals, some of which were not yet ripe, and by the advice of Idle Women made use of Fat and Cream to dry them up, her Face was overcast with a deformed Scab, and the Scars remained; besides a Redness arose in her Eyes, that could never be cured, but continued as long as she lived. HISTORY XV. A Noble Young Lady about twenty Years of Age, having sat a while with her dear Companions that lay Sick of the Small Pox seemed to have received some Infection from it: That very Evening her Head grew heavy, and she lost her Stomach which was accompanied with a slothful weariness of the whole Body. The next day she grew Feverish: upon which I foretold her, she must ex∣pect the Small Pox: Thereupon I gave her a Sudorific Draught, and ordered her to be kept in a gentle Breathing Sweat all the next Night. The third day in the Morning I found her well covered over all the rest of her Body, only her Legs out of the Bed, and her Feet up to the Ankles in a Vessel of warm Milk. This she had by the Advice of the silly Women, who had perswaded her that if she bathed her Feet in warm Milk she would have no Pox in her Face: So that she continued in that Milky Bath all the day till the Evening. In the mean time the Small Pox came out that very day, but no where so thick as in the Face; and so the In∣vention of Bathing the Feet in Milk was found to be useless: How∣ever in other things the Patient followed my Advice, and being well Cured, without many Pits in her Face, laught many times af∣terwards at the silly Milky Counsel that was given her.
ANNOTATIONS. THis Patient had good Luck that her Bathing did her no more harm, for though she were well cover'd, yet by that Ventillation some Cold might easi∣ly have got to her, and have done her much Injury; I remember afterward I saw the same Bath made use of in the Court of the Baron of Brederode to a young Lady that then lay sick of the Small Pox; but still with the same Success: So that this Bathing in Milk lost all its Reputation in that Court, though it never had any with me, not∣withstanding that I have heard it com∣mended by several Women. HISTORY XVI. IN October two Sons of N. Romburch a Vintner, were taken with a Fever. The next day the Parents gave to each half a dram of Treacle, which caused a moderate Sweat; and for Drink they gave them the simple Decoction of Figs in small Ale. The third day some Red Spots appeared; and afterwards the Small Pox came out very thick over the whole Body and many also seized the Eye∣lids. Then my Advice was desired. Now because the Children were Indifferent well, proportionably to the time of the Disease, I did not think it necessary to prescribe any Physic, only I ordered the Parents, to wash the Eye-lids three or four times a day with a soft Spunge dipt in a Decoction of Althea, Flowers of Melilot, Roses and Fenigreek, and to open the Eye-lids with their Fingers once or twice a day, to let out the Humour gathered underneath: But the Parents neglected that Advice, foolishly tender, and fearing to hurt their Children by handling their Eylids. Upon the fourteenth day the Pox being ripe, the Swelling of the Eye-lids fell, and the Eyes open'd; but it was observed that both the Boys were perfectly Blind, and that there was a Skin grown over the Sight and the Iris, which Skin was generated out of the Humour, so many days detained within the Eye, and became viscous, and now covered the whole Eye like a veil. This unexpected accident greived the Parents; there∣upon I prescribed the following Powder. ℞. The whitest Sugar-Candy ʒij. Lapis Calaminaris ℈j. make a very fine Powder. This I caused to be blown into their Eyes through a hollow Quill: and the slight pain which it caused, quickning the motion of the Eye-lids, those little Films were in a short time rubbed off, and washed away, by the Tears that dropt from the Eye; by which means the Boys were cured of that Impediment. ANNOTATIONS. THis we have often happen'd to see in Practice, that by reason of the Eye-lids being swell'd and shut up by the Small Pox, littles Films have grown in the Eyes, but we have easily rubb'd them off with this Powder, because they only stick to the outside of the Sight of the Eye; if it be presently us'd at the beginning, when the swelling falls, and the Eyes begin to open; but if you stay till they are dry'd and hardned by the External Air, then they will not easily give way to so slight a Remedy, but sharp Medicines must be us'd; and the mischief is to be remov'd with more trouble and pain. Two things are there∣fore
to observ'd. 1. That the swell'd Eye-lids, let the Patient be never so un∣willing, must be parted one from the other with the Fingers; and free Egress given to the Liquor contained in the Eye. 2. That if those Films are grown▪ that their Cure be not delayed, but that care be immediately taken to remove them before they are harden'd by the external Air. HISTORY XVII. BEing sent for together with a Chyrurgeon to the Village of Bem∣mel to see a Country Man that was wounded in the Breast, by accident we found a Boy in the same House that was taken with a Fever and under great Anxiety; and therefore because we had no other Remedies at hand, we perswaded the Man to get an ounce of new Sheep's dung, and steep it three hours in small Ale, and then Straining it give it Blood warm to the Boy and cover him up close. The next day I went again, and found that the Boy had Sweat very well after his Draught; and when I look'd nearer upon him I per∣ceived that the Measles were come out very thick upon him, upon which the Fever was almost gone off with a great part of his heaviness. I ordered them to keep him in a Breathing Sweat for three or four days, and to be sure not to let him take Cold. ANNOTATIONS. I Expected this Body should have had the Small Pox, but the Measles came forth, of which the first Cure is the same with the Small Pox. New Sheeps-dung with equal Efficacy expels both the one and the other, and there∣fore in both cases is very advantageously administer'd, especially in those places where other things are not to be had, some there are who prefer Horse-dung administer'd after the same manner, before it. But that Sheeps-dung is much more prevalent, the Savour tells, in which we find there is much more Salt of Niter or some more specific Diaphoretic Salt. HISTORY XVIII. A Young Man of twenty four Years of Age, strong and Plethoric after his violent Exercises of Tennis, and Fencing, and hard drink∣ing of Wine between while, fell into a violent Fever, accompany'd with great thirst, dryness of the Mouth, and extream Anxiety and restlessness, with other very bad Symptoms. This Young Man we order'd first to be let Blood and then prescribed him a Glister, together with Julips, cooling Apozems and Electuarys to quench his thirst. The third day he was Purged with an Infusion of Senna-Leaves and Rhubarb mixt with Electuary Diaprunum; which gave him six Stools, but the heat remaining together with the Fever, he was let Blood again the fourth day. The fifth day he continued the use of his Julips, Apozems and cooling Electuary. The Night succeeding the sixth day he was so very heavy and drowsie, that there was little hopes of his Life, and we thought he would have dyed. The seventh day the Measles came out all over his Body by way of Crisis. Then the Fever and all the pressing Symptoms somewhat remitted, so that the Patient slept a little the next Night: but by the two next days both Fever and Symptoms were quite gone off by degrees. The tenth day the Measles began to lessen, and upon the twelsth quite vanished. And thus the Patient who seemed to be at Deaths Dore, con∣trary
to the Expectation of many was restored to his former Health. ANNOTATIONS. THE beginning of the Disease was such, that no Man could well have any suspition of the Measles; and therefore the Patient was dealt with by us, as labouring under a Burning Fever▪ which Fever at length you see, ended nevertheless in a Critical Evacuation of the Measles. HISTORY. XIX. A Strong Young Man was seized by a Violent Fever accompany'd with a thick, weak and unequal Pulse, an Extream Anxiety, heavy Pain his Head, drowsiness, restless sleep, and a slight kind of Deli∣rium. I would willingly have let him Blood, but because he would not permit me, I gave him the following Sudorific toward the Evening. ℞. Treacle ℈ij. Diascordium of Fracastorius ℈i. s. Confectio Alkermes, Extract of Carduus Benedictus, Salt of VVorm∣wood an. ℈j. of our Treacle Water, Carduus VVater an. ℥j. mix them for a Draught. Though upon this he Sweat very well, yet finding the Disease to continue in the same State: the next day he took the same Sudorific again, and Sweat very well; but then the red Spots that fore-run the Small Pox began to appear up and down in the Skin. Never∣theless the Fever and other Symptoms seemed to be somewhat abated, yet did not go off: Therefore I ordered the Patient to be kept in a gentle breathing heat, and that he should take a Draught of the following Decoction luke-warm several times a day. ℞. Red Vetches ℥j. s. Barley cleansed ℥j. Scabious one handful s. fat Figgs no. XVI. Raisins Stoned, ℥ij. VVater. q. s. make a Decoction to two Pints. By this means the Small Pox came forth every where very thick, and rose very high, the Fever and Anxiety still continuing; so that the Patient seemed to be in great danger of his Life: For which reason I thought it necessary to give him the former Sudorific again; puting him into somewhat a greater Sweat, and the Decoction of Figgs being continued over and above for two days, the seventh day, contrary to all expectation, the Measles came out over the whole Body between the Small Pox, and then the Fever and other Symptoms abated very much; and by degrees went off, all together, and the Patient being happily recovered the fourth week from the beginning of the Disease, went abroad again. ANNOTATIONS. I Do not remember that ever I saw this Accident above twice or thrice in all my Practice; that is to say that the Small Pox and Measles should come both together. However by this Ob∣servation it appears, that although both these Diseases in respect of Infection have somewhat in common, yet in re∣spect
of the Subject to which that In∣fection adheres, there is something of difference and distinction between them. Otherwise what should be the reason that in this Patient, the whole Infection should not be Evacuated with the Ex∣pulsion of the Small Pox? Then again it is to be admir'd that why the Measles, adhering to the more suttle and thinner Matter, did not break out first, seeing that the thinner Matter is quicker in coming forth than the thicker. HISTORY. XX. A Noble Batavian, was seized by a Fever, accompany'd with a strong Pulse but very unequal, an extream Anxiety, Thirst, restlessness, a slight Delirium, and some little convulsive Motions of the Extream Parts. Having loosned his Belly with a Glister, I ordered him to be let Blood. Toward Evening having taken a Sudorific he Sweat very much, but the Disease remaining in the same State, the next day the Sudorific was repeated, he Sweat very well. All this while the Symptoms nothing abated, but the Patient began to complain of a Pricking in his Skin quite all over his Body. Soon after it was observed that great red Spots appeared in his Skin, some as broad as a Dollar, some half a Hands breath, some more, some less, which seemed to be all fiery, sown all over with little risings like Millet Seeds. These Spots in a days time closed all to∣gether, and spread themselves all over the Body. So that it was all over of a red florid Colour. In the mean time the Fever and Symptoms abated. Three days after, that general redness abated also, and the Spots returned to be as they were when they first appeared, and so within three days vanished quite away, and so the Patient, after the Skin of his Body was all peeled off, was re∣stored to perfect Health. ANNOTATIONS. THis Distemper, which Forestus calls Purpurae, or the Purples is very near akin to the Measles; and the Cure of both is almost the same; only the Subject to which this Infection adheres is hotter then that of the Measles; but it is as easily dissipated; nor are those little Pustles suppurated, but dissipated by heat.
MEDICINAL OBSERVATIONS AND CURES OF Isbrand de Diemerbroeck. OBSERVATION. I. An Inflammation of the Lungs. MOnsieur La Fontaine, a Noble French Man, about thirty Years of Age Plethoric, no great Drinker, yet a Lover of unmixed Wine, upon the Tenth of November, going to Bed, began to complain of difficulty of breathing, yet without any pain in his Breast: soon after a redness seized his Face, especially his Cheeks, and his Eyes also appeared swelled and inflamed. This difficulty of breathing, within two hours was so encreased, that he could hardly draw his Breath; insomuch that he was afraid of a Suffocation. Wherefore about Midnight he sent for me, bidding the Messenger tell me withal that he should dye, unless I could help him with some present Remedy. By the redness of his Face, and his little frothy and flowry spitting, as also by his difficulty of Breathing, which was without any pain, yet with a kind of heaviness in his Breast, I judged this Distemper to be an Inflammation in his Lungs, so much the rather because I found by his Pulse, that he was in a strong Fever. Thereupon I ordered a pint of Blood to be taken from the Basilic Vein of his right Arm: by which he felt very much ease. To drink (for he was very thirsty) I gave him a Ptisan of Barly cleansed, and Licorice boyl'd in Water. In the mean time the following Glister was prepared, and given by six a Clock the next Morn∣ing. ℞. Emllient Decoction ℥x. Elect. Diacatholici Diaphoenici an. ℥j. common Salt ʒj. Oyl of Violets ℥ij. for a Glister.
This gave him two sufficient Stools: But because the difficulty of breathing still continued very oppressive, about ten o Clock we took away a pint of Blood out of his left Arm. The Blood appeared in∣different good, only that it had a great deal of Yellowish froth at the top. Then besides the Ptisan, he drank of the following Apozem now and then every day. ℞. Barley cleansed ʒij. -Licorie ʒj. . Endive Sorrel, an: one handful, Violet Leaves two handfuls, Flowers of Poppy Rheas two little handfuls, the four greater Cold-seeds, and Lettice-seeds an. ʒij. Currants ʒij. Common-water q. s. Boyl this according to Art to two Pints. In the straining dissolve Syrup of Poppy Rheas, Violets and Limons an. ℥j. mix them for an Apozem. For his nourishment I prescribed him Broths with Chervil, Endive, clensed Barley and the like boiled therein. The next day because the Patient would admit no more Glisters, I gave him a Laxative Medicin, which gave him four stools with great ease. In the mean time he breathed much more freely, and his Fever very much abated. The following days, the foresaid Apozem was five times repeated, the seventh day of the Disease, he fell into a very great Sweat of his own  and so the force of the Disease being broken by a Crisis; the ever, with the difficulty of breathing went off, and the Patient was restored to his former Health. ANNOTATIONS. SAys Gallen, when an acute Fever happens with difficulty of brea∣thing, accompanied with streightness and heaviness, that Distemper is an In∣slammation of the Lungs. Now this In∣flammation sometimes happens of it self, sometimes it succeeds a Squinancy, or , when a Humor is carry'd from the Chaps or side into the Lungs by way of Mutation. Whence Hip∣pocrates, An Inflammation in the Lungs from a Distemter in the sides, is bad. For it is a dangerous thing for one acute Disease to accompany or follow ano∣ther. But an Inflammation of the Lungs that does not proceed from any other Distemper, but grows of it self, proceeds from a thin and Choleric Blood flowing in a greater quantity then can be circulated into the Substance of the Lungs, and there inflamed. This Inflammation of the Lungs Fernelius asserts to be the less frequent of the two. And it is much less frequent then the Pleurisie, from which it differs, because the one seizes with a most acute pain, the other with a little pain, but an op∣pressing heaviness; for that the one in∣flames and distends the Pleura Mem∣brane, which is endued with an Exqui∣site Sence; the other inflames and di∣lates the Lungs, which are nothing so Sensitive. In other things, as acuteness of the Fever, difficulty of breathing and other signs, as also in the Cause and Cure of the Disease they both a∣gree. But besides the foresaid Inflmama∣tion of the Lungs, there is another sort more frequent which differs very much from the other in the excess of the Symptoms and the Cause, as arising either from Flegm collected and putrified in the Lungs; or from a thin, sharp, and copious distillation falling down upon the Lungs from the Brain, and there pre∣ternaturally glowing and causing a Fever, and by degrees wasting the Patient with a Cough, difficulty of Breathing and a slow Fever, without any spitting of Blood. An Inflammation of the Lungs there∣fore is an acute Distemper, which, as Celsus testifies, is more dangerous than painful. Now this Distemper does not always seize the whole Lungs, but sometimes one particular Lobe, which Iacotius testifies he has seen in the opening of a Peripneumonic Body. So says Iouber also. In a Peripneumony, there is no necessity that the whole Lungs should be always enflamed, but many times some one of the Lobes only suffers, as we have found by the Dissection of an Infinite number of Bodies. This Hippocrates,
plainly declares where he teaches us how to know the differences of this Distemper in these words. In an In∣flammation of the Lungs, if the whole Tongue be white and rough, both parts of the Lungs; are vext with an Inflammation; but where but half the Tongue is so effect∣ed, on that side where it is discoloured and rough, there the Inflammation lyes. A pain under one Clavicle, denotes an In∣flammation of one of the upper VVings of the Lungs; but the pain extending under both Clavicles denotes that both the upper Wings of the Lungs are inflamed; if the pain lye in the middle of the Ribs, the middle part of the Lungs suffers; but if the pain comes to that part to which the Lungs extends it self, the lower wing of the Lungs is effected. Where one whole Part is affected, there all that answer to that Part must of necessity suffer. The most certain and proper sign, besides others, of a true Peripneu∣mny, is a redness of the aws (accord∣ing to the Testimony of Galen, Paulus Aegineta and Avice) with an acute Fe∣ver, and extream difficulty of Breath∣ing, if accompanied with none or very little oppressive pain. All which, when they appeared so manifestly in our Pa∣tient, there was no question to be made of the Distemper; which Disease went off the seventh day upon an extraordi∣dinary spontaneous Sweat: which Fore∣stus observes to be customary in a true Peripneumony. Though sometimes as Aetius tistifies, in young People it uses to go off with a violent Bleeding at the Nose or Flux of the Monthly Evacua∣ations; which nevertheless I find that Riolanus denies. Gregory Horstius has observed, that a Peripneumony has gone off the seventh day with a Critical Flux. Which however seems to be contrary to Rea∣son, when a Flux of the Belly, accord∣ing to Hippocrates, is very prejudicial to this Disease, as being that by which the Morbific matter contained in the Breast cannot be evacuated, there being no Passage from the Bowels included in the Breast to the Intestines. It may be said that Nature seeks occult ways for her self unknown to us, by which she Evacuates that filth which is noxious and troublesom to her, as when in an Em∣pyema, the Matter in the Breast is void∣ed by Urine; which she may also do in a Peripneumony, and so the Matter in the Lungs may be conveighed to the Guts, but this rarely falls out. The Cure of this Disease is very like the Pleuisie; for in this Cure Blood∣letting has always the greatest share, many times repeated according to the strength of the Patient, and prevalency of the Distemper, using at the same time  Remedies or Glysters, and other Medicaments, as well to ex∣pectorate, as extinguish the heat of the Feve. But there is no delay to be made in the Cure; for unless this Disease be opposed with all speed, in a short time it either suffocates the Patient, or turns into an Empyema or Consumption, for it corrups the substance of the Lungs. Thus Iacotius reports, that upon open∣ing the Body of a Peripneumony he found the upper Part of the Lungs gan∣green'd; and the Medrastinum full of a bloody Serum. OBSRVATION. II. The Tooth-ach. THE Daughter of N. complained of an Intollerable pain in her Teeth, which had lasted for some Months together, nor could be asswaged by any Topics or other Medicaments taken. I advised her for some Nights together, when she went to Bed, to swallow two Pills of Transparent Aloes, about the bigness of a Pea, and not to drink any thing afterwards; which when she had done three or four times, the pain ceased and never returned. ANNOTATIONS. IT so happens that sometimes the up∣per Orifice of the Stomac being stuft with Viscous, Cold or Cholo∣ric Humors is the Cause of the Tooth∣ach; partly, because of the great consent there is between it and the Brain, by the Nerve of the Sixth Conjugation; partly, because that then being loosened
with over much moisture, it sends up many Crude and Cold, or Choleric and sharp vapours to the Brain. In such a Case, those Cold and Viscous Choloric Humors are best expelled by strong Vo∣mits or Bitter detersive Medicaments, that will adhere long to the place affect∣ed. And therefore I ordered her to∣ward the Evening to swallow two dry Pills of Aloes; sometime after she had Supped, and to drink nothing after them, to the end that staying in the Oesophagus, and being there melted, they might stick the longer to the Ori∣fice of the Stomac, and have more time to cleanse it. For Medicaments that are taken upon a fasting Stomac, presently ink down to the bottom of the Stomac, and signifie nothing in the Distempers of the upper Orifice. Thus Avicen orders all Pills that Purge the Head to be taken at Night an hour af∣ter Supper. OBSERVATION. III. A Pestilential Fever. A French Merchant came to an Inn; and not finding himself very well, presently went to Bed, believing it to be nothing else but the weariness of his journey; the next day the Disease augmenting, the Woman of the House desired me to see him, and try whether he were not infected with the Sickness which was very rise in many Places. He was very weak with a little Pulse thick and unequal. Yet the Fever did not offend so much by it's heat as by it's malignity. I understood also by the Sick Person, that he found himself ill the day before he came, and that this was the third day of the Disease. But when I found neither Carbuncles, nor Bubos, nor any other Signs of the Pestilence; I Judged his Disease to be rather a Pestilential Fever, then the Pestilence it self; thereupon I began with Blood-letting, after I had first given him a Glister, and took away fifteen or sixteen Ounces of Blood out of the Median Vein of the Right Arm, which Blood (a thing to be wondered at) was for the most part whitish; so that it hardly seemed to be Blood: When it was cold, that which first came out, first like Milk, was all coagulated like a Muscilage, and was of a greenish Colour, only some very few red Clods were to be seen at the bottom: That which flowed out last, was for the most part between green and white, but at the bottom there was a Setling of Blood of a dark red Colour, that was scarcely curdl'd. This Blood∣letting gave him great ease. In the mean while for his Drink I gave him a Ptisan, wherein Citron Rinds and the Fruit of Tamarinds were boyl'd. Then, because of the extraordinary Corruption of his Blood I ordered him to be let Blood again, which the Patient hearing, impatient of the Anxiety that oppressed him, he earnestly desired me it might be done that day. Thereupon toward the Evening we took out of his other Arm about a Pint of Blood, that which came out first was very white, that which came out last very red: and to repair his strength we gave him Chicken Broth with Sorrel and a Pome Citron boil'd in it. All the next Night he was very pensive, weak and restless, so that it was thought he would have dyed. But Nature, being now discharged of her burthen, the next day which was the fourth day of the Disease, strongly and successfully expelled the remainder of the Malignity, by a critical and spontaneous Sweat, which about Noon breathed out in great abundance from the Patients Body: at the same time also small red Pustles, like Millet Seeds, came forth very thick, so that the Skin of his whole Body was cover'd with them from Head to Foot. After this lucky Crisis the Fever went off, and then the Patient falling again to his Broths, and Drinking his
Ptisan, recovered his former Health and lost Strength. But all the Cuticle of his Body became new; the former peeling off not with∣out an extraordinary Itching. ANNOTATIONS. CErtainly it was a very great Malig∣nity that had caus'd such a Cor∣ruption of Humors, by which the Blood was so strangely changed in so short a time, as to loose its Natural Colour and grow white. 'Tis true I once saw at Beauvais Blood which came out at first white like Milk, and afterwards somwhat red from the Arm of one that was Sick of a Malignant Fever; which Blood was then shew'd to several that lookt upon it with admiration. These Malignant Fevers too, were at that time very rise in most Parts of France, and were caus'd by the common and great Infection of the Air. The Nature and Cure of which see Obs. 24. where we shall describe the Story of a Fever like to this that seiz'd one of our Country Men. OBSERVATION IV. JOhn de Laurier, a Merchant of Poitou, about threescore Years of Age, ask'd my advice concerning a Gonorrhea, which he had for some Months, accompanied with a heavy pain in the Loyns. Upon Ex∣amination of the case, I found by many Signs that there was no Virulency, but only a Mischeif contracted by the more violent use of Venery, which had weakened the seminary Vessels. Wherefore I prescribed him a diet moderately heating and drying, meats of good juice and quick nourishment, to drink unmixed Wine moderately and to take some other corroborating and nourishing things. Then after I had purged his Body twice with a gentle Purge, that the Viscous humours might be first expelled the seminary Vessels, before the use of other Medicaments, every Morning and about five a Clock in the Afternoon, I gave him ij. s. of Salt Prunella in a Draught of red Wine; which when he had taken for eight days together, he was perfectly Cured, without having need of any more remedies, which I had ordered him to use. All this while I ordered his Loyns to be anointed with the following Oyntment. ℞. Martiat Oyntment ʒij. Oyl of Foxes ℥ s. Oyl of Turpentine ʒij. Oyl of squeezed Nut-meg ʒj. make an Oyntment. ANNOTATIONS. A Gonorrhea according to Galen, Aetius and others, is an unvolun∣tary Excretion of the Seed; of which some make two, others three, we four differences. First, by reason of the heat of the Reins, and plenty of Seed, and this is called Pollution. It happens with some Pleasure and Erection wherein it differs from other Gonorrheas, because they are accompanied with neither. It is cur'd by Blood-letting, slender Dyet, refri∣gerating Medicaments and Nourish∣ments, as also drying and gentle Astrin∣gents. The second is caus'd by the fal∣ling down of evil and corrupt Humors and Phlegm from the Brain and Liver, and other Bowels to the Spermatic Ves∣sels, the retentive faculty of which is thereby endamaged, and so those pu∣trid Humors flow forth with the Seed. This as it seldom happens to Men, so is it very frequent among Women, and hard to be Cured; nor is it to be Cured, until you can first remove the vitious Distemper of the Bowels, which sends those humours thither. The third proceeds from the ex∣cessive use of Venery, by which the
Spermatic Parts being weary'd and extin∣guish'd are refrigerated & grow languid, and gather together crude and cold Hu∣mours, by which their concoctive and retentive faculty being loosened, they can neither concoct nor retain the Seminal matter. This is easily got by Elderly People, less used to Venery, who not meeting so often with Oppor∣tunities to delight themselves, force all their Nerves so strenuously when they come to it, that they weaken the strength of the whole Body, and having wasted the strength of the Seminal Parts, such a Gonorrhea ensues, ac∣company'd with a weakness of the Loins. This is Cured by corroborating Medi∣caments and Nourishment, hot and gentle Asringents, having made use be∣fore of Purgatives and Diuretics, to free the Urinary and Seminary Passages, from the Crude and Viscous Humours collected therein; which done the Cure easily proceeds. The fourth which they call virulent, is contracted by coition with those that have the Pox: of which Infection, it is often a fore-runner, and as often a most faithful Companion, as being deriv'd from the same Cause, and which can∣not be safely cured before the perfect Cure of the Pox. In this there is a stinking Poyson of a White and Greenish colour, that distills insensibly from the Semi∣nary Vessels, and frequently corrods the Pipe of the Yard, which causes sharp pains upon Erection and making Water, and thence also Ulcers and Caruncles grow in the Urinary passage. And besides if this virulent Running be stopped un∣skilfully for the most Part it occasions Aposthumes either about the Testicles, which then begin to swell very much, or else about the Seminary vessels, and thence Veneral Buboes. Many times also the Ve∣nom ascending inward, and infecting the Liver and other Bowels, communicates the Contamination to the whole Body. OBSERVATION. V. A Scald. WIggerd Simonis was melting a good quantity of Rosin upon a quick Fire; which being too hot, the Flame got hold of the Kettle; now as he was going to put out the Flame and cover the Kettle with a Pillow, unwarily he thrust both his hands into the scalding and boyling Rosin; and the same thing happened to him, that went about to help him to put out the same Flame: so that both most greviously complained of the pain that their hands were in. A present remedy was requisite, but having none at hand, I bethought my self of a whole Bottle of Ink that I had in my Study: this I powred forth into a Pot, and bid them both plunge their hands into it, and for some time to wash and foment with it; which when they had done for half an hour the Heat and Pain ceased; nor did any Blisters rise, nor did they receive any damage by so terrible a Scald. OBSERVATION. VI. The closing of the Eye-lid by reason of a Wound. A Young Country Girl had fallen from a high place, and with the fall had received a great wound in the right Eye-brow, that is to say, in the inner part next the Eye; by which wound the Bone of the Cranium was laid half bare, and the Eye-brow being cut cross∣ways, the upper Eye-lid hung over the lower. A certain Chyrurgeon had quickly Cured the wound; but after the Cure of the wound the upper Eye-lid would never rise of it's own accord; nor could the Maid open her Eye, but by the Assistance of her Fingers; many Topics were apply'd by several Chyrugeons to remedy this defect; but none of them availing, after some Months my Assistance was desired. When I had viewed the Place affected, I perceived the Mischeif was
incurable, and therefore advised them to forbear any further Appli∣cations. However the Maid, by the advice of others, who put her in great hopes, for a whole Year together, applied sometimes one thing sometimes another, till at length receiving no benefits he quite gave over. ANNOTATIONS. HEre the streight Muscle of the Eye∣lid was cut. Moreover the un∣skilful Chyrurgeon at the beginning had not sufficiently clos'd the Lips of the wound; so that afterwards a thick Scar being grown over it, the Muscle could no longer preform it's Duty; so that there was no Man that understood Anatomy but might perceive the Wound to be in∣curable. OBSERVATION VII. A Dysury or difficulty of making Water. A Young Son of N. a Domestic Servant of the Lord Dolre, a Boy of five Years of Age, made Water for some Months with great difficulty, and in extream pain and misery; and which also many times stopped at the time it should have Evacuated. The Parents had taken the Advices sometimes of Chyrurgeons, sometimes of Old Women, and sometimes of Strowling Mountebanks: but at length in December, my advice was desired. Thereupon after I had gently Purged his Body with Powder of Diacarthamum, and Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, ordered him to take a Draught several times a day of the following Apozem, which the Boy impatient of the pain greedily suckt up. ℞. Roots of rest Harrow or Cammock, Sea Holly, sliced Licorice an. ℥. s. Flowers of Cammomil two handfuls, Seeds of Lettice, Parsley, Dill, an. ʒij. Fat Figs. nō. vij. new Milk and Water an. . ij. boyl them to the Consumption of the third part, then strain them. After he had used this Apozem two days, he voided every day much viscous and tough Matter together with his Urin; and after he had made use of two of these Decoctions, he was quite freed from his troublesome Distemper. ANNOTATIONS. THere are various Causes of the difficulty of making water, In∣flammation, Imposthume, Stone in the Bladder, the Flesh grown over, a cold Distemper of the Bladder and Sphin∣cter, thick and viscous humors either mixed with Urine, or sticking close to the Bladder and it's Sphincter, with several others of the same Nature; of which the two latter are the most frequent. But all in particular do not only cause a difficulty of Urine, but sometimes absolutely stop the Urine, as it happened to the Boy before men∣tioned which they who cut off the Stone had viewed, and thought he had the Stone, and judged him to be cut. But I believing his Distemper arose not from the Stone, but from a thick and tenacious Flegm that stopped up the Bladder and the passage of it, as I had observed had frequently happened to younger Children, rather chose to begin the Cure with attenuating, leni∣fying, and Diuretic Medicaments, seeing that many times such Medicaments
expel little stones also. But in this case, when Children cannot swallow ungrate∣ful Medicines, I have known flowers o Camomil boyl'd in new Milk with Figs do a great deal of good, especially, i after the boiling and the straining, the said Flowers be lay'd to hot to the Region of the Hair, and the Decoction at the same time given to drink. Fo∣restus in the same case commends Pelli∣tory and Chervil boiled, and applied hot to the Region of the Hair, with Butter, and Oyl of Scorpions. Mer∣curialis applauds Garlick bruised and applied to the Bladder. Amatus of Por∣tugal, extols a Turnep hollow'd, and fill'd with Oyl of Dill, and then roasted in the Embers, afterwards bruised and laid on. OBSERVATION VIII. Suppression of the Courses. JOan Elberty, a strong Maid of about twenty four Years of Age, com∣plained that her Purgations had stopped for four Months, so that she was in a very bad Condition, tortured with pains in her left side and Head, sometimes troubled with Suffocations, and her Stomach quite gone. After I had ordered her an attenuating and heating Diet, and forbid her all things that generate tough and viscous Humours, the sixth of Ianuary I Purged her with Electuary of Hiera Picra, then I prescribed her this Apozem to drink three times a day. ℞. Roots of Lovage, Master-wort, Fennel, stone Parsley, Vale∣rian an. ℥. s. Sassafrass-wood ʒiij. Nep, Mag-wort, Peny-royal, white-Mint, Fever-few an. one handful. Flowers of Camomil half a handful, Seeds of Lovage, wild Carrots, Gith, an ʒij. Laurel Berry ʒj. s. Tartar of Rhenish-wine ʒvj. stoned Raisins ℥ij. common Water q. s. boyl these for an Apozem of two pints. The 11th. of Ianuary I Purged her again with an Infusion of the Flowers of Senna and Agaric, with a mixture of Hiera Picra. The next day I prescribed her another Apozem to drink like the former. ℞. Root of Master-wort ℥j. of Elecampane, Valerian, Parsley an. ℥. s. Dittany, round Birth-wort an. ʒiij Mug-wort, Nep, Sa∣vio, Foverifew, Rue, Peny-Royal, an one handful. Southern∣wood, Flowers of Camomil an. one handful, Seeds of Parsley, Gith, Lovage, wild Carrots an. ʒj. s. red Vetches ℥j. s. common Salt and White-wine, an. equal parts; make an Apozem for two pints. Fourteenth of Ianuary I prescribed her this Electuary, of which she was to take the quantity of a Filberd, before she drank of her Apozem. ℞. Specier. Diacurcume, Cremor Tartar, Trochists of Myrrh, Hoglice prepared, Steel prepared an ʒj. seeds of Parsley, Nep, Venetian Bo∣rax an. ʒ. s. Salt Prunella, Eastern Saffron an. ℈j. reduce all these into a very fine Powder, to which add, Oyl of Iuniper, Amber an ℈j. of Dill drops vij. Electuary of Hiera Picra ℥. s. Syrup of preserved Elecampane Roots q. s. make an Electuary. Moreover because she felt a hardness at the bottom of her Belly about her Navel, I prescribed this Sere-cloth.
℞. Gum Opoponax, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Emplaster de Cumino, of Melilot an. ʒij. of Castor Pulverized ʒj. mix them and make them into a Roll to be spread q. s. upon red Lea∣ther. The nineteenth of Ianuary she was let Blood in the Saphena Vein of the left Foot, and bled indifferent well. The last Apozem was repeat∣ed again, which she took together with her Electuary till the twenty eight of Ianuary, at what time her courses came down very copious, after that she was very well in Health. ANNOTATIONS. A Long suppression of the Courses is oft-times the Cause of very great Distempers. For from hence arise Suf∣focations of the Matrix, and the pale Colours of Virgins; hence Palpitations of the Heart, Vertigo's, terrible pains in the Head, Joynts, Back and Loyns, Fevers, Swooning Fits, Coughs, difficult breathing, Cholic and Nepheretic pains, and lastly, the evil continuing long, Me∣lancholy Passions, swelling of the Bow∣els and Dropsies. Therefore the Cure is not to be delay'd; for the longer the Courses stop, with so much the more difficulty are they provoked to come down. The Cause of this Distemper is the Narrowness of the Vessels of the Womb; which again are accompanied with several other Causes, as Obstru∣ction, Constipation, Coalescence, or grow∣ing together, Compression and Settle∣ment. But the most frequent Cause is an obstruction occasioned by thick and vis∣cous humors: Which thickness and vis∣cousness is either in the Blood it self, when it is too cold or viscous; or else when Ex∣crementitious, Flegmatic and Melancholy Humors are mixd with the good Blood; and with that good Blood carried to the Veins of the Womb where they cause the Oppelation. But this Obstru∣ction and Viscousness of the Humors, as it is more or less, or has been of longer or shorter Continuance, so the Cure is performed by gentler or more violent Medicaments, with more ease or more difficulty. But in the Cure of our Patient, we were forced to use the stronger Medicaments, as well in regard of the cold season of the Year, as the greatness of the Obstruction. For she was wont to eat green Fruit and course Meats, that beget a viscous and cold Nourishment, which had gathered to∣gether a great quantity of the thick and crude Humors. OBSERVATION IX. An incurable Hoarsness. A Holland Boor in a quarrel between Carters, had received a wound with a Knife in the right side of his Neck near his Throat. The wound was soon cured by a Chyrurgeon. After some Months he came to me to prescribe him something for an Extraordinary hoarsness, with which he began to be troubled so soon as he had received the wound, and which the Physitian, who had had him in Cure, together with the Chyrugeon, could no way remove with all the Looches, Lozenges and Decoctions which they could give him. His voice was so small and hoarse that you could hardly understand what he said; but I observed that there was a Nerve which run back athwart from the Wound which was cut, through which the vertue of forming the Voice is conveighed; whence it came to pass that half the Vocality was defective, which when it could not be restored by any Remedies, I refused to meddle with him as one that was not to be cured.
ANNOTATIONS. THE Vocal Nerves, which conveigh the Vertue of forming the Voice, by Galen call'd the Recurrent Nerves, rise from the sixth Conjugation, and creep through the Throat to the Larynx. Galen extols their admirable Vertue in forming the Voice with a large Encomi∣um. And Laurentius, Columbus and Bauhinus give us a curious Demonstra∣tion of these Nerves in their Anatomical Treatises. Both these Nerves being cut, the Creature becomes mute; but if on∣ly one, but half his Voice remains. This Boor had but one Nerve cut, and so kept half his Voice; for had he been cut in the same manner on the other side, he would have been quite Dumb. Columbus, in the Dissection of a living Dog, has elegantly demonstrated the wonderful Efficacy of this Nerve to∣ward the forming of the Voice. But Galen was the first that made known the Use of these Nerves, and confirms the same with this History. A certain Chy∣rurgeon, says he, having cut out the Kings-Evil out of the Neck, that lay deep in the Flesh; as he drew the Scroffles out with his Nails, out of Ignorance, he also tore out the Recurrent Nerves along with them; by which means, he freed the Boy from the Scroffles, yet he took away his Voice and left him quite mute. Ano∣ther Chyrurgeon having made an Incision in another Boy, took away half his Voice, by cutting one of the Nerves, which made all the People stand amazed, how it should come to pass, that neither Aspera Arteria, nor the Throat being touched, the Voice should be prejudiced; but so soon as I shewed them the Vocal Nerves, they ceas'd admiring. Avicen also has a Story like this, of the Scroffles ill cut, a certain Per∣son, says he, mistook, when going about to perforate certain Scroffles, he met with a Branch of the Turn-again Nerves, by which means, he cut away half the Voice of his Patient. In like manner, Amatus of Portugal, tells us a Story of a Wo∣man that had the Kings-Evil in her Neck, to eat out the Roots of which, the Chyrurgeon put in Sublimate, by the Acrimony of which, one of the Recurrent Nerves was corroded, and the Woman almost lost her Voice. Nor is it only the Incision of this Nerve, but the Refrigeration of it, that uses to spoil this Nerve, which Galen confirms by this Story. I remember, says he, a Voice so prejudiced, that it was almost lost, and the recurrent Nerves being refrigerated to excess, by an Incision made in the Win∣ter time; which when I understood, by the Application of hot Remedies, restoring the Nerves to their natural Temper, I re∣stored also the Patient his Voice. In like manner says Avicen, There was a Per∣son whose Turn-again Nerve was over∣cool'd, there being a Necessity of long ap∣plying cold Iron to his Neck, and so he lost his Voice. Gentilis affirms, That there was some Apostume in that Part which was to be cut. So that the Apo∣stume being cut, and the Nerve laid bare, in regard it was Winter, and the Air was very sharp, the Cold got into the Nerve and spoiled the Patients Voice. OBSERVATION X. A Palsie. WE saw a strange and wonderful Cure of a Palsie in Susan Smacht, a most noted Woman, the Sister once of the Sexton of the Church of Montfort. This Woman, when she was a Girl of about six years of Age, being terribly frighted by an Accident, pre∣sently fell into a Palsie of her whole Body, except her Head. She was under the Hands of several Physitians and Chyrurgions, eminent at that time, who, by the Application of several Medicaments, reduced the Distemper to that pass, that all the rest of the Parts being recove∣red, only both her Thighs and Legs remain'd paralytic, from the Loyns to the Feet, so that she could neither stand nor go; in this Condition she lived a miserable Life, till the forty forth Year of her Age, at what time she was miraculously cur'd of her Distemper, after the fol∣lowing manner. In the Month of Iune, about Midnight, arose a
most terrible Tempest, with Thunder and Lightning, with which she was so dreadfully and unusually frighted, that at the same time she was delivered from her deplorable Disease. The next Morning, to the Admiration of all that beheld her, she was seen walking before her own Door, giving Thanks to God for her unexpected Cure. Thou∣sands of People, not only in the Town and Places adjoyning, but also from Cities remote, crouded to see her, and all admired her miracu∣lous Recovery. By others, being asked how this Cure was perform∣ed, she answered, that she was extreamly terrified by the Thunder and Lightning, and pray'd to God continually, but that during the terrible Tempest, her Brother the Sexton knock'd at her Chamber Door, and while she was thinking to creep, as she used to do, and to that end was feeling for her Crutches, that always stood by her Bed-side, but could not find them where she thought she had set them, a vast Flash of Lightning discovered them to her at the other side of the Bed. Where∣upon the prepared her self to creep along upon her Arms to reach her Crutches: But when she was about to put her Legs out of the Bed, (at what time, she said she heard and saw something, but what that was, she never would discover to any Body) she found that she could stand, and so, without any help, went to the Door and open'd it. And this very Relation she gave to Us more than once. Her Brother the Sexton, who had known his Sister to be paralytic for forty Years together, when he saw her open the Door and walk briskly about the Chamber, was so astonished, that for fear he fell into a Swoon. The next day, and the days following, the said Susan exposed her self to be publicly seen. I my self also knew her for many years, and have seen her a thousand times in that miserable Paralytic Condition, and afterwards saw her alive for fifteen years or more, a sound Woman, and free from so dreadful a Misfortune. ANNOTATIONS. THere may be given a manifest natu∣ral Reason for so miraculous a Cure; that is to say, that the Humor which fastened upon the Nerves, upon her first Fright, was again loosned from them by this more vehement Terror. As for the Patients saying she saw and heard something, I know not what, I leave that to the Judgment of the Rea∣der; perhaps she imagined something in her fear that was not really so. In the mean time, that there have been other unexpected Cures of the Palsie, is cer∣tain, by the Testimony of several Au∣thors. Thus Valleriola tells us a Story of a Citizen of Arles, affected with a Dissolution of both Sides, and destitute of all Humane Assistance, as one whom neither the Industry of the Physitians, nor seasonable and proper Applications, nor Observance of Diet could relieve, who at length, upon a vehement dread of Death, and being burnt in his Bed, the House wherein he lived being on fire, was of a sudden delivered from that deplorable Disease; Sense and Motion being restored to the Languid Parts. The same Author relates another Story of a Cousin German of his, who had been Paralytic six years of both his Thighs, who nevertheless, being pro∣voked by one of his Servants into a ve∣hement and sudden Passion, recovered his Limbs, and lived a found Man to his dying Day. And thus sudden and ex∣orbitant Commotions of the Mind have cur'd not only the Palsie, but other Di∣seases incurable by Art. Thus Herodo∣tus testifies, that the Son of Croesus born Dumb, when he saw a Persian running upon his Father to kill him, became vocal, and cry'd out, Friend, do not kill Croesus, and ever after that spoke like other Men. The same Valleriola reports, that he saw a Person cured of a Quartan Ague, through the vehemency of a sudden Passion, when no manner of Physical Remedies could cure the Distemper before.
OBSERVATION XI. Bleeding at the Nose. CHarles N. an Ale-Brewer, in the Month of October, drinking and dancing to Excess at his Sister's Wedding, of a sudden, in the midst of a Dance, fell flat to the Ground upon his Face, and by the Vehemency of the Fall, broke a Vein in his Nostrils, which caused such an abounding Flux of Blood, as if the Median Vein in his Arm had been cut. Presently Cloaths dipp'd in Water and Vinegar were clap'd about his Neck and applied to his Nostrils, Ligatures fastned a∣bout his Extream Parts, but nothing would prevail. Insomuch that the Patient, as well because he was heated with Drink, as by reason of the Pain of the Fall, swooned away. Thereupon, seeing nothing would do, and because there was no Chyrurgeon at hand to open a Vein, I ordered a Towel four times double to be soaked in cold Wa∣ter, and apply'd to his Testicles, which being twice repeated, con∣trary to the Opinion of the Standers by, not only stopp'd the Blood, but recovered him to his first Sobriety. OBSERVATION XII. The Itch. COrnelius Iohannis was troubled with a dry Scab, or running Itch, with dry Crusts, and little Scales upon his Skin, that itch'd intol∣lerably, especially in the Night, when he grew warm in his Bed. The Crusts being scratched off, by reason of the Itching, with his Nails, under them the Skin being a little raised, appear'd very dry, red, and rough, and then came Crusts and Scales like the former, so that the common People thought him to be infected with the Le∣prosie. This Distemper seized the lower part of his Belly, his Thighs and Legs, in such a manner, that by reason of the dry Crusts or Scales, the bare Skin was not to be seen in any of those Parts. His Arms also and Breast were infected in some pla∣ces, Two years before, upon the Crisis of a Quartan Ague (for the Cure of which, for fifteen Months together, by the Advice of that famous Physitian, D. Gallius and others, who judged his Distemper to proceed from a vitiated Spleen, se∣veral Medicines, both inward and outward, had been in vain made use of,) the Disease not only abating, but rather encreasing; at length I was sent for to a Consultation, and seeing the Person of a strong Constitution, and in good Health, excepting only the aforesaid Distemper, and observing there was no Sign, either of Spleen, Liver, or any other Bowel affected, I judged by that same Crisis of the Quartan Ague, that all the noxious, sharp, and vitious Humors were expell'd out of the Spleen to the Skin, and so his Spleen recovered its former Soundness, but that the Skin was deeply infected with that dry Scab, and that the Cause of the Distemper lay no lon∣ger in the Spleen, but only remain'd deeply fixed in the Skin; and that the Skin so infected, contaminated also the Juices and Humors flowing thither every day for its Nourishment; as a Vessel that has contracted any Filth, infects the best Wine that is poured into it. And indeed the Event of the Cure prov'd the truth of my Judgment. For
then I resolved to tame this obstinate Distemper, not so much by In∣ternal, as by Topical Medicaments, and those not gentle ones, but strong Remedies answerable to the Greatness of the Evil, and the Per∣tinacy of the Matter, since many other things, which others had try'd, would do no good. To this purpose, his Body being well purged before hand, in March I prescribed a Fomentation, with which, being luke-warm, to foment the Parts infected twice a day, for five or six days together. ℞. Roots of Briony ℥iij. Worm-wood, White Hore-hound, Pimpernel, Plantain, Centaury the less, an. Handfuls iij. Oak-leaves Handfuls iiij. Elder▪flowers Handfuls ij. boil them in common Water q. s. to ten Pints, adding at the end Roman Vitriol ℥j. Alm ℥j. s. for a Fomentation. After Fomentation, the Parts being dry'd with a Linnen Cloth, I ordered them to be anointed with our Oyntment against the Shingles. After six days Fomentation was discontinu'd, and only the Oyntment used, which in a few Weeks carried off a great part of the Distemper. This Oyntment the Patient used all the Summer, till September, by which time he was almost cured, excepting only three or four places about the breadth of a Dollar, which would not submit to this Oynt∣ment, but still produced new crusty Scales. Wherefore, the sixteenth of September, I prepared him the following Oyntment. ℞. Quick-silver ʒj. s. Turpentine ʒiij. To these well mix'd add the Yolk of one Egg, Unguent. Papuleum ʒvj. of our Oyntment against the Shingles ℥j. s. mix them for an Oyntment. These Remainders were very hard to be extirpated, and therefore I was forced to continue the Use of this Oyntment a little longer, augmenting afterwards the Quantity of Quick-silver; also I again apply'd the foresaid Fomentation; and thus at length this nasty trou∣blesome Deformity of the Skin, which others despaired of ever cur∣ing, was at length abated and vanquish'd, so that about the second of November it vanish'd quite and the Patient continued free from the same all the rest of his Life. ANNOTATIONS. THE Itch, by the Greeks called Li∣chen, by others Serpigo, from Ser∣po to creep, is a hard Asperity of the Skin, with dry Pustles, and a violent Itching, creeping and extending it self to the adjoyning Parts. Galen asserts two kinds of this Distemper. There are two sorts, says he, of the Itch, that mo∣lest the Skin. The one tolerable and more gentle, the other wild, and diffi cult to be removed. In these the Scales fall off from the Skin, under which, the Skin appears red and almost exulcera∣ted. Celsus, who by the Word Impeti∣go, seems to have understood some o∣ther Distemper, describes this Itch of Galen under the Name of Papula, and makes also two sorts of it. The one, says he, is that the Skin is exasperated by the smallest Pustles, and is red, and slightly corrodes, in the middle somewhat lighter, and creeps slowly; it begins round, and dilates in a Circle. The other, which the Greeks call , or the wild Itch, is that by which the Skin becmes more rough, is exculcerated, and vehemently corroded, looks red, and sometimes fetches the Hair off, which is less round, and more difficultly cured. As for the Cause of the Disease, Galen Aetius, Aegmeta affirm it to be genera∣ted out of certain mix'd Humors, that is to say, serous, thin and sharp, mix'd with thick Humors. But in my Judg∣ment,
Galen writes better, and more perspicuously, that this Distemper is ge∣nerated out of a salt Flegm and yellow Choler, which is the reason, that as in earthen Vessels corroded by Pickles, the Scales fall off the Skin. Now these Humors being transmitted to the Skin, putrifie it, as Avicen says. To which I add, that this Corruption afterwards is intermixed with the good Humors, carried to the Skin for its Nourishment, and so the Mischief becomes diuternal. Thus also Mercurialis writes, that the Skin only having acquir'd a deprav'd Habit, corrupts all its Nourishment, and converts it into increase of Impurities. And in the same manner, discoursing of such a kind of scabby Patient. In the whole Circuit of the Body, there is a vitious and itchy Humor implanted, by vertue of which, whatever good Nourishment is carried to it, is presently converted into a nasty salt corroding Humor, which occasi∣ons that continual Itching, toge∣ther with those little Ulcers, and the roughness of the Skin. Now these Humors corrupting the Skin, must of necessity be hot and salt, from which proceeds that Heat and Itching of those Scales. This Distemper however is not so dangerous as it is troblesome, which if it continue long, gets that deep foot∣ing, that it is a very difficult thing to extirpate it; and sometimes it har∣dens into a dry Mange and Lepro∣sie. The gentler sort is cur'd at the begin∣ning with gentler Medicaments, as Fast∣ing-Spitle, tosted Butter, Oyl of Eggs, of Tartar, or Juniper, boyled Honey, liquid Pitch, or Juice of Citron. But that which is of longer continuance and wild, requires stronger Remedies, as Sulphur, Minium, Lytharge, Ceruse, Vitriol, Pit-salt, Rust of Brass, Lime∣allum, Niter, white Hellebore, &c. To which we may add Quick-silver, Sub∣limate, and precipitate, Mercury hav∣ing a peculiar occult, yet apparent Quality, to kill the Malignity that accompanies this Distemper. Thus Pe∣ter Pachetus, in his Observations com∣municated to Riverius, when no o∣ther Remedies could tame a wild Itch, cur'd it with this Oyntment. ℞. Unguent. Rosaceum ʒ iij. White Pre∣cipitate ʒ iij. Mix them for an Oynt∣ment. OBSERVATION XIII. A Mortification of the Legs and Thighs by Cold. MAny times severe Mischiefs attend the Imprudence of Persons given to drink; which a certain lusty young Man, sufficiently made known by his own woful Example. For he in a most terrible Winter, when it freez'd vehemently hard, coming home about Mid∣night well Cup-shot, without any body to help him to Bed, went into his Chamber, where falling all along upon the Floor, he fell asleep, and neither remembring himself nor his Bed, slept till Morning. But when he awak'd, he could feel neither Feet nor Legs: Presently a Physitian was sent for. But there was no feeling either in his Legs or Feet, though scarified very deep. Hot Fomentations were apply'd, of hot Herbs boil'd in Wine, adding thereto Spirit of Wine; but to little purpose. For half his Feet, and half his Legs below the Calves were mortified, the innate Heat being almost extinguished by the Ve∣hemency of the intense Cold. The Fomentations were continued for three days. Upon the fourth day, the mortified Parts began to look black, and stink like a dead Carcass. Therefore for the Preservation of the Patient, there was a necessity of having recourse to the last Extremity, namely, Amputation, and so upon the sixth day both his Legs were cut off a little below the Calves in the quick part; by which means, the Patient escaped without his Feet, from imminent Death, and afterwards learn'd a new way to walk upon his Knees.
ANNOTATIONS. AN Example of the same Nature we saw at Nimeghen, in the Year 1636. of a Danish Souldier, who hav∣ing slept, Drunk, as he was, upon a Form, in a bitter frosty Night, when he walk'd in the Morning could not feel his Feet. But by heating Fomen∣tations, the native Heat, at most extin∣guished by the Cold, after two days so menting, was restored to his Feet, tho his Toes could never be brought to their natural Constitution; but remain∣ing mortified, and beginning to putrifie, were all cut off by the Chyrurgeon. And therefore I would advise all hard Drinkers not to take their Naps too im∣prudently in the Winter, unless they have first laid themselves in a warm Place, and well fortified themselves a∣gainst the Injuries of the Air, least their being buried in Wine, bring them to be buried in Earth. OBSERVATION XIV. Obstruction of the Spleen. KAtharine N. a Woman of forty four years of Age, had been troubled a whole year with an Obstruction of her Spleen; much Wind rumbled in the Region of her Spleen; she was tormented with terrible Pains of the same Side, by reason of the Distention of the Bowels and the neighbouring parts; so that she went altogether bow'd toward the Side affected, till at length, grown as lean as a Skeleton, with continual Torments, she could go no longer. You might also perceive by laying your Hands upon the Place, that the Spleen was very much swell'd; and more than all this, her Stomach was quite gone. In March, being call'd to the Cure of this Distem∣per, I first purg'd her Body with a gentle Purge; upon which, when she found but very little Relief, I prescribed the following Apozeme for two days, to open the obstructed Passages, and prepare the Mor∣bific Matter, and withal, to keep her Body open. ℞. Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Dandelyon an. ℥j. Roots of Fennel, Elecampane Stone Parsly, Peeling of Capery roots, Tamarisc an. ℥s. Baum, Fumary, Water Trefoil, Tops of Hops, an. Handful j. Centaury the less, half a Handful. Fen∣nel seed ʒij. Damask Prunes o xi. Currants ℥ij. Boil thm in common Water q. s. In the straining, macerate all night, of Spoonwort, Winter Nasturtium an. Handful j. Leaves of Senna cleansed ℥ij. Anise-seed ʒvi. Make an Apozeme for two Pints. After she had drank two Mornings a Draught of this Decoction, she went to Stool twice or thrice a day, but the Ease which was ex∣pected did not follow. Wherefore, after she had drank up her Apo∣zeme, I gave her a purging Medicine somewhat stronger, which I thus prescribed. ℞. Leaves of Senna cleansed ℥s. White Agaric ʒj. Roots of Black Helleore ʒs. Rhenish Tartar, Anise-seed an. ʒj. Fumary VVa∣ter q. s. Make an Infusion all night, and add to the straining Elect. of Hiera Picra, Diaphoenicon an. ʒij. for a Draught. After she had taken this, at first she voided common Excrements. Soon after she felt an extraordinary Pain in her Left-side, which pre∣sently removed from thence to the Guts; which Pain weakned her to that degree, that she went away sometimes in a Swoon. Not long af∣ter,
she voided a certain black Water, like Ink, in so great quantity, that she fill'd three whole Chamber-pots to the top. From hence she felt an extraordinary Ease, and the Pains of her Left Hypocondrium went almost quite off. Four days after I gave her the same Purge a∣gain; upon which, she voided again a great quantity of black Water, but not so black as before, neither was it so black as the former, as not being much unlike the Lye in which our Country-women boils their Linnen Spinnings. After this Evacuation, she was terribly griped in her Belly, wherefore, about Evening, I prescribed her Methridate De∣moc. ʒj. with five Drops of Oyl of Aniseseed, in a Draught of heat∣ed Wine. After the use of these Medicines, the Patient grew indiffe∣rent well, and in regard she began to loath Physic to that degree, that she could not endure to hear the Name of Physic, we were forced to defer the rest of the Cure till May, only ordering her to observe a proper Diet. But in May she drank three Apozemes again, was three or four times purged, and took her Electuary, and so was restored to her pristin Health. ANNOTATIONS. THis Woman, for two years before, had lost her monthly Evacuations, and from that time the Distemper of the Spleen began to seize her more and more, till she became altogether Melancholy. Whence it is very probable, that the failing of her accustomed Evacuations, that fling off many other Excrements of the Bowels, was the Cause of the Ac∣cumulation of this Melancholy Hu∣mor in the Spleen and Neighbouring Parts, which now wanted the usual pas∣sage of Evacuation through the Womb. Therefore says Sennertus, The accustom∣ed Evacuations of the Hemorrhoids and Courses being suppressed, conduce very much to accumulate vitious Humors in the Spleen. Thus we have seen in our Practice, that Women after their Purgations have left them, have fallen into several Di∣seases, because the noxious Humors that were evacuated with the menstruous Blood, were then retain'd in the Body. And therefore when Womens Purgati∣ons fail through Age, they ought to purge often, to the end the excrementi∣tious Humors that want to pass through the Womb may be drawn to the Guts. As to the black Evacuations, it is in∣deed a Wonder how these melancholy Humors heap'd together in our Patient, could be retain'd in the Body without doing any more harm, and could be changed into a Blackness like Ink. Be∣sides, Hippocrates tells us, that black Stools are dangerous and mortal. Tho Petrus Salius well advises the Physitians not always to fear those black Stools, wherein there is nothing many times of dangor▪ For if the Spleen be out of order, this Matter gathers together a∣bout the Bowels in great abundance, and in those Veins which are common to them; which if it be in great quantity, it gathers also about the Mesentery and Sweet-bred, which are, as it were, the Sink of the whole Body, and then when it grows burthensome to Nature, is expell'd, to the great Ease of the Pa∣tient, by the Expulsive Faculty, excit∣ed either of its self, or by Medica∣ments, the Evacuations of which are black. However, that Melancholy Matter so collected, is not always ex∣pelled through the Guts, but also to the great benefit of the Patient, sometimes by Urine, which Mercurialis also testi∣fies. Nor are you to wonder, says he, that Diuretics are by me preferred above other Medicines, since Reason tells, that Melancholy and Splenetic Persons have black melancholy Blood. With which a∣grees the Authority of Aristotle, in his Problems, but chiefly of Hippocrates, who gives us the Story of Byas the Fisty-Cuffer, who was cured of a Swelling in his Liver, by a Flux of Urine. For which reason, they that undertake the Cure of the Spleen, must make it their Business to provoke Urine: for which, we have a remarkable Story which Va∣letius relates in Holler. I knew, says he, a Religious Person, whose Liver swell'd three or four times a year, but chiefly at the beginning of Spring and Fall; and while that bunchy Tumor lasted, he was infested with Hypochondriac Pains, black and blew
over his whole Body, and growing worse and worse by degrees. But at length, coming to make black Water, like to Ink, for five or seven days, he recovered his former Health, the Tu∣mor and Pain of the Hypochondrium vanishing. And now for these twelve or fifteen years, he has had these Pro∣fluvium's of black Urine, whereas be∣fore he had the Hemorrhoid, which though they swell'd indeed, were nr so open. OBSERVATION XV. A Wound in the Leg. ANdrew Ioannis, a Cook, hapening to be drunk, and finding his Chamber-door shut, set his Foot to the Door with all his force; so that after he had broke it, his Leg past through the Slit with the same swiftness, and rak'd the middle of his Leg withinside toward the Calf to that degree, that though the Solution of the Continuum were not very broad, yet it reach'd to the very Periosteum, and by reason of the Contusion in the Part, swell'd very much. A certain ignorant Chyrurgeon had had him in hand for some days, but his Pains increa∣sing, my Advise was desired. By this time his whole Leg was swell'd very much, and began to look of a greenish Colour among the Black and the Blew, with most acute Pains, and the Colour sufficiently de∣monstrated that the Fore-runner of Mortification would soon contract a Gangrene, which I found to have been occasioned by the Igno∣rance or Mistake of the Chyrurgeon; for he having thrust in a hard Tent into the Wound as far as the Periosteum, had stop'd it so close, that no Moisture could come forth. For he had laid a defensive Plai∣ster over it, as broad as my hand, composed of Bole Armoniac, and o∣ther astringent things, then had wrap'd his Leg, from the Knee to the Foot, in a Linnen Roller dip'd in Water and Vinegar, and had swath'd all this extreamly hard, pretending, by this means, to pre∣vent a Tumor and Inflammation. To say truth, the Wound was plain∣ly raw and ill colour'd, without any Digestion; so that upon draw∣ing forth the Tent, only a little watry Corruption came forth. All these things I threw away, and to prevent a Gangrene, took care to have the Wound wash'd with Spirit of Wine, that no Tent should be put in, but only that a Linnen Cloth four double, should be laid up∣on it, and that the whole Leg should be fomented with the following Fomentation. ℞. Betony, Thyme, VVoorm-wood, Sage, Hissop, Rosemary, Flow∣ers of camomil, Elder, Melilot, Roses, an. Handful j. Seeds of Cumin and Lovage, an. ℥j. s. Laurel Berries ʒij. VVhite-wine q. s. Boil them to three Pints, add to the Straining Spirit of VVine lb j. This Fomentation being wrapt warm about his Leg, the next Night his Pain was much abated, and much of the watry Corruption run out of the Wound. Within two days after, the Swelling of his Leg palpably fell, and returned to its natural Colour, and threw out the Corruption well concocted, and so being dressed as it ought to be, the Cure was easily compleated.
ANNOTATIONS. THings put into a Wound that ought not to be, are utter Enemies to Nature, endeavouring Consolidation, especially if they compress any nervous Body, Membrane or Tendon, or the Periosteum. Hence terrible Pains, Tu∣mors, Inflammations, and other Mis∣chiefs proceed; and therefore all such things as are foreign to Nature, are to be taken away, as Paraeus, Pigius, and other Chyrurgeons tell us. Thus hard and thick Tents, which inwardly offend and distend the Wound, or else stop it quite up, or compress the Nerves, Membranes, or Periostea, are not to be thrust into Wounds, as being those things that hinder the Operation of Na∣ture, Suppuration, Erection of the Matter and Consolidation, and beget Pains, Inflammations, and other Mis∣chiefs. Thus we have seen, by the Ig∣norance of Chyrurgeons, some Men tormented with Pains, others thrown into Fevers, Syncope, Convulsions, Mor∣tifications and Gangrenes. As it had like to have befallen our Patient; who, beside other ill Simptoms, was very near a Gangrene; and had it not been in time prevented, upon the Approach of the Mortification, he had hazarded the loss of his Limbs, or his Life. Hence Felix Wirtius, in Wounds of the Hands and Joynts, rejects the Use of Tents; which Opinion Hildan refutes, who says, that Tents are necessary in the nervous Parts, to keep the upper Lips of the Wound open, and give passage for the Corruption. By which Doctrine it appears, that he praises those Tents, which do not offend the inner Part of the Wound, but only keep the upper Parts open. But the Chyrurgeon, as to our Patient, had committed a great Error in this very Particular, for he had distended the inner Parts of the Wound with a thick and hard Tent, and had compress'd the Periosteum, and pre∣vented the Concoction and Efflux of the Corruption. OBSERVATION XVI. Suppression of Urine. THE Wife of Gerrard Anthony, a Taylor, had layn in, in May, and in three days after▪ she was brought to Bed, had not made Water, which was an extraordinary Pain to her, and had brought her so low, that she could hardly speak. The Mid-wife declared that she was very well laid, but that presently after her Evacuations were stopp'd, that something hard was to be felt on the other side in the lower part of her Belly. Hence I guessed that there was some Superfoetation or Mole, which remain'd behind. For the Cure of which, and to provoke her Urine and Purgations withal, I pre∣scribed this Apozeme. ℞. The Roots of Stone Parsly, Masterwort, Valerian, Sea-holly, Cammock an. ℥s. Round Birthwort, sliced Licorice an. ʒij. Leaves of black Ribs, Mgwort, Peny-Royal, Water-Nasturtium, an. one Handful. Water-Parsly with the Whose, two Handfuls. Sa∣vine, Flowers of Camomil, an half a Handful. White-wine q. s. Boil them for an Apozeme to a Pint and a half. ℞. Of the said Apozeme ʒiij. Oyl of Amber distilled by descent, Drops xx. Make a Draught. This she took hot the first time. This she took after three hours a∣gain, upon which, several Motions of Child-bearing supervening, she brought forth a round Mole, about the bigness of a Childs Head, which had the perfect Eyes of a Man. This being thus luckily ex∣pell'd,
her Urine and Purgations followed, and she was presently de∣livered from the imminent danger she was in. ANNOTATIONS. MOles are of different kinds, some within, others without the Birth; some very dangerous and troublesome to the Woman, others less hazardous; some without any Form, others resem∣bling some Shape or other; some hav∣ing Life, others without Life. Some∣times they presage something of Good; for though they do not hinder the Birth, yet they are very prejudicial both to the Birth and the Mother Which our Patient confirmed by her own Exam∣ple, who had certainly dy'd, had not the Mole, expell'd by Medicaments, made way for her Urine and Purgati∣ons. OBSERVATION XVII. A Dysentery. GErard Vossius, our Neighbour, had been troubled with a Dysen∣tery for some days; he was miserably tormented with cruel Pains in the Guts, and many times he voided Excrements that were all bloody, and mix'd with a tenacious Slime; he slept not at all, his Stomac was gone; he was very thirsty, and he had a Fever, which though not vehement, yet was continual. Though the young an were not above thirty years of Age, and very strong, yet he was brought so low by these Mischiefs, that in a few days he was reduced to an extream Imbecility. The sixth of February, I gave him the fol∣lowing Purge, which brought away much Choleric Matter. ℞. The best Rhubarb somewhat burnt ʒij. Mirobans Indian, Ci∣trine an. ʒj. Leaves of Senna cleansed ʒiij. Anieseed ʒj. White Poppy ʒij. Plantain Water. q. s. Let them boil for half an hour. Add to the Straining Elect. Diaphanicon ʒj. s. Mix them for a Draught. In the Evening, after his Purging, I gave him this Bolus. ℞. Terra Sigillata, Nicholas's rest an. ℈j. Mithridate Damoc. ℈ij. Mix them for a Bolus. The next day the following Apozeme was prepared, of which, he took three times a day, and once at mid-night. ℞. Barley cleansed ℥j. Roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, Pomegranate Rinds an. ℥s. Leaves of Oak, Plantane, Sanicle, Pimpernel, Great Sanicle, Snake-weed an. one Handful. Seed of small Roses ʒvj. Heads of white Poppies noiij. Raisins with the Stones ℥v. Common Water  iiij. Boil them to the Consumption of the half, for an Apozeme. In the Hours intervening, he took often in a day a small quantity of this Electuary. ℞. Nutmegs, Trochischs of Terra Sigillata, an. ʒs. Harts-horn burnt, red Coral prepar'd, Lapis Hematitis, Mastich. an. ℈j. To these being pulverized, add Conserve of Red Roses ℥j. s. Miv. cion. Rob. Acaciae an. ʒiij. Nicholas's Rest ʒj. s. Syrrup of sower Pomegranates q. s. Mix them for a Conditement.
I ordered him to bear with his Thirst as much as he could, which he the more ready yielded to; in regard, that after drinking, especi∣ally of Ale, he found himself most cruelly griped, and therefore in∣stead of Ale, I prescribed him this Amygdalate for his usual Drink. ℞. Barly cleansed ℥j. s. Seed of the smallest Roses ℥j. Of white , Plantain and Lettice an. ℥s. Common Water  iij. boil them to the Consumption of the Half. ℞. The Straining aforesaid, sweet Almonds blanh'd, ℥v. white Poppy Seed ʒiij. The four greater Colt-seeds ʒj. s. Make an Amygdalate according to Art, to which add Syrup of Poppies ℥j. Of Red Roses ʒj. s. The ninth of February I gave him ℈iiij. of Rhubarb a little burnt and powdered, in a little Ale; the tenth and thirteenth I repeated the Apozeme, and the twelfth the Conditement. And thus by the use of these Medicines, the Flux ceasing, the Patient regain'd his Health by degrees, and by the help of convenient Diet, recovered his lost Strength: However, for a long time after his Cure, he was ill, and coveted after any sort of Drink, which ill Habit, however afterward vanished, so soon as his Guts, by the use of good Diet, were again fortified with new Slime, which had been corroded away by the Acri∣mony of the former Humors. This Patient thus cured, the same Di∣stemper seiz'd three or four others in the same House, who were all cur'd in the same manner. ANNOTATIONS. AT the same time, at Montfort, Dysenteries were very rise over the whole Town among the Common People, and kill'd several, which there∣fore many judg'd to be Malignant and Contagious; but erroneously, for that it was not rife, as it was contagious; but in regard of the Season of the year, and the Diet then in use, for the Au∣tumn of the Year before was hot and moist, and had multiplied many Hu∣mors in the Bodies of People; then fol∣lowed a dry and intensly cold Winter, which intense Cold lasted a long time with a most terrible Frost, and thick∣ned those Humors. But at the begin∣ning of February, that rigid Cold chang∣ed of a sudden into a mild Warmth, by which means the Humors condensed by the Cold, were dissolved again and became fluid. Now during the Frost, be∣cause there was no bringing of fresh Flesh or Fish, or any other fresh Diet, the Common People fed upon old Flesh and old Fish, salted and hardned in the Smoak, Turneps, much Spice, and the like Food, that sharpen the Humors; which being again dissolved and ren∣dred fluid by the sudden Heat, occasi∣oned that great number of Dysenteries; yet no where but among the vulgar People, that made use of such a sort of Diet; for the wealthy sort, that eat well, were not at all troubled with the Distemper. Hence also it came to pass, that because three or four in the same House fed alike, they had all the same Disease; not that the Disease was common upon the score of Contagion, for then it would have infected those that came to them, as well as them∣selves.
OBSERVATION XVIII. A Dysentery. PAnras Collert, a stout young Man, about two and twenty years of age, at the same time also was seized with a Dysentery, and in regard he could not endure to take Physic; perhaps because he was very Covetous, he refused to take the Advice of any Physitians, but would needs be his own Physitian. He had observed that I was wont to purge Dysenteries at the beginning, and therefore he resolved to fol∣low my Course in his own Disease; yet willing to spare Cost, he pre∣pared himself the following Purge; Tabacco small cut ℥s. this he steep'd in small Ale all Night; the next Morning he boil'd it a little, and strain'd it, and drank of the whole Straining at a Draught. After which, he was taken with an extraordinary Faintness, even to Swoon∣ing, so that the People of the House thought he would have died: Presently followed a prodigious Vomiting, and Purging downwards, so that he voided an Extraordinary quantity of various Humors, espe∣cially yellow and green Choler, upwards and downwards; by which means, the Cause of the Disease being violently and altogether eva∣cuated, he was cured of his Dysentery by that one Draught. ANNOTATIONS. SAys Celsus, Oft times those whom Rea∣son will not recover, Rashness helps. This is apparent by the Example of that young Man, whose Rashness, had any other weaker Persons followed, they had perhaps cured their Dysentery by the Flux of their Soul. For Tobacco that way taken, is a most vehement disturbing Medicament, against the Vi∣olence of which, there is no resistance. And therefore I would not advise all People to use this Experiment. If the rash taking of such a violent Medicine succeed well with some young Persons that are of a robust Constitution, the same Success is not to be expected in all People. Nevertheless, that this Tobac∣co thus taken by a very strong Man, should heal his Dysentery, is no way re∣pugnant to Reason; for by its extraor∣dinary Violence, it evacuated altoge∣ther the whole Cause of the Distemper. I heard also, that two other country Boors, being troubled with a Dysentery, made tryal of the same Experiment. OBSERVATION XIX. Suppression of Female Purgations. ANtonia, a Plethoric Woman, very strong, about three and twen∣ty years of age, lying in of her first Child, rising the third day after her Delivery, too venturously trusted herself to the cold Air; upon which, her Purgations immediately stopp'd, yet she was well e∣nough till the third Week of her Month, at what time a violent Pain seized her Right-side toward the Region of the Spleen, as also her Loyns, and extended it self from the Huckle-bone to the true Ribs. The Pain had brought her very low, and taken away her Appetite; yet by her Pulse I found she had no Fever, and therefore upon the twentieth of September, I ordered her to be purged with this following Potion. ℞. The best Rhubarb ʒj. Leaves of Senna cleansed ʒiij. Rhenish Tartar, Anisseeds an. ʒj. s. Mugwort water q. s. Make an In∣fusion according to Art. Adding to the Straining Elect of Hi∣era Picra ʒj. s. for a Potion.
After this Purge, she loathed Physic to that degree, that we must have here given over, but that upon the twenty second of Sep∣tember, she was seized with a violent Suffocation from her Womb; by which, the Passage of her Breath being stopp'd, she was almost stifled, and sometimes swooned away. Then, tormented with her Pains, and afraid to dye, she promised to take whatever we gave her, though never so ungrateful to the Palate, so there were any Hopes of Ease. There to abate the Uterine Suffocation, I gave her this De∣coction, of which she was to take one, two or three Ounces several times a day. ℞. Leaves of Rue, one Handful, seed of Lovage ʒvj. Down of Nuts ℥. Seed of Caraways and Bishops-weed ʒj. Decoction of Barly-water q. s. Boil them to a Pint and strain them. By the use of this, the Suffocation was almost vanquished, only the Pains of her Side more and more increased, and extended them∣selves to her very Shoulder, so that I began to be afraid of her Life; therefore the twenty fourth of September, this Apozeme was made. ℞. Roots of Fennel, Valerian, Stone-Parsly, an. ℥s. Of Briony ʒvi. Of round Birthwort, Dittany an. ʒjj. Of Sassafras-wood ʒiij. Herbs, Mugwort, Rue, Peniroyal, Feverfew, Savine Nipp, an. Handful j. Flowers of Camomil, half a Handful. Seed of Lo∣vage ʒv. Common Water q. s. Boil them to two Pints. In the straining, steep for a whole Night together, Leaves of Senna cleansed ℥ij. White Agaric ʒj. s. Aniseseed ʒv. In the Morn∣ing let them simper over the Fire, and then strain them by Ex∣pression for an Apozeme. Of this Decoction she took twice a day, in the Morning, and at four or five a clock in the Afternoon, each time four or five Ounces lukewarm, which brought away every day, three, four or five times, putrid, nasty, tough, black and very viscous Excrements besides an extraordinary deal of Wind. In the intervening Hours, because of the Suffocations frequently returning, she sometimes took her first Decocti∣on. By the use of these Medicines, within four days the greatest part of her Pains ceased. The twenty ninth of September, I ordered the Saphena Vein in her Left-foot to be opened, and a good quanti∣ty of Blood to be taken away, which gave her ease; and the same day she took her last Apozeme again, of which the following days she drank no more than once a day. And thus by the use of these Reme∣dies, she escaped a dangerous Disease, and recovered her Health. ANNOTATIONS. CHild-bearing Women, in their Ly∣ings in, frequently commit very great Errors, afterwards, the Causes of great Mischiefs. Among which, this is not the least, that they are over confident of their own Strength, and trust them∣selves in the Air sooner than the time of their Lying in will permit; whence a∣rise those dangerous Diseases, Suppressi∣on of the Courses, Fevers, Suffocati∣ons, and many others; of which, there are several Examples to be found in Authors, besides what we see every day. Thus in our Practice, we have seen through this Error committed by Child∣bearing Women, most terrible Diseases brought upon them, some of whom have died, others ran most terrible Ha∣zards; others have go those afflictions of some particular Part, which they could never claw off as long as they liv'd. They do not all escape so lucki∣ly as our Patient before mentioned, for sometimes extream Weakness, or loath∣ing of the Taste, or a Fever, or some other thing hinders the taking of the
Medicaments, or inverts or hinders the operation of the Medicines, and then all the Art and Diligence of the Physitian signifies nothing. Thus, the same year that I had this Woman in Cure, the Wife of a Kinsman of mine at Utrecht, a strong Woman, fell into the same Dis∣temper, but not to be cured by all the Prescriptions of the most learned and prudent Physitians. In these Cases I have observed this, that the Courses, suppressed a little af∣ter Delivery, unless they be stirred within three or four days by Medica∣ments, can very hardly or not at all be moved by the help of the Physitians, but are the Causes of very desperate Diseases, which Diseases do not pre∣sently appear, sometimes not till after some days; sometimes not till after the third or fourth Week. And in the Cure of these Diseases, I have farther observed this, that the greatest Relief is given at the beginning, before the Strength of the Patient is abated, part∣ly by attenuating Apozems, and loos∣ning withal, to provoke and evacuate the Matters peccant, both in quantity and quality, partly by Blood-letting in the Feet; which way of Cure, I have with success experienced more than once. OBSERVATION XX. The Nephritic Passion. THE Young Lady Calsager was so cruelly tormented for three days, with a Pain a little below her Loyns, that she knew not where to turn her self; these Pains were also accompanied with Vo∣miting, and an extraordinary Restlessness. It was the Nephritic Pas∣sion, and the Gravel or Stone descending through the Ureters, caused this Pain: Wherefore, to expel the Gravel with more speed and ease, I prescribed this Decoction. ℞. Slic'd Licorice ℥s. Herbs, Stone-parsly, Althea, Chervil, Mallows, Water-parsly, Leaves of black Ribs an. one Hand∣ful, Flowers of Camomil, one Handful and a half, fat Figs no ix. New Milk, common Water, an. q. s. Boil them to the Consumption of the third part for an Apozem. That Day she drank almost all the Decoction, and about Evening, voided some small Stones, with a good quantity of Gravel, and was freed from her Distemper. ANNOTATIONS. MEdicines that break the Stone, sometimes crumble the little Stones that stick in the Kidneys, as Ex∣perience tells us. But when they are expell'd out of the Kidneys, and stick in the Ureters, they are not to be crum∣bled by the force of any Medicaments whatever, which Reason, besides Ex∣perience, teaches us, since no Medica∣ments can reach thither with their Ver∣tue entire; for that the great quantity of Serum running thither, and there setling, hinders and abates the Strength of the Medicaments; so that they are disabled in their Operation. And there∣fore, to force the Stones out of the U∣reter, lenifying and molifying Medica∣ments must be mixed with the Diure∣tics, to smooth and mollifie the Ure∣ters, and to prepare a more easie De∣scent for the Stone. Such is that De∣coction which I, and such is that Pre∣scription of Io. Baptist Thodosius, which he, boast never fail'd him in driving out the Stone, though he had made use of it several and several times. ℞. Leaves of fresh gathered Althea one Handful and a half, New Butter ℥iij. Honey lb j. Boil them together in Water q. s. to the Consumption of the third part. Take of the Straining a warm Draught Morning and Evening. Such is also that celebrated Secret of Forestus, which most Physitians highly approve, and which I have successfully made use of, only now and then with
some Alterations and Additions; of which, Forestus himself thus writes. This, my Secret, I will no longer conceal, for te common Benefit of the Sick; that it may not be laid to mine, which was laid to the Charge of the wicked Servant, who hid the Talent, which God had given him, in the Earth. And therefore I will no lon∣ger, to the Prejudice of Posterity, keep this Secret by me, which is this. ℞. Seed of Mallows, Althea an. ʒiij. Red Vetches ℥iij. The four greater Seeds an. ʒij. Barly cleaned ℥ij. Fat Figs no ix. Sebeston no vij. Licorice slic'd ʒj. Rain∣water  iiij. Boil these to the Consump∣tion of half, and reserve the Straining for use, which the Patient continually using, always voided Stones. OBSERVATION XXI. The Worms. A Little Boy, the Son of Antonius, about three years of age, had the lower part of his Belly extreamly swell'd, and stretch'd like a Drumb, so that he seem'd to be Hydropic; his Stomach was gone, with a slight Fever, accompanied with Frights in his Sleep, and he would be always rubbing his Nose with his Fingers. I guess'd them to be either Worms or crude Humors sticking in the first Region of the Belly, that caused all those evil Symptoms. Wherefore, because the Child would take nothing, but would be always drinking, I or∣dered new Ale to be given him for his Drink, with which I only mixt a little Oyl of Vitriol, so much as suffic'd to give it a gentle Sowrness. This Drink being continued for a fortnight or three Weeks, the Swelling of his Belly fell, but he voided no Worms. ANNOTATIONS. OYl of Vitriol given after that man∣ner, does not only remove all Pu∣trefactions and Corruptions, but kills and consumes the Worms in the Sto∣mach and Guts, and those that are in∣fested with such like evils; and we have seen it recover those that have been de∣spaired of, contrary to Expectation. Thus my Sister Cornelia, when she came to be seven years of Age, and was mi∣serably tormented with the Worms in her Belly, and had taken several Re∣medies to no effect, when she was de∣spaired of, and nothing but Death ex∣pected, at length, by taking Oyl of Vitriol given in Ale, she was recovered in a short time. The same thing hap∣pened to Margaret Dobre, the Daughter of the Marshal of Montfort, and seve∣ral others. Therefore it is not without reason that the Chymists cry up this Oyl so highly as they do. Concerning which, and the Oyl of Sulphur, Min∣dererus thus writes, There is no Corrupti∣on, the Strength of which they do not break; no Infection which they do not overcome, no depravation of Humors, which is not vanquished by them. OBSERVATION. XXII. A Burning. PEter Abstee, going to shoot off a Musquet, by chance the Breech of the Gun broke, and though the Splinters of the Iron did him no harm, yet his Face was all over burnt with the Flame of the Pow∣der, and several of the Corns of Powder stuck in his Skin. The Corns being presently pick'd out, we apply'd to his Eyes, Linnen Rags doubled and dipp'd in very Salt Butter; and over his Face we lay'd raw Turneps bruis'd in a Mortar with Salt Butter, which
we chang'd thrice the first day, and once the next night. This Ca∣taplasm drew out the Fire remarkably, nor did any Blister rise upon his Eye-brows, which the Butter had prevented; so that after one or two Anointings afterwards with Oyntment of Roses and Pomatum, he was perfectly cured. ANNOTATIONS. IN a Burn, the greatest Care to be taken, is to fetch out the Fire, and to prevent the rising of Pustles and Blisters; for the effecting of which, va∣rious Remedies are commended. In a slight Burn, the Cure is perfected by holding the Part which is hurt to the Fire, or by putting it into hot Water, or Water as hot as you are able to en∣dure it. But Burns of more Concern∣ment, raw Turneps beaten with Salt, are a most certain Remedy, by which, I have done strange things in very terri∣ble Burns. Common People, says Pare∣us, find by Experience, that the Heat of the Part slightly burnt, vanishes, and the Pain ceases, if they hold the Part af∣fected to the Flame of a Candle, or to quick burning Coals; for Similitude causes Attraction. Therefore the outward Fire draws out the inner, and so Fire becomes the Cure of the Mischief which it caused. It is also a try'd Remedy, and easie to be had, if presently after the Burn, you clap raw Turneps bruised with Salt to the part aggrieved. Nevertheless, Hildan says, that Tur∣neps do not agree with Burns in the Face, because they prejudice the Eyes, which would be true, if the Turneps were put into the Eyes; or if the Eyes, before the Application were not guarded with o∣ther things, which we think is best done with Linnen Rags four doubled, and dipp'd in very salt Butter; for that the Salt Butter draws out the Fire, by rea∣son of the Salt; and by its fatness, leni∣fies and guards the Eye-lids. But di∣still'd Waters are far less convenient, as are also Woman's Milk, or Whites of Eggs, or any such like things, which are presently dry'd up, and stick so close to the Part affected, that they can hardly be pull'd off without excoriati∣on. In Burns of the Face, Hildan ra∣ther uses this Oyntment. ℞. Venetian Soap ℥j. Oyl of Sweet Almonds and Roses an. ℥s. Mscilage of the Seeds of Quinces extracted with Rose∣water, a small quantity. Mix them for an Oyntment. In other Parts, he writes, the follow∣ing Oyntment powerfully draws out the Fire. ℞. Raw Turneps ℥j. s. Salt. Venice Soap, an. ℥s. Mix them in a Mortar, and make an Oyntment with Oyl of Roses and Almonds. Besides these, there are many other things which powerfully draw out the Fire. Among the rest, Writing-Ink, as we have already shewed, and Pickle, Linnen Rags being dipped there∣in, as also Lime-water do the same. Concerning Pickle or Brine, Lemnius thus writes, Pickle or Brine, by a present and peculiar force, draws the Fire out of Burns, and asswages the most intense Pains, whether the Burns be of Gun-powder, or the Scaldings of Oyl, Pitch, Scalding∣water, or fiery Coals; especially if the Parts affected be but fomented with a Rag dipped in the Pickle; this is confirmed by Matthias Pactzerus. Butter also mix∣ed with a great deal of powder'd Salt, and laid upon the Scald, does Wonders. But these things are to be used at the be∣ginning, before the Wheals and Blis∣ters rise, and that there be any Excori∣ation, else these things are not so pro∣per, but the Cure must be ordered ano∣ther way. OBSERVATION. XXIII. The Tooth-Ach. COrnelia Iacobi, a strong Woman, was troubled with a terrible Pain in the Teeth, together with a Pain in half her Head; whereupon I gave her this Vomit.
℞. Glass of Antimony powder'd gr. xii. White-wine ℥v. Let them sleep all Night, in the Morning filter the Wine through a Sheet of brown Paper, and give it for one Draught. This brought up Choleric, Flegmatic and tough Matter in abun∣dance; and besides she had some Stools; the next Night she slept well, the Pain of her Teeth ceased, and she never had it more. OBSERVATION XXIV. The Gallic Fever, Epidemic. IN the Year 1635▪ the Summer was extream hot and dry; at what time, the King of France's Army being joyned with ours, besieg'd Lovain, where the Souldiers were in great want of all things, especi∣ally of Bread and Water, and for that reason they fed upon the Fruits of the Season, unripe and crude, Flesh newly kill'd and never salted, without Bread, and other Food that bred ill Nourishment; so that at length, almost consumed with Hunger and Thirst, they raised their Siege, and by reason that Schenk-Fort was at that time betray'd into the Spaniards Hands, they were forced to come into our Country. Hi∣ther when they came, besides our own, the greatest part of the French Foot quartered for some time at Nimeghen (where I liv'd at that time, and began to practise) and among those Souldiers, a certain Pestilent and Malignant Fever began to be very rife some few days before their com∣ing to the Town. Here the Souldiers overjoy'd, found Plenty of all things, and were well refresh'd; but within a few days this malig∣nant Fever swept away great Numbers of the whole Army, more e∣specially of the French; for not to reckon our own, within two or three months this dire contagion laid in their Graves, at least three thousand of the French at Nimeghen; nor did it rage less in the Camp before Schenk Sconce, and in other places it made the same Destruction, both of our own and the French Souldiers, and from them the Infecti∣on spread it self among the Citizens and Inhabitants at Nimeghen, where above a thousand were devoured by the Earth in a few months. Nor was the Havock less among the Inhabitants of the ad∣joyning Cities; nay, it penetrated even into the very Heart of our Country. Now, because this Fever first infected the French, and af∣terward the rest, it was generally called the French Fever, and by many also the Gallic Disease. There is not a small Contagion in this Disease, which is chiefly communicated to others by Contact and Attraction of putrid and most nasty Vapors, of Sweat, of Ordure, &c. and therefore they who at∣tended the Sick, or staid any while with them, were sure to be infect∣ed with the Distemper; but the Contagion was first spread all over Nimeghen, more especially for this reason; because the whole City, by reason the Army was so vast, was all full of Souldiers, insomuch that all the Streets and Lanes were fill'd with Souldiers, some in Health, and some sick, lying every where at the Sides of the Streets: and hence the Filth and Excrements, as well of the Sick as Healthy, were thrown into the publick Passages in great Heaps; nor was there any avoiding them, because of the extraordinary Multitudes of People passing to and fro. And thus it came to pass that the malignant and corrupt Va∣pors rising from those nasty Dunghills, infected the whole City with Contagion and Disease.
The Cause of this Disease did not lye so much in the malignant Cor∣ruption of the Spirits, as of the Humors, and therefore it might be very properly call'd a Pestilence in the Humors; but it differed from the Pestilence in this, that in the Pestilence, the vital Spirits, in this Fever, the Humors, are corrupted after a malignant manner. Moreo∣ver the Contagion of the Pestilence hangs in the Air, and infects more at a distance; but the Contagion of this Fever is communicated by the Immediate Contact and Attraction of malignant Vapors. Lastly, the Pestilence is a Disease more acute and dangerous, and of which more die than escape; but in this Disease more escape than dye. This Fever, at the beginning seiz'd some sharply, but most People gently; some without, and others with a slight Cold and Shivering. A little after the beginning, in many followed a very great Heat, ac∣companied with a vehement Thirst; which Burning sometimes inter∣mitting by slight Intervals, continued for the most part till the seventh day or longer. In many also this intense Heat was not perceived; and in such Persons the Heart was more affected by the malignity of the Humors than the heat, for in them the Vital Faculty was more en∣dammag'd. At the beginning of the Distemper, there appeared a ve∣ry great Debility and Dissipation of the natural Strength. Deliriums in some, in most Faintness, in many Head-achs and want of Sleep; in all Thirst, with a great driness of the Tongue; many also presently after the Disease, were troubled with malignant Dysenteries and Diar∣rea's, very difficult to be cured. The Pulse was also very thick, but weak and unequal. Upon the days of Crises's, the Patients were generally worse, ne∣vertheless very few Crises's that were good. Nature seemed to endea∣vor and attempt Crises's; but in regard of the great quantity of ma∣lignant Humors, and the wasted strength of the Patient, she was not able to accomplish them. Crises's, by Sweat or bleeding at the Nose, or coming down of the Courses, sometimes alone vanquish'd the Di∣stemper, but very seldom; for they were for the most part imperfect, bt by loosness of the Belly they were dangerous, and to many mortal. In some, little red Spots breaking out over all the Body upon the Skin, chang'd the Disease sometimes for the worse, and sometimes for the better. Some that lay long sick had critical Abscesses in some sound part. But Carbuncles never appeared. I never saw any that had ei∣ther Kernels in their Groins, behind their Ears, or under their Arm∣pits, or that Nature ever voided any thing through those Emuncto∣ries. Some that had been cured of this Fever, easily relapsed into as dan∣gerous and mortal a Distemper, especially if they exposed themselves abroad too soon, or committed the least Error in Diet. In the Cure of this Distemper, the primary and chief Relief was gi∣ven by Blood-letting three or four times, and in some six or seven times repeated. I have seen French-men, whom their Physicians have let Blood in four days space, no less than twelve times, and have taken great quantities of Blood from them; for the Patients found great Ease after Blood-letting; and because so known a Remedy, at length, that many, without the Advice of a Physician, would order them∣selves to be let Blood, by which means, some cured themselves of their Distemper. More than that, this seemed a greater Wonder, that when Blood-letting decays the Strength so much, yet in this Disease, after great quantities of Blood taken away, Nature gathered new Strength, and was relieved from the burthen of malignant Humors; and all the
Patients, even they that were in the weakest Condition, were able to endure Blood-letting. These Fevers submitted to no Remedies so easily as to Blood-letting. The Blood which was drawn forth for the two or three first times, was very Corrupt in all Men. Nor do I re∣member that among all those Multitudes of Sick People I ever saw one that had good Blood taken from him at the beginning: but for the most part whitish, often between livid and greenish, wherein there was a little mixture of red Blood. It was Muscilaginous like the De∣coction of Calves-feet. In most it was Coagulated: In some also it would hardly Coagulate, the Fibres being for the most part con∣sumed by the Corruption; and those were in most danger. After the third or fourth Bleeding the Blood prov'd tolerable. Being call'd therefore to Patients, after loosening the Belly with a Glyster, we order'd Blood-letting as soon as possibly we could; and if the Patients strength would permit, we repeated it the next day; taking away every time from half a pint to a pint of Blood, and the same we did again after three or four days intermission, according to the strength of the Patient and the excess of the Fever. Nevertheless in the mean time we Administer'd Purging Medicines, and sometimes Glysters to keep the Body open, and because there was a Malignity in the Disease we made frequent use of Diaphoretics and Antidotes, Ju∣leps, and Cooling and Cordial Electuaries were very Beneficial, mix'd with Diuretics, more especially if they were opposite to the Malignity. When the Patient could not sleep, we anointed his Temples with some gentle Opiate, and gave him sometimes Narcotics to swallow. ANNOTATIONS. MAlignant and Pestilent Fevers how they may be allowed without a true Pestilence, we have shown at large in our Treatise of the Pest. But these Fevers are various, as not pro∣ceeding always from the same Cause, nor seizing the same manner, nor ad∣mitting the same Cure. Sometimes the Infection of the Air alone, some∣times extraordinary Corruptions of the Air by bad Dyet, or otherwise, some∣times hurtful Exhalations of things Corrupt and Putrid: sometimes dispo∣sitions of the Temperaments of the Air and Bodies; either single of them∣selves, or some or all of them con∣joyned together, create these Epidemic Fevers, and therefore as the Causes are various, so is there great varieties in the Cure. And therefore it is that these malignant Fevers seldom appear twice altogether one like another. Fra∣castorius describes a Pestilential Fever, which differed very much from ours, which came from a certain Infecti∣on of the Air, and chiefly prey'd upon the Spirits, and not upon the Humors, and was chiefly cured with Antidotes; whereas Blood-letting did harm: On the other side, our Fever more an E∣nemy to the Humors then the Spirits, was cured by Blood-letting. Wierus makes mention of a Malignant and Pestilent Fever, which was very rife about the Countries lying upon the Rhine, and very different from ours, which the Cure informs us: for he writes, that he found Blood-letting very dangerous. From our Fever also dif∣fer very much those Fevers which Forestus describes, wherein there were neither the same Symptoms, neither would the Cure admit repeated Blood∣letting. Lazarus Riverius produces one Example of a Malignant Fever, which in many Patients agreed with ours, and was cured by five times Blood-letting. To which there was one very like that we saw in France in the year 1632 already mentioned, Observ. 3. But that it may be the better understood. How Patients afflicted with this same Malignant Fever are to be ordered, I shall produce one or two Examples of a thousand in the following Observations.
OBSERVATION XXV. A Malignant Fever. HErman Thomas, a Baker, was seized with the foresaid malig∣nant Fever the fifth of September, with a very great Heat and Consumption of his Spirits; at the beginning, his Pulse beat thick, yet not very unequal; this Thirst was vehement, with a very great driness of the Tongue. All the Body seem'd to be equally affected, and therefore he never felt any Pain, only complained of a great Faint∣ness and Dejection of his Heart, the first day coming to him about the Evening I ordered him an Emollient Glister, which gave him three Stools, and to quench his Thirst, I prescribed him this Julep. ℞. Carduus-water, Borage and Sorrel-water an lb j.  of Citron newly squeezed out of the Fruit, Syrrup of the owre part of the Citron, of Violets, Rob of red Ribs an. ℥. Oyl of Sulphur q. s. to make it gratefuly sharp mix them for a Iulep. The sixth of September in the Morning we took away a pint of Blood out of the Median Vein of the right Arm; which gave him great ease. The Blood was very bad, the upper half between livid and green, and like a Muscilage, the lower half black and coagulated; the Serum also was Green. The next day he felt a Pain in his Throat, which was without any Tumour, for the asswaging of which, I ordered him a proper Gargarism. In the Morning he took a gentle Purge which gave him five Stools. To quench his Thirst he took small Ale, and sometimes his Julep: the eight of September his Fever continuing in the same state, we took away ten Ounces out of his left Arm, which was as bad as the first: the ninth this Sudorific was given him. ℞. Diascordium of Fracastorius ʒj. Confection of Hiacinth, Extract of Carduus, Salt of Rue an ℈j. Treacle and Car∣duus water an. ℥j. Oyl of Vitriol ix. drops, mix them for a Draught. Upon this he sweat well; nevertheless the Continual Fever, his weakness, his Pain in his Throat, his Thirst and driness of his Mouth continued still; besides that he could not sleep hardly at all. There∣fore in the Afternoon he drank two Draughts of the following Apozem, and took it also the next day. ℞. Roots of Succory, Grass, Asparagus an. ℥j. of Elecampane, Sea Holly, and stone Parsley; an. ℥s. Herbs, Sorrel, Car∣duus Benedict. Borage, Centaury the less, Scordium, Scabious an. one handful. One whole Pome Citron cut in slices, the four greater Cold-seeds an. ℥j. s. Fruit of Tamarinds, Rhenish Tartar an. ʒvj. Curants ℥j. s. Boyl them in common water q. s. to . ij. add to the straining Syrup of Limons ℥iij. mix them for an Apozem. The eleventh, after an Emollient Glister first given, we took away
seven Ounces more of Blood out of his right Arm, which very much abated the Fever; the twelfth, after he had taken his former Antidote in the Morning, he Sweat very much: and in the Afternoon he took his Apozem. The next day because his Belly did not answer our Expectations I gave him this Powder to take mixed with a little of his Julep, which gave him three Stools. ℞. Rhubarb the best ʒj. Cremor Tartar ʒ s. for a Powder. This Powder he took again the sixteenth in the Intervening days, and the three days following he took the foresaid Apozem and a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Pulvis Liberans ʒj. s. the three Saunders ℈ij. Confection of Hyacynth ℈j. s. Candy'd Orange Peels, Rob of red Ribs Pulp of Tamarinds an. ℥ s. Syrrup of Limons q. s. mix them for a Conditement. Upon the twelfth his Fever abated every day more and more, neither was he molested any more with Anguish or Thirst; but his Stomach began to come to him; but then through a slight Errour in his diet, he fell into a Relaps, and his Fever returned with great violence: Therefore after we had Glistered him first, we took half a pint of Blood out of his left Arm, which gave him so much ease that the Fever was almost totally quenched with that one Blood∣letting. The next Morning taking his Antidote again, he Sweat soundly, and then taking his Apozem and his Conditement, both that day and the three or four next days, he was presently delivered from his Fever. During the Cure we kept him to a slender diet of Broths, wherein were boil'd Sorrel, Borage, Pome Citrons, Barley cleansed and unripe Grapes. To drink we gave him small Ale, and sometimes Juleps, and sometimes he quenched his Intollerable Drought with Pulp of Tamarind, or by chawing a slice of Pome Citron dipped in Sugar: or else by laying upon his Tongue a Leaf of the bigger Sempervivum, steeped in water, and the outer Skin pulled off. OBSERVATION. XXVI. A Malignant Fever. GErtrude Coets, a Young Maid of about twenty four Years of Age, was seized with the same Pestilential Fever. Upon the eight of September I being sent for (which was the fourth day of the Disease,) I found her so weak that she could hardly speak; she swoonded away every moment, by reason of the Malignant Vapours that oppressed her Heart; her Pulse was very weak, thick and un∣equal: the heat not very intense, in regard the Morbific Matter in∣fested her more by it's Malignity then it's Heat; presently I gave her this Sudorific. ℞. Oriental Bezoar stone ℈ s. Diascordium of Fracastorius, Mithridate Damoc. Confection of Hyacinth an. ℈j. Carduus water ℥j. mix them for a Draught.
Though she did not sweat long, by reason of her weakness, yet she had very much ease; to quench her Thirst, I prescribed her this Julep. ℞. Carduus, Baum, Sorrel and Scabious waters an. lb. s. Cinna∣mon ℥j. Citron juice newly squeezed ℥j. s. Syrrup of Limons, Violets an. ℥j. s. Oyl of Sulphur q. s. mix them for a Iulep. The ninth her Belly was moved by a Suppository: and two hours after we took from the Median Vein of her right Arm half a pint of Blood, which was very corrupt, Muscilaginous, between Pale and Greenish, with a green Serum containing a little good Blood at the bottom, notwithstanding the great Consumption of her strength she endured her Blood-letting very well, which gave her great ease; she also often took a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Pulvis Liberans. ʒj. Salt Prunella ℈j. Rob of red Ribes, Pulp of Tamarinds, Conserve of Roses. an ℥s. Confection of Hyacinth ʒj. s. Syrrup of Limons q. s. mix them for a Conditement. The next day she continued the same Medicins; and for her ordinary drink she drank small Ale with some few drops of Oyl of Vitriol. The eleventh of September she took again her last Sudorific, and found some ease by it. The twelfth her Anguish and Weakness seemed again to increase; wherefore we drew six Ounces of Blood out of her left Arm; which was as bad as the former. This Blood-letting gave her very great ease, I would willingly have prescribed her Apozems and some other things, but because she was nice, and had a very nauseous Stomach by reason of her Disease, she could take nothing. The thirteenth we mixed ʒj. of Rhubarb Powdered and ʒ s. of Cremor Tartar, in a little small Ale and deceived her, which gave her three Stools; the next day she was much better, and taking the foresaid Conditement, her Fever became very remiss. The eigh∣teenth she relapsed into an extraordinary weakness; then I ordered her this mixture in a Spoon, which somewhat releived her. ℞. Oriental Bezoar stone ℈ s. Confection of Hyacinth. ℈j. Cina∣mon-water ʒj. Carduus-water ʒij. mix them. The nineteenth we again drew out of her right Arm five Ounces of Blood; which very much abated her Fever that day and the next day, she continued the use of her Conditement and Julep; at this time D. Gilbert Coets cheif Physitian of Arnheim, was called to consultation who recommended for a try'd and most proper Remedy his own Treacle-water, which he called Carbuncle-water, and concealed as a great Secret; by his advice one Spoonful of this water was given twice or thrice a day to the Patient; but the twenty first her Fever growing more upon her, I gave her this Antidote. ℞. Salt of Wormewood, Confection of Hyacinth an. ℈j. Oriental Bezoar gr. xii. Carbuncle-water, Carduus water an. ℥ s. mix them.
This was again repeated the twenty second and twenty third, the twenty fourth by the help of a Suppository she had a Stool; in the Even∣ing she took this, ℞. Bezoar stone Oriental gr. xii. Pearls prepared ℈j. Carbuncle water ℥ s. mix them and give a Spoonful at a time. The next day she swallowed xii. grains of Pill. Ruffi in two Pills; which toward the Evening gave her two Stools. The twenty eight of September she took them again as also upon the second of October, in the Intervening time she continued the use of her Conditement, Julep and Cordial-water, and fed upon Broths, and thus she was restored to her former Health. OBSERVATION XXVII. A malignant Fever. HEnry ter Koelem, being taken with the same Malignant Fever, the fourth of September sent for me, I found him full of Anguish and weak; his Pulse weak and unequal, yet without any intense beat; we let him thrice Blood, us'd proper Glisters, loosening Medicaments, Sudorifics, and such as resisted Corruption and Malignity, together with other Cordial Remedies, and so recovered him. But going abroad too soon, and being careless of his diet upon the twenty eight of September he relapsed into a more dangerous Fever then his first. After twice letting Blood, and several other Medicaments exhibited, red Spots, and some Purple ones came forth over all his Body upon the Skin, upon which the Fever went off, and within eight days he recovered much of his strength; but then ignorant of his weakness and trusting too much to his strength, upon the twenty eight of October going but once a little abroad, he fell into a second Relapse more dangerous still: by reason of his strength debilitated by his former Sickness. The Fever harrass'd his Body already much weakened, with great violence, nevertheless after Blood-letting, we gave him several Remedies with that success, that at length upon the tenth of November he fell into a very great Spontaneous Sweat; but as he lay in his Sweat; a certain Ruddy Tumour began to appear in his left side, above the fifth, sixth, and seventh Rib; which the next day bunched out as big as a Man's Fist. Thus the Fever went off, and the Crisis of the Disease was performed by Sweating and an Impostume; but the Tumour was very hard, which because we could not bring to a head in five days with mollifying and ripening Cataplasms; and for that the Party complained of the Pain of the inner part affected, I was afraid, least some matter sticking between the Ribs near the Pleura Membrane should have already ripened, which might occasion some greater Mischeif, should the Impostume break within, before the outward Maturation, and so the Matter fall down to the inner parts, to prevent this Inconvenience though I could neither see nor feel any sign of outward Maturation, I ordered a Chy∣rugeon to open the Tumour half a Fingers breadth above the Ribs, which done, it appeared that my judgment had not failed me for there came forth at the same time matter both white and Mature; and thus the Patient escaped the danger threatened by the Impostume,
to that so soon as the Tumor was cured he recovered his former Health. OBSERVATION XXVIII. A malignant Dysentery. AT the same time that the foresaid Malignant Fever so cruelly raged, Malignant Dysenterys fatal to many, were very rife, after they had voided the slime of the Guts, they presently voided Blood, not alone and pure, but mixed with a certain white, Viscous and Tenacious Humour; which like Pitch or Bird-lime stook close to every thing it touched; and might be drawn out into long strings. The Patients were cruelly griped in their Bellys; and besides a con∣tinual Fever, Anguish of the Heart, extream Weakness, vehement Thirst, loss of Stomach, want of Sleep, and something of heat in the Urine were the Concomitants of this Distemper; and as for them that voided that viscous and white slime, mixt with Bloody De∣jections, if it were very tough, the most of those People dy'd; and the less tenacious it was, the better they escaped. They who brake wind during Exoneration, gave great hopes of recovery. They that were conversant with the Sick or tended upon them, were infected with the contagious Stench of the Disease; these Fluxes were very difficultly cured, in regard that Blood-letting avails nothing in the cure; and many times neither Purges nor Astringents, nor Sudorifics nor other Remedies usually administered in this Distemper were given with any success. ANNOTATIONS. THIS same Contagion, at this very time carry'd off vast numbers of our Men in the Camp before Schenk-Fort. And when the Physitians to the Army had try'd all the Remedies they could think of for the Cure of this Distem∣per, but very few did any good, at length there was a Remedy found out by certain Italian Physitians, who came hither with the French Army, by which afterwards great numbers were cured. First they Purged the Patients with Rhubarb. Then they took white Wax ʒ j. s. or ʒ ij. and cut this very small into ℥ iiij. or v. of New Milk, which they boil'd till the Wax was perfectly melted, and then gave their Patients that Milk as hot as could be to drink; for it must be taken very hot, because of the Wax, that else would thicken, so that it could not be drank; if the Lask did not stop the first time, then they gave it a second and a third time. But in regard there were a great number of Souldiers that lay sick of this Distemper, there was such a vast quantity of white Wax consumed in a short time, that the Apothecaries of Emeric were quite exhausted; so that they were forced to send for it to other Places. Now though Wax seldom is gi∣ven to swallow, yet it is no new thing. For Diascorides writes, that it is of great Effi∣cacy to fill up wounds, and is given in Broths to those that are troubled with Dysenteries. Thus Valleriola speaks of a Dysenteric recovered by such a Remedy. He cut an Apple hollow, and filled it with Citrin coloured Wax, and then covering it laid it in the Ashes to roast, till the Wax was melted and mixed with the substance of the Apple, and then gave it the Patient fasting to eat for some days together; though he believes it better to roast and melt the said Wax in a Quince, as being more astrictive and glutinous. Quercetus pre∣pares the same Remedy by cutting an Apple hollow, and filling it with white Wax and Gum Arabic an. ʒ j. Sole∣nander stuft a Turtle with an Ounce of white Wax, and boyl'd it in Water, and then gave both the Flesh and the Broth to be eaten with Bread. Others pre∣scribe a Young Pidgeon stuft and boil∣ed after the same manner.
OBSERVATION XXIX. A Dysentery. MArcellus Bor, a strong Man of about forty Years of Age, was taken with a Dysentery of the same Nature. The ninth of October I Purged him with Rhubarb, then I gave him Juleps, Conditements, Powders cooling, thickning and Astringent Apozems, Sudorifics and other proper Medicaments in convenient manner and time; so that the Patient being reduced to extremity of weakness I began to give him over, not beleiving he could live two days in that condition, but in regard he was very thirsty and called for cold Water, I ordered in a desperate condition that he might have as much cold water as he would drink, to the end that by drinking such a quantity of water, the Morbific cause, if it were possible, might be washed off from the Guts, and the Acrimony of it blunted by the force of the cold. All that Night the Patient drank as much as he would of Well-water; which at first past swiftly through his Guts and with wonderful griping flowed down to the lower parts; afterwards not griping so much, toward Morning the Pains of the Guts were almost ceased, and the Stools less frequent; about noon the Patient falling a sleep, slept quietly for some hours, before the Evening the Flux stopt, and so the Patient refreshed with proper diet, when every one thought he could not have lived, was unexpectedly recovered from a most desperate Disease. ANNOTATIONS. COncerning the Drinking of cold Water in a Dysentery, there are hardly any of the Modern Physitians that speak a word. Yet it is a Reme∣dy not improper in a Choleric Dysen∣tery: For it washes the Intestines with its moisture, and frees them from all the filth of sharp Humors, and clean∣ses the inner Ulcers. By its coldness al∣so it abates and dulls the Heat and Acri∣mony of the Choler; and binds up the Exulcerations of the Intestines. Nor was the Drinking of cold Water un∣known to the Ancients in this Disease. Therefore says Aetius, at the beginning, for drink, use Rain-water; but if there be no good Rain-water, take Fountain∣water. Celsus also writes in these words, If after several days tryal, other Reme∣dies will not prevail, and the Disease is come to be of some continuance, the drinking of cold Water binds the Ulcers. In like man∣ner Paulus and others of the Antients make mention of the drinking of cold Water in a terrible Dysentery. Among the Moderns Amatus of Portugal, was one that by his own report, saw a Choleric Dysentery cured by the drink∣ing of a great quantity of cold Wa∣ter. At other times it also happens, that when the best Medicines avail nothing, a plain ordinary Medicine has cured most desperate Dysenterys. So by the Relation of Captains I have heard, that when Breda was besieged by the Spa∣niards, and that Dysenteries were very rife in the City, nor any Remedy could be invented for this Distemper, when all the known Remedies of the Physiti∣ans fail'd; at length a new invention was found out, by which many were cured. A piece of Silk double dy'd of a deep Crimson colour, comb'd into slender Threads and steep'd in Wine; this taken in Wine with a dram or half a dram of Powder of the same Silk for some times, infinite numbers have been cured by it. I know a certain Dysenteric Person who was given over, who upon eating a vast quantity of Medlars, recovered beyond all expecta∣tion. Another was freed by Man's Bones drank in red Wine, of a Flux which was thought incurable. Oyl of Olives taken alone, or eaten with
a White-bread Toast dipp'd in it, ma∣ny times works wonders. Holler affirms, that he was cured several times with the Juice of Ground-Ivy. Forestus writes, that he never found any thing more prevalent, then the Dung of Dogs that only fed upon Bones given in Cha∣lvbeate Milk. And with this Medicine, Fuchsius says, that he cured above a hundred Dysenterics in one Year. Rive∣rius tells us of a Dysenteric that only used the Decoction of Pimpernel with Water and Butter, and so was cured in three days, Bruyernius writes thus of himself being troubled with a Dysentery. We says he, being terribly afflicted with a Dysentery, lay given over by the Phy∣sitians: for no Remedies were able to as∣swage or Cure the Disease: At length by the Advice of an old Woman, upon eating a great quantity of raw Services, the next day I felt all my Pain almost abated. And by this means my Belly being shut up, and I, as it were recalled from the dead, and restored to my former Health; experienced the saying of Gelsus to be true, that Rash∣ness does more in Diseases than Prudence can do. OBSERVATION XXX. A Consumption. LEwis Gulielm, a Sea-man, about thirty four Years of Age and in∣differently robust, had sometimes before lain Sick of a Malig∣nant Fever; of which by the Assistance of God I had cured him. In the Month of October, about a Month after the cure of the said Fever he was taken with an Extraordinary Catarrh, occasioned by a Salt and sharp Defluxion that fell upon his Lungs; a short while after, in Coughing he spit a great quantity of Blood; and not long after this same spitting of Blood he also spit Corruption. More then this, there was mixt with his Spittle, a white Viscous and very Tenacious white slime, which he spit forth every day with a great quantity of Matter and Blood. This Disease was accompanied with a slight Fever but not continuous, The Patient was all over consumed away and so hoarse that he could hardly speak, he also complained of an in∣ward oppressive Pain in his right Lung; and said that he was sufficiently sensible that what he spit forth ascended from that side of his Breast, sometimes he was almost Suffocated with Coughing, by reason of the Tenacious Matter sticking in his Throat; for the cure of this Distemper, I gave him many and various Remedies for a long time to stop the Catarrh, abate and lenify the Cough, promote Expectoration, drying and Vulnerary Medicins, Decoctions of Guaiacum, China and Sassaperilla, Haly's Powder against a Consumption, Looches, and other proper Medicaments but all in vain, at length when these things nothing availed, but that the Ulcer grew worse and worse, and the Patient grew averse from taking any more Physic, his Body being become as lean as a Skeleton, and his strength more and more failed him, we were constrained for some time to give over the use of Physic; In the mean time to repair his strength and support Na∣ture, I ordered him to drink a Draught of Goats Milk, newly Milked from the Goat and Blood-warm; beginning with a less quan∣tity till he came to a Pint, after he had continued to take this Milk for two or three Months, his Cough began to abate and his Lungs to dry up; he spit little and gathered strength every day. Therefore still continuing the use of it, the Ulcer in his Lungs was perfectly consolidated, and he luckily escaped a most dangerous Con∣sumption, neither did he perceive any thing of evil in his Breast for several Years, till twelve Years afterwards, he relapsed into the
same Distemper through a Defluxion of sharp Rhums, and in regard I then lived at Nimeghen, and for that other Physicians did not pre∣scribe him proper Medicins, he died altogether consumed and ema∣ciated. ANNOTATIONS. A True Phthisis or Consumption is a very dangerous Disease, which few escape. Sometimes by long use of Me∣dicines the Mischief may be asswaged for a time, and Life may be somewhat prolonged, but the Patients are very rarely perfectly cured; and yet in the foresaid Patient we prevailed so far, that he liv'd Eleven Years after the Cure, in perfect Health. Now that Milk contributes very much to the Cure of a Consumption, is confirm'd by the Testimonies of Galen, Rhasis and seve∣ral other Ancient and Modern Physiti∣ans. Therefore, says Sennertus, speak∣ing of a Consumption, The most proper Medicines here to be made use of, are such as answer all our ends; such as consolidate the Ulcer, restore the Emaciated Body, and mitigate the heat of the Fever. Of which the chiefest is Milk; then which, as Galen affirms, there can be nothing more preva∣lent given to Cure Consumptions. And then again. Among Nourishments, Milk obtains to be preferred above all others. It nourishes the Body extreamly, affords good Matter to the Blood, tempers the Acrimony of vitious Humors, cleanses the Ulcer with its serous Part, with its Cheesy part it contributes Consolidation, and with its Buttery Part, it moistens and resists the dryness of the Body. The same Com∣mendation Riverius gives to Milk in his Treatise of Physical Practice. But in the use of Milk several things are to be considered. 1. With whom it does not agree. 2. When, and how, it is to be given. 3. What quantity. 4. How it is to be corrected. 5. What Milk is convenient. 1. Grato tells for what Persons Milk is not convenient in these words. Let Practitioners in Physic observe three Con∣ditions in the Prescription of Milk; first that there be no weakness, nor pain in the Head. For Hippocrates tells us, it is not good for such. Secondly, That the Fever be not very violent; For it is almost im∣possible, but that Milk must corrupt in the Stomac of a Person troubled with a violent Fever. Thirdly, That the Bowels be not distended with Wind. And of this o∣pinion also is Sennertus. Secondly, Milk must be taken up∣on an empty and clean Stomac, else it grows sowr and corrupts. Also it is to be taken newly milked and warm, or suckt from the Teat: For if it be cold it gathers filth; if it be boyled, it be∣comes thick, viscous and ungrateful. After the Patient has taken it, let him not sleep, nor take any other meat or drink, (as Wine, Vinegar or Stale-beer) before the Milk be sufficiently corrupted in the Stomac. Thirdly, Let the quantity be small at first, about four or five Ounces, that the Stomac may accustom it self to it by degrees; then increase it to half a Pint, and so to a Pint. For it is to be always gi∣ven in such a quantity, that the Sto∣mac may be able to bear and concoct it: And therefore you must ascend from the less to the greater quantity; first once, then twice, then three times a day. Fourthly, To prevent the Milk from curdling or growing sowr in the Belly, a little Sugar may be mixt with it (Ri∣verius praises the mixture of Sugar of Roses) which however is not necessary where there is no fear of Coagulation. O∣ther Physitians mix Honey with it; but we do not approve that Mixture. Fifthly, In the last place there is some choice to be made of the Milk. That womans Milk, says, Mercurialis, is cer∣tainly the best, there is no body will que∣stion. For this without doubt is most agreeable to the Nature of our Bodies. And Zacutus of Portugal says, that he perfectly cured a Consumptive Person with the use of it. And such another Cure Valleriola relates. So Plater tells us that he had seen several recovered by sucking Womens Milk from the Teats. Among which there was one that not only re∣covered, but gathered so much strength, that because he would not want Milk; for the future, he got his Nurse with Child again. Next to Womans Milk, are Asses, Cows and Goats Milk. As∣ses Milk is thinner, more serous and  to cleanse the Ulcer. Cows Milk lss serous, but more nourishing. Goats Milk differs not much from Wo∣mans Milk. It drys and consolidates very much. By the use of this our Patient was cured.
OBSERVATION XXXI. Vomiting. MOnsieur de Guade a Captain in the King of France's Army, was taken with a Vomiting which lasted for three days together, nor would any Vomitories or any other Remedies given him do him any good; I found that what he Vomited up was a frothy kind of Flegm (which the Patient himself affirmed to be Salt) with which there was a little Choler intermixed; however he did not Vomit up very much, but little often, and with violent straining. We gave him twice or thrice a good draught of the De∣coction of Barley luke-warm, sweeten'd with a little Honey; which when he had Vomited up again, with a great quantity of tough Flegm; At length we gave him Cinnamon water Distilled with Wine ℥ s. with which we mixed three drops of Oyl of Cinnamon; which when he had taken, he found himself better. Half an hour after we gave him the same again. In the mean time we laid the following Cataplasm to the Region of his Stomach. ℞. Flowers of Mint, Baum and red Roses an. half a handful; Mace, ʒ s. Clove-gillow-flowers, Numegs, Mastic, Olibanum, Storax, Benjamin, an. ℈ij. make a Powder, to which add sower Leven, ℥iij. Vinegar of Roses, q. s. make all into a sost Past without boyling. With these few things the vehement Vomiting ceased. The trouble∣som Vomiting, which had lasted a whole day, I stop'd, by giving him twice the following draught. ℞. VVhite-wine warmed before the fire, ʒij. Oyl of Clove-gillow∣flowers one drop, of Cinnamon two drops, mix them for a Draught to be taken very VVarm. The Region of his Belly was also anointed with Oyl of Nutmegs warm. ANNOTATIONS. VOmiting is caus'd by the consent of other Parts, as when the Me∣ninxes of the Brain are wounded, or that the Kidneys are troubled with the Stone or Gravel &c. Which Vomiting ceases, when the Disease is Cured of which it is the Symptom. Or it is excited by the abundance and sharpness of Humors that stimulate the Fibers of the Stomach; which are either Choleric and hot, or Flegmatic Salt and cold, or Melancholic and Salt, or sangui∣neous extravasated and corrupting into the Stomach, or flowing in too great a quantity into it. At the beginning of the Cure, the Vomiting is still more to be provoked, that the Stomach may be well wash'd, and freed from the Cause of the Distemper: for according to Hippocrates a Vomit cures Vomit∣ting. This done the Stomach is to be fortified either with cold or warm Me∣dicaments, as the Cause of the Disease is either Hot or Cold. If the Cause be Hot, Juleps made with juice of Pomegra∣nates, Quinces, Citrons, and Oyl of Vitiol are proper. The raw juice of Quinces alone, taken one or two spoon∣fuls at a time miraculously stays this Vomiting. Outwardly Fomentations with a Spung dippd in Vinegar of Ro∣ses or Elder-Vinegar warmed, or a Quince roasted and applied warm in the form of a , or sowr Le∣ven
mixed with Vinegar and juice of Mint, and applied, which very quickly stays Vomiting, and is highly extolled by Villanovanus. Also smelling to Vinegar, Camphire and the like, may be very prevalent. If the Cause be cold, the Stomach is to be corroborated with hot things, as Wine, Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Cin∣namon-water, Oyl of Cinnamon, Nut∣megs, Mace, Clove Gillowflowers, Spi∣rit of Vitriol, and such like Distillations. Among Simples all hot Stomach-Herbs and Spices; also outwardly Applications of Castor, Storax, Labdanum, Benzoine, Galbanum, Tacamahacca, Olibanum, Oyl of Nutmegs and Mace, &c. To which add Quinces, Masic and other Astringents. If these do no good, Fallo∣pius gives you this Experiment. If the Vomiting do not cease, let him bite a piece of a Turnep twice or thrice, and champ it only with his fore-Teeth, and you shall see the Vomiting will absolutely ease, tho his Stomach be very weak; And this Reme∣dy is so extraordinary, that I could never find a better. If these things will not stay the Vomiting, you must come to Narcotics among which in a cold Cause, Roman Philoniam is preferred above all the rest given to the quantity of one dram. But in a hot Cause Pills of Storax or Opiate Laudanum. OBSERVATION XXXII. A Country Man of Groesbeck, who because of his extraordinary Stature was called Ironically Little Iohn about forty years Old, and very strong, about two years since being very hasty in Cleavingof Wood, by chance receiv'd a hurt from a Splinter in the fore Tibiaeon Muscle of his right Thigh; the wound not being very broad, but reaching to the Periosteum. This wound though he slighted it at first, it could never afterwards be consolidated by any Remedies, but re∣main'd like an Issue, Nature voiding continually several Excrementi∣ous Humors out of it; which was the reason that the Country Man was troubled with frequent Inflammations and other Mischiefs. At length in September, having by Accident sold a parcel of Wood, to a certain Chyrurgeon of Nimeghem, after he had shew'd him his Thigh, the Chyrurgeon promised to consolidate the little wound, which had now been of two Years standing. The other weary of his Pain and trouble, gladly accepted the Condition, presently the Chy∣rurgeon, without ever Purging his Body, thrust in Tents with I know not what Oyntment into the wound, and laid on Plaisters, the Fatness of which the parts adjoyning to the Periostea brook'd but very scurvily. Hence within three days by reason of the stop∣page of the deprav'd Humors now remaining within, a terrible Inflam∣mation of the whole Thigh ensued, with a vast swelling and intolle∣rable pain, that threatned nothing less than a Gangrene. Then my Advice was ask'd. Presently after I had thrown away all the other applications and the Oxycrate that was bound about his whole Thigh, I ordered the wound to be well washed with Spirit of Wine, and then that they should pour in Balsam of Perue warmed, with some few grains of Camphire mix'd with it, and that his whole Thigh should be wrapt about with Linnen Cloths dipped in Spirit of Wine. I also Purged his Body, and the next day let him Blood, and prescrib'd him a proper Dyet. By these means not without some trouble, the iflamm'd Swelling being fallen, his Thigh within six days was restor'd to its first Condition. But in regard that afterwards some new beginnings of an Inflammation (with which he was wont to be molested before) be∣gan to appear, I clapt the grey Plaister about his whole Thigh, having mixed with every ounce of the Plaister ℈ij. of Camphire, which I let lye for three weeks together, only putting in a fresh Plaister three
times, which prevented the return of those Inflammations. In the mean time, to Cure the wound also I ordered first an Issue to be made with a potential Cautery on the other side of the same Thigh; from whence before I could well pull off the Blister, Nature by this new Passage evacuated all those evil Excrementitious Humors, which be∣fore were voided through the wound, and the wound closed within a few days with the only application of the Balsam of Peru, camphora∣ted. But I perswaded him to keep the Issue open as long as he liv'd. But his Thigh being thus Cur'd, the Country-man complained to me of another Malady no less ungrateful to his Wife, that his Incli∣nations to conjugal performance were utterly extinguish'd, and his Ve∣nereal Ability quite lost, which Malady he said had befallen him but since the Cure of his Thigh. Presently I suspected that this Languid∣ness proceeded from the use of the Camphire, which I had mixed with the Balsam and other Plaisters; so that I forbore the farther use of it, and gave the Country-man Electuary of Dyasatyrion to take, and pre∣scrib'd him a Nourishing Dyet of Hot Meats, with Spices, Leeks and Onions, which restored him to that Degree that he followed his Wives Agriculture as he was wont to do. ANNOTATIONS. LET your Chyrurgeons learn from hence not to trust too much to the Certainty of their own knowledge▪ and make slight of Wounds of this Nature. Much more let them be care∣ful how they go about to close them too soon, least by their ignorance causing Gangrenes and Mortifications, they prove the loss not only of their Pati∣ents Limbs but Lives. First therefore let them carefully consider, whether Nature have not been accustomed to evacuate excrementitious Humors through that Wound, and then let them not begin the Cure, till they have caused a Diversion some other way. Next, let them examin the place affect∣ed very well, whether the Periosteum, or any Nerve, or such like thing that cannot endure fat Plaisters, lye near the Part, and then what Topics are con∣venient. In the next place let them Purge the Body well before they begin the Cure, by that and all other convenient means to prevent the Afflux of corrupt Humors to the Part affected; for the Humors easily descend to the lower Parts. As to the Cure of the Country mans Frigidity, we have observed strange things in the use of this Camphire. The very smell and fume of it drawn through the Nose, being sufficient to extinguish Venereal Ardor, according to the Verse, Camphora per nares castrat odore mares. Such is the smell that Camphire yields; That through the Nose the Oour gelds. But I could hardly have believed, that being laid upon the Thighs it should have had this Operation. But I remember my Brother met with the same Accident in the Cure of Mounsieur Edward, who was troubled with old Ulcers in his Thigh; and who having worn a camphorated Plaister for two Months upon his Thigh, found his Venereal faculty quite extinguished, and his Wife full of sad Complaints; who nevertheless by the use of hot Medi∣caments, a Nourishing hot Dyet, not without his Wives consent, was restored to his pristine Vigor. Now because of these extraordinary Vertues in Cam∣phire, certain Monks in Germany, who were more desirous, then usual, to live a chast Life, hang it up in the Barrel to steep in Al, which they usually drink, on purpose to suppress their carnal de∣sires, and to avoid the Temptations of Venus. This occasioned a very pret∣ty Story at Nimeghen of a Carpenter, who being hired to mend the Floor in a certain Monastry in the Territory of Cleves, in Lent-time, when the Monks chiefly Camphire their Ale, and being forced to stay there till he had finished, for three or four Months, drank of their Ale all the time. But when he came home to his Wife, never was a Guest more unwelcome in this World. For not having the least inclination to Venery▪
he was forced to leave his Farm untilled; which impediment was afterwards how∣ever removed in a short time by the use of hot things. Nevertheless the Car∣penter hated that Monastry ever after, and never would work there any more. Some attribute this Faculty of extin∣guishing Venus, to the cold and driness of Camphire, but erroneously; For its sa∣vor and its aptness to take fire, declare that it is not cold but manifestly hot; and therefore it must be ascrib'd to some oc∣cult quality, which is said to be in Agnus Castus, Mint and Rue, all which things are hot, and yet we find by Experience that they extinguish Venery. Sennertus attributes this faculty to the dryness of Camphire. But there are many other things which are endued with the same and a greater dryness, which have no such Anti-venereal vertue; For dryness alone will not make a Man Frigid; Scaliger endeavours by the Example of a Dog, to shew that Camphire does not ex∣tinguish Venery, but erroneously; Since the constitution of a Man is different from that of a Dog, and therefore be∣cause the operation is not in both the same, it does not follow that we should make conclusions against known ex∣perience. OBSERVATION XXXIII. The Head-ach. THE Wife of Captain Schayck, a strong Woman of forty years of Age, had a violent Head-ach for three Months together. All the Remedies prescrib'd her in the Camp would do her no good. At length in September she came to me. I prescribed her a proper Dyet, and after I had well Purged her Body, I prescribed her this Quilt. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary an. two little handfuls, of Sage, red Roses and Melilot, an. one little handful; Mastic, Olibanum; Nutmegs an. ℈ij. Cloves ℈j. s. beat these into a gross Powder, and sow them up in a red Silken Quilt. This being laid upon her Head the intollerable pain began to abate, and in a few days vanished. She prized this Quilt so highly, that she caus'd the Apothecary to make her two more; the one for her felf, the other for her Kins-woman, who was troubled as much as she was with the same Distemper. OBSERVATION XXXIV. Suppression of the Courses. JOan N. a Young Plethoric Maid, about twenty four years of Age, had her Courses stopt for three Months which was occasioned at first by her excessive Drinking cold raw Whey. Hence Paleness, loss of Stomach, Vomiting, Head-ach, and the like. The first of October, I prescrib'd her a convenient Dyet, and Purged her Body with the Infusion of the Leaves of Senna and Agaric, with which I mixed Hiera Pira. Afterwards I prescrib'd her these things. ℞. Roots of round Birth-wort ʒij. of Dittany, Master-wort, Va∣lerian an. ℥j. s. Leaves of Nep, Penny-royal, Southern-wood, Savine an. half a handful, Worm-wood a little handful, seeds of Gith, Parsley an. ʒij. of Lovage ʒj. s. of Anise, Nasturtium, Bishops-weed, an. Oriental Saffron ℈j. make these into a gross Powder to be put in a Bag, and so to be hung up to sleep in five Pints of White-wine.
℞. Trochischs of Myrrh. ℈j. s. Species of Hiera, Diacurcuma, Ori∣ental Saffron an. ℈j. Cistor, Venetian Bora an. ℈j. Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar of Squills ʒj. for a mass to be made into Pills about the bigness ofa Pea. Of these Pills she swallowed five every Morning and Evening, drinking after them ℥iiij or v. of the foresaid Infusion. At length on the fifteenth of October her Courses came down. But two days after her Purgations began, she went too soon into the Cold Air, and the Wind, and stopp'd the Work of Nature so luckily begun. Hence immediately a Suffocation of the Womb ensued, so that she seemed to be almost choaked. I ordered Castor, Assa fetida and green Rue to be tyed in a bag and held to her Nose. And once a day ordered her to drink some of this Decoction. ℞. Roots of Valerian, Master-wort an. ℥ s. Leaves of green Rue M. j. s. of Fever-sew, M. j. down of Nuts, ℥ s. seed of Lovage, ʒ v. of wild Carots, of Bishops-weed an. ʒj. Wine and Common∣water equal parts, boyl them to a Pint. But in regard the Women that stood by, desired that something might be laid to her Feet to draw the Matrix down, I prescribed this following Paste which was laid to her Feet: ℞. Leaves of Green Butter-burr, M. v. bruise them small, adding to them sowr Leven, ℥iij. Salt ʒj. s. VVine, Decoction of Fever∣few, q. s. make a Paste. This abated the Uterine suffocation. But in regard it was not altoge∣ther gone off the twentieth of October, she was Purged again with Hiera Picra, the twenty first she took the Decoction again. The next day she took a Sudorifie; after which when she had Sweat well, she was freed from her suffocations. ℞. Crabs Eyes prepared, Salt of Carduus an. ℈j. Treacle of Andro∣mach. ʒj. Castor, Saffron an. g. iiij. Treacle-water ℥j. s. Oyl of Amber, drops xii. mix them for a draught. The rest of the Cure, there being no necessity, we deferred till the eight of November, at what time she returned to the use of her Pills, and Infusion prescribed October the second: November the fourteenth, she was let Blood in the Saphaena Vein, of the left Foot: the eighteenth her Courses came down plentifully, and from that time she continued in Health. ANNOTATIONS. AT the same time that the Courses flow, it behoves Women to have a great care of themselves, otherwise they are easily stopped again by drink∣ing cold Water, or from cold Air or Wind getting into the parts, or catch∣ing cold in the Feet, or upon frights or mistake in Diet or otherwise, which afterwards prove the causes of grievous Maladies; as it befel this our Patient. Thus Forestus tells a Story of a Maid, that when she had her Courses, washed her Rooms bare-foot, which putting a stop upon her Courses, terrible Symptoms ensued; not could that Flux be brought down again till ater some Months. The same Person relates another Story of a Young Girl, that at the time of her Courses leapt into the Water; and of a Country Wench, that at such another season ordered her self to be let Blood.
For the Provocation of the courses, we use many Remedies and as variously composed, as we find the Patients willing to take them, and for that reason, besides the Historical infusion, we gave our Patient Pills, as more grateful, and no less effectual in that disease; which Pills many Physitians prescribe after several forms, Montag∣nana praises these. ℞. Trochischs of Myrrh, ʒj. s. seed of Par∣sley, Cassia-wood, an. ℈ s. Mosch, gr. xv. make them into Pills with the juice of Parsley. Sennertus commends Trochischs of of Myrrh taken in Pills, and these also; ℞. Trochischs of Myrrh, ℈iiij. Extract of Gentian, Savin, an. ℈j. Castor ℈▪ s. make these into Pills; the dose is ℈ij. Others believe these more Effectu∣al. ℞. Trochischs of Myrrh, species Hiera Diambre, Venetian, Borax, prepared Steel, Castor, an. ℈ij. Saffrons, ℈j▪ Gum Ammoniac, dissolved in Vinegar, of squills, ʒiij. make small Pills, the dose from ℈j. to two. Zacutus of Portugal tells of a Noble Matron, that reduced to the last Ex∣tremity when no other Remedies would do her good was cured at length by taking Pills only of Steel, and Powder of Calamint prepared with Syrup of Mug-wort, of which she took one dram in the Morning, and exercised upon it for the space of twenty days. As for laying Medicins to the Feet, if they have no great force in Uterin Maladies, yet they do no harm, and therefore the designs of Patients may be satisfied in that Particular, especially those things having the approbation of great Physitians, as being useful by their peculiar Qualitys, as Mug-wort, Peny∣royal, Savin, Fever-few, cheifly the Leaves of the Butter-bur, and Burdock, which are thought by some to be of that force, that being laid upon the Head they draw the Matrix upward, being apply'd to the Feet they draw it downward. The ancient also used to tye to the Feet of menstruous Women, and Women newly deliver'd to pro∣voke the courses, Spunges dipt in Vine∣gar and squeez'd again. OBSERVATION XXXV. An immoderate and violent Purging. A Kinsman of that Stout and Valiant Gentleman Mr. Lucas, Captain of Horse, about forty years of Age, finding himself not very well, by my Advice steeped all Night in ℥iij or iiij of small Ale, Leaves of Senna ʒij. Rhubarb ʒj. and Anisd ℈ij. (for he said he was easily moved) and drank the Straining the next Morning. This slight and gentle Purge within the space of eight hours gave him about three∣score Stools, and perhaps there had been an end of his Life, had I not stayed the Flux with the following draught, and provoked him to Sweat. ℞▪ Terra Sigillata ℈j. s. Red Coral prepared, Harts horn burnt an ℈j. Treacle of Andromachus ℈iiij. Nicholas's Rest ℈j. Treacle and Carduus-water an ℥j. mix them for a draught. I ordered also Napkins scalding hot to be applyed to his Belly one after another, and so the Flux stayed. I perswaded him for the future not to take any Purge by the Advice of any Physitian, though never so gentle, unless upon eminent necessity, but rather to Ioosen his Belly with a Glyster, or some Emollient Broth.
ANNOTATIONS. THose Physitians are unfortunate, who at the Beginning of their Practise meet with such a Patient as this; for they expose themselves not to a little hazard of their Reputation. For it happens in Physie, that the younger Physitians are called the best Tormen∣tors; and if by their Medicaments they cure any Patient of a dangerous Disease, it is ascribed to chance, but if the Patient miscary under the violence of the Distemper, then they impute it to the Physitian and his Prescriptions. Thus without doubt here had been some mistake laid to my charge, had the Medicament by me prescribed been prepared in an Apothecary's Shop; and People would have said there had been some Poyson mixed with it; but I was freed from that Calumny, in regard that Capt. Lucas's Wife made the In∣fusion and prepared it her self. The same accident befel my Brother also, who having prescribed only a Dram of Rhubarb for a Gentleman to take, and to steep it first at his own House in small Ale, by that single Draught had above forty Stools. There is a great difference in Men as to Purging; some strong Men, whom hardly any Medicaments will stir, some∣time, the most easie and gentle Phy∣sic casts them into violent Fluxes. Others who are lookt upon to be most easily and soonest moved, many times the strongest Purgations will not stir. Thus I knew a Man of a very short Stature and Lean, whom nothing could Purge but Tobacco steep'd in Ale all Night, and the straining given him next Morning; nor did that give him above three or four Stools without any Altera∣tion; which would have put another Man in danger of his Life. The Wife of Simon VVigger, a weak and lean Woman could hardly be Purged with any Cathartic, only Tobacco moved her; and that without any trouble. Cornelius Steenacker, a School∣master, a very weak Man, was so hard to be Purged, that sometimes he could not be moved with Com∣positions of Antimony and other vehe∣ment Cathartics. On the other side, there are some that the very looking upon Physic will give them a Stool. Thus I knew a Young Lady, whom the very smell of the Physic Purged as well as if she had swallowed it; for when she took the Physic it seldom worked more. Alex∣ander Benedictus, also and Erastus, Iohanes Postius, and Rondeletius, quote the like Examples of such as have been Purged by the smell of the Physic only. OBSERVATION XXXVI. A Stinking Breath. THE Son of Iodocus N. a Nobleman had a very Stinking Breath. His Parents believed that the Original of this Malady proceed∣ed from his Stomach; and for that reason many times gave him Hiera Picra; which doing him no good, they came to me. I presently found that the Cause did not lye in his Stomach, but in his Gums and Teeth: for that the dregs of his Meat detain'd long in the spaces between his Teeth, and there corrupting, begot that Evil Smell. I ordered them there to cleanse his Teeth twice or thrice a day very well with a Tooth-Pick, and then to wash them well with his Water. ℞. Powdered Allum ʒj. common Water ℥ v. Cinnnamon water ʒ s. Oyl of Vitriol ix. drops, mix them well together. After he had used this for a few days, the ill smell of his Breath was no longer perceived.
ANNOTATIONS. THere are several Causes of a stinking Breath; sometimes it proceeds from Exulcerations of the Lungs, as in Phthi∣sical People: Sometimes from ill va∣pours corrupting the Lungs, as in the Scurvy; sometimes (according to Bauhi∣nus) from the loosness of the Valve at the beginning of the thick Intestine, through which the continual stench of the Or∣dure passing through the thin Guts and the Stomach, breaths through the Mouth; sometimes it proceeds from the fault of the Teeth only, when they are not well cleansed every day, so that the remnants of chawed Meat corrupt and putrify between the spaces; In which last case, an alumm'd-water is mainly beneficial, for that it resists Putrefaction, and preserves the Teeth from all Cor∣ruption. OBSERVATION XXXVII. Want of a Stomach. CHristian ab Ummersom, a Wine Merchant, in March 1636. was troubled with a Nauseousness, and loss of Appetite for many days, so that for want of feeding he was become very weak. Now because the Pestilence was very rife at that time, he thought he had got the Infection: But it was not the Pestilence, but his own Preservative, which he drank every day before Dinner very plentifully, that was the Cause of his Malady, that is to say, Wormwood-wine, wherefore I forbid him to drink that, prescrib'd him a proper Diet, and after I had gently Purg'd his Body, gave him the following Conditement: ℞. Roots of Calamus Aromatic. Nutmegs, Mace, Flowers of Sulphur an. ℈ j s. Cremor. Tartar▪ ʒ j. choice Cinnamon ℈ j. Cloves ℈ s. Powder them very fine. Then add Roots of Can∣did Elecampane ʒ vj. Conserve of Anthos ℥ s. Ginger condited ʒ vj. Oyl of Vitriol drops xv. Syrup of Limons q. s. Make a Conditement. Of this he Eat a small quantity Morning and Evening, and some∣times before Dinner, absta ining from Wormwood-wine; which after he had taken for some time, his Nauseousness ceased, and his Appetite returned. From that time he had so high an Opinion of this Condite∣ment, that for some Years he caused his Apothecary to make it, as he said, for the preservation of his Appetite and his Health. ANNOTATIONS. GAlen ascribes to Wormwood, a heating, cleansing, corroborating, and drying faculty, Whence Pliny writes that it corroborates the Stomach, and that the Savour of it is with great benefit translated into Wine; And as true it is that Wormwood-Wine (so much now in use, but by most detestably abused) is no new thing, but an anti∣ent invention, and very well known among the Physitians of old; which is apparent from hence, that Diascorides sets down various Compositions of it, where he says that it is profitable for the Stomach, moves Urine, accelerates slow Concoction, and cures the Mala∣dies of the Spleen and Kidnies, and Yellow Jaundise, want of Appetite, and Distempers of the Stomach; That it prevails against Inflations and Disten∣sion of the Hypochondrium, expells round Worms, and brings down the Courses. All which Commendations of Wormwood-Wine, Oribasius also confirms;
but though Wormwood and Worm∣wood-Wine have many excellent qualities, yet there are bounds and limits set to all things; which if we exceed, we render good things mischeivous, for that the best of Medicaments and Nourish∣ments, if taken immoderately, prove hurtful, so I have many times observed, that the excessive and inordinate use of Wormwood-Wine causes Inappetency, extraordinary weakness of the Stomach, Liver, and the whole Body, Vertigos in the Head, loss of Memory, Epi∣lepsies, Dropsies, and several other Maladies, to which the daily drinkers of Wormwood-Wine are exposed; many times to the utter ruin of their Healths, after which nothing but Death ensues; as it befel N. Heymerick, who dy'd of a Cachexy and Dropsie; and Anthony N. who dy'd of an Epilepsie, both daily drinkers of Worm-wood-Wine. Therefore Wormwood-Wine is only to be drank upon occasion. I will here add one foolish Story, in the Year▪ 1635. when the French Army quartered in Nimeghen, the French, to preserve themselves from the Pestilence, drank Sack betimes in the Morning. But some of the Noble Men asking what the Dutch-men drank to preserve themselves from the Infection, the Vintner answered, Wormwood-Wine; which being a sort of Wine, which they had never tasted, they called for some; but when they had tasted it they cry'd out, the Devil take the Vine that yeilded such Wine as that; for certainly said they, this is the very Wine which the Iews gave Christ upon the Cross; for the French-men thought the Grape it self had been so bitter, not knowing it to be a mixture. OBSERVATION XXXVIII. A Wound in the Lungs with a Musket Bullet. IN the Year 1636. in May, during the Seige of Schenck Sconce, a Trooper of our Army in a Horse-Charge was Wounded with a Musket-shot, in the Right side of the Breast, about the Pap, three Bul∣lets passing through his Breast and his Right Lung, and going out again about the Scapula, at three several Holes in his Back. When he was brought to Quarters at Nimeghen, I went along with the Chyrur∣geon, and by the Condition of the Wounds gave him over for Dead. However that he might not Dye through any negligence of Ours, we bound up his Wounds, losen'd his Belly with a Glyster, and gave him proper Medicines to stop the Blood, flowing out of the Lungs, we also thrust in a Pipe of Lead into the lower Wound, through which the Blood and Matter might be Evacuated; but finding it could not be conveniently done in that Wound, we opened a more conveni∣ent passage in his side by an Intercostal Incision. For Diet, I for∣bid him all sharp, cold, Salt, Acid things, as also meats of hard disgestion and bad nourishment; but prescribed him fresh Meats, broth made of Mutton, Lamb and Chicken, potched Eggs, new Milk and the like. And as to other things that concerned his Diet, we prescribed as we saw occasion; However we continued the use of Vulnerary, Pectoral Apozems, no Fever troubled him, and his Appetite was none of the worst: after three or four weeks together with the Blood, (which in all that time had vented it's self upward through the Leaden Pipe, sometimes frothy, sometimes watery, sometimes curdl'd,) he began to throw up a good quantity of Matter with his Cough; which Spit∣ting of Blood and Matter continued till the sixth Month; so that there appeared no hope of recovery; for the Patient all wasted away, was reduced to utmost leanness and debility; however the poor Man willing to live, besought us not to give him over, so that we could not choose but go forward, though we thought it to no purpose; in the first place, therefore, to repair his Strength, we ordered him to
drink a draught of Goats Milk, warm from the Udder, three times every day, and sometimes we gave him corroborating Amygdalates, and Conditements; after we had made use of the Goats Milk for some∣time, his Spiting of Bloody Matter began to abate, and at length about the beginning of the tenth Month, after his being Wounded, surceased altogether, as did also his Cough; from that time forward, continuing the use of his Milk he gathered strength every day more and more, and got Flesh upon his Back; toward the end of the tenth Month he walked about the Chamber; and at the end of the eleventh Month, being perfectly cured, he walked abroad, nor was there any thing that troubled him after so dangerous a Wound: and I saw him seven Years afterwards riding sound and well among the rest of the Troops. ANNOTATIONS. WOunds in the Lungs are very dangerous, and for the most part mortal, according to the opinion of Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen, Celsus, and of all the most Famous Physitians, and Chyrurgeons; for that being a Spungy Bowel it will hardly admit of any cure; but that they are not always mortal ex∣perience teaches us, in regard that very dangerous wounds of the Lungs given by Swords, have been known to have been perfectly cured; and others when part of the Lungs have been cut away. As Rowland of Parma, Theodoric, Gemma, Valleriola, Hildan, and others testifie; but you shall rarely hear of any that have been shot into the Lungs with Musket Bullets, who have escaped and been perfectly cured, because the vio∣lent contusion of the Bullet seems to ad∣mit no cure in that Spungy part, but rather threatens an Inflammation, a Gangrene, or a Mortification, though Peter Futman, describes such a cure done, in an Epistle to Gregory Horstius; and such a Cure it was that so luckily besel this Trooper through the use of Goats Milk, and other Medicaments; and indeed it is to be look'd upon as a very wonderful Cure; for my part I never believed before, that ever three such VVounds in the Lungs with a Musket Shot, could have been cured by any means whatever, and should have hardly believed it, had I not been an Eye witness; we have in∣deed seen VVounds in the Lungs with Swords and Knives cured; but that is not so wounderful, because there is no Contusion there, nor does an Inflamma∣tion so easily happen. Besides the said Cure this is also to be admired in reference to this Trooper, that being so dangerously wounded he was not infected with the Plague, which was then very rise, as many that were wounded and sick of other Di∣seases were; but he was a strong Man, in the Flower of his Age, and of a good Temper of Body in Captain Conyers a English Gentleman's Troop. OBSERVATION XXXIX. Burstenness of the Guts. THE Wife of Iohn Vermulen an Ale Brewer, a Woman about forty Years of Age, had a Burstenness of her Guts, protuberant in her right Groin about the bigness of a Goose Egg, it was accom∣panied with a total obstruction of the Belly, by reason the Guts was fallen through the narrow hole of the Rupture into the Groin. The sixth day after the beginning of the Malady I was sent for; I ordered her to be Glistered twice, and the Gut to be gently put back by a Woman that professed that operation; but all to no purpose, the Guts being so distended with Wind, neither the Gut nor the Wind would go back,
Fomentations nor other proper Topics availed nothing; upon which I told her, there was nothing but Death or a desperate Remedy, that was, to dilate the Peritonaeum by Incision, that the Gut might be put back through a large hole, my advise did not please: And therefore when I saw there was nothing else to be done, but what they were unwilling to permit, I took my leave and left the Patient for gone. After that an ordinary fellow a Stone-cutter that wandered about the Country to get business, commonly called Mr. Gerrard was sent for, who boasted that he would return the Gut in a small time; but after he had several times attempted it in vain, he was dismissed with more shame then reward, four days after his departure, the Groin putrifying and breaking, a great quantity of Excrements came forth to the great ease of the Patient, but her inevitable ruin; for the Gut was broken by the compression of the Mountebank, which was the reason that the part was putrify'd so soon by the falling of the Ex∣crements into the void hollow of the Groin, the last remedy then was to sow up the Gut, and enlarge the Peritonaeum; but in regard I saw no hope of recovery in so weak a Patient, I advised her to let it alone and prepare her self for a more easie Death; but such was her desire of life, that neither the sharpness of the Pain, nor the Apparency of the danger could deter her from the Operation, so that presently sending for four eminent Chyrurgeons she desired them to go to work. The Skin therefore and the adjoyning parts being opened with great torment, we found the thin Gut fallen out, and not only a little part of it broken, but almost torn asunder, quite a cross: for hardly the breadth of a Straw held the two ends of the Gut together; this was a certain Sign of Death; for had the solution been small it might have been cured, but of this there was no hope; in the mean time the Gut was sowed together with a Silk Thread four times twisted, and well wax'd, and put up into the Belly, after a small dilatation of the Peritonaeum; and then Glisters, proper Diet, and all things requisite were prescribed, the Patient complained of a great Pain about her Navel, which we could not asswage by any Fomentations, Bags or other Topics; otherwise she was indifferent well, eat with an Ap∣petite, neither were her Excrements amiss. The fifth day after the operation, the Pain about her Navel encreased; and the next Night as the Patient was talking very heartily to the Company about her, pale Death came and interrupted her Discourse. ANNOTATIONS. THIS Rupture was so narrow, that it was a wonder how the Intestine could fall through it, it being almost impossible to put it back as it was of it self and empty, through so narrow a Passage, much less distended with Wind. Such a narrow Rupture I once saw be∣fore in one that was opened. Wherefore they do very ill, who endeavour to force back the Guts through such narrow passages, like your strolling Hang-men of Mountebanks; for that by such a force the Gut may be sooner broken then reduced, both Reason and Ex∣perience teach us. Bursten Guts there∣fore must be gently handled, and first we must endeavour with Cataplasms, Fo∣mentations and other proper Topics, to dispel the Wind, and drive it back, and then without any violence to attempt the reducing of the Gut: which if they will not do; there is no way but dilatation of the Peritonaeum.
OBSERVATION XL. Difficulty of Urine. GErard Driessem, a Merchant about fifty Years of Age was troubled with a difficulty of Urine; so that his Urine did not only drizzle from him with great difficulty and Pain, but also very often came not forth at all. The cause was a certain viscous and tenacious Slime, which at times falling down, in great quantity to the Bladder, did so besiege the Sphincter, that it stopped both it's own and the passage of the Urine. This Slime descending through the passage of the Yard, and coming forth, was tough, and many times might be drawn out in ropes with the Fingers, many times it stuck so obstinately to the passage, that there was a necessity of loosening it and drawing it forth with a long Silver-Headed-Bodkin; this Malady had been familiar to him for many Years, and sometimes seized him three, four and five times a Year, and between the Intervals, he voided a great quantity of slimy Flegm, many noted Physitians had used several Remedies for the cure of this Malady; but all in vain, which Physitians vary'd in their opinions concerning the cause and generation of that same tough and slimy Flegm; as also about the place from whence it descended so Periodically; In the mean while the Patient could neither be cured by others, nor by my self. The Malady there∣fore increasing he found the greatest benefit and ease by the following Potion, which he took very often, and by means of which his Pains were mitigated and his Urine provoked, and because it rendered the Urinary Passages Slippery, he voided that thick and viscous Flegm, more commodiously, with more ease, and less Pain, and in greater quantity. ℞ Oyl of sweet Almonds, ℥j. s. the best Malmsey-wine, ℥ij. Iuice of Pome-Citron newly pressed ℥ s. mix them for a Potion. ANNOTATIONS. SEnnertus, among other Causes of a Dysury, reckons up one not much different from that already rehearsed. Many times, saith he, a white, and as it were, a milkie Matter is copiously void∣ed with the Urine, and causes a heat in making Water, which is sometimes voided in so great a quantity, that where it set∣tles, it fills up half the Chamber-pot; and such a voiding of Water many times con∣tinues very long. Concerning its Gene∣ration, I have known several varieties of Opinions▪ and that some have taken it for a mattery Substance bred in the Kidneys. But if the whole Kidneys should be dis∣solved into Matter, it could not amount to so great a quantity as is sometimes voided every day for several Weeks together. My Opinion is, that this matter proceeds from Crudity and vitious Concoction, first, of the Stomach, then, because the Error of the first Concoction cannot be mended in the second, of the Liver, where the Chylus, and afterwards the Blood is left raw, and uncleansed from the Salt and tartarous Parts, which ought to be sepa∣rated in the first Concoction, which being afterwards attracted by the Kidneys, and transmitted to the Bladder, cause Pain in making water, especially toward the end, while something of the said Matter sticks pertinaciously to the Neck of the Bladder, and the Extremity of the Urinary Pas∣sage. For the Cure of this Malady there are many things very prevalent, which temper and dulcifie the Acrimony, and render the Urinary Passages slippery,
to afford a freer Passage for the thicker Matter; as Oyl of sweet Almonds newly extracted, which is very useful in this case. Malmsie-wine, the drink∣ing of which alone, as Sennertus writes▪ cured a certain Person that was troubled with a terrible Dysury. The Decocti∣on of Cammomil-flowers in Cows Milk▪ with which, Forestus writes, he knew an old Man cured. Or that Decoction with which we cured a Child, Ob. 7. Also the Decoction of Marsh-mallows, Mallows, Figs, Licorice and the like. Fernelius's Syrup of Althea, more espe∣cially Turpentine mix'd with Sugar, and swallowed in a Bolus, which cuts the thick Humors, attenuates, cleanses, ex∣pels, softens and mollifies the Passa∣ges. OBSERVATION XLI. Spitting of Blood. MOnsieur Ioannes, a Priest of Craneburgh, in the Year 1636. Fe∣bruary the 16th. sent me this Letter. Doctor, THE Fame of your Knowledg and Experience ha over-rul'd me, to desire your Advice in my Distemper. For a long time a violent Cough has troubled me, which will hardly permit me to rest; moreover, a∣bout a Month since, this Cough was accompanied with a spitting of frothy Blood, which ever since I have continually spit, sometimes in a less, some∣times greater quantity; which Spitting is very troublesome to me. I have lost my Stomach, so that I can eat nothing, unless it be some small Trifle mix'd with Vinegar, or some other Acid. If you have any proper Remedy, I beg you to impart it to us, Your most Devoted Ioannes Sacerdos. The same day I sent him this Answer. Reverend Sir, I Received your Letter, to which, according to the shortness of the time, I send you this short Answer; you have been long troubled with a sharp and salt Defluction upon your Lungs, from whence your vehement and con∣tinued Cough has derived it self: At length some Vein of the Lungs being opened by the great quantity of distilling Humors, or broken by the force of the Cough, pours out that Blood which you spit out frothy from your Lungs. This Malady cannot be cured, unless the descent of the Catarhs be prevented, and the Cough allay'd; to which purpose, I have here sent you some Reme∣dies. First, seven Pills to take to morrow Morning, which will gently purge you. Secondly, A Conditement, of which you are to take, after you have purged, the quantity of a Nutmeg, Morning, Noon, and Night, for several days together. Thirdly, A Looch, to lick when your Cough afflicts you. Fourthly, Lozenges to let melt in your Mouth as often as you please, as well in the Day as Night-time. To these four I have added a little Bag, what is in it you must put in a new earthen Pipkin, and heat it over the Fire without any Moisture, then put it into the Bag again, and
lay it to your Head as hot as you can endure it, letting it lye one or two Hours, and this you must do twice or thrice a day. When you take this off, put on a woollen Cap well fum'd with Mastich and Cloves, bind a warm Napkin about it, to the end, that by this means, your Head being over cold and weak, may be again heated, corroborated and dry'd, that so the Catarh be stopped from further descent; which done, the remain∣ing Cure will be easily accomplished. I am well assured, that by reason of the Wars, and your continual quartering of Souldiers, you cannot live with those Conveniences about you as you ought to have, nevertheless you are to take the best care of your Diet you can; therefore you must keep your self in a warm Place, and more especially to preserve your Head from all manner of Cold. As to your Diet, abstain from all manner of salt and smoaked Meats, and all others of hard Digestion and Nutriment, more especially from all Acids, as Vinegar, Iuice of Limons, sowre Apples, sowre Wine, and every thing else that has any Acidity in it; for all Acids are hurtful to the Lungs. Broths made of Mutton, Lamb, Veal, Hens, Cocks, and the Flesh themselves boil▪d with Rosemary, Marjoram, Barley cleansed, and stoned Raisins, potch'd Eggs, and Goats Milk, and in a Word, all sweet things are proper. If the Malady do not yield to these things, send me back word of the State of your Disease, Yours to Command, I. de Diemerbroeck. The Medicaments which I prescribed him, were these. ℞. Of the Mass of Pill. Cochiae ℈j. s. Diagredion gr. v. for seven Pills. ℞. Red Coral prepared, Blood-stone, Trochischs of seal'd Earth, an. ℈ij. Flowers of Sulphur ʒj. Olibanum, Tragacanth, Spodi∣um, Harts-horn burnt n. ℈j. Conserve of Red Roses ℥ij. Codig∣niach ℥j. s. Nicholas's Rest ʒj. s. Syrup of Poppy, q. s. Mix them for a Conditement. ℞. Syrup of Iujubes, of Colts foot, of Licorice an. ℥j. of Poppy, Looch, Sarum an. ℥j. s. Mix them for a Looch. ℞. Heads of white Poppy, n• v. Cut them small, and boil them half an hour in common Water q. s. Strain them very hard, with the Straining boil White-sugar ℥iiij. to the Consistence of a Lozenge, adding at the end Powder of the Root of Althea, ℈j. s. of Licorice slic'd ʒj. Flowers of Sulphur ℈ij. Red Coral prepared, true Bolearmoniac an. ℈j. Make Tablets according to Art. ℞. Herbs, Marjoram m. j. Rosemary, Bitony, Flowers of red Ro∣ses, Melilot an. m. s. Cloves ʒj. Nutmegs, Cummin-seed an ʒjj. Beat them into a gross Powder, and then add Millet-seed m. iiij. Salt m. iij. Mix them together, and put them into a large lin∣nen Bag. When he had used these Remedies for eight days, he wrote me word, that his Coughing and Spitting of Blood were very much aba∣ted, but not quite cured: Therefore to perfect the Cure, I wrote
him word to continue his Pills, Looch and Conditement, and withal sent him the following Prescription. ℞ Roots of the greater Cumfrey, Snake-weed, Tormentil, Fennel, an. ℥s Licorice slic'd ʒvj. Herbs, Hyssop, Colts-foot, Scabious, Herb Fluellin, Plantain, Betony, Rosemary an. m. j Sage, Flow∣ers of red Roses an. m. j. Head of white Poppies cut small no iiij. Raisins unstoned ʒiiij. Dates no ix. Decoction of Barley q. s. Boil to an Apozeme of lb iij. First let him purge with his Pills, and make use of Looch, let him take his Conditement Morning and Evening, and drink a Draught of his Apozeme after it, about the end of March, he wrote me word that he was quite cured of his Cough and Spitting of Blood, that he slept very well, and could eat, and gave me many Thanks for my Ad∣vice. ANNOTATIONS. ALL spitting of Blood out of the Veins of the Lungs threatens great Danger, and therefore ought to be cur∣ed with great speed and prudence. As Benedict Faventius observes, If a Vein, says he, be broken with Coughing, and Blood spit out of the Lungs, it will never be consolidated but with great difficulty and care of the Physitian. This Cure is more easily, or with more difficulty accom∣plished, according to the variety of Causes, the Vehemency and Diuturnity of the Distemper, and the natural Strength of the Lungs affected. But a∣mong other Causes, this is one; when Na∣ture endeavours to expel by the violent force of the Cough, the Humors stop∣ing the spiritual Passages; for by that extraordinary Violence there is a force put upon the Organs of Respiration, so that they become very much extended with their Vessels, and sometimes bro∣ken, and then the Blood comes away with the Spittle. Such was the Blood∣spitting that troubled our Patient, which was very dangerous, but less then if it had been occasioned by some ill Dispo∣sition of the Lungs, or Corrosion of the Vessels, or any such like Cause. How∣ever, had the Distemper persisted any longer, the Vessels, without doubt, would have been corroded by the Acri∣mony of the distilling Humors, and the Strength of the Bowel would have fail'd, and then Suppuration, Con∣sumption, Rottenness, a Fever, and se∣veral other Maladies of difficult Cure, and for the most part mortal, would have ensued. But because it was not come to that, and because the Disease had been of no long standing, and the Patient was of sufficient strength, the Cure was fortunately performed, and much sooner than was expected. OBSERVATION. XLII. Suppression of the Secondines and Courses. THE Wife of Peter Vleys-houwer, the sixth of March miscarried; presently after her Secondines, Courses, Urine and Evacuations of Excrement stopped, which exposed her to imminent danger; especially when the Medicaments given her by the Midwife availed no∣thing. The ninth of March, which was the fourth day after she had miscarried, I was sent for, and presently prescribed her these things. ℞. Roots of round Birthwort, Dittany, Valerian, Briony, Ma∣sterwort, Fennel, an. ʒiij. Herbs, Mugwort, Peniroyal, Tansie, Feverfew, Savin, an. m. j. Seed of Parsley, Lovage, wild Car∣rots ʒij. red Vetches ℥j. s. White-wine q. s. Boil them for an A∣pozeme of lb j. s.
℞. Of this Decoction ℥v. Leaves of Senna cleansed ʒiij. Best Rhu∣barb ʒj. s. Aniseseed ʒj. Choice Cinamon ℈j. Make an Infusion for four hours, then strain them very hard, and add to the Straining Oyl of Amber ix. Drops for a Draught. After she had took this she purged gently, and her Urine and Cour∣ses came down in great Plenty, and her Secondines came forth by Piace▪meals; and thus by this one Medicament she escaped a very great danger. OBSERVATION XLIII. A Wound in the Brain with a Pistol-shot. MR. Vane, an English man, and Ensign of a Company, a strong young man, about twenty five years of Age, at the Siege of Schenk Sconce, in the Year 1636. was wounded in the ead with a Pistol Shot, a little Bullet entring through the inner Corner of his Right-Eye, without hurting the Eye, and passing through the Sub∣stance of the Brain in a streight Line, to the upper Bottom of the fore-part of the Head, on that Side, in that Place stopp'd and stuck under the Bone. The Man, so soon as he was wounded, fell down in a deep Sleep, void of Sense and Motion, and so was carried to Nimeg∣hen for dead. No Man thought it possible for such a Wound to be cur∣ed, in regard the Brain was so much prejudiced. However the Chy∣rurgeon prob'd to the place where the Bullet was lodg'd, and felt it about the upper part of the Lambdoidal Bone. Then he took a longer slender Instrument, like a Mold wherein they cast Bullets, and thrust∣ing it into the Wound, got hold of the Bullet, but as he was about to draw it out, I know not by what Misfortune, the end of the In∣strument that clasp'd the Bullet broke, and that part of it which had taken hold of the Bullet, remain'd, together with the Bullet, in the Brain; yet not so, but that the end of it might be seen about the en∣trance of the Wound. However, for want of proper Instruments, we were forc'd to leave it in the Brain till the Evening, at what time, with proper Instruments, both the broken Instrument and the Bullet within it, were both drawn forth, and as much of the Substance of the Brain came out along with it as the quantity of a Nutmeg. Also some little bony Fragments sticking to the Orifice of the Wound, were taken out. The Chyrurgeon applied to the Wound a Magisterial Bal∣sam, and Cephalic Fomentations were clap'd round about the whole Head, to strengthen the Brain, and his Belly moved with a Glister. The next day some ounces of Blood were taken out of his Right-Arm. The fourth day after the Wound received, upon which we presently ordered him some Broth for Nourishment. About the fourteenth day, that deep Sleep abated, and after that he only slept naturally. He was troubled with no Fever, nor did he loose his Appetite. For some Weeks he took cephalic Decoctions and Conditements; but as for the Wound, nothing was put into it but the said Balsam. Afterwards, in∣stead of a Cephalic Fomentation, we took a dry Cephalic Cap, made of certain Cephalic and other Herbs, and clapt it about his whole Head. And thus this Person, so desperately wounded as he was, after three Months, being perfectly cured, walk'd abroad again, and at the fourth Months end, returned again to the Camp. Six years after this
Cure, coming to Nimeghen, he gave me a Visit, affirming, that he re∣tain'd no farther Inconvenience of his Wound, only that upon some suddain and tempestuous Change of Weather, his Head would ake a little; or if he drank Wine too freely, he should presently be intoxi∣cated, and then he was almost mad; at other times he did whatever he had to do, as if he had never been wounded. ANNOTATIONS. Hppocrates affirms all Wounds of the Head to be mortal. The Bladder, says he, being broken, or the Brain, or the Heart, or the Midriff, or any of the small Guts, or the Stomach, or the Li∣ver, it is mortal. In which place, we are to understand by Mortal, not of ne∣cessity Mortal, but very dangerous, as Galen observes in his Comment upon that Aphorism. For Wounds of the Brain, that do not penetrate the Ven∣tricles, do not of necessity cause Death; because we find they are many times heal'd, as Massa, Carpus, Iacoti∣us, and many others testifie. And Avi∣cen thus writes, concerning Arrows to be drawn out of the Wounds of those Parts. If an Arrow, says he, be fixed in any principal Member, as the Brain, Heart, Lungs, Belly, small Guts, Liver, Matrix or Bladder, and there appear Signs of Death, then we must abstain from drawing out the Arrow, because it will occasion us to be look'd upon as Fools, when we know we can do the Patient no good: But if no ill Sign appear, then we go to work; for many times in such cases, se∣veral escape to a wonder. We therefore, following this Do∣ctrine of Avicen, though the case seem∣ed desperate, yet because all our Hope lay in drawing out the Bullet, drew it out from this Patient, whom no ratio∣nal Physitian would have judged could have ever escaped; especially since the Wound was made with so much vio∣lence of the Pistol, accompanied with a Perforation of the Meninxes, and some loss of the Substance of the Brain. Cer∣tainly, if ever there were a miraculous Cure, this was one. I could hardly give credit before to the Testimonies of Authors in this matter; and had I not seen such Wounds as these, with loss of the Brain, twice healed, I should hard∣ly yet have believ'd it. OBSERVATION XLIV. An Asthma. ANdrew à Sal ingen, in the Month of May, was troubled with a vehement Asthma, which afflicted him so terribly, that he could hardly speak; he had no Cough, and spit but very little or nothing, and besides, he had quite lost his Stomach. He had taken several Re∣medies, by the Advice of others, for above half a year together. And for my Part, because the Patient was threescore years of age; I did not believe my self, that ever the Distemper could be eradicated; however, I told him it might be much abated and asswaged, and therefore bid him pluck up a good Heart, and take of the following Electuary Morning and Evening the quantity of a Nutmeg, and to abstain from all acid and cold, flatulent, viscous and smoak'd Meats, and in a word, from all Meats of hard Concoction and bad Nutri∣ment. ℞. Choice Myrrh, lucid Aloes, Flower of Sulphur, Elecampane, Licorice slic'd an. ℈j. Saffron, Benzoin an. ℈j. Make these in▪ to a very fine Powder, then add the best Honey ʒ xi. Oyl of Anise, Drops ix. Mix these for an Electuary.
By taking this, his Belly was gently loosned, and his Apetite restored; the Asthma ceased to a Miracle; insomuch that within a few days he was quite freed from it, and when the Malady afterwards return'd, he presently cured himself by taking the same Electuary. ANNOTATIONS. AN Asthma is of those Diseases, which are not curable in old People, but accompany them generally to their Graves, because it is caused ei∣ther by crude and cold Defluxions powring down from the Brain upon the Lungs, or by more crude and thicker Humors flowing from the Liver into the Lungs, through the Arterious Vein. Which crude, cold and flegmatic Hu∣mors in old men, do not admit of Con∣coction, by reason of the Debility of the Concoctive Faculty; which in them is feeble, because of their cold Constitution, Age, and abundance of cold Superfluities. And therefore when they are trou∣bled with this Malady, we are only to try how to abate it. In which case, the use of our Electuary prov'd very ad∣vantageous to our Patient. Mercurialis, for the Cure of an Asth∣ma, highly commends a Cautery in the Arm, and long kept open. For, saith he, we find it by daily Experience, that they who are vexed with difficulty of breathing, are mainly succoured by the help of these Remedies. As for Specific Remedies proper for an Asthma, there are several to be found in various Au∣thors. Avicen prescribes to Asthmatics, that are grievously troubled with Difficulty of breathing, Cumin-seed mix'd with Vi∣negar, or white Mustard-seed mingled with equal proportion of Honey, to the Consistence of an Electuary. Hippocrates, to prevent Suffocation, prescribes Quick∣silver, the quantity of a Bean, with Ethio∣pic, Cumin-seed; as also Sulphur beaten and dissolved with Salt of Niter. In like manner, among the Neoterics, Lelius à Fonte, Victor Favent, Salo∣mon Albert, Quercetan, Beguin and o∣thers, prescribe Sulphur as the chiefest Remedy in the Cure of an Asthma. Some, in case of a violent Asthma, pre∣scribe Sulphur with Venice Turpentine. Miraldus writes, that viscous Humors may be easily expectorated by swallow∣ing Nettle seed powdered ℈j. with any Pectoral Syrup. Leonellus commends Ammoniac, with a little Oxymel of Squills. Which Ammoniac is com∣mended by several Physicians, but e∣specially by Mercurialis, in these words: But in regard Asthmatics are wont to have certain Fits, with which they are more vehemently troubled, I find by Experience, that Oxymel ℥ij mix'd in a Mortar with ℥s. of Salt Ammoniac is a thing which gives great ease, a Spoon∣ful being taken at a time. Paulus Ae∣gineta commends Hog-lice patch'd in an earthen Pipkin, and then boil'd with Honey; but I use them without parch∣ing. The same Commendation Valeri∣us also gives to Hog-lice, in his Notes up∣on Holler. Your Hog-lice, saith he, that lye under Water-tubs, ty'd up in a Linnen Rag, and steep'd in White-wine, and the Straining given to drink, rid the Lungs of tough Humors in a short time to a Wonder. Soon after, says he, to asswage a violent Asthma, one Tablet of Diatragacanth sprinkled with some Drops of Oyl of Sage, Anise, or Rose∣mary, Chymically extracted, conduces very much, and gives present ease. Cardan writes, that Saffron is the Soul of the Lungs, and affirms that he has cured many Asthmatics with it. I have known my self the Decoction of red Colewarts given for several days with a little Sugar, give great ease. Au∣genius highly applauds Syrip of Tobac∣co; of which also Monardes, Quercetan and others make mention; by the use of which, Zacutus of Portugal writes, that he has cured several. Some there are who give Turpentine ʒij. or iij. with Oyl of sweet Almonds, by that means purging both the Breast and the Belly at the same time. For this Distemper are no less approved Elecampane-wine, Balsam of Sulphur, Looch of Squills, Foxes Lungs, and the like.
OBSERVATION XLV. Pain in the Kidneys. NIcholas of Rostock, in Iune, was cruelly afflicted with sharp Ne∣phritic Pains, which lasted for eight days, without intermission. At length, by the Advice of an old Woman, he swallowed twice or thrice a day, the quantity of an Acorn of new Butter, without any Salt in it; which when he had continued for three days together, at length, without any Pain, he voided a Stone, about the bigness, and very like an Almond, and several others lesser, with much Gravel, and by that means was freed from his Distemper. Afterwards, the same Pain returning, taking the same Remedy, he voided more Stones. ANNOTATIONS. VVHen the Stone is already fallen out of the Bladder, it is soon∣est and best expelled by such Remedies as smoothen the Urinary Vessels, and render the Passages slippery. Such is new churm'd Butter, by the use of which, Iohn de Scherpenhuysen many times lya∣ble to Nephritic Pains, frequently void∣ed little Stones out of his Yard. Such is also Oyl of sweet Almonds, either alone, or with Malmsey-wine. VVe have also seen some, who have frequent∣ly voided Stones by the much eating of Figs. The Decoction also of Forestus, by us mentioned Ob. 20. and 24. is also very useful in this case. OBSERVATION XLVI. A Wound in the Leg. THE Wife of Christian ab Ummersum, having slightly bruised her Leg, and laying on a Plaister of her own Head, this slight Con∣tusion grew to an Ulcer, for the Cure of which, when she sent for a Chyrurgeon, after many Oyntments, Plaisters and other Topics, for three or four Weeks applied, he could do no good. But at length she was cured by an old Woman, who advised her to Powder-Chalk, and mix it with old Butter roasted, by which her Ulcer was cured in a short time. OBSERVATION XLVII. A Pain from an odd and unexpected kind of Wound. The Author would have it from Witchcraft. JOhn Peter Nirot, a Child, of about five years of age, for almost a whole Year together, had complained of Pain in the lower Part of his Belly, and was often so miserably griped, that his Parents knew not what in the World to do. He had no Fever, nor was his Sto∣mach very bad, and he went well enough to stool; yet his Belly was swell'd, and his whole Body all worn to Skin and Bones; he would rub his Nose very much, but he slept very little, only slumber'd, and that with troublesome and frequent Wakings. In Iune, my Advice was sent for, I believing the Child was troubled with Worms in his
Guts, gave him several Medicaments to expel the Worms, the Crudi∣ties and Impurities of the lower Region; but all to no purpose, the Torments of his Belly more and more increasing, so that by reason of his continual crying, I was afraid the Child would become bursten. At length, after so many Medicines try'd in vain, I felt with my hand a Hardness in the lower part of his Belly, in the middle, between the Navel and the Region of the Hair, somewhat toward the Left-side. This Hardness was also oblong, yet caused no Swelling, so that I could not conjecture what it should be. Wherefore I sent the Mother with the Child to a Chyrurgeon, to know his Judgment concerning the Hardness. He for some time felt the Place with his Hands, yet not able to make any right Conjecture. But perceiving the Child to be more in Pain by his handling him, the better to find out the Cause of the Malady, he squeez'd the Part affected on both sides with his Hands somewhat hard, at what time, he presently felt on the one side something hard and sharp, that piers'd the Skin and prick'd his Fin∣gers. Therefore believing it to be some little Bone, or some such thing, he took hold of it with a Pair of Pincers, and drew forth, not a little Bone, but, to the admiration of all that stood by, a large Shoo-makers Awl; after which, the Child grew very well. This Awl was about half the length of a man's middle Finger, such as the Shoo∣makers use when they sow on their Polony Heels, without any Handle, only to the End next the Handle, there stuck a piece of Shoo-makers Wax'd-Thread, with which it had been formerly fastned to the Handle. ANNOTATIONS. THere was no Person that could judg this to be a preternatural Malady. For it is not probable the Child could swallow so long and large an Awl, without any harm, and without any bodies knowing of it. But grant it had been so, there is no reason can be given, how the Awl should be carried through the Membranes of the Stomach or Intestines, the Peritonaeum and Muscles of the Abdomen, and so athwart to the Skin, the Bowels untouched, and without any Exulceration; insomuch that the Patient was cured, as it were, in a Moment, after the drawing out the Awl, and was living seven years after to our knowledg. And therefore it is very probable that it was put into the Body of the Boy by diabolical Incar∣tation; like to that same Story which Longius tells of a Country Man, who had an Iron Nail which appeared un∣der his Skin without any Prejudice, which was cut out by the Chyrurgeon; and when he was dead, four Knives, two iron Files, Hair and other things were found. And several other remarkable Stories of the same nature are related by others, as Forestus, Codronchius, Gem∣ma, Zacutus, &c. 'Tis true, it has been a Controversie for several Ages among Divines, Lawy∣ers, Physicians and Philosopers, whe∣ther there be any Inchanters or Witches, and whether they have so much Power by their Charms, to hurt the Crea∣tures, to cause Sickness and Death, clear up Rain, and cause Thunder, &c. For a brief Solution of this Question, in short, we must conclude, that there are Inchanters, who by the Permission of God, can do very strange things; seeing that the Scripture testifies, that Pharaoh's Magicians in Moses's time were such a sort of Inchanters, who turned Rods into Serpents, Rivers into Blood, &c. Thus St. Luke makes men∣tion of Simon Magus, who made the People mad with his Magic Arts. Whence we must of necessity conclude, that there are Witches and Sorcerers, who by their Demoniac Arts, cannot only work various Miracles, but also blast Herbs and Fruits, and do mischief to Beasts and Men; which Mischiefs however they cannot do when they please, nor to all that they please, but only when, and in what manner God pleases, and to such whose Faith God has a Will to try, as he permitted the Devil to exercise his Sorceries upon
Iob. Or to such, whose Incredulity or Impiety he has a mind to punish, not only in the proper Person of the Trans∣gressor, but also by giving the Witches Power over their innocent Children, their Flocks, Herds, Fruit, &c. And thus, by the Incantation of Witches, many times Infanrs, Oxen, Sheep, Hor∣ses, Fruit, &c. are mischiefed, as we saw at a certain Country-mans at Mont∣fort. Yet, though there are such In∣chanters and Witches, their Power of doing Harm is not at their own, but at the disposal of God. Nor can Satan inflict Diseases, but by the Permission of God, and then his Witches are but his Instruments, not the primary Cause. OBSERVATION XLVIII. Of the Gout in the Knee. A Little Son of Thomas Peters, an English Merchant, about six years of age, being troubled with the Gout in his Knee for three or four Weeks, at length his Pain was so great that he could not go. There was no Tumor, no Inflammation, nor Dislocation, and there∣fore, after I had purged his Body, I only laid on a Cere-cloth of Oxi∣croceum, which lay on for three days without any benefit. Afterwards his Knee swell'd very much, and the Pain likewise encreased; wherefore, leaving off the Cere-cloth, the following Cataplasme was laid on for four or five days together, shifting it twice a day. The Use of which, cleared the Child both of his Swelling and Pain, nor did they afterwards return. ℞. New Goats-dung lb. j. Boil it in strong French Wine q. s. to the consistence of a Cataplasm; and when you take it off from the Fire, add Spirt of Wine ℥iij. Mix them for a soft Cata∣plasm. ANNOTATIONS. THis Cataplasm has a very great discussing and corroborating Fa∣culty, which is look'd upon by some as a great Secret in these sorts of Tumors of the Joynts; the signal effects whereof, we have try'd in many other cases of the same nature. This Dung boiled in Oximel Aetius highly commends, as a Medicament which he has often succes∣fully used in long continued Tumors of the Knee. OBSERVATION XLIX. A Swelling in the Fore-head, by reason of a Fall. A Young Son of Dimmer de Raet, Consellor to the Court of Box∣mer, had fallen down a Pair of Stairs upon his Fore-head, whence ensued a Swelling in his Fore-head to the bigness of a Hens Egg. To this I only applied green Grass fresh gathered and bruised in a Mortar, cold as it was; which done, the Swelling vanished the next day to that degree, that there was not the least sign of it re∣maining.
ANNOTATIONS. THese Swellings, though some make nothing of them, yet if they be neglected at the beginning, they are ma∣ny times the causes of great Mischiefs, which we saw happen'd to the Child of Monsieur Armstrong, who having such a Tumor in his Fore-head, when it could not be dissipated by no Topics, the Place affected, continued swell'd for some Weeks after, till at length the Hu∣mor therein beginning to putrifie, and from thence bad Simptoms appearing, there was a Necessity not only of a Tor∣menting Incision, to open the Tumor and let out the putrid Humor, but also of scraping off the putrid Humor, cor∣rupted with the same Putrefaction from the Bone that lay underneath, by which means, that imminent danger was to be removed from the Patient, to which also the Wound was consolidated with∣out any conspicuous Scar. Wherefore it is far better to dissipate the Humors at the beginning, at what time it may be easily done, and which we luckily did with Grass only bruis'd. Many times we have likewise applied brown Paper moistned in Spirit of Wine, with as good success, or Oyl of Wax or Anise, anointed up∣on the Place. OBSERVATION L. The Chollic Passion. MOnsieur Starkenburgh, Collonel of the Regiment of Groening, about forty years of age, of a cold and flegmatic Constituti∣on, in September was taken with a violent Cholic Passion. His Belly was very much swell'd with Wind, which he could neither void up∣ward nor downward, and terrible Gripings seemed to dilacerate the Guts. He complained also of an extraordinary Anxiety of his Heart, with which he was so much oppressed, that he was all over of a cold Sweat; but because he seemed to be almost ready to burst with Wind, and had need of present Relief, I prescribed the following Glister, which was given him about eleven a Clock at night. ℞. Emollient Decoction lbj. Elect. Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra ℥j. s. Oyl of Dill and Camomil, an. ℥j. Common Salt ʒj. Mix them for a Glister. This Glister he voided within a quarter of an hour, without any Ease, neither Wind nor Excrement following; for which reason, soon after we gave him another of the same, which did him as little good. At the same time the Patient growing Stomach-sick, threw up some Choler with tough Flegm. Therefore about six a Clock in the Morn∣ing, I prescribed him another Glister after this manner. ℞. Emollient Herbs, lesser Centaury, Wormwood, Rue, Flowers of Cammomil, Dill, an. m. s. Seeds of Anise and Lovage an. ʒij. Cummin, Laurel-Berries, an. ʒj. s. Boil them in common Wa∣ter q. s. to lbj. In the Straining, gently boil Flowers of Senna, ℥j. Then press them, and add Elect. Hiera Picra, Diacatho∣licon, an. ℥j. s. Oyl of Cammomil and Dill, an. ℥j. Common Salt ʒij. For a Glyster. After he had taken this, there came away with it much Excrement, and much Wind. Afterwards, being sick at his Stomach, he threw up a great quantity of Choler and tough Flegm, which gave him much Ease. Twice the same day he took Chicken Broth boil'd with
Barley cleansed, Citron and Orange Peels, and for his Drink, some∣times he drank Ptisan, sometimes small Ale. In the Evening this Bo∣lus was given him, which caused him to sleep a little the Night follow∣ing, and gave him very great Ease, and the next day he had three Stools. ℞. Of our Anticholic Electuary ʒj. Transparent Aloes ℈j. Mix them for a Bolus. This Bolus, afterwards he took thrice a day, every other day. The seventh of October, not having gone to stool in three days, upon forbearing his Bolus, his Cholic Pains increased again. But then, be∣cause the Gentleman would not admit of any more Glisters, I gave him a gentle purging Draught, which caused him to void much Choler and Flegm upward and downward. The twelfth of October, his Belly be∣ing bound, he took a Glister. The thirteenth, Dr. Harscamp, an e∣minent Physitian, was called to Counsel, and then, by common Con∣sent, to stop his Vomiting, we gave him at two times, one Spoonful of Cinnamon-water, with two Drops of Oyl of Cinnamon, and or∣dered the following Ligament to be applied to the Region of his Sto∣mach. ℞. Oyl of Nut-megs squeez'd, of Laurel, an. ʒj. Of Dill, of di∣stilled Fennel, an. ℈j. Of Anise Drops iij. Mix them for a Li∣gament. In the Evening he took the forementioned Bolus. The sixteenth of October, he took another Glister, which gave him three Stools with great ease. The twentieth, to loosen his Belly, we prescribed him Pills made of transparent Aloes only, of which, he swallowed two or three every other day, or every other three days; which Pills wrought so well, that afterwards we had no need of any other Pur∣ges. The twenty eighth, I gave him ℥j. s. of our Anticholic Electuary, wherein I had mingled ʒj. s. of transparent Aloes, of which he took Morning and Evening ʒs. or ℈ij. to his great Advantage. For it strengthned his Stomach, dispell'd the Wind, and cleansed away the Flegm and Choler. This Electuary he afterwards used as a preserva∣tive, taking his Aloes-Pills in the intervening days. And by this means he recovered his former Health. ANNOTATIONS. THE Cause of this Cholic Passion was a great quantity of salt Flegm sticking to the Guts, and an over∣abounding quantity of sharp excremen∣titious Choler; for the Choler being voided out of its Bladder into the Guts, and being there mixed with that Flegm, and causing that salt and tough Flegm to boil, (like quick Lime thrown upon Water, or Oyl of Vitriol powred upon powdered Crabs Eyes) begat an extra∣ordinary Flatulency, violent Pains, and extream Anxieties. That this was the true Cause, appeared by his vomiting, which brought up yellow and greenish Choler, with tough and frothy Flegm, as I have often observed in my Practice. Wherefore in this case, there is need of a hotter Medicament, in regard of the cold Flegm and the Wind; at the same time, to cleanse away the Choler, and asswage the Gripes. To which three Purposes, the foresaid Electuary, mixed with Aloes, was of great use; other ge∣neral and necessary Medicaments being given as occasion served. To asswage the Pains of the Cholic, many notable Remedies are prescribed by various Authors, which are to be va∣ried according to the variety of the
Causes. In a cold Cause I make use of my own Anticholic Electuary with good success, the Composition of which, is this. ℞. Specier. Diagalangae, Rosatum A∣romaticum an. ʒiij. s. Diambra ʒiij. Mass of Storax Pills ʒiij. s. Treacle of Andromachus ℥iij. s. Mithridate of Damoc. ℥iiij. ʒv. Oyl of Anise ʒij. ℈ij. of Cloves ʒj. of Nutmegs distill'd ʒj. s. Syrup of Stocchas q. s. For an Electuary. This Electuary sometimes I use alone, sometimes with every ounce I mix ʒj. or ij. of Aloes, and so given, have found it much more prevalent against the Chollic. Holler boils in odoriferous Wine, one small Handful of common Wormwood with ʒij. of Cummin-seed. He also commends Orange-peels boil'd in Wine, and the Decoction drank fasting in a Morning. We have also given the same Peel powder'd and mix'd with Wine, and found it no less benefi∣cial. Wormwood-wine is commended by Aetius, because it corroborates the Belly, purges away the Choler, and prevents the Growth of it, and discusses and expels the Wind. Others boil ʒj. of Cummin-seed in VVormwood-wine, and give the Straining. Rases approves Confection of Laurel Berries. Avicen prescribes an effectual Medicament of equal Parts of Castor, Pepper and A∣niseseed. Against the same Distemper are no less prevalent the Powder of Ze∣doary Root, from ℈j. to ʒj. Also the distilled Oyls of Anise, Fennel, Caroes, Dill and Zedoary given in hot Wine. The Decoction of Flowers of Cammo∣mil, with a little Cummin-seed added, given in Ale or small White-wine ℥iiij. or v. at a time, is a most present Re∣medy to asswage the Pains and expel the Wind. Others applaud this Car∣minative Water of Schroderus. ℞. Flowers of Roman Cammomil m. xxx. ut, bruise and infuse them twenty four hours in Cammomil-water lb x. (others say xv.) stout Wine lb vj. squeeze these very strongly, and in the straining, infuse for twenty four hours more, Flow∣ers of common Cammomil m. xxiiij. Press them and strain them. In the Straining steep Flowers of Cammomil m. xij The yellow of Orange Peels ℥j. s. Pontic Worm∣wood m. ij. Lesser Centaury, Peny∣royal, Basil an. m. ij. s. Seed of Dill ℥iij. Of Anise and Fennel an. ℥j. s. of Caroways, Cummin, Carduus Bene∣dictus, Maries Carduus an. ℥j. s. Iu∣niper berries ℥j. Laurel-berries ℥s. Let them stand twenty four hours, then di∣stil them with a Gentle Fire, in Balno Mariae. Rodoric Fonseca recommends, as a singular Remedy, and a very great se∣cret, arising from the Propriety of the whole Substance, the Testicles of Hor∣ses, which he says he has several times try'd in the Cure of cholical Distempers. These Testicles he washes in generous Wine, and cuts into thin slices and then dries them in an Oven with a gentle Heat, and keeps them for his Use upon occasion, after general Remedies, he gives of these powdered ʒj. in Wine, three hours before any other Meat. Zacutus prefers the Pizzle of a Bull, as having a Wonderful specific Vertue, one Scru∣ple of the Powder being taken in Malmsey Wine, affirming, that he had cured several who were most cruelly tormented with that Grief, with that only Medicament. He also commends for almost as effectual the sole drinking of Urine. In vehement Cholic Pains, Riverius prescribes these Pills, which he has often given with great Suc∣cess. ℞. The best Aloes ʒj. Laudanum Opiate gr. iiij. Diagridion gr. vj. Make six Pills. Let the Patient take these at a conve∣nient time, and within an hour after they asswage the Pains and carry away noxious Humors. Paraeus tells us of one, who when all other Remedies would not prevail, was at length cured with drinking ℥iiij. of the Oyl of sweet Almonds mix'd with White-wine and Pellitory-wall-water, and then swal∣lowing a leaden Bullet smear'd over with Quick-silver. This we also saw our selves of a Trooper, who being troubled frequently with the Cholic, swallowed three or four Pistol Bullets, which coming out again, he was pre∣sently rid of his Distemper.
OBSERVATION LI. A Wound in the Head. THomas Gravener, about sixty years old, but a good strong Man of his age, a Trooper under Captain Conyers, an English Officer, upon the fourteenth of November, playing with some others in the Lieutenants Quarters, by what Misfortune I know not, fell backward, and broke the hinder Part of his Head against the Pavement, which made a slight Wound in the Skin, which the Chyrurgeon slighted, and only laid some sort of Plaister to it. But immediately after the Fall, the Trooper grew sick at his Stomach, and had an Inclination to Vo∣mit; besides, he had a slight giddy Pain in his Head, yet not so, but that he walked the Streets for the three or four first days; but upon the sixth day, his Face and all his Head began to swell very much. The twenty fourth day of November, and the eleventh after his Fall, about Evening, I was sent for; I found the Patient very weak, with his Face so swell'd, that he could not open his Eyes for the Swelling, and under his Eyes were black and blew Spots. Thereupon, having examined the whole Case more diligently, from the beginning of the Fall, I concluded he would dye, in regard, that by the Signs, his Head seemed to me to be cleft, and that the Blood being extravasated be∣tween the Meninxes and the Cranium, was there putrified; and that therefore this Blood which the Chyrurgeon should have drawn out at first, by a Perforation of the Cranium, would be the Cause of his Death. The Chyrurgeons therefore that had him in Cure, Mr. Ed∣munds and his Son observing their Mistake, as also the Troopers Wife and Friends earnestly desired that the Operation might yet be try'd, and notwithstanding all my Perswasions to the contrary, I stood by while it was done. Thereupon that Evening the Hair being taken off, and a Cross-like Incision made in the place affected, the Cranium was laid bare to a good breadth. The next day, the Tents being taken, and the Wound more narrowly look'd into, we found a long Fissure in the Skull, which Cranium was immediately trepan'd. But then we found the Blood, which the Wound had bled, sticking to the thick Meninx, not coagulated or putrified, but altogether dry'd up, so that it stuck like a clammy Powder, the more close to the Me∣ninx and Cranium, which was a most certain Sign of Death, by reason that the Blood so dry'd, could in no manner flow forth. So that upon the twenty sixth of November, he fell into a deep Sleep, and the next day he dy'd. ANNOTATIONS. COntusions and Wounds in the Head are never to be made slight of. For sometimes they deceive the quickest Eyes; so that such as seem to be nothing dangerous, bring a Man into the greatest hazard of his Life. We have observ'd some, who after the tenth, nay four∣teenth and twentieth day after a slight Wound in the Head, have felt little or no pain, yet of a suddain have been taken with an Apoplexy, Convulsions, or some terrible Distemper; which con∣trary to expectation has ended their Days. Thus a Servant of the Sieur Morignan, a French Gentleman, falling from his Horse upon his Head had no outward Wound to be seen: the first day his Head aked, and he was so very Giddy that he could not stand▪ from the second to the twelfth he felt no harm, but went about his business. The twelfth day he complain'd of a Giddi∣ness
of his Head, the fourteenth about noon he fell down with an Apoplexy and within a few hours Expir'd. In the same manner a Servant of Captain Lucas, a Captain of Horse, in a Scuffle among certain Souldiers received a slight blow upon the Head with a Cudgel, whence ensued a very great swelling, without any wound; for the first few days he was Giddy, after that he com∣plained of a Heaviness of his Head: the thirty second day an Epilepsy took him; and the forty sixth after the blow he Dyed Convulsive. Valeriola also tells a Story of a Woman that having received a very slight Wound with a Pot in her Forehead, for two days seem∣ed to aile little or nothing. The third day a terrible Fever seiz'd her; her face swelled all over, with a Redness and Inflammation; soon after a Delirium, and Convulsion, afflicted her, to all which Evils upon the fifth day, Death put a final end. Her Head being open'd there appear'd a Chink in her Skull which was hardly conspicuous, a very great Inflammation within the Skull, the hard Meninx swelled, black and blew, and covered with a great quantity of Putrefaction. In such cases therefore it is better to lay bare the Skull at first, and if need be to perforate, then by lingring to expose the Patient to mortal danger. OBSERVATION LII. A Fissure of the Skull. PEter ab Ewjick, a Trooper under Captain Conyers, about thirty four Years of Age, being talking to the Lieutenant with his Hat off in the Yard belonging to his quarters, a Servant of the House threw down out of an upper Window a peice of Wood of ten or twelve Pound weight, which fell accidentally upon the Troopers Head; Im∣mediately the Trooper fell down Speechless, and was carry'd into the next Room for dead; where, for an hours space he appeared so Apoplectic, that every Body thought he would have dy'd, at length he came to himself, but rav'd all that day and the next Night; the Chyrurgeon that was sent for perceiving nothing but a slight superficial Wound thought there was no danger, and promised to cure him in three or four days. However Mr. Cooper, not confiding in that Chyrurgeon, upon the third day desired me to see him, I found him without Pain, sound in his judgment, with a slight Wound in the fore-part of his Head; yet hardly Penetrating; his Eyes also were surrounded with black and blew, so that so few Symptoms appearing, the Chyrurgeon and all the standers-by made slight of the business; But I having examined the business from the beginning, certainly affirmed that the Skull was either broken or slit, and therefore that it was absolutely necessary to make a pre∣foration as soon as possible, that the Extravasated Blood might be let out, and that there was no dallying till more terrible Symptoms ensued, when Art and Industry would be too late; so that at length my Advice was followed. First therefore, after we had loosen'd his Belly with a Glister, the same Evening upon the sinister Bone of the Bregma, an Incision large enough was made in the form of the Letter T. and the Skull triangularly laid bare; at that time we could per∣ceive nothing for the Blood; but the next day we discovered two apparent Fissures in the Cranium, and upon one side a small Particle about half a Fingers length, somewhat depressed; which Particle was every way sever'd and broken from the Bone. Therefore in the next firm Part we made a perforation with a Trepan, and took out half an ounce of Blood, which had flow'd out of the little broken Veins between the Cranium and the thick Meninx, and there had shelter'd
it self; which being wiped off, we laid a little rag dipped in Honey of Roses upon the Meninx, and having filled the Wound without side with dry Wooll, we covered it with Emplaster of Betony. The sixth of February, some little Blood came forth; but after that, none at all; in the mean time we kept his Belly loose with a gentle Purge, thus we ordered the Wound till the twelfth of February, and covered his Head with a quilt of Cephalic Herbs, and other things; afterwards we began to lay the following Powder mixed with Honey of Roses upon the Meninx. ℞. Sanguis Draconis, Frankincense, Aloes, Myrrh, an. ℈j. Fine Barley Flower, ℈j. s. Make it into a very fine Powder. The eighteenth of February, the flesh began to grow from the inside of the Meninx. The first of March, the Meninx was covered with flesh. The sixteenth of March, a little Scale was separated from the upper Bone of the Skull laid bare: and at the beginning of April, the Man being perfectly cured went abroad. ANNOTATIONS. THE suddain Consternation of this Person, as it were Apoplectic was a certain sign of the Skull being de∣press'd; which depression could never have been made without a Fracture or a Fissure. And though for the following days the Patient felt nothing in his Head, in regard such a depression and Fis∣sure could not happen without breaking some of the little Veins, it was better to open the Skull and take out the Extrava∣sated Blood, then to expect the Symp∣toms of it when Corrupted and Putrifi∣ed: For a very little Blood, though no more then a dram, yet Putrifying upon the Meninx, may cause terrible Symptoms and Death it self. OBSERVATION LIII. The Head-ach. PEtronel de Kuijck, a Country-Woman, about threescore Years old, complained in February, of terrible Pains in her Head, as also of Catarrhs falling upon her Eyes, Teeth, Shoulders, and other parts; that she had been troubled all the Winter, and felt a very great cold at the top of her Head, as if the fore part of her Head had been dipped in cold Water; Therefore having prescribed her a hotter and Cephalic Diet, I Purged her with Pill. Cochiae and Golden Pills, then I ordered Linnen-cloths four doubled and dipped in Spirit of Wine warmed, and gently squeezed to be laid over all the upper Part of her Head, and to continue so doing for some days, which done, that Diuturnal Pain, together with her Catarrhs, all ceased within a few days, then for prevention and preservation I prescribed her a Quilt to wear upon her Head, ℞. Marjoram one little Handful, Rosemary, Sage, Flowers of Melilot, Lavender, an. one little Handful, Nutmegs, Cloves, an. ℈ij. Make a Powder for a Quilt.
ANNOTATIONS. IN these cold Maladies of the Brain, besides general and internal Medi∣cines, proper Topics are very beneficial; so that many times they alone, at the beginning of the Distemper, contribute very much to the Cure. In which case we made use of Spirit of Wine with good Success; the Fomentations of which are highly commended▪ by Arcu∣lanus. Plater commends Dill; Forestus Cammomile, however they are made use of in Head-achs proceeding from cold Causes. Aetius applaudes Goats dung, bruised and laid on Morning and and Evening. Others dry up cold su∣perfluous humors after this manner. ℞. Millet-seed lb j. common Salt lb s. Leaves of Majoram, Rosemary, Sage, Flowers of Lavender, Melolet an. one small handful, Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Dill, Cummin an. ʒ ij. Lawrel Berries ʒiij. These being fryed in a Frying-pan, let them be put into little bags, and while they continue warm, let the head be first dried and then well rubb'd with them for half an hour. Aetius prefers Vervein. with the Roots, and creeping Time, boyl'd in Oyl, for the Cure of all Head-aches proceeding from cold and thick Humors. He also recom∣mends Hog-lice boyl'd in Oyl for the same purposes. P. Aegineta writes of a Woman who was very famous for cu∣ing Head-aches either with or without a Fever by this means. She boyl'd the green Roots of Asses Cucumers, cut ve∣ry small, and Wormwood in Oyl, till they grew soft, and with this Oyl and Water she moistened and watered the Head, and then clapt the Root bruised with the Wormwood upon it: Which Medicine is highly recommended by Avicine, who prescribes it after this form ℞. Common Oyl, common-water an. lb j. Leaves of Wormwood M. j. s. Root of Asses Cucumers ʒ ij. Let them boyl toge∣ther. OBSERVATION LIV. A Hickup. ANtonetta N. a poor Woman desired me to see her Daughter, a Maid about twenty four Years of Age, she had been troubled for ten days with a continual violent, and troublesome Hickup, and none of the old Womens Remedies would do her any good, when I understood her Womb was well, I judg'd that the Malady pro∣ceeded from some sharp Matter, firmly Impacted in the Tunicles of the Stomach; therefore I gave her first a light Vomit, which gave her three or four Vomits, but no release from her Hickup. There∣upon I prescribed her this following little Bag. ℞. Flowers of Mint, camomil, Dill, an. M j. of red Roses, Melilot an. M. s. one white Poppy Head cut small, Nut∣meg, Aniseed an. ʒj. of Dill, and Cumin, an ʒj. s. cut and bruise them grossly, and make a Linnen bag about the bigness of two hands breadth. This Bag I ordered her to boil for half an hour, in new Milk and common Water an. lbj. s. and to take ever and anon a Draught of this Decoction; and after she had gently squeezed the Bag to apply it hot to the Region of her Stomach; which when she had continued to do but for one day, her Hickup left her.
ANNOTATIONS. SAys Hippocrates, A Convulsion is caus'd by Repletion or Emptiness, and so is a Hickup. But for the most part a Hickup proceeds from Repletion, seldom from Emptiness as Galen testifies. Under the word Plenitude are compre∣hended also whatever matter sticks close to the Tunicles of the Stomach, and twiching and gnawing them with its Acrimony, whether sharp, tough Hu∣mors, Pepper or any other thing. A Hickup if it last long, is very troublesome, but it seldom uses to con∣tinue long. Yet M. Gatinaria tells a Story of a Doctor of Law, who was troubled with a Hickup for twelve days together: and Forestus makes mention of an old Woman that Hickupp'd many times for half a year together. To suppress this Hickupping, those Medi∣caments are most proper, which loosen and remove the sharp and biting humors from the Tunicles of the Stomach; such are Vomiting Medicines and Sternuto∣ries. Hence says Hippocrates, Sneezing frees the Person that is troubled with a Hickup. But if these things nothing avail, and that the sharp Matter will not be thus removed, then the Acrimony of it is either to be mitigated (thus in Forestus we read, that a certain old Woman, when no other Remedies would prevail, was cured with Looch Sanum) or else to be concocted and mitigated together. To which purpose a Decoction of Ca∣momil-flowers, and Seeds of Dill, Cu∣min, Figs, or drinking of Malmsey or other soft Wine neat and pure. Or else the Matter is to be concocted, and at the same time the acute Sense of the Stomach is somewhat to be blunt∣ed, and then Treacle, Mithridate, and chiefly Philonium are mainly contribu∣tory. Sometimes we read of Hickups cured by suddain Frights: and Variola confirms the same. OBSERVATION. LV. A Wound in the Head; and an opening of the Skull with a Trepan. LAmbert N. a Dutch Gentleman, about twenty four Years of Age, Young and strong, the seventh of March, as he was managing a sprightly Horse, was unawares thrown out of his Saddle, and knockt the hinder part of his Head against the Carriage of a great Gun, yet so that no Wound appeared outwardly: Presently after his fall he fell a Vomiting, and was taken with an extraordinary diz∣ziness, which ceasing for some time, he mounted again and rode home. But no sooner was he alighted in the Stable, but being again taken with a dizziness, he fell down upon the Flower, and his memory being as it were quite lost, he neither knew what had befallen him, nor how he fell from his Horse, nor where he was. At the same time a Camp Chyrurgeon being sent for after he had shav'd off the Hair behind the left Ear, somewhat upward, where the Patient complained of no Pain, made a slight incision, which no way concerned the Peri∣cranium; and the next day took about a pint of Blood out of his left Arm. The twelfth of March, the Pains increasing, I was sent for; at what time I found that the Patient complained of most sharp Pains in his Head, yet there was no Fever, in the place affected, besides the Wound, which the Chyrurgeon had made, I perceived a slight and soft Tumour; so that by the feeling, a Man might easily conjecture a depression or Fracture of the Skull, the Chyrurgeon had hitherto laid on a defensive of Bolearmoniac, whites of Eggs and Vinegar mixt together, for fear of an Inflammation, which because it was misapply'd in this case, I threw away, and ordered Linnen Cloaths four doubl'd and dipt in the following Fomentation, and gently
squeezed to be clapt warm over all his Head, and to be shifted three or four times a day. ℞. Betony, Rosemary, Thyme, Sage, Marjoram, Vervain, an. M. j s. Flowers of Stocchas, Camomil, Melilot, an. M. s. Lawrel berries Comin seed, an. ʒiij. White-wine, q. s boil them according to Art to  lb iij. add to the straining, Spirit of Wine ℥ vj. mix them for a fomentation. But in regard the Patient had not gone to Stool in four days, I gave him a gentle Purge, which gave him five Stools; the same Evening, after the fomentation several times applied, appeared in the place affected a Tumour about the bigness of half a Hens-Egg, which being perforated, there flow'd out Black Blood; therefore the next day sending for a more skilful Chyrurgeon, I advised him to open the Skull. But the Patient and his Friends being extreamly against it, we staid two days longer, till the fifteenth of March, which was the ninth day from the fall, by which time there appeared in the same place a Tumour bigger then the former, so that then with the Pati∣ents consent I ordered the Skull to be laid bare about the Evenings and in regard the Wound was near the temporal Muscle, there was an Incision made cross-wise to the very Bone it self, somewhat toward the hinder part of the Head, by the Lambdoidal Suture, presently gushed out a large quantity of Blood black and coagulated, which was expelled by the strength of Nature, through the Lambdoidal Suture, which by the Incision we had in part laid bare, and had stuck between the Cranium and the Pericranium; the Cranium thus laid bare, and the Pericranium scraped, the Wound was filled with dry Wool; the next Night, the Pain being somewhat mitigated, the Patient slept a little, the next day the Cranium was Trepan'd, but scarce a Dram of Blood flowed out upon the opening of it, which till then had stuck between the Cranium and the Hard Meninx, and by this time was in some Measure coagulated; from thence I judged the Patient to be in great danger, when I found coagulated Blood, and believ'd there might be more which still lying hid under the Cranium could not come forth, and for that the Meninx being gently squeezed, nothing fol∣lowed. The seventeenth of March, a Fever seiz'd him; the next Night followed Convulsions, so strong that four robust, stout Men, could hardly hold his Arms and his Thighs; Moreover he slept not at all, raved altogether, was very thirsty, and when Drink was offer'd him, Drank very greedily; the next day he remain'd in the same Condition, so that because of his Delirium and his Convulsions his Wound could not be bound up, thus raving he both Dunged and Pissed in his Bed, and more then that he bit off a peice of the tip of his Tongue with his Teeth; of the Pain whereof, when he came to himself, he very much complained; these three mortal Signs, the De∣lirium, the Fever, the Convulsions continued till the twentieth of March; at what time the Convulsions remitted, but the Fever, and raving contiued, that day the Chyrurgeon with a flat, obtuse and oblong In∣strument, which I ordered to be provided on purpose, compressed the Meninx a little, and between the Meninx and the Cranium, thrust in his Instrument about the breadth of two Fingers, separating the Meninx from the Cranium, by depressing it every way round about, to the end that if any coagulated Blood lay there concealed, it might the more con∣veniently be evacuated; but when he put down his Instrument upon the
Meninx toward the Back-part, by chance he litt upon the place where the cause of all the mischeif recided, out of which there came out about half an ounce of black Blood, purulent, and watry. The twenty first, twenty second and twenty third of March, the same Instrument being every day thrust in, a good quantity of Blood and watry, putrified Matter was brought away, in the mean time the Delirium abated very much, and the Patient took several naps. The twenty fourth the Meninx being pressed downward nothing came out, then the Delirium was very slight, and the Patient rising out of his Bed sat two hours by the Fire, then also the flesh began to grow up from the lower Bone about the Meninx in the hole of the Cranium; he could hardly eat because of the Pain in his Tongue, of which he had bit of the tip with his Teeth; for which reason we gave him a proper Water to wash his Mouth, which heal'd his Tongue again by degrees; all this while we made use of the fomentation prescribed the twelfth of March; but then leaving that off, we clapt a Cap about his Head with Cephalic Herbs sowed into it. Upon the twenty fifth, the Fever went off and the Patient grew much better, hitherto we had laid nothing but Mel Rosaceum, or Honey of Roses mixed with a little Spirit of Wine, upon the hole of the Cranium, or the Meninx; but then we mixt the following Powder with the Honey. ℞. Aloes Hepat, Sang. Draconis, Myrrh, Mastick, Olihanum, an. ℈j. s. Barley Flower, ℈ij. s. reduce the whole into a very fine Powder. The twenty sixth of March, he quite recovered his Sences, then again the Meninx being pressed down with the foresaid Instrument, there flowed out a small quantity of white and well concocted Matter both Morning and Evening; after this day he rose and sate up for three or four hours, and fed well; the following days no∣thing of Matter came forth of his Skull; but contrary to our desire, in four days time the hole was filled up with Flesh, without side also the Flesh grew every way, but too suddainly; so that we were forced many times to take it off with a slight Caustic; in regard we were to stay till the Bone Scal'd, at last in the sixth Week a great large and thick Scale was seperated from the Bone: and then the Wound being filled up with Flesh, the Patient was cured in a short time; only this Inconvenience remain'd, that upon any suddain change of Air his Head would ake, and Wine presently fuddl'd him. In this Condition of Health he lived above four Years as he used to do. But in September, 1641. as he was sporting in the Camp, well in Health with some other Troopers, he fell down Senseless, and presently his whole Body being contracted with a most terrible Convulsion, he Expir'd within a quarter of an hour; had I been there at that time, I would have opened his Skull to have seen whether the cause of his Death had proceeded from any thing of his old Wound. ANNOTATIONS. AS to Wounds in the Head with a Fracture of the Cranium, the Question is, when the Separation is to be made, says Albucasis, If the Pa∣tient come to the three first days after the Wound, then the Bone must be taken away before the fourteenth day: if it be in the Summer, then make hast to remove the Bone before the seventh, before what lyes under the Bone of the Pannicle be corrupt∣ed,
and terrible accidents ensue. Says Avicen, Separation must not be de∣lay'd in Summer beyond seven days, in Winter not beyond ten, but the sooner the better. Hippocrates allows but three days before Separation of the Bone, which is to be cut, and admits no longer delay if the weather be hot. To which Hippocrates ought to have added, if the Chyrurgeon be sent for soon enough: for if he be sent for late; or that the Patient and his friends will not consent, then the Skull is to be perforated at any time, so there be any hopes of Life. For in a certain danger a doubtful Remedy is better then none. For it matters not, says Celsus, Whe∣ther the Remedy be altogether safe, when there is no other. Horstius opened the Cranium of a certain Person upon the Eleventh day, and of another upon the Fifteenth. Hildan tells a remarka∣ble Story of a Cranium perforated with success, two Months after the Wound received; upon which the Matter gushed out with a full stream, the Patient was cured. Thus in our Patients Case at first came forth mattry and watry Blood, and upon the Seventeenth day meer white Matter. Hildan also produces ano∣ther Example of a Skull perforated upon the eleventh day. And Aegineta writes, that he knew one whose Cranium was per∣forated a Year after the Wound re∣ceiv'd, by which means, the Patient re∣covered. However he advises Separation of the Bone in the Winter before the fourteenth day, and in the Summer be∣fore the Seventh. In short these Ope∣rations prove best at the beginning, and as Avicen says the sooner the bet∣ter. But if the beginning be over-slip∣ed, it would be inhuman to give men over so long as there is hopes. Other∣wise as Celsus says, It is part of a pru∣dent Man not to meddle, where there is no hopes at all. Had those deadly Symp∣toms there appeared in our Patient be∣fore the Operation, which appeared af∣terwards, we had never adventured it; nevertheless he was cured contrary to our Expectation. Some Physitians advise ye to take great care, least in the laying bare of the Cranium, which proceeds perfora∣tion, you make any Incision in the Sutures, for fear the Fibres of the hard Meninx, passing by the Sutures, and uni∣ted with the Pericranium, should be hurt: as if there were any such great danger in that. For I have been present at such Operations many times, and have ordered Incisions to be made upon the Sutures, if I found it a proper place, and that the little Fibres should be scraped off with a Pen-knife; and yet no harm ensued; and I have found by Experi∣ence, that such cautions as these are on∣ly fit for contemplating Physitians, who never were present at such Operations. Only take care of hurting the Tem∣poral Muscle, and that the Trepan be not set upon the Sutures, and the Per∣foration made there. OBSERVATION. LVI. An Opthalmy. THE Wife of Captain Iunius was troubled with an extraordinary Inflammation of her Eyes with great Pain, two days after two of her Maids and a Man Servant were seized with the same distemper, and said they contracted it by looking upon their Mistress; after due Pur∣gation I laid upon the Eyes, all Night, the Yolk of a hard-boyl'd Egg, kneaded together with Womans Milk, to asswage the Pain, afterwards I ordered one or two drops of this Opthalmic Water to be dropt into the Eyes twice or thrice, which being duly observed, the Ophthalmy vanished within three days. ℞. White Vitriol, ℈j. Sugar-Candy, ʒj. Plantain Water, ℥ij. Rose-Water, ℥j. mix them together.
ANNOTATIONS. GAlen numbers Blear-Eyedness a∣mong the Contagious Diseases, and says it may be contracted by Contagion, like the Pestilence or Itch. But he gives no reason for what he says. Thus Plutarch, of all Diseases, the Con∣tagion of Blear-Eyedness says he, creeps amongst them that live together from one to another, so sharp a faculty it has of affecting the Sight. Thus says Ovid, Dum spectant Laesos Oculi, laeduntur & ipsi; Multaque Corporibus transitione nocent. As to the Nature of this Contagion, Physitians are very silent; but who treat of it, seem to be of this Opinion, that Corrupt Vapours and Spirits issue forth from the vitiated Eye, which being car∣ried to the Eyes of those that are sound, infect the same. However Be∣nedictus Faventinus writes, that there is something of Putrid, which Exhales from the Blear-Eyes, which infects the ambient Air with the same Quality, which Air being received by the Eyes of others, affects them by Contagion. Of the same Opinion is Mercurialis, that an Ophthalmy is therefore Conta∣gious, because the Spirits of the Eye affected are contaminated, which when they come to touch those Eyes that are sound, infect them likewise. But none of these seem to have hit the Mark. First, Who can believe that such a quantity of Malignant Spirits should Ex∣hale from the Eye, which is covered with a hard horny Membrane, as to infect the Eyes of those that look at a distance. Such a Transpiration would dry up the Eye in a few hours. Second∣ly, Grant such an Exhaling should in∣fect the ambient Air, and so infect the Eyes of others, why are not the Eyes of all Visitants and Relations infected, but only of such as fix their Eyes upon the Party. Thirdly, Why are not they infected also, that more curiously and long behold and view Blear'd-Eyes in reference to their Cure, as well as they that view Short Eyes but for a time, and only by accident? For these reasons I do not believe Blear-Eyedness can be communicated by Con∣tagion, but that it may be contracted sometimes through the Conturbation of the Humors and Spirits of the sound Eye. Which Conturbation is not oc∣casioned by corrupt Humors or Spirits, carryed from the Blear-Eye to the sound Eye: but because the sound Eye be∣holds the Blear-Eyes with a kind of terror and abomination; which terror vehemently disturbs the Spirits and Humors of certain weak Eyes, so that being rapidly mov'd and stirred up by that Conturbation they flow to the Eye, and their growing over hot enflame the Eyes. Which Rabbi Moyses seems to intimate; where he says, he that first sees a Blear-Eyed Person, presently has his Eye disturbed, so that if he still look more intently, the Eye is not only disturb∣ed, but contracts an Opthalmy. Now I have said that weaker Eyes are di∣sturbed; according to that of Sennertus, You may know those Eyes to be weak, that are bleared themselves by looking upon another. But stronger Eyes, and such as are not terrify'd at the Sight, as they are not disturbed, so they contract no Ophthalmy. So that it is the strength or weakness of the Eye, the more or less aversion, which is the Cause that some Eyes are endamaged by looking, others not. Nor is this a new, or to be admired at Opinion, when we find that Contubati∣ons and Frights upon the sight of frightful Objects are many times the occasions of very terrible Diseases, as we find by Expe∣rience in Women great with Child, whose tender Issue frequently bear the Marks of the Mothers Frights, and aversions of Sight. Others upon the sight of any frightful Object having the Spirits of their Brain vehemently disturbed, have become Paralitic or raving Mad; or upon a Perturbation of the Spirits of the Heart, have fallen into Palpitati∣ons, Syncopes, Fevers, or violent Distem∣pers: What wonder then that the Spirits of a sound Eye should be in a Perturbation upon the frightful Sight of a Blear-Eye, and by that vehement Motion be heated to that degree, as to cause an Ophthalmy? If any one object that Ophthalmies have been Epi∣demical, we say, that Propagation does not proceed from any Contagion, issu∣ing out of the affected Eye, but from that common Depravity of the Air or Dyet. Nor does it signifie any thing, what Aristotle affirms, That Menstrous Women will infect a Looking-glass by looking upon it; because it is not credible that such an Infection happens
through any Contagion issuing from the Eyes, but from certain corrupt Va∣pors which they send forth upon the Glass together with their Breath. Nor is it of any moment what Philosophers say, that a Basilisk will kill a Man by looking upon him; for which there may be other reasons given; the first, For that many venemous Vapors exhale not on∣ly from the Eyes, but from the whole body of the Serpent, which infect the ambient Air. Secondly, Because he that sees that horrid Creature may be terri∣fied and disturbed in his Spirits to that degree, that the venemous Spirits may be easily drawn by that terror from the Body close by, and carried to the Heart, to its extream prejudice: So that it is not the Sight, but the Terror and Con∣turbation, caus'd by that horrid Sight, and joyned to the venemous habit which causes Death; I say, joyned to the venenmous habit; For no Man shall perswade me that a Basilisk seen at a distance can ever kill a Man with his Eye, though the same Man should look upon him all day long. To say that a Basilisk will dye, if he sees himself in a Looking-glass, is a meer Dream, unless we may allow the Crea∣ture it self to be so terrified, and di∣sturbed at the sight of it's own horrid shape, that he dyes upon his Spirits be∣ing too much disturbed, and over tu∣multuously crowding about the Heart. Or else that he is so extravagantly over∣joy'd at the sight of his own Image, that the very dissipation of his Spirits kills him. OBSERVATION LVII. Spitting of Blood. JOhn Hugo Trumpeter to Monsieur de Persil, having over-strain'd, and consequently over-heated himself with sounding his Trumpet, soon after felt a kind of a dull Pain in his Breast, and with a little Cough began to Spit out frothy Blood but not much, and became so weak that he could hardly draw his Breath, neither could he stand or speak, but was forced to lye in his Bed upon his Breast; he was so averse to Physic, that he resolved to take the Advice of no Physitian: But after he had lain about six or seven Weeks in that con∣dition, and found himself nothing better at length upon the tenth of March, he sent for me, I found him Sick without a Fever, but very weak, which weakness proceeded from some want of Breath; for he could not dilate nor contract his Breast at his Pleasure; the reason of which Malady was, for that by his straining in blowing his Trum∣pet, he had over-stretched the Muscles of his Breast, and thereby so weakned them, that they could never afterwards be contracted, but the spitting of Blood, which was very much, proceeded from some little Vein that was broken in his Lungs. First therefore I pre∣scribed him a proper Diet; next I Purged him gently, thirdly, I took out of the Median Vein of his right Arm, half a pint of Blood; and lastly I applied the following Cere-cloth to lay over all his Breast. ℞ Castor, Saffron Oriental an. ℈ ij. Mastic, Olibanum, Storax an. ʒj. Benzoin ʒ j. s. Gum Taccamahacca, Galbanum dis∣solv'd in Vinegar, Emplaister of Melilot, Oxocrotium an. ℥j. Make a Cere-Cloth to be spred upon red Leather big enough to cover the whole Breast from the Sword-form gristle, to the Asperia Arteria, as also to come about the sides under the Arms on both sides, let it be anointed with Oyl of Nuttmegs. Moreover I ordered a Girdle to be made of the Skin of an Elke, a∣bout a Hands breadth, with a broad Button; the Cere-Cloth was first laid on, and then the Girdle girt about his Breast just under the
Arm-pits, as hard as he could well endure it, and so Button'd. This done he presently felt a great deal of ease, and fetch'd his Breath much more freely, and strongly. The fourteenth of March, his spitting of Blood, together with his Cough, quite left him; this Cere-Cloth lay on a Month, by which time the Muscles of his Breast were so closed, that the Patient had no need of any other Medicins, and sounded his Trumpet again, without his Girdle, however I advised him to wear his Girdle; especially when he told me, that he blew his Trumpet with more ease when he had it on. ANNOTATIONS. THIS Patient would swallow nothing but only a Laxative Medicament, which made me fear he would fall into a Consumption; for besides his spitting of Blood, his strength was so wasted, that he could not sit upright in his Bed, but was forced to lye upon his Back. But when I found that weakness proceeded meerly, from a defect of Motion in the Instruments of Respiration, I re∣covered him contrary to the expectati∣on of all Men, by the said Cere-cloth and Girdle. Nor was the least part of the Cure to be ascribed to the Gir∣dle; for so soon as I had bound his Breast tite, he could sit up in his Bed, and fetch his Breath much more freely. Many of these Trumpeters striving to out-vie one another, strain themselves in their Sounding to that degree, that often-times they become Bursten, or spit Blood, and many times crack the Thread of their own Lives. As we saw in November 1641. at what time one of Captain Bax's Trumpeters, striving to out-do the rest in Sounding, broke a great Vein in his Lungs, which bled in such abundance that within two hours he Expir'd. OBSERVATION LVIII. An Hysterical Suffocation. RIcherda, a Maid, belonging to the Lady of Nassau, was troubled with a vehement Hysterical Suffocation accompany'd with a grumbling in her Belly, and sometimes with Vomiting and raving talk, she said she contracted this Distemper by sitting in a cold House of Office exposed to the Wind, which she received up into her Body. The ninth of Ianuary, because she was bound, I gave her a gentle Purgative, which gave her five Stools; upon which day she was clear of her Fit; But the next Night her Fit was more violent, and the next day very greivous; the Fit went off very well with the Smoak of Partridge Feathers held to her Nose; besides that, we gave her a Ball of Assa Faetida, made up with Castor and Galbanum to hold in her hand, and smell to ever and anon; toward Evening two hours before her Grand Fit, she fell into such Deliriums, that she talked idly, and had several Inclinations to Vomit, but nothing came up, but what she had eaten or drank before; the Fit went off again with the Smoak of Partridge Feathers, and the follow∣ing Emplaster was applied to her Navel, ℞. Castor ℈j. Benzoin ℈j. Oppoponax▪ Sagapen dissolved in Vinegar an. ℈j. mix them and spread them upon a peice of Leather of a hands breadth. I gave her also an Hysterical draught; but that she brought up again within an hour. The eleventh of Ianuary, she took the following Apozem ever now and then.
℞. Roots of Masterwort, Valerian, Dittany an. ʒiij. Leaves of Mug-wort, Peny-royal, Feverfew, an. M. j. Seeds of Lovage, Wild Carrots ʒij. Common▪ water q. s. Boyl them to a pint and a half. All that day she took of this, and never vomited; but without any benefit; her deliriums and ravings returned by Intervalls, toward Evening I gave her this Powder in a little Ale, ℞. Castor ℈ s. Oriental Saffron, gr. v. Trochischs of Myrrh, ℈ s. make them into Powder. All this did no good; therefore the twelfth of Ianuary, when the Symptoms began again to appear I gave her only ʒj. of Yellow Am∣ber prepared and pulveriz'd with a little Ale; which Powder when she had taken, within an hour all the Symptoms miraculously va∣nished; but in the Evening when she began to perceive some fore-bodings of her Distemper, the same Powder was given her again, and so she slept quietly all the next Night, the thirteenth and fourteeeth when she perceived any grumbling in the lower part of her Belly, she took the same Powder again Morning and Evening, which quite recovered her. ANNOTATIONS. AMber is said to be a prevalent Re∣medy in Hysterical Distempers by a peculiar Faculty; the effect of which when I found by this Experi∣ment, I made use of it again with great success in the like Cases. The Smoak of Patridge Feathers is very effectual also in the time of the Fit, of which I also made use upon the like occasions with the same good fortune. With these Feathers Forestus freed a Hysteric Woman from her Fits, when all other Remedies fail'd, as he writes himself, and there∣fore he always kept them by him, as being endued with an occult quality for that purpose. Gradus, Bottonus, Ri∣verius and Others commend the same, beside that it is a Remedy well known among the Women. Most Physitians extol the Smoak of Hair, Horns, Old Shoes and Rags burnt, and held to the Nose. Galen and Priscian commend the smell of Rue; and the same Effects are produced by Galbanum, Castor, Assa Faetida, and such like stinking Smells held to the Nostrils. Leonellus com∣pounds a Ball of Castor ʒiij. Assa Fae∣tida, Galbanum an. ʒij. Wax. q. s. to incorporate them. Among all the Re∣medies, says Bottonus, that, that soonest recals Women out of their Fits is a Fumigation of the Powder of Wens, that grew upon Horses Legs, dryed in a hot Oven, burnt upon the Coals and held to the Nostrils. This Powder is commended also by Auge∣nius and other Physitians. But though these stinking and loathsome Fumiga∣tions, tryed by common Experience, and by Galen, Avicen, and other Fa∣mous Physitians, are made use of, and extolled as the best and most present Remedies in these Uterine Suffocations, yet there are some who utterly reject and disapprove them. Thus Cleopatra, and Moschio disparage them as vain and frivolous. Capivaccius writes, that they do very ill, who at first make use of Frictions and Fumigations; for he would have the whole Body first Eva∣cuated, and in the first place the U∣terine Parts. Duretus writes, that ill Smells nothing avail in Suffocations, that proceed from Menstruous Suppressions, or Suppression of the Seed, but do more harm then good; which Mercatus also affirms: But that they are only proper, when the Womb moves of it self to the Liver, and sticks to it. However with their good leave, this Opinion seems very repugnant to the Doctrine of Hippocrates, whom in all Uterine Suf∣focations prescribes stinking things; but for the lower Parts recommends sweet Fumes, as also the Fumes of Castor and Fleabane. As for the Suffocation when the Womb ascends voluntarily
to the Liver, 'tis hardly credible there should be any such thing in Nature; For the Womb never moves of it self, but when it is forced by some manifest Cause, as Menstruous suppression, refri∣geration, corruption of the Seed or the like. OBSERVATION LIX. Loss of Appetite. Mr. Hare, an English Gentleman about Thirty Years of Age, having for several days together, contrary to his custom, fed excessively hard, and by that means disturbed the Functions of his Stomach, and collected many crudities therein, lost his Stomach to that degree, that for a fortnight together, he could scarce eat any thing at all, at length by my advice he took this Vomit; ℞. Green-leaves of Asara-Bacca, ʒiij bruise them, and press out the juice with ℥ij. s. of the Decoction of Radish, add to the expression Oxymel with Agaric ℥j. mix them for a Draught. This caused him to Vomit stoutly, afterwards I ordered him to eat three or four Mouthfuls of candied Elecampane Root, three or four times a day, to observe a warm Diet, to abstain from Im∣moderate eating, to drink generous Wine, but in a less quantity, and after Dinner and Supper, because his Stomach was very moist, to eat a bit or two of a raw Salt Herring, and by this means he recovered his Stomach again within a few days. ANNOTATIONS. LOss of Appetite sometimes proceeds from a hot Cause, as a hot Distem∣per of the Stomach, a Fever, abundance of Choler, and then it is cured with Choler purging and Refrigerating Medi∣cines. Sometimes it proceeds from a cold disposition of the Stomach; which happens either through weakness of the innate Heat, as in old Men, or through bad Dyet; and thence Crudities collected in the Stomach; or else by reason of cold humors flowing from the Head, or other Parts to the Stomach. Now in e∣very cold Disposition of the Stomach, by reason of the weakness of the Con∣coctive faculty, mary crude, flegmatic, moist and cold humors are collected in the Stomach, which weaken the heat of the Stomach, and dissolve the strength of it, and blunt the Sense of Attracti∣on and Suction. In the Cure of this Distemper, t lear the Stomach from the filth of Crudities, Vomits are main∣ly necessary. But if other Purgatives are to be made use of, Hiera Pills are chiefly commanded by Galen. Then a Dyet is to be observed upon things of good juice and easie of Digestion, hot and dry, not fat or oily, which take away the Sence of Suction▪ The use also of most hot things, Gagale, Calamus Aromaticus, Rosemary, Mar∣joram, Hysop, Sage, Lawrel-berries, hot Seeds, all Spices and the like, all generous Wines, and moe pecally Wormwod Wine, Spirit o Wine is commended by all, either simple, or di∣stilled off with Juniper-berries, Seeds of Anise, Caraways, Fennel, Cinnamon, or Cloves: all Hippocras and Cinnamon Water sublimated out of Wine. Mat∣thiolus extols his own Aqua Vitae, which is used by many Physitians, Levinus Lemni above all extols Ginger, either dry or condited, to help Concoction, restore the Appetite, dispel Wind, and consume Crudities. Others are for swallowing some few Pepper-corns, either whole or cut into three or four pieces. I have observed in my Practise, that the Roots of Elecampane alone, so condited, that they still retain their bitterness, are more effectual than all the rest; by the  of which I have made those who have lost their Sto∣machs, in a short time, in a few days
very hungry. I also used to give them pulverized with strong Wine, and have found them answer Expectation. For they warm the Stomach, yet not too much, consume Crudities, promote Concoction, corroborate, open, dry and dispel. Salt meats also very much excite the Appetite; So that I have observed that the eating of a third or fourth Part of a Pickled Her∣ring after Dinner or Supper has recover∣ed a lost Stomach, if the Person be not very old; for it extreamly drys and corroborates the Stomach: For though a Herring be hard of Digestion when it is boyl'd or broyl'd, yet taken out of the Pickle and eaten raw, it is easie of digestion. OBSERVATION LX. A Superfoetation THE Wife of Dionysius N. a Souldier living at Nimeghen in October 1637. was brought to Bed of a Boy lusty and at the full time, which she Nursed her self, after she was Delivered, her Terms came down in due order, and she was indifferent well all the time of her lying in, like other Women, after her Month was out, she went about her business as before; but the seventh Month after her delivering being at Church, she felt such a suddain alteration that she was forced to return home; where a Midwife being sent for, her Waters came down accompanied with the throws of Delive∣ry, and while the Women were all admiring what the matter should be, she was brought to Bed of another lusty sound Child, which she Nursed with the former, and may be alive still for ought I know. ANNOTATIONS. SAys the Great Hippocrates, the mouth of the Womb of such Women as are with Child is compressed. And Galen observes, that if the Mouth of the Womb be shut, 'tis a sign of Concep∣tion: and he says it is then so close shut, that it will not admit the point of the smallest Bodkin. But granting all this, yet we must not conclude from hence, that there can be no Superfoetation though it rarely happen. For says Ari∣stotle, if after Conception there be Copu∣lation, there may be a Superfoetation; though rarely; for that the Womb though very rarely closes it self till deli∣very. Thus Hippocrates, those Women have Superfoetations whose Wombs are not exactly closed after the first Conception. He also gives us an Example of Superfoeta∣tion in the Wife of Gorgias, who Con∣ceived a Girl, and when she was near the time of her delivery Conceiv'd again. I knew a Woman says Albucasis, that was again impregnated, when she had a dead Birth in her Womb. Says Cardan, Superfoetation is rare, yet seen at Millan in our time. Says Dodonaeus Superfoe∣tation is very rare, yet there has been an Example of it in the Wife of a very honest Man. And Plater gives us two Examples of Superfoetation. But now granting Superfoetation, the Question is how the Superfoetation can be brought to perfection, Aristotle says, that if after the first Conception a Wo∣man Conceive again, the Superfoetation may be nourish'd; but if the first Con∣ception be grown, then the second proves Abortive. Which is the Opinion of Hip∣pocrates Plinie, Dodonaeus, Bauhinus and others, Reason also seems to agree with Experience, which teaches us that the first Conceiv'd, and first increas'd, draws the chiefest part of the Nourishment to its self, by which means the latter Conception must be depriv'd of Nourish∣ment, and consequently dye and be ex∣pell'd as an Abortion. But if the last Conception draws sufficient Nourish∣ment, and be sufficiently perfected, and do not prove Abortive, it is impossible it should be ready so soon for delivery as the former; and yet it will be de∣livered in time: as we find by this Ex∣ample, by me recited, for the ratities sake. Yet Nicholas tells ye a greater
Wonder; I knew, says he, the Wie of Zachary de Scarparia, who brought forth a Male Child, and three Months after that was delivered of another Boy, and both lived in good Health. There∣fore we must conclude, the last Con∣ception had Nourishment enough in the Womb, and was strong, and conse∣quently able to retain it self in the Womb, during the delivery of the o∣ther, in regard the Woman's Labour was easie and without any violence. OBSERVATION LXI. Worms in the Head. THE Son of a certain Treasurer of Iuliers, a Young Lad about twelve Years of Age, from his Child-hood had been always troubled with Worms in his Head, at length his Mother by the advice of a Quack, washed and daubed his Head with I know not what Lotions and Oyntments, and so the Worm was kill'd; by which the Mountebank thought to have got himself a great name in the Town; but within a few days after the Boy began to complain of a Pain in his Head, which every day increasing at the Months end was so in∣tollerable, that I was sent for, but all to no purpose; after tryal of all external and internal Medicaments; at nine Weeks end, Epileptic Convulsions seiz'd him, which in a few days turned to a vehement Epi∣lepsie, which afflicted him at first every day, then every hour, then every quarter of an hour, at length the Child died; his Head being open'd, the Hard Meninx was all over of a red Colour, and very Black in that part next the upper-part of the Head, somewhat toward the the left side, this being dissected, there came forth a Blackish and watry Goar, which had lain between both the Meninxes; the sub∣stance of the Brain was very little altered: but in the Ventricles of it there was a kind of greenish Humour, watry, yet not very clammy, but the quantity very small, in other things there was no altera∣tion. ANNOTATIONS. IN this manner it was that these Worms were cured by this Mounte∣bank; However he was wise in this, that upon Notice of the Boys Death, he sneaked out of Nimeghen; perhaps afraid I should upbraid him with the Death of this Patient; like an Ignora∣mus as he was, who had stopp'd up the way, by which Nature voided the noxi∣ous Excrements of the Brain before he had made any diversion. OBSERVATION LXII. A Tertian and Intermitting Fever. THE Wife of Monsieur de Spieck, a strong Child-bearing-Woman, the second Week after she was brought to Bed, found her self very well; but trusting too much to her strength, got out of her Bed, walked about the Chamber, and eat a bit of a dry'd Neats-Tongue; but at the end of the third Week, she was seiz'd with a violent double Tertian Intermitting Fever, with an extraordinary Heat, continual Waking, her Stomach quite lost, unquenchable Thirst, with several other bad Symptoms. The twenty second of August, I was sent for, when I found her very anxious and weak
and in the midst of her second Fit; which most People thought would have carry'd her off. I gave her presently Bezoar Stone ℈. s. Confection Hyacinth ℈j. with six Drams of our Treacle-water, which as she said soon after gave her some ease; to quench her Thirst I gave her this Julep, which pleased her so well that she drank nothing else all the time of her Distemper. ℞. Waters of Carduus Benedict. Succoury, Borage, an. lb. s. Syrup of Limons ℥j. s. Violets ℥j. Oyl of Sulphur q. s. to make it grateful to the Pallat. Toward the Evening I prescribed this Infusion which she took the next Morning. ℞. Leaves of Senna well cleans'd ℥ s. Rubarb the best ʒj. s. Rhenish Tartar, Anniseed an. ʒj. Succoury water q. s. Steep them all Night; the next day boyl them gently, then press them strongly, adding Syrup of Roses Solutive ℥ s. For a Draught. This gave her four Stools which brought away much stinking Ex∣crement, and gave her great ease; after the Purge I prescribed her Chicken Broth with Sorrel and Chervil boiled together in it, with a little juice of Citron, to relish it, and to quench her Thirst still gave her the Julep before mentioned. The next Night she slept in∣differently, and when she waked found her heat much abated, the next expected Fit was so slight, that she was hardly sensible of it; nor did the Fever after that appear any more, being vanquished by these Medicins only. ANNOTATIONS. CHild-bearing Women not careful of themselves when they lye in, oft-times pay for their Rashness, as this Gentlewoman did: As also did a Neigh∣bour of Ours, who going abroad too soon fell into a continued Fever, upon which first a Frenzy and then Death ensued. Another of our Acquaintance the se∣cond week of her Month, looking to soon after her House Affairs, and pre∣suming to Combe her Head, fell into an Epilepsie, upon which a Delirium ensu∣ed; which Maladies though at length they were much abated, yet could they never be cured all the while the Gentle-Woman lived. OBSERVATION LXIII. A Bleeding at the Nose. THeodore Bijl about fifty five Years of Age, in August about four a Clock in the Morning, was taken with a Bleeding at his right Nostril: Three hours after, being sent for, for revulsion I ordered the Chyrurgeon to open a Vein in his right Arm with a large Orifice, and to take away ten Ounces of Blood; which done, by applying cold Water to his Neck and Forhead, the Bleeding was stay'd; three days after, being invited to a Feast where he drank Wine a little too freely, upon his return home, he was again taken with the same Malady, and bled all that Night before I was sent for; the next day I ordered him to be let Blood as before, but to no purpose; nor durst we repeat Blood-letting in regard of his Age
and his strength, nor would he permit any Tents to be put up into his Nostrils; and therefore we apply'd a little lock of Tow moisten'd with this mixture to his Forhead; ℞. Bole Armoniack ʒij. s. Bloodstone, Mastick, Frnkincense, Red Coral an. ℈ij. The white of one Egg. Vinegar of Roses q. s. mix them together. Moreover Oxocrate, which is actually cold, was applied to his Neck, Forehead and Testicles, and Revulsions by Ligatures and Painful Frictions of the extream Parts, and by Cupping Glasses applied to his Shoulders, which avail'd nothing; at length, after the bleeding had continued above thirty six hours, and the strength of the Patient, through loss of Blood was very much exhausted, then he was forced to admit of Astringents to be thrust up into his Nostrils; therefore when we had cleansed his Nostrils from the clotted Blood, we ordered a Powder of Trochischs of Myrrh, of Bole-Armoniac, Mastick and Frankin∣cense to be blown through a Quill into his Nostrils, and withal thrust up a thick Tent made of Linnen about a Fingers length dipt in Vine∣gar, and the white of an Egg, and sprinkled with the same Powder, by which means the bleeding seemed to stop for two or three hours; but afterwards the Blood began to descend through his Palate into his Mouth, and the Tent falling out, he bled again at the Nostril. Then after we had once more cleansed his Nostril; we blew up the same Powder again, and thrust up a peice of Chalk in the form of a Tent, so big as to fill the whole Concavity of the Nostril; which stopped the bleeding presently; however, to be sure, we let the Chalk stay in three days; and so for this time the Patient escaped a most threatning danger; the next Year, in Autunm, the same bleeding took him again, for the stopping of which, after he had used a whole Day and a Night certain idle old Women's Remedies in vain; when his strength was almost Exhausted, he sent again for me; and then with the same means of a Chalk Tent I presently stopped the Bleeding as I had done before; but not long after, his Liver being refrigerated and weakned through the loss of so much Blood, being seiz'd at the same time with a Dropsy and an Asthma, he ended his days. ANNOTATIONS. AN excessive Bleeding at the Nose, when Symptomatical, and not Critical, in regard it occasions the Dropsie, a Cachexy, and other grei∣vous Maladies, is to be stopped with all the speed imaginable. This is cured by revulsion of the Blood flowing to the Nostrils; by repelling the Blood from the Nostrils; by thickning the Blood; and by shutting the opened Veins. The best and suddainest way to draw back the Blood, is, by opening a Vein in the Arm, on that side which is affected; by which means Galen affirms, that he has suddainly stopped violent Bleedings at the Nostrils. Most Physitians believe a little Orifice is best, and to take away the Blood in a small quantity and at several times. But we are for a large Ori∣fice, that the Blood may freely spin forth, which causes a swifter revulsion, Cup∣ping-glasses also are are prevalent Re∣vulsives. Thus Galen stopped a bleed∣ing in a Young Man by applying a Cup∣ing-glass to his Hypochondriums. Fo∣restus cured a desperate Bleeding at the Nose by Cupping-glasses applied to the foot; which Experiment we have fre∣quently try'd with success. Cupping∣glasses apply'd to the shoulders are not so well liked by many; because they draw the Blood from the lower Parts to the upper. Crato commends the pain∣ful bending of the little-finger on the
side affected: of the same Nature are Frictions and painful Ligatures of the Extream Parts, and an Actual Cau∣tery applied to the Soles of the Feet; by which means Zacutus writes, that he cured a most desperate bleeding at the Nose. The Blood is repelled from the No∣strils with Vinegar, cold Water, or Oxy∣mel applyed to the Temples and Neck, or with Cataplasms of Bole, sealed Earth, Mastic, Frankincense, Vinegar, Whites of Eggs and the like; to which may be added Plantain, Pimpernel, and other astringent and cooling Herbs, gathered fresh and bruised; Snails with their Shells mixed with Frankincense and Vinegar, and applied to the Fore∣head and Nostrils, are much com∣mended. Riverius commends Parget kneaded with Vinegar, and laid upon the Forehead and Nostrils about the thickness of two Fingers. Others pre∣fer Vinegar alone or Oxymel snuft up into the Nostrils, or cold Water dash∣ed unawares in the Face. Actius com∣mends the Steam of Vinegar, pour'd up∣on a red hot Tile. Says Pachequus, be∣ing sent for to a Countryman, who bled so excessively that he was just at Deaths door, I dropt into the contrary Ear to the Nostril that bleed, some drops of Vinegar of Roses, and presently the Bleeding stopped. This I learnt from Dr. Pontuado, who saw this Remedy made use of by a Dutch Physitian. Thickning of the Blood is performed by cooling, astringent and thickning Medicaments taken inwardly, and out∣wardly applied, such are Oxymel and cold Water, and the repelling Medi∣cines already mentioned. Thus Hil∣dan, by wrapping the whole Body of the Party in Linnen Cloaths, dipped in Oxymel, stopped a Bleeding of which the Cure was dispaired of. The Veins are shut by astringent and glutinying Medicaments thrust up into the Nostrils. Galen mixes Frankincense and Aloes reduced into Powder with the White of an Egg, and with a Linnen Cloth first strewed with Hare's Hair, put up into the Nostrils. The Moss that grows upon dead Mens Skulls ex∣posed to the Air, powdered, and put up any way into the Nostrils, is accounted a most effectual and present Remedy. For my part I have always found the Benefit of a round piece of Chalk. Cotten dipt in Ink, and thrust up into the Nostrils is a very good Remedy. Hogs-dung if ap∣plied while warm, or warmed with Bole-armoniac and Vinegar is account∣ed a Specific, if applied to the Forehead and Temples, smelt to, or thrust up, in∣to the Nostrils; by which means I knew a Noble German, cured of a desperate Bleeding at the Nose. Rodoric a Castro, and Zacutus commend Asses-dung, used in the same manner, the Powder of Mans Blood dried, and Snails burnt with the Shells, and Frogs burnt, and blown up into the Nostrils, is by some no less e∣steemed. Pereda tells us of his curing an old Woman that had bled for three days, with only thrusting up Mint into her Nostrils. The Juice of Nettles either taken inwardly, or applied to the Nostrils, or else Nettles bruifed and laid to the Forehead by a Specific Qua∣lity, stop Bleeding. Lastly, Riverius ap∣plauds for a present Remedy, Spikenard finely powdered, and one dram given in Broth, Plantain, or other proper Li∣quor, which not only by a Specific qua∣lity, but by strengthening the Liver stops Blood. OBSERVATION LXIV. The French Pox. A Certain Captain about sixty Years of Age, complained of a very dry Cough, which had troubled him for two or three Months together, with some difficulty of Breathing, and a very great Pain in his Chest; he had eaten very little in two Months, his Stomack was so bad, which had reduced him to a very low and weak condition, though he did not keep his Bed; his Head and Shoulders aked extreamely, but cheifly in the Night, he had a Pain in his Loins, he made water very often, but very little; and when he had need he must do it presently; for he could not hold his water, sometimes his Urin was very sharp, and pain'd him in passing through; besides that, it died his Shirt of a Safforn or reddish Colour, more
then this he had found himself impotent for a whole Year together. By these Signs I judged him to be troubled with the French Disease; more especially because he confess'd he had been a long time troubled with a Gonorrhea, which an unskilful Chyrurgeon had stopped with∣out any preceding Purgation, which occasioned these Symptoms, that every day increased. He had also been pepper'd with the Distemper, about ten Years before; and was known to be a common frequenter of leud Company. As for the inward Pain of his Chest and dry Cough, I knew they proceeded from his immoderate taking Tobacco, sometimes fifty, and when he took least, thirty Pipes a day. First therefore I prescribed him a proper Diet: and among other things enjoyned him to leave off his excessive taking Tobacco, allowing him three or four Pipes a day, for fear the total forsaking of an inveterate Custom might do him an injury, then for his Cough and the Pain in his Breast I prescribed him the following Emplaster to be laid over all his Chest, which in a short time first abated, and then per∣fectly cured his Cough, and difficulty of Breathing, to a won∣der; ℞. Castor, the best Saffron, Nutmegs, Cloves, Storax, Calam. Be∣zoin an. ℈j. s. Reduce them to a fine Powder; and mix there∣with Gm Armoniac, Galbanum dissolved in Wine, Emplaster of Meltlot, Oxycroceum, an. ʒ v. Make a Plaister to be spread upon a thin peice of Leather. Before I laid on this Plaister, I purg'd his Body. The next day, being the twenty second of November, I prescribed him this Decoction, to take every Morning a good draught, and Sweat a little, and in the Evening to take another draught, but because he was so weak, no Sweating was expected. ℞. Lig. Guaiacum. ℥xii. Bark of the same, Salsaperil. an. ℥iij. Sassafrass-wood, Licorice sticed an. ℥j. s. Common-water lb. xii. Macerate them near the fire twenty four hours. Then boyl them in a Vessel close shut to lb. v. Roots of Elecampane ℥j. Carduus Benediot. M. ij. Rosemary, Scordium, Baum, Ger∣mander, Groud-Ivy, Marjoram, Centaury the less an. M. j. Stoned Raisons of the Sun. ℥vj. Make a Decoction. The twenty eight of November he was purg'd again, and he took the same Decoction again, adding ℥j. s. of China-root; but he Sweat with a great difficulty, and very little, because of the extremity of the cold Weather. By the fifth of December, the Pains in his Shoulders and Head were much abated, so that he slept quietly at Nights, and felt himself much better, however the sharpness of his Urine still continued, and a slight Gonorrhea; where we went on as we begun; for his Cough and weakness of his Stomach, I prescribed him this Tablet. ℞. Dry root of Elecampane ʒ j. English Saffron ℈. s. Calamus Aro∣maticus, Florence-Orrice, Benzoyn an. ℈j. Flower of Sul∣phur ℈ij. sliced Licorice ℈ j. s. Reduce them in a very fine Powder; and with fine white Sugar dissolved in Fennel-water make them into Tablets. The tenth of December, he purged with our Antipestilential Pills: for his Body was soon moved. The seventeenth of December, he took
Decoction again, which made him Sweat plentifully, because per∣haps the long use of the Decoction had made Nature more prone to Sweat; and now all the Symptoms began to vanish by degrees, his Appetite returned, and in regard the Patient felt no more Pain, we forbore any more Physic; and thus by this easiy course, the Gentle∣man was perfectly freed from that detestable Disease. But his Genitals had contracted such a Debility from a long continu'd Gonorrhea, that his Venereal abilities were quite decayed, nor could be restored by any Provocatives whatever. The Year following 1638. in Feburary returning to his wonted excess of taking Tobacco, the Pain in his Breast, his dry Cough, and difficulty of breathing likewise returned, which by his abstaining from Tobacco, and the application of the foresaid Emplaster were again absolutely removed. OBSERVATION LXV. A Diarrhaea. A Dutch Gentleman having drank in the Evening too large a quan∣tity of new Wine, all that Night was Tormented with violent Pains in his Belly; the next day he was taken with a loosness, which seemed at first to give him some ease; but afterwards increasing within two days was changed into a Dysentery; then the Gentleman, afraid of his Life, sent for me; I presently gave him the following Purge; ℞. The best Rubarb ʒij. Leaves of Senna cleans'd ʒiij. Myrobo∣lan Cheb. ʒij. Seeds of Anise ℈ij. Decoction of Barley. q. s. Make an Infusion. To the straining add Syrup of Succory with Rubarb ℥ j. Mix them for a Draught. This brought away much Choleric Matter, and strangely eased the Gripes of his Belly; the next Evening I gave him the following Su∣dorific, which caused him to Sweat much that Night afterwards he Sweat quietly, and both the Pain and the Flux ceased, and his former Health returned. ℞. Treacle of Andromachus ʒj. Philonium Romanum ℈j. Of our Treacle-water, Stone-Parsly-water an. ℥ j. Mix them for a Potion. ANNOTATIONS. MUST or new Wine, as Diascorides and Galen testifie is difficulty con∣cocted, and begets Wind. Hence Cru∣dities, Oppilations of the Bowels, and Griping of the Guts. Many times the excessive drinking of it causes a Sup∣pression of Urine, as it befel my self once in France. Sometimes it begets Cholic pains; Sometimes it causes a Dy∣sentery, as it happen'd to our Patient. Hence it happens that our Germans lit∣tle accustom'd to Must, when they go into France and swill it too immode∣rately, are troubled with Diarrheas dangerous and many times mortal Dy∣senteries, especially such as had eaten great plenty of Grapes before.
OBSERVATION LXVI. An Uterine Suffocation. JOan Segers a Widow, in the flower of her Age, left with Child by her Husband, that dyed some Months before, was delivered of a Son in August. This Woman during her Month having been too busie about her House, in the third week was taken with an Uterine Suffocation; so that she thought her Matrix ascended up to her Throat; and this Suf∣focation was accompanyed with Murmuring and Pains of the Belly and Sides. The Woman had not slept in three whole days and nights, nor could she either sit or lye still in a place for a quarter of an hour. I conjectur'd that these Suffocations proceeded from Wind or Cold receiv'd into her Body through her Womb. In the Evening therefore I gave her the following Potion, which caus'd her to sleep a little, and put off the greatest part of the Symptoms. ℞. Flowers of Cammomil. M. s. Lovage seed. ʒj. s. Wild Carot seed ʒ. s. White-wine q. s. Let them boyl a little. ℞. Of the straining, ℥ij. Roman Philonium, Mithridate of Da∣moc, an. ʒ s. Oyl of Amber distilled by descent drop, ix. Mix them for a Potion, The next day, though she was much better, yet because the Symp∣toms were not absolutely ceas'd, and for that she had not gone to Stool in three days, I gave her a gentle Purge; which done, this Emplaster was laid to her Navel. ℞. Castor Pulveriz'd, Benzoyn an. ℈j. s. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, Tacamahacca, an. ʒij. s. Mix them, and spread them upon a peice of Leather of a hands breadth. In the Evening going to Bed she took ℈ij. of Amber powdered with a little Wine: She slept quietly, and heard no more of her Symptoms. ANNOTATIONS. ERotis in a Suffocation and Disloca∣tion of the Womb, commends the Root of Lovage boyl'd and bruis'd with Hogs-grease, and laid to the Navel; but I believe the raw root bruis'd to be better. Mercatus recommends Tacama∣hacca or Caranna alone; or an Emplaster of Great Treacle, Angelica and Agnus Castus seed. Montagnana extols for a great Secret, and a present Remedy, the following Emplaster laid upon the Na∣vel: ℞. Mugwort, Feverfew, Lignum Aloes, an. ℈. s. Galbanum, Ammoniac dissolv'd in Vinegar an. ʒj. s. Wax, q. s. For a Plaister. But he more highly applauds the fol∣lowing Emplaster. ℞. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, ℥j Soft and whitish Bedellium ʒij. Powder of Feverfew ʒj. s. Myrrh. ℈j. Mix them for a Plaister. Forestus affirms that a Plaister of Gal∣banum alone has done Miracles: but that he had found by daily Experience the extraordinary benefit of the fol∣lowing Magisterial Emplaster, which he spreads upon Leather, edg'd about with Galbanum, to make it stick the better. ℞. Gallia Moscata, Alipta Moscata, Storax Calam. Pure Laudanum, Ma∣stic, an. ℥. Lignum Aloes, Xylobalsa∣mum, Galangal, Cyperus Carpobalsa∣mum, an. ʒiij Red Roses ʒj. s. New Wax lb. s. Turpentine, q. s. Make a Plaister according to Art.
OBSERVATION LXVII. A Burstenness in the Groin, with a Gangrene. THomas Adeler, an English Trooper, about sixty years of age, had had a burstenness in his left Groin for many years. In the Year 1637. in September, the Gut which fell down into the Burstenness, be∣ing distended with a great quantity of Wind, hapned to break, so that the Ordure fell down into the void Space of the Burstenness. This presently caused a Gangrene of the Part, with an intollerable Stench; by which means, the Part being putrified and broken, the Ordure of the Belly came forth at that Hole, never at the Fundament. Being sent for, though I thought him incurable, yet I ordered Spirit of Wine, with Mel Rosatum, and Oyntment Egyptiacum, to be applied to the Part; till the Gangrenous Parts were separated from the sound Parts. Then we found that the Gut was not only broken, but quite broken off the one Part from the other, and that the upper Part hung out, and gave passage to the Excrement. The end of this Intestine afterwards grew fleshy, and acquired a kind of a fleshy Ring, and this Ring cleaved afterwards so fast to the neighbouring Flesh; so that for the future, the Intestine remained always fix'd and open in that Part, and gave passage to the Excrement: So that we ordered him to carry a little brass Pot, so ordered and hung, as to give him the least trouble that might be; and thus, in all other Parts sound and healthy, he walk'd abroad where-ever he pleased; and in nine years, that he was forced to carry about him that troublesome Burthen, he was never sick. ANNOTATIONS. THis is a tare and remarkable Ex∣ample. I never thought before that a broken Gut could grow to the adjoyning Flesh in the Groyn, till I was a Witness of it in this Patient. True it is, that if a Gut happen to break a∣mong the fleshy Muscles of the Abdo∣men, such a Coalition may sometimes happen, as Plater observes: A certain Captain, says he, being wounded in his Belly, voided his Excrements through a Pipe which was left there after the Wound was cured, and was for many years afterward a∣live and well. The Cause of which, when I examined, I found that Wounds of the Guts, if they seem to trace the fleshy Por∣tions of the Muscles of the Abdomen, af∣ter the Lips of the Wounds of the Guts and muscly Flesh are glutinated on both sides, there may be a Passage made for the Excrement to come forth, and be prevent∣ed from falling into the Cavity of the Abdomen; and that those Wounds, al∣though they cannot be consolidated, yet they are not Mortal; which though very seldom happens, sometimes in other Parts, as in the Bladder. Iohn Hornung, al∣so a Physician of Heydenheim, tells a Story of a Country Man, whose right Gut, upon a Wound in the Abdomen, came forth, opened with a broad Wound; nor was it put back by the Chyrurgeon, but the Wound of the Abdomen being cured, hung out as long as the Man lived, retaining its natural Colour, yet somewhat more thick and more fleshy; and through this Passage it was that the Excrement came always forth with an extraordinary Stench, for∣saking the common Road of the Fun∣dament.
OBSERVATION. LXVIII. A Pining Consumption, caused by a vitiated Stomach. MOnsieur de Nassau, a Captain of Horse, in the Flower of his Age, in the Year 1637. during the Siege of Breda, in Sep∣tember, as he lay in his Bed all in a Sweat, hearing some Troops of Horse march by his Window, leap'd out of his Bed, opened his Casement, and stood looking out for some time; and by that time became suddenly overcool'd by a North Wind, at that time cold and tempestuous, fell into a violent Distemper. Presently he complained of an extraordinary Griping in his Belly about the Region of his Sto∣mach; he had also withal, a slight Fever, with a violent Cough, which brought up much clammy, flegmatick, ill-coloured Matter, yet without any Pain in his Breast. Several of the most eminent Physici∣ans were sent for, who by his Spittle, his Cough, and other Symptoms, concluded that his Disease was a real Consumption, and that incura∣ble, and told the Prince of Orange that he would suddenly dye. As for the Pain in his Belly, those they unanimously agreed to be the Cholic Passion, caused by the suddain Cold. To asswage this Pain, which they call'd the Cholic, they used several Remedies for a long time, which gave ease sometimes, but never cur'd, which they affirm∣ed was impossible to be done. To abate his Cough, they made him an Issue in his Left-arm, and gave him the following Apozeme to take for many Weeks; ℞. China Roots the best ℥j. Leaves of Scabious, Colts-foot, Betony, Pimernel, Plantain, an. m. j. Cordial Flowers, an one small Handful, ston'd Raisins ℥j. Licorice shav'd ʒij. Anise-seed ℈iiij. Boil them in Barley water of the second Decoction, q. s. to lb ij. For an Apozeme. For an ordinary Looch, they gave him equal Parts of Syrup of Poppy and Cumfrey. Also they prescribed him a cold Diatragacanth in Tablets; and to loosen his Belly, they gave him this small Po∣tion. ℞. Rhubarb choice ʒj. Yellow Saunders ℈s. Decoction of Barley ℥iij. Infuse them all Night, and to the Straining add Manna of Calabria ℥s. For a Potion. This gave him one or two Stools. Now, when they had had the Gen∣tleman two Months and a half, and all their Physick did no good; insomuch that the Gentleman was reduced to Skin and Bone, and his Strength every day more and more decay'd; they would give him no more Physic, but gave him over for incurable. Then I was thought of, and the Gentleman was brought from Breda to Nimeghen in a Man of War. The Gentleman gave me a full Accompt of his Di∣stemper, and what had been done to him, and shewed me the Receits that had been prescribed him, and which he had taken: So that when I had considered all things, I could not be of those Physicians Opinion. For by his Spittle and Cough, he shewed no Signs of a Con∣sumption, for though he brought up tough and ill-coloured Stuff, yet neither was it Matter nor Blood. The Pain of his Stomach was no
Cholic, as being fixed in his Stomach, and not accompanied with Wind; but twitching the Ventricle with extream Pains, by Intervals, not wandring through the Guts. Therefore I judged the Cause of this Pain to be a salt Flegm, caused by the first sudden Refrigeration, and adhering to the Ventricles of the Stomach, which fermenting at Intervals through the afflux of Choler, or sharp Rhume, caused those cruel Gripings. Other things also shewed the Stomach to be offended, as loss of Appetite, inclination to vomit, troublesome Belches, Cru∣dities, &c. The Cough I looked upon, as caused by Defluctions falling upon the Lungs, which were continually fed by the crude Va∣pors carried from the ill affected Stomach to the Head, and thence falling down again upon the Breast; the Gentleman thus satisfied with my Conjectures, in order to the Cure, upon the twenty sixth of No∣vember, I laid him on upon his Head, a Cap or Quilt of Cephalic Herbs, and other hot Ingredients, which he wore all that Winter. I or∣dered him a warning and attenuating Diet, Meats of good Juice, and easie of Digestion; to which Diet, I left him wholly, without giving him any other Physic, for three or four days, because of his extraordi∣nary Weakness. Within a few days, his stinking and ill-coloured Spittle, his Brain being corroborated by the help of the Quilt, and his Defluxions ceasing, became white and of its natural Consistence, and neither so much nor so clammy as before. The thirtieth of No∣vember, the Pains of his Stomach began to gripe him, not extending themselves beyond the Region of the Stomach, yet so terrible, that they seemed to surpass the Pains of Child-bed. To asswage this Pain, I gave him one Dram of our Anticholic Electuary, by five a clock in the Morning, and again, at eleven at Noon; but this would not stir the Pain. Thereupon I applied to his Breast a Cere-cloth of Storax, Benzoin, Castor, Galbanum, all over the Region of his Stomach. The first of December, the Patient would swallow no Physic, only he took a Glister that gave him one Stool. The next day, he having taken Pill. Ruffiae, had three Stools, but his Pain nothing abated, so that his Strength being extreamly wasted by the Violence thereof, we were forced to Narcotics; of which, I made choice of the hotest, by its heat to strengthen the Stomach, and digest and cut the clammy cold Humors, and by its Narcotic Faculty to asswage the Pain. To which purpose, I gave him about Night one Dram of Philonium Romanum, prepared with Euphorbium, which allay'd the Pains within three hours. The third of December, he took several times that day a small quan∣tity of the following Conditement; ℞. Specier. Diamosch. Diambra, an. ℈j. s. Diagalanga ℈j. Roots of Calamus Aromaticus condited, Conserve of Anthos, an. ℥s. Preserved Nutmegs ʒij. Confection of Alkermes ℈j. Syrup of Limon q. s. Oyl of Cinnamon gutt. ij. For a Conditement. About Night his Pains began to return again, but not with that vehemency. The next day, taking Pill. Ruffiae, he had three Stools. Toward Evening, by his Pulse I found him somewhat feverish; but upon taking this small Potion the Fever vanished. ℞. Treacle of Andromac ʒj. Of our Treacle-water ℥j s. Oyl of Vi∣triol gutt. vij. For a Draught.
The fifth of December, the Pain in his Stomach was very gentle; his Cough and Spitting ceased; but some beginnings of a Fever ap∣peared, which upon taking this Apozem vanished; ℞. Succory Roots of Asparagus, an. ℥j. Of Elecampane ℥s. Herbs, Endive, Centaury the less, Roman Wormwood, an. M. j. Car∣duus Ben. M. s. Anise-seed ʒj. s. Corrents ℥ij. Orange and Citron Peels dried, an. ʒiij. Boil them in common Water q. s. for an Apozem, to lbj. s. In the Evening I gave him an Amigdalate, which caused him to sleep, which was continued for three days, during which time, feed∣ing now and then upon Chicken-broth, his Strength was somewhat recovered. All this while there was somewhat troubled the Patient's Stomach, which he could not well express in Words, only that some∣thing ascended up now and then to his Throat; this spoiled his Appe∣tite, and hindred his Digestion, and as the Patient believed, was that from which the Fits derived their Original; therefore to extirpate this Malady, I gave him the following Antimoniate Wine. ℞. Crocus Metallorum of our Preparation gr. xv. Strong French Wine ℥iiij. Steep them all Night, the next Morning strain them through a double brown Paper for a Draught. He took this Potion the twelfth of December, at eight of the clock in the Morning: At nine a clock he had an Inclination to Vomit, but brought up nothing; but a little after, he brought up some few Lumps like Glew, and of a greenish Colour. About eleven a clock, his Anxi∣ety ceasing, he had seventeen watry Stools, of a mixed Colour, with∣out any Gripes; however, because his Strength was much impaired, we refreshed him with Cinnamon-water and Sugar. In the Evening, I gave him a Draught of generous Wine, with a Dram of Treacle, and so the next Night he slept indifferent well. The next day, he per∣ceived the thing that troubled him in his Stomach to be gone, which he never felt more. From that time his Stomach began to come to him, and he eat three Porringers of Broth that day, and digested them well. The following days he was so hungry, that he not only eat three or four times a day, but sometimes at Midnight: the two first days he was fed with Broths variously prepared; the third day, be began to eat boil'd Chickens, Lamb, Veal, &c. and some∣times to drink a Glass of Wine; the fourth, he came to roasted Meats, and so fell to his accustomed Diet, and so in a short time he recovered his former Strength. OBSERVATION. LXIX. Nephritic Pains. MOnsieur Bronkherst, Lord of Werdenburgh, in the Flower of his Youth, and a great Lover of Rhenish-wine, was taken the twen∣ty sixth of December, with most cruel Nephritic Pains, not without some obstruction of his Urine. Six years before, being troubled with the same Pain, he had voided a little Stone, but after that he had not had the least touch of the Malady, nor so much as voided any Gravel.
To asswage the Pain, I gave him an Emollient Glister, then prescribed him this Mixture. ℞. Oyl of sweet Almonds new drawn ℥iij. s. Iuice of Limons ʒvj. Malmsey-wine ℥iij. Mix them for three Doses, to take once in three hours. The following Liniment was also laid warm to his Loins; ℞. Oyls of Scorpions, Lawrel, bitter Almonds, an. ℥s. Of Cammo∣mil, Dill, Turpentine, an. ʒij. Mix them. Toward Evening his Pains ceased; in the Night, making Water free∣ly, he voided a rough unequal Stone, about the bigness of a Pea. The fourteenth of Ianuary, having exposed himself to the Cold in vehe∣ment Weather, his Pains returned; at what time, taking the same Mixture again, he voided another Stone, and was again freed from his Pains. But for the future Prevention, I advised him to swallow every other day a Pill of transparent Aloes, or a Bolus of Venice Tur∣pentine, and sometimes to use Fernelius's Syrup de Althea; but above all things, to forbear the use of Rhenish-wine. ANNOTATIONS. THE Reason why Rhenish-wine en∣genders the Stone, and causes the Gout, is the Sal Tartar, which is more sharp, and four times more abounding in Rhenish-wine, than in French or Canary, or any other Wine; which tartareous Salt, not being well digested in some Bodies, is separated from the Mass of Blood, and with the Serum, carried to the Kidneys, and so hardens into Stones, and being expell'd into the Joynts, causes most dreadful Torments. For the Nature of Salts is, by corrod∣ing other Bodies to reduce them in∣to Atoms, and associate to them∣selves. This Corrosion is the Cause of the Gout; for while the tartarous Salt corrodes the nervous and membranous Parts, and endeavours to associate them to its self, those cruel Pains are excited, which are mitigated by an Afflux of watry Humors, for Salt dissolv'd with much moisture looses its Acrimony. But you'l say, why does not this Salt cause as great Pains in the Kidneys as in the Joynts? because the most subtle and acrimonious part of it, is dissolved by the continual Passage of the Urine, and carried away with the Urine through the Bladder; but the thick, gravelly and earthly Substance remains, which does not offend so much by its Acrimony, as by its Bulk and roughness. Now the reason why the German Wines abound with Tartar, is, because the very Soil of Germany it self, where the Vines grow, aboundeth with Tartar; nor is there any Plant which sucks up the salt and tartarous Parts of the Earth, more than the Vine. And therefore it is, that in many Places of Moravia, Austria, Bohemia and Hungaria, where the Soil is such, that most Men are troubled with the Gout, or Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder, or both. Lastly, that Wine engenders the Gout, is ap∣parent from hence, for that the For∣bearance of VVine cures it. Of which, the Physicians bring many Examples; and M. Donatus himself confesses, that he was cured of the Gout by leaving off VVine for two years.
OBSERVATION LXX. An Extream Pain under the Sternon-Bone. LIeutenant More, in the Flower of his Age, in Ianuary, felt a most terrible Pain, which extended it self in a right Line from the top of the Aspera Arteria, to the upper Orifice of the Stomach, all along the Sternon-bone, and so cruelly tormented the Person, that he could not move himself one way nor other. He neither had any Cough or difficulty of Breathing; his Lungs and Aspera Arteria were perfectly free; nor did his Gullet pain him in swallowing; neither lastly, was there any thing to be seen outwardly. The Pain lay un∣der the Sternon, where it is fastned to the Mediastrinum, or in the Membrane annexed to it withinside, which was thus occasioned. The Patient, the Evening before, had been hard drinking a strong sort of French Wine, at a great Supper, and with that and a very great Fire all the time in the Room, had over-heated himself to a great degree. After which, going home at Midnight in a Sweat, of a suddain by the way, he was taken with a violent Cold, for it freezed very hard; hence the Pores being presently shut, the hot and sharp Vapors being condensed and congealed, stuck to the inner Membrane of the Ster∣non-bone, which almost numb'd that part with the sharpness of the pain, that was still encreasing by the motion of the Breast. For the Cure of this Malady, I loosened his Body with a Glister, and then pre∣scribed him this Sudorific to take warm. ℞. Treacle ℈iiij. Extract of Carduus Ben. and Angelica an. ℈j. English Saffron gr. vj. Of Treacle-water ℥ij. Oyl of Anise gr. iiij. Mix them for a Potion. Upon this he sweat very well, but the pain continued as before. Af∣ter he had sweat, I applied the following Cere-cloth to the place affected. ℞. Powder of Castor, Cloves, Benjamin, Saffron, an. ℈j. Galba∣num dissolved in Wine ℥s. Melilot, Oxicroceum ʒiij. Mix them and make a Cere-cloth to be spread upon Leather as long as the Part affected, four Fingers broad, and anoint the same with Oyl of Nutmegs distilled. After this Cere-cloth had stuck six or seven hours to the Part, the pain began to abate very much, so that the Patient could move himself with more ease. The next day he took a Purge, and had five Stools; which done, after the Cere-cloth had stuck on three days, the pain went quite off, and the Gentleman went abroad well in Health. But afterwards, in February, having over-heated himself with drinking of Spanish Wine, the same Cere-cloth cured him again in three days.
OBSERVATION LXXI. The Head-ach. PEter Ioannis, an Ale-brewers Servant, a strong Fellow, in Ianua∣ry, when it freezed very hard, was taken with a terrible pain in his Head, otherwise ailing nothing; by reason of which pain, he could take no Rest night nor day, for several Days and Nights together, which not only caused the loss of his Stomach, but also a Delirium; nevertheless, the Patient was so obstinate, that he would take no Phy∣sic, only by much perswasion he would admit of Topics. Thereupon, for present ease, I prescribed the following Fomentation, with which being warm, I ordered his Head to be fomented, and Napkins four times doubled, and dipt in the Fomentation, to be laid all over his Head, and to be shifted as they grow cold, and this is to be continued all the Night long. ℞. Rosemary, Vervain, Betony, Thyme, an. m. j. Marjoram m. j. s. Sage m s. Flowers of Cammomil and Melilot an. m. j. of Dill and Stoechas, an. m. s. Seeds of Cummin and Dill, Lawrel Berries, an. ℥s. White-wine q. s. Boil them to lb iij. To the Straining add Spirit of Wine ℥iiij. For a Fomentation. The next day the pain was much abated; but in regard the Patient refused all manner of Physic, the Fomentation was continued for two days, by which time his Sleep returned, and the pain went almost all off, only some remainder of pain in his Fore-head, a little above his Nose, with some Obstruction of his Nostrils, which proceeding from a tough Flegm, closely adhering to the Ethmoids-bone; I prescribed him a sneezing Medicine of the Juice of the Root of Betony, which when he had drawn up into his Nostrils, first opened with a Quill, he voided from his Palate and Nostrils a great quantity of tough Flegm, and so was quite freed from his intollerable pain. ANNOTATIONS. I Confess this Course of curing, with∣out any Evacuation or Diversion preceding, was not so safe; for that the flegmatic Humors collected in the Brain, and attenuated by the hot Fo∣mentation, might have easily fallen up∣on some noble Bowel, not without great danger; but in regard the great abun∣dance of Humors threatned either an Apoplexy or a Delirium, or a Lethar∣gy, and the Intensness of the Pain, a Fever, and for that the Patient refused to take any Physic, not so much as a Glister, nor would suffer Blood-letting, I was forced, for the prevention of greater Mischiefs, to proceed as I did to Topics, remembring the Saying of Cel∣sus, 'Tis no matter whether the Remedy be safe when there is no other. OBSERVATION LXXII. The Scurvey. AGnes Alberti, a Maid of about twenty four years of Age, com∣plained of a dull heavy Pain in her left Side, under the Bastard Ribs; as also of a certain Chilliness of her whole Spine. She had also certain cold Shakings, frequent Debilities and fainting Fits, which
presently went off; besides, she had certain black and blew Spots upon her Thighs; moreover, her Teeth were loose, and her Gums eaten away, she had an ill Smelling. By these Signs, I judged her to have the Scurvy. But in regard it was in the midst of a hard frosty Winter, when no proper Herbs were to be got, and because the Extremity of the Cold would not permit of Purgation, I only prescribed her this following Electuary, to take of it the quantity of a Nutmeg three times a day, and all the while to observe a good Diet; ℞. Specier. Diambrae, of Aromaticum Rosatum, Seed of Bishops∣weed and Parsley, an. ℈ij. Nasturtium, Cremor Tartar, an. ʒiij. Choice Cinnamon ʒj. Sal Prunella ℈j. Reduce them into a ve∣ry sine Powder. Then, ℞. Long fat Raisins q. s. Boil them in Wine till they are soft, and strain the Pulp through a hair Sieve. ℞. Of this Pulp lbs. and mix the whole Powder with it, together▪ with Oyl of Anise and Iuniper, an ℈j. Syrup of Limons q. s. For an Electuary. I would willingly have mixed some bitter things, but she had an Aver∣sion to them. I advised her also, if there were any Winter Scurvy∣grass or Nasturtium to be got, to steep those Herbs in small Ale or Wine, and then to boil them gently, and to take that Decoction, de∣ferring the rest of the Cure till April; in the mean time, to fix and fa∣sten her Teeth, I prescribed the following Alum-water. ℞. Powder Alum, ʒj. Common VVater ℥vj. Cinnamon-water ℥j. Mix them to wash the Mouth. After she had made use of these things a while, she felt a great ease, and the Spots of her Thighs vanished. The twenty sixth of April, the following Apozem was prepared for her; of which, after she had taken three or four times, and purged her Body twice, she was quite freed from her Distemper. ℞. Pylypody of the Oak, Rind of Caper-roots, an. ℥j. Roots of Fennel, Eryngos, Stone-parsley, Elecampane, an. ℥s. Fumary, Dodder, Lesser Centaury, the whole Dandelyon, an. m. j. Roman VVormwood, Flowers of Elder, an. m. s. Seeds of Parsley, Anise, Fennel, Nasturtium, an. ʒj. s. Currants ℥ij. Rhenish Tartar ℥j. Common VVater, q. s. Boil them according to Art, adding at the end, Root of wild Raddish ℥j. Herbs, Scurvy-grass, VVater-Nasturtium, Brook-lime, an. m. j. To make an Apozem of lb ji. ANNOTATIONS. MAny believe the Scurvy to be of the number of those new Dis∣eases, which Dodoneus writes were first known in Brabant, in the Year 1556, though epidemic for some years before; among the Belgians, Danes, and other Northern Regions. However, Hippo∣crates describes a certain Disease call'd the Bloody Volvulus, very like the Scur∣vy, if not in all things, yet in most, as a stinking Mouth, starting of the Gums from the Teeth, bleeding at the Nose, Ulcers upon the Thighs, some going off, others newly come, the Skin ema∣ciated and black, Sloathfulness, and Inability to work or walk. Pliny de∣scribes this Disease by the Name of Sceleturbe, where he says, that there was a new Disease in Germanicus's Camp beyond the Rhine, which caus'd
shedding of Teeth, and loosned the Joynts of the Knees. But that there was a Root which was found out for it, which was called Britannica, good for the Nerves and Maladies of the Mouth, having a long Leaf and a black Root. For as in the French Disease, Guaiacum, Sassaperil, and some few other things are Specific; so has this Disease certain proper Antidotes, as Spoon-wort, the Nasturtiums, Brook-lime, Fumitory, wild Radish, &c. with some other bit∣ter things that are not purgative. OBSERVATION LXXIII. A Weakness of the Stomach. CAptain de Gone, about fifty years of age, for some Weeks had been troubled with a Weakness of his Stomach, which had both lost its Appetite and Concoction, accompanied with trouble∣some Belches, and a nauceousness. After I had prescribed him a pro∣per Diet to cleanse his Stomach from Crudities and cold and viscous Humors, I prescribed him this Apozeme, to take at four times, four Mornings together; ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Mecoacan, Fennel, an. ℥s. Calamus Aromat. Galangale, an. ʒij. Herbs, Mint, Rosemary, Nipp, Marjoram, lesser Centaury, an. m. j. Wormwood, Baum, Hyssop, an. m. s. Seed of Carthamum ℥j. Of Fennel, Caroways, an. ʒij. Raisins stoned ℥ij. Common Water q. s. Boil them, and add toward the end, White Agaric ʒij. Leaves of Senna cleansed, ℥j. s. Anise-seed ʒv. This gave him three or four Stools a day; so that after he had thus purged, I ordered him to take an hour before Dinner and Supper, a Dose of this Powder in a Draught of generous Wine. ℞. Root of Calamus Arom. Specier. Diagalangae, Diambra, an. ʒj. s. Mace, Choice Cinnamon, Ginger, an. ʒj. Make a Powder to be divided into ten equal Doses. I advised him also in a Morning, to drink a Draught of Wormwood-Wine, and these few means restored his Stomach to its former Strength. ANNOTATIONS. IN cold Distempers of the Stomach, besides those already mentioned, Observation 5. 8. there are several o∣thers which are highly commended by Physitians. Some extol the use of Tur∣pentine, and call it the true Balsam of the Bowels, in regard it gently heats, purges and cleanses the Bowels. Zechi∣us highly commends this Bolus, and says there is nothing better can be used. ℞. Clear Turpentine ʒj. Mastich pow∣dered ʒs. Powder of Aromaticum Ro∣satum ℈s. Make a Bolus to be given two hours before Meat. Some there are that boil up Turpen∣tine into the Form of Pills, but errone∣ously; for that the more effectual ver∣tue of the Turpentine exhales in boiling. Balsam of Perue is an admirable thing to strengthen the Stomach; if you take some few Drops of it in strong Wine be∣fore Meat. Crollius commends his Elix∣ir Proprietatis: Hartman and others pre∣fer Zedoary before all other things. The Decoctions of Guaiacum and Sassafras are very good. Distilled Oils also are very proper, of Cloves, Anise, Carro∣ways, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and the like, given in some few Drops of strong Wine. The following digestive Pow∣der
is also very much used to help Con∣coction. ℞. Coriander prepared ℥j. sweet Fennel∣seed and Aniseseed, an. ʒij. Cinnamon, Cloves, an. ʒs. Sugar ℥iij. Reduce them into Powder; the Dose one Spoon∣ful after Meals. Wormwood also taken any way is very much commended, as Galen testifies, who cured a Woman that had lost her Stomach, and so weak, that she could get no Food down, with only Worm∣wood-wine. Therefore, says Montagna, among Medicines which strengthen the Appetite and Digestion, and open the Ob∣structions thereof, and cleanse away and dries up the Matters therein contained, Wormwood is the most famous: and all Wormwood Medicines, whether Julebs or Confections. Langius's Electuary is also very proper in such cases. ℞. Conserve of Roses ℥ij. s. Rosemary Flow∣ers ℥j. Lavender Flowers ℥s. Galangale, Cubebs, Xyloaloes an. ℈j. Aniseed ʒs. Cinnamon ʒj. Calamus Aromaticus ʒij. Ginger condided ℥s. Pine Apples pre∣pared ʒvj. Make these into an Electu∣ary with Syrup of preserved Citron. I restored a lost Appetite, and a Sto∣mach overwhelmed with Crudities by the use of this Powder. ℞. Roots of Zedoary, Galangale, Ca∣lamus Aromat. an. ʒj. VVhite Gin∣ger ʒs. Cinnamon ℈ij. Cremor Tar∣tar ʒij. Make a Powder, the Dose ʒs. or ℈ij. in the Morning, after Dinner and Supper in a Draught of generous VVine. Monsieur de Spieck generally made use of this; ℞. Root of Calam. Aromatic. VVhite Ginger, Galangale, an. ʒj. For a Pow∣der. But these kind of Stomachical Electua∣ries, Powders, Tablets, &c. every Phy∣sician ought to prescribe according to the Disposition of the Patient. Horstius makes use of this Powder. ℞. Coriander-seed prepared ℥j. s. Anise, Fennel-seed, an. ℥s. Ginger, Galangale, an. ʒj. s. Lignum, Aloes ʒs. Cinnamon ʒj. Fine Sugar, the weight of all the rest, for a Powder. OBSERVATION LXXIV. The Stone. RUtger Schorer, a little Boy, had a small Stone which fell down into his Bladder, with extraordinary Pain, but being after∣wards expelled into the Passage of the Yard, because it was too big to pass, it stuck in the middle of the Pipe, and stopped the Urine. Several ways were tried in vain to get it out, so that at length, to add to the Pain, there appeared an Inflammation of the Part; by which we found that there was no way but Incision to get it forth. Where∣fore, after the Chyrurgeon had pulled up the Skin somewhat toward the Glans, he opened the Ureter on that side where the Stone stopped, and took out the Stone, and so the Wound was presently consolidated, without any hurt to the Child. ANNOTATIONS. THis sort of Operation, mentioned by Aetius, Grumelenus and Paraeus, seems difficult and dangerous, but yet is very secure. Plato also recites two Ex∣amples of Stones cut out of the Ureter. And though some are afraid of a Fistu∣la upon such a Wound, yet I never knew any such Consequence▪
OBSERVATION LXXV. Nephritic Pain. THE Son of Lieutenant St. George, about eighteen years of age, who had been always troubled with Gravel from his Infancy, and had often voided little Stones, in Ianuary, was so tormented with a Stone that stuck in both Ureters, that he knew not where to turn himself: For Cure I prescribed him this Apozem, ℞. Roots of Fennel, Saxifrage, an. ℥s. Licorice scraped ʒvj. Herbs, Althea, Mallows, an. m. j. Cammomil Flowers, m. j. s. Cleansed Barley ℥j. Seeds of wild Carrots, Mallows, Nettles, Burdock, an. ʒj. Four greater Cold-seeds, an. ʒj. s. Fat Figs no ix. Dates xi. New Milk, Common VVater equal parts. Biol them and make an Apozem to lbiij. This being taken the same, and the next day, the Pain ceased, after he had voided a small Stone and much Gravel. The next Month he was troubled with the same Pains, but then, by taking the said Decoction, the Stone was easily brought down through the Ureters into the Bladder; but then, when it came into the Yard, it was so big it could not pass, but obstructed the Urine with most cruel Torture, which the Father not being able to bear, there being no Chyrurgeon to be sent for, with a Razor, made a small Wound underneath the Urinary Passage, where the Stone stuck; which done, the Stone spurted out, and the Urine followed in great quantity. The Wound was consolidated afterwards, sooner than we imagined, with the Application of a few Plaisters. OBSERVATION LXXVI. Milk in a Virgin's Breast. A Certain Noble young Lady, about twenty years of age, a Vir∣gin of eminent Chastity, in the Month of February, complained of a Pain in her right Breast, which was also full of Milk. When I had diligently examined the place affected, I felt a hardness in the middle of the Breast, about the bigness of a Pidgeons-egg, which pained her upon Compression: I also understood from her self that her Purgations had been suppressed for four Months together. In or∣der to the Cure, I prescribed her first a convenient attenuating Diet; then, after I had purged her Body, I gave her some Apozems to move her Evacuations, and three or four days before the time of the Period, I opened a Vein in the Heal, by which means, the Evacuation succes∣fully ensued, which having continued three or four days, the Swelling in her Breast fell down, nor did any more Milk come forth. However, in regard the Hardness remained with some Pain, I laid this Oyntment spread upon Linnen, upon the place affected, shifting it once a day; ℞. Honey, Populeon Oyntment, Virgins Wax, an. ℥j. first melt the Wax, then mix the rest, and stir them with a Spatula till they are cold.
This Topic very much abated, and within four days the hardness came to Suppuration. After the Apostem was broken, and had cast forth much white Matter, within a few days the same Topic cured her. ANNOTATIONS. CErtainly had not this Lady been a Person eminent for her Chastity, she might easily have incured the Scan∣dal of lost Virginity among the Vul∣gar. For rational Physicians will not deny, but that upon menstruous Ob∣structions, Milk may sometimes be ge∣nerated in the Breasts of Virgins. For, says Hippocrates, if a Woman, that nei∣ther is with Child, nor ever brought forth, has Milk, that Woman labours under a Suppression of her Courses. And I re∣member the same Case in a young La∣dy of Montfort, whose Chastity was above the reach of Scandal, who was cured upon the forcing down her Pur∣gations: To which purpose, Bartholin thus writes, Even in Virgins, many times Milk may be generated, if the Breasts are full of Sperituous Blood, and that there happen withal a menstruous Suppression, in regard the glandulous Sub∣stance concocts more than is necessary for the Nourishment of the VVoman. But 'tis no wonder that such things should happen in young Virgins that have their Flowers, when it is known that the same thing happens to old Women. For Bodin reports a Story of an Infant, that sucking a dry old Woman upon the Death of her Mother, at length drew Milk out of her Breasts, and was nourished with it to sufficiency. Nay, I have seen Milk more than once milked out of the Breasts of Infants not above two years old; which is also attested by Cardan and Camerarius. But more wonderful it is, that Milk should be ge∣nerated in the Breasts of Men; as A∣ristotle testifies of a certain Lemmian Slave; and Abensina, who saw Milk milked from the Breasts of a Woman, enough to make a Cheese. Several o∣ther Stories also there are in several o∣ther Authors, of Men giving Milk, too tedious to relate. OBSERVATION LXXVII. Epileptic Convulsions. A Little Son of Iohn ab Udem, an Infant of seven Months old, was twitched with Epileptic Convulsions, almost, without in∣termission, for two days together, so that nothing but Death was ex∣pected. The third day I was sent for, presently I ordered this Quilt to be prepared and laid upon his Head. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram, Vervain, Rosemary, Flowers of Melilot, an. one small Handful, Nutmegs ℈j. s. Cloves ℈j. Make a gross Powder to be quilted up in red Silk. After this had lain four or five hours upon his Head, the Convulsions ceased by degrees, and within twelve hours vanished quite, to the Admiration of all, that the Child should be so soon freed from so des∣perate a Distemper. ANNOTATIONS. IN regard the Brains of Children are very moist, and that thence arise many watry and flegmatic Vapors; Nature, for their more easie Evacuati∣on, leaves the Skull open for some time at the top of the Head. But as this Opening gives an easie Exit to the Va∣pors, so if the Head be not well covered, to prevent the entrance of the exter∣nal, Cold then upon shutting the Pores, and the Refrigeration and weakning of the Brain, the Vapors being detained
therein, condense into a tough Slime in the Ventricles of the Brain; which Burthen, when Nature cannot throw off, thence arises Epileptic Convulsions, which procure the Death of many Infants. Or if they scape with Life, they either be∣come Changlings, or retain some other terrible Misfortune as long as they live; as some Paralytic Member, Blindness of one Eye, &c. However this Diistem∣per differs from a true Epilesie, in re∣gard the Convulsions in this Malady are less vehement, though more frequent and of longer continuance: Besides, that these Convulsions proceed from abun∣dance of Humors, and weakness of Con∣coction an Expulsion in the Brain; but the true Epileptic, from the Maligni∣ty and the Envenomness of the Hu∣mors. Nevertheless it has been known when the Humors so collected in the Brain, if the Distemper have continued long, by degrees have acquired a malig∣nant Quality, and indeed a malignant Quality into the Brain and Meninxes, and then these Convulsions become the most grievous of all Epilepsies. The Cure of this Distemper consists chiefly in corroborating and warming the Brain, to the end the Pores may be opened, and the Vapors have free ex∣it; which being done in time, I have known many that have escaped the Distemper. Some endeavour an Eva∣cuation of the Flegm at the Nose and Mouth, by thrusting up Oyl of Amber and Rosemary into the Nostrils. But when the Brain is become so weak through the extraordinary quantity of Flegm that overlays it, that it cannot contract it self, that way of Cure does little good, or rather more harm▪ as causing stronger Convulsions, while the enfebled Brain is forced to more vehe∣ment Expulsion. Therefore it is much more expedient to warm and corrobo∣rate the Brain, and by that means to promote the Concoction of the crude Humors, and to evacuate the Vapors through the Brain, not yet consolida∣ted: Which done, the Brain is suffici∣ently able to concoct and dissipate the rest of the Slime which adheres to the Ventricles, and to expel it through the Passages appointed for that Evacuation. To which purpose I have often found a Quilt lay'd upon the top of the Head, to be very prevalent; for it answers all Expectations, it warms and corrobo∣rates the Brain, it opens the Pores, and powerfully promotes the Concoction and Dissipation of the Crude Humors. Sometimes before I lay on the Quilt, I anoint the top of the Head with a drop or two of Oyl of Marjoram. Some∣times I order the Patient to take a spoon∣full or two of the Water of the Flowers of Lilly of the Valley, and Syrup of Stoechas, two parts of the first, and one of the latter. I have also observed, that if Infants wear these Quilts till their Heads are firmly consolidated, they are not only free from this, but many other Maladies of a cold Brain. Nicholaus Fontanus▪ in this case highly extols Childrens Urine, and tells a Sto∣ry of a Patient to whom he gave three Glysters with success, of the Decoction of proper Herbs boiled in Urine, and then gave him to take, a Syrup of Childs Urine, made up with various Cephalics. OBSERVATION. LXXVIII. An Intermitting Tertian Ague. JOseph Wenties, a young Man, in the beginning of March, was taken with an Intermitting Tertian Fever, which seized him with an ex∣traordinary shaking, and went off with a violent Sweat: Within a months space he had made use of a hundred several Remedies of old Women and Mountebanks, Purges, Vomits, and Topics to his Wrists, not forbearing Charms and Amulets to hang about his Neck; all which were so far from abating the Fever, that after the beginning of April, it grew stronger every day than other. Upon the seventeenth of April I was sent for; I found the Patient very weak, his Stomach quite gone, and so lean, that his Skin could hardly cover his Bones. He had taken a Vomit the day before, and therefore I thought it not proper to purge him any more. Wherefore, after I had prescribed him a proper Diet, I gave him an opening and refrigerating Apozeme, which he drank three days together, but without any benefit. There∣upon
I ordered the following Mixture for a bag to be hung up in a Vessel of White-wine. ℞. Leaves of Carduus Benedict. Lesser Centaury, VVormwood, an. two small handfuls, Lucid Aloes, ℈ij. Cut the Herbs small, and bind them together in a bag to be hung in  v. of White-wine, and sometimes to be squeezed out. Of this bitter Wine he drank a draught of ℥iiij. or v. the first day twice, but afterwards once a day; this gently purged him, and brought the Distemper to a simple Ague; and then it abated every day; and this drink being continued, in a short time went quite off leaving the Patient restored to a very good Stomach. OBSERVATION LXXIX. A Bastard Intermitting Tertian. THE Lady of Nassaw, in the Flower of her Age, but lean and squeamish, was seized by an intermitting Tertian, that came every other day, but no certain hours, sometimes latter, sometimes sooner, accompanied with pain in the Head, Nauseating, Anxiety of Heart, and seizing with an extraordinary shaking, but going off with a violent Sweat; her Stomach was gone and she slept very little; and in regard she was very thirsty, she would drink six or eight Pints of Water during her Fit. Upon the twenty fifth of April, at the beginning of her cold Fit I was sent for, at what time to make her sweat the sooner, I prescribed her this draught. ℞. Salt of Wormwood, Extract of Carduus Ben. Confection of Hyacinth, an. ʒj. Treacle water, ℥j. Mix them for a draught. The next day, not willing to a Purge, she took a Glister only, which gave her two Stools; after which, she took no more Physic for four days. May the first, I prescribed her a refrigerating and opening Apozem, which she drank up in two days; her Ague still continuing in the same state; thereupon because she abhorred the taste of Physic, I gave her the following Vomit which when she took, she thought she had drank Wine. ℞. Crocus Metallorum, gr. xvi. White French VVine ℥iiij. or v. Steep them all Night, and the next day strain them through brown Paper. This draught she took the sixth of May in the Morning, about nine she began to Vomit, without much trouble at first; but at length she brought up a whole Chamber-pot full of Yellow green Choler, mixt with a tough and Flegmatic Slime: and her Vomiting ceasing, she had also two or three Stools: but still the Ague con∣tinued in the same condition; but then I prescribed her a Magisterial Wormwood-Wine in this manner.
℞. Carduus Benedict. Lesser Centaury, VVormwood an. two small handfuls Lucid Aloes, ʒj. Cut the Herbs small and hang the mixture in a long bag in a Glass Vessel filled with  viij. of small white French or Rhenish Wine Of this Wine she drank four Ounces Morning and Evening for the first two days, but afterwards, because it gave her three or four Stools a day, no more then only once a day, that is to say in the Mor∣ning; the fourth day, through the use of this Wine the Ague be∣came simple, much milder and shorter, and from that time abating by degrees, upon the eighth day left her quite; however for more certainty I ordered her to continue the Wine for four days longer, which gave her two Stools a day: and thus both her Appetite, and her sleep returned, and she recovered her lost strength in a few days. ANNOTATIONS. AT this time intermitting Bastard Agues were very rise about Nime∣ghen and the neighbouring Parts, obstinate and of long continuance, in some simple, in others double. Physic seldom cur'd them, ordinary helps nothing avail'd; not would Blood-letting do any good. Some felt a slight Pain in the right Hy∣pochondrium: some Vomited great store of Choler of their own accord: some were troubled with Head-aches, others with anxiety of Heart; all were very thirsty, during the Fit; very Cold and Shivering at the beginning but in∣tensely Hot at the end. That the Cause of this Ague proceeded from the Ex∣crementitious Choler putrifying in the Follicle of the Gall and neighbour∣ing Parts, the very Signs, and the Fever it self, sufficiently declar'd. Somtimes the Cause of the Disease being Evacua∣ted by Vomits, the Disease ceas'd: sometimes neither Vomits nor Purges would avail; for that though they purged away a great quantity of Choler, yet they left some remainders of the cor∣rupt Choler behind, to which new Hu∣mors flowing were Infected with the same Corruption. Blood-letting no∣thing profited, because the Seat of the Distemper lay neither in the Veins or Blood. Refrigerating Medicaments could not subdue the Choler, because they could hardly reach thither, in regard the Follicle attracts that one which is most bitter and hottest in the Blood. Upon these Considerations I thought that the Cure of this Disease required some cleansing, opening, bitter and moderate∣ly hot, and that in a thin and liquid substance: that by reason of its liquid∣ness it might be able to penetrate the Mesaraic Veins more easily, and by reason of its heat and bitterness be more eagerly drawn by the Follicle; and be more effectual to concoct Crudities, re∣move Obstructions, resist Corruption, cleanse the part affected, and expel Noxious and Superfluous Humers. To answer all which expectations, I thought nothing better then the foregoing Worm∣wood-Wine, with which I have Cured several without any other Remedies. Nor let any one wonder that I give Wine in Fevers contrary to the Opinions of all the Ancients: for that the Ancients meant simple and not Medicated Wines, seeing that both Galen and several o∣thers both Ancient and Neoteric Phy∣sitians recommends Wormwood-Wine in Agues. Some question whether Me∣dicaments prepared with Wormwood are proper in exquisite and Bastard Ter∣tians; Trallian allows them in Bastard, not in Tertian Agues; and with him Avicen, Oribatus, and Amatus of Por∣tugal agree. But says Galen, If the signs of Concoctions appear, then thou mayst safely Administer Wormwood-Wine; which is otherwise a Soveraign Preser∣vative of the Stomach, when molested by Choler. To decide the Question there∣fore I say that Wormwood is not less proper in Exquisite, then in Bastard Agues, especially after Concoction in regard it potently cleanses Choler, and Purges as well by stol as Urine: for which reason it must of  abate an Ague by removing the Evil Mater that Feeds the Distemper: and that therefore the heat and draught of it ought not to be scat'd, especially if it be given with other refrigerating things; in regard that the Choler be∣ing remov'd, the heat will cease.
OBSERVATION LXXX. The Cholic Passion. PEter Galman, a German Merchant, in March, the weather being cold and rainy, had the hap to Travel along with me; at what time not being able to heat our selves by riding the excessive cold brought upon him a most vehement Cholic passion; so that he could no longer sit his Horse; alighting therefore at the first good Inn, we came to, we warm'd our selves by a good Fire, and apply'd warm Cloths to his Belly to mitigate the pain; but the pain increasing more and more, for want of other Medicaments, that were not there to be had, I took of common Sope and White-wine of each ℥j. and after I had warmed them very hot over the Fire, I added ℥j. of Spirit of Wine. In this mixture I dipped a Linnen-cloth doubl'd fourfold, about a hands breadth, and apply'd it hot to his Navel, and by that only Topic freed him from his Pain within a quarter of an hour. ANNOTATIONS. BEsides several Remedies against a Fla∣tulent Cholic to be given inward∣ly, there are various Topics which being outwardly applied are of singular Ver∣tue, as we found by this quick and suc∣cessful Experiment. In this case there is an Oyl of Sope, the Extraction of which Sennertus teaches us in his Institutions, that it is very prevalent, nor is Oyl of Galbanum less effectual▪ Galbanum also it self dissolv'd in Wine or Aqua Vitae, then mixt with Castoreum, and applyed like an Emplaster to the Navel, as also Caranna and Tacamahacca dissolved with Spirit of Turpentine, are of singular Efficacy. Holler prepares this Liniment of Civet; Which he says, he has of∣ten tryed. ℞. Oyl of Rue, Nard. an. ʒvi. Galbanum dissolved in Aqua Vitae. ʒiij. Melt them together, then add Civet gr. iiij. Saf∣fron gr. vj. Horstius anoynts the Navel with Trea∣cle mix'd with a little Civet. And it is not amiss to apply warm to the Belly equal parts of Common Salt and Sand tyed up in a Linnen Bag. The Ophite or Serpents stone heated and applyed is also in great esteem among the Vul∣gar. Little Bags also of Flowers of Dill, Cammomil, Melilote, Cummin, Anise, Fennel seed and the like, sprinkl'd with warm Wine, or gently boyl'd in Wine, and applyed hot to the Belly. One thing more I may add concerning Sope, which a Mountbank in France was said to have Cured several Persons of the Wind Choic: his Secret was this. ℞. Malmsey Wine lb j. Spanish Sope ℥s. or ʒvj. and sometimes also an. ℥. Salt ʒij. Dissolve these altogether for a Glyster. OBSERVATION LXXXI. An Obstruction of the Spleen. JUstin de Nassau, a Noble Youth about six Years of Age, about the end of April, began to be troubled with an obstruction of his Spleen; which within a Fortnight encreased to that degree, that the hard Spleen bunched out almost half as big as a Mans Fist; when I came I felt the Boy's Spleen with my hand, and perceived the
Child otherwise chearful, then grown Melancholy like an Elder Person; but in regard he loath'd Physic, I only prescribed him a proper Diet, and ordered him only ʒ s. of Tartar Pulverized every Morning and Evening in a little Broth; I also order'd the following Emplaster to be laid upon his Spleen, which after it had lain on ten days, and then but once shifted, the hardness vanished, and the obstruction was dissipated; ℞. Gum Ammoniac, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, an. ℥j. Emplaster of Melilot, ʒiij. Mix them and spread them upon red Leather. OBSERVATION LXXXII. A Suffocation of the Womb. GOdefrida ab Essem, a Woman about thirty Years of Age, had been troubl'd with an Uterin Suffocation, for which she had taken in vain several things that had been given her by Midwives and other Women; her Fits increasing I was sent for, and found her somewhat red in the Face, but altogether senseless, only she breath'd and that but very little neither. The Woman cry'd out her Womb was got up to her Throat, which was Impossible; but indeed I felt a certain hardness in the upper Region of her Stomach, that moved up and down from one side to the other, about the bigness of a Mans Fist; therefore because she was not in a condition to swallow any thing, I ordered her Temples and the inside of her Nostrils to be rubbed with Oyl of Amber distilled by descent. Then I ordered the Midwife with her middle Finger smear'd with three or four grains of Civet, to fret the sides of the Matrix within side, while another Woman with all her strength forced down the hardness: and thus within a quarter of an hour, the Woman after she had ejected a putrid sort of Seed, came to her self again, nor had she ever after any more Fits. ANNOTATIONS. THat sweet Odours applyed below draw down the Womb, not only the Authority of Authors, but Expe∣rience tells us. Therefore Galen says that perfumes which heat and loosen, do good, because they heat. Those that heat, attenuate also and loosen, by which means what is thick, and difficultly moveable is easily Purged out through the open Pores: More∣over that they have a faculty to dis∣pel Wind, which is very troublesome in Uterine Suffocations. Aegineta ad∣vises the pouring of most Odoriferous Oyntments ito the Womb: and Aetius would have the Womb fumigated with Spices that have a faculty of loosning, sweating, and expelling Wind. How∣ever care is to be had how you hold these sweet Odours to the Nose, least you encrease the Suffocation by oppres∣sing the Head. In this case some Physi∣tians make use of many sweet Scents; but for my part, I only make use of Musk mixt with a little Oyl of Lillies: and many times order a Woman to fret and sitillate the inside of the Orifice with Musk only, which has produced wonderful Effects. Frication with the Finger alone helps to a miracle, and is, commended by Galen, Avicen, Va∣lesco de Tarenta, Simon Betreino: though indeed there is nothing like present Co∣pulation, where it is to be done with allowance; so that indeed for a Wo∣man in the same Condition with our Patient, there is no such Remedy as a Husband. Thus Duretus being call'd
to a Woman under a Hysterical Suf∣focation and finding her in a Fit as cold as Ice, and her Husband by, or∣der'd him to have to do with her, which he did, and the Woman presently re∣covered. OBSERVATION LXXXIII. An Erysipelas, or St. Anthony's Fire in the Thigh. MOnsieur Kelfken, Consul of Nimeghen, had an Erysipelas in his right Thigh, with which he had been formerly often troubl'd; he was threescore Years of Age, and had a very foul Body. He had laid upon the Erysipelas Linnen rags dipt in Vinegar, and Water of Elder-berry Flowers, which somewhat abated the Erysipelas, on∣ly certain little Blisters rose up here and there, as he was wont to have when he used the same Vinegar and Water before; upon these Blisters after he had prickt them with a Needle, he laid a Leaf of green Tobacco; but after it had lain on for three or four days the Skin was more and more exulcerated, and a certain gangrenous Particle began to appear; upon which the Gentleman sent for a Chyrurgeon; who easily cut out that gangrenous Part, sticking in the Skin; and then endeavoured with various Plaisters, to cure the solution; anointing the whole Thigh, because of the Erysipelas with Galens refrigerating Oyntment, and this course he took for six Weeks; but when he could do no good I was sent for; I found the Patient full of watry and Flegmatic Humors, which falling Salt upon his Thigh, caused that continual Exulceration: this made him loose of Body, and his Stomach was indifferent, but he had such an Aversion to Physic that he would swallow nothing; when I look'd up∣on his Thigh, I found the Plaisters were the cause of the Exulcera∣tion of the Neighbouring Parts; which by reason of their Fatness and Density they were not able to retain or suck up the Salt and sharp Humors flowing into them, the Humors were forced to flow to the Neighbouring parts, which they corroded; therefore deeming it the best way to perform the Cure with Cataplasms, which by reason of their softness, might suck and dry up the flowing Humors, I prescribed the following Cataplasm without any Oyliness or Fatness. ℞. Pomegranate Rinds, Flowers of Pomegranates, an. ℥j. Leaves of Oake, of Plantain, Egrimony, Sanicle, an. Mij. Pimpernel, Flowers of red Roses, an. Mj. common water, l. iiij boil them to the Consumption of half. ℞. Leaves of Oake, M. iiij. of Egrimony, Plantain, an. Mj. s. Powder them together; then ada Bean Flower, ℥ij. of the said Decoction, q. s. boil them a little, and make a Cata∣plasm. This being oftentimes shifted, cured the Ulcer; but about three Months after a new Defluction fell upon the Thigh, causing a large fiery Erysipelas; now unless it were one Purge, and one Decoction of China, Sarsaperil. &c. He would take nothing inwardly; there∣upon the foresaid Cataplasm was laid on which did very well for a time; but then a new Defluxion happening with a large Erysi∣pelas, the Pains encreased, the Ulcer enlarg'd it self, and a little after the part gangren'd, and there appeared a blackish gan∣grenous
Particle in the outer side of the Thigh, about the bigness of a Doller; the Chyrurgeon therefore washed the part affected with lukewarm Wine, anoynted it with cleansing oyntment of Parsley, and laid on the same Cataplasm, which caused the gangrenous Par∣ticles to fall out; then the Ulcer being well cleansed, the Cataplasm alone was laid on; in the mean time for the more convenient Eva∣cuation of the Humors descending, I would have made an Issue in the outer part of the Calf of the Leg; but the Patient would not permit it. In March, the Ulcers being by this time healed, a new sharp Defluxion fell down with an Erysipelas, which raised a new Ulcer as broad as the Palm of a Mans Hand, on both sides the Thigh; the Cataplasm would do no good; both strength and Appetite decay'd, and he became so weak that he could hardly go, presently after a Gangrene appearing as broad as a Mans Hand, the Patient seemed to be in some danger, as well by reason of the abundance of ill Humors in his Body, as also because of the great loss of his strength, however the gangrenous Ulcers were anoynted with cleansing Plaister of Parsley, the Cataplasm laid on; for Spirit of Wine so Tormented him that we were forced to leave it off. Then he admitted an Is∣sue in the Calf of his Leg, which was made with a potential Cautery; within three or four days the Gangrene was much increased in the Ulcer, and seized the very place where we had applied the Cautens, from which the Crust was not yet fallen off; thereupon the Chyrurgeon Scarified the Cauteriz'd place to the quick, for the more speedy separation of the Crust, some bits of which he cut off. The three next days the Gangrene encreased more and more, so that in the place of the Issue, there was a piece of dead Flesh, to be cut out as broad as a Dollar, and as deep as my Thumb; the next day the Gangrenous parts stunk like putrified Carrion, and the Gan∣grene continually encreased, therefore to resist Putrefaction and Mortification, we rubbed the part affected with Spirit of Wine, wherein we had first disolved common Salt: and laid on Tents dipt in the same Liquor, and bound up the Ulcer three times a day, by which means the stench was taken away in half a day. Then that the Gangrenous and dead parts might be the sooner seperated by Suppurating from the parts adjoyning, and the sound be preserved from Corruption, we laid on our own Magisterial Balsom, which powerfully resisted Putrefaction, and promoted Suppuration, by which means the Gangrenous parts began to fall away: which being taken off, for sometime a disgestive Oyntment was laid on, and then the Cataplasm alone, by which the Ulcers at length were cured, but very slowly; and the Humors afterwards vented themselves out at the Issue. OBSERVATION LXXXIV. An Exquisite Tertian Ague. CAptain Willmot, a strong Man, was seized with an Exquisite Ter∣tian Intermitting Fever, after the third Fit he sent for me; and upon his well day I gave him a Purge that gave him six or seven Stools, and brought away much Choleric Matter; but hi Fit returning the next day, with the same violence, he would take no more Physic, but by the advice of another Captain, applied the following mixture
hotb his Wrists; which the other Captain told him had expelled Agues in three or four days time, so that they never returned. ℞. VVhite Mustard prepared with Vinegar, ʒ j. s. black Peper, gr. xv. five Cloves of Garlick, Salt, a small handful, Chimney Soot, Sowre Leaven, an. ʒiij. Beat them together and make a Past with a little Vinegar of Roses. Of this apply to each VVrist, a piece about the biggness of a Dollar, and let it lye on three days. ANNOTATIONS. OUR Patient, and many others who saw him thus Cured, as∣crib'd the whole Cure to this only To∣pic: but they were mistaken; in regard that after the Purgation, the Ague had ceas'd of it self in the same Interval of time, without that Topic, or the taking of any other Physic; For the Patient observ'd an exact Dyet, and the Ague was an exquisite intermitting Tertian Ague, which as I have observ'd, never exceeds above the seventh Fit, unless any error in Dyet be committed. For Confirmation of which we have that Rule in Hippocrates, an exquisite Ter∣tian is judg'd at the end of seven Fits at most. I have seen a thousand several Topics, a thousand times apply'd to Wrists, which have avail'd nothing; or if after their application the Agues have either abated, or being Cured, it was not to be ascrib'd to those Topics but to other Causes. I remember I once knew a Person that had been long molested with a Diuturnal Bastard Ter∣tian, which when it could not be Cured by all the Remedies prescrib'd by two Physitians, at length by the advice of an Old Woman, he took Ginger, Seed of Nasturtium and Cobwebs kneaded together with a little Populeon-Oynt∣ment, and laid it to his Wrists. This Topic being twice or thrice shifted, the Ague ceas'd within four days, not through the Vertue of the Topic, but because the Topic was applyed at such a time when Nature was endeavouring a Crisis by a Choleric loosness and E∣vacuation of the Belly. Which Crisis hap∣pening the next day after the application of the Topic, and lasting two days, freed the Patient from the Ague by Evacuating the Matter which fed the Ague, though the Cure were by the Ignorant ascrib'd to the application of the Topic. Ano∣ther I knew, to whom an Egregious Critical Vomiting happen'd presently after the application of a Topic of the same Nature, who was freed from his Ague not by Vertue of the Topic, but by the force of the Vomiting. But these follies have invaded some Physi∣tians to that Degree that they ascribe great Vertues to these Topics which are but meer Whimseys. Thus many ex∣tol Cobwebs, concerning which, says Abraham Seiler, I have observ'd, that if before the Fit comes, you apply Cobwebs mixt with Populeon to the Wrists it has done very much good. These Cobwebs others mix after this manner. ℞. The lesser Nettle, Sage. an. M. s. Cob∣webs ℥ s. Common Salt. ʒiij. Strong Vinegar one spoonful. Mix them for an Emplaster to be applyed to the VVrists two hours before the Fit comes. The Egyptians prepare an Oyntment of Spiders themselves bruis'd toge∣ther with their Cobwebs, and reduced into the form of a Liniment with Oyl of Roses: or else they boyl Spiders in Oyl of Roses, and clap them warm to the Wrists, others prepare this mix∣ture. ℞. Leaves of Plantain, Celandine the Grea∣ter an. Mj. Cobwebs, Nettle seed, Coimney Soot common Salt an. ʒj. Strong Vine∣gar. q. s. Make a Cataplasm, to be applyed to the VVrists before the Fit, and to be shifted three or four times. Plater takes the inner Rind of a Nut-Tree, and after he has steeped it in strong Vinegar applys it to the Wrists: at the same time he also commends this that follows; ℞. Leaves of Treacle, Mustard, Plantain, Shephearas-purse an. M. s. Apply them bruised with Salt and Vinegar. Others commend Chimney Soot bru with Nasturtium and the white of a▪ Egg: Others Soot with Garlick and
Onions; others the fresh Leaves of Crow∣foot bruis'd: others Mousear bruis'd with Salt and Vinegar; and some Prick-Madam prepared after the same man∣ner. I knew a Woman that applyed to the Wrists seed of Zedoary bruis'd and mix'd with Oyl of Turpentine. Coetius applies this following Topic to the Wrists, which he says has cured several; ℞. The greater Celandine green, Fever∣few an. M. s. Bruise them in a Mortar, and then add Olibanum powdered ʒ j. Sowr Leven ʒiij. strong Vinegar q. s. Make soft past. Yet though these things are extolled by many, I cannot conceive by what ver∣tue they perform their work, or how they can do any good. Nay the known vertue of the Ingredients are sufficient to shew the Vanity of them. Neither does Sennertus seem to give any Credit to these Topics. Is you ask, says he, how these Medicaments operate, there can no other reason be given then this; that the Putrid Vapours is by these Medicaments drawn from the Heart; especially that defilement which corrupts the Humors, more especially if any small Corruption remain behind, and the Ague be in its declination. Thus because some raise Blisters in the Wrists in the Cure of Agues, therefore all Vesicatories may be said to have an Ague expelling Ver∣tue. But as for Cobwebs, Plantain, Fever∣few, Olibanum, Sage, &c. There never was nor can be given any reason why they should have any such Vertue. Reiverius however believes that they Communi∣cate their Vertues through some re∣markable Arteries running to the Wrist; and by that means may be able to work a Cure. Whereas the Heart expels from it self through the Arteries, so that the Vertues of Topics can hard∣ly ascend through them to the Heart; besides that, this reason does not shew us by what Vertue these Topics which are so well known can any way prevail. So that unless Reverius will fly to the com∣mon Sanctuary of Occult Quality, I do not find how he can get out of this Labyrinth: Therefore my advice is that Men abstain from things venemous and corrosive, and endued with such a Malignity as may do much hurt: but as for other things that do neither good nor harm, let the Physitians prescribe them as they please, not that any Cure is to be expected from them, but only to satisfie their Patients. OBSERVATION. LXXXV. A Swelling in the Face caused by a Fall. MAry de Frist, a Young Maid, the Wagon where she sate being overthrown, fell with a Terrible Fall upon the left side of her Face, presently she vomited extreamly, and lay in a Swoon for half an hour; when she came to her self she vomited Blood, but that seemed to have fallen down into her Stomach from some Vein broken in her Nostrils; half her Head swelled extreamly; so that her Eyes were hardly to be seen; In the exteriour part of the Orbit of the Eye, there was a small solution of the Continuum: and Blood came out from the inner corner of the Eye, so soon as I saw her to dissipate the Contussion and Tumors, I ordered this Fomentation to be ap∣ply'd. ℞. Leaves of Betony, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, red Roses, an. M. S. Cumin seed, ʒj. shred them and sow them in a little bag: which must be boiled a while in Wine and pressed, and then laid on warm. I did not question much a Fissure in the Skull, for that presently after her vomiting she fell into a Swoon; Blood had come out of her Eye, and because a very great swelling accompany'd the Contusion: therefore after application of the Topic, I took out of her right
Arm half a pint of Blood; about Night she had a slight Fever with shivering, which upon her taking a Sudorific left her, and returned no more. The next day I ordered her a Purge, that gave her four Stools, two days she continued the foresaid Fomentation, repeating it twice or thrice a day. The sixth of Iune, the swelling in her Face was very much fallen, so that she could open her Eye in∣different well; the Fomentation therefore being continued for two days longer, her Eye, that was over-spread with a redness and wept much, so that she could not see out of it, had the following Collyrium laid all over it, between two Linnen-rags, and shifted Morning and Evening. ℞. Whites of two Eggs, beat them with a little Alum till they thicken into the form of a hard Oyntment; in which after you have steeped a Flake of Tow, lay it between two Linnen∣rags upon the part affected. This Collyrium presently took away the redness of the Eye; abated the weeping, and restored her sight; but the swelling of the Face being dissipated, there still remained a deformed redness all over her Cheek, which I cured by washing her Face three or four times a day with Virgins Milk; nevertheless there still remain'd a weeping of the Eye, which was very troublesome, I ordered a peice of raw Beef, cut from the Muscles of the Neck, to be laid o the Neck of the Patient, and so to be bound on, shifting it Morning and Evening; which being done for six days, the weeping ceased. And thus was this Maid restored to her former Health, only that she had a little Scar in the outer corner of the Eye, next her Cheek, in which place, after the Cure, it manifestly appeared that the Bone was depressed by the fall. OBSERVATION LXXXVI. The Kings Evil miraculously Cur'd. SIR Water Vane, a Captain of Horse in our Army in his Youth had been troubled with the Kings-Evil, nor could all the Art of all the Physitians, and Chyrurgeons of England, of any remark, do him any good: so that the Malady still encreased, there∣upon he was advised to go to the King, and to desire his Blessing, from which he could only expect a Cure; this Favour was easily ob∣tained by his Father, then Secretary to King Charles the First, who moved with Compassion laid his hand upon the Head of the Young Lad, and at the same time pronounced these words. The King touches thee, but God heales thee: and withal gave an Angel peice of Gold, boar'd through, and threaded with a blew Riband, to hang about his Neck, which afterwards he always wore as long as he lived. And from that time his Distemper vanished in a few Months, without the help of any Physic; I asked him several times, whether he durst not leave off that peice of Money, for sometime; to which he an∣swered, that he durst not, for that he had known some who having thrown away their Money, were again persecuted with the same Distemper, and though touched a second time by the King, could never be cured.
ANNOTATIONS. THis Privilege of Healing the Evil many ascribe to the Kings of France only; and among the rest Andrew Laurentius. But Experience shews us that this Divine Privilege is granted by God, not only to the Kings of France, but also to the Kings of England. For besides this Sir Walter Vane, I knew ano∣ther Young Gentleman the Son of C. Killegrew, who having receiv'd the same Kings Blessing, was Cured of the Evil otherwise incurable, who also wore such another peice of Gold about his Neck as Captain Vane did. OBSERVATION LXXXVII. Obstruction of the Spleen. CAptain Aussuma, in the full Vigour of his Age, had long been troubled with an Obstruction of his Spleen, and was become very Melancholy. At length his Spleen grew hard and swelled very much, so that it bunched out a good way; so soon as he came to me, after he had try'd several others in vain, I prescribed him a proper Diet, forbidding him smoak'd and Salt Meats, windy Fruit, shell Fish, Herrings, Salmon, in a word all sorts of Meat, breeding crude and flatulent Humors, all strong and sweet Wines, all muddy sorts of Ale: but to observe a moderate Diet upon food of easie digesti∣on and good nourishment; and for his drink enjoyn'd him small Wine and small Ale, and moreover to keep merry Company and refrain Melancholy; this done I gave him a convenient Purge; but because he had an Antipathy against Physic, I ordered him only to take a draught Morning and Evening of this Medicinal Wine. ℞. Rind of the Root of Tamarisch, Capers, Fennel, Elecam∣pane, Polypody of the Oak, an. ℥ s. Water-Tresoile, Mj. Dodder, Ceterach, Fumitory, Lesser Centuary, Roman Wormwood, an. M. s. Nutmegs, Iuniper-berries, Seeds of Fennel, Bishops-weed and Anise, an. ʒj. Make a little  to steep in . v. of White-Wine. This being drank up, the same was repated again with an addition of Senna leaves, ℥j. s. Aniseed, ℥ s. of which he drank a draught every Morning that gave him five Stools; this gave him some ease, brought him to a Stomach, and made him a little more chearful; but the hardness of his Spleen with the Pain remain'd as it was before; but in regard, the Patient would take no Decoctions, Powders, Conditeents, or other Medicaments, nor would take the Wine prescribed him any longer, I prescribed him the following Topics, ℞. Wormwood, Althea, Mallows, Flowers of Camomil, Melilo, Elder Dill, an. Mj. Seeds of Cummin, ℥ s. of Anise, Lovage, Fennel, an. ʒij. Make two little quilts, according to Art. ℞. Roots of Dwarf Elder ℥j. Althea, ryony, Fennel an. ℥ s. Flowers of Elder, Coleworts. Hmlock, an. M. j. s. Mallows, Bees, Althea, Flowers of Melilot Camomil, an. M j. Cummin-Seed, Anise, ʒvj. Boyl them in commo water, q. s. to. lb j. s. then add strong Vinegar  s.
℞. Oyl of Capers, Wormwood, bitter Almonds, Goose-grease, an. ℥j. Oyl of Turpentine, ℥ s. Mix them for a Limment. In the Morning he made use of these Topics in this manner, first the Region of the Spleen was chafed somewhat hard, the two little bags were dipped in the Decoction being warmed by turns, and the Fo∣mentation continued for half an hour: afterwards the place af∣fected was anointed with the warm Oyls, which being contiued for some days and the Patient now and then taking a draught of the last Wine, the swelling in his Spleen quite vanished, and the hardness went off; and to dissipate the Relics, all other Topics being laid aside, this only Emplaster was applied. ℞. Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, ʒvj. Ammoniac, ʒiij. Em∣plaster of Melilot, ℥ s. Mix them, and spread them upon Leather. Thus the Captain being freed from his Distemper, returned to the Camp. ANNOTATIONS. OBstructions and hardness of the Spleen, where the Patients refuse to take inward Medicines, are many times remarkably Cured by Topics. Among which Galbanum, and Am∣moniac dissolv'd in Vinegar are cheifly to be commended; Fabricius ab Aqua∣pendente applauds his own Cere-cloth, made of two parts of Ammoniac dis∣solv'd in Vinegar, one part of juice of Tobacco, half a part of Pine Rosin, Turpentine and Juice of Dwarf-Elder, the other of Oyl of Capers and new Wax, q. s. with which Degestive and Emollient Plaister he Cured several hard Spleens. Mercurialis applauds this that follows, ℞. G. Ammoniac dissolv'd in Vinegar, ℥j. Powder of both Hellebores, Colocynth an. ʒj. Mix and apply them. Heurnius compounds a most effectual Plaister thus, ℞. Hemloch, M. iiij. Ammoniac. lb j. Infuse them in very sharp Vinegar eight days; then let them boyl till the Am∣moniac be dissolved. Then strain them hard through a strong Linnen Cloth; and let the strain'd Liquor simper five times, then with the Wax and Oyl of Sweet Almonds make an Emplaster. Forestus makes use of the following Oyntment. ℞. Oyl of Capers, White Lillies; New Butter an. ℥s. Iuice of Briony, and Sowbread an. ʒv. Boyl them to the Con∣sumption of the Iuices, then add Am∣moniac dissolv'd in Vinegar, ʒij. s. Hens grease, Marrow of Calves Legs, Moist Sheeps-grease an. ℥s. Powder of the Rind of the Roots of Capers, Ta∣marish, Ferne, Ceterach an. ʒs. Seed of Broom, Agnus Castus an. ℈s. A little Wax. For an Oyntment. Amatus of Portugal extols this for a Miracle, as that with which he has cured the most obstinate Schyrruses of the Spleen, ℞. Common Oyl,  iij. Marrow of Oxes Leg, lb j. New Buer,  s. Iuice of Bri∣ony, Sowbread an. lb j. Let them boyl over a gentle fire to the consumption of the Iuices. To the straining add Green Wax, ℥ viij. Powder of Ceterach, Rind of Cper-roots, Tamarish, and Agnus Casti-seed an. ʒ iij. Mix them for an Oyntment. Senertus prepares a Sovereign Remedy of the juice of the Flowers of Elder mixt with a Decoction of Mallows and Oxycrate. Galen commends simple Vinegar, because it cuts and attenuates thick obstructing Humors, and is proper in respect of the Bowel, because Fermen∣tation is not troublesom to it. Aqua∣pendens
his having cured the Schyrrus of the Spleen and Dropsie, by fomenting the Abdomen with a Spunge dipt in Lime-water. But as for cutting the Spleen as it is called, he laughs at it as a ridi∣culous peice of Witchcrat; This is done, says he, by setting the Edge of an Ax upon the hard Spleen, the place being first covered with a piece of Paper, and then striking upon the Ax with a Hammer or Mallet. One of these Professors once brought his Ax to one that was troubled with a hard Spleen; but after he had set his Ax upon the Paper, he stroke so hard with his Mallet, that he cut through Pa∣per and Skin, into the very Spleen it self, to the loss of his Patients Life. OBSERVATION LXXXVIII. The Sciatica. THE Son of Albert Verstegen, about twenty four Years of Age, addicted neither to Venery nor Gluttony, began to complain of Sciatic Pains in his right side; which increased in a few days to that degree, that he could no longer go, when I was sent for I found no Tumour in the Part, nor Inflammation, but a sharp Pain with a weakness in the Joynt, so that he could not move his Thigh but with great trouble; he had taken by the advice of others two Purges; and therefore I rather chose that I might abate the Defluxion of the Humors to prescribe the following Apozem, of which he was to drink three or four Ounces in a Morning, which gave him three or four Stools. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Valerian, Fennel, Bryony, Mechoacan, Stone Parsley, an. ℥ s. Herbs, Rosemary Majoram, Betony, an. Mj. Thyme, Baume, Sage, Germander, Ground-Ivy, Flowers of Elder, an. M. s. of Stoechas, two little handfuls, seeds of Lovage and Anise, an. ʒ ij. of Carthamum, ℥j. Raisins of the Sun well washed, ℥ ij. Boyl these in Common-water, q. s. adding at the end Leaves of Senna cleansed, ℥j. s. white Agaric, ʒij. Fennel-seed and Dill-seed, an. ʒj. s. Make an Apozem of  ij. The following Emplaster was likewise applied to the part affected. ℞. Sulphur finely Powdered, ʒv. Castoreum, ʒj. Tar. ʒvj. Oxycroceum Plaister, ℥s. Balsome of Sulphur ʒij. For a Plaister to be spread upon red Leather. After he had taken all his Apozem, and that his pains remain'd in the same condition, I prescribed him another purging Decoction; of which he drank twice a day. ℞. Sassafrass wood, ʒvj. Roots of Eringos, Cammoch, Lovage, an. ʒj. Masterwort, Fennel, stone Parsley, an. ʒ s. Vervaine, Rose∣mary, Betony, Majoram, Germander, Ground Ivy, an. Mj. Savine, Flowers of Stoechados, an. M. s. Anise-seed. Iuniper-berries, ʒiij. Boyl them in Common-water, q. s. to . ij. Then add. Syrup of Stoechas, ℥iij. For an Apozem. Two days after the former Plaister was laid on again, and when he had drank up his Apozem, I gave him the following Vomit, which brought up a great quantity of Viscous Flegm with Choler.
℞. Leaves of green Assarabacca, ʒiij. Bruise them and press out the juice with ℥ij. of the Decoction of Raddish, to which add Oxymel Scyllit, with Agaric, ℥j. Mix them for a Potion. When all these things did no good I applied this other Plaister. ℞. White Mustard-seed, and of Nasturtium, an. ʒj. Castorium ℈ij. Euphorbium ℈j. s. Spanish-Soe, ʒx. Pine-Rosin, and Turpentine, an. ʒiij. Mix them well to spread upon Leather. After this had stuck on two days, it had raised innumerable little Blisters in the Skin, out of which a green Humour flowed from the inner parts in great quantity; so that in four days he felt great ease. The Plaister being removed I laid on Colewort-leaves; but ob∣serving the Plaister not to be very violent, but that it only gently drew out the internal Humors, and kept the Blisters open without Corrosion, I laid it on again; and so in twelve days the pain went quite off, and the joynt was so corroborated, that the Patient went about without any trouble; but for fear of a relapse I gave him the purging Apozem again, and the Plaister of Sulphur was laid on for a Fortnight longer, which absolutely compleated the Cure. ANNOTATIONS. THough the Sciatica be a kind of a Gout, yet because of the Place the Cure differs in some Remedies. Sometimes it is very hard to be cured, because that joynt is not so profound, that Topics cannot reach it by reason of the thickness of the Muscles that lye over it: and for that inward Medicines require a great deal of time to abate and remove the Cause. This Disease proceeds from too much fullness of Blood, some∣times from a defluxion of cold and and sharp Humors. In repletion Blood∣letting is requisite; which in a very great repletion is to be done in the Arm, then in the Thigh affected. The Vein is to be opened in the Ham, or else the Sciatica Vein. I have cured, said Galen, the Sciatica by opening a Vein in the Thigh. Some there are that apply Leeches to the Fundament instead o Blood-letting. Which way Paulus and Aurelian commend, if you lay on eight or ten Leeches at a time; and Zacutus affirms, he has cured the Sciatica with Leeches, when other Remedies sailed within the space of ten hours. Some pre∣fer Cupping-glasses before Leeches. But if the Malady proceed from sharp, tartarous and cold Humors, Blood-let∣ting does no good (unless there be a Plethory) but first there must be strong Purging with Elect. Caryocostin and Her∣modactyl Pills; or Vomits of Ammonia, or Asarabacca; and then Topics such as asswage Pains, sufficiently known to eve∣ry skilful Physitian. Some extract and dissipate the Morbific matter in∣sensibly: to which purpose Donatus ab Altomary, takes a great quantity of the Stones of sweet Grapes, and presses out the Liquor strongly. This he heats with its Must, then pours it out upon the Pavement, and with his Hands strongly compresses into a heap; then making a kind of a furrow in the Grape-stones, burys the Patient in them, up to the Mid-belly; and there lets the Patient lye to sweat for half an hour, or an hour twice a day. Duretus commends Grape-stones in all sorts of Gouts. If in Vintage time the Grapes are carried into a Barn, and covered with Coverlets till they grow warm, and then for the Patient to thrust his Feet, Arms, legs, r else to lay his whole Body in the heap. Then which says he, There is not a bet∣ter Remedy under Heaven. Solenandr also among the best and safest Remedies that corroborate the Parts affected, and cherish the natural heat, commends the laying the Hands and Feet, or other Parts affected, in a heap of Grape-stones hot from the Press, or heated with new Wine, and this continued for fif∣teen days. To which he adds that he knew a Noble Person, that could not go, who was recovered by the use of this Medicine. I knew my self, a Coun∣try man cured by such a Fomentation,
for some days together in Horse-dung. Matthiolus affirms experimentally, that several Sciaticas have been cured with the slimy water of Snails, when all o∣ther Remedies failed, which Paraeus and Laurentius approve. Old stinking Cheese kneaded into the form of a Ca∣taplasm, with the Decoction of a West∣phalia-Ham, asswages the Pain, draws forth the cause of the Malady, and dissolves the rigid hardness of the Part. Sylvius commends a Cataplasm of Dwarf-Elder, Barley-meal and Honey. Forestus also tells of two Sciaticas cured, with laying upon the Part only Nettles boyled in Ale. We look upon Balsom of Sulphur among the most effectual Remedies; as having more then once observed the happy effects of it. Galen commends an Emplaister of Pitch two Parts, and one of Sulphur, mixt and laid upon the Part affected, till it fall off of it self: Which Forestus so high∣ly extols as the most effectual Remedy that can be invented; only he believes it would be better to equal the propor∣tions of the Pitch and Sulphur. If these things, or the like, avail not, then such things must be made use of that insensibly draw forth the matter, and that either by diversion or from the Part affected. By diversion, auteries applied to the Arms and Thighs are of great use. So Paschal tells us of a Physitian cured of a pain in his Hipps. by a Caustic applied under his Knee, of Quick-Lime and Alum. Hippocrate orders an Incision of the Veins behind the Ears. Zacutus of Portugal in  defluxion from the Head, saw a Person cured by a Caustic applied behind the Ears, from whence after the falling off of the Crust, for ten days together▪ there flowed a thin and watery moi∣sture, and so the Distemper ceased. From the Part affected Visicatories and Rubificants draw forth the peccant Matter. Thus Douynetus tells us of se∣veral that have been cured by the ap∣plication of Vesicatories. Arculanus and others have successfully made use of a blistring Cataplasm in an obstinate pain that gave way to no other Reme∣dies. ℞. Sowre Leven lb s. Cantharides ℥ j. Pulp of Figs ℥ s. Andrew Laurentius recomends this Visicatory. ℞. Old Leven ℥ ij. Cantharides ʒ. ij. Seed of Mustard and Stavesacre, an. ʒiij. Beat them together with Strong Vinegar, for a Vesicatory. Iohn Matthew de Gradibus prepares ano∣ther of the Seeds of Mustard and Nastur∣tium, Pigeons-dung, Decoction of Figs and Venegar; which rubifies and raises Blisters, which being broken and cleansed with the Decoction of Figs, then lay on a Colewort Leaf warm; and this he says extirpates the inveterate Pains of the Hips and the Gout. Galen, Aetius, and Paulus prefer a Cataplasm of wild Cresses, which raises Blisters; and is accounted a peculiar Remedy for these Distempers. Schenkeus tells us of a Sci∣atic, who when all other Remedies failed, of his own Head took Skins of Hemp macerated with Ashes, and having boiled them in strong Vinegar, laid them to the place affected, as hot as he could endure them: This raised several Blisters upon the Skin, out of which flowed a great quantity of gree∣nish yellow Water, by which means his Pain left him. Tagaultius celebrates this Emplaister of Galen and Avicen, then which he says there can be none more effectual, or that gives such pre∣sent ease. ℞. Mustard and Nettle-seeds, Sulphur, Froth of the Sea, round Birthwort Bdelium an. ℥ j. old Oyl, Wax an. ℥ij. For an Emplaister. I have found that Emplaister, which I prescribed to our Patient, with Spainish Soap, to have wrought wonderful ef∣fects. I remember a Young Maid at Montfort, miserably troubled with the Gout, so that she could neither move Shoulders, Arms, nor Hips, who was cured only with Emplaisters of Spanish Soap, mollified in Wine, and spread upon Leather; which raised Blisters, and drew out a great quantity of yellow, greenish Water; which restored her unexpectedly to her Health in a few weeks.
OBSERVATION LXXXIX. A Wound with a Bullet. A Citizen of Nimeghen, the twentieth of May, 1637. imprudently discharged his Pistol downward; so that the Bullet rebounding from the Flint-stone-pavement of the Street, hurt a Woman that was passing accidentally by. The Bullet had entered the Cavity of her Breast about three Fingers from the Spine of the Back, between the fifth and sixth Rib, and entring the exteriour substance of the Lungs, had made a great Wound in the fourth Rib, in the side from the inner part, so that the Rib was broken, but the Bullet did not pass through, but stook in the Cavity of the Breast, not round but flat and oblong by hitting against the stone, as appeared by the Wound unequal and bigger then usual, the Woman was carried wounded home; very little Blood Issued from the Wound; but the next day with Coughing she threw up a good quantity, the danger was great which I foresaw; in regard that the Bullet lying upon the Diaphragma, could no way be drawn forth out of the Cavity of the Breast: as also for that Wounds in the Lungs are difficultly cured, because of their continual motion; especially when the Wound is made by a Bullet, which cannot be done without a great contusion. However the Chyrurgeon bound up the Wound, and after I had gently purged her Body, I prescribed her this Apozem to drink Morning and Evening. ℞. Roots of Madder, ℥j. Eryngos, Fennel, stone Parsley, an. ℥ s. scraped Licorice, ʒvj. Herbs, Scabious, Violet-leaves, Coltsfoot, Chervil, Leaves of black Ribes, or Garden Currants, an. M. j. greater Celandine, M. ij. four greater Cold-seeds, Anise-seed, an. ʒj. Raisins of the Sun, ℥ij. Boyl them in Common-water, q. s. to lbij. add Syrup of Licorice, Poppy Rheas, an. ℥j. s. Mix them for an Apozem. She complained of no pain but one where the Wound was, and the place where her Rib was broken, which pain went off upon laying on a Plaister of Oxycroceum, and her Rib closed again. The first six days she was very weak, she eat little or nothing: little or no Matter came out of her Wound: she had no Fever or Cough or difficulty of Breathing; and after the second day she spit forth nothing either of Blood or Matter out at her Mouth. May twenty seventh, being some∣what bound, we gave her a loosening Draught, which gave her two or three Stools. May the thirtieth she was grevously tormented, so that every Body thought she would have died; but in the Evening of a suddain she coughed up a good quantity of white Matter with some Blood, which gave her great ease, and then she began to be better, the Wound also closed against our Wills; neither did any thing of Matter come forth from the Wound out of the hollowness of her Breast all the time of the Cure; after she had voided this corruption, for seven days she continued without a Cough. The seventh of Iune, with a slight Cough she spit up a small quantity of Corruption again, and then the Cough ceased, and the Patient grew stronger and stronger every day, nor did she after that spit forth any more Matter or Blood, but after the second Month being restored to her perfect Health, went abroad again, feeling no Inconvenience from
so great a Wound afterwards for nine Years together, nor did she feel the Leaden Bullet in her Breast, only when she fetched her breath with a deep sigh, she felt something heavy upon her Mid∣rife. ANNOTATIONS. WIthout doubt the Bullet did not pass the middle of the Lungs: nor touched the Bronchia or bigger Ves∣sels, but only slightly touched the sub∣stance of the Lungs in the outer side: o∣therwise more terrible Symptoms would have ensued; nor would the Cure have been so soon accnmplished; which how∣ever was sufficiently to be admired, when such a wound could not happen with∣out a very great Contusion. Now the great Wounds in the Lungs are incurable, and slight Wounds diffi∣cult to be cured, yet we are not to de∣spair, since very great Wounds in the Lungs have been often Cured. I re∣member I knew a Victualer that lived near Leyden, who in a scuffle with a Country-man was stabbed under the Pap of his right Breast, with a broad Knife that past through the middle of his Lungs, and went out behind under the Scapula. Yet this Man reduced to meer Skin and Bones, through the Ex∣ulceration of his Lungs, two years af∣terwards being brought to Utrecht, was perfectly cured by a Chyrurgeon, with only vulnerary Decoctions. However a great Pat of his Lungs was consumed by Suppuration, which was easily per∣ceived, when he moved backward or forward, for then his right Lung would strike against his Breast, like the Clapper of a Bell. 'Twas to be admired that such a Wound should be brought to a perfect Cicatrization; yet this Man I saw ten years after without a Cough, without any Malady, sound and whole as ever I saw a Man in my Life. In the year 1635. I had another sturdy Coun∣try-man in Cure, who had received a Wound under the Pap of his left Breast, with a broad Knife that entered as far as the middle of the Lungs. Other Country∣men before we came had laid him upon his Belly, and kept the Wound open with their Hands; so that he had bled three full Chamber-pots. After we had bound up the Wound, the Patient sounded and it was thought he would have died, but upon giving him corro∣borating Cordials he came to himself. For the first day he voided sometimes a great deal of Blood, and sometimes Corruption; and frothy coagulated Blood came forth from the Wound, but not much; yet to be short, this Man was cured of this dangerous Wound by the Use of proper Medicaments, nor did he afterwards feel any inconvenience in his Chest. Hildan tells us also of a remarkable Cure of the Lungs wounded, at what time a good Part of the Lungs was cut away. And many other Examples of the Lungs cured are frequently to be found in several other Authors. OBSERVATION XC. An Extraordinary Binding of the Belly. N. ab Offendorph, a German Gentleman, a strong Man in the Flower of his Age, was usually so bound in his Body, that he could hardly go to the Stool without the help of Physic; yet he was not sick, but when he had not gone to Stool in five or six days he grew sleepy, dull and lazy. In August, not having been at Stool for seven days together, when his usual Pills would not move him, he went to Monsieur Romphius, Physitian to the Queen of Bohemia, who gave him two Glisters and two Purges without success; then afraid of his Life he came to me: at what time he had been bound for sixteen Days together, first therefore I try'd to move him with this following Glister.
℞. Roots of Bryony ℥j. Herbs, Mallows, Althea, Herb Mer∣cury, Wormwood, Lesser Century, Flowers of Camomil, and Melilot, an. M j. Leaves of Senna ℥j. s. Colocynth Apples ʒj. fat Figs no. vij. Anise-seed ℥ s. Boyl them in Common∣water, q. s. to ℥x. add to the Straining Stibiate-Wine, ℥iiij. For a Glister. After he had kept this a quarter of an hour, his Belly was much moved, and he had above twenty Stools with a great deal of ease, afterwards I prescribed him a loosning and emollient Diet, and so sent him away back to the Camp quite eased of his burthen. ANNOTATIONS. SChenkius has collected several Exam∣ples of People that have been strangely bound in their Bellys. In which Cases, when Cathartics will do no good: I have observed the wonder∣full Operations of Stibiate-Wine: I remember I gave a Purge to a strong lusty Country-man once, that was very much bound in his Body, but without success. The next day therefore I gave him a Glister, wherein among other things I boiled ℥ s. of dry Tobacco, which presently opened his Body with a Witness. I knew a Captain of a Man of War also, that told me, how he was bound in his Body at Sea, to that de∣gree, that when no Medicaments would move him, and that he was in dispair of his Life, by the advice of one of his Seamen, drank the Parings of his Thumb-Nails in a draught of Ale; which when he had done, at first he fell into a Swoon, so that every body thought he would have dy'd; but coming to himself, he purged upward and down∣ward to that degree, that he was soon freed from his Distemper. OBSERVATION XCI. A Bastard Ague. A Daughter of Captain Rifflaer, about six Years of Age, had been troubled a long time, with a disorderly kind of Ague, yet not very vehement, which took her sometimes in the Forenoon, sometimes after Dinner, sometimes at Night, sometimes every day, sometimes every other day; she looked black and blew about the Eyes; slept unquietly, had her Belly swelled and distended; rubbed her Nose often but com∣plained of no pain, from these signs I conjectured that crude and Fleg∣matic Humors were putrified in the lower Region of her Belly, which caused the Ague, and that moreover she might have Worms in her Belly; now in regard she was very squeamish and would take nothing that was bitter, I gave her ℈j. of Mercurius Dulcis which gave her five or six Stools, that brought away much viscous and slimy Matter, and three or four large Worms; the three days following I ordered her to take a dose of the following Powder, Morning and Evening, in which time she voided eight Worms. ℞. Harts-horn, burnt Coral prepared, an. ℈iiij. Sugar-candy ʒij. to be divided into six equal Doses. Afterwards when I observed her Ague, and the distension of her Belly to continue in the same condition, I gave her again ℈j. of Mercurius Ducis, which after it had given her six Stools, she found her self better, the next three days she would take nothing; the fourth day I got
her to take Mercurius Dulcis again, which after she had voided much viscous and watry Matter, but without Worms, the distension and tu∣mour of her Belly went off together with her Ague, and she recovered her former Health. ANNOTATIONS. IN these Cases I have frequently with success made use of Mercurius Dulcis: and though several eminent Physitians disapprove the use of it, as too dange∣rous, yet so it be well prepared, I ne∣ver observed that it did any harm in moist Bodies. For dry Constitutions it is not thought so proper, and there∣fore to such I either give other Physic, or mix other Purgatives with it, that it may be the sooner expelled out of the Body. Thus Simeon Iacoz, gave xii. gr. of it mixed with gr. v. of Diagridion to a Child of four Years of Age, which within two hours brought away twenty Worms. And indeed it is a most ex∣cellent Remedy against Worms in the Belly; for it not only kills and expels the Worms, but brings away the the cause that breeds them; therefore says Sebastian Strommayien, there is no such Remedy to be found; for it falls upon all manner of Worms bred in our Bodies, speedily, safely and pleasantly, and by a certain Specific quality utterly ex∣pels them: which Experience has suffi∣ciently made manifest. Sometimes in∣stead thereof ℈ j. of Jalap pulverized; or less according to the Age of the Pa∣tient, which is an insipid Medicine and and not displeasing to the Taste, which gently Purges away the Cause of Worms and Agues joyned together. Rondeletius extols Electuary Diacarthamum, as a powerful Remedy to expel Worms and Purge away Flegm, and the corrupt Chy∣lus that breeds and nourishes Worms. Others commend Diaturbith with Rhu∣barb. For such as can take ill tasted Phy∣sic Hiera Picra, or Aloes alone is an excellent Remedy, given in Pills. Dodo∣neus tells us of a Woman of forty Years of Age suddenly taken with terrible gripings in her Stomach, that upon taking Hiera Picra voided forty Worms; and the same Vertue have all Medicaments, wherewith Aloes is mix∣ed. Benivenius writes of one that after he had taken a Composition of Aloes, Myrrh and Saffron, voided forty eight Worms. Crato recommends these Pills that follow. ℞. Aloes Rosat. ℥ j. choice Mirrh. ʒ j. Make them into Pills, the Dose ʒ s. Plater commends these, ℞. Aloes, ʒij. Myrrh, ʒj. Worm-seed ℈j. Make them into a Mass with juice of Wormwood or Gentian, the dose from, ʒs. to ʒj. Sennertus prescribes these, ℞. Aloes, ℈j. Rhubarb. ℈ij. Myrrh, ℈ s. Trochischs of Alhandal, gr. iij. Powder of Coral, ʒ s. Make them into twenty two Pills with juice of Worm∣wood. The Dose for Children ℈j. To destroy all Matter and Nutriment of VVorms in the Guts there is not any better Remedy to be found, then for the Patient to swallow once a VVeek one ℈. of Aloes Succotrine; for Aloes has a peculi∣ar occult quality to Purge and cleanse the extream Parts of the Guts. This is the opinion of Mercurialis in his own Words; but I usually order a ʒ or two of Rhubarb to be put into a little bag, and hung up in the ordinary drink which the Patient drinks; and by that means I both expel the Worms and the cause of the Worms. Saxonia and Solenander with many others extol the Decoction of Sebesten, in ʒiiij: of which Crato macerates, ʒj. of Rhubarb and gives the straining to drink; Rhubarb also given in substance is a great enemy to the Worms; and Dodoneus voids them with this Powder. ℞ Worm-seed ʒj. Shavings of Hearts∣horn, Citron-seed, and Sorrel-seed, an. ℈j. Rhubarb, ʒij. Make them into a Powder, the Dose, ʒ j. Riverius takes, ℞. Powder of Rhubarb, and Coral, an. ʒs. Duretus prescribed this, ℞. Chosen Rhubarb, Wormwood, Sea Wormwood, Shavings of Harts-horn, an. ʒiij. Make them into a Powder Dose ʒj. with the Decoction of Scordium. This as we have tried, says he, excells all the rest. Lastly Antonius Cermisonius as a most destroying expelling Remedy against the Worms, prescribes a Glister of ʒ x. of Goats Milk, and ʒij. of Honey.
OBSERVATION XCII. The Worms. THE Son of Mr. Cooper, about six or seven years old, had been long troubled with Worms in his Belly, which sometimes as∣cending his Gullet, crept out at his Mouth in the Night-time. The Parents had often given him Worm-seed, but to no purpose; so that at length, when the Child was nothing but Skin and Bone, they sent for me. I found him thirsty and averse to all manner of Physick; there∣upon I took half a pound of Quick-silver, and macerated it in two pound of Grass-water, shaking the Water very often. Afterwards, having se∣parated the Mercury, I added to the Water, Syrup of Limons ℥iij. Oyl of Vitriol, q. s. to give it a grateful Taste. This he only took for two days together, in which time he voided downward six and thirty Worms and being so rid of his troublesome Guests, recovered his Health. ANNOTATIONS. SOme extol Quick-silver it self given in the Substance, as an excellent Remedy against the Worms; inso∣much that Sanctorius says, there is no killing of the Worms but with strong and violent Medicines, as Aloes and Mercury or Quick-silver. Of which, Baricellus thus writes, Quick-silver, says he, which many take to be Poyson, is gi∣ven with great Success against the Worms, and is accounted so certain a Remedy in Spain, that the Women give it to In∣fants that puke up their Milk, to the quantity of three Granes. I cured a VVo∣man that for nine days together had been troubled with continual Vomiting, occasi∣oned by the VVorms; besides that, she had not eaten in three days, nor could keep what she swallowed; but after I had gi∣ven her two Drams of Quick silver, mor∣tified with a little Syrup of Quinces, with∣out any trouble, she voided downward a∣bout a hundred VVorms, and was freed from her Distemper the same day. I have VVater at home wherein I continu∣ally keep Quick-silver infused, and wil lingly give it away to children for the VVorms, yet never heard of any Hurt▪ that ever it did. The dose of Mercury to be given to Children is ℈j. to elder People ℈ij. or ʒj. It is corrected and mortified by bruising it in a Glass Mor∣tar with brown Sugar, till it be dissolv∣ed into invisible Parts; and to prevent it from returning to its pristine Form, you must add to it two little Drops of Oyl of Sweet Almonds, and give it fasting with Sugar of Roses, Sy∣rup of Violets or Quinces to the Party affected. Zappara confirms this use of Quick-silver by many examples; and Hildan tells of a Woman cured of the Worms by Quick-silver, of which she passed ʒj. s. through a piece of Leather, and then swallowed it. Where this is remarkable, that the same Woman at that time wore a Plaister upon her Na∣vel, which was afterwards found all covered over with Quick silver. Thus many Physicians celebrate Quick silver; but more applaud it than condemn it; as Plater, Horatius, Egenius; and Fal∣lopius, says of it, That it does not work those Effects being drank, as used by way of Oyntment. I have known, says he, Women that have drank Pounds of it to cause Abortion without any dammage; and I have given it to Children for the Worms. The same is testified by Maria∣nus Sanctus, and Fracastorius. And Matthiolus affirms, that Quick-silver is only prejudicial, because it tears the Guts by its weight; and therefore if it be not given in too great a quantity, he says it can do no harm. And I have seen it given by Midwives to Women in difficult Labours, without any hurt at all. For my part, I never give it a∣lone, but always in some Infusion of Grass-water, Wine, or other Liquor. And as for Stromaiier and Horstius, though they reject raw Quick-silver, yet rightly prepared, they extol it as the best Remedy in the World against the Worms. Sennertus however advises, that though Quick-silver may be used
in desperate Cases, yet to forbear it where milder Medicaments may serve the turn. Since there is a possibility that it may do mischief. OBSERVATION XCIII. The Gout. MR. Hamilton, in the Flower of his Age, was miserably tormen∣ted with the Gout, in the Joynt of his Right-shoulder; so that he had not slept in three Days and Nights. After I had prescrib∣ed him a proper Diet, I purged him with Cochia Pills, gave him a Diure∣tic Decoction for some days, and then applied this Plaister to the place affected. ℞. Gum. Galbanum dissolved in Spirit of Wine, Tacamahacca dissolved in Spirit of Turpentine, Emplaster of Oxycroceum, an. ℥s. Mix them and spread them upon Leather This Plaster stuck on eight days, within which time that immense Pain went off, so that he could freely move his Arm; after that, he return∣ed to the Camp, where he was unfortunately slain. ANNOTATIONS. MAny Disputes there are about the Causes of the Gout; but for my part, I believe there are necessarily two. For either those Pains proceed from cold Defluxions, mixed with some Salt and Acrimony, falling from the Head upon the Joynts, refrigerating and cor∣roding the Nerves, Tendons and Liga∣ments, annexed to the Joynts. For how great an Enemy Cold is to the Nerves and membranous Parts, we find in Winter-time, by the Wounds by which those Parts are laid bare. There, says Hippocrates, all cold things are fatal to the Nerves. Besides, that such De∣fluxions cause Weakness and Stiffness of the Nerves, or too much Relaxati∣on; so that being oppressed with weight, they are extended with Pains; but this sort of Gout is not so terrible. For the second Cause of the Gout proceeds from the salt, sharp and tartarous Humors, separated from the Blood, and thrust forward upon the Joynts. Therefore, says Sennertus, I must conclude, that a sharp, salt, subtil Humor, nearest to the Nature of salt Spirits, is the Cause of the Gout. Let any Man call it by what other Name he please, Choler, or Flegm mixed with Choler, Salt or Tartar, so the thing be rightly understood. In vain therefore Physicians have hi∣therto sought, for the Cause of the Gout in the Heat and Drougth of Cho∣ler, or the Moisture and Cold of Flegm, for they are not the first but the second Qualities which induce those Pains; that is, the Salt and the Acrimony which corrode and gnaw those Parts. Therefore, says Hippocrates, 'tis not hot, cold, moist and dry, that have the act∣ing Power, but bitter and salt, sweet and acid, insipid and sharp, which if rightly tempered together, are no way troublesome, but when alone and separated one from the other, then they give the Vexation and shew themselves, &c. In the Cure of the first, in regard the Cause proceeds from a depraved Dispo∣sition of the Brain; therefore the Brain is to be evacuated and corroborated, to prevent these Excrements from gather∣ing any more in that place. The Parts affected also are to be corroborated with Topics, warming the Parts, dissipating and drying up the crude Humors. In the Cure of the hot Gout, the salt Humors are to be evacuated and purged away by inward Medicaments, before they be pushed forward into the Joynts, and that their Generation may be prevented. Topics also must be made use of to temper the Acrimony of the salt Humors, to dissolve, dissi∣pate and evacuate by transpiration, those Humors; the Forms of which, I shall give in another place.
OBSERVATION XCIV. A Pain in the Stomach with Vomiting. PEtronella Beekman, a Maid about twenty seven or twenty eight years of age, the nineteenth of Iune, was taken with an intole∣rable Pain in the upper part of her Belly, which extended it self sometimes to the Right, sometimes to the Left, but most to the Sides. She had a Vomiting likewise, sometimes more gentle, sometimes vehement, which brought up all her Meat. Sometimes her vehement Vomiting brought a Pint, or a Pint and a half of black Water, with some tough Flegm: At the top of this Water swam cer∣tain little Bodies, about the bigness of a Filberd, in Colour and Con∣sistence resembling Butter. When these came up she had some ease for two or three hours, but then her pain returned again. She had no Fever, no Tumor in her Spleen, no Obstruction in her Kidneys; and she made Water without trouble, but very thick, neither did she void any Gravel either before or after; nor was there any Distemper to be perceived in her Womb, where all things proceeded according to Na∣ture; nor had bad Diet been the cause of her Distemper, but what that buttery Substance should be▪ I could not certainly tell for my Life, only I conjectured that it might be some corrupt Choler, preternatu∣rally chang'd into that Substance. However, the first thing I did, was to stop her Vomiting; to which purpose, I caused her Stomach to be anointed with Oyl of Nutmegs, and applied a warm Cataplasm to it of Mint, Red Roses, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mastich, Olibanum, sowre Ferment and Vinegar of Roses, but all to no purpose. The next day, her Pains and Vomiting having very much weakned her, I gave her a corroborating Medicament of Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Treacle and Cin∣namon-water and Syrup of Limons, equal parts, to take frequently in a Spoon, which stay'd with her. The twenty first of Iune, I applied to the Region of her Stomach a corroborating Plaister of Tacamahacca, Galbanum, Cloves, Benjamin, and the like. The twenty second, I gave her a gentle Purging Draught, which she presently brought up a∣gain; then I ordered her a Glister, which gave her two or three Stool, but her cruel Pain and Vomiting continued still. The twenty fourth I gave her one Scruple of Pill. Ruffiae, which stay'd with her, and gave her three Stools about Evening; and then, because the Plaister was troublesome, I took it off, and applied in the Room a Linnen Quilt filled with Mint, Wormwood, Sage, Flowers of Cammomil, Melilot, Dill, Nutmegs, Cumin-seed, Fennel, and Dill-seed; which Quilt was boiled in strong Wine, and applied to her Stomach. The twenty eighth she took another Glister. The twenty ninth about night, I gave her two Scruples of Philonium Romanum, prepared with Euphorbium in a little Wine, which caused her to sleep that Night four hours, whereas she had not slept till then from the begin∣ning of her Distemper; the next day her Pain returned, neverthe∣less the Philonium seemed to have endeavoured some Concoction; for that she began to belch, which gave her some ease; wherefore about Evening I gave her two Scruples of Philonium. The first of Iuly, she belched more freely, therefore that Evening I gave her Philonium a∣gain. The next day her Pains abated, and her Vomiting ceased, and at Noon she supp'd a little Broth, which was the first Nourishment
she had taken since her Sickness. Iuly the third, she took Pill. Ruffiae to loosen her Belly. The fourth of Iuly, her Pains encreasing, I pre∣scribed her an Amigdalate, but she brought it up again. Therefore the sixth of Iuly, I gave her two Scruples and a half of Philonium, which caused her to rest indifferently. The next day her Pains abated, so that at night the same Dose of Philonium was again given her, as also the next Evening▪ The ninth of Iuly, in the Morning, she took Pill. Russiae, and in the Evening Philonium again, and so for three E∣venings more one after another; by which means her Pains and Vo∣miting ceased, her Appetite returned, and she recovered her Health. The twenty third of November she was again taken with the same Pains and Vomiting; thereupon, after I had purged her Body with Pills, I gave her Philonium again, which gave her ease, and so conti∣nuing the use of Philonium for twelve Evenings together, and loosning her Body every day with Pills, at length I mastered the Obstinate Dis∣ease; so that for six years together, I knew her safe and sound from that and all other Distempers. OBSERVATION XCV. A Bastard Intermitting Tertian Ague. HErman N. in the Vigor of his Age, in the beginning of March, was taken with a Bastard intermitting Tertian Ague, which began with a great Coldness, and ended in a violent Heat; it came every other day, but at uncertain hours, sometimes sooner, sometimes later. During the Fit, his Head ach'd violently, and he was very faint; his Stomach was gone, and his Strength much wasted. After he had taken many things in vain from other Physicians, coming to me, I gave him half a Dram of lucid Aloes reduced into Pills, which gave him five Stools; afterwards I ordered him to take dry Wormwood Mj. Lesser Centaury Mij. Carduus Ben. Flowers of Cam∣momil, an. Mj. s. and to cut them all▪ small, and then boil them in three Pints of Small Ale for a quarter of an hour, and then to squeeze it out strongly, and to take of the Straining warm, twice upon the Fit-Day, and thrice upon the Intermitting-day, and when that was done to make more; but this Decoction served the turn, for the Ague van∣quished by this Medicine, lasted not above four Fits; after which time the Patient was fully cured, and his Stomach returned. ANNOTATIONS. THis Decoction, by which this Pati∣ent was freed from a long Ague, though it did not consist of many costly far-fetch'd Ingredients, or prepared by laborious and pompous Chymistry, yet was compounded of such Simples as are chiefly celebrated for the Cure of Agues. For Wormwood, Carduus and Centau∣ry the less manifestly open all Obstructi∣ons of the Bowels, concoct and remove Crudities, cut thick Matter, and resist Putrefaction, and expel noxious Hu∣mors by Urine and Sweat, and are so well known among the Vulgar to have these Vertues, that they are able to be their own Physicians in the Cure of Agues, by the use of Powder of Cardu∣us, Wormwood-wine, and Decoctions of Centaury. I added Flowers of Ca∣momil, by reason of the Wind which troubles the Hypochondriums, and there∣fore of great benefit in Agues. Camo∣mil, says Galen, discusses and dissolves Agues where there is no Inflammation of any Bowel; especially such as proceed from choleric Humors, or thickness of Skin. For
which reason, by the wise Egyptians it was consecrated to the Sun, and was looked upon as a Remedy against all Agues, but in that mistaken for it; only cures such A∣gues as I have mentioned, and those con∣cocted. Though it helps the rest, which are Melancholy and Flegmatic, and pro∣ceed from the Inflammation of the Bow∣els. For against those it is also a potent Remedy, when they are once well concocted. Wherefore Cammomil is most grateful to the Hypochondriums. But though Galen tells us here that Cammomil is only to be used after Concoction of the Matter; yet in regard that of it self it is very prevalent to promote that Concoction, cuts thick Humors, opens Obstructions, removes Crudities, discusses Wind, and provokes Sweat and Urine; therefore it is thence apparent, that it may be given with success before the Concoction of the morbific Matter. Thus Sennertus reports, that Iohannes Anglicus was wont to give Cammomil promiscuous∣ly, as well before as after Concoction, and that he always found it very ad∣vantagious; and therefore it was no wonder that our Patient succeeded so well with those four most noble Febri∣fuges boiled together, and that the morbific Matter was so speedily con∣cocted, discussed and expelled. OBSERVATION. XCVI. Thunder-struck. IN the Year 1637, upon the twenty fourth of August, rose a most terrible Tempest, with horrid thunder and Lightning. At that time a Servant of a Country-man of Nimeghen was abroad in the Field gathering in Harvest, having with him a Girl, an old Woman with a Child, and a Cart with one Horse; they terrified with the Tempest fled, and the old Woman with the Child crept under the Cart, while the Servant and the Girl were endeavouring to bridle the Horse. In the mean time a violent Thunder-clap struck the Servant, the Girl, the Cart and Horse, the old Woman and the Child receiv∣ing no harm. The Beam of the Wagon made of strong Wood, was broken into Shivers; the Horse fell down dead of a suddain, and yet nothing of hurt appeared outwardly; the Girls Right-thigh and Leg were both struck by the Thunder, so that all the Parts appeared black, blew and purple; besides that, her Peticoat and Smock were torn into long Rags; the Girl also was thrown to the Ground and lay speechless for two hours. The Servant was maim'd over all his Body, especially upon his Right-side; from which Side, his Doublet, Breeches, Drawers and Shirt were not only torn, but shivered into long Rags, and retained a vehement stink of Fire, as if they had been burnt for Tinder. His Right-shoo, made of very strong Leather, was rash'd into long Thongs, and cast thirty Paces from his Foot. By such a ve∣hement Stroke the young Man being lay'd prostrate upon the Ground, fell into a Swoon, and was carried home for dead: This Fit lasted for two hours, and then he came to himself. I saw the Man, and viewed his whole Body, and found his Right-side from Head to Foot all of a Colour, between black and purple, his Skin flead off in some places; there was also a very great Contusion, and a burning fiery Heat joyned with it. The Patient spoke very little, only complained of a violent Pain of his whole Side, an extraordinary Heat of his Heart, a Com∣pression of his Breast, and Difficulty of Breathing; he could not move the Joynts of his Right-side, and remained so disabled for two months. Being asked what he first felt, he answered that at the very moment that he was struck, he thought his Heart had been burnt with a red hot Iron; neither could he draw his Breath, which was the reason that he fell down as if he had been stifled. I gave him several things,
and applied several Topics to the Parts affected; but nothing availed against that aethereal Fire; till at length, the Patient, by Divine as∣sistance, was cured without the help of any Medicaments. The old Woman, that with the Infant escaped under the Cart, related that she smelt a most horrible Stink when the Stroke was given, and felt such a violent Heat, as if her Head had been in a Bakers Oven, so that for the time she could hardly draw her Breath. ANNOTATIONS. WIth what a violent force, and how wonderfully Thunder sometimes strikes inferior things, both antient and modern Testimonies suffici∣ently convince us. In the Year 1626. eight days before Easter, rose a very great Tempest, with Thunder and Lightning; at what time, with one Clap of Thunder, four Houses and six Barns were quite overthrown in Block∣land near Montfort, and above three thousand Trees, not only broken, but torn up from the Roots, and cast at a great distance from their Holes, neither Men nor Beasts receiving any harm. In the Year 1628, a Country Man was killed in the Fields near Bodegrave with a Flash of Lightning, his Bones being broken to bits, yet neither his Skin or Flesh endamaged. In France at Poitou, in a certain Tower, we saw the Rafters burnt, the Lead being untouched; nor was the Fire quenched without a great deal of trouble. In the Year 1638, at Nimeghen, in the Walk called the Calves-wood, above a thousand Birds were kill'd at one time by the Light∣ning; and while the same Tempest lasted, some Oxen were killed by the Lightning, having their Bones broken, and several Trees were thrown down and broken, having their Leaves scorched and parched by the Flame▪ Cardan reports, that in the Year 1521, the Castle of Millain was almost demo∣lished by Lightning, at what time a hundred and thirteen Men were kill'd. Hildan tells a remarkable Story of a Gentleman, who was Thunder-struck himself, at what time his own Horse, and his Man with another Horse were both killed out right. The Gentle∣man's Cloaths were torn to Peices, and his Sword melted, the Scabbord, re∣ceiving no harm; only that the Iron Chape was melted at the same time. Therefore says Cardan, upon this; Mo∣tion not only causes a greater Penetration, but kindles the Heat it self, and renders the Fire hotter. Therefore it is no won∣der there should be such a force in Light∣ning, and that a Fire so different from the Nature of other Fires, should work Miracles; for by reason of the Swiftness of its Motion, it not only penetrates more, but the Fire is also hotter than any other Fire: For what other Fire is there that kills by touching? This is peculiar to this Fire; that is, the hotest of most hot; or as I may say, the Fire of Fires: And therefore sometimes it melts the Money in the Purse, and leaves the Purse un∣touched, &c. OBSERVATION XCVII. A Cough. NIcolaus Kerckwegg, in the Vigor of his Age, was troubled with a lamentable Cough for three or four years; he was nothing but Skin and Bone, and seemed to be perfectly Ptisical. When, after he had tried several others in vain, he came to me; I examined the Condition both of the Person and the Disease; I looked upon his Spittle, which was slimy and tough, without any Matter or Blood, therefore I could not judge him to be in a real Consumption, but that the Cough proceeded from a Cathar falling upon his Lungs, which in a long time of continuance, had weakned, not only his Lungs, but his whole Body. For Cure, I prescribed him a proper Diet, and some few Remedies, for that his Antipathy against Physic, and his Weak∣ness,
would not permit me to give many. Therefore, having gently purged his Body, I ordered him to take a Draught of the following Decoction three or four times a day. ℞. White Horehound M. iij. Shred it small, and steep it all night in common Water lbj▪ s. to which, the next day, add the Head of one white Poppy shred into bits, Leaves of Hys∣sop M. j. Oxymel lbj. s. Boil them in an earthen Pipkin close stopped, to the Consumption of the third Part, and keep the Straining for your Use. This Decoction he continued for three or four months till at length the Cough abated every day more and more, and at length ceased; the Man also having recovered his Strength, and growing fat and lusty, so continued without any further Molesta∣tion. OBSERVATION XCVIII. An Uterine Suffocation. THE Wife of a Brick-layer at Nimeghen, about twenty eight years of Age, in Iuly, was troubled with a Suffocation of her Womb with a great pain in her Left-side, and difficulty of Breath. Being sent for about Evening, I gave her the following Draught, which when she had taken, the Malady ceased in part, and so she slept quietly that Night. ℞. English Saffron, Castoreum an. gr. v. Trochischs of Myrrh ℈s. Prepared Amber ℈j. Treacle ℈ij. Treacle-water ℥j. Mug∣wort ℥s. Oyl of Amber gut. ix. Mix them for a Draught. The next day her Fit returned with the same vehemency, and be∣cause she had not been at Stool in three or four days, I gave her this Purge. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥s. Lovage-seed ʒj. s. Mugwort-water q. s. Make an Infusion, then add to the Straining Elect. Diapheni∣con, Hiera Picra, an. ʒj. s. For a Potion. This gave her five Stools; the Suffocation remaining, nay, growing more violent than before, wherefore I prescribed her the following Decoction, of which she drank warm an ounce, or an ounce and a half every hour, which after she had continued the whole day, her Evacu∣ations came down, and the Suffocation vanished. ℞. Roots of Masterwort, Valerian, an. ℥s. Dittany, Briony, an. ʒiij. Savine M. j. Seed of Lovage ʒvj. Of wild Carrots ʒij. White-wine q. s. Boil them for an Apozem to lbj. s.
OBSERVATION XCIX. Deafness. THE Wife of Henry Iordens, in the Month of August, complained that for half a year she had been troubled with a very great Deafness, so that she could hear nothing but very loud Noises. She was about forty years of age, and during this Deafness, had been all along very hard bound in her Body, so that she seldom went to Stool in four or five days; for which reason, I judged that many Vapors as∣cended up to her Brain, which furring the auditory Nerve and Tym∣panum, caused this Deafness: Thereupon, after I had well purged her Body with Pills, I ordered her every Evening when she went to Bed, to swallow two Pills of Lucid Aloes, about the bigness of a Pea; by taking of which, her Body was naturally loosned, and so that great Deafness, within a Fortnight, was quite taken away, to the Admiration of many. ANNOTATIONS. THE Head, like a Lembick, re∣ceives the Vapors of all the Parts that lye underneath: Which if they are carried thither in greater abundance than can be digested and discussed by the Brain, causes various Diseases of the Head, Pains, Catarrhs, Ophthalmies, Deafness, &c. And this abounding Ascent of copious Vapours, chiefly happens to those that are bound in their Bodies. For this reason, if the Deafness have not been of a very long standing, then the Malady is easily cured by loosning the Body; by which means the morbi∣fic Matter is derived to the Intestines: Which Celsus intimates; where he says, Nothing more prevails against Deafness than a Choleric Belly. For which, Galen gives this Reason, because that Choler being carried to the Auditory Passages, and causing Deafness if it be removed from those Parts to the lower Parts, the Deafness is cured by Choleric Stools. Neither is this only true in Deafness, but in Ophthalmies, and other Affecti∣ons of the Head, according to that Say∣ing, All Stools below remove the Diseases of the Superior Parts: Which is to be understood not only of Evacuations of Choler, but of all other Evacuations by Stool. Hippocrates and Celsus speak particularly of Choleric Humors, be∣cause they occasion Deafness more than any other Humor, in regard that Cho∣ler has a familiar passage to the Ears; as appears by the Bitterness of the Ex∣crement of the Ears: Which Mercuri∣alis believes that Nature carries thither, meerly to cleanse the Auditory Organ, and keep it clean. Wherefore in such Maladies of the Head, purging Medi∣cins that mollifie the Belly, are of great use; partly to hinder the Ascent of such Humors and Vapors; partly to draw off such as are already got up into the Head; of which, we saw the happy Event in our Patient. For though there be no conspicuous Passage for the De∣scent of those Humors from the Brain, yet Nature finds out ways unknown to us, by which she evacuates the Morbific Matter, and rids her self of many Di∣stempers. OBSERVATION C. The Itch. A Young Gentlewoman had got the Scab, which chiefly infested her Hands with an extraordinary Itching. This Malady had continued for half a year, and because it began to spread more and more, I was sent for: Thereupon, after I had purged her Body, I or∣dered
her to wash her Hands with equal parts of mercuriated Water and Virgins Milk, and to let them dry of themselves. By which means the Scabbiness came forth more and more for two or three days, but within three or four days afterwards, wholly dry'd up, and was cured. OBSERVATION CI. A Malady in the Stomach. ISaac of Aix la Chapelle, forty six years of age, was troubled with an old Distemper in his Stomach, occasioned by difficult and painful Belchings; so that after he had eat or drank any thing, he was forced to belch fifty, and sometimes a hundred times and more, and that of∣ten both by day and by night; neither could he stop them; or if they did not break forth, he was like one that was ready to burst. Besides, his Sight was very weak, so that he could not see to read or write without Spectacles, and that at a very near distance too, and thus he had been troubled from the twentieth year of his Age till then. He had had the Advice of several Physicians to no purpose; upon which, I desired him to try only one Experiment, which was to smoak one Pipe of Tobacco after Dinner and Supper. At first he took but half a Pipe, but afterwars he grew such a Proficient, that he would take two or three; so that after he had continued the use of Tobacco in that manner for about a month, his Belching ceased, and his Sight was much amended. ANNOTATIONS. NIcholas Monardes writes, that To∣bacco is hot and dry in the second degree, and therefore attenuates, con∣cocts, cleanses, discusses, asswages Pain, and has a stupifying Quality, is good against the Tooth-ach, allays all Pains of the Head being outwardly ap∣plied, and laid upon the cold Stomach, cuts the same, &c. Which Qualities, Dodonaeus acknowledges also in Tobacco. But in regard that in their time this Plant was not so much in request, the Benefit and Abuse of it was less known to them than to us.
Practical Disputations OF Isbrand de Diemerbroeck, Concerning the DISEASES OF THE HEAD, BREAST and LOWER BELLY. The Cures of the chief Diseases of the whole Head, in Twenty Five Disputations, annexed to the Cases of the Patients themselves. HISTORY I. Of the Head-ach. A Person of forty years of age, of a Fleg∣matic Constitution, often liable to Ca∣tarrhs, in the midst of VVinter, in a very cold Season, had travelled for forty Days toge∣ther, and by the way had fed upon flatulent, viscous Meats, of hard Digestion, and other such kind of Food, to which he had not been ac∣customed, and instead of VVine, he had been forced to drink thick muddy Ale. Upon his return home, he complained of a troublesome Pain in his Head, more heavy and obtuse than acute, which if you laid your hand hard upon
the place, was so far from being exasperated, that it was more gentle for the time. This Pain was also accompanied with Noises in his Ears, an In∣clination to Sleep, which his Pain however would not permit him to take, and a want of Appetite, a Lassitude of the whole Body, and Paleness in the Face. I. IN this Patient we find the Head to be first affected, by the Pain thereof, and the Noise in his Ears: Whence, by consent, the whole Body suffers, as appears by his Lassitude and other Simptoms. II. The Malady of which he chiefly complains, is a Pain in the Head; which is a trouble to the Sense of Feel∣ing in the membranous Parts, caused by the Solution of the Continuum. III. This Pain is internal, in the Parts contained within the Skull; as is from hence apparent, for that it is not exasperated, but somewhat mitigated by laying the Hand hard upon the Part. IV. The remote Cause of this Mala∣dy is disorderly Diet; by which means, by the use of Meats of ill Juice and hard Concoction, several crude and flegmatic Humors are generated in the whole Body, but especially in the Head, which produce the Antecedent Cause; which being encreased by the external Cold, wherein he had traveled for four days together, and fixed in the mem∣branous Parts of the Brain, occasioned the containing Cause. V. These flegmatic Humors being by the external Cold condensed in the Head, and not being evacuated through the Pores, obstructed by the Cold, or other Passages appointed for the Evacu∣ation of the Excrement, were gathered together in great abundance in the Pas∣sages of the Brain, and by reason of their quantity distending the membra∣nous Parts of the Brain, and dissolving the Continuum, caused the Pain. VI. The Cure is to be hastned, for if that flegmatic Humor stay long in the Head, 'tis to be feared that the Ma∣lady may turn to a heavy Drowsiness, or an Apoplexie, or if it dissolve too soon, and make too improper a way, least it cause some dangerous Catarrh, which falling upon the Lungs or lower Parts may endanger a violent Cough or Suffocation, or some other desperate Distemper in some other part. VII. Four Indications are here to be considered in order to the Cure. 1. That the abounding Flegm be evacuated from the Head and whole Body. 2. That it be specially evacuated out of the Head it self. 3. That the Pain be al∣lay'd. 4. That the Head be strength∣ened, and the Concoctions of the Bow∣els be promoted, and so a new Gene∣ration of abounding Flegm, as well in the Head as whole Body, be prevented, and that the Flegm already generated and abounding may be consumed. VIII. For the Evacuation of Flegm abounding in the whole Body, let him take this purging Draught. ℞. Trochischs of Agaric ʒj. Leaves of Senna cleansed ℥s. Anise-seed ʒj. s. White Ginger ℈j. Decoction of Barley q. s. make an Infusion. Then add to the Straining Elect. Diaphaenicon ʒij. Diagredion gr. iiij. Mix them for a Draught. If the Patient cannot take this, give him of Pill. Cochiae ℈ij. or iij. or else ʒj. of Powder of Diacarthamum, or Di∣aturbith with Rhubarb. This Purgati∣on must be repeated to prepare the Hu∣mors three or four times every three or four days one after another. IX. For Evacuation of the Flegm, particularly accumulated in the Head, Sternutories and Errhines are of great use. The one, because they draw down viscous and tough Humors through the Nostrils and Palate. The other, because the Brain being by them provoked, and violently contracting it self, as violently expels tough Humors sticking to the Ethmoides Bone, and by removing the Obstruction, makes way for the Excrements detained therein. X. Of this Sneezing-powder, let him twice or thrice a day snuff up a little into his Nose.
℞. Marjoram Leaves ℈j. Root of white Hellebore ℈j. s. Pellitory of Spain ℈s. Black Pepper, Benjamin, an. gr. v. If Sneezing prevail not, let him snuff up a little of the following Errhin into his Nostrils. ℞. Iuice of Marjoram ℥s. Iuice of the Root of white Beets ℥j. Mix them for an Errhin. XI. In the mean time, to allay the Pain, anoint the Fore-head, Temples and Top of the Head with Martiate or Alabastrin Oyntment, mixed with a sixth part of Oyl of Dill; or a Cata∣plasm of Flowers of Cammomil, Me∣lilot and Dill; adding a little Nutmeg and Saffron with as much of the Crum of White-bread and White-wine as is sufficient, and lay it between two Lin∣nen Rags to the Temples and Fore∣head; but beware of all Narcotics. XII. For the Corroboration of the Head▪ and the rest of the Bowels, and Diminution of the Flegm, External and Internal Medicaments are proper, and a convenient Diet. ℞. Roots of Calamus Aromatic. Elecm pane, Fennel, an. ℥s. Galangale ʒiij Herbs, Betony, Marjoram, Rosemary, Hyssop, Baum, Thyme, an. M. j. Sage. Fowers of Cammomil, Staechas, an M. s. Seed of Fennel, Anie, Caro∣ways, an ʒs Iuniper-berries ʒvj Raisins cleansed ℥ij. Common Water nd White∣ine equal Parts. Boil them an make an Apozem to lb j. s. with which, mix Syrup of Staechas ℥ij. or iij. If after he has taken this, there requires more Exsiccation still, the same Sim∣ples may be boiled in a Decoction of , Sassapeil or Sassafras, which will make the Medicine more effectual. Let him continue this Decoction for some time, or if at length it prove distastful, let him often take of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambra ℈iiij. Aromatic. Rosatum ℈ij. Ginger condited, Con∣serve of Flowers of Sage and Rosemary, an. ℥s. Syrup of Staechas q. s. For a Conditment. XIII. And in regard that Topics are of great use to corroborate the Head, and fetch down cold Humors therein remaining, let him anoint his Tem∣ples and fore-part of the Head up∣on the Coronal Suture with this Lini∣ment. ℞. Oil of Nutmegs pressed ʒj. Oils of Thyme, Rosemary, Dill disilled, an. ℈j. Mix them for a Liniment. After this Anointing, put upon the Head the following Quilt. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary and Marjoram, an. ʒs. Flowers of Melilot, Red Roses and Lavender, an. ʒj. Root of Flo∣rence Orrice, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ben∣jamin, an. ℈j. Beat them into a gross Powder for a Quilt. Let him wear this a Month or two upon is Head. XIV. Let the Patient keep a proper Diet; live in an Air moderately hot: Let his Food be Meats of good Juice, hot and easie of Diestion, seasoned with Rosemary, Marjoram, Stone-Parsly, Sage, Betony, Hysop, Pepper, Ginger and other Spices. His Drink, small Wine or Mede, or midling Ale. Let him not sleep long, and use mode∣rate Exercise. Let him keep his Body soluble. Let him avoid Sadness, Me∣lancholy and sudden Frights, and keep himself in an even Temper, free from Passion. HISTORY II. A Phrensie. A Stout young Man, of a Choleric Constitution, abounding with Blood, and living intemperately, having drank over freely at a Merry▪meeting, and thereby over-heated, at length, being affronted by one of the Company, fell into a most violent Passion; yet being hindred from his present Revenge, and carried Home, never slept all that Night, but like a Mad-man ran about his Chamber, talking of
nothing but Brawls, Fighting, Wounds and Revenge; and that with great Rage, and many Follies intermixed, The next Day he was ab∣solutely mad, and began to lay violent Hands upon the Servants, so that he was forced to be held by lusty Men. The next Night he con∣tinued waking with an extraordinary Delirium and Fury, picking Straws and the Bed-cloaths, sometimes flying upon those that were in the Room. His Eyes were red, his Looks furious and wild, he bawl'd and roar'd, was very thirsty, feverish, and his Urine pale. The third Day the Physicians were sent for. I. THE continued and raging Deli∣rium, with his Waking shew∣ed that the Brain of this Patient was distempered, and the Fever was a Sign that his whole Body was out of or∣der. II. The Disease was an Inflamation of the Membranes of the Brain, and thence a hot Distemper of the Brain and Spirits, which caused the Fever; and that the Commotion of his Mind, which the Physicians call a Phrensie, which is a raging and continued Deliri∣um, with a continued Fever, arising from an Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain. III. The remote Cause was Intem∣perance in Diet, which engendring a great quantity of choleric Blood in the Body, occasioned the antecedent Cause. Which choleric Blood being heated by excess of drinking Wine, and carried in greater quantity to the Head, and there powred into the Substance of the Membranes of the Brain, constitutes the containing Cause of this Distemper, which Disease this Simptom follows. IV. For the hot Blood flowing over copiously into those Membranes, and there putrifying inflamed them; and part of that Putrefaction being com∣municated through the Veins to the Heart, and thence expelled hotter through the Arteries to the whole Bo∣dy, kindles the Fever, which causes the extraordinary Drought of the Gul∣let and Mouth. V. This Inflammation of the Mem∣branes infects with a hot Distemper the Brain it self, and Spirits, whose ex∣tream Heat, Mobility and inordinate Motion, deprave the principal Functi∣ons of the Brain, and so breed a Deli∣rium, which proves raging and conti∣nued, because of the extream and con∣tinued Heat, and rapid Motion of the fervent Spirits. VI. This Disease is dangerous for several Causes. 1. Because the princi∣pal part is affected. 2. Because conti∣nual Waking weakens the Patient. 3. Because this Delirium is not accom∣panied with Laughter but with Raging. 4. Because the Inflammation is thereby much augmented and fomented, and the Choleric Matter which uses to dye the Urine is carried all to the Head, and leaves the Urine pale. Only there is some hopes of Cure, because there is no decay of Strength, or appearance of bad Simptoms, as Convulsions, loss of Speech, Hickupings, Gnashing of Teeth, or the like; and therefore Cure must not be delay'd till the Patient grow worse. VII. This Cure consists in taking a∣way the antecedent and containing Cause, and Correction of the ill temper of the Parts. VIII. The choleric Blood which flies to the Head, is first to be evacuated, drawn back, derived, and repelled. And therefore after an emollient Glister given, open a vein, first in one Arm, and take away ten or twelve ounces of Blood; the next day in the other, and the third day again, if there be necessity, in the Vein of the Fore-head. IX. To evacuate the choleric Hu∣mors, give this Draught. ℞. Rubarb the best, Leaves of Senna, an. ʒij. Rhenish Tartar ʒiij. Anise∣seed ℈j. Succory Water q. s. Make an Infusion, then add to the Straining Elect. Diaprunum solutive ʒiij. Dia∣gridion gr. iij. Mix them for a Draught. The next Days, if he be bound, let him be loosned with Glisters, and the third or fourth day give him the fore∣said Purge again. X. Let his Temples and Fore-head be anointed twice or thrice a day with the following Liniment. ℞. Populeon Oyntment ʒvj. Oyl of Poppy ʒiij. Mix them for a Lim∣ment.
After anointing, apply the following Oxyrrhodine, with rags luke warm to his Fore-head. ℞. Oyl of Roses ℥ij. Iuice of Lettice ℥iij. Iuice of Housleek, Rose-water, Vine∣gar of Roses, an. ℥j. s. Mix them well together. XI. For diversion of the Morbific Matter, apply Pidgeons dissected alive to his Feet, or else this following Me∣dicine. ℞. Leaves of red Cabbage, white Beets, an. . j. s. beat them in a Mortr, and make them into a▪ Past with sowre Le∣vea ℥iiij. Salt ʒij. Vinegar of Roses q. s. XII. About Night, give gr. iiij. of Laudanum in a Pill, or if he refuse a Pill, dissolve three Grains of that Laudanum in one ounce of Decoction of Barley, adding an ounce of Syrup of Poppy Rheas to provoke Sleep. XIII. While these things are done, for his usual Drink, give him small Ale, or Whey of sowr Milk or Foun∣tain Water, having some Pieces of Ci∣tron steeped in it, adding a little Sugar and Rose-Water, or else this Julep. ℞. Lettice Leaves M. iiij. Endive M. ij. Red Currants M. j. Barley-water q. s. Boil them to a Pint; to the Straining when cold, add Syrup of Violets and Limons, an. ℥j. of Poppy ℥s. Iuice of Citron q. s. to make it pleasing. XIV. Let him also take of this Con∣ditement often in a day. ℞. Powder of Diamargarite cold ℈ iiij. Pulp of Tamarinds, Conserve of Vio∣lets, pale Roses, Robb of red Cur∣rants, an. ʒ iij. Syrup of Violets q. s: About Evening, when he does not take his Laudanum Opiate, let him drink one or two Draughts of this Emul∣sion. ℞. Four greater Cold seeds, an. ʒ ij. Seed of white Poppy ℥ s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of about ℥ vij. To which add Syrup of Violets and Poppy Reas, an. ʒ v. XV. When the Distemper begins to asswage, the sooner to dissolve the pec∣cant Matter, cut alive Hen in the mid∣dle, and lay it to his Head, or else the Lungs of a Calf or Sheep newly killed. XVI. Let his Air be between cold and moist, and his Chamber somewhat dark. His Diet sparing and cooling, prepared with Lettice, Endive, Borrage, Sorrel, and the like; his Drink as be∣fore. Let him not be toubled with much company nor Talk. Only let those, for whom he had a Kindness in his Health, endeavor now and then to pacifie his Rage with good Words▪ Lastly keep his Belly soluble. HISTORY III. Of Melancholly. A Learned Man, forty years of age, of a melancholly Constitution, in the Summer time, walking out of the City with a Son of his, came to the River side, pulling off his Cloaths, leat into the Water, to please himself with Swimming, to which he perswaded his Son likewise, to make him skilful of the same Art; but his Son leap∣ing into the Water, sunk to the bottom, and was drowned before his Father could come to his Assistance. Upon which, the Father fell in∣to such a deep Sadness, continuing thinking of his Misfortune, and believing himself the Author of his Childs Death, that he did nothing but weep Day and Night, without sleeping: and within a few Days, was brought to that pass, that he believed himself guilty of Murther, and for that reason eternally damned. He also thought the Devil, who had tempted him to do the Fact, alway stood at his side, and shew∣ed his horrid Shape to those that stood by, pointing at him with his
Finger, wondring they did not see him, as well as He. As to other things he was well enough; only this false Imagination stuck so deeply in his Mind, that no Perswasions or Consolations of his Friends could root it out. I. VVhen the seat of the Principal faculties in the Brain was endamag'd, and the Imagination de∣prav'd, it was a sign the Patients Brain was out of order, as appeared by his sadness and fear. II. This Malady is Melancholly, and a deprav'd Distemper of the Brain, hurting the Imagination, and deluding it with false Apparitions, and causing fear and sadness without any reason; which are two unquestionable Signs of Melancholly, according to Hippocrates. Therefore we may well define Melan∣cholly to be, a Delirium without a Fever, arising from a Melancholly Fancy. III. The first and external Cause of this Mans Malady, was his grievous Misfortune, having his Son drown'd, which seiz'd him the more violently, as being naturally Melancholly. Which when he could not forget, but spent whole Days and Nights, continually thinking upon it without any Sleep, the Animal Spirits, prone to Melancholly, were disorderly agitated in the Brain, and so contracted a Specific and Ocult distemper, which they communicated not to the Brain, but to the Heart and whole Body: Hence horrible thoughts, sadness and fear. VI. When he thought of his Son, whom, he believed to be drown'd by his fault, he perswaded himself he was guilty of Murder, which because he knew it was a Sin hareful to God, therefore he thought himself Damn'd, and the Devil to be always at his El∣bow; the continual thinking upon which, had shaped the Idea of a Devil, so firmly in his mind, that he could not be otherwise perswaded, but that the Devil was always before his Eyes, nor could any Body dispossess him of that Imagination. In other things he was well, because his perception and judgment of things was no way hin∣dred by that false Imagination: as being wholly taken up with that Imagi∣nation, and nothing so much, not with such an emotion of Mind intent upon other things. V. Because this occult Distemper of the Brain and Animal Spirits was bred in the Brain, plain it is that this was a primary or self-suffering Melan∣cholly. VI. This Melancholly Delirium, tho' very troublesom, yet is it not Mortal; and gives great hopes of Cure, because only the Imagination is depraved, the Ratiocination and Memory little enda∣maged; then again, he was sound in Body, and lastly, because he was a Learned Man, and so much the sooner to be governed by Reason: besides that it was in the Summer when this happen∣ed; which was a Season more proper for Cure. VII. In the Cure the Evil Melancholly Matter, and the ill Temper of the Brain is to be amended, that the purer Spirits may be freed from that Specific Melan∣cholly, Contamination and generated anew. The same evil Matter is also to be evacuated, and his Head to be cor∣roborated, and all means try'd to take off the Patients thoughts, from false and horrible Imaginations. VIII. First, therefore Purge him with this Bolus. ℞. Conection Hamech, Elect. Diaphoeni∣con an ʒ j. s. Diagridion gr. vij. Mix them. Or if he will not take that, give him this Glister. ℞. Emollient Decoction to which an Ounce of the Leaves of Senna has been added ℥ix. Elect. Diaphoenicon ℥ ij. Oyl of Camomil ℥ j. s. Salt. ʒ j. IX. Because such a Patient has not much Blood, therefore to preserve his strength, there is no Blood▪letting to be used, unless there be a Palpitation of the Heart, or any such Symptom which requires it. X. After the Belly is well cleansed, to prepare the Melancholly humor, and strengthen the Head, let him drink three or four times a day, a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Root of Polypody of the Oak ℥ j. Ca∣lamus Aromatic. Fennel, rind of Ca∣per-roos, Tamarisch an. ℥ s. Herbs Baum, Borage, March Violets, Tops of Hops, Betony, Germander, Majoram
an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Cor∣dial Flowers, an. one little handful, Ci∣tron and Orange Peel an. ʒ iij. Seeds of Fennel and Caraways an. ʒ j. s. Cur∣rants ℥ ij. Water and Wine equal Parts. Make an Apozem for a Pint and a half, to which mix Syrup of Stoechas and Borage an. ℥ j. s. XI. After this preparation, Purge with this Potion. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥ s. White Agaric ʒ j. Anise-seed ʒ j. Ginger ℈ j. Decoction of Barly q. s. Infuse them all Night. Then add to straining Confect. Hamech ʒ iij. XII. This done let him take this Apozem again, and continue it for some time, loosing his Belly every three or four days either with the foresaid draught, or Confect. Hamech, or Cochiae Pills, or Mesues and compounded Syrup of Apples, highly commended by Ron∣deletius in this Case. XIII. After every Dose of his Apozem, as also after Dinner and Sup∣per, let him eat the quantity of a Nut∣meg of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambr. sweet Diammosch Dianthos an. ℈ ij. Candid Citron and Orang Peels, an. ʒ iij. Conserve of Flowers of Borage, Baum, and Rose∣mary, an. ℥ s. Confect. Alkermes, ℈j. s. Syrup of Citron Rind. q. s. Mix them, for a Conditement. XIV. In the midst of these Cures, pe∣culiar Evacuations of the Head will not be amiss, either by Masticatories or Sternutories made of Mar joram, Gith∣seed, Roots of white Hellebore, and Pellitory, or the like. XV. Great care is to be taken to provoke the Patient to sleep. There∣fore for his Supper give him some∣times a Hordeate or Amygdalate, made with a Decoction of Barly and Lettice, with which if he be hard to sleep, mix one Ounce of Syrup of Poppys or more. Or if these avail not, of the Mass of Pills of Storax fifteen grains, or of Laudanum Opiat. three grains; but this not often: When he is not so much troubled with Wak∣ing, it will suffice to anoint his Tem∣ple with Oyntment of Populeon, mixt with some few grains of Opium. Though Narcotics are to be used as little as may be, for fear of accustoming the Patient too much to the use of them. XVI. His Diet must be such as breeds good Blood, and corrects all the qualities of Melancholly Humors; easie of Digestion, moderately hot and moist, prepared with Barly clean∣sed, Borage, Baum, Bugloss, Marjoram, Raisins, Betony, &c. avoiding Leeks, Onions, Garlic, Cabbige, Fish long pickled, or dry'd in the Smoak; and whatever beeds ill Juice and Melanchol∣ly nourishment: let the Patient be mo∣derate in his Diet, neither too full nor too empty: Let his Drink be small, with a little Baum, Rosemary or other such Herb mixt with it: Let his Exercises be moderate: His sleeping time much longer: Let his Body be kept soluble. And which is of great moment in this Cure, let his Mind be taken off from all manner of sadness and thougthfulness; and all occasions of fear and grief be avoided; while his friends on the other side labour with grateful Arguments to perswade him of the vanity and false∣hood of his idle Dreams and Imagina∣tions. HISTORY. IV. Of Hypochondriac Melancholy. A Noble German of forty Years of Age, of a Melancholy Con∣stitution having suffered deeply in the calamities of the late Ger∣man War, as Captivity, Exile, Famine, and other Miseries, which had reduced him to an ill sort of Diet; the long use of which had be∣got wind, roarings and distensions about his Midriff, and a troublesom Ponderosity especially about his left Hypochondrium, with difficulty of respiration, and a palpitation of the Heart, though not continual, with loss of Appetite, which made him sad, fearful, and thoughtful; till at length understanding the death of his Wife, he became so con∣sternated,
that no perswasive and kind Language could asswage his sad∣ness; so that through continual watching, restlessness, horrible thoughts, and want of sleep he began to rave at first by intervals, but after∣wards without ceasing; he thought every Body came to kill him, and therefore sought retirement, and avoided Society. No body but Servants entered his Chamber, and of them he was afraid too: if any other Persons came to visit him, he besought them not to Murder him unprovided, but to give him time to prepare himself for Death; he only seemed to trust his Physitian, from whom he often desired Antidotes against Poyson, which he assured himself were often mix∣ed with his Meat, and took any Medicaments that were brought him. IN this Person thus Distempered, va∣rious Parts were grievously afflicted, especially the Brain, as appeared by the Delirium, and the Bowels of the middle and lower Belly, which the Palpitation of his Heart, difficulty of breathing, distention and ponderosity of his Hypo∣chondriums and loss of Appetite plainly demonstrated. II. The Symptom that chiefly insested, is called Melancholly, which is a Deli∣rium without Rage or Fever, arising from a Melancholly Phantasm. III. The remote Causes of this Mala∣dy are Fear, Terrors and Grief, occasi∣oned by Misfortunes, which had long troubled and disordered the Spirits in their Motion: to which an ill Diet mainly contributed. For thereby Cru∣dities were bred in the Bowels of the lower Belly; thence Obstructions in the Spleen and neighbouring Parts. The faculty of the Spleen was weaken'd, so that not able to do its Office in Chy∣mification, and breeding Matter unfit for convenient Fermentation of the Hu∣mors, it left many feculent, acid, sour, thick and crude Humors, which not able to pass the small Vessels, got toge∣ther in a large quantity in the left Hypo∣chondrium about the Spleen, which occa∣sioned that troublesom Ponderosity; ac∣companied with wind and roarings; for that while Nature endeavours the Con∣coction of that acid Matter, which she can∣not well accomplish, those acid Humors receive some Fermentation, which be∣gets that great quantity of Wind, which not finding an easie Exit, occasions those rumblings, and distensions of the Parts. This thicker, acid and sharp Matter being carried to the Heart, causes Palpitation, while the Heart en∣deavours to expel that sharp pricking Matter from it. And in regard that Melancholly Juice is not equally trou∣blesom to all the Parts of the Heart; thence it happens that the Palpitation does not always continue, but comes by intervals. The same Juice being expelled from the right Ventricle of the Heart to the Lungs, when it comes to fill the small branches of the Arterious Veins, and Veiny Artery, as not being able to pass them without great difficul∣ty, fills the Breast with many Vapors, and causes difficulty of Respiration. But being carried through the Arteries with the Vital blood to the Brain, it dis∣orders the Motion of the Animal Spi∣rits, renders them more impure, and alters them by a Specific and bad mis∣temper. Thence those Melancholly Ima∣ginations, by which the Operations of the Mind and Ratiocination are disturbed, which occasions a Delirium accompany∣ed with fear and sadness. IV. But because that Melancholly humor is not generated at first in the Head, but ascends from the Hypochon∣driums, especially the left, to the Head; hence this Melancholy is not particular to any Part, but Sympathetic, and therefore from the Name of the Place, where the Nourishment of the Distem∣per lyes, is called Hypochondriac. V. This Melancholly Delirium is hard to be cured, and not void of dan∣ger. 1. Because the Causes of it are mischievous and remote, in regard they occasion the Generation and Accu∣mulation of that feculent Melancholly Matter in the Hypochondriums. 2. Be∣cause that feculent Matter is obstinate and not easily tam'd by Medicaments, and infects the Animal Spirits with a peculiar evil Temper. 3. Because the Cure requiring a longer time, the que∣stion is, whether the Patient will take so much Physic or no. 4. Because the continued ascent of the Melancholly hu∣mor to the Brain, the Distemper in∣stead of being Sympathetic, may turn to be the peculiar Passion of that Part. 5. Because those Melancholly Humors are troublesom to the Membranes of
the Brain and Nerves, through their oc∣cult and manifest Qualities, their acri∣mony and sourness, &c. whence the fear is, least their copious afflux to the Brain should cause Convulsions, Epilepses, &c. 6. Because this Delirium is not accom∣panied with Laughter, but with a sad and serious Musing. Yet while there is strength and a willingness to take Phy∣sic, there is some hopes of Cure. VI. In the Method of Cure, the containing Cause is first to be discussed, and the ill temper of the Animal Spirit to be removed as also that the An∣tecedent Cause, or Melancholly Hu∣mor in the Hypocondriums, be atteua∣ted, digested and evacuated, and a new Generation and Accumulation of it pre∣vented, that Obstructions be removed, and that the Brain, Spleen and other Bowels be corroborated. VII. Milder Medicaments, not very hot will be most convenient; least the Matter being agitated by stronger and very hot Medicines be carried in too great a quantity to the Heart and Brain. VIII. First loosen the Belly with this Glyster. ℞. Emollient Decoction ℥ x. choice Hiera Pcra, Diacatholicon an. ℥ j. s. Oyl of Camomile ℥ j. s. Salt ʒ j. mix them for a Glyster. The next day but one, or the third day, give him this Purge. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥ s. white Agaric, Anise-seed, an. ʒ j. Ginger ℈ j. Deco∣ction of Barly q. s. make an Infusion, then add to the straining Confect. Ha∣mech ʒ ij. Hiera Picra ʒ j. For a Po∣tion. IX. Now because People thus affect∣ed have their Veins swelled, with a Palpitation of the Heart sometimes, and that their strength is in good Condition, after Purging, Blood-letting will not be amiss in the Arm; or if the Hemo∣rhoid Veins appear, Leeches may be properly applied. X. This done let the Patient drink three or four times a day, a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Root of Polipody of the Oak ℥ j. Erin∣gos, Cammoch, Rind of the Roots of Capers, Tamarisch, an. ℥ s. Herbs, Bo∣rage, Roman-Wormwood, Strawberry∣leaves, all the Dandelions, Ceterach, Germander, water Trefoile an. M. j. March Violet leaves and Baum an M. s. Citron and Orange-Peels an ℥ s. Da∣mask Prunes vij. Currants ℥ ij. Steel ty'd in a little knot ℥ j. Anise-seed ʒ iij. common Water q. s. Make an Apozem. of lb j. s. XI. After he has used this Apozem four days, let him take the Puge afore∣said again, and then return to his Apozem; and so continue this method for some time, and if he be bound while he takes his Glister, let him be loosened with the foregoing Glister; now and then the Apozem may be made Purging by adding. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥ ij. Root of black-Hellebore ʒ ij. Indian Mirobalans ʒ vj. Anise-seed ℥ s. and let him drink ℥ iiij. every Morning. If he find himself nauseous and inclin∣ing to Vomit, this Vomitory may be given him. ℞. Conserve of Leaves of Asarabacca ʒ x. Decoction of Radishes ℥ iij. Oxymel Scyllitic with Agric ℥ s. Vomitious Wine ʒ iij. XII. In the mean time that he takes these things, let him also for the streng∣thening of his Head and Bowels, take of these Tablets several times in the Day. ℞. Specier. Diambrae ʒj. Dianthos, Aro∣matic. Rosatum, an. ℈ j. Powder of the Yellow of Citron-rina ℈ j. s. Sugar dis∣solved in Betony-water ℥ ij. For Tab∣lets. Or let him sometimes take a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambrae ʒ j. Conserve of Bo∣rage, Baum, Rosemary-flowers, pale Roses an. ʒ iij. Syrup of Citron rind, q. s. XIII. Let him keep in a good and plea∣sant Air, and avoid Loanliness; converse with merry Company, and be merry himself. Let him abstain from all Meats of hard Digestion and ill Nou∣rishment, especially salted and smoak∣ed food. Let him avoid bottled and windy Drink, and let his Salads and Sauces be such as attenuate and open, and promote Concoction, but not very hot.
HISTORY. V. Of Madness. A Young Gentlewoman about twenty eight Years of Age, lusty, perspicacious, melancholy, musing and thoughtful, but using an ill Diet, and sometimes liable to obstructions in her Hypochondriums; finding her self to be slighted by her Parents, a long time concealed her greif, and publickly shewed her self chearful, but spent the Nights without sleep, in Morosness, Tears and Sighs. At length she was taken with a pain in her Head, accompany'd with a slight Fever, disorderly but continual: within a few days her pain leaving her she appeared to be light Headed, for she that was before reserved of her Speech, grew to be very talkative of a suddain; so that at length she began to talk not only all day but all night long. How∣ever for the first two or three days, though she talked much yet what she said was all sence and rational enough; but after that she fell to raving and non-sence; then her Fever ceased; but still she never slept; this Delirium within a few days increased to that degree, that she grew sullen, angry, run about the Chamber, made a noise, and grew so out-ragious, that she laid violent hands upon all that came near her, talked obscenely, and tore her Cloaths: so that she was forced to be held down in her Bed, nevertheless she was strong, had her Evacuations duly, and an indifferent good Stomach, nor was she very thirsty; neither was she much sensible of the bitter Cold, Frosty, Winter-Season, though she had hardly any Cloaths upon her; but was always warm. I. THAT the Brain of this Woman was terribly affected, appears by her continued Madness, accompanied with want of sleep, boldness, immodesty and anger, and that her Heart and the rest of her Body suffered, was plain from her extraordinary heat. II. This Delirium is called Madness, and is a continued Commotion of the Mind with an enraged Boldness, arising from the heat of the Spirits. III. The chiefest of all the evident Causes, was her grief to be so slighted by her Parents, which though she dis∣semblingly suppressed at first, never∣theless in a young Person, Melancholy of her self, and by reason of her disor∣derly Diet, abounding with Choleric and Melancholy humors, and so liable to Diseases, it might easily produce a raging Delirium. For that slight, some∣times moved her to Anger, while the Choler boiled that was mixed with her Melancholly humors, sometimes to sad∣ness, the Melancholly humors being mo∣ved, and overcoming the Choleric, and through that disorderly strife and Effer∣vescency of the Choler with the Melan∣choly, the whole Mass of Blood boiled, which occasioned a slight Putrefaction, which begot a slight disorderly Fever accompanied with the Head-ach, caused by the sharp Choloric▪ and Melancholy Vapors, carried up together to the Head. But at length that effervescency of Choler and Blood, being vanquished by the abundance and quality of the Melancholy Humor, the Fever went off; and the Animal Spirits were heated also, by the hot Melancholy humors, predominant in the Body and the Head, and set a boiling by the fore∣going effervescency of the Choler; and were so rapidly and disorderly moved, that they caused a Delirium, first more ge, while the Spirits were not so much heated and agitated; then vio∣lent with Anger, Immodesty and Rage, by reason the sharp heat of the Animal Spirits was augmented; so that being now too much attenuated, and become more eager, they are more rapidly moved, and more disorderly and violently agi∣tated. IV. Now because not only the Ani∣mal, but the Vital, Spirits are possessed
with that heat, as also the whole Mass of the Blood, hence it comes to pass that the whole Body becomes so heated, that they are not cool'd by the Cold of the External Air, but always re mains hot. V. Yet there is no Fever, because that violent fervor of the Blood and Spirits, though it be great and sharp, yet there is neither Putrefaction nor Inflammation, because it consists more in Salt then Sulphury Particles. VI. This Malady is difficult to Cure, partly, because the most noble Bowels are affected; partly because the Cause lyes in a depraved, obstinate and co∣pious Humor. Lastly, because the Pa∣tient being Mad, will not be rul'd, nor suffer the administration of proper Medicines. However the longer it is delay'd, the more difficult the Cure will be. VII. The primary Indications relat∣ing to the Cure are these. 1. To pre∣pare and evacuate the Melancholly hu∣mor abounding in the Body, and to ex∣tinguish the heat both of that, as of the Blood and Spirits. 2. To prevent the new generation of the same Humor and Fervor. 3. To coroborate the Bowels, especially the Heart▪ Brain, Liver and Spleen. And this is to be done by Diet, Chyrurgery and Pharmacy VIII. The Chamber wherein the Pa∣tient lyes must be gloomy, where he or she must be kept by strong Men or Wo∣men; or else their Arms must be bound with broad Swaths, that they may do no harm to themselves nor others. They are to be visited by very few, whose Company they loved in the time of Health. They must be kept in a temperate Air. Their Diet must be moistning and moderately cooling, rather moist then dry. Their Drink▪ Ptisans or small Ale. They must be kept quiet with good words, and pro∣voked to sleep as much as may be, and all Evacuations of Nature in both Sexes, must proceed naturally; while Art supplys the disorders of Na∣ture. IX. Though the enraged Patient re∣fuses all Medicaments, yet fair words must be try'd, and this draught obtrud∣ed instead of Drink: ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥ s. Anise-seed ʒ j. Decoction of Barly q. s. infuse them according to Art: then to the straining add▪ Confect. Hamech ʒ iij. Extract of Hellebore ℈ j. Mix them for a draught. X. After Purgation Blood-letting is re∣quisite, not once but often in the Hands, Feet, Forehead▪ Arms, and other conveni∣ent Places, and a good quantity of Blood to be taken away, according to the strength of the Patient. And the Patient is to be well guarded from loosening the bindings of the Fillets after stopping the Blood. XI. Between every Blood-letting, Purge the Patient then with a draught before mentioned, or Powder of Dia-Senna, or Confect. Hamech alone. Or if these be refused, make use of Codi∣niac, or Rob of red Currants, to every Ounce of which, add grains twenty four; and of this mixture give six or seven drams, as you find it works. Or if the Party love Currants, boil them in the Decoction of Senna-leaves, or Roots of black Hellebore, till they row plump, then take them out and let them dry, in a place exposed to the Wind, that they may not seem to have been boil∣ed, and give them to eat. XII. You may try either by fair words or by fraud, to make her drink now and then in a day, a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Polypody of the Oak, Succory an. ℥ j Rind of Caper-roots, Tama∣risch. an. ℥ s. Herbs, Dodder, Venus∣hair, Lettice, Dandelion with the whole, Sorrel, Ceterach, Borage, Bugloss an. M. j. Cordial Flowers an. one little handful, Citron and Orange Peels an. ʒiij, Fruit of Tamarinds ℥ j. Common∣water q. s. Boil them for an. Apozem of lb j. s. If you steep in this Apozem, Leaves of Senna ℥ j. s. Root of Black He∣lebore ʒ ij. Anise-seed ʒ ij. By that means it will become a Purging Apozem, which if the Patient likes may be often administered. XIII. Let this Conditement be also offered upon occasion. ℞. Conserve of Violets, Pale Roses, Rob of Red Currants, Candied Citron-peel an. ʒ iij. Pulp of Tamarinds ʒ vj. Sy∣rup of Violets q. s. XIV. Because such a Patient chiefly requires sleep; toward Evening giv an Amygdalate, wherein put an Ounce of Syrup of Popies, or a little more, or three grains of Opiate Laudanum; but this not above once or twice in a Week,
or one or two Heads in the boiling the aforesaid Apozem, or by adding to the aforesaid Conditement one or two drams of Nicholas's Rest: or by a∣nointing the Temples and Forehead with Oyl of Popies or Populeon Oyntment. But give not these Soporifics too of∣ten, too long, nor too strong. XV. In the mean time, the Hair be∣ing shaved off, let the Head be foment∣ed for an hour or two in the Morn∣ing, with this Fomentation luke-warm. ℞. Herbs, Betony, Vervain, Marjoram, Plantain an. M j. Lettice M iiij. Flow∣ers of Roses, Melilot, Dill, Camomil, an. M j. Hemp and Coriander-seed an. ℥ s. Common-water q. s. After Fomentation keep the Head well covered from the cold Air. But this Fomentation will not be proper be∣fore the Body be well purged, and some Blood be taken away. XVI. When the Distemper begins to asswage, it will not be amiss to clap alive Hen cut in two upon the Head, or the Lungs of a new kill'd Sheep or Calf newly killed. XVII. Some applaud the clapping of Medicines to the Feet, as also Pidgeons slit, or Tenches slit, or else Leaves of Coleworts and Rue, with Sowre Fer∣ment Salt and Vinegar, and so bruised into the form of a Past, and bound to the Soles of their Feet, which if they do no good, yet do no harm, and therefore in this case may safely be made use of; for the satisfaction of such as desire it. HISTORY. VI. Of the Disease call'd Coma, both Somnulent and Wakeful. A Person about forty Years of Age, somewhat of a Phlegmatic Constitution, was wont to be troubl'd twice or thrice a Year with Catarrhs falling upon his Teeth or Lungs, which some∣times seized him with a slight Pain in his Head, sometimes without any at all; at length in Autumn, he felt a distensive and hea∣vy pain in the hinder part of his Head, such as used to precede his Catarrh, but then no Catarrh ensued; however this pain increasing and being accompany'd with a giddiness, after Purgation and Blood∣letting by the advice of a Physitian, and other proper Remedies ap∣plied, the Pain abated, so that the Patient went abroad again; but venturing too soon into the cold Air, when he found the Pain together with the giddiness encrease again, he was forced to take his Bed, and of a suddain was perceived to rave. The Pain still more and more augmenting, the second day, standing by his Bed side, he fell down, not being able to rise, but by those in the Room was put to Bed again, where in a short time he fell into such a deep sleep, that nothing but violent pulling and pinch∣ing him would wake him, and then he only opened his Eyes a little, but spoke nothing, and fell asleep again. The third day there was no rowsing him; but when this profound sleep had con∣tinued about four days he began to wake, however then he spoke but little, and that after a wild and raving manner; thus he lived eight days. Afterwards he had a continual Inclination to sleep, with his Eyes winking, but could not sleep, and muttered many things idly to himself; sometimes lying still, when he was thought to be asleep, of a suddain he would endeavour to leap out of his Bed and to do something or other; but was so weak that he could not. In this inclination to sleep with a continued Delirium he remained eight or ten days; afterwards he could not sleep at all, neither had he any Inclination to sleep for a Fortnight together; in the mean time the Delirium abated every day; so that with∣in that time, he became sound of his Mind and recovering his
strength was restored by his Physitians to his former Health, during the whole course of his Distemper he had no Fever. His Appetite was good even in his profound sleep; for though when he waked he asked for nothing, yet he took whatever was given him and di∣gested it well. By his wild Answers it appear'd, that not only Imagi∣nation and Reason, but his Memory was weakned. The Question is, what sort of Disease this Man was troubled with, and with what Re∣medies it was to be cur'd? I. THat the Brain of this Person was affected, and thence his Principal and External Senses were also troubled, is plain by the Relation. II. That profound sleep, which at first op∣pressed him was a Somnulent Coma, which is a deep sleep arising from the benumedness of the common Sense. But that heavy in∣clination to sleep, which followed after, yet with an inability to sleep, was a Wakeful Coma, which is a heavy pro∣pensity to sleep, with an impotency so to do, by reason of the Obstruction or Com∣pression of the Vessels in the Ventricles of the Brain, and a disorderly motion of the Spirits disturbing the Mind. III. The Antecedent cause of this Malady was a Copious Generation of Flegm in the lower Parts; which be∣ing carried to the Brain, and collected in the Ventricles of it, constitutes the containing Cause. For that same Flegm not being able to fall down to the lower Parts, as is usual, but being there detained, with its quan∣tity distends the Vessels; whence first a distending and oppressive Pain; af∣terward that Flegm being more en∣creased, in some manner compressed the Choroid-fold, together with the wonderful Net, hence the Vital Spirits not suffing to supply the want of Ani∣mal Spirits to perform the Offices of the principal and external Senses, the Patient, motion ceasing, fell down, not being able to rise again; and then the external Senses ceasing, a deep sleep ensued. At length by the help of Na∣ture and Medicines that obstruction of the Choroid-fold being somewhat open'd, and the Vital Spirits let loose to en∣crease the Animal, which were not yet plentiful enough, besides that they moved disorderly through obstructed passages, hence the mind became di∣sturbed; for that though more Spirits then before flowed forth to the Organs of the Senses, yet they were not suffici∣ent to perform the whole duty; which caused that great inclination to sleep; which however was still disturbed by the continual disturbance of the Mind; so that though the Patient were willing to sleep he could not, but as it were wak'd sleeping, with continual Deli∣riums. Lastly the Obstruction being wholly opened, and the Spirits ha∣ving gain'd free Passage, yet very few Vapors ascending to the Brain by reason of the extream Emptiness of the Body, to stay them their due time in the Brain, hence followed continual Watchings, which abated as more Vapors ascended to the Brain upon Digestion of more Nou∣rishment. There was no Fever, be∣cause no Putrefaction of Humors mo∣lested the Heart. IV. A Somnulent or waking Coma, is a most dangerous Disease, which kills many, especially if the profound sleep ex∣tend it self beyond the fourth day: in regard the most noble Bowel the Brain is most grievously affected. For that Obstruction and Compression en∣dangers the Choroid-fold for two Rea∣sons: either because the Coma for want of Animal Spirits may turn to an Apo∣plexy; or because the hot Vital Spirits, not being able to get through their wonted passages, may cause an Inflam∣mation in the Membranes of the Brain, and then a Phrensie would ensue. V. The principal Curative Indica∣tions are to draw back and evacuate the containing Matter at the begin∣ning, and so to open the Obstruction; then to take away the Antecedent Cause; and hinder a new collection of Flegm. VI. Because a Man in that profound sleep can swallow nothing. Glysters must be administred at least once a day. Hard Frictions and Dolorific Ligatures of the extream Parts must be made use of: Blood must be taken from the Arm. Cupping-glasses both without and with Scarification, must be applied to the Shoulders, Back and Neck. The Patient also must often be waked with jogging and pinching, i it be possible; and that the containing Matter may be
shaken off and expelled, this Sternutory is to be blown up into the Nostrils, ever now and then: ℞. Root of white Hellebore, ℈j. Pellitory, ℈s. Leaves of Marjoram, ℈j. Pepper, Castoreum, an. gr. v. For a Powder. VII. His sleep abating; give him these Pills. ℞. Mass of Pill Cochiae, ℈j. Extract of Catholicum, ℈s. For five Pills. Or if he cannot swallow them, give him one dram of Powder of Diaturbith, or Diacarthamum in a little small Ale. Or a Purging draught, prepared with Leaves of Senna, Agaric and Jallop-Roots or the like. VIII. The Body being sufficiently Purged, this Apozem, or such like may be prescribed. ℞. Root of Acorus, ʒvj. of Elecampane, Fennel, an. ℥s. of Galangal, ʒij. Herbs, Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Baum, Calaminth, an. M. j. Sage, Flowers of Stchas, an. M. s. Iuniper-Berries, ʒvj. of Lawrel, ʒij. cleansed Raisins, ℥ij. VVater, q. s. Boil them, and make an Apozem of . j. s. to which may be added Syrup of Stoechas, ℥ij. or iij. Let him drink of this Decoction, three or four times a day. In the mean time let him continue the use of his Sternutory. IX. If he cannot take his Apozem, let him now and then take a Quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambrae ʒ j. s. Conserve of Baum, Flowers of Sage, Betony, Rosema∣ry, an ʒ s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. For a Conditement. X. Also let the following Quilt be laid upon his Head. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary, Flowers of Lavender, Melilot, an. ℈iiij. Ben∣jamin, Nutmeg, Cloves, an. ℈j. To be grosly powdered for a Quilt. Then anoint his Temples and the top of his Head with this Liniment; R. Oyls of Rosemary, Marjoram, Nut∣megs, an. ℈j. Martiate Oyntment ʒij. And let him wear this a good while after the Cure. XI. Let his Diet be sparing, Meats of good Juice, and easie of Digestion, seasoned with Rosemary, Marjoram, and other Cephalics. When he wakes continually Amygdalates are proper: for they yield good Nourishments and provoke sleep: and all natural Evacu∣ations must duly proceed. HISTORY VII. Of the Lethargy. A Person, threescore Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, having all the Autumn being careless of his Diet, feeding gree∣dily upon Fruit, Lettice, Cowcumbers, Melons and such like, for some days perceived a weariness of his whole Body, with a great Inclination to sleep. Then he was taken with a slight continued Fever, which toward Night growing worse, seemed like a Quotidian. This Fever was presently accompany'd with a very great drowsiness, so that he could not be kept from sleeping and which was so profound, that he heard not the standers by, though they bawled out and made never so loud a noise; being at length rowsed out of his sleep not without great difficulty and hawling and pulling, he looked upon the standers-by, but answered very little to their questions; and that, very little to the purpose; not knowing that he had been asleep: if they gave him a Chamber-Pot; he forgot to make water; and so
with his Mouth and his Eyes shut he fell asleep again; his Pulse was strong, but slow and at distant intervals; and toward Night unequal and somewhat swifter, his Urine was muddy, with a very thick Fleg∣matic Sediment. I. THat the Head and whole Body of this Patient were affected, appears from the profound Sleep, which oppressed the one, and the continued Fever and lassitude that seized the other. II. That heavy drowsiness which seiz'd our Patient, is called a Lethargy, which is an insatiable Propensity to sleep with a gentle Fever and molestation of the Prin∣cipal faculties. III. The remote Cause of this Mala∣dy was cooling and bad Dyet, which generating a great quantity of Flegmatic humors in a Flegmatic Body, made the antecedent Cause. IV. Which Flegmatic humors being carried in great quantity to the Brain, and affecting it with a cold mistemper; partly putrifying in the larger Vessels, and inflam'd in the Heart, and thence dispeirsed through the whole Body, and through the Carotides Arteries to the Brain, constitute the containing Cause of the Sleep and Fever. V. For when those crude Humors alrea∣dy inflam'd in the Heart come through the Carotides Arteries to the Choroid-Fold, whose small Arteries by reason of the cold temper of the Brain, (are narrow∣er then usually,) and partly through their own thickness, partly through the nar∣rowness of those passages slowly pass through the Choroid Fold, they are there thickened still more and more, by the cold Constitution of the Brain, and their Passage becomes more obstructed; so that for that reason the Animal Spirits growing fewer, and but ill supplyed, and consequently not sufficing to offici∣ate in their dutys, hence follows a Cessa∣tion in the Organs of those Senses: by which means when no objects can be carry'd to the Principal Senses they cease too, when a profound Drowsiness out of which when the Patient is roused, the Principal Senses appear damnified, for want of Spirits, and their disorderly motion through obstructed Passages. VI. This Disease is dangerous. 1. Be∣cause the Brain is dangerously affected. 2. By reason of the Fever which af∣fects the whole Body. 3. Because the Patient was old, and unable to conquer such a Malady for want of Natural heat and strength; but because he had some strength remaining, there was hopes of Cure. VII. In the Cure, the Flegmatic Matter abounding in the whole Body is to be Evacuated, drawn back from the Head, and deriv'd to the lower Parts. The Cold Distemper of the Head to be remov'd, the Head to be corroborated, and the Matter therein contain'd to be dissolv'd and drawn away. VIII. After a Glyster, Dolorific Li∣gatures, and hard Frictions of the Thighs are very proper, if frequently used. Blood-letting at such an Age is not so convenient; therefore Cupping∣glasses both with and without Scarificati∣on are to be apply'd to the Shoul∣ders, Neck and Back. But no repel∣ling Cold Medicines are to be used in this Case. IX. So soon as the Patient can be wak'd let him have this Apozem gi∣ven him. ℞. White Agaric, ʒj. Leaves of Senna, ℥ s. Anise-seed, ʒj. Ginger, ℈j. De∣coctions of Barley, q. s. Infuse them, then add to the straining Ele. Dia∣phenicon ʒiij. If the Body be bound it must be loosen'd with Glysters. X. The Body being well Purg'd, let him take every foot a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Aromatic Reed, Elecampane, Fennel, Stone-Parsly, an. ℥s. Herbs, Betony, Venus Hair, Century Lesser, Dandelion, an. M. j. Rosemary, Mar∣joram, Hyssop, Flowers of Stoechas, Camomil, an. M. s. Iuniper-Berries, ʒvj. Anise-seeds, ℈j. s. Citron and Orange-Peels, an. ℥s. Water q. s. Make an Apozem of lb j. s. To which add Syrup of Stoechas ℥ij. or iij. XI. After he has taken this A∣pozem, let him Purge as before or if he like Pills better, let him take ℈ij or iij of Cochia Pills, or ʒj. of Diaturbith or Diacarthamum powder'd and dis∣solv'd in Barley-water. XII. After this second Purgation, let him return to his Apozem, to which you may then add several Diu∣retics
as Roots of Dodder, Asparagus, Eryngos; and Herbs as Stone Parsley, Strawberry Leaves and the like. Ca∣storeum also may be properly mix'd in this Apozem; or else five or six grains given him in a little Oxymel of Squills. XIII. While these things are a doing let the Matter be specially Evacuated out of his Head; the Head be Corro∣borated with Topics, and the remain∣ing Matter there discuss'd. Evacuation is performed by Errhins of equal Parts of Roots of Beets and Leaves of Marjoram: and by Snuf blowing into his Nostrils the following Sternutory. ℞. Root of white Hellebore ℈j. of Pellitory, and Leaves f Marjoram, an. ℈ s. Black Pepper, gr. v. Castoreum, Benjamin, an. gr. iiij. To corroborate the Brain anoint the top of the Head and Temples with this Liniment: and then cover the Head with the following Quilt. ℞. Oyls of Amber, Rosemary, Marjoram, an. ℈ij. Martiate Oyntment, ʒij. Casto∣reum, Powdered, ℈ s. For a Lini∣ment. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram, M. j. of Rose∣mary, Sage, and Flowers of Melilot, an. one little handful, Cloves, Nutmegs, an. ℈j. Castoreum, ℈ s. Beat these into a gross Powder for a Quilt. XIV. Let him have a good Air, a light Room, moderately warm, and Perfumed with Castor, Peny-royal, Rosemary, Sage, Thime, Marjoram, Baum, &c. let his Food be easie of Digestion, Condited with Rosemary, Betony, Marjoram, Hyssop and the like. Let him avoid Milk, Pulse and Fruit, Garlic, Onions, Mustard, Ra∣dishes, &c. Let his Drink be Barley-water, with Majoram, Hyssop, Rosemary and the like boil'd in it, sweetened with a little Hydromel or Honey, and aomatiz'd with Saffron. Let him sleep as little as may be: and make his natural Evacua∣tions come forth in due order. HISTORY. VIII. Of the Profound Sleep call'd Carus. A Stout young Man having fallen from a high Place upon his Head, was seized with a deep sleep; being put by his Friends, who thought him drunk, into his Bed; he continued so for two days. There was no Wound appeared in his Head, which was defended by a good strong Cap; only in the top of his Head there was a Contu∣sion, not very big; his Pulse beat well; nor did he shew any Signs that his Heart was affected; he breathed freely▪ If he were prickt, he shrunk up the prickt Member; In the mean time no noise, nor pulling him by the Hair nor other means would wake him. I. How far this Patients Head was affected, the profound sleep sufficiently shew'd. II. This sleep is called Carus, which is a profound sleep, with an injury to the Animal Actions. III. 'Tis no Apoplexy because the Person breaths freely; nor Lethargy, because there is no Fever: and the Pa∣tient cannot be waked; wherein it dif∣fers from Coma since the Patients in that Distemper are often waked, and move their Limbs from one place to ano∣ther. IV. The cause of this is a depression of the upper Skull, and the Bones of the Bregm caused by the Fall, by which the Brain being depressed the Brain is hindered in its Motion, which in∣jures all the Animal Actions. Besides that the Choroid-fold being obstructed by the Compression, hinders the Pas∣sage of the Vital Spirits to the Brain, and consequently the Generation of A∣nimal, to supply the wast of Spirits in the Organs of the Senses; into which the Animal Spirits having not a free Influx by reason of that Compression, the actions of the Parts fail, and thence that deep sleep. V. This Carus is very dangerous, and threatens an Apoplexy, if not taken care of in time. VI. The Cure consists, in raising the
depressed Skull. 2. In corroborating the wakened Brain. 3. In taken care of the whole Body to prevent the flux of many Humors to the Head; or any other Disease from breeding at that time in the Body. VII. Therefore a Glister given, take eight or nine Ounces of Blood out of the Arm. Then proceed to Denudation, and if need require, Perforation of the Brain. VIII. The same day the Glister is given, and the Vein opened toward the kull, in the place where the Contusion ppears, must be laid bare with a Cross∣ike Incision made in the fleshy Parts: The next Morning raise the Bone with roper Instruments. But for fear least y that violent Contusion, some little Veins should be broken in the hard Meninx, which may have poured forth any Blood between the Meninx and the Cranium, which corrupting there, should aferward be the Cause of unexpected death, the safest way would be to Perforate the Skull in the firm Part next the depressed Part; to give he extravasated Blood an easie Exit, and for the more easie raising of the depres∣sed Skull. IX. The Skull being raised and the wound stopt according to Art, let this Fomentation be clapt warm about his Head, still shifting it as it grows cold. ℞. Betony M. iiij. Marjoram, Rosemary, Vervain, Fennel, Leaves of Lawrel, Baum, Thime, Rue, Flowers of Stoechas, Camo∣mil, Melilot, an. M. j. Common Water q. s. boil them according to Art, adding toward the end White-wine lb j. Make a Fomentation of  iij. X. Anoint his Fore-head with this Liniment. ℞. Oyls of Amber, Rosemary, Marjoram distilled an. ℈ j. Castoreum pulverised gr. ix. Martiate Unguent ʒ ij. XI. The Patient being rous'd from his sleep, which uses to happen, after the raising of his Skull, give him this Purging draught. ℞. Leaves of Senna ʒ iij. Rubarb ʒ j. s. white Agaric ʒ s. Anise-seed ʒ j. De∣coction of Barley q. s. Infuse them: then add to the straining, Elect. Dia∣prunum solutive ʒ iij. XII. The Body being Purged, let him drink twice or thrice a day a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Succory Root ℥ j. s. of Fennel and Aco∣rus an. ℥ s. Herbs, Betony, Dandelion, Borage, Baum, Rue, an. M. j. Rose∣mary, Marjoram, Flowers of Stoechas an. M. j. Orange and Citron Peels an. ℥ s. Currants ℥ ij. Water q. s. For an Apozem of lb j. s. XIII. Instead of the Apozem, he may now and then take a small quantity of this or such like Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambrae ʒ j. Roots of Aco∣rus Condited, Candied Orange-peels, Conerve of Anthos and pale Roses an. ℥ s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. XIV. If he be bound at any time in his Body, let him be loosened with Glisters. Or else take the following Mix∣ture, and hang it up in a little Bag, in a Pint and a half of small Al, and give him a draught or two every Morn∣ing. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥ j. s. Rubarb ʒ ij. Root of Iallop ʒ j. Anise. ʒ ij. Leaves of Marjoram, Carduus Benedict. an. M. s. XV. Keep him in a good temperate clear Air: let his Meats be of easie Di∣gestion; and spaing at first. His Drink small; his Exercises moderate: little Sleep at first especially. But let his natu∣ral Evacuations duly proceed, either spontaneously or provoked by Art. HISTORY IX. Of a Catalepsis. A Young Maid, her Evacuations being obstructed, and frequently liable to Uterine Suffocations, being taken of a suddain, re∣mained void of Sence, and in that Posture as she taken waxed cold, keeping her Eyes open and fixed but seeing nothing; if the standers∣y moved her Arm upwards or downward or side-ways, it remained
as they laid it; if they set her upon her Feet she stood; if they moved her Body forwards, she put out her Foot, if they turned her Head on one side, so it stood all this while she breathed freely; when this fit had lasted an hour, she came to her self, but remembered nothing of what had happened. Two days after she was taken with another Fit, which went off of it self. I. THat the Seat of this Distemper was in the Head, the terrible Molestation of the Animal Actions de∣clare; as the Uterine Suffocation shew∣ed the Distemper of the Womb. II. This Affection is called a Cata∣lepsis, and is a sudden, and very great Molestation of the Animal Actions, with a cold Rhuminess of the whole Body; in which Distemper the Patient keeps that Posture of Body, wherein they were when first taken. III. The Brain of this Woman was affected, not the whole, but in that Part where the common Sense lies, and that by a vitious Humor or Vapor, translated thither from the Womb. IV. The Antecedent Cause, is a viti∣ous and viscous Humor, or thick Va∣por, generated or collected in the Womb, and thence conveighed to the Head through blind Channels, which adhering to the common Sensory, and Parts adjoyning, and involving them of a sudden, hinders the determination of the Spirits from the common Sensory, and so constitutes the containing Cause of this Catalepsis. V. Now because the whole Brain is not affected, but that sufficient Spirits are generated therein, whose Influx into the Nerves is not hindred by any Compression or Obstruction of the be∣ginning of the Nerves, hence it comes to pass, that those Spirits flowing into the Parts designed, when the common Sen∣sory is already possessed of a sudden by that vitious Humor, or thick Vapor, are not determined to other Parts, but copiously flow to those Parts to which they were determined, just before the Catalepsis. Which is the reason that the several Parts remain in that Posture, wherein they were before the Fit, and that the Eyes, Arms and Thighs re∣main as it were fixed. VI. Now the reason why the Patient stands, being set upon her Legs, and why her Members being moved this way or that, remain in the same Situa∣tion, is this, because the Situation of the Muscles being changed, the Influx of the Spirits is also changed, and the Pores before open, through which the Spirits flowed, are shut; but others which were shut before, are opened; so that the Spirits which copiously flowed before into these, the Situation being altered, flows into those Muscles, into which they still also flow, till the Situ∣ation be altered. VII. Respiration is performed after the same manner as in those that sleep, and remains unhurt; partly, because of the remarkable largeness and broad∣ness of the Pores, and the mainly ne∣cessary use of the Respiratory Nerves; partly, because of the Customary and continual Determination to the Respi∣ratory Nerves. VIII. The Fit ceases upon the dis∣cussing or dissipation of that Humor or Vapor which possesses the common Sensory. And the Fit returns when any Vapor or Humor of the same Na∣ture suddenly takes possession again of the same common Sensory. IX. This Distemper is very dange∣rous, because the most noble Part is af∣fected, and because those vitious Hu∣mors or Vapors are not easily dispiers'd. But in this Patient there was great hopes of Cure, in regard the Malady was not generated in the Brain, but arose from another Place. Besides that, the Fits being short, we thence judge the com∣mon Sensory to be seized, not so much by a tough and viscous Humor, as by a thick Vapor, which is more easily atte∣nuated and dispelled. However, in re∣gard this thick Vapor may condense into a tough Humor, to the hazard of a more durable Catalepsis, and loss of Life it self, therefore the Cure is not to be delay'd. X. The Method of Curing, is, 1. To discuss that thick Humor or Vapor, pos∣sessing the common Sensory. 2. To purge the Womb, and remove the Obstructions of it, and prevent a new Generation of that depraved Humor. 3. To prevent the assent of that Hu∣mor or Vapor to the Head. 4. To strengthen the Head, that it may no more admit of those Humors or Va∣pors, but may be able forthwith to dis∣sipa and expel them. XI. In the Fit, let this Sternutory be blown up into the Nostrils, that the Expulsive Faculty being provoked, the
Vapor or Humor may thereby be vio∣lently removed. ℞. Root of white Hellebore ℈j. s. Pellitory, Leaves of Marjoram, Flowers af Lilly of the Valley, an. ℈s. Black Pepper Corns no vii. Castoreum gr. iiij. Then anoint the Nostrils, Temples and Top of the Head with this Liniment, and put a little Cotton dipped in it into the Ears. ℞. Oil of Thyme, Rosemary, Sage, Caro∣ways, Castoreum, Amber, an. ℈s. Martiate Oyntment ʒj. Then let this little Bag be hung about the Neck. ℞. Castor, Assa Fetida, Camphor, an. ℈j. s. Sow them into a thin silk Bag. And in the mean time, omit not the giving of a strong Glister. XII. If after all this, the Fit remain, apply Cupping glasses, with and without Scarrification to the Necks, Scapulas and Shoulders, with dolorific Ligatures, and painful Frictions of the Thighs and Feet. Then lēt this little Bag boil a little while in Wine, and then squeez'd, be laid warm upon the top of the Head. ℞. Flowers of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Calamint, Flowers of Camo∣mil and Stoechas, an. M. s. Seeds of Cummin, Caroways, Lovage, an. ʒj. s. Lawrel-berry, Nutmegs, an. ʒj. For a little Bag. XIII. The Fit being gone off, give this purging Draught. ℞. Leaves of Senna ℥s. White Agaric ʒj. Seed of Lovage ℈ij. Decoction of Bar∣ley q. s. infuse them, and add to the Straining Elect. Hiera Picra ʒij. XIV. The Body being thus purged, open a Vein in the Ancle, and take away six or eight ounces of Blood. XV. Then let the Patient drink three or four times a day, a Draught of this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Fennel, Valerian, Dittany, Aromatic Reed, Male Pyony, an. ℥s. Herbs, Marjoram, Nipp, Calamint, Rue, Peniroyal, Water Trefoil, Baum, an. M. j. Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stoechas an. M. s. Seeds of Lovage and wild Carrots, an. ʒij. Iuniper Berries ʒvj. Water q. s. For an Apozem of lbj. s. XVI. These Medicaments are to be often repeated, as occasion requires. And as for the regular Course of living, let the Air be temperate and pure, perfumed sometimes with Rose∣mary, Baum, Thyme, Rue, Lovage, Castor, and the like. The Diet of good Juice and easie Digestion, as such as corroborates the Brain and Womb. The Drink small, and without Setling. Sleep and Exercise moderate; and let all the Patients Evacuations be regular, and in due time, either spontaneous, or procured by Art. HISTORY X. Of Giddiness. A Woman, of thirty years of age, fat and lusty, of a flegmatic Constitution, having many times been troubled, so soon as Win∣ter was over, with a heavy Pain in her Head, and Noise in her Ears, at length, in the Spring time, was taken with a Giddiness that often went and came; first more mild, then more vehement, at what time, she thought all things turned round, so that sometimes she could hard∣ly stand upright, but fell down, unable to rise, till the Giddiness ceas∣ed; which presently returned, if she looked upon Wheels that ran round, Flame or Smoak ascending upward; upon any rapid Stream, or from any Precipice. Her Appetite and Digestion were good; her Evacuations were regular and in Season, and all the Bowels of the middle and lower Belly seemed to be in a good Condition.
I. CErtain it is, that the Seat of this Affection was in the Brain, in regard that Annoyance of the Sight did not proceed from any Fault of the Sight, or of the Medinum, or the Ob∣ject. II. This Malady, by the Physicians is called Vertigo or Giddiness. And is a Deception of the Sight, which makes that visible Objects seem to turn round, a∣rising from a kind of Whirl-pit Motion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain. III. The remote Cause is the Exter∣nal Motion, refrigerating the Brain, and streightning the Passages of it, appointed for the evacuating of Excrements; so that Flegm abounding in the Body, and copiously collected in the Ventricles of the Brain, constitutes the containing Cause. IV. By those flegmatic Humors, the Ventricles are first distended; thence the heavy Pain. This Flegm aug∣menting, stops up the Passages of the Brain, through which the Spirits ought to pass, partly by repletion, partly by compression; so that the Spirits mis∣sing their direct Passage, and lighting upon the obstructed Passage, gets tho∣rough in a circular Motion, as Water falling with violence, if it meet a Dam in its way, recoils three or four times in Circles, before it run by. V. These whirling Spirits thus circu∣larly carried to the Seat of the Mind, intermixing with the Images of visible things, which are carried to the same Mind, are offered to the common Sen∣sory with the same circular Motion, and so occasion that Fallacy of Sight; by which all visible Objects seem to be whirled about in the same manner as the Images of visible things. VI. But this same whirling of the Spirits does not last, partly, because the narrowness of the Passages of the Brain is sometimes more, sometimes less; partly, because the Spirits are sometimes thicker, and sometimes thinner, and pass through sometimes with more, sometimes less violence; which is the reason the Vertigo comes by Fits: For in the Motion of the Body, the Spirits are moved with more violence, and in greater abundance, which if they can∣not pass freely and directly through the ordinary Passages of the Brain, but light here and there upon the obstructed Pas∣sages, causes the Fit, whether they be thin or thick. For the Repulse of the Obstruction puts them into a Circum∣gyration; and the plenty and violent rushing of the thin Spirits makes them they cannot pass; but the thick are stoped by reason of their thickness; and therefore Drunkards, and young Peo∣ple that abound with thin Spirits, are as much liable to Giddiness, as old Men, whose Spirits are thicker. But the Giddiness of old Men is more fre∣quent, and lasts longer, because of their more abounding Flegm; longer, and more frequently streightens the Passa∣ges of the Choroid-Fold. Therefore the Vertigo seldom happens when the Body is in Motion, and is generally abated and cured by rest. VII. But because there are not e∣nough of those whirling Spirits that make their way through the Passages of the Brain; besides that, their ir∣cumrotation hinders them from entring in sufficient quantity into the Nerves: This was the reason that this Patient, for want of Animal Spirits in the Mus∣cles, often fell to the Ground, without being able to rise before the Vertigos ceasing, the Animal Spirits flowed more copiously again into the Mus∣cles. VIII. Then the Fit returns again up∣on the Sight of Wheels turning round, Precipices, &c. because the Images of those things being carried to the inner Parts with that same whirling and un∣equal Motion affects the Animal Spirits with the same circular and unequal Mo∣tion. Upon the Sight of Precipices, the Vertigo returns; in regard the Sight of them striking a Terror into the Behol∣der, the Affright streightens the Passa∣ges, and by that means, puts a sudden stop upon the Spirits, which being for∣ced forward by those that come behind, because they have not a free Passage, are agitated by the Repulse of the Obstru∣ction, and forced into a circular Mo∣tion. IX. This Malady is hard to be cur∣ed, and many times turns to an Epi∣lepsie, or Apoplexie, or some other grievous Distemper of the Brain, and therefore the Cure of it is not to be delay'd. X. The Cure consists in removing the primary, antecedent and continu∣ing Cause, and Corroboration of the Brain. XI. First, Therefore let her be purg∣ed with these Pills. ℞. Mass of Pill. Cochiae ℈j. Extract of Catholicon ℈s. Diagridion gr. ij. Sy∣rup of Stoechas a little. For vij. Pills.
XII. Though not much good can be expected from Blood-letting, yet least the Blood should fly up to the Head in too great a quantity, it may be taken from the Arm, or if it happen in the time of her monthly Customs, out of a Vein of the Foot. Let the Vein be opened, the Patient lying in Bed, and let her not see her own Blood. XIII. Then let her drink three or four times a day, a Draught of this Apozem. ℞. Root of Acorus ℥j. Elecampane, Fen∣nel, an. ℥s. Herbs. Betony, Marjoram, Rosemary, Calaminth, hyme, an. M. j. Sage, Leaves of Lawrel, Flowers of Stoechas, an. Ms. Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Caroways, an. ʒj. s. Cleansed Raisins ℥ij. Water q. s. Boil them ac∣cording to Art, adding toward the end White-wine lbs. Make an Apozem of about lbj. s. Sometimes, instead of the Apozem, she may take a small quantity of this Apozem. ℞. Specier. Diambrae ʒj. Sweet Diamosch ℈j. Candied Root of Acorus, Conserve of Flowers of Sage, Anthos, Baum, an. ℥s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. XIV. In the mean time, let her use this Masticatory. ℞. Root of Pellitory, Elecampane, an. ʒj. Herbs, Marjoram, Hyssop, an. ʒs. Black Pepper ℈s. Mastich ʒv. Re∣duce these into a Powder, and then make them into Trochischs with a little Turpentine and Wax. XV. Let her Temples, Nostrils and Top of her Head be anointed twice a day with this Oyl. ℞. Oyl of Nutmegs distilled ʒj. Oyls of Rosemary, Amber, Marjoram, an. ℈s. She may also wear the following Quilt upon her Head for some Months. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary, Melilot, Sage, Flowers of Melilot, an. one little hand∣ful, Nutmeg ℈ij. Cloves ℈j. Benjamin ℈s. Beat them grossly for a Quilt. XVI. Let her have a warm Room and good Air. Let her feed sparing, and let her Food be easie of Di∣gestion, not flatulent, and seasoned with hot Cephalics, and carminative Seeds. Her Drink must be small, wherein, if a little Bag of Marjoram, Rosemary, and a little Cinnamon be hung, 'twill be so much the better. Moderate Sleep and Exercise is best, when the Giddiness is off; but let her Rest in the time of the Fit. Keep her Body soluble, and take care that all Evacuations be regular and natural. HISTORY XI. Of the Night-Mare. A Woman of fifty years of age, in good plight, fleshy, strong and plethoric, sometimes troubled with the Head-ach, and Ca∣tarrhs falling upon her Breast in the Winter; the last Winter, molested with no Catarrhs, but very sore in the Day-time, but in the Night-time, when she was composing her self to Sleep, sometimes she believed the Devil lay upon her and held her down, sometimes that she was choak∣ed by some great Dog or Thief lying upon her Breast, so that she could hardly speak or breath, and when she endeavoured to throw off the Burthen, she was not able to stir her Members. And while she was in that Strife, sometimes with great difficulty she awoke of her self, sometimes her Husband hearing her make a doleful Inarticulat Voice, waked her himself; at what time she was forced to sit up in her Bed to fetch her Breath; sometimes the same Fit returned twice in a Night, upon her going again to Rest.
I. THe Brain of this Woman was primarily affected, especially in the hinder Ventricle of the Brain, near the Spinal Pith, for the Muscles of the Parts seated below the Head, are agrieved, which appears by her diffi∣culty of breathing, and the hindered Motion of her Breast, Thighs and Arms. Hence the Heart is affected with the Lungs. II. This Affection is called Incubus, or the Night-Mare, which is an Inter∣cepting of the Motion of the Voice and Respiration, with a false Dream of some∣thing lying ponderous upon the Breast, the free Influx of the Spirits to the Nerves be∣ing obstructed. III. The antecedent Cause of this Malady, is an over-redundancy of Blood in the whole Body, whence many Va∣pors are carried to the Head, and there detained by the Winter-cold, streightning the Pores, and thickning those Vapors, and narrowing the Passage to the be∣ginning of the Spinal Marrow, which hinders a sufficient Passage of the Ani∣mal Spirits to the Nerves; and this constitutes the containing Cause. IV. For while the Passages of the Nerves are compressed by the more thick Vapors, detained about the lower part of the Brain; at the entrance of the Marrow into the Spine, sufficient Animal Spirts do not flow into the low∣er Parts, which causes the Motion of the Muscles to fail. Now, because the Motion of the Muscles, for the most part ceases in time of sleep, except the Respiratory Muscles, therefore the fail∣ing of their Motion is first perceived, by reason of the extraordinary trouble that arises for want of necessary Respi∣ration. Now the Patient in her Sleep growing sensible of that Streightness, but not understanding the Cause in that Condition, believes her self to be overlay'd by some Demon, Thief, or other ponderous Body, being neither able to move her Breast, nor to breath. Then endeavouring to shake off that troublesome Weight, as apprehensive of some ensuing Suffocation, but not being able to move the rest of her Members, she believes them under the same Pressure. Upon which, when she tries to call out for assistance, but because of the streightness of her Respi∣ration, she is not able to speak distinctly, she makes an inarticulate Noise with great difficulty. In this Strugling she continues, till the Animal Spirits, de∣tained at the lower Part of the Brain, by the Compression of the Spinal Marrow, and there collected in a greater quan∣tity, at length forced by the continual Flux of Spirits from the Heart, vi∣olently make their way through the Pith into the Nerves and Muscles, and restore Motion to the Parts. Then the Patient moves her Body and wakes, and by that motion those thick Vapors are dissipated, and being awake, she is for∣ced to take Breath, to repair the Loss which she suffered for want of Respirati∣on. But because there is yet a larger quantity of these Vapors still remaining in the Head, hence it comes to pass, that if she fall asleep again, especially if she lye upon her Back, the same Evil returns, in regard those thick Vapors settle more easily toward the hinder part of the Head near the Marrow. V. Now that they are Vapors, and not Humors, is plain from hence, that the Malady is so soon mastered, which could not be done so suddenly were they Humors, which would rather cause an Apoplexie, or some other more dan∣gerous Evil, that they are thick, and not thin Vapors, appears from hence, be∣cause the thin Vapors would pass more easily through the Pores, though nar∣rower, which the thick cannot do, which requires motion of the Body to dissipate them; which Motion ceasing in Sleep, they stick to the Place and streighten the Pores of the Nerves. But if any cold ill Temper of the Brain happen at the same time, those Vapors are easily condensed into Humors by that Cold, which if detained in the Head, cause Heaviness, the Coma, A∣poplexy, and the like. If they flow from the Head to the lower Parts, they breed Catarrs, with which our Patient was wont to be troubled in the Winter∣time. VI. This Malady is dangerous, least the collected Vapors being condensed in the Head, should breed a Coma, Apo∣plexy, or the like. VII. It consists in removing the Ante∣cedent, Principal and containing Cause, and the Corroboration of the Brain. VIII. To purge away the Antece∣dent Cause, or the great quantity of Humors, let the Body be purged with Pill. Cochiae, Powder of Diaturbith, or this Potion. ℞. Leaves of Senna ʒiij. White Agaric, Rhubarb, an. ʒj. s. Anise-seeds ℈ ij. White Ginger ℈s. Decoction of Barley
q. s. Infuse them, and to the Straining, add Elect. Diaphaenicon ʒij. IX. Then because she is plethoric, take away ℥viij. or ix. of Blood from her Arm. X. After Blood-letting, let her take every morning a Draught of this Apo∣zem. ℞. Root of Calamus Aromaticus, Fennel, Stone-parsley, Capers, an. ʒvj. Herbs, Betony, Marjoram, Dodder, Succory, Borage, Sorrel, an. m. j. Flowers of Stoechas m. s. Iuniper Berries ℥s. Blew Currants ℥ij. Water q. s. Boil them according to Art, adding toward the end Rubarb, white Agaric, an. ʒij Anise-seed ℥s. Cinnamon ℈j. s. Make an Apozem of lb. s. XI. To expel the containing Cause, Errhinas snuft up into the Nostrils, or a sneezing Powder of Root of white Hellebore, Pellitory, Leaves of Marjo∣ram, and Flowers of Lilly of the Val∣ley, greatly conduce. XII. To corroborate the Brain, let her take a small quantity of this Con∣ditement. ℞. Specier. Diambr. Aromatic. Rosat. an. ℈ij. Conserve of Flowers of Betony, Sage, Anthos, candied Root of Acorns, an. ℥s. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. XIII. To the same purpose let her wear such a Quilt as this upon her Head. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Flowers of Lavender, an. ʒj. Nutmegs ℈ij. Cloves ℈j. Benjamin ℈s. Beat them into a gross Powder. XIV. Keep her in a pure and mo∣derate hot Air. Let her Diet be spar∣ing, but of good Juice and easie Di∣gestion. Let her Suppers be more mo∣derate then her Dinners. Her Drink must be small, her Exercise moderate, and so must her Sleep be, and let her be careful of sleeping upon her Back. Lastly, a sedate Mind, and a soluble Body are of great moment in this Case. HISTORY XII. Of the Apoplexy. A Strong Man, about forty years of age, both a great Feeder and Drinker, complained of a heavy Pain in his Head for two Months together, but took no care of himself, but followed on his usual Course of Drinking Fore-noons and After-noons; but at length, one Morning waking in his Chamber, after he had muttered out three or four inarticulate Words, he fell of a sudden void of Sense or Moti∣on, only that he breathed, and had a strong Pulse. I. THat this man's Head was ter∣ribly afflicted, the Cessation of the Animal Functions sufficiently de∣clared. II. This Affection is called an Apo∣plexy, which is a sudden Privation of all the Animal Functions, except the Act of Respiration. III. It is plain that it was no Lethar∣gy, Syncope, Sleepy Coma, Catalepsis, or Epilepsie, because the Patient, without any Fever, lay almost immoveable, in∣sensible, nor could be waked by any means▪ having all his Members lan∣guid, only with a strong Pulse, and a heavy Respiration, which are no Simp∣toms of the foresaid Diseases. IV. The Brain is affected about the beginning of the Pith, which is the O∣riginal of all the Nerves, then besieged by a Flegmatic Humor. V. The remote Cause was continual Gluttony and Drunkenness, by which the Brain in a long time was extreamly weakned, and the many crude and Flegmatic Humors generated therein, and collected together in the Ventricles, made the Antecedent Cause, which afterward setling at the Original of the Nerves, constituted the containing Cause. VI. The Animal Spirits being hin∣dred by those Humors, contracting the Pores of the beginning of the Nerves,
presently all the Animal Functions cease, and the Patient becomes void of Sense and Motion, except Respira∣tion; because the Spirits still flow thi∣ther by reason of the largeness of the Pores of the Respiratory Nerves. But the Distemper lasting, together with the Flegmatic Obstruction or Compression, the Influx of the Spirits into them is also stop'd, which causes the Respiration also to fail, and thence a heaving and ratling in the Throat. VII. The Pulse beats well, because the Blood sent from the right Ventri∣cle of the Heart to the Lungs, is suffici∣ently, as yet, refrigerated; but if the Disease continue, the Pulse will also fail, because the Blood of the right Ventricle of the Heart, is not suffici∣ently ventilated and cool'd, so that lit∣tle Blood comes to the left Ventricle, which weakens the Motion of the Heart. VIII. This Disease is very dange∣rous; yet because it is but in the begin∣ning, and Respiration is not yet come to Ratling, and for that there is a strong natural Heat remaining in the Patient, there is some hope of Cure, though not without some fear of a Palsie that will ensue the Cure. IX. The Method of Cure, the re∣moval of the flegmatic Humors, ob∣structing the beginning of the Nerves; to prevent a new Generation and Col∣lection of them, and to corroborate the Brain. X. Let the Body be moderately moved, let the Hairs be plucked, and laborious Rubings and Ligatures of the Arms and Thighs. This Glister may be also administred. ℞. Wormwood, Rue, Pellitory of the Wall, Mercury, Hyssop, Beets, Lesser Centaury, an. M. j. Leaves of Senna ℥j. Celocynth ty'd in a Bag ʒj. Anise∣seed ʒv. Water q. s. Boil them accord∣ing to Art. ℞. Of the Straining ℥x. Elect. Hiera Pi∣cra, Diaphoenicon, an. ℥j. Salt ℈iiij. for a Glister. Or instead thereof, this Suppository. ℞. Specierum Hierae ʒj. Trochises, Al∣hanhal ℈s. Salt Gemma ℈j. Honey ℈vj. Make a Suppository, and at the end of it, fasten gr. iiij. of Diagri∣dium. XI. After he has taken this Glister, Bleed him moderately in the Arm; then apply Cupping-glasses with and without Scarification to his Neck, Shoul∣ders, Scapulas and Legs. XII. Let this Sneezing Powder be al∣so blown up into the Nostrils. ℞. Roots of white Hellebore ℈j. Pellito∣ry of Spain ℈s. Leaves of Marjoram ℈j. Black Pepper, Castoreum, an. gr. v. For a Powder. XIII. Outwardly, let this little Bag be applied warm to his Head. ℞. Salt M. j. s. Sea-sand Mij. Seeds of Cummin, Fennel, Lovage, an. ʒij. Cloves ʒj. s. Heat them in a dry Stone Pot, put them in a linnen Bag, and apply them warm to the Head. XIV. Let the Nostrils, Temples and Top of the Head be anointed with this Liniment. ℞. Ols of Castor, Lavender, Rosemary, Amber, an. ℈j. Martiate Oyntment ʒj. XV. When the Patient begins to come to himself, give him now and then a Spoonful of this Water. ℞. Water of Tylet Flowers, Lilly of the Valleys, Aqua Vitae of Matthiolus, Syrup of Stoechas, an. ℥j. XVI. Let him then be purged with Pill. Cochiae, extract of Catholicon, Elect. Diaphenicon or Hiera Picra, Powder of Diaturbith, or the Infusion of such kind of Flegm-purging Ingredients. XVII. After Purgation, let him take this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Sweet Cane, Fennel, an. ʒvj. Galangal ℥iij. Marjoram, Betony, Rose∣mary, Rue, Calamint, Hyssop, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Cordial Flow∣ers, an. one little Handful, Iuniper Berries ʒvj. Seeds of Anise, Fennel, an▪ ʒij. Water and Hydromel, equal pars. Make an Apozem of lbj. s. Of which, let him take four or five ounces thrice a day, with a small quan∣tity of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambre ℈iiij. Sweet Dia∣mosch ʒs. Roots of sweet Cane candied, Conserves of Betony, Anthos and Flow∣ers of Sage, Syrup of Staechas, q. s.
XVIII. Let this Quilt be laid also upon his Head. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram M. j. Rosemary, and Flowers of Lavender, an. two small Handfuls, Cloves, Nutmegs, an. ℈jj. Benjamin ℈j. Beat them into a gross Powder, and quilt them into red Silk. XIX. An Air moderately hot and dry, either by Art or Nature, is most proper for this Distemper. Meats of good Nourishment and easie of Di∣gestion, condited with Rosemary, Mar∣joram, creeping Thyme, Sage, Beto∣ny, Baum, Hyssop, the Carminative Seeds, and Spices, &c. Small Drink, and sometimes a little Hypocrass, Short Sleeps, moderate Exercise, and orderly Evacuations. HISTORY XIII. Of the Palsey and Trembling. A Virgin, twenty five years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, having for a long time ed upon Sallads, Cucumbers and raw Fruit, afterwards complaining of heavy dozing Pains in her Head, at length, fell Apoplectic to the Ground, without Motion or Sense, ex∣cept Respiration. The Physician who was sent for, had brought her to this pass, that after six hours she opened her Eyes again, and after twenty hours, was fully restored to her Senses, and spoke; but all the Left-side of her Body below the Head, remain'd immoveable, with a very dull Sense of Feeling. Yet her Monthly Customs observed their Periods, though not so copious. I. THat Affection which remained, after the weak Apoplexy went off, is called a Palsie, Which is a Pri∣vation of Voluntary Motion or Sense, or both, in one or several Parts of the Body. II. The Part affected is the Spinal Pith, chiefly about the beginning of it; where the one half Part of it being compressed or obstructed by the Fleg∣matic Humor, expelled from the Brain, disturbs the Use of all those Nerves proceeding from that side, and by con∣sequence of the Muscles. III. The remote Cause is disorderly Diet, and the too much use of cold things, whence many flegmatic Hu∣mors being generated in a flegmatic Body, cause an oppressive Pain in the Head, which is the antecedent Cause, which also afterwards obstructing the Original of the Marrow of the Brain, and afterwards cast off by one half, but still obstructing the other, constitute the containing Cause. IV. Thus the Motion of the Left-side was taken away, because that half of the Pith being obstructed, the Animal Spirits could not enter into that half of the Pith, nor the Nerves proceeding from it, which causes a Cessation of the Actions of the Instruments of voluntary Motion, or the Muscles on that side. But the Sense is not quite lost, but re∣mains very dull, because that several Spirits pass through the contracted Pores of the Pith, sufficient for Motion, yet not anew to impart Sense to the feeling Parts. V. This Malady is hard to be cur∣ed, by reason of the detension of a vis∣cous and tenacious Humor in a cold Part; but Youth and Strength of Body promise hopes of Recovery. VI. The Method of Cure requires the Attenuation and Dissipation of the Obstructing Humor. 2. To prevent the Afflux of any more. 3. To take away the antecedent Cause. 4. To cor∣toborate the Parts affected. VII. For Evacuation of the Flegma∣tic Humor, give these Pills. ℞. Mass of Pill. Cochiae ʒs. Extract of Catholicon ℈s. with a little Syrup of Stoechas, make up vij. Pills. Instead of them may be given Powder of Diaturbith or Diacarthamum ʒj. or a Draught of an Insusion of Leaves of Senna, Root of Jalap, Agaric. These Purges are to be repeated by Inter∣vals.
VIII. Blood-letting is not proper in this Case. IX. To corroborate the nervous Part of the Body, and prevent the Genera∣tion of flegmatick Humors, let him take this Apozem. ℞. Root of Acorns, Fennel, an. ʒvj. Florence Orice ʒiij. Betony, Ground∣pine, Marjoram, Rosemary, Calamint, Thime, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Seeds of Fennel, Caroways, Bi∣shops-weed, an. ʒj. s. Water and Wine equal parts, boil them to a Pint and a half, and to the Straining add Syrup of Stoechas ℥iij. For an Apozem. Of which, let the Patient take four ounces three or four times a day, with a small Quantity of this Condite∣ment. ℞. Specier. Diambr. Diamosch Dulcis, an. ℈iiij. Conserve of Flowers of Sage, Anthos, Root of Acorns candied, an. ʒv. Syrup of Stoechas q. s. X. The Use of Paralitic and Apo∣plectic Waters will be very proper in this Case; of which there are several to be found among the Prescriptions of Physicians. XI. If the Disease will not submit to these Remedies, let him take every Morning five ounces of the following Decoction, and sweat in his Bed, ac∣cording to his Strength. ℞. Lig. Guaiacum ℥iiij. Sassafras, Sar∣saperil, an. ℥ij. Water lbvij. Macerate these twenty four hours; then boil them, adding toward the end Roots of A∣corns, Valerian, Butter-bur, Fennel, an. ʒvj. Galangale, Licorice sli'd, an. ʒij. Herbs, Betony Miij. Ground-Ivy, M. ij. Thyme, Marjoram, Rosemary, Flowers of Stoechas, an. M. j. Sage Ms. Iuniper-berries ℥j. Boil them to lb. iij. XII. For Corroboration of the Head, prepare this Quilt. ℞. Flowers of Rosemary, Marjoram, Thyme, Flowers of Lavender, Melilot, an▪ one small Handful, Cloves, Nut∣megs, an. ℈ij. For a Quilt. XIII. While these things are doing, let the Spine of the Back be well chafed with hot Cloaths, especially in the Neck about the Head, and then fo∣mented with a Fomentation of hot Ce∣phalics boiled in Wine; or else anoint the Neck with this Liniment warm. ℞. Oyl of Foxes, Spike, Rue, Goose and Cats-grease, an. ʒvj. Oyl of Turpen∣tine ℥s. Oil of Peter, Rosemary, Amber, an. ℈ij. Powder of Castoreum ℈iiij. After Unction and Friction, lay on this Plaister. ℞. Pul, Castoreum ʒij. Benjamin ʒj. Gal∣banum, Opoponax dissolved in Spirit of Wine. Emplaster of Betony, Lawrel-Berries, and Melilot, an. ʒvj. Mix them according to Art. XIV. This Disease requires a hot, dry and pure Air. Meats of good juice and easie Digestion, calefying and at∣tenuating. For Drink, Hydromel or Wine, imbib'd with Rosemary, Mar∣joram, Betony, Cardamum, &c. Now and then a Draught of Hypocrass, or a Spoonful of Juniper-wine, or Anthos∣wine, or Aquae Vite of Matthiolus will not be improper; avoid long Sleeps and Repletion, and let Natures Eva∣cuations be regular and due. HISTORY XIII. Of Trembling. A Man, fifty years of Age, struck with a great and sudden Ter∣ror, immediately fell down, fixing his Eyes upon▪ the Standers by, but not able to speak: Soon after recovering his Spirits, he talked well enough, but rose up with a Trembling over his whole Body. From that time, when he moved his Limbs, the Trembling still remained, which as his Body drew cold, was more violent, as he grew warm, a∣bated.
I. TRembling is a Deprivation of the Voluntary Motion of the Limbs, by which they are agitated with a contra∣ry Motion, in a continued Vicissitude. II. The antecedent Cause is a Fleg∣matic Humor contained in the Brain, which being stirred by the great sudden and disorderly Commotion of the Spi∣rits proceeding from the Terror, and cast off to the Pith of the Spine, con∣stitutes the containing Cause. III. For the Humor in that place contracting the Pores of the Pith, pre∣vents the free Influx of the Animal Spirits through the Marrow into the Nerves and Muscles. So that not being sufficient to perfect the voluntary Moti∣on, it happens that the Limbs are mov∣ed forward by a voluntary Motion, but are depressed by their own Weight, so that both together cause a trembling Motion. IV. This Trembling is more vehe∣ment in the Body, when cold; less vio∣lent when the Body is warm: Because the Pores are more contracted by the Cold, and more dilated by the Heat. Which causes a freer or less open Pas∣sage to the Animal Spirits, and conse∣quently a more or less vehement Trem∣bling. V▪ This Trembling is not a little dangerous, for it may turn to a Palsey, or may be accompanied with an Apo∣plexy, a Carus, or a Lethargy. VI. The Cure is the same as of the Palsey. HISTORY. XIV. Of a Convulsion. A Maid, about thirty years of Age, received a Wound in her Right-arm, which laid a Nerve bare, but unhurt. However she lay in a cold Place, and by reason of her Poverty, not well guarded against the Cold, and besides an unskilful Chyrurgeon, hav∣ing stopped the Blood, put a Tent into the Wound dipped in Egyptia∣eum and the Apostles Oyntment, which caused a most painful and ve∣hement Convulsion in her Arm; which soon after was accompanied with a Convulsion of the Thigh on the same side, and of her Arm and Thigh on the other side, which lasted sometimes half a quarter, some∣times an Hour, sometimes half an hour, intermitting and returning. She was in such Pain, that many times it made her talk idly. I. THE Nerves and Muscles of this Patient were affected, as ap∣peared by the Motion not spontaneous, and that still more encrease; and her Head was grieved, as appeared by the Delirium. II. This Simptom is called a Con∣vulsion, which is a continued and unvo∣luntary Contraction of the Nerves and Muscles toward their beginning. III. The remote Cause was the Wound received, which laid the Wound bare. The next Cause was the sharp and biting Oyntment, pro∣voking the Nerve, and the cold Air no less troublesome to it. IV. Which Vellication of the Nerve being communicated to the Nerve, and perceived by the Mind, presently more copious Spirits were determined to the Place affected for its Relief, which di∣stending in breadth the Nerve and Mus∣cle belonging to it, but contracting it in length, caused the Convulsion. By the Pain of this Convulsion, the Head be∣ing troubled, sends the Animal Spirits disorderly to these or other lower Parts, and so contracting them in the same manner, the Contraction happens not only in the wounded, but in other Parts likewise; and from this great Disturbance of the Brain and Animal Spirits happens a Delirium. V. This is a dangerous Malady; for besides the Nerves and Muscles, the noble Bowel is distmpered. Therefore, says Hippocrates, a Convulsion ensuing a Wound is very dangerous. But the Youth and Strength of the Patient promises great hopes of Cure, besides that, the Convulsion proceeds from an external Cause that may be removed.
VI. The Method of Cure consists in keeping the Patient warm, and in a warm Place, in removing the sharp and biting Oyntment, and washing the Wound with Barley-water boiled with Hyssop, and a little Honey dissolved in it; then put a Tent into it dipped in this Oyntment. ℞. The Yolk of an Egg, n• j. Honey, Turpentine, an. ʒiij. Spirit of Wine ʒij. Then lay on Emplaster of Betony or Melilot. VII. The Parts afflicted, and especi∣ally the wounded Arm, are to be fo∣mented with this Fomentation. ℞. Marjoram, Rosemary, Betony, Cala∣mint, Hyssop, Basil, an. M. j. Flowers of Dill M. ij. Of Chamomil, Melilot, an. M. j. s. Seeds of Cumin ℥j. of Lo∣vage ʒiij. Of Dill ℥s. White-wine q. s. Boil them to lbiij. VIII. After Fomentation, strongly chae the Parts affected with this Lini∣ment warm. ℞. Martiate Oyntment, Oyl of Ireos, Oyl of Foxes, Earth-worms and Spike, an. ℥j. Oyl of Castor ℥s. IX. In the mean time, after a Glister given, let the Parties take a Draught of this Apozem to strengthen the Brain and Nerves. ℞. Root of sweet Cane, Fennel, Male Piony, an. ʒvj. Herbs, Of Majoram, Rue, Betony, Rosemary, Baum, Basil, Calamint, an. M. j. Flowers of Stoechas M. s. Fennel Seed ʒij. Raisins cleansed ℥ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Then mix Water of Tilet Flowers, Sy∣rup of Stoechas, an. ℥iij. X. Now and then let her take a small quantity of this Conditment. ℞. Species Diambra ℈iiij. Candied Root of sweet Cane, Conserve of Flowers of Sage, Betony, Anthos, an. ℥s. Syrup of Stoechas, q. s. XI. Lastly, clap such a quilted Cap upon her Head. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram M. s. Of Rose∣mary, Betony, Flowers of Dill, Melilot, an. Two little Handfuls, Nutmegs ʒj. Benjamin ʒs. Beat them into a Gross Powder for a quilted Cap. XII. The Convulsion ceasing, the Bo∣dy must be purged with an Infusion of Leaves of Senna, Rubarb, Agaric, &c. or with Cochiae or Golden Pills, Dia∣phenicon, or Diaturbith, with Rubarb. And then return to the use of the fore∣said Apozem and Conditement. XIII. Her Diet must be easie of Di∣gestion, condited with Marjoram, Hys∣sop, Rosemary, Betony, Sage, Anise∣seed, Fennel-seed, and the like. Let her sleep Long, and take her Rest as much as may be. And be sure the Bo∣dy evacuate regularly. HISTORY. XV. Of the Epilepsie. A Boy of eight years of Age, indifferent lusty, no care being had of his Diet, first became sad, and the Winter being past, often complain'd of a grievous Head-ach. In March, as he was at play, he fell down of a sudden, quite senseless, writh'd his Eyes, and clutch'd his two Thumbs hard in his Fists. That Fit soon went off; but the next day it returned much more vehement, attended with manifest Convulsions of the Body. From that time the Fits returned twice, thrice, and four times a Week, with more terrible Convulsions. But in the Summer they were much gentler, and not so frequent. But the Autumn following, especially near Winter, the Fits took him very of∣ten, and very violent, and that too of a sudden without any warning, with horrid Convulsions and Foming at the Mouth. And at last, the
I continuance and violence of the Distemper had so disordered the Ani∣mal Functions, that the Child was become sottish. I. THAT the Boys Brain was af∣fected, was plain by the di∣stress of the Animal Functions. II. This Distemper is called an Epilepsie, Which is a Convulsion of the whole Body, not perpetual, with which the Party ta∣ken falls to the Ground, with an intercept∣ing of the Senses and Functions of the Mind, rising from a Peculiar malignant and acrimonious Matter. III. Bad Diet contributes much to the breeding of this Disease (as the greedy devouring of bad and raw Fruit) which heaps up Crude and Flegmatic Humors in a Flegmatic Body; and these filling the Brain, first caused the Head-ach; then through their long stay in the Brain, obtaining a certain pecu∣liar pravity and acrimony, constitute the containing Cause of the Epilepsis. IV. From this depraved and acri∣monious Humor exhale sharp and malignant Vapors, which as often as they twitch and bite the beginning of the Nerves, about the heat of the common Sensory, so often they cause the Fit. For while Nature endeavors to shake off that troublesom Acrimony from the sensible Parts, it happens that as the Spirits flow in greater or less quan∣tity into them, they contract and re∣lax alternately, and move the rest of the Nerves and Muscles of the Body after the same manner; whence those short and frequent Convulsions. V. Now because this Malignant and sharp Humor chiefly and oftenest afflicts the small diminutive Nerves, near the seat of the common Sensory, hence it comes to pass, that the fit so suddainly seizes. For so soon as those little Nerves feel that Acrimony, Na∣ture endeavors to shake it off. And be∣cause that endeavor is made, and begins near the common Sensory; therefore there is a stop put upon the Functions of the Senses and Mind. For in re∣gard the Pine Kernel is presently affect∣ed, and for that the Influx of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves sometimes contracted, sometimes relaxed, can ne∣ver be regular, hence it happens that the Organs of the Senses become de∣fective in their Functions, and by rea∣son of that disorderly Influx of the Spirits into the Nerves and Muscles, the Patient presently falls. VI. The Fits are milder and not so frequent in Summer. For that the Pores of the whole Body are more open, by reason of the External heat, so that there is a greater dissipation of the Hu∣mors; and considering the time of the year less Flegm is bred and heaped up in the Brain. Therefore in Autumn and Winter they are most frequent and violent, because of the greater abun∣dance of Flegm then bred, and less easie to be dissipated through the Pores then contracted with Cold; besides the Vapors exhaling from it, are more abundant and acrimonious. VII. The Foam at the Mouth pro∣ceeds from hence; for that those Fleg∣matic Humors expelled from the Brain into the Jaws and Lungs, by that vehement agitation, by reason that respiration is hindered, grows hot in those places, and being mixed with the Air, unequally and difficultly passing to and fro, by ve∣hement respiration are forced all frothy into the Mouth. VIII. The Fit lasts, till that malig∣nant and sharp Vapor be altogether dis∣cussed; and returns again when the de∣praved matter, stirred anew, sends forth the same Vapors to the Original of the Nerves. The Fit is more or less vehe∣ment, and does less hurt to the princi∣pal Functions, according to the quan∣tity and quality of the evil Matter. IX. Now because this ill and acrimo∣nious Humor is bred in the Brain, and because the Fits were frequent and ve∣hement, and the Disease of nine Months standing, therefore the Cure was difficult, but the Strength and Age of the Patient gave great hopes of Cure. For being but a Child, the very change of Youth out of one Age into another many times effects the Cure, as Hippocrates testifies. X. The Cure is to be performed ei∣ther in the Fit, or when the Fit is gone off. In the Fit, Castor, green Rue, Oyl of Marjoram, Amber, Nutmegs and the like are to be held to the No∣strils. XI. When the Fit is past, the Ori∣ginal Causes are to be taken away, the antecedent Cause to be removed, the depraved quality of the containing Cause to be removed, and the whole Brain to be corroborated.
XII. Let the Body be gently Purged with two drams of Heira Picra or Dia∣phaenicon; or with one Scruple and a half of Powder of Diacarthamum; or an ounce of Purging blew Currans. XIII. Then let him drink twice or thrice a day a draught of this Decocti∣on. ℞. Roots of Male Piony, Misletoe, Sassa∣fras-wood an. ʒvj. of Calamus Aromatic. Valerian an. ℥. s. Herbs, Marjoram, Rue, Calamit., Rosmary, Vervan, Laurel-leaves, Flowers of Stoechas an. M j. Iuniper-berries ℥ s. Seeds of Anise, Wild Carrots, Fennel an. ʒ j. Seed of Male Piony ʒ iij. Raisins cleased ℥ ij. Water q. s. Boil them to an Apozem of lb j. s. Before he drinks this, let him take a small quantity of the following Con∣ditement. ℞. Spicier. Diambr. ʒ j. s. Roots of sweet Cane candied, Conserves of Anthos, Flowers of Sage, Betony, an. ℥ s. Sy∣rup of Stoechas q. s. XIV. Sometimes instead of the Apo∣zem, he may take a spoonful of this mixture. ℞. Epileptic water of Langius ℥ iij. Wa∣ter of Lime-tree Flowers, of the Lilly of the Valleys an. ℥j. Syrup of Stoechas ℥ j. s. XV. Upon his head let him wear this Quilted Cap. ℞. Leaves of Marjarom, Rosemary, Thime, Flowers of Lavender and Red Roses an. Two small handfulls. Cloves, Benjamin an. ℈ j. Beat them into a gross Pow∣der. XVI. Let the Patient be kept in a warm Air; his food must be Meats of easie digestion condited with Marjoram, Baum, Rosemary and other Cephalics. His drink must be small; his sleep and exercise moderate; and his Evacuations regular. Raw Fruit, Garlick, Onyons and Swines Flesh, and all other Meats of hard digestion and ill juice are nought. HISTORY. XVI. Of a Catarrh. A Man of forty Years of Age, of a cold Constitution, and one that had long used a cooling and moistning Diet, was troubled first with a heavy Pain in his Head, with a proclivity to sleep. After∣wards he was troubl'd with a vehement Cough, sometimes with deaf∣ness, noise in his Ears, Pains in his Neck, Teeth, Shoulders, and other Parts, sometimes a most terrible Cough took him, not without some difficulty of breathing and danger of Suffocation, sometimes he had nauseousness, and was molested with troublesome Belchings and Pains in his Stomach; under his lower Jaw rose Flegmatic Tumors, which fell and vanished soon after; his Nostrils were more then usually dry and he spit little. He complained also that he felt a continual chil∣ness in the top of his Head; and that his Hair was not so moist as it used to be. I. HEre is one molested with a Ca∣tarrh, which is a Preter natural Defluxion of Humors from the Head to the lower Parts. II. The remote cause of this Distem∣per was a cold raw and Flegmatic nou∣rishment, which over-cool'd and wea∣kened the Bowels serving to Concoction, and bred a great quantity of Excremen∣titious Flegm, which was the antece∣ding Cause of the Distemper: and which being colected, and accumulated in the Brain, over-cool'd it, and thence fell down upon the lower Parts. III. This Flegm augmented in the Brain, because it had not heat enough to concoct and dissipate so cold and thick a Humor; besides that the Passages to the Nostrils and Palate were obstruct∣ed.
IV. This Obstruction happens in the inner Parts of the Head by reason of the viscosity of the Humors stuffing up the narrow Passages for the Evacuation of those Excrements. Therefore not able to pass the regular way, they flow to the inner Parts of the Ear, where they cause Noises, Deafness and Pain; sometimes to the Larinx and Lungs, which causes vehement cough∣ing and danger of Suffocation; some∣times to the Stomach and other Parts, where they breed several Maladies. In the Exterior Parts this Obstruction happens, by reason the Pores in the top of the Head, are filled with Humors contracted by the External cold: and that cold continuing in those refri∣gerated Parts, causes that chilness com∣plained of by the Patient. And this cold not only hinders the Passage of the Vapors, but condenses them under the Pericranium, into a serous and flegma∣tic Humor, which being ill concocted becomes salt and sharp. Which for want of dissipation falls down upon the Teeth, Neck, Shoulders, &c. and causes those Pains complained of. V. That the ordinary Passages were obstructed is apparent from the driness of the Patients Nostrils and Hair, and because he spit so little. VI. This Affection is not a little dangerous, in regard the Symptoms that attend it may bring a Man into a Con∣sumption; and breed occult and dange∣rous Apostems in the inner Parts. VII. In the Method of the Cure, the Body must be Purged twice or thrice with Pill. Chochiae, Powder of Diatur∣bith or Diacarthamum, or such a draught as this. ℞. Leaves of Senna ʒiij. White Agaric. ʒ j. s. Anise-seed ʒ j. Choice Cinnamon white Ginger an. ℈ s. Decoction of Bar∣ley q. s. Infuse them, then add to the straining Elect. Hiera Picra ʒ j. Dia∣phoenicon ʒ ij. VIII. Then the Brain is to be dried and strengthened with the following Apozem. ℞. Roots of Acorus Fennel, an. ʒ vj▪ Ga∣langal ʒ iij. Herbs, Marjoram, Betony, Thime, Rosemary, Baum, Calamint, an. M. j. Laurel-leaves, Flowers of Stoechados an. M. s. Seeds of Anise, Fen∣nel an. ʒ ij. Laurel-berrys ʒ s. Water and Wine equal Parts, Boyl them to an Apozem of lbj. s. Of which let him take three or four draughts a day. IX. Noon and Night after Meals let him take a small quantity of this Con∣ditement. ℞. Specier. Diambr, Diamosch, Diaga∣langa, an. ʒ s. Conserve of Anthos, red Roses, an. ʒvj. Candv'd Roots of Acorus, ʒiij. Syrup of Stoechas, q. s. X. While he follows this course, Masticatories and Errhines may be used; and the taking of Tobacco is very Be∣neficial. XI. Decoctions of Guaiacum, Sassa∣fras and Sassaparil prepared with hot and drying Cephalics to provoke Sweat now and then are of great use. XII. This Quilt may be made for the Patient to lay upon his Head. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjarom, Thime, Flowers of Lavender an. two small hand fuls, Mastic, Frankincense an. ʒ j. Cloves, Nutmegs an. ℈ j. For a Quilt. To anoint the Temples and top of the Head, which is every day to be done use this Liniment. ℞. Oyls of Rosemary, Amber, Marjoram an. ℈ j. Oyl of Nutmegs pressed ℈ ij. Martiate Oyntment ʒ ij. XIII. If notwithstanding all this, the Catarrh continue, make an Issue in one Arm or in the Neck. XIV. Let him keep in a moderately warm Air; observe a good Diet, roast∣ed rather then boil'd, condited with Spices and hot Cephalics, avoid Radi∣shes, Mustard, Garlic, Onions, which raise and fill the Head with Vapors▪ His Drink must be sparing, but strong; moderate sleep and moderate Exer∣cise.
HISTORY XVII. Of an Opthalmy. A Person about thirty Years of Age, abounding with hot and Cho∣leric Blood, having heated himself the last Winter at an extra∣ordinary compotation of strong Wine, and then exposing himself in a bitter cold Night to the extremity of the weather, presently felt a sharp pain in his Eyes, with a burning heat; the next day a very great redness appeared in the white of his Eye, with a manifest swelling of the little Veins. He could not endure the light, so that he sat con∣tinually with his Eyes shut, sharp Tears flowed from his Eyes, which when he opened his sight appeared to be very dim. I. HEre the Part affected was the Eye, in which the annate Tuni∣cle or the Conjunctive Tunicle, was chiefly aggreived, the other Parts of the Eye, only by Accident. II. This Disease the Physitians call an Opthalmy, or Blear-eyedness, which is an Inflammation of the annate or white Tunicle, accompanied with redness, heat, pain and tears. III. The Antecedent Cause of this Disease, was an abundance of hot Blood through the whole Body, which being violently stirred by the extraordinary heat caused by the Wine, and suddain∣ly detained by the Original Cause or the outward extream Cold, and over∣flowing the conjunctive Tunicle, con∣stitutes the containing Cause. IV. For the blood being moved more rapidly through the Arteries and Veins by reason of the extraordinary heat of the Wine, was thickned of a suddain by the external Cold received into the Eye; so that it could not pass so speedily through those little Veins, as it was sent from the Heart, which caus'd the Veins of the Tunicle to swell, and distended the Tunicle it self; and the stay of the Blood corrupting it, and causing it to wax hot and sharp, pro∣duced the Inflammation. V. The Pain was occasioned partly by the distention of the Tunicle; partly by the acrimony of the Humors cor∣roding the Tunicle. VI. He could not endure the Light, partly because the Pain was exasperated by admission of the External Air; partly because the Eyes being opened the Animal Spirits presently flow into it, as they are determined for the be∣nefit of seeing, and distend the Eye, which destension augments the Pain, for the avoiding of which the Patient keeps his Eyes shut, to avoid the distension of the Part. VII. Now in regard the sight pro∣ceeds from the copious Influx of the Spirits into the Eye, and because the Tunicle cannot endure that distension, hence the Eyes being open, the sight grows dim; in regard that the fewer the Spirits are, the duller the sight is. VIII. The Tears issue forth, chiefly upon opening the Eye, by reason that the Caruncle in the larger corner of the Eye, that lies upon the hole in the Nose, is twitched and contracted in each Eye by the neighbouring Inflam∣mation: especially if any injury of the Air accompany it, and by reason of that painful contraction does not exactly cover the Lachrymal point, so that the hole being loose and open, the Tears flow forth in greater abundance. And they are sharp by reason of the Salt mixt with the serous Humor, and seem to be much sharper then they are, by reason of the exquisite Sense of the Tunicle, which is now already molest∣ed. IX. This Opthalmy threatens great dan∣ger to the Eye, in regard that by reason of the Winter cold, the discussion of the Hu∣mors flowing into the Annate Tunicle is the more difficult, and the longer stay of it may hazard the Corrosion and Ex∣ulceration of the Annate and the Horny Tunicle, and so produce a white Spot, a Scar, or some such blemish in the Sight. X. In the Cure, the antecedent Cause is to be removed, as being that which nourishes the Containing; and the Original Cause is to be removed, that the Containing one may be the bet∣ter discussed.
XI. The Body is first to be Purged with one dram of Pill. Cochiae or half an ounce of Diaprunum, Electuary So∣lutive, adding a few grains of Diagri∣dium: or else such a Draught. ℞. Rhubarb ʒ j. s. Leaves of Senna ʒ iij. Tartar ʒ j. Anise-seed ʒ j. Decoction of Barley q. s. Infuse them, and then add to the straining Solutive Diapru∣num Electuary ʒ iij. XII. The Body being Purged, open a Vein in the Arm, and take away eight or ten ounces of Blood. Then Purge again, and if need be bleed again. XIII. To divert the Excrementitious Humors from the Brain to the Eyes, Cupping-glasses may be applied to the Neck and Shoulders; or a Vesicatory behind the Ears. Which if they prove not sufficiently effectual, make a Seaton in the Neck, or apply an Actual or Po∣tential Cautery to the Arm or Neck. XIV. To asswage the Pain, drop into the Eye the Blood of the Wing-feathers plucked from Young Chickens, or Wo∣mens Milk newly milked from the Breast; or the Muscilage of the Seeds of Flea-wort, and Quinces extracted with Rose-water; or the Yolk of an Egg boiled to a hardness, or else the following Cataplasm laid upon the Eye. ℞. Pulp of an Apple roasted ℥ j. s. Crum of new White-bread ℥ iij. Saffron Pow∣dred ℈ j. s. New Milk and Rose-water equal Parts. Make them into a Cata∣plasm. XV. The Pain being somewhat as∣swaged, this Collyrium may be dropped into the Eye. ℞. Sarcocol fed with Milk ʒ j. Traga∣canth. ʒ s. Muscilage of the Seed of Quinces q. s. XVI. For discussion of the Humor contained in the Tunicle, foment the Eye with a Spung dipt in the following Fomentation warm. ℞. Herbs, Althea, Fennel, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. j. Water q. s. boil them to eight ounces; then add Rose-water ℥ iij. XVII. After Fomentation lay on the Cataplasm again, or else drop the fol∣lowing Collyrium into the Eye. ℞▪ Alloes washed in Fennel-water ℈ j. Sarcocol steeped in Milk ʒ j. Saffron gr. vij. Eyebright and Fennel-water an. ℥ j. XVIII. Let him keep in a temperate and clear Air, free from Dust and Wind and Smoak; let him avoid too much Light, and wear a green pece of Silk before his Eye. His Diet must be sparing and of easie Digestion, con∣dited with Fenel, Eyebright, Succory, Borage, &c. His Drink must be small. Let him avoid Radishes, Onions, Cab∣biges, Beans, Lentils, Olives, &c. The longer he sleeps and the less Exercise he uses, the better: and let him keep his Body open. HISTORY. XVIII. Of the Pin and Web, and Bloodshot. A Boy about twelve Years of Age of a cold Constitution, above five Months since perceived a dimness in both his Eyes, so that at first he thought he saw Gnats and Straws fly before his Eyes. Afterwards he seemed to look through a thick Mist; and so his sight began to fail more and more; so that he saw Men after a fashion, but could not distinguish Faces; nay he could hardly distinguish a Horse from a Cow. In the Apple of his Eye appeared a white spot, cover∣ing the Christaline Humor, which yielded to the Finger if lay'd upon it. I. THis Affection of the Eye is by the Physitians called Suffusio or the Pin and Web, which is an Obstructi∣on▪ of the hole of the Uveus Tunicle, caused by a Humor preternaturally gather∣ed and staying between the Horny Tunicle and the sight of the Eye, and hindring the Sight▪
II. This Humor in this Patient was Flegmatic, as appeared by the white colour in the Apple of the Eye: where it was collected by reason of the cold Temper of the Eye, not so able to concoct their Nourishment, but that some few thick Vapors exhale from the Uveous Tuncle, which are condensed into a thick Humor by the External cold, in the space between the Chry∣stalline Humor, lying upon the Uveous hole, and the Horny Tunicle, and mixed with the watry Humor, and swim at the top in viscous and thick Particles. III. This Humor being thinner and less in quantity at the beginning, did not hinder the Ingress of the Beams in∣to the Christalline humor altogether, but only the thicker Particles of it, pre∣vented all the Beams from entring in, which made the Patient think at first that Gnats and Straws hovered before his Eyes; which however were only the thicker Particles of the said Humor; but the Humor afterwards becoming more plentiful and thicker, then the Sight lookt as it were through a Cloud; and as that thickness of the Humor increased, the Sight waxed dimmer and dimmer. IV. The Cure of this Evil is very difficult, because the Humor covering the Apple of the Eye, is now very much condensed; and therefore the danger is, least hardning into a little Skin it should produce Blindness. But there is hopes of Cure while the Sight remains, and for that the Humor giving way to the Finger appears as yet not to be fixed. V. In the Cure the Body must be Purged with Pill. Lucis, Golden Pills or Chochiae: Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra, Diacarthamum, or any draught com∣posed of Agaric, Turbith, Iallap, Senna or the like. VI. For the discussion of the cold humors, let the Patient Sweat twice a week with Treacle, Mithridate, De∣coction of Sassaparil, China, and Sassafras. In the middle between whiles let him take Decoctions of Marjoram, Rose∣mary, Eyebright, Fennel, Betony, Rue, and the like: as also Cephalic Con∣ditements of Conserves of Anthos, Flow∣ers of Sage, Eyebright, Betony, &c. VII. To strengthen the Head, let him make use of Cephalic Quilts. The Excrementitious humors are to be diverted from the Eye, and carry'd otherways off by Visicatories applied behind the Ears, or an Issue in the Arm or Neck. VIII. After these things Topics may be applied to the Eyes; and first such a Decoction is to be prepared. ℞. Roots of Radishes ℥ ij. Valerian ℥ j. Rue, Fennel, Eyebright, Lovage, Mar∣joram, Leaves of Laurel an. M. j. Flow∣ers of Camomil M. ij. Seeds of Fennel, Caroways an. ʒ ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lb j. s. While it is boyling let the Patient sit with his Eye over the steam of the De∣coction: afterwards with a soft Spunge dipped in the same Decoction luke∣warm, let him frequently and long fo∣ment his Eye, and observe this course for three weeks together. IX. Let him then drop this Colly∣rium into his Eyes. ℞. Iuice of the bigger Celandine, Rue, Fennel, Hony-water an. ℥ s. When he has used this for some time, let him make it stronger by adding to it, the Gaul of a Patridge, and of a Pike one dram, and afterward one dram and a half▪ X. His Diet must be moderate hot, attenuating and discussing. His Sleep and Exercise moderate, and an open Body. XI. If these avail not the Suffusion must be taken from the Eye by the help of a Needle. Of Bloodshot. A Plethoric Young Man playing in a Tennis-Court by misfortune, a Ball strook him in the Left Eye: His Eye upon this aked to that degree that he could not hold open his Eye. The next day the Pain ceasing, an extraordinary Bloody Redness was seen over his whole Eye without any Inflammation, and his Eye-lids seemed to be infected with the same Redness. But his Sight was no way damni∣fied.
I. THis Malady of the Eye is called a Suggillation or Bloodshot, Being a pouring forth of the Blood with∣out the Vessels into the Tunicles over the Eyes and Eye-lids. II. This Blood flowed out of the small Vessels of the Annate Tunicle and the Eye-lids, broken and opened by the stroak of the Ball. For the Horny Tunicle was not hurt as appear∣ed by the soundness of the Sight which was no way damnified. III. There is no danger in this affecti∣on if it be taken in time, before the ex∣travasated Blood putrifie and inflame. IV. First the Body is to be Purged, and a Vein opened in the Arm. Then drop Womans Milk into the Eye, or Blood squeezed out of the Quills of live Chickens, and foment the Eyes fre∣quently with this Fomentation. ℞. Willow-leaves, Plantain, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot an. M. j Boil them in Water, q. s. Add to the straining Rose∣water ℥ j. s. V. When there is no fear of a larger Efflux of Blood, let the Fomentation be only discussive. HISTORY XIX. Of Blindness. A Person of forty Years of Age, strong, but given to his Belly, after he had complained for sometime of a slight giddiness with a troublesome heaviness, at length his sight in two days time was so decay'd, that he could hardly see, no not so much as the light, but became absolutely Blind; and yet his Eyes did not seem to ail any thing. The Patient for some time was very temperate, but his blindness still continued, though his heaviness and Vertigo went off: and the rest of his Body was well. I. THis Malady is called Caecitas or blindness, which is a Deprivation of the Sight. II. The Antecedent Cause of this Di∣stemper is Flegm collected in the Ven∣tricles of the Brain, which flowing thence to the Optic Nerves, and obstructing them, hinders the Influx of the Ani∣mal Spirits to the Eye and the precep∣tion of visible Objects. III. This Flegm was generated out of the Crude and Flegmatic Vapors and Humors arising from too much gutling, and there thickned through the colder temper of the Part. IV. By the same crude Vapors carried through the Carotides to the Choroid-Fold, and obstructing the narrow pas∣sages of it, that first whirling passage of the Humors, and consequently the Vertigo was caused; which was accom∣panied with a great Heaviness caused by the thick and viscous Humors, which Na∣ture endeavors to evacuate through the Sieve-like Bone. V. In the mean time the Eyes look very well, because there is no Mistem∣per no vicious Conformation in them, and because the Sight fails only for want of Animal Spirits, caused by ob∣struction of the Optic Nerves. VI. These Nerves are obstructed only at their beginning by the said Flegmatic Humor which somewhat insinuated it self into the broader Pores of the begin∣inng of the Pith. VII. The Patient was afterwards freed from his Vertigo and Murr, because he abstained from his usual Gormon∣dizing: which produced in a strong Body a better Concoction of the Crudi∣ties, which abated the anteceding Cause, and consumed the containing Cause. VIII. But the Blindness remained, because the crude Humor, fixed in the Pores of the Nerves, as well in regard of their own Viscosity as the narrow∣ness in the Pores of the Nerves, could neither be discussed nor consumed. And though it be no longer supplied by the anteceding Cause, yet in respect of it self and the Part to which it adheres, may remain and cause the obstruction. IX. This blindness is very difficult to be cured: because the Humor sticking in the Optic Nerves is not easily dis∣cussed. But because the Distemper is of no long continuance, there is some hopes of Cure.
X. In the Cure, first the Body is to be Purged with these Pills. ℞. Mass of Pill. Lucis, Cochiae an. ʒ s. with a little Syrup of Stoechas. Make nine Pills. Instead of which may be given ʒ j. of Powder of Diaturbith with Rheon, or Rubarb. XI. The next day take away a little Blood out of the Arm; and two or three days after Purge again. XII. After that let him drink three times a day a draught of this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Acorus, Valerian, Fennel, Elecampane an. ℥ s. Betony, Eyebright, Creeping-time, Marjoram, Rosemary, Laurel-leaves an. M. j. Flowers of Ca∣momil, Stoechas an. M. s. Seeds of Fen∣nel, Caroways an. ʒ ij. Iuniper-berries ℥ s. Raisins cleansed ℥ ij. Water q. s. Boil them for an Apozem of lb j. s. After this is drank off, it may be made Purging by adding, ℞. Leaves of Senna ʒ. j. s. Rubarb, white Agaric an. ʒ ij. Aniseed ʒ iij. Cina∣mon ʒ j. This let the Patient drink not above once aday. XIII. The Body being sufficiently Purged, this Errhine may be coveni∣ently put up into his Nose. ℞. Iuice of Marjoram, Fennel an. ℥ s. of Beets ʒ j. s. XIV. For diversion, apply Cupping∣glasses to the Back and Scapulas; Visi∣catories may be also applied behind the Ears, or a Seaton or Issue made in the Neck. XV. To dissipate the Remainders contained in the Brain of the Optic Nerves, and for the Corroboration of the Head, foment the Eyes, Forehead, top of the Head and Temples with this Fomentation. ℞. Fennel, Marjoram, Rue, Rosmary, Be∣tony, Eyebright, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stoechas an. M. j. Seeds of Anise, Caroways, Lovage an. ʒij. Wa∣ter q. s. Boil them to  ij. for a Fo∣mentation. XVI. After Fomentation lay on a Quilt of hot attenuating Cephalics; and into his Ears put little Tents dip∣ped in Oyl of Fennel. XVII. This done drop into the Eye such Colliryums as these. ℞. Iuice of Fennel ℥ j. Celandine and Rue an. ℥ s. Which may be made sharper by adding Juice of wild Radish three drams. XVIII. Let his Diet be Food of easie digestion, Condited with Marjoram, Fennel, Betony, Rosemary, Eyebright, Fennel, Anise-seed and the like; Shun∣ning Mustard, Garlic, Onions and the like. His drink small and clear. Let his Sleep and Exercise be moderate, and let him keep his Body open. HISTORY XX. Of thickness of Hearing and Noise in the Ears. A Woman about thirty six Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Consti∣tution, the Winter before had been often troubled with Ca∣tarrhs; from which however she was quite freed about the beginning of Feburary. But then for some few days she complained of a slight heavy pain in her Head; which in a short time went off; upon which ensued a very great noise in her Ears, with such a thickness of hearing that she could hardly hear the loudest bawling in her Ears; which thickness of hearing and noise continued for near three Months together. Otherwise she was well in Health, and her Monthly Customs came kindly down. I. IN this Patient the Instrument of Hearing was affected in the lower Part. II. The Malady was twosold, Thickness of Hearing and Noise in the Ears. The one is defect and difficulty of Hearing, wherein only loud Noises moved by the Ex∣ternal Objects are heard, soft Speaking is not at all perceived by the Sense of Hear∣ing. This is a troublesom Sound between
the Eares themselves, excited by no exter∣nal Object. III. The Cause of the thickness of Hearing is a Flegmatic Humor lying toward the inner Parts of each Ear, and hindring a sufficient Influx of the Ani∣mal Spirits to the inner Parts of the Ear partly by compressing the Acu∣stic Nerve; partly by hindring the free Motion of the Tympanum. For hence it comes to pass, that gentle Noises hardly move the obstructed Tympanum, and the Air included within it; so that the Motion by them made for want of Spirits is not perceived, and consequently not communicated to the common Sensory. But loud sounds more strongly move the Tympanum and the Air included within it, but yet the Motion for want of Spirits, and by reason of the narrowness of the Acustic Nerve is perceived no otherwise then only as sleightly communicated to the common Sensory. IV. The noise or singing in the Ears, is caused by the Vital Spirits passing the inner little Arteries of the Ears, and with their Motion moving also the neighbouring Air included within the inner Part of the Ear. Which moti∣on, when it cannot be freely made by reason of the containing Place, being narrowed by the Flegm which lyes to∣ward the inner Parts of the Ear: Hence it is that the moved Air continually strikes against the Tympanum, and being repercussed by that, offers it self to the common Sensory, like a singing or ringing Noise. V. These Symptoms continued three Months, because the next Cause was fomented by the Flegmatic Tempera∣ture of the whole Body. 2. Because the Flegm sticking in that affected Part is hard to be discussed. VI. The fear is least these Maladies may turn to absolute Deafness. For that the Flegmatic Humor may en∣crease, and upon the dissipation of the thinner Parts, thicken to that degree, that no Remedies will be able to attenu∣ate and discuss it. But if the Cure be undertaken in time there is some hopes, because there is no distensive Pain, nei∣ther is the Hearing quite lost. VII. The Body therefore must be Purg∣ed twice or thrice a week with Cochiae Pills or Golden Pills, Powder of Diatur∣bith, Electuary of Hiera or Diaturbith; or Infusions of Agaric, Diaturbith, Iallop, or other Phlegmagogues. VIII. To abate the Flegm of the whole Body, Decoctions of Sassafras, Sassaperil and Guaiacum are most proper, to which add hot Cephalics at the end of the Decoction. The Humors in the Ven∣tricles of the Brain must be evacuated by Masticatories, Errhines and Sneezing. And to corroborate the Brain, proper Apozems and Cephalic Conditements must be prescribed. IX. To disupate the remainders in the Head and Parts affected, a Fomentation of hot and discussing Fomentations will be requisite, as Betony, Sage, Rosema∣ry, Marjoram, Calamint, Thime, &c. the Head being often fomented with a large Sponge dipt therein. After which a Quilt of the same Cephalics will be no less proper. X. Afterwards to attenuate and dissi∣pate the Flegmatic Humors contained in the Organ of Sense, some such Decocti∣on as this may be prepared. ℞. Root of Wild Radish ℥ iij. Thime, Be∣tony, Hyssop, Marjoram, Rosemary, creep∣ing Thime, Lawrel-leaves, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot an. M s. Seeds of Caroways, Cummin, Lovage, Fenne, an. ℥ s. Water q. s. Boyl them accord∣ing to Art. While they are Boiling he may receive into his Ear the steam of the Decoction through a Pipe placed in the Cover of the Pot, then let the Ears be fomented with Sponges dipt in the said Decoction: and after Fomentation put into the Ears, two Tents dipt in the Oil of Anise-seeds, Fennel or Caroways. XI. This Cataplasm also laid upon the Ears in the Night time between two Linnen Cloaths may prove very ef∣fectual. ℞. Marjoram, Sage, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot. an. M. j Seeds of Nasturtium, Cummin, Fennel an. ʒ j. s. Reduce them to Powder, and to the Powder, add Onions roasted under the Embers No. ij. one midling Turnep roasted, Flower of Fengreek-seed ℥ j. Water q. s. Let them boil a little while, and ad∣ding Oyl of Dill, of Bitter Almonds an. ℥ j. make a Cataplasm. XII. In the day time instead of this Cataplasm, let him lay warm to both Ears this little▪ Bag. ℞. Marjoram M. j. Rosemary, Flowers of Camomil an. M. s. Seeds of Cummin, Fennel, Caroways, Lovage an. ℈ ij. cut and beat these and put them into a silken Bag.
XIII. If the use of these Remedies afford no ease, then make Issues in the Neck and Arms, to divert the flegma∣tic Matter from the Ears through other Passages. XIV. Beware of Places exposed much to the Wind, especially the North. His Diet must be easie of Digestion, condited with Marjoram, Lawrel-leaves, Creeping Thyme, Rosemary, Betony, Carminative Seeds, or Seeds against Wind, Nutmeg, &c. His Drink small. All Meats that fill the Head with Va∣pors must be avoided. Moderate Sleep and Exercise, and a soluble Belly. HISTORY. XXI. Of Bleeding at the Nose, the Murr, and loss of Smelling. A Man about forty Years of Age, indifferent strong, and aboun∣ding with Blood, sometimes drinking over hard was for some∣time troubled with sharp and salt Catarrhs falling down partly to his Nostrils, partly to his Lungs and Chaps, which brought upon him a violent Cough, insomuch, that while he was once Coughing very vehemently his Nose fell a bleeding, nor could the bleeding be stopt for some hours: But that being stopped, and some Remedies given him for his cold and the Catarrh, within two days his Cough ceased; but then the bleeding returned by Intervals, especially if the Patient stirred more then ordinary, and that in such abundance, that his life was in danger. I. THE Malady is Bleeding at the Nose. II. The Antecedent Cause is twofold. 1. Redundancy of Blood. 2. A sharp Humor collected in the Head. III. The Blood abounding in the whole Body being vehemently forced upward in great quantity by the violent Cough, and distending and opening the Veins and Arteries of the Nose, in re∣spect of it self, becomes the containing Cause. IV. Now the Blood was copiously, forced upward by the Cough, because the descending Trunk of the Aorta Ar∣teria was compressed and streightned by the forcible Contraction of the Muscles of the Breast and Abdomen, so that much less Blood could be thrust for∣ward through it from the Heart, which therefore was forced in greater quantity to the Head, through the ascending Part of the said Artery, and so it di∣stends all the Veins and Arteries of the Head. V. Now that distending Plenty opens some Vessels in the Nostrils sooner than in any other Parts of the Head, be∣cause they are there seated in a moist and tender Part, and cloathed with only a very soft and tender Skin. VI. But because sharp and salt Ca∣tarrhs preceded, certain it is, that not only their Distension, but Corrosion opened some Vessels in the Nostrils. Otherwise had they been opened only by Distension, the Bleeding had not so often returned; which now returns, because the Solution being made by Corrosion, could not be so soon conso∣lidated. VII. If the Patient never so little o∣verwalked or stirred himself, the Bleed∣ing returned, because that Motion heated, and more rapidly moved the Blood, which therefore flowing hotter, and in greater quantity to the Nostrils, could not be held in by the Extremities of the Vessels not yet well consolidated; so that it forces its way out again. VIII. This Returning Bleeding is somewhat dangerous, for fear too much loss of Blood should turn to a Syncope, or that thereby the Liver should be o∣ver-cold and weakned, and thence a Cachexy or Dropsie ensue. IX. In the Cure, Blood-letting in the Right-arm is first to be done, and a moderate quantity of Blood to be taken away, with respect to the strength of the Person. The Belly is to be loosned with Rubarb mixed with Ta∣marinds, or a Glister.
X. In the time of Bleeding, clap cold Water or Oxymel to the Neck and Testicles, and Cupping-glasses, with much Flame to the Legs and Feet. XI. Tye to the Fore-head a Lock of Tow, with this Mixture. ℞. Bole Armoniac, Terra Sigillata, Dra∣gons Blood, red Coral, an. ʒj. Volatile Flower ʒij. White of one Egg, a little strong Vinegar. Mix them. XII. Into the Nostrils blow this Powder. ℞. Trochischs of seal'd Earth, Blood∣stone, an. ʒj. Frankinscence, red Coral, Dragons Blood. an. ℈j. Or else make long Tents, and being moistned in the White of an Egg, rowl them in this Powder, and so put them up into the Nostrils. Or mix the same Powder with the White of an Egg like an Oyntment, and dip the Tents there∣in before you thrust them up. XIII. Simples also may be put up in∣to the Nostrils, as green Horstail or shave Grass, or Pimpernel or Plantain bruis'd, or Hogs or Asses Dung, and such like, which are found by Experi∣ence to have wrought great Cures. XIV. Nor are those things to be neglected that benefit by an occult qua∣lity; to which purpose the Patient may wear the following Amulet about his Neck. ℞. Powder of a dry'd Toad ʒij. Blood∣stone ʒj. s. Trochischs of Seal'd Earth, Moss of human Skulls, an. ʒj. red Co∣ral ʒs. Cobwebs ℈j. Reduce them into Powder, and then make them into a Paste, with Muscilage of Tragacanth, or the white of an Egg, to be form'd into a slat Cake, and sowed up in a silk Bag, and hanged about the Pati∣ents Neck. XV. While these things are doing, give him sometimes a Draught of this Decoction. ℞. Roots of Tormentil, greater Consound, Snake-weed, an. ʒvj. Knotgrass, Pim∣pernel, Plantain, Shepherds Purse, Sa∣nicle, Purslain, an. M. j. red Roses M. s. White Poppy Seed ʒv. Seeds of Quinces and Lettice, an. ʒj. s. Raisins of the Sun ℥ij. Water q. s. Boil them into an Apozem of lbj. s. to which add Syrup of Quinces and Sowre Pome∣granates, an. ℥j. s. XVI. Now and then let him take a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Trochischs of seal'd Earth ℈ij. Pulp of Quinces, Conserve of red Roses, an. ʒvj. Syrup of Poppy, Rheas q. s. XVII. If these things will not stay the Bleeding, clap a Cupping-glass with much Flame to both Hypochondriums, without Scarification. Or else give him fourteen Grains of the Mass of Pill. de Cynoglossa, or Hounds-tongue, reduced into three Pills. Or else this Amyg∣dalate. ℞. Sweet Almonds peel'd ℥j. The four greater Cold Seeds ʒj. White Poppy Seed ʒiij. Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of lbs. To which add Syrup of Poppy ʒj. s. Sugar q. s. Mix them for two Doses. XVIII. Avoid a cold and dry Air, and a very light Being. Observe a cool∣ing and thickning Diet, and drink small Drink. Abstain from Exercise, nor cover the Body too hot, sleep long, and keep the Belly Soluble. HISTORY X. Of the Pose or Murr, and Loss of Smelling. A Gentleman, about thirty years of Age, was wont to snuff up Powder of Tobacco into his Nostrils, which caused him to sneeze. At length, being taken with the Pose or Murr, yet he continu∣ed his Powder of Tobacco, which he took three or four times a day, which made him void a great quantity of flegmatic Humors, through his Nostrils and Palate; however, his Murr encreased to that degree, that he quite lost his Sense of Smelling. And then his Sneezing brought away little or no Matter.
I. THis Gentleman lost his Smell by reason of that Pose, which is a cold and flegmatic Distillation from the Ventricles of the Brain, and falling into the Ethmoides Bone, and the Membranes belonging to it. II. This flegmatic Matter, by reason of the Gentlemans frequent Sneezing and Contractions of the Membranes of the Brain, and consequently the streight∣nings of the Pores, and Detentions of the Vapors was copiously collected in the Ventricles of the Brain, and expel∣led down to the Ethmoides Bone. The diminutive Holes of which, when it was not able to pass, it so obstructed, that no Odor could come to the inner Parts of the Nostrils, which caused the Loss of the Smell. III. Because this Pose which hinders the Smell continued long, the Cure proves the more difficult. IV. After due Evacuation of the Bo∣dy, care is to be taken of the Head, which is to be corroborated with hot Cephalics given in Apozems, Condite∣ments, Powders, &c. the better to atte∣nuate and discuss the Vapors, ascend∣ing thither. V. To open the Pores, Frictions of the Head, and Fomentations, with hot and opening cephalic Decoctions. After which, put on a dry Quilt of the same Cephalics upon the Head of the Par∣ty. VI. Put up into the Nostrils, such things as are proper to cut and attenu∣ate thick Humors, as amphire, Vine∣gar of Squills, and Root of wild Radish bruised. VII. Let him continue the Use of these things for some time, which if they prove ineffectual, the only way will be to make an Issue in the Neck. VIII. Let his Food and Drink be condited and intermixed with hot Ce∣phalics, and let him feed sparingly. Let his Sleep and Exercise be moderate, and let him be sure to keep his Body open. HISTORY XXII. Of the Tooth-Ach. A Young Lad, about fifteen years of age, of a flegmatic Temper, having, after hard Exercise, exposed himself bare-headed to the cold Air and the Wind, was taken with a most terrible Pain in his Teeth, upon the Left-side, which extended it self to the innermost and upper Parts of the Head. There was no Swelling in the Gums of the the out-side of the Cheek, no Redness or Inflammation; only out of one of his Hollow Grinders he felt a certain serous, salt, sharp Humor distil as cold as Ice. I. THis Malady is by the Physicians called Odontalgia, or the Tooth-ach. II. The anteceding Cause was fleg∣matic and cold Humors gathered in the Body, which by the Heat of Exercise being attenuated into Vapors, and car∣ried to the Head, and there not only detained by the External Cold shutting up the Pores, but also being condensed into a scrous, sat and sharp Liquor, and not able to pass through the Passages appointed for the Evacuation of the Ex∣crements of the Brain, fell upon the Jaw-teeth on the Left-side, and there caused a most cruel Pain. III. That this is a salt, serous, cold Humor, the Patient himself finds by the Taste of the Drops that distil out of his Teeth into his Mouth. IV. The Pain proceeds from hence, because the little Nerve inserted into the Cavity of each grinding Tooth, to∣gether with the Periostium that sur∣rounds every Cavity, is corroded by the sharp Humor, and vexed by the extraordinary Cold of it. V. The Pain extends it self upward to the inner parts of the Head, because the little Nerves of the Teeth, inserted in the Cavities, are Branches of the third and sixth Pair. No wonder then
that those Nerves being grieved, carry the Pain to the inner Parts of the Head; besides that, 'tis very probable that that same sharp and salt Humor falls down to the Teeth all the whole length of those Nerves, through the Holes of the Cranium, from whence those Nerves is∣sue forth, and so not only the Particles which are inserted into the Roots of the Teeth, but the whole Nerves from the Cranium to the Teeth, are infested with that Humor. VI. There was no Tumor in the outer Part of the Jaw, because the Humor which caused the Flux, did not abound in quantity, but was only sharp, and very little. Nor was there any Swelling in the Gums, because the Hu∣mor did not stay therein, but issued out from the hollow grinding Teeth. VII. Neither was there any Redness or Inflammation in the Gums or Jaw; for though the Humor were sharp, yet it was actually and potentially cold, so that it could not breed any Inflammati∣on or hot Distemper. VIII. This Pain is not to be contem∣ned, for that being so terrible as it is, and causing continual want of Sleep, and Commotion of the Humors and Spirits, it may produce Deliriums, Con∣vulsions, and continual Fevers. IX. In the Cure, the Anteceding Cause is to be taken away, then the Containing and the Original is to be removed, the Pain to be asswaged, and the Head to be corroborated. X. Let the Body be purged with one Dram of Powder of Diaturbith, or Diacarthamum, or with these Pills. ℞. Mass of Pill. Cochiae, Golden Pills, an. ℈j. Diagridion gr. iiij. with Syrup of Stoechas, Make up vij. Pills. XI. To evacuate the Humor con∣tained in the Ventricles of the Brain, make use of this Errhine. ℞. Iuice of Mercury, Marjoram, an. ℥s. of Beets ʒj. s. Or else instead of this, take the follow∣ing Sternutory. ℞. Roots of Pellitory, White Hellebore, Leaves of Marjoram, an. ℈j. black Pepper gr. v. For a Powder. XII. To strengthen the Head, open the Pores, and dissipate the cold Hu∣mor, prepare this Quilt. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, an. M. s. Flowers of Lavender, Meli∣lot, red Roses, an one small Handful; Nutmegs, Cloves, an. ℈j. Frankincense, Mastich, an. ʒj. Beat them into a gross Powder for a silken Cap. XIII. Also lay this Plaister upon both Temples. ℞. Frankincense, Mastich, an. ℈j. Saga∣pen, Tacamahacca, an. ℈j. s. Mix them and spread them upon black Silk. Nor will it be amiss to make use of Con∣ditements and Cephalic Apozems of Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, Betony, Conserves of Anthos, Sage, &c. To∣bacco also taken in a Pipe is an excellent Remedy. XIV. Let the Patient also frequently wash his Mouth with this Decoction warm. ℞. Root of sharp pointed Dock ℥j. Male Piony ℥s. Marjoram, Sage, Hyssop, Thyme, Betony; Rosemary, an. M. j. Fennel and Aniseseed, an. ʒij. Wine q. s. Boil them to lb j. XV. After he has washed his Mouth, let him put into the Hollow of the Tooth with a little Cotton, one Drop of Oyl of Basil or Cloves. In extre∣mity of Pain, a little Spirit of Wine may be held in the Mouth to the Teeth affected. But this is not to be done often, for fear of hurting the Lungs. XVI. To divert the Humor, apply a Vesicatory behind the Ear, or in the Neck, and keep it open for some time. XVII. These Remedies not availing in extremity of Pain, give the Patient toward Evening three grains of Opiate Laudanum in a Pill, or thirteen grains of the Mass of Cynogloss Pills, or two or three Scruples of Philonium Roma∣num. XVIII. Let his Diet be condited with hot Cephalics, avoiding all salt, sharp and acid Diet, that fill the Head with Vapors. Let his Drink be small: Let him sleep long, exercise moderately, and keep his Body open.
HISTORY. XXIII. Of those Tumors in the Mouth called Aphtae. A Woman of about thirty years of Age was taken with a conti∣nued Fever, accompanied with an extraordinary Faintness; yet without any vehement Heat or great Thirst, which in two days had brought her extreamly low. Her Pulse beat slow and unequal: Her Urine was like that of a Man in perfect Health. So that she com∣plained of no excessive Pain in any Part, but of an extraordinary Weakness of her whole Body, which was such that she could not sit upright in her Bed. The fourth Day, she perceived a Difficulty to Swallow, so that her Drink would not go down her Throat and Gullet without Pain, Trouble and Impediment. At the same time her Palate, Gums, Tongue and Chaps were full of little white Pustles without number. Her Taste was also so far gone, that she relished nothing that she eat. I. THis Woman was seized with a Malignant Fever, accompanied with Aphtae, which are certain Exulcera∣tions in the upper part of the Mouth, with an extraordinary Heat. II. The Anteceding Cause were pu∣trid Humors, sharp and malignant, contained in the Body, which being at∣tenuated by the feverish Heat, and car∣ried through the Arteries and occult Passages to the Mouth, and causing an Exulceration therein, constitute the next Cause. III. That these Pustles proceed from a certain malignant putrid Humor, is plain from the putrid malignant Fever, preceding and joyned with them. The Malignity of which, appeared by the Faintness and Decay of Strength which the Patient endured, whereas a Fever seems to shew no such manifest Causes of so much Weakness. Then again, that it was a flegmatic Humor, appear∣ed by the lesser Heat of the Fever, and the whiteness of the Pustles. IV. This Humor, attenuated by the Fever, and coming sharp to the Mouth, exulcerated the inner, rather than the other Parts, as the Palate, Tongue, Gums, &c. because they are cloathed with only a thin and soft Pellicle, which are easily exulcerated by sharp and putrid Humors, whereas the for∣mer Parts more easily resist the Cor∣ruption. V. Now because that Pellicle which covers the inner Parts of the Mouth, extends it self through the Jaws and Gullet to the Stomach. Hence also the Gullet was beset with the same Pustles, which caused that Difficulty of Swallowing, and painful going down of the Drink. VI. Her Taste was lost, because the inner Pellicle of the Mouth, into which the Gustatory Nerves are inserted, and by means of which, the Taste happens, was so full of those little Ulcers, that the Gustable Objects could not come to it. Besides that, the Tongue being grieved by the Ulcers, and infected with bad Humors, could not well judge of Savors. VII. These Pustles are more a Sign, than a Cause of danger. For they indicate a malignant and dangerous Fe∣ver, upon the Cure of which, their Cure depends. VIII. The Body therefore being well purged, and Blood being taken away, and other convenient Remedies admi∣nistred, the Mouth of the Patient must be gargarized with this Decoction. ℞. Barley cleansed, Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentil, an. ℥s. Licorice sliced ʒiij. Plantain, Purslain, Knot-grass, Oak∣leaves, an. M. j. Flowers of Mallows, red Roses, Pomegranates, an. M. s. Water q. s. Make a Decoction to lb j. Add Syrup of Mulberries and Dia∣nucum, an. ℥j. s. Mix them for a Gar∣gle. IX. After she has well gargled her
Mouth, let her lick and wash the inside of her Mouth with this Syrup. ℞. Syrup of Quinces, sowre Pomegra∣nates and dry Roses, an. ℥j. X. If the Pain grow sharper, let her hold new Milk in her Mouth, or rather Whey, and change it often. Then let her lick Syrup of Quinces, or dry Ro∣ses alone, and rowl her Tongue about her Mouth, especially when the Pustles are broken. XI. Let her Diet be refrigerating, and such as resists Putrefaction; her Drink small, or else Ptisans, and let her be sure to keep her Body solu∣ble. HISTORY II. Of the Aphtae Pustles. AN Infant of two months old, when the Mothers Milk failed, was put to a Nurse of a choleric Temper, but otherwise healthy and abounding with Blood and Milk. After the Infant had suckt this Wo∣man eight days it began to vomit up curdled Milk mixed with choleric and flegmatic Humors, slept unquietly, and voided much yellow and green Excrement. At last, the Mouth of it was full of white Pustles, so that through Pain it could suck no longer, though it seemed very desirous of the Breast. In the mean time there was no manifest Fever nor alteration of the Pulse. I. THE Cause of these Pustles was the Nurses serous, hot and sharp Milk, which the weak Stomach of the Infant could not well concoct, but bred much Choler; from which sharp Vapors ascending to the Mouth, exulcerated the tender Pellicles of the Inner Part of the Mouth. II. That there was a great quantity of Choler, was apparent from the yellow and green Colour of the Excrements. III. The Milk was curdled in the Stomach by reason of the Acrimony of the Choler, and the Crudities there bred. It was vomited up curdled, be∣cause Nature being oppress'd with that and other crude Humors, and provok∣ed by the Acrimony, endeavoured as much as it could, to cast of that Mo∣lestation by vomiting. IV. There was no Fever, because the Choler was not yet corrupted, nor was carried to the Vena Cava, but as yet was voided sufficiently upwards and downwards. V. The Infant could suck no longer, because the Pain of the Pustles was ex∣asperated by sucking. But it desired the Breast to allay the Heat of the Mouth, with the Moisture of the Milk. VI. These Aphties newly come, and without a Fever, are easily cured; but being delayed, there may be danger of a more deep and fatal Exulceration, and that a Flux of the Belly and Fever will ensue upon Corruption of the Choler. VII. In the Cure, the Nurse is chiefly to be considered, who by reason of her choleric Constitution, breeds sharper Milk than the Infant is able to concoct. Then the Infant it self is to be consi∣dered. VIII. Therefore the Nurse is to be purged more than once or twice with Choler-purging Medicaments; next to be let Blood. And some refrigerating Apozem to be given her of Succory, En∣dive, Lettice, Borage, Sorrel, Tamarinds, the four greater Cold seeds and the like. Also steep three drams of Rhubarb ty'd up in a linnen Rag in a pint of small Ale, and let her drink it twice or thrice a Week, which will not only purge her, but the Child. IX. Let her Meat be condited with Barley cleansed, Endive, Lettice, Aspa∣ragus, Pomcitrons, Cherries, red Cur∣rants, &c. Let her forbear Onions, Ra∣dishes, Mustard, Spices, and all hot things, as Honey and Sugar. Her Drink must also be small, avoiding Wine, Mead, and all hot and windy Drinks. X. Wash the Infants Mouth often with Syrup of Mulberries and Quinces; or of dry Roses, or sower Pomegranates, &c. Also give it in a Spoon some thin
Broth or Panada wherein Currans have been boiled till they break, with a little Sugar. XI. If these things avail not, the Nurse must be changed, and one more proper for the Constitution of the In∣fant must be sought out. HISTORY XXIV. Of the Tumor breeding under the Tongue called Ranula. A Woman about thirty years of age, accustomed to feed upon a flegmatic Diet, complained of a great Impediment in her Speech; otherwise every way healthy. Under her Tongue appeared a soft, loose▪ indolent Tumor, of the same Colour with the Membranes un∣der the Tongue, full of Blackish Veins, manifestly distinguished at the String of the Tongue into the Right and Left Part, on both sides about the bigness of a Nutmeg, and rising in height above the Teeth, and by filling the Mouth, forcing up the Tongue to the Palate, and so not only hindring the Speech, but incommoding the Act of Swallow∣ing. This Tumor, at first no bigger than a Tare, grew bigger and bigger every day; so that in three or four weeks it swelled to the big∣ness aforesaid; and the Patient, not without reason, was afraid of a Suffocation. I. THis Disease, by the Greeks is called , by the Latins, Ranula; either because it somewhat re∣sembles a Frog; or rather because they that are troubled with it▪ instead of speaking, are forced to croak like Frogs. II. This Ranula is a soft and loose Tu∣mor gathered under the Tongue, and di∣vided at the Bridle of the Tongue into a Right and Left Part. III. The Extremities of the Salival Channels lying hid under the Tongue, are affected in this Distemper, which, together with the Membrane of the Tongue that rests upon them, are di∣stended by the Spittle or thicker Slime, and hence become so big. IV. Now why they swell'd in this Woman more now than at other times, was because of the cooling Aliments to which she had long accustomed her self, which had bred a more copious crude and viscous Flegm, which partly falling upon the Salival Channels, and not be∣ing able to pass the Pores of the Frog∣resembling Kernels, augmented within them, and distending them with it a∣bundance, formed a soft Swelling, as it were cohering into two Bladders, and distinguished by the Bridle of the Tongue. V. Without doubt this Tumor was not a little augmented, because the ex∣tream Pores of those Channels and Ker∣nels were also obstructed by some ex∣ternal Cause, as washing the Mouth with cold Water, or astringent Meats and Drinks, by which means the Spit∣tle had not free Passage. VI. The Humor was soft and loose, by reason of the Humor contained therein. Indolent, because it lies in a moist Part; where, by reason of the small quantity of Nerves which it re∣ceives, the Feeling is very obtuse. It is of the same Colour with the rest of the Membranes, because there is no Inflam∣mation to dye it of another Colour: And it was augmented in a small time, because the Passage of the Salival Slime was obstructed. VII. The Danger of this Distemper is not great, if taken in time; other∣wise there may be some fear of a Suffo∣cation. VIII. Such a Patient must be purged every fifth or sixth day with Pill. Co∣chiae or Golden Pills, Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra, Diacarthamum, Infusion of Agaric, or any other Flegm purging Medicine. IX. To abate the quantity of Flegm, and hinder the Generation of it, be∣tween the days of purging, Apozems of the Roots of Elecampane, Acorus, Ca∣lamint,
Fennel, Thyme, Rosemary, Marjoram, Hyssop, Wind-expelling Seeds, &c. and Conditments and Pow∣ders of the same to strengthen the Bow∣els. X. And at the same time Topics may be applied to cut and attenuate the viscous Humor, and open the Pores of the Salival Channels. XI. The Patient also may wash her Mouth with this Decoction. ℞. Hyssop, Calamint, Marjoram, Flow∣ers of Camomil, an. M. j. Anise and Fennel-seed ʒiij. White-wine q. s. Boil them to lbj. To the Straining add Sy∣rup of Hore-hound and Hyssop, an. ʒvj. XII. After washing, let the Ranulae be rubbed with this Powder. ℞. Dry Hyssop, Common Salt, an. ʒij. Calamint, and Root of Elecampane, an. ʒj. for a Powder. XIII. If these things will not discuss the Tumor, it must be Chyrurgions Work to cut the Tumor athwart with a deep Incision, and bring out the Matter therein contained, and then to wash the Mouth with the aforesaid Water or some other Astringent, wherein you may mix a little Allum. XIV. If after Consolidation of the Wound, the Tumor return again, then make a Cross-like Incision upon the Su∣perficies, without hurting the inner Membrane, and separating the upper Pellicle that lies upon it, lay bare the whole Vesicle on both sides the Bridle of the Tongue, and cut it out as deep as may be, and then close up the Wound. Otherwise you may take away the Vesicle by a potential or actual Cautery. Neither is there any danger of any Damage to the Mouth, though the Salival Channels be stopped up by this Cure; for Experience tells us, that the Spittle finds other Channels and Passages for the moistning the Mouth. The Diet is the same as in other flegmatic Diseases. Now because I do here assert a new Cause of the Ranulae, and another part to be affected, than other Physicians do, and mention also the Salival Channels▪ I think it necessary to tell what those Channels are. These Channels were unknown, till of late found out in England by Doctor Wharton and Glisson, and last Winter publickly shown at the Anatomy Thea∣tre at Leyden, by Doctor Iohn ab Horn. The Substance of them is much like the Veins, but stronger. They are two in number, and so wide in a Man, as to admit an ordinary Bodkin. They rise with a broad Beginning from the great and remarkable Kernel, above the middle Tendon, seated be∣tween the Flesh of the Digastric Mus∣cle. And hence carried upward about the middle of the Cheek, they ab∣scond themselves between two small Kernels there seated, which when they have past, they are carried with a streight Channel along the Nerve of the seventh Pair, which they cut like a St. Andrews Cross, and so somewhat to∣ward the Fore-parts, near the Bridle of the Tongue, they terminate and open into two peculiar Kernels, covered with a thin and porous little Membrane, which are seated under the Tongue, near the Frog-like. Veins, between the Flesh that joyns the Tongue to the neighbouring Parts, and the Kernels that lye under the bottom of the Tongue. Their Office is to powre the Sal Moisture into the Frog-like Kernels, which in them is contained as in a Sponge, and emptied into the Mouth through the broad Pores of the Mem∣brane that covers them, for the moist∣ning of the Tongue and Mouth.
HISTORY XXV. Of the Hydrocephalus, or Watry Tumor of the Head. A Little Boy, about a year and a halfold, having been weaned six months, and by his Parents, that were very poor, fed with raw Why, Fruit and other bad Nourishment, nor keeping his Head suffi∣ciently warm in the Winter, within a short time had the hairy Part of his Head and Fore-head swelled out to his very Eyes. Which Tumor, in a months space, increased to that degree, that his Head was as big as a Mans Head, and yet his Face was not swelled; the Tumor was soft and white, and the deep Prints of the Finger might for some time be seen in it. The Child eat and drank indifferent well, he had no Fever, but was sleepy, and moved the Members of his whole Body but dully and faintly. His Nostrils were drier than usual, and he spit but little. He was loose, and voided much Urine. I. THis Childs Disease, by the Phy∣sicians is called Hydrocephalus, which is a Swelling of the Head caused by a Collection of serous Humors. II. This serous and flegmatic Humor is collected within the Cranium, and lies hid under the Skin, which is dis∣cerned by the Touch; there being only a soft Tumor. III. That it is a serous and flegmatic Humor, appears by the white Colour of the Skin, and copious, because it yields to compression without pain. IV. The anteceding Cause are cold and most Humors in the whole Body, which being raised beyond the Cranium, and condensed under the Skin, consti∣tute the containing Cause. V. These Humors are generated, partly through bad Diet, partly through the cold and moist Constituti∣on of the Body; which weakens the Concoctions of the Bowels, and causes the breeding of many flegmatic and se∣rous Humors, which being carried to the Head, are there attenuated into thick Vapors, and gathered together till they come to a copious Body. VI. These Humors cannot be eva∣cuated through the Nostrils and Palate, because their thickness has obstructed those Passages. Nor can they pass through the streightned Pores of the Skin, as being streightned by the Ex∣ternal Cold, so that new Humors in∣creasing every day, and none being e∣vacuated, thence hapned such a Swelling in a Months space. VII. However the Child fed, be∣cause his Stomach was not yet loaded with this excrementitious Flegm, as being copiously evacuated downwards by Urine and Stool. VIII. He had no Fever, because the Humors were not putrified, nor was there any Malignity or Excess of Heat. IX. He was sleepy, because of the cold and moist Temper of the Brain, which renders the Nerves of the Senso∣ry languid and unfit for the Passage and Reception of the Animal Spirits; be∣sides that, fewer Animal Spirits are generated, in regard the vital Spirits cannot pass the streightned Arteries of the Choroid Fold. Which Scarcity of Animal Spirits causes him also to move the Members dully and languidly as he did. X. His Belly was soluble, by reason of the great quantity of serous and fleg∣matic Humors, that flow'd down to the Intestines; the thinner Part of which being mixed with the Blood, and sepa∣rated from it in the Reins, causes a greater abundance of Urine. XI. This Disease is dangerous in ten∣der Age that will not bear strong Re∣medies, in regard of the ill Temper of the Head, the great Cachexy of the whole Body, and the Quantity of the Humor. In the Cure, the serous and flegma∣tic Humor collected in the Head, is chiefly to be gently evacuated, the Bow∣els to be strengthened, and the Gene∣ration of the Mistemper for the future to be prevented. XIII. First, give the Child in a Spoon, an ounce of laxative Syrrup of Succory
with five or six grains of Jallop in Pow∣der, or give him to Eat five or six drams of Solutive Currans. Then give him a little old Treacle, and if you can let him Sweat, also give him every day a little Conserve of Anthos, Balm, or Flowers of Sage. XIV. This done foment his Head with the following Fomentation warm. ℞. Betony, Rosemary, Basil, Thime, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stoechas, an. M j. Leaves of Lawrel M. s. Seeds of Anise, Fennel, Cummin an. ʒ ij. White-Wine q. s. Boil them to  ij. For a Fomentation with a large Spunge taking Care not to let it cool. XV. The Tumor being dissipated by the use of this Fomentation, to re∣move the other Distemper, anoint the Head Morning and Evening with this Oyntment hot. ℞. Oyl of Camomil, Alabastrin Ointment an. ℥ j. Oyl of Nutmegs pressed ℈ iiij. Powder of Castor, Storax, Benjamin, an. ℈ j. Mix them for an Oynt∣ment. XVI. After anointing, put on the fol∣lowing Quilted Cap. ℞. Leaves of Rosemary, Marjoram, Flow∣ers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. s. Ben∣jamin, Cloves, Nutmeg an. ℈ j. s. Beat them for a gross Powder, to be sowed in∣to a Silken quilted Cap. And let him wear this Quilted Cap for some time. XVII. In the mean time to Corrobo∣rate the Bowels twice or thrice a day, let him take a Spoonful of this Mix∣ture. ℞. Tylet-Flowers-water, Lilly of the Val∣leys an. ℥ ij. innamon water ʒvj. Syrup of Stoechas ℥ j. Or instead of this, let him now and them drink a little Hydromel. And to the Region of the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, apply this Liniment. ℞. Oyl of Lawrel, Camomil, Matiate Oyntment an. ℥ s. Oyl of Nutmegs pres∣sed ʒ j. s. XVIII. If these things avail not, in three or four the most swelled places of the Head, make a small Perforation in the Skin, with a little Lance, no wider then is usual in Blood-letting, that the Serum may distill by degrees through those little holes, which is to be dried up with warm Rags, till it ceases to flow: then lay the afore mentioned Quilt. XIX. These Children must have drier Diet then ordinary; as Biscuit masticated. Little bits of White-bread moistened in the Decoction of Raisins, or Hen-broath and sweetened with a little Cinnamon or Sugar. Let him have thin Broths made with Wheat∣flowre and Decoction of Raisins, to which add a little Wine. Let him often drink Almond-Milk with a little Cinna∣mon-water. Let him abstain from Sowre Milk, Whey, Ale, Fruit, unless now and then a Baked Apple or Pear: Let him sleep moderately, and keep his Body soluble and regular in his Evacua∣tions.
THE CURES OF THE Chief Diseases Of the whole CHEST. WITH TEN CASES OF THE PATIENTS. HISTORY. I. Of the Pleurisie. A Young Gentleman of twenty four Years of Age, having over∣heated himself in the Tennis-Court, and being very dry, drank a large Draught of cold Ale. Upon this he felt a Pain in the left side of his Chest, which within half an hour grew so acute, that through the trouble and the intolerable Pain, he could hardly breath. At the same time he had a strong Fever and a dry Cough, which very much exasperated the Pain. But neither his Faintness nor his Thirst was very great. I. VArious Parts were affected in this Patient, the Pleura Membrane, the Muscles of the Misopleuron, and the Heart, and consequently the whole Body. II. The Diseases called the Pleurisie, which is an Inflammation of the Pleura Membrane, and the Muscles of the Mesopleuron, accompanied with a Prick∣ing Pain in the Side, difficulty of Breath∣ing and a continued Fever. III. That it is a Disease appears by the pricking Pain, difficulty of Breathing and the continued Fever▪ that it is no
Inflammation of the Lungs, the prick∣ing Pain declares, which never is felt in that Distemper. That it is no Tumor, Inflammation or other Pain in the Spleen, appears from the sharpness of the Pain above the Diaphragma toward the Arm-pits, and the difficulty of Breathing. IV. The anteceding Cause was the great quantity of Blood in the Body. The Original Causes, vehement Ex∣ercises, and pouring down cold Ale just after it. The containing Cause is the over-large quantity of Blood contained in the Pleura Membrane and the Meso∣pleuron Muscles, inflamed and corrupt∣ed. V. The whole Body was over-heated by Exercise, whence a strong and swift Pule of the Heart, which attenuating the Blood, forced it in great quantity to all the Parts, which so long as it had a free return through the Veins, never occa∣sioned any trouble. But being thicken∣ed by the cold Ale in the Veins of the Left side of the Pleura, and the Veins themselves thereby contracted, it came to pass that more past through the Ar∣teries then could circulate through the Veins, which caused that accumula∣tion of Blood that bred that Tumor in the Pleura: and because the Blood that flows from the Heart, has its own heat, thence, with the increase of the Blood the heat encreased, and thence the In∣flammation, which caused the Putre∣faction, Part of which putrifying Blood being carried through the Intercostal Veins to the hollow Vein, and so to the Heart, caused the continued Fever, which however is only Symtomatical, as only arising from the Putrifaction of the Inflamed Part, poured fourth into the larger Vessels. VI. Now in regard the Ribs must be dilated in Respiration; but by rea∣son of the Tumid Inflammation, of the distention of the Pleura Mem∣brane and Mesopleuron Muscles, they can hardly be dilated, thence difficulty of Breathing, which is the more trouble∣some, because the Pleura, being ended with a most acute Sense can endure no farther distention. So that the Patient to avoid the Pain breaths slowly, which not being enough to cool the Lungs, causes a Drought of the Chaps and Mouth. VII. Sharp Vapors exhaling from the inflamed Part, infest the neighbouring Lungs, and by their vellicating the Aspera, Arteria cause a dry Cough. VIII. This Disease is dangerous in regard the Heart is affected, and Respi∣ration is impeded: besides the fear of an Imposthume in the Breast. IX. In the prosecution of the Cure, Blood-letting is first to be done in both Arms, and the Patient must bleed free∣ly. And if the first bleeding do not relieve the Patient, it is to be again repeated within an hour or two, after a third time if need require, with regard to the strength of the Patient: though a small debilitation is not to be fear∣ed. X. In the mean time his Belly must be mov'd with a Glister. ℞. Emollient Decoction ℥ x. Elect. Dia∣catholicon, Diaprunum, Solutive▪ an. ℥. j. Salt ʒ j. Or else infuse two drams of Rubarb in Barley-water, and give him to drink, the streining with one ounce of Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, or Solutive Ro∣satum. Stronger Purges must be a∣voided. XI. He may also three or four times aday drink a draught of this Apo∣zem. ℞. Cleansed Barley, Roots of Asparagus, Grass an. ℥ j. Licorce sliced ℥ s. Venus∣hair, Borage, Lettice, Endive, Violet∣leaves an. M. j. Flowers of Wild-Pop∣py, Violets an. P. ij. Four great Colder Seeds an. ʒ j. s. Blew Currans ℥ j. Water q. s. Make an Apozem of lb j. s. with which mix Syrup of Poppy Rheas and Violets an. ℥ j. To allay the Cough let him take this Looch. ℞. Syrup of Wild-Poppy, of Venus-hair, of Violets an. ℥ j. Mix them for a Looch. To allay the Pain, and to attenuate; discuss and Concoct the Blood collected in the affected Part, Foment the Re∣gion of the affected Part, with this Fo∣mentation. ℞. Mallows Althea, Colewort, Chervile, Beats, Violet-leaves, Flowers of Camomil, Elder and Dill an. M. j. Water q. s. Make a Decoction to  i j. For a Fomenta∣tion. Of the same may be composed a Ca∣taplasm, by adding Meal of Lin-seed and Barley, Oyl of Almonds and new Butter.
XIV. Let him keep a Temperate Diet, and of easie digestion, Cream of Ptisan, Chicken-broths prepared with Endive and Lettice, or else let him take some such Amygdalate. ℞. Sweet Almons blanched ℥ ij. Four great Colder Seeds, White Poppy Seed an. ʒj s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of lb j. with Sugar q. s. to sweeten it gently. His ordinary Drink must be Ptsan: or small Ale, but not Sowre, or such a Ju∣lep. ℞. Decoction of Barley lb j. Syrup of Wild Poppy and Violets an. ℥ j. Mixt them for a Iulep. Let him sleep long, if possible, and use no Exercise. HISTORY II. Of an Empyema. A Person about forty Years of Age, being seized with a terrible Pleurisie in his left side, and not having any Remedies applied to him before the third day, found little ease, so that the Distemper continued till after the fourteenth day, being accompany'd with a Fever and other bad Symptoms; from that time forward he felt his Pain and his Fever much abated, only a ponderous heaviness troubled him about the Ribs in the side affected. About the twentieth day the Fever still continuing, though very slight, he felt a troublesome Ponderosity, with a little Pain, upon his Diaphregma, chiefly on the left side; and if he turned from one side to the other of a suddain, he felt a certain Humor to flow down, the Fluctuation of which was manifestly to be heard in the motion of his Body forward. He had also a dry Cough, but spit little or nothing; he could hardly fetch his breath, especially if he lay upon his right side, he was faint and weak, easily and often sweat: he loathed Victuals, and de∣sired rather Drink then Meat. I THis Man was afflicted with an Em∣pyema, which is a Collection of Corruption in the Cavity of his Breast. II. This Disease is known by the Signs preceding and present. The pre∣ceding Signs are the Pleurisie it self. Then the Pain and Fever ceasing with any manifest Evacuation by Spittle; whence that heaviness about the Ribs in the side affected. The present Signs are, the heaviness upon the Diaphregma: the fluctuation of the Humor upon Mo∣tion of the Body: and a Cough to no purpose, with faintness, weakness, diffi∣culty of Breathing, and loathing of Vi∣ctuals. III. The Matter was not Evacuated by Spittle. 1. because the Lungs of this Patient did not stick close to the place affected. 2. Because the Matter in the Cavity of the Breast, could not enter the Lungs through the Pores of the Membrane investing the Lungs. 3. Be∣cause perhaps the Pores of this Mans Lungs were so narrow, as not to admit such sort of thicker Humors. IV. The Pain and Fever abated, be∣cause the sharp matter, of the Inflam∣mation was turned to Matter, and so rendred more gentle. The quantity of which Matter contained within the Membrane, troubled the Ribs of the af∣fected side, with its Ponderosity. But upon breaking the Aposthume about the twen∣ty fifth day, the Matter flowing into the Cavity of the Breast, molested the Dia∣phragma, with its weight, and the Flu∣ctuation of it was easily perceived in the Motion of the Body. For the weight hindred the depressed Diaphragma from moving freely, which caused the Pain in Breathing; especially if he lay upon his right side, for that besides the Diaphragma, the right Lobe of the Lungs is compressed by the weight of the Matter lying upon the Mediasti∣num. V. The slight Cough proceeds from the Vellication of the exterior Tunicle of the Lungs, caused by the Acrimony of the Corruption. But nothing is spit forth because the Matter touches only the out∣side
of the Lungs, but never enters the Aspera Arteria. VI. The Patient is faint by reason of Respiration hindred; and weak, as having been weakned by the acute pre∣ceding Disease. And the Stomach and Liver being weakened by the same Cause, thence debility of Concoction and loss of Appetite; and loathing of Meat; but drink is still desired, to quench the drought of the Fever. VII. This is a dangerous Distemper, 1. Because Respiration is damnified. 2. Because it follows an acute Disease, that has much wasted the Body already. 3. By reason of the Difficulty to Eva∣cuate the Matter out of the Breast. 4. Be∣cause if the Matter stay but a short time, it will putrifie and corrupt the Lungs. 5. Physic is uncertain; 6. Chyrurgery dangerous. VIII. Therefore after a gentle Evacua∣tion of the Belly, Expectorating Me∣dicaments are to be made use of; to try if the Matter may be drawn away that way. IX. To which purpose let him take this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Elecampane ℥ j. Florence Orrice ʒ ij. Licorice shav'd ℥ s. Hyssop, white Hore-hound, Venus-hair, Violet∣leaves an. M. j. red Cabbage M. ij. Anise-seed ʒ ij. Four greater cold Seeds an. ʒ j. s. Raisins cleansed ℥ iij. Water q. s. Make an. Apozem of lb j. s. To which add Syrup of Horehound, Hyssop, Oxy∣mel an. ℥ j. Let him take three or four Doses in a day. Now and then also let him take a lick of the following Looch. ℞. Syrup of Horehound, Hyssop, Iujubes, an. ℥ j. Saffron Pulverized ℈ j. Mix them for a Looch. Turpentine also reduced to a Cream with White of an Egg in Barley Water, and sweetned with Sugar, may be very pro∣per in this Case. For though these Medicaments be hot, yet the Fever be∣ing small, there is more regard to be had to the Cause, which being taken away the Fever will soon go off. X. If these or such like Medica∣ments, will not bring away the Matter in a Fortnight, there is no more to be expected from Physic: So that the last Remedy must be the Chyrur∣geons hand. XI. To that purpose the Chest is to be cut through, as far as the inner Ca∣vity with a sharp Pen-knife, under the Arm-pit, between the fifth and sixth Rib, so as not to hurt the Intercostal Vein, Nerve or Artery, nor must the hole be very large, but such as will ad∣mit a Silver hollow Pipe, which is pre∣sently to be put in after the Incision, and so to be fastened that it may not fall out of it self. The fore-part also is to be stopt; So that the Matter may not flow out, without the Chyrurgeons leave. Through this Pipe twice a day, half a Pint or a Pint of Matter more or less, is to be let out according to the quanti∣ty of the Matter, and the ability of the Patient to endure, and then the Pipe is to be stopped again. XII. When no more Matter flows forth, the Lung and inner Cavity is sometimes to be washed with this mix∣ture syring'd into the wound. ℞. Decoction of Barley ℥ v. Spirit of Wine ℥ iiij. Hony of Roses, Syrup of Horehound an. ℥ j. Mix them for an Injection, to stay within for some hours, and then to be drawn ut again through the Pipe. XIII. If the continual Efflux of Mat∣ter shews that the Ulcer within is not healed, abstergent and vulnerary De∣coctions must be used, and Injections moderately drying and abstergent. And the Pipe is to be kept in the Wound, till no more Matter flow forth, and then to be taken out and the wound to be closed. XIV. The Patients Diet must be at∣tenuating and abstergent, as Meats con∣dited with Chervil, Hyssop, red Cab∣bage, Beets, Fennel, Almonds, Raisins. His Drink sweetned with Sugar or Hony, or Hydromel. Moderate Sleep, and a soluble Body: and let him be sure to avoid Passion and Anger.
HISTORY. III. Of a Cough. A Merchant in the prime of his Years, taking no care of his Diet, and many times traveling in cold and hot, in fair and fowl Weather, and many times ill fortified against the external Air, the last Autum began to be troubled with a Pose, and toward Win∣ter with a terrible Cough that lasted all the Winter long. Many times his Cough was extreamly violent, especially toward the Evening, for an hour together, at what time he brought up a great quantity of tough and viscous Slime, which sometimes tasted saltish; he Cought very much after Meals, insomuch that through the violent Agi∣tation of his Stomach he brought up all he had eaten, with a great Pain in his Breast and Abdomen. After Vomiting his Cough ceased; he never spit Blood; he had no Fever, however his Body fell away, and his strength wasted, yet not so, but that he still went a∣broad about his business. Somtimes he was very Loose. His Appe∣tite held indifferent good, and he slept moderately well. I. THE Lungs of this Person were chiefly affected, then the Sto∣mach and several other Parts of the Body suffered under the violent Agita∣tion of the Cough. II. This Malady is called Tusis or a Cough, which is a violent forcing of the Breath, caused by a swift Contraction of the Breast and Lungs, whereby what is troublesome to the Instruments of Breath∣ing is expelled by  force of thein-breath'd Air. III. This Malady needs no signs to discover it. IV. The anteceding Cause of this Distempet is a Cold and Flegmatic dis∣position of the Air contracted by bad Diet. The Original Cause was Heats and Colds, violent and unseasonable Exercise. The containing Cause is Flegm in the Lungs, either by Deflu∣ction or Collection, partly twiching them with its Acrimony, partly obstru∣cting the Bronchia with its great quan∣tity. V. Cold Diet and of hard digestion bred Crudities and many saltish Hu∣mors, which for want of Concoction became Acrimonious. The Brain was refrigerated by the cold empestous Weather, and the Pores of the out∣ward Head obstructed, so that the Fleg∣matic serous Vapors ascending from the lower Parts, soon condensed in the Ven∣tricles of the refrigerated Brain, which not being able to pass through the ob∣structed Pores, caused first a Pose. After∣wards the fiercer Cold of Winter encrea∣sing the quantity of those Humors, they being debarr'd their usual Passages, by reason of their thickness, fell upon the Aspera Arteria and Gristles of the Lungs, and hinder Rispiration: and the Acrimony of those Humors farther molesting the Pellicle of the Aspera Arteria and Bronhia, enforces those Parts to a violent Exclusion of the provoking Humors. VI. This Cough had lasted long for want of care of Diet, and taking Reme∣dies; whence a frequent defluxion of Catarhs to the Breast, the Cold of which in time much refrigerated and weakned the Lungs, so that Vapors rising from the lower Parts, and stopping in the Lungs, were easily condensed into a Viscous liquor, that stopped up the Channels of the Lungs, and stuck like Bird-lime to the sides of the Bronchia, which caused that violence of Cough∣ing to shake off that tenaoious Mat∣ter. VII. The Cough was longer and more vehement, and threw off much more te∣nacious Flegm, in regard the Flegmatic Humors, that had been gathering to∣gether all day and night, about the beginning of the day, abounded in so great a quantiy, that they could no longer be contained in the Head, but falling down upon the Lungs and tick∣ling the Bronchia not only with their Acrimony provoked the Cough, but more plentifully filling the Bronchia con∣tracted
by the Vapors condensed within them, and thence hindring Respiration irritated the Cough, as being that by which Nature endeavoured to throw off the trouble. VIII. The Cough increased after Meals, because the Vapors being rai∣sed by the swallowed Nourishment, and endued with some Acrimony fell upon the Lungs, and there con∣densed stick to the refrigerated Bron∣chia, and tickling the sensible inner Tunicle both of them, and the Aspera Arteria already prepared to ease Pro∣vacation by the former Humors, ex∣asperate the Cough; through the vi∣olent Agitation whereof and Compres∣sion of the Muscles of the Abdomen, the Stomach throws up all again; upon which the Cough ceases for a time, be∣cause there is nothing in the Stomach from whence any more sharp Vapors can ascend to the Lungs. IX. And by reason of the same vi∣olent Motion, and over frequent disten∣sion of the Muscles, some Pain is felt in the Breast and Abdomen. And that Compression forcing the Meat and Drink unconcocted out of the Stomach, causes a violent Loosness and dejection of the Nourishment. X. There is no Fever, because there is no Putrefaction of the Humor, but the Body is emaciated, and becomes very weak, because the violent concus∣sion of the Cough, weakens all the Parts of the Body; nor are they able to re∣ceive or retain the Alimentary Blood flowing through the Arteries, some∣times loose, sometimes compressed as they ought to do. 2. Because that vi∣olent Agitation expells the Nourish∣ment received before due Concoction; by which means all the Parts of the Bo∣dy are deprived of their due Nourish∣ment, and consequently must be very much weakned. XI. The appetite continues, because the Stomach is in good order, undistur∣bed by the Catarrhs: the disturbance of its Concoction being only acciden∣tal. XII. He sleeps moderately; because the Flegmatic humor falls not in the Night from the Head to the Breast; besides that the rapid Motion of the Animal Spirits to the Organs of the Senses is for a while restrained by the Cold and Plenty of the Humors; so that the Organs are at rest for a while for want of copious Spirits. XIII. Such a Cough as this threatens great danger by reason of the Saltness of the Catarrhs, the Acrimony where∣of in some Veins in the Lungs may be easily corroded and broken, thence Spitting of Blood and Exulcerations. Beside that the Cure is difficult, by rea∣son the cold ill Temper of the Brain and Lungs is of a long standing; not easie to be removed. XIV. In the Method of the Cure, 1. The vehemency of the Cough, and the Acrimony of the Catarrhs is to be al∣lay'd. 2. The Teacity of the Spittle is to be attenuated, concocted and brought to Maturation. 3. The cold ill temper of the Lungs and Head is to be amended, and the Parts to be Coro∣borated. 4. The falling down of the Catarrhs to the Lungs is to be prevent∣ed. XV. After Purgation with Chochi Pills or Golden Pills, Electuary of Hie∣ra Picra or Diaphcon, &c. this Apo∣zem is to be prescribed. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Acorus, Florence Orrice an. ℥ s. sliced Licorice, Barley cleansed an. ℥ vj. Scabious, Venus Hair, White Hore-hound, Betony, Coltsfoot an. M j. Oak of Jerusalem M. s. Iuni∣per-berrys ℥ s. Seeds of Anise and Fen∣nel an. ʒ ij. Fat Figs No. ix. Raisins cleansed ℥ ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lb j s. Add to the straining Syrup of Stoechas, Horehound, Oxymel, Pectoral Magistral an. ℥ j. Mix them for an Apozem. To which you may afterwards add for the swifter Consumption of the Flegm Sassaperil, Sassafras and China-root. Also the Patient may make use of this Looch. ℞. Syrup of Hyssop, Horehound, Oxymel, Magistral an. ℥ j. Syrup of Stoechas ℥ s. Instead of which he may now and then take one of these Tablets. ℞. Powder of the Root of Elecampane ℈j. Florence Orice ℈ ij. Licorice ʒ j. Saffron gr. xiv. Sugar dissolved in Fennel-water ℥ ij. XVI. If after all the Cough still re∣main, give him this Bolus twice a week as he goes to Bed.
℞. Philonium Romanum. Nicholas's Rest, Mithridate of Damocrates an. ℈ j. Mix them for a Bolus. At other times let him use his Apozen and Tablets. XVII. To corroborate his Head, let him wear this Cap. ℞ Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary P ij. Flowers of Red Roses and Lavender an. P. j. Nutmeg, Benjamin, Cloves an. ℈ ij. Beat them into a gross Powder for a Quilt. XVIII. If after all this, there be no abatement of the Catarrh and Cough, then to divert and evacuate the flowing humour, make an Issue in the Arm or rather in the Neck. XIX. Let him keep his Head and Breast warm, against the Injuries of the cold and moist Air. Let his Diet be of easie Digestion and good Nourishment, seasoned with Turneps, Chervil, Hyslop, Marjoram, Betony, Baum, Rice, Bar∣ley cleansed, Spices, Raisins, Sugar and such like Ingredients. Let his drink be middling, not stale, Hydromel an∣chosated, or sweet Wine moderately taken: and let him avoid all acid, sharp, salt and sowre things. Let him be mo∣derate in his Sleep and Exercise: and take care to keep his Body open. HISTORY IV. Of an Asthma. A Young Man, thirty years of age, of a strong Constitution, but careless of his Diet, and living a sedentary Life, some years a∣go, having overheated himself with Walking, and presently opening his Breast, and throwing aside his Cloaths, fell a drinking cold Rhe∣nish-Wine, and presently was taken with a Difficulty of Breathing, which made him pant and heave; and the next day, the Malady still increasing, he was in such a Condition, that the third Day he could not breath, unless he stood upright; so that for fourteen Days he could not lye in his Bed, but was forced to sit or stand whole Days and Nights together; but he was more troubled in the Night than Day time. After a little Cough happening, which brought up a good quantity of tough and viscous Flegm, his difficulty of Breathing aba∣ted, and he recovered his former Condition. From that time for∣ward, he was often afflicted with the same Distemper by Intervals, sometimes more, sometimes fewer Days together, more especially if he exposed himself to the Air, when very hot, or drank cold Rhenish; and this he further observed, that when the North-wind blew, he was presently seized with this Distemper, unless he had a great Care of himself, and that rather in the Summer and Autumn, than in the Winter. During this Malady, his Stomach was indifferent, but he could hardly eat for narrowness of the Parts, and after Meals his Diffi∣culty of Breathing grew worse. He had a great Inclination to Sleep, but no sooner had he closed his Eyes, but he waked with Terror and Faintness, so that during the Fit, he could not sleep for some Days and Nights together. His Belly and Breast seemed to be distended by Wind, sometimes he felt a heavy Pain in his Head, with a Chilliness in the hinder Part toward the Neck. And about this time he had a∣nother terrible Fit, not without danger of Suffocation. He had no Fever, nor complained of any Pain in any other Parts of the Body.
I. THis Mans Distemper is an Asth∣ma, which is a difficult panting and heaving Respiration; and it was in∣deed the highest degree of this Distem∣per, which we call Orthophnaea, which is an extraordinary Difficulty of Breath∣ing, in which the Patients cannot sleep, but standing upright, becuse of the Narrowness of the Respiratory Parts. II. The antecedent Causes of this Distemper were flegmatic Humors, a∣bounding in the Body. The Original Causes were Heat and Cold. The con∣taining Cause is a tough and viscous Humor accumulated in the Bronchia of the Lungs, and fastned to them. III. The flegmatic Constitution of the whole Body causes a Redundancy of cold crude and flegmatic Humors therein. Especially in those Parts, which being cold of themselves, are o∣ver-chill'd by some external Cause; so that the Body being overheated by vi∣blent Exercise, the Blood and Humors are more swiftly moved, and many Vapors excited in the lower Parts, which by a sudden Cold are condensed, and collected in the Brain in greater quantity. But in regard the Bronchia are cold of themselves, and more refri∣gerated by the Cold of the In-breath'd Air, they fasten to them like a tough Bird-lime, and contracting them, cause difficulty of breathing. To which, the Access of a Defluxion from the Brain, causes a greater Contraction, conse∣quently a greater Difficulty of breath∣ing, attended with Wheezing. Nor can the Patient breath but standing up∣right, the Lungs being pendulous, are most easily dilated in that Posture, and the Bronchia are more open in that Si∣tuation. IV. The Distemper is still worse to∣ward Night, because the nocturnal Cold thickens the Flegmatic Humors, and renders them more tenacious, by which means they become more ob∣structive to the Bronchia. V. At length, when the tenacious Mat∣ter is abated and thrown off by cough∣ing, then the Obstruction of the Bron∣chia abates, and the Difficulty of breathing ceases till the condensing and falling down of new Vapors. VI. Which was plain, because the North-wind was so hurtful to him; the reason of which was because that Wind streightned the Pores, condensed the Humors and Vapors, and chill'd the Head and Lungs. And because the Body is hotter, and raises the Vapors more copious in the Summer, there∣fore the sudden Chilliness of that Wind more suddenly condenses and fastens them to the colder Bronchia. VII. The Stomach of the Patient continued good, because neither the in∣breathed Air, nor the Defluxions from the Head offended the Stomach. But the Difficulty of breathing was worse after Meals, by reason of the Vapors raised by the Concoction of the Sto∣mach, which ascending to the middle and upper Belly, are condensed in both, and in the one fasten themselves to the Bronchia. VIII. He cannot sleep, because he is forced to satisfie the Necessity of Re∣spiration, in the Dilatation of the Breast; which failing in Sleep, and con∣sequently Respiration, he is waked with Terror and Faintness, and compelled to wake that he may breath, and to breath with violence, that he may live. IX. The Belly and Breast seem to be distended by Wind; though it be not Wind, but the continual and copious Flux of the Animal Spirits, for the Relief of the Lungs, which distends the Respiratory Muscles, which makes him think they are distended with Wind. X. The heavy Pain in his Head pro∣ceeds from the abundance of Cold Hu∣mors collected in his Head. And thence that Chilliness in the hinder part of it. XI. There was no Fever, in regard that neither the Blood nor Humors were corrupted. Nor Pain in any o∣ther Part, the sharp Humors being all got together in the Head and Lungs of this Patient. XII. This Disease is dangerous, as threatning a Suffocation, especially i a new Defluxion fall from the Head up∣on the Lungs during the Continuance of the Malady. XIII. In the Method of Cure, to the containing Cause must be removed that obstructs the Lungs. 2. The next things required, are to hinder the De∣fluxions of Catarrhs to the Lungs. 3. To reform the cold ill Temper of the Head and Lungs. 4. To change the Flegmatic Disposition of the Body, and abate the cold Humors abounding in the whole. XIV. In the first place, let him take a common Glister, or a Suppository: Let him use a thin Diet, and Sawce
his Meat with Hyssop, Sage, Betony, Saffron, Anise, Fennel, Raisins and the like. XV. Let him often take a Spoonful of this Syrrup. ℞. Syrup of Hyssop, Horehound, Pre∣served Ginger, and Roots of candied Elecampane an. ℥s. Compounded Ma∣gistral Oxymel ℥j. Mix them. Also in the Morning, and about five a clock in the Afternoon, let him take one dram of this Powder in a little Malmsey Wine, Hydromel or Broth. ℞. Roots of Elecampane ʒj. Root of Flo∣rence, Orrice, Seed of Bishops-weed, an. ʒj. Benjamin, Saffron, an. ℈j. Musch gr. j. White Sugar Candy ʒiij. To which add Oyl of Anise, drops iiij. or v. XVI. The Fit ceasing, let him be purged once a Week with Cochiae or Golden Pills, Hiera Picra, or some Phlegmagog Infusion. Blood-letting is not convenient. XVII. Upon other days let him use this Apozem. ℞. Root of Elecampane, Fennel, an. ℥j. Acorus and Licorice sliced an. ʒv. Marjoram, Scabious, Venus Hair, Hys∣sop, white Horehound, Savine an. M. j. Iuniper Berry ℥s. Anise and Fennel∣seed an. ʒij. s. Raisins cleansed ℥ij. Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Add to the Straining Magistral Oxymel, Sy∣rup of Stoechas, Horehound an. ℥j. Mix them for an Apozem. XVIII. Also let him often take a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Dianthos, Diambr. an. ʒj. Root of Elecampane candied, con∣serve of Flowers of Sage, Anthos, an. ʒv. Syrup of Elecampane q. s. Mix them for a Conditement. XIX. To evacuate the Flegm out of the whole Body, Decoctions of Saffa∣frass and Sassaperil are very proper, adding at the end some proper Cepha∣lic and Pectoral Ingredients to corrobo∣rate the Head and Lungs. Also let him wear a Cephalic Quilt upon his Head; and lastly, let him make an Issue in one Arm, or in the Neck. XX. If the Patient mend upon the use of these Medicins, for removal of the farther Cause of this Mischief, let him take every other day in a Morn∣ing a Draught of this medicated Wine. ℞. Root of Elecampane dry ℥s. Of Flo∣rence, Hyssop, Ialop an. ʒj. s. Hyssop, white Horehound an. M. s. Iuniper Berries ℥s. Anise and Fennel-seed, an. ʒj. s. white Agaric ℈v. Lucid Aloes ℈iiij. Tye them up in a Bag, and hang them in four or five pound of White∣wine. XXI. For preservation, let him use this Bolus twice a Week, for three Weeks together. ℞. Venice Turpentine ʒiij. white Sugar ʒij. Mix them for a Bolus to be swal∣lowed in a Wafer moistned in Malmsey Wine. XXII. His Diet has been already prescribed. His Drink must be small, his Sleep and Exercise moderate, and let him be sure to keep his Body soluble and regular. HISTORY. V. Of the Quinancy. A Young Man, about thirty years of Age, fleshy, strong and Ple∣thoric, having overheated himself with hard Labour, and be∣ing very thirsty, drank a large Draught of small Ale, brought him out of a cold Cellar. So that not able to endure the Coldness of the Drink in his Chaps, he was forced to take the Pot from his Mouth. Soon after he felt a certain Narrowness, with a Burning in his Chaps, and from thence some kind of Trouble in Breathing and Swallowing,
which still more and more increased. After seven or eight hours, a strong Fever seized him, with a strong, thick and unequal Pulse, and the Difficulty of Breathing and Swallowing encreased to that degree, that he could hardly breath either sitting or standing, and his Drink presently flew back out at his Nostrils. His Mouth was dry, with an extraordinary Thrist, which because he could not swal∣low, no Drink could allay. His Tongue looked of a dark Colour, and being depressed with an Instrument, in the hinder Part an intense Redness appeared; but no remarkable Tumor was conspicuous, be∣cause it lies in a lower Place. The Frog-like Veins were thick and tu∣mid. His Speech so obstructed, that he could hardly be heard: Rest∣less, he tumbled and tossed, and was mighty covetous of the cool Air: Without there was no Swelling, but an unusual Redness about the Region of the Chaps. I. THis terrible Distemper is called Angina, or the Quinancy, Which is a Difficulty of Breathing and Swallow∣ing, proceeding from an Inflammation and Narrowness of the upper Parts of the Throat, Larynx and Chaps, and al∣ways accompanied with a continued Fe∣ver. II. This is no bastard Quinancy Swelling of the Tonsilae, with Redness caused by a Catarrh, but a real An∣gina, bred by a meer Inflammation. III. The anteceding Cause of this Malady, is Redundancy of Blood, which being stirred by the original Causes, and copiously collected in the Chaps and Muscles of the Larynx, and there putrifying, becomes the contain∣ing Cause. But the original Causes were hard Labour and cold Drink; the one exciting the Heat, the other chilling too soon. IV. For the Body and Heart being heated by hard Labour, the Blood was rapidly moved by the strong and thick Pulsations of the Heart, and swiftly pass'd through the Vessels; but the Blood in the little Veins about the Chaps being thick∣ned by the coldness of the cold Drink, and the Roots and Orifices of the little Veins being likewise so streightned, that the Blood sent continually from the Heart, was not able to circulate through those Passages, which caused a Detenti∣on of much Blood therein; thence proceeded the hot Tumor, which streigthned the Passages of Respiration and Swallowing, and the Blood now no longer under the Regulation of the Heart, became inflamed and putrified, and part of it communicated to the Heart, kindled a continued Fever, a∣bout seven hours after, when the Mat∣ter was sufficiently enflamed, and the effervescency was become grievous to Nature. V. The Fever made the Respiration more difficult, because the boiling Blood required more Room, and by that means encreased the Tumor and Nar∣rowness of the Passages; besides that, the feverish Heat requires more Respira∣tion. VI. His dryness of Mouth, and ex∣tream Thirst, proceeded from the hot Vapors exhaling partly from the Infla∣med Part next the Mouth; partly from the Heart and lower Parts, by reason of the Fever. Nor can he swal∣low his Drink, because the upper Part of the Ossophagus is so compressed and strengthened by the inflamed Tumor, that nothing can pass that way, so that the Drink is forced to find another Passage back through the Nostrils. VII. The Intense Redness that ap∣pears in the Chaps proceeds from the abundance of Blood in those Parts, which being denied free Passage through the Frog-like Veins, is the Cause that they are swell'd too. VIII. The Speech is disturb'd by reason of the Inflamation of the Muscles of the Larynx, and Difficulty of Breathing. IX. There was no Tumor conspicu∣ous without, because the whole Infla∣mation lay hid about the Larynx, Osso∣phagus and Chaps, nevertheless a certain Redness extended it self toward the out∣ward Parts adjoyning to them. X. This is an acute and dangerous Disease, which must be either speedily cured, or sudden Death ensues; for that the Inflamation and Tumor in∣creasing will cause a Suffocation. The Fever augments the Danger, for that the Patient being not able to swallow a∣ny thing, the internal Heat cannot be quenched by Drink, nor the Debility
of the Body be repaired by Nourish∣ment. However there is some hopes, because the Inflamation does not lye al∣together hid in the Miscles of the La∣rynx, but extends it self to the out∣ward Parts, where Topicks may be ap∣plied; besides that, the Redness pro∣mises an Eruption of the Inflamation towards the outward Parts, to the great Benefit of the Patient. XI. In the Method of Cure it is re∣quisite, 1. To hinder the violence of the Blood flowing to the Parts affected. 2. To discuss the Blood already collect∣ed therein. 3. To promote Maturati∣on. 4. To prevent Suffocation by Chy∣rurgery. XII. The first thing therefore to be done is to let Blood freely in the Arm. And if once letting Blood will not suf∣fice, to open a Vein in the other Arm, and a third time, if need require. Al∣so to draw a good quantity of Blood from the Frog-veins. XIII. In the mean time the Body is to be kept open with emollient Glisters. XIV. Let the Patient make frequent use of this emollient and discussing Gar∣garism. ℞. Sliced Licorite ʒiij. Two Turneps of an indifferent bigness, Scabious, Violet Leaves, Mallows, Mercury, Beets an. M. j. Flowers of Camomil, pale Roses, an. M. s. Citron Peels ℥s. Water q. s. Boil them to lbj. s. Add to the Strain∣ing Syrup of Dianucum ℥ij. Diamorum ℥j. Honey of Roses ℥s. Mix them for a Gargarism. If the Tumor seem to tend to Suppu∣ration, add thereto, Cleansed Barley ʒj. s. Leaves of Althea M. j. s. Figgs no ix. XV. Outwardly apply this Cata∣plasm. ℞. Root of white Lillies ʒj. s. Leaves of Beets, Mallows, Mercury, Althea, Flowers of Camomil, an. M. j. Pale Roses M. s. Fengreek Meal ℥j. s. The inner Part of one Swallows Nest pow∣dered, Water q. s. Boil them into the Form of a Poultis; to which add Oyl of Camomil ℥ij. Mix them for a Ca∣taplasm. If there be any likelihood of Maturati∣on, add thereto, Fat Figs no vij. or viij. Meal of the Root of Althea, Hemp-seed, Pulp of Cassia, Oyl of Lillies an. ℥j. XVI. So soon as the Patient is able to swallow, purge him gently with an Infusion of Rhubarb, Pulp of Cassia, Syrup of Roses solutive, or of Succory with Rheon. XVII. Then give him this Julep for Drink. ℞. Decoction of Barley lbj. s. Syrup of Diamoron, Dianucum and Violets an. ℥j. Oyl of Sulphur, a little to give it a Sharpness. Mix them for a Iulep. XVIII. If the Imposthume break, let the Patient, holding his Head down, spew out the purulent Matter, and cleanse the Ulcer with a Gargarism of the Decoction of Barley, sweetned with Sugar, Honey, or Syrup of Horehound or Hyssop, of which Syrups a Looch may be made. Afterwards let him use a Gargarism of Sanicle, Plantain, Egri∣mony, Cypress Nuts, red Roses, &c. sweetned with Syrup of dry Roses and Pomegranates. XIX. If while these things are made use of, the Difficulty of breathing in∣crease, so that a Suffocation may be feared, before the Matter can be dis∣cussed or brought to maturity, the last Remedy is Laryngotomic or Incision of the Larynx; concerning which, consult Casserius in his Anatomical History of the Voice. Aquapendens in his Trea∣tise De Perforatione Asperae Arteriae; and Sennertus's Institutions, L. 5. P. 1. Sect. 2. C. 7. XX. When the Patient can swallow, let his Diet be Cream of Barley, A∣mygdalates, thin Chicken and Mutton Broth boiled with Lettice, Endive, Purslain, Sorrel, Damask Prunes, &c. Let his Drink be small Ale, refrigera∣ting Juleps and Ptisans: Keep his Body soluble and quiet.
HISTORY VI. Of a Peripneumony, or Inflammation of the Lungs. A Strong Young Man, having overheated himself with drinking Wine, after Mid-night drank a Pint of cold Water, and so exposing himself to the cold nocturnal Air, went home. Presently he felt a Difficulty of Breathing, which every moment encreased without any acute Pain in the Breast. However he felt a troublesome Ponderosity in the middle of his Breast, toward the Left-side. He had a little Cough, which after molested him, and caused him to spit bloody and frothy Matter, but not much. He had a great Redness upon his Cheeks. About three or four Hours after, a strong and conti∣nued Fever seized him, with an extraordinary Drought and Dry∣ness of his Mouth. His Pulse beat strong, thick and unequal, and his Head pain'd him extreamly; and his Difficulty of Breathing en∣creased to that degree, that he was almost suffocated. I. THE chief Part here affected, was the Lungs, especially the left Lobe, as appeared by the difficulty of breathing, and the heaviness in the middle of the Breast toward the Left∣side. By consequence also the Heart and the whole Body. II. This Disease is called Peripneu∣monia, which is an Inflamation of the Lungs with a continued Fever, difficul∣ty of Respiration, and a ponderous trouble in the Breast. III. A Plethora is the antecedent Cause of the Disease. The next Cause is greater Redundancy of Blood forced into the Substance of the Lungs, then is able to circulate. The original Cause, was too much overheating, and too suddain refrigeration. IV. The Wine overheated the Body, thence a strong and thick Pulsation of the Heart, by which the Blood attenu∣ated by the Heat, was rapidly forced through the Arteries into the Parts; but being refrigerated by the actual Coldness of the Water drank, and the in-breath'd Air, and not able to pass through the obstructed Passages of the Pulmonary Veins and Arteries, begets that remarkable Swelling, accompani∣ed with an Inflamation; partly through the Encrease of the Blood, partly by reason of its Corruption and violent Effervescency. V. Now the Bronchia or Gristles of the Lungs being compressed by this Tumor of the Lungs, the Respiration becomes difficult, and that Difficulty more and more encreases, because eve∣ry Pulse adds some Blood to the Tu∣mid Part. VI. Then, because the Lungs being swelled and distended, must needs be more heavy, thence that troublesome Ponderosity is perceived in the Breast, especially toward the Left-side, because the Inflamation possesses the sinister Lobe. However, there is no great or acute Pain, because there are no large Nerves in the Substance of the Lungs, which therefore have no quick Sence of feeling; and as for the inner Tunicle of the Bronchia, which most acutely feels, it is hardly affected with this Distemper, only the sharp Heat of the putrifying Blood somewhat tickling it, and the thinner Particles of the Blood being squeezed into it, provoke a little Cough, accompanied with a little spitting of Blood. VII. The Cheeks are red, by reason of the spirituous Blood boiling in the Lungs, which insinuates it self and its Vapors into the spungy Substance of the Cheeks; besides that, there is a hot Ex∣halation from the inflam'd Lungs them∣selves, with which fierce Vapors break forth out of the Chaps, and lighting within the Mouth into the Cheeks, make them much hotter, and encrease the Redness. VIII. The continued Fever proceeds from the Blood, putrifying in the Lungs, and communicated continually to the Heart; which did not appear at first, till after three hours, that the Blood be∣ing
encreased in quantity and heat, be∣gan to putrifie and be inflamed; and then the Mouth became dry by reason of the fervid Exhalations drying the in∣side of the Mouth. The Pulse was strong and thick, by reason of the quan∣tity and heat of the Blood. Unequal, because of the unequal Mixture of the putrid Particles, sometimes more, some∣times less communicated to the Heart. IX. At the beginning of the Fever, the Difficulty of breathing encreased al∣most to Suffocation, because of the greater quantity of Blood forced into the Heart by stronger Pustles; partly, because the Blood now putrifying and boiling in the Lungs, wants more room, and therefore causes a greater Com∣pression and Contraction of the Bron∣chia. X. The Pain in the Head is caused by the sharp Humors caused by the Wine excessively drank, and vellica∣ting the Membranes of the Brain; partly by the hot Blood, and its sharp Exhalation, forced by the Motion of the Heart into the same Membranes, somewhat chill'd by the Cold of the Nocturnal Air. XI. This Disease is very dangerous, by reason of the Difficulty of breathing, and the Excess of the Fever. Besides that, the Bowel is affected, which is next the Heart, and without the use of which, it cannot subsist. XII. Therefore in the Method of Cure, a Vein is first to be opened in the Arm, and a good quantity of Blood to be taken away, and the same Bleeding to be repeated twice or thrice, if need require, which though it weaken the Party, yet it is better he should be cu∣red weak, than die strong. XIII. In the mean time let his Belly be moved with some ordinary Glister, as the Infusion of Rhubarb, Syrup of Roses solutive, Succhory with Rheon, Decoction of Pruens or solutive Electu∣ary Diaprunum, or some such gentle Purgatives, for stronger must be a∣voided. XIV. To quench his Thirst, give him some such Julep. ℞. Decoction of Barley lbj. s. Syrup of Poppy, Rheas, of Violets, Pale Roses, an. ℥j. XV. This Apozem may be prescrib∣ed to take of it three or four times a day. ℞. Roots of Succory, Colts-foot, Aspara∣gus Grass, an. ℥j. Sliced Licorice ℥s. Violet-leaves, Endive, Coltsfoot, Let∣tice, Venus Hair, Borage, an. M. j. Flowers of Poppy, Rheas p. ij. Four greater Cold Seeds an. ʒj. Blew Currans ℥j. Water q. s. Boyl them to lbj. s. Then add to the Straining Syrup of Poppy, Rheas, of Violets and pale Ra∣ses an. ℥j. For an Apozem. Of the same Syrups equally mixt with a little Saffron added, may be made a Looch to alleviate the Cough. XVI. If the Inflamation come to maturation, which will appear by the purulent Spittle, and the Diminution of the Fever, then first let him take ab∣stergent Apozems of Elecampane, Hore∣hound, Hyssop, Scabious, &c. also Loo∣ches of Syrup of Venus Hair, Hore∣hound, Hyssop, &c. And when the Ulcer is sufficiently cleansed, then come to Consolidation. XVII. Let the Patients Diet be Cream of Barley, Chicken and Mut∣ton Broth, with cleansed Barley, blew Currans, Endive, Lettice, Damask Pru∣ens, and such like Ingredients, boiled therein, or Almond Milk: For his Drink, small Ale, or the aforesaid Ju∣lep. HISTORY VII. Of Spitting Blood. A Lusty Young Man accustomed to a salt, hard and sharp Diet, ha∣ving many times exposed himself bare Headed to the Cold of the Winter Air, and thence contracted first a terrible Pose, with a heavy Pain in his Head, was after molested with a violent Cough, caused by sharp Catarrhs descending upon his Breast, that brought him to spit up a great quantity of Blood, and that not without some pain. At first a Physitian being sent for let him Blood in the Arm, and took
away a good quantity, which appeared cold, very thin and ill coloured, and something but very little coagulated; the Blood-letting stopped his spitting of Blood for two days, but afterwards it returned again. His Appetite failed him, and his strength decay'd; but he had no Fever. I. THE Primary Malady that afflict∣ed this Man is called by the Greeks , by the Latines Sangui∣nis Sputum, or spitting of Blood. II. In general it is a Symptom of Ex∣crements flowing from the Lungs and the Vessels belonging to it; but the Di∣sease which follows that Symptom is a Solution of the Continuum. III. The Part Primarily affected is the Lungs, with it's Vessels, which ap∣pears by the Cough, and the Blood spit out with the Cough: which comes away without Pain, because of the little sence of Feeling in the Lungs. The Pose and falling down of the Catarrhs, shew the Head to be affected in like manner. Secundarily, and the other Parts suffer nothing, but only as they are wearied by the violence of the Cough, and wea∣kened by that, and the Evacuation of the Blood. IV. The anteceding Causes are the sharp and crude Humors, descending from the Head to the Lungs, which vel∣licating the respiratory Parts by their Acrimony, cause a terrible Cough, and by their Corrosion, a Solution of the Continuum. The Original Causes are the External Cold, the obstruction of the Pores of the Head, and what ever others that cause a Collection of crude Humors, or an endeavour to expel them being colected. V. Disorderly Diet and ill Food bred a great quantity of bad and sharp Humors in the Body, and made the Blood it self thin and sharp; hence many sharp Vapors were carry'd to the Head, which wont to be evacuated through the usual Passages and Pores, which be∣ing stopped and contracted by the Cold, the Humors likewise condensed, with their viscous Slime beset the Spongy∣bones of the Nostrils, and so caused the Pose, which was attended with a heavy Pain in the Head, while the de∣tained Humors distended the Mem∣branes of the Brain; afterwards descend∣ing to the Aspera Arteria and Lungs they induced a violent Cough, and Corrosion of the Vessels, upon which ensued a Solution of the Continuum, while the Vessels were broken and opened by the Violence of the Cough. VI. That the Blood abounded with bad and sharp Humors appeared from hence, that being let out of the Veins, it was thin and ill colored. VII. This spitting of Blood returned again, because that when the opened Vessels are emptied, there is some time required before they can be filled a∣gain: but no sooner are they swelled with more Blood, but it bursts out as be∣fore. VII. Now the reason why the Blood stopped for two days after the Blood-let∣ing, was because by that Evacuation the Heart was debilitated and the Pustles grew weaker, so that less Blood was forced out of the right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs. But after two days the Heart gathering strength and filling the little Vessels of the Lungs with Blood, the violence of the Cough easily forced it out again. IX. The Appetite was lost, through the continual Agitation of the Cough, and weakness caused by the Evacuation of so much Blood; which caused a Debi∣lity of the whole Body and Bowels to∣gether with the Stomach. Besides that bad Diet had bred several crude Hu∣mors in the Stomach, which had dulled the Appetite and weakened Concocti∣on. X. The decay of strength proceeded from loss of Blood and the Bodies be∣ing wearied by the violent Agitation of the Cough. XI. This Disease is very dangerous. 1. In respect of the Part affected; since no man can want Respiration. 2. In respect of the Cause; which is partly a Corrosion, partly a Rupture of the Vessel. 3. In respect of the difficulty of the Cure, which requires rest, which is not to be expected in the Respiratory Parts. Neither can the Solution be ta∣ken a part, but the Flux of the Ca∣tarrhs, and the Cough must be cured together. Therefore says, Faventinus, Blood being spit from the Lungs with a Cough, the broken Vein cannot be closed but with great difficulty. For when any little Vessel of the Lungs is opened or broken, an Ulcer follows, which brings
a Consumption that soon terminates in Death. All the hopes of this Patient consisted in his Age and strength. XII. In the method of the Cure, the Cough is first to be allay'd. 2. The Blood to be diverted from the Lungs. 3. The broken Vessels to be consoli∣dated. 4. The descent of the Catarrhs to be prevented. 5. The crude and sharp Humors to be hindred from ga∣thering in the Head. 6. The deprav'd Constitution of the Blood and Humors to be amended. XIII. After Glystering, or some Le∣nitive Purge given at the Mouth, Blood∣letting is most proper, which is to be repeated as necessity requires; especially when the Patient perceives any heavi∣ness in the lower Part of the Breast, for the Blood-letting hinders the reple∣tion of the Vessels of the Lungs, and their being forcibly opened by the quantity of Blood. XIV. To thicken the Blood and the Catarrh, and allay the Cough, ℞. Haly's Powder against the Consump∣tion ℈ ij. s. Red Corral prepared ℈ j. Decoction of Plantain, ℥j. Syrup of Comfrey ℥ s. Mix them to be drunk Morning and Evening. Let him often in the day use the follow∣ing Looch and Amigdalate. ℞. Syrup of Comfrey, dry Roses, Colts∣foot an. ʒ vj. Of Poppies ʒ iij. Mix them for a Looch. ℞. Sweet Almonds blanched ℥ ij. s. Lettice Seeds ℥ s. Decoction of Barley q. s. Make an Emulsion of lb j. with which mix with white Sugar q. s. For an A∣midgdalate. XV. To divert the Catarrh, make an Issue in the Arm or Neck, and ap∣ply Cupping-glasses to the Scapula and Back. And to prevent the Collection of crude Humors, let him wear a Cepha∣lic Quilt, composed of Ingredients to heat and corroborate the Head, dry up the Humors and open the Pores; and to open the Passage of the Nostrils, let him take some gentle Sternutory. XVI. When the Cough is thus re∣moved, and the Blood-spitting stopped, proceed to the farther consolidation of the corroded and broken Vein. To which purpose the Patient must be gent∣ly Purged by Intervals, to evacuate the sharp Humors by degrees. In the mean time let him drink this Apozem thrice a day. ℞. Barley cleansed ℥ j. Roots of the grea∣ter Consownd, Tormentil, Snake-weed, sliced Licorice an. ʒ vj. Sanicle, Herb Fluellin, Winter-green, Colts-foot, Egri∣mony, Ladies Mantle, Plantain. an. M. j. Red Roses M. j. Heads of white Poppy ℥ ij. s. The relicks of prest Grapes, ℥ iij. Figgs No. v. Make an Apo∣zem of lb j. s. Instead of this he may take the quantity of a Nutmeg of this Conditement, ℞. Haly's Powder against a Consumption ʒ j. s. Coral Prepared, Blood-stone, Harts-horn burnt an. ℈ j. s. Conserve of Red Roses ℥ ij. Syrup of Comfrey q. s. XVII. His Diet must be of good Juice and easie Digestion, and somewhat of a clamy Substance, as Veal, Lamb, Mut∣ton, and Broths of the same, ordered with Barley, Rice, Reasons, &c. More especially Goats Milk. Let his Drink be sweet Ale, not too small, let him not any way strain his Voice: and for his Body let him keep it so soluble, that his Stools may be easie. HISTORY VIII. Of a Consumption. A Lusty Young Man, twenty two Years of Age, having for a long time lived disorderly, at first felt for some time a heavy pain in his Head, which seeming to abate about Winter, presently he began to be molested with a Defluxion of sharp Humors to the Lungs, and thence with a violent Cough, which brought up every day a great quantity of thick tough Flegm, after he had been troubled with this Cough for some Months, at length he brought up Blood mixed with
his other Spittle: and about three Weeks or a Month since purulent matter was observed to be mixed with his Spittle, sometimes without, sometimes mixed with Blood, of which he hauk'd up every day more and more. However his Spittle had no ill smell; he had also a con∣tinual slight Fever, but attended with no signal Symptoms, his Nostrils were dryer then usually; and out of which there came little or nothing to speak of; he was much Emaciated and very Feeble. His Appetite lost, or very little: and his Cough frequently interrupted his sleep. I. SEveral Parts of this Young Mans Body were affected; The Head, as appeared by the Pain therein, and the Catarrhs. The Lungs, as appeared by Cough and Spittle; and the Heart, as was manifest by the Fever; and conse∣quently the whole Body was out of Or∣der. II. This Disease is called Phtisis, or a Consumption, Which is an Atrophy or wasting of the whole Body, proceeding from an Ulcer in the Lungs, with a sleight lingring Fever. III. The remote Cause of this Disease was disorderly Diet, which bred many sharp and viscous Humors in the Body; and the going carelesly uncovered in the Winter time, bred a cold ill temper in the Head, which contracted and stopped the Pores of it: by which means the Vapors ascending from the lower Parts, condensed in the Brain, and for want of passage, begot a heavy Pain in the Head, being as yet more ponde∣rous than acrimonious, and lodged in the less sensible Ventricles of the Brain. IV. The same Humors with their vis∣cosity had obstructed the usual Passages of the Nostrils and Palate, and so find∣ing no other way, fell down upon the Lungs and Aspera Arteria, which caused the Cough; at what time the Head∣ach abated, because the condensed Hu∣mors having found out a new Channel, were no longer troublesom to the Head. V. By the Acrimony of the Catarrhs some Corrosion was made in the Lungs; and thence, the violence of the Cough preceding, an effusion of Blood mixed with the Spittle, yet not very much, because none of the larger Vessels were either corroded or dilacerated by the fury of the Cough. Suppuration and an Ulcer followed the Corrosion; whence the Purulent matter spit up; which became still more and more, as the Ulcer increased. However as yet it has no ill smell, because the Ulcer is not come to that degree of Putrefacti∣on. VI. the sleight Fever proceeded from the Humors putrifying about the Ul∣cer. For the Blood forced from the right Ventricle of the Heart, cannot but receive some infection from the putrified Humors about the Ulcer, and carry it to the left Ventricle, where it kindles that Fever; which is but sleight, because the Putrefaction is not great. But continual, for that every time the Heart dilates, something of that Putre∣faction falls into the left Ventricle. VII. The Nostrils are dry, because the Flegmatic humors have found out other Passages to the Breast, and none come to the Nostrils. VIII. The Patient is emaciated, be∣cause the Blood is corrupted by the putrid Humors continually heated in the Heart, and mingled with the Blood, which is thereby made unfit for Nourish∣ment, and uncapable of Assimulation with the Parts. IX. The Appetite decays, because the Stomach not being nourished with good Blood, grows weak and breeds bad Humors; besides that the continu∣al and violent Agitation of the Cough destroys the natural Constitution of it, so that it is not sensible of that Corosi∣on which begets Hunger, neither can it conveniently retain nor concoct the Nourishment received. X. By what has been said, it is ap∣parent that the Disease is a Consump∣tion; the certain Signs of which are Bloody and purulent Spittle, a soft and lingring Fever, and a wasting of the whole Body. XI. This Disease is very dangerous; 1. Because the Ulcer is in such a Bow∣el, the use of which cannot be spared. 2▪ Because it is in a Spungy part that is not easily consolidated. 3. Because at∣tended with a Fever that drys up the whole Body. 4. Because there is a great wast and decay of strength. 5. Because the Cure of the Ulcer requires rest, whereas the Lungs are always in conti∣nual Motion. 6. Because the Medica∣ments do not come to the Lungs with their full Vertue but through various
Concoctions. 7. Because a Fever and an Ulcer require different Reme∣dies. XII. The Method of Cure requires, 1. That the cold ill Temper of the Head be amended, the generation of cold Humors, and the defluctions of cold Humors, and the Cough be pre∣vented and allay'd. 2. That the Ulcer be cured and the Fever be remov'd. XIII. First, Therefore the defluction of the Catarrhs is to be diverted from the Breast by Issues in the Neck or Arm. The Head is to be corroborated, the redounding cold Humors are to be dry'd up, and the obstructed Pores to be o∣pened. To which purpose the Temples and Bregma are to be anointed Morn∣ing and Evening with Oyl of Rosemary, Sage, Amber, Nutmegs, &c. Let him also wear a Quilted Cap stuft with Ce∣phalics, for some time. ℞. Leaves of Marjoram and Rosemary an. ʒ j. s. Flowers of Rosemary, Lavender, Melilot an. ʒ. j. Nutmegs ℈ ij. Cloves, Storax an. ℈ j. Beat them into a gross Powder for a Quilt. XIV. The Belly is to be gently mo∣ved with Manna or Syrup of Roses Solutive. XV. Then to facilitate Excretion of the Spittle with such Remedies as at the same time may heal the Ulcer. ℞. Syrup of Venus-hair, of Comfrey, of dried Roses an. ℥ j. Mix them for a Looch. Or such kind of Trochischs, ℞. Flower of Sulphur, Powder of sliced Liconice an. ʒ j. Root of Florence Or∣rice ℈ ij. Haly's Powder against a Con∣sumption ʒ iij. Benjamin, Saffron, an. ℈ j. White Sugar ℥ v. With Rose-water q. s. Make them into a Past for Tro∣chischs. XVI. If the Cough continue very violent, add to the Looches a little white Syrup of Poppy. Moreover to allay the Cough and recover strength, let him frequently take of this Amygda∣late. ℞. Sweet Almonds blanched ℥ ij. s. Four greater Cold Seeds an. ʒ j. Seed of white Poppy ʒ iij. Barley water q. s. Make an Emulsion to lb j. To which add Syrup of Popies ʒ ij. Sugar of Roses q. s. XVII. Afterwards for the more spee∣dy closing the Ulcer, use this Condite∣ment. ℞. Haly's Powder against a Consumption, ʒiij. Old Conserve of Red Roses ℥ j. s. Syrup of Comfrey, For a Conditement. XVIII. Let his Food be easie of Di∣gestion, and very nutritive, as potched Eggs, Veal, Mutton and Chicken-Broath, with cleansed Barley, Raisins, Rice, Almonds, Chervil, Betony, and such like Ingredients: also Gellys of the same Flesh. Let him drink Goats Milk Morn∣ing and Evening warm from the Udder, and not eat after it for some hours. Let his Drink be Ptisans sweetned with Su∣gar of Roses. Let him sleep long, keep his Body quiet, and his Belly solu∣le. HISTORY IX. Of a Syncope. A Man forty Years of Age, of a Flegmatic Constitution, after he had fed largly upon Lettice, Cowcumbers, Fruit, Whey, and such like Diet all the Summer long at length having lost his Stomach became very weak with a kind of sleepiness and numness, and a Syn∣cope which often returned if any thing troubled or affrighted him: which Syncope held him sometimes half an hour, sometimes longer with an extraordinary chillness of the extream parts, and much cold Sweat; so that the standers by thought him Dead. Coming to him∣self he complained of a Faintness of his Heart, and with an Inclination to Vomit voided at the Mouth a great quantity of Mucous Flegm; no Fever nor any other Pain.
I. MAny Parts in this Patient were affected, and many times the whole Body, but the Fountains of the Disease were the Stomach and Heart, whence all the rest proceeded. II. The most urging Malady was a thick Syncope, which is a very great and Headlong prostration of the Strength proceeding from want of heat and Vital Spirits. III. Now that it was a Syncope and no Apoplexy is apparent from the Pulse and Respiration, both which cease at the very beginning; whereas at the be∣ginning of an Apoplexy they continue for some time. IV. The remote cause of this Syn∣cope is disorderly Dyet, crude and cold, which weakens the Stomach, that it cannot perfect Concoction; and thence a vast quantity of viscous Flegm which adhering to the upper Orifice of the Sto∣mack begets in that cold and moist Di∣stemper which destroys the Stomach. And because there is a great consent be∣tween the Stomach and the Heart by means of the Nerves of the sixth Con∣jugation, inserted into the Orifices of the Heart and Pericardium; hence the Heart becomes no less languid, and faint∣ing, sometimes suffers a Syncope. For that Flegmatic Blood affords very few Spirits, for want of which the strength fails, and sometimes is ruin'd alto∣gether. V. And not only the Animal, but the Vital Actions fail, for the Vital Spirits failing in the Heart, the Animal fail also in the Brain. And the Motion of the Heart failing, the Motion of the Brain fails, which renders the Body numb'd and sleepy, though the Syncope be over. VI. In this Syncope the Patient lies like a dead Man, by reason of the ex∣traordinary Prostration of the Strength and Vital Actions. The External Parts are cold, for want of hot Blood from the Heart. There is a cold clammy Sweat, in regard the thin Vapors, which otherwise used insensibly to exhale through the Pores of the Skin, are sud∣denly condensed by the sudden want of Heat, and so sticking viscous to the Skin, begets a cold Sweat. Nor is there hardly any Respiration to be per∣ceived, for that the fainting Heart sends no hot Blood to be cool'd in the Lungs; besides that, the Motion of the Heart and Brain failing, few or no A∣nimal Spirits are sent to the Respirato∣ry Muscles. VII. The Syncope ceasing, the Lan∣guor of the Heart remains, by reason of the great quantity of Flegm con∣tained in the Stomach, which flows out at the Mouth with a kind of nausea∣ting. VIII. This is a dangerous Malady, as well in respect of the Principal Bowel affected, as in respect of the Cure, in regard of the Weakness of the Pa∣tient. IX. The Cure is as well to be begun during the Syncope, as when it is o∣ver. X. During the Syncope, the extream Parts are to be rubbed with Musk, Amber, Benjamin, green Baum bruised, and such other odorous Smells are to be held to the Nostrils, either alone, or mixed with Wine or Spirit of Wine. A little of Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, Spi∣rit of Wine, Cinnamon-water, or Hip∣pocrass is to be powered down his Mouth with a Spoon; and the Region of the Stomach to be somented with this Epitheme warmly applied. ℞. Rosemary, Baum, Mint, Leaves of Laurel an. M j. Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Cloves an. ʒj. s. Fennel Seed ʒij. Ge∣nerous Wine q. s. Boil them according to Art to lbj. To the Straining add Spi∣rit of Wine ℥ij. For an Epitheme. XI. When the Syncope is past, the Flegm accumulated in the Stomach is gently to be removed. To which pur∣pose let him take this Bolus. ℞. Electuar. Hiera Picra ʒij. for a Bo∣lus. Or this Powder, ℞. Root of Ialap, Cinnamon an. ℈j. Diagridion gr. iiij. Make them into Powder. XIII. Afterwards to strengthen the Heart and Stomach, and gently to purge away the Flegm, this medicated Wine is very proper. Of which, let the Pati∣ent take a Draught every Day, or eve∣ry other Day. ℞. Root of Elecampane ℥s. Acorus, Ga∣langale an. ʒij. Baum, Marjoram, Tops of Wormwood, an. M. s. Orange Peels, Iuniper Berries an. M. s. Fennel and Anise-seed, an. ʒj. s. Agaric, Lucid Aloes an. ʒj. Choice Cinnamon ʒij. s. Cloves, ℈ij. Put these into a Bag, to
be hung in lbiiij. Of odoriferous White∣wine. XIV. In the day time, let the Pati∣ent now and then drink a little Hippo∣crass or Hydromel, after a little Bag of Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves and Grains of Cardamum has been hung. Or take now and then a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Specier. Diambrae, Sweet Diamosch, an. ʒj. s. Orange-peels, Roots of Ele∣campane, Ginger condited an. ℥ s. Con∣serve of Anthos ℥ v. Oyl of Cinnamon, and Cloves an. gutt. ij. Syrup of pre∣served Ginger q. s. For a Condite∣ment. Or let him use these Tablets. ℞. Choice Cinnamon ℈ij. Mace, Cloves, White Ginger an. ℈j. Specier. Diam∣brae ʒj. Sugar dissolved in odoriferous Wine ℥iij. For Tablets. XV. Outwardly apply this little Bag to the Region of the Heart and Stomach. ℞. Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Storax, Benjamin, an. ℈j. s. Leaves of Marjo∣ram and Rosemary, an. M. s. Reduce them into a gross Powder to be sowed into a little Bag. Lastly, that which is called the Am∣ber Apple; or Storax, Benjamin, Grains of Cardamom, Cloves or other odoriferous Spices somewhat bruised, and ty'd up in a thin piece of Silk, or put into an ivory or silver Box perfora∣ted, will be very proper to smell to. XVI. When the Patient begins to recover Strength, let him take a spoon∣ful or two of this Mixture. ℞. Strong Rhenish-wine ℥iiij. Cinna∣mon-water ℥j. Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae ʒvj. Confection of Alkermes ʒj. s. Perl'd Sugar, q. s. to a moderate Sweetness. For want of this Composition, let him take a little generous Wine, or Spirit of Wine, or Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae. XVII. Let his Chamber be strewed with odoriferous Herbs, as Baum, Thyme, Marjoram, Rosemary, &c. or else be perfumed with Cephalic Spices. His Diet must be sparing, easie of Digestion, and very nutritive, as the Juices and Gravies of Chickens and Partridges, Gellies of Mutton, Veal and Hens prepared with Baum, Rose∣mary, Sage, Roots of wild Raddish, Anise and Fennel-seed, Nutmeg, Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon, &c. His Drink must be midling Wine, Hydromel or Ale moderately taken, tinctured with a little Wormwood. Nor will it be amiss to take now and then a little Wormwood-wine or Hippocrass, or a spoonful of Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae, or Spirit of Juniper Wine, Cinnamon or Fennel Wine. His Sleep and Exer∣cise must be moderate and gentle, and his Excrements must have their due and regular Course. HISTORY X. Of the Palpitation of the Heart. A Lusty young Man, about thirty four years of Age, but some∣what Scorbutic, and for a long time accustomed to salt Meats dryed in the Smoak, and pickled in Vinegar, and other Food of hard Digestion, many times complained of a troublesome Ponderosity in his left Hypochondrion. Afterwards, about three or four hours after Meals, he felt a strong Palpitation of his Heart, accompanied with a strong Pulse, very unequal, and sometimes intermitting for two or three stroaks together; at what time he was seized with an extraor∣dinary Faintness. This Palpitation lasted for half an hour, then ceased again; after which, slight, but frequent Palpitations often return'd. His Appetite was indifferent, and his Stomach digested well. He slept also very well, only sometimes he was troubled with frightful Dreams.
I. THE Part most manifestly affect∣ed in this Patient, was the Pal∣pitation of the Heart, which is a disor∣derly, and over vehement Motion of the Heart. II. The Proximate Cause is a salt and sharp Humor mingled with the Blood, which being mixed with the Chylus, concocted out of sharp and salt Food, and three or four hours after Meals, poured forth into the hollow Vein, and sliding with it into the Heart, causes a disorderly and vehe∣ment Fermentation in the Chyle, which is to be turned into Blood. For the sharp and salt Particles of the Chylus, together with the Veiny Blood impreg∣nated with that sharp Humor, falling into the Heart, too much augment the Fermentation; whence that vehement and disorderly Dilatation and Contra∣ction of the Heart, which causes that Inequality and strong beating of the Pulse. III. Now in regard there are many fixed and thicker Particles mixed with the thinner Particles of that salt and sharp Humor, which cannot be so soon dissolved and attenuated in the Heart; therefore, while the Heart is busied in the Dissolution and Dilatation of them, the Pulse intermits for a stroke or two, whence arises the Faintness, for that no Spirits are forced to the Parts while the Pulse ceases. IV. This vehement Palpitation lasts half an hour, because in that space all the Chylus of one Meal, or the great∣est part of it, is mixt with the Blood in the hollow Vein, and passes through the Heart, and the Remainders more or less, cause those slighter Palpitations af∣terwards. V. Now the reason why that sharp Humor continually flowing with the Veiny Blood to the Heart, does not cause a continual Palpitation, is, because the Particles of the Blood and sharp Hu∣mor fermented in the Heart, are many times more equal, more mitigated, and less sharp, so that such vehement Effervescencies cannot be excited in the Heart, especially if they fall into the Ventricles by degrees, and in lesser quantity. But when the Body being heated by exercise, the Blood more co∣piously and rapidly passes through the Heart with its sharp Particles mixed with it, then the Heat encreasing, and the sharp Humors abounding, the Effervescency increases, and thence the vehement Palpitation, which abates up∣on Rest, and Diminution of the Heat, and extraordinary Motion of the Blood. VI. This salt and sharp Humor is bred through a particular Depravity of the Spleen, and emptied out of it into the Liver, through the Spleenic Branch, where it is concocted with the sulphu∣rous Juice, and mixed in the hollow Vein with the Blood flowing to the Heart. The Vice of the Spleen is a depraved and salt ill Tempet, with some Obstruction, causing that trouble∣some Ponderosity. VII. The Stomach still craves and di∣gests well, because it is not affected, be∣sides that, the same sharp Humors car∣ried with the Blood through the Arte∣ries to the Tunicles of it, raise a Fer∣mentation within it. VIII. He sleeps well, but troubled with troublesome Dreams, because that Vapors ascending to the Brain do cause Sleep, but being somewhat sharp, they twitch the Membranes of the Brain, and the beginnings of the Nerves, and so disordering the Fancy, procure frightful Dreams. IX. This Disease is dangerous, be∣cause the Heart is affected, and because the depraved Disposition of the Bowels is not so soon reformed. X. The Cure aims at three things. 1. To correct the Depravity of the Spleen. 2. To attenuate and concoct the salt and sharp Hmors in the Brain. 3. To corroborate the Heart. XI. First then, let the Patient be three or four times purged with Pill. Cochiae, Hiera Pills, or Golden Pills, Electuary of Diaphoenicon, Hiera Picra, Confection Hamech, or Infusion of Senna Leaves, Agaric, &c. XII. Afterwards let him take this A∣pozem. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Fennel, an. ℥j. Of Capers, Tamarisch, an. ℥s. German∣der, Dodder, Fumitory, Borage, Mo∣therwort, Water Trefoil, an. M. j. Baum M. ij. Citron Rind, Iuniper Berries, an. ʒv. Fennel-seed ʒiij. Blew Currans ℥ij. Water and Wine equal Parts. Boil them to an Apozem of lbj. s. XIII. After he has taken this, let him drink every Morning a Draught of this medicated Wine. ℞ Roots of Acorus, Elecampane an. ℥j. Of Capers and Tamarisch an. ʒij Water Tresoil, Germander, an. M. s Orange∣peels,
℥s. Iuniper Berries ʒvj. Choice Cinnamon ʒj. s. Cloves ℈j. Fennel-seed ʒij. Lucid Aloes, white Agaric an. ℈iiij. Make them into a Bag to be sleeped in Wine XIV. In the Afternoon; let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg two or three times. ℞. Specier. Diambrae, Sweet Diamosch, an. ʒj. Orange-peel and Root of can∣dy'd Elecampane, Conserve of Anthos, of Flowers of Sage and Baum, an. ℥s. Syrup of Elecampane, q. s. for a Con∣ditement. XV. Let him keep a good Diet up∣on Veal, Lamb, young Mutton, Pullets, Rabbets and Partridges, &c. The Broths of which, must be prepar'd with Rose∣mary, Borage, Baum, Betony, Hyssop, Calamint, creeping Thyme, Leaves of Lawrel, Root of wild Raddish, Rinds of Citron and Oranges, Seeds of Anise and Fennel, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, &c. Also gravelly River-fish, Turneps and new-laid Eggs. His Drink midling Ale, with a little Wine at Meals. Moderate Sleep and Exercise, and a soluble Belly.
THE CURES OF THE Chief Diseases OF THE LOWER BELLY. WITH THE CASES OF THE PATIENTS IN THREE HISTORIES. HISTORY. I. Of a Preternatural Ravening Hunger. A Young Man, twenty eight years of age, of a healthy Consti∣tution, but somewhat Melncholy, and a great Lover of hard, salt, and acid Diet, was sometimes seized with a very great and extraordinary Hunger, so that unless he presently drank two or three Draughts of strong Ale or Wine, and eat a piece of Bread or other Meat, he complained of a Dimness of Sight, accompanied with a slight Vertigo, and presently became so weak, that not being able to stand, he fell into a Swoon. From which, when he recovered, and had refreshed himself with Bread and Wine, he continued free from that excessive Hunger for some days. This Distemper suddenly
came upon him, sometimes in the Morning when he was fasting; sometimes an hour after Meals, before his Stomach was well emptied, without any Nauseousness or Vomiting. I. THE Stomach of this Man was affected in the upper Part of the Stomach: and the Disease is called Buli∣nus; Which is a Preternatural and Insati∣able hunger seizing a Man on a suddain with Weakness and Swooning. II. The remote Cause was a Melan∣cholly Disposition of the Body, and such a Dyet as somewhat vitiated the Concoction of the Spleen; which bred many sharp and Acid Humors in the Body ill concocted by the Spleen, which being carried to the Ventricles, and adhering to the upper Part of it near the Stomach, twich'd it after a peculiar manner, and by means of a certain acid Distemper and Constriction caused an extraordinary Hunger. III. The swooning follows together with a notorious weakness, because of the great consent between the Stomach, the heart and the Brain, by means of the vagous Nerves, which are inser∣ted into the Stomach, and upper Part of the Ventricle, with infinite little Branches; which being ill affected a∣bout the Stomach, by Sympathy, the Heart and Brain are affected. Now the Brain being affected, presently the Animal Spirits were disturbed, which caused the dimness of Sight, and the Vertigo. The same disorderly and spa∣ring Influx was the occasion of the weak∣ness and faintness of the Heart, which is the reason it makes lesser Vital Spirits, and sends a lesser quantity of Ar∣terious Blood to the Heart. IV. Now whether a few hours after Meals or Fasting, tis all one; for at whatever time that subacid Juice flows into the Ventricle, and knaws the upper Part of it, that vehement Hunger seizes. V. The Patient is so corroborated with strong Ale or generous Wine, and the Distemper is presently mitigated, because such sort of Liquor refreshes both Animal and Vital Spirits, and wa∣shes off, nay sometimes concocts and digests the acid Humor sticking to the Tunicles of the Ventricle, and breaks the sowre Force of it, till there be a suf∣ficient quantity of the same Humor col∣lected again to make the same Vellicati∣on. VI. The danger of this Distemper is, least the Patient should be seized at any time with this raving Hunger, where Meat and Drink are not to be had, and so should be carry'd off in a Swooning Fit. VII. Therefore a Person thus affected ought never to Travel without a suffici∣ent Provision of strong Wine and Food along with him; that he may have his Weapons ready to resist the suddain In∣vasion of his Enemy. VIII. Moreover let him be gently Purged with Electuary of Hier a Piora, Cochia or Ruffi. Pills, avoiding strong Purgations: or if he be easie to Vo∣mit, let him take a Vomit of Asara∣bacca. IX. To strengthen the Ventricle and Spleen, and mend Concoction, let him take this Apozem. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Tamarisch, Capers an. ʒ vj. Galangal ℥ s. German∣der, Dodder, Agrimony, Ceterach, Baum an. M. j. Leaves of Lawrel, M. s. Orange Peels ℥ s. Iuniper-berries ʒ vj. Fennel-seed ʒ ij. s. Blew Currans ℥ j. s. Water and Wine equal Paris. Make an Apozem of lb j. s. To the same purpose also, let him take this Conditement. ℞. Specier Diambrae, Abbots Diarrhodon an ʒ j. Elecampane Roots and Orange Peels Candy'd, Conserve of Anthos and Flowers of Sage an. ℥ s. Syrup of Elecampane q. s. For a Condite∣ment. X. Let his Dyet be of good and easie Nourishment and Digestion. Mutton; Lamb, Veal, Pullets and River-fish, the Broaths of which must be prepared with Rosemary, Betony, Anise and Fennel-seed, Nutmegs, Cloves, Wild Carrots, &c. Let his Drink be clear Ale, and middling Wine. Moderate Exer∣cise and Sleep.
HISTORY. II. Of a Canine Appetite. A Maid about Thirty Years of Age, of a Melancholy and some∣what Pensive Disposition, accustomed to Salt, Acid, Sowre, smoaked Meats of hard digestion, for a whole Year was troubled with an insatiable hunger without Swooning. All manner of Victuals she devoured most greedily, but drank moderately after it; when her Belly was full, her hunger never ceased, but was somewhat abated. After eating she flung up all again, which in a short time became so Sowre in her Stomach, that the Sowre smell offended the standers by; and the Maid her self confess'd that they came up sharper then juice of Limons. After that Evacuation she fell to again, and then again brought up what she had eaten: and day and night she would have done nothing but eat and Vomit, had not her Poverty enjoyned her a most troublesome and tedious abstinence, in the mean time however she grew very Lean. I. THIS Distemper is called Canina Appetentia, or a Cane or Dog∣like Appetite, Which is an unsatiable Hun∣ger without swooning proceeding from an acid ill Temper of the Inferior Sto∣mach: wherein the Nourishment so greedi∣ly devoured is presently cast up again, and then other Nourishment devoured without any abatement of Hunger. II. It differs from a Bulimia, for that there is a Prostration of the strength without Vomiting; but many times with Swooning; in the other there is Vomiting without any signal weakning of the Body. III. The Ventricle of this Maid was affected, especially in the lower Part. IV. The containing Cause is an acid and viscous Humor bred through the defect of the Spleen, and infused in the Ventricle, which vellicating the Ventri∣cle with it's acidity, causes an insatiable Appetite after all sorts of Nourishment to appease that Vellication. Which Nourishment being infected by the Hu∣mors with the same acidity, causes the Vellication to be more troublesome; upon which great plenty of Spirits be∣ing determined to the Inferior Fibres of the Ventricle, causes a Contraction of the lower Tunicles of the Ventricle, and so by the help of the Muscles of the Abdomen, a strong Expulsion of the Nourishment received: which not be∣ing able to dissolve or eject the acid Humor, still firmly impacted in the Tunicles of the Ventricle, which is ra∣ther fomented by the Spleen, it hap∣pens that the same raging Hunger still continues after Vomiting. V. There is no Swooning in this case, because there is no great consent between the lower Part of the Ventricle and the Heart and Brain. VI. Because this Raging hunger ac∣company'd with Vomiting, hinders due Nutrition, and Atrophy and wast of the Natural strength is to be feared. VII. In the Cure the Body is osten to be Purged with Aloes, Hiera Picra, Infusion of Agaric, and other bitter things, and two or three Vomits with Leaves of Asarabacca. VIII. Then such things are to be pre∣scrib'd, which corroborate and cleanse the Ventricle and Spleen, and promote Concoction by consuming the acid Cru∣dities, such as are prescribed against the Bulimia; and the same Dyet must be observed.
HISTORY. III. Of Difficult Concoction of the Ventricle. A Certain Person Forty Years of Age, accustomed to Salt, Smoaked, Acid Meats, and of hard Digestion, after he had struggled with a Quartain Intermitting Ague for Eight Months, at length being freed from that, slowly recovered strength because his Ventricle difficultly digested the nourishment which it received: for that after Meals he was troubled with a great distention in the Region of the Ventricles, and Hypochon∣driums; which was eased sometimes by sending forth violent and loud Bel∣ches; and the fewer of those he sent forth, the more he was troubled. Sometimes he did not belch at all; and then he felt his Meat to fluctu∣ate in his Stomach, and the next day he threw it up raw and uncon∣cocted, with some relief of his trouble; and so he remained free as long as his Stomach was empty: but after feeding the same molestation returned▪ His Urine was thick and pale, with a copious sediment, thick and palish. No Fever could be perceived; but his Pulse was weak and unequal, and his natural strength decay'd. I. HERE the Ventricles, which performs the first Concoction and Chylification was infected; which occasioned a difficult Concection of the Nourishment by the Greeks called , proceeding from a cold ill Temper of the Ventricle and chylify∣ing Bowels. II. Ehe Proximate Cause of this Evil, is the unaptness of the Ferment, to promote fermentaceous Concoction in the Ventricle, by reason the subacid and saltish Particles of it are less fixed, and not reduced to that fluxibility and tenuity, as to penetrate the Particles of the Aliments, stir up the Spirits la∣tent therein, and separate them from the thicker mass. III. That defect of the Ferment is contracted through the depraved and over-cold disposition of the chylifying Bowels, the Liver, Spleen and Sweet∣bread; for which reason they do not sufficiently concoct the Ferment which is to be prepared, nor reduce it to a due fluxibility and tenuity; but make it over-fix'd and crude; which being com∣municated to the whole Body begets Crudities, 1. In the Blood, which is therefore difficultly and unequally di∣lated in the Heart, so that few and those thicker both Vital and Animal Spirits are generated, whence a decay of Strength and dejection of the Mind. 2. In the Salival Kernels of the Chaps, and others of the Head, where the fermentaceous falival Juice being bred raw, and so falling into the Stomach, becomes unfit to make a due Fermen∣tation of the Nourishment. And the same is to be said of all the other ser∣mentaceous Juices flowing through the Choler-receiving and Pancreatic-Chan∣nel into the Duodenum, and thence in good part ascending to the Ventricle to promote Concoction. Which is the rea∣son they make no Fermentation, so that the Nourishment fluctuates in the Sto∣mach, and is vomited up raw. Or else they only cause a flatulent dilatation of the Aliments, whence a great distention of the Ventricle, the occasion of those loud Belches, by reason of the Viscosity of the crude Matter therein contain∣ed. IV. The deprav'd disposition of the chylifying Bowels was contracted by disorderly Diet, and the long use of Meats thick, sharp and hard to be digest∣ed; out of which an unconcocted Chy∣lus, and out of that a crude and not easily dilated Blood was generated, which being carry'd to the chyllfying Bowels could not be master'd conveni∣ently by them, and so by degrees they became debilitated and vitiously dispo∣sed. V. By reason of an ill concocted Chylus, and the crude humors collected and bred in the Ventricle, it acquir'd a cold ill Temper, which render'd it unable to perform its duty, by bring∣ing the sermentaceous Matter sticking to its Tunicles, to any farther perfecti∣on. VI. A great part of the Flegmatic hu∣mors abounding in the Blood passes through the Reins, hence the Urine be∣comes
pale and thick, and the sediment like it. VII. There is no Feyer, because no Putrefaction, nor excessive Sulphureous Effervescency. VIII. This is a dangerous Disease, because it threatens an utter decay of the natural strength for want of Nou∣rishment. IX. In the Cure, the Body is to be often purged with Hiera Picra, Diaphae∣nicon, Cochiae Pills, Infusion of Agaric and the like. X. Then this Apozem is to be pre∣scribed, of which he is to take three or four times aday. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Calamus Aromatic an. ℥j. Roots of Zedoary and Tamarischs an. ℥ s. Germander, Dodder, Baum an M. j. Leaves of Lawrel, Marjoram an. M s. Iuniper-berries, Orange-peels an. ℥ s. Anise and Fennel seed an. ʒ ij. Raisins cleansed ℥ ij. Water and Wine equal parts. Make an Apozem of lb j s. XI. The Stomach and other Bowels are to be corroborated with some such Conditement. ℞. Ginger condited, Candied Elecam∣pane root, Candied Orange-peel, Con∣serve of Anthos and Flowers of Sage an. ℥ s. Oyl of Iuniper ℈ j. of Anife, gut. viij. Oyl of Cinnamon and Cloves an. gut. j. or ij. Syrup of Elecam∣pane q. s. For a Conditement. XII. If after this the Distemper do not abate, give the ensuing Vomit. ℞. Leaves of green Asarabacca ʒ iiij. Rhaddish water ℥ ij. Squeeze out the Iuice according to Art; then add, Vomitive Wine ʒ jij. Oxymel of Squils ℥ s. XIII. Then Prepare a Medicated Wine, of which let him drink a draught every Morning, between whiles taking a small quantity of the foresaid Con∣ditement. ℞. Roots of Elecampane ℥ s. of Zedoary ʒ ij. Germander, Marjoram, Cardus Benedict. an. M. s. Orange-peels and Iuniper-berries an. ʒ iij. Anise and Fenel seed an. ʒ j. Cloves, Cinnamon an. ℈ ij. Lucid Aloes ℈ iiij. Hang them in a bag in  iiij. of White-wine. XIV. Forbear Pork, pickled and smoaked Meats, but observe a Diet of good juice and easie Concoction prepared with Horse Radish-root, Ma∣joram, Rosemary, Sage, Lawrel-leaves Anise and Fennel-seeds, Pepper, Cloves and Spices. Let his Drink be middle Ale and Wine, and sometimes af∣ter Meals, let him take a spoonful of Spirit of Wine, or Matthiolus's Aqua Vitae. Let him sleep and exercise mode∣rately, and let him sometime anoint the Region of the Ventricle and Hypo∣condriums with Oyl of Nutmegs, and cover it with the Skin of a Vulture or Wild Cat: and let the Excrements of his Body be duly and regularly eva∣cuated. HISTORY IV. Of a Hypochondriacal Passion, with a Nauseating and Vomiting. A Young Man in the Flower of his Age accustomed to hard, salt and acid Food, living an idle Life, for a long time nauseating some sorts of Nourishments, sometimes had no Stomach, sometimes had too much, but with difficulty retained and digested the Aliment re∣ceived, with rumbling distention and pain in his Stomach, and many times was cruelly griped in his Guts, and all the lower Part of this Belly with an extraordinary rumbling. But these Evils were for some time abated by the copious breaking of Wind upward and downward. Sometime a saltish Liquor was wont to void it self at his Mouth, with an extraordinary nauseating and a slight Vomiting, especially in the Morning, though it many times happened at other times of the day, and upon that evacuation he was somewhat better. But about a Month since all these ill accidents began to grow worse. For his
Vomiting was often and violent, so that he threw up whatever he swallowed with a great force; which though they had not been long in his Stomach, yet they came up very acid, and which was more to be admired, sometimes after dinner he brought up two or three ounces of a transparent Liquor only, as he said himself, Saltish and Sowrish. Yet he retained both his meat and drink, and after that Liquor was come up, retained and digested them very well; when he did not Vomit, the Gripings and Rumblings of his Belly were more troublesome. He had no Fever but was thoughtful and sad; several Scorbutic Spots ap∣peared also upon his Skin, and his Body waxed lean. I. HERE several Parts were ill af∣fected, chiefly the Stomach, Guts and Sweetbread. II. This Disease is called a Hypocon∣driacal Affection, which is an acid ill Temper of the Sweet-bread, Ventricle, Intestines and Parts ajoyning. III. The Primary cause proceeds from a saltish and acid ill Temper of the Sweet-bread, contracted by irrigular Diet, by which the Pancreatic Juice be∣came too salt and acid, and that at one time more then another, according to the nature of the Aliments received in∣to the Stomach. IV. This Juice flowing out of the Sweet∣bread into the Duodenum, and ascend∣ing good Part of it into the Ventricle, corrupts the Ferment of it, and so causes bad Concoction▪ But if it fall into the Stomach infected with any stinking and depraved quality, then it causes loss of Appetite and nauseating, and sometimes vomiting. But if it flow in over acid, then it begets outragious hunger. V. From this vitious Concoction and Fermentation arise Distensions, Pains, Rumblings, and much Wind, which being belched upward, in some mea∣sure abates the Distention. VI. But if that vitious Juice fall al∣together down to the Intestines, then the Decotion is better, the nauseating less; However a vitious Effervescency excited in the Guts, from whence Wind, Rumblings, Roarings, Pains and Disten∣sions of the Intestines. VII. The Liquor flowing out at the Mouth with a nauseousness is the Pan∣creatic Juice carried up to the Head, and through nauseousness ejected out at the Mouth together with the Salival Liquor. VIII. Which Pancreatic Juice grow∣ing afterwards more sharp and deprav'd, and more violently twinging the Sto∣mach, causes a frequent and violent Vomit. Which if it happen after Meals to break forth through those Aliments into the upper Part of the Stomach, as it causes a great nauseousness alone, is vomited up alone, the Aliments re∣maining in the Stomach, where they are well digested, that vitious Ferment being Evacuated. IX. There is no Fever because no Pu∣trefaction. X. He is thoughtful and sad, for that by reason of the acid Humors mixed with the Blood, the many Animal Spi∣rits are generated somewhat thicker in the Brain, so that they do not pass so chearfully and orderly through the narrow Pores of the Brain, which makes the Patient thoughtful and musingly Melancholly. XI. The Body is emaciated, because the first Concoction is not well perform∣ed, which infects the Blood with a Scor∣butic quality, that renders it more unapt for Nutrition. XII. This Disease is dangerous for fear of an absolute Atrophy, and Con∣sumption of the Natural strength. XIII. Therefore in the Cure let the Patient be Purged once in eight days, with an Infusion of Senna, Agaric, &c. adding thereto a little Electuar of Hiera Picra or Diaprunum: or with Chochia Pills, Extract of Catholicon, Powder of Diaturbith and the like. Blood-letting signifies little in this Case where there is no Fever. XIV. If his inclination to Vomit con∣tinue, give him some such Vomitory. ℞. Fresh Leaves of Asarabacca ʒ iij s. Radish-water an. ℥ ij. squeez out the Iuice, then add Antinomiate Wine ʒ iij. Oxymel of Squills ℥ s. XV. Let him take three times a day some convenient Apozem, like this that follows. ℞. Roots of Tamarisch, Capers, Polypody
of the Oak, Elecampane an. ʒ vj. Ger∣mander M. j. s. Baum, Betony, Borage, Dodder an. M. j. Leaves of Lawrel, Water Trefoyl an. M. s. Orange-peels ʒ vj. Anise and Fennel-seed an. ʒ j. s▪ Raisins cleansed ℥ ij. Water q. s. Make an. Apozem to lb j. s. XVI. Between whiles let him take a small quantity of this Conditement. ℞. Roots of Elecampane, Orange-peels Condited, Conserve of Borage, Baum, Flowers of Sage an. ℥ s. Oyl of Anise drops xij. Syrup of Elecampane q. s. XVII. In a great distention of the Maw and Intestines, with Faintness and Pain, such a Bolus will be very pro∣per. ℞. Treacle ʒ j. Crabs Eys prepared ℈ j. Oyl of Annise drops iiij. Mix them for a Bolus. XVIII. Instead of his Apozem sometimes in a Morning fasting, give him a Dose of this Powder in Ale or Broth. ℞. Crabs-Eyes prepared ʒ ij. Red Coral prepared ʒ s. Amber prepared ʒ s. Make a Powder to be divided into four Doses. XIX. Let his Diet be of good and easily digested Nourishment, avoiding all dry'd, smoak'd, acid, sowre, rank and crude Victuals. Let his Drink be sound stale Ale, and small Wine but not acid. Let him Sleep and Exercise moderately, and evacuate duly and regularly.
AN INDEX OF MATTER Contained in the TREATISES OF THE Small-Pox & Measles AND THE CURES and DISPUTATIONS following. AGue Tertian, 134, 140 Ague Bastard, 135, 151, 156 St. Anthonie's-fire. Apoplexy 185 Appetite lost, 113 Apthae, 204, 205 Arabian's Opinion of the Causes of the Small Pox. 4 An Asthma, 44, 216 The Author rejects the Opinions of all the Phy∣sicians concerning the Small-Pox, 6 Avicins Opinion concerning the Causes of the Small-Pox. 4 B. Bthing in the Small-Pox dangerous, 37 Belly-bound, 150 Blear ey'dness whether contagious, 109 Bleeding at the Nose, 52, 116, 200 Blindness, 197 Bloodletting, when to be admitted in the Small-Pox. 13, 34 Bloodshot Eyes, 195 To break the Pox more speedily, 19, b. Breath stinking. 83 A Burning, 64 Burstness of the Guts, 86. With a Gan∣grene, 122 C. Camphire debilitates Venery, 79. a. b. A Canine Apetite, 233 Carus, 178 Catalepsis, 179 A Catarrh, Chimical dissolutions of little use, 15, a. Chyrurgical Helps for the Small-Pox, 12 Cinnamon water, the use of it in the Small-Pox, 35 Cholic, 98, 137 Coma, a Disease so called, 174 Ill consequences of catching of Cold in the Small-Pox, 26, a. b. Concoction difficult, 234 A Consumption, 75, 123, 224 Convulsions Epileptic, 133 Convulsion, 189
Coverlets red, contribute to expel the Small-Pox. 15 A Cough. 158. 214 Cupping-Glasses improper. 13 Cure of the Measles. 24. a D. Deafness. 160 The Diagnostic Signs of the Small-pox. 7 Diagnostic Signs of the Measles. 23. b Diaphoretics for the Small-pox. 14 Diarrhea. 120 Duncan Liddel defends the Opinion of the Arabians. 5 What Di convenient in the Small-pox. 10 A Disentery. 59, 61, 73, 74 A Dysury. 47 E. Emplasters hurtful. 15 Empyema. 212 Epilepsie. 190 Epileptic Convulsions, vid. Swoonings. Epithemes hurtful. 15 Evacuations monthly, dangerous in the Small-Pox. 32. a. b Expulsoes, the several Sorts. 14 External Parts, how to cure. 19. a. Exulcerations, how to cure them. 22. a. Eyes, how to preserve. 20 Eye-lid seized by the Small-Pox, how to cure. 37 Eye-lids closed by a Wound. 46 F. Face swell'd with a Fall. 142 Fever Malignant. 69, 70, 72 Tertian Intermitting. 115 Female Purgations suppressed. 61. 80. 91 Fernelius of the Small-Pox. 5 Figs, the use of them in the Small-Pox. 15. b The Vertues of them. 16. a Fissure of the Skull. 102 Fomentations hurtful. 15 French-Pox. 118 G. Gallic Fever. 66 Gargles. 19. b Gentilis of the Small-pox▪ 5 Giddiness. 181 A Gonorrhea. 37 Gout in the Knee. 97 Gou. 154 H. Head-ach. 80, 103, 128, 163 Hickup. 104 Several Histories of the Small-pox, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, &c, and Measles. 38 Hoarsness. 49 House-Swallows. 13 A Hurt upon the Shin. 78 The Hydrocephalus. 208 Hypochondriachal Passion. 235 Hysterical Suffocation. 111 I. Imagination, the Strength of it. 29 Inflammation of the Lungs. 41, 221 Internal Bowels may be seized by the Small-Pox. 27. a Internal Parts, how to re. 15. b The Itch. 52, 160 Itching in the Measles, how to prevent. 24. a K. Kidneys pain'd. 95 Kings-Evil. 143 L. Lethargy. 176 What Lotions to be rejected. 22. a M. Madness. 173 Of the Measles in General. 1 Of the Measles in Specie. 23. a Melancholy, 167. Hypochondriac. 169 Mercurialis of the Small-pox. 5 Milkie, which the best for a Consumption. 76. b Milk in a Virgins Breast. 132 Mortification of the Legs and Thighs by Cold. 54 The Murr. 200, 201 N. Nature to be observed in the Cure of the Small-pox. 28. a. b Nephritic Passion, 63. Pains. 125, 132 The Night-Mare. 183 Noise in the Ears. 198 O. An Ophthalmy. 108, 194 Oyls hurtful. 15
P. Pain extream under the Breast-bone. 127 Palpitation of the Heart. 228 Palsie. 50, 187 Perforation with a Bdkin dangerous. 21. b Pestilential ever. 36 Pharmacutic Remedies. 13 A Phrensie. 165 Pin and Web. 195 Pitting, to prevent. 21. a Pits, to take them away. 22. b The Pleurisie. 210 The Pose. 200, 201 Of the Small-pox in general. 1 Of the Small-pox in specie. 3 The Causes of the Small-pox. 4 The preservative Physic. 9 The prognostic Signs of the Small-pox. 8 Prognostic Signs of the Measles. 23. b Purgatives, whether proper or no. 13 Purging, violent. 82 Purples. 24. a. b. 32 Q. Quick-silver good for the Worms. 153 Quinancy. 218 R. The Ranula. 206 a Red Spots, how to take them away. 22. a Remedies not to be changed when truly applied. 28. b S. Saffron, the Use of it in the Small-pox. 35 A Scald. 46 Scars, to prevent. 21. a Siatica. 146 Scurvy, 128. When first known. 129 Secondines suppressed. 91 Sennertus of the Small-pox. 6 Sheeps-dung expells the Measles. 38 Small-pox may sometimes scize the same Person twice or thrice. 32 Small-pox and Measles both together. 39 Smelling lost. 200, 201 Sower things hurtful in the Small-pox. 15. b Spitting of Blood. 89, 110, 222 Spleen obstructed 55, 137, 144 Stomach decayed, 84. Fowled. 161 Stone. 131 Strength of Imagination. 29. a Sudorificks, how to be used in the Small-pox. 15. a Superfetation. 114 Suppression of the Courses. 48 Swelling in the Fore-head by a Fall. 97 Swoonings dangerous, unless the Pox appear presently. 31. a A Syncope. 226 T. Of the Therapeutics Cure. 10 Thunder-strook. 157 Timorous People must avoid coming near those that are sick of the Small-pox. 30. a Topicks, when useless, 23 a. When useful. 33. a Toothach. 43, 65, 202 Trembling. 188 Tumors in the Mouth. 204, 205 V. Virgins Milk proper to take off the red un∣seemly Colour. 23. a Vomiting, 77. With pain in the Stomach. 155 Urine suppressed 58, 88 Uterine Suffocation. 121, 159 FINIS.
