D2188 11988116 51977
Imprimatur, P. MEWS. Vice-Cancel. OXON. Feb. 9. 1671.
A SHORT and SURE GUID in the Practice Of Raising and Ordering OF Fruit-Trees. Being the many years Recreation and Experience of FRANCIS DROPE, Bachelour in Divinity, late fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. OXFORD, Printed for Ric. Davis, An. Dom. 1672.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND TRULY NOBLE PHILIP, LORD WENMAN, Baron of Kilmainham, Viscount Tuam. My Lord, AS a testimony of my Gratitude, for those many Favours I have received from your Lordship, I humbly present this small Book of my deceased Bro∣thers, of Planting. I confesse it un∣worthy
your Honours perusal, who are as great a Judge of Books as Men: yet I intreat your Lordships Patronage and Countenance, pre∣suming it may be serviceable for the preserving, and perfecting your new Orchard at Brackly, and so somewhat prevail towards the pro∣curing your Honours pardon, for prefixing so great a Name before so mean a Discourse. My Lord, I lay it at your Feet, and assure your Lordship, it comes from one who honours you in the most secret cor∣ners of his Heart, and who had no other way, nor method to express it but this. I know your Lordships Charity to be so diffusive, as to in∣vite
all those, who have the honour to know you, to make their applica∣tion to it: and that you are readier to afford your protection to those that want it, then they are to crave it, and will not I humbly conceive, be offended at this Dedication, knowing the weakest, and meanest ever seek their support from the Great, and Good. And that is ano∣ther Reason of the present Ambi∣tion of (My Lord) Your Honours, most obliged, most humble and most devoted servant, Edward Drope.
THE PREFACE. Friendly Reader, THe Author of these following papers, ha∣ving lately pay'd his debt to Nature, I thought it great pitty that they should die, and be buryed with him, since I am inform'd, by some of Learning and judgment, they may be useful to the publick, and this is the only aim (and not any popular applause) that produceth this
publication; for though many worthy and ingenious persons have written more largely already on this Sub∣ject, yet none (I presume) hath say'd so much, in so little a Treatise, and what he directs, is by his own Expe∣rience, which I take to be the best In∣structer. Yet it was not his study (who was by profession a Divine) but his Recreation, an inoffensive de∣light hee took in Planting; neither do I think this study so ill becoming that Function, when Solomon, that great King, and princely Divine, wrote of Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hysop that springeth out of the wall; that is, from the highest and tallest Tree,
to the smallest shrub, and lowest herb. I may truly say, this our Author knew most Herbs and Flow∣ers in this Nation, yet I do not find he wrote any thing of them; but I would not have thee think that this Knowledge was his Master-peice, who had a Competency in all Arts and Sciences, sufficient to compleat a Schol∣ler. He was my Brother, and I am affraid lest that my affection should lead me to partiality, and therefore shall say no more as to that particular; only somthing more as to the Book, which is but small, yet may prove of great benefit to thee; and therefore if thou art a good Husband, thou canst not but think it well worth thy money,
when it teaches thee how to Plant and order Fruit-trees, the planting whereof, both for Sider and Ta∣ble Fruit, I account one of the best parts of good Husbandry, for I have frequently seen (in diverse Coun∣tries of England) what improve∣ments persons have made upon their Estates by so doing, beside that Li∣quor of Cider is say'd to agree best with our English Bodyes, men Liv∣ing to great Ages in the Cider-Coun∣tryes, both Active and strong, as may appear by a storie, I shall here insert, which I borrowed out of an Honoura∣ble and Learned Author; Lord Verulam. that at a Wake in Herefordshire, a Daunce was performed by eight men,
whose Ages, added together, amount∣ted to eight hundred years, some be∣ing as much above one hundred years Old, as others were under that Age. We may well suppose them to be Ci∣der-Drinkers most of their dayes; and what an excellent Remedy it is for the cure of the Stone, will be verifyed in this following Ex∣ample; a Gentleman of Quality, of my acquaintance, who from his Childhood was tormented with the distemper of the Stone, being upon some occasion in that Countrie for one year and half, or thereabouts, fell to drinking of Cider, and there∣by cured himself, as is supposed, for he has not been troubled with it
since, and it is now four or five years agoe. I will detain you no longer at the Door, but let you into the Or∣chard, and so farewel. I am Thine in all Christian Offices of Love and Service, Edward Drope. Comner, March. 1672.
A SHORT and SURE GUID IN The Practice of Raising and Order∣ing of Fruit-Trees. THe goodnesse of materials, and the sufficiency of the Ground∣work, as in Building, so in Plant∣ing, is the first thing considerable; The stock therefore being the cheif foundation of a good Fruit-tree, shall give the Beginning to this my ensuing discourse. And whereas the best of stocks are produced from the seed; I will not pervert Na∣tures method, but keeping in her Tract all the way treat of such in this first following Chapter.
CHAP. I. Of Raising stocks from the seed. EVery sort of seed hath a delight peculiar to it self, to be pro∣duced in a place, that affords juice most agreeable to it's Nature. The best Ground (or mould) that I have seen for the sowing of Apple and Pear-kernells is a Clay. If you have not the conveniency of such for your purpose, then procure and bring into the Nursery (or Gar∣den) good store of Clay, and make therewith a Bed of about one foot and an half in Thicknesse, of what breadth and length you please. Upon this Bed must be laid some
spit-dung (i. e. such horse-dung as is rotted in the heap, and may be digged with a spade) or excel∣lent mould, upon which likewise lay as much sand, as will cover half a foot, or more, thick, when you have thus done, digge the sand, dung (or mould) and half of the Clay, so that they mix well toge∣ther. Let this be done in the Sum∣mer before you intend to sow your kernells, so will this Compost be sufficiently work't together against the time you sow, which may be any time after Christmas and afore Mid-March. Digge it over often, but especi∣ally digge it afresh, and very fine, when you intend to put the seeds in the ground; rake it then even, and pick all the stones, and trash
out of it. Afterwards, by the guid∣ance of a line, digge (or drill) a lit∣tle trench of about two inches deep, and as much broad; into the which cast some of the seed. When you have done this, remove the line, and place it about half a foot distant from the trench, make by it another trench in like manner, and sow it with seeds, as you did the former. Do thus, until all your bed is sown, or your seeds spent. Then cover all these little trenches by raking the earth upon them. Let this bed for kernells be on the North-side of a wall, or fence, or in some shady place: So will the young plants be freed from the parching heat in the Summer; and thereby be kept moist a longer time then they would in another place.
This bed, being thus made of clay, yeildeth little harbor for the mole, mouse, or worm; all which are very busy in destroying seeds sown in light ground; what the clay is supposed to kill by its cold and astringent clamminesse, the sand preserveth by heat and friabi∣lity; filling up the chaps, which would otherwise be in the clay, if the bed should happen to be neg∣lected to be watered in season. You may not wonder that I make choise of clay to sow kernells in; for it is the natural soile for them: wit∣nesse the moist and clay woods, which afford far better (and grea∣ter store of) wild stocks, then any other whatsoever. By this manner of sowing in clay, I have known kernells to
shoot, some two foot, others a yard in a dry year; when those, that were sowne in loose and richer mould, grew not above half a foot, or a foot at the most. Having mentioned something about Mice, I thinke it not amisse to adde thereunto in this place (once for all) how to keep them from destroying the seeds, which (besides the trappes) may be done by mixing a little soot with them in the sowing, and to scatter a little lime and soot on the super∣ficies of the bed, after the seeds are sown: by the bitternesse of the soot and the heat of the lime, the Mice (unlesse very much pinch't with hunger) will be cautelous to venter thereon, as disagreeing to the relish of their discerning pallats.
But to return where I left. Although this is the best kind of ground (or mould) to sow the seeds in; yet will I not deny, what I have seen, viz. that they have thrived very much in others beside. Plum-stones will grow very well this way: but Cherry stones will not. Wherefore you must pro∣cure (or make) a place of light mould, or black sand, and sow them therein in the like manner, as you did the Apple and Pear kernels; So will they thrive extraordinarily. Peach-stones thrive best, when set in a loomy ground (such as serves to make bricks about Lon∣don) mixt with some spit-dung, &c. I have known them inocula∣ted the first year, they grew herein so bigge; the next unto this is that
wherein you sow the black Cher∣ries. These are the cheif seeds to make stocks: but now to tell you, what stocks serve, for what kinds of fruit; for there must not be a mixture of grafts and stocks of di∣verse Natures, as many (who treat of Miracles not truth) do deliver. Know therefore, That the kernels of Wildings, for all sorts of Apples to be grafted on, are the best; if you can obtain them; if not, of any Crabbe (such as are in the hulls, out of which verjuice was prest) will serve the turn, if the Crabbs were not too small. Some are of opinion that Apple kernells make the fittest stocks for the sweetest sort of Apples, but
of this I never saw the tryall, my opinion being wedded to the Crabb and Wilding; for as the same men affirme, the stock coming from the Apple is not so lasting. All Pear-kernells, but especially those, that came from some what soure Pears, (such are these, that make the best Perry) for all kinds of Pears, Wardens, and Medlars, though these last are usually graft∣ed on white-thorne; yet they af∣ford larger fruit, when grafted on Pear-stocks, as I have seen happen by the experience of others. The Service-tree both wild and planted is an excellent stock for Medlars, the fruit thereof being better relish't and thicker set on, then those of the Pear stock. The separation of Crabb and
Pear-kernells is performed on this wise. After that the liquor hath been pressed forth of the bruised fruit, take the hull-cakes and rubb them between your hands, that they may loosen themselves from the kernells; then spread them on a blancket or winnow-sheet laid in the Sun, where let them dry for a while: Then take a wide sive and ridder them, so will the ker∣nells drop forth, like as corn usu∣ally doth. If some of the smaller hulls do come forth with the ker∣nells, they may be dryed a fresh, and shaken in a closer (or Ray∣ing) sive, whereby part will fall through, and part will gather into an heap, by the turning round of the sive, but a clean separation is tedious and unnecessary, if the ker∣nells
are to be carried a great way, it is good to dry them again, least they grow mouldy in the carriage. These and all other kinds of seeds here mentioned must be mixt with fine mould or sand in like sort, as plums are mingled in fine flower by the bakers, to make cakes with∣all, and kept in tubs or pots, nei∣ther too dry, least they wither, nor yet too moist, least they grow mouldy and rotten; let them there∣fore, if they are kept within doors, be watered now and then, and af∣ter every watering be carried forth an hour or two for two or three days together to receive the benefit of the refreshing Air; and after∣wards cast into pots each kind by it self as before. Some men do keep them so mixt always without
doors where they stand to the ad∣venture of all Weathers. The stones of Plums, coming of a kind, whose bark is smooth and full of sap, are the best to make stocks for all sorts of Plums, and Aprecocks; more especially, if they are of a white Pear-plum, which also will serve indifferently for the more common sorts of Peaches. But The generall and best approved stocks for Peaches, Nectrines, Me∣locotoons, and the rest of that tribe, are the stons of Peaches themselves, and among them, the Melocotoon, and such whose flesh easily sepa∣rates from the stone: which stones (notwithstanding what I have said of seeds in generall) ought to be set early, or else (which is better)
the shells broken in such sort that the kernells be not bruised but carefully taken forth and then set like others: for the shell is a great hinderance, to the speedy and re∣gular shooting forth of the tender seedling, yea many a good kernel is rotted before it can break through such a thick inclosure. Some choise exoticke Plums and Aprecoks prove good when grafted or inoculated on Peach∣stocks low on the face of the ground. Almonds make a great shew the first year, whereby many have been invited to inoculate them with the best kinds of Peaches, &c. but the next year (or when they are once removed) they do for the most part come to nought, however
if any of Cherrys stand, they are never so good as these of Peaches. Aprecock stones are little worth, for they grow slowly, and are some∣what, to dry to inoculate on. Black Cherry stones prest from their juice and washt from their flesh, make the only gallant stocks for all sorts of Cherrys, if planted in a blackish sand (as I have said) in three or four year they shoot both in length and bignesse almost beyond beleif. The English Cherry called the Hony-cherry is the stock whereon the earlyest May's do grow, yet that fruit is not so good as that on the Black cherry, Enquirie and tryall may be made, how some Cherrys (especially the Morisco) will prove on the Rhamnus cathar∣ticus
or the Harts Thorne. For the bark thereof shews that they will agree well together. The young plants must be con∣stantly kept clean, and sometimes the Earth between the ranks loos∣ned by howing, or (rather) gentle digging, least they be overcome and choaked by the weeds. If the young seedlings grow too thick, or too close to one another pluck up some of the weakest of them, and the rest will shoot the stronger, but of this hereafter.
CHAP. II. Of the Nursery or place, where young trees are to be brought up be∣fore the Translating into an Orchard, &c. BEfore that these seedlings be transplanted from the bed, wherein they were sown, it is re∣quisite, that a plot of ground (to make a Nursery) be chosen fit to cherish and entertain them; the na∣turall (or genuine) soile, of which I advise to be between (or a mix∣ture of) clay and sand, but therein the sand to abound; if such with conveniency may be to this pur∣pose acquired; if not, any Indif∣ferent [i. e.] neither too fat nor
faint) will serve the turn. How∣ever the Situation thereof should be guarded, and fenced from the blasts of the North and North-We∣stern Winds: for those are the greatest destroyers of buds in Ino∣culation & tender graftings; where you intend the Nursery shall be large, this choise will not be of such consequence, for one Tree will guard another. The place being thus chosen and designed, ought the year (or two) preceding to have been well soil'd and till'd for corn, or digg'd as for a garden; and at the Michaelmas (or at such time as the Crop is of) before the planting, Trenched [i. e.] digged two spit deep, the upper spit of Earth being turned in the place of the lower and the lower cast in the
room of the upper. The Super∣ficies of the whole, lying in Plano, as an Area in a Garden, must im∣mediately before (or at) the time of setting be spread over suffici∣ently with the best soil, (or dung,) such is that, that cometh from the Brew-houses; which soil in the Planting is to be lightly turned in∣to the Earth, more especially about the roots of the seedlings. By this manner of Trenching and ordering the Nursery, Trees are caus'd to improve exceedingly: for the Earth, which before (like milk,) threw up and contained all it's fatnesse (or cream) on the Superficies, now feedeth the low∣est root, that a young Tree is able to send forth: and although to some it may seem to have a dispro∣cortion
(or a part) of bad mould in the midle [i. e.] where the roots will shoot out the second year, yet may they understand, that, by the soaking (or sinking) of the soil, that was laid afresh on the new Superficies, and the rising (or ebullition) of the fat mould of the quondam Superficies, now turned two spit into the Earth, there will be a perfect mixture through out the whole, before the first year be fully ended. Besides this good mould, being thus under the roots, doth at once supply the stead of many dungings; which, though never so often repeated, will not be able to descend so deep. As to the objection of others, (and those the greatest number of men that deal in Fruit-Trees,) who
say that by this enriching the Nur∣sery, those Trees that are fetch't from off thence will not grow or thrive else where, save in such like or better ground; cause, if into worse transplanted, for the most part they dy: I must answer this, that no man (unlesse very idle on ignorant, and so unfit for imploy∣ment in this purpose) would ever set a Fruit-Tree, but would pre∣pare the place by soil, and mel∣lowing it before hand; whereby it comet to passe, that the Tree (though brought off a rich Nur∣sery yet) is meliorated in the trans∣planting, which lasteth for at least two years; that space of time be∣ing enough to keep alive and make grow the Tree; after which i seldome happeneth, that any dy.
Yea, granting the supposition, that the Tree is removed from better to worse, I can say, that it is a great furtherance to the quicker bearing of Fruit; hereby the sap, that in the Nursery spent it self altogether in effecting the growing of the Tree, is arrested in it's speed, and so di∣gesteth, and prepareth it self in the Tree for the bringing forthe of blos∣soms (and consequently Fruit) the next year aster; this may be seen daily in the re-planting of Cherry Trees. Moreover these people do not consider, that young Trees (like young cattle) do desire in their first years a tender education; which if not granted, they are hindred (or hide bound) in their growth and improvement; where∣by
it hapneth, that an inconside∣rable dilatation of their bran∣ches, and in the end a mossinesse affects them, though transfer'd to richer quarters; where if they do escape those Maladves and thrive, their growth will be so fast, that for it no Fruit can be produc'd, and (which is the worst of all diseases) a Canker in few years stops the career. Most Apple-Trees give this experiment and observation. But in these matters I do not take part with the too much infor∣ced Nurseryes: such being as ly∣able to reproof, for their over-do∣ing, as these other (censures) are for their opinion in under-doing; the first occasion and cause whereof was Lazinesse. Having cleared the difficul∣ties
about the choise of ground for the Nursery and the due order∣ing thereof before planting, I must now return to discourse of the work it self; and before it, the season (or time of the year) is to be consi∣dered: This I find to be best, and safest from Michaelmas to the mi∣dle of February; (when the wea∣ther is open; for Frost will kill the roots in the Winter; in like sort as the heat doth in the Summer.) The earlyer removall, (viz. in and about August,) I dislike; be∣cause of the danger proceeding from the checking of the Tree, be∣fore the sap be throughly hardned into wood; by reason whereof the bark, being then too tender, withe∣reth (or wrinckleth) and so be∣cometh a dead cover; when a live
Tree is expected. Secondly, for that hereby it is hindred of a se∣cond spring; Lastly, because those fibers at root, which usually sprout forth upon such early set∣ting, do perish in the Winter; if the Frost be penetrating. Yet when seedlings grow too thick, and your mind is to save them all, you may at any time throughout the whole Summer, by the help of a scoop like a paddle, after a watering, take up what num∣ber you please, with the Earth on their roots; and reset them in a new appointed border, where with due watering and Shading they will scarce take notice of their remo∣vall, unlesse it be by a faster thriv∣ing, through their deliverance from the incumbrances of their fellowes,
and by being set at liberty in a fresher quarter. The best way to preserve the close and low growers of Peach∣stones is by the thus taking up of their overtoppers; or (as the fan∣cy guides) the lesser may be taken up, and the greater stand. A late removall I affct not; because the Tree benummed (if I may so speak) by it's taking up, is to seek for nourishment at the roots, when it should be springing out in branches. Yet in the earlyer, Cherry-stocks (by care) do fre∣quently grow, and Crabb-stocks in the latter. Now proceed I to the planting. Fist let all the greatest sort of seedlings be taken (or drawn) up by themselves, slip (or prune) off
all the side-branches (if there be any) from them, leaving only the middle (or upright) stemme stand∣ing, which may be a little top't too, if it be taper, then cut away all the fibrous roots, (that the Earth may close to the main,) and good part of that root, which com∣monly groweth directly down∣ward: for thereby fresh roots will spring forth at the sides; and be∣cause that direct descending root shooteth most commonly deeper, then the good mould extendeth, which is one of the causes of bar∣rennesse in Trees, trimme also the ends (when there are any) of the side roots. Having done thus, and designed the plot in the Nursery, where they should be set, extend a Garden-line a crosse the breadth
of the said plot at one end thereof, by the guidance of which line digge a small trench, not much deeper then the roots of the young plants, (newly prepared as afore-menti∣oned) which you must place therein, one plant half or three quarters of a foot distant from ano∣ther; so causing their heads to rest directly erect on the line: then throw the mould [mixt with the dung, that was spread over the superficies of the plot, as I have said,] on the roots: and shake the plants, one after the other, somewhat after this loose covering, that the Earth may be fitted on every of the roots, and that the plants be not buryed too deep in ground: after which you ought to tread the Earth, pretty hard for
the firmer and better closure there∣of to the roots in generall, but in this fixing of them, there must be a regard had, they stand upright by the line, as at the first placing▪ when the rank is fill'd up in this manner, remove the line from thence 2 foot (or a space sufficient for men to passe to and fro, to ino∣culate grafts and prune them, and for them to spread) then set o∣thers in the like form, as the for∣mer: do thus, till all the greater sort of seedlings be spent. Then deal in like order with the second sort, or those of the middle growth, but as for the least, let them grow an year or two longer in the beds, where they were Sown, (for even the worms will turn out of the ground such tender roots) then set
them in like manner, as the other two were before. Some planters make holes by the line, with a di∣ble or settingstick made of the han∣dle of a spade cut picked at the end, into which they put the seed∣lings, and (by treading) close the Earth about them. But this man∣ner of setting serves not for those plants that have side-roots, because the holes without some trouble, cannot be dilated to admit them: neither is it altogether so good for those that can be so set; because the Earth is clotted by the dibber, as it maketh the hole; where up∣on it cannot so exactly encompasse the roots, unlesse with a spade, or trowell, it be thrust close to them, which is a trouble exceeding that of making a small trench as is
before directed. Observe, that all seedlings one time or other must be removed, by reason of the di∣rect descending roots: as is above specified. Those Plum-stocks, you intend to inoculate Aprecocks, and to graft wal-plums on, as also Peach∣es, must be set a somewhat great∣er distance in the rank; because that their spreading ought to be low, unlesse you are certain to re∣move them the next year after their insition keep the spaces between the ranks clean from weeds, by once (or twice) howing them, in the Summer, if you have so much leasure: however at the Winter fail not to digge them over a fresh, for the better mixture of the Earth and soil; and for the refreshing
of the roots by the rain, which here by hath the freer admittance into the Earth. Some years, when you have perceived the former dung devoured, and the heart (or fat∣nesse) of the Nursery to faint, by the slow shooting of the spriggs and grafts, lay on fresh dung, and turn it in by the said winter-digging. At Al-hallontide (or there about) cut of all the side-branches (or spriggs) from the Plum∣stocks & Cherry-stocks every year; leaving the upright one, (or that that is intended for to graft or ino∣culate on,) standing against ano∣ther year, for a leader: this labour may be spared, when the stocks are reserved for the wall, or to be dwarfe standards, in which a low grafting, and inoculation, is to be used.
The contrary kind of pruning [i. c.] by cutting of the erect ascending branch) may be used to Crabbe-stocks and Pear-stocks, for to make their bodyes grow bigge and not toppe-heavy: or it is not of much moment, whether you use any, when that you have about two, or three, foot of the stocks clear bark't above the ground; for that will be high enough to graft them on.
CHAP. III. Of Grafting and the severall fashions therein. WHen the Crabb-and Pear∣stocks have thus stood, and grown in the Nursery, two, three, or four years, according to their improvement in bignesse; then the grafting must be thought upon, and effected. But the Winter before [i. e.] (between Michaelmas and St. An∣drews-tide,) let their branches and heads be cut off, an handfull or more, above the smooth place ap∣pointed to be grafted on. This cut∣ting of the heads is for the better arresting the sap in the main body
of the stock, which doth hereby become the more turgid in it's bark, by being thus hindred of it's vent; for the sap (more especially the more serous part thereof) is not wholy spent, till the great Frosts in Winter, as may be seen by the long continuance of the leaves on the top-branches, and their soft∣nesse. Now, I say, it is hereby re∣strained to the greater effusion of it into the graft (instead of it's own toppe and branches) the next spring. Cherry-stocks, that you have reserved for standards in Orchards, must not be thus dealt with, but the side-branches (as I have said) only pruned of the stocks; because they must be grafted at such an height, as the Trees are to spread:
for Cherry grafts (for the most part) immediately expand them∣selves into branches on the head of the stock, neither will they grow any higher in an entire body. Thus much to the preparation of grafting, whose cheifest time is February and March, the weather being warm, [i. e.] without Frosts or cold Winds, February for Cher∣ryes, and most sorts of Plums, March for the latter kinds of Plums, and for all the species of Apples and Pears. Yet some have, in the variety of their practice, adven∣tured to graft from, and in, Novem∣ber; as also in Aprill, both which have happened to grow well: but these are but nicety's, the surest grafting being in those two months, I now have named.
Now the manner and several ways of Grafting, (which not∣withstanding the difficulty to attain without ocular demonstration) I will in this place endeavour to de∣scribe. First there is the most vulgar called stock-grafting, or Cleft-grafting. To do this, cut off the head of the stock smooth, at the place where you intend to fix the the graft, then cut the graft like a wedg for two inches, (but) with shoulders on both sides at a seam, or (which is as well by mine own triall) an eye; the inner part (that is to be placed within the wood of the stock) being made somewhat thinner then the outward, which with it's bark is to join to the bark of the stock; the graft thus prepared
must be laid down in the basket or put in a dish of water till you have cleft the stock, (a little be∣side the pith,) with a mallet and sharp chisell, or knife, without bruising the bark. Into this cleft, which if rough, or continued with strings of bark one side to the other, must be shaved smooth with a pen∣knife, from the bottom (upward) to the top; and if too short must be made long enough to receive the wedg-part of the graft: put a woo∣den wedge, about the center (or middle) of the stock to keep it open for the graft, which must then be fitted thereunto exactly, bo that the shoulders on the top, and the sides; the insides, not out∣sides, (as by many mistaken, whose work thereby came to nought,) of
the barks, both of the graft and stock; they touching one the other, almost as even, and close as two peices of wainscoat shot by a joi∣ners plain. When you perceive, that they will do thus, let the graft alone in the cleft, and pull out the wedg, that held the cleft open, but if you find the graft will be pinched by the stock, leave a little peice of a wedg in the middle of the cleft, to keep it from pressing too close thereon: if the stock be big enough, another graft may be pla∣ced on the adverse side of the stock in like manner as the former. This way of grafting (though universally known, and practised) is not good; because the heart of the stock is wounded, and the rain (ormoisture) oft falleth into the
cleft, and where likewise Earwiggs, and such like Vermin find harbour; both which are causes, that the head of the stock often dyeth, or rotteth away, before the bark hath encompassed it. It is better therefore, (if by a cleft you would graft) that you cut the head of the stock aslope [i. e.] (oblique descending) like a Colts∣foot (from the similitude whereof, this manner of grafting hath it's de∣nomination,) but plane a little, on the top, where the shoulder of the graft is to rest. The remainder of the work is after the same order, and fashion, as in the former. By this way the stock admitteth only one graft; you may therefore make two slits, or clefts, on each side of the pith one, for two seve∣rall
grafts, if the stock be large enough to contain them. This cutting of the head of the stock a-slope, doth in part (not wholly) divert, and avoide the mis∣cheifs of the former. This stock grafting (or the former) must be used when stocks are thick set with knots; but in others it pleaseth me neither, for I find these ensuing ways to be the more excellent, as bringing in their operation lesse dan∣ger to the whole, and as being fi∣nished in a shorter time. Whip-grafting (otherwise cal∣led Backing, Packing, or Splicing) is thus performed; After the stock is cut even, as in the first or second grafting, you must cut your graft on one side only with a shoulder, very even and smooth, descending
(like the side of a wedg) till the point (or end) thereof sharpeneth it self in the bark, that is on the op∣posite side of the graft, this shoul∣der must be made a little beneath an eye (or bud.) The other side must be left whole and intire, with another eye (or bud) on it, about the middle, from the shoulder, toward the bottom, or end, which must be distant two inches (more or lesse) from the shoulder. The graft and head of the stock being thus prepared, lay the cut-side of the graft on that side of the stock, that hath the smoothest bark, (the shoulder lying exactly on the top of the stock,) and mark with your penknife-edg the place, to which the bottom or end of the graft exten∣deth, then (having laid the graft by)
with the penknife cut a slice (of such breadth as you guesse the flat side of the graft to be) out of the bark to the wood (and some part of the wood, when otherways it will not be broad enough) from a little below the place, you did mark at the bottom (or end) of the graft, to the top of the stock. This done; see whether the inward part of the bark of one side, and the end of the graft, fit to the inward part of the bark (or the narrow space, or line, between the bark and wood) of the stock, in the room of that, which was sliced off by the penknife. It is not so materiall, whether the other side join so ex∣actly: nay I rather advise, that that side of the graft fall somewhat within the wood of the stock; for
thereby it will sit the closer and firmer to the former side. If the stock be big enough, and you have a mind thereunto, you may place another graft, after the same man∣ner, on the adverse side of the stock; but whether you graft one or two, you must with one hand hold them on a right, and with the other (if that none other person be there present to help you) bind them fast on the stock, (staying the bond with the hand, that holds the grafts,) with a soft flag, rush, peice of basses or inward rind of any Tree, or such like. Observe in this place, both for this and all other kinds of grafting, where the grafts are to be thus bound on the stock, that you loo∣sen the bonds at such time as the
grafts have grown a little, for there∣by they escape the dammages that ensue by pinching. Another way may be termed shot-grafting; for, if we can un∣derstand small things by great, it is like the shooting of two peices of timber (as in a Ship-mast) toge∣ther. The graft is prepared, and the whole operation performed, after the same manner as before in Whip-grafting, from which it va∣ryeth but little, and that is, by cutting away the wood of the stock like the graft, if you would graft with a shoulder; if not, it is no more trouble then to cut a slice of two inches (more or lesse) long from of the graft, and the like from of the stock, and to place the one upon the other in the same fashion
as in the other. But yet the graft groweth the surer, if the bud on the back be (orly) beneath ano∣ther bud on the opposite side of the stock; for by the bud, that is on the stock, lying higher then the bud on the graft, the sap tak∣eth hold on the graft in it's passage thereunto. This way is most used, when the graft and stock are of equall bignesse; but it may serve very well also, though the bignesse of the stock do somewhat exceed that of the graft; so that they close on one side exactly, as I have menti∣oned in the former. There is a way much used by some of the best Nursery-men a∣bout London, and indeed very easy and certain, which is performed
on this wise. First they cut of the head of the stock on the side, where the graft is to be put, descending or a little bending downward, and not altogether flat, when there is but one graft intended to be placed thereon; but when there are two grafts to be inserted on the same stock, it must be cut flat, or (which is better) with a ridg (like a cheveron in Heraldry, or the tops of two rafters coupled) in the middle. Then they slice of a peice of the graft in the same fashion, as is de∣scribed in the second shot-grafting way; the stock, if somewhat big, is dealt with as in Whip-grafting; but if little, as in shot-grafting, these things being thus accomplished, and the sliced side of the graft found
to agree to the sliced place of the stock; then they slit the graft (gently, least the bark should be urt) on that side that is to ly on the stock, from within half an inch (or lesse) of the end, (or bot∣tom,) to within (about) half an inch of the top, or where the slice began; the like they do unto the stock, so that on them both there is (as it were) a tongue: now they put the tip (or point) of the tongue of the graft into the slit of the stock, and the tongue of the stock into the slit of the graft, and guiding them even on one side they thrust them gently (the one tongue within the other) till the bottom of the graft come to the place of the stock, whereon it is to ly. Last of all, they bind it, as in the two last preceding ways.
This grafting I account the best, for it's certainty and easy accom∣plishing, as I have said: very cer∣tain it is, because that by the mak∣ing and placing the tongues, the one within the other, it commeth to passe, that the graft may be fed in three several places by the sap; whereas in the other ways of graft∣ing it receiveth it's nourishment, but in one or two at the most. It is easy likewise, as having lesse trou∣ble in the placing and binding, the others of that kind; for the grafts stick almost as close to the stock in this as in cleft-grafting. In Grafting between the wood and the bark, the head of the stock is cut off flat and smooth, as for cleft-grafting; and the graft pre∣pared in the same fashion, as in
Whip-grafting: which being effe∣cted, and a style of iuory, box, or such like hard and smooth wood cut like (though somewhat lesse then) the end of the graft, pro∣vided in a readinesse; you must make a place for the graft with this style, by thrusting it (but not rash∣ly, between the wood and the bark (on the smoothest side) of the stock, as deep almost as the cut part of the graft is long, then, hav∣ing pulled out the style, put the point of the graft in the room there∣of, with it's cut side close to the wood of the stock; continue the thrusting it (gently though it be stiffe in going) down, till the shoulder of the graft rest even on the head of the stock, and then the work is finished, save that, least
the wind, or the very putting on the clay, should shake it, you must bind it, as in others. This way of parting the bark and wood pleaseth me not very well; because herein the bark will rise on both sides the graft, farther then is requisite; or if it be not so flexible, it will either not part clear from the wood, or else it will pinch and bruise the graft in it's passage. All which do (as I have known) frustrate the labour and expecta∣tion. Some, to avoid this dan∣ger, cut the graft on both sides, without any shoulders, like a sharp wedg; and so thrust it between the bark and wood: but hereby like∣wise too great a wound is given to it for to come to good; though I deny not, that it may happen to
grow, if the sap can take hold on any place thereof in such sort as that the back part may in a short space be covered afresh. Instead therefore of these I have substituted, and made triall of ano∣ther way, taken notice of by few, though the most neat, and least dan∣gerous, and hurtful for the graft∣ing of great stocks. The opera∣tion about it is somewhat agreeing to that of inoculation, from which because there is some variation, I will here set down the whole in the same order I was accustomed to do it. First I cut off the head of the stock (like the coltsfoot) a∣slope, and at the very top flat, for about half an inch, on the side, where I place the graft. Then I fit the graft like unto that for
Whip-grafting, save that in this I cut the pith, and middle part of the wood, from both sides some∣what hollow scoop-like, that the outsides thereof might stick the compleater to the stock; from whose top I draw a slit, with the point of my penknife, through the bark, direct downward, of an inch or more in length. Then I raise the bark on both sides the slit by the back of my penknife, to receive the point of the graft, which being put therein, I thrust the cut part down between the wood and the bark, till the shoulder thereof rest on the top of the stock, as it doth in others. Now although the bark of the stock was not opened, nor slit the length of that part of the graft that
was to be applyed to the wood; yet will the point of the graft, by this gentle thrusting down, cleave and dilate the bark wide enough to receive it most exactly. When the stock is of a larger size, I set another graft in like sort one the same side, but distant from the other about an inch; and if the stock be very big, (such are the arms and bodys of Trees) I place others, with oblique shoulders, to fit the sloped part of the head, and one without any shoulder, at the lower end of the Clots-foot. By this slitting of the bark I es∣chew the inconveniency's of the o∣ther graftings between the wood and the bark; for herein the bark opens no wider then to receive the graft, whom likewise it cannot by pinch∣ing
oppresse. Yet sometimes it fal∣leth out, that the bark of an old stock is so thick, that it will rise, further then is needfull, as not be∣ing able to turn short enough, only for the admittance of the graft; wherefore I pare, and cut away some part thereof on both sides the slit, whereby that mischeif is pre∣vented. All sorts of grafting between the bark and the wood, for the most part are used in juicy-bark't stocks; or late, [i. e.] when the sap be∣ginneth to arise, otherwise to make them part clear will prove a diffi∣cult matter. Some Trees there are, whose cions will not be grafted, if taken clean from the Tree, whereon they grew at the first; with these you
must deal in another method of grafting, called inarching. To effect this, you must, an year or two before hand, plant some stocks so nigh the Tree from whence you would graft, that the cion, which is to make the graft, may by that time extend over the head, of the stock, when it is cut and cleft, a∣bout five or six eyes, without any difficult straining or pulling of it; from one of these (suppose the fourth) eyes, it must be cut with cheeks, or shoulders, from which, about two inches in length, must the bark and some part of the wood be smooth and evenly taken of on both sides, like as in Cleft-graft∣ing, save that herein the graft is not cut off like a wedg, but ought to continue on the Tree, without hurt∣ing
the outside bark in any place. Then, in the cleft of the stock, prepared (as hath been said) to receive it, in like order and form, as in Cleft-grafting, must you place that part of the graft, where the bark was taken away next to the shoulders, as far as may; so that the lower part thereof, which joynes to the old Tree, and is the thickest, do not cause the cleft to open at top from the shoulders set thereon. When this is done, bind it upright so fast, that the wind, when it shakes the Tree, from whence the graft is binded, may in no wise loosen it. Now, though this be the most usuall way of Inarching, I know and do find, that the working whip, or (rather) shet-graft fashion is
better, for the grafts are not so sub∣ject to break, neither is there so great a wound given to the stock by this, as by cleaving. Another manner of Inarching, where the wood of the cion is not too brittle, is by cutting the head of the stock, like a wedg, for an inch and an half: and then to cleave, or slice, out of the cion, a tongue somewhat more then half way through; of the same length, as the wedged part of the stock is; for the end of the tongue must ex∣tend to the place, where the bark of the stock began to be sliced for to make it wedg fashion. Being thus cleft it must be placed riding a∣stride on the edged head of the stock, the tongue on the one side, and the part that holds on the old
Tree, on the other side of the stock lying, as in Whip-grafting, or, in short, the whole is like cleft∣grafting revers't; for the graft, by being cleft, in this imitates the stock in that, and the graft of that shews the fashion of the stock in this; the difference is, that here∣in the stock must not be cut with shoulders, nor the tongue flat, but descending, till it end sharp in the bark, as the cut part of the graft in Whip-grafting. This manner of Inarching I approve of, as the best, when it may be effected; for that the graft can herein receive the sap from both sides the stock, if it be well guided in the binding thereon. In these inarchings the old Tree feeds the graft, till such time, as it is united to the stock, and groweth
firmly there with; which will be before the Summer is ended: so that the winter following, it may with safety be cut off, from the old tree, close unto the stock, on which it will have made a very great growth by double feeding. In an year or two store of Apre∣cocks, without inoculation, may be produced, if that before hand Plum-stocks be set round about an Aprecock-Tree at such a distance as that they may be grafted by these ways of Inarching. By the same also a cion, or a great bough (if the uttermost point of a branch thereof be cut like the lower part of a graft) may be made to grow, with the lower end upward, whereof I have known the experience, whereby that foo∣lish
traditional opinion of having fruit without stones or kernels was confuted; for the fruit proved to be of the kind and manner with that of the Tree; from whence the cion, or bough was inarched. These are the cheif ways of grafting, some whereof are ne∣cessary, for a compleat grafter to know, other some meer curio∣sityes; but there are other variati∣ons, which I purposely omit; sup∣posing that from these, as from the cheif heads, an ingenious lover of this art, will of his own industry, discover and improve them, to his greater pleasure, and content.
CHAP. IV. Certain Rules to be observed in and after grafting. FOr the better detaining the grafts in their right posture, and for preserving the sap, at the graft∣ed place, in the tender growing, from the extremity of heat and cold, adventitious moisture and drinesse; like as an Emplaster on a wound, in all Graftings there is to be used a loom or compost of clay and horse-dung or such like. The best, that I find, for this pur∣pose is made on this manner: viz. Take of clay one half, new horse∣dung, and cow-hair from the tan∣pits, of each one fourth, which
makes the other half; mix all these very well together, by kneading, beating, &c. with it cover over your stock in the grafted place, a∣bout an inch above the head, and a little beneath the point of the graft: the whole representing an egge or a ball of an ovall forme. When the grafts have grown somewhat, then pull off the loom, and the bindings of such as requir∣ed binding, and put only a little of the like loom on the head of the stock, to keep it from the heat and wet, or, if your leasure gives leave, daube them over afresh, yet not with such curiosity as in the for∣mer. As for the smaller sort the re∣newing the loom is altogether un∣neceslary. Before the grafts do grow, the
stock will usually send forth some shoots out of it's body; which must not be rubb'd of (as is commonly practised) till the graft grow; and then, if the graft be free in grow∣ing, all must not be pull'd of at one time, but one, or two, left to pre∣vent the ascending of too much sap into the graft: for by it the Tree will grow lop-heavy, and the graft toward that winter, or the next year, corroded with a canker. In this I seem to many paradoxical; because that they, by thus doing, think to force up the sap into the graft: but experience hath shewed me, that, when the buds are not suffered to stand till that time, the stock will either dy for want of ven∣ting it's sap, or, at the best, the root will endeavour to send forth suck∣ers,
whereby the grafted part is weakned, if not gone, and the pains most commonly comes not to the wished effect. Besides the buds, that are toward the top serve to draw up sap the nigher to the graft, which the graft it self through wounds and weaknesse is not so able to perform. But if you find, that the graft in it's growing shoots but slowly, you may then pick off all the springs from the stock, and not before. At Michaelmas prune off all the irregular, and side branches from the grafts, leaving only that, you intend for a leader, or to make the body of the Tree; do thus to them every year, till those, you reserve for standards, are shot up to the height of a man, or a foot lower;
after which time the upright bran∣ches may be taken away, and three, four, or five of the side ones, re∣main to make the spreading arms of the Tree. The vulgar grafters do always pick off the side buds, till such time as the Tree is high enough: but herein they erre; for by that means the Tree grows taper, and not able to stand by it self, without a stake to hold it upright; whereas if the side buds be suffered to grow afresh from year to year, the body of the graft will be big, and strong enough, to maintain it self against the winds; then may it by prun∣ing (as afore said) be raised to such an height you please, to which speedy rise these men only aim at, not regarding those now menti∣oned
inconveniencyes. The body of the graft, being thus kept low to grow big, doth likewise cover the head of the stock much sooner, then when it is strip't up to such a taper dimension. Trees, that are for the wall, must be made to spread very low; therefore leave three, or four side branches, constantly cutting away the upright. Dwarf standards at the height of an yard at the furthest must be made to spread as tis elsewhere spo∣ken of. As for the choise of grafts I ad∣vise, that they be taken from the fairest and best bearers, large, full∣eyed, and smooth-bark't, of the last years shooting; when you graft, cut off the heads, and let not above
four buds remain, on a graft, above the loom for Appels and Pears. In Cherrys and Plums two will be enough, because, for the most part, they send forth new branches out of those that grew at the first hand of the year, which Appels and Pears (unlesse the tops be bro∣ken) do seldom adventure to do. An old Tree which is a good bearer seldom affordeth cions for grafts; wherefore some cut off a bough from the Tree the year be∣fore, to cause the Tree to sprout forth at that place. But usually the sap of the Tree, striving only to cover that place neglecteth all ir∣ruption thereat. What grafts take on what stocks hath been shewed in the first Chap∣ter.
CHAP. V. Of Inoculation, &c. A Precocks, Peaches, Nectrines, and such kinds of choise fruit, are seldome procured by ordi∣nary grafting, because they bring forth blossoms before the young shoots; so that the graft, missing the usuall method of it's kind, wither∣eth away, as not able to stay, so long for a conglutinating juice, when the season is to be in flower, and if the stock should endeavour to preserve the new union by throwing up such a sap, yet will the graft refuse it for the same rea∣son, whereby it turns to a killing gelly; but this seldome happens,
for these earlyer kinds are calling for nourishment before the spring is strong enough to awake and rouse it in the stock. There is therefore another way invented to increase them, and this is called Inoculation, or Budding. The time for it is principally from a fortnight before Midsom∣mer, to a fortnight after, when the buds and bark are newly hardned enough to part from the wood, and that without any difficulty. Yet if the Tree hath been forward in growing that year, the buds will be fit to inoculate with, even in May; and if backward, then to the last of July. Aprecocks are the first to be inoculated, and Peaches the last, and between both all other kinds of fruit.
Those sprigs, that shot that year biggest and fairest, afford buds for inoculation, only toward the bot∣tom, or (rather) the middle half way and more; so that the top must be cut of and thrown away: for the buds thereof are always too tender to part from the wood, as the lowest are oftentimes too old and tough. These sprigs, or cuttings, must immediately be wrapped up in some wet linnen cloth, or (which is surest) their lower ends stuck in clay and the whole body of them enclosed with watered mosse and so put in a box; if that they are to be carryed any long way, or must continue any space of time, before the inoculation; for otherwise in lesse then six hours they will wither
or prove very difficult in the sepa∣ration. Now you having obtained such cuttings and brought them on this wise to your stocks, cut of all the leaves, reserving only the stalk of them (or, if you perceive that will be too short, a very little of the leaf also) to hold them by in the work. Go to your stock, and in the smoothest. place thereof (some∣what low) cut a transverse cut, with an even and sharp edged pen∣knife, three quarters of an inch (or more) in length: from the middle of this cut, or line, draw, with the very point of the penknife, another cut directly downward of an inch, or such like length, within a little, as the escutcheon shall be. But nei∣ther cut ought to be deeper then the bark. Both of them joined thus
together are represented by a great T. And that you may not be de∣ceived in your work, open with the back of the penknife (toward the point) the direct descending cut a very little at the top thereof, where it joynes to the transverse cut, only to se whither the bark will part easily from the wood; if it will, then let it rest, till you have prepared the bud to put there∣in, which you must do on this wise: having designed which bud shall be made use of, cut with the penknife a transverse cut, half an inch, or lesse, above it, cut the like beneath, both quite round the shoot. Then draw the side-cuts (on each side the bud one) from the cut above the bud to the cut
beneath: these cuts are not to be drawn parallel, to one another, as the transverse; but oblique des∣cending, meeting thereby in an ovall point at the lower transverse line: so that the form of the bud, with that part of the bark, that is to be with it, is like an escutcheon, in the same manner as is expressed in the margent; the point in the middle sheweth the stalke of the leafe, and the bud before it. These cuts being thus made with the knife, peele away the bark of the shoot, between the transverse cuts, that is on the side opposite to the escutcheon. [Thus far of the preparation may precede the cut∣ting of the T in the stock, but I place them together, as being lesse trouble to the understanding of the
description, but to proceed.] When you have done this, cut a small notch above (but ending in) the upper transverse cut, to admit the quill or steele that is to take off the escutcheon. Then thrust this quill or steele in that notch between the bark, or escutcheon, and the wood, very even and steedy, that so the escutcheon may be taken off with∣out bruising. Observe after it is ta∣ken off, whither it hath any hole withinside at the root of the bud, if it hath, cast it away, as unmeet for that purpose, and prepare o∣thers in like sort, till that you have one without any hole at the bot∣tom of the bud, which being pro∣cur'd must be laid on your lip, to be kept moist, or put in a dish of water till you have nimbly opened
the descending cut in the stock with the back of your penknife, without touching the gelly or moisture on the wood, into which immediately put the escutcheon on this wise; take it from your lip and pour out the water by the stalk of the leafe, and hold it and the bud close (though not pinching) between your forefinger & thumb; in which posture, thrust the point thereof into the top of the descending cut between the bark (you newly open∣ed) and the wood of the stock, so by degrees draw down the whole escutcheon, if it be somewhat stiffe (as it should) in drawing down, lay the back of the penknife on the stalk, close to the bud, but not on it least you bruise it, place likewise the top of your thumb underneath
the stalk, and presse it down by the back of the penknife with your other hand, till the upper end of the escutcheon come within a little of the transverse cut where it must be cut off with the sharp edge of the penknife, which will by that means fit it exactly to the bark that is above. But if the going down be very difficult, then may you open the bark by the back of the penknife a little, on the sides and beneath the escutcheon, as he stands on the stock; then presse it down as before. When you have thus finished, bind the whole with some soft flag, bull-rush, woolen yarn, or basse, pretty straight, beginning at (and upon) the transverse cut and so winding downward, till all the es∣cutcheon
be covered with the bind∣ing: but be sure, not to touch the very bud, but to skip it, lest it should be bruised; however let the binding be placed close above, and beneath the stalk of the leaf, under which the root of the bud lyes. Some open the bark of the stock, before they take of the escutcheon, but in my mind they do not so well therein; for if the root of the bud should (as it often doth) happen to be broken in the taking off, the air and heat doth often dry the place, that is prepared for it, be∣fore another bud can be made rea∣dy to be put therein: but men may do herewith, as it best pleaseth their fancyes. If that the stalk of the leaf will
fall off, before the escutcheon can be brought to it's proper place, or where there is no stalk at all, but a bare bud, you may stick the point of the penknife somewhat beneath the side of the bud, and draw the escut∣cheon down, as well as if it had a leaf-stalk thereon. The style, that taketh off the escutcheon, is a quill cut two third parts away, sloping downward as for a pen, and at the end, instead of a nibb or point, with a flat round edg. After the same fashion ma∣ny procure a steel one (well bur∣nish't) to be made for them, which indeed is better then the other, but the best is an Ivory one, cut in the same form, which seldome hurteth the root or gelly. Many there are who take off
the bud by thrusting the style from the point of the escutcheon up∣wards: but in this the edg of the style must be kept close to the wood, whereon the bud groweth; otherwise it will glide between the root of the bud and the bud it self, rendring it thereby unprofitable for inoculation. Others never use a style, but make the upper transverse cut on the cion at a greater length, or distance from the bud, so that they may take hold thereof with their penknife and thumb, thereby pulling it leasure∣ly, till it comes (or is peeled) off. What is bruised by the taking hold of it thus, is cut off at the transverse line in the stock, before it be quite thrust down in the same order, as in the other before.
This is the quickest and safest way; for the bud and inward bark are not touched hereby, as they are by the style in the other, which (unlesse very smooth and round edged) often maketh the same rug∣ged, to the indangering the whole inoculation. The next best unto this is the taking off the escutcheon, by a suddain and equall twist of the fore∣finger and the thumb, as you hold it between them. There is a way to inoculate, whose fashion is con∣trary to this; for in it the trans∣verse cut is made beneath the direct descending line, both which there∣fore are like a great T reverst; so that the escutcheon must be cut re∣verst likewise, and the whole ope∣ration performed from the lower
part upward. This, without doubt, is a very good way, and the bud likely to take; but I dare affirm nothing of certainty there∣in, because my self have not as yet seen the tryal thereof in fruit-trees; having received the hint here∣of from an Orange bud, which (though otherwise very difficult in propagating) hath by this way ta∣ken very well. A freind of mine did once use to inoculate, without taking away the wood from within the escutcheon, which many times (especially in moist years) hath luckyly pro∣ceeded: but it is not so sure as the other (whose trouble, I confesse, is the greater) because that the sap of the stock cannot so compleatly annex it self to the new adopted bud.
There are other (but fantasti∣cal) ways of cutting, and placing on the bud, such are the fashioning it Lozenge-wise, and like the leaves of a book opened, &c. but I omit their description, as uncertain in themselves, and therefore unne∣cessary to my discourse. It is (and hath been) a great tra∣dition among divers Gardners that no bud will take, if any adventitious moisture touch the root thereof, be∣fore it be inoculated; but this I know to be as frivolous a rule as hath been invented, for it is not only good, but very necessary in dry wea∣ther, to dip the escutcheon in water before you put it on the stock, for thereby it will slide down the bet∣ter into the slit. All inoculations succeed best,
when they are done in a gloomy and cloudy day; now if there be none such in the season, but the weather prove wholy dry, and parching, it is best to work some∣what early in the morning before the Sun make the day too hot, and in the afternoon, when the heat is abated. To prevent that the heat do not so much mischeif, as otherwise it would, ty or hang some cabbage∣leaf, or such like, over the buds after the inoculation; under this shadow will they be in some mea∣sure preserved. When the weather hath been and is extraordinary dry, it is of good consequence to water the stocks 2 or 3 nights before the ino∣culation, and the like, after; for that
by the former the bark will rise the better; and by the latter the new adopted bud will receive the great∣er nourishment: yet in the water∣ing after, there must be a caution for overdoing, least insted of afford∣ing liquor to a thirsty plant you make it drunk, which will appear in the spuing up of a gum at the place, to the buds destruction. Within ten or fourteen days, if the inoculation be done before, or about, Midsommer, the bark will happen to swell; wherefore the bond must be taken off, or loosned, least the bud be destroyed by pinching. But the true time of loosning the bond will be best known by the goodnesse and smoothnesse of the bark of the stock; for some stocks
(such as are full of sap) will in a shorter time swell out, and extend the bindings, when as others, that are dryer, and inoculated late, re∣quire a longer time, before that the bond will be streightned. In dryer weather the bud re∣quires the longer time, in moister the shorter for unbinding. It happeneth sometimes that in four, or five dayes you may know whither the bud have taken or no: for if then it look fresh and green, as when it came of the cion, it hath taken; yea, although the stalk of the leaf will at the touching fall off; that being caused by the bruise, it received either from the back of the penknife in the depres∣sion of the escutcheon, or else from the streightnesse of their binding.
Because of the difficulty of one single bud in running through all the hazards, it is necessary that three, or four, buds be placed on the same stock; where, if none have come to good, the inocula∣tion, especially when you began the first early, may be renewed se∣verall times, untill you are assured that one on every stock will answer your desire. Rebind the buds loose, &c. when the weather is very wet, for else the bark of the stock will open from the escutcheon. After the unbinding there re∣maines nothing to be done till the next Autumne or Winter; at which time you must cut of the heads of these stocks two inches from the bud, and the next year
close to the shoot, that grew out of the bud, then it were good like wise to cover it with loom as in grafting. If you should the first year cut off the stock close to the bud, 'tis ten to one, but that the head there∣of with the bud therein will' dy; Besides the leaving of the head thus long, more especially with a natu∣ral bud on it, serves at the spring to convey and attract the sap into the bud that is inoculated; but all other buds below ought to be rub∣bed of; and that above too, when the inoculated one hath shot two inches long. After an early inoculation, where∣in the buds held very well, that I might see varietyes, I adventured to cut off the heads of some plump bark't stocks; whereby it came to
passe, that the bud immediately sprung forth a considerable legth, able enough to withstand the pier∣cing winter, yet this is not of such certainty as the not permitting of it's growth till the next spring. The inoculation of Roses (which most account a difficult matter) comes best to effect this way; for it is seldome seen that their Midsommer buds do stay so long as the spring, from shooting forth; such shrubs if observ'd, con∣tinue always growing, unlesse im∣peded by the Frost, which is no sooner over, but they (even in the mid'st of winter) thrust out their heads again, to the often nipping of many of them, amongst whom the adopted are likelyest to suffer, if the head was cut off just at that
winter season; wherefore it is (as I have found) the best course to cut off their heads four or five days after the unbinding, where∣upon they will immediately shoot lustily enough to withstand the en∣counter of the winter, like unto other Rose-Trees, that are clipped after bearing. But this is somewhat beside my purpose; I now return. As to the stocks, whereon each kind should be inoculated, see in the first Chapter. Those Trees thus inoculated, may, even in the bud, the next Autumn, be removed, as well as when they have grown an year or two; yea I find it best so to do: for there is lesse danger ln trans∣planting Trees (such are these) whose heads are cut of, and they
thereby pruned, then those, whose branches must be left at full length. Yet it may prove a losse to the buy∣er, if the bud should chance to miscarry. If the winter and spring prove very frosty, it is of a very great concernment to wind wisps of straw round the buds, during all the season of cold; for thereby the tender buds are preserved, which otherwise by the peircing of the Frosts are oftentimes destroyed. If such kind of weather continue long, you must sometimes un∣wreath the straw, from off the buds, for an hour or two in the hot∣test time of the day, to give them fresh air, and afterwards wind them up as before. Many men, being ignorant of this guarding the
buds, have lost multitudes, which held very well and continued fair a long while after the inoculation; admiring in themselves, why the Tree sprung not out at the season, when as they were all killed the preceeding winter. It will not be much from our purpose, as a close to this and the other Chapters, to seek out and as∣sign, for the satisfaction of some, the cause why the greatest part of Trees yeild better and fairer Fruit, through insition, then, when per∣mitted to bear from seed. Now whereas I cannot so exactly fetch the resolution hereof from the in∣sensitive Tree itself, whose method of separation avoids even the clear∣est eye; I must by comparing Trees and animals find the full de∣mination
thereof, yet so, as that I abstract the same from the facul∣tyes of sense and motion, and speak of them only as to augmentation. Whereas therefore it cannot be made appear, that there is any great difference between a beast and a plant in their nutrition, the one therefore will demonstrate and clear the other. Thus then; As the Chyle which is separated from the digested meat, thrown into the guts, for a further purification or concoction, hath other vessels to secern it from it's several excre∣ments, before that it is fit for the nourishing of the particular mem∣bers, who in themselves likewise have an attractive force to elect the meetest thereof for their own in∣crease, and being there which suffi∣ced,
by another quality they do reject the superfluity (though in it self good, yet as) unprofitable for them; from whence it proceed∣eth, that there is such a conforma∣ble growth in the animal, answer∣able as well to the bearing of Fruit, as to the extension of the branches and trunk in Trees: So is there in Trees, themselves an allicient pro∣perty, to draw by roots (like la∣cteal veines) a juice out of the whole Earth, or cheifly the moi∣ster parts thereof; which juice so extracted is by a natural inclinati∣on carried into the body of the stock, as into a common recepta∣cle, out of which likewise the graft inticeth and altereth, what it finds best for the true purpose of it's be∣ing, and the end appointed it by na∣ture,
refusing the other, which yet serveth for the nourishment of the stock, as too grosse, or excremen∣titious, so that the juice hath need of a second and finer concoction, before it can be turned into the proper substance of the more ex∣cellent Fruit. This is not wholy a compari∣son; for it will further be mani∣fested, if we consider the growth of Masse, Polypody and Misletoe on the Trees themselves, which, though all the art of man be used, cannot be perswaded to live on the meer ground: for that they have not those Ostridge-like substances to turn the grosser and (as I may say) iron juice, at the first extra∣ction out of the Earth, into more subtile spirits for nutriment, before
that the Trees (like loving nurses who, though fed with course meates themselves, give the finest of their Chyle in their milk, to be suck't out of their paps by the In∣fants) hath (as it were) chewed and digested it for them. Whence it cometh to passe that the Misle∣toe beareth such a Crystalline ber∣ry, and together with the Mosse and Polypody doth abound in such medicinal qualityes, which in the Tree it self were dogged by others more perdominant, till that by the excellent Chymistry in these plants, after a due fermentation in the Tree, they are delivered. And whereas it is urged, that Trees without grafting have and do bear Fruit; it may be answered, that they grow a longer season, in
respect of the others, before they bear, and then too, produce not so large, nor so well compacted fruit: for that their finer bodyes, which are but single, are to effect and undergo two offices at once, which they are not so able to do, as when they have a stock of a more rough (though not alto∣gether disagreeing) nature, for to give the juice a preparation. This likewise is the reason why such Trees are more busied in bringing forth branches and are more subject to cankers then others; for having taken from the Earth at the first for the most part a growing nourishment, they have no other place, nor stop in it's pas∣sage, through which it might be percolated, and where it might
deposite it's corrosive humor, which doth not prove so in the sower stock, where there are eni∣mies enough to encounter and sub∣due it into a better temper. CHAP. VI. Of stocks raised without seed, and Trees without insition. NOw least it should seem strange, or a neglect in me, not to speak of a thing generally us∣ed; I will in few words deliver something concerning stocks pro∣cured out of the woods, and suck∣ers from the roots of Trees. Where seedlings can be ob∣teined, I advise that none do make
much use of any others, such as wild ones and suckers are, for usu∣ally their roots grow in a dispro∣portioned manner, whereby the inriching the mould round about them cannot so truly be effected, and the grafts in few years out strip the stock in bignesse; which is a great hinderance to the bearing of good and large Fruit. The only re∣medy hereof is the grafting them low on the superficies of the earth. The best sort of these are such whose bark is smooth and green, the bodyes single [i. e.] not two stems upon one root, and the knots thin set on them. These marks shew, that they are either descended from seed, or at the least plants of themselves, and not dependent on an old maimed trunk; a care like∣wise
must be had, that the roots be drawn up without any great bruis∣ing. If there be many on one root, they make unhandsome Trees; if grey coloured, they prove hungry and hide bound; if full of knots, (besides the other inconvenien∣cyes,) they are very difficult to be grafted: and if notwithstanding this they thrive, the young sprigs through an irregular nourishing of the whole, are more subject to the canker then those of others. The roots must be cut into such a con∣formity as that they answer one another like the radii of the same circumference. Then set the big∣ger sort of them in the place, where they are to remain constantly; and after two years they may be graft∣ed. By this means they become
good Trees, and grow the faster and kinder, for that they are na∣turalised to the ground before their grafting, wherein likewise they a∣void the many mischeifs that are incident to their rough Natures, up∣on a second removall. Yet those that are small (that is, within three inches compasse) may be set in the Nursery, and entertained like seedlings, howbeit few of them will improve so well. What I have spoken in this is concerning the Crab, Pear, and Black-Cherry: Suckers that come from the roots of full and juicy∣bark'd Plumtrees (such as the Pear-plums who) make excel∣lent stocks, in no wise giving place to the seedlings; for the greatest part of them ascend from
the roots of the old Tree by one single erect root at the first, out of which the side-roots immediately do spring, so that the second year after their irruption, they are like seedlings, not much regarding the assistant sap of the old Tree, as ap∣peareth by the little improvement of the erect root beneath the side∣roots, whereas above them it is of a larger compasse, receiving nou∣rishment from them, and from it's first as from one of the same num∣ber. Crab and Pear suckers are of such a carelesse and unweaned Nature, that they will hardly ad∣venture to send forth above two, or three new roots, as being assured that what food these will not fo∣rage for, the old stump, like a lov∣ing mother, will afford, out of her
own store house, as not caring much in what low estate she keeps her self, so that her ofspring may flaunt it, whereby it comes to passe that they (though otherwise of hardy nature) are such punyes in their growth at the first upon a re∣moval, when Plum-suckers (as neglecting the dependance on the old one after the first year) do, as I have said, improve themselves exceedingly; it is good therefore to procure store of these for your Nursery, for so you gain two, or three years of the other. Under this head of thus raising stocks the multiplying them and other plants by layers will fall; A businesse not yet vulgarly known, though naturally practised by bri∣ers and thornes themselves; yea of
so great antiquity that it was found by Alexander the great to have been a long time used by the Mardi a neighbouring nation of Hyrcania for the artificial fortifying of their Country against (him and) their Enimies. Of this see further in Quint. Curt. lib. 6. where this ve∣ry thing is exactly described. Virgil seems to give an hint hereof in this expression. Virgil. Georg. 2. Sylvarum{que}, aliae pressos propaginis arcus Expectant: & viva sua plantaria terra. Some trees require their boughs be set archwise And make their own soile living Nurseryes. The causing Trees to increase by laying is effected after several wayes; the cheif are these. First by bare bending down a branch from a Tree into the ground, (where it is to be kept steady by a forked
stick drove over it and) then turn∣ing the end out of the ground up∣right as if it were a young one pro∣ceeding from a root of it's own, in one year that part, that is in the ground, will take root, which when you have found it to do, cut it three quarters through (hard by the roots) on the side that joines it to the Tree, then let it remain another year untouch't in the same ground, as it did at the first, this year being expired, it may at the winter be clear cut off, and trans∣planted. This is for very choise plants. The second manner of laying is by cutting the branch half way or more through, and then ordering it as the former, yet a little more gently, least it break in the cover∣ing.
In this the branch will root faster and stronger; for that at the cut there is an occasion given to the sap to turn into fibres, whilest it strives to cover the wounded part. The next winter you may open the mould, wherein if you find the roots to have shot forth sufficiently you may then transplant it; if not let it remain till another year as did the former. Some use to take only part of the bark, three quarters round, from of the branch, and so to lay it; but it comes all to one end, if there be any difference, the cutting is the better. Others wreath or twist the bough in the part that is to be lay'd in the ground, which cleaveth it in Sundry places, out of which the
fibres for roots will issue. The time of laying is usually in winter, or spring, but it may be done at any time of the year, and the plant take rooting very well. If the branch be high, so that it cannot be bended to the Earth, it then must be laid in a basket, box, or earthen pot fill'd with good mould in such wise, as shall be described when I come to speak of the vine slips, and of the Kentish codling, Nurse-garden, Sweeting, &c. who will grow without roots like ozier-sticks. A branch sometimes will grow if two or three inches of bark be cut off round about it, as it growes on the Tree, and then clayed suf∣ficiently about the place, where the bark was taken away. This is
done in July and August, and at the winter toward spring, the branch is cut off and set in the ground, where it often happeneth to thrive like another Tree. But a better way to make a bough grow on the Tree is by slicing off small peices of the bark and hacking it a little in the place where the roots should issue forth, and then placing an old boot over the bough, so that the middle of it be the conteiner of the place that is sliced, it being thus placed must be bound close at the bottom, and filled with good Earth, after∣wards in dry weather the Earth should be watered, whereby the bough will send out roots into the boot. This is to be performed in spring. If you find at latter end of Summer that it hath taken root,
you may cut off, and set it as the former. But it often happens that instead of roots there is only certain extuberancyes, or knots a risen in several places about the slicings, which are but so many preparatives for roots against the ensuing year; wherefore it must stand till the next season, at present only cut away the bark, that was reserved at the first for the better conveiance of sap into the upper part of the bough. Now that the cion groweth, af∣ter the bark is wholy taken away, is not (as some suppose) by a pas∣sage of new sap through the clay or mould; for if it were so, the up∣per part would not endeavour to take root downward, that being a contrariety of motion in the same
organ, which cannot be granted: yea I scarce beleive that any juice passeth that way for the nourishing of the sprig; because that all such cions do not grow but by the medi∣ation of the roots of the Tree, who refine the course juice of the earth, before these receive the least atom thereof, and although the lower part sendeth none but good, yet the clay and mould reduceth it into it's former coursness, immediately at it's passage into the upper part of the cion. Neither is the root∣ing caused (as others affirm) by the arrest and stoppage of the sap in it's descent at Autumn, where∣by it not finding a place where to retire, doth at the cut transforme it self into fibres; if this were so, and that there is any such thing as
the descent of the sap at the fall of the leaf, then would all Trees grow more at the root in the winter then in the Summer, the contrary where∣of is sufficiently known. The true reason therefore and manner of this growing (by the leave of so many who content themselves with the former) I conceive to be by the ascent of sap through the heart and pores of the wood, which, to con∣serve the upper part of the cion, doth in an extending motion find out the wound, which it, (with o∣ther juice then called in a large mea∣sure to assistance) doth strive to cure by reuniting the upper to the nether part: but the wound proving too great, and that juice (by rea∣son of the affluence of new and it's own weight) not able to return the
way it came, nor finding any other place to divert it self, doth at the same wound burst forth into fibres, which afterward being strong (like the vessels of an Embryo when it becomes an animal subsisting of it self) act a contrary part, and suck fit nourishment for the plant, when as at the first they received it from the same. And this likewise must be the manner how all rootlesse sticks thrust into the ground do grow. That there is a motion of sap through the internal parts and pores of the wood appears plainly to the eye, in late pruning of vines, wherein these pores mani∣festly shew themselves, to give the only nourishment, whose passage between the wood and bark is here
really stop't through the thinnesse and binding drinesse of the bark, whereby it will sooner exhale then ascend. If any branch (or limb) be cut off from other Trees also in the spring, there will be an exsudation (or weeping, which is the Lachry∣mae in Physick) throughout the whole wood of the remaining part of the branch even if the bark it self should be taken away. Now that there is likewise upon occasi∣on, a motion (though preternatu∣ral) of sap thus through the pores even downward too, I have de∣monstrated to my self in an expe∣rience upon a Walnut-Tree, one of the roots whereof I cut off a di∣stance from the Tree, in the month of March, which within
half an hours space began to destil fromward the body of the Tree, fa∣ster then any spirit of wine can do in an Alembick, the bark during that space was hardened by the air. This water therefore must needs come by descent from the several parts of the Tree, and not by any other way; neither could so great a quantity ly in the part of the root that remained on the Tree, for in three dayes space the destillation was so great, that if the liquor had been weighed, it would have ex∣ceeded that of the root in a mani∣fold proportion. In very young trees, who are of a nimbler growth, the substance encircling the pith is of a greenish colour, very tender & spongy, through which (I suppose) a larger quantity of sap doth passe, then doth in any other part beside.
The cheifest use of the bark is to preserve the sap from the injury of the weather, (in the like manner as the skin doth the internal parts from external injuryes,) and in no wise administring moisture to the body being it self generated by a restagnation thereof, it's office in these tricks the clay and mould do supply. As for the sap that was drawn in the spring & Summer, part there∣of is converted into leaves, new branches, and Fruit; part likewise after by an exsudation through the wood turneth first into a jelly be∣tween the bark and wood, & after∣ward, by ehe help of the heat in and about Summer solstice, into wood it self; and the remainder is imployed in dilating the old tree; so much of it only retaineth it's own old Na∣ture,
as serveth to keep the whole moist until the next spring. This manner of growth is mani∣fested in that action of Woodmen, who, to know of what age any un∣derwood is, do cut off a stick (viz. of Hazel or Sallow) somewhat a∣slope, and by telling the scaly orbes (which some men call colts I sup∣pose they mean coats) do know the age of the wood; which orbes can∣not be so distinguished, were there not every year a new one made by the hardened sap. These orbes in young sticks may be separated, but in old wood they scarce appear. There is one thing yet remain∣ing, which (perhaps) may cause a dissent from this my opinion, and that is an argument raised from grafting, the substance whereof is this; If there ariseth little or no sap
between the bark and the wood, how cometh it to passe, that to make the graft grow, there ought such a regard to be had to the pla∣cing of the inwardest part of the bark of the graft so exactly to the inwardest part of the bark of the stock, and not to the wood of the same, which (according to the pre∣ceding position) hath the largest quantity of sap: To this an answer may be found in the foregoing words likewise; where 'tis said, that part of the sap, after an exsudation through the wood, turneth first into a jelly between the bark and the wood: which being granted, I can say, that the sap, arriving at the out∣side of the wood there to generate a new orbe, doth in the restagnation seize upon and conjoine it self to that moist part of the graft, that is
of affinity unto it; according to the maxime, which saith, That moist things are easily contained in others bounds, but very difficultly in their own, so that by this the graft is nou∣rished like other parts of the Tree. Now upon the cutting off the head of the stock, the woody part there∣of groweth dry on the superficies of the wound; for that the sap retireth another way, because that, having no inclosure, it would pump the tree into a languishing condition, if not to death it self; which if it do es∣cape, yet would that weeping choak the graft, wherefore it leaveth the naked face of the wood devoid of moisture: howbeit not resting un∣mindful of the preserving the conti∣nuity of the whole, it doth rally it's force on the borders or circumfe∣pence of the wound, and assuming
for it's armour a new filme, doth under the protection thereof by a rouling March at length cover the wounded place, rendring it the same defensive cloathing, of which it had before been divested; whereby it happeneth, that the graft not being adopted, before the filme is gene∣rated, is thrust off the wood of the stock, and excluded as a stranger, to whom the stock hath no relation. But to proceed again according to the design of the Chapter. If a branch cannot be allured to grow by laying or otherwise, nor the tree afford suckers; then may a root be cut off from the tree, and left lying in the ground; as when it was on the tree: If it dy not, it will the next spring send forth several young shoots; by reason that the sap which the root draweth, hath no way else
to vent it self, then by setting up new trees instead of the old one, from whence it was of late seclud∣ed. Observe that such suckers must the next autumn be cut half or three quarters through, close to the old root; and cover well above with good mould, wherein they will that next summer shoot out roots suffici∣ent enough to maintain them in a removal the second winter. If you should the first year endeavour to transplant them, you would find but one single root, and that joining to the old one, as its proper and sole nurse, for want of which, or some others in the room thereof, it may chance to wither; wherefore it is better to use them in such sort as I have declared. Some have adventured to cut down the whole tree somewhat
within the ground, whereby every root contributeth to the making up of an Hy∣dra-like company of young ones surround∣ing the stump of the old; now if the smal∣ler sort be plucked up, and the greater let stand, these will thrive extraordinarily. It sometimes happeneth, that before any root is cut off, or the tree felled, there doth a gallant number of upstart cions spring from the roots of the tree, whereby the tree it self pineth away through the disability of the sap, which cannot feed both young and old; wherefore in such a case, where there is a desire of multiplying that kind, there need no doubt to be made of cutting down the tree; For Quae tenera caeso virga de trunco stetit, Par ipsa matri tempore exiguo subit. sen. The suckers that from felled trunckes remain, In few yeares with the trees like bigness gain. These devises, though properly belong∣ing to the Mulberry, and rare exotick plants, because of the great difficulty in propagating them, rather then to those of an Orchard, may yet for recreations sake be practised in Fruit-trees also. FINIS.
