E728 12400231 61256
ENDER∣BIE.
CAMBRIA TRIƲMPHANS, OR BRITTAIN IN ITS PERFECT LUSTRE, SHEVVING THE Origen and Antiquity OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS NATION. THE Succession of their Kings and Princes, from the First, to KING CHARLES Of Happy Memory. The Description of the Countrey: The History of the Antient and Moderne Estate. The manner of the Investure of the Princes, with the Coats of Arms Of the Nobility. By PERCIE ENDERBIE, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crooke, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1661.
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY Charles the Second, KING of Great BRITTAIN, and PRINCE of WALES, &c. Most DREAD SOVERAIGN, HE who is so brain-sick as to question or dispute the Antiquity of KINGS and MONARCHICAL Government, will put the choicest Wits to their Trumps, to find out a Nomenclation to expresse his Folly, the Word Fanatick being too weak and slender. KINGS write in the plural Number, Mandamus, volu∣mus, facimus, &c. which is GOD's own Stile: And in Scripture we oft find them called GODS and Man; as a civil Creature, was directed to that kind of subjection, as if the sole Observation of Nature had necessarily led this Affections of Men to this kind of STATE. Whence it is also that whilst Others of the most curious in Philosophy, tell us of Angels and the Supreme Heavens being immediately Governed by the Maker of all things, they add together that upon the Earth, KINGS are in like sort of Government; as if natural Reason had at first Ordained them on Earth by an una∣voidable imitation of their Creators Providence; and que∣stionlesse, MONARCHY as far exceeds Oligarchy, Demo∣cratie, Aristocratie, or that so much lately gaped after Anar∣chy, as the Sun in its purest and most perfect lustre the smallest Star. Why then, O why then should the Commons of England Vote the Office of King in this Nation (and to have the Power
thereof in any single person) unnecessary and burdensome to the liberty and publick Interest of this Nation! This pleased their palats, whose proper Advance, and not the common Good was sought after; and therefore one King was more then laid aside, to whom all Allegiance was due, and Forty Tyrants set up to whom we owe no allegiance at all. Great Monarch, Man proposeth, but God disposeth; and therefore after a dark and tedious night of care and anxiety, hath reduced and plac'd you in your proper sphere, like to a morning Sun and Sun of Justice, to drive away our cares and rectifie our miseries by this your auspi∣cious return, assured hope shines in us, that the Prophesie is fullfil'd, Carolus a Carolo descendens erit Carolo Magno Major. This ensuing Treatise will lay open and unfold the manner of Great Brittains Government, which was ever Princely, (con∣trary to this Chymerical Anarchy) the which your Majesties most faithful and humble Subject with much of fear and reve∣rence (as being too rustick and homely to appear before so great a Majesty) offers up, begging of Almighty God to grant You a long and happy Reign, Fruitful and Princely Off-spring, adorned with all Vertues and heroick Endowments to Succeed You; that You may say with the Prophetical King and Kingly Prophet, Blessed be the Lord my God, who hath caused my Eyes to see this day, that one of my own Loyns shall sit upon my Throne. And for this all Loyal Subjects ought pray; and so shall he incessantly, who is, Your MAJESTIES Most Loyall And Obedient Subject, P. E.
THE GENEALOGY OF CHARLES THE IId. MONARCH of Great BRITTAIN, from the WELSH Blood. CAdeth King of South-wales. Howell Dha Prince of South-wales. Owen King of Wales, who Married Augharad D. and Heir to Lhewely Prince of Powis. Meredith King of Wales. Lhewelyn ap Sissylht Descended from Anarawd King of North-wales, by the Marriage of Angharad D. and H. of King Meredith, was King of Wales. Griffith ap Lhewelyn King Wales. Nest the Daughter of Griffith ap Lhewelyn was Married Fleance Son of Banquo whose Issue was, Walter Stuart. Alan Lord Stuart. Alexander Lord Stuart. Walter Lord Stuart. Alexander Lord Stuart.
John Lord Stuart. Walter Lord Stuart Married Margery D. and Heir of Robert the first King of Scots, and had Issue. Robert the Second King of Scots. Robert the Third King of Scots. James the First King of Scots. James the Second King of Scots. James the Third King of Scots. James the Fourth King of Scots, Married Margaret Eldest Daughter to King Henry the 7th. King of England. James the Fifth King of Scots. Henry in Right of his Wife Queen Mary, sole Daughter and Heir to James the Fifth King of Scots. James Monarch of Great Brittain. Charles Monarch of Great Brittain. Charles the Second Monarch of Great Brittain, whom God of his infinite Goodnesse protect from his E∣nemies.
TO THE Gentle Reader VVhether WELSH or ENGLISH, P. E. wisheth all Happiness. Courteous Reader, LET it not seem strange unto you, that being no Native of Waies, but born as far remote as Caer luid Coyd, I should attempt to compile a General History and entitle it The Anci∣ent and Modern Brittish and Welsh History. Sir Walter Raleigh wrote a History of the whole World; Mr. Knolls composed the Transactions of the Turkish Empire; both English, both excellent and approved Authors: many more have done the like. The enduce∣ments which drew me on to attempt this work, were first the marriage of a person of quality of that Nation; Secondly my long continuance and aboad in that Country, which hath rendered me in a manner a Native; the civilities of the Gentry prick me forwards, and the help of a good Library of Sir Edward Morgans of Lantarnam, encouraged me to bring the Embrion to its full maturity: many and those most learned, both Accademicks honoured with the scarlet robe; and Mar∣tialists enobled with sword and spurs, have added much lustre to the almost perisht Brittish glory, unto whose writings I must ac∣knowledge my self highly engaged; from their Hives, I have ext acted many drams of hony, and laid it up in store to present unto the VVorld in a whole Mass, that many may undeceive themselves, and rectifie there misled judgments, who apprehend the thirteen Counties of Wales, to produce nothing but Barrenness: as for the language, if any seem to make a question, this I suppose may give satisfacti∣on unto his curiosity: That, The beginning and original thereof as yet was never fully discovered: some dream that it was had from the Gallick as Neighbouring, others from the Romans as conquering, yet is it so far different from all the Europæan and VVestern tongues,
(at least as now they are) and hath so little affinity and resem∣blance of them, that its improbable from them to have either extracti∣on or derivation: They I think do not judge amiss, who affirm that amongst the rest, it received its first being at the confusion of Babel, for it sounds most after the Eastern way, having little or no congruence, or affinity with the VVest, unless some few words scattered and left by the subduing Roman, and so lately contracted and intermingled by the daily commerce of the English: some out of Cæsar will infer a consequence that the Gallic and Brittish lan∣guage were the same, when he saith Gallis (in more positum) ut qui Druidum disciplinam diligentius cognoscere vellent, in adversam Britanniam ad Druides proficiscerentur, quod eis nihil profuisset nisi idem his cum illis fuisset sermo, cum Druides libris non uterentur sed omnia viva voce explicarent: but this signifies little to perswade that the language of these two Nations was the same; for the language in which the Druides taught their mysteries, was that of Greece: Carmina multa millia interdum viginti annorum studio cogebantur e∣discere, qui eorum disciplinæ se tradidissent, quæ Græca fuisse non teme∣re quis conjecerit: so that the inference is, that those of Gallia, learned from the Brittish Druides, the use and speech of the Greek tongue only. It is no sufficient proofe to alledge that the continent was first inhabited, and that from thence the Islands took their language, for it is very probable, that some Islands as being the most safe and securest places, were even with the first inhabited. VVhich Theophilus seems to intimate concerning Brittain; and sacred writ tells us, that the Islands towards the North were allotted to the off-spring of Japhet, amongst which some learned Authors place Brittain: Those who endeavour to make good that the Brittains borrowed their language from the Latines, let them stop their mouths with this; Prisca Italiæ lingua sub priscis Italiæ regibus quicunque fuerint usur∣pata, Doricæ similis fuisse dicitur, ejusque initio magna fuit stirilitas quæ a poetis Eunio, Plauto, Pacuvio, & aliis, ab Histiorographis & maxime ab Oratoribus detersa est, facta a vicinis mutuatione vel novis excogitatis vocibus. And again, sed & veteres Latini summa lin∣guae inopia laborantes, tum ob aliorum populorum in jus civitatis ad∣missorum linguis infinita sumpsisse dicuntur, tum maxime a Græcis & Etruscis quos Aramæa vel Syriaca olim usos credunt, & voces Latinas quæ hodie habentur, non errarit si quis censeat esse Tuscae originis. So that we see the Latines more fit to borrow, then to lend: some may say that many Brittish words, sound Latin like, tis true, Est natura hominum novitatis avida. The Brittains call that Rhoud, which the Latines call Rota, in English a wheel, not that they wanted a signifi∣cant word in their own language, for they have two, Troel and Olwyn, they call that Porth, which the Romans call Portam yet can they if they please call it as properly Moreb: As for their borrowing words from
the Greeks, the like reason may be given: Moreover Bladud, when he went to Athens to apply himself to the study of Philosophy, at his re∣turn, brought with him many learned Graecian Philosophers, who being conversant with the Druides, communicating with them in points of doctrinalls, many greek words might become familiar with the Brittains. The most constant opinion is, that before the confusion of Babel the Hebrew was the sole and only language, and in that grand confusion, the Brittish questionless was one, probably used in Phrigia where Troy stood, and from thence conveyed unto this our Island. There was a People in Italy, in those places which we now call Cala∣bria and Naples, called Brutii from the name of Brutus; whose nomenclation and language differed very little from that of the An∣cient Brittains: this people after the destruction of Troy was brought into Italy by Nestor, where the Pylians built a City called Meta∣pontus; the Brutii built another, naming it Nova Troja, after by the Tarentines call'd Heraclea. So our Brittains in this our Island built Troy Novant now London, both taking their name from Brutus, and both having the like affection to the memory of old Troy. As concern∣ing Brutus his coming hither, (having more at large spoken of it, in the ensuing History) I will only here insert this out of our own records. In the time of King Edward I. at Lincolne, where held a Parliament, after much diligent search of Antiquities and due examination, as the greatest matter of right of a Kingdom required: Apologitical letters were sent to the Pope of Rome, sealed with an hundred seals and wit∣nesses thus. Rex Angliae ex deliberato concilio apud Lincolniam convo∣cato pro jure suo declarando, literam hujus tenoris rescripsit centum si∣gillis signatam: wherein is declared and justified that in the time of Hely and Samuel the Prophet, Brutus a Trojan landed here, and by his own name called the Country Britannia, before named Albion: De nomine suo Britanniam sociosque suos Britones appellavit: and ha∣ving three Sons, Locrinus Albanactus, and Camber, at his death devi∣ded the Island into three parts or provinces. Loegria now England, (though VVelsh keep the old name) was given to Locrinus the eldest Son; Albania Scotland, to Albanact the second Son. Cambria, now mis∣called Wales to Camber his third Son. Locrino primogenito dedit illam partem quæ quondam Loegria, nunc vero Anglia nominatur; Albanacto filio Secundo dedit Albaniam, quæ nunc Scotia Vocitatur; Cambrio vero tertio filio dedit Cambriam, quæ wallia appellatur, reservata Locri∣no regia dignitate; this conjecture may suffice for this business, it being testified by so many Domesticall and forrain, private and pub∣lick witnesses, that this his tripartite division was here from the be∣gining, and the first name of Brittain given by Brutus. Other re∣markable things might have been added to this History, as that of St. Winefreds well, and many more note worthy, which I leave to other pens, who happily may write the descriptions of each County in par∣ticular;
as God willing, I do speedily intend to publish that of Mon∣mothshire: had I been near the press to have perused every sheet as it past, I would have affixed an Alphabetical index at the end of this work, of all memorable passages; but I intreat the courteous Reader to accept in good part my weak endeavours, and what Errata's he shall find not mended by the Printer, to dash them lightly with his quill, and not impute them to me who desire to be esteemed by all. From my Chamber at Lantarnam in Monmothshire 16. of May 1661. Their faithful friend and Servant PERCY ENDERBIE.
THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITTISH and WELSH HISTORY. Beginning with BRƲTE and continued untill KING CHARLES the First. The First Part. THe state of every Kingdom well managed by prudent government, seems to represent a humane body guided by the soveraignty of a reasona∣ble soul: the Country and the Land representing the one; the Actions and State-affairs the other. The Island of Great Brittaine containeth the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and is of many counted the greatest Island in the world, though Justus Lipsius gives that praise to Cuba in America, as the Ori∣ental Navigators unto Sumatra, (taken from Ptolomey's Taprobana) or to Madagascar the Island of St. Laurence, both which are neer or un∣der the Equinoctiall line; in which we will not contend, as pleasing our selves with her other praises, far exceeding her Greatnesse; yet with this Honour also, that it was without Questi∣on the greatest Island of the Roman world, and for any thing yet certainly known, of all the rest: concerning whose positure in respect of Heaven, Lucretius the first of the Latine Writers that names Brittain, seemeth to place it in the same parallel with Pontus; where he saith, Nam quid Brittannum cœlum differre putamus, &c. What differs Prittains Heaven from that of Nile, Or Pontus welking from Gades warmer Isle. It is by experience found to lie included from the Degree Fifty and thirty scruples of latitude; and for longitude extended from the 13 degree and 20 minutes, unto the 22 and 50 minutes, according to the observation of Mercator. It hath little Brittain, Normandy, and other parts of France upon the South; Germany, Denmarke, and Norway upon the East, the Iles of Orkney and the Deucalidonian sea upon the North, Hebrides upon the West: and from it all o∣ther Ilands and Ilets which doe scatteredly environ it, and shelter themselves, as it were, under the shaddow of great Albion (another name of this famous Iland) are also accounted Brittish. Brittaine thus seated in the Ocean hath her prayses not onely in this present sense, and use of her commodities, but also in those honourable Eulogies, which the learnedest of Antiqua∣ries have collected out of the noblest Authors, that he scarce doth seem to have left any glea∣nings; neither will we transplant them out of his flourishing gardens, but as necessity com∣pels, since nothing can be further or otherwise better said.Robert of A∣mesbury. Cæsar in his Comentaries. Cornelius Tacitus. Some praises of great Brit∣taine. That Brittaine therefore is the Seas High-admiral is most Famously known, and the fortu∣nate Island supposed by some, as Robert of Amesbury doth shew; whose Aire is more tempe∣rate (saith Cæsar) then France; whose foyle bringeth forth all graine in abundance (saith Tacitus;) whose Seas produce Orient Pearle, (saith Suetonius;) whose fields are the Seat of a Summer Queen; (saith Orpheus) her wildest parts free from Wild Beasts, saith the ancient Panegyrick; and her chiefe City worthily called Augusta, saith Amianus. So as we may truly
say with the Royall Psalmist, Our lives are fallen in pleasant places, yea we have a pleasant In∣heritance; which whatsoever by the goodness of God, and industry of man it is now, yet our English Poet hath truly described unto us the first face thereof, thus: The Land which warlike Brittaines now possesse, And therein have their mighty Empires rais'd, Brittain and France former∣ly one conti∣nent by some.In ancient time was savage VVilderness, Ʋnpeopl'd, unmanur'd, unprov'd, unprais'd. And albeit the Ocean doth at this present thrust it selfe between Dover and Calice dividing them with a deep and vast entrenchment, so that Brittaine is thereby of a supposed Penisle made an Island; yet divers have stifly held that once it was joyned by an arm of Land to the Continent of Gallia, to which opinion Mr. Spencer further alluding thus closeth his Stanza, Spencer in his Fairy Queen. Ne was it Iland then, ne was it prais'd. Amid the Ocean waves, ne was it sought Of Merchants farr for profits therein prais'd, But was all desolate, and of some thought By Sea t'have been from the Celtick mainland-brought. Which was a matter meerly conjecturall (because it is not plain that there were no Ilands nor hills before Noahs stood.) I leave at large Virgil, sure of all the Poets the most learned; when describing the Shield which Vulcan forged (in Virgils brain) for Æneas, he calls the Morini (people about Calice) the outmost men, doth onely mean, that they were Westward the fur∣thest inhabitants upon the Continent; signifying withal, that Britaine as being an Iland lay out of the world, but yet not out of the knowledge of men; for the commodities thereof invited the Famous Greek Colonies of Merchants which dwelt at Marsilia in France to venture hi∣ther, as hath been well observed out of Strabo. And as Julius Cæsar was the first Roman which ever gave an attempt to Conquer it, so will we close its prayses, with a late Epigram concerning the outward Face of the Isle, and the motive of Cæsars coming thither. Albions high Tops, her woody locks fore-shew. With quires of chaunting birds, those woods resounding: Her downes and meadowes clad in verdant hue Meadowes and Downs with flocks and heards abounding. Brutus his three sonnes.Latium had greater wealth, yet Cæsar thought, To Brittish glory Latiums wealth was naught. Wales prefer∣red before Scotland.Our most ancient Historians begin with Brute, and so continue the succession of Kings till CHARLES the First; which Brutus divided the Kingdome into three parts: To Locrinus he gave Loegria now England, to Camber his second sonne he gave Cambria now VVales, and to Albanist or Albanact, Albania now Scotland. Ireland called Brittaine the less.Ptolomy naming Britaine the great and the less, hath been by some mistaken, as so dividing the Island into two parts; but his proportion and distance from the Equator, compared with his Geographical description will evince, that he calleth this our Island Great Britaine, and Ireland Brittaine the lesse. Howbeit some later writers indeed do make the South and more Champion to be called Great Britaine, and the North and more Mountanous, Britaine the lesse: whose Inhabitants were Anciently distinguished into Majatae,Why the Ro∣mans were not greedy to con∣quer Scotland. and Caledonii, and now by the Scots are into High-land-men, and Low-land-men; but the Northern Clime being more piercing for the Romans constitutions, and lesse profitable and fruitful, they set their bounds not farre from Edenburgh, and altogether neglected the other parts of Scotland more North-wards. The division of Brittaine by the Romans.The nearer part of Brittaine they sub-divided into two parts, for the more Southern tract together with VVales, Dio termeth the higher, and that more North-ward the lower, as by the seats of their Legions may appeare; For the second Legion call'd Augusta (which kept at Caerleon in South-wales) and the twentieth called Victrix (which remained as some say at Che∣ster) he placeth in the higher Brittaine:Caerleon in Monmouthshire. but the sixth Legion named also Victrix resident at York served as he writeth in lower Brittaine, which division as seemeth, was made by Severus the Emperor, who having vanquished Albinus General of the Brittaines, and reduced their state under his Obedience, divided the Government thereof into two Provinces, and placed two Prefects over them. Another divi∣sion of Brit∣taine.After this again, the Romans did proportion Brittaine into three parts, whose limits our great Antiquary assigneth by the Archiopiscopal seats, grounding his conjecture on the saying of Pope Lucius who affirmeth, that the Ecclesiasticall Jurisdictions of the Christians accorded with the precincts of the Roman Magistrates, and that their Arch-Bishops had their Sees in those Cities wherein their Presidents aboad, so that the Ancient seats of the three Arch-bishops here, being London in the East, Caerleon in the West, and York in the North, Londons diocesse as
seemeth made Brittannia prima, Caerleon Brittannia secunda, and York Maxima Caesa∣riensis. But in the next age, when the power of the presidents began to grow over great,A third divisi∣on of Brittain. they again de∣vided Brittaine into five parts, adding to the three former Ʋalentia and Flavia Cæsariensis; the first of which two seemeth to have bin the Northerly part of Maxima Cæsariensis, recovered from the Picts and Scots by Theodosius the Generall under Ʋalens the Emperour, and in ho∣nour of him named Ʋalentia; and Flavia may be conjectured to receive the name from Fla∣vius the Emperour (sonne of Theodosius) for that we read not of the name Brittannia Flavia before his time. So as these five partitions had their limits assigned after this manner.What places every division contained. Brittannia prima con∣tained those coasts that lay betwixt Thamesis and Severne, and the Brittish sea. Brittannia secunda extended from Severne to the Irish sea, containing the Countrey which we now call Wales. Flavia Cæsariensis was that which lay betwixt the Rivers Humber and Tyne; and Ʋa∣lentia from the said Tyne and Picts wall reached to the Rampire neer Edenburgh in Scotland, the furthest part that the Romans possessed when this division was in use. For the severall peo∣ple inhabiting all those parts with their ancient names and borders (whether designed by the Romans or old Britains) together with our modern names and Shires, answerable to each of them, you may read in Mr. Speed, Ortelius, and others. The whole Province of Brittain, as in our Histories doth appear, was highly esteemed by the Emperors themselves, assuming as a glorious sirname, Brittannicus, coming thither in per∣son over those dangerous, and scarce known Seas; here marrying, living, and dying; enact∣ing here Laws for the whole Empire, and giving to those Captains, who served here, many Ensigns of great honours: yea Claudius gave Plautius the first Prefect of that Province,What great esteem the Romans had of Brittany. the right hand as he accompanied him in his Triumphs; and his own Triumph of Brittain was set out with such magnificence, that the Provinces brought in golden Crowns of great weight, the Governours commanded to attend, and the very Captains permitted to he present at the same. A naval Coronet was fixed upon a pinacle of his Palace: Arches and Trophees were raised in Rome, and his self upon his aged knees mounted the stairs into the Capitol, support∣ed by his two sons in Law; so great a joy conceived he in himself for the Conquest of so small a portion of Brittain. How the Romans found it, held it, and left it, God willing I will endeavour in this ensuing Treatise, to lay open to the Readers view. Many, and those as different, have been the opinions of men both learned and skilfull in History, concerning the Nomenclation, or name of this Island. Sir Thomas Eliot,The several names of great Britain. a sound and able Antiquary, takes it from a Greek Fountain or Spring, to wit from , but what his conceit was for this derivation, I mean not to beat my brains about it, being too far off to look after. Mr. Floyd, or Lloyd, a Cambro-Brittaine, and one who for his knowledge may justly challenge an eminent place amongst our Antiquaries, will give the honour to his own Language, and tels us that it is derived from PRID-CAIN, a fair and beautifull form or pro∣spect, and thinks he hath hit the nail on the head. Pomponius Laetus will fetch it out of Ar∣morica, or little Brittain, but let him be merry with his conceit, whilst Becanus his brain being full of conception, brings forth another issue, called Mrs. Bridania, for that the Danes wan∣dering to finde new habitations named this Isle so, putting Brye, for Free, as it were, Free-Denmark: and yet our Histories speak not of any Danes inhabiting this Kingdom, till long after Christianity flourished, which those cruel Pagans most cruelly persecuted: by reason of which villanies and outrages by them committed, it might rather be called the Captived, and enthralled Denmark, then Denmark the free. Others will have it denominated from Prute∣nia, a Province or Region of Germany. Another good fellow, as it seems will have it called Brittania from Brithin, which as Atheneus tels us, was a certain kinde of drink which the Grecians much used; yet I am confident neither the Brittains, nor the Welch (though their Cwow exceeded even Greece it self, if we speak of Liquor) were never so addicted to bib∣bing as to new name their Country in an Alehouse, nor after any sort of Tipple whatsoever. Another to dash out the brains of this monstrous birth, will have it to be called Brittannia from a sort of people in Italy called Brutii. Concerning the Inhabitants Mr. Cambden saith,Mr. Cambden in his Britannia. they are of a most excellent composure of bo∣dy, singular wits, modest, and civil manners, and most haughty stomacks and courage, whose admirable vertue and prowess both in Civil and Martial affairs, is most manifest to the whole world. As for their manners and customs of this Isle before the Inhabitants were Civilized, Authors write diversly. Dio Nicaeus saith, they Till or Plow not their Fields,Dio. Nicaeus in Mr. Cambden cited. but live by prey and hunting, and such fruits as the Trees naturally produce. Fish, although nature hath fur∣nished them with great plenty, they make no use of. They live for the most part in Pavilli∣ons, or Flutes, naked, and without shoes; their wives are in common,The customs of the ancient Brittains. and so they breed up their children: The Commons for the most part bear the sway; thieving is a pastime, they war in Chariots, and though their horses be but small, yet very fleet. The foot men are very agile and nimble: their Arms a Buckler or small Shield, with a Javelin, at whose lower end or butt is a pomel hollow, which, whilest they offend, maketh a noise, and terrifieth the enemy, they have also daggers or poniards; but above all with singular patience they endure hunger,
cold, and labour; insomuch that plunged in deep Marishes, or Pools, even to the very neck, for divers days together they endure hunger with great resolution: In the Woods, the rinds of Trees and Roots suffice for food. They make a certain kinde of meat, of which whosoever shall take a quantity of a Bean, for a long time shall neither thirst nor be hungry. Heridianus apud. Com.New fashioned apparel, nay even the ordinary use of Garments is altogether unknown to them, only they deck their necks and shoulders, as also their wastes with Iron, taking as much pride and content in that adornment, as did the Barbarians in their gold: Their bo∣dies depicted with the forms of all kinde of Animals, so that to put on cloaths was deemed prejudicial, lest thereby those pictures should be hid. A Nation most warlike, and thirsty after blood and slaughter; content with a small Shield and Javelin, yet having a sword ap∣pendent to their naked bodies: brest-plate, or helmet they undervalue as obstacles and impe∣diments to the passing over Fords and Rivers. Plinius de Ma∣gia.Plinie treating de Magia, or Art Magick, saith that the Brittains so admirably honoured it with uncough Ceremonies, that they may seem to have sent it unto the Persians. Another Author saith, that the Brittains far exceed the French in Stature and bigness of body: affirm∣ing,Strabo apud cundem. that he himself had seen Brittish youths in Rome to surpass their tallest men in height at least half a foot, Diodorus Siculus saith, Brittains spend their time after the custom of their ancient Forefathers; and in wars used Chariots, as did the Grecians in time of the Trojan war (and who knows,The honesty of Brittains commended by Di Siculus. Mr. Camb. de∣nies not Brute. Mr. Broughton, fol. 289. The Brittains called Gens Bruti. Leges S. Ed Reg. apud. Guli. Lamb. l. d. pri∣seu legi. fol. 36. Gildas apud Galf. l. 1. c. 17. Vic. l. 1. Pont. Nen. Hist. Antiq. Land. Eccles. Isiadr l. Etm. Thom. Eliot. apud Stow. proof for Brute. Thaliesnanus apud pris p. 27 Gal. Manus. apud eundem. Hn. Hunting. Hist. de Reg. Brit. cum mal∣tis aliis ibidem. Brute landed here in the time of Holy & Samuel the Prophet. Brittannia so called from Brutus. Gualt. Oxor. apud Hard. c. 16. Bal. 2. cent. Si∣gib. Gembl. hist. & de regn. Britt. Mariam apud Hard. c. 10. Liter defenso∣ris Ed Reg 1. ad apam apud Th n Walsin. Hist.  Y lib. Neustr. A. 1301. Gri apud Hi. ea. M. S. chr c 47. Galf. Mn. l 1. Hist. Britt. but that custom might be continued from their first founder Brutus.) Their houses compact of wood, reed, or thatch; their sheafs of Corn they stored under dry roofs, threshing out every day as much as served for present use; honest and just in conver∣sation, much differing from the subtilty and cunning of our men, content with ordinary and indifferent Diet, detesting the gurmandizing of gluttons and Epicures; the Isle replenished with multitude of men. In matters concerning the Inhabitants of this Isle, Mr. Cambden is very copious, producing several opinions; but I finde no Commander in chief, whether King, Duke, or General na∣med (Brute excepted) of whom he saith, shall I (so mean a man) give a determinate sen∣tence in so weighty a matter? I leave it to the Senate of Antiquaries undecided. In the mean time I deny not Brute, but leave every one to his own best liking and opinion. So that it is manifest Mr. Cambden, naming no other principal Commander or Guide of that people, who first Colonized and Inhabited this Land, doth not altogether deny Brute, but leaves it to the Counsell, Consent and Decree of the Learned Parliament and Senate of Antiquaries. Let us hear what others write, Mr. Broughton out of an old Brittish History saith, Having thus in∣vincibly proved by all Antiquities, that there were among the Gentiles, especially in this Kingdom of Brittain, not only Flamens but Arch-flamens, and they seated in the principal governing Cities in several Provinces, and how after the coming of Christ, even from the A∣postles time, and by their Ordinance and Institution, their Residences were to be changed in∣to Archiepiscopal or Metropolitan chief commanding Sees in the Christian Religion: If we had no other particular proof in this but in general terms. St. Edwards Laws, the testimony of Gildas, Nonnius the Antiquities of Landaff, St. Isiodore, who as Pope Eleutherius also calleth this Nation, Gens Bruti, the off-spring and Nation of Brute; Thomas Archbishop of York a Norman by birth, in time of King VVilliam the first, Thaliessianus above a thousand years since; VVilliam of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntington, Gualterus Calenus, Sigibertus, with many others before Galfrid Mon. wrote, and Vicunnius himself with innumerable after both of this and other Nations, and publick Parliament; as that in the time of Edward the first at Lincoln, who after most diligent search of Antiquities, and due examination as the greatest matter the right of a Kingdom required, sent his Apologetical Letters to the Pope of Rome sealed with an hundred Seals and Witnesses, wherein is declared and justified that in the time of Hely and Samuel the Prophets, Brutus the Trojan landed here, and by his own name called the Country Britannia before named Albion. And having three sons, Locrinus, Camber and Albanact did at his death divide the Land into three parts or portions; Leegria now England to Locrinus, his eldest Son: Cambria Wales to Camber; and Albania Scotland to Albanact. This might suffice for this business, but being testified by so many Domestical and Forreign, private and publick witnesses, that the Tripartite division was here from the first nme and beginning of Brittain, we must needs for every several part and Province as∣sign a several Government and order therein, as their Rulers and Governers were divers and distinct. But our Antiquaries carrie us further, and inform us that not only London, Caerlegeon and York, were the several chief Cities in this division, but the Kings which founded them for such, ordained them likewise to be the Seats and Residencies of three several Archflamens, or Pramens: for the glory and nobleness of London, thereupon named Augusta, it is the common opinion of Antiquities, that it is the most ancient Citie of this Iland builded by Bru∣tus, as not only the Brittish History, Galfridus, Vicunnius, and our English Antiquaries after them, but Gldas, Sigibertus, and others sufficiently witness: And except Mr. Stow be decei∣ved in his Authors Aethieus an old Pagan Philosopher testifieth no less, affirming that Bru∣tus named this Kingdom Brittannia; and John Harding in his plain Verses, with others Re∣cordeth, how he there from the very first beginning, Instituted an Archflamens Seat.
At Troynovant he made full especially An Arch-flamine his See,Harding Chr: fol. 16. cap. 14. Cathedral certain A Temple thereof, A policy to obtain By Trojan Law. This is commonly written to have been a thousand years before Christ, and it is a common received opinion among our Antiquaries, that Ebrincus son to Mempricius, builded the City of York; of which more hereafter in its due place. That this Island was called Albion before the coming of Brute, all Authors seem to agree, though there seem to be some difference; the just and most rational Writers call Albion ab al∣bis Rupibus, from the high and white Cliffs and Rocks discovered by Navigators, as they sailed by it: yet some will be more quaint, and fetch it further, as if far fetcht and dear bought were always good for Ladies, and tell of a Damasella, called Albone or Albina, daugh∣ter of Dioclesian King of Syria, and this some of our Histories seem to aver, notwithstanding no Authentick Writer as yet ever produced any such King to bear sway and Government, ei∣ther over the Syrians or Assyrians; nor that he had thirty daughters, who all slew their Hus∣bands, of which this Albine is supposed one, and came into this Island, from whole body sprung those Giants which Brute here found at his first arrivall. Such peradventure might be, but rather conveyed hither by shipping, then produced by the copulation of any such murder∣ing Harpies. This Isle is encircled by Neptunes curled tresses and watry furrows round;The Content of this Island. and extends it self in length from the South to the North. The longitude from Totness in Cornwall to Cate∣ness 800. miles, and in latitude from St. Davids or Menevia in Wales to Dover Clifts most men account 300. miles, and from Menevia to Yarmouth in Norfolk, as divers affirm, it containeth 300. miles. Venerable Bede saith, that it is 200. miles over. First,The three se∣veral names of this Isle. therefore we see it was cal∣led Albion. Secondly, Brittain from Brute. Thirdly, Egbert commanded it to be called Auglia from a Nation of which himself descended; some forsooth will have it so called from a Queen thereof, whose name was Auglia, but if you consult with skilfull Astrologers, and such as pretend Art in calculating and casting Nativities (with which sort of people this Island now aboundeth, especial cashierd Troopers) they will positively tell you, that this Lady was born in Ʋtopia, and much about the Greek Kalends: Albeit this Island hath had but three several names, yet hath it been four times conquered; first by the Romans; secondly, by the Saxons;Brittain four times conque∣red. thirdly, by the Danes; and fourthly, by the Normans. Brute descended of that ancient, noble, warlike off-spring of the so much admired Trojans, had to his Fore-father Æneas, who had married Creusa a legitimate daughter of Priamus, who descended from Dardanus second son of Camboblascon, and his wife Electra daughter of Atlas. Italus King of Italy, the eldest brother of this Dardanus was called Jasius Janigena, who mar∣ried Cibeles, and lived in such happy condition, that now there wanted not any terrene,The Travels of Noe into Eu∣rope, translated by Rich. Lynch. or earth∣born delight or felicity, which might make this happy-seeming Potentate more fortunate, mighty or contentfull; but it is a common humour of Fortune, that amidst the thickest and most abundance of her graces and favour, she in some angry or fantastick imagination, sud∣denly snatcheth away her so liberally bestowed gifts, and leaveth the late possessors thereof involved and wrapt in a world of the miserablest unhappiness and foul vexations that may be invented as by the fatal Success and end of this Kings life most plainly appeareth. For when Dardanus his younger brother; a man indeed of a proud heart, great courage and inward ambition, saw his brother Jasius thus to float on the calmer Seas of prosperity, and to taste of the sweet cup of Nectar, he infinitely repined as living privately, and without command, as an inferior or some base born person or slave; whereupon he goes to his brother to demand leave and licence, that he might depart out of the Country to seek his better fortunes, which request Jasins refused to condescend unto, and would by no means allow of his purposes. Whereupon Dardanus began secretly to enter into deadly hostility, and to gather many Fa∣ctions and Parties to his side, which by reason that he was exceeding well beloved grew to a great number (this hapned much about the time, saith my Author,Rich. Lynch. ut supra. that Sharan King of E∣gypt persecuted Moses and the children of Israel.) The fire of discontent between the two brothers being now wholly set on flame, and divers attempts passed between them: it hapned that Dardanus received the worst, and upon many encounters was still put to his shifts, so that in the end he awaited a time when the King his brother went privately to a fountain to bathe himself, where Dardanus most unnaturally slew him, which done, terrified with his own con∣science, he presently ships himself at the next Haven, and with all his Jewels, and what else riches portable, he could carry with him away, with many of his Friends, Followers and Servitors, he secretly set sayl, and departed. After long travel Dardanus comes to Altius the younger, who was of the same blood and descent and in respect thereof willingly entertains him, and in fine, desires of him (his Country being over peopled, and victuals scarce;) That since he must needs send forth such people for the finding out of new places, that he would bestow the Charge, Conduct, and leading of them upon him, and that he would joyn with them for the provisions and necessa∣ries needfull and convenient for the setling of themselves in such their new places of abode.
This thing King Altius very willingly entertained, especially for that Dardanus was of his own kindred and consanguinity. This request of Dardanus thus obtained, he knew no other means to requite so great a fa∣vour, and to be occasion to draw on further kindness, but to offer unto Altius, and utterly to resign all his right, title, interest and claim in the Kingdom of Italy for one of his sons, unto which of them the Father was contented. This proffer of Dardanus being well considered, was thankfully accepted by Altius, in lieu and exchange whereof was alotted unto Darda∣nus, a certain quantity or piece of Land in Phrygia for him to erect and build a City upon: Thus Dardanus with his people and associates began to build in Phrygia,By whom Troy was first built, and at what time. Noe his travels, ut supra. and in short space fully finished a City, which he called after his own name Dardania, which was before the Incarnation of the Son of God Christ Jesus 1487. and before the building of Rome by Romulus, 427. years, and before the City of Paris 70. years, as Eusebius, and most writers do affirm: In few years Dardanus began to grow unto great mightiness, riches and power, who had also a neighbour Prince of mighty puissance, wealthy and fortunate, whose name was Teucrus, whereupon many Authors call this place Teucria,Why Troy called Teucria. and the Inhabitants Teucri, and this Teucrus was the son of Scamander, and Idea, and had also himself a beautifull and fair daughter, which he married shortly after unto Dardanus, which was called Batea, of whom Dardanus begot a son called Ericthonius, who succeeded him in the Kingdom of Phrygia; this Erictho∣nius in process of time arose up unto a wonderfull greatness and large possessions, who (as ma∣ny writers do affirm) was accounted to be one of the richest Kings in those days in that part of the World, who had at the least three thousand horses of his own continually feeding in his Pastures. This Ericthonius begat a Son whom he named Tros, whom he left to succeed him, and from whom the people were after called Trojans. This Tros very much enlarged and beautified the City of Dardania, now called Troia, Dardania from King Tros is called Troia.which name long time after it re∣tained. This King had three Sons Ilus, Assaricus, and Ganimedes, all which he brought up in the knowledge of Arms, and Martial Discipline, unto which kinde of study he himself was much addicted, and had many years together maintained Wars with the King of Grete, na∣med Jupiter, the fourth of that name there. In which Wars his Son Ganimedes was taken prisoner, even by the hands of Jupiter himself, who for that in his Ensign and Colours The Antiquity of bearing of Arms, and badges of honour. he gave an Eagle (being his arms) it should seem that Poets for that cause, have feigned that Ga∣nimede as he was hunting was snatcht up to heaven by Jupiter, then transformed unto an Eagle, and that he is now taken for one of the 12. Signs of the Zodiack called Aquarius. Some other Authors also write, that one Tantalus King of High Phrygia and Paphlagonia, a most miserable, covetous, and avaricious Prince had laid certain snares and private means to en∣trap Ganimede, and to take him prisoner, as he used to sport himself in Hunting, thinking by that devise to get a mighty ransom from Tros, for redeeming of him; and that this Tantalus sent him to Jupiter, for to secure him, and to have half the ransom that should be payed for his delivery; and hence it may be that the Poets feign that Tantalus is plagued and tormented in Hell standing up to the chin in water, and apples hanging down to his lips, and yet can neither touch the one, nor taste the other. Tros thus having lost his son, studied upon re∣venge and in the mean time comforted himself with his two other sons Ilus and Assaracus, and this Ilus called Troy afterward Ilion, who begot a son named Laomedon, the father of the re∣nowned Priamus; and of Assaracus issued and came Anchises who was father to Æneas, who as we said before married Creusa, a legitimate daughter of King Priamus; so that we see both by the Male and Female line in this marriage, our Warlike Brute, derives his lineal descent from Dardanus, and so from Noe. Æneas after the fatal destruction of Troy, gathered together the remnant and parcel of the War-shaken and distressed Trojans, with whom he embarked and hoysing sail, committed himself with the lives and fortunes of all his followers and fellow Adventurers to Fate, and the protection of the Supream and highest Providence; three years was he tossed, not only with the merciless billows of the ever-unconstant Ocean, but also by such Destinies as seemed no ways to favour his designs: at last smiling fortune wasted his weather beaten Navy unto the Italian Continent, where no sooner arrived (having scarce refreshed his over-toyled Troops) but Mars puts him upon present action. Latinus king of the Country endeavours to impeach his setling, and denies him admittance; from words they come to blows, Bellona seems to take no small pleasure to hear the groans of souls departing from their bodies, ready to forsake their long enjoyed habitations; many are the assaults, approaches, conflicts and com∣bats, which daily pass betwixt the two enraged parties; the one labouring to encroach, the other to keep his own. Venus not willing to have Mars too long kept from her charming and soft embraces, contrives to set a period to those bloody broyls; a match must be concluded be∣tween the unparalleld Trojan Heroe, and the fair Lavinia, Latinu's daughter, and sole inheritrix of that vast Kingdom. Lucina favours the design, and from this new married Couple of Match∣less Progenitors, in due time is born a son, from whose loyns, the worlds greatest Emperours, and Brittains Warlike Kings deduce their Progenies: From this branch budded forth our Brutus: Some Writers will have him to descend from Silvius Posthumus Policronica, Guido de Columna, with others affirm, that Ascanius the first son of Aenaeas by his first wife had a son named Sylvius Aenaeas, who was Father to Brutus.
It is commonly held that the mother of Brutus died in Child-bed of this son, and that at his coming to the age of fifteen years casually (many and secret are the designs of the Ce∣lestial Star-chamber) shooting at a wild and savage beast unfortunately, though not ungra∣ciously, as being an act contrary to his will or intention, slew his own Father; for which Act (divine Providence having designed him for this our Iland) by the common consent and de∣cree of the Magistrates of Latium, he was adjudged to exile, and for ever to be banished from his Country: Necessity compels him to shift for himself; neither yet so distressed or ill belo∣ved, but that he is followed by Troops of the noblest and most Heroick Spirits of his time, who partly attracted by that worth which they finde innate in him, and partly pusht forward with an ardent desire to purchase honour to their never dying fames, engage both lives and fortunes ith him; being now sufficiently stored with all manner of Provisions, they put to Sea, shaking hands for ever with their beloved Country, Friends, and Parents, as having Spirits not confin'd to any one place. Their propitious stars bring them to a province of Greece, where they find encouragement, as finding there many scattered Trojans, so that of this unexpected aid, I may say with the Prince of Poets, Quid minime veris Graia pandetur ab urbe. The Prince or King of this place, according to some was called Vandrasus; other Writers call him Vandarus: Geffery of Monmouth proceedeth further, and tells us, that he was line∣ally descended from Achilles, that mortal enemy of the Trojan glory, and Hectors valour; but Brute gathering these dispersed, or it may be captived and enthralled Trojans which he found there, and old Innicie received from Ʋlisses, Agamemnon, and other Chieftains of Greece, sticking in their stomacks of the firing of old Ilium, and the Dardanian Towers, galls the al∣most closed sore; whets his memory to call to mind things past, and those once raked out of the embers of oblivion, gather new flames, and set all on fire with an unquenchable desire of Revenge, which is so sweet and tickles the souls of those male-contents, that nothing but fire and sword will serve their turn. Pandrasus is assaulted in his own Court, and so hardly put to , that he is enforced to purchase his own peace by bestowing his daughter Ignogen upon Brutus, and such other conditions as the almost conquering strangers please to demand; the Solemnitie of these constrained Nuptials orderly finished; the Trojans mutually consent to leave that place, and put themselves upon new Adventures: Ships are provided, and que∣stionless Vandrasus is not backward in the business, willing to be rid of such unruly Guests, who will take all things upon score, at their own price and rates; once more to Sea goes this gallant Chieftain, with his new espoused Consort; and Post varios casus, & tot discrimina re∣rum, the whole Fleet safely arrives at an Isle in Africa (as saith Guido and others) called Ler∣gesia or Leogetia, in which the Superstitious and mis-believing Pagans many Ages past (but now ruinous) had erected a sumptuous Temple to Dina Diana. This when Brute understood, his zeal moving, and his particular devotion to that Goddess seconding it, thither attended with his whole Train, as an humble Supplicant and Votary he bends his course, and Religi∣ously, according to the manner of those profane Rights and Ceremonies (if that may be re∣ligious, which is profane in the highest superlative) and there prostrates his Princely knees, and from a soul (as he imagines) full fraught with pleasing vows and gratefull Orasons, to his ado∣red Goddess, he thus declares himself: Dina potens Nemorum, Terror silvestribus Apris Cui licet Amfractus ne per aethereos Inferuasque Domos, terrestria jura resolve Et dic quas terras, nos habitare velis Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aevum Qua tibi virgineis Templa dicabo choris. These verses are translated in Fabian, and because they smell of Antiquity, I judge it bet∣ter to leave them as they are, then to dress them in the garb, mode, and stile now in use in England, and therefore courteous Reader, be pleased to accept of them; as also the others which follow in answer, in the Language in which they were writ: Celestial Goddess, the weldest Frith and Wood, The wilde Bore and Beasts, thou fearest by thy might; Guider of Shipmen, passing the Rageous flood, The Infernal Houses for, and the Earth of right, Behold and search, and shew where I shall light; Tell the certain place where everlastingly A Temple of Virgins I shall to thee edifie. These Ceremonies, Rights and Occasions ended, the Goddesse pleased with the Sacrifice of his Devotions, sends Morpheus in a thick and drowsie Mist, who with his somniferous Rod lulls this humble Votary, locking up all his sences within the sable curtains of a most pro∣found
sleep, whilst the courteous Diety in a Vision or rather imaginary Fancy, distills and in∣fuseth into his sollicitous Soul this Oracle: Brute sub occasum solis, trans Gallica regna, The Gyants lay destroyed, before Brutes coming. The Language which he brought must needs be that which we now call Welsh.Insula in Oceano est, undi{que} clausa mari. Insule in Oceano est, habitata Gyantibus olim, Nunc deserti quidem Gentibus apta tuis: Hic de sobole tua Reges nascentur & ipsis, Totius terrae subditus Orbis erit: Hanc pete nam{que} tibi sedes erit illec perennis, Hîc fiet natis altera Troja tuis. In ENGLISH thus: Brute for the West over the Land of France, An Ile in Ocean, there is all closed with the Sea. This Ile with Gyants whilone inhabit by chance, Now being desert as apt for the people and thee. In this of thy body Kings born shall be And of this Isle thou shalt be Lord and King, Search this for here a perpetuall Sea to thee And here to thy Children a new Troy shall be. When our Pilgrime awaked, the Vision had so fully possest him, that deliberating with him∣self what was best to be done, he pitcht upon this Resolution, to call together and Assemble the Noblest and best able for Judgement, Wit, and Experience of all his Colonie; which done, he imparted the secret unto them which begat a general rejoycing in them all; and all Una∣nimously decree a Thanksgiving to be due unto the Goddesse, and therefore out of hand, the Flamen takes Milk, calls for divers Aromatick spices; and several Liquors, of which he com∣poseth an offering of most sweet and precious Perfumes, to offer to the Diety; great Fires are made, and Wine cast into them according to the Pagan rights, and when things were per∣formed in thankfulnesse to the Numen, in a joyful procession they hast towards the Ships not willing to admit of any delay. In an instant as it were (so desirous was every one to see the event of this specious Oracle; and enjoy quiet (the object and end of all travel and labour) the Sayls are hoist, and the Canvas filled with such prosperous gales, that in a trice, the Navy is without ken of Land, bending their full endeavours for the West, Thus they sayled for the space of thirty dayes, passing by many adventures and dangers; as of Philenes, The Lake called Lacus-Salinarium, the place where Salt is made, as also the River Maeloa and Hercules Pillars; at length they enter the Turon or Tyrrhen Sea, where they met with a small Fleet, and those also Trojans, whereof Corineus Nephew to Brute was Admirall; great were the acclama∣tions and expressions of joy for this so fortunate though accidental meeting, an happy omen of future successe; and being thus joyned together to sayl to a Province of Gallia called Guyan whose Prince was Groffarius, to whom was brought iding of the approach of this unexpected Fleet, He wisely to prevent ensuing danger, musters his Souldiers and in a full body marcheth towards the Sea coast, there intending to fight his (as yet unknown) Enemy, before he should get any firm footing within his Territories; but the Trojans whose resolution was either to win or die, so behaved themselves that Groffarius with all his Knights had the worst and were put to flight, whilst the Trojan bravely maintain'd & kept the Field. No joy on earth so absolute and compleat, but it is intermingled with some sorrow or disaster; great questionlesse was the solace and mirth of the Trojan for this so fortunate a Victory; but when the dead bodies were viewed, amongst those who had ended their lives in the bed of honour, was found Turonus a Nephew to Valiant Brute, which caused a petty Ecclipse to their Victory; but to eternize the Name and perpetuate the never dying honour of his deceased Nephew and couragious fellow-souldiers: Brute built that well known City in France, which to this very day is called Turon. After the atchievment of this Victory, and of the City Brute, which Corineus and the rest of the Trojans betook themselves again to the Seas, as yet not having attained to the Iland appointed by the propitious Goddesse,2828. III c. lxxxii. DCCCI. which hapned about iiii M. lxx. before the building of Rome (saith Mr. Fabian) following the foresaid account iiii C lxx, before the Incarnation of Christ xi. C. xxxvi. and before Alexander the Great conquered the world viii C. xi. also before any King reigned over the Frenchmen Monarchally, or that they were free from Tribute to Rome xv. C. lvi. The Arrivall of Brute in Albion. Brute having now past the pikes of many hazardous passages and exanclated dangers, arrives at last at the long hop'd for Haven of his fore-promised happinesse: the first thing he did, was to progresse the whole Iland to view and consider the comodiousnesse thereof which he found
no way to frustrate his hopes and longing expectation, he finds it fertile and well stored with Woods, garnished with pleasant and enamel'd Meadows, and embroidered with many goodly Rivers and purling Brooks and Rivulets (replenished with abundance of Fish) like so many veins and arteries running through the whole body of the Iland; these things could not but please, but yet they are not solely to be enjoyed without some danger; for as the Trojans passe from place to place to view the scituation and opportune places to inhabit, they are oft encountered with grisly creatures exceeding humane proportion, who give them but rude and savage welcome; and these were they whom the Goddesse meant, when she said, habitata Gygantibus olim; amongst these prodigious Caitiffs one exceeded all the rest in bulk and robustiousnesse, who was called Gogmagog, with whom Corineus Nephew to Brute wrestled; who although he had a rib broken by this Monster, yet so foiled him that he cast him down from the Cliffs; for which cause the place afterwards was called, The Fall of Gogmagog, (I have heard some say that in Glamorganshire there is a place which the Inhabitants in their own Mother tongue, call Cwymp y Cawr, which is as much as to say, The Gyants fall or overthrow,) but that Name being changed, it was afterwards called, The Fall of Dover. For this most valiant Act and speciall good Services Brute gave and allotted unto Corineus, the Province or Country now called Cornwall. Brute having destroyed that race of Gyants formerly mentioned, after a perfect discovery of the whole Island, passing by the River of Thames for his Recreation, and finding a place in all respects fit to build a City to make the Capital and prime habitation of his new atchieved Kingdome; set Workmen, of all Arts and Callings to accomplish and finish this his Design; which being brought to perfection, to renew like a Phenix out of Ashes Old Troy, he caused it to be called Troynovant (i.) new Troy which name continued till K. Lud enjoyed the Scepter and rule in Great Brittaine, upon that time (saith my Author) of M. lxviii.Fabian, fol. 10. who then caused it to be called Luds Town, and now London. This now Glorious City, (Rome it self was not built in one day) and formerly as glori∣ous a stile, being called Augusta, for we read in divers Grave and Learned Authors, that St. Augulus was Bishop of Augusta, viz. London, in England, as both Catholicks and Protestants expound it, and among them one in a Sermon before K. James, saith, Your City hath been anciently stiled Augusta: for we read both in the ancient Roman Martyrologe, St. Bede, Ʋsu∣ardus, Ado Vandalbertus, Petrus de Natalibus and others that this Augulus was Bishop of Au∣gusta in Brittannia, Augusta or London in Brittanny and was a Martyr; Augusta in Brittannia natalis beati Auguli Episcopi qui aetatis cursum per Martyrium explens aeterna proemia suscipere meruit: Baronius saith, he cannot tell when he suffered, Quo tempore passius sit hactenus mihi obscurum. But if we compare the name of London at that time it was called Augusta with o∣ther circumstances, and with the Catalogue of the Bishops of London after the time of K. Lucius, we shall very probably find that this our worthy Saint Bishop of London is to be reckoned one of the first Bishops that were consecrated in this Kingdom, and long before our common Conversion in the dayes of K. Lucius, and so consequently of St. Peter, or his Disciple St. Ari∣stobulus, no other then being here with eminent Authority to consecrate him Bishop and settle him Bishop of Augusta: London or first, this City was not called Augusta in the Reign of K. Lucius when this Nation was generally converted, but onely Londinum, London; nor never since that time or by any before but by the Romans at their first setling here in the time of Claudius; and that the general opinion was that London was called Augusta Dio. And Xiphe∣linus writ, That Legio Augustalis non nata hibernabat in superiore Britannia, The Roman Legion so termed wintered in the upper Brittany near London as is thought; it was long before Dio∣clesian's time when it was thus called, in the dayes of Cæsar Augustus or soon after, A late French Author of this our Brittain in his History, seemeth to say or think, that Caer∣legeon was in the time of Julius Agricola and by him named Augusta, which if it were so, it only varyeth the particular place of his Martyrdome (viz. St. Augulus) nothing detracting from him or the glory of this Nation, and that this Saint was Bishop of Augusta, (i.) London, and not Augusta Caerlegion, this reason may conclude, for that Tremonius and St. Dubritius be the first that be named Bishops of Augusta Caerlegion. Certainly Mr. Cambden observeth very well, That London was called Augusta, quia ea dignitate floruit Londinum, ut Augusta dici cae∣perit and many forraign Cities very famous were called Augusta in that Respect: as Augusta Taurinorum; Aug. Trieastinorum; Aug. Veromanduor m; Aug. Valeria; Aug. Emerita; Aug. Bracchara; Aug. Acilia; Aug. Tiberii; Aug. Vindeliciorum; Aug. Cæsarea; Aug. Ve∣storum; Aug. Trevirorum. Now as concerning Bishops, not onely Augusta London, St. Anacletus, (it being ordered by the Church to constitute Primates where Pagans had their Arch-flamens,) but also other places ordered by his Tome or the Catalogues of St. Peter, St. Clement,Caerlegion. & ex Anacleto hujus in∣sulae divisionem Canterbury, London, Caerlegeon, York and Alba in Scotland (by some taken to be the now St. Andrews) urbs legionum, (observe in the Latin Caerlegion (i.) urbs Legionum put in the first place) Cantuaria, Londonia, Eboraca and Alba, unde Albania Provincia, were designed Sees of such Primates, as Giraldus Cam. Sir John Price, Matthew Parker. 1 Arch. B. Pro. do testifie. Thus much concerning this famous and renowned City of London not without cause called Augusta. Brute having finished this structure and given name to it to perpetuate the
memory of that City of which the Poet saith, Nunc seges est ubi Troja fuit, gave also a name to the whole Iland, calling it Britania, à Bruto; so did Romulus by Rome, Alexander by Alexan∣dria, and Cæsar by Casarea; and so divers other great and eminent Commanders and Po∣tentates, named both whole Kingdoms, Ilands and great Cities after their own names, that in them their Memories might live for ever. Brute having accomplished the thred of life allot∣ted by the fatal Sisters, and having left Rules for his Britons to live in civil Amity and or∣derly Government; after a prosperous Reigne, and happy in a hopeful posterity, he bethinks himself of setling his Estate whereby to avoid all Contention and Discord betwixt his Sons, which were three, Locrine, Camber and Albanact, betwixt these three he divides his new ac∣quired Kingdom; to the eldest he gives Troynovant, with all the Countries adjacent which are now called England, containing East, West and South; but (as his Father had called the whole Iland Britannia and his Subjects Britannos or Britones,) so Locrinus after his name called his Share Loegria, and at this very day the Welsh call England Lloegre; to his second Son Camber, he bequeathed that part which after the Saxons call Wales, which Nomen-clation it yet keeps; and Camber imitating his Father and Brother, named his Moiety from Camber Cambria: This partition or Cambers portion was formerly divided from that of Loegria by the River Severne in the East, and on the North side by the River Dee, and on the South by the River Vaga now called the River Wye at the Castle of Stringlinge,Fabian, fol. 11. (a name which I find not elsewhere) or rather Chepstow Castle, but of this place what Mr. Cambden speaks, take these his own words,Chepstow in Monmouthshire. Hinc fluctuoso volumine descendit in Austrum Vaga in quo Copiosa est Salmonum piscatura à Septembri ad Aprilem, (and by the way give me leave to tell you that when Sal∣mons grow out of kind or season in Wye, in the River Ʋsk which runneth through Caerlegion but ten Miles distant in the same County, Salmons come in season, so that in the County of Monmouth all the whole year Salmons are fit to be presented to an Emperors Table,) and if a Wye Salmon chance to come into Ʋsk or e contra, the Fishermen are so skilfull as to tell you this is an Ʋsk Salmon, this of Wye) limes hodie inter Glocestrenses & Monumethenses, olim inter Anglos & Wallos juxta illud Nichami versiculam. Inde Vagos Vaga Cambrenses, hinc respicit Anglos. Qui cum jam ad ostium ferè devenerit Chepstow præterfluit (id est) si e Saxonico interpreteris, Forum (viz.) Negationis locus, Brittannis Castle-went, (and is this day called Cass. Gwent) Op∣pidum hoc est celebre, clivo a flumine surgenti Impositum, manibus circumvallatur magno cam∣bitu quæ agros & hortos in se includunt, Castrum habet ad occiduum latus, flumini impeudens (in which Castle there is a stately Fabrick called Longius or Longinus Tower, supposed to be built by that Centurion who was present at the death of our most sacred and blessed Saviour, and out of this opinion it is hard to beat many of the Natives; but who so pleaseth to read Surius, xv. Martii, shall find, That Longinus the Centurion, one of the Jews who thirsted after his blood, (who most willingly shed it for the Redemption of Mankind,) signis & prodigiis, discussis tene∣bris, veritatis splendorem, Christi ipsius gratia quem in Crucem sustulerat videre meruit; and dete∣sting the impiety of the Jewes freely manifested the most glorious Resurrection of our Lord Jesus; this his so confident and publick affirming of the truth, for Crucis ei custodia ut Centu∣rioni mandata; postquam autem vivificum Christi Corpus sepulturae mandatum fuit eadem sacro∣sancti corporis custodia Longino commissa fuit; caused the Jews to procure from Cæsar a Sen∣tence of death against him: Longinus flies from Hierusalem (leaving all his military Prefer∣ments,) with some religious and devout Christians, he betakes himself into Capadocia, where he converted many by his instruction and exemplar Life and Vertues, to the faith, knowledge and adoration of the true Messias, Jesus Christ; In Capadocia he is aprehended and there ob∣tains the glorious Crown of Martyrdome, his Head as a great Trophee is sent unto Pilate, who to ingratiate himself and please the perfidious and stony-hearted Jews, caused the holy relique to be placed before one of the Gates of that once holy City Hierusalem, so that Longinus could not be the Founder or Erecter of that Edifice before spoken of. But to follow Mr. Cambden a little further concerning Chepstow, he continueth his Discourse, saying; Et e rigione stetit Pri∣oratus cujus parte meliore demolita, quod reliquum est, in Ecclesiam parochialem convertitur, Pons vero quo Vaga jungitur, sublicius est & admodum excelsus, quia accedente aestu in magnam altitu∣dinem fli vius exsurgit: hujus Domini fuerunt e Clarensium familia nobiles, a proximo castro Strigul quod incoluerunt Striguliae & Pembrochiae comites dicti, quorum ultimus Richardus vir infra∣cto animo, & projectissimis brachiis StrongBow cognominatus quod arcu intentissimo uteretur & nihil levi brachio ageret, &c. This place after by a Daughter and Heir came to the Bigots, and now the Earls of Worcester (or at least before the late Wars) enjoyed both Town and Castle, the eldest Son of that Family being stiled Lord Herbert of Chepstow. To Albanact the third Son of Brutus was given the third part of great Britain, now called Scotland, which as it is now is called the second Kingdom of Great Britain, and the North part of this Iland hath on the East the German Ocean, on the North the Orkneys and Deucalidon Sea, the West affronted by Ireland, on the South it hath the River Tweed, the Cheviot Hills and the adjacent Tract, reaching to the Sulway Sands whereby it is separated from England. This Kingdome is spacious and from the South borders spreadeth it self wide into the East and West, till again it contracts it self narrower into the Northern Promontories, furnished with all things befitting a famous Kingdom, both for Air, Soil, Rivers, Wood, Mountains, Fish,
Fowl, Cattle and Corn, so plenteous that it supplieth these with other Countries in their want; Their Nobility and Gentry are very studious of learning and all civil knowledge, for which end they not only frequent the three Universities of their own Kingdom (St. Andrews, Glasco, and Edenborough, the Nurseries of their Muses, but also much addict themselves to travel into Forraign Countries, especially France; whose King hath a Guard of Scots, the double Treshure florie in the Arms of the Kingdome, makes manifest the French Interest in former time in that Nation. If it is desired to know more of Scotland, read their own Authors; it is enough for me to say that Albanack from his own name called it Albania. This Country is divided from Loegria or England, as saith Venreable Bede, by two arms of the Sea, but they meet not: The East arm of which beginneth about two Miles from the Minster of Eburcuring in the West side of Penulton, The West arm had some time a strong City named Alclino, which in the Brittish Tongue was called Clincston and stood upon the River Clint. Thus Brute having divided Britain into three Parts, after he had ruled twenty two or four years after most Concordance of Writers, he died and was interred in Troynovant commonly called London or Luds Town. Locrinus second King of Brittain. LOcrinus the first and eldest Son of the late deceased Brutus, takes possession of his Kingdom of Loegria, now England, in the year from the Creation of the World, four thousand fourscore and seven. This Kingdome as it was the largest, so was it the most beautifull, rich and commodious, both in respect of Navigable Rivers, Ports and Havens; as also fruitfulness of the Soils, and abundance of stately Woods and Groves, and according to the relation and assertion of Policronica and Guido de Collumna, it stretched forth and extended it self as far as to the River Humber, as now it is called, (a name when Locrinus entered into Soveraignty unknown.) Locrinus thus invested in his Principality, (as much as could be in a Land not formerly, or at least by savage People or Gyants inhabited) made ready to his hand; His Brother with such Regiments as were allotted to him to Colonize and people his Part, being retired into his own Quarters or Patrimony, whilst by his own Industry and Advice of such as he made use of in a matter of so great importance, was endeavouring to frame a modell how to Go∣vern and Uphold this his new Plantation, an unexpected Enemy appears; Humber with a Navy arrives, and having with him a sufficient Army of war-like Huns, sets upon Albanact, whose thoughts were more busied how to settle his People and frame his Commonwealth, then to oppose an Enemy; distressed Albanact is put to his shifts, whilst the Scythian King, for so most ancient Writers onely call him, takes occasion by the Foretop, and making use of his opportunity fiercely assaults the Albanian Prince, and with bloody slaughter, and the death of Albanact, makes way for himself and Followers to intrude into his Possessions, who as yet had scarce time to call them his own. Fame whose vigilant eyes never sleep, with an exasperating Trumpet quickly blowes this unfortunate Newes into the Eares of Locrinus; he to revenge the Dishonour done and the Death of his Brother, and also to enjoy that which now by right was fallen unto him; but above all to remove so dangerous and powerful a Neighbour, or rather Enemy, summons all his Nobles, and gathers together all the force he possibly could make; and with a mind full of Revenge, Resolution, and Courage Advanceth, and with speedy Marches setteth forwards to Fight the Scythian before he take to Deep root in Albania. Camber is not slow to second this action as a thing which he conceives deeply to concern himself; and therefore unites his Forces with his Brothers that thereby the Victory may be more certaine, and the losse lesse considerable. Desire quickens actions, and resolute souls seem rather to flye then walk; The Armies meet, the Brittains inflamed with revenge for the Death of Albanact, who was their fellow Souldier and Traveller, Son of their Deceased King, brother to the present, breath nothing but Death and Confusion. The Scythian with like Valour and Courage, thinks no danger too great to make good by the sword what he already purchast and gotten by the same. Terrible is the conflict on both sides, but fortune after long debate, with victory Crowns the Brittaines, the Scythians are put to Flight, and flying are so hotly pursued, that many are drowned and the King himself, (and as the Poet saith of Icarus, Icarus Icarias, nomine fecit aquas) put to such a straite that he was Drowned in that Famous River which from his name hath ever since been called Humber, of which Mr. Cambden saith, Est certe totius Britanniae aestuarium amplissi∣mum & piscosissimum the largest and most full of Fish throughout Britannie. Ex aestuantis oce∣ani accessibus adauctum, & iisdem retro remeantibus, suas illiusque aquas vehementissime vasto cum murmure non sine magno navigantium periculo agit; unde Nichanus. Fluctibus æquoreis nautis suspectior Humber Submersis nomen contulit Humbris aquæ. And another Poet much to the same purpose saith, Dum fugit, obstat ei flumen, submergitur illic Deque suo tribuit nomine nomen aquæ.
Mr. Cambden in his Britannia setteth down these two Distichons, but speaks not a word of the cause, or the battel; and the reason is easie to be imagined, for should he expresse the death of Albanack and the just revenge of Locrine and Camber in behalf of their brother, he must needs grant Brute to be Progenitor of the Britains, and consequently of the Welsh, a Na∣tion which are very little beholding unto him. Locrinus is now a Conqueror, no fear of further supplies to affront him, the day is absolutely his own; but unfortunate Prince, what a proud Foe clad in steel and with a courage equalizing that of Mars could not effect, is done by an Amorous Glance of a Female Creature; Estrild Humbers Daughter casts forth such piercing darts from her Charming Eyes, that maugre both steel and coat of Male, Locrine is wounded to the Heart; he sighs, complains, beggs com∣passion from her who is his Captive; and in conclusion becoms her slave, she his Mistress, in these bewitching Fetters he reposeth his happiness, her enriching Arms he deemes the Trophees of his Victories; but fond-man Gwendolena thy abused Lady disgests not a Corrival, shee will make thee know quidfoemina possit irata; she complains to her Father, he acquaints his deerest Friends, and all enter into an Association to be revenged; Locrinus awakes out of his effe∣minate dalliances, Armes himself to oppose the storme at hand and beat back the threatned danger; but too late, his Enemies are too powerful, the abused Gwendolena too well befriended, and leaves justice not to be controuled; and thus Locrinus a Conqueror after he Reigned by account of most Authors Twenty Years, through his intemperate lust and wanton affecti∣on, was deprived at one time both of Life and Kingdom, leaving his body to be interred in Treynovant. Gwendolena Queen Regent of Brittain. LOcrinus for his unjust and unlawful Love being thus justly punished, the States and Coun∣sellors of the Kingdom elect and chuse Gwendolena the abused and injured Queen during the Nonage and Minority of her Son, to fit at the Helm and manage the Affairs of the King∣dome; this Lady was daughter to Corinaeus, who joyned his navy and came along with Brute, and he who Encountered with Gogwagog on the Hills by Dover as some write, others say neer Plimmouth in Devon-shire, which place this day is called the HAW, a hill betwixt the Town and the Sea, on whose brow is a spacious and pleasant down, yeilding a delightful prospect, in which is a Sea mark called the Compasse to direct and guide Navigators passing that way, of this conflict betwixt Corineus and Gogmagog. Thus writeth a certain Poet, Hos avidum belli robur Corinæus Averno Precipites misit, cubitis ter quatuor altum Gogmagog Herculeo suspendit in aere luctu Antaeum{que} suum scopulo detrusit in æquor Potavit{que} dato Thetis ebria sanguine fluctus, Divisum{que} tulit mare corpus Cerberus umbram. Gwendolena to the eternal memory and glory of her Name and Sex governed this Iland for the space of Fourteen years, and then her Son coming to maturity and fit age to undertake so great a burden, with the general applause and acclamations of all, resigned her Trust and Authority to Madan. Madan Son to Locrine and Gwendolena Succeeds in the KINGDOME. MAdan Son to Locrine and Gwendolena and Grandchild to Brute, being now past his mi∣nority, his Mother joyfully resignes her Regency, and is with generall applause and acclamations seated in his Throne and with all solemnity acknowledged King, about the year from the worlds Creation, 4122. Authors write very sparingly of the Acts of this King; only all agree that during the time of his Reign which continued for the space of Forty years (a time too long for any Tyrant) he ruled insolently with Oppression and Tyranny; Vindex no∣centes sequitur a tergo Deus; for being at his sports of Hunting, he was slain and torn to pieces by Wolves and other savage Beasts, leaving two Sons, Mempricius and Manlius. Jac bus Gor∣donus Scotus Fol 9.This King being Grandchild to Brute the Trojan, I think it not amiss to give my Reader some satisfaction concerning Old Troy; Si 300 annis stetit Regnum Trojanum, caepisse oportet ante 4 annos in Dardano 1. Rege 2520. sed Dardani regnum rectius sub finem Ducatus Moysis & ab hoc anno 2524. exortum putatur; Nam a Dardano ad Ilii excidium sunt anni 296. Conti∣git igitur Ilii casus anno nostro 2820. sic enim peritiores numerant hos reges. Dardanus regnavit annis 65. Erichtanus 46. Tros 40. Ilus 49. Laomedon 44. Priamus 52. Ex quibus colliguntur anni illi 296. hunc Regum Catologum ad suas neomenias reducit Scaliger. lib. 2. Can. sub finem & nostris annis probe consentit.
As for the Destruction of Troy, what Homer the Greek, and Virgil the Prince of Latine Poets have written, I pass by, as being Poetical fictions, each striving to advance the glory of his own Nation; But Gordon in the same Folio, tells us, Circæ hæc tempora, præsertini sub Ducatu Judicis Aod, ponitur Tros Dardaniae Rex tertius, quem sequuti sunt alii, Hic Tros (à quo Trojani) belium intulit Tantalo regi Phrygiæ ob raptum Ganymedem; and for this, Gor∣don cites Eusebius 99. cap. 8. and so proceeds, Juxta regum Catologum anno 2524. notatum sequitur hunc annum 5. quo regnavit Tros, quod recte consentet tum cum Ilii excidio, tum cum chronologia inter hunc Troem & Tantalum; ac deni{que} cum anno quo Pelopidae Mycenis soli reg∣naverunt, pulsis Heraclidis: à Trois autem morte us{que} ad Atreum Tantali ex Penelope nepotem vix sunt anni 71. juxta regum annos notatos; Dardania quidem anno Orbis 2524. & Mycaena∣rum 99. c. 8. Consurgunt quo{que} anni tantum 20. ab obitu Trois us{que} ad mortem Acrisii, cæsi à Perseo nepote quando cæpit Mycenarum regnum: nec ab his alienus est Tatianus qui Pelopei è Phrygia exitum refert ad Acrisii tempora. De Trojano Excidio. Si, quod supra indicavi, condita Troja est anno Orbis 2524.Gordon fol. 11. inquem incidit initium Ducatus Josue: Cum steterit Ilium annis 296. ut probatissimi Autores magno fere consensu testantur, ne∣cesse est excidium hoc incidisle in annum 2820, ab orbe condito, & recte sunt enim sic ab eversa Troit ad primam Olympiadem anni 407. quod intervallum doctissimi qui{que} probarunt. Scaliger. lib. 5. de Emen. pro hac suæ ac vera sententia veteres citat, Ephorum, Calisthenem & Damascen. Sane tabula Eratosthenis quam habet, cap. 18. an Appen. idem perspicue refert, Hanc tabulam laudat & sequitur. Dionysius Halic. Idem{que} intervallum ex Diodoro colligit citatus Scaliger; ab hoc autem excidio ad Palilia anni consurgunt 432. hunc numerum saepe repetit Dionysius Halicar. quem Glareanus & alii libenter sequuntur, &c. MEMPRICIƲS. MEmpricius the Eldest Son of Madan, his Father being dead, by right of Inheritance was Crowned with the Royal Diadem of Brittaine about the Year of the worlds Creation 4142. but long he enjoyed not his Soveraignty without Troubles and Opposition; for Man∣lius his younger brother, a man of an Ambitious spirit, Haughty and aspiring to Royal dignity, would not content himself with any Titles of Honour under the degree of a King; and there∣fore to bring this his Designe to his wisht for Period, he resolves either to subdue or to expell his brother: and to this purpose he insinuates himself into the bosomes of the Nobles, casts As∣persions upon his brother, Detracts and Malignes all his Actions; and so farre prevailes, that Rebellion is rais'd, and an unnatural Warre taken in hand, which was eagerly prosecuted on each part, and continued a long time; at length both Nobles and Commons finding Bellum minime bellum, and perceiving these intestine broyles, to wast their Country and threaten an utter Ruine, incline to peace; no fitter way can be thought upon then an attonement and re∣conciliation between the brothers; and therefore a day of meeting is appointed, and great hopes conceived of a final peace and Concord; but Mempricius having now got his brother under the fair pretence of becoming friends into his power, to avoid all Jealousies and Fears of future deceit and Treachery, becomes a Traytor himselfe, and by Treason caused his own brother to be slain, making that saying of the Poet good, Rara est concordia fratrunt. This perfidious and tragical scene performed, Mempricius, (his brother Manlius being taken away) enjoyes as he conceives a happy peace; this peace makes him forgetful both of his person and Honour, and now fearing nothing he contemns even the Deity, and precipitates not only himself but his subjects also into Sloth, Idlenesse, and Treachery; and when the Gate is set open, and free scope given to sin, though nemo repente fit pessimus, yet those who forsake Grace and Abandon themselves over to unlawful lusts and pleasures, fall from one sin to another till they arrive at last at the very Jawes of Hell: so fares it with Mempricius, his Wife or Wives give him not content, the fairest and choicest beauties must be his Concubines, and these as many as his own wandering fancy shall think fit, in these horrid sins he wallowes with all sen∣suality. I know some of Epicurus his Scholars or rather Atheists will excuse Mempricius for this his Platonick as it is now commonly stiled, love, and tell you that whatsoever is natural is no sin, and out of this deduce a most damnable consequence or conclusion, which chast ears abhor to hear: but this natural act as it is called, fied not Mempricius, he falls to that which is most unnatural, the sin of Sodomy, with wild and brutish Creatures, and by this means becomes hateful both to God and Man, but not without just punishment from Heaven: for intending to disport hemself in hunting becomes a prey to wild beasts, and by them is torn to pieces, after he had enjoyed the Kingdome twenty years, leaving to succeed him in his Throne, a son by his lawful wife called Ebrank. Mempricius his Reign is observed by those who write of him to have been Tyrannical. Plutarch though a Panim saith,De sera numi∣nis vindicta. that God doth serve himself of wicked Tyrants as of Hangmen to execute his justice upon others, no lesse or more wicked then they; and that as poysons are sometimes medicinable, and necessary to purge sad humors and cure diseases; even so Tyrants are necessary to purge the sins and cure
the vices of wicked Subjects, To which end (saith he) Phalaris the Tyrant was ordained by Almighty God to govern the Agrigentins, and Marius the Romans. As for the brutish sin of Mempricius, holy Gildas brings it in, as one amongst the rest, for which God so severely puni∣shed the Britains;De excidio Britanniae. and touching briefly the lives of some of the Kings and Princes that were in his time, as of Constantius, Aurelius, Conanus, Vortiporius, Cuneglasus and Maglocus, taxing them with Tyranny, perjury, sacrilegious murders and parricides, committed even before the holy Altars, &c. yea, and two of them of Sodomy; for which and other general corruptions and wickedness Gildas threatneth or rather prophesyeth the utter ruine and destruction which was to follow; which also Geffrey of Monmouth acknowledgeth saying, that King Cadwallader the last of the Race of the Britains used these words as he fled by the Sea into France with the reliques of the Brittish Nation, Vae nobis peccatoribus ob immania scaelera nostra, &c. And truly so great is the sin of Lust, especially in Kings and great Dukes and other Commanders in the sight of God (how little soever in these our sinful times we make of it) that whole Kingdomes for it have been destroyed. The Kingdom of Spain when it had flourished as well in Reli∣gion as Power from the time of King Richard (the first Catholick King thereof) for the space of 120 years, the wicked King Vitiza being a man given over to all lust and carnality infected and corrupted all Spain, not onely with the bad example of his one dissolute life (having ma∣ny Wives at once besides Concubines) but also with abominable lawes whereby he gave leave to all sorts of men to have as many Wives and Concubines as they listed; yea and forced Priests and such as lived Chast to Marry, by which means all Spain became within a while to be no better then a common stew or brodel: and although Almighty God according to his accustomed manner expected their conversion and amendment all the time of his Reign, and layed only the penalty thereof upon him, whom he deprived both of his Crown and of his Eye-sight by the means of Roderick who succeeded him in the Kingdome; yet when the said Roderick followed his steeps as well in his vicious life as in the maintenance of his abominable Laws; it pleased God of his justice to permit him to give the occasion both of his own ruine as also of the overthrow of all Spain by the sin of the flesh wherewith the whole Kingdome was, as it were, overflowed. For as whereas King Roderick had sent a Kinsman of his own called Count Julian Ambassa∣dor into Africk, and in the mean time Ravished his Daughter, or (as some write) his Wife; the Count understanding it at his return, was so incensed therewith against the King, that for revenge thereof he practised with the Moores to bring them into Spain, who with his assistance Conquered it so speedily, and with such destruction of the people, that the punishment of God was most evident therein: for having first overthrown King Roderick (whose body could never after the battel be found) they subdued almost all Spain in Eight months or in Fourteen as some say, and slew 700000. of all sorts of people, besides great numbers of Captives which they sent prisoners into Barbary: and from that time forwards they remained in the possession of that Kingdome or in some great part thereof for the space of 700 years. This example of the Conquest and subversion of Spain for the sins of the flesh, was so famous and so much observed by Godly and Wise men, at the same time when it hapned that St. Boni∣facius a Countryman of ours and Bishop of Mentz in Cermany, who lived in the same age and converted the Saxons and Frisons from Paganisme to the Christian Faith, proposed it to one called Etholbud King of the Mercians to withdraw him from his dissolute life, and tells him that in old Saxony where there was no Christianity, there if either Maid or Wife did commit Adultery or Fornication, she was first strangled and after burnt: and he that corrupted her, Hanged over her, or else she was stripped naked to the middle and whipped by chast Matrons from Town to Town, and prickt with sharp Knives till shee dyed therewith. EBRANCK. EBranck, after the unfortunate death of his Father, by the general consent and Approba∣tion of both Nobles and Commons, is invested in the Regal Dignity Anno mundi Creati∣onis,Policronica Gaufride and others. 4182. Authors affirm, that he had a thing, in those times not unusual, one and twenty wives; by whom he was enriched with a plentifull and numerous off-spring, to wit, twenty Sons, and thirty daughters, whereof the most fair and beautifull was named Guales, or Gua∣lea; these daughters (intending to uphold the Trojan blood) he sent to Alba Silvius, the e∣leventh King of Italy, or seventh of the Latines, there to be espoused unto Trojans: This E∣branck, was a comely man, Majestical, and well proportioned; of incomparable valour, and as desirous of Martial Attempts, as his Progenitor Brutus; and therefore providing all War∣like Engines and Furniture correspondent to his designs, he attempts to invade France, which is testified by Jacobus Bergomas in the sixth of his Chronicles, and Jacobus Lessabeus in the de∣scription of Henalt affirmeth the same, and that he was driven back by Brunchildis Lord of Henalt, with some loss of his men: Yet Fabian affirmeth this Voyage to have been prosperous and successfull; insomuch that what by his own fancies, judgement and policie, being assist∣ed by the Trojan-Latines, or Latine-Trojans, where he had espoused his daughter, he over∣ran and conquered a great part of Germany. Some Authors ascribe this Conquest and good fortune to Assaracus the second Son of Ebranck, with the rest of the younger brothers, and
esteem it no great service or enterprise of moment; for that Europe was then scarce peopled and Colonized, unless towards the Sea Coasts, as Dalmatia, Italy, and the coasts of France: of these Brethren, had Germany the name, à Germanis fratribus, who subdued it. Ebrank thus fortunate either in his own undertakings, or in these of his children, having setled his affairs to his hearts desire, begins to take into consideration, the beautifying and strengthning Britannia; and as Brutus about an hundred and fourty years (if he built it in the second year of his Reign) before to his eternal glory had built Troynovant, Ebranck, with no less ambition to continue and perpetuate his name and memory, layeth the foundation of a glorious City, calling it, being fully finished, after his own nomenclation Caer Ebrank, which now we call York. A late learned Author saith, it is a common received opinion among our Antiquaries,Mr. Brough. fol. 280. 2. that Ebrancus son to Mempricius, a hundred years after the building of London (or thereabouts) builded the City of York, calling it then Kair Baruch, as both Brittains and Saxons ancient and modern agree; where as Harding and Stow, with others, affirm he seated an Arch-Flamen. He made a Temple in Ebrank City Of Diane where an Arch-Flamen he set,Harding. To rule Temples at that time was his det. In the twentieth year of his Reign (saith Mr. Stow) he built Kaer Ebrank by the Saxons cal∣led Evorwick, now corruptly York, wherein he builded a Temple to Diana, and set there an Arch-Flamen, and was there buried, when he had reigned sixty years. Thus ancient these our Historians make Arch-Flamens in Brittain, as I have related their very words; not that I think the name and word Arch-Flamen, but only their Office and Calling among the Gentiles to have been so ancient, as the time assigned to our Brutus, but of younger continu∣ance and age by divers hundreds of years; the word Flamen, not known till the time of Nu∣ma Pompilius, and taken from a kind of Attire worn upon their heads upon Festival days, yet the Office of Flamen and Arch-Flamen, Pontifex and Summus Pontifex was always the same among the Pagans. Three Arch-flamens, he made through all Brittain,Harding. As Arch-bishops now in our Laws been, Three Temples all to govern and Domaine, At Troynovant, one Logres to overseen, Her false gods to serve and to queme, At Ebranch another for Albany, And at Caerleon for Cambre one soveranly. And this is so evident a Truth in Histories, that the Bishop himself, which before with one only opposed against Arch-flamens, freely confesseth that at this time Arch-flamens, Bishops, were placed in these three Cities in Brittain, and in them only,Mr. Broughton, fol. 281. 3. 2. Age. Godwin. Cat. of Bish. in Lond. Edit. Anno 1615. where so many (saith my Au∣thor) have testified, and shall testifie hereafter further, these Arch-flamens were resident. Thus he writeth. At what time Christian Religion was first publickly received in this Island, there were established in the same 28. Sees, or Cathedral Churches (which were the Seats of Arch-fla∣mens and Flamens, as shall be shewed hereafter with their names) whereof three were Arch∣bishopricks, York whose Province was Scotland, and the North of England, &c. Another Author saith, Eboracensi vero (scilicet Archiepiscopo) tota terra Northumbrina ab arcui Humbri fluminis cum tota Albania: To him of York all Northumberland from Humber, with all Albania (i. e.) Scotland, which is confirmed by these words, Eboracensi Deira & Albania, under York, Deira and Albania. Giraldus Cambrensis according to the Tome or Book of St. Anacletus,M. B. fol. 167. which divided this I∣sland into five Provinces, relateth, as divers modern and others in this manner;Giral. Com. l. de sedis Mene vensis digni∣tate. Matthew Parker, lib. Antiq. Brit. p. 24. T. Pris. defen. Histo. Brit. p. 73. 74. To. Leland Indice Brit. aut. v. Brit. Beat. Renanus &c. ibidem. as he saith he found it then both in Papal and Imperial Acts and Constitutions, Juxta Provinciarum nu∣merum quas tempore gentilitatis habuerit Insula, quinque Metropoles Juxta Tomum enim Ana∣cleti Episcopi Romani, sicut in Pontificalibus Romanorum gestis, & Imperialibus continetur di∣rectum Galliarum Episcopis; juxta statum Gentilium ante Christi adventum Britannia habuit pro∣vincias numero quinque Britanniam primam, Britanniam secundam, Flaviam, Maximiam, Va∣lentiam. Prima dicta est occidentalis Pars Insulae, Britannia secunda Cantia, Tertia Flavia, quæ & Mercia; Quarta Maximia id est Eboraca. Quinta valentîa scilicet Albania quæ nunc abusive Scotia dicitur. According to the number of Provinces, which it had in the time of the Pagans, the Island of Britany hath five Metropolitan Cities; for according to the Tome of Anacletus Bi∣shop of Rome, as it is contained in the Decrees of the Popes of Rome, and Emperors, directed to the Bishops of France, according to the State of the Gentiles, before the coming of Christ, Brittain had five Provinces, Brittain the first, Brittain the second, Flavia, Maximia, Valentia; the first was the West part of the Island, the second Kent, the third Flavia, called also Mercia, the fourth Maximia, that is to say York; the fifth Valentia; Albania, now corruptly, called Scotland: The Metropolitan City of the first Brittain was Caerlegeon: The Metropolitan of
the second Dorobernia, now Canterbury: In the third London; in the fourth York; and in the fifth, Alba taken to be the City now named St. Andrews. Thus far Giraldus of St. Anacletus Tome, extant in his time, as he hath witnessed: Caerlegion the first Metropo∣lis, of the five in this Isle.York is now esteemed the second City of England by some (though others think Norwich, and not a few Bristoll) both for fame and greatness; a pleasant large and stately place, well fortified and beautifully adorned, as well with private as publick Edifices, and rich and po∣pulous withall; seated on the river Ouse, which cutteth it as it were in twain, both parts be∣ing joyned together with a fair stone bridge, consisting of high and mighty arches. A City of great fame in the Roman times, and of as eminent reputation in all ages since, and in the several turns and changes which have befallen this Kingdom under the Saxons, Danes, and Normans hath still preserved its ancient Custom; adorned it was with an Archiepiscopal See in the time of the Brittains, nor stooped it lower when the Saxons received the Faith: Ri∣chard the second laying to it a little Territory on the west side thereof, made it a County of it self, in which the Archbishops of York did enjoy the rights of Palatines: and for a further lustre to it, Hen. 8. appointed there a Councel for the Government of the Northern parts, consisting of a Lord President, certain Councellors, a Secretary, and other Officers: And yet in none of these hath York been more fortunate, then that it hath adorned so many Princes of the Imperial Line of Germany, and blood Royal of England. The Line of YORK. 1461. 36. Edward the IV. 23. 1483. 37. Edward the V. 1483. 38. Richard the III. With the Title and Honour, Stile, and attribute of Otho of Bavaria, Earl of York. Gules two Lions Passant Gardant, Or. Edmund of Langley, fifth Son to King Edward 3. Earl of Camb. and D. of York. Edw. Plantagenet Son of Edmund of Langley, Earl of Rutland, and D. of York. Richard Plantagenet, Nephew of Edmund of Langley, by his Son Richard, Earl of Cam∣bridge, D. of York. Richard of Shrewsbury second Son to King Edw. 4. D. of York. Henry 2. Son to King Hen. 7. D. of York. Charles 2. Son to King James D. of York. James 2. Son of King Charles, D. of York. Let us return again to our valiant and fortunate King Ebranck, who having happily and with great Successe finished his Forrain Wars, and living in peace, the mother of plenty, at home, lends all his cares and endeavours, both to beautifie and strengthen Brittania, as we may partly see in what is already declared of York: which work finished, he proceeded to a second Erection; and laid the foundation of Alcuid or Alcluid in Albania, now Scotland, which Hector Boetius,M. B. f. 336. 6. the Scotch Historian, in honour of his Country, imagines to be Dunbrit∣ta n: but another Author, to whom I give more credit, saith: And the old Flamens City Alcluid or Alclucht, was also founded by the same King (viz. Ebranck) of Brittain. There is a question where this City for certain was, but all agree, near the wall of division, and so the priviledges and power thereof must probably extend on both sides of that division. The City Caerlile or Lugugablia, was a place of this prerogative, builded by Leil, the seventh in number of the Brittish Kings; and out of doubt had power and prerogative in both sides of the wall, both in Leogria and Albania, having as our Antiquaries say, and experience yet proveth, in it, part of that famous Wall of Separation, habet hæc urbs aliquam partem illius muri famosi qui transcindit Northumbriam, Ranulphus Higedon, and others, placeth an old
City Ʋrbs Beble, Ʋrbs Regia, a Regal City upon the River of Twyde, super ripam Twydi, which divideth England and Scotland; and if it was a Flamen or Bishops See, as the ancient glory of it perswadeth to think, the jurisdiction of it must needs extend into Albania. The third notable place which this Ebranck founded was the Castle of Maidens, which stand∣eth at the one end of the City of Edenbrough, a Castle by the Scots thought so impregnable that the grand Seignior himself with all his numerous Armies could not be able to surprize it, but the valour and courage of the English in these late wars maugre all their Scotch juglings, and sanctity, made them know the contrary, who now have it in their possession as a curb to check that—Nation. This Castle of Maidens or rather Edenborough it self was also an ancient Flamins City and Residence, and after Converted into an Episcopall See. Ebrancus not yet content with such Edifices as he had already erected layeth a fourth Foun∣dation, and called it Bamburgh, but whether this was the place which we now call Bambury, Burgh, and Bury in their several Languages signifying the same thing I will not decide: if it were, Mr. Cambden saith, Hic Banburie quondam Bananbyniz primum perfundit ad quod Kinricus visisaxo Britannos pro aris & focis fortiter Dimicantes memorabili prælio olim fudit; & superiori saeculo Ricardus Nevill comes Warwicensis dum à Lancastrensibus partibus staret Ebo∣racenses profligavit, ut statim etiam ipsum Edwardum 4. consilii innopem caeperit & abduxerit: Nunc autem conficiendo Caseum notissimum. Here Kinricus the Visisaxon in a most memorable battle overthrew the Brittains most valiantly fighting for their lives, liberties and Religion; and in later times, Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick being for the Lancastrian party, so vanquished King Edward the Fourth that ignorant which way to turn himself, he took him and carried him away; the place is now famous for excellent Cheese, &c. To end his dayes with famous glory, this heroick King laid the Foundation of that long conti∣nued and learned University now called Oxford, which was first known by the name of Caer Mennix, and after Bellesitum a name most fit for so pleasant a place, and after Caer Bossa Rhy∣dohen, in conclusion Oxenford of a certain. Ford called Isis, in English Ouse,Howes fol. 9. and so instead of Ouseford, Oxenford or Oxford, upon which word a Student there, to prefer his own Univer∣sity before Cambridge for Antiquity, Quibles thus; the Ox went over the Ford and then Came¦bridge: Others call it Caer Mennip. Galfridus calls it Caer pen huelgoit, Leland from the Anti∣quities of Dover, writeth that it was a City before the time of K. Arviragus that builded the Castle adjoyning, and nameth it a most renowned city, and that King Lucius builded a Church in the said Castle, Referunt & idem Annales Lucium regem Britannorum, &c. Whosoever desireth a further and more large satisfaction concerning the erecting of the several Colledges Churches. Monasteries, Halls and Schools, let him peruse Mr. Cambden in Oxfordshire. Ebranck after he had reigned Forty years and builded so many goodly Cities, departed out of this life, whose Corps were buried or burned, at York his Obsequies being celebrated with great solemnity, and left to succeed him in his Kingdome his Son Brutus the second sirna∣med. Green shileld. BRƲTE GREEN-SHIELD. BRute the Second, eldest Son of Evranck, succeeded in the Kingdome, and for that his Father had received a repulse as some write at the hand of Brunchildis Lord of Henalt, Ha∣nolt or Hannonia which lyeth on the East of Flanders, 60 miles long and 48 broad, containing 950 Villages and 24 Towns besides Castles. The chief are Banais supposed to stand in the same place where the ancient Belgium was built, Mons, Condè Valencennes, &c. he in revenge thereof Invaded Henalt with a great Army in the Fens and Marsh land at the mouth of the River Scaldis (in old time called Stadus) and encamped himself upon the River Hania where between Brutus and Brunchildis was fought a fierce and bloody battel in that place, which to this day is called Estambruges of the station and Camp of Brutus, as Jacobus Lessabeus writeth in his description of Henalt, This Brute of his lusty courage, was sirnamed Greenshield he reign'd twelve years and was buried at Caer Ebranck or York. LEIL. LEillus, or Leill Son of Brute the second commonly called Green-shield, began his Reign over the Kingdome of Great Brittaine in the year of the worlds Creation Four thousand two Hundred fifty four, he was a just man and one who highly esteemed Justice and Dignity, and imitating the worthiest of his Predecessors in erecting ornaments for his Kingdome; he laid the foundation and in time fully built the City of Carliele. The Romans and Brittains had several appellations for this place, sometimes calling it Lugu-vallum, and Lugu-ballium, and some∣times Lugu-baliam, and Caerliel. The Saxons after they had possest themselves of this Island called it Luell as St. Bede affirmeth, Ptolomeus as some seem to affirm called it Leucopibiam and Nennius caer Lualid; the old Prophesies of the Brittains, which Mr. Cambden calls ridicula
Britannorum vaticinia, indeed he never was Friend to the Brittains and Welsh.) Ʋrbem Duballi at this day well known it is by the name of Caerlile, and by the Latines, Caeliolum, Lugum or Lucum, priscis Celtis, who spake the same language with the Brittains, as Mr. Cambden imagineth and but imagineth; Pomponius Mela tells us it signified a Tower or Fortification, and Caerlile or Lugu vallum is as much as to say Turris or munimentum ad vallum; certain it is that this City flourished and was in high esteem with the Romans as may appear by several Monuments of great Antiquity which have been digged up and found there, and although it suffered great detriment and ruine by the irruptions and inroades of the barbarous Picts and Scots, yet it ever retained the stile and dignity of a City. In processe of time, to wit, in the 619 year of the Incarnation of our Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, Egfridus King of the Northumbers gave it to St. Cuthbert, these are the words of the Donation, Donavi etiam civitatem quæ vocatur Caerlile Luguballia & in circuitu ejus xv.Mr. Camb. in Cumberland. milliaria, at which time the walls were firme and whole: venerable Bede affirmeth, Cuthbertum duxerunt cives ut maenia videret fontem{que} in ea quendam Romanorum opere extructum, The Citizens led Cuthbert to behold the walls and view a Fountaine which the Romans formerly had made; who as saith the Register or book of Durham, congregationem sanctimonielium & Abbatissam ordinavit scholas{que} ibi constituit, who in∣stituted there a Cloyster of Religious Virgins or Nuns, and also Schooles; but the fury of the Danes afterwards so demolished and destroyed this City that for the space of near upon two hundred years it lay buried in its own ashes. William of Malmesbury saith, That in this City Visum erat triclinium Romanum ex lapidibus fornacibus concameratum quod nulla unquam tem∣pestatum injuria aut ignium flamma labefactare potuit, in cujus fronte scriptum erat Marii VICTORIA, some suppose this Marius was that gallant Arviragus the Brittain, of whom we shall have occasion to speak much hereafter. William commonly called Rufus reedified this so long buried Caerlile, and furnished it with stately Buildings, strengthing it with a Princely Castle, though some think that Richard 3. by reason of his Arms found there in the building, erected it. These are Mr. Cambden's words, Ad occidentem est castrum satis magno ambitu quod Regem, Ric. 3. ex insignibus vendicat: The same Author further saith, that Caerlile est Ʋrbs vetustissima à Septentrione Itunae, (i.) Eden, alveo, ab Ortu Peterillo (i.) Peterell, ab occasu Cauda (i.) Cauda & præter hæc defendentis naturae munimentis firmis maenibus è saxo, Castello, & Cita∣della quam vocant armata: And a little after, Ad ortum vero Citadella quam propugnaculis variis firmo opere posuit Hen. 8. defenditur. Thus much for the honour of our Brittish King Leill the Founder of this ancient and strong City, a Bulwark against the Scots, of which I could say more, but it may be it would be out of season; and therefore I will onely tell you that Caerlile hath given the honour of Earl onely to two Families. 1. To Andrew de Harcla, who did bear for his Arms, argent a cross gules, upon the canton point a Mertlet sable; but for proving a Traytor, his Armes reversed, his Spurs hackt from his heels, and all his Honours being taken from him, he was Drawn, Hanged, and, Quartered. The second, James Hay Viscount Doncaster, Created E. of Caerlile, 18 Jac. Sept. 17. James Hay, &c. Argent 3 escoucheons Gules. King Leill also repaired Chester, which Ptolomy calls DEVNANA, Antoninus, DENAM from the River Dena or Dina. The first Inhabitants of this Isle, the ancient Brittains, called it Caerlegion, Caerleon Vaur, Caerleon or Dufyr Dwy; and Caer as who would say the City, or the only City in way of eminency and superiority. The Saxons called it Leze acentep, names which without all doubt were taken from the Legion which was called Victrix, sent into these remote parts, the Pretorian and Consular Legats standing in fear of it: Some, as Mr. Hen. Bradshaw for one, will bring and deduce the Name from a terrible Gyant long before Brute, and to make their invention good, they call this Gyant Leon Vaur; but being before Brute how he came by this Brittish name, my brains cannot find, and therefore as a fictitious ima∣gination and mere Chymera I leave it: but that the xx. Legion called Victrex resided in this City, it is most apparent by the Coyns oft found there: the one side having this Inscription, Col. DINANA LEG. XX. Victrix: but now there remains very few Marks and Signes of the Roman magnificence and state, unlesse some small parcels of checker or Mosaick, work, which are usually found where the Romans formerly inhabited. Hear what Ranulphus once a Monk of this City saith concerning these Antiquities, these are his words, Viae sunt hic subter∣raneae lapideo opere mirabiliter testudineatae, triclinia concamerata, Insculpti lapides prægrandes antiquorum nomina præferentes; hic & numismata Julii Cæsaris aliorum{que} illustrium inscriptione insiguita quando{que} sunt effossa; Here are passages under ground with stone-work most wonde∣rously vaulted over, banquetting rooms with arched roofs; vast stones inscribed with the names of ancient Romans; Coyns stamped with the Inscription of Julius Cæsar and other fa∣mous Commanders. Rogerus Cestrensis in Policratico saith, Intuenti fundamenta lapidum in viis, ingenio videtur potius Romano sive Gyganteo labore quam Britannico sudore sundata, Whosoever shall view the foundations and consider the vast proportion and huge bulk of the stones, shall judge the work rather finished by the toyl and labour of Gyants or the ingenious Roman industry, then by the sweat of any Brittish brow: the City is quadrate, the Walls containing four Miles in compasse; the building beautiful and neat, the prime Streets so deckt
with Galleries, that in rainy dayes passengers walk dry; the Castle is of late erection: this City hath been defaced several times, once by Egfride King of the Northumbers, after by the Danes; often repaired by Adelfleda Lady and Queen of the Mercians. Over the River Dena or Dee a fair stone-bridge leadeth, built upon eight Arches, at either end whereof is a Gate from whence in a long quadran-wise the Walls do encompasse the City, high and strong built, with four fair Gates opening unto the four winds, besides, three Posterns with four Watch-towers, extending in compasse 1940 paces. On the South side is mounted a strong and stately Castle, on the North side is the Minster first built by Earl Lerfrick to the honour of St. Werburga the Virgin, and after most sumptu∣ously repaired by Hugh the first Earl of Chester of the Normans; Now the Cathedral of the Bishops See. Herein lyeth interred (as report doth relate) the body of Henry the 4. Emperor of Almain, who leaving his Imperial estate, led lastly an Hermits life. Who built this stately and ancient City appeareth not, but in that it was repaired by the Brittish Leill, to him the glory must needs belong; to the Romans thanks belong for its first name, or at least to the twentieth Legion called Victrix; a Legion of the Romans (as Vige∣tius reporteth) contained 6000 Souldiers or more, and was divided into ten bands, the first exceeding all the rest both in number and estimation; For this band bare the Eagle which was the chief Standard of all the Romans; it contained 1105 Foot men, heavy armed; Horsemen 132. and was named Cohors Miliaria, that is to say, a company of One thousand and more souldiers. This Band hath the preheminence above all the Legions when they go to Fight; for they are placed in the Forefront and begin the battel. The second Band contai∣neth 555 Footmen and 66 Horsemen of heavy Armour, and is called Cohors Quinquegintaria. The third band hath also 555 Footmen and 66 Horsemen. The Fifth had as many. These Five bands are set in array in the first battel; The other Five bands have equally each band the like number; so that these ten bands make a compleat Legion, containing 6100 Footmen and 726. Horsemen. King Leill in the end of his Reign fell to sloth and lust, whereby civil dissentions arose, which ended not in his life. He reigned 25 years, and was buried at Caleile alias Chester, which hath given the honour of Earle to these honourable Families. 1. Hugh sirnamed Lupus, Azure, a Wolfs head erased Argent. 2. Richard Son of Hugh, Gules crutely Or, a Wolfs head erased Arg. 3. Randolph de Meschines, Or, a Lyon rampant with his tail erected Gules. 4. Randolph de Gernoniis, Gules a Lyon rampant with his tail erected Arg. 5. Hugh Kivilioc son of Randolph, Azure 6 garbs 3. 2. 1. 6. Randolph Blondevil Son of Hugh, Azure 3 garbs, Or. 7. John le Scot Son to the Lady Maud, eldest sister of Randolph, Or, 3 piles Gules. Edward eldest Son to K. Ed. 3. England, a label of 3 points. Symon de Montfort E. of Leicester, after whose death Chester was laid unto the Crown, and hath been since united to the Principality of Wales. Lud or Lud Hurdribras alias Cicuber. KIng Lud, his Father being Dead, with general applause and consent ascends the Royall Throne of great Brittaine, in the Year of the Worlds Creation, 4279. as Mr. Fabian ac∣counteth; the First businesse which he took in hand was to settle his Kingdom, for his Father towards the latter end of his Age addicting himself to sloath, and giving way to the youthful sin of lust, a vice most hateful in an old Man, gave occasion to his Subjects who lived in Ease, Wealth and Delights to stir up commotions and dissentions, these, broyls, Lud though young yet wisely endeavours by all means and diligence to suppresse, knowing that peace and quiet is the Object and chief effect which all distempers and Wars how just soever aim'd at; by his studious endeavours and assistance of faithful Friends and careful Councellours, he obtains his desire; and having settled all distempers and reduced them to their due order and mo∣tion he set his mind wholly upon the beautifying of Britanny, and therefore in imitation of his Royal Progenitors, he begins a City which he calls Caer gant or Kaer kin, which after∣wards the Saxons call Canterbury, which is to say, the Court of Kentishmen. True it is that Canterbury is now a Metropolitan Church and Archbishops See, but it never had an Archflamen. St. Augustine out of an affection of his own (though some Authors affirm London according to the general rule of placing Archbishops where Archflamens were, and bi∣shops where Flamens was appointed by Pope Gregory) to be the place, there settled his Ar∣chiepiscopal chair. For Canterbury, it was first a Flamens Seat, And the old Manuscript History called Abbre∣viatios Chronicorum saith in this time, and setling of Bishops in King Lucius his Reign, That the old Church of St. Martins was builded, tunc constructa est extra Cantuariam Ecclesia sancti Mar∣tini, and to notifie that he meant thereby a Cathedral and Episcopal Church, he addeth this when he speaketh of changing Flamens into Bishops; and all Histories testifie, that the holy Bishop Lethardus which came hither with Queen Bertha before St. Augustin's time, used it as his Episcopal See; And Canterbury besides the Arch-bishop had another Bishop in that
Church of Saint Martin divers hundreds of years, and Mr. Lambert the Antiquary of Kent saith from Antiquities, St. Martins Church built by the Romans in Canterbury was a bishops See untill the Normans came in, and so two in one City thus substitute to the Arch∣bishop. Gius.And that Canterbury was a Primates See, Mr. Broughton, fol. 178. out of other Authors, Ex Anacleto hujus Insulae divisionem, Canterburie, London, Caerlegion, York, and Alba in Scotland, by some taken to be St. Andrews, Ʋrbs Legionum Cantuaria, Londonia, Eboraca & Alba, unde Albania Provincia were designed Primate Sees, for such, as Giraldus Cambren∣sis in his second book to Innocentius the 3. Sir John Price, Matthew Parker the first Arch-bishop of Canterbury with others testifie. Mr. Cambden calls this City Dorovernum, saying, that the River Stoure runs most swiftly by it, which seems partly to give name unto it, for that Durwherne signifies in the Brittish tongue a swift or fierce running river; he saith it is, Ʋrbs pervetusta Romanoque seculo proculdubio il∣lustris: And Malmesbury tels us, Nec adeo magna, nec euiliter parva, quæ & terrae positione so∣li assinis maxima ubertate, & integro murorum ambitu, fluviis irriguae, nemorum opportunitate inclyta, præterea maris vicinitate piscium faecunda: if any desire to satisfie himself further con∣cerning this famous and glorious Brittish City, let him read Mr. Cambden in his description of Kent. The next City which King Lud founded was Caerguent; Ptolomeus and Antoninus call this City Venta Belgarum, the Saxons þinvancesvor, the Latines Vintonia, at this day Win∣chester: some seem to derive the Etymologie from Vento, others from Vine, and not a few from Wina the Bishop. But Lelands conjecture pleaseth better, who from the Brittish word Guin or Guen i. e. white, doth derive it, and so maketh Caer Guin, the White City; so ab albedine prisci latini Albam Longam, & Albam Regiam nominarunt; for this venta, as the other two Venta Icenorum, and Venta silurum, in the midst between Chepstow and Caerleon in Monmouth∣shire, in times past a Flamens Seat, a City, and an University or School of Philosophers, Nunc seges est ubi venta fuit, the high way or road is through the midst of it: This City was remarkable in the Romans days, In qua textrina sua sacra Imperatores Romani habuisse vide∣rentur, their weaving houses; for according to Guidus Pancirolus, illa Gynecia constituta sunt texendis principis ut militum vestibus, navium velis, stragulis, aliis, & ad Instruendas mansiones necessariis, to weave vestures and garments for Princes and Souldiers, sails for ships, linnen coverings or coverlids, and other necessaries to furnish habitations; the Cathedral Church of Winchester (saith Godwin) according to a respect that I finde in an old Manuscript, was first built and erected by King Lucius, and to speak further in his words; This Church was hal∣lowed and dedicated October the 29. 189. by Faganus and Damianus Bishops; and he proveth from the same Antiquity, that in the year 309. one Constance was Bishop there; and in Saint Dubritius time,Godwin. Catal. Epist. by the Brittish History, Dinuanius was also bishop there, Episcopatus Guintonia Dinvanio decernitur; the same author produceth an old Manuscript, which testifieth another (Monasterie) founded at Winchester; only his error is (which the Antiquity doth not say, that it was the Cathedral Church, confounding them as one, whereas both the Brittish History and Matthew of Westminster, make them two several Churches; otherwise he thus truly writeth, a Church in Winchester, according to a report that I find in an old Manuscript, was first built and erected by King Lucius, who abolishing Paganisme, embraced Christ about the year of our Lord 180. and placing Monks in the same, allotted for their maintenance large Reve∣nues, which heretofore had belonged for the most part unto the Flamens, and other Heathenish Priests; and this Monasterie so continued untill the persecution of Dioclesian, when it was destroyed and the Monks martyred or dispersed; yet upon the ceasing of the persecution, it was presently within one year and thirty days new builded, and the Church hallowed and dedicated unto the honour and memory of Amphibalus (who was a noble Brittain) that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, by Constans bishop of Winchester, in the year 309. the 15. day of March, at the request of Deodatus the Abbot: The first Dedication of that Church in King Lucius time, Bough. l. 09. by the two Legats Faganus and Damianus bishops was by that old Antiquity, October the 29. 189. The Antiquities of Winchester make it more ancient: and it thus continued a famous Monasterie until the year 519. at which time Cerdick the first King of the West Saxons, converted the Church into a Temple of Dagon, and either slew or chased away all the Monks. This was that holy Sanctuary, whither to the Altar of this Church one of the Sons of Mordred did flie for succour against Constantine the younger, who there cruelly slew him before the Altar, Constantinus filios Morredi caepit & alterum juvenem Win∣toniae in Ecclesiam Sancti Amphibali fugientem aute altare trucidait, in the year 543. others say that it continued within 17 years of St. Augustin's coming hither, others continue Christi∣ans there for longer time. Winchester hath honoured both Earls and Marquesses with their Titles; As first: 1. Saer de Quincy, E. a Fess. and labell of xi. points. 2. Robert de Quincy, Gules 7. Mascles, Or 33. 1. 3. Hugh de Spencer, Quarterly the first and 4. arg. the 2. and 3. each charged with a fret, Or, a bond sable.
4. Lewes de Bruges, Azure, 10 Mascles, 4. 3. 2 and 1. Or on a Canton Gules a Lyon passant gardant, of the second. 5. William Pawlett E. of Wiltshire and Marquesse of Winchester. 6. John Pawlett. 7. William Pawlett. 8. William Pawlett. 9. John Pawlet Marquesse of Winchester, 1657. Sable, 3 swords in pile, Argent hilts and pomels, Or, a mullet for difference. The Third City which this King built was Caer Septon now called Shaftsbury, and Caer Paladur ut falso vulgus putabat, saith Mr Cambden; for he takes and draws what he can from Brittish glory: it seems the Welshmen gave him no liberal hospitality in his travels; for he is no friend of theirs, he will by all means ascribe the building of this place to King Alfred producing this Monument and Malmsburiensis for his Author. Anno Dominicæ Incarnationis Elfridus Rex fecit hanc Ʋrbem DCCCLXXX. Regni sui VIII. The Saxons called this place Scheafverbyryg it may be from the broach or spice, which in their language they call Scheaf, in this place one Aquila, whether Man or Eagle is in∣certain, by the report of Historians is said to have prophesied the future times of this Empire, and that after the Reigns of the Saxons and Normans it should again return unto the Govern∣ment of the Brittish Kings. In this City was St. Edward the Martyr Son of Edgar, and one and thirtieth Monarch of the English Nation interred, 972. being murdered at Corf Castle by his Stepmother Aelfrith to make way for her own Son to the Crown. But as concerning Mr. Cambden, who would gladly take away the glory of building this place from the Brittons the Predecessors and Forefathers of the Welshmen, so abusively called by their Enemies, and confer it upon the Saxons; Hear what a learned Writer saith, and a deep Searcher into An∣tiquities, having demonstrated where the Primates and Metropolitans of this Ile have their Sees (which I will shew you as occasion requires) after tells you where the Suffragans or ordi∣nary bishops had theirs; taking two Rules for his direction, From Antiquity the one, that they were placed as the custom was in our Brittish Cities; the other, that they were ordained where the Pagan Flamens were before. Gildas writeth that Brittain had 28 Cities besides strong Castles, bis denis bis{que} quaternis civitatibus instructa, but he names them not; but Ranulphus Higeden the Monk of Chester citing Alfridus, tells us thus, Regio Britanniae erat quondam civitatibus nobi∣lissimis 28 Insignita; The Country of Britain was in old times adorned with 28 Cities, beside innumerable number of Castles defensed with strong Walls, Towers, Gates and Locks. The Names of the Cities were these, Caer Lud, (i.e.) London. Caer Ebrane, (i.e.) York. Caer Kent, Canterbury. Caergorongon, Worcester. Caerlyrion, Leicester. Caer Glau, Glocester. Caer Golden, Colchester. Caerrei, Chichester, which the Saxons anciently called Cissancester. Caer Ceri, Cirencester. Caer went, Winchester. Caergrant, Cambridge. Caerlile Luguba∣lia, Caerlile. Caerperis, Porchester. Caer drom, Dorchester. Caerludcoit, Lincoln. Caer Merthin, (i. e.) the City of Merlin, Caersegen, Silcester was, is seated upon Thames not far from Reading. Caerthleon or Caerlegion, (i. e.) the City of Legions, which first was called Lenscester, but now Chester. Caer Badon, Bath, which sometime was called the City of Acha∣mannus. Caer Paladur, (now ut falso credebat vulgus, good Mr. Cambden here are Authors above vulgar people) Septona now called Shaftsbury; there are also other names of Cities sound in Chronicles. This King reigned 29 years, or as Fabian saith 39. who calls Septon or Shaftsbury Mount Paladur, by reason that it is seated upon a Hill. BLADƲD the Son of Lud Hardibras BLadud the Son of Hardibras, took upon him the Crown of this Iland in the year of the Worlds creation, 4318. This King was much addicted to Learning, insomuch that he undertook a Journey to Athens, the most famous City in the World, for the knowledge of Philosophy, Astrology, and all other Sciences whatsoever, there fully to be instructed by the grave Philosophers of that place; neither was he content to become learned himself, learning indeed being the greatest ornament a Prince can have, but he endeavoured likewise to confer so great a Treasure upon the Nobles of his Court and Subjects of his Realm, and to that end he brought from Athens with him into our Brittain, four learned Philosophers to lay a plat∣form, and found an habitation for the Muses and Nursery for Learning making choice of Stam∣ford
in Lincolnshire for his design and purpose. Mr. Cambden according to his wonted cu∣stome not willing to write any thing which may advance the glory of the Welsh or Brittish Nation, giveth a slender account of this place, saying that the Saxons called it Sveanford ex Saxo structili; and that Edward the Elder, built them a Castle against the Danes, which at this day is quite demolished; and that Henry the Second, gave totam Villatam de Stanford quæ erat in Dominio suo exceptis feodis Baronum & Militum ejusdem Villae Richardo de Humetz sive Humete, &c. and that afterwards Gulielmus comes Warrenae eandem tenuit per voluntatem Regis Joannis; that in the time of Edward the 3. by reason of a division and falling out a∣mongst the Scholars of Oxford, the one Part came hither and here opened Schools and began a third University, of which as yet the Citizens boast: but the intestine broiles between the Yorkists and Lancastrians so defaced this famous place, that as yet it hath scarce recovered its pristine glory; yet it so flourisheth at this day, that it hath an Alderman and twenty four Brethren, seven parish Churches, two Hospitals, the one very fair and ancient, built by a Citizen of that place, called William Brown; the other of late Erection, founded by William Cecill Baron of Burleigh, the Nestor of his times. But let us look a little beyond the Saxons by Mr. Cambden's leave; the Author cited in the Margent writing of K. Bladud saith,Richardus Vitus l. 2. Hunc principem diustuduisse Athenis, inde{que} secum abdux∣isse quatuor Philosophos qui Scholas aperirent in Britannia eo loco quo post Ʋrbs dicta Stanfordia structa fuit, & quo universi litterarum artium{que} studiosi magno numero undicun{que} convenerunt adeo ut Juvenalis Saty. 15. dixerit. Nunc totus Graias nostras{que} habet Orbis Athenas. This Prince studied long at Athens, and from thence brought with him four Philosophers who taught School at Stanford, whither such as desired Literature and the knowledge of Arts flocked from all places; nay, he further bringeth in Caius Plinius, lib. 3. c. 1. to tell you that propter illicitas artes Magicas usitatas in Britannia, scripserit Magiam esse transgressam quoque Oceanum, & ad inane naturae provectam, honorari quidem tantis ceremoniis in Brittannia, ut ipsa illam Persis dedisse, atque in ea re toti mundo quanquam ignoto sibi longe{que} distanti consentire videatur. M. B. fol 206. 8.And again another Author, having spoken of Cambridge, proceedeth and saith; so may we more then probably hold of our other Schools and Universities in this our Brittain then, namely Stanford founded by King Bladud and furnished with Philosophers of Athens by him, and so continued a place of Learning untill the coming of St. Augustine hither, when it was by the Pope interdicted for Heresies. This King not only founded Stanford and furnished it with Philosophers to instruct Youth in learning and other qualities to inform and beautifie the intellectual part, but built the famous City now called Bath, and so provided Waters and hot Springs that his Subjects might not alone take pleasure and delight in those warm and pleasing Baths, but even by their occult Vertue find ease and relief for their infected and diseased limbs and members. Wil∣liam of Malmesbury will have Julius Cæsar the Author of these Baths: But Richardus Vitus tells the old Monk, Id opus falso à quibusdam Julio Cæsari assignari cum ille ad illum locum nunquam pervenisset; That work is falsly attributed to Julius Cæsar who never came so far as that place: Another Monk will have St. David to have been Causer of the hot baths saying, At the place now called Glastenburie,Father Hierom Fter in his Saints Lives, printed at Dray, 1632. in the life of S. David, 1. Mat /  He (viz. St. David) built a Church new from the ground; and coming thence to Bath, he cured the Infection of the Waters thereabouts, and with his holy prayers and benedictions, gave them a perpetual heat, and made them very healthfull and sove∣raign for many diseases ever after, as to this day is experienced, to the wonderfull comfort and commodity of all England. But this Relation is as true, as is that other of his, where out of ig∣norance, he placeth the Metropolitan See of Wales at West-chester; and that's as true as that the Sea burns; for I will make it appear in the sequel of this Book, that Caer leon upon Ʋsk, and not Caer leon gaur, was the Arch-bishops See. Ptolomeus calls this Caer Badon, Aquas folis & Thermas, and aquæ calidae; some called it Akmanchester (i. e.) the City of such as are sick or troubled with aches. Stephanus calls this city Badiza, the Latines Bathonia, the English Bath. Cambden will have this city to be Caer Paladur, that is the city of warm or hot-wa∣ter, but will not admit Bleyden cloyth (i. e.) Bleyden, the Magician to be the builder; and therefore rather then allow the Foundation thereof to a Brittain; he produceth no Founder at all. Solinus, cap. 24. saith, In Brittannia sunt fontes calidi opiparo apparatu exculti ad usus mortalium quibus fontibus præsul est Minervae numen, in cujus aede ignes perpetui, &c. In Brit∣tannie there are hot baths adorned with exquisite buildings for mortals use and convenience, dedicated to Minerva, in whose sacred Temple is kept perpetual fire which is never permitted to go out. Athenaeus scribit Herculi balnea consecrata esse quæ sua natura scatent è visceribus terrae, sane quidem Graeci Palladem Herculi post labores exantlatos lavacra primum administrasse den onstrant. These two Acts of this learned King, had he proceeded no farther, had left his Name famous to all Posterity; as likewise his building a Temple to Apollo and placing therein a amen, which after in King Lucius his time became the See of a Christian bishop; but pride and vain-glory made him become ridiculous, (as indeed these two Vices have the power to make all
men who follow them;) his vain thoughts being composed more of Air then any other Ele∣ment, tickle him with ambition to leave the Earth and live in the Air, he beats his brains how to bring this his new conceived invention to a timely birth, he provides feathers, wax, glew, and all such Utensils as his abused brains apprehended necessary to quillifie him into the nature of a fowl or rather a fool: and thus like Esops crow deckt with feathers not his own, he appears more formidable and monstrous then the Griffons in the Mountains of Armenia. Et ignotas animam dimittit in artes Naturam{que} novat, nam ponit in ordine pennas A minima caeptas longam breviore sequente. Et postquam manus ultima cæpto Imposita est, geminas opifex libravit in alas Ipse suum corpus, mota{que} pependit in aura, Cœli{que} cupidine tactus Altius egit iter; rapidi vicinia Solis Mollit odoratas pennarum vincula ceras, Tabuerant cerae: nudos quatit ille lacertos, Remigio{que} carens non ullas concipit auras. And so destitute of help he falls headlong, a just reward of his temerity, and breaks his neck upon the Temple of Troynovant, as some affirm, having Reigned 20 years. The Greeks and Latines gave Names to this place according to the nature and condition of the Waters or Baths, there being  hot waters, Aquæ solis waters of the Sun. Bath is the chief City in Somersetshire, seated in a very low plain, and round about environed with Hills very high and steep; From whence come many Rivulets and fresh water-springs to the great commodity of the people; but that which brings most wealth unto the place, are not the Waters from without but those within, sending up from them much thin vapours and a strong scent withall, which springs are very medicinable for many diseases. Three of those Springs there are in all, the waters of which being received in large and fitting receptacles for the publick use, they call the Kings Bath, the Cross Bath, and the hot Bath: the Cathe∣dral a fair Church, but belonging to Moncks, found the heavy hand of K. H. 8. but it is now in indifferent repair. Earl it had none till the time of Hen. 7. since it hath had divers. Earls of BATH. 1. Philbert de Chandew of little Brittain. 2. John Bourchier Lord Fitzwarren Created E. of Bath. Hen. 8. July 10. 3. John Bourchier. 4. William Bourchier. 5. Edward Bourchier. 6. Henry Bourchier. Argent a Cross engrailed Gules inter 4 water bougets sable, a label of 3 points Azure charged with 9 flower de luces, Or.
LEIR the Son of BLADUD. LEIR the Son of Bladud, (his Father through his own Arrogancy, Ambition and Vanity, or rather Foolery, saepe feruntur in altum ut lapsu graviore ruant; having soared to too high a place, and so in a hasty stooping broke his neck) began his Reign in the year from the Worlds creation, iiii M. CCC. XXXiii. This King was of a most Noble and Heroick mind, as being questionlesse bred under the Discipline of those Philosophers which his Father had brought from Athens, besides a natural Propension of his own to moral Vertue; insomuch that his Kingdom flourished in great Peace and abundance of Wealth. This King to imitate his worthy Predecessors, laid the Foundation of a Famous city, calling it after his own Name Caerlirion, and after Leircester: this is one of those 28 cities where Flamens were. Mr. Cambden tells us that it was called Ligecestria, Leogora, Legeocester and Leicester, saying it rather savoured of Antiquity then handsomenesse; yet acknowledeth that it was formerly a bishoprick, but that the See being removed, it much decayed in renown, till at last Edelfleda optima Foemina the best of Women or a very good woman in the year 913. did repair it, and inclose it with new Walls; insomuch that Matthew of Paris in his lesser History saith, Legecestria Ʋrbs pulentissima & munitissim a muro indissolubili, qui si Funda∣mento roboraretur nulli Ʋrbium secunda fuisset; Leicester a most rich city with a wall unbreak∣able, had it had a sufficient Foundation, second to no city whatsoever. In the time of King Henry the 2. this Town was in great distresse and much affliction, by reason that Robert Bossu (i. e.) bunch-backt, Earl of Leicester attempting innovations and conspiracies against his Prince and Soveraign, forced, Henry; Propter contumaciam comitis Roberti contra Regem recalcibran∣tit obsessa est & per Regem Hen. subversa Nobilis civitas Leicestria & murus qui videbatur in∣dissolubilis funditus in circuitu dirutus, Ʋrbs enim muris Fundamento carentibus, sub fossis, & fulciminibus tandem combustis maenium fragmenta, ceciderunt quæ us{que} in hodiernum diem propter caementi indissolubilis tenacitatem scopulorum retinent cum integritate magnitudinem. King Leir beginning now to be aged and full of years, having no Heir-male, he called unto him his three Daughters, Gonorilla, Ragan and Cordeilla, intending out of the discovery of their love and filial affection and duty towards Him to settle his Kingdome upon them: to the Eldest he said, Daughter, I shall desire you to expresse unto me, how well and dearly you love and esteem me your aged Father; the young Lady hearing a question of so high a nature and so much concerning proposed unto Her, First that her answer may not seem forged or to have any smack or rellish of dissimulation, calls the immortal Gods (being then the custome amongst Pagans) and all the celestial Powers to witnesse her Assertion, and then replies; My Princely Lord and Father, I love you more then my own soul: the feeble old man was much taken with this Answer, resting satisfied, that his Daughter did cordially and entirely love him: He calls for the second, propounds the same question; she thinking to out-vie her El∣dest sister, and thereby to endear and engratiate her self into the old Mans favour, spares no oaths or invocations and imprecations, assuring him that her Tongue was too slender a Messen∣ger to deliver the depth of her affection and duty, and that she loved him far beyond all creatures; Leir is tickled and exceedingly solaced with these two Answers and thinks no mortal Man more happy in his children then himself. Cordeilla is called for, the same interroga∣tory used; she wittily perceiving the deep dissimulation and fawning of her Sisters, replies; My dearest Father, I am much joyed to see you so well pleased with the expressive Answers of my two sisters; for my own part as a Father I have ever honoured, obeyed and loved you, and for ever shall and if you desire further expression from me, Know honoured Sir, That as much as you deserve to be beloved so much I love you and no more. King LEIR being nothing pleased with the integrity of his third Daughters answer, Obsequium amicos veritas Odium parit; bethinks himself how he may best dispose and bestow his two eldest Daughters to their most content, honour and advancement, the Eldest therefore he espouseth to the Duke of Cornwall, the second to the Duke of Albania, which is now called Scotland, dividing his Kingdom betwixt them in Reversion, and a Moiety for their present maintenance and livelyhood, nothing being left for the poor Lady Cordeilla, whose tongue was the true Embassador of her heart, and whose heart hated all dissimulation and hypocrisie. Fame who is never slow in reporting the transactions of eminent persons especially Kings, sounds this passage of King Leir in France, and with a shrill Note ecchoes forth, the beauty, modesty, vertue, and all the adorning graces which wait upon Cordeilla. Aganippus (an eminent personage and by some stiled King of France, through a great mistake; for as Policro∣nicon, Petrus Pictaniensis, Robert Gagwine, Antonius Episcopus, and divers others affirm the name of France was not then known, neither were there any Kings, the inhabitants being called Galli and Tributaries to the Romans, and so continued till the time of Valentinianus the Emperor,) hearing Cordeilla's beauty so highly extolled, her vertue so superlatively com∣mended, deems her a fit companion for his Princely bed and fortunes, if so rare a Jewel may be purchased: Upon a mature resolution he sends his Agents to the court of King Leir with
full instructions to demand Cordeilla in Marriage: The offerd Fortune pleaseth the King, yet he fears the success; by reason of his own folly which had given all to the two sisters, and left nothing for the third: Leir returns thanks to Aganippus by his Embassadors, shews a willing∣ness to comply with their Masters request; and withall lays open his unsufficiency to bestow any Dowry upon her; Aganippus enformed by Letters of these passages, is glad his suit and mo∣tion finds friendly acceptance, and far valuing the rich endowments of his so much affected Cordeilla before all terrene riches so he enjoy the beloved treasure of his heart, desires no more: the espousals are with all solemnity celebrated, and Cordeilla answerable to the greatness of her birth and quality, conveyed to Aganippus, who (by the opinion of those who write that France was then governed by twelve Kings) was one, and so Cordeilla a Queen. Leir having thus happily as might be thought, disposed of his three daughters; being aged, betakes himself to ease and quietness, and so intends to spin out the remnant of his time, but his Sons in Law Monaghlanus and Henninus the Dukes of Cornwall and Albania, envy the happy tranquility of the feeble old King; and each daughter, for all their deep and large ex∣pressions of filial love and duty, Patris inquirit in annos: Leir lives too long, too much at ease, his bones would better become a Sepulchre, then a Throne; and since the fatal Sisters will not of their own accord cut off his thred of life, his daughters by the hands of their ambiti∣ous and covetous husbands will undertake that task: nothing is now heard in Brittaine but the clashing of arms, neighing of horses, thundering of Trumpets, and warlike Musick. The impotent King is begirt on all sides with Martial Troops, and not able to resist two such powerfull enemies, to preserve that small span of life, is forced to flie for succour, being quite forlorn, to his daughter Cordeilla, whom formerly he had so much slighted; The arrival of the Father is not long unknown to the daughter, who acquaints her husband with so sad an accident; Aganippus out of an heroick spirit, compassionating the calamity of a distressed Prince, especially his wives Father, puts on a resolution to chastise and revenge so gross an in∣jury, and to reinvest him in his throne again. Cordeilla is not idle in the mean time, but with all obsequious behaviour like a dutifull childe cherisheth her drooping Father, accomodates him with all Princely provision, with pleasant speeches drives away his melancholy thoughts, and leaves nothing undone or said, which may add vigour and alacrity to his pierced heart: Aganippus arrives in Brittain with his Father in Law, gives battel to the disobedient Rebels, gives them the overthrow, and again establisheth Leir in his Regal dignity; but the Author of so great happiness lived not long after, leaving Cordeilla a sad and disconsolate widow. King Leir once more holding and guiding the stern of the Brittish Monarchy, passed his time with perfect quietness, the space of three years; after which time he left this transitory world, leaving his daughter Cordeilla, as well she deserved, to succeed him in his Kingdom; his body was buried at Leicester in a Vault under the River side,John Rous a∣pud Hows in Stow. which he himself had built and consecrated to Janus Bifrons, where the workmen of the Town, when the solemnity of the day came, began all things which they had to do the year following. Those who undervalue the Brittains call this History in question; yet divers Authors relate it, out of which I will produce one in the same Language, in which he writ, Cum in Senectutem vergere Leir coepisset,Vitus ex Gau∣frid. fol. 173. Regnum dividere filiasque tres suas idoneis Maritis in manus cum parte regni bene gubernanda tradere cogitavit; Prius tamen ex amore singularum tentare voluit quæ∣nam illarum potiore regni parte censeretur digna. Itaque Gonorilla interrogata respondit, Pa∣trem sibi chariorem esse corde atque anima suæ propria qua viveret; Ragana dixit ipsum super omnes creaturas se diligere. Cordeilla videns his adulationibus acquiescere senem, vicissim tentan∣do quæsivit An usquam filia sit quæ patrem plus quam patrem amare presumat. Ego te semper ut patrem dilexi & diligo, siquid amplius requiris audi signum amoris in te mei: Quantum enim habes & quantum vales tantum te diligo. Pater Iratus eam cum stomacho sic loqui putabat quasi suam senectutem sprevisset: proinde dixit illam cum sororibus nullam in suo regno partem habi∣turam, & consilio procerum regni duas primas nuptui dat, Cornvalliae & Albaniae ducibus, una cum parte media Insulae donec ipse viveret & alteram dimidiam post obitum ejus accipere jube∣bat. Quo tempore Francorum Rex Aganippus fama motus pulchritudinis Cordeillae nunciis missis eam petit in matrimonium sibi dari: Quibus humaniter acceptis pater ait, se daturuni, sed sine terra vel pecunia: Aganippus qui tertiam Galliae (ut Zerixaeus ait) Belgicae partem possi∣debat; virgine tam nobile sola contentus erat.Polidorus, Vir∣gillius. Quam Polidorus Virgilius naturâ præcocis ingenii fuissi dicit, sed interogatam de amore in patrem respondisse; se quidem i lum oculis ferre sem∣perque laturam licet deinde contingeret (de Marito intelligens) amaret ardentius; Quo responso tam etsi pleno sapientiae Leir indignatus indotatam nuptui collocat Regulo Gallo (inquit Polido∣rus) puellae forma capto. Sed haud multo poste à generis ejus mortem expectare censentibus esse nimis longum, spoliatus regno ad Cordeillam fugere coactus est, a qua restituitur in Regnum & ge∣neris interfectis triennium regnat. Hanc inter novem Bellicosas hujus insulae foeminas numerat Ge∣rardus Leighus: Thus much I have added, to confirm the History of our Brittish Leir, and his daughters; I forbear to translate it, having already out of other Authors related the same in effect. Robert Bossu having put his Soveraign King Hen. 2. to much trouble in repentance of these mischiefs, built the Monastery of St. Marie de Pratis, wherein he became a Canon Regular; and for fifteen years continuance, in sad lamentation, served God in continual prayers: with the like devotion Henry the first, Duke of Lancaster, built an Hospital for an hundred and
ten poor people, with a Collegiat Church, a Dean, twelve Canons Prebendaries, as many Vicars, sufficiently provided for with Revenues, wherein himself lyeth buried; and it was the greatest ornament of that City, untill the hand of King Henry the eight lay over heavy upon all the like foundations, and laid their lofty tops at his own feet: In this City also was buried another Crouch-back, viz. Richard the third, in the Church of the Gray-Friers; but now nothing remains of his Monument, but only the stone chest, wherein he was laid, a drink∣ing Trough now for horses in a common Inne. This place hath given the Titles of honour to many Honourable Families. 1057. 1. Algar the Saxon. 1103. 2. Edwin died 1071. 3. Robert de Bellamonte, Gules a cinquefoyle Ermine. 4. Robert de Bellamont. 5. Robert de Bellamont L. Steward. 6. Robert de Bellamont, L. high Steward. 7. Simon de Montfort married Amicia sister and coheir to the last Earl Robert, L. high Steward. 8. Simon de Montfort, L. high Steward, Gules a Lion rampant, his tail double forked salteir wise Argent. 9. Edmond Earl of Lancaster, L. high Steward. 10. Tho. Earl of Lancaster L. high Steward. 11. Hen. D. of Lancaster, L. high Steward. 12. Henry D. of Lancaster, L. high Steward. England a Label of 5. points Ermine. 13. William of Bavaria, Earl of Heinalt, married the Lady Maud of Lancaster, Bendis losengè, Argent and Azure. 14. John of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, L. high steward. Henry D. of Lancaster, Lord high steward. Quarterly France and England, a Label of 3. points Ermine. Robert Dudleigh, Lord Denbigh, &c. Or, a Lyon rampant, his tail double forked, Vert. Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle descended, of a sister of the said Robert. Robert Sidney, Earl of Leicester. Or, a Phaon Azure. CORDEILLA. THis Heroine Lady, after just revenge taken upon her two sisters husbands, and her fathers and husbands death, by the consent of most Writers, by the joynt suffrages and votes of the Brittains, was admitted to the Royal Scepter, in the year from the worlds creation, four thousand, three hundred, and ninety eight years; she governed her people and subjects, for the space of five years, with great applause, and general liking; but the two sons of her sisters, Morgan of Albania, and Cunedagius of Cambria and Cornwal, envying her prosperity, and thinking themselves injured in their birth-right; their grandfather Leir having divided the kingdom equally betwixt their Mothers upon their Marriages, conspire together, and mu∣stering their forces, invade Cordeilla, and reduce her to that necessity, that she is taken pri∣soner, and by her merciless Nephews cast into Gaol, which she patiently a while endured, but perceiving no hopes to regain her freedom, or repossess her kingdom; scorning to be any longer a slave to her insulting enemies; seeing she could not free her body from bondage; with true Trojan and masculine Heroick Spirit, she makes a divorce between her purer soul and encaged carcass, giving it free power to pass into another world, leaving those parts which participated of drossie mold, to be interred again in the earth, from whence at first it came, at Leicester in the Temple of Janus by the Sepulchre of her father.
Cunedagius and Morgan. THe obstacle which hindered the designs of these two aspiring Princes (Cordeilla the gal∣lant Brittish Amazon and Virago, being by violent death perpetrated by her own hand, taken out of the way) divide the kingdom betwixt them; and became both kings, in the year of the world, four thousand four hundred and three; but this gallantry lasted not long; for the Court-Gnats, whose life is a perpetual buzzing of news and flatteries, fall upon the ear of Morgan, and so fill his head with projects, that he highly conceives he is injured by the equal dividing of the kingdom, and thus discourses with himself, And am not I the son of Gonorilla, and she the eldest daughter of my Grand-father; to me then as lawfull Heir, Brittains Crown belongs? Why then do I admit a corrival, competitor, and co-equal; one firmament ad∣mits not two Suns, nor one kingdom two kings; no reason I should lose my birth-right, no I am resolved, I will not: Cunedagius shall know that Morgan can rule the Brittains without his help: this fire once kindled, his flattering parasites bring fewel enough to augment it: Cune∣dagius must bear rule no longer, a private life or none at all, must content him; it is no small policy for Princes to have Spies in neighbouring Courts: Cunedagius is quickly enformed of all the passages of his Cozen Morgan, and thinks there is no security in delays; and therefore puts himself into a posture as well to offend as defend; yet to make his case the better, and to ingratiate himself with the subjects, he sends Messengers to Morgan (who is already firing and destroying his Territories) to Treat of a reconciliation and atonement; but Morgan puft up with his imagined good success, and thinking the offer of his kinsman to proceed either from fear or want of ability to resist him, lends a deaf ear to the Treaty of peace, and will have no other Arbitrator but the sword; Cunedagius now resolved, comes into the field and offers battell to his enemy, his cause being just, the Celestial powers seem to second his attempts, and he who would have all or nothing is put to flight; where the Conqueror makes use of his advantage, and taking occasion by the foretop, to prevent all hopes of recruiting, and rallying again, so hotly pursues his victory, that Morgan is chased from place to place, from Province to Province, till being beaten into Cambria, now Wales, a Territory belonging to his Mortal Foe, and there being most sharply put to it, lost his life; yet with this honour, that that Country ever since from him hath had the appellation of Glanmorgan, which is as much as to say, in the vulgar tongue, Morgans Land; and thus after two years joyntlie reigning with his kinsman, Morgan departed this life, leaving Cunedagius to rule alone. Cunedagius to shew an humble thankfulness to his Gods for so great a Victory, having fully setled his Kingdom, erects a stately Temple to Mars at Perth (which is now St. Johns town) in Albania, now abusively called Scotland, then a part of Brittannia, and inhabited by the Brittish Nation. We finde, saith my Author, in several Authors and Antiquaries, to speak in their words, that 800. years before the coming of Christ, Cunedagius, King of all Brittain,Mr. Broughton, fol. 336. 6. builded a Temple of Mars at Perth, that is now St. Johns town in Scotland, and placed there a Flamen: Therefore we may not singularly deny unto this old city a Flamens Seat, which Antiquaries generally grant unto all such in this time, to have been changed into a Bishops See. If any one ask what I have to do with Scotland, my Scene being only the Brittish History? I answer, that to the great glory of the Brittains, that which is now called Scotland, was formerly Al∣bania, and was a part of Brittany; for in the conversion of the Scots, which hapned in the time of Pope Victor; for Sacerdotibus præceptoribus quos victor pontifex maximus ad Christi dogma propalandum in extremam miserat Albionem: which farthest part of Albion is 300. miles distant from that part of Albania which joyned with Loegria, England; Therefore we see clearly that the Scots only, then lived in the furthest and most remote parts of Albion, or some Ilands thereof, and possessed not our great Albania, the Brittains Country and possession; and in such sense they may call their small places of abode Scotia or Scotland, yet could it be very small when Josephus in the Age before had testified that it had no Land at all,Jseph. orat. ad Judaeos apud Egisip. lib. 3 cap. 13. Scotia ter∣ris nil debet; of which and there place of habitation, hear what Mr. Cambden saith, That nei∣ther Cæsar nor Volanus penetrated so far (into Brittain) as the Caledonians; for as Plinie doth testifie in his time, three years after Claudius, the Roman Arms knew no further of Brittany then to the Caledonian Woods; for Julius Agricola under Domitian,Mr. Cambden in Scotland. Galgacus a stout Brittain. was the first who entred Caledonia, where Galgacus commanded (Galanc ap Liennanc) who is reckoned one of the three Heroes of Brittany, a man of strong courage, and valiant spirit, who so stoutly defen∣ded his Country (the 11. Legion of the Romans being put to the worst) that he never gave over, till Fortune rather seemed to forsake him then his own valour or courage. These Nor∣thern Brittains were the last, who enjoyed the Liberty, and also the furthest part of the Iland according to Catullus. Cæsaris visens monumenta magni Gallicum Rhenum, horribiles & ulti. mosque Britannos.
In the time of the Emperour Severus (as Xiphilinus reporteth) Argeticoxus a petty King reigned in those Northern parts now called Scotland, but then Albania, or Caledonia, whose Lady be∣ing upbraided and taunted by Julia Augusta, answered, We Brittish Ladies, if we transgresse it is with Noble men both of valour, worth and quality; whereas you Roman in hugger-mugger prostitute your selves to every base varlet and inferiour groom. Not far from the River Taw stands Perch, in Latine St. Joannis Fanum, vulgarly St. Johns Johns, a place of late erection; the ancient Town of the same name long since being swallowed up by the waters, of which Nichanus, Transis ample Tai per rura, per oppida, per Perch Regnum sustentant istus. Ʋrbis opes. Rous, Homes and Stow.But of Cunedagius the builder, because a Brittain, not a word from Mr. Cambden. Cunedagius having founded Perch in Albania, casts his eye upon Cambra, and there in the remotest part begins a new Erection at Bangor; which Mr. Cambden also calls Banchor a choro pulchro, from the fair Quire, or as other derive it Locus chori, the place of the Quire, Owen Glendoverduy the most wicked and arch Rebel, amongst many other Towns and Cities of Wales set this also on fire and consumed it,Bangor built by Cunedagius the Brittish King. which was again in the time of Henry the 7. reedi∣fied by bishop Henry Den or Denaeus, but not to the pristine glory; for formerly it was so large and ample that for the greatnesse thereof, it was called Banchor vaur, and fortified with a Castle whose very Ruines are not now apparent. M. B. fol. 602. Age 4. Ca. 28.We may have some apprehension of the great Devotion of our Brittains both men and women in this age (viz. 4. Age) to chast and monastical life, by the Example of St. Ʋrsula, and so many thousands of holy Virgins with her devoted to that Profession, which we may further confirm unto us by the Examples of the Brittains,Jo. Bal. cent. 1. in Pela. Calph. Agric. & Con∣gello. Bed. hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. Galf. Mon. Hist. Britt. l. 2. cap. 12. Mat. West super Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 9. c. 12. & l. 11. c. 1. Matth. West an. 541. Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 11. c. 3. Manusc. antiq. & cap. in vita St. David Me∣ne. & Pits ae∣tat. 6. in ead. which were then in that part of Brittany now called Wales more free from the Saxons persecution, whose Antiquities, although not well preserved, not naming many Archbishops of Caer legion, and very few bishops in that Province, having many from the first receiving of their faith; yet they do propose and re∣cord unto us many Monasteries, and of great name and honour, as that of Bangor, stiling it Fumatum Collegium, where Pelagius before his Heresies lived, and by some was Abbot Præ∣positus there, having 2100 Monks in it, and divided as it were into seven Monasteries, every one of them having 300 Monks; which Monastery, as St. Bernard, our late Authors and o∣thers write, was the head or chief of principal Monasteries and brought forth many thousands of Monks. In vita Malachiæ Hibernensis Episcopi Bernardus Clarovallensis hunc locum tradit primorum extitisse Monasteriorum Caput & multa generavisse Monachorum mille. This was the most noble Monastery of this Country, nobilissimum Monasterium, as St. Bede and others term it, and so justly did, having so many Monks, that being divided into 7 Companies under 7 Pryors, under their chief Abbot, every one had 300. or more Monks, and amongst them most Learned men; Viri doctissimi plures de Nobilissimo Monasterio Bancornabury lingua Anglorum, Inter cæteras erat in civitate Bangor quædam Nobilissima Ecclesia in qua tantus fertur fuisse nu∣merus Monachorum, ut cum in 7 portiones esset cum præpositis sibi Prioribus Monasterium divisum, nulla harum portio minus quam trecentos Monachos haberet. Cunedagius builded a third place in Cornwall where he was born, but yet I cannot come to a certain knowledge of the place, where he erected a Temple and a Flamen to Mercury. He Reigned thirty three years and was buried at Troynovant or new Troy now London. An Author calleth Perth before spoken of Berth, and saith, no lesse strange, but more lamen∣table is the remembrance of the great innundation, hapning by the sudden rising of Tai, which bare away the Walls and Town of Berth or Perth, and with it the Cradle and young Son of King William into the Sea, wherein the Royal Infant with many others perished, the King and his Courtiers scarcely escaping the Danger: The ruine of this Town raised another called St. John's Town. RIƲALLƲS. RIvallus the Son of Cunedagius, took upon him the Government of this Kingdome in the year of the Worlds creation, four thousand four hundred and thirty eight; this King was stiled the Fortunate and Peacefull: for that during the time of his Reign he governed his Sub∣jects with all lenity, meeknesse and prosperity; yet Authors leave little recorded of this Prince; for indeed Tragical Acts and Warlike Scenes better please most Writers in smooth and calm times: yet it is noted that whilst Rivallus governed Brittanny for the space of three dayes it continually rained Blood, out of the corruption whereof were ingendred a multitude of those which we call animalia insecta, which are Vermine, divided as it were between the head and belly, having no flesh, blood or sinews, as flies, gnats, pismires, caterpillars, and such like, which id so swarm and grew infectious, that by the contagion many people died; and that again, caused a great and strange mortality, insomuch that the Island seemed in a manner un∣peopled. Thus after Rivallus had Reigned 46 years he departed this life, and was buried at York.
In the Reign of this King, Rome was builded by the two brothers Romulus and Remus 356 years after Brute came into England, Et ejus (speaking of this King, saith Vitus) Tempore Ro∣mam in Italia per Remum & Romulum fratres esse conditam post adventum Bruti Prisci ad Bri∣tanniam anno plus trecentis quinquagesimo sexto: Sane quidem Alexander ab Alexandris l. 2. c. 22. In Palilibus sacris inquit hoc custoditur ne qua mactetur hostia, quia eum diem qui patriæ natalis est, à caede & sanguine deceret esse parum, fuit enim is dies 12. Calendas Maii quo fausto & fae∣lici omine jacta sunt primum fundamenta urbis Romae, quo die mos erat ovilia purgare, flammas transilire, sapa & milio sacrum facere, geniales Dies agere, caenas apparare, à litibus abstinere, quæ singula prosperos rerum successus decernebant: Sed quia Gaufridus per consequentiam literarum scribit undecimo Calendas Maii qui est 21. Aprilis conditam esse Romam, fortasse mendosus est Codex Alexandri, per literas numerales Scriptas ad 12. Calendas qui esset Dies 20. Aprilis. Nam Plutarchus in vita Romuli scribit Romam fuisse conditam 21. die Aprilis & Palilia esse celebrata prius quam urbs Roma conderetur, circiter annum tertium Olympladis 6. est autem Olympias spatium 4. Annorum sic appellatum quod inter duos ludos Olympiacos haberetur, eorum fiebat initium, ut in Theatro suo Lycosthenes scribit, anno 19. Amulii Silvii Regis Latinorum, qui erat ab orbe condito super ter mille ac contum annus 8. cui si addantur Olympiades quin{que} cum an∣nis tribus Olympiadis 6. atque sic 23. anni, videbitur Roma condita fuisse anno undecimo supra ter mille ducentos, at{que} sic 26. Rivallonis. In his time (viz. Rivallus) Rome in Italy was built by Remus and Romulus after the coming of old Brute into Britany 356. Alexander ab Alexandris, lib. 2. c. 22. saith that in the Pali∣libus (or Festival days of the Shepherds in honor of Pales their Goddess) order is taken that no Hostia (or Sacrifice where in blood was shed) should be offered, because being the Birth day of the Country, as it were, it ought to be pure and clean, and not polluted with any slaughter or bloodshed; this day hapned on the 12. of the Kalends of May, in which with happy and auspicious Omens the foundation of Rome was laid, in which day the Custom was to purifie and purge their Flocks, skip over fires, to Sacrifice in boyld or burnt wine, millets or hyrse; to keep Wakes or Gaudy days, and to make bunquetting and delicious Suppers; and to abstain from all debates; all which they imagined betokened prosperous success in the succeeding affairs: but because Gaufridus writes Rome to have been built, it may be the book of Alexander may be faulty, or mistaken in the numeral Letters, concerning the xii. of the Calends, which is the 20. day of April; for Plutarch in the life of Romulus saith, that Rome was built the 21. day of April, and that the Palilia, or Shepherds Festivals, was celebrated be∣fore the building of Rome, about the 3. year of the 6. Olympiade, containeth 4. years, which was the space between two Olympick Games, which Games as Lycosthenes in his Theater writes, had their beginning in the 19. year of Amulius Sylvius, King of the Latines, which was in the three thousand one hundred and 88. year since the worlds Creation, to which if you add five Olympiads, and three years of the 6. and so 23. years, it will appear that Rome was built the 26. of Rivallus: others as Fabian, say that Rome was built 470. years after London, and in the 32. year of Rivallus. GƲRGƲSTIƲS. GƲrgustius the son of Rivallus, whom some call Gorbodian, and his father Reignald began his Reign over the Kingdom of Great Brittain 4483. the flower of Histories saith, that he reigned thirty and eight years, otherwise little mention is made of him in History, onely Mr. Howes in his continuation of Stow saith, that he was a common drunkard, whereof fol∣lowed all other vices; he died after a Reign of 38. years, and was buried at York, leaving no issue behinde him to succeed. SISILLIƲS. SIsillius, or according to Sylvius, the brother of Gurgustius, as affirmeth the old Author, saith Fabian, was elected King of Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4521. he is called by the English Chronicle Seizil; little is recorded of this King, only some Authors say, that he reigned only two years; but the most common opinion is, that he was King 49. years, and after died and was buried at Caer Badon or Bath, leaving no issue of his own body. JAGO or LAGO. JAgo or Lago the cozen of Gurgustius, and his next heir took upon him the Government of this Iland, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4540. whether this Kings life, as the two pre∣cedent, was so foul, that Learned and modest Writers were ashamed to let them come to light,
or that they lived in such sloth and ease, that nothing was done worth recounting, I cannot affirm; all that is recorded of him is, that he ruled 25. years, and through ill and disordi∣nate living, he fell into a Lethargy, whereof he died, and was buried at York without issue. Kymmacus or Kynimacus. KYmmacus or Kynimacus, the Son of Silvius, or more likely, as saith the old Chronicle, the brother of Jago, was invested in the royal dignity of this Island, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4595. as little is said of this King, as of his three immediate predecessors, only that he ruled 54. years, and was buried at York, leaving after him a son, who as testi∣fieth Flos Historiarum, was called Gorbodug. GORBODƲG. GOrbodug the Son of Kynimacus was made King of great Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation 4650. this King crod in the footsteps of those whom he followed, leaving no∣thing to be recorded, only that he ruled to compleat the account of Histories 63. years; so that these five last Kings, Rivallus, Gurgustius, Jago, Kynimacus and Gordobug died ingloriously leaving nothing to perpetuate their memory, saving that they were Kings, the last whereof was buried at Troynovant, and left two sons to succeed Ferrex and Porrex. FERREX and PORREX. FErrex and Porrex the Sons of Gorbodug were joyntly made Rulers of Great Brittain, four thousand, seven hundred and eleven, or as some say, thirteen; this amity continued for a while betwixt the brothers; but ambition of sole command, and a Spirit not brooking a Col∣legue, so inflamed Porrex the younger, that he intends to lay violent hands upon his elder brother; these tidings are brought to Ferrex; but the warning comes not so speedily, but that the danger is at the heels of it; and the elder brother, to avoid the snares laid for him, hath no other way but to flie into Gallia, and there as an humble suppliant to crave aid and succour of a Duke whom Gaufride calls Gunhardus or Suardus; who most willingly accords to his desire, and furnishing a Navy well provided with Munition, as well men as weapons, and the very nerves of war, sends him back into Brittain: Porrex who lets no occasions slip which may advantage his design, attends his landing, and at his very arrival, scarce afford∣ing him leisure to order and marshal his forces gives him battel; wherein Bellona was so pro∣pitious unto him that victory crowned his Souldiers, although with the death of his brother, and loss, or at least discomfiture of all his Army. Porrex (though some mistake, who make Fer∣rex the surviver) being now an absolute King without a Competitor, makes himself sure of all the kingdom, but long he enjoyed not his unnatural Conquest. For the more unnatural mother, Idone, Widen, or Idone, whose affection more enclined to her elder Son, vows revenge, and arming her self with cruelty, cruelty indeed before not heard of, and taking her Maids to assist her in the night, enters Porrex Pavilion, where finding him profoundly sleeping, these she devils became his Hellish Executioners, and after inhumanely tear him to pieces; after this most horrid murther followed a Race of people wholly addicted to war and bloodshed, daily inventing and contriving broyls and seditions, and even in the quietest times of peace blood thirsting, insomuch that the weakest went to the wall; and he who imagined he had strength enough, presumed he had right enough to the Kingdom; thus had the Brittains dai∣ly domestick Wars, till at the length the whole power came into the hands of five Tyrants, or petty Lords and Governours, who Ruled questionless with Arbitrary power, with a sic volo sic jubco; but deserve not to be named as Kings of this Island. Gaufride affirmeth, that after the death of Ferrex and Porrex, great discord and civil dis∣sension arose amongst the Brittains, which continued long; insomuch that five Kings were erected, which was a great plague and oppression to the Country: Guido de Columna relateth, that the Brittains so abhorred the linage and off-spring of Gorbodug, partly for the unnatural quarrels and hatred betwixt the two brothers; but above all, for the horrid, inhumane and barbarous cruelty of the mother, that had there been any Lawfull Heir to succeed, they re∣solved none of that issue should enjoy the Government: this caused a mighty distraction in the Commonwealth; insomuch that one took upon him the guiding of Albania, or Caledonia now Scotland: another seized upon Loegria, or England: a third took Cambria, or Wales: and the fourth usurped Cornwall for his share: a fifth there was, but by many Authors not distinctly specified. This difference continued till Mulmutius, which Fabian saith, was 51. years: and to give some light what the names of those five Kings should be, he brings,
An Addition of Robert Record thus. The five Kings that be omitted here, are found in certain old Pedegrees; and although their names be much corrupted in divers Copies, yet these are the most agreeable. Rudaucus King of Wales. Lotenus King of Cornwall. Pinnor King of Loegria. Statorius King of Scotland. Yevan King of Northumberland. Quocirca Piremen Loegriæ Regem aggreditur & prælio interfecit;Vitus fol 181. lib. 2. notius ad Mulmut. inde factus victor arma tendit in Rudacum Cambriæ Regem, qui fædere inito cum Albania Rege Staterio conabatur junctis viribus exercitum movere in provincias Mulmutii, quibus ille obviam & comitatus triginta millibus fortissimorum virorum, comissoque diu prælio, cum videret differri victoriam, usus est fraude similitudinis armorum quibus induti erant hostes ejus, atque sic pessundatis regibus ipsis cæteros pa∣lantes fugavit ad urbes & oppida, quibus incensis agrisque devastatis totam omnino insulam suæ potestati suæque Jurisdictioni subjecit, ac primus ex auro factum Diadema capite gestavit. Quis erat rex quintus Cantii nescitur ex historia Brittanica, quæ numerat reges quinque, nec alios quam cos qui bella gesserunt commemorat tres, fortasse quod illi reliqui in societatem venerint, aut sponte se subjecerint. Where Mulmutius sets upon Piremen (or Pinmor as the other Author calls him) and kills him in the field; and being now victorious, and a Conqueror in his first attempt, full of courage and boldness, he bends all his power and forces against Rudacus King of Wales, who having made an offensive and defensive League with Statorius King of Albania, with joyned forces, and banner displayed, had invaded his Territories; Mulmutius delays no time, but being in the head of a gallant Army; consisting of thirty thousand experienced Souldiers, gives them the meeting, and joyns Battell; but thinking victory to hover too long before she enclined to his pat, he makes use of a stratagem, and counterfeiting the Arms, Weapons, and habits of his enemies, in a friendly appearance gives them a most discourteous and unfriendly over∣throw, insomuch that the two Kings being quite overthrown, he pursues the stragling Soul∣diers, who flie to Towns and fortified places, which he presently sets on fire, and destroying all round about, brings the whole Kingdom under his own power and subjection; and being an absolute Monarch, he encircles his conquering Temples with a Diadem of purest Gold, being the first of the Brittish Kings that ever did the like. Who was the fifth King either in Kent (or as others say) in Northumberland, the Brittish Histories do not fully declare, only the three who waged war against Mulmutius, are expresly treated of, the other, either for that they combined or submitted, are silently passed over. After the death and murder of Ferrex and Porrex, ended the lineal descent of old Brute; but here a curious diver into Antiquities may object, How then was the promise in the Pro∣phecy by the Oracle made good, that to the Kings of his seed, Totius terrae subditus orbis erit, This Ʋniverse shall them obey. If after the space of 600 and some few years his Race should be extinct; this objection is nothing to the Oracle; for it was not specified, whether it should be fulfilled in the direct or collateral Line: so that if any of a Brittish off-spring should obtain the Dominion over the whole world, that is, so far as ever any Emperour had command, the prophesie is fulfilled: which was made good in Constantine the Great, who as both King of Great Brittain, and son of Hellen, the daughter of Coillus, a Brittish King, born in this Isle, and Emperour of Rome, which is as much as to say, of the whole world; Rome being stiled, Totius terrarum orbis Re∣gina or Domina, Lady and Queen of the whole world. Vitus sets down the order and succession of the Kings of Brutus his Lineage, with the terms and continuance of their Reigns, but differs much from the account of Fabian, and other Writers; for he saith. 1. Rex Brutus Priscus, began in the year from the worlds Creation, 2855. and Reigned four and twenty years. 2. Locrinus 2879. and reigned 10. 3. Madanus 2889. and reigned 40. 4. Membritius 2929. and reigned 20. 5. Ebrancus 2949. and reigned 40. 6 Brutus Junior, 2980. and reigned 12.
7. Leilus 3001. and reigned 25. 8. Rudibras 3026. and reigned 39. 9. Fladus 3065. and reigned 20. 10. Leir 3085. and reigned 60. 11. Cordeilla 3145. and reigned 5. 12. Morganus & Cunedagius began to reign 3150. 13. Rivallo 3185. and reigned 46. 14. Gurgustius 3231. and reigned 38. 15. Sisillius 3269. and reigned 49. 16. Jago 3318. and reigned 25. 17. Chynemarces 3343. and reigned 54: 18. Gorbodio 3397. and reigned 63. 19. Ferrex & Porrex 3460. and reigned 5. Which computation, as he tells us, compleats six hundred and ten years; during all which time the Progeny of Brute held the Scepter of Brittany, and then followed the Pen∣tarchy. Epilogus Libri Primi. BY reason that divers and various are the opinions of Authors and Antiquaries, concerning the computation of years since the Creation of the world, and framing of the first Adam, the overthrower of mankinde and his whole posterity, unto the birth of the second Adam, that sacred Messias, that long lookt for Emanuel, and most blessed Jesus, who repaired that loss by his Incarnation, death and passion, opening to the sons of Eve, the gates of the Celestial Paradice, which untill his glorious Ascension were close lockt up against all mankinde; It will not be amiss to give a brief Compendium and abridgement of the variety of opinions: The Hebrews account from the said Term three thousand, nine hundred and fourty three. The seventy Interpreters, assign five thousand, one hundred, ninety and nine: others there are, who number five thousand, two hundred and twenty eight. In the third or fourth Book of Policronicon, there are other conceits and judgements shewed concerning calculation of these years; whereof (saith Fabian) the most certain is five thousand, and two hundred years; there are not wanting others, whereof some reckon some more, some less: some account from the first building and structure of Rome; some from the overthrow and subversion of the most famous City of Troy, others from the founding of Troynovant or London; and not a few from divers Edifices and Foundations. But since that the account of the Septuagint, or seventy In∣terpreters both by venerable Bede, and other Learned Writers is esteemed as most authentick; I will follow their judgement; and accordingly give you to understand, in what year of the world Brute first entred this Isle then called Albion now England. First, therefore from Adam to Noe, was two and twenty hundred and fourty two years. From Noe to Abraham, was nine hundred and fourty two years. From David to the captivity of the Jews, three hundred and five years. And from the Captivity to the Incarnation of our blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, five hundred fourscore and ten. The which in all make 5199 years. After which accompt (although divers Authors have their several Computations) the an∣cient, and glorious City of Troy was subverted and felt its dismal Catastrophe by the hands of the Conquering Grecians, as Learned Eusebius, and others testifie in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand and twenty three. It was the first year of Achas, and before Hezekias xvi. years, after Eusebius, iiii. M cccc xliii.And according to the same Eusebius, the foundations of Rome were laid in the eleventh year of Hezekiah then King of Judah; the which year maketh after the computation of the said Authors, 4470. who also affirm that the said City was edified, after the destruction of Troy, four hundred and fourty seven years, so that it must by consequence follow, that it was built Anno mundi, as before. Peter Pictaniensis, and others, testifie, that Brute entred first this sle of Albion, called now England in the eighteenth year of the Priest and Judge of Israel, named Hely; and Hely, as divers Writers avouch, began to rule the Israelites, the year of the third Age, that is, from Abraham to David, eight hundred and fourty one years, which maketh the years of the world four thousand and five. Whereunto if there be joyned the abovesaid eighteen years, then must it follow that Brute entred this Land, Anno mundi four thousand sixty three; to this agreeth the Author of Poli∣cronicon, who saith that Brute entred Albion fourty years after the subversion of Troy, which forty years joyned to the former saying of Eusebius,iiii. M. lxii. xlii. compleat the number of four thousand and fourty three years. Another Historian called Jacobus Philippus saith, that Troy was taken by the Grecians in the third year that Abdon or Labdon judged the Israelites, who began his Rule over the said Isra∣elites,iiii. M. xviii. after the accord of most Writers Anno mundi, four thousand and twenty, whereunto if
there he added three years for the third year of his rule, in which year, as before is declared,iiii. M. xviii. Troy was sacked and destroyed; and forty years which passed before Brute entered Albion: It must follow, that Brute came into this Island in the year of the worlds Creation,xlii. four thou∣sand threescore and three. MƲLMƲTIƲS DƲNWALLO. MƲlmutius Dunwallo, or as others please Dunwallo Mulmutius the Son of Glotene Duke or King of Cornwall, as the English book and also Gaufride affirm after he had fully subdu∣ed and conquered the five petty Kings or Princes before mentioned, and had brought the Iland into a Pentarchy took upon him the Government of Brittany in the year of the worlds creation 1748. This Prince in some Histories is called Donebant,iiii. M. vii. C. lxix. and was of a Noble and He∣roick Spirit; but much (after he came to be fully setled in his Government) inclined to peace, insomuch that in the City of Troynovant, in a place, which now as some are of opinion is called Blackwell-Hall, he builded a Temple, calling it the Temple of Peace or Concord: The Laws which he made and established, were of such Authority and esteem, that holy Gildas translated them out of the Brittish Language into Latine, and Aluredus King of England out of Latine into English; Vitus tells us, that these Laws, or at least the heads of them were, Ʋt deorum templa tantam dignitatem consequantur, nequis illo confugiens extrabi possit prius quam ab eo quem laeserat veniam impetraverit: That the Temples of the Gods should enjoy such immu∣nities and priviledges, that no malefactor flying unto them for succour should be drawn from thence, untill he should obtain pardon from him, whom he had offended. Ʋt hujusmodi privi∣legium immunitatis habeant etiam ipsæ viae quæ ducunt ad templa & urbes: that the high ways, leading to the Temples and Cities should enjoy the like immunities and priviledges, Immo & jumenta quoque illa quæ rei rusticæ subserviunt, denique Colonorum aratra ipsa tali prerogativa libertatis perfruantur; nay even the Cattle which were imployed in husbandry should have like priviledges; Ne qua terra vacaret cultura, neve populus inopia rei frumentariæ premeretur, aut ea minueretur si pecora sola occuparent agros qui ab hominibus coli deberent, constituit quot aratra quælibet Diaecesis haberet, ac pænas statuit per quas ille numerus aratrorum minuere∣tur: Least any Land should lie until'd, or the people be famisht for want of bread-Corn; or Grain be diminished, by feeding Herds and Flocks, where Tillage ought to be; to which end he appointed how many Ploughs should be in every Diocess or Shire, inflicting a punishment upon whomsoever should diminish the number of them: Item vetuit bovem aratorem pro de∣bito pecuniæ assignari creditoribus si alia bona creditoris essent; He also prohibited the working Oxen, or Plough-bullock, to be distrained upon for any debt, if any other Chattels or per∣sonal estate be to be found: Ita fore ne compendii causa homines pecuarii agros incultos redde∣rent, sic enim fore nequid earum rerum quas natura præbet hominibus usquam deesse posset, that by that means Grasiers and Drovers for their own private interest should not deprive their fel∣low Subjects of natures benefits, and liberal gifts; Optimus iste Rex viros incumbentes ad bonas artes & opibus & favore juvit adeo ut exemplo suo principes regni ad faciendum idem & juven∣tatem totam ad virtutes capessendas excitaverit. This good King was such a patron to those who endeavoured to learn Arts and Sciences, that he not only graced them with his counte∣nance; but also assisted them with competent subsistance; by which his example he invited other Nobles of his Realm to do the like; a great encouragement to youth to endeavour to train themselves up in vertuous education: Item pondera & mensuras rebus emendis venden∣disque posuit, fures & omne noxium genus hominum severissime punivit. Ita{que} sub hoc principe latrocinia, rapinae saevitia generis omnis aberat à populo, nec audebat quisquam vim alteri in∣ferre vel injuriam propter exquisitam legis observationem; He caused weights and measures to be made for buyers and sellers: Thieves and all loytering idle vagabonds he severely bani∣shed; so that none was found who durst to offer either force or violence to any man, being ter∣rified with the severity of the Laws. Having now regulated all things for the due and requisite Governing of the Commonwealth, by the general request and advice of his Nobles and Council, he caused a Diadem of Gold to be made, with which according to the Rights and Ceremonies of those times he was so∣lemnly Crowned, in so much that properly speaking we may call him the first King or rather Monarch of Great Brittaine. He caused several Cities and Towns to be made, amongst which Malmesbury seems to have been the chief, a verity which Mr. Cambden seems not much to deny: Dum exilis est Malmesbu∣rie collem sibi imminentem substringit recepto{que} profluente fere incingit. Oppidum sane elegans & pannis laneis sane celebre, quod ut in Historiarum Eulogio le itur, Dunwallo Mulmutius Brittan∣norum Rex una cum Lacok, & Tetbury castris adjacentibus construxit & Caer Bladon nomina∣vit, Malmesbury a polite and neat Town, and famous for Wollen Cloaths, which as it is written in the Eulogy of Histories was founded by Dunwallo Mulmutius as also the Neighbouring Ca∣stles Lacock and Tetbury, which Town he called Caer Bladon. The Saxons called this Town in their tongue Ingelborn which appellation continued a long time till Maildulphus a Scot, a man of singular learning and piety being much taken with the shades and solitarinesse of the
Woods and Groves, he resolved there to live an Heremetical life; and there setting up a schoole, he himself together with his Scholars and Auditors addicted himself to a monastical rule of living, so that from this Maildulphus, the old appellations both Caer Bladon the Brittish and Ingleborn the Saxon, being by little and little worn out, the Town got a new name and was called Maildulfesburge, Bede calls it Maildulphi Ʋrbs, others Meldunum, corruptly Malmes∣bury. Amongst the Disciples of this Maildulph the chiefest and most remarkable was Adelmus his appointed Successour: who by the help of Adelmus a West Saxon Bishop, to whom the ju∣risdiction of that place belonged, built there a most famous Monastery, and was therein the first Prior or Abbot, insomuch that in an ancient manuscript this Town is called Adelmesberg: but this new nomenclation quickly vanished, though the memory of Adelmus continued in esteem, he being canonized and registred amongst the happy number of the Saints; (after his death, not as the Saints in these our times who are Saints while they live, and I know not what after death) upon the feast day of this St. the Fair is kept, where souldiers were appointed to guard and watch, least jangling and discord should arise amongst so great concourse of peo∣ple; Truly (saith Mr. Cambden) he deserved that his name should everlastingly flourish, being the first who writ in Latin, and taught the English Art of Poetry and versifying as he himselfe witnesseth. Primus ego in patriam mecum modo vita supersit Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas. If Heaven lend life, from Helicon I'le bring Th' Aonian Muses in this Isle to sing. Athelstane the great who had made choice of this Saint for his patron, for his sake honoured this Town with many priviledges, and enriched the Monastery with many princely gifts, making choice of it for the place of his Sepulchre, as the Inhabitants will inform you to this day, shewing his Monument. From Athelstanes time this Monastery flourished in abundance of wealth, and was the prop and upholder of the Town, when by the love and expenses of Robert Bishop of Salisbury, it was fortifyed with a Castle and inclosed with Walls in the time of the Wars, betwixt Henry the Son of Matilda, and King Stephen: in which season it indured a siege by Hen. 2d. but shortly by the permission of K. John in favour of the Monks it was de∣molished, thereby to inlarge the precincts of their Monastery, and so continued till the fatal hand of Henry the 8. laid it level with the ground; yet a wealthy and rich Clothier whom Mr. Cambden colls Stumpuis, partly by petitioning and supplications; but without doubt not with∣out emptying his bags; obtained that the Church might stand which is now the Parish-Church. This Town saith a new Author Anonymus, was by Antoninus in his Itinerarium called Cunetio from the River Kennet, and Marleburgh as being seated in a Chalkie soyle, which in some pla∣ces still well called by the name of Marle. Here Hen. 3. held a Parliament in which were many statutes; and as the preamble saith, right necessary for the peace and tranquility of the people; now a title of honour and hath given stile of, EARLE to 1. James L. Ley L. Tr. Created Earle of Marlborough 1. Car. Feb. 7. 2. Henry Ley. 3. James Ley, E. of Mal. Argent a cheveron between 3 Bears Heads Couped Sable. The next place which Mulmutius Dunwallo built was The-Vies, which Florentius Wigornien∣sis calls Divisio, another De vies, and Nubrigensis, Divisae: Here was a Castle built by Roger the rich Bishop of Salisbury, for scituation and workmanship giving place to none: but For∣tune is a Goddesse both blind and fickle; for he who even now was the second Head in the Kingdom, by the frowns, or rather avarice of K. Stephen, is not only plunder'd of his vast and almost inexhaustible Treasure, but also cast into a loathsome Gaol, where the poor old Man with Hunger, and what with Afflictions and Miseries, betwixt the fear of death and tor∣ments of his life, would feign have died yet knew not how to die. Mulmutius Dunwallo having with great honour rul'd the Brittains by the space of forty years, yielded to death what was mortal, and was buried in the Temple of Troynovant, which he had built, leaving his two Sons Bellinus and Brennus, joyntly to succeed in the Kingdome.
BELLINƲS and BRENNƲS. BEllinus and Brennus the two Sons of Mulmutius, began to Reign joyntly as Kings of great Brittain, in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred and eight. To Bellinus, according to the agreement of Partition, fell Loegria, Cambria and Cornwall; that is to say, England, Wales and Cornwall; and to Brennus, by the same accord, all the Land beyond the River of Humber. This Partition, according to Policron and others, pleased and gave full content to both the Brothers for the space of five years. The reason why Bellinus had the bigger and better share, was, Quia erat primogenitus,Vitus fol. 209. & Trojana consuetudo requirebat ut dig∣nitas Hæreditatis perveniret ad eum. Hanc vero fuisse consuetudinem Trojanorum scribens Herodotus; ad Alexandrum, ait, non erat perventurum Regnum, cum Hector & major natu,Herodotus. & virtute præstantior quam ille, Regnum defuncto Priamo suscepturus esset. Idem scribit Messala Corvinus, in libello de Augusti Progenie, Troem, à quo dicta Troja est, Regem Trojanorum habuisse duos filios Ilum & Assaracum, at{que} Ilum defuncto patre quod ipse major natu esset obti∣nuisse Regnum;Messala Cor∣vinus. Deni{que} is qui dicitur Dares Phrygius in libro de excidio Trojæ narrat Priamum commone fecisse filios quos habebat multos, ut majores natu minoribus Imperarent, ex quo sequitur, ut minores majoribus subderentur. Adeo{que} Legem hanc latam in Anglia esse propter ius istud Trojanæ consuetudinis, at{que} servatam esse scribit Andreas Taraquellus in præsatione primogenitorum:Andreas Tara∣quellus. Bartolus. & Bartolus ad l. 1. Codicis de summa Trinitate; Consuetudinis est in Anglia inquit ut primogeni∣tus succedat in omnibus bonis; Because he was eldest, and the Trojan custome was, that the In∣heritance should fall to the Eldest; and this to have been the Trojan custome, sheweth Hero∣dotus, saying, that the Kingdom of Troy after the death of Priamus was not to fall to Alexan∣der but to Hector, who was both the more Valiant and also the Eldest by birth; and Messala Corvinus, in his Book of the Progeny of Augustus, confirms as much, saying, that King Tros from whom Troy took its Name, had two Sons, Ilus and Assaracus, and that Ilus, his Father being dead, for that he was the Eldest enjoyed the Kingdom; and he also (who is called Da∣res Phrygius) in his Book of the Destruction of Troy, tells us, That Priamus, who had many Sons, admonished them, that the Elder should have Power over the Younger, &c. and this Law to have taken root in England, as being derived from the old Trojan Custome, affirmeth Andreas Tarquellus. After five years thus in brotherly love and amity expired, Brennus suppo∣sing himself injured and intending to enlarge his Territories, raised Forces, and in hostile manner sets upon his brother Bellinus: but as his quarrel was unjust, so the sequel proved Fa∣tal; for he was totally Routed, and to save his life, compelled to fly into Armorica, now cal∣led Little Brittain, or as Gaufride will have it, into the Country of the Allobroges; others affirm, that without the knowledge or consent of his Brother, he sailed into Norway, and there mar∣ried the Daughter of Elfunge or Elfinge, Duke of that place; which tydings when they were brought to Bellinus, he seized into his hands all the Lands of Brennus and fortified his Cities, Castles, and other strong Holds with his own Garrisons. Fame quickly brought these Ru∣mours to Brennus, who neglected no time, but gathering a strong Army of Norwegians, ships himself for his own Principality, where by the way he was met by Guilthdacus or Guiclidacus, King of Denmark, who being inflamed with the Love of the Lady, whom Brennus had espoused, awaited his coming; and being now met, the two Fleets strongly encounter each other, and in short time come to grappling, a most bitter and bloudy Conflict ensueth: But the Danish King, having surprized the Vessel, in which the Object both of his love and anger was imbarked, though he had totally dispersed his Enemies Navy, pursued no further, thinking himself highly rewarded with the beautiful prize which he had already taken, and there withal resolves as a most victorious Conqueror to return to Denmark; yet whether Fortune to shew her accustomed fickleness and cross the Designs of such as think themselves most fortunate and her darlings, or rather Neptune incensed to see so violent a Rape committed within his watery Kingdom, with his revenging trident turned up and undermined the calm waves and ploughed them into hideous ridges; such a tempest arose, that the Heavens were darkned, the winds blustered, the billows roared and made such a hideous noise, that Guilthdacus each minute ex∣pected to be swallowed up in the mercilesse surges of the angry Ocean; this death-threatning storm continued for the space of five dayes; at the end whereof, the skies began to clear, the winds and waves to leave their Violence, and the Danish King to understand he was driven upon the coasts of his Enemies Country, for his tattered Fleet so much as was left of it was now arrived in Northumberland. Belinus to make good that he had already begun, and to prevent all opportunities which might help and further his Brother at his landing, was now in Northumberland; and having in∣telligence of the Danish Kings Arrival, with so small a Company, he commanded his person with the rest of his Followers to be secured and committed to safe Custody; upon which discovery Brennus sends peremptorily to his brother, not only to surrender his territories injuriously (as is complained) taken from him, but also his then (in his possession) a prisoner, violently ravisht from him by Guilthdacus the King of Denmark: These Proposals or rather Demands, Bellinus absolutely denies; insomuch that Brennus having gathered together his scattered and dispersed
Navy, new rigs his Fleet, reinforceth his Army, and with fresh Supplies and strong Recruits, once more puts forth to Sea, and with more prosperous gales and auspicious fortune, arrived in Albania; and having given a short refreshing to his Souldiers, marcheth towards his Brother (already resolved to give him a hot Entertainment) near Calaterium, a well known and famous Wood; there these two incensed Brothers meet, the Officers and ordinary Souldiers equally bent to live and die in their Commanders quarrel; The signal is given to battel, and a strange confused noyse from both the Camps pierceth even the skies; terrible was the Encounter, and with Martial and Heroick mettle and courage maintained on both sides; the groans of dying men, whose souls (as the phrase now goes) left their bodies in the beds of Honour, were hide∣ous, and so great a destruction and havock was made that day, that forty thousand bodies wanted Forms to give them being. Victory at length decided the businesse and crowned Bellinus with a trimphant Laurel; compelling Brennus with his forreign Adherents and Assi∣stants to fly from his native Soil. Bellinus now thinking himself to have run through all his Disasters, applies his mind to re∣ctifie things and settle his people: and in the first place casting his eye upon the Danish King and his beloved Lady (as then his Captives) he released Guilthdacus upon Articles of Agree∣ment and Composition, That he should hold and do Homage for the Kingdome of Denmark unto the King of Brittany, and pay a yearly Tribute of one thousand pounds: Upon this accord Hostages being given, the captive King had free liberty to depart for his own Coun∣try; and Bellinus prosecutes and makes good that which his deceased Father had designed and begun, (to wit,) the finishing of the four High-Wayes; the first of which was named Foss, stretched out of the South into the North, and began at the Corner of Totness in Cornwall and passed forth by Devonshire, Somersetshire, and so by Tutbury upon Cotteswold, beside Co∣ventry and Leicester, and from thence to Newark, and endeth at the City of Lincoln. The second Way was named VVatling-street, the which stretcheth overthwart the way of Fosse over the South East into the Northast, this began at Dover and passeth by the middle of Kent, over Thames, besides London, by West of VVestminster, and so forth by St. Albans, in the West side of Dunstable, of Stratford, of Touceter and of VVedon, and by South Killingborne or Killebourne, by Athriston unto Gilberts Hill, that now is named VVrekin, and so forth by Seuarum, passing by VVorcester, and thence to Stratton and so to the middle of VVales unto a place called Cardigan. The third Way was named Erming-street, the which stretcheth out of the West, North-west unto the East, South-East and beginneth at Menevia at St. Davids in VVales, and so stretcheth forth unto Southhampton. The fourth and last Way was called Kikeneldis-street the which stretcheth forth by Worcester, by VVickham, by Bermingham, by Lichfield, by Derby, by Chesterfield, by York and so forth unto Tinemouth, the which was sufficiently made. Belinus granted or confirmed unto these pla∣ces all such priviledges as formerly Mulmutius had done; which together with other Lawes made by the King, are translated out of the Brittish tongue by Gildas, but are here for brevity sake omitted. Whilst Belinus thus imployed his time in providing for his Countrey and Subjects necessa∣ry conveniences, Brennus after his late and almost irrecoverable overthrow, like a forlorne Pilgrime spends his time in Gallia, and there summons all his wits to Counsel how he may in some sort recover his Countrey and former Glory and Renown; and as great spirits will leave nothing unattempted to bring their designes to the wished period; so he resolves being accompanied only by twelve Cavaliers to addresse himself unto a Duke who had great power and command in those parts: where it is to be observed by the way that (as Ʋtropius and other writers affirm) the Galli at that time possessed divers Counries; upon which ground Ti∣tus Lavius who writ the Acts of the Romans, tells us that those Souldiers who followed Brennus when he sacked Rome were Galli Senonenses, to wit, those who inhabited the Countrey where the City Sena stood and yet doth, (as testifyeth the Author of Cronica Cronicorum and others) in a part of Italie, in succeeding ages known by the name Etruria; which Sena, as divers affirm was built by Brennus when he there inhabited, before the Incarnation of our Saviour Jesus Christ, iii. C. lxxx. and vi. years. Brennus finding favourable admittance into the Court of Duke of Seginus of Allobroge (for so Gaufride calls him) which after was called Armorica, and now little Brittaine according to Policronicon and the English Chronicle; the Duke beholding the comely person, manly proportion, and princely carriage and behaviour of Brennus, and much condoling and com∣passionating the calamity of his Fortunes, which he with a singular grace had declared, (set out in the most lively colours and flowers of Eloquence,) entertained him in a most friendly manner, and observing that he delighted and was most expert in hunting and hawking, and was fully accomplisht with all the parts belonging to a Gentleman, cast such favours upon him, that in short time he became the most eminent man in the Court, and the only favorite of the Duke; insomuch that Seginus being in admiration of his endowments, and gallant behaviour, resolves to make him his Son in law; with this promise also, that if the Gods shall call for him hence without other Heir, that then the issue of Brennus should succeed in the Duke∣dome; or at least, in case the Duke should be made happy by the birth of a Son, that then he would use all possible endeavours to reestablish Brennus in his own Possessions, and upon
these Conditions and Articles the Duke espouseth his only Daughter and Heir to this Heroick Brittish Prince: these Nuptials are no wayes displeasing to the Nobles of Allobroge, they all jointly giving their approbation and full consent. Not long after, death summons Seginus to appear before a greater Tribunal then his own, and a convenient space being allowed to the Dutchesse Dowager, the term whereof expired, she was found not to have conceived nor to be with child; all sorts did Homage to Brennus as their lawful Leige and Supreme. Brennus being not only a titular Prince, but possessed of large Territories; and finding great plenty of Treasure congested by his wary and careful Predecessours, was not close-fisted, but with a liberal hand imparts a large Proportion to men of Action and gallant Resolution, and de∣termines once more to hazard both life and fortunes with his Brother, rather then lose Alba∣nia. The sons of Mars and fierce youthful spirits, applaud their Princes gallant Resolution, and each equipps himself to the rank of his birth and height of his desire. Bellinus hearing of these great and warlike Preparations like a prudent Prince, perceives this threatning cloud to bend its course towards Brittany; and therefore seeing he cannot prevent the coming thereof, makes such provision that wheresoever it shall disgorge it self, it may do as slender hurt as may be; thus he stands in a readinesse with Weapons to receive this menacing storm with the point of his Sword. Brennus maugre all oppositions arrives with his Navy: These heavy tidings pierce the very soul of Connuvenna or Conwenna the poor afflicted Mother, whose affectionate love was equally divided betwixt her dearest children; and having long time been deprived of the tender imbracements of her younger Son, carried with the most Noble passion of love, she casts her self betwixt the Brothers, and with most bitter sighes and floods of tears shews those brests which once they both had suckt; she pleads, commands, intreats, nay begs to make them friends. An ancient Poet in few Verses makes Conwenna to speak thus: Proh dolor hic quid erit, quid Vos, mea viscera turbat? Fraternas a cies quæ mala causa movet? Tota tenere nequit modo vos Brittannia, quondam Quos tenuit venter unicus iste meus Non vos maternae lachrimae sparsi{que} capilli Nec quæ suxistis ubera nuda movent? Oh Heavens I my Sons why do you let me see your naked swords unsheath'd for butchery? Cannot you two in one great Kingdome live? my narrow Womb life to you both did give Behold my Tears, my Locks with Age grown Gray, the Breasts you suck't, then cast your swords away. The brothers with this unlookt for spectacle stand gazing each at other, which Convenna wisely perceiving, takes time fast by the fore-top and prosecutes her complaints with the very depth of sorrow, and rising up with a discreet motherly compassion, now embraceth the one, now the other, and never leaves till she locks them close in the Armes of a most firm and bro∣therly reconciliation, and so as it were hand in hand to the amazement of both Armies, but unspeakable joy of the overjoy'd Convenna they came to Troynovant; where after a due set∣ling of the affairs of Brittaine, those forces who not long before were mortal Foes are now be∣come confederates and fellow souldiers, and uniting strength to strength, a new employ∣ment is set on foot; Gallia is the mark aim'd at, at which they level so directly, that as Gau∣fride, they sayled into a part of Gallia burning and wasting the Country without regard or pitty, and in short time subdued a large proportion not only of Gallia, but also Italy and Ger∣many. As yet Belmus and Brennus according to Gaufride were together and performed many worthy deeds and feats in Armes; but because Livius makes only mention of Brennus in the Roman Histories, I suppose Belinus was again returned for Brittany, his own Kingdome, leaving the managing of what followed to his brother. What hereafter I shall speak of Brennus I have collected out of Plutark, in the life of Camillus, whose words translated by Sir Thomas North Kt. are these. Now as touching the Gaules they came of (as they say) the CELTAE, whose country, being not able to maintaine the multitudes of them, they were driven to go seek after other countries to inhabit in, and there were amongst them many thousands of young men of service and good souldiers, but yet more women and little children by a great number; of those people some of them went towards the North Sea passing the Mountaines Riphei and did dwell in the extreme parts of Europe, others of them remained between the Mountaines Pirenei and the Mountaines of the Alpes near unto the Senones and the Celtorii; there they continued a long time untill they fortuned in the end to tast of the wine, which was first brought out of Italy to them; which drink they found so good, and were so delighted in it, that suddenly they Armed themselves, and taking their Wives and Children with them they went directly towards the Alpes to go seek out the Countrey that brought forth such fruit, judging all other Coun∣tries in respect of that to be but wild and barren. It is said that the first man that did bring wine to them, and did procure them to passe into Italy was a Noble man of Thuscany called Ar∣ron, and otherwise of no ill disposed Nature; how be it he was subject to this misfortune fol∣lowing.
He was Tutor to an Orphan Child, the richest that was in that time in all the Coun∣trey of Tuscany, and of complexion wondrous fair, he was called Lucumo. This Orphan was brought up in Arrons house of a Child, and though he was grown to state, yet he would not depart from him feigning he was well and to his liking: but indeed the cause was that he loved his Mistress, (Arrons wife whom secretly he had enjoyed a long time, and she him) that made him like his continuance there. Howbeit in the end love having so possessed them both, that neither party could withdraw from other much lesse conceale it, The young man stole her away by force from him, and so kept her; Arron put the matter in suite but he prevailed not, for Lucumo over-weighed him with Friends, Money, Gifts and Charges: which he took so grievously that he left his Countrey and having heard talk of the Gauls he went unto them and was their guide to bring them unto Italy. So they conquered at their first coming all that Countrey which the Tuscans held in old time, beginning at the foot of the mountains, and stretched out in length from one Sea to the other, which invironeth Italy as the names themselves do witness: for they call yet that Sea which looketh unto the North the Adriatick Sea, by reason of a City built some time by the Tuscans, which was called Adria: The other which lieth directly over against the South is called the Tuscane Sea; all that Country is well planted with trees, and hath goodly pleasant pastures for beasts, and cattel to feed in, and is notably watered with goodly running Rivers. There was also at that time, eighteen fair great Cities, all of them very strong and well seated, as well to inrich the Inhabitants by Traffick, as to make them live delicately for pleasure: All these Cities the Gauls had won, and had expulsed the Tuscans; but this was done long before time. Now the Gauls being entred further into Tuscany, did besiege the City of Clusium, thereupon the Clusians seeking ayd of the Romans, besought them they would send Letters and Ambassadors unto those barbarous people in their behalf. They sent unto them three of the best and most honourable persons of the City, all three of the house of the Fa∣bians. The Gauls received them very courteously because of the name of Rome, and leaving to assault the City,Brennus a Brittain King of the Gauls. they gave them audience. The Roman Ambassadors did ask them what injury the Clusians had done unto them, that they came to make Wars with them; Brennus King of the Gauls hearing this question, smiled, and answered them thus, The Clusians do us wrong in this; they being but few people together, and not able to occupy much Land, do not∣withstanding possess much, and will let us have no part with them that are strangers, and out of our Country, and stand in need of seat and habitation; the like wrong was offered unto you Romans in old time by those of Alba, by the Fidenates and Ardeates, and the Volsci, against whom ye have taken, and do take Arms at all times, and as oft as they will let you have no part of their goods, ye imprison their persons, rob, and spoil their goods, and de∣stroy their Cities; and in doing this you do them no wrong at all, but follow the oldest Law that is in the world, which ever leaveth unto the stronger, that which the weaker cannot keep nor enjoy, beginning with the gods, and ending with beasts; the which have this property in nature, that the bigger and stronger have ever the advantage of the weaker and lesser; therefore leave your pitty to see these Clusians besieged, lest you teach us Gauls to take compas∣sion also of those you have oppressed. By this answer the Romans knew very well there was no way to make peace with King Bren∣nus; wherefore they entered into the City of Clusium, and incouraged the Inhabitants to sally out with them upon these barbarous people, either because they had a desire to prove the valiantness of the Gauls, or else to shew their own manhood and valour: so the Citizens went out and skirmished with them, hard by the wals, in which one of the Fabians, called Quintus Fabius Ambustus, being excellently well horsed, and putting spurs to him, did set up∣on a goodly big personage of the Gauls, that had advanced himself far before all the Troop of his Companions; he was not known at the first encounter, as well for the sudden meet∣ing and skirmishing together; as for that his glistering armour dimmed the eyes of the enemies. But after he had slain the Gaul, and came to strip him. Brennus then knew him, and protested against him,Brennus re∣proacheth Fa∣bius for break∣ing the Law of Armes. calling the Gods to witness how he had broken the Law of Arms, that coming as an Ambassador he had taken upon him the form of an Enemy. Hereupon Brennus forthwith left skirmishing, and raising the Siege from Clusium, marched with his Army to Rome gates. And to the end that the Romans might know that the Gauls were not well pleased for the in∣jury they had received; to have an honest colour to begin war with the Romans, he sent an Herald before to Rome, to demand livery of the man that had offended him, that he might punish him accordingly. In the mean while he himself came marching after, by small journeys, to receive their answer. The Senate hereupon assembled, and many of the Senators blamed the rashness of the Fabians, but most of all the Priests, called theHeralds very ancient. Faeciales; for they followed it very closely, as a matter that concerned Religion, and the honour of the Gods, declaring, how the Senate in discharge of all the residue of the City for the offence committed, should lay the whole weight and burden of it upon him alone, that only had done the Fact. (Numa Pompilius, the wisest and most peaceable of all the Kings of Rome that had been, was he that erected the Colledge of thoseHeralds. Faeciales, and did ordain that they should be Keepers of Peace, and Judges to hear and allow all the causes for the which they should justly begin any War) Nevertheless the Senate in the end turned over the ordering of the whole matter to the Will and Judgement of the people, before whom also the Faeciales, or Heralds did accuse Fabius
Ambustus: The people made so little account of their propounded Religion, and honour of the Gods in that case, that instead of delivering this Fabius to the enemy, they did choose him for one of the Tribunes of the Souldiers with his brothers. The Gauls understanding this, were so furious and angry thereat, that they would no longer linger their journeys, but mar∣ched with all speed to Rome. The people that dwelt by the High-wayes where they should passe by, were marvellously afraid to see the multitude of them and their brave and gallant Furni∣ture, & beginning to doubt the fury of their rage, they imagined that first of all they would de∣stroy the Champion Countrey before them, and afterwards would take the strong Cities. They contrariwise did take nothing at all out of the Fields, neither did any hurt or displeasure unto any body; but passing by their Cities, cryed out, They went to Rome, and would have no Wars but with the Romans, and how otherwise they desired to be friends with all the world. These barbarous people march on in this wise towards Rome, the Tribunes of the Souldiers brought their Army to the Field to encounter them: they were no lesse in number then the Gauls; for they were 40000 Foot men; howbeit most part of them were raw souldiers that had never served in the Wars before. They were very carelesse of their Gods, and dissolute in matters of Religion; for they passed neither for good signes in their Sacrifices, neither to ask councel of their Soothsayers, which the Romans were religiously wont to doe before they gave any battel. To make the matter worse; the number of the Captains, having Power and Authority alike, did as much (or more then the rest) disorder and confound their doings; for oft-times before, in far lesse Matters and Dangers then these,One Supreme better then Many. they did use to choose spe∣cial Officers that had sole and soveraign Authority, which they called Dictators; knowing very well of how great importance it is in dangerous times to have but one Head and General to command all, to have supreme Authority of justice in his hands,Monarchy. and not to be bound to deliver account of his doings to any. The injury also which they had too ungratefully done to Camillus, brought great mischief then and inconvenience upon them; for the Captains after him durst no more command the people roughly, but ever after did flatter them much. When their Armies were now brought into the Field, they Encamped themselves by a little River called Allia, about the eleventh stone from Rome, and not far from the place where the same River falleth into Tiber; thither came Brennus with his Army to them, who overthrew them in battel by their disorder and lack of Government: For the left point or wing of their battel was broken off at the first by the Gauls, who charged them so furiously that they drave them headlong into the River. The right wing then retiring out of the plain before they had any Charge given, and having gotten certain Hills hard by them, they had little hurt, and most of them did recover Rome again; the rest that escaped after the Enemies were weary of killing, fled by night unto the City of Veies, thinking Rome had been lost, and all the City put to the Sword: this overthrow was on the longest day in Summer, the Moon being at the Full. The Romans were very superstitious in dayes Fortunate and Unfortunate, which I here passe over as not material to our businesse in hand. The day of this overthrow is one of those which the Romans take for one of the unfortu∣natest dayes that ever came unto them. Now after the battel lost, if the Gauls had hotly pur∣sued the chase of their flying enemies, nothing could have saved Rome from being Taken, and the Inhabitants thereof from being put unto the Sword; for the Romans that fled from the battel brought such a fear upon those that received them, and filled the whole City of Rome with such grief and trembling that they wist not what to doe. The Gauls again believing lit∣tle their Victory was so great as it was, fell to make good cheer for so great a joy received, and divided among them the spoil of their Enemies goods they found in the Camp. So gave they time and leisure by this means to the multitude of people that fled out of Rome to seek them some place of safety, and to such as remain still they left good hope to save themselves and to make some provision for defence. Thereupon they all fortified themselves within Mont Capitol, and storing it with all kind of Victuals, Armour, and Ammunition they wholy did forsake the rest of the City; but the first work they took in hand was this, they did bring into their said Fort, part of their sacred re∣liques, and the professed Vestals brought thither all their holy Fire, and all their holy Monu∣ments, &c. Furthermore the Priests of other Gods, and the most honourable old men of the City of Rome (that had been Consulls aforetime or had past the honor of triumph) had not the heart to forsake Rome; but putting on all their costly Robes and Vestments did vow and most willingly sacrifice themselves unto the fortune that should befall them for the safety of their Countrey. And using certain words and prayers which their high Bishop Fabius had taught them, they went even thus apparelled unto the great market place, and did sit them down there in Chaires of Ivory, expecting the good will and pleasure of the Gods what should become of them. Within three dayes after Brennus came to Rome with his Army, who finding the Gates of the City all open, and the Walls without watch, he doubted some devise in it, and feared some privy ambush had been layed, as one hardly, believing to have found the Romans of so base a mind as to forsake their City. After being informed of the truth, he entred into Rome by the gate Collina, and took the same: little more then 360 years after it was first builded, if it be true at the least that there remained any certaine Chronicles of those times unto this present day; considering the trouble and confusion of that time hath made many things more certaine then that, doubtful unto us; but so it was that the rumor ran to
Greece incontinently how Rome was taken, but yet withal somewhat doubtfully and uncertain; but Brennus having now entred Rome did appoint part of his souldiers to besiege those that were gotten in Mont Capitol, and he with the residue of his Army marched on towards the market-place, where when he saw the ancient Senators sit gravely on their Chaires and speak never a word, nor offered once to rise, though they saw their enemies come Armed against them, neither changed countenance nor colour at all, but leaned softly upon their staves which they had in their hands seeming to be nothing affraid nor abashed, but looked one upon another; he wondered marvailously at it; this their so strange manner at the first did so dump the Gauls that for a space they stood still, and were in doubt to come near to touch them, fearing least they had been some Gods; until such time as one of them went boldly to Marcus Papirius and laid his hand fair and softly upon his long Beard,The Majesty of the old Sena∣try set in the Market place of Rome. but Papirius gave him such a wrap upon his Pate with his staffe, that he made blood run about his Ears. The Gaule was in such rage with the blow, that he drew out his sword and slew him, the other souldiers also kil∣led the rest afterwards, and so they continued many dayes afterwards spoyling and plundering all things they found in the houses; and in the end did set all on fire and destroyed them every one,Rome rased by Bennus the Brittish Prince for despite of those that kept the Capitol, and would not yield upon their Summons, but valiantly repulsed them when they scaled the Walls. For this cause they rased the whole City and put all to the Sword that came into their hands, young and old, man, woman and child. Now this Siege continuing long and the Romans holding them out very stoutly, victuals be∣gan to grow very scant in the Camp of the Gauls, insomuch as they were driven on force to seek it abroad without the City; Hereupon they divided themselves, whereof some remained still with them at the Siege of the Capitol and the rest went a foraging and spoiling all the Champion Country and Villages there abouts, scattered as it were by Bands and Companies, some here, some there, fearing nothing, nor passing upon watch or ward, they lived in such se∣curity of their Victory. Howbeit the greatest Company amongst them, went by fortune to∣wards the City of Ardea where Camillus dwelt living like a private man medling with no matters of State from the time of his Exile, until that present: But then he began not to be∣think himself as a man that was in safety and might have escaped the hands of his enemies, but rather sought how to devise and find all the means he could to subdue them if occasion were so offered: whereupon considering that the Citizens of Ardea were enough in number to set upon them, though faint-hearted and cowardly by reason of the sloth and negligence of the Governours and Captains who had no manner of experience in wars, he be∣gan to cast out these words among the young men. That they should not think the Romans misfortune fell upon them through the Valour of the Gauls, nor that their Calamity (who had refused good Councel) had hapned unto them by any work or act of the Gauls having done nothing for their part to make them carry away the Victory, but that they should think it was no other thing but fortune alone, who would needs shew her power. Therefore it were now a notable and honourable Enterprize (although somewhat dangerous) to drive those strangers out of their Country, considering that the onely end of their Victory was but to de∣stroy and consume as fire all that fell into their hands; wherefore if they would but onely take a good lusty heart and courage, he would with opportunity and place assure them the Victory without danger. The young men were pleased with these words of life and comfort; whereupon Camillus went to break the matter also unto the Magistrates and Counsellours, and having drawn them by perswasions unto this Enterprize,Camillus per∣swades the Ardeans to take Arms a∣gainst the Gauls. he armed all that were of age to carry Ar∣mour, and would not suffer a man to go out of the City for fear lest the Enemies (which were not far off) should have intelligence of the same. Now after the Gauls had run over the Champian Country, and were loaden with all sorts of spoils, they did encamp themselves negligently in open fields, and never charged Watch nor Ward; but having their full Carriage of Wine, laid them down to sleep, and made no noise at all in their Camp.Camill. Camillus being advertized thereof by his several Scouts, caused the Ardeans, with as little noise, as might be, forthwith to go out into the fields, and having mar∣ched somewhat roundly the distance between the City and the Camp of the Gauls, they came thither much about midnight: Then he made his Souldiers make great shouts and cries, and the Trumpets to be sounded on every side to put a fear in their enemies, who yet with all the loud noise they made, could hardly be made to wake, they were so deadly drunk; yet there were some notwithstanding, that for fear to be taken tardy, did bustle up at this sudden noise, and coming to themselves fell to their weapons to resist Camillus, which were slain by and by: the rest, and the greatest number of them, lay here and there scattered in the middle of the field, without any weapon, dead asleep, stark drunk with wine, and were put to the sword, and never struck stroke; those that fled out of the Camp that night (which were but few in numher) were overthrown also next day by the horsemen, which followed, and killed them as they took them straggling here and there in the Field. The bruit of this victory was blown abroad incontinently through all the Towns and Villages thereabouts, which cau∣sed many young men to come, and joyn themselves to Camillus; but especially the Romans desired the same, who had saved themselves in the City Veies, after the battel lost at Allia, who made their moans among themselves, saying, O Gods, what a Captain hath Fortune taken from the City of Rome? What honour hath the City of Ardea by the valiantness and worthy deeds of Camillus? and in the mean season, his natural City that brought him forth, is now
lost and utterly destroyed; we for lack of a Captain to lead us are shut up here, within others walls, and do nothing but suffer Italy in the mean space to go to ruine and utter de∣struction before our eyes; why then do we not send to the Ardeans for our Captain? or why dowe not arm our selves and go to him? for he is now no more a banished man; nor we poor Citizens, since our City is possessed with a Forreign power of our hatefull enemies; so they all agreed to this counsel, and sent to Camillus, to beseech him to be their Captain, and lead them. But he made answer, he would in no case consent unto it, unless they that were be∣sieged in the Capitol had lawfully first confirmed it by their voices; for those, said he, as long as they do remain within the City, represent the State and body thereof; therefore if they commanded him to take this charge upon him, he would most willingly obey them; if other∣wise they misliked of it, that then he would not meddle against their good wills and command∣ment. They having received this answer, there was not a Roman amongst them, but greatly honoured and extolled the wisdom and justice of Camillus. But now they knew not how to make them privy to it, that were besieged in the Capitol; for they saw no possibility to convey a Messenger unto them, considering the enemies were Lords of the City, and laid siege unto it. Howbeit there was one Pontius Cominius, among the young men (a man of a mean house, but yet desirous of honour and glory) that offered himself very willingly to venter to get in, if he could, so he took no Letters to convey with him to them that were besieged; for fear lest they might be intercepted, and so they should discover Camillus intention, but putting on an ill favoured gown upon him, he conveyed certain pieces of Cork under it, and travelling at noon days, kept on his way without fear, untill he came to Rome, bringing dark night with him; and because he could not pass by the bridge, for that the Gauls kept watch upon it, he wrapped such cloaths, as he had, about his neck (which were not many nor heavy) and took the River, and swimming with these Corks which he had brought, at length he got over to the other side, where the City stood; then taking up those lanes where he thought the enemies were not, seeing fire, and hearing noise in other places, he went to the gate Carmentall, where he found more silence then in other places, on the which side also the hill of the Capitol was more steep and upright, by reason of the great rocks that were hard to clime up upon: But he digged and crept up so long amongst them that he got up with great pain unto the wall of the Fortress, on the which side also the enemy kept no watch; and saluting the watch of the Capitol, he told them what he was, so they plucked him up to them, and brought him to the Magistrates that ruled them, who caused the Senate to assemble presently, to whom he told the news of Camillus Victory, which they had not heard of before; and therewith also he did declare unto them, the determination of the Roman Souldiers that were abroad, which was to make Camillus their Captain and General, and did perswade them also to grant him the Charge, for that he was the only man abroad, whom the Citizens gave consent to obey; when they heard this, all that were within the Capitol consulted thereupon among themselves, and so did choose Camillus Dictator, and returned the Messenger, Pontius Cominius back again, the self same way he came unto them; this fortune in returning back was like unto his co∣ming thither, for the enemies never saw him: And so he brought report to them that were a∣broad of the Senates decree and consent, whereof they were all marvellous glad. Thus came Camillus to take this Charge of General upon him, and found there were twenty thousand good fighting men abroad and well Armed. Then got he further ayd also of their Allies, and Confederates, and prepared daily to go and set upon the enemies. So was Camillus chosen now Dictator the second time, and went into the City of Veies, where he spoke with the Ro∣mane Souldiers that were there, and leavied a great number of Allies besides to go fight with the enemies as soon as he could. But whilst Camillus was thus preparing, certain of the Gauls in Rome walking out by chance on that side of the Capitol where Pontius Cominius had gotten up the night before, spied in divers places the prints of his feet and hands, as he had griped and gotten hold, stil digging to get hold, and saw the weeds also, and herbs growing upon the Rocks, and the earth also in the like manner flat trodden down; whereupon they went pre∣sently unto the King, to let him understand the same, who forthwith came to view the place, and having considered it well, did nothing at that time; but when dark night was come, he called a company of the lightest Gauls together, and that used most to dig in Mountains, and said unto them, our enemies themselves do shew us the way how to take them, which we could not have found out but by themselves; for they having gone up before us, do give us easily to understand that it is no impossible thing for us to clime up also, wherefore we were utterly shamed, having already began well, if we should fail also to end well, and to leave this place as invincible; for if it were easie for one man alone, by digging, to clime up to the top there∣of, much less is it hard for many to get up one after another, so that one do help the other. Therefore Sirs, I do assure you, those that do take the pains to get up, shall be honourably re∣warded according to their just desert; when the King had spoken these words unto the Gauls, they fell to it lustily, every man to get up, and about midnight, they began many of them to dig and make steps up to the Rock one after another, as softly as could possibly, with catch∣ing hold the best they could by the hanging of the Rock, which they found very steep, but nevertheless, easier to clime then they took it at the beginning, so that the foremost of them being up to the top, were now ready to take the wall, and to set upon the Watch, that slept; for there was neither man nor dog that heard them. It chanced then there were holy Geese
kept in the Temple of Juno, which at other times were wont to be fed till their crops were full: But victuals being very strait and scant at that time, even to finde the men, the poor Geese were so hardly handled, and so little regarded that they were in a manner starved for lack of meat: This Fowl indeed naturally is very quick of hearing, and so also very fear∣full by nature, and being in a manner almost famished with their hard allowance, they were so much the more wakefull and easier to be afraid: upon this occasion therefore, they heard the coming of the Gauls, and also began to run up and down and cry for fear, with which noise they did wake those that were within the Castle. The Gauls being bewrayed by these foolish Geese, left their stealing upon them, and came in with all open noise and terrour they could. The Romans hearing this Alarm every man took such weapon as came first to hand, and they run suddenly to rescue that place, from whence they understood the noyse; amongst those the foremost man of all was Marcus Manlius, a man that had been Consull, who had a lusty body, and as stout a heart. His hap being to meet with two of the Gauls together, as one of them was lifting up his Ax to knock him on the head, he prevented him and struck off his hand with his sword, and clapt his Target on the others face so fiercely, that he threw him backward down the Rock, and coming afterwards unto the Wall with others that ran thither with him, he repulsed the rest of the Gauls that were gotten up, who were not many in num∣ber: Thus the Romans having escaped this danger, the next morning they threw the Captain down the Rocks from the Castle, who had charge of the Watch the night before; and gave Manlius in recompence of the good service he had done, a more honourable then profitable reward, which was this, every man of them gave him half a pound of the Country Wheat which they call Far: and the fourth part of the measure of wine, which the Grecians call Cotile, and this might be about a Quart, being the ordinarie allowance of every man, by the day. After this Repulse the Gauls began to be discouraged, partly for that their victuals failed them, and durst no more forrage abroad in the fields for fear of Camillus; and partly also for that the Plague came amongst them, being lodged amongst heaps of dead bodies, lying in every place above ground without burial, and amongst burnt houses destroyed, where the ashes being blown very high by the wind, and vehemency of heat, did give a dry piercing ayr, that did marvellously poyson their bodies, when they came to draw in the breath of it. But the greatest cause of all their mischief, was the change of their wonted Diet, who coming out of a fresh Country, where there were excellent pleasant places to retire unto to avoid the discomodity of the parching heat of the Summer, were now in a naughty plain Country for them to remain in, in the later season of the year. All these things together, did heap diseases upon them, besides the long continuance of the siege about the Capitol (for it was then about the 7. moneth) by reason whereof there grew a marvellous death in their Camp, through the great numbers of them that died daily and lay unburied. But notwithstanding all the death and trouble of the Gauls, the poor besieged Romans were nothing holpen, and the Famine still did grow upon them: And because they could hear no∣thing of Camillus, they were almost grown into despair; and send unto him they could not, the Gauls kept so strait a watch, upon them in the City; whereupon both parties finding them∣selves in hard estate; first, the Watch on each side began to cast out words of peace amongst themselves; and afterwards by consent of the heads, Sulpitius Tribune of the Souldiers came to parley with Brennus. In which parley it was articuled, that the Romans should pay a thou∣sand pound weight of gold; and that the Gauls should incontinently, after the Receit of the same depart out of their City, and all their Territories; this decree being passed by oath from both, the gold was brought: And when it came to be weighed, the Gauls at the first, pri∣vily began to deal falsely with them; but afterwards they openly stayed the balance, and would let them weigh no more, whereat the Romans began to be angry with them; then Bren∣nus in scorn and mockery, to despite them the more, pluckt off his sword belt and all, and put it into the balance where the Gold was weighed. Sulpitius, seeing that, askt him, what he meant by it? Brennus answered him, What can it signifie else, but sorrow to the vanquished? This word ever after ran as a common Proverb in the Peoples mouths. Some of the Romans took this vile part of theirs in such scorn, that they would needs take the Gold from them again by force, and so return unto their Hold to abide the Siege still, as they had done before; others were of opinion to the contrary; and thought it best with patience, to put up this scorn of theirs, and not to think it was shame to pay more then they had promised; but only to pay it by compulsion as they did by misfortune of time, was rather to think necessa∣ry then honourable. And as they were debating the matter thus, as well amongst themselves as the Gauls, Ca∣millus came to Rome gates with his Army, and understanding all that had passed between them, he comands the rest of the Army to march fair and softly after him in good order; and he himself in the mean season, with the best choice men he had, went before with all speed. As soon as the other Romans within the City had spied him, they shouted for joy, and every one with great reverence received him, without any more words, as their Soveraign Prince and Captain, who had power over them all: And Camillus taking the gold out of the scales, gave it unto his men, and commanded the Gauls presently to take up the scales, and to get them going; for said he, it is not the Romans manner to keep their Country with gold, but with
the sword: then Brennus began to be hot, and told him it was not honourably done of him to break the accord that had passed between them before by oath, whereunto Camillus stoutly answered him again, that accord was of no validity; for he being Dictator was before all other Officers and Magistrates whatsoever; and their acts by his election were made of no authority: And seeing therefore that they had dealt with men that had no power of them∣selves to accord to any matter, they were to speak to him, if they required ought; for he alone had also late power to pardon them if they repented, and would ask it; or else to pu∣nish them, and make their bodies answer the damage and loss his Country had sustained by them: These words made Brennus as mad as a March Hare, that out went his blade; then they drew their swords on all sides, and laid lustily one at another, as they could within the houses, and in open streets, where they could set no Battel in order; but Brennus suddenly remembring himself, that it was no even match for him, retired with his men about him into his Camp before he had lost many of his people. The next night following he departed out of Rome with all his Army, and went to encamp himself about threescore Furlongs; from thence in the high way that goeth towards the City of the Gabians, Camillus with his whole Army, well appointed, went after him immediately, and shewed himself at his Camp by break of day. The Romans having taken heart again unto them, did lustily give them Bat∣tel, the same continued very long cruel and doubtfull, till at length the Gauls were overcome, and their Camp taken with great slaughter: As for those that did escape the fury of the Bat∣tel, they were killed some by the Romans themselves, who hotly followed the chase after the Battel broken; and the residue of them, and the greatest part were slain by those of the Ci∣ties and Villages near abouts, that did set upon them as they fled here and there scattering in the field: Hitherto Plutarch; and most likely it is, that the Heroick Brittain, the most cou∣ragious Brennus, here also perished; and therefore we will return to his brother. Belinus, now absolute Monarch of Brittain, after he had lest his Brother in Forreign Coun∣tries, and returned into his own Kingdom, built the famous City of Caerleon upon Vsk, for confirmation of which verity there are many witnesses, as the Brittish History, Galfridus, Vi∣cunnius, Matthew of Westminster, Ranulph, Hegen, Caxton, Harding, Stow, Hollinshead; and to write in his words, Most part of all our Writers. Galfridus calls this City Kaerose: Vicun∣nius nameth it Kaer Vsk, Matth. West. Kaer Vsk, Higeden Caer Huth; and it was one of the three Arch flamens Seats of Brittany. The Priests amongst the old Romans, were called Fla∣mins, by reason of certain little narrow hats which they did wear upon their heads, as if they had called them Pilamines; for Pilos in Greek signifieth a Hat: Numa Pampilius, is said to have been the first Founder of the Flamens, by reason that he added to the Priests of Jupiter and Mars a third, who was called Flamen Quirinalis. This City, in succeeding times, was called Caerlegion, that is to say, the City of Legions, and was the See of an Archbishop; to which was subject all Cambria or Wales, then adorned with seven Bishops, now with four Suffragans, Sedes Archiepiscoporum in Brittannia tres fue∣runt tempore Lucii regis, Brittannorum primi Christiani, videlicet apud London, apud Ebora∣cum, apud Caer-hursc, urbem Legionum in Glamorgancia, quibus tunc subjecti fuerunt 28. E∣piscopi Flamines tunc vocati, &c. Vrbi Legionum subjacuit tota Cambria 7 tunc Episcopis nunc vero quatuor suffraganeis insignita, quam flumen Sabrina tunc Secernebat à Loegria,Mr. Brough. fol. 282. which Severn then separated from England: and in this City, faith a French Author was King Lucius born. The same Author speaking further; the Sees of these three Arch-flamens,Fol. 283.4. The praise of Caerleon. being the three most noble Cities of Brittain, which were London, Everwicks, and the City of Legions upon the River Vsks in the County of Glamorgan in Wales, not far from Severn, which is a place delicious, and passing in Riches all other Cities. As concerning the Arch-bishops of Caerleon, they have been many, and of great note,Godwin in his Catalogue of Bish. Landaf. & St. Davids. Fol. 319. Learning, and Sanctity; We must account (saith Godwin) St. Dubritius the first Bishop, Not that I deny any other to have sate there before him; but because be is the first whose name is re∣membred: And it is probable he had no Predecessors, because the memory of his Successors is so carefully preserved: But as this mans Authority is so weak to be rested upon (saith Mr. Brough∣ton) that it hath often before deceived them who builded upon it; so his reason here alledged is of as feeble strength; for the memory of the Successors hath been so carelesly preserved by his own confession after, that he having cited two different Catalogues of their names, only above twenty in number, concludeth in these terms against himself before; Of these fore∣named Bishops, until Sampson, there remaineth little or no memorial, but their names only. And in the names themselves, there is difference in the memorials of them.Harpfield Hist. in five 7. seculi. John Bal. l. de Scrip. Brit. Gent. 1. in Sa∣muele Beulano. John Leland apud Pits. li. de viribus illa. in Elbode. Harris Hist. Ecclc. Manu. li. 2. c. 20. And both of them omit their most renowned Archbishop Elbodus, who joyned with St. Augustine and his com∣pany, and wrote against his own Brittains and Scots for their untrue observation of Easter. Some think he was created Archbishop by St. Augustine. Mr. Harris seemeth to be of opi∣nion, that St. Fugatianus, one of Pope Elutherius Legates was first Archbishop of Caerleon, and St. Damiunus the other Legat Archbishop of London, yet with the common opinion he had pla∣ced St. Thean there before, both which may stand with truth in due construction if St. Damia∣nus resigned it to St. Thean, who, as he saith, was Archbishop there eighteen years; and see∣ing we find no final departure of these two holy Legats from hence, but rather a continual a∣bode here, after their return from Rome, as though they were wholly designed for the spiritual good of this Kingdom, if we joyn here with what eminent men and Bishops they were, we
may not deny them any chief place of honour, according to their worth and deservings here. The old Writer of St. Gudwalus Life, Surius Haraeus, and others say, he was Archiepiscopus Britannus, an Archbishop of Brittany, and by his life and aboad of no other place, but our old Caerlegion; And if we should follow their opinions, which hold, that Caerlegion was Au∣gusta, where our renowned Archbishop Augulus was martyred, we must also make him Arch∣bishop there; and the old Brittish History with divers other, testifieth, that Tremonus was Arch∣bishop here,Mr. Brough. fol. 320. age 2. 5. Tremonus urbis Legionum Archiepiscopus, long before St. Dubritius. And it was foretold long before, probably, St. Dubritius was born, or Tremonus was Archbishop of Caer∣legion, that this Archbishops See should be translated from thence to St. Davids, and there the Archbishops Pall of Caerlegion should be worn, Menevia Pallio urbis Legionum induetur, which was after verified in the time of St. David; as also the prophecie of the translation of London to Canterburie by St. Augustine: and the seventh Archbishop of York going into Ar∣morica, performed by St. Sampson, all foretold at one time altogether long before: There∣fore as in London and York there were Archbishops, so in this City also of Caerlegion there were such wearing the Pall, justifying the undeniable change and performance of that Predi∣ction.Ibid. After this time all Histories agree of St. Dubritius, St. David, Eliud, Theelianus, Ki∣nocus immediatly succeeding one another, and Elbodus in St. Aug. time. And a late Writer saith further: In which three Cities of London, York, and Caerlegion upon Usk, there had been before time three Arch-flamens erected unto Apollo, Mars and Minerva, but now rased to the ground, and three other Churches builded in their steads by Lucius, to the intent that the Countreys round about, might have indifferent access unto those places, and therewithall under∣stand for certain whether to resort for resolution. The Persecution under the Roman Emperors being generall to all Churches and places, even in the beginning thereof came to the City of Caerlegion, where the Church being destroyed, and the School founded by King Lucius overthrown, the holy Priests and other Christians there, had their part therein. Amongst others St. Julius and St. Aron were then cruelly mar∣tyred in that City, being by consent of all, Citizens and Inhabitants, there: Aron & Julius Legionum urbis cives, most cruelly torn in pieces, by torments never heard of before, passi sunt inaudita membrorum discerptione in testimonium Dei excelsi. Others say, it is evident in Histories they were learned men, brought up in the Colledge or School, there founded by King Lu∣cius;The old School of Caerlegion brought forth many noble Martyrs. thus write two late authors, Ex Sanctorum Historiis constat Amphibalum Aaronem & Ju∣lium Sanctissimos Dei Martyres cœlestem Christi Doctrinam, apud urbem Legionum inter literas tradidisse. Ex nobili Gymnasio urbi Legionum viri multi summa pietatis & doctrinae laude con∣spicui prodierunt, ut Amphibalus Julius & Aron. By which Authorities, and Testimonies joyning these holy Martyrs for Education, School, Learning, Preaching and professing Christ with that most renowned Priest and Bishop St. Amphibalus they incline to hold and teach that they also were Clergy men. This persecution at Caerlegion when these holy Martyrs were put to death, was at the destruction of the Cathedral Church there, being at the same time when the like desolation was at Winchester long before St. Albans Martyrdom, I must needs say the same of these Saints, as the Annales of Winchester do of their Martyrs. And this the rather, because our Antiquaries have told us, that S. Amphibalus who converted S. Alban, was born, bred, instructed in learning, and remained at Caerlegion, and being there in all probable Judge∣ment, when these troubles began there, was as our Brittish History witnesseth, pursued, and in present danger to be apprehended by the Persecutors, when St. Alban gave him entertainment and succour; and addeth plainly, that when St. Amphibalus thus fled from Caerlegion, St. Ju∣lius, and St. Aron were, Absque cunctamine, presently Martyred there, having their members so torn in pieces, as the like had not been heard of before. Inter cæteros utriusque sexus summae magnanimitate in acie Christi præstantes, passus est Albanus, Julius quoque & Aron urbis Legi∣onum cives;Julius and Aaron marty∣red before St. Alban. quorum Albanus charitatis gratia fervens, confessorem suum Amphibalum à per∣sequitoribus insectatum, & jam jam comprehendendum, in domo sua occuluit; cæteri veri Duo inau∣dita membrorum discerptione lacerati ad egregias portas Hierusalem absque cunctamine cum Mar∣tyrii trophæo convolaverunt. The very same testimony hereof is given by St. Gildas, both for St. Amphibalus then flying the persecution, and the martyrdom of these saints at that time. St. Bede also is witness that St. Alban entertained St. Amphibalus flying the persecutors, Cleri∣cum quendam persecutores fugientem hospitio recepit. And that St. Aron and St. Julius were martyred at that time, Passi sunt ea tempestate Aron & Julius urbis legionum cives: The like have others; therefore Giraldus Cambrensis doth worthily call them our two Protomartyrs in this time, only in dignity, second and next to St. Alban and St. Amphibalus, but in time first and before them, Duo nobiles & post Albanum & Amphibalum præcipui Brittanniae Majoris Protomartyres.Gild. excid. Brit. c. 8. These our two Protomartyrs are wonderfully commended in our Histories: St. Gildas saith of them, that they stood out in the Army of Christ, with greatest magnanimi∣ty,Giral. sup. Itin. com. l. 1. c. 5. Summa magnanimitate in acie Christi præstantes dico. Giraldus Cambrensis is witness that amongst the Martyrs of that time, they were the chiefest next to St. Alban, and St. Amphiba∣lus, Post Albanum & Amphibalum præcipui martyrio coronati, Julius & Aron: How they were honoured of the holy Catholick Christians of that time, with Churches dedicated to them, Pilgrimages to the places of their Martyrdom, and they both there, and in other places ho∣noured, invocated and prayed unto, presently upon the ceasing of the Persecution.
Now it will suffice to conclude with that their title of glory and renown, which the anci∣ent and learned Bishop of their Nation before hath given them, and the due and honour to the place of their triumphant death, Jacent hic duo nobilis Brittanniæ Majoris Protomartyres & ibidem Martyrio coronati Julius & Aron. Here lie (at Caerlegion) the two Noble Proto∣martyrs of great Brittain, Julius and Aron, and there crowned with Martyrdom. This title to be the first Martyrs of Brittain in the most terrible persecution, and with such exceeding magnanimity, and Christian constancy, as hath been related, in induring torments till then never heard of, without any example going before them, but giving themselves the first ex∣ample hereof, so wonderfull patience, love of Christ, and Heroical true fortitude to so many thousands, which by their singular example, with invincible courage imitated them therein, is the greatest honour we can yeild to such blessed Saints on earth; their Festivity is celebra∣ted by the old Roman Martyrologie upon the first day of July.Baronius in Indice non Sanct. in Julie & Arone. On which day as Baronius plainly writeth, many others suffered Martyrdom with them, Julius & Aron Martyres cum aliis plurimis in Brittania sub Dioclesiano primo die Julii. So likewise affirmeth the English Writer, and the Roman Martyrologe which Baronius glosseth upon, may very well carry that construction, for setting down for a certain truth, that these two holy Martyrs were put to death in Brittany upon the first day of July, Primo die Julii in Brittannia Sanctorum Marty∣rum Julii & Aron, qui in persecutione Dioclesiani passi sunt; it presently addeth, quo tempore ibidem quam plurimi diversis cruciatibus torti & saevissime lacerati ad supernæ civitatis gaudia consummato agone pervenerunt: At the same time, in the same place very many tortured with divers torments, and most cruelly torn, having ended their combats, came to the joys of heaven. And St. Bede saith, that ea tempestate, at that time when St. Julius and St. Aron were mar∣tyred, divers others, both men and women were put to death, Alii utrius{que} sexus passi sunt ea tempestate. So hath Henry of Huntington, Passi sunt eo tempore Julius & Aron alii quo∣que plures utriusque sexus: And we cannot probably think that these raging Persecutors, who in places where there were not in any degree so many Christians, as in this renowned City an Archiepiscopal See, and Christian University put them to death by thousands, sent these here by cruel Martyrdom to heaven alone; These holy Martyrs by all Antiquities suffered Martyrdom at Caerlegion, and both Giraldus Cambrensis and Ranulphus, Higeden writing at Winchester: As also our late Antiquaries of the same Country, plainly say it was at Caerle∣gion in Monmouthshire, which was the Archiepiscopal City and School, distinguishing it from Winchester, by some called Caerlegion; also I will only cite one Englished to my hand by a Modern; In this Region Monmouthshire is seated, the most ancient and most noble City of Le∣gions, which our Countrymen call Caerleon on Usk, that is to say, the City of Legions upon Usk for difference sake, between it and the other which is built in Northwales, upon the River Dee; of which Giraldus writeth thus. The same was a Noble and ancient Town, the tokens where∣of remain as yet, an huge Palace, a Giant like Tower, goodly Baths and Hot-houses, Re∣liques of Churches and places like Theaters, compassed with beautifull walls, partly yet standing; also buildings under the ground, Conducts, secret passages and Vaults under the Earth, framed with wondefull Workmanship. There lyeth Julius and Aron, which had Churches dedicated unto them, Ʋna Julii Martyris altera Araonis. In the Church of St. Ju∣lius which is now called St. Julians, and is distant from the now Caerleon a mile, seated fast by the River of Ʋsk, which runneth through the Town, belonging to the Right Honourable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury and Castle Issand, a most stately house in this Church, for∣merly Virgineo choro de corata, was a Nunnery: for in this Town were two famous Monaste∣ries one of Monks, or Canon Regulars, the other of Nuns,M. Broug. fol. 603. 9. Matth. Westm. an. 541. dedicated to St. Julius in which Queen Guenhumara wife to King Arthur did after receive the habit of Religion Guenhumara Regina in Monasterio Julii Martyris inter Moniales habitum Religionis suscepit. Not far from Caerlegion, is a place called St. Albans, standing on the ascent of a hill, at the bottom whereof runneth the River of Vsk, where by an old Tradition, the Inhabitants believe St. Alban was put to death, and will not be perswaded out of their errour by any reason; wherefore to convince that mistake,Mr. Br. 443▪ though the circumstances of the place be some∣thing alike, where St. Alban was put to death; for St. Bede writeth, that the people who came to behold his Martyrdom were so many, that being to passe over the River by a Bridge, if St. Alban had not so miraculously dryed up the River, they could hardly have gone over by the Bridge before night, Ita fluminis occupabat pontem ut intra vesperam transire vix posset: There was scarcely any left in the City, Cunctis pene egressis, a great multitude of both Sexes, divers Estates and Ages came thither by instinct, Vtriusque sexus conditionis diversae & aetatis quæ sine dubio divinitatis instinctu ad obsequium beatissimi confessoris ac Martyris vocabantur. There∣fore so many of divers conditions, being thus called by the inspiration of God to such an ho∣ly purpose, we cannot but think many of them were there converted at that time. St. Bede setetth this to be done at St. Albans death before the great miracle of Angels, appearing and praising of God, and honouring St. Alban, the night following at his place of burial: and so soon as this miracle appeared, the Pagans presently came thither in great numbers to hear and see it publikely, professing that those Miracles were wrought by the power of Christ the Sonne of GOD, and so being converted unto him, a thousand of them at one time took their Journey to seek Saint Amphibalus in those parts, which we
now call Wales so far distant from Verulamium (now St. Albans in England) where by the help of divers Christians in their company among other others, him that took up St. Albans Crosse which he held in his hands at his Martyrdom, which all to be spotted with his blood, they presented to St. Amphibalus whom they found preaching to the people of that Country,Math. West. Anno 303. ma∣nuscript. Antiq. in vita St. Am∣phibali. Capr. in eadem & alii. and they were Instructed, Catechized, and Baptized by him in Christian Religion. Cum ad hoc spectaculum subito fieret concursus Paganorum, unus ex omnibus in hanc vocem prorupit. Hæc miranda quæ vidimus Christum Dei Filium liquidò operari constat, eamus & inquiramus virum Dei, quia sicut nostis Albanum prædicando convertit ad Christum: Cum{que} omnibus ista sententia placuisset, ad mille hominum versus Walliam iter arripiunt & virum Dei Amphibalum ibi inve∣nerunt regionis illius hominibus Verbum Dei prœdicantem;Jocob. Gen. in vita S. Alba. & S. Amphi. cui adventus sui causam exponentes, Crucem quam suo quondam Albano commendaverat cruore respersam obtulerunt; at ille gratias Deo agens, novis auditoribus fecit de Religione Sermonem, cui mox illi consentientes signaculum qùod in Christo est ab ejus sacris manibus alacriter susceperunt. Some Authors will have these thousand Martyrs to have suffered at Lichfield, because there were so many in that persecution Martyred there; and the very name Lichfield signifieth a Field of Blood, and the bearing the Arms accordingly belonging thereto: but this Contro∣versie is decided before, when our Antiquaries assure us, that it was in the County now cal∣led Wales, in which Lichfield never was nor can be accounted, neither was it the way of these persecutors thither, from Verulamium; nor so long and tedious a journey; Iter tam laboriosum as they went Dictum est quod omnes pro quibus tam laboriosum iter susceperant in extremis finibus perierunt; Certainly great and cruel was the Massacre; for these cruel Pagans Diabolica in∣vecti furia slew all they met; the Son not sparing his Father nor the Brother his Brother, no Man his Neighbour;Jacob Genven. Mat. West. 33.. cap. in S. Amp. but sine respectu sanguinis, ætatis, aut reverentiae, vicini vicinos, & amicos amici neci tradunt, & atrociter in ore gladii mille viros pro Christo occidunt, ex hoc sacro Colle∣gio unus omnino superfuit qui in via corporis infirmitate detentus adesse non potuit. Thus much concerning Caerleon in this place. Bellinus having built Caerleon upon Ʋsk, built also a Gate in London, to this hour called Bellinus Gate,Historiarum, lib. 3. nota 12. In cujus summa (saith Ri. Vitus) Turrim aedificat & in imo portum appellentibus per Tamesim navibus idoneum; item aliam Turrim in colle Londini, Quam hodie (secundum Jo∣annem Lelandum) Turrim Londinensem vocamus quod non est improbabile, nam Peredurus Rex postea captus in ea custoditus; Hanc igitur arcem Londinensem, inquit Polidorus Virgi∣lius satis munitam & multis Turribus (unde nomen habet) exstructam, falso vulgus Anglorum præ∣dicat à Julio Cæsare conditam esse, qui de Londino non meminit quippe quod eo non pervenerit. In whose top or highest place he caused a Tower to be made, and at the Fort or Basis a Har∣bour and safe landing place for ships sayling up the Thames; He also built an other Tower on the hill of the mount of London, as affirmeth John Leland, which at this day we call the Tower of London, nor much unprobable for that Peredurus, King of this Island, being surpri∣zed,In his Notes upon his 3. Book. Figure 13. was there kept prisoner; Polidorus Virgilius is of opinion (as Vitus tells us) that this Tower being strongly built and garnished with many smaller Towers, from whence it takes its name, was not built by Julius Cæsar, as the vulgar opinion is, for that he maketh no men∣tion of London nor ever came so far. Bellinus autem cum regnasset annos viginti & unum solus, diem obiit nobili{que} ceremonia in ig∣nem conjectus uritur primus quidem omnium Brittannorum Regum qui crematus est, & cineres in urnam auream conditi ponuntur, super fastigio portae Bellinæ; Bellinus after he had reigned alone the space of one and twenty years, finished the course of his natural life, whose body with noble but unusual ceremony was cast into a fire, being the first of all the Brittish Kings, whose body was consumed with Funeral flames; his ashes being gathered together, were put into a golden Vessell or Urne, and placed in the highest part of his late built Arch or Gate. You have already heard how Brennus the heroick Brittish Prince sackt Rome, besieged the Capitol, compelled the Senators to compound with him for a thousand pound weight of Gold, and how lastly he was pursued by Camillus the Dictator, and how he was vanquished and his whole Army routed and put to the Sword, partly by the country Peasants and neighbouring Towns and Villages, in which sad condition Plutark leaves: but he was a Roman Writer and may speak partially in the behalf of his own Country. Let us hear therefore what Count Pa∣latine thinks of the matter; he was born in this Island and will speak as much for Brennus as did Plutark for Camillus;Ri. Vitus Ba∣sing Stochius. and therefore tells you, Brennus autem domitis Pannoniis & audita Victoria suorum qui Belgio Duce Macedones vicerant preda{que} relicta discesserant, adunatis cen∣tum quinquaginta millibus equitum erumpit in Macedoniam; sed pauci à pluribus, trepidi à va∣lentibus facile vincuntur. Ita{que} cum victi Macedones se condidissent intra muros Ʋrbium, Victor Brennus nemine impediente totius Macedoniæ agros deprædatur, inde quasi spolia sorderent, con∣vertit animum ad Deorum immortalium Templa, joco dicens oportere Deos locupletes hominibus dona largiri: statim igitur Delphos iter vertit, Religionis aurum pro præda Deorum offensae præ∣fert, eos ait nullis opibus indigere; ita{que} cum in conspectu Templum Apollinis haberet, diu deli∣beravit an confestim rem aggrederetur, an vero fessis via militibus daret spacium noctis ad resu∣mendas vires. Emidanus & Thessalonus duces qui se junxerant ad prædaesocietatem jubent moras amputari dum hostes forent imparati & sui adventus eis esset terrori; sed Galli ex inopia longa cum invenirent rura referta vino, cæteris{que} commeatibus, se per agros sparserant desertis{que} signis
ad occupanda omnia pro victoribus vagabantur. Prius ergo Delphi viribus sociorum aucti præ∣munierunt Ʋrbem suam, quam Galli vino veluti prædæ incubantes ad signa evocantur. Brennus habebat ex omni exercitu lecta Sexaginta quin{que} Millia peditum. Delphorum sociorum{que} non e∣rant nisi militum instructorum quatuordecim Millia, quorum contemptu Brennus præ numero suorum de victoria non dubitat; sed ad acuendos animos militibus ostendit ubertatem prædæ statuas{que} cum quadrigis fusas auro solido: quarum rerum animadversione Galli magis incitati ac pridie vino pleni, ruunt in bellum sine ulla cogitatione periculorum. Delphi contra plus in Deo quam in viribus suis subsidii ponunt, Gallos{que} scandentes de summo vertice montis Parnassi quo templum Apollinis est, partim Saxis partim Armis obruunt, maximo{que} terræ motu parte montis ejusdem erupta, Gal∣lorum Exercitum prostravit, confertissimi{que} cunei vulneribus dissipati cadebant; Dux ipse Bren∣nus cum non poterat amplius ferre dolorem vulnerum suorum vitam pugione finivit. Brennus having vanquished the Inhabitants of Pannonia, and hearing of the Victory which his Soul∣diers had obtained under the Command of Belgius their Commander against the Macedoni∣ans, who fled away leaving the booty and spoils behind them, rallying up fifty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse, he suddenly and with great violence enters Macedonia; where whilst he plundered, ransackt, and destroyed both Fields and Villages, Sosthenes with an Army well appointed made Head and Resistance against him: but being far fewer in number, and overwhelmed with multitudes of his Enemies, he was forced to Retreat and give way to his present Fortune: the Macedonians being thus put to the worst, by necessity are compelled to hide and secure themselves under the protection of their walled and fortified Townes and Castles; mean time Brennus having none to oppose him, fleeceth and wasteth the Countries round about; and seeing these spoils too slender for his avaricious and aspiring mind, he de∣vours and swallows up in his all-devouring thoughts the opulency of the Gods; deridingly, and as he thinks wittily though profanely, saying, The wealth-abounding Gods must supply the indigent wants of poor distressed mortals; and therefore bends all his power for Delphos, preferring their rich and massie oblations, and consecrate golden offerings before the just and most deserved anger of the Gods, saying, The Gods could never want; busying himselfe with these imaginations, he comes within the sight and view of great Apollos Temple, where he pauseth, considering with himself, whether it were better suddenly to assault, or rather give that nights rest unto his wearied Souldiers to refresh their tired bodies: Euridanus and Thessalonus Captains of great skill and experience, who had associated themselves meerly for lucre and spoil, advise him by all means to cut off delays as dangerous, and suddenly to set upon the attempt; the Enemy as yet being altogether unprovided, in regard whereof a sud∣den motion would strike them into a terrible fear. But the Gauls having suffered hunger and hard marches, finding the Country well furished with Wines and other welcome Provisions, leaving their Colours, disperse themselves every one according to his own pleasure and liking, and as if already all were their own, like Conquerors they strut it up and down. This re∣misnesse gives opportunity to the Delphians by the Auxiliary Forces of their Friends and Neighbours to fortifie their Town and reinforce their Garrison; which Brennus perceiving, sends out Command for every man speedily to repair to his Colours, whose minds were set upon nothing but looking to their bellies and quaffing lusty bowls. The Army of the Gauls consisted of sixty thousand Foot; the Citizens of Delphos had only fourteen thousand fighting Men, Brennus undervaluing this slender handfull of Men in respect of the numerous Troops of his Souldiers, made himself cock-sure of the Victory; and therefore to encourage his Men the more, he wish'd them to behold and consider, the richness of the Treasure, and greatness of the Spoil which was like to fall unto their share, the Statues and Images together with their Chariots if not made, at least covered over with pure and solid Gold. The greedy Souldier easily swallowed up his golden Bait, and elevated, and inebriated with the blood of the lusty grape, without either Order or command (being sufficiently armed with Bachus to set all danger at defiance) runs headlong into Battel; on the contrary, the wary Delphians, confi∣ding more in the protection of their God than strength of their humane Forces, from the high and towring Top of the cloud, kissing Parnassus, (where stood Apollos stately Temple) with stones and other such Materials, besides the help of their Weapons, beat down, and headlong precipitated the aspiring Gauls: this their endeavour was seconded by a sudden and hideous Earthquake, which so broke the Ranks of the amazed yet furious Assailants, and so disordered their best ordered Squadrons, that what with a sudden fear & what with those unwonted kinds of wounds, they were totally disperst and overthrown. Brennus whose haughty spirit not long before was puft up with presumption of winning golden Mountains, is now no longer able to endure his late received wounds; and therefore with one stroke to put a period to all his mi∣series, he sheatheth his fatal Dagger with a more then manlike thrust in the most remote angle of his own entrails. Bellinus together with his brother began their Reign anno Mundi according to Fabian, four thousand eight hundred and eight; according to which Author jointly and alone: elli∣nus reigned twenty six years, leaving a Son after him called Gurguintus, Gurguint, Brabituc or after some Writers, Gurguint Barberous, that is to say, Gurguint with a red Beard. Finis Libri primi.
To the High and Mighty PRINCES, THOMAS HOWARD, Duke and Earl of Norfolk, Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Lord Howard, Fitz Alan, Mow∣brey, Matravers, Segrave, Bruse and Clun. SEYMOUR or De Sto Mauro, Duke of Somerset, Mar∣quesse and Earl of Hertford, Baron Beauchampe and Seymour, &c. GEORGE VILLIERS, Duke, Marquesse and Earl of Buckingham, Viscount Villiers and Baron of Whaddon, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. CHARLES STEWART, Duke of Lennox and Richmond, Earl of March and Lichfield, Lord Awbigney, Darneley, Tarbolton and Nethven in Scotland, and Baron of Leigh∣ton Bromswould in England. GEORGE MONCK, Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Tor∣rington, Baron Monck of Potherige, Beauchampe and Teyes, Capt. General and Commander in Chief of all his MAJESTIES Land Forces in his Kingdomes of England, Scotland and Ireland, and all other his Majesties Dominions and Territories, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Master of his Majesties Horse, & one of the Lords of his Majesties most Honble privy Councel. The Duke of Norfolk. ROBERT commonly called Consull, Earl of Glocester, Son to King Hen. 1. by Nest Daughter to Rees ap Tewder, K. or Prince of South-Wales, which Rees married Gladis, Daughter and sole Heire of Rees ap Kenvin Prince of Powis. Randolph sirnamed De Gernoniis E: of Chester. Matildis or Maud, Daughter of Robert E. of Glocester. Hugh Kavilioc Earl of Chester Bertrude Daughter of Simon Earl of Montford:
William de Albeneio Earl of Arundel. Mabell Daughter to Hugh Kavilioc and Sister and Co-heir to Randolph Blundevill her Brother. John Fitz Alan Lord of Clun and O∣walstre, two Lordships in Wales. Isabell D. and Coh. (after the death of her brothers William and Hugh) to William de Albeneio or Albany. Richard Fitz Alan Grandchild to John 1. E. of Arundel of that Name. Alizan D. to the Marquesse of Sluce in Italy. Edmund Fitz Alan E. of Arundell. Alice D. of William and Sister and Co-h. of John, E. Warren and Surrey. Richard Fitz Alan E. of Arundel, &c. Lord of Yale, Bromfield, Chirkland and Dinas Bran in Northwales. Elinor D. to Henry Plantagenet, E. of Lancaster. Richard E. of Arundell, &c. Eliza. D. to William de Bohun, E. of Northampton. Thomas E. of Arundell, &c. Beatrix base D. to John King of Portugall. Thomus E. of Arundell, &c. sans Issue, so the Lands of the Earldome of Surrey were divided betwixt the Sisters, and the Earldome of Arundell fell to John Fitz Alan being entailed. John Fitz Alan E. of Arundell, Knight of the Garter, great Grand-child to John. Maud. D. and H. of Robert Lovell and Eliz. his wife D. and Co-h. to Sir Guy Bryan. To John Fitz A∣lan and Elinor his wife, sister and Coh. of Henry Lord Maltravers. Humphrey Earle of Arundell, sans Issue. William Fitz Alan Uncle and Heir to Humphrey. Margaret D. of Richard Woodvile, E. Rivers, Sister and Co-h. to E. Rich. her Brother. William Fitz Alan Earl of Arundell. Ame D. of Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, by which Match this Honourable Family also de∣scends from the Welsh Line, as in that Pedegree shall appear. Henry Lord Maltravers, sans Issue. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke. Mary D. and Co-h. of Henry Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundell. Philip Howard eldest Son of D. Thomas did assume the Name and Title of Earl of Arundell. Anne D. of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gilestand and Si∣ster and H. of George Lord Dacres. Thomas Howard Earl of Arundell. Alathen D. and Co-h. and at last sole H. to Gilbert Talbot E. of Shrewsbury, by which Match the Ho∣nourable Family descends from the Welsh Line, as in its proper place shall appear. Henry Earl of Arundell, &c. Eliz. D. to Elsme Stewart D. of Lennox, by which Match this House again springs from the Welsh blood, as the Princely Line of the Stewarts do shew. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolke. Henry Howard second Son Heir ap∣parent. Anne Daughter to Edward Marquesse and Earl of Worcester, &c. by which Conjunction the Welsh Alliance is strengthned. NORFOLK is the greatest County of England next to Yorkshire, but far more popu∣lous then that, as comprehending in the whole 660 Parish Churches, of which 27 are Mar∣ket Townes. The soyl according to the variety of places is of different nature; some fat, rank, and full of moisture, in others very light and sandy, yet so that one contributing to the other, and the Sea giving help to both; it is a very plentifull County for Corn, Sheep and Fish. It is observed by a great Antiquary of this Kingdome, that in this County are 100 Families of
ancient Gentry were never attainted of High Treason. The Dukes and Earls of Norfolke have been as followeth. 1070. 1 Ralph de Ware Earl of Norfolk. 2 Hugh Bigot. 3 Roger Bigot. 4 Hugh Bigot. 5 Roger Bigot. 6 Roger Bigot. 7 Thomas de Brotherton Son of K. Edw. 1. E. of Norfolk. 8 Margaret Daughter of Thomas de Brotherton, Duch. of Norfolk. 9 Thomas Lord Mowbrey, Son of Marg. D. of Norfolke, Duke of Norfolk. 10 John Mowbrey, D. 11 John Mowbrey, D. 12 John Mowbrey, D. 13 Richard D. of York and Norfolk. 14 John Lord Howard Descended from the Lady Marg. Daughter to Thomas Duke of Norfolk. 15 Thomas Howard, D. Lord Treasurer and Admirall. 16 Thomas Howard, D. L. Treas. 17 Thomas Howard, D. of Norfolk. 18. Thomas Howard, D. of Norfolk. 1660. The Duke of Somerset. THis Honourable Family hath been Seated formerly in Wales, whose Habitation was Pen∣how in Monmouthshire, where I find their Arms cut in stone, and depicted in glasse in the Church Windows; which Church was Dedicated to St. Maurus, from which Name question∣lesse that illustrious Family took the Name De Sto Mauro; and yet to this day there is a Piece of Ground called Park Seymour: and to confirm this, I judge it not amisse to shew you parcel of an ancient Record. The Saturday after the Feast of St. Michael in the full Court of Strigull, in the 55. year of Hen. the Son of K. John, before William de Walste, then Steward of Strigull, who ought to have House, Bote and Hey-bote in Wentwood. The JƲRY. The Abbot of Tynterne, the Prior of Strigull, Lord Robertson of Pagan, William Bloet, William Denford of Creeke, Richard de More, Robert de St. Maure, Bartholomew of More, Knights, Matthew Denbane, Robert de More, and John Morbell, who say in their Faith, that William Lord Bloet, ought to have to his House at Langston, House, Bote, by complaint or request: Lord William de St. Maure to his House (or Castle) of Penhow by the same means, &c. Henry Gray Marquess Dorset and Duke of Suffolk, Descended from Sir John Gray, Kt. Lord Powis, who married Jane Daughter and one of the Heirs of Edward Charleton Lord Powis, Son of John of another John Charleton, who married Hawis, Daugh. and sole Heir of Howel ap Griffith, lineally descended from the Princes of Powis. Frances D. and Co-h. to Charles Bran∣don, D. of Suffolk, and Queen Mary, D. to Hen. 7. who by Owen Tudor descended lineally from the Princes of Southwales, and from Rees ap Tew∣dor King of Demetia, who died 1090. and was buried at St. Davids. Edward de Sto. Manro Earl of Hertford. Joan D. to L. Hen. Piercy E. of Nor∣thumberland, by which Match this Fa∣mily is the 3. time descended from Wales. Edward Seymour E. of Hertford and Duke of Somerset. Katharine D. to Henry Grey and Fran∣ces D. and Co-h. to Charles Brandon D. of Suffolk and Mary Queen of France.
William Seymor Duke of Somerset, who married Sister and Co-heir to Robert Earle of Essex. Seymor Lord Beauchampe. Daughter to the Lord Capell, that Loyall and Heroick Spirit, who lost his life on the Kings behalf. SEYMOR now DUKE of SOMERSET. 1660. Somersetshire is a Country of a fertile Soyl both for Corn and Pasture, exceeding populous (as comprehending in the whole 385 Parish-Churches, whereof 33 are Market Towns,) and furnished also with commodious Havens for Trade and Traffick; in the parts towards Wilts, it is hilly and stony, which places about Mendip especially afford rich veins of Lead; the rest of the Country is very fertile, abounding with rich Meadows and Pastures: it hath formerly been known by the name of Somertonshire, but now it is ordinarily called Somerset∣shire, by which name it hath given the Honorary Title of, Dukes and Earles of Somerset. 1 William de Mohun, E. 2 William Longespe, E. of Salisbury and Somerset. 3 Reynald de Mohun. 4 John Beauford eldest Son of John of Gaunt by his 3. wife. 5 Henry Beauford. 6 John Beauford, D. of Somersetsh. 7 Edmund Beauford, E. and D. 8 Henry Beauford, D. 9 Edmund Beauford, D. 10 Edmund 3. Son of Henry 7. 11 Henry Fitz Roy, base Son of Henry 8. D. of Somerset and Richmond. 12 Edw. Seymor, Lord Prot. of Ed. 6. D. of Somerset. 13 Robert Carr, E. of Somerset. 14 William Seymor, D. of Somerset. 15 Seymor now D. of Somersetshire. 1660 The Duke of Buckingham. GEorge Duke of Buckingham married  sole daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Fairfax, and  his wife sole daughter and heir of the Lord Vere, by which affinity this illustrious Family is derived from the Brittish blood, as shall more at large appear in the pedigree of the Earls of Oxford. George Villers Duke, Marquiss, and Earl of Buckingham, &c. married Katharine, the sole daughter and heir of Francis Mannors, Earl of Rutland, by which match this honourable Family apparently is derived from Brittish Noble Progenitors, as is copiously declared in the Genealogy of the Earls of Rutland. Buckingham, as it is supposed, takes it name from Bucken, that is, Beech Trees, with which the Country is well stored. It is generally a rich and plentifull soyl, equally good for Corn and grazing, and lyeth all along on the bank of Thames, confronting Berkshire; it contains in it 185. Parish Churches, eleven of which are Market Towns, and amongst them, the chief in name is Buckingham, a Town of no great note, when it was at best, but more considerable heretofore then at present, being once fortified with a Castle, now hardly to be found in the very ruins; as also with a Rampire and certain Sconces built for the defence thereof against the Danes, now more invisible then the Castle; the greatest honour it can challenge, that it hath given titles of highest honour to many a brave and worthy personage, as well of the
Blood-Royal, as other Families, who by the Kings of England have been hence deno∣minated, Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles of Buckingham. 1 Walter Giffard, Earl. 2 Walter Giffard, E. 3 Richard Strongbow, E. 4 Thomas of Woodstock, E. 5 Humphrey Plantagenet, E. 6 Humphrey Stafford, Duke. 7 Henry Stafford, D. 8 Edw. Stafford, D. 9 George Villiers D. Marq. and E. of Buck. 10 George Villiers D. Marq. and E. of Buck. The Duke of Richmond. GHARLES STEWART Duke of Richmond, Earle of March and Lichfield, &c. 1660. by that Royal Progeny is descended from Cadelm. King of Southwales, Meruin K. of Powis, Anarand King of Northwales, and Gwaith voyd K. of Cardigan, and by the genealogy of the Martiners from Gladiis Daughter and H. to Prince Llewelin, and by the Daughter of Henry the 7. from Owen Tudor, as is manifest in the Royal Descents of his Majesty, King Charles the second and James Duke of York. Richmondshire is no County of it self but a part of Yorkshire, lying towards the Northwest; the chief Town is Richmond, first built by Alane E. of Bretagne the first Earl thereof after the Norman Conquest, who fenced it with a Wall and a strong Castle, and gave it the Name of Richmont, as a place equally participating of strength and beauty. The Earls of Bretagne for a long time together continued in the Titles and Possession of this Country: since it hath been bestowed upon other Families, who in their several Times have been adorned with the Stile of, Dukes and Earles of Richmond. 1 Alan the Red, E. 2 Alan the black, E. 3 Stephan E. 4 Alan E. 5 Conan E. 6 Jeof. Plantagenet who married Const. D. to Conan, E. 7 Arthur the Son of Jeof. E. 8 Guido Viscount Towers 2. Husband of Const. E. 9 Randolph of Chester by his wife, E. 10 Peter de Dreux, D. of Bret. 11 Peter de Savoy Uncle to Queen Elinor. 12 John de Dreux, D. of Bret: E. 13 John de Dreux, D. of Bret. 14 John de Dreux, D. of Bret. 15 John de Dreux, D. of Bret. 16 John to Montfort, D. of Rich.
17 John of Gaunt, D. of Lan. E. 18 John de Montfort sirnamed the Valiant E. 19. Ralph Nevill, E. of Richmond durante vita. 20 John D. of Bedford. 21 Edm. of Hadham half brother to K. Hen. 6. 22 Henry E. of Rich. after K. of England. 23 Henry Fitz Roy, D. of Rich. 24 Lodowick Stewart, D. of Lennox, E. of Rich. 25 Esme Stewart, D. of Rich. Stewart, D. of Rich. 26 Charles Stewart, now living, 1660. D. of Rich. The Duke of Albemarle. George Monck Duke of ALBEMARLE. Sir Thomas Monck of Powdrich or Potheridge Com. Devon. Knight. Eliz Daughter of George Smith of Madeworthy juxta Exceter, Kt. Anthony Monck de eodem Armig. one of the Deputy Lieutenants Com. Devon. Mary Daug. of Rich Arscot of Ashwater, Esq Com. Devon. Thomas Monck, Esq de eodem. Frances 2. D. and Coh. to Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, who as being an Inheritrix brought unto the Family of her Husband, these Coats, quarterly in the first, France and England, quartered in the 2. and 3. Ʋlster, and in the 4. Mortimer a batune Argent. Arthur Plantagenet, Kt. of the Garter, natu∣ral Son to Edw. 4. by the Lady Eliz. Lucy, as is supposed, was created Viscount Lisle at Bridewel in London, the 26 of April, 1533 This Arthur was Lieutenant of Calis, which Town some of his Followers intended to betray to the French, for which with their Fact he was sent unto the Tower; but the truth appearing after much search, K. Hen. the 8. sent him a Ring from his Finger, with such comfortable words, that at the hearing thereof, he was so overjoyed, that in the same night he died. Eliz. Daughter of Edward Grey, Viscount Lisle, Sister and Coh. to the Lord John Grey her brother, in whose Right her Husband (after the Surrender of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk) he was Viscount Lisle. King EDWARD the Fourth. Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York. Cecely D. to Ralph Nevil first E. of Westmerland. Richard Plantagenet, E. of Cambridge. Anne D. and Heir to Edmund Mortimer, E. of March and Ʋlster, her Brother. Roger Mortimer, E. of March. Elinor D. of Thomas Holland, E. of Kent. Edmund Martimer, E. of March. Philip only D. and Heir of Lyonel Plantagenet, D. of Clarence and E. of Ʋlster. Roger Martimer, E. of March. Joan D. and Heir of Peter Tenivil or Genevil Lord of Mede, Vancolour and Trim in Ireland.
This Roger lineally in the Male Line descended from Sir Ralph Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, who married Gladis, Daughter to Prince Llewelin (and Sister and Heir to David by the whole blood) who had Issue Roger Mortimer, Lord VVigmore, and by right of Inheritance, Prince of VVales. ALBEMARLE. AƲmerle or Albemerle is the Name of a small Town and Territory in the Dukedome of Normandy, it belonged heretofore to Stephen Son of Odo, descended from the Earls of Champagne, who William the Conqueror made Earls of Albemarle as being the Son of his half sister by the Mothers side, and gave unto him for the further Maintenance of his Estate, the Territory of Holderness in Yorkshire; this Title he enjoyed and left to his Posterity who enjoyed it also; and when his Issue failed, the Kings of England honoured others with it though they had long since lost their Estate in Normandy. The Dukes and Earls whereof take thus in order. Dukes and Earles of Aumerle. Stephen Son of Odo, Earl of Bloys, William le Gros. William de magna Villa, E. of Essex, who married Hawys D. to William le Gros. VVilliam de Fortibus. VVilliam de Fortibus. VVilliam de Fortibus. Thomas de Fortibus. Thomas of Woodstock, D. of Glocester. Edw. Plantagenet, D. Thomas D. of Clarence, E. Richard Beauchampe, E. of VVarwick, created E. of Aumerle by K. Hen. the 6. George Monck created Duke of Albemarle by King Charles the Second, in the Twelfth year of his Reign, 1660.
THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITTISH and WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRƲTE, and continued untill KING CHARLES the First. The Second Book. GƲRGƲINTƲS. GƲRGƲINTƲS or Gurguint Brabtruc, or according to others, Barbarous, which is as much as to say, with the red Beard or red-bearded, the Son and Successor of the Renowned Bellinus, began to sway the Scepter of Great Brit∣tain, in the year of the worlds Creation, 4834. This King in the English Chronicle you shall find named often Corinbratus or Corinbatus; Vitus Comel. Palatinus calls him Gurguntius Ahenobarbus, and saith,Lib. 3. fol. 198. He was Vir admo∣modum prudens, qui gesta patris imitanda sibi proposuit, maximus amator pacis & aequitatis; A most prudent man, and one who set before his eyes the glorious Acts of his Father as a pa∣tern for himself to follow and imitate, a great lover of equity, peace and justice. Being now fully setled in his Regal Throne, and having purchased the Loyal affection of his Nobles and Commons, he begins to cast his eye upon Denmark (which as you have heard before, by the taking of Guilthdacus the Prince thereof, was made Tributary unto the Brittain by imposing a yearly Tribute of one thousand pounds to the Successive Kings of this Isle) which by what reason induced, or upon what hopes encouraged, utterly refused to be any lon∣ger subject to a Forreign Power; Gurguint not willing to be baffled by those whom his Father had subdued, nor desirous to pocket up the losse of a thousand pounds per annum, musters up his Forces, and in short time appears in the head of a gallant Army; which being in all points equipide, he ships his men in a Navy furnish'd, and with prosperous successe, in short time arrives in Denmark; where not delaying any opportunity, he falls to destroy, waste and ran∣sack the Country, supposing that to be the speediest and most ready way to bring his businesse to a wish'd Catastrophe. The Danes startle at the sudden and unexpected approach of so dan∣gerous and unlook'd for a Guest; the Danish King at his wits end, not knowing which way to turn himself, seeing all things go to rack, and no way to give redresse or remedy, thinks it bet∣ter to enjoy his Kingdome, paying a small Tribute, rather then to be unking'd and thrust out of all, and compell'd to beg Assistance from neighbouring Princes be reinvested: Upon these cogitations, he consults with his Nobles and Barrons, who all accord to avoid the extre∣mity of peril, to pay the Tribute, and to give what security the conquering Enemy shall think fit. Gurguintus is not mispleased with their submission, but after so victorious an enterprize, with great glory and triumph, endeavoureth a speedy return into his own Kingdome; but
being now with his whole Fleet on the main Ocean, a Navy of about thirty sayl is discovered upon the Coast of the Isle of Orcades, which seemeth to make towards them; yet upon a nea∣rer approach they appear to be Men, Women and Children, who being expulsed from their native soyl. wander up and down to seek some place of rest and habitation. Gurguint com∣mands the Commander in Chief, whom our Histories call Bartholomew, to be brought aboard his ship; who after some few interrogatories, in a lamentable Oration setting forth both his own and his Companions disasterous calamities, he gave the King to understand that they were of Spain, and of that Province whose Inhabitants were called Balenses, and that they had long travelled and wandered up and down to find some propitious Prince who would com∣passionate their most sad and lamentable condition, and grant them some small Angle or Can∣ton to settle themselves and Posterity; for the obtaining of which laudable favour, they would become his most faithful Liege-people and Subjects; otherwise, their Victuals and Pro∣vision being now almost quite spent, they were in all probability like to starve and be utterly ruined. These sad accidents were spoken with such a doleful Expression by Bartholomew that Gurguint being a King endued with the vertues of Justice and Mercy, gave compassion free accesse into his bosome, and consulting with his Councel, it was generally decreed that they should have allotted unto them the then void and wast Country, which was and is the furthest of all the Isles towards the West, called Ireland, which was in the time of Aristotle or the an∣cient Author of the Book , of the world called Ierna; so doth Theodoret name it: Claudius Ptolomaeus calls it Ivernia or Hibernia, and Claudianus Hyberne: Scotorum Tumulos flevit glacialis Hyberne. And if Ireland hath been at any time named Scotia or Scotland,Mr. Br. f. 28. it was only among the Scottish and Irish Writers, and such as followed them therein, these Irish Historians willing to give that denomination unto it, because many of the Scots with other people dwelt there, when the true name and among strangers was not so, but as I have declared before from ancient Histo∣ries,Author of the Book of E∣states in Ire∣land, the state of the Q. of Great Brittain. p. 22. and to speak out of a late Writers mouth, whose words are these; Ireland, which some of the Ancients called Hibernia, others Ivernia, Innernia, and Irene and Ogygia, and by the Irish themselves Erim, called by Ptolomy little Brittaine, lies between Brittaine and Spain; where we see the Name of Scotland is never attributed simply unto it by these Authors judge∣ments, either by the Irish themselves or other Writers Late or Ancient. Concerning the Nomenclation Ogygia, the Count Palatine citing Cambden, tells us, Si sit verum quod Hiberni Historici narrant, eorum insula merito dicta fuit Ogygia, id est per∣antiqua; Cesaram enim ante Diluvium incoluisse scribunt; post secula plurima Hiberum & Her∣mionem, Hispanos Gurguntis Regis Brittannorum permissu Colonias deduxisse in hane Re∣gionem pestilentia exhaustam Historia Brittanica demonstrat. Hæc ne{que} affirmare ne{que} denegare mihi in animo est, inquit Cambdemus; certe ut Hiberniam antiquitus habitatam crediderim, cum genus humanum seminaretur per universam terrarum orbem; ita perspicuum est ex Brittania primos Incolas illic migrasse; nam in Hibernico Sermone vis infinita est Brittanicarum aictionum; at{que} vetus cultus Hibernorum, ut ait Cornelius Tacitus, non multum differt à Brit∣tanico. Deni{que} à Scriptoribus antiquis omnibus Insula ea Brittanica nominatur, præfertius cum Romani suum imperium undi{que} propagassent, multi proculdubio ex Hispanis, Gallia & Brittannia se receperunt in Hiberniam, ne potentiæ Romanæ subjicerentur, quæ res fecit Juli∣um Agricolam persuadere Romanis capere Hiberniam, si Britannos in officio continere vellent. Attamen Hibernia licet ipso situ fuerit Imperio Romano summè necessaria, ejus{que} aditus & Portus per commercia cognita Romanis, & Julius Agricola quendam Hibernum Regulum seditionis expulsum retinuerit ad occasionem capiendae Insulæ, nunquam tamen à Romanis in ditionem accepta fuit. If it be true which the Irish Writers affirm, their Island may justly be called Ogygia (that is, very ancient;) for they aver Cesara to have there inhabited before the Deluge; and the History of Brittany avoucheth, that Hiberus and Hermio, two Spaniards many ages after, by the appointment of Gurguint King of Great Brittaine, inhabited it with their Colonies and Planters; I will neither say it nor gain-say it, quoth Cambden, but certainly it is very proba∣ble that Ireland was very anciently Inhabited when mankind was dispersed and spread abroad over the face of the whole earth; and manifest it is, the first Inhabitants to have come thither out of Brittannia; for in the Irish Speech there are a multitude of Brittish words and accents; and as Cornelius Tacitus tells us, the mode of the Irish differs not much from the Brittains. And for a Conclusion of this Discourse, by the most ancient Writers, that Island is called Brittanica or Brittish; and evident it is, that when the Roman valour and glory had con∣quered and spread it self almost throughout the whole known world, divers as well out of Spain as France and Britttain fled thither for shelter, not willing to submit their necks and shoulders under the Roman yoke, which was indeed the very cause that moved Julius Agicola to perswade the Romans to get Possession of Ireland if they ever meant to keep the Brittains in s bjection. And although that Iland was of great consequence and necessary to the Romans, neither were their Ports and Haven by reason of the constant and dayly Commerce and Tra∣fick to them unknown; And Julius Agricola having got a certain Irish petty King into his clutches, driven by sedition from his native soyl, intended to make him his decoy to seize
and fasten upon the Irish jurisdictions; yet for all these stratagems Ireland never came un∣der the Roman slavery or obedience. Gurguint being hitherto victorious and fortunate, returns home, having his head enriched with Laurels of choicest honour and renown, being a Prince of singular prudence and ju∣stice, and having laid the Sword aside, he applies himself to build Cities and Towns for the great beauty of his Kingdome; The first place which he erected, was (as saith Howes citing J. Rouse) Caierwerith, that is, Lancaster; of which place the Learned Cambden speaking,Lancaster built by Gurguim. hath these words; 'Ʋbi sub Britanniarum duce ut est in Notitia Provinciarum, numerus Longovi∣cariorum, qui è loco suum nomen sunt mutuati, stationem habuit; Whereas we find in the notice of Provinces, a company of the Longovicarians under the Lieutenant General of Brittain lay, which took their name from the place, that is, from the River Lon, which gave name also to Loncaster, and Longovicum; this is onely a Market town at this day; the ancient Town stood where after was a Cloyster; at the foot of the hill are fragments of old walls, and oft-times Roman Coyns are found; but above all, there are the ruins of a very antique structure, which is called Werywall: Recentiori ut videtur hujus oppidi nomine: Hoc enim oppidum, saith Mr. Cambden, ilii Caerwerid (i. e.) Ʋrbem viridem dixerunt à viridanti forsitan illo colle; This Town the Brittains called Caerwerid, that is to say the Green town, perchance taking its Name from the Green hill which is there. The first time this place became an Earldome was when K. Hen. 3. conferred that Title on his second Son Edm. and it was destinate to greatnesse in the first Foundation, there being laid unto it at the very first, besides this County, the whole confiscated Estates of the Earls of Lei∣cester and Derby, and the Barony of Monmouth. And into this by Marriages accrued in time the great Estates of William de Fortibus, Earl of Aumerl and Lord of Holderness, Beauford and other goodly Lands in France, the Earldom of Lincoln and good part of that of Salisbury, the Lordships of Ogncare and Kidwelly in Wales which were once the Chaworths; John of Gaunt added thereunto the Castles and Honors of Hertford and Tickhill, and his Son Bullingbroke a moiety of the Lands of Bohun, being Earl of Hertford, Essex and Northampton, so that it was the greatest Patrimony (as I verily think) of any Subject Prince in Christendome. Lan∣caster finally was made a County Palatine by King Ed. the 3. and hath been honoured with these Dukes and Earles of Lancaster. Edmund Plantagenet 2. Son to K. Hen. 3. E. of Lan. Thomas Plantagenet. Henry Plantagenet. Henry Plantagenet first D. of Lan. John of Gaunt Son to K. Ed. 3. married the Lady Blanch Daughter of Henry D. of Lan. Henry of Bullinbroke, Son of John of Gaunt, after King of England, by whom this County Palatine and all the Lands and Honors belonging and incorporate into the Dutchy of Lancaster, were brought unto the Crown of England, though governed as an Estate apart then by its proper Officers, as it continued till the time of K. Ed. 4. who did appropriate it to the Crown, and dissolved the for∣mer Government thereof; to which it was restored again by K. Hen. 7. and so still remaineth under the guidance of Chancellor and other Officers of the same. The next Town which Gurgunstus (as Howes calls him) built, was Porchester in Hampshire, of which place Cambden speaking of those parts, saith; In cujus interiori recessu olim floruit Port Peris ad quem Vespasianum appulisse nostri produnt. Saxones novo Nomine Portchester dix∣erunt, non à Porta Saxone sed à portu; Ptolomæo enim  (i. e.) portus magnus vo∣catur; castrum{que} sanc amplum superest quod in subjectum portum longe late{que} prospectat; where in times past Port Peris flourished, where in succeeding Ages our Writers affirm,Porchester built by Gar∣guint. Vespasian when he came into Brittain first landed, the Saxons changed the Name into Portchester, but not deriving it from Porta the Saxon Chieftain, but from Port (i. e.) Haven or Harbour, in which sense Ptolomy useth , the great Harbour or Port; this by the ancient Brit∣tains was called Caer Peris, and was one of the eight and twenty Sees where the Flamens were seated; in our times it is a Garrison, where in King James his time Sir Cornewallis was Captain. The third and last place which this Fortunate Prince built was Warwick; Cambden saith,Warwick built by Gurgaint. That the Saxons called this place Warryng-wyc. Mennius and the Brittains Cair Guarvie and Caer leon, all which Names seem to take their derivation from the Brittish word Guarth, which signifieth a Garrison, Sconce or place of Defence; Hoc illud oppidum est quod præsi∣dium Romanis in Brittannia dicebatur, ubi ut est in provinciarum Notitia præfectus equitum Dalmatarum sub dispositione Ducis Brittanniorum egit; The situation of this place is most
pleasant upon a Hill rising from the River, over which is a strong and fair stone Bridge, and her sharp stream upon the Town side checked with a most fair and sumptuous Castle: It seemeth this Town hath been walled about, as appeareth by the Trench in some places seen, and two very fair Gates, whose passages are hewed out of the Rock, as all other into the Town are; over which two beautiful Chappels are built; that towards the East, called St. Peters, and on the South-west St. James; two fair Churches are therein seated, called St. Maries and St. Nicholas; beside these in and about the Town suppressed, St. Laurence, St. Michaels, St. John Baptist and St. John of Jerusalem, and the Nunnery in the North of the Town; the Castle which we named, was ruinous, but was of late Repaired at the great cost and charges of Sir Fulk Grenil, the late Lord Brook, who therein dwelt; so was it anciently the Seat and abiding Place of the Dukes and Earles of Warwick. 1 Henry de Newburgh, E. 2 Roger de Newburgh. 3 William de Newburgh. 4 Walleran de Newburgh. 5 Henry de Newburgh, Lsengè, Or, and Azure on a border Gules 8 plates. 6 Thomas de Newburgh, Chechy Or, Azure and a Cheveron ermin. 7 John Marshall first Husband of Margery, Sister and Heir of Thomas de Newburgh. Gules a bend fusile, Or. 8 John de Placetis, second Husband of the said Margery. Ar, 6 annulets, Gules 321. 9 Walleran de Newburgh, Uncle and Heir of Thomas de Newb. Losengè, Or and Azure on a border gules 8 plates. 10 William Manduit Son of Alice, Sister and Heir of Walleran. Ar, 2 bars, Gules. 11 William Beauchamp Son of the Lady Isabella, Sister and Heir of William Manduit. 12 Guido Beauchamp. 13 Thomas eauchamp, E. Marst. 14 Thomas Beauchamp. 15 Rich Beauchamp, Reg. of France. 16 Henry Beauchamp, D. of Warwick. Gules, a fess between 6 cross croslets, Or. 17 Richard Nevill who married Anne, sister of Henry Beuchamp, D. of Warwick, Gules, a saltoir arg. a label of three gob. A & B. 18 George D. of Clarence, who married Anne D. of Ri. Nevill, England and France, quartered on a label of 3 points, arg. as many cantons G. 19 Edw. Plant. Son of George, arma paterna. 20 John Dudley descended from the Lady Margaret, Daughter of Rich. Beauchamp, E. of War. 21 Ambrose Dudley. Or a Lyon rampant, his tail double-sorked, veet. 22 Robert Lord Rich, created E. of VVarwick, 16 Jac. Aug. 2. 23 Robert Rich. Gules, a cheveron between 3 cross croslets Or. Gurguntius buried at Caerleon.After Gurguint had ruled this Kingdom by the space of twenty nine years in great peace and tranquillity, he departed out of this transitory life, and was buried at Caerleon, leaving to succeed him his Son Guinthelinus or Guintellius.
GƲINTHELINƲS. GƲINTHELINƲS or Guintellius the Son of Gurguint, his Father being dead, took upon him the Government of this Island, and was crowned King of Great Brittain, in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred fifty and three. The English Chronicle cal∣leth this Prince Gwentoline, a man of singular Parts and Education, understanding exactly both the Greek and Latine Language; he governed his Subjects with such moderation and judgement, that his Memory deserveth to live for ever; and to make him the more glorious, the heavenly Providence bestowed upon him a Lady for his wife, who equalized him in all the Excellencies that can be exprest in her Sex; she was so transcendent being but a woman, that she had beautified her intellectual parts with the knowledge and perfection of many Sci∣ences, insomuch that she might justly be stiled learned; but above all, these rich Treasures of her mind she imployed not to ostentation or vain-glory that thereby she might be praised, but made use of them for the common good and utility of the Kingdome. Martiae who was the Paragon of her time and nature also, she composed a Law so conducing to the good of all, that in memory of her, it was called the Martian Law, and continued in full force and power many years, and so well approved of by Aluredus the Saxon Prince, that he thought it an honour to him to translate it himself out of the Brittish Language for the good of his Subjects into the Saxon Tongue, and called it Mathehelage, that is, the Law of Martia; great was her assistance to her Kingly Consort in the Administration of the Republick, inso∣much that after his decease, their Son being in his minority and very young, all Orders of the Kingdome, as well Nobles as Commons, for her great Wisdom and Discretion made choice of her to be Queen Regent, till her Son came to full Age, and in this condition she ruled for the space of some years; though they be not numbred, by reason that her Son had the Title of King, yet the Count Palatine tells us, That Deinceps Martia uxor ejus,Vitus. à qua conditæ sunt Martiæ Leges, regnat annis septem cum Filio suo; and then (viz. after the death of her Hus∣band) Martia his wife who made the Martian Law, reigned jointly with her Son seven years. De quo Polidorus,Polidorus. Nutu Dei factum (inquit) est ut Guintolinus ad Regnum civilibus dissensionibus quassatum perveniret, quod reduceret illud in pristinum statum, id quod graviter fecit; Eo enim potitus, Rempublicam Brittanicam ejus Legibus ac moribus velut de integro condere ac ornare maxime studuit; sed ante omnia civiles discordias quæ adhuc tanquam reliquiæ factionum dura∣bant, penitus sedavit. Huic uxor erat nomine Martia mulier præter cæteras pulchra & sapiens, quæ peperit unicum filium Sicilium; iste mortuo patre cum nondum esset maturus imperio, Martia multarum rerum perita Regni curam interim suscepit, quod Reipublicæ erat id imprimis sibi fa∣ciendum rata, leges tulit quas posteri Martianas appellarunt. This King was called by some Guttelinus, and by others, after the Roman Dialect, Guinte∣linus; who after he had ruled six and twenty year left this world, and was buried at Troyno∣vant or London, leaving his onely Son Sisillius to succeed him in his Kingdome. SISILLIƲS. SISILLIƲS or Cecilius Son to Guinthelinus, began his Reign over the Brittains, in the year of the World, four thousand eight hundred seventy and nine. The English Chronicle calls this King Seizill; either he lived in great peace and tranquility, as well he might, his most worthy Parents both the heroick Prince his Father and beautiful and prudent Queen his Mother, having quite extinguisht all, even the least sparks of Sedition and Rebellion, and left the Realm in perfect quietnesse, or else the Records of his life perished; for Writers relate very little of him; only Mr. Howes tells us (as the Scotch Writers say) that he Reigned seven years, and that in the very first year after his coming to the Crown,Picts arrive in Brittain. the Picts arrived in Brittain and possessed those parts, which now be the Marches of both Kingdomes betwixt England and Scotland, and confusedly makes no distinction betwixt Scots and Picts; whereas Authors affirm that the Highland-men, the natural Scots indeed, are supposed to descend from the Scythians, who with the Getes infesting Ireland,The Author of a Book of Maps, printed 1646. printed for Wil. Humble Anonymus. left both their Issue there and their manners, apparent in the wild Irish and Highlanders even to this day. And from Scythia as is thought the name of Scots grew; for so the Netherlands by Scutten expresse indifferently the Scythian and Scot: so Gildas calleth the Irish Brittains, Scythians; so King Elfred in translating the History of Orosius turneth Scots in Scyttan; and so saith Walsingbam from one and the same Original, Scythe Scytici, Scotae Scotini take their names, as from Getae Getici, Goti Gotici have done. As for the Picts (saith the same Author) anciently inhabiting part of that Kingdome, they were Inborn Brittains, and such as thither fled to avoid the Romans servitude; whose Names began first to be distinguished under Dioclesian the Emperour, when they were termed Picts from painting their bodies like the Brittains, as saith Flavius Vigetius, which is more
strengthned, for that the Northern Brittains converted by St. Columb, are called Brittan Picts; but the Conversion of that Nation may more properly be attributed to Saint Ninian; Ninianus Bernicius ex Regio Brittannorum sanguine procreatus, Italiam adhuc adolescens lite∣rarum studio petit; Romae apud divini Verbi ministros mysteria Veritatis edoctus ad plenum, celer in-patriam remigrabat; ubi Magister & Paedonomus non vulgaris concreditum à Deo Ta∣lentum per Brittannorum, Scotorum, Australium{que} Pictorum, terras latissime profudit. Hujus pia industria Picti primum relicto Idololatriæ cultu,St. Ninian a Brittain. veram Christi fidem percepere; Ninian born of the Royal Brittish Bloud, being yet a youth, went into Italy to follow his Studies, and at Rome was fully taught the Mysteries of Truth by the Teachers of the divine Word, and then returned into his own Country; where becoming a Master and Instructor above the ordinary pitch of men, he distributed the Talent bestowed upon him by Almighty God amongst the Brittains,Jo. Bal. li. de Ser. Brit. cen. 1. iu Niniano Bernicio. Hector Boetius Scot. Hist. li. 7. Fol. 119. Scots, and Southern Picts, cast off the bondage of Idolatry, and embraced the sweet yoak of Christianity. And for those holy labours was in former times, as our Histories testifie by all, throughout all Brittanny called by the title of Doctor and Inctructor of the Scots, Picts and Brittains; Scotorum, Pictorum, Britonum{que} Doctor & Pædonomus non vulgaris; & eo nomine omnibus qui Albionem incolunt vel hac nostra ætate in multa veneratione habitus; and in that respect was had in great veneration by all the Inhabitants of the Kingdome of Albion. The first King I read of, of that Nation that was Christian, was Hiergustus, King of the Picts, who with his Pictish people and subjects were Christians,Mr. Br. fo. 582. and publickly professed that Reli∣gion: but in the time of Maximus all the Scots were banished out of this Land, which was in the year of Christ,Hec. Boe. l. 6. Histo. Buchan. Rer. Sco. l. 4. in Rege 39. 379. 'Annus à Christi adventu in carnem, tricentesimus septuagesimus nonus; the Picts were generally and publickly instructed and professed Christians. And also in the days of King Fincomark of Scotland, who reigned 47 years, and died multis virtutibus nobilis; and in the year of Christ, 358. 'Salutis humanæ anno trecentesimo quinquagesimo octavo, the Picts had received the Faith of Christ, and before that time; For whilst King Fincomark reig∣ned,Annal. Scot. Hec. Boe. sup. l. 6. fol. 104. Hollish. Hist. of Ireland. Fincomarko Rege Scotis adhuc imperante, By divers Writers many of the Irish people received the law of Christ, by means of a worthy Christian woman of the Picts, as the Scottsh and other Histories testifie. Per id tempus mulier Christianae pietatis cultrix, Pictici eam fuisse sanguinis, Scotici asserunt Annales, Regina insinuata Christi nomen illi mirifice prædicavit re∣verendum{que} effecit. This our Brittish St. Ninian deserveth eternal memory for converting the Picts. Interea Sanctus Ninianus Australes Pictos quibus adhuc error gentilis inhærens Idola venerari ac colere compellebat, aggrediens Evangelii veritatem sequentibus signis prædicabat; caeci vident, claudi ambulant, leprosi mundantur, surdi audiunt, mortui resurgunt, oppressi à daemonibus liberantur; sic{que} fides suscipitur, error abdicatur, destructis Templis Ecclesiae eriguntur, currunt ad salutis lavacrum divites, pauperes gratias Deo agunt in insulis quæ procul sunt habitantes. Ordinavit Presbyteros, Episcopos consecravit, & totam terram per certas parochias divisit. In the mean time St. Ninian going to the Picts, which yet were Pagans and worshipped Idols, preached the Truth of the Gospell unto them, with these signes following; The b lind see, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised, and they which were oppressed with Divels are delivered. And so the Faith is received, Error abandoned, Pagan Temples are destroyed, Christian Churches erected, Rich and poor are baptized, those that inhabit in the Isles a far off, give thanks to God. He ordained Priests, consecrated Bishops, and divided the whole Land by certain Parishes. Bede. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. Capgr. in St. Ninio Guli. Malm. l. 4. de gest. Pont Angl. The first Stone building in Britt.And having thus converted and confirmed the people unto and in the Faith of Christ, being the chiefest end of his Mission and coming hither, he returned to his Church, Confirmatis in fide omnibus ad Ecclesiam suam est regressus; This House and Episcopal Church which he now returned unto, was the same which he had built before of stone, called, for the rarenesse of such building in Brittain, that being the first, as our History saith, and thereby named Candida Casa, the white House or Church, at a place called Witerne, between Scotland and England, as they are now termed, upon the Sea coast quite environed with the Sea, excepting the pas∣sage on the North side thereof. Candida Casa vocatur locus in extremis Angliæ juxta Sco∣tiam finibus ubi beatus Confessor Niva requiescit, Natione Brito, qui primus ibidem Christi prædi∣cationem Evangelizavit. Nomen loco ex opere inditum quod Ecclesiam ibi ex lapide polito Brito∣nibus miraculum fecerit. The Count Palatine will have this King to have reigned fifteen years alone, and speaks some thing favourably in his behalf; Regina Martia (saith he) gubernaculum 7 annorum accepit cum filio unico adhuc puero, qui Sisillius eo nomine secundus appellatur, & feliciter insequutus vestigia patris, administrat quindecim annos postea solus, & mortuus Caerleili sepelitur. To this account of fifteen years agreeth the English History, saith Fabian; but the Flower of Histories alloweth unto his Reign onely seven years: howsoever Death demanded his due, and summoned this King into another world;Sisillius burled at Caerleon. whose Body, as Mr. Howes saith, was buried at Caerleon, and not at Caerlile; but the nearnesse of the Names questionlesse breeds the mistake. He left behind him his Son Kimarus to succeed him.
KIMARƲS. KIMARƲS Son of Sisilius, after the death of his Father, was with all solemnity ad∣vanced to the Throne and Crown of Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand eight hundred fourscore and six. The English Chronicle calleth him Kymor. Fabian saith, that there is no mention made of this King either concerning his deeds and course of life, or concerning the length of his Reign; yet he alledgeth an old Chronicle to aver, that he was a wild young man, and lived after his pleasure; wherefore as he was at his disport of Hunting, he was by his Ill-willers slain when he had ruled scarcely three years: but the Count Palatine saith, he was killed by wild Beasts;, Illius filius (saith he, speaking of Sisilius) Chimarus in imperando successit, moribus adolescens improbus, sui{que} in rebus omnibus agendis arbitrii ac voluntatis, adeo ut post tres annos quibus rexit à feris bestiis dum venabatur occisus est. Kimarus succeeded, a young man of most dissolute life and behaviour, who swayed all things according to the humour of his own vain and fantastick imagination, and not according to the rule of reason and judgement; insomuch that after the three years of his Reign he was devou∣red of wild Beasts. It behoves Princes as well as others to have a care how they live: For the holy Writ tells us, Fire, hail, famine and death,Eccles. c. 39. all these things are created for mans punishment, the Teeth of Beasts for the utter extermination of the wicked. It is great reason that Princes should regulate their lives after the true square of vertue; for a Prince cannot with reason expect that the severity of Laws, or other Politick means shall re∣presse in his Commonwealth, any Vice which shall be Authorised by the Example of his own Practice. For as the Poet saith, —Totus componitur Orbis Regis ad exemplum; nec sic inflectere sensus Humanos edicta valent ut vita Regentis. That is to say, all the World is framed after the modell of the King; and no Laws or Edicts can so move the mind of men as doth the life of the Governour; which Plutarch confirmeth notably, saying, That even as a Square or Rule must be streight in it self before it can make other things streight; so the Prince who is, as it were, the Rule of his Subjects, ought first to rectifie him∣self before he go about by Laws or other means to rectifie his Commonwealth; for he that is falling, saith Plutarch, is not fit to uphold others, nor he that is ignorant to teach, nor he that is incor∣rigible to correct, nor he that is himself disordered to put others in order. ELIANƲS. ELIANƲS the Son of Kimarus, whom some also call Danius, as the Flower of Histories affirmeth, but Gaufride saith, he was Kimarus Brother, was Crowned King of Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand eight hundred fourscore and nine. This Prince by the English Book is called Howan: one Chronicle will have Kimarus and Elianus to be one and the same person, though others think otherwise, and that he reigned two years; little or nothing being left to posterity of any memorable Acts of his, either good or bad: only the Count Palatine tells us, Frater eum sequitur Elianus, natura stupidior, & legum spretor, quocirca rem administrabat imprudenter, bellis & seditionibus undecun{que} vexatus, ne{que} pacem habere potuit vel publice vel privatim, illis decem annis quibus imperabat; Elianus his Brother succeeded him, of a most stupid nature, and a contemner of all Laws, which was the cause that he governed with great indiscretion his Kingdome and Commonwealth, being continually vexed and troubled with insurrections and seditions, insomuch that during the ten years of his Reign he could never enjoy either privately or otherwise one hour of peace; this was one amongst the Brittish Princes, for whose sake, as Gildas the wise writeth, the whole Nation suffered. MORINDƲS. MORINDƲS the Bastard-son of Elianus, as Gaufride affirmeth with others, took upon him the Crown and Government of this Island of Great Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand eight hundred and ninety. Elianus begat this Prince upon Tanguestula his Concubine, who proved as Bastards commonly doe, being gotten in the heat of Courage, a most resolute and couragious Chieftain, but so over-swayed by his own passions, especially that of anger, that in his fury no mans life was secure. To the matchlesse
strength of his body, Nature added all those features which might make him the most hand∣some and accomplisht Gentleman in all his Kingdome; these his admirable endowments he beautified with a most Princely liberality, being very open-handed when the least merit re∣quired. During the Reign of Morindus, there arrived out of Mauritania (which Country according to Strabo is seated between Hungaria and Fohemia,) a war-like and most cruel people, which with Fire and Sword consumed all before them. Morindus having tidings brought to him of those insolences and misdemeanours, with all speed Levied an Army, and with speedy Marches encounters his Enemy, and after a most bloody Conflict, compels the greatest part of the unwelcome Intruders back to their Ships; the rest he sacrificeth to his own anger, causing some to be dismembred, others cast into the fire, some chopt in pieces, not a few strangled; death acted several parts in this most horrid execution; no manner of torment imaginable to Morindus was left uninflicted, so great was the tyranny of his blood-thirsting revenge. After this great overthrow and most cruel Massacre, this Brittish King progressing a long the Sea coasts for his Recreation, chanced to discry a most hideous Monster coming out of the Irish Ocean. Morindus is overjoyed at this presented occasion to try the edge of his matchlesse Valour; and therefore putting spurs to his Horse, stays not but pre∣vents the coming of this hellish Fury, and with most Knightly Courage and Gallantry (as Guido de Columna and others aver,) gives a most fierce Encounter to the Fiend; but after a long and cruel Conflict, having quite spent his spirits, he is swallowed up and devoured by that Fish, Fiend or Monster, after he had Reigned, according to most Writers, eight years, leaving after him, five Sons, Gorbomannus or Gorbonian, Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius or Nigenius, and Peredurus; Morindus (saith the Count Palatine) quem Elianus ex Tangustula Concubina suscepit, Rex creatur. Is magnà quidem probitate morum futurus erat vir clarus ad omnem temporum aeternitatem, nisi nimium indulsisset asperitati, crudelitatique, & incitatus ad iram se tam insolenter & superbè cum hominibus gessisset, ut omnino parceret nemini, furore{que} percitus nec etiam amicos suos vellet ab hostibus internoscere; nam quod ad cætera pertinet, homo fuit aspectu pulcher, muneribus{que} dandis largiter assuefactus; tantæ vero fortitudinis, ut cum eo luctari vel armis congredi nemo auderet. Maurorum rex quidem ingressus, magna vi militum di∣cebatur Northumbriam divastare, cui Morindus, collecta manu juventutis, fit obvius, ac præ'ium instituens fertur plus efficisse solus, quam reliqua pars totius exercitus; nam ubi Victor evasit, ne quidem unum ex hostibus reliquit superstitem; jubebat homo immanis ordine singulos captivos ad se produci, ut quemlibet ita seorsim perimendo suam feritatem exsatiaret; cum{que} fatigatus quodam∣modo nec dum cessaret ardor ille sanguinis humani profundendi, hoc amplius jubebat eos qui adhuc superessent pelle detracta de toto corpore protenus comburi, qua ex re famam & gloriam consequi sperabat; ideo cum ex Hibernico mari bellua quædam inauditae feritatis & magnitudinis quasi monstrum naturæ aliquod certum emersisset, appulisset{que} in Brittaniam, & Maritimos populos vehementer divexasset, ipsemet Rex clam suis satellitibus ad littora pergit, & solus cum immani bellua marina congreditur; eam{que} sicut ipse interemit, sic ab ea vicissim interfectus est postquam novem imperasset. GORBOMANNƲS. GORBOMANNƲS, or as the English Book calls him, Granbodian, his Father being dead, is Crowned King of Great Brittain, in the year of the worlds Creation, four thou∣sand eight hundred ninety eight: A Prince, as saith Gaufride, just in all his actions, insomuch that we may call him our Brittish Numa; for his first care was the honour of his Gods, unto whom he erected Temples for divine Honour, add repaired such as were ruinous and decayed; to his Subjects he did Justice, and to all men Right, exactly observing that excellent rule of morality, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; in his time Brittaine flourished in abun∣dance of Wealth and Riches; for Peace begot Plenty, and that plenty caused the Subjects to Honour their Prince as the very Author thereof.R. Vitus. f. 200. Gorbomannus primo natus ascendit regni soli∣um, quo viro justior vel amantior æqui nemo repertus est, aut qui majore cum cura populum guber∣naret. Assiduus illi mos erat, primum. Deis debitum honorem impendere, populis deinde jus reddere; in ferè omnibus civitatibus Deorum Templa collapsa instaurat, & ex integro nova condit. Arte tanta divitiarum honeste parandarum utebatur, quanta nullus in insula princeps unquam; quippe colonos ad agriculturam excitabat, eos ab injuria virorum potentium defendebat, ado∣lescentes potissimum idoneos ad bellum gerendum benigne accepit, eos{que} crebris pecuniarum lar∣gitionibus à rapinis faciendis. abstinebat: deni{que} talem inter cives operam suaviter & amice vivendo præstabat, ut eo regnante, damnum dare aut vim inferre nemo auderet, ne quidem ille qui cæterorum pessimus vulgo existimaretur; cum hac innata sibi bonitate morum postquam Brit∣tanos opibus affluentes rexisset undecim annos, vita functus est, Ʋrbe Trinovanta sepelitur: Gorbomannus the eldest Son is inaugurated King, surpassing all in his time for justice, mercy and careful governing of his Subjects; His first thoughts called upon him to offer up unto the Gods all due reverence and honour, and after that to doe right unto every man; in each place he repaired the ruinous and decayed Temples, and in many Towns founded new; He exceeded all the Princes his Predecessors in gathering Riches, and that in so upright a way,
that he was rather highly to be extolled then any way to be grudged at; for he animated the harmlesse Husband to agriculture and closely to follow his Plough, keeping them under his protection, and defending them from the oppression of griping Land-lords, and over-top∣ping great-ones: Youth which he esteemed fit to be trained up for Martial Discipline, he fur∣nished with large Donatives, Salaries and advance-Monies, whereby to keep them from plun∣dering and such peccadillio's as are incident to men of that profession. To conclude, he gave such Example by his temperate and just living to his Subjects, that even he who was branded with the infamy of the basest Varlet, durst not presume to offer an injury or out-rage unto his Neighbour. This good King after he had Ruled Brittain in the height of wealth and prospe∣rity, gave way to Fate, and was buried at London. This King in his devotion towards his false gods, having repaired and new built so many Temples, questionlesse allotted Flamens or Druids to offer the wonted sacrifices; the Druids were of high esteem amongst the Brittains, and of large Antiquitie; for Pontalion saith, their beginning was in the year of the worlds Creation, 2900. But the profession of the Druids, which the Brittains, the Inhabitants of Gallia, and a great part of Germany, had many hundreds of years followed and practised, was impious, false and idolatrous, damnable and diabolical. They worshipped for gods, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Mercury, Audate, Berecynthia, and some o∣thers.Mr. Br. f. 241. Hen. Pan. l. de vir. illust. Ger. part. 1. p. 40. 41. Selden, Anal. Alab. l. 1. c. 1. c. 4 Berosus Nichol. Vignier. Biblio. Hist. an. Mundi 2200. Hist. Aggregat. de Annal. f. 3. Bernar. Giunti Chro. in Dryus. Joan. Frisius, Bibliot. Philos. an. Mund. 2070 ante Christum 1892. Jo. Bal. lib. de Scrip. Cent. 1. in Semothe. Cambd. Britt. p. 11. Pliny. l. 12. c. 1. Lud. Caelius. li. 7. c. 1. Tac. l. de morib. & pop. Germa. Andu. Altham, in Schol. n. Cor. Tacit. Jul. Cæsar. l. 6. bel. Gall. Hector Boetius. Scot. Hist. li. 2. f. 22. 23. Their religion and themselves had continued by that Name and flourished in the world from the time of Druius the great King and high Priest; Druius Germanorum Pontifex, who reduced the Gentils Religion into this Order, Founded them a Colledge, and gave them their denomination about the year of the worlds Creation, 2900. Druius ille apud Germanorum Celtas, vir magnae authoritatis Gentilitiam religionem in ordinem redegit, at{que} Druidorum Col∣legium religionis ergo constituit, à quo etiam Druides apud Gallos & Germanos dicti. And the Town in Normandy Dreux also was named from him, as their Histories say, and the River Druentia running thereby; what was the exact time of their beginning is not certain: Pan∣talion saith it was in the year of the world, 2900. Joannes Frisius saith in the year thereof 2070, and 1892 before Christ. Bernard Giunti will have it in the 420 year after the Flood of Noe. Nicholas Vignier ascribeth the Reign of King Dryus or Cruius unto the year of the World 2200. Therefore I cannot be of the mind of those late Writers, which say, they were called Druides of  an Oak in Greek, because they used to be sometimes under Oaks in woods, for so we might call all old Idolators Druids; for the Scriptures witnesse, they sacri∣ficed in woods and groves; so doth Pliny, Lud. Caelius and others, Lucos & memora consecrant. And the Greek Writers as Eutropius, Herodian, Dio, Zosimus and the rest, are silent of this sect, as the Latines also, but when they speak of Brittain, France and Germany, where onely and no where else this Religion remained: And Julius Casar is plain, there were no Druids in Ger∣many, but they differed much from the Gauls in Religion; Germani multum à Gallorum con∣suetudine differunt; Nam ne{que} Druides habent qui rebus divinis præsunt. And the Scottish Hi∣storians say, the ancient Name of those men in the Language here was Durcergliis, and they were Romans who spake not Greek, who gave them the first Name Druides à Druius, to make the strange Name to take Latine Declension, Hos Romani scriptores Druides, ut peregrinum vocabulum inflectionem caperet Latinam, appellant. And here were no Greeks in these parts to give them a Greek Name, neither did their Sect come nere any part of Greece at any time, or howsoever we will pronounce the Greek word  an Oak, Drys or Drus, we should by the deriving them from thence, call them Dryssets or Drussets as of Chus and Huss we call Cussits and Hussits, and not Druides or Druids. But for their Antiquity truly they might make it of so great continuance. Neither was their honour and glory in Brittain or where else they lived of a low degree; Vestitus eorum valde preciosus at{que} ornatus insignis; nam collo torques, manibus annuli, lacertis armillae addebantur; vestes erant tinctae & auro pictæ: Their apparrell was very precious, and attire singular; for they wore Chains of gold about their necks, Rings on their hands, and Bracelets on their arms; their Garments were dyed and embroidered with Gold. And their Habitations and Dwellings were no lesse stately, the chiefest of them seated in the best Cities of Brittain, and their Mansions converted after to be Archbishops and Bishops Pallaces; sometimes they resorted to woods, as all ancient Witches, Magicians and Idolaters did, to ex∣ercise their Sorceries, and offer their Sacrifices, especially to such Oaks as bore Misseltoe, na∣turally medicinable for divers infirmities, and therefore to the rude people they ascribe a certain Divinity to such Trees:Mr. Br. f. 242. Their Houses as themselves also had exemptions from all Services, Exactions and Troubles; They were chief Judges in all matters both Temporal and Spiritual, having all men obedient to their Order, Sentence and Determination, under the greatest penalty of abandoning and exilement from the society of Men, and such like, and death it self at their pleasures, designing whom they listed to be cruelly sacrificed to their Divels and Idols, whom they termed Gods: the chiefest of them had for a singular sign of ho∣nour, Fire born before him; 'Ante quem ignis dignitatis honoris{que}; insigne deferretur. Ammi∣anus Marcellinus speaking of these men giveth this praise unto them, That they were of great Wits, and lived in Companies or Colledges, according as Pythagoras ordained; they were lifted up with questions of hidden and high things, and despising humane matters, pronoun∣ced that mens souls were immortal; Druidæ ingeniis celsiores, ut Autoritas Pythagorae de∣crevit, sodalitiis astricti consortiis, questionibus occultarum rerum altarum{que} erecti sunt, &
despectantes humana, pronunciarunt animas immortales. Which opinion of theirs of the souls immortality Julius Cæsar with divers others also confirmeth, but in a leud sense of Transmi∣gation or going from one body to another; Hic volunt persuadere non interire animas sed ab aliis post mortem transire ad alios. And if any man was dangerously sick, in war or peril, and would offer sacrifice or vow, they used the Druids as Ministers to offer it; Qui sunt afflicti gravioribus morbis, qui{que} in præliis periculis{que} versantur, aut pro victimus homines immolant, aut se immolaturos vovent, administris{que} ad ea sacrificia Druidibus utuntur. Diodorus Siculus who lived in the same time with Julius Cesar, giveth this reason, that the Druids were thus used for Priests in all sacrifices of the Brittains and Gauls, much to their honour in their opinion, who were ruled by the Druids, because they hold that sacrifices should be offered by them, which be acquainted with the divine nature, and are skilful of the language of the gods; and they think that by these mens intercession good things should be asked of the gods, by whose Counsel they enjoy peace and war; Est apud eos moris, nullum abs{que} Philosopho sacrificium facere; existimant enim per divinae naturæ conscios sacra fieri oportere, tanquam linguæ deorum peritos, at{que} horum intercessione bona à deis censent petenda, quorum consilio & pace & bello fruuntur. The Authors of the Theatre of Great Brittain make Cesar and ancient Writers to speak in this manner; The Druids Office was imployed about holy things; for they had the managing of publick and private sacrifices, and to interpret and discuss matters of Religion unto them, do resort great numbers of young men to learn at their hands, and they be had in great reverence; for they determine almost all Controversies and matters in variance as well pub∣lick as private: and if there happen any thing to be done amiss, or if there be any murther com∣mitted, if there arise any controversie concerning inheritance or bounds of Lands, they take the matter into their power and award either recompence or penalties in the Case; and if there be any (be it private person or be it Corporation,Theat. of Great Britt. lib. 6.) that will not stand to their judgement, they inter∣dict him with punishment; among them it is held most grievous: They that are so excommunicated, are accounted in the number of the wicked and ungracious; All men shun them, all men fly their company and communication. This is one of the chiefest things that they labour most to beat into mens minds, that their Souls die not, but do after death, pass from one to ano∣ther, and hereby they think men should be most stirred unto vertue, when fear of death is nothing re∣garded. Also they dispute many other things, as of the stars, of their movings, of the bignesse of the world and the earth, of the nature of things, of the strength and power of the immortal Gods, and do therein instruct their youth. Thus we have heard what those Druids and their Follow∣ers were. Now let us a little examine their cause by their own Writers and their own proceedings; for to write at large of their most grosse and inhumane absurdities, would require a Volume from me, as the like had done of other Writers against such Pagan Gentils their superstitions, whereas all Creatures cry out unto us, especially the more noble as the Celestial bodies (in searching whose natures and effects these men were most conversant) that there is an eternal and omnipotent Maker and Causer which created all things, who being without beginning or ending, was made or caused by no other; Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, & opera manuum ejus anunciat firmamentum.Mr. Br. f. 244. And divine worship is onely due unto him, for his Almighty Excel∣lency, and the benefit which man a reasonable Creature received and further expecteth and needeth to receive from him, which we commonly call Religion, a Releiging, Religation, or dutiful binding of man informed with a reasonable intellectual and immortal Soul, ordained as it were the Lieutenant and Viceroy of God to govern this inferior world, and by his bet∣ter eternal part assured that better and eternal things are ordained for him, if he doth not deprive himself of them, but find out and perform the Will and Commandment of so infinite good and bountiful a Creator, Preserver and Maintainer of all things, especially for the use and end of Man, so dignified and exalted among his Creatures, which these Druids and their Disciples were so far from effecting, that they gave him no honour at all, never remembring him among those that they worshipped, but doing the greatest dishonour they could unto him, in giving that glory and majesty which is only proper and due to him, to his rebellious Creatures and professed Enemies, damned and infernal souls, hundreds of thousands before them, and divers of these by probable Historical accounts of later Time and Creation then the Author of their own Sect, Druius was. And if we will follow Julius Cesar, who of all writeth most of their pretended Religion living in the time of their chiefest Sway, and best knew what they professed; he writeth of the Germans that they differed much from the French and their Druids in their Religion, having no sacrifices, and only accounting for their gods whom they see, and by whom they are manifestly helped, as the Sun, the Moon, and such visible things, and heard not of any God; Germani multum à Gallorum consuetudine differunt; Ne{que} sacrificiis student; deorum numero eos solos ducunt quos ceruunt, & quorum aperte opibus juvantur, Solem Vulcanum & Lunam; yet the German Writers are so confident that the Druids ruled there in Religion, that they shew unto this day in Germany, as far as Bavaria, two especiall places where they were wont to assemble under great Oaks to exercise their su∣perstitions; and in detestation thereof, two Monasteries called Oberaltaich and Nederaltaich were founded to blot out their Memory.Pont. de viris Illust. Ger. part. 1. p. 40, 41. In Bavaria quoque inferiore sub quercu magna su∣periore & inferiore suam superstitionem exercebant, quæ loca postea in Monasteria conversa etiam∣num Oberaltaich & Neberaltaich appellantur. Therefore these could not be Professors
and Teachers of the true God, his Worship and Religion, which for divers People and Countries, and for themselves also had such variety and change of gods and Religion in divers times and places; and yet all of them professing most grosse and stupid ignorance or woeful Idolatry, the greatest irreligion that can be. And as they thus proved themselves to be Atheists, leaving no possible true God to be worshipped; so by their error of transmigration of souls from one body to another, they fell into one of these absurdities, that one soul should in the end inform many, even hundreds of bodies; or else cease at the last to inform, cease to be, and made mortal. And as Chimeri∣cal a fiction it was of them, to say (as Lucan expoundeth them) that when a soul left a body in this world, it went into another world, and there informed another body. Vobis Autoribus umbræ Non tacitas Erebi sedes Ditis{que} profundi Pallida Regna petunt; Regit idem spiritus artus Orbe alio longe. For so they must needs make more worlds where generation and corruption is, besides this terrestrial and sublunary, where we inhabit; and therefore justly doth the same Author call their profession barbarous Rites, a false manner of worship, and singular against all the world besides, Et vos barbaricos ritus morem{que} sinistrum, Sacrorum Druidæ positis repetistis ab armis; Solis nosse Deos, & Cœli sydera vobis Aut solis nescire datum. St. Gildas tells us, that the monstrous Idols in Brittain were not inferior in number to those of Egypt, commonly esteemed the most idolatrous Nation of the world, and some of them with deformed lineaments remained to be seen in his time; and the people of Brittain gave divine honour even to Mountains, Hills and Rivers. And yet besides these had Errors and I∣dolatries common with other Nations. Non omittentes priscos communes{que} cum omnibus gentibus errores, quibus ante adventum Christi in carne omne genus humanum obligabatur obstrictum, nec enumerans patria portenta, ipsa Diabolica pene numero Egyptiaca vincentia,Gildas li. de Exid. Britt. quorum nonnulla li∣neamentis adhuc deformibus intra vel extra deserta maenia solito more rigantia torvis vulti∣bus intuemur; ne{que} nominatim inclamitant montes ipsos aut colles aut fluvios olim exitiales, nunc vero humanis usibus utiles, quibus divinus honor à cœco tunc populo cumulabatur. The same have other later Writers, and the sacrifices which they offered to those abominable idols, were the most detestable, and for such not unworthily ranked by the Pagan and Christian Wri∣ters amongst the most cruel and barbarous savages of the world. Pro victimis homines immo∣lant, administris{que} ad ea sacrificia Druidibus utuntur; Publicé{que} ejusdem generis habent insti∣tuta sacrificia. They offer men for Sacrifices,Cæsar lib. 6. belli Gallic. and the Druids be the Ministers of such sacri∣fices, and such sacrifices be instituted by publick Authority among them; thus hath Cæsar and others. Cicero speaking of these Druids, saith, His quicquam Sanctum ac Religiosum videri potest, qui etiamsi quando aliquo metu adducti Deos placandos esse arbitrtur, humanis hostiis eorum aras ac Templa funestant, ut ne Religionem quidem colere possint, nisi eam ipsam scelere violarint: Quis enim ignorat eos usq ad hunc diem retinere illam immanem & barbaram consuetudinem hominum immolandorum? Quamobrem quali fide,Cicero in Orai pro Marc. Fon∣teio. quali pietate existimatis eos esse qui etiam Deos immortales arbitrentur hominum scelere & sanguine facilè posse placari? Can any thing be accounted holy and religious with those men, who when they are afraid of any thing and would have their Gods pacified, do prophane their Altars and Temples with sacrificed men, so that they cannot exercise their Religion, except they first violate it with wickednesse? For who is ignorant that even to this day they retain that savage and barbarous custome of sacrificing Men? Therefore can you think those men to have any Reli∣gion or Piety who think the immortal Gods may be easily appeased with the wickedness and blood of Men? The like hath Dio, Cassius, Amianus, Marcellinus, and others among the Gen∣tils, all crying out against those most barbarous proceedings, and yet termed with them Re∣ligion; and to fill up the measure of this their most inhumane irreligion, as Julius Cæsar with others testifieth, These men had Idols of huge greatnesse, whose members being made of wands, they filled full of men alive, and so setting them on fire, burned them; Immani mag∣nitudine simulachra habent, quorum contexta viminibus membra vivis hominibus complent, quibus succensis circumventi flamma exanimantur homines. And Pliny with others is witnesse, that they were so far from doing any homage or duty unto God, that they bestowed all such upon the Divels, his enemies, and were so far and so long time in his dayes practised in Magick and Invocation, and worshipping Divels, that he supposeth the Persians so far distant and given o∣ver then to that most horrible dishonouring of God, had learned it and received it from hence, where the chief Masters and Practisers thereof remained. These Druids permitted many wives to one man; for Cæsar saith,Cæsar bell. Gall. li. 6. Ʋxores habent deni & duodeni inter se communes, & maxime fratres cum fratribus & parentes cum liberis; the like
hath Zonoras, and in this Country the people went naked; nudi degunt, mulieribus promiscuè utuntur; and this was accounted a vertue and an honour amongst them, as Queen Bunduice did publickty professe in her prayer to her Goddesse Audraste or Audaste; qui cum caeter ae omnia, tum liberes & uxores communes inter se putant; they think wives, and children and all things Common. Thus much of the Druids, their Antiquity and Institution with their abo∣minable sacrifices and superstitions, of whom as occasion shall serve we shall speak more here∣after. Grantham built by Gor∣bomannus.Gorbomanuus is reported to have Founded Grantham in Lincolnshire, of which place Mr. Cambden maketh onely this mention; post Paunton visitur Grantham, oppidum non infre∣quens, Schola à Richardo Foxo Wintoniensi Episcopo, & Templo specioso exornatum, cujus sacrae Pyramis admirandam in altitudinem surgit, & fabulis est famigerata; Grantham a Town well peopled, and adorned with a free School built by Bishop Fox, and a very fair Church, whose Broach or Steeple is of such height, that it is spoken of far and near. The same Gorbomannus builded (as the English Chronicle seems to affirm) Cambridge, anciently called Granta,Cambridge supposed by some to have been built by Gorbomannus. Caer Grant and Grantchester; yet Mr. Broughton out of other Au∣thors saith, that Cambridge was Founded by Cantaber a Spaniard many hundred years be∣fore Christ and walled about by Grantinus, Sint{que} Doctores & Scholares illius celeberrimae ma∣tris Philosophiæ civitatis Cantabrigiæ â Cantabro aedificatae, nec non à Grantino Comite hono∣rabiliter muratae, ab omni calumnia, inquietatione & scandalo liberi; Let the Masters and Scho∣lars of that famous Mother of Philosophy, the City of Cambridge, built by Cantaber, and walled about by Count Grantinus, be free from all Calumny, molestation and disturbance whatsoever; which divers Oxford Men and Antiquaries (though no Friends to the glory of Cambridge) yield unto. But of this place more hereafter in the Lives of Lucius, Morpen-dragon, Arthur and Cadwalader. ARCHIGALLO. ARCHIGALLO the Son of Morindus, after his Brother had Reigned by consent of most Writers, the space of eleven years, ascended the Throne of Brittain in the year of the worlds Creation, four thousand nine hundred and ten. This Prince in the English Chronicle is called Artogail, who utterly forsaking the model of exact Government which his Brother had left behind him for him to follow, he lent too facile an ear to flatterers and sycophants; and where no just cause could be found, faults were contrived and invented whereby to entrap the Nobles, and new Plots discovered which never were thought upon but by the Contrivers, whose Machiavillian brains hatch'd them for the destruction of the valiant and wealthy, were they never so innocent: a point of policy so palpably manifest in these latter dayes, that the weakest judgement may see it, but the greatest dare not gain-say it. These state tricks pleased Archigallo; the ancient Nobility are thrust out of all command and power in the Commonwealth, Delinquency laid to their charge, or at least a disaffection to the present Government; and upon these pretences, many are secured, and more utterly ruined, either being put to such an intolerable Composition for their Estates, that they ne∣ver after recer the losse, or else are utterly thrust out of them, and new Upstarts put in, whose Predecessor never knew how to write himself Gentleman, nor ever bore Coat unlesse a thred-bare one, in which peradventure he held an other mans Plough, or used some poor and sordid mechanick Trade; but by these sinister means Archigallo cram'd his Coffers, and raised to dignities such as best suted with his disposition; so that Beggars ride on horse back, and Nobles go on foot; And set a Beggar on horse-back and ride to the divel; but too much of one thing is good for nothing, and the poorest Worm trod upon will turn again. The Nobles and Commons begin to grow sensible of their just sad Condition and heavy Taxes and Impo∣sitions; after which followeth a general grudging and murmuring, when presently dispair sends fury amongst them, and furor arma ministrat; the intolerable yoak will be no longer endured; all joyn in an association to take revenge upon the common Enemy Archigallo, whom they suddenly set upon; and before he could provide means to defend himself, he is unking'd, and quite difrobed of all princely Command, after he had worn the purple (by con∣sent of most Writers) five years. It concerns Princes and great Commanders to make choice of Counsellors who not only have the reputation of vertue and Religion, but also that be indeed truly vertuous & religious; For two Causes; The first thereby to obtain the assistance of God's grace, which how necessary it is for the illumination of mans understanding in all matters of Counsel, is most evident to all good Men. The second Cause why it behoveth a Counsellor to be truly religious and vertuous, is, for that such is the force of vertue that it giveth credit to the Possessors thereof, and maketh them the more easily believed, and their Counsel better accepted; And therefore we see that all men of discretion and judgement do demand Counsel rather of those who are reputed wise and vertuous, then of wicked men who have onely the reputation of wisdom; For as St. Ambrose saith,Amb. li. de offi. 2. c. 10. Where wisdom and vertue are conjoyned, Magna erit Consiliorum salu∣britas, there is all good and wholsome counsel to be had, and all men are willing to hear the wise
and vertuous man, as well for the admiration of his wisdome as for the love of his vertue. In which respect he also saith, that men addresse themselves commonly for Counsel to those who are more vertuous then themselves; for no man hath reason to think him who is inferior to him∣self in manners, to be his superior in Wisdom and Counsel. Furthermore, such is the dignity and authority of vertue, that evil men bear a reverend respect thereto, and stand as it were in awe of good men, whereof we have an Example in Herod, who although he held St. John Baptist in prison, and would not follow his counsel in the matter of his divorce, yet for the reverence he bore to his vertue, he consulted many other things with him, and followed his advice therein; and as the Scripture also saith, metuebat eum, be feared him: and no doubt but wise and vertuous Princes much more esteem and respect the Counsel of wise men that are vertuous, then of others of equal wit and judgement that are vicious and wicked, knowing that as Solomon saith, Consilia impiorum fraudulenta, the counsels of wicked men are fraudulent;Pro. c. 12. and that he who hath no care of his Conscience, will have no care of his Duty towards Men. Basilius the Emperor advised his Son to choose those for his Counsellors who had given Proof and Experience of their Wisdome in the good Conduct and Direction of their own private Affairs; and it is very necessary that Counsellors in Conference with their Prince use all sincerity, truth and plainnesse, without flattery; for although the common Proverb say, Ob∣sequium amicos, Veritas odium parit; Flattery gaineth Friends, and Truth hatred; Yet as there is nothing more pernicious to Princes then flattery, so by consequence, there is nothing more unfit to be used of Counsellors whose Office is and special care should be to undeceive their Prince in all things wherein they are any way deceived, and to labour therein so much the more, by how much less other men do it, seeing one of the greatest infelicities of Princes is, that all or most men flatter and sooth them in all things; in which respect Seneca saith, Quid omnia possidentibus deest? ille qui verum dicat: What wants he who hath all? marry one to tell the truth. And Quintus Curtius saith, Regum opes, The States of Princes are oftener overthrown by Flattery then by Force. But this must be done with great moderation and discretion; for commonly those do offend in this kind (I mean of being forward and rigorous in admonishing) who presume over much either of their own wits and power, or of their Princes weaknesse, or of his over great favour and familiarity, or of the need he hath of them, or else perhaps are of nature severe, insolent or passionate; for such sometimes do forget themselves, yea and take a pride in contradicting or admonishing their Princes with less duty & respect then were convenient; and such an one was Callisthenes of whom Arrianus writeth, that he made himself odious to Alexander the Great, Tum ob intempestivam libertatem, tum ob superbam stultitiam, both for his unseasonable liberty of speech, and also for his proud folly. But Hæphestion Counsellor to the same A∣lexander, avoided that error; for he alwayes admonished him discreetly and freely as occa∣sion served, yet he ever did it in such sort that it seemed rather to be Alexander's Will and Pleasure that he should so doe, then that he challenged any right to himself; yea, a Coun∣cellor though he should fear to incur displeasure for his plainness,Plutarch in Themist. yet he ought to discharge his Conscience, and to say as Themistocles said to Euribiades (who took up a staffe to strike him for his free speech) strike me, so you hear me after: Seneca most excellently saith, Sunt duo contraria Consilio, festinatio & ira; Two things are contrary to Counsell, haste and anger. And again, saith he, Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est femel; The thing that is once to be determined is to be deliberated by leisure. And Aristotle tells us, That a wise Man ought to counsel slowily, and execute speedily. Had Archigallo followed with his Councellors these Rules and Principles, he had not been thrust out of his Throne. ELIDƲRƲS. ELIDƲRƲS third Son to Morindus and Brother to Archigallo, was by common con∣sent and applause of all the States of the Brittains, chosen and crowned King, in the year of the World four thousand nine hundred and fifteen. This Prince in the English Chro∣nicle is called Hesider or Esodir; he was of such a temperate and mild disposition, that his Sub∣jects called him Elidure the Meek; but I suppose this Appellation of Meek, in Latine Pius, came upon another occasion; for the Count Palatine thus delivers unto us the Kings life; Elidurum tertio natum Morindi statuunt Regem, qui totidem annos Rempublicam, sed diversa ratione humanitatis & benevolentiæ fratri sc. per omnia dissimilem tenebat. Archigallo jam privatus imperio à provincialibus Regnis ad quæ proficiscitur, auxiliares copias petit. Nusquam auditus pro animi disiderio redit donium, militibus{que} decem tantum modo comitatus visit eos quos nuper habebat amicos; transit nemus Calaterium, in quo Rex venebatur, qui forte temerè casit Fratrem non speratum intuens, pietate motus, amplectitur eum, & secum ad Arcluidam perducit. Ibi concilium cum proceribus capit de fratre restituendo in Regnum, quam ejus co∣gitationem graviter & iniquo animo omnes tulerunt, quod nihil pro sano ab Archigallione spe∣rarent; usus igitur arte quad am fingendi morbum, vocat ad se singulos, & secreto ingredienti∣bus persuadet ac minatur etiam, nisi Archigallioni ut & tanquam Regi suo fidem spondeant; deinde per alia Cubicula educi & singillatim custodiri, quibus ita concitatis fratri per terrorem,
sua{que} oratione confirmatis de morum ejus commutatione, ducit Elidrus Archigallonem Ebora∣cum, de{que} suo Capite demptum Diadema imponit Fratri; A quo raræ pietatis erga Fratrem exemplo cognomentum adeptus est, ut apud omnes homines Elidurus merito Pius cognominatus est. Elidurus the third Son of Morindus, was chosen King of Brittain, who ruled as many years as his Brother had done before him, but of a far more excellent temper and behaviour, nothing in condition like him. Archigallo being now expell'd his Kingdome, flies to the Pro∣vincial and Neighbouring Princes, and there craves Aid and auxiliary Forces to reestablish him in his Throne; but finding each ear close shut and deaf to his demands and desires, is constrained to return into his native Country, being attended or accompanied by only ten Persons; there he visits those whom he supposeth to be his Friends, casually travelling through the great Wood Calaterium, where it fortuned that his Brother was taking his pleasure in Hunting; who suddenly, and beyond his expectation beholding Archigallo, struck with a brotherly love and affection, he with tender embraces expresseth how welcome is his Com∣pany, taking him along with him in his Presence to the City Alcluid. Here Elidurus falls into most serious consultations with his Nobles for the Restitution of his Brother to his Regal dignity; but they all give the Italian shrug, and shake their Heads, having no conceit or o∣pinion that ever any good can be hoped or expected from Archigallo. The King in esse Sum∣mons all his Wits together to bring his designed purpose to perfection, and counterfeiting a sudden and dangerous sicknesse, he sends for his Nobles one by one, and as they come, he useth all possible perswasion, and fearing not to prevail, he addeth Threats and Comminati∣ons, whereby to induce them to reenstall his Brother, and causing them to be secured and closely kept severally in several places, he perswades them through fear to him who formerly had been their King; and by a perswasive Speech and Oration in the behalf of his Brothers reforming all former Errours, and a future happy Government, prevails so far with them, as to promise faithful Allegiance and Subjection: and having obtained what he so cordially desired, coming to York, takes the Diadem from his own Head and setts it upon his Bro∣thers; By which heroick Act, he purchast to himself eternal fame, with the Title of Elidurus Pius, Elidure the Pious. ARCHIGALLO. ARCHIGALLO being thus by the unparallel'd affection of his Brother Elidure the Pious re-enthron'd, made good what was promised on his behalf; he suffered not his whispering Parasites to abuse his Ear, but with singular care employed all his endeavours to the right administration of his Affairs and the good of his Kingdome; and in short time by doing justice and right to all, became so beloved amongst the Brittains as if he never had been the man that had wronged them. Afflictions oft bring Mortals to the true knowledge of themselves; for it tempereth and setleth the exorbitant humours of men, who so abound commonly in continual prosperity, that their judgements are greatly blinded and hindered thereby; in which respect the famous Lady Queen Katharine of England, and Daughter to Fardinand King of Spain, was wont wisely to say, that if she must needs make choice either of continual prosperity or continual adversity, she would choose the latter; For in affliction, said she, n good man can want consolation, whereas in prosperity most men want wit. Iterum regnat Archigallo decem annos (tells us Comes Palatinus) quibus assumit viros genere, virtute{que} claros, ad Reipublicæ munia capessenda; obscuro loco natos qui minus idonei sunt ad res gerendas, re∣pellit; quod{que} est suum cujus{que} id unicui{que} liberum esse permittit; in omnes deni{que} homines ju∣stitiæ officium & æquitatis exercet; tandem languore quodam extinctus Leircestriæ sepelitur. Archigallo admitted again, reigneth ten years, making choice of Gentlemen sprung from ancient families, and eminent for their education and virtues, to supply the places of Go∣vernment in the Kingdome, utterly excluding base-born brats from intermedling in matters of honour and consequence, as altogether unworthy of such preheminence; and being fur∣nisht with such worthy Assistants,Archigallo bu∣ried at Leice∣cester, or ra∣ther York. he gives to every one what belongs unto him, makes justice flourish, and every man enjoy what is his own, and in this glory he finished his dayes, being seized upon by a disease which stop't his vital spirits. His body was buried at Leircester, or as the English Chronicle saith, at Caer Ebrank or York, and so also saith Howes. ELIDƲRƲS. ELIDƲRƲS once more for his admirable and singular virtue which he shewed in his first Government, is now the second time, though as Fabian saith, much against his will, (for well he knew Regnum to be but dulce venenum, a sweet and gilded poison) by the general Votes and Suffrages advanced, or rather thrust into the Throne of this Land: But
Quota pars moritur tempore fati! Quos foelices Cynthia vidit, Vidit miseros abitura dies;Seneca. Rarum est foelix idem{que} senex. The two younger Brothers intoxicated with ambition and desire of Princely Rule (not like Elidurus, who freely surrendered the Scepter to his displaced Brother;) Vigenius and Pere∣durus, sollicit, tell their Friends, and what with present Advance-mony, and what with fair Promises, raise an Army; and in a most mutinous and rebellious way, lay violent hands upon their Brother, and cast him Prisoner into the Tower of London: after which unworthy Act they divide Brittany betwixt them. Vigenius is to enjoy all from Humber that famous River, to the remotest angle Westward; and Peredurus Albania. And thus for seven years space they Reign in amity, peace and mutual League and concord. After which time, Pere∣durus (Vigenius being dead) becomes Lord and Master of all, and so continues his Reign two years longer; and with so great applause of all sorts, by reason of his equity and indulgence towards his Subjects, that he is extolled above all the rest of his Brethren, whose praise is in every mans mouth; nothing to be heard but his Panegyricks; insomuch that even the Name of Elidurus the godly, or Elidurus Pius, is lockt up in the greatest darknesse and obscurity of Oblivion. Such is the vanity and inconstancy of the Vulgar, varium semper & mutabilo vulgus; the best Princes are soonest forgot, and no longer thought upon then their present Fortunes cause them to be present and remembred. This Peredurus builded the Town of Pickering in Yorkshire. Cambden speaking of this place, saith, Memorandum nihil occurrit, nisi Pickering Lancastrensis patrimonii oppidum non parvum, colli affixum, & veteri Castello munitum ad quod plurimi circumsiti viculi spectant, unde vulgi Pickering-Leith, libertas de Pic∣kering, Forresta de Pickering, quam Edmundo filio suo minori Lancastriæ comiti Rex Hen. 3. elar∣gitus est, regio adjacens nominatur. Nothing occurs here worth memory, except Pickering belonging to the Lancastrian Family, placed upon a Hill, and fortified with an ancient Ca∣stle, unto which many neighbouring and adjacent Villages belong, being called the Leith, Liberty and Forrest of Pickering, which Hen. the Third gave unto his Son Edmund Earl of Lancaster. Guido contrary to all other Writers, saith, that Peredurus was cruel and tyrannous to the Brittains, and slew and murthered many of the Lords; he caused him to become so odious, that they rebelled and slew him. ELIDƲRƲS. ELIDƲRƲS now the third time is made King, 4941, and ruled four years in the same equity and Princely demeanor as formerly, and then died, and was buried at Caerleil or Karlile. The Count Palatine gives this Character of him, Vir omni genere virtutum præ∣stantissimus, animi magnitudine superans ipsam fortunam, adeo ne{que} prosperis rebus elatus, ne{que} adversis dejectus esse voluit; diceres fortunam cum eo certasse ut Rex esset, ne{que} tamen animum ejus infractum constantem{que} vincere potuisse; quo magis abnuebat, eo frequentius ad regendum vo∣cabatur; sic honor & gloria persequentes fugit, & fugientes persequitur, ut umbræ Corpus; after his death he left a son named Gorgonianus or Gorbomannus to succeed him. Fabian in the beginning of his Chronicle hath a Caveat for the Computation of years from Elidure to Lud, which I thought convenient here to insert. To make Histories agree and to keep the order of years begun, we must observe as Ranulph of Chester tells us, with divers o∣thers, that Julius Cæsar made Brittain Tributary to Rome, anno 48 ante Christum natum, or in the year of the World, 4150. which was in the ninth year of Cassabilane. From whence taking from the time of Cassabilane before the Tribute paid nine years, and for the time of the Reign of Lud, eleven years, it followed evidently that King Lud did begin his Reign in the year of the World, 5131. and so from the last year of Elidure unto the be∣ginning of the Reign of Lud or in the time of the 33 Kings there passed 186 years. GORBOMANNƲS. GORBONIANUS or Gorbomannus, the Son of Regni and Grandchild to Elidure, was Crowned King of Brittain, in the year of the World, 4945. The Count Palatine speak∣ing of Elidurus saith, Ei Gorbonias filius Gorboniani succedit, Patri similis in rebus pru∣denter agendis; mira fuit in omnes benevolentia ejus, at{que} modus ipse quo in administratione re∣rum utebatur, fecit illum universis esse gratissimum: Ita{que} cum post annos decom quibus optime regit, moreretur, publico luctu plangebatur, honoré{que} funeris publico majore quam cæteri Sepulchro condebatur. Gorbonias the Son of Gorbonian succeeded his Uncle in the Kingdome, treading in the same paths of good Government; his Benevolence was admirable, and his Decorum
in managing his Affairs so plausible, that he was generally beloved of all men: Thus when he had ruled with universal good liking of every one, he departed this life; whose death was lamented with a general and most doleful mourning, and his Funerals celebrated with grea∣ter pomp and solemnity then any of his Predecessors. MARGAN. R. Vitus. f. 204.MORGAN or Margan succeeded in the Kingdome; he was a younger Son of Archi∣gallo, and governed this Land for the space of fourteen years in great Peace and Tran∣quillity, following the Example of his Forefathers. EMERIANƲS. EMERIANƲS Brother to Margan succeeded, sed longe diversis moribus, but of quite an other temper and disposition; for he swayed all things after his own Will and Pleasure, and not according to Reasons law and dictamen, practising Tyranny towards both No∣bles and Commons, which rendered him so odious unto all, that after the space of seven years, he was deposed and quite thrust out of all Government and Princely Authority. YDWALLO. YDWALLO or Ivall the Son of Vigenius, was promoted unto the Regal Throne who being admonished by the evil Example of Emerianus, had learn'd a better Lesson; he was very indulgent to his Subjects, avoiding Tyranny as the very bain of Princes, and ad∣ministred justice and equity to all men; bonos in officio continebat, upholding honest men in their places, & malos qua debuit indignatione persequebatur, correcting the wicked with con∣digne punishment; and like a good Steward relieved as well the one as the other, in their wants and necessities. After thus he had Reigned twenty years, he forsook this World, and left to succeed him. RIMO. RIMO the Son of Peredurus, a Prince adorned with true and perfect Nobility, and ambitious of Honour; who after he had most happily Reigned sixteen years, highly re∣nowned for his heroick Spirit, and activity and glory in martial Affairs, he gave way to Ge∣runtius to ascend the Regal Throne. GERƲNTIƲS. GERƲNTIƲS the Son of Elidure, with the general good liking of all, is Crow∣ned King of Great Brittain; a great lover of goodnesse, Peace and justice; he com∣manded a strict observation of the Laws, by which means he preserved Unity and Concord among his people, and became highly honoured of them; yet for all this, after he had reig∣ned twenty years, death seized upon him, to the great grief and sorrow of all the Kingdome, leaving to succeed him his Son CATELL or CATELLƲS. CATELL or Catellus the Son of Geruntius, is solemnly invested with the Royal Ensigns of the Brittish Monarchy, a great Benefactor to the poor and distressed; insomuch that he caused all Oppressors to be taken and hanged: Were such justice put in Execution in these our dayes, such heavy Oppressions would not break the hearts of honest-meaning men. This King Reigned in great peace ten years, and then died.
COILƲS. COILƲS Reigned ten years in great peace and quiet. PORREX. PORREX the second a vertuous and gentle Prince, Reigned five years. CHIRIMƲS. CHIRIMƲS or Chirinus, through his drunkennesse Reigned but one year; drunk∣ennesse is a vice so far unbeseeming a Prince, that we commonly say As drunken as beg∣gers; yet in our potting times it is now come to that passe, that we say as drunk as a Lord; drunkennesse hath been the overthrow of Chieftaines, Armies and Kingdomes, as we may read in sacred writ of Holofernes that great General; Borro Holofernes jacebat in lecto nimiae ebrietate sopitus, when Judith percussit bis in cervicem ejus, & abscidit caput ejus; and the Army of the Gaules under the command of Breunus was full of wine when Camillus totally routed it; neither had our Brittains so foolishly been Massacred and lost their Kingdome to the Saxons, had they not been drunken at the entrapping banquet on Salisbury Downes or Plaines; for as there are three things which do maintain and uphold a Common-wealth, and for the which God doth blesse and prosper it; the first Religion and Piety towards God, the second Justice and Equity amongst men, the third good Discipline in Life and Manners: so there are three other things contrary to those, which do subvert Common-wealths and provoke the wrath of God against them. The first is all sorts of false Religion, Superstition, Idolatry, Heresy, and Schisme, and such sins as do belong thereto. The second is all sort of Injustice, as Rapine, Immoderate exactions, Oppression of the poor, effusion of innocent blood, and calumniation or slander and such like, for the which God punisheth Kingdoms and States, at the Holy Ghost signifyeth in Ecclesiasticus, saying, Regnum de gente in gentem transferetur, &c. A kingdome is transferred from Nation to Nation for injustice, injuries, calumniations or slanders and divers deceits. The third kind consisteth of Licentiousness, Drunkenness, and dissolutness of life and man∣ners. This Drunken King left after him three Sons, Fulgenius, Eldad, and Androgeos, who successively Reigned in this Kingdome. FƲLGENIƲS. FƲLGENIƲS the Eldest Son of Chirimus, was Crowned King of Great Brittain, but enjoyed his Kingdome only two years. ELDRED or ELDREDƲS. ELDRED the second Son of Chirimus, and brother to Fulgenius, was Crowned King, but enjoyed that honour but one year. ANDROGEOS. ANDROGEOS the third Son of Chirimus, and brother to the two precedent Kings, was Crowned, but lived only one year after. ƲRIANƲS. URIANƲS the Son of Androgeos, wholly gave himself to lust and the sin of the flesh; homo (saith Comes P.) voluptati deditus more pecudum, he was King only three years; lust hath been the overthrow of many Countries, and cause of much blood shed: had not
Paris seen Helena in the Isle of Cythera, in the Temple of Venus, whether this Lady out of cu∣riosity to behold the Trojans under pretence of performing some vowes was come; and Paris hearing of her presence and beauty, entered into the Temple in all Princely bravery; as they mutually beheld each other, they became so enamoured with the scorching flames of unlaw∣ful love, or rather lust, that presently being now linked together in equal desires, and haud caret effectu quod voluere duo, they embark together, which lustful act caused not onely a ten years siege but also the utter destruction and subvesion of Troy. Hereunto I may add another notable example of the overthrow of the Lacedemonians, and the losse of the Empire of Greece by the just judgement of God, as both Diodorus Siculus and others affirm; the story is this. Two Lacedemonians passing over the plain of Leuctra, were lodged and courteously enter∣tained in the house of one Scadasus, who had two handsome Women to his daughters, and re∣turning that way shortly after, and finding the two young Women at home and their Father absent, first ravisht one, after kill'd them both; their father at his return finding his daughters slain, and understanding who had been the doers of it, went to Lacedemon to crave justice against the Malefactors; but so potent were they and their friends there, that he could by no means obtain it: whereupon after infinite maledictions poured forth in the sorrow of his heart against them and their state, he went home and desperately kil'd himself upon the grave of his Daughters. Not long after Wars growing between the Thebans and the Lacede∣monians, the soul of Scadasus appeared to Pelopidas (one of the chief Captaines of the The∣bans) and encouraged him to give battel to the Lacedemonians in the plain of Leuctra, where he and his daughters were buried: telling him that their death should be there revenged, and so afterwards it fell out; for the Lacedemonians lost not only the battel, but also the Empire of Greece: we will omit the burning of Sodome and Gomorah for the sin of lust, and also the rape which those of the town of Gabaa committed upon the wife of a Levit, for which percussit eos Dominus in conspectu filiorum Israel, who killed of them 25100 men that bore Armes. But come a little nearer to our times; concerning the punishment of the sins of the flesh, we have a notable and fearful example thereof in the Kingdom of Spain, conquered by the Moors, and possessed by them 700 years for that offence. For when the Kingdome had flourished as well in religion as power, from the time of K. Recared (the first Catholick King thereof, the space of 120 years: the wicked King Vitiza being a man (like this our Ʋrianus) given over to lust and carnality, infected and corrupted all Spain, not only with the bad example of his own dissolute life, (having divers Wives at once besides many Concubines) but also with abo∣minable Laws, whereby he gave leave to all sorts of men to have as many Wives & Concubines as they listed, yea and forced Priests and such as would have lived chast to marry, by which means all Spain became within a while to be no better then a common Stew or Brothel. And although Almighty God according to his accustomed mercy expected their conversion and amendment all the time of that Kings Reign, and laid onely the penalty thereof upon him whom he deprived both of his Crown and his eye-sight, by the means of Roderick who succee∣deed him in the Kingdome: yet when the said Roderick followed his steps as well in his vici∣ous life as in the maintenance of his abominable Laws, it pleased God of his justice to per∣mit him to give the occasion both of his own ruine and also of the overthrow of all Spain by the sin of the flesh, wherewith the whole Kingdome was as it were overflowed. For whereas King Roderick had sent a Kinsman of his own Count Julian Embassador into Affrick, and in the mean time ravished his Daughter, or (as some write) his wife; the Count understanding it at his return, was so incensed therewith against the King, that in revenge thereof he practised with the Moores to bring them into Spain, who with his assistance conque∣red it speedily, and with such destruction of the people, that the punishment of God was evident∣ly seen therein. For having first overthrown King Roderick (whose body could never after the Battail be found) they subdued almost all Spain in eight Months, or in fourteen, as some say, and slew 700000 of all sorts of people, besides great numbers of Captives which they sent Prisoners into Barbary; and from that time forward remained in the possession of that Kingdome, or of some part thereof for the space of 700 years. ELIƲD. ELIƲD Reigned five years; he was a great Astronomer, Astrologiae peritissimus Rex. This vain study, especially of judicial Astrology in these our dayes, is much in request even amongst Troopers disbanded; some of whom I know so ignorant that they cannot write true English, nay scarce read. The Professors of this Science, especially such as would seem to be learned, would make it very ancient, fetching the Original from the Egyptians and Babylonians, the most ancient of all Mortals: Jactabant olim Astrologi Chaldæos qua∣dringinta & septuaginta annorum millia in periclitandis, experiendis{que} pueris quicunque nasce∣rentur, posuisse, To have spent forty and seventy thousand years, and yet the Chaldeans had their beginning at the destruction of the Tower of Babel: And Picus Mirandulanus in his se∣cond Chapter of his 12. Book, to disprove the Name and forged Antiquity of Astrologers,
saith he can shew no Students thereof before the time of Nebuchodonosor:Benedictus Pirerius. and Benedictus Pire∣rius in a Book which he writes de divinatione Astrologiæ: Tanta est Astrologorum (qui vulgo Judiciarii appellantur) vel impudentia vel Amentia, ut etiam sibi divinam Scripturam suf∣fragari suæque Astronomatiæ fidem & Authoritatem firmare jactent: etenim verba illa quæ dixit Deus creans luminaria, Et sint in signa & tempora, &c. ad suam referunt divinationem Astrologi∣cam, per quam ipsi profitentur ex observatione siderum futura rerum eventa posse prædici: quo∣circa B. Basilius & Ambrosius, aliique permulti patres in explanatione eorum verborum bene longam & acuratam in refellendi istiusmodi Astrologorum prædictionibus orationem posuerunt; quorum nos Patrum exemplis provocati & gravissimis Dei sententiis contra Astrologos multifa∣riam in divina Scriptura proditis permoti, quin etam justissimo adversus Astrologos odio propter fraudulenta & perniciosa eorum figmenta librum hunc ad confutandas eorum prædictiones à no∣bis scriptum, gratum multis & utilem fore existimamus; scripsit adversus Astrologos quidem co∣piose Joannes Picus Mirandula: sed multos ab ejus lectione deterret prolixitas operis. Nos licet in prædiviti & uberi versemur argumento, eo tamen breves erimus, quod non omnia quæ disputari possent, sed aptiora duntaxat causae firmior aque tractabimus: quinque autem erunt hujus libri & disputationis adversos Astrologos capita; primo enim docebimus sacrae & Ecclesiasticæ doctrinae aivinationem Astrologicam esse contrariam; tum ostendemus Astrologos esse rerum cælestium impe∣ritos; Deinde divinatricem istam artem rectae rationi ac Philosophiæ adversari demonstrabimus; ad hæc probabimus astra non solum non esse causas efficientes rerum futurarum, verum nec esse certa figna quæ res futuras præuotent ac præmonstrent; ad extremum, cur nonnulla Astrologorum præ∣dicta sint vera, causas exponemus. This Author reduceth his book into five principall heads against Astrologers. First he sheweth Astrology to be contrary to sacred and Ecclesiastical do∣ctrine. Secondly, Astrologers themselves to be ignorant of Celestial things; and that that divining Art is opposite both to sound Reason and Philosophy; and that the Stars are not the efficient causes of future things, no not so much as certain Signs to point out or shew us things to ensue: and lastly, he makes appear the Causes why some Astrological predictions may prove true. I wish every man of learning would read Pirerius, to laugh at the folly of our Age, wherein every paltery Almanack-maker will make him to open the Closets and Cabi∣nets of Princes Counsels, and condemn Personages of high and eminent Quality to violent and untimely deaths at their pleasure; where the best of them, even Ly-Ly himself is obser∣ved to tell Lyes in the plural Number, and Verites scare in the singular. DEDANTIƲS. DEDANTIƲS or as other call, Dedacus, was after his Predecessor, King of Great Brittain the space of five years also: of this Prince no further mention is made; atque per tot alios, (scil. quinque annos) Dedacus inde tenuit. Dedacus, Com. Pal. DETONƲS. DETONƲS Reigned two years, as affirmeth Mr. Howes; Com. Pa. speaketh nothing of this Prince, but after Dedacus, saith, Enimvero Clotenus nisi duos annos regnabat; and Fa∣bian also next to Dedacus puts Clotenus, and then Gurgenites, and tells us that Lanquet leaveth these out; Com. Pal. puts one Gurguineus, it may be the same which Fabian calls Gurginetes, to rule three years. MERIANƲS. MERIANƲS by consent of all Writers, was King two years. BLADƲNƲS. BLEDƲƲS as Fabian saith, or Bladunus, as others, ruled two years. CAPENƲS. CAPENƲS or Cap, was King three years.
OVINƲS. OVIMƲS, Oenus or Owyn, ruled other three years. SISILIƲS. SISILIƲS or Silius, governed the Bittains two years. BLEDGABREDƲS. BLEDGABREDƲS or Bledgabridus, wore the Brittish purpure ten years, as Mr. Howes affirmeth, Fabian saith twenty; he loved and studied Musick, in so much that Com. Pal. tells us tanta canendo excellentia superavit omnes homines ut quidem in arte Musica deus esse videretur, he so far excelled all mortal men in the art of singing, that he seemed to be the god of Musick; this he confirmes in his notes, figure the 18. Deinde Galfridus lib. 1. c. 22. Bel∣gridus omnes cantores quos aetas præcedens habuit, plurimum excellebat tum in modulis, tum in om∣nibus musicis instrumentis, ita ut deus faculatorum esse videretur. Belgridus so far excelled all the singers of the precedent age, as well in Madrigall and voice as all other Musical instruments, that he was called the god of mirth, or merry companions; nam ita Cajus, Belgabridem homi∣nem regem (inquit) tantum fuisse musicum constaet, ut propter excellentem musices cognitionem musi∣corum deus appellaretur. Belgabride a Princely man was so rare and skilful in the Art of Mu∣sick that for his excellency therein, he was called the god of Musitians, I dare not say Min∣strils, least some should think the King a Fidler; many great Princes, Kings and Empe∣rours have singularly affected the heavenly melody of Musick; and much may be spoken in praise thereof, which I forbear; yet I am of an opinion that no man can be of a good nature who loves it not. ARCHIMALƲS. ARCHIMALƲS, Archimelus or Archemall, Reigned two years: Isti frater Archi∣malus in regno suffectus est, qui & ipse post annos duos accepit Eldolum successorem. ELDOLƲS. ELDOLƲS, Elden or Eldell, was King of the Brittaines four years, in whose time of Go∣vernment many prodigious signs were seen as Globes of fire bursting out of the air with great noyse; ignei Globi de nubibus erumpentes cum aeris maxime strepitu. RODIANƲS. RODIANƲS or Redian was King two years. REDARGIƲS. REDARGIƲS Reigned three years, Com. Pal. calls him Roderecius, saying, Rodere∣cius hunc sequitur pro tribus annis; but Fabian is so far from speaking of this King, that he quite leaves him out, making no mention of his name. SAMƲLIƲS. SAMƲLIƲS was King two years; Samulius pro duobus, Com. Pal.
PENISILLƲS. PENISILLƲS Reigned three years; rursum pro tribus Penisellus; Com. Pal. Fabian saith that Samul Penisel was but one individuum, and that he Reigned five years. PYRRƲS. PYRRƲS, whom Fabian calls Pyr Phyrrus, Reigned two years. CAPORƲS. CAPORƲS whom Fabian calls Capoir, Reigned two years. DINELLƲS. DINELLƲS the Son of Caporus, whom Fabian calls Glyguell Dinell,Vilus fol. 205. ruled the Brittain four years; Com. Pal. Dinellus autem Caporii filius, gerendarum rerum scientissimus prin∣ceps, pro summa suavitate morum & erga singulos benignitate laudatur. Quanquam homines ex infima plebe nascerentur, tamensi erant bene periti earum rerum quæ in deliberatione ponebantur, ipsorum sententias libenter audiebat, ne{que} magis à quo quamquæ ad rem præsentem utiliter di∣cerentur attendebat; etenim consilia sciebat non ex persona suggerentium sed sua vi esse ponderan∣da. Idcirco viri conditione humilis opinionem sapenumero præserebat sententiae viri nobilis ac illustris domi; pœnas male facientibus infligebat, foris annonam & omnia militibus necessaria pro∣curabat, aegros ac debiles corpore visebat; nec eo contentus, res quibus indigebant, liberaliter suppeditabat, extinctus morte cum annos regnasset septem; Dinellus the son of Caporius, a Prince excellently well seen in managing his Affairs, for his love and affable carriage towards all men had in high esteem; In his consultations his judgement reflected not upon the persons of men, whether mean and born of low degree, or sprung from noble and illustrious Families; but alwaies, in all debates, he gave ear to such as spoak most to the purpose, not regarding who the speaker was, but what he spake: for he rightly knew that matters were not to be bal∣lanced after the quality & condition of the Relator, but according to the essence and truth of the thing: which caused him often to prefer a mean mans opinion before a Courtiers, or No∣bles; at home he caused condigne punishments to be inflicted upon malefactors, and abroad he was very sedulous and careful to provide all things convenient and necessary for his Soul∣diers; The infirm, weak and sick he often visited; not that alone but whatsoever they wanted, he took order that it should be brought unto them: after all which good deeds he left this world, having Reigned seven years. Howes and Fabian say but four. HELY. HELY Son of Dinellus, governed the Brittains one or not fully one year:Mr. Howes. of this Prince the Isle of Ely took it Name, saith Geffrey. Hoc vero nomen (saith Mr. Cambden) Beda ab anguillis deduxit, unde nonnulli Insulam anguillarum dixerunt; Polidorus Virgilius à Greco  quod paludem denotat; alii ab Helig Britannico quod salices significat, quarum, cum aliarum arborum sit impatiens, est feracissima tum soli natura, tum quod contra irrumpentium omnium impetus satæ, saepius{que} caesa innumera hærede, ut Pliniano verbo utar, profuerunt, ex quibus hic & alibi corbes texuntur, quas nunc Brittanni Baskes vocant. The Name of Ely (saith Mr. Camb∣den) Beda deriveth from Eeles, insomuch that some call it the Isle of Eeles; Polidor Virgil will have it named from the Greek word , which signifieth a Marrish or Fennish place; others bring it from the Brittish word Helig, which signifieth an Osier or Sallow, which kind of twigs grow there in great abundance, though otherwise the Isle is bare of Trees and Tim∣ber; but these grow partly from the nature of the soil, and partly are planted to stop and hinder the irruptions of the water, and bring such a numerous encrease, that they supply Tradesmen for the making of Baskets not only there but in the Countries round about. This Isle hath in it a City of the same Name, had in account for the repute and holinesse of Votary Nuns residing there, built first by Audrey wife of Tombreta Prince in this Province, who had in this place a part of her Dowry;Anomus Maps in Camb. sh. she having departed from her second Husband Egbert King of Northumberland by his leave and consent, devoted her self to the service of
God, and built there a Monastery whereof she became the first Abbesse; This in the Danish desolations was destroyed, but soon after reedified by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, who stored it with Monks, unto whom King Edgar granted the jurisdiction over four hundred and a half, within these Fens and the East Angle-limits, which to this day are called the Liber∣ties of St. Audrey. After whose Examples the Nobles so enriched it with large Revenues, that as Malmesbury saith, The Abbot thereof laid up yearly into his own Coffers, a thousand and four hundred pounds. And of latter times the Monks thereof became so wealthy that their old decayed Church they renewed with new and stately Buildings, which is now the Cathedral of the Diocesse, and for beauty giveth place to no other in England. Comes Pal. speaking of this Hely saith, A quo splendor Imperii Brittannici coepit in orbe Romano per filios maximos belli duces apparere: From whom the splendor and glory of the Brittish Empire through the Va∣lour of its Martial Children began first to display its beam in the Roman Orb or Hemisphere. Com. Palat. (though others allow, as Howes and Fabian, but one year to his Reign) saith, He∣lius Regnum annis quadraginta gubernat, tres filios generat, Luddum, Cassuellanum, Nen∣nium; whose very names manifest a certain excellancy: And he further saith, that Giraldus affirms, Pirrhi mansionem fuisse Castrum Manubri, quod aetate sua fuerat adhuc turribus & pro∣pugnaculis eximium, ab occidente portum habebat extensum, à Circio & Borea sub ipsis mae∣nibuss vivarium egregium tam sui venustate quam profunditate aquarum valde conspicuum. LƲD. LƲD the Son of K. Hely, by right of Inheritance, and general applause of all the Brit∣tains, is Crowned King of this Island: The first Act worthy of Observation which he took in hand was to immure the City of Troynovant, which he inclosed with strong Walls, garnishing the same with many lofty and stately Towers; which done, he gives command to the Citizens to Erect their Structures and Edifices within the Compasse of the same: the mo∣tion proceeding as it were out of an innate love and respect which he bore to that place, in which he spent most of the time which he had spar'd from war-like Affairs and the publique Administation of justice. In this City he built (saith Com. Pal.) Palatium egregtum, a stately and sumptuous Pallace; and on the West side thereof, a strong & defensible Gate of large big∣nesse and solid work, which to this day is called Lud's Gate. Trinovant being now beautified with most delicate and pleasing Buildings, peopled and inhabited by rich & wealthy Citizens, began to shake hands with its old Name, and bid it adieu, resuming a new Nomenclation from its present Benefactor and Restaurator, and begins to be better known by the Name of Luds Town then Trinobant, now corruptly London, then Troynovant. This King Lud sir∣named Imanuentius, was a Prince of a most heroick and warlike Spirit, and remarkable for the Courtship which he used, in inviting his Nobles and Chieftains to costly Feasts and Ban∣quets; but amongst all these Interludes and Princely Pastimes, the provident King forgot not to root out such overgrown and inveterate Customes, as he observed to be ob∣noxious to the Commonwealth; and what by experience he found irregular, he quite abro∣gated, instituting new and commodious Laws and Edicts in their places; and knowing that no Republick can be well governed without a due Observation of Religion and Piety, he builded many goodly Temples in the honour of his gods: It is in my judgement worthy ob∣servation, how zealous Pagan Princes have been to build places of adoration to their false gods; and in the infancy of Christianity and primitive Church, with what devotion and piety, not onely Christian Emperours, Kings and Princes, but even Noble Men and private Citizens bestowed their Wealth and Patrimonies in erecting Churches to the honour of our most Bles∣sed Saviour and his holy and glorious Martyrs; and how those who in our present times call themselves Saints (sunt autem intus Lupi rapaces,) pollute, contaminate, deface and destroy Churches, and Chappels, pull down the Fonts wherein they received the badg of Christianity, the sacred Lavacre of Baptisme, draw down the monuments and shrines of Martyrs, Sepul∣chres of those whose Memories are held in Veneration, unclapper the Bells, sacrilegiously take away the Ropes, (sed dabit Deus his quoque funem;) if these be acts of Religion, or a Re∣formation (as forsooth they term it) then will I say, That Gardiner rectifieth and reformeth a good Orchard, planted with the choicest Fruit-bearing Trees, when he pulleth up by the roots all those goodly stocks, and leaves the ground digged and turned up by the profane snouts of Hogs and wild Boars, and taketh no care to replant young Saplings and Graffts in their places. King Lud began his Reign in the year of the World five thousand one hundred and thirty one; who after he had governed the Brittains with great justice and moderation eleven years, ended the period of his days, and was buried in the Temple which he had built nere Ludgate in Caer Lud or London, for so hereafter we must usually call it; leaving two Sons, Androgeus and Tenancius or Temancius.
CASSABILAN. CASSABILAN brother to King Lud, began to govern the Brittains, in the year of the world five thousand one hundred and forty two; The Nobles and Commons made e∣lection of this Prince, in regard that the two Sons of his deceased brother were so young, that the eldest of them was held unfit to govern: Cassebilan, as witnesseth the old Chronicle, and also Flos Historiarum, was not Crowned long, but only elected Protector during the Nonage of his Nephews; but Ambition and the dazling aspect of a princely Diadem are able with out the grace of the Almighty, if it were possible, to overthrow even honesty and justice it self: yet Cassabilan a Pagan shews far more civility and natural tenderness, then Richard the third a Christian, who murdered his Nephewes being their Protector; Cassabilan lets them enjoy that breath which God & nature had bestowed upon them; but so cunningly by his wily practises, by doing justice, shewing himself liberal and bountiful to the subjects, he insinuates himself into their hearts and bosomes, that as a man immediately sent from the Gods, with ge∣neral Votes and suffrages he is Crowned King of Brittain: yet had he an after-game to play full of hazard and difficulty; his two Nephewes are living: had Machiavel been his Tutor, he had sent them long ere this to their Graves; and whilst the lawful Heirs are in being, the unjust possessor upon what title soever can never be secure; Cassibalan to stop the mouths of all such as should find themselves aggrieved with the disinheriting of the Orphans, gives unto Andro∣gias the City of London, with the Dukedome or Earldome of Kent; And unto Tenantius the Earldome of Cornwall; but men deprived of their Birth-right will make hard shift, rather then not obtain their Right, or at least be revenged; This was the present condition of Brittany, about the four and fiftieth year, before the Birth of our Saviour Jesus Christ: Cæsar being the Governour of Gallia for the Senate and people of Rome, and having brought some part of that Countrey under obedience, intended a Voyage into Brittany, partly upon pretence of revenge (for that the Brittaines had divers times aided those of Gallia in their Wars against the Romans) and partly to satisfie himself with the sight of the Island: and knowing the In∣habitants and their custome, whereby he might be perhaps the more readily induced by reason of his own natural Inclination to undertake great and difficult attempts, and with the encrease of his own glory to enlarge the limits of the Roman Empire: unto which at that time the Soveraignity of the whole world was by divine providence Allotted; And to this end he thought good to be first informed of the nature of the people, and of such havens in the Isle as were most commodious to receive any shipping that should come thither; which things where in a manner unkown to the Gaules, by reason the Flanders suffered none to have accesse to them but Merchants onely, neither knew they any other places then the Sea Coasts, and those parts of the Isle that confronted the continent of Gallia; wherupon Cæsar supposing it necessary to make some discovery before he adventured himself in the action, sent Caius Volu∣semus in a long boat, with instructions to enquire of the quantity of the Island, of the condi∣tions of the Inhabitants, of their manner of making War, of their Government in Peace, and what places were fittest for Landing; After which dispatch made, he himself with all his For∣ces, (which were newly returned from making War beyond the Rhene) Marched into the Country of theThe ancient Inhabitants of the Guines and Bolonois in Pi∣cardie. Morini, from whence was the shortest cut into Brittany, for there he had ap∣pointed his shipping to meet him. In the mean time his purpose being known to the Brittains, by report of the Merchants (that traded with them) divers states of the Isle (either fearing the greatness of the Roman pow∣er, or affecting Innovation for some private respects) sent over Ambassadours, who promised in their names to deliver Hostages for assurance of their obedience to the people of Rome; but Cæsar though he was fully resolved to enter the Island, curteously entertained their offer, exhorting them to continue in that good mind, as a means to draw on the rest in following the example of their submission; for the better effecting whereof he appointed Comius the chief Governour of the Attrebates (as a man whose wisdome and faith he had tryed, and whom he knew to be respected of the Brittains) to accompany the Ambassadours in their return, giving him in charge to go to as many Cities as would permit him acoesse, and to perswade the Rulers to submit themselves as some of their Nation had already done: and further to let them know, that himself with all convenient speed would come thither. The Princes of the Isle being yet altogether unacquainted with any civil kind of Govern∣ment, maintained quarrels & factions among themselves, whereby one sought to offend another, and to enlarge his own part by encroaching upon his Neighbors (not observing that what they gained in particular one of another, they lost altogether in a general reckoning) they made an open passage in the end for the Roman to Conquer the whole (a thing common to them with other Nations, who have found the like effects, to proceed from the like cause) for the most part of the Brittains in those dayes, delighted in War, neglecting Husbandry, or perhaps not then knowing the use of it; Their manner of living and customes were much, like to those of the Inhabitants of Gallia; Their Diet was such as nature yielded of her self without the in∣dustry of man; for though they had great store of Cattle, yet they lived (especially in the In∣land
Country) with Milk; It was held among them as a thing unlawful to eat of a Hare, a Hen, or a Goose, and yet they nourished them for Creation sake. Their apparel was made of the skins of Beasts, though their bodies were for the most part naked and stained with woad, which gave them a blewish colour, and as they supposed, made their Aspect terrible to their Enemies in Battail. TheirYet had they Cities wald, and strong; this must be understood of those which we now call Peasants and Cottagers. Houses were compact of stakes, reeds and boughes of trees fastned together in a round Circle. They had ten or twelve wives a piece common among them, though the issue were alwayes accounted his that first married the Mother being a Mai∣den. They were in stature taller then the Gauls; by this time Volusenus (who durst not set foot on land to hazard himself among the Ilanders) returned to Cæsar (to wit, the fifth day after his setting forth) and made relation of such things as he had seen and heard by report in roving up and down the Coast in view of the Iland. Cæsar having composed some Tumults in the hither part of Gallia, that he might leave no Enemy behind him to annoy him in his absenee, pursued the Enterprize of Brittain, having to that end prepared a Navy, which consisted of about fourscore Ships of burden (a number sufficient) as he thought, for the transportation of two Legions, besides his long Boats, wherein the Questor, the Lieutenant, and other Officers of the Camp were to be embarked; There were also eighten ships of burden (that lay wind bound about eight miles from the Port) appointed to waft over the Horse-men. P. Pulpitius Rufus, a Lieutenant of a Legion was commanded to keep the Haven it self with such power as was thought sufficient. These things being thus ordered, and a good part of the summer being now spent, Cæsar put out to Sea about the third watch of the night, having given direction, that the Horsemen should embarke in the up∣per Haven, and follow him; wherein while they were somewhat slack, Cæsar with his shipping about the fourth hour of the day Arrived upon the Coast of Brittain, where he beheld the Clifts possessed with a multitude of people rudely armed, but ready to make resistance. The nature of the place was such, as by reason of the steep hills (encloasing the Sea on each side in a narrow strait) it gave great advantage to the Brittains, in casting down their darts upon their Enemies underneath them. Cæsar finding this place unfit for landing his Forces, put off from the shore and cast Anchor, expecting the rest of his Fleet; and in the mean time calling a Council of the Lieutenants and Tribunes of the Souldiers, he declared unto them, what he had understood by Volusenus, and directed what he would have done, warning them that (as the state of War, and especially the Sea service required) they would be ready to weigh Anchor and to remove Too and Fro upon all occasions at a beek, and in an instant. This done, having advantage both of Wind and Tide, he set forward with his Navy about four League from that place, and then lay at Anchor in view of the open and plain shore; But the Ilanders upon intelligence of the Romans purpose had sent thither (before Cæsars coming) a company of Horsemen and Chariots called Esseda (which they then used in their Wars) and following afterwards with the rest of their Forces, empeached their Enemies from Landing, whose ships by reason of their huge bulks (drawing much water) could not come near to the shore, so as the Roman Souldiers were thereby enforced in places unknown (their bo∣dies being charged with their Armour) to leap into the water and encounter the Brittains, who assailed them nimbly with their Darts, and drove their Horses and Chariots with main force upon them. The Romans being therewith terrified, as Men unacquainted with that kind of Fight, failed much of the wonted courage which they had shewed in their former land Services; and Cæsar perceiving it, caused the long boats which seemed more strange to the Brittaines, and were more serviceable by reason of the swiftnesse of their motion, to put off by little and little from the great Ships, and to Row towards the shore, from whence they might more easily charge the Ilanders, with their Arrowes, Slings and other Warlike Engines, which (being then unknown to the Inhabitants, as also the fashion of the ships and motion of the Oares in the long Boats, having stricken them with fear and amazement) caused them to make a stand and afterwards to draw back a little. But the Roman Souldiers making no haste to pursue them, by reason of the water which they suspected in some place to be deep and dangerous, the Standerd-bearer of the Eagle for the tenth Legion, praying that his attempt might prove succesful, then the Legion cryed out with a loud voice saying, Fellow Souldiers leap out of your Boats, and follow me, except you mean to betray your Standard to the Enemy; for my own part, I mean to discharge the duty I owe to the Commonwealth, and to my Generall; This said, he cast himself into the water, and carried the Standard boldly against the Brit∣tains; whereupon the Souldiers exhorting one another to follow the Ensign what fortune so ever befel, with a common consent leapt out of their long Boats, one seconding another, and so wading through the water, at length got to shore, where began a sharp and bloody Fight on both sides. The Romans were much Incumbred by reason that they could neither keep their ranks nor fight upon firm ground, nor follow their own Standard; for every one as he came on Land, ran confusedly to that which was next him; some of the Brittains who knew the flats and shallow places, espying the Romans as they came single out of their ships, pricked forward their horses and set upon them, overlaying them with number, and finding them unwieldy and unready to make any great resistance, by reason of the depth of the water, and weight of their Armour, while the greater part of the Natives with their Darts assailed them fierely upon the shore, which Cæsar perceiving, commanded the Cock-boats and Scouts to be Manned with Souldiers whom he sent in all haste to rescue their Fellows.
There was a Souldier of Cæsars Company called Cassius Scaeva, who with some other of the same Band, was carried in a small Boat unto the Rock, which the ebbing Sea in that place had make accessible. The Brittains espying them, made thitherwards: the rest of the Romans escaping, Scaeva was left alone upon the Rock, to which Island the fury of the enraged mul∣titude assailed him with their darts, which he received upon his Shield, and thrust at them with his Spear till it was broken, and his Helmet and Shield lost: then being tyred with ex∣treme toyl, and dangerously wounded, he betook himself to flight (carrying two little Har∣nesses on his back) with much difficulty recovered Cæsars Tent, where he craved pardon for making so bold an attempt without commandment of his General. Cæsar did both remit the Offence, and rewarded the Offender by bestowing upon him the Office of a Centurion. This was that Scaeva who afterwards gave good cause to have his Name remembred in the Roman Histories for the memorable service he did to Cæsar, in the time of the civil Wars be∣tween him and Pompey at the battail near Dyrrachium. The Romans having at length got footing on the dry land, gave a fresh charge unto the Brittains, and in the end forced them to turn their backs, and leave the shore, though they could not pursue them far into the Land for want of Horsemen, Cæsars accustomed Fortune failing him in this one accident. The Brittains after this overthrow assembling themselves together (upon consultation had amongst them) sent Embassadors to Cæsar, promising to deliver in pledges, or to do whatsoe∣ver else he would command them: With these Embassadors came Comius of Arras, whom Cae∣sar had sent before out of Gallia into Brittain, where having delivered the Message he had then in charge, he was apprehended and committed to Prison, and now after the battel re∣leased. The chief States of the Brittains, seeking to excuse their attempt, laid the blame upon the multitude, who being the greater number, and wilfully bent to take Arms, would neither by perswasion nor Authority be restrained: And they pretended their own ignorance as be∣ing a free people, and not experienced in the Customes of other Nations. Cæsar although he reproved them for making War in that manner, considering that of their own accord, they had sent Embassadors to him, before his arrival in Brittany to desire peace; yet was content to pardon them upon delivery of pledges, whereof some he received presently, and the rest being to come from remote places, he appointed to be sent in by a set day; so the Brittains were dismissed to return into their Countries; and in the mean time there came divers Prin∣ces from other parts of the Isle to submit themselves and their Cities to Cæsar. The fourth day after, the Romans Landing the ships before mentioned, appointed for Transportation of Cæsars Horse men, having a favourable Gail of wind, put out to Sea from the upper Haven; and approaching near the Island in view of the Roman Camp, a suddain storme arose and scattered them, driving some back again to the Port from whence they came, and some others upon the lower part of the Island Westward, where after they had cast Anchor, (their Keeles being all most overwhelmed with the Waves) they were carried by violence of the storm in the night into the Main, and with very great peril recovered a harbour in the Continent. The same night the Moon was at the full, at which time commonly the Sea in those parts is much troubled, and overfloweth the banks by reason of the high Tides (a matter unknown unto the Romans) insomuch as the long Boats which transported the Army, then lying upon the shore, were filled with the flood, and the ships of burden that lay at Anchor were beaten with the storm and split in pieces, the greater number of them perishing in the water, and the rest being made altogether unserviceable (the Anchors lost and Tacklings broken) wherewith the Romans were much perplexed, for that they neither had any other ships to transport them back again, nor any means to repair what the Tempest had Ruined; and Cæsar had former∣ly resolved to winter in Gallia, by reason he was unfurnished of victuals to maintaine his Ar∣my, during the Winter season: which being known to the chief States of the Brittains (who had met together about the accomplishment of such things as Cæsar had commanded them) they supposed a fit opportunity was offered them to revolt, while the Romans wanted Horse∣men, shipping and all manner of provisions; the number of their Forces seeming also the lesse, in respect of the small circuit of their Camp (Cæsar having transported his Legions, with∣out any Carriages, or such like Warlike necessaries) whereupon they concluded to keep them from Victuals, and to prolong the War till Winter; assuring themselves that if they could ei∣ther vanquish the Romans, or bar them from returning thence, there would no Forraigne Nation after them adventure to set foot again in Brittany; and hereupon they conveyed them∣selves by stealth out of the Roman Camp, and gathered company to them privily from di∣vers parts to make head against their Enemies. Cæsar, albeit he was ignorant of the Brittains purpose, yet supposing that the State of his Army and the loss of his ships were to them known, and considering that they had broken day with him, in detaining the pledges contrary to the contract, he suspected that which afterwards proved true; And therefore to provide remedies against all chances, he causedThe Brit∣tains not ig∣norant of Agriculture, as som aver they then were, as the Author from whom I took this, seemeth to say. Corn to be brought daily out of the Fields into his Camp; and such ships as could not be made fit for service were used to repair the rest, and such other things as were wanting thereto, he appoint∣ed to be brought out of the same continent; by which means and the diligence of his Souldi∣ers, by losse of twelve ships, the rest of the Navy was made able to bear sail, and brook the Seas again: while these things were in doing, the seventh Legion (according to custome) was sent forth a Forraging, till which time the Brittains revolt was not certainly known, for that
some of them remained abroad in the Fields, and others came ordinarily into the Roman Camp; The Warders in the station before the Camp, gave notice to Cæsar that the same way which the Legion went, there appeared a greater dust then was wont to be seen; Cæsar mi∣strusting some new practice of the Brittains, commanded the Companies (that kept Ward) to march thither, appointing two others to supply their rooms, and the rest of his Forces to Arme themselves with speed and follow him; when he approached near the place discried, he per∣ceived his Souldiers to be over-charged by the Brittains, who assailed them on all sides with darts; For the Brittains having commanded their Corn from all other parts (this onely ex∣certed) and suspecting that the Romans would come thither, lay in the woods all night to in∣texcept them: and finding them dispersed and unready, they suddenly set upon them (as they were reaping) killing a few of them and disordering the rest with their Horses and Chariots. The manner of the Brit∣tains fighting in ChariotsThe manner of their fighting in Chariots was thus; First they used to ride round about their Enemies Forces, casting their Darts where they saw advantage, and often times with the fiercenesse of their Horses, and whirling of their Chariots wheels, they broak their Ene∣mies ranks: and being gotten in among the Troops of Horsemen, they would leap out of their Chariots and Fight on Foot. The Chariot-drivers in the mean time withdrew them∣selves by little and little out of the battle, and placed themselves in such sort, as their Masters (being over matched by their Enemies) might readily recover their Chariots, so that in their Fighting they performed the Offices both of Horsemen in swiftness of motion, and also of Footmen in keeping of ground: and by daily use and exercise they were grown so expert in managing their Horses as driving them forcibly down a deep hill, they were able to stay or turn them in the midway, yea to run along the beam, to stand firm upon the yoak, and to return thence speedily into their Chariots again. The Romans being much troubled with this new kind of fight, Cæsar came in good time to the rescue; for upon his approach the Brittains gave over the Skirmish, yet keeping still their ground as Masters of the Field; and the Romans for fear, retired themselves to their Gene∣ral, who thought it no point of wisdome to hazard his Forces in a place unknown: but ha∣ving staid there a while, conducted the Legions back again to his Camp, and in the mean time, the Brittains that were in the Field dispersed themselves and shrunk away. After this there were many dayes together continual tempests, which kept the Romans in their Camp, and hindred the Brittains from making any open attempt; though they sent Messengers se∣cretly into divers parts of the Ile, publishing abroad what a small number of their enemies were left, what hope there was of a rich booty, and what apparent likelyhood of recovering their liberty, if they drive the Romans from their Camp: and hereupon in short time they assembled a great number of Horse and Foot men to put their purpose in execution. Against the which (Cæsar understanding thereof) made preparation for Defence, having gotten also about him thirty Horse men, (which Comius of Arras brought over with him) whose service he supposed very necessary, if the Brittains (according to their wonted manner) should seek to save themselves by flight; The Legions were placed in battle Array, before the Camp. Then the Brittains began to Fight, which had not long continued, when they gave back and fled, the Romans pursuing them as far as they durst, killing many whom they overtook, and burning Houses and Towns as they returned to their Camp. The same day the Brittains sent Embassadours to Cæsar desiring peace, which after long sute was granted upon Conditions, that the Pledges (which was before required) should be now doubled, and speedily sent over into Gallia. For the Aequinoctial drawing neer, Cæsar made haste thither, doubting his crased ships would not be well able to brook the Seas in Winter: whereupon taking advantage of the next fair wind, he embarqued his Forces about midnight, and with the greatest part of his Fleet Arrived in the Continent. The Roman Senate (upon Relation of these his Services) decreed a Supplication for him, for the space of twenty dayes. In the spring of the year following, Cæsar having pacified some tumults in Gallia, prose∣cuted the enterprise of Brittain, and to that end he had prepared a Fleet of new ships, all ap∣pointed and commodiously built for landing his Forces, (the want whereof he had found before to his great losse) and a sufficient Army consistent of five Legions, and a proportionable number of Horse which he embarked atCalis Portus Iccius about Sun setting: having a faire Southern wind to set them forward, which failing them about midnight, the Tide diverted their course, so as in the morning he discovered the Island on his left hand, and then follow∣ing the turning of the Tide, he commanded his Souldiers to use their Oares, that they might reach that part of the Isle, where they had found the best landing the summer before; wherein they took such pains, as their ships of burden kept way with their long boats and lighter Ves∣sels; about noon they landed on the shore, where there appeared no man to make resistance; the cause whereof was (as Cæsar afterwards learned by such Prisoners as he took) for that the Brittains having assembled themselves together in Armes at the Sea side, were so terrified with the sight of the ships (which of all sorts were esteemed above eight hundred sayle) that they left the shore, and ran to hide themselves in the Upland Countries; Cæsar (upon intelligence of Fugitives, where the Brittish Forces lay) leaving at the Sea side ten Chariots, and three hundred Horse to guard the ships then lying at Anchor (whereof Quintus Atrius had the charge) Marched forward with the rest of his Army in the night about twelve miles into the
Land, where he espied a multitude of Brittains flocking together neer a river, having gotten the upper ground, from whence they began, to charge the Romans with their horse and Cha∣riots, but being repulsed by Cæsars Horsemen, they fled and hid themselves in the Woods in a place which being notably strengthned both by nature and art, they had used as a Fortresse in their civil War, among themselves; for by reason there were many great Trees cut down and lay'd overthwart the passages round about, there could hardly any entrance be found into the wood: Howbeit the Brittains themselves would oft times, sally forth upon advantage, and empeach the Romans where they attempted to enter, hereupon Cæsar commanded the Souldiers of the seventh Legion to make aA warlike Engine made of bords cove∣red over with raw hides to serve for a de∣fence against fire or stones in scaling a Wall. Testudo, and to raise a Mount against the place; by which means after loss of men on both sides, the Romans in the end got the Fort, and cha∣sed the Brittains over the wood; but Cæsar would not suffer his Souldiers to pursue them; for in regard the place was unknown, and a great part of the day being spent, he thought it fit to bestow the rest in fortifying the Camp. The next day in the morning he sent out Horsemen and Footmen three several wayes to pursue them that fled; but before they had gotten sight of the Brittains, certain Horsemen sent from Quintus Atrius (who had charge of the shipping) brought news that a great Tempest the night before had distressed his ships, and beaten them upon the shore, the Anchors and Cabels being not able to hold them, nor the Mariners to guide them, or to endure the force of the storm; whereupon Cæsar caused the Legions and Horsemen to be sent for back again, and marched with speed towards the Sea side, where he found his Navy in ill plight; forty of his ships being clean cast away, and the rest with great difficulty seeming likely to be recovered: for effecting whereof he took some ship-rights out of the Legions, and sent for others out of the Continent, writing to Labienus who had the charge of certain Legions there, and the guard of Portus Iccius, that he should prepare as many ships as he could to be sent over to him with expedition; and though it were a work of great toyle, yet he thought it necessary to have all the ships haled on shore, and to be brought into the Camp where his Land-forces lay, that one place might be a safe-guard to them both; in the accomplishment hereof he spent ten dayes (the Souldiers scarce intermitting their labour in the night time) till all was finished. Cæsar having fortifide his Camp, and left there the same Forces, (which were before ap∣pointed to keep the harbour) returned to the place whence he dislodged, upon Atrius his in∣formation, where he found the number of the Brittains much increased by confluence of people from sundry parts within the Island; The chief Commandment and direction for the War, was by publick consent of the States of the Isle assigned to Cassibelin, the bounds of whose Territorie were divided from the Maritime Cities, by the River Thamesis, and were cast out from the Sea about fourscore miles. There had been of long time continuall War between him, and some other Princes of the Countries near adjoyning: but now (both parts fearing to be over-run by a Forraign Enemy) neglected private respects, and joyned their Forces to∣gether, appointing him to be their Leader, as a man of whose valour and sufficiency in mili∣tary Affairs they had good experience. The Roman Army being come in view of their E∣nemies Camp, the Brittains pressed forward to begin the Fight with their Horsemen and Cha∣riots, and Cæsar sent out his Horsemen to Encounter them, so as the battle was maintained with great resolution on both parts, and the event thereof seemed doubtful, till in the end the Brittains gave ground, and fled through the woods to the hills, many of them being slain in the Chase, and some of the Romans also who adventurously pursued them so far. Not long after the Romans (suspecting no danger) were occupied in fortifying their Camp, the Brittains sallyed suddenly out of the Woods and made an Assault upon the Warders that kept station before the Campe; to whose aid Cæsar sent out two Cohorts (the chief of the two Legions) which making a lane through the middest of the Brittish Forces joyned them∣selves with their distressed Fellowes, and rescued them from the peril, though Quintus Liberius Durus, a Tribune of the Souldiers, was slain in that Enterprize: But new Cohorts coming to supply the former, the Brittains were repulsed, and sought to save themselves by flight. By the manner of this Skirmish (which was fought in view of the Roman Camp) the Romans per∣ceived the Advantage, which the Britains had of them, and how ill themselves were appointed for such a fight, when by reason of the weight of their Armour they could neither pursue such as fled, nor durst leave their Ensignes, nor were able (without great disadvantage) to en∣counter the Brittish Horse men, which oft-times gave ground on purpose; and having with∣drawn themselves a little and a little from the Legions, would leap out of their Chariots and fight on foot; the manner of their fighting with Horse and Chariots, being alike dange∣rous to those that retired, and to those that pursued; Besides they divided their Forces into Companies (when they fought) and had several stations, with great distances between them; one Troop seconding another, and the second and fresh men yielding Supplies to the woun∣ded and wearied. The day following, the Brittains were discried upon the Hills afaroff, scattered here and there in great numbers together; being not very forward to begin a new Fight, till Cæsar having sent out three Legions, and all his Horse men under the Conduct of C. Trelonius the Lieutenanant to go a forraging, they flocked suddenly together from all parts, and set upon the Forragers, not sparng to assail the Ensignes Legions themselves who strongly resisted them, and made them turn their backs, when the Roman Horse men also eagerly pur∣sued them, never giving over the chase (as being confident in the aid of the Legions that fol∣lowed
them) untill they had driven them headlong before them, killing all those they over∣took, and giving the rest no time, either to gather themselves together, or to make a stand, or once to forsake their Chariots: after this overthrow many of the Natives (who had come from divers parts to aid their Countrymen) shrunk away; and Cæsar understanding what course the rest of the Brittains meant to hold in prosecuting the War, led his Army to the bounds of Cassibelins Country upon the River of Thames, which was passible on Foot in one place onely, and that with some difficulty; when he came thither, he perceived that the Brit∣tains had great Forces in readinesse on the further side of the River, the banks whereof were fortified with sharp-pointed stakes or piles (about the bignesse of a mans thigh, and bound a∣bout with lead) pitch'd near the shore, to impead their passage, and some others of the same kind, (the remnants whereof continue to this Age) were planted covertly under the water in the main River; of this, Cæsar having intelligence (by some Fugitives and prisoners that he had taken) commanded the Horse men first to enter the River, and the Legions to follow, so as (the dangerous places being discovered) the Romans waded through (their heads onely appearing above the water,) and charged the Brittains with such violence, as they forced them to forsake the she and betake themselves to flight. Cassibelin seeing no likelyhood to maintain the War any longer by Force, dismissed the great∣er part of his power, and keeping with him, about four thousand Chariots only, retired into the Woods and places of most Safety, driving Men and Cattel before him out of the Fields all that way by which the Romans should passe with their Army, whose Horse men as they ran∣ted up and down to plunder, he surprised with his Chariots, and distressed them in such sort as they durst not march forward, but keeping themselves in their strength gave over their former purpose; and from thenceforth sought onely to annoy the Brittains by spoiling and burning their Houses and Towns. In the mean time theThe ancient Inhabitants of Middlesex and Essex. Troynobantes, one of the chief States of those parts, sent Embassa∣dors to Cæsar, promising to submit themselves and to be at his Commandment. There was also one Mandrubratius who had fled over to Cæsar, when he was in Gallia, and was now be∣come a Follower of his Fortune, while preferring the satisfaction of his own discontented humour, before the advancement of the common Cause, he served as an instrument to be∣tray his native Contrey, abusing the credit which he had with his Countrymen, by working their subversion to his own dishonour, and advantage of a Forraign enemy. His Father Ima∣nentius (having been sometime chief Ruler of the City of Trinobantes, and well esteemed a∣mong them) was slain by Cassibelin the present Governour, against whom the Citizens de∣sired Cæsar to protect Mandubratius, and to commit unto him the Government of that City, which Cæsar granted upon delivery of a certain number of Pledges, and a sufficient propor∣tion of Victuals for provision of his Army. Hereupon divers petty states thereabout sent Em∣bassadors, and yielded themselves to Cæsar, who understood by them that Cassibelina his Town (being well stored with Men and Cattle) was not far from thence; this Town was only a circuit of ground inclosed with wood and marshes, or else entrenched with a Ranger of Earth about it: Cæsar coming with his Legion to this place (which he found very strong, as being fortifyed Naturally, and also by the industry of man) began to assail it on both sides. The Brittains having expected a while the event of the enterprise, and perceiving themselves unable to withstand the assault, issued out at a back way, where many of them being slain, and some taken as they fled, the Town it self and all the provisions within it were left as a spoil to the Romans: while these things were doing among the Trinobants, Cassabelin dispatched mes∣sengers into Kent or Cantium that lyes upon the Sea. The Inhabitants of these parts were better furnished to make War then any other of the Isle; the Country at that time was Go∣verned by four Kings, as Cæsar himself calleth them, either for that they had among them a kind of absolute Government in several, or else for that being the Register of his own Acts, he supposed it would be more for his glory to be reputed a Conqueror of Kings; their names were Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximugulus, and Segonax, whom Cassibelin then required to raise all the power they could make, and on the sudden to assail the Roman Forces that Guarded their ships at the Sea side. This was attempted accordingly, but with ill successe, for that the Romans having timely advertisement of their purpose, prevented the execution thereof, by setting upon them as they drew near the Roman Army: and so after a great slaughter made of the Brittains (Cingetorix a Noble Captain, and one of the Princes being taking prisoner) the Romans returned safe to their Camp. Cassibelin hearing of the unhappy issue of his enterprize, after so many losses sustained on his part, his Country being wasted with War, and himself in a manner forsaken, by the revolt of the Cities round about, which most of all discuraged him, sent Embassadors to Cæsar by Comius of Arras, offering to sub∣mit himself upon reasonable conditions. Cæsar determining to winter in Gallia (the state of his affairs there requiring it) and the summer being almost spent, commanded that he should deliver certain pledges for assurance of his obedience, and that he should offer no wrong, nor give cause of offence to Mandubratius or the Troynobants, whom he had taken into special pro∣tection; and then having imposed a Tribute to be paid yearly by the Brittains to the people of Rome, he marched towards the sea side, where he embarked his Forces, and arrived with them safely in the Continent. Thus Cæsar having rather shewed some part of Brittain to the Romans then made a Con∣quest
of the whole, supposed he had done sufficiently for his own glory in undertaking a matter so rare and difficult in those Times. At his coming to Rome he presented there cer∣tain Captives (which he had taken in the Brittish Wars) whose strangenesse of shape and be∣haviour filled the peoples eyes both with wonder and delight; He offered also in the Temple of Venus Genetrix a Surcote embroidered with Brittish Pearl as a Trophy and spoil of the O∣cean, leaving to posterity a perpetual remembrance of his Enterprize in this Iland, to the ho∣nour both of his own Name and of the Roman Nation. After the death of Julius Cæsar (by reason of the civil Wars among the Romans) the Isle of Brittain was for a time neglected, and Augustus Cæsar being setled in the Empire (which was then grown to such greatness as it seemed even cumbred therewith) accounted it good policy to contain the same within it known bounds; Besides the attempt was like to prove dan∣gerous, and a matter of very great expence to send an Army so far off to make War with the Brittish Nation for desire of glory only, (no special cause besides moving thereto.) Howbeit as some Writers Report above Twenty years after Julius Cæsar's first Entrance, Augustus intended a Voyage hither in person, alledging for pretence of the War, the wrong offered to the Roman State by such Princes of the Isle as had for certaine years witheld the Tribute which Cæsar his Prædecessor had imposed upon them; intelligence whereof being got, the Brittains sent over Embassadours, who meeting the Emperour inThe Coun∣trey between the Rivers Garony and Seinin, France. Gallia Celtica, declared their submission and desired pardon; And the better to win favour, they had carried over certain gifts of good value to be presented as offerings in the Roman Capitol (having already learned the Art to flatter for Advantage, and to appease Princes by rewards) Hereupon a conditional peace was granted them, and the Emperour having pacifyed some troubles in Gallia, returned to Rome: then began the Ilanders to pay Tribute and Custome of all kind of Wares which they exchanged with the Gaules; as namely, Ivory boxes, Iron chaines, and other trinkets of Amber and Glasse which were Transported Too and Fro, both out of Gallia and Brittain. The year following the Brittains having failed in performance of Conditions, he prepared for another expedition; but being set forward on his Voyage, the revolt of theThe Bis∣cayans. Cantabrians andThe Inhabi∣tants between Gallicia and Portugal. Assyrians stayed him from proceeding any further therein; after which time the Brittains were left to themselves to enjoy their Liberty, and use their own Laws with∣out molestation of forraign Invaders; for that the Romans having found the sweetnesse of peace (after long civil Wars) sought rather to keep in obedience such Provinces as had been before time brought under subjection, then by attempting new Conquests to hazard the losse of that they had already gotten. In those dayes the Countrey of the Troynobants in Brittain was Governed by Conobelin, who kept his residence atMalden in Essex. Camalodunum; he began first to reclaim the Brittains from their ill customes, and to make his state more respected, he afterwards caused his own Image to be stamped on his Coyne after the manner of the Romans, a custome never used by the Brittains before his dayes, and but then newly received by the Romans themselves; for before that time the Brittains used Rings of Iron, and little plates of Brasse of a certaine weight instead of Coyne; During the time of his Government, the divine mystery of humane Redemption was accomplished by the birth of our Saviour Christ Jesus; Augustus Cæsar then possessing the Roman Empire, which he afterwards left to Tiberius his Adopted Son, a Wary and Politick Prince, who following the advice and example of Augustus, did never attempt any thing in Brit∣tain, nor maintain any Garrison there: Howbeit the Brittains at that time were well affected to the Romans, as appeared by the entertainment which their petty Princes gave to some Soul∣diers of the Roman Army in Germany, who crossing the Seas were by force of weather cast upon the coast of Brittain, and from thence in courteous manner sent back to Germanicus their General. This Conobelin or Kimbelin, was in Rome when the blessed Tidings of the Incarnation of the Son of God were declared through the world; for Augustus after the death of Julius Cæsar, successor in the Empire (as say our Antiquaries both ancient and late) by the will of God had established most sure peace through the world; our Redeemer Jesus Christ, true God and Man was born in the 42 year of his Empire, in the fifth year of the Reign of Cunobelin or Kimbelin in this Kingdome of the Brittains. A little before which time, by the great providence of God, to make this our Brittain more timely and particularly partaker of such heavenly tidings before other Nations, Augustus intending an expedition against this Kingdome, Embassadours came from Brittain to Rome, entreating for peace, swearing fealty in the Temple of Mars, offering gifts in the Capitol to the Gods of the Romans, and submitting part of the Isle to Augustus;Mr. Br. f. 1. &  they gave him for security, so many great Nobles of this Land for Pledges and Hostages, that all here were so quiet, that one band of Souldiers and a few Horsemen were sufficient to keep the Isle in the Roman possession. Now by such means the Romans did ever here secure themselves of the Brittains, from their first invasion by Julius Cæsar, carrying away from hence, and keeping at Rome for their glory, honour and quiet not only many of our chief Nobility, Men, Women and Children: but of the Regal race, and blood, and Kings themselves; Among which we find that Androgius Son and Heir to King Lud lived and dyed there; Cassibeline his Uncle, who was subdued by Cæsar, gave Hostages, and made this Kingdome Tributary to the Roman Empire. Theo∣mantius his Nephew and Successor in the Kingdome payed Tribute to the Romans, which Cas∣sibeline
had granted and Reigned quietly. And his Son Cunobeline King after him, (his Fa∣ther) was one of his Fathers Hostages in Rome, and was Knighted there. Adaminus Sonne of King Cunobeline, was kept at Rome by Cajus; thus much and much more Mr. Broughton that eminent Antiquary in his first and second Folio, out of divers Authors by him there cited, which I here for brevity omit. Augustus Cæsar the Emperour being urged by the Romans to be made a God, after the Heathenish manner then, or about the very time when Christ was born, before he would con∣sent unto it, consulted with Sybilla Tiburtina, then renowned for her Prophesies. Sybillam Tiburtinam super hoc consuluit, quæ post trium dierum jejunium respondit in hunc modum; Judicii in signum, Tellus sudore madescet; De cœlo rex adveniet per secla futurus: Quorum ver∣suum capitales literae hunc reddebant sensum, Jesus Christus Dei filius salvator. Eo illico apertum est cœlum; & nimius splendor irruit super eum, & vidit in cœlo pulcherrimam virginem stantem super altare, puerum tenentem in brachiis, & miratus est nimis, & vocem dicentem audivi, Hæc ara filii Dei est. Qui statim projiciens in terram adoravit, quam visionem Senatoribus retulit, & ipsi mirati sunt nimis. After she had fasted three dayes, Sybilla answered in these Achrostical known verses, whose first letters make this sence, Jesus Christ the Son of God our Saviour; and presently the Heaven opened, and an exceeding brightnesse fell down upon the Emperour, and he saw in Heaven: a most beautiful Virgin standing upon an Altar, holding a Child in her Armes, and he marvelled exceedingly, and heard this voice saying, This is the Altar of the Sonne of God; whereupon presently prostrating himself upon the ground, he adored, which Vision he related to the Senators, who marvelously wondered at it. And this miraculous preaching of Christs birth so far off, then at Rome, was so much more publick and general, that at or a little before this time the same Emperour, as Suidas witnes∣seth,Suidas in Augusto. in their than greatest sacrifice, was told by their Oracle that an Hebrew Child command∣ed the Gods (as they termed them) to silence; whereupon Augustus ab oraculo reversus in Ca∣pitolio aram erexit, Romanis{que} literis inscripsit, Hæc Ara est Primogeniti Dei. Augustus return∣ing from the Oracle, erected an Altar in the Capitol, and made this inscription upon it in Ro∣man Letters; This it the Altar of the first and only begotten Sonne of God; our English Histo∣rians with others proceed to more such publick testimonies concerning Christ at Rome,Jo. Herc. in Martin. Polon. Dedic. to Q. Eliz. Martin. Polon. in Aug. & alii. Mr. B. Fol. 4. and at that very time; hoc ipso die quo natus est Christus, trans Tyberim fons olei emanavit, ac per totum diem largissimo rivo fluxit; tunc etiam circulus ad speciem cælestis arcus circa solem appa∣ruit; etiam statim ut virgo peperit, illa statua aurea corruit in Romuliano Palatio quam Romu∣lus posuerat dicens, Non cadet donec virgo pariat. The very day on which Christ was born, be∣yond Tiber at Rome, a fountaine of oyl flowed, and ran with a most large stream all the day: The circle like to a heavenly bow appeared about the Sun; also presently so soon as the Virgin brought forth her Son, the Golden Statue in the Palace of Romulus fell down, which Romulus placed there (above 700 years before) saying, it shall not fall untill a Virgin be brought to bed of a Child. Upon these and other such motives this Emperour was so fully perswaded of the Messias then born, that he highly reverenced all testimonies thereof; the Prophesies of the Sybills which are so clear for almost all Mysteries of Christ, as his Nativity, Life, Passion, Resurrecti∣on, Ascention, with the rest, as if they had been present witnesses, rather then Prophets or E∣vangelists of those things,Suetonius in Augusto. he so respected, that as Suetonius a Pagan writeth, Quidquid fatidicorum librorum Graeci Latini{que} generis nullis vel parum idoneis autoribus vulgo ferebatur, supra duo millia contracta, undi{que} concremavit, & solos retinuit Sybellinos, hos quo{que} dilectu habito, condidit{que} duobus forulis auratis sub Palatini Apollinis basi; he gathered together all books of South-sayers Greek and Latine, and he burnt about two thousand, whose Authors were either un∣known or of little credit; he only preserved the books of the Sybills, making also the best choice of them, and those he layed up in two guilded chests under the Base of Apollo Palatinus; And was so convinced in his understanding by these means of the truth of Christ, that as our moderne Writers with others write, when the Romans came to him & said, Te volumus adorare quia deus est in te: si hic non esset, non tibi omnia tam prospere succederent; we will adore thee, because God is in thee: if he were not here, all things could not succeed so prosperously with thee; yet he being the greatest Conquerour that ever was in the world, and was never Conquered and overthrown in battel; Quum ipsum pro Deo colere vellent Romani, prohibuit, nec se Dominum appellari permisit; when the Romans would haue worshipped him for God, he forbad it, and would not suffer himself to be called Lord. And if we may follow our Brittish Histories, Mathew of Westminster, a Man as all tell us, ex∣cellent for History and supputation of years, Quantum ad Historiam, in recta annorum supputa∣tione singularis, and our late Writers; By computation of time, our King Kymbeline was then in Rome;Ja. Bal. l de script. cent. 3. fol. 143. in Math. Flor. Calf. Mon. Hist. l. 4. c. 11. Ponticus aerun. Hist. Brit. l. 4. Heath. West. Anno Dom. 5. for we are told, Post Tenantium ad culmen regale Kimbelinus filius suus miles stre∣nuus quem Cæsar Augustus nutriverat, promotus est; After Tenantius Kimbeline his Sonne, a Valiant Knight, whom Augustus Cæsar had brought up and promoted to the Kingdome of Brit∣tain; Kimbeline was but young, when Augustus Cæsar first brought him up, and he stayed in Rome so long that as divers, and also Verunnius affirmeth, Augustus made him Knight, quem Aug. Cæsar nutrierat & armis decoraverat; and if we follow this exact supputator of times, Mathew of Westminster, he was come from Rome to be King here but five years before the birth of Christ. Anno Dominicae Inacrnationis quinto Kimbelonus Rex Brittaniam decem annos
tenuisset. And most certain it is by all Histories of our Noble and Renowned Brittish Hosta∣ges resident in Rome all the time of Augustus Cæsar, and after that we had many worthy Brittains there, both ear and eye witnesses to know these passages by themselves, and to testi∣fie them to their Countrymen and Friends at home. This Kimbeline Sonne of Tenantius was made King of the Brittains in the year of the world 5180 of his Reign. Authors write diversly, some shewing no years, others very few,Fabian fol. 39. part. 3. which agreeth not well with the Computation of other Writers. The Author of the Flower of Hi∣stories, affirmeth, that he Reigned thirty five years; after which time gloriously spent, he died, and was buried at Caer Lud, leaving two Sons, Guiderius and Arviragus. The Brittish History (written by a namelesse Author,) yet some suppose him Noble, and for private reason to have conceal'd his Name, maketh little mention of Tiberius concerning our Brittish Affairs; but because certain passages with happened during the time of his Empire, will redound to the glory of the Brittish Nation, it is expedient, and I hope will not offend the Reader, to write some things hapning in his life time. Kimbeline continued King of England till the 15 or 16 year after Christs Nativity, which must needs he in this Tiberius his time,Mr. Bro. fol. 12. when the true knowledge of Christ was more clearly manifested unto the world, and among others, to some Brittains of this Nation, especially such  then lived in Rome; For as in the time of this Emperour our Saviour began and ended his preaching, and suffered his Passion for our Redemption: so those things in such order as they were accomplished in the Land of Jury, they were presently and truly declared and sent to the Emperor at Rome and others there. Matthew of Westminster, and Ranulphus Higeden, consent in this with others, that Tiberius was truly informed at Rome of Christs miraculous life and preaching long before his Passion;Mr. Bro. ibid. and being afflicted with a Leprosy, was so confident in the heavenly power of Christ, esteeming him then at the least for a great Prophet, Saint and worker of Miracles, that he sent with great solemnity Volusianus to Hierusalem to entreat Christ Jesus to come with him to Rome, to cure him of his incurable Malady; but the Jewes had caused Pilate to put him to death before. The Magdeburgians with others, have published to the World an Epistle of Lentulus out of the Annals of the Roman Senators, to this Emperour Tiberius before the death of Christ, thus beginning; Apparuit his temp ribus & adhuc est homo magnæ virtutis nominatus Iesus Christus, qui dicitur à Gentibus Propheta, quem ejus Discipuli vocant filium Dei, suscitans mor∣tuos, & sanans omnes languores: There appeared in these time and still is a man of great vertue named Christ Jesus, who is called of the Gentils a Prophet, whom his Disciples call the Son of God, raising the dead, and curing all diseases. And presently upon the death of Christ, as it is proved both by our own and Forraign Antiquaries, ancient and later, Greek and Latine; Pontius Pilate wrote unto Tiberius the Emperor of Rome of the Passion of Christ in this man∣ner. De passione Dominica Pilatus Tiberio Cæsari scripsit in hunc modum.Episcopus Ana∣cet. de morte Christi. Matth. Westm. an. 33. Flor. Wigorn. an. 38. Tertull. Apolon. c. 5, & 21. Eust. Hist. l. 1. c. 24. Oros. l. 7. c. 4. Nuper accedit quod & ipse probavi, Judæos per invidiam se suos{que} posteros crudeli damnatione peremisse; nam cum promissum haberent Patres eorum quod Deus illis mitteret de cœlo Sanctum suum, qui eorum qui eorum merito Rex diceretur ut hunc se promiserit per Virginem missurum ad terram, iste me praside Hæbræorum Deus cum venerit, ut vidissent eum cæcos illuminasse, leprosos mundasse, paralyticos curasse, Dæmones ab hominibus fugasse, mortuos sucistasse, ventis imperasse, super mare siccis pedibus ambulasse, & multa alia mirabilia fecisse, cum omnis populus Judæorum hunc Dei Filium dicerent, invidiam contra eum passi sunt Principes Sacerdotum, mihi{que} tradide∣runt, & alia pro aliis mentientes, dixerunt illum magum esse, & contra eorum legem agere; ego autem credidi ita esse, & flagellatum tradidi arbitrio eorum; At ii crucifixerunt eum, & sepulto ei custodes adhibuerunt; ille vero militibus meis custodientibus eum tertia die resurrexit. Sed in tantum exarsit nequitia eorum ut darent eis pecuniam, dicentes, Dicite quia Discipuli ejus corpus ipsius rapuerunt; veruntamen milites cum accepissent pecuniam, quod factum fuerat tacere non potuerunt; nam & illum resurrexisse testati sunt, & à Judæis pecuniam accepisse; & ideo suggessi hoc, ne quis aliter referens mentiatur, & existimet credendum Judæorum mendaciis. Pilate wrote unto Tiberius of our Lord's Passion in this manner; It lately chanced which I have made proof of, that the Jews through envy have destroyed themselves and their posterity with cruel damnation. For when their Fathers, had a promise, that God would send unto them his holy One from Heaven, who worthily should be called their King, and promised him to be born of a Virgin to the Earth: This God of the Hebrews when he came, I being Præsident, when Men had seen him to cause blind men to see, to have cleansed the Lepers, cured the diseased with Palsies, to have driven Divels from Men, to have raised the dead, commanded the winds, to have walked upon the sea with his Feet, and to have done many other marvellous things, when all the people of the fews said he was the Son of God, the principal of the Jews were malicious against him, and delivered him unto me, and devising many lyes, said, he was a Magician, and did a∣gainst their Law, and I believed it was so: and having whipped him, delivered him to their will: but they crucifyed him, and being buried they appointed Keepers unto him. But he rose again the third day, my Souldiers keeping him: but their iniquity so flamed out that they gave Money unto them saying, Say you that his Disciples took him away: but the Souldiers when they had received the Money, could not conceal that which was done; for they both witnessed that he rose again, and that they had received Money from the Jews. And therefore I have suggested this, lest any Man relating it otherwise, should make a Lye, and think we should give credit unto the Lyes
of the Jews; Hitherto the words of the Epistle of Pontius Pilate himself to the Emperour, not only allowed by our English moderns and other our Authors, the greatest Chronographers of their time by their Judgement, but word for word so justifyed by the German Writers; Ter∣tulian and almost all ancient Writers and others treating of that age, approve of it. And Tiberius the Emperour having sent Volusianus (as before) to to invite Christ to come unto him to heal his Leprosie, Christ being put to death before Volusianus his coming thither, he brought from thence with him, as our English Authors witnesse, that miraculous Image of Christ which he gave to St. Veronica in a handkerchief, wherewith he wiped his Face going to his Passion, and with great reverence presented it to this Emperour at Rome, and he as reve∣rently received it;Bal. in Flor. Wig. & Math. Floril. Magde∣bur. cent. l. 1. c. 10. Col. 354. Tert. Apol. adver. gent. Nauel. in Chron. volum. 2 gener. p. 512. &c. Eng. Pro. in Math. West. Anno Dom. 37. Ranulph. Hige∣den. Polychron l. 4. for say these Authors, Cæsar viam pannis sericis sterni fecit, & imaginem sibi præsentari fecit. Qui mox ut eam fuit intuitus, pristinam assequutus est sanitatem; & hæc imago us{que} hodie Romae in ecclesia Apostolorum Principis, populo demonstratur, quæ & à portatri∣ce, & a quibusdam Veronica appellatur: Cæsar caused the way to be spread with cloaths of silk, and commanded the Image to be presented unto him, who presently as he had beheld it, obtained his former health; And this image even to this day, is shewed to the people in the Church of the Prince of the Apostles at Rome, and is called by the name of her that carried it Veronica; and although Pilate as before, had so excused himself, and acknowledged Christ for the Messias unto his Emperour, yet say the German Writers, Narrat Nicephorus Pilatum ideo maximis Romae affectum esse contumeliis, quod Maria Magdelena Romam adierit, & salvatoris res ibi retulerit; Nicephorus maketh relation that Pilate suffered most great reproaches at Rome, for that Mary Magdelen went thither, and there related the things of our Saviour in Tiberius time, whereby Tiberius was so moved and convinced for acknowledging the truth of Christs Doctrine, that these English Authors thus confesse with St. Gildas, Tertullian and many others, Tunc Cæsar cum suffragio magni favoris retulit Epistolam ad Senatum, postulant ut Christus Deus haberetur; sed Senatus consecrationem Christi recusavit, indignatione commotus quod non secundum morem prius Epistola sibi delata fuisset; Cæsar with his voyce of great favour, related the Epistle of Pilate to the Senate, requesting that Christ should be accounted God; but the Senate refused the consecration of Christ, moved with indignation, because the Epistle was not first delivered to them, as the custome was. Sabelicus l. 2. Eucad. 7.Sabelicus with others writeth that Pilate did truly repent him of delivering Christ to the Jewes, was actually a Christian, and obtained pardon for his sinns; Non defuerunt qui træ∣diderunt Pilatum suæ impietatis pœnitentiam egisse, meru isse{que} adeo veniam; And that in this be∣ginning of the Gospel, the Faith of Christ might be every where received, without let, or con∣tradiction as the ancient Learned Father Ferculphus saith, God put it into the mind of Tiberius the Emperour,Ferculphus Lexonien. Epis. l. 1. c. 9. Gildas de ex∣cid. & cong. Brit. c. 6. Math West. ann. gra. 37. Ranul. Hig. in Manusc. Polychron. l. 4. c. 4. Manus. antiq. Gall. in Tibe∣rio, &c. Fabian fol. 40. to give it way and suppress the persecution of the Senate: Quod profecto divina providentia jam tunc Cæsaris sensibus ingessit, ut abs{que} ullo obstaculo in ipsis dun∣taxat initiis Evangelii sermo undiqua{que} percurreret. And our Learned Countryman St. Gil∣das with others witnesseth, he threatned death to those that should accuse Christians: Tem∣pore summo Tiberii Cæsaris, abs{que} ullo impedimento Christi propagatur Religio, comminata, Se∣natu volente, à Principe, morte delatoribus militum ejusdem; which is proved and confirmed by all sorts of Writers. Tunc Senatus edicto constituit, Christianos ab urbe esse exterminandos. Sed Cæsar hæc indigntatus, accusatoribus Christianorum mortem comminatus est. Then the Senate ordained by an edict that Christians should be driven forth of the City; but the Emperour being therewith offended, threatned death to the accusers of Christians. Occasion being here offered to speak of the Incarnation of the Messias our most blessed Saviour Jesus Christ; Fa∣bian tells us from the first creation of Adam, to the birth of Christ, was five thousand one hun∣dred and ninety nine, the which account is approved, as he saith, by Isidore, Beda and others; thus he brings his account. From No'es Flood or after, two thousand nine hundred and forty seven years. After Abraham, two thousand and seventeen. After David King of Israel, one thousand threescore and fifteen. From or after the Transmigration of the Jewes, five hundred and ninety: After Brute entered Brittain, eleven hundred and thirty six. After Alexander the Great, near upon a eleven hundred and twenty five. After the building of Rome, seven hundred and twenty nine. GƲIDERIƲS. GƲIDERIƲS the first Son of Kimbeline, was advanced to the Legal command of the Brittains, who were under his Fathers subjection: he was invested in the year of the world, 5216. Anno Dom. 170. This King was potent and abounded in Treasure, which indeed are the sinews of War, and was alwaies a Prince of Haughty courage: and where wealth and cou∣rage meet, almost miracles may be wrought, if the cause be good, and guided by a celestial providence; but self-Love, Pride and Arrogancy often bringeth confusion; Guiderius bol∣stered up with these supporters, denies the covenanted Tribute to the Romans: which, if thus
confirmed by Authors, Expletis diebus vitae suæ, cessit gubernaculum Regni Guiderio;Mr. Bro. fol. 23. 8. cum ergo Tributum quod appetebant Romani, ipsis denegaret, supervenit Claudius qui in Imperium sub∣rogatus fuerat; When Kimbeline was dead, Guiderius succeeeded in the Kingdome; therefore when he denied the Tribute, the Roman Claudius came hither being then Emperor.Mr. Br. 335. And I have read in a very good Author, That in Claudius the Roman Emperors time, he with his Romans brought the Orchades, and after them Anglesey under the Roman subjection; though this Act be commonly ascribed to Julius Agricola. Fabian confirms my Authors Assertion, saying, Wherefore Claudius who was Uncle to Caius Caligula the Fourth Emperor of Rome, arrived in Brittain with a great Army; and not only as writeth Polychronican, constrained the Inhabitants to pay the Tribute, but also subjected to the Roman yoke the Iles of Orchades, or Orkeys, which are scituate beyond Scotland, and at the end of six Months returned to his Imperial City. In this Army (as tells us the English Chronicle and Gaufride) was a Captain called Hame or Hamo, who to compasse his purpose against the Ilanders, changed his Armour and Shield, arming himself like a Brittain, and in this Disguise did extreme Damage unto his Enemies; and still pressing forward, at length came to the very place where King Guiderius was fighting, and by this unexpected Stratagem and Policy slew him; which his Brother Ar∣viragus perceiving, used the like policy, immediately investing himself in Princely Array, that the Fall of the King was not perceived; and thus personating a Soveraign in his Regal Ensignes, he encouraged the Brittains, and by his own Example, Courage and Valour, so animated them, that they did Feats beyond belief, insomuch that they put the Romans to flight. Thus was Guiderius by the opinion of several Authors slain by Hamo, after he had reigned the space of twenty eight years, leaving his Brother Arviragus, by reason that he had no Issue of his own to succeed him. ARVIRAGƲS. ARviragus the youngest Son of Kimbeline, and brothor to Guiderius, was Crowned King of Great Brittain in the year of Christs Incarnation forty and four. The English Chroni∣cle calls him Armiger; he was a Prince of a high Spirit, and skilful in warlike Affairs, maintai∣ning with great resolution and prosperous successe his Wars against the invading Romans, neither suffered he the death of his Brother to passe unrevenged; For with his own hands he slew Hamo, the Murderer of Guiderius, near a Port or Haven, which by reason of that Fact, was called Hamons Haven, and now with some alteration South-Hampton; a Town, populous rich and beautiful, from which the whole Shire deriveth her Name; most strongly walled with square stone, containing in Circuit, one thousand and two hundred Paces, having se∣ven Gates for entrance, and twenty nine Towers for Defence, two very stately Keyes for Ships arrivage, and five fair Churches for God's divine Service; besides an Hospital called God's House, wherein the unfortunate Richard, Earl of Cambridge, beheaded for Treason, lyeth inter'd. On the West of this Town is mounted a beautiful Castle in form Circular, and wall within wall, the Foundation upon a hill so topped, that it cannot be ascended but by stairs, carrying a goodly prospect both by Land and Sea, and in the East without the Walls a goodly Church sometimes stood, called St Maries, which was pulled down, for that it gave the French direction of Course, who with fire had greatly endangered the Town; instead thereof is newly Erected a small and unfinisht Chappel. In this place, saith Learned Camb∣den, stood the ancient Clausentium, a Fort of the Romans, whose Circuit on that side extended it self to the Sea: this suffered many depredations by the Saxon Pirates, and in Anno, 980. was by the Danes almost quite overthrown. In K. Ed. 3. time it was fired by the French, under the conduct of the King of Sicills Son, whom a Countryman encountred and struck down with his Club, he crying, Rancon, that is, Ransome; but he neither understanding his Language, nor the Law that arms doth allow, laid on more soundly; I know thee a Francon, and therefore thou shalt die. And in Richard the Seconds time it was somewhat removed, and built in the place where now it is. In this Clausentium Canute to evict his Flatterers, made tryal of his Deity, commanding the Seas to keep back from his Feet; but being not obey∣ed, acknowledged God to be the only supreme Governour, and in a religious Devotion gave up his Crown to the rood at Winchester. Earls of this Southampton have been 1067.1 Bevis of Hampton, that famous Souldier so much talked of, Azure 3 Lyons passant gardant, Or. 2 William Fitz-Williams. Losenge arg. and Gules.
3 Thomas Wricthesley L. Ch. created E. by Ed. 6. and King at Arms. 4 Henry Wricthesley. 5 Henry Wricthesley. 6 Thomas Wricthesley. 1641. Azure a Cross, Or, 4 fulcons closed argent. Policr. l. 4. c. 8. cited by Fa∣bian, fol. 41.After divers changes and alterations in War and Peace, an Agreement was concluded be∣tween Claudius the Roman Emperor and Arviragus, insomuch that the Emperor sent to Rome for his Daughter Genniss or Gennissa, and espoused her to the Brittish King, who had by her his Son and Heir Marius, his Successor in the Kingdome. This King Reigned in Brittain when St. Joseph came hither,Mr. Bro. f. 22. who gave to him and his Followers a place of Residence, in lateribus suæ Regionis, in the outside of K. Arviragus his Countrey, in Regionis suæ finibus, saith the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury in the very end of his Dominion.Math. Parker. A late Writer speaking of King Arviragus, saith, Quidam Historici testantur, ipse omnium Regum Brittannorum primus;Joes Pitseus Rel. Hist. in Arvirago. Fidem Christi cum Sacramentis Christianis, Christianus factus suscepit. Some Historians witness that of all Brittish Kings he was the first that being made a Christian, received the Faith of Christ with the Christian Sacraments. Another thus plainly writeth of St. Joseph, He converted to the Christian Faith Marius and Coillus Son and Nephew to Arviragus; and John Harding is Author, that he both was a Christian, and Converted by St. Joseph, and plainly alledgeth Nennius Authority. Thus he writeth: Joseph converted this King Arviragus By his Preaching, to know the Law divine; And baptized him, as written hath Nennius, The Chronicler in Brittain Tongue full fine, And to Christ's Law made him incline: The Antiquity of the Crosse for England.And gave him then a Shield of silver white, A Cross end long overthwart full perfect. Thus writeth this Author, but without Warrant of any thing I can find; for whereas as he citeth Nennius to have written thus in the Brittish Language, it is evident by all Antiquities, that Nennius which wrote in that Tongue, was long before the Birth of Arviragus or St. Joseph, and dead 50 years before the Nativity of Christ, and was Brother to King Lud and Cassibelin, and was named Nennius Helius, and he could not write any such thing; the other Nennius called Bancharensis, as all Authors agree, wrote onely in Latine, and consequently could not write so in the Brittish Tongue, as that Author thinketh, or our best modern Authors affirm; they find no such thing in any copy of Nennius, Codices ii quos consuluisse me Nennii anti∣quos contigit, hnjusce rei parum sunt memores; Neither is King Arviragus, or St. Joseph named by him. The places which he allowed to St. Joseph and his companions, were, propter munitiones Arundineti,, & fluminis, & paludis: so compassed and invironed with Reeds, River and Fens, that they builded a poor Oratory themselves of such base Elderwands, as that Fenny wilder∣nesse afforded, which giveth sufficient testimony how far Arviragus was from being a Chri∣stian, that had nothing but such abject and outcast things to allow to Christ and his servants; when for the maintenance of the Pagan Idolatry, which he professed, both as the Brittish Hi∣story Matthew of Westminster, Ponticus Virunnius, and as well Modern as Ancient are witnesses; he was Author of stately and sumptuos buildings, and so far from diminishing any honour that was then given to the false gods of the Brittains, that he added more unto them, namely, worshipped the wicked Emperor Claudius (whose Bastard-daughter he had taken as wife) as god, dedicated a costly Temple unto him, soon after his death; yet after this his acquain∣tance with S. Joseph; for as I find in an old Manuscript-history (and others do not dissent) the City of Gloucester then Caer Glou,Anonymus his Maps in Glo∣cestershire. the City of Claudius, was built by King Arviragus in the year of Christ 66. This City was first won from the Brittains by Chenlin the first King of the West Saxons about the year of Christ 570. and afterwards under the Mercians it flourished with great honour, where Offirick King of Northumberland by the sustenance of Ethelred of Mercia, founded a most stately Monastery of Nuns, whereof Kinelburgh, Eadburgh and Eve Queens of the Mercians, were Prioresses successively each after other. Edelfled a most renowned Lady, Sister to King Edward the Elder, in this City built a fair Church, wherein her self was interr'd; which being overthrown by the Danes was afterwards rebuilt and made the Cathedral of that See, dedicated unto the honour of St. Peter; in this Church the unfortunate Prince, King Ed. 2. under a Monument of Alabaster doth lie, who being murdered at Berkley Castle by the cruelty of the French, Isabell his wife was there in∣tombed: And not far from him an other Prince, as unfortunate, namely Robert Curthose, the eldest Son of William the Conqueror, lyeth in a painted wooden Tomb in the midst of the Quire, whose eyes were pluckt out in Cardiff Castle, where he was kept Prisoner twenty years with all contumelious indignities, until through extreme anguish he ended his life, and
before any of these, saith our Brittish Historian, the body of Lucius our first Christian King (or rather at Caerleon in Monmouthshire) was Interred, and before his days the Brittain Arviragus. This City hath given Honourable Titles to these Dukes and Earls. 1 Robert Base Son to K. Hen. 1 Earle. Gules three rests Or. 2 William 3 John Sansterre, Son to K. Hen. 1 who Married Isabell Daughter and Coheir of Will. E. of Gloucester. England a bend Azure. 4 Geofry de Mandevile, E. of Essex. 2d. Husband of Isabell. Quarterly Or and Gules, over all an Escurbuncle Pomet and Flory Sable. 5 Almerich de Evereux, Son of Mabell, another Coheir of E. William; some put this Almerich before Geofry, but erroneously as I conceive. Partly perpale endented Arg. and Gules. 6 Gilbert de Clare, Son of Annice, another of the Coheirs. 7 Rich. de Clare. 8 Gilbert de Clare, who Married Joan of Acres Daughter to King Edw. 1. Or 3 Cheverons Gules. 9 Ralph de mont Hermen, 2d. Husband of Joan of Acres. Or an Eagle displayed Vert, membred and leaked Gules. 10 Gilbert de Clare, Son of Gilbert and Joan. Or three Cheverous Or. 11 Hugh de Audley, Married Isabell sister and Coheir of Gilbert. Gules Alfret Or. border argent. 12 Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, and Lord Constable. Quarterly France and England a border arg. 13 Thomas Lord Spencer, Grand-son to Elinor, Coheir of Gilbert Earl. Quarterly the 1. and 4. or 2. and 3. Gules there on a fret Or, a bend sable. 14 Rich. Plantagenet, Brother to K. Edw. 4. Lord Adm. and Constable D. Quarterly France and England, a Label of 3 Ermine, as many Cantons Gules. 15 Humphrey Plantagenet, son to King Hen. 4. This Hump. place immediately before Rich. Quarterly France and England, a border argent. 16 Henry 3d. Son of the late King Charles, declared by his Royal Father Duke of Gloucester, Anno 1641. but not create. And to demonstrate that he both lived and died a Pagan, this King Arviragus was, and that by his own order, buried in that Pagan Temple, in the year of our Lord Christ 73. ten years after St. Josephs coming hither, Arviragus ut dies suos explevit, sepultus est Claudiocestriae in quodam templo quod in honore Claudii dedicaverat ut construxerat. And Scut. Virunnius fur∣ther addeth, that he did every month offer sacrifice in that Temple, after the Pagans manner; so much be loved him; singulis mensibus sacrificabat, tanto eum amore prosequibatur. And it is fur∣ther evident by many Antiquities, that Arviragus did many publick acts besides this which Christian Religon could not permit; as that after he had been long time Married to Voada sister to Cataracus King of the Scots, and had divers Children by her, he disinherited the Children, put away and imprisoned the Mother, and Married Genuisse the supposed Bastard, Daughter of Claudius, and kept her, the other yet living, and left the Kingdome to Marius her Son: and was so far from repenting this barbarous act, contrary to Christian Religion, that being challenged for that impiety, he wrote a book in defence of this his wickednesse,Mr. Bron. fol. 132. affirming therein that it was lawful for him to have plurality of Wives, because that neither the Ro∣man, nor the Brittish Pagan Laws, as he avouched, denyed that to Princes, never speaking of or regarding the Law of Christ; and in this state he lived and died.
Moreover all Antiquaries whatsoever of any credit, tell us plainly that Arviragus was no Christian, but persisted in his Pagan Religion; First William of Malmsbury saith, Rex qui tunc regnabat fuit Barbarus, & prædicationi eorum consentirie noluit, nec Paternas traditiones commutare volebat: The King which then reigned was a Pagan, and would not consent to their preachings or would he change his Ancestors Traditions. The Antiquities of Glaseury, Cap∣grave and many other Ancients write, Rex Barbarus cum sua gente tam nova audiens & in∣consueta, nec prædicationi eorum renuebt. The Pagan King with his people hearing such new and unaccustomed things, as St. Joseph and his fellows taught, would not change his Ancestors traditions for the better, but refused their preaching; The first Protestant Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury with his followers affirmeth, Quorum prædicatione Rex Arviragus cum proceribus suis, ab inveterata Druidum religione abduci noluit. King Arviragus with his Nobles, would not by the preaching of Joseph and his companions be drawn from the inveterate Religion of the Druids. Thus we see it manifestly declared, that King Arviragus, was in all his actions, life, and death far from being a Christian in profession. Fabian tells us that after the departure of Claudius, Arviragus progressed through his Domi∣nions, and with great cost, care, and expences repaired Cities and Towns which were dis∣mantled and defaced by the Roman Souldiers, and behaved himself with such gallantry, that he was more beloved, and also feared then any of his Prædecessors; in tract of time he accu∣mulated heaps of Treasure: but wealth begot pride, and that again a presumption of his own strength and power, which caused him to deny payment of the Tribute: but the Senate having speedy notice of his Transactions, Caius Caligula is speedily dispatched with order to reduce him to his former obedience; who with certain Legions (a Legion consisteth of six thousand, six hundred and sixty six men) arrives in Brittain, forceth him to pay Tribute, or rather he is perswaded so to do by his Wife Genissa, Caius Caligula had a meaning doubtlesse to have invaded the Ile of Brittain, had not his rash entrance into the Action,The Brittish History, c. 10. and his ill successe in the German War overthrown the Enter∣prize, by reason whereof he brought nothing to Effect, but onely made a ridiculous expedi∣tion, (answerable to the vanity of his humour, bringing an Army into the hither parts of Belgia, and there having received into protection Admimus or Adaminus (whom Cunobelin his Father had banished) and certain other Brittish Fugitives that came with him) he Writ vaunting Letters to the Senate as though the whole Iland had yielded it self, giving special charge to the Messenger, that his Letters should be carried in a Chariot to the Forum, and not delivered to the Consuls but in a full Senate, and in the Temple of Mars: afterwards drawing his Forces down to the sea coasts of Belgia, where with wonder he beheld the high cliffs of the Ile possessed with the Natives, he placed his Souldiers in Battell-array upon the shore, and himself entring into a Long-boat, was rowed a little way upon the 8ea: but not daring to adventure further, he returned speedily to land, and then commanding a charge to be sounded, as though he would have began to fight, he appointed his Souldiers to ga∣ther Cockels and Muskels in their Helmets, terming them spoils of the Ocean, and meet to be preserved as offerings due to the Capitol. For this Exploit he after coming to Rome, was not ashamed to demand a Triumph, and divine honours to be assigned him; but finding the Senators for the most part to be unwilling to give their Assent, he burst out into threats, and had slain some of them in the place if they had not speedily avoided his fury. After this, himself in open Assembly made a Declaration of his journey, and what adventures he had passed in the Conquest of the Ocean (as himself vainly termed it,) whereat the common people either for fear or flattery gave a general applause; which he taking as a testimony of their de∣sire to have him placed among their gods, rewarded in this shameful manner, he caused a great quantity of gold and silver to be scattered on the ground, and certain caltrops poysoned of Iron to be cast among them, whereby many were killed, partly with those envenomed En∣gines, and partly with the press of one another (each Man being earnest in gathering, and supposing another Mans gain his own losse, so naturally was he inclined to all kind of wickednesse; as he spared not the lives even of those whom he thought to deserve best at his hands. Yet we read not among the many Vices which he had, that ever he was a persecutor of Christians: for those Outrages which he committed against the Jews, which amongst others our own Histories do report, were rather in revenge against the Jews for the death of Christ, and the persecuting Christians, then for any hatred to Christian Religion. And it was a just punishment of God towards that incredulous people and their holy Temple, that had been so long renowned for the true worship and sacrifice of God, To see it now polluted with the Idolatrous sacrifices of the Gentils,Matth. Westm. an. 40. Theat. of Britt. in Caius Caligul. the Idol of Jupiter, and the Emperor himself a vile and wic∣ked man, to be worshipped and adored there as the Lord of Heaven and Earth. Cæsar templum quod erat Hierosolymis jussit prophanari sacrificiis Gentilium; Jovis statuam ibi collocat, se{que} ut Dominum cœli & terrae coli & adorari præcepit; When as concerning Christians, he permit∣ted the favourable Edict of Tiberius to remain in force. He banished Pilate, by whom Christ was crucified. He deprived Herod of his Kingdom, and together with Herodi his brothers wife which he kept (the occasion of the Martyrdome of St. John Baptist) he drave into ba∣nishment; and these and such favours and justice he extended unto Christians, that although he seemed to make War against the Brittains, it was not for Religion sake.
Though mention be made concerning several passages betwixt Claudius and Arviragus, yet the Reader must know that Caligula preceded in Government, Julius being first, Augustus second, Tiberius third, Caligula fourth, and Claudius fifth; but to conclude with Arviragus, Fabian saith, That after he had nobly Ruled the Brittains thirty years, he died, and was bu∣ried at Caergloin, Caerloon, Claudiocestria or Glocester, leaving after him one Son, named Marius or Maurius. MARIƲS. MARIƲS the son of Arviragus, was crowned King of Brittain, in the year of Christs Incarnation threescore and fourteen; the English Chronicle calleth this Prince Westmer-Gaufride saith that he Governed his Subjects in great Affluence, Peace and Tranquillity; some dispute hath been, whether this Marius was a Christian or not. Harding and other wit∣nesse that he was of a Child brought up at Rome, with the Emperour Claudius and his Mo∣thers kindred. Who nourished was at Rome in his Juvent With his Mothers Kin, the best of the Empire,Harding Chro. in Marius, c. 49. fol. 41. With Claudius also, that was his own Grandfire. And not returning into Brittain untill the death of Arviragus his Father, to inherit the Kingdome after him for any thing we read in History; and by the common computation of Antiquaries, King Arviragus and St. Joseph, dying within three years together, it is not a thing to be easily believed that Marius did or could learn Christianity of St. Joseph; Neither did or could Christian Religion allow Marius, a notorious known Bastard, to inherit the Kin dom of Brittain as Heir to K. Arviragus, he having divers legitimate children by his law∣ful Wife Voada, Daughter of King Caracus; Ex qua filium unum & duas filias susceperat. All which, by Christian Religion, should have inherited before him; and he whether they had been living or dead, by that could not claim Title to inherit or possesse the crowne of Brittainas he did. And the Scottish Historians, who had best reason to keep these things in memory, do tell us that he was so far a Roman, as by all Antiquities, by his Mother and Education he truly was; They stile him Marius the Roman: Marius nobilis Romanus. And he was so far from having any true Title to the Crown by being the bastard son of Arviragus, that he was declared King by the Emperors Authority; Cæsaris autoritate Britonum Rex ap∣pellatus; and to take all controversie away, was forced to marry his own Sister by his Father, the eldest Daughter of Arviragus, and his lawfull wife Queen Voada; Harum natu majorem ut jam Insulae status pacatior foret, Matrimonis sibi copulavit, which all men know no Christian could doe. And yet this was after the great Victory of Marius against the Scots and Picts, with their Captain Rodericke; which was as Matthew Westminster and others write, not above a year before the death of St. Joseph, that chancing in the 75. and in the 76. year of Christ; In which battel the two Daughters of Queen Voada (their brother as it seemeth, being dead,) were taken Prisoners, and the oldest the next Heir of Brittain, after the matters pacified, which was not in any probability before St. Joseph's death, was as is said before, married to Marius her bastard-brother; which Marriage (if I may so term it) was still continued; and by them was begotten in it Coilus, after King and Father to our first Christian King Saint Lucius. So that if we speak properly and strictly of Christians, and name them onely such, which actually and really both in Faith and Profession do hold onely the Christian Religion, and no other, it is evident, that none of these three Kings of Brittain, Arviragus, Marius, or Co∣illus, was a Christian, much less converted or baptized by St. Joseph. But if we speak of Christianity in an ample and extended sense, as Tertullian and some Ancients have done of Tiberius Caius, and some other Emperors, not actually Christians, but so affected especially in some points, as as he doth of Pilate, which washed his hands, and said, he was innocent of the putting of Christ to death; Innocens sum à Sanguine justi bujus; I am innocent of the blood of this just person; that he was in conscience a Christian, pro sua conscientia Christianus; We may speak the like of these Kings; and go so far with Harding's Author, as to say with him: Joseph converted this King Arviragus By his preaching, to know the Law Divine. For it is not unprobable, but he was perswaded the Law and Religion which St. Joseph pro∣fessed, was true: But whereas Harding addeth, And baptized him, as written hath Nennius, A Chronicler in Brittain Tongue fall fine.
Except we take Baptizing in a very large and amplifying construction, and say Harding a Poet did thereby understand the true knowledge of Baptisme, and not the receiving there∣of, neither Nennius, nor any approved Author doth or can prove any such thing; By this also we are sufficiently assured, that neither St. Joseph of Arimathea, nor any of his company though otherwise most Holy and most Renowned Saints and excellently deserving of this Na∣tion, none of them converting either the King, Nobles, or People of Brittany, as so many worthy Authors and Antiquaries have told us, may be named the Apostles which converted this Kingdome to the Faith of Christ,Mr. Bro. f. 166. or first founded Christian Religion here. Marius King of Brittain by the opinion of all, was both a Friend and Benefactor unto Christians, confirming unto the Eremits of Avalon, St. Joseph and his Associats, those dona∣tions, liberties and immunities which his Father Arviragus had formerly granted unto them; and the Emperour Vespasian was so friendly and favourable unto holy Christians, that when he was in Brittain before he was Emperour, as Harding from more ancient Authors hath te∣stifyed, he procured those immunities and exemptions for S. Joseph and his company, which King Arviragus endowed them with: and I do not doubt but that he was so far a Christian in judgement, that I may recount him in the number of those first Emperours of whom Ter∣tullian writeth;Tert. Apol. contr. gentil. c. 21. The Emperours themselves would have believed in Christ, if the Emperours had not been necessary to the wold, or Men that were Christians might have been Emperours; Sed & 'Cæsares credidissent super Christo, si aut Cæsares non essent saeculo necessarii, aut si & Christiani potuissent esse Cæsares. This King Marius as Matth. Westm. and divers others do testifie, died the 78. year of Christ,Math. West. ao. 78. and left Coillus his Son his Successor in the Kingdome, Anno gratiae 78. Marius Brit∣tannorum Rex ab hoc saeculo transiens, Coillum Filium habuit successorem; by whom he reigned but a short time, not above six years: Others affirm that he reigned a far longer time, the Publisher of the Brittish History ascribe,Mr. Bro. f. 169. 52 years. Harding avoucheth that he died When he had Reigned sixty years and three; His Tribute paid full well to Roman City, Hard. in Chron. in Reg. Marius c. 50. fol. 42.Of Christs Faith somewhat he was informed; But much more he needed to have been reformed. But howsoever the question about his Regiment, long or short be resolved, certain it is that he was a Friend to Christians; and if he Reigned long, longer was their peace by his per∣mission. Fabian in the life of this King tells us, that the Chronicle of England calls him VVestmer: and that during his Reign, a certain Chieftain, whom Gaufride calleth Londricus, of the Picts, Landing with a great Navy, in the Province of Albania now Scotland, began to make havock with fire and sword; which ungrateful tidings being brought to Marius, he leaveth a considerable Army and marcheth towards his Enemies to give them battle; in which Londri∣cus, or as others call him, Rodicus, with a great part of his Army was slain; In remembrance of which Victory, King Marius caused to be erected a great stone and thereon to be ingraven Marii Victoria or the Victory of Marius; but VVilliam of Malmsbury is of opinion, that this stone was erected in memory of Marius the Roman Consul, the country round about being cal∣led Fince, that time Westmaria, and now VVestmerland; and it pleased K. Ri. the second to add unto the Titles of the Nevills of Raby the higher and more eminent stile of EARLS of Westmerland. 1 Raph Nevill Lord of Raby, Sir Marshall. 2 Raph Nevill. 3 Raph Nevill. 4 Raph Nevill. 5 Hen. Nevill. 6 Charls Nevill. Gules a Salton Argent. Francis Fane Eldest son of Mary Lady Dispencer, descended from the Nevills, Earl of VVestmerland, created Earl of VVestmerland, 22. Ja. Decemb. 29. Mildmay Fane Earl of VVestmerland. Azure 3, left hand Gauntlets Or. The Picts being thus slain and vanquisht, those who where left undestroyed, with all humble submission requested of King Marius to graunt them a place of habitation, who assigned unto them an angle or canton in the remotest parts of Scotland, which by some Authors was called
Cathenesia, which these people the Brittains disdaining to give them their Daughters, the Irish contracted their children, which in processe of time increased into a great Colony, and the Country as affirmeth Policronicon in the 37. Chap. of the first book, was first called Ireland: Secondly Pictania, and lastly Scotland; Marius giving way to fate, was buried at Caerlile. Having in short shewed you the Lives and Deaths of the Brittish Kings and Princes, to the death of Marius; let ut cast our eyes a while upon the Romans, and view the remainder of their proceedings, not yet, related, in this Isle. TheThe ancient Inhabitants of the Counties of Gloucester and Oxford. Boduni then living under the Govern∣ment of theThe ancient Inhabitants of Buckingham, Bedford and Hertford. Cattieuchlani, betook themselves to the protection of Plautius, who leaving Ga∣risons in those parts, marched towards a River, over which the Brittains supposed that the Romans could not passe without a Bridge: and therefore imagined themselves safe, having pitched their Camp on the other side of the water; But Plautius sent over certaine Germans, (who being accustomed to swim over Rivers with swift currents) even in their Armour, found an easie passage to the further bank, and there set upon the Brittains, wounding the Horses, withdrew their Chariots, and by that means overthrowing their Riders, and disordering their whole power; Then was Flavius Vespasian (who had the leading of the second Legion,) and Sabinus his brother, appointed to passe over and to charge them on a sudden as they were dis∣persed; if we follow John Harding, he will tell us that St. Joseph and his Religious company came hither with Vespasian Lieutenant to the Roman Emperour; and that by the intreaty of Vespasian, the then King and Queen of the Brittains, Arviragus and Gennissa, those Fa∣vours and Freedoms which by our Histories he enjoyed at Glastenbury, were bestowed up∣on him; for thus speaking of Vespasian, he saith, With whom Joseph full holy and full wise Of Aramathie with his fellowes fourteen Into this Land then came, and gave content, For whom so then Vespasian pray'd the King, The Queen also, to him to be good Lord And good Lady, which they granted in all thing; When Vespasian returned to Rome home again, The King indued Joseph in Meatrine. Which relation wanteth no probability to make it good; for Vespasian came hither out of Ger∣many, by which St. Joseph must needs passe in his journey towards Brittain, from the Asiati∣cal Gallia, and the adjoyning Countries; neither was Vespasian an Enemy, but a Friend and lover of Christians, of whom we shall have occasion to speak more, when we come to the time of his being Emperour. Some of the Brittains being slain, and others taken prisoners, the night made an end of the skirmish; The next morning the rest of the dispersed rout shewed themselves upon the shore, and gave occasions of a new Fight, which continued a long time with equall advantage, till C. Sydius Geta being in danger to have been taken, recovered himself, and at the last enfor∣ced the Brittains to retire; For which service he had afterwards triumphal honors assigned him, although he were no Consul; in this conflict Vespasian (being beset round about with the Brit∣tains) was in great danger, either to have been slain or taken, if he had not been timely res∣cued by Titus his son, who then exercised the office of Tribune of the Souldiers, and began in his tender years to give some proof of his valour; After this battle, the Brittains withdrew themselves to the mouth of the River Thamesis, near the place where it falls into the Sea; and being skilful in the shallowes, and firm grounds, passed over in safety, when as the Romans that pursued them (not knowing the dangerous places) were oftentimes in great hazard; Some of the Germans that were most forward to adventure, by reason of their skill in swim∣ming, as soon as they had got to the further shore, were compassed about and killed by the Natives, and the rest of the Roman Army that followed was much distrested in the passage, and sharply assailed at their comming on land, where began a bloody fight, in the which Togo∣dumius a Brittish Prince, one of Cunobelines Sons was slain, whose death did nothing abate the courage of the Brittains, but rather enflamed them with desire of revenge; for the effecting whereof, they gathered together new Forces from divers parts of the Isle. Plautius fearing the greatnesse of their power, and being straightned in a place of disadvantage and danger, pro∣ceeded no further at that time, but fortifying only such Townes as he had already taken, advertised Claudius of the doubtful state of his Affairs. In the mean time Vespasian was imployed in the other parts of the Isle, where fortune seem∣ed to lay the Foundation of that greatnesse, unto which he afterwards attained; for in short space he fought thirty times with the Brittains, overcoming two Warlike Nations, and tame∣ing the fierceThe Inhabi∣tants of the Countries of Somerset, Wil∣ton and South-Hampton. Belga: whose Ancestors coming hither out of Gallia Belgica at the first, either to take booties, or to make war, gave the name of their own Country to such places as they had subdued (a custome commonly used amongst the Gaules, when they seated them∣selves in any part of this Island.) Which like fortunate successe Vespasian proceeded in attempting, and conquering the Isle Vectis that lyeth on the South side of Brittain; when Claudius the Emperour being now fur∣nished of all things necessary for the Brittish expedition, set forward with a mighty Army,
consisting of Horsemen, Footmen and Exphanes; He marched first to Ostria, from hence to Masselia the rest of the Voyage he made by Land toBolein in Picardie. Gessoriacum in Gallia, where he embar∣ked; His forces being safely transported into the Isle, were led towards the River Thamesis, where Plantius and Vespasian with their power attended his coming; so the two Armes being joyned together, crossed the River again; the Brittains that were assembled to encounter them, began to Fight, which was sharply maintained on both sides, till in the end a great num∣ber of the Ilanders being slain, the rest fled into the woods, through which the Romans pursu∣ed them, even to the Town ofMalden in Essex. Camolodanum, which had been the Royal seat of Canobeli and was then one of the most defensible places in the Dominions of the Trynobb; this town they supprized, and afterwards fortifyed, planting therein a Colony of old Souldiers to strengthen those parts, and to keep the Inhabitants therein obedience; Then were the Brit∣tains disarmed, howbe Claudius remitted the confiscation of their goods, for which favour the Ilanders erected a Temple and an Altar unto him; honouring him as a God. Now the states of the Country round about, being so weakned by the losse of their Neighbours, and their own civil dissensions, as they were unable to resist the Roman power any longer, began to offer their submission, promising to obey and live peaceably under the Roman Govern∣ment, and so by little and little the hither part of the Isle was reduced into the form of a Province. In honour of this Victyro, Claudius was divers times saluted by the name of Imperator, con∣trary to the Roman custome, which permitted it but once for one expedition; The Senate of Rome also upon advertisement of his successe, decreed that he should be called Brittanicus, and that his son should have the same Title, as a surname proper and hereditary to the Clau∣dian Family; Massilina his Wife, the monster of her sex, for impudency and lasciviousnesse, had the first place in council assigned her (as Sivia the Wife of Augustas sometime had) and was also licensed to ride in a Chariot at his return to Rome (which was the sixth month after his departure thence, having continued but sixteen dayes onely in this Isle) he entred the City in triumph, performed with more then usual ceremonies of state, whereat certaine Pre∣sidents of Provinces and banished men were permitted to be present; On the top of his pal∣lace was placed a crown set with stems, and fore-parts of ships which the Romans called Corona Navalis, as a sign of the conquest of the Ocean; divers Captains that had served under him in Brittany, were honoured with Triumphal ornaments, yearly playes were appointed for him, and two Arches of Triumph adorned with Trophies, were erected, the one at Rome, the other at Gessoriacum, where he embarked for Brittany, to remain to succeeding Ages: as perpetual records of his victory, and a work of such merit to have subdued so small a part of this Island. About this time (as it may be probably conjectured) Christian Religion being yet green, and of small growth, began to cast forth some small sparkes of her brightnesse in the Isle of Brittain; whether Christians of Rome and other countries, then flying persecution, resorted for safety and quietnesse, as to a place remote, and by reason of the Wars and Troubles there, not much subjected to inquisition; whereas also divers Brittains remaining at Rome (where Christianity then increased) either for Hostages,The History of Great Brit∣tain, part 1. fol. 35. or detained as Prisoners, or haply for some private respects of profit and pleasure, had opportunity and liberty to converse with the Ro∣man Christians, and to be by them instructed and confirmed in the Faith of Christ. The gate being now set open by this Author to discourse of our Famous and Saintly Brittains, who even with the very first submitted themselves to the most heavenly and sweet yoak of their divine Master and Lord eternal, Redeemer of Mankind, God and Man Christ Jesus; I shall endeavour to make it evident by the Testimony of Learned and apporved Antiquities, to the great glory of the Brittish Nation, that divers of them were the adopted sons and children of their eternal Father, and the never-erring Catholick Church their Mother, within few years after the Death and Passion of our most blessed Redeemer. To begin therefore this intended Relation, I will begin with St. Mansuetus the Disciple of St. Peter the Apostle, and by him ordained the first Bishop of Tullum or Teul in Lorain, who was born in that part of Brittain which now and for many years hath been called Scotland: but whether he was a Brittain or a Scot, will more fully appear hereafter; and that he was by birth (that part of the Ile now called Scotland, being at that time a part of Brittain, and long after) which among others, Martial the Poet maketh manifest for that time: who wri∣ting to Quintus Ovidius, who was to to travel into those parts, saith, Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britannos. Caius Calig.Quintus Ovidius Roman called so; To view the Caledonian Brittains now doth go. St. Mansuetus a Brittain, by St. Peter Con∣secrated Bi∣shop of Tul∣lum.In the time of this Emperor we read that St. Peter the Apostle consecrated our holy Coun∣tryman St. Mansuctus (whom he had Christened before in the time of Tiberius) a Bishop, and sent him to Tullum in Loraine. The inhabitants of Tullum in Loraine had for their Apostle and first Bishop of their Faith in Christ, St. Mansuetus a Scot by Nation, the Disciple of St. Peter the Apostle, and companion of St. Clement. This is testified also by many others, as Gulielmus, Eisengrenius, Antonius, Democharez, Petrus de Natalibus, with others, saying, Mansuetus by
Nation a Scot (so they term our Northern Brittains according to the last Name thereof,) born of a Noble Family, the Disciple of Simon Bar-Jonas the chief of the Apostles, fellow of Saint Clement the Bishop of Metz, was consecrated by Saint Peter the first Bishop in the city of Tullum. Hitherto these Authors; onely the difference I find between them, is this,Mr. Bro. f. 31.3 that Arnoldus Mirmanunus saith, St. Clement whose companion Mansuetus was, was Bishop of Metz by St. Peters appointment in the 40 year of Christ when Caius Caligula was Emperor: and Eisengre∣nius, tells us, that St. Mansuetus was Bishop of Tullum, in the year 49. eight or nine years after, which may easily be reconciled together, by saying St. Mansuetus was sent by St. Peter, in the year of Christ 40. and took not upon the charge of Tullum untill the year 49. in the mean time being otherwise or elsewhere imployed in preaching the Gospel of Christ. Neither will it avail or prove any thing to the contrary for any man to object, that S. Peter was not yet come to Rome, nor after until the beginning of the Empire of Claudius; for although he came not thither to make any residence there til about that time, yet this nothing hindred many of these Western Nations moved with the Love of Christ, and Fame of St. Peter, to resort unto him in the parts of the East, where he remained to be instructed by him: And he both by himself and his Disciples sent from him had Founded many Churches, in divers parts of the Western World before this time; as namely at Tauremonium the 39 year, and at Syracuse the same year. And to have Founded the Church of Christ in Sicily the same time. This our Countryman St. Mansuetus was either in the Reign of Caius Caligula or Clau∣dius Bishop of Tulls, and Founded the first Episcopal succession there; And no Man will think that he alone of this Nation, was either consecrated Bishop or Priest, or became a Chri∣stian. It is a thing scarcely heard of in Histories that any one Man should only be call'd to that high dignity and calling in the Church of God, and to leave his Country to preach to strangers, except his own Nation was otherways supplyed with Clergymen & other Christians, and except some storme or violence of persecution should separate him from his natural friends and coun∣try, which neither is nor can be pretented in this case; For neither at any time, nor all the life of St. Mansuetus ing very long, yet (he not returning into Brittain) was there any pro∣secution of Christians, but quiet in this Kingdome, and favour and friendship of all in office and authority to that Religion; and not this only, but a general inclination and disposition in the whole Island, to be instructed in, and receive the faith of Christ; And so whether we will say this Holy Bishop of Brittain, went from hence to St. Peter in the Eastern countries, or St. Peter was there then in these parts, when he consecrated him Bishop or Priest; no man can be so unadvised to think, that he was the onely Bishop, Priest, and Christian of this Nation then. This cannot enter into a reasonable judgement;The Brittish Lady Claudia and others of her Family became Chri∣stians about this time. Baron. in An∣not. in diem 19. Maii. Martyr. Author of the 3 Conversions. Mr. Bro. f. 33 Godwyn. Conv. of Britt. p. 17. Godwyn ut sup. p. 17. 2 Tim. 4. Godwyn sup. Mart. Rom. die 19. Maii. Martial Epig. Bal. cent. 1. De Scrip. in Claud. Christian Brit∣tains in Rome the first En∣tertainers of St. Peter the Apostle there, & their House the first Church or Oratory for Christians thereof. These proba∣bly converted by our Coun∣tryman St. Mansuetus. If we said St. Mansuetus went out of this Nation to St. Peter in the Eastern countries (which our late Authors will rather agree to) this maketh as much for the honour of that Apostle, and the love and reverence of our first Christians unto him, to draw them by such forcible bands thereof, to undertake so long and dangerous a journey, to be instructed by that holy Apostle; And this holy Bishop being associ∣ate to St. Clement, a Roman born, and so returning by Rome from these Eastern countries, being their direct way to Metz, Tullum and those places where they preached; but at their passing by Rome, St. Mansuetus visited those Brittains of this Nation, which then were Hosta∣ges and Pledges there; whereof some at that time in true judgement must needs be thought to be Christians; as namely, the Parents of the Lady Claudia, which both were Brittains; And that they then were Christians before the beginning of Claudius his Empire, or St. Peters coming to Rome, in the beginning thereof, the Romans themselves shall witnesse; for they tell us, that the House of Pudens, Husband of our Counntrywoman St. Claudia was the first lodging of St. Peter in Rome, and there the Christians first assembled to serve God. And yet certain it is that this St. Pudens was either but a very young child or not born when St. Peter came to Rome and so young that a late Writer saith of him and Claudia, Pudens and Claudia were two young persons when St. Paul remembred them in his second Epistle to Timothy, which they say was in the last year of Nero, or without doubt not long before, 24 or 25 years after St. Peters coming to Rome, in the beginning of Claudius his time by all our Accounts. And these Authors further say, they were so young that they were not in their judgements married untill the latter end of Trajans time or about the beginning of Domitian. And the Ancient Martyrology it self is witnesse, That when St. Peter came to Rome, St. Pudens was not a Chri∣stian but baptized by him. Therefore it was not St. Pudens, then not born, or a young child and not Christned but after, that did or could give the first entertainment in his House to St. Peter, or make his House a Church for Christians. Besides, evident it is that this Saint Pudens was born in Ʋmbria in Italy far from Rome, and his dwelling place was there at Sabi∣num; of which St. Claudia his wife took another Name unto her, as more hereafter. There∣fore I must entreat the Romans to give me leave to think that this House which was the first Lodging of St. Peter in Rome, was the House of the Holy Christian Parents of our renowned country woman Claudia, and they then Christians, and some of the Hostages of Frittain at Rome when St. Peter came thither at first, and were so charitable to the Saints of God, that they gave entertainment to that Holy Apostle before any of the Romans, and made their House the House of God, and serving him. Not unprobable it is that those Holy Brittains then in Rome which first received St. Peter
there, were first converted by their holy Countryman, St. Mansuertur disciple of St. Peter, as be returned from that great Apostle at Antioch, or thereabout, with St. Clement by Rome into those parts, whither St. Peter sent them Bishops; And by this happy means of that holy Apostle St. Peter, our Disciple and his Christian countryman at Rome, much spiritual good redounded after to this Kingdome; neither can we think but very many here in Brittain, were also then converted by the means of St. Mansueus, and some other of his holy companions, both in this journey to Antioch to St. Peter, and in his return into these Countries again to preach the Gospel, especially in the more Northern parts of Brittain; of which Nation he is supposed to be, and named Scotus a Scot, as all the Brittains of the North part beyond the wall or trench of the Emperours Adrian and Severus were named, because they were so mixed with the Scots, that in time the Scots were the stronger and greater Nation in that part, and of that time; and in this sence, it is most properly true for any thing which we read particularly in the Histories of the Magdeburians,Magdiburgina centur. 1. c. 2. col. 6. Theater of great Brittain. l. 6. Tertullian lib. adversus Ju∣daeos, c. 7. Petrus Cluina. ad Bernard. which divers also of this Kingdom both ancient and mo∣dern seem to say; Petrus Cluniacensis (and I may add Tertullian) tells us, that the people of Brittain in the North (where the Scots now be) were the first Christians; Petrus Cluniacensis calleth the Scots the more ancient Christians; and hereto we may add the testimony of Ter∣tullian, who saith, the places of the Brittains which were unaccessible to the Romans, were sub∣ject to Christ, and addeth of the Brittains, the name of Christ reigned among them, which our English late Authors, in their Theatre confirm in this manner; It is certain that the Brittains were with the first Converts; and Tertullian who lived within 200 years of Christs Nativity, shew∣eth no lesse, who the more to provoke the Jewes against whom we wrote, calleth to witnesse the fruitful encrease of the Gospel of salvation through many countries and nations, and among them nameth the Brittains to have received the word of life; The power whereof saith he hath pierced into those places whither the Romans could not come. Whence Petrus Cluniacensis supposeth the Scottish men the more ancient Christians. The like have other late Writers, and those their cited Authors which cannot be otherwise verified, but by applying this preaching of the faith of Christ unto those Northern Brittains, either by this their holy Countryman St. Mansuetus, the first Bishop we n find of this King∣dome, or some other associate of his, sent hither at or about that time  the same holy Apo∣stle St. Peter; for in all other respects, whether we speak of the Brittish Christians here in the time of Claudius or Nero (of which these modern Antiquaries will tell us more hereafter) or the coming of St. Joseph of Arimathea in his Religious companions into this Kingdome, in the days of Nero, or the general conversion of the Kingdome of Brittain, unto the trenches of Severus in the time of King Lucius by Elutherius; all these were long before the conversion of the Scots, in the time of K. Donaldus, either by Pope Victor, or Zepherinus, as Harrison rather supposeth; the first time which is assigned by any, being in the 203 year of Christ: and if it was under Pope Zepherine, it was after that time; for he was not chosen Pope until the year 209. before which time, or the beginning it self of the papacy of St. Victor, which was in the year 198. this our Brittain, on this side the division, had generally and publickly recei∣ved the faith of Christ; And the very words of Tertullian living and dying before the con∣version of Scotland, within the first two hundred years, writing in his book against the Jews, that the places of Brittain which the Romans could never conquer or come to, did acknowledge Christ and his name did reign in them, do manifestly convince it to be so; For Tertullian li∣ving and writing in Affrica, could not possibly take notice of things done here in an Island so far off, presently after they were first effected, and by no means could either he, or any other Writer speak of things done so long after; truly to report them done so long before, he had been the greatest prophet that ever was. St. Claudia of whom mention is formerly made, was the daughter of Brittish parents, which then lived as Hostages at Rome to the Emperor for this land and Kingdome of Brittain, and by that means it was their happiness and honour to give the first entertainment to that bles∣sed Apostle St. Peter, at his first coming thither, as that Roman tradition of that their house; after by marriage with the holy Brittish Lady Claudia,Mr. Bro. f. 53.3 their daughter and heir, with Pudens the Senator;Floren. Wigor. Hist. an. 38. and 60. Stow and Howes. and so long after this coming of St. Peter to Rome, named the house of Pudens, the Senator, assures us, which I prove by another undoubted tradition of the Romans; That St. Peter was 15 years in Rome, before St. Paul came thither; so writeth Florentius Wigorn, with the common consent of Antiquity and Writers both ancient and modern. And the Ro∣man Martyrology tells us of this Pudens the Senator,Mr. Bro. f. 56. that he was baptized by the Apostles; And there calleth him plainly Pudens the Senator, Father of St. Pudentiana the Virgin, so that being baptized by the Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul (for no others were then in Rome) this could not be by true account, untill at the soonest fiveteen years after St. Peter was first received in that house; And if the Martyrology could carry that interpretation, to under∣stand by the Apostles in the plural number one Apostle (one proper constructoin) yet by this Friendly, and more then lawful interpretation, he must needs be baptized by St. Peter; and so also a most unprobable thing, that divers Christians then being in Rome, St. Peter would first commit himself to a Pagan or Catechumen, and he and the Christians of Rome make such an house their chiefest Church and place of Assembly for Divine things;Martial 11. Epig. 54. de Clau. Ruff. This Lady Claudia, though born of Brittish parents, yet was not born in this Isle; Martiall, saith Claudia caeruleis cum sit prognata Brittannis, but not in Brittain; only she is called of the same Poet, peregrina
a stranger, as the children of strangers usually are termed, both with us and other people; And the time of her birth and age so convince. And whereas we find no memory at all of any natural parents of St. Pudens dwelling at Rome, we have sufficient testimony not only of the permanent dwelling both of the Father and Mother of St. Claudia there, but that by divers probable Arguments they dwelled in that very House, where Pudens continued with them, after his marriage with their Daughter, and were holy and renowned Christians, although their native Country of Brittain hath hi∣therto been almost wholly deprived of their honour, and so must needs be by the Roman Tradition, the first entertainers of St. Peter in Rome; for as a late Author writeth, Pudens and Claudia were two young persons, but faithful Christians,Godwin. com. of Brittain, p 17. c. 3. 2 Tim. 4.21. at that time unmarried when Paul writ the second Epistle unto Timothy, which was in the last year of Nero as all men suppose that I have read, except Baronius, and that they were married in the later end of Vespasian, or about the beginning of Domitian. Therefore Pudens being so young in the end of Nero his Empire, although we grant him then newly married, yet this was by all Computations, at the least 24 years after the coming of St. Peter to Rome, and so it could not possibly be Pudens but the parents of Claudia, our Brittains, that entertained first St. Peter in their House at Rome; who for certain being Brittains of Noble Order and Degree, and living in Rome as Hostages, by all judgement they enjoyed more freedome and liberty in matters of Religion, then the Romans did at that time. The Emperors of Rome then nor long after intermedling with the Brittains for matters of Religion, but leaving it voluntary and free unto them, as other Tributaries, to use the Religion of their Countries, or as they were best and most disposed, pri∣vately at the least, even in Rome it self without controlment. So by the great mercy and providence of God, the subjection and temporal captivity or restraint of divers of these our worthy Countrymen proved to be the most happy spiritual freedom in Christ, both of those our Hostages there and this whole Kingdome, afterward converted to the true Faith, from thence by this original so renowned and glorious for ever to this Nation, to have in Rome it self the first Harborours and Receivers of that most blessed and highest Apostle St. Peter, that the House where St. Peter was first received, was called the House of Pudens the Senator, may be because he long after was owner of it, as it was also called the House of St. Novatus, the House of St. Timothy, the House of St. Pudentiana the blessed children of St. Pudens and St. Claudia our Countrywoman, who all successively possessed it, termed by their Name for the time, as usually houses and places be by the owners Names, untill the time of Pope Pius the first, it was by the Donation of St. Pudentiana, as the Roman Antiquities themselves and their continual kept tradition do declare, absolutely converted to a Church, and ever since after her death called the Church of St. Pudentiana, which before was called the house of them, as they possessed it in order, or the house of them all; sometimes as the old Roman Martyrology calleth it, the house of all the four children of St. Fudens, and St. Claudia; for speaking of them all by name, St. Novatus Timotheus, Pudentiana and Praxedet; it addeth, The House of these being changed into a Church is called the Title of Pastor. And it is evident by all probability that the Father of the Lady Claudia owner of this House where all his children long after lived, was yet living & possessor thereof both now and when St. Peter was first entertained there; For Martial the Poet which lived in this time, and wrote in the dayes of Domitian and Nerva, long after maketh an honourable Memory of the Father of the Lady Claudia, then living, calling him Socer of Pudens,Martial. l. Epigr. saepe. Joan Bale. li. de script. Cent. 1. in Claudio Ruff. To. Pit. li. de vir. illust. in eadem. Godwin Com. Britt. & alii. The Brittish parents of St. Claudia were Christians. Chrys. in Epist. 2 ad Tim. Theodoret in Epist. 2 ad Tim. the Father of his wife St. Claudia our Countrywoman by parents; for the word Socer hath no other mean∣ing then a Father in law, father to the wife, whose Father in law he is, or Father to the husband of that wife to whom he is sirnamed Socer. Evident it is also, that Pudens had no other wife but Claudia, and she long overlived her husband Pudens. And that this his Father in law was as noble for his Faith and Religion in Christ, as by descent and birth, we may easily inform our selves, if from no other ground, yet from the most holy and vertuous e∣ducation of his Daughter in that profession, who by the examples and documents of her pious parents, the best Tutors of children, their greatest charge, was by their instruction come to that perfection in the law of Christ, that being yet but young in all opinions, when St. Paul writ his second Epistle to Timothy a little before his death: she deserved the stile of one of four principal Christians in the judgement of that great Apostle as two great Doctors S. Chrysostome and Theodoret that part of his Epistle, Eubulus saluteth thee, & Pudens and Linus, and Claudia, & all the brethren. He remembreth them by Name whom he knew to be more fervent in Faith. And again, Theodoret upon that place, saith, Paul put in the Names of them which were the best and most loving of vertue: by which we may sufficienty see the great piety not onely of St. Claudia, but her holy parents also, the then honours of this Kingdome, that had caused her then under their charge to be taught and instructed in so excellent a manner in true Reli∣gion. And if I may have the like licence to write for the Religion of this Father in law, which a late Author taketh to prove Pudens the son in law a Christian, I may do it with much more reason; for thus he writeth, That the same Pudens was a Christian,Godwin Com. Brit. p. 17. we have a great presumption in the Epigram of Martial, where for his vertuous carriage he calleth him S. Maritus; but a greater in another of the same Martial, wherein he yieldeth him thanks for perswading him to amend his Writings, that for obscenity and lasciviousness are indeed not to be endured by Christian oars: And this it is,
Martial. l. 7. Epigram. 11.Cogis me calamo manuque nostra Emendare meos Pudens libellos. Pudens thou wilt that I the errors mend Which in my wanton Verses I have pen'd. That by this kind of Argument the Father of Claudia our noble Countrywoman, was in all degrees as good or rather a better Christian then his son in law Pudens was, is most evi∣dent;Martial. l. 7. Epig. 57. ad Ruffin. for these Verses which Pudens did well like and allow, yet by the testimony of Martial himself might not be imparted to the Father in law of Pudens, but would seem light unto him occupied in more serious things. For he writeth unto Pudens, St. Eubulus named, with honour by St. Paul, probably was the Fa∣ther of St. Claudia a Brittain.Commendare meas instanti Rufe Camœnas. Parce precor socero, seria forsan amat. Rufus, my lines from thy wives Father keep, His thoughts are rap't with things more grave, more deep. Where we see that the gravity of the Father in law of Pudens was greater then his 3. there∣fore much more may we presume from hence that he was a better Christian then the other, by that argument.Martyr. Rom. 20. Jan. in St. Novato. And yet we have a better Author both for his Christianity and Name also; for the other three named by St. Paul to send salutations to Timothy from Rome at that time, for certain, except Eubulus the first, were continuing in one House; Pudens and Claudia were then married, as is evident in the ancient Roman Martyrology and others; and seeing by the Romans tradition and other testimonies, the house wherein they dwelt, was the chief lodging of the Apostles, St. Peter and Paul, and their successors until the time of Pope Pius the first, it was con∣verted to be a Church; we must needs account St. Linus the Bishop, the third which is here named, to be also of the same family for the most part; then how to single forth St. Eubulus, which here is first, either for Piety, or Nobility, or that he was the chief Pater-familias, or Master of the house,Mr. Broug. fol. 59. 6. or all, and make him a stranger there, I cannot find it by St. Paul, onely repeating them of one family, or any other warrant; For it was plain here by the Apostle, that he was a chief and principal Christian in Rome, and first named among those worthies; and before St. Linus a Bishop then, and Pudens a Senator, and absolutely there set down as their chiefest receiver, friend and patron: which cannot agree  any other better then to the Father of St. Claudia,St. Eubulus probably a Brittain. this Father in Law to her Husband St. dens, and first entertainer of St. Peter the Apostle in Rome, by the Romans tradition; for neither Dorotheus the continua∣tor of Florentius Wigor, nor any other that write of the Disciples there, place him among Clergy-men; and St. Paul which giveth him that honour in that place, clearly proveth he was none of his Disciples then in Rome; for he writeth in the same place, only Luke is with me; No Martyrology speaketh of him, neither any Historian or Interpreter of Scripture, to my reading setteth down of what Nation he was, but leave him for a stranger, as likewise many do St. Claudia. Therefore except better Authority can be brought against me, seeing he is by the Apostle so signified and placed the first in that family and salutation, Eubulus greeteth you,2 Tim. 4. and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, there is no cause yet I find to deny him to be the owner and Master of that house that first entertained St. Peter in Rome, and he himself the first happy man that gave that glorious Apostle entertainment there; that he was our most re∣nowned Countryman of Brittain, and Father of Lady Claudia; for there is no other, by any probable conjecture was likely to perform this duty in that house; Pudens as before, was either then unborn or an Infant; of his own parents, Father or Mother, there is no mention in an∣tiquities, that either they were Christians, or that they dwelt at all in Rome, much lesse in that house, being inhabitants of Sabinum, and by Country Sabinites, far distant from Rome; And so there is none left unto us to be a Christian, and left to entertain that heavenly Mes∣senger and Guest S. Peter in that time and place, but the renowned parents of St. Claudia then dwelling in Rome, and there confined to a certain house and place of permanency by com∣mand of the Roman power; to whom with many other Noble Brittains; they were hostages and pledges for the fidelity and obedience of this Kingdome, to the Roman Emperours at that time. Mr. Broug. fol. 59. 6.To strengthen this opinion, we may add that St. Paul sendeth to St. Timothy his Disciple the salutations of Eubulus before all others; of which sending the greetings of so few by name, it will be no easie search to find out a better or more probable reason then this, that St. Timo∣thy so neer and beloved a scholar of St. Paul, lodged usually in this house: he also was there with his Master entertained by Eubulus the owner thereof, and by that Title of his Hospitality, obtained the first place in that salutation; otherwise no man will doubt but S. Linus Bishop by calling, so honourable in the Church of Christ, ought and should have been named before him; And that this familiar acquaintance between St. Timothy and these our holy Christi∣an Brittains received original from their ancient entertainment of St. Timothy in their house in Rome many years before this their salutation, in the Epistle of St. Paul it is evident: for
St. Paul being now lately come to Rome, when he wrote this Epistle, neither he nor St. Ti∣mothy were after St. Pauls first dismission from prison there so long before; it is manifest that these, though the Lady young in years, were ancient Christians at that time, and we have an uncontroleable warrant from St. Paul himself, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, that St. Timothy was at Rome, when he was first prisoner there in the beginning of Nero his Empire; For thus he writeth, Know you that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; Thus St. Paul writeth from Rome, in the time of his first imprisonment there, and so maketh these our country Christians to be acquaintance of St. Timothy then, to be more ancient in the school of Christ then either St. Timothy or St. Paul at his first coming to Rome, when there was none to instruct either them, or others in Christian Religion at Rome, but St. Peter and his Disciples. I add to this the charge and warning which Martial the poet gave before to Pudens, Rufus, my lines from thy Wives Father keep; an evident testimony that they then lived in one house together, and so the poems sent to Pudens might easily come to his Father in law his hands and reading, except Pudens hae been so forewarned to keep and conceal them from him, whereof there had been no danger nor need of that admonition, if they had lived in distinct places, and not in one House. And thus much of the Father of the Lady Claudia. Concerning her holy Mother also, so good a Nurse and Tutrix to so happy a child, we are not altogether left desolate without hope, but we may probably find her forth for the honour of this Kingdome her Country. And except the Roman Historians can find unto us a Chri∣stian Father to St. Pudens, and dwelling with his wife in the same House, as I have found unto them a Father unto St. Claudia, and Father in law to Pudens, an holy Christian dwelling in that house before Pudens his time, by Nation of this Kingdome, which by that is said before they cannot doe, seeing that Noble Matron, which is acknowledged by the Roman Writers, even Baronius, to have dwelt in that House, and Grandmother to St. Claudia her children,Priscilla foun∣dresse of a Church-yard in Rome of her Name, Mother of St. Claudia, very probable. Baronius in Annot. in Mar∣tyrolog. Rom. July the 8. St. Pastor Sen. Hermes in Act. St. Pu∣dens. Baron. Tom. 1. Annal. Anno 159. & an. 166. must needs be her Mother, her Fathers wife and Mother in law to Pudens. I am bold to as∣sign that glorious and renowned St. Priscilla, Foundresse of that wonderful and religious Church-yard to be the same Brittish Christian Lady. Baronius (though staggering sometimes in his opinion herein) saith plainly, There was a most Noble Matron in Rome called Priscilla, Grandmother of the Virgins, Pudentia and Praxedes, of whom there is mention in the Acts of Pudentia written by St. Pastour. The like he writeth in other places, whereas she is there by him called the Mother of Pudens: he must needs be understood to speak in their phrase, which ordinarily all Mothers in law use, by the absolute name of Mothers as the common cu∣stom is. Sometimes in other places Baronius saith, St. Priscilla was wife to Pudens, and Mother to St. Novatus, Pudentiana and Praxedes; so likewise doth Zepherinus Binius, when it is evi∣dent, that St. Claudia our Brittish Lady was the only wife of St. Pudens, and Mother to those Saints. Therefore to excuse the one from Errour, and the other from Contradiction, they must hold that both the Mother of St. Claudia, and her self also was sometime called Priscil∣la, as she was in Ʋmbria called Sabinella, of her Husbands house at Sabinum there; and this may sufficiently be gathered from those Antiquities Baronius citeth, in which one St. Pris∣cilla is called Priscilla senior the Elder, or old Priscilla, to make which justifiable,Mr. Bro. f. 60. 8. we must al∣so have Priscilla Junior, the younger or young Priscilla; and this is usual for distinction sake, where the Mother and Daughter, Father and Son be of one and the same name, to call the Father and Mother by their names, with the addition of Old, or elder; then the Sonne and Daughter with the distinction of young and younger added to them: and there be other di∣stinctions between these two; The eldest (Grandmother to these holy Children) as the Roman Martyrology with others testifyeth, who died at Rome, having imployed her self, and her goods to the service of Martyrs; where we see her Festivity kept upon the 16. day of February,Martyr. Rom. 16. Feb. and that she dyed at Rome; Of the other the younger, if by any called Priscilla, we find no such observation, nor that she dyed at Rome, but quite otherwise, that after her husband St. Pu∣dens death, she lived so long at his house at Sabinum, in Ʋmbria, that she thereupon took her name Sabellina, and by all writers died there, far from Rome. Secondly, St. Pastor who lived in the Apostles time, and familiarly in that our Brittish house, in witnesse (even Baroni∣us acknowledging it) that the elder St. Priscilla the Grandmother to St. Novatus, Timotheus,St. Pastor in actis St. Praxe∣dis & apud Baron. in An∣no. Mart. Rom. die 16. Jan. Pudentia and Praxedes, which were St. Claudia her Children, was foundresse of that re∣nowned Church-yard in via Salaria at Rome which bare her name, and was founded before St. Claudia was of years to be foundresse thereof; And it must needs be this, and no other, which prepared that most charitable, Christian, costly work: for we find no other Saints of that name, especially in that time, but only her, and St. Priscilla wife to St. Aquila, divers times mentioned by St. Paul being a Jew, who could not be Author of that foundation at Rome, being at Corinth, and there saluted by St. Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and was with her Husband Coadjutrice to St. Paul in those parts, as the same Apostle testifyeth;1 Cor. c. 16. Nei∣ther did she with her Husband stay so long at Rome to effect such a businesse; for as St. Luke proveth, they came from Rome upon the banishment of the Jews, from thence by Claudius,Rom. 16. which was soon after their coming thither;Acts 18. and they were at or near Ephesus a little before St. Pauls death, as he proveth, writing in his 2d Epistle then to St. Timothy,2 Tim. 4. Salute Priscilla and Aquila; and the old Roman Martyrology with others give evidence, they ended their lives in Asia the less upon the 8th. day of July, when the other St. Priscilla died (as before,Mart. Rom. 8. July. at Rome) far from thence the 16. of Jan.
And Baronius who was an eye-witnesse of the chargeable work of that foundation found in his time, shall prove all the wealth both of this St. Priscilla, and her Husband St. Aquila (be∣ing but Tent-makers, as the scripture testifyeth) was not able to effect such a work; Baronius who had seen and often visited it,Baronius An∣nal. Tom. 2. An. 130. The costly and admirable building of a Brittish Lady in Rome. Marty. Rom. 21 Jul. Act. St. Prax. in Breviario die 2 Jul. & St. Pudentianae die 19 Mai. St. Peters first Church and Seat at Rome, in the house of a Brittish Lady. compareth it to a City for largenesse, and streets under the Earth, relating that the whole City of Rome was amazed to see it; so wonderful and charge∣able a work, with such streets, turnings, Churches, places for divine service, and Conventions, Images of Saints, and other things of great price: as they argue the rich and noble decree of the blessed Foundresse; so for a Lady of Brittain, a stranger, there to be at such excessive charge and expences, to provide such a sanctuary for the honour of Christ, safety, reliefe, and comfort both temporal and spiritual, of his servants in a Forraign Country must be a perpe∣tual Glory to this Nation; and too give further testimony, that this our renowned Country∣woman was Foundresse thereof, we find expresly that divers of her family, and posterity, namely, St. Pudens her son in Law, her Grandchildren, his Daughters, St. Pudentia and St. Praxedes, as likely St. Timotheus and Novatus were honourably interred there. And yet be∣sides this memorable foundation, for the publick good of the Church of Christ, these Romans themselves do tell us, and the late continued buildings do testifie, that there was another such secret Church-yard at her own house, to hide, protect, and bury holy Martyrs in; And thus we have found out now at the last, the house of our noble Christian Brittains at Rome, to have been the first lodging of the great Apostle St. Peter, there his first Church and seat, the harbour of St. Paul, and many of their Disciples and successors, Popes of Rome after them; the first Semi∣nary Colledge, or Mother of Christian Learning there, or in the Western world, the common and ordinary place of holy Christian Assemblies and Exercises: from whence as from the Originall Well and Fountain, the water of life did take course and current to diffuse it self unto all parts and Nations of the Occidental world; we may make some estimate and appre∣hension of the wonderful charitable help and assistance this most happy house of our Noble Brittish Christian parents of St. Claudia, yielded to the holy work, of converting this and all other Western Countries: if besides their extraordinary love to their own Nation, we do re∣flect upon that, the old Roman Martyrology hath told us of this Priscilla, imploying her self and her substance to serve the Saints and servants of Christ; That she and her husband were two of the chiefest of the Nobility of the Brittains, kept Hostages at Rome for this Kingdome: and yet after so many years spent, and their Honourable Revenues much exhausted in these pious works, in maintaining and relieving distressed Christians, by themselves, substance, and great number of Attendants and servants attending also to those holy ends, they left so much to posterity, that in the Family of their Grand-child St. Pudentia in the same House, there were Ninety six Christian men, ordinary Attendants, and St. Praxedes her sister being there, nineteen holy Christians were Martyred in that House at one time. Theat. of great Brit. l. 9. c. 9. Sect. 5.As concerning St. Peters preaching himself in Brittain, the Theatre of Great Brittain saith, If Peter were here at all it was before he went to Rome, and that the Gospell was preached here before it was in Rome, if Peter were the first as some hold who preached there; both which may be more probable, if we consider the huge multitudes of Christians; 1500 saith Baronius, which dispersed themselves into all parts of the world, upon the Martyring of St. Stephen at Hierusa∣lem.Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. an. Chr. 58. p. 597. Metaphr. die 29 Jul. And Baronius himself speaketh in this manner, When we knew that the rest of the Apo∣ples were not sent into the West, as into the Eastern parts of the world, except only Barnabas who a short time taught the Ligurians, or James, if we shall consent to them who deliver that quickly to re∣turn from thence, he went into Spain; it manifestly appeareth that none of the others were sent into the West part of the world. Therefore it was the Office of Peter, who having travelled very many provinces of the East in preaching the Gospel now which was left to doe, he should compasse the We∣stern world; and as Metaphrastes and others witnesse, penetrate to the Brittains, preaching the Faith of Christ; Where he maketh it a certain known truth, and manifestly apparent in Hi∣stories, That none of the twelve Apostles but only St. Peter preached the Word of God in Brittain. And among others he citeth Metaphrastes for that manifest Truth; and when he had alledged divers and approved Authors for Christs appearing unto St. Peter, and sending him into the West part of the World, he addeth, Metaphrastes consenting unto these, writeth thus: Our Lord appeared unto St. Peter in a Vision,Baron. Anueal. Tom. 1. & in Indice v. Petrus Theater of great Brit. l. 6. saying, O Peter, arise and go to the West; for it hath need to be lighted by thy links, and I will be with thee. And he saith plainly for his own opinion, Peter admonished by our Lord so to do, came into the West, and setteth down the time of his coming hither into Brittain in the time of Claudius the Emperor. But to come to things certain and undoubted, in this History of St. Peters living and teach∣ing in this Ile, it is an Historical Verity out of Question, that he was here both in the time of Claudius and Nero also: his being here in the time of Claudius, what time soever it was of his Empire, must needs be long before St. Paul, St. Joseph of Arimathea, or any other that is thought to have preached here or came into these parts; to which I add the Testimony of Gildas our most ancient and renowned Historian, who in his Book De excidio Brittanniae, of the Destruction of Brittain,Gildas Epist. de excid. Brit. thus writeth: So that this Iland might rather be deemed Roma∣nia then Brittania; and whatsoever coyn it had, either brass, silver or gold, it was stamped with the Image of the Roman Emperor: in the mean time, while these things were doing, Christ who is the true Sun, not onely from the temporal Firmament, but from the high Tower of Heaven, exceeding all times, shewing his exceeding brightnesse to the whole world,
doth first afford his beams, to wit, his precepts to this Iland, stiffe with frozen cold, by a long distance of Land removed from the visible Sun. Therefore seeing this Nation did first receive the Faith of Christ, it must needs be in the time of Claudius, when first and never before this Iland was in that state.Mr. Bron. fol 86. 3. And this is that very time which so many Antiquaries, Sameon Metaph. Surius, Luppomannus, Cambden, Au∣drie, Chesne, and others agree upon, that St. Peter preached in this Kingdom. To which St. Paul himself, by his Epistle written to the Romans at that time, and amongst so many Chri∣stians in Rome then, which he remembreth, and never once saluting either St. Paul, St. Ari∣stobulus, (who some Authors say died here, and by Martyrdome, at Glastenbury, Arnoldus, Mermannus saith in the time of Domitian;) St. Clement,Soph. Hier. li. de laboribus St. Petri & Pauli. Metap. die 29. Junii. Mr. Brough. fol. 88. 4. or any one that is supposed to have been in these parts with St. Peter, giveth no small allowance. And St. Paul saluting the Fa∣mily of Aristobulus in Rome, and omitting him, doth sufficiently insinuate, that St. Peter had acquainted him with this his Western Voyage, and taking St. Aristobulus with him or sending him hither before him; for except Identity of Name, both Sophronius and Metaphrastes deceive us: St. Aristobulus brother to St. Barnabas was Father in law to St. Peter and so fol∣lowing him did likely at the coming of St. Peter to Rome, remove his Family thither, and left it there, and he himself employed by St. Peter,Probable that St. Peter was in Brittain, or sent Disciples about the coming of Claudius hi∣ther. Baron. Tom. 1. ann. in S. Petro. Auth. of the 3 conversions. Math. West. ann. 49. Mich. Singel. in Martyrio. Dion. Ariopac. Clem. Rom. ep. 1. Hist. antiq. Mos Eccles. Cant. ad cic. ann. 49. Guliel. Eiseng. cent. 1 dist. 3. Math. West. an. 46. Eiseng. sup. in St. Mansuet. & Epist. Gall. Arnold. Mir. Therat. Conc. gent. & Cent. 1. Francis. Bell. Cosmagr. Tem. 1. in Tou. Mr. Brou. f. 89. Anton. Donio∣charuz. l. 2. de miss. Cont. Cal. c. 30. Eiseng. cent. 1. fol. 56. Bed. Mart. prid. Cal. Jan. Pet. de Natale, l. 2. c. 25. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 25. Sect. 3. Mart. in Chr. Vicol. in Ha∣giol. Ʋnr. Carth. in fas∣cul. temp. Eiseng. Cent. 1. Fran. Bell. Tom. 1. p. 202. l. 2. Godwyn. Con. of Brittain, c. 1. p. 6. and p. 5. and by him ordained Bishop of this our Brit∣tain, must needs be here or in his journey hither at that time. Whether St. Peter was here, in or about the beginning of the Empire of Claudius, and his Invasion of this Nation, in the Fourth year of his Reign, as the common opinion of Anti∣quaries is, I dere not absolutely determine, though divers together with Baronius incline to that opinion, and reasons be not wanting to give probability to it. For if Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plautius, the Emperors Lieut. in Brittain, was converted here to the Faith of Christ, this being before the persecution, which they say Claudius raised against the Christians the 49. year of Christ, Aulus Plantius then being returned to Rome, together with his Wife and Company to triumph there, therefore she could not be converted here by any which they say fled hither from Rome in the beginning of that persecution; and they can find no other Christians here, except St. Peter or some other sent by him, which they do not expresse (our late Writers) to perform that holy Office. Secondly, whereas it is manifest, that St. Peter after his coming to Rome, changed the darknesse of the West into most bright splendour, and was commanded to illuminate the West, the more dark or obscure part of the World, it carrieth great probability that he began this work before his coming from the East to Rome the second time, after the Assumption of the B. Virgin Mary, and had enterprized it here in Brittain before those dayes: for we read in our own ancient Authors (especially the Manuscript-An∣tiquity of Canterbury) that about the 49. year of Christ, Peter did take the Roman Chair a∣gain, which must needs be to make it true after his return to Rome out of some of these West parts. Thirdly, We find in the French Annals, cited by Gulielmus Eisengrenius, divers Bi∣shops consecrated by St. Peter in this time for our neighbouring Country of France; as namely, St. Maximinus or Maximus at Aquens or Aix, and St. Lazarus at Marsiles, in the year of Christ 46. St. Martial at Limoges, and St. Julian at Maus in the same year, St. Paulus Sergius at Narbon in the year 48. when St. Paul the Apostle was not come into these parts to place him there. And to make this more credible, If we follow that Author with his Antiquities, St. Cle∣ment at Mentz and our Countryman St. Mansuetus at Toul in Loraine, who in this opinion may be thought to be left there by St. Peter in his first return from Brittain to Rome, being in his way from hence thither; and this the rather because many Historians testifie, he was or∣dained there by St. Peter: and yet not any one remembreth any place from whence he was directed thither, but only affirm, as he expoundth them, that he was consecrated Bishop of that place by St. Peter in the 49. year of Christ. And this more probable, because after this 49. year of Christ the French Historians, which take pains to set down exactly the very year, wherein their first Apostles and Bishops were ordained unto them, by St. Peter, which are ma∣ny, do not set down the year wherein any one after this time was Consecrated, until the 54 of the Nativity of Christ, by and before such time S. Peter was come unto Hierusalem, and the Eastern parts, the second time into these Western Nations of the world, when he both was, and stayed long time in this our Brittain. And this giveth light unto us, that about this year of Christ 54. S. Peter came hither to stay long time in Brittain; for in this year, as the French Antiquaries write, S. Peter Conse∣crated many Bishops in France, in his way from Rome to Brittain; in this year, as they write he ordained S. Sabinianus, or Sabinus one of the 72 Disciples primate of all France, Archbishop of Sens; in which year also he Consecrated (as these Authors say) many other Bishops in France, as St. Nathaniell spoken of in the Gospell: and by some named Ʋrsianus, S. Amator, S. Poten∣tianus, S. Fronto and others; among which the rather to induce us to think that S. Peter was then in France, this S. Fronto then Consecrated Bishop by S. Peter, was a Frenchman born, as many Authorities prove unto us: and so most likely to be Consecrated in his own Coun∣try; and the Authority of S. Simeon Metaphrastes (who was as Godwyn calls him, An Author without exception) who of all others doth most particularly set down the travailes of S. Peter, will bring him into Brittain about this time, the second time as it seemeth of his being here; for bringing him to Rome as others do, in the beginning of the Reign of Claudius, he addeth
of him; when he had stayed not long with the Romans, and baptized many one, founded the Church,Probably St. Peter came in∣to Brittain the second time about the 54. year of Christ. Ant. Demochar. lib. 2. Eisengre. f. 56. Pet. de Natal. l. 2. c. 25. Anton. part. 1. tit. 6. c. 25. Fran. Bellef. To. 1. p. 202. l. 2. Pet. de Natal. apud Eisergr. in St. Fronto in Gall. Mr. Br. f. 89. 5. and ordained Linus a Bishop: he went into Spain, then into Egypt, and so into Hierusa∣lem by revelation for the transmigration of the Mother of God; then returned into Egypt, and through Africk returned to Rome, whence he came to Millan and Photice, and so into Brittain; which time being truly calculated, will teach us that he came hither in or about the 54 year of Christ, when in the way hither he made so many Bishops in France, long before S. Paul came, although as a prisoner, first to Rome, or any other Apostle thither, or any other Western Nation; For as it is proved before, S. Peter going up to Hierusalem by revelation, at the death of the blessed Virgin, did stay but a short time there, and in the Eastern parts in that Journey; but the charge of the Western world being more particularly committed unto him before, he returned unto it, to discharge his duty here, and although Metaphrastes bringeth him back again to Rome, yet he speaketh of no stay, he made there at his time; but presently bringeth him into Brittain. And Mr. Broughton to confirm this Verity of St. Peters being in Brittain, hath these words; When St. Peter miraculously testified concerning the Church of Westminster in London, I have quoth St. Peter, a place in the West part of London, chosen to my self and dear unto me, which sometimes I did dedicate with my own hands, renowned with my presence, and illustrate with divine miracles, the name whereof is Thorney; which cannot litterally and truly be understood of any spiritual Vision wherein St. Peter in his only glorified soul should appear, as in the time of King Ethelbert we read he did, but of his personal presence there before his death, when and never after untill the day of Judgement and general Resurrection St. Peter had or at any time shall have proprias manus, his own Hands, or any part of his Body united unto his soul; and yet he speaketh plainly here, that he consecrated the place with his own Hands, which is not true either in a spiritual Vision, or where an assumpted Body is used: for an assumpted Body cannot be called the own body of any person. Having thus passed over and related unto you the admirable sanctity, the constant faith, ardent charity, and pure and unfeigned zeal of our never to be forgotten pious Brittains; I will return again to the Roman Transactions in this our Isle. In those terms as you have heard before stood the state of Brittain, when Plautius the Lieutenant was revoked, and the perse∣cution of the War committed to P. Ostorius Scapula, who at his landing found all in an up∣roar; the Brittains (that were yet unconquered) ranging the confederate Country, aad using the greater violence; for that they supposed the new Captain as unacquainted with his Army (the Winter also being then begun) would not come forth to encounter them: but he knowing well that in such Cases the first successe breedeth either fear or confidence, drew together with speed his readiest Cohorts, and made towards them, slaying such as resisted, and pursu∣ing the residue (whom he found stragling abroad) least they should make head again; and that a Faithlesse or a cloaked peace might not give either the Captain or Souldier any time of idle repose, he Disarmed all those whom he suspected, and Hemmed them in with Garrisons, betweenThe River on which Northampton is seated (as it is conjectu∣red) Antona andthe Ri∣ver of Severn. Pabrina. The first that began to stir, were theThe ancient Inhabitants of Norfolke, Can∣bridgeshire and Hunting∣tonshire. Icenians, a strong people, and unshaken with Wars, as having of their own accord in former times, sought the Roman Alliance and Amity; The Countries also adjoyning neer unto them, following their example, prepared themselves to Fight, choosing a place that was compassed about with a rude trench, which had a narrow entrance to impeach the coming in of the Horsemen; That Fence the Roman Captain (not having the strength of the Legions) went about to force, with the aid of the Confederates a∣lone, and having placed his Cohorts in rancks, he set his Troops of Horsemen also in like rea∣dinesse; then giving the sign of battle, he assailed the Rampire, and brake it, disordering the Brittains, who being touched with a kind of remorse, for their rebellious attempts: and see∣ing the passages stopped up on all sides, shewed very great courage and valour in defending themselves (as it falleth out oft times, where extremity of danger it self takes away all fear of danger) In this fight M. Ostorius his son was Crowned with an Oaken Garland, as an Honou∣rable reward for saving a Roman Citizen; Now by the slaughter of the Icenians, the rest of the Brittains (who stood upon doubtful termes, as wavering between War and peace) were well quieted, and Ostorius led his Army against theThe Inhabi∣tants of Che∣shire as is con∣jectured. Caugi, whose Countrey he spoil∣ed, and wasted, whilst the inhabitants doth not come into the Field, but privately, sur∣prised such as they found stragling behind the Roman Army, which was now come near to the Sea Coast that looks towards Ireland; when as certain tumults stirred among the Brittains, brought back the General, who thought it best not to enter into any new action be∣fore he had made all sure in those parts; howbeit upon his coming thither some few of the Brit∣tains (that first began to take Arms) being taken in and put to death, the residue were par∣doned and the Country quieted. For the General wisely considering that in such cases Le∣nity sometimes prevaileth, where Force and Rigour cannot, did seek to win favour of the Brittains by courteous usage of such as either fled unto him for protection or else by the for∣tune of War fell into his Hands; sometimes pardoning them, sometimes rewarding them, and sometimes using them in service against their own Nation, as he did Cogidunus a Brittish Prince,The ancient Inhabitants of Southwales. upon whom he had bestowed certain Cities in free gift, according to an ancient custome amongst the Brittains, who used even Kings themselves for instruments of bondage. But the Silures could neither by cruelty, nor fair means be held in, so as the General saw
there was no way to keep them under but with a Garison of Legionary Souldeirs; and to that end, the Colony of Camalodunum (consisting of a strong Company of old Souldiers) was brought into the subdued Country to defend it against such as should rebell, and to make the Confederates more willing to live in obedience. This done, the Army marched against the Silures, who besides their natural boldnesse, relied much upon the strength of Caracticus their Leader; a man that had waded through great dangers, and had been fortunate in many adventures, having gotten thereby such re∣putation, as he was preferred before all the British Captains. But as in policy and know∣ledge of the Country, he had an advantage of the Romans; so perceiving himself to be une∣qually matched in strength, he removed the War to theThe ancient Inhabitants of Northwales. Ordovices, who entering into the action with him (as fearing alone the Roman power) resolved jointly to hazard the chance of War; and hereupon they prepared for battle, having chosen a place very commodious for themselves, and disadvantageable to their Enemies; then they went to the top of an Hill, and where they found an easie passage up, they stopped the way with heaps of stones in manner of a Rampire; not far off ran a River with an uncertain ford, where upon the bank, a company of the best Souldiers were placed, for a defence in the foreward; the Leaders went about exhort∣ing and encouraging the common Souldiers, using such perswasions as may best fit their hu∣mors and the present occasion; and Caracticus himself posting up and down, protested that that day, and that battle, should be either the beginning of the recovery of their Liberty, or of perpetual Servitude. Then he called upon the names of his Ancestors, that had chased Cae∣sar the Dictator out of the Island, and had delivered them from Hatches and Tributes, and had protected their Wives and Children from shame and violence; while he uttered these or the like speeches, the people round about him made a noyse, and every man sware, according to the Religion of his Country, that neither the Enemies Weapons, nor their own Wounds should make them give over; that chearful cry terrified and astonished the Roman General; and the rather, when he considered how he was couped in, having the river beneath him, the Fort before him, the high Hills hanging over it, and all things on every side threatning dan∣ger and destruction to the Assailers: howbeit his fellow Souldiers demanded the battle, cry∣ing, That there was no thing which Valour could not overcome, using the like speeches, added courage to the rest. Then Ostorius having viewed the places of difficulty led his Souldiers (being hot or eager of the Fight) unto the further side of the river, and from thence to the Rampire, where while they fought with their Darts, they had the first, but having broken down the rude compacted heap of stones with a Testudo, and both Armies coming to handy stroaks upon equal advan∣tage, the Brittains turned their backs, and ran to the Hill top, the Romans pursuing them, both with their light and heavy armed Souldiers, the one assailing with Darts, the other (as they marched thick together) breaking the ranks, and beating down the Natives, who had neither Head piece, nor Armour to defend themselves; so that being hedged in between the Legionary Souldiers, and the Auxiliaries the greatest part of them was slain in the place. At this assault Caracticus his Wife and Daughter were taken prisoners, and his Brethren yielded to the Enemies, but himself driven to extremity, scaped by Flight into the Country of the Brigants, hoping to receive some aid of Cartismandua the Soveraigne Lady there; But as it falleth out commonly with men in adversity, to be forsaken and left succourlesse, so instead of finding the relief which he expected, he fell into the danger which he little doubted: for Cartismandua either fearing her own estate; or thinking to winne favour of the Conqueror (as Princes oftentimes make use of one anothers mis fortunes, to serve their own turnes) de∣tained him in prison a while, and afterward delivered him to Odorius, who was exceeding glad he had gotten him, and forthwith sent him to Rome, as a prize of great worth, and the hap∣py fruit of nine years service in the Wars. The report of Caracticus misfortune was soon spread throughout the Isles and Provinces adjoyning; for his name was renowned in most parts of Italy, and each man desired to see him, who had so long time withstood, and continued that power, which held all the world in awe and obedience; The City of Rome for many dayes together was filled only with the talk of him, and expectation of his coming: and the Emperour himself as a Conquerour, by extol∣ling his own worthinesse, covertly added more glory to the Conquered; the people assemble together, as it were to see some notable and rare spectacle; the Emperours guard in Arms were orderly placed in the Field, before the Camp; after this preparation made, the Prisoners and Trophies were presented in this manner. First, The Vassals of Caracticus going for∣most, bowed their bodies to the people as they passed, and seemed by their Ruefull Counte∣nances to discover their fear; the Caparasons, Chaines, and other spoiles, taken in the War, were carried after them; then Caracticus, his Brethren, Wife and Daughters followed. And last of all came Caracticus himself; his body was naked for the most part, and painted with the figures of divers Beasts; he wore a Chain of Iron about his Neck, and another about his Middle, the Hair of his head hanging down in long Locks (curled by nature) covered his back and shoulders, and the Hair of his upper lip, being parted on both sides, lay upon his breast, the rest of his body was shaven all over; neither was his behaviour lesse noted then the strangenesse of his habit; for he neither hung down his head, nor craved mercy (as did the rest) but went on boldly with a settled and stern Countenance, till he came before the Empe∣rours
Tribunal Seat, and there standing still a while, he after spake these, or the like words. CARACTICƲS his Speech. IF either my vertues in prosperity had been answerable to the greatnesse of my estate, or the successe of my late attempts to the resolution of my mind, I might have come to this City, to have been entertained rather as a Friend, then as a Captive to be gazed upon; For it would have been no disgrace for the Romans to have admitted me into society with them, a man Royally Descended, and a Commander of many Warlike Nations. But what cloud soever fortune hath cast over my estate she is not able to take from me those things which the Hea∣vens and nature have given me (that is) the dignity of my Birth, and the courage of my mind which never failed me: I know it is a custome among you, to make your Triumphs the specta∣cles of other mens miseries; and in this my calamity, as in a mirrour you do behold your own glory; yet know, that I was sometimes a Prince furnished with strength of Men, and ability of War; and what marvell is it that I have now lost them, since your own experience hath taught you, that the events of War are variable and uncertain? I thought that the deep waters which like a wall inclose us (whom the Heavens seem to have placed far off in another world by it self) might have been a sufficient defence for us against Forrain Invasion; but I see now that your desire of Soveraignity admits no limitation, since neither the danger of an unknown Sea, nor the distance of place, can any longer warrant our safety and liberty: if you will needs command the whole world, then must all men become your Vassals, and live under a forced obedience; For mine own part, so long as I was able, I made resistance, being unwil∣ling to submit my Neck to a Forrain Yoak. The Law of natural reason alloweth every man to defend himself being assailed, and to withstand force, to which force had I yielded at the first, thy Glory and my Mishap had not been so renowned, but both of them would soon have been forgotten; Fortune hath done her worst, and we have now nothing left us but our lives, which if thou spare (having power to spill) thou shalt do that which best beseemeth a great Mind, and a Noble Nature. The Emperour hearing his Speech, and wondering to see such boldnesse and constancy of a mind in dejected estate, pardoned both him and the rest of his company, commanding them to be unbound, and so dismissed them. For many daves together Caracticus his fortune ministred matter of discourse to the Lords of the Senate who affirmed the spectacle of his Captivity to be no lesse honourable then that of Syphax the Numidian King, over whom P. Scipio triumphed, or that of Perses, whom P. Aemilius vanquished, or of any other Kings that had in former times been taken in War, and shewed to the people the publick honours of triumph were decreed for Ostorius, whose fortunes being now at the highest, began afterwards to decline by reason that either Caracticus, the ob∣ject of his valour being removed, he supposed he had made a full conquest, and therefore fol∣lowed the service more carelesly, or else for that the residue of the Brittaines having compassi∣on of the misfortune of so mighty a Prince, and being eager of revenge, renewed the War; for they assailed the Legionary Cohorts, which were left behind to build Fortresses in the Si∣lures Country, killed the Camp Master, and eight Centurions, besides some of the forewardest Souldiers, and they had put all the rest to the sword, if speedy rescue had not come from the Villages and Forts adjoyning; divers other sallies they made as time and place gave them ad∣vantage, prevailing sometimes by strength, sometimes by policy, and sometimes by chance; the principal motive that induced the rest to take Armes, was the example of the Silures, who were most resolutely bent, as being exasperated by reason of a speech that the Roman Empe∣rour had used, which was, that he would root out the name of the Silures, as the Sicambrians had been in former time; this made them bold and desperate to adventure as men knowing their destiny before hand; many skirmishes they had in surprising the scattered Troops of the Roman Souldiers, and oftentimes with good successe, in taking rich Booties and Prisoners, and distributing the spoiles among their Neighbours, by which means they drew them also to re∣volt; In the mean time Ostorius wearied with care and travel, ended his Life. Claudius the Emperor being advertised of the death of Ostorius, sent Aulus Didius to take charge of the Army in Brittain, where notwithstanding all the haste he made, he found all out of Frame; Manlius Valens with his Legion having encountred the Brittains with ill successe, which by report of the Ilanders, was made greater then indeed it was, to terrifie the new Governor, who also made use of the same policy to serve his own turn; for by encreasing the Fame of that which he heard reported, he supposed either to win greater praise if he prevailed, or to purchase a more favourable Censure of his actions if he miscarriede. The Silures had made many roads into the subdued Country, wasting and spoiling round about, when Didius the Lieutenant upon his first arrival entering into the Field, restrained their outrage, and for a while kept them in some awe. After Caracticus was taken, Venutius a Prince faithfull to the Romans, and protected by them (so long as Cartismandua his wife and he agreed together,) upon private discontentment
began a new rebellion; For Cartismandua whom the Romans specially favoured for the Deli∣very of Cataracticus) abounding now in peace, wealth and plenty, (which are commonly the Nurses of licentious living) fell in love with Velocatus one of her husbands servants, and forgetting in the end her own honour, preferred him before Venutius, who being deeply tou∣ched with such an open injury and disgrace, raised a power to expell her and her Paramour out of the Kingdome. The War seemed at the first to have been maintained between them∣selves and their private followers onely till Cartismandua by pollicy, had taken Venutius his brother and certain of his kinsmen, and then the Inhabitants round about fearing the event, and disdaining to be brought under the servile yoak of a Woman, declared themselves for Venutius, and with a choice number of youthful and well experienced Souldiers invaded the Country: whereof Didius having timely intelligence, sent certain Cohorts to encounter them. Hereupon issued a sharp Conflict; the Successe whereof was much doubted in the beginning, but in the end the Romans prevailed. The like Fortune also had Caesius Nasica with his Legion; for Didius himself as a man stricken in years and fitter to direct then execute, used for the most part the Ministery of other men, keeping that which his Predecessors had gotten, and building onely some few Castles and Places of Defence within the Land, to win thereby a Fame of augmenting the Office. The year following, Claudius the Emperor by the treachery of Agrippina his wife, who pra∣ctised to prevent Brittanicus, and to prefer her own Son Nero to the Empire, died of poyson, leaving to posterity no greater Fame of any thing by him attempted during his Go∣vernment, then of his fortunate Expedition into Brittany. Finis Libri Secundi.
To the Right Honourable and Illustrious EDWARD Marquess and Earl of VVorcester, Earl of Glamor∣gan, Lord Herbert, &c. HENRY Marquess Dorchester, Earl of Kingston, Viscount New∣ark, &c. The Marquess of WORCESTER. Bernard Newmarsh, Lord of Brecon. Nest D. of Griffith ap Llewellyn Prince of Southwales. Milo Earl of Hereford. Sibill D. and H. of Bernard Newmarsh. Henry Fitz Herbert, Lord o the Forrest of Deane. Lucy Daughter and Coheir of Milo Fitz Walter, Earl of Hereford. Peter Fitz Herbert. Alice D. and H. of Blethin Broad-Spear, Lord of Lhanthloell in Monmothshire, a Welsh Prince. Reinold Fitz Peter Lord of Llanthloell, jure matris. Margaret Daughter of Sir John Welsh. Adam ap Reinold Lord of Llanthloell. Christian D. and H. of Gwaren ddy of Gwaren ddy, the armes belonging to this Family, are the same which Inyr King of Gwent did bear, Viz. party per pale S. & B. 3. de liz. Or. Jenkin ap Adam. Gwenllian Daughter to Sir Aron ap Bledry Lord of Kilsant. Guillim Jenkin Esquire. Gwenllian D. to Howell Vichan, ap Howel, ap Jorworth. Thomas ap Guillim Jenkin Esquire. Maud Daughter to Sir John Morley Knight. Sir William Thomas Knight. Gladis D to Sir David Gam Knight; this was that valiant Knight who when the French so over numbered the English, as to be ten for one, boldly told his King, there were sufficient to kill, sufficient to take prisoners, and a jolly company left to run away. William Herbert Earl of Pembroke. Anne D. to Sir Walter Devereux. William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon. Mary D. to Richard Woodvile, Earl Rivers. Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester. Elizabeth sole daughter and heir of William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon. Henry Somerset Earl of Worcester. Eliz. D. to Sir Anthony Brown.
William Somerset Earl of Worcester. Christian D. to Edward Lord North. Edward Earl of Worcester. Eliz. D. of Francis Hastings Earl of Hun∣tingdon. Henry Earl and Marquess of Worcester. Anne Daughter and sole Heir of John Lord Russel, Son and Heir apparent to the Earl of Bedford, by which means also this fami∣ly descends from the Welsh blood. Edward Earl and Marquess of Worcester, and Earl of Glamorgan. Elizabeth D. to William Lord Dormer. Henry Lord Herbert. —D. to the Lord Cpel, Widow to the Lord Beauchamp, and Mother to the Duke of So∣merset. The Marquess of DORCHESTER. John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, de∣scended from Gilbert Talbot,Mr. Brock fol. 291. temp. Hen. 3. who married Gwenllian, D. to Rees ap Gruf∣fith Prince of Southwales, and assumed for his armes G. a Lyon rampant d' Or ala bor∣dure endente de mesne, which armes were Rees ap Gruffith's, Prince of Southwales. Maud Daugher and only Heir of Thomas Nevil Lord urnival. John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Ver∣don, by which family also comes in the Welshblood; for Theobald, Lord Verdon, married Maud daughter of Edm. Mortimer, L. of Wigmore, son of Ralph, who married Gladis d. and h. to Llewellyn ap Jorworth P. of Northwales. Eliz. D. of James Butler, E. of Ormond. John L. Talbot E. of Shrewsbury. Iatherine D. to Humphrey D. of Buckingham. George Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Anne D. to William Lord Hastings. Francis Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Mary D. to Thomas L. Dacres of Gilsland. George Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Gertrude D. to Thomas Lord Mannors, by which match this Honourable Family a∣gain descendeth from a Welsh line, as in the descent of the Earls of Rutland. Henry Talbot fourth son of Earle George. Eliz. D. to Sir William Reyner. Robert Pierpoint Earle of Kingston, &c. Gertrude D. and coh. of Henry Talbot, Son to the Earl of Shrewsbury. Henry Pierpoint Earl of Kingston, and Mar∣quesse of Dorchester. Cecely D. of Paul Viscount Banning.
THE ANCIENT AND MODERN BRITTISH and WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRƲTE, and continued untill KING CHARLES the First. The Third Book. The Succession of the Roman Emperors from Nero unto Domitian. 6 Nero 14 years 7 Galba 7 Months. 8 Otho 4 Months. 9 Vitellius 8 Months. 10 Vespasian 9 years 11 Months. 11 Titus 2 years. 12 Domitian 15 years. LIeutenants under Nero. Veranius. Suetonius Paulinus. Petronius Turpilianus. Trebellius Maximus. Lieutenants under Vespasian. Petilius Cerealis. Julus Frontinus. Julius Agricola.
Lieutenant under Galba. Trebellius Maxmius. Lieutenant under Titus. Julius Agricola. Lieutenant under Otho. Trebellius Maximus. Lieutenants under Domitian. Julius Agricola. Salustius Lucullus. Lieutenant under Vitellius. Vectius Bolanus.   The Princes and Men of Note among the Brittains, In the time of Suetonius Paulinus Government under Nero the Emperor. Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians. Voadica (the Valiant) his Wife. In the time of Julius Agricola's Government under Domitian the Emperor. Galgacus Prince of the Caledonians. In the time of Sulustius Lucullus Government under Domitian the Emperor. Arviragus. This was the state of the Affairs in Brittain when Claudius the Emperor died, leaving the Roman Monarchy to Nero his adopted Son who (after his first five years spent) being given over to all kind of Vice, neglected the Government both at home and abroad, not daring to enter into any military Action. And it was thought that he would have revoked the Ar∣my out of Brittain, if very shame in detracting from his Fathers glory, and losing that which he had won, had not withheld him. About that time Veranius was Governour in Brittain, where the shortnesse of his continu∣ance suffered him not to effect any great matter; for he died in the first year of his Govern∣ment, and then was the Province assigned to Suetonius Paulinus, one of the most famous Men of that Age for military Affairs. His good Successe at his first entrance, in subduing Nations and establishing Garisons (where need required) made him bold to assail the Isle ofAnglicey. Mona (lying in the West part of Brittain) as having been a common receptacle for Fugitives du∣ring the War: in his passage thither he left the Country behind him as he marched unfurni∣shed in divers places, laying it thereby open to all opportunites of Annoyance. At his arri∣val, the Natives meanly armed, standing upon the shore, made shew of their purpose to Resist. The Women in mourning Attire, their hair about their ears, shaking burning fire-brands like Furies of Hell, ran up and down, and the Druids lifting up their hands to∣wards the Heavens, filled the Air with cries and cursings. These Druids (of whom mention is formerly made) were certain Priests had in great Reverence by the Brittains; they kepe their residence for the most part in shady and dark Groves (as fittest places for devotion.) A∣mongst all Trees they most esteemed the Oak, as hallowed, and without the which they could not perform their superstitious Rites. Their Sacrifices were both private and publick; they instructed the youth of Brittain, and decided Controversies Civil and Criminal: if any man refused to stand to their award, he was forbidden to be present at their Sacrifices, which was accounted the greatest punishment that might be; for thereby he was reputed a notorious Offender, exempt from the ordinary protection of the Laws, uncapable of any preferment, and all men would fly his company. The strange behaviour of these religious or rather irrelegious Priests, and the out-cries of the people of Mona, so amazed the Roman Souldiers, that like men inchanted, they stood still without motion, till the Captain spake unto them and encouraged them to adventure, not fearing a flock of silly women or frantick people, and then boldly giving the Charge, he soon disordered and dispersed them, making himself Master of the Field; which done, the Roman Souldiers entered the Towns and placed Garrisons there, felling the Woods which the Inhabitants superstitiously reputed holy by reason of the Altars whereupon they sacrifi∣ced the blood of Captives, and prophesied of the Successe of their own Affairs by viewing the entrails of men whom they had killed. Marcellus the Disciple of St. Peter, a BritainThis Emperor Nero was the Tyrant who put Saint Peter to death, and after most mi∣serably murdered himself. The Body of this blessed Apostle, and to whose preaching the Inhabitants of this Isle owe their first Conversion, was buried by Marcellus his Disciple, by
Birth a Noble Brittain: 'Marcellus quidam Discipulus Sancti Petri accepit corpus Apostoli & 'lavit illud tali unguento quod nunquam posset putrescere, & postea misit illud in monumento. True, there was another Marcellus in this time, a Roman born, 'Marci Ʋrbis Romae præfecti 'filius, that sometimes followed Simon Magus, and was converted to the Faith of Christ by St. Peter, and wrote among other Works the Acts of St. Peter and St. Paul: but this man being thought to be Martyred by Nero, cannot so well be adjudged to have been the Burier of St. Peter, seeing St. Peters Martyrdome was one of Nero's Actions. And we may not doubt, but our Brittains that first received St. Peter in their house at Rome, and were ever afterward most faithful and true unto him, both at liberty and in prison, as we are taught by their love unto St. Paul in like case testified by himself,St. Praxedes a Noble Brittain Eminent in the Primitive Church. and brought up their children in such sort, that among other Acts of Christian piety, we find as in St. Praxedes that they bu∣ried the Bodies of the holy Martyrs: Imperatore Christianos persequente, eos facultatibus, opera, consolatione, & omni charitatis officio prosequebatur; nam alios domi occultabat, alios ad fidei constantiam hortabatur, aliorum corpora sepeliebat: iis qui in carcere inclusi erant, qui in ergastulis exercebantur, nulla re deerat. The wicked Emperor persecuting the Christians, she relieved them with her worldly Substance, with her own travels and labour, with sweet consola∣tions, and assisted them with all charitable Offices: some she concealed and hid under her own roof, others she animated and exhorted to prove constant in their faith: she interred the Bodies of those which died or were Martyred, and to such as were imprisoned and kept in Dungeons, she was never wanting in any thing. In the mean time Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians, a Man renowned for his Riches, did by his last Will make the Roman Emperor his Heir (joyntly with two of his Daughters,) sup∣posing that thereby his Principality and Family should have been maintain'd in good Estate, and protected from Violence after his death: all which fell out contrary to his hopes; for his Kingdome was made a prey to the Souldiers: Voadica his Wife whipped, his Daughters de∣floured, such as were of the Family made slaves, and the wealthiest Men of his Country, ei∣ther by open force or surmised pretences, deprived of their goods and dispossessed of their inheritance; besides that Seneca one of Nero his Counsellors, having forced divers of the better sort of the Brittains to take great Sums of Mony of him upon Usury, did then for his private gain, exact the payment of the Principal upon a sudden, to the utter undoing of his Debtors; and Decianus Catus the Procurator in Brittany, renewed the Confiscation of their Goods, which Claudius the Emperor had pardoned. The Souldiers placed in the Colony at Camalodunum, had thrust the owners and ancient Inhabitants out of their Houses, terming them slaves and drudges, and abusing them in all shameful manner. The Temple erected in honour of Claudius was an eye-sore and a continual burning unto them, while the Priests Augustales that attended there, wasted the Wealth of the Inhabitants, under the pretext of Religion. To these common grievances of the afflicted people, the present occasion seemed to offer means of redresse while the Roman General was making War in Mona: whereupon they resolved to take Arms, inciting the Trinobants and other Nations (that were wholly brought under subjection) to doe the like. Then they began to discourse of their miseries of bondage, to lay their injuries together, aggravating them by their own constructions, and complaining that their patience had profited them nothing, but to draw heavy burdens upon them as men that would gently bear. That whereas in former times they had only one Com∣mander, now there was two thrust upon them; the Lieutenant to suck their blood, the Pro∣curator their substance; whose disagreement was the vexation of the subject, and agreement utter undoing; while the one burdened them with Souldiers and Captains, the other with wrongs and indignities. That the lust and covetousnesse of these their Enemies laid hold upon all persons without exception; that though in the field he that spoileth be commonly the stron∣ger, yet themselves were by Cowards and Weaklings (for the most part) dispossessed of their Houses, bereft of their Children, enjoyned to yield Souldiers for other mens behoof, as though they were such a kind of people as knew how to doe any thing else save onely to die for their Country. For otherwise there was but a handful of Souldiers come over, if they did but reckon their own number, considering withall that Germany had already shaken off the yoak, having no Ocean-Sea, but a River to defend it. That the causes then moving them to take Arms were just and honourable; namely, to recover their liberty, and to defend their Parents, Wives, Children and Country; whereas the Romans had nothing to provoke them to war but their own covetousnesse and wanton lust, and were likely enough to depart (as Julius Cæsar had done) if themselves would imitate the vertues of their Progenitors, and not be dismaid with the doubtful event of one skirmish or two, seeing that men in misery have commonly more courage (then at other times) and more constancy to continue: and now the Heavens themselves seemed to pity their poor estate, by sending the Roman Governour out of the way, and confining the Army (as it were) into another Iland, by which means opportunity of revenge and hope of liberty was offered: and finally, that being Assembled to advise and deliberate together, they had obtained the hardest point in an action of that nature; wherein it were more dangerous to be taken consulting then doing; with these and the like Speeches they stirred up one another, each man laying his own particular grievances, and adding them to the common cause. About this time divers prodigious Signs were noted to portend the subversion of the Roman
Colony; as namely, an Image of victory falling down, reversed at Camalodunum, strange noyses sounding in the Air, strange apparitions seen in the Sea, the Ocean bloody in shew, and the prints of mens bodies on the Sands; diverse constructions were made of these things as o∣minous, whether that they proceeded of some natural causes (though not alwaies observed) or else that they do necessarily forgoe the ruine and change of great states: howbeit com∣monly in such cases mens minds do misgive them, while they frame the future event of things answerable to their own fearful imaginations, and great alterations falling out sometimes af∣ter like accidents, they superstitiously suppose them to be alwaies the certaine forerunners of destruction; the apprehension of these things at the first struck the Romans with great fear, by reason of the absence of their General, and thereupon they required the aid of Catus De∣cianus theReceiver of the revenues of the Pro∣vince. Procurator, who sent a small company badly armed, to re-enforce the Garison. The old Souldiers that had been left within the Town (although few in number) yet trusting to the Frenchise of the Temple, and not doubting the secret conspiracies of their confederates, were in a manner carelesse, as in times of peace, following their pleasures, and making no provision for defence; The Brittains having in the mean time taken Armes under the conduct of Voadica, a Lady of the blood of their Kings (for in matter of Government they made no difference of Sex) and being informed of the state of the Colony, determined, first to assaile the Towns and Forts in their passage thither, which they attempted accordingly, and with no great difficulty surprised the greatest number of them. The good successe the Brittains had in taking in some places of defence as they marched forward, made them desirous and adventerous to invade the Colony it self; and Voadica as their Leader, being a Woman of great Spirit, and comely Personage (apparaled in a loose Gown of divers colours, with a Golden Chain about her Neck, and a light Spear in her hand standing upon a heap of Turfes, the better to be seen (her Daughters on each side of her) with a shrill voice, uttered these or the like words. The Oration of the gallant Lady Voadica, to the Brittains. IT is no new custome for the Brittains to make War under the leading of a Woman, Enobled by their Birth and Discent; the examples of former times can well witnesse the experience thereof; howbeit at this present, I will disclaim all Titles of Dignity, and Prerogatives of blood: and what difference soever there is in our Estates, yet shall our Fortune in this acti∣on be indifferent, and common to us both; it shall not need to repeat that, which you all know but too well, namely, what miseries we have endured under the Tyranny of this proud Nation; you have had the triall both of Liberty and Bondage, and I doubt not but you find now how much the one is to be preferred before the other, and howsoever some of you here∣tofore for private respects have inclined to the Roman Governours, as Favourers of their u∣surped Sovereignty; yet I suppose you will now confesse with me, that freedome in a poor Estate, is better then Golden Fetters: for what abuse can there be named so vile, or indig∣nity so disgraceful, that hath not been offered us, without respect of Degree, Age or Sex; we Till our ground and sweat for other Men that reap the sweat of our Travels; the wealth that we gather together to maintain our selves, and our Families, is by other men wastfully and rio∣tously mispent; we have nothing our own, but what they leave us; and nothing left us, but la∣bour and vexation: our bodies and estates being consumed to satisfie their ambition and covetousnesse; we have not so much as our heads toll-free so narrowly we are sifted, from the highest to the lowest; Other subdued Nations are yet by death free from Bondage, but we even after death seem to live still in Thraldome, while we are inforced to pay Tribute, as well for the dead as the living; what? are we a Nation so contemptible, that we can serve to no other use then to be slaves, or so unhappy that death it self cannot acquit us from being miserable? How long shall we give way to our own wrongs? shall we hope for reformation of these abuses? nay we have hoped too long, and by patient bearing of one injury, we have drawn on another; why should we not rather seek to redresse them? for if we enter into due consideration of our selves, what are the Romans more then we? our bodies are as strong as theirs, our numbers greater; we have agility of body (our women no lesse then our men) to run, to leap, to swim, and to perform all warlike exercises; for which indeed we are natural∣ly more fit, then for the spade, plough, or handy-crafts; and howsoever the Romans may seem fortunate by the folly or weaknesse of other Nations, yet are they not comparable to us, whom nature hath framed to endure, Hunger, Cold, and Labour, and to be content with things necessary only; for to us every herb and root is meat; each river and spring yieldeth us drink, while we seek no further then to appease hunger and quench thirst; each tree serves for shelter against stormes in winter, and for shadow against the parching heat of Summer; we need no other beds then Earth, nor coverings then the Heavens, whereas they must have their joints suppled with hot Baths, sweet Oyntments, and soft Couches, and their bodies pampered with Wine, dainty fair, and all kind of effeminate nicenesse and delicacy; these
be the properties wherein they imitate their Master Nero, who hath only the shape of a man, being indeed a woman, or rather neither man nor woman, but a monster of nature, a Singer, a Fidler, a Stage-player, a Murderer, and one that excelleth other men as far in Vice, as he doth in preheminence of degree. Besides all this, the cause of our War is just, and the Di∣vine powers (that favour justice) have made our first attempt prosperous; and me thinketh that the necessity of our Case were able even to make Cowards valiant: your Ancestors could make Head against Julius Cæsar, and the Emperors Caligula and Claudius. The Germans have lately freed themselves by that memorable overthrow of the Roman Legions under the Conduct of Quintilius Varus; And shall not we (who scorn to be reputed Inferiour to the Ger∣mans in Valour) be confident in our own strength and boldly adventure? considering that if we prevail, we recover our lost liberty; if we be forced to retire, we have Woods, Hills and Marishes for our Refuge; and if we die, we do but sell those lives with Honour, which we cannot possesse with Safety. For mine own part, you shall find me no lesse ready to exe∣cute (when time serves) then I am now to Advise and Exhort you; my self having deter∣mined either to Vanquish or die: if any of you be otherwise minded, then live and be slaves still. With these and the like Speeches she inflamed the hearts that were already kindled, and perswading the Brittains to pursue their Enemies as Dogs and Wolves doe fearful Hares and Foxes, she let slip out of her lap a quick Hare, at whose running through the Camp, the Brittains shouted, apprehending it as a matter ominous and fore-signifying the Romans flight. And thereupon they cried, that they might be speedily led to the Colony it self (as the seat of their slavery) which at the coming they surprised, killing, spoiling, and consuming all with Sword and Fire, except the Temple onely, into which the Souldiers fled as a Sanctuary, though it could not protect them from the Violence of the furious multitude. Petilius Ce∣realis the Lieutenant of the Ninth Legion, coming to succour the Garison, had all his Footmen slain, and himself with a few Horse hardly escaped. Catus the Procurator knowing himself to be odious to the Brittains (by reason of the extortions he had committed in his Office) fled secretly into Gallia. Suetonius upon Intelligence of the Revolt, returned out of Mona, and led his Army with some difficulty towards London (a place not known at that time by the Name of a Colony,) but Famous only for concourse of Merchants and Traffick: there he stayed a while, as doubt∣ing what course to take, the small number and ill successe of Cerealis making him more wary, and he supposed it would be a work well worth his labour, if with the losse of one Town he could preserve the rest that were likely to Revolt. Whereupon furnishing his defective Com∣panies with such able men as were then in the Town, although the Londoners with tears im∣plored his Aid, and desired his aboad there for their own Defence, yet he marched forward, leaving behind him all such as either by reason of their age, sex,The Inhabi∣tants of Lon∣don put to the sword by the Brittains themselves. or other infirmities could not follow, or else for love of the place (as being bred and born there) would not abandon it. The Town being thus weakly guarded, was taken by the Brittains, and the people therein put all to the Sword. The like calamity befel the free Town ofAn ancient City, with whose ruines St. Albans was built. A great slaughter by the Brittain, of such as si∣ded with the Romans. Verulamium, by reason that divers of the Brittains finding their own strength, forsook their Forts, and assailed the most notable and wealthy places, enriching themselves with the spoil of their Enemies, whom they hanged, burned, and crucified, exercising all kinds of Cruelty that a mind enraged with desire of revenge could devise. They took no prisoners either to preserve for ransome or to exchange, according to the Laws of War, but slew both Citizens and Confederates to the number of above Seventy thousand. Suetonius with the Fourteenth Legion seconded by the Standard-bearers of the twentieth, and some Auxiliaries, made haste to encounter the Brittains, and resolved without further delay to try the chance of a set Battle. Then he pitched in a place that had a narrow entrance with a thick Wood for a Defence behind him, and a fair wide plain before his Camp. The Legionary Souldiers were marshalled together in thick ranks, the light Harnessed enclosing them about, and the Horsemen making wings on both sides; Poenius Posthumus the Camp-Master of the second Legion, was appointed to lead the fore-ward, but he contemptuously refused the charge. In the mean time the Brittains ranged abroad in great Troops, triumphing for their late good Successe, and being encoura∣ged by the Example of Voadica their General, were fiercely bent to assail the Roman Camp, supposing now that no Force was able to resist them. And they brought their Wives with them in Waggons about the utmost parts of the plains, who were not dismayed to be the Beholders of their valiant Acts, and Witnesses of their expected Victory. Suetonius being now ready to joyn battel, though he perceived that his Souldiers, with the sight of so great Numbers scattered upon the plain were not dismayd, yet he supposed it not unnecessary to use some Speech unto them by way of Exhortation, And therefore began in this manner.
SƲETONIƲS his Exhortation to his Souldiers. I Cannot use many words to exhort you, the time permits it not, and the present occasion requires rather deeds then words; yet let not our small number discourage you, conside∣ring that your Ancestors with a smaller number have undertaken greater matters; and that where many Legions have been in the Field, a few Souldiers carried away the Victory; what a glory shall it be for you then, if with so small a power you can purchase the praise of a whole Army; there is no fear of Ambush, the Woods guard you behind, and on the Plain before you lyeth your Enemies Camp, wherein you may behold more Women then Men, and the Men themselves for the most part unarmed, and not likely to endure the points and stroaks of your weapons, which they have so often felt to their smart, it stands you upon now, to approve your selves the same men you are reputed to be; This is the time either to recover that is lost, or to loose that which ye shall never recover, you fight not for honor only, but for honor and life: Remember that you are Romans, whose glory is to doe, and suffer great things. The fortune of this battle will either give us peaceable possession of that our fore-fathers have won, or for ever deprive us of it; what shall become of you if you be taken? the woful experience of our Countrymen most miserable Massacred before your eyes may sufficiently testifie; revenge therefore both their wrongs and your own, and no doubt but the gods themselves (who never leave cruelty unpunished) will assist you; It is better for us to dye in this action, then by yielding or flying to out-live the pa se of our own worthinesse; but whether we live or dye Brittaine shall be ours; for if we live and recover it, our posterity ever after shall be able to defend it; and though they should not, yet shall our bones keep continuall possession of it; take courage therefore and fear not the loud and vain shouts of a disordered multitude, but boldly give the assault, and keeping your selves close together, pursue the fight without think∣ing of the spoile till you have made a full end; for the victory once gotten, all things else will of themselves fall to your share. With these or the like words, the old Souldiers were pricked forward, and Suetonius per∣ceiving it, gave the signal to battle, the Legions kept the strait, a place of defence till the Brit∣tains had spent their Darts, and then they sallied out into the plain (the Auxiliares and the Horsemen making the way) and pressed into the thickest Troopes of the Natives, who being unable to endure the fiercenesse of the assault, turned their backs thinking to save themselves by flight; but by reason of the Waggons placed about the plain, had hedged in the passages on all sides,Brittish Hist. fol. 64. few of them escaped, the residue as well Women as Men were put to the sword, and their dead bodies (mingled with the carcases of their horses and chariots) were heaped one upon another. The number of the Brittains slain in that battle was reported to be about fourscore thousand, and of the Romans about four hundred only, and not many more wound∣ed in the conflict; this days service was renowned among the Romans as comparable to those of ancient times in the free commonwealth. Voadica disdaining to fall in her enemies hands, ended her life by poyson; and Paenius Posthumus seeing the good successe of the fourteenth and twentieth Legion, for that by disobeying the General contrary to the discipline of War, he had defrauded his own Legion of their part of the glory in that action, for very grief slew himself. That Voadica poysoned her self, is the opinion of Stowland, Howes, and Holinshed, who yet introduceth Dio Cassius, to affirm that she dyed a naturall death, and called her Voadica or Bonnica; The count Palatine saith Bunduica, vero vitam veneno finivit; but Ponticus Virunnis relates far other ways of this heroick Brittish Amazon Lady; for saith he, facto congressu exer∣citum Romanorum delevit & Paulinum crudeliter pœna eadem affecit, venit in Galliam, cuncta superans, Italiam properabat delere, sed prope Alpes labore bellorum defessu aegrotavit, & periit mulierum gloria. Tunc tantus terror Romam innaserat Italiam quantus nunquam antea, ne{que} in adventu Brenni, ne{que} Hannibalis, ne{que} alterius ducis, erat mulier procera, flava & coma alba us{que} at crura, &c. In the first onset she destroyed the Roman Army, and most cruelly sent Pau∣linus the same way after his Souldiers; after which she came into Gallia, destroying all as she pas∣sed, making all possible speed to bring Italy also to ruine and destruction, but not far from the Alpes being fatigated with the toyle and labour of War, she fell sick and so dyed; the honour and glory of women; she struck such fear and terror, not only unto Rome, but even unto all Italy, that nei∣ther Brennis, Hannibal or any commander whatsoever had ever done the like. Then Suetonius having gathered together his scattered Troops, certaine Legionary Souldi∣ers, and Cohorts of Auxiliares were sent him out of Germany to re-enforce the Garisons and to make an end of the War, so of the Brittains that either openly resisted, or else stood doubt∣fully affected were put to the sword; and some that escaped the sword, died of Famine for lack of Corn (a calamity incident to them, as to people given rather to War then to Husbandry) the rest found means to relieve themselves by the Romans provisions; and though some over∣tures were now and then made for a Treaty of peace, yet the Brittains could not very readily hearken thereunto by reason they much doubted their safety, as imagining that their guiltiness of rebellion had excluded them from all hope of pardon, and they feared also the private dis∣pleasure
of the Lieutenant, who (though otherwise a singular man) yet seemed to shew too much haughty and hard dealing towards them that yielded themselves, and in some sort under the pretext of the publick service to revenge his own injuries. Besides Julius Classianus (which was sent to succeed Catus) being at variance with Suetonius, had given out that a Lieutenant was coming, and that he was such a one as being void of malice or the pride of a Conquerour, would be ready to receive into favour all such as would yield themselves. He wrote Letters also to Rome, signifying to the Senate that they should look for no end of the War in Brittain, so long as Suetonius continued the government there; and that the ill successe which he had in the service, was to be attributed to his own ill carri∣age of himself, and the good to the fortune of the Commonwealth. Hereupon Nero sent Po∣licletus a Libertine into Brittany to examine and report the state of the Affairs there, and to enterpose his Authority, as a mean to reconcile the Lieutenant and the Procurator; and to win the Brittains to embrace peace. At his landing in the Ile the Roman Souldiers there see∣med to fear and reverence him, and the causes of his coming were diversly reported at the first. But the Brittains derided him; for as men being born free they knew not till that time the power of the Libertines (men made free) but rather marvelled that a Captain and an Army which had atchieved so great an enterprize, could be brought to obey and yield an account of their actions to a base bond-slave (as they termed him.) These things howsoever they were censured by others, yet they were reported to Nero in such manner as the reporters thought might best content him; And Suetonius after the losse of some of his shipping, was commanded, the War being not yet finished, to deliver up his Ar∣my to Petronius Turpilianus, who had but even a little before given up his Counselship. Turpilianus was a man of a soft spirit, and being a stranger to the Brittains faults; was more tractable and ready to remit them, by which means having composed his former troubles, he delivered up his charge to Tribellius Maximus, whose unfitnesse for action, and want of experi∣ence in military matters, gave the more boldnesse to the Brittains that began now to discover the defects of the Governours, having learned both to flatter and dissemble; in confirming themselves to the present time and occasion for their advantage, and for the most part yield∣ing themselves to those pleasures which security useth to endanger even in minds well-dispo∣sed by Nature. For Trebellius, besides his insufficiency, abused the authority of his place to enrich himself by polling the common Souldiers, and Roscuis Caelius Lieutenant to the twenti∣eth Legion, whetted them on against him, as against an ancient Enemy; so that in the end they brake out into hainous terms, the one objecting matter of crime against the other. Trebellius charged Caelius with factious behaviour, Caelius again Trebellius with beggering the Legions, and the discord between them grew so far, that Trebellius being despised as well by the Hides as the Legions (both of them sorting themselves to Caelius his side) was in great fear of his life, the danger whereof he sought to prevent, rather by flying away, then by executing any exem∣plary justice upon offenders; in the mean time the Souldiers neglecting the ancient disci∣pline of War fell to Mutiny and all kind of Riot, as men that had rather be doing ill, then do∣ing nothing. Afterwards Trebellius taking again his former place as it were by capitulation, seemed to govern onely at the discretion of the Souldiers, who finding his weaknesse and want of judgement to use his Authority, took upon them to do what they listed; and here∣with also the Lieutenant himself seemed contented, as being now given over altogether to a sloathful kind of life (terming it peace and quietnesse) for which the death of Nero the Emperour, and the civil discord at that time between Otho and Vitellius contending for the Soveraignty ministred some colour of excuse. Not long before this time the fourteenth Legion (famous for many great attempts, and growing now more insolent then the rest) was revoked out of the Isle to have been sent to the streights about the Caspian Sea, though afterwards upon intelligence of the revolt in Gallia, Spain, (when Julius Vindex took Armes against Nero) it was retained about the City of Rome for a safeguard to those parts; in the turbulent times that ensued Nero's death; it took part with Otho against Vitellius at the battle near Bebriacum, where Otho was overthrown, and Vi∣tellius after the victory suspecting the Souldiers of that Legion (as knowing their great stomachs and ill affection towards him) thought it expedient to joyn to them theBands of Hollanders. Battanian Co∣horts, that by reason of the inveterate hatred between them they might one oppose the other, and himself in the mean time remain more secure. Vectius Bolanus a man not much unlike Trebellius in some respects, was sent over by Vitellius, during the time of whose Government the like disorders still continued in the Camp: (Vi∣tellius was third after Nero,) for Galba succeeded him, and continued Emperor for six months and a little more; him Otho slew, whose Empire continued a lesse time, for being in the fourth battle which he fought with Vitellius,Mr. Br. f. 763. conquered by him having had victory in the three former, impatient of his dishonour killed himself, bearing the name of Emperour but three months, and Vitellius which triumphed over him enjoyed as short and imperial a life; onely eight months or thereabouts, and his death for his cruel wickednesse was dishonourable, stab∣bed to death, cast into the River Tiber, and wanting burial, Cum Vitellius multa crudeliter, ac nequiter Romae ageret minutissimorum ictuum punctionibus, est excarnificatus & ad ultimum in Tiberim mersus communi caruit sepultura, saying that Bolanus by the mildnesse of his nature (being not touched otherwise in his reputation,) had purchased love and good will instead of
fear and disobedience; in this time divers choice men of War, taken out of the Legions in Brittain, were conducted to Rome by Hordonius Flaccus in aid of Vitellius; but when Vespasian made War for the Empire, Bolanus refused to send Vitellius any sucour, by reason that the Brittains finding the Romans state encumbred with civil dissension, began to revolt in divers places of the Isle; and some of them also shewed openly in favour for Vespasian, who had car∣ried himself honourably in Brittany when Claudius was there, and seemed now by many omi∣nous predictions to be a man specially marked for the Empire. The death of Vitellius quenching the flame of civil broyles among the Romans, confirmed the possession of the Empire to Vespasian, who shewed the care and respect he had to the Isle of Brittain by employing great Captaines and good Souldiers there; of this Vespasian, saith that grave Author Mr. Broughton,Mr. Brough. fol. 166. we find in ancient Histories, Manuscripts, and others, written divers hundred years since, that this Vespasian being miraculously cured of a natural incura∣ble disease by the power of Christ, did plainly acknowledge him to be the Sonne of God, Fuist le filz de Dieu, and promised thereupon to revenge his death upon the Jewes, which he performed when he sacked Jerusalem, and slaved that people; for executing which justice of God, and desolation of the Jewish Nation, from this Kingdome of Brittain (though so far di∣stant thence) were present there,Joseph Bengor. apud Rich. Hakluit præf. l. Naviga. Ang. as both Hebrew and English Writers witnesse, 20000 soul∣diers; I read saith a learned Author, in Joseph Bengorion a very Authentical Hebrew Author, a testimony of passing of twenty thousand Brittains valiant Souldiers to the siege and fearful sack∣ing of Jerusalem, under the conduct of Vespasian and Titus the Roman Emperours; There∣fore so many thousands going so great a journey to fight under so Christianly minded a Ge∣neral, and for the quarrel of Christ, we cannot think but many of these were in judgement, also act, or both, Christian. And so we may worthily Register Brittain for one of the first believing Nations, though so far distant from the place of the life, death, and first preaching of Christ; and boldly say it was the first, chiefest, principal and onely Kingdome that sent so great Forces, and so far off, through so great difficulties, to execute the just revenge of God upon his enemies. And the Christian either publick profession, or known disposition of many Brittish Souldiers there mix∣ed with the Roman, under Vespasian, must needs be a motive to justifie his words for true, to force Josephus to these forcible complaints to the Jews at that time, That they could not expect any help from God; for as they had forsaken him, so he also had forsaken them; and he that was wont to defend them,Ora. Josephi ad Judaeos E∣gesip. l. 5. excid. Hierosol. c. 15. was gone to the Romans their enemies, who then worshipped the true God, whom the Jews had offended, & the true God was with the Romans. Au præsidium speratur divi∣num at{que} auxilium de penetralibus? sed qui nos defendebat, ad hostem migravit, quoniam quem nos colebamus, Romani venerantur, nos offendimus; Quis autem ignorat cum illis esse Deum? So that whithersoever we go where Brittains were in that time, either in Jury about Hierusalem, or at Rome in Italy, or in Brittain, then termed by Josephus and Egesippus another world, Quid asseram Brittannias interfuso Mari à toto orbe divisas, & à Romanis in orbem terrarum reductas? We find there were many Christians among them, and their chief Rulers even in temporal Affairs not unchristianly minded, as Vespasian in Jury, King Marius in Brittain, at Rome Coillus, a great Friend to Christians both there and in Brittain when he came to Rule. The Lieutenantship which was assigned to Petilius Cerealis, a man that had given good proof of his sufficiency in former services, upon his first entrance into office, he invaded the Country of the Brigants, (the most populous state of the whole Province) the greatest part whereof (after many bloody Battels) was either conquered or wasted, and the hope of the Brittains greatly abated, when as Julius Frontinus (whose reputation was nothing impared by the Fame of his Predecessor,) took upon him the charge, which he afterwards executed with great commendation in subduing the strong and warlike Nation of the Silures,The praise of the South-wales men. among whom he seemed to fight not onely with men (whose strength and valour was able to make opposi∣tion against his Attempts) but also with mountains, straits and places of very great and diffi∣cult accesse. In this Estate Julius Agricola (having been trained up for the most part in the Brittish war) did find the Province at his first coming thither. He crossed the narrow seas about the midst of Summer; at which time as though the season of the year had been past to begin a new War, the Roman souldiers attended an end of their travel, and the Brittains a beginning of an annoyance to their enemies. TheNorth-wales men. Ordovices a little before he had landed, had al∣most cut in pieces a Troop of Horsemen that lay in their borders: upon which Attempt the Country being awaked as desirous of war, allowed the example, and some then staid to see how the new Lieutenant would take it. Agricola in the mean time, although the Summer was spent and the Bands lay dispersed in the Province, his Souldiers presumed of rest for that year, and divers Officers of the Army being of opinion, that it were better to assure and keep the places suspected then to make any new attempt; yet all this notwithstanding, he resolved directly to encounter the danger, and gathering together the Ensignes of the Legions and some few Auxiliaries (because the Ordovices durst not descend into indifferent ground) himself first of all (to give others like courage) marched up to begin the assault. And having in that Conflict destroyed almost all the whole Nation of the Ordovices, and knowing right well, that Fame must with instance be followed; (for as the rest should fall out, so the rest would suc∣ceed) he deliberated to conquer the Isle of Mona from the possession whereof Paulinus had been
formerly revoked by the general Rebellion of Brittany: But Ships being then wanting (as in an enterprize not intended before) the policy and resolutenesse of the Captain, devised a speedy passage: for he commanded the most chief of the Aids (to whom all the shallows were known, and who (after the use of their Country) were able to swim in their armour if need were, to lay aside their carriage, and putting over at once suddenly to invade it, which thing so amazed the Inhabitants (who supposed that the Romans would have a certain time for Ships and such like provision by sea) that now believing nothing could be hard or invincible to men, which came so minded to make war, they humbly intreated for peace, and yielded the Iland. This Agricola at his first entrance into office (which time others used to consume in vain o∣stentation and ambitious seeking of Ceremonies) entring withall into labours and dangers, became famous indeed and of great reputation. Howbeit he abused not the prosperous pro∣ceedings of his Affairs to vanity or braving in speeches; for he esteemed it an action not wor∣thy the name of a Conquest, to keep in order onely persons subdued by force, neither deck∣ed he with laurel his Letters of Advertisement, but stopping and suppressing the same of his doings, he greatly augumented it, when men began to discourse upon what great presumpti∣ons of future successe he should make so light an account of so great actions lately per∣formed. As touching the civil Government, Agricola knowing how the Province stood affected, and being taught of others that Armies avail little to settle a new conquered State (if violence and wrongs be permitted,) determined at the first to cut off all causes of War and Rebellion: and beginning at home, he first of all reformed his own house (a point of more hardnesse to some men then to govern a Province.) He committed no manner of publick Affairs to Bond∣men or Libertines, he received no Souldier near his person upon private affection of partial Suiters, nor upon commendation or intreaty of Centurions, but elected the best and most ser∣viceable. He would look narrowly into all things, yet not exact all things to the very most; light faults he would pardon and the great severely correct, not alwayes punishing Offenders, but ofttimes satisfied with repentance, choosing rather not to prefer to office such as were like∣ly to offend, then after the offence to condemn them. The augmentation of Tribute and Corn, he tempered with equal dividing of burdens, cutting away those petty extortions which grieved the Brittains more then the Tribute it self; for the poor people in former times were constrained in a mockery to wait at the barn-doors which were locked againg them, first to lay Corn, and after to sell at a low price: Several wayes also and far distant places had been assigned them by the purveyors appointmment, for carrying provisions from the nearest standing Camps to those which were far off and out of the way (petty Officers in the mean time making a gain thereof, by sparing some, and charging others at their pleasures) so as that which lay open to all at hand, was turned onely to the private profit of a few. By repressing these abuses in his first year, a good opinion was concei∣ved of the peace, which either by negligence or partiality of former Lieutenants had been no lesse feared then War. In times of service he was very painful, and ofttimes more adven∣turous in his own person then was fit for a General: for himself would alwayes appoint his ground for piching the Camp, as also be the first man in pruning the Thickets, Bogs, or any other places of danger, nor suffering any corners or secret harbours unsearched, but wasting and spoiling everywhere with sudden incursions and assaults. Howbeit when by these means he had terrified the Brittains, then would he again spare and forbear, as hoping thereby to allure them to peace; whereupon many Cities (which before that time stood upon terms of equality ave hostages and meekly submitted themselves, receiving Garisons, and permit∣ting the Romans to fortifie a work, performed with such foresight and judgement, as nothing was ever attempted against them while he continued in office, whereas before that time no fortified place in all Brittain escaped unsailed. Thus far had Agricola proceeded, when Newes came that Vespasian was dead, and Titus his Son invested in the Empire. The Winter ensuing was spent in a most profitable and politick device; For whereas the Brittains were rude and dispersed, and therefore prone upon every occasion to War, Agri∣cola that he might induce by pleasures to quietnesse and rest, exhorted them in private, and commanded his Souldiers to help them to build Temples, Houses and places of publick re∣sort, commending such as were forward therein, and checking the slow and idle persons, see∣ming thereby to impose a kind of necessity upon them, while every man contended to gain the Lieutenants good will. Moreover the Noblemens Sons he took and caused to be instructed in the liberal Sciences, preferring the wits of the Brittains before those of the Students in Gallia: The Brittains also themselves being now curious to attain to the Eloquence of the Roman Lan∣guage, whereas they lately rejected the Speech; after that the Roman Attire grew to be in ac∣count, and the Gown much used among them, and so by little and little they proceeded to those provocations of Vices, namely sumptuous Galleries, hot Baths, and exquisite ban∣quettings, which things the ignorant people termed common civility, though it were indeed a badge of their bondage. In the third year of his Government, he discovered new Countries, wasting all before him till he came to the Firth ofThe River of Tweed. Taus; which thing so terrified the Northern Brittains, that although the Roman Army had been toyled and wearied with many sharp conflicts, yet they durst not assail it, whereby the Romans had the more leisure to encamp themselves and to
fortifie: wherein Agricola was either so skilful or so fortunate, that no Castle planted by him was either forced by strength or by conditions surrendered or as not defensible forsaken. In all these Actions Agricola never sought to draw to himself the glory of any Exploit done by another, but were he Centurion, or of other Degree that had atchieved it, he would faithfully witnesse the Fact and yield him alwayes his due commendation. The fourth year of his Office was spent in viewing and ordering that which he had over∣run; and if the valiant minds of his Souldiers and the glory of the Roman Name could have so permitted it, there should have been no need to have sought other limits of Brittany then were at that time discovered. ForThe Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland. Glota andThe Firth of Edenborough. Bodotria, two arms of the two contrary Seas, shooting mightily into the Land, are only divided asunder by a narrow parti∣tion of ground, which passage was guarded and fortified with Garisons and Castles, so that the Romans were now absolute Lords of all on this side, having cast their Enemies as it were into another Island. The Fifth year of the War Agricola subdued with many and prosperous conflicts, strange Nations before that time unknown, and furnished with Forces that part of Brittany which ly∣eth against Ireland; And this he did more for hope of advantage, then for fear of danger; for if Ireland might have been won lying as it doth betwixt Brittany and Spain, and commo∣dious also for Gallia, it would aptly have united to the use and profit one of another, those strongest members of the Empire; The nature and fashion of the Irish did not then much dif∣fer from the Brittish, but the Ports and Haven Townes in Ireland were more known and fre∣quented, by reason of greater resort thither of Merchants, Agricola having received a Prince of that Country (driven thence by civil dissensions) under colour of courtesie and friendship did retain him till occasion should serve to make use of him; It was afterwards reported that with one Legion and some few Aides, Ireland might then have been won, and possessed, and that it would have been also a means to have kept Brittany in obedience, if the Roman Forces had been planted each where, and liberty as it were even banished out of sight. Now in the summer following, because a General rising in Armes of the further Nations beyond Bodotria was feared (the passages being all beset with the power of those people) he manned a Fleet to search the Creeks, and harbours of the ample Regions beyond it; backing them first of all with a Navy and a goodly shew, bringing War both by Sea and Land, and oftentimes it chanced that the Horsemen, Footmen, and the Sea Souldiers met and made mer∣ry in the same Camp, each man extolling his own prowesse and adventures, and making vaunts and comparisons, Souldier like; some of the Woods and high Mountains that they had passed, others of dangers of Rocks & Tempests that they had endured; the one of the Land, and the enemy defeated; the other of the Ocean, assaied and subdued; The Brittains (as by the prisoners it was understood) were much amazed at the fight of the Navy, supposing that (the secrets of their Sea being now disclosed) there remained no refuge for them, if they were overcome; whereupon the Caledonians arming with great preparation and great fame (as the manner is of matters unknown) began to assail their Enemies Castles, and some of the Roman Captaines which would seem to be wise, being indeed but Cowards, counselled the Generall to retire on this side Bodotria, and rather to depart of his own accord, then to be driven back with shame; In the mean time Agricola had knowledge, that the Brittains meant to divide themselves and give the onset in several Companies, whereupon least he should be inclosed a∣bout, and entrapped either by their multitude, or by their skill in the passages; he marched also with his Army divided in three patts; which when it was known unto the Calidonians, they changed advice on the sudden, and uniting their Forces together, jointly assaulted by night the ninth Legion, as being of weakest resistance; and having slain the watch (partly asleep and partly amazed with fear) they broke into the Camp, and were fighting within the trenches; when Agricola having understood by spies what the Brittains had taken, and following their footsteps, commanded the lightest Horsemen and Footmen to play upon their backs, and to maintain the skirmish: when the day drew near, the glittering of the Ensigns dazled the eyes of the Brittains, who being daunted with fear of danger on each side, began to draw back, & the Romans like men that were now out of peril of their lives, did fight more chearfully for their honour, freshly assailing the Brittains and driving them to their own Gates, where in the very streets the conflict was sharp and cruell; till in the end the Brittains were forced to flie, whilst the Roman Forces severally pursued them, contending with a kind of emulation, the one to have helped the other, and the other to seem to have needed no help; upon the success of this battle, the Roman Souldiers presuming, that to their power all things were easie, and openly cried to the General to lead them into Caledonia, that with a course of continual conquest they might find out the utmost limits of Brittain; Now such as before the battle were so weary and wise in adventuring, waxed forward enough after the event; and grew to speak gloriously of themselves (such is the hard condition of war, if ought fall out wel all challenge a part, misfor∣tunes commonly are imputed to one) contrariwise the Brittains (presupposing that no true valour but the coming of the General by using the occasion had carried away the victory) a∣bated not much their wonted courage, but armed their youths, transported their children and Wives into places of safety, and sought by Assemblies and Religious rights to establish an as∣sociation of the Cities together, and so for that year both parties as Enemies departed incensed away.
In the beginning of the next summer, Agricola sending his Navy before (which by spoiling in sundry places, should induce a greater and more uncertain terror) followed himself with his Army by land, having drawn to his party some of the valiantest Brittains (whom by long experience in peace he had found most faithfull) and so armed at the MountGrants lane in Scotland. Grampius, where the Brittains had lodged themselves before; For they were not altogether dejected with the unfortunate event of the former battle, but now as men prepared for all chances, they attended nothing else but revenge, death or servitude: and being taught at length, that common danger must be repelled with mutual concord (by leagues and embassages) they had assembled the power of all the Cities together, in number above thirty thousand Armed men (the view being taken) besides a great company of youths (which daily flocked unto them;) and lastly old men renowned in War, and bearing the badges due to their honour, at what time Galgacus for virtue and birth the principal man of all the Leaders, seeing the multitude hotly demand the battle, is said to have used this or the like Speech. The Speech or Oration of Galgacus to his Souldiers. WHen I consider the cause of this War, and our present necessity, I have reason (me seems) to presume that this day, and this our general agreement will give a happy be∣ginning to the freedom of the whole Island; for we have all hitherto lived in liberty, and now no Land remaineth beyond us, no Sea for our safety. The Roman Navy as you see surveying and environing our Coasts, so that combat and Armes, which men of vertue desire for honour, the dastard must also use for his security; The former battles which have with divers events been fought with the Romans, had their refuge and hope resting in our hands; for we the flower of the Brittish Nobility, and seated in the furthest part of the Isle, did never yet see the borders of those Countries which were brought under servile subjection, (our eyes being still kept unpolluted and free from all contagion of Tyranny) beyond us is no land, besides us none are free, us only hither to this corner and secret harbour hath defended; you see the ut∣termost part of the line is laid open, and things the lesse they be, which in knowledge the greater is the glory to atchieve them; but what Nation is there now beyond us? what else but water and Rocks, and the Romans Lords of all within the Land, whose intolerable pride in vain shall you seek to avoid by services and humble behaviour. They are the Robbers of the world, that having now left no Land to be spoiled, search also the Sea: if the enemy be Rich, they seek to win wealth; if poor, they are content to gain the glory to themselves; whom neither the East or West can satisfie, as being the only men of all Memory, that seek out all places, be they wealthy or poor, with like greedy affection; to take away by main force, to kill and spoile, they term Empire and Government, when all is wast as wildernesse, that they call peace; his Children and blood each man holds most dear, and yet even they are pressed for Souldiers and carried away to be slaves we know not where; our Sisters and Wives, though they be not violently forced as in open Hostility, yet are they under the colour and title of friends and guests shamefully abused, our goods and substance they daily draw from us, re∣warding us only with stripes and indignities, slaves which are born to bondage, and sold but once, and after are fed at their owners expences; but Brittain daily burieth, and daily feedeth, and is at charge with her own bondage, and as in a private retinue the fresh man and last comer is scoffed at by his fellow servants; so in this old servitude of the whole world, they seek only the destruction of us, as being the latest attempted, and of all others in their opinion the most vile, we have no Fields to Mannure, no Mines to be digged, no Ports to trade in, and to what purpose then should they keep us alive: considering that the manhood and fierce courage of the Subject doth not much please the jealous Soveraigne. And this corner (being so secret and out of the way) the more security it yieldeth to us, the greater suspition it worketh in them; seeing therefore all hope of pardon is past, it behoveth you at length to shew courage in defending and maintaining both your safety and honour. The Ige∣nians led by a Woman Fired the Roman Colony, Forced the Castles, and had the prosecution of the War, being answerable to so lucky a beginning; the Southern Brittains might have then with ease shaken off the yoak, and prevented our perill; we as yet never touched, never sub∣dued, but born to be free, not slaves to the Romans; we I say are now to make proof of our Valour, and to shew in this encounter what manner of men Calidonia hath reserved in store for her self. Do you think that the Romans be Valiant in War as they are wanton in peace; no, you are deceived; for they are grown famous not by their own vertue, but by our jars and discord, while they make use of their enemies faults, to the glory of their own Army, composed of most divers Nations; and therefore as by present prosperity it is holden toge∣ther, so doubtlesse (if fortune frown on that side) it will soon be dissolved, unlesse you sup∣pose the Gauls and the Germans, and (to our shame be it spoken) many of our own Nation (which now lend their lives to establish a Foreign Usurper) to be led with any true-hearted and faithful affection. No it is rather with terrour and distrust (weak-workers of
love) which if you remove, then those which have made an end to fear, will soon begin to hate. All things that may encourage and give hope of Victory, are now for us. The Romans have no Wives to hearten them on if they faint, nor Parents to upbraid them if they fly: most of them have no Country at all, or if they have, it is some other mens. They stand like a sort of fearful persons trembling and gazing at the strangenesse of Heaven it self, at the sea and the Woods. And now the Heavens (favouring our cause) have delivered them (mewed up, as it were and fettered) into our hands; be not terrified or dismaid with the vain-shew and glittering of their gold and silver, which of themselves do neither offend nor defend. And think that even amongst our enemies we shall find some of our side, when the Brittains shall acknowledge their own cause, the Gauls remember their old Freedom, and the rest of the Germans forsake them, as of late the Ʋsipians did; what then should we fear? The Castles are empty, the Colonies peopled with aged and impotent persons, the free Cities dis∣contented, and distracted with factions, whilst they which are under, obey with ill will, and they do govern and rule without right. Here is the Roman General and the Army, their Tributes & Mines, with other miseries, inseparably following such as live under subjection of others, which whether we are to endure for ever, or speedily to revenge, it lieth this day in this Field to determine; wherefore being now to joyn Battel, bear in mind I beseech you, both your Ancestors (which lived in the happy estate of Liberty) and your Successors, who (if you fail in this enterprize) shall live hereafter in perpetual servitude. This Speech delive∣red (with great vehemency of voice and action) was chearfully received by the Brittains, with a Song (after their fashion) accompanied with confused cries and acclamations. As the Roman Cohorts drew together and discovered themselves, whilst some of the boldest pressed forward, the rest put themselves in array; and Agricola albeit his Souldiers were glad of that day, and could scarce with words have been withholden, yet supposing it fit to say somewhat, He encouraged them in this wise. AGRICOLA his Speech to his Souldiers. FEllow-souldiers and Companions in Arms, your faithful diligence and service these eight years so painfully performed, by the Vertue and Fortune of the Roman Empire, hath at length conquered Brittany. In so many Journeys, so many Battels we were of necessity to shew our selves either valiant against the Enemy, or patient and laborious above and against nature it self; in all which Exploits, we have both of us carried our selves, as neither I de∣sired better Souldiers, nor you other Captains. We have exceeded the limits, I of my Pre∣decessors, and you likewise of yours. The end of Brittany is now found, not by Fame and Report, but we are with our Arms and Pavillions really invested thereof. Brittany is found and subdued. In your marching heretofore, when the passage of Bogs, Mountains and Rivers troubled and tired you, how often have I heard the valiant Souldiers say, When will the Enemy pre∣sent himself? Lo now they are put out of their holes, and here they are come; lo now your wish; lo here the place for trial of your Vertue, and all things likely to follow in a good and easie course if you win; contrariwise all against you if you lose. For as to have gone so much ground, escaped the Woods and Bogs, and passed over so many arms of the sea, are honourable testimonies of your forwardnesse; so if we fly, the advantage we have had, will become our greatest disadvantage. For we are not so skilful in the Countrey, we have not the like store of provision; we have only hands and weapons, wherein our Hopes, our For∣tune, and all things else are included. For mine own part, I have been long since resolved that to shew our backs is dishonourable, both for Souldier and General; and therefore a commendable death is better then life with reproach, (surety and honour commonly dwel∣ling together.) Howbeit, if ought should mishappen in this Enterprize, yet this will be a glory for us to have died even in the utmost end of the world and of nature: if new Nations and Souldiers unknown were in the field, I would by the example of other Armies encourage you. But now I require you only to recount your own victorious Exploits, and to ask counsel of your own eyes; these are the same men which the last year assailed one Legion by stealth in the night, and were suddenly and in a manner by the blasts of your mouths overthrown. These of all the Brittains have been most nimble in running away, and by that means have escaped the longest alive. For as in Forrests and Woods the strongest Beasts are chased away by main force, and the cowardly and fearful scarce only by the noise of the Hunters; so the most valiant of the Brittish Nation, we have already dispatched; the raskal herd of dastardly cowards only remaineth; and lo, we have now at length found them, not as intending to stay and making Head against us, but as last overtaken, and by extreme passion of fear, standing like stocks, and presenting to us occasion in this place of a worthy and memorable Victory. Now therefore make a short work of a long warfare, and to almost fifty years travel let this day impose a glorious end. Let each of you shew his Valour, and approve to your Country, that this Army of ours could never justly be charged, either with protracting the War for fear or upon false pretences, for not accomplishing the Conquest.
As Agricola was speaking the Souldiers gave great tokens of their fervent desire to fight, and when he had ended his Speech, they joyfully applauded it, running streight wayes to their weapons and rushing furiously forward, which the Roman General perceiving forthwith orde∣red his Army in this manner: with the Auxiliary Footmen he fortified the middle Battle, The Horsemen he placed in the wings on both sides, The Legions he commanded to stand behind, Before the Trench of the Camp, to the greater glory of the Victory, if it were ob∣tained, without Roman blood, or otherwise for assistance, if the forward should be distressed, The Brittains were marshalled on the higher ground fitly to shew and to terrifie their enemies: The first Troop standing on the plain, the rest on the ascent of the hill, rising up as it were by degrees one over another. The middle of the Field was filled with Chariots and Horse∣men, clattering and running round about. Then Agricola finding them to exceed him in number, and fearing least he should be assailed, on the Front and Flanks both at one instant, thought it best to display his Army in length, and although by that means the Battel would become disproportionably long, and many advised him to take the Legions: yet he confi∣dently rejected the counsel, and leaving his Horse, advanced himself before the Ensignes on Foot. In the first Encounter before they joyned both sides, discharged and threw their darts. The Brittains imploying both Art and Valour, with great Swords and little Targets defended themselves and wounded their Enemies, till Agricola espying his advantage, appointed threeCompanies of Hollanders. Battanian Cohorts, and two of theThe ancient Inhabitants of the Territory of Leige in the Low Coun∣tries. Tungrians to presse forward, and to bring the matter to Handy-stroaks and dint of sword, which they by reason of their long service were able readily to perform to the prejudice of the other side, in regard of their little Buck∣lers and huge Swords. For the Swords of the Brittains being weighty and blunt-pointed, were neither fit either for the close or open fight. Now as the Battanians began to strike them on the faces with the pikes of their Bucklers, and (having overborn such as resisted) to march up to the Mountains, the rest of the Cohorts (gathering Courage upon emulation) violently beat down all about them, and running forward left some of the Brittains half dead, some wholly untouched for haste, as desirous to have part of the glory in winning the Field. In the mean time, both the Chariots of the Brittains mingled themselves with their enemies Battel of Footmen, and also their Troops of Horsemen; (albeit they had lately ter∣rified others) yet now themselves beginning to fly were distressed by the unevenness of the ground and the thick ranks of their enemies, who continued the Fight till the Brittains by main weight of their own Horses and Chariots were born down one upon another; the ma∣sterless Horses afrighted, running up and down with the Chariots, and many times over∣bearing their Friends which either met them or thwarted their way. Now the Brittains who stood aloof from the Battel, upon the top of the Hills, and did at the first in a manner, disdain the small number of their enemies, began to come downe by little and little, and sought to fetch a compasse about the backes of the Romans, which were then in train of winning the Field. But Agricola suspecting, as much opposed them with certain wings of horsemen, purposely retained about him for sud∣den dispatches upon all chances, and repulsed them as fiercely as they ran to assaile; So the council of the Brittains turning to their own hurt, the Roman wings were commanded to for∣sake the battle and follow the Flight; then were there pitifull spectacles to be seen, pursuing, wounding, taking prisoners and then killing such as were taking as soon as others came in the way. Then the whole Regiments of the Brittains (though armed and more in number) turn∣ed their backs to the fewer, others unarmed fought their own death, offering themselves vo∣luntarily to the slaughter; The fields every where were imbrued with blood; every where weapons lay scattered, wounded bodies, mangled limbs, some slain out right, some half dead, some yielding up the Ghost, and yet even at the last gaspe seeming by their countenances to discover both anger and valour; such of the Brittains as in flying recovered the Woods, joy∣ned themselves together again and intrapped unawares some of the Roman Souldiers that unadvisedly followed, not knowing the Countrey; and if Agricola had not, by his presence and direction assisted at need, setting about them his most expert Footmen (as it were in form of a Tayle) and commanded some of his Horsemen to leave them Horses (where the passage was narrow) and others to enter single on horseback where the wood was thin, doubtless the Romans had taken a blow by their own over much boldnesse; but after that the Brittains saw them again in good array, and orderly following the chase, they fled (not in Troops as before, when they attended each other, but utterly disbanded, shunning ill company) to∣ward the desart and farre distant places; the darknesse of the night and satiety of the blood, made an end of the chase; of the Brittains were then stain about ten thousand, of the Romans 300 and 40. amongst whom the chief man of note was Aulus Atticus, the Captain of a Cohort, who upon a youthful heat, and through the fierceness of his Horse, was carried into the middest of his Enemies; that night the winners refreshed themselves, taking pleasure in talking of the victory, and dividing the spoile; but the Brittains uttterly discouraged, crying and howling (both men and women together) took and drew with them their wounded persons, calling the not wounded, forsaking their own Houses, and in despair setting them on fire; then seeking holes abroad to lurk in, and having found them, straight awayes again forsaking them, some∣times communicating Councels together, conceiving some little hope, and then by and by de∣jected and desperate, sometimes moved with pity at the sight of their Kinsfolks and Friends,
and sometimes stirred with rage and envy in thinking and speaking of their Enemies (which was most lamentable) some of them by way of compassion and mercy killing their own Chil∣dren and Wives. The day following did more plainly discover the greatness of the victory, by the calamity of the vanquished desolation and silence every where, the smoak of the houses fired appeared a far off: no sallies out of the woods, no stirring in the Mountains, no man to make resistance, or to meet with the Roman spies, who being sent abroad into all quarters, found by the print of the Brittains footsteps that their flight was uncertain, and that they were no where in compa∣nies together, but scattered in divers places, and altogether unable to make any new attempt upon the sudden; wherefore Agricola the summer being now spent in this journey, and the time past for any other imployment, brought his Army into the borders of theThe Ancient Inhabitants of Eskdale in Scotland, (as it is constru∣ed.) Horestians Countrey, where having received Hostages of the Inhabitants, he commanded the Admiral of his Navy (being furnished with Souldiers and sufficient strength for that purpose) to saile about Brittain, whether the Fame and Terror of the Roman Name was already gone before. Then he planted Garisons upon the borders between Blota and Bodotria, and disposed of his Foot∣men and Horsemen in the wintering places within the Province. Thus after many Conflicts about the space of one hundred thirty six years from Julius Cæsar's first entrance, the utmost limits of Brittany and the Isles of the Orcades, lying on the North side of it, were by the Va∣lour and Industry of Julius Agricola first discovered and made known to the Romans, and the South part of the Isle in the fourth year of the Reign of Domitian, being in the year of our Redemption 86, reduced into a full Province, the Government whereof was particular to the Roman Emperours themselves, and not at the disposition of the Senate. This state of affairs here Agricola signified by letters (without any amplifying terms to Do∣mitian, the Successour of Titus his brother in the Empire) who after his manner with a chearful countenance and grieved heart, received the news, being inwardly pricked with anger and dis∣dain, to think that his late counterfeit triumph of Germany (wherein a shew was made of slaves bought for mony, attired like Captives of that Country) was had in derision and justly scorn∣ed; whereas now a true & great victory (so many thousand of Enemies being slain) was currant in every mans mouth: besides he esteemed it a most perilous point in a state, that a private mans name should be exalted above the name of a Prince; and he supposed that he had in vain suppressed the study of Oratory, and all other publick Arts, if he should in military Glory be excelled by another; for matters of other kinds, as he supposed might more easily be passed over, but to be a good Commander of an Army, was to be above a private estate, that being a private estate peculiar to a Prince; Domitian being tormented with these and the like conceits, and musing much in his closet above (which was commonly noted as a sign of some mischief in working) thought it best for the present to cloak and dissemble his malice, till the heat of Agricola's glory, and the love of his Souldiers were somewhat abated (for as yet Agricola remained in office: wherefore he commanded that all the houours of Triumphal Ornaments, the image Triumphal, and what else was usually bestowed in lieu of triumph, should in most ample and honourable terms be awarded him in the Senate: and then send∣ing a Successour, he caused a brute to spread, that the Province of Syria (which was then void, and specially reserved for men of great quality) should be assigned to Agricola; the common opinion was that Domitian sending one of his most secret & trusty servants unto him sent with all the Commission for the Lieutenancie of Syria, with private instructions, that if Agoicola at the time of his coming, should be still in Brittain, then it should be delivered; if otherwise it should be kept back; and that the same man meeting Agricola as he crossed the Seas, without speaking to him or delivering the message, returned again unto Domitian; whether this were true or fained upon a probable surmise, as agreeable to the Princes disposition, it could not be directly affirmed; But in the mean season, Agricola had yielded up the Province in good and peaceable estate unto (Neus Trebellius, or rather as some Authors report) to Salustius Lucullus. Agricola least his coming to Rome should have bin noted by reason of the multitude of peo∣ple, which would have gone out to see and meet him, did warily cut off the occasion of that curtesie, entring the City by night (and by night as he was commanded) came to the Palace, where being admitted to the Princes presence, and received with a short salutation, and no further speech, he sorted himself with other Gentlemen of his rank, carrying himself ever after very temperately & warily in all his actions, as knowing the present state of those times, & the dangerous inclination of the Emperor himself, who being (as all other Princes are commonly) more fearful and jealous of the good then the bad, envyed in him those vertues & that honou∣rable reputation, whereof himself was not capable; yet, as good deserts cannot be hide (true worthinesse shining even in darknesse it self) so the retired life which Agricola led, did nothing diminish his glory, but rather like water sprinkled on a burning fire, encreased and conti∣nued the heat thereof. Divers times was he accused in his absence (which ministred to his ill-willers opportunity of working his disgrace) and as often in absence was he acquitted the opinion only of his good deserts, and no matter of crime giving occasion, while such as highly commended him to the Emperor (seeming his friends but indeed being the most pestilent kind of Enemies,) procured underhand his peril and ruine in the end. Howbeit the ill successe of the Roman Armies in divers Provinces at that time, serving as a foil to set out his Honourable Actions, drew him perforce into glory; and Domitian made pretences of his purpose to em∣ploy
him thinking thereby to satisfie the people who then complained of the want of good Leaders. But vertue that never continueth long time in prosperous Estate (as being the common object of envy) hastned the death of Agricola, who (as the constant fame went) was made away by poison; and that not without the Emperors knowledge and consent. These things concerning Agricola's Government in Brittain, I have set down particularly as they are reported by Cornelius Tacitus, who writ the Story of his life, which remaineth to the World as a perpetual Monument of the Doings of the one, and the Writings of the other. Salustius Lucullus succeeding Agricola, left little Memory of himself, by doing any thing here, either for that no occasion was then offered to shew himself in action, or else for that the Fame of so worthy a Predecessor blemished his Reputation; for having held the Office but a short time, he was by commandment of Domitian put to death for suffering certain Spears of a new fashion to be called by his own name. About this time, Arviragus a Brittain by birth and education, did Govern as King part of the Isle of Brittain: the Romans accounting it a point of policy to permit the Brittains sometimes to be ruled by Princes of their own Nation, whose Aid and Counsel they might use (upon occasions) to the pacifying of Rebellion, and the establishing of their own greatnesse. For the common people (whose affection doth oftentimes sway the Fortunes of Princes) are much more easily brought under the Obedience of their own Countrymen then of Strangers. The Succession of the Roman Emperors from Nerva Coc∣ceius unto Honorius, in whose time the Romans gave over the Government of the Isle of Brittain. 13 NErva Cocceius, reigned one year and four Months. 14 Ʋlpius Trajanus (a Spaniard) 19 years and 6 months. 15 Ælius Adrianus, 20 years. 16 Antoninus Pius, 23 years. 17 M. Aurel. Antoninus Philosophus, 19 years: L. Verus his Colleague in the Empire. 18 Aurel Comodus (the son of Anton. Philos.) 13 years. 19 Ælius Pertinax, 6 months. 20 Didius Julianus, 7 months. 21 Septimius Severus Britt. 18 years. Pessenius Niger Usurpers. Clodius Albinus Usurpers. 22 Anton. Bassianus, Caracalla Britt. (the eldest son of Severus) six years. Geta Cæsar Britt. the younger son of Sept. Severus. 23 Opilius Macrinus, 1 year 2 months. 24 Varius Heliogabulus (the base son of Caracalla) 4 years. 25 Alexander Severus (a kinsman of Heliogab.) 13 years. 26 Julius Maximinus, 3 years. Balbinus Cæsars Elect. Pupienus Cæsars Elect. 27 Gordianus the father with his two sons and his Nephew, 6 years. C. Valens Hostilianus Cæsar.
28 Philippus the Arabian, 5 years. 29 Decius Trajanus, 2 years. 30 Vibius Pallus Hostilian. (with his son Volusianus) 2 years. 31 Æmilius of Mauritania, 3 months. 32 Licinius Velerianus, 15 years. 33 Gallienus the son of Valerianus, 9 years. Valerianus Brother of Gallienus Cæsar. Cassius Labienus Posthumus Cæsar. 34 Flavius Claudius, 2 years. 35 Aurelius Quintillus, the brother of Claudius, 17 dayes. 36 Valerius Aurelianus, 5 years and 6 months, 37 Tacitus, 6 months. 38 Annius Florianus (brother to Tacitus) 60 years. 39 Valerius Probus, 6 years 4 months. 40 Carus Narbonensis, 2 years. Numerianus Cæsars. Carinus Cæsars. Dioclesianus, 20 years. Maximianus Herculeius Cæsar. Constantius Chlorus, 4 years. Galerius Maximus, 11 years. Severus Cæsars. Maximianus Cæsar. Maxentius son of Maximian, 6 years. Licinius, 14 years. Constantinus Magnus, 30 years. Magnentius, Usurper. Constantinus the 3 sons of Constantine the Great. Constans the 3 sons of Constantine the Great. 47 Constantius the 3 sons of Constantine the Great. 48 Julianus Apostata, 1 year 6 months. 49 Jovinianus, 8 months. 50 Valentinianus, 12 years. Valens his Brother Cæsar. 51 Gratianus, 6 years. Valentinians Cæsar. Theodosius Cæsar 52 Theodosius, 3 years. 53 Arcadius, 13 years. 54 Honorius, 28 years. Lieutenants in Brittain from Nerva Cocceius, his Entrance into the Government of the Empire, until the Reign of Honorius the Emperor. Lieutenants under Nerva and Trajanus. There is no mention of any Lieutenants in Brittain during the time of their Government.
Lieutenants under Adrian Britt. Julius Severus. Priscus Licinius. Lieutenants under Antoninus Pius. Lollius Ʋrbicus Britt. Lieutenants under Antonin. Philos. Calphulnius Agricola. Lieutenants under Commodus. Ʋlpius Marcellus. Helvius Pertinax. Clodius Albinus. Junius Severus. Lieutenants under Pertinax. Clodius Albinus. Lieutenants under Did. Julianus. Clodius Albinus. Lieutenants under Sept. Severus Britt. Heraclianus. Virius Lupus. For the time of Basianus Caracalla the Successor of Severus unto Constantine the Great, there is no mention in approved Histories of any Lieutenants in Brittain. Deputies under Constantine the Great. Pacatianus. Deputies under Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great. Martinus. Alipius. Deputies under Honorius. Chrysanthus. Victorinus. Princes and secular Men of special Note among the Brittains. In the time of Calphurnius Agricola's Government under Mar. Aurel. Antonin. Philos. Lucius sirnamed Lever-Maur, the first Christian Prince in Brittany.
In the Reign of Aurelianus. Bonosus an Usurper of the Empire in Brittain. In the Reign of Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great. Magnentius Toporus, Usurper of the Empire of Brittany. Archbishops of London from the time of King Lucius untill the coming of the Saxons. 1 Thean. 2 Clavus 3 Cador. 4 Obinus. 5 Conanus. 6 Paladius. 7 Stephanus. 8 Jetut. 9 Dedwinus. 10 Thedredus. 11 Hillarius 12 Guidilinus 13 Vodinus, who lived when the Saxons first entred the Land. HItherto hath been declared the successe of times and affairs in Brittain, under the first twelve Emperours of Rome, the same being recorded by such Writers as had best means to understand the truth thereof, and were principal Registers of things done by the Romans in those times; as for the occurrents ensuing the death of Domitian, until the Reign of Hono∣rius (in whose time the Roman Government ceased) they are imperfectly reported, or a great part of them meerly omitted, so that I am forced of many things only to make a bare and brief relation; as unwilling by adding or diminishing, to ater in substance what Antiquity hath left us, or fill up blancks with conjectures, or projects of mine invention (saith the Author of theLib. 3. f 104. Brittish History) and therefore howsoever this book following (which comprehendeth the Acts of many more years then the former) may seem to carry with it a kind of dispro∣portion from the other two; and likewise in respect of the style and composition to be some∣what different from them, yet the cause thereof ought to be imputed to the very matters themselves, being for the most part Fragments and naked memorials (the loose ends of time) without observation of circumstance or congruity in substance, which will hardly admit any method befitting a continued History; and I owe so much love and reverence to truth, as I would rather expose her in the meanest and worst habit that time hath left her, then by dis∣guising her, to abuse the world and make her seem a Counterfeit. After the death of Titus Domitian, his younger Brother taking the Empire upon him, as you have heard before, differed so much from his Brother and Vespasian, his father before him; that he fell into such great pride and impiety, that he caused and commanded himself to be called and worshipped as a god, and was the second after Nero; who setting forth his cruel Edicts, to that end persecuted the Christians; and the Church of Christ; which cruelty of his, although it did not extend to our Christian Brittains in Rome, still by the Roman Laws enjoying there their priviledges and immunities, from compulsion to square themselves in matter of Religi∣on, to the Emperial Laws and Edicts; at which time many of those banished, and persecuted Christians, as in the persecution of Nero before, as good Antiquaries tells us, fled into this our Brittain whether that persecution did not, nor could extend it self) for refuge and succour;
Domitian being now dead, Nerva revoked all his cruel edicts against Christians, and recalled such as were banished. Nerva primo edicto suo cunctos exules,Mr. B f. 170. quos Domitianus relegavit re∣vocari precepit. Nerva was a Prince much honoured for his Vertues, but in what estate the Affairs of Brit∣tain then stood, the Histories of those times make no mention; either for that the Emperour being a man stricken in years, and disposed to ease and quietnesse, employed himself rather in reforming abuses at home, then in maintaining War abroad, or else for that the short con∣tinuance of his Government, did not suffer him to enter into any great actions in places so re∣mote; for having held the Empire little above a year,The first election of a stranger to be Emperour. he left the same by death to Ʋlpius Tra∣janus a Spaniard, whom he had adopted for his valour and wisedome, being then even the first president for electing strangers. In his time some of the Brittains desirous to free themselves from the Roman tyranny, entred into Rebellion, but wanting means to effect what they had begun, they soon gave over the enterprize; howbeit Aelius Adrianus (who succeeded Trajan in the Empire) having intelligence that the Northern Brittaines made incursions into the Province, sent over Julius Severus to impeach their attempts; but before he could come to make an end of the War, he was revoked and sent into Syria, to suppresse the Jewish Rebellion; and Adrian the Emperour himself came with an Army into Brittany, where he encountred the Northern Riders; recoverd such Forts as they had taken, and forced them to tetire to the Mountains and Woods, whither the Roman Horsmen without danger could not pursue them; & then fortifying the borders of the Province, by raising a wall of Turues, about eighty miles in length (between the mouths of the RiversThe River Eden in Cum∣berland. Stuna andThe River Tyne in Nor∣thumberland. Tina) to defend the Inhabitants thereof from the sudden assaults of their ill Neighbours, he returned triumphantly to Rome; This exploit won much reputation to the Roman Army, and no small honour to the Emperour himself, who was then called the Restorer of Brittain, and had the inscription figured in the stamp of his coyne. Now the Brittains dwelling within the Province, seemed for the most part patiently to bear the yoak (which custome had made lesse painful) and they obeyed the more willingly, as standing in need of the Romans help against their own Countrymen, whose cruelty was now as much feared, as in former times the Invasion of strangers; Whereupon they conform∣ed themselves to the Roman Laws, both in Martial and Civil Affairs, which were then principally directed by Licinius Priscus, who had been not long before employed by Adrian the Emperour in the expedition of Jury, and was at that timeLieutenant. Propretor of Brittain. This Emperour Adrian, began his Empire about the year of Christ 123.Mr. Brough. f. 196. 2. in his first years he was a persecutor of Christians, among whom St. Euaristus the Pope was by his Authority put to death, and he caused to take away the memory of Christ, the statutes of Divels to be erect∣ed in the place of our Lords passion; and by Severus Sulpitius and others is termed the fourth persecutor. In loco dominicæ passionis daemonum simulachra constituit; yet soon he corrected his error therein, forbidding Christians to be punished for their Religion. Quod sub Hadriano per∣secutio numeratur. Quam tamen postea exerceri prohibuit injustum esse pronuncians, ut quisquam reus sine crimine constitueretur; And wrote so expresly, commanding Minutius Fondanus his Proconsul in Asia, moved thereto perhaps by Apology, and Oration ofSerenus. St. Quadratus unto him for Christians & the letters of Serius Granianus his legate in behalf of Christians, declare∣ing their innocency, and S. Aristides presented the like Apology unto him; and he was so much moved by these men, that one of our own Historians Writeth, that he was thereby instructed and informed in the Christian Religion. Imperator Hadrianus per Quadratum Apostolorum discipulum, & Aristidem Atheniensem virum fide & sapientia plenum ac per Serenum Legatum libris de Christiana religione compositis instructius est & eruditus; And Ælius Lampridius con∣firmeth as much more, when he saith, that this Emperour Adrian did intend to receive Christ for God; and caused Temples in all Cities to be erected without Pagan Idols, which remain∣ed so in Lamprideus time, and were called Adrians Churches, which he intended to the honor of Christ; but was kept back from performing it, by fear or flattery of the idolaters, told by their Oracles, that if he proceeded so, all would become Christians, and their Temples would be∣come desolate and forlorn; Christo templum facere voluit Alexander, eum{que} inter deos recipe∣re, quod & Hadrianus cogitasse fertur, qui templa in omnibus civitatibus sine simulacris jusserat fieri, quæ hodie idcirco quia non habent Numina, dicuntur Hadriain, quæ ille ad hoc parasse dice∣batur, sed prohibitus est ab iis qui consulentes sacra, repererunt omnes Christianos si id optato eve∣nisset, & templa reliqua deserenda. And these were motives in those dayes to very many to embrace Christian Religion, both at Rome, where the mind and judgement of the Emperour himself (a good Prince) was so known to be convinced by the constancy and innocency of the Christians, and their unanswerable Apologies for the only truth of their Religion, and evident errour and falsehood of the Pagans superstitious rites now made manifest in all places. I find in the Chronicles of Burton, under the year of Grace 141. and time of Adrian the Emperour, that nine Scholars of Granthe or Granta (now Cambridge,) were baptized in Brittain, and became Preachers of the Gospel there; but whether Taurnius Bishop over the Congregation of York who (as Vincentius saith) was executed about this time, was one or not, as yet, I do not certainly find.Mr. B. f. 205. out of Will. Harrison, p. 23 Antoninus Pius succeeded Adrian the Emperour, when (Lollius, Ʋrbicus being Lieutenant)
the Northern people made a road into the Province, but were beaten back by the Roman For∣ces that lay upon the borders; And then was there another wall of Turve built by the com∣mandment of the Lieutenant, to strengthen those parts with a double Rampire; in the mean time a new war was kindled among theThe Ancient Inhabitants of the Countries of York, Lan∣caster, Durham, Westmer an, and Cumber∣land. Brigants, that annoyed some of the Roman Con∣federates; but by the discretion of the General, it was quenched before it came to a flame; for Lollius Ʋrbicus upon the first rumour of revoult, marched thither with part of the Army, leaving the rest behind to guard the borders; and Seius Saturninus, Admiral of the Brittish Fleet, being well appointed by Sea, lay upon the Northside of the Isle to defend the Coasts; and (upon occasions to further the Land service) by this means, the Brigants were easily re∣duced to obedience, even by the presence onely of the Lieutenant, who for his good service done in Brittany, during the short time of his imployment there, obtained the surname of Britannicus. Mr. B.Here give me leave to speak of St. Timothy a Brittain of this Nation, by his holy Mother St. Claudia Sabinella, who as divers Write, preached in this Kingdome, sent hither by the Roman Sea Apostolick, must needs be sent here about this time; for Authors testifie he was at Rome, and Martyred in the time of Antoninus; Romæ Sanctorum Martyrum Marci & Timothei qui sub Antonino Imperatore Martirio coronati sunt; which Antoninus began his Empire in or a∣bout the year of Christ 138. Mr. B. f. 201.Antonius sirnamed Pius, by Baronnis reckoning, was Emperor twenty two years, seven months, and twenty six dayes, annis vigenti duobus, mensibus septem, & diebus viginti sex, which differeth not much from Orosuis and Marianus, who say, triginti & non plenis tribus annis, And both Marius and Wigormensies say; Eusebius and Bede gave three months more then 23. years, because it was the custome of Historians to depute unto the Emperour that year where∣in he dyed; and therefore we may say (say they) that Antoninus Pius did not Reign full twen∣ty three years, because he lived not until the end of the year; mensibus item tribus secundum Eusebium & Bedam, hoc est us{que} ad Calendas Novembris, in anno 134 post passionem Domini, qui autem mos erat Historicorum & Imperatori disputeretur annas in quo moreretur vel regno deficeret; Idio dici potest quod non plenis viginti tribus annis Antoninus Pius regnavit, quum non us{que} in finem anni vixit. Antoninus Pius was so friendly to Christians, that as both Ancient and Moderne Writers witnesse, he wrote unto all places for them to be free from persecution; Testatur Melito re∣ferente Eusebio Antoninum Pium generaliter ad omnes civitates pro Christianis scripsisse. And in his Epistle to the people of Asia; recited at large by Eusebius, Nicephorus, and other Writers, he plainly affirmeth; That the Christians had been unjustly punished for worshipping the one true God, 'mortem ab singularis, & veri dei cultum appetere, and addeth further; That their persecutors did not observe the worship of God, and therefore did envy the Christians which wor∣shipped him, and persecuted them to death; and that divers Rulers of Provinces had written to his Father before against the Christians, to whom he writ again, that they should not trouble such men, except they could be proved to do any thing against the Roman Empire; and many having written also unto him of such men, to whom he answered, according to his Fathers sentence, whom he meant to follow: If any man having an action against a Christian, and accuseth him only as such a man, the Christian accused shall be absolved, although it be manifest he be such an one, and his accuser shall be punished in Judgement; And that Christians were farre more Dutifull and Faithfull to God, then their Persecutors were. And although divers years of this Emperours Reigne had passed before he established such publick order for the quiet of Christians, and much persecutions was in the beginning of his time; yet it cannot be thought to have had Warrant or Original from him. And it was almost in the beginning of his Empire the third year thereof (as some write) that Saint Justine wrote and delivered unto him, his Apology for Christians, and made him friendly unto them, 'Anno gratiae 141. Justinus Philosophus librum de Christiano Religione compositum Antnino Tradidit eum{que} benignum, erga Christianis Ifecit. And he was sirnamed Pius: Godly by some judgements for his Piety towards Christians, as well as for other res∣pects. 'Antoninus Pius geuer Adriani erat, erga Christianos Pius. And he himself is witnesse, that he proposed his adopting a Father in law Adrian, so friendly to Christians, to be imitated by him herein. ANTONINƲS PIƲS being dead, Marcus Aurelius, sirnamed Philosophus, possessed the Empire; Calphurnius Agricola was made Lieutenant of the Province, who at his first Entrance into Office, understood of some new Tumults raised during the vacation; but partly by policy in preventing occasions, and partly by shew of force (his very name striking the terror into the Inhabitants by reviving the Memory of Julius Agricola,) he in short time appeased them, deserving thereby great commendation; though the glory of such Exploits was for the most part attributed to the Emperors themselves (the labour and peril in attempt∣ing, and commonly disgrace and envy after Victory) remaining only as towards their Mi∣nisters.
This Marcus Aurelius, by the command or direction of Adrian,Mr. Bro. f. 220. 2. who adopted Antoninus Pius, was to succeed, whom from his Infancy he had trained up in the Gentiles superstition when he was but eight years old he was put by Adrian into the Colledge of the Salii; most superstitious Priests of Mars, and was made a Priest, a chief Prelate or Ruler, a Southsayer and Master among them. Octavo suæ aetatis anno ab Adriano in Saliorum Collegium est relatus; & in Saliatu functus Sacerdotio, & Præsul, & Vates, & Magister, & nonnullos inauguravit & exauguravit, nemine præeunte, quod ipse carmina didicisset; So that there could be little hope, but this Man so superstitiously brought up, and such a maker and un∣maker of theirs Sacrificers and Enchanters, would still continue in the same, and professe himself an enemy to all Impugners of such proceedings as all Christians were, which he per∣formed when he came to be Emperor, raising a general persecution against Christians, which to omit, but as it concerned this Kingdome, and the Christians thereof, the holy house of our glorious Countrywoman St. Praxedes in Rome, which until then both in the time of Saint Novatus her brother, her holy parents St. Pudens and St. Claudia, Sabinella or Priscilla, and likely as before under her parents also Christian, Brittains had been a safe refuge, and a sanctuary for the persecuted Christians, was most cruelly ransacked,Act St. Prax. per St. Pastor. Martyr. Rom. die 26 Maii. Beda, Ʋsuard. & Ado eodem die. Petr. Catal. li. 5. c. 58. Baron. Tom. 2. Anna. an. 164. St. Marcellus a Brittain. and twenty two holy Martyrs, together with the sacred Priest Simitrius most barbarously without any tryal, que∣stion or judgement presently put to death; of which blessed Company we may not but think divers of this Kingdome to have been, and St. Timothy himself returning from hence to Rome, upon the death of his brother and sister, St. Novatus and St. Pudentiana was Martyred there, and before the 62 year of Christ: if we will allow of Matthew of Westminster his computation, who saith, that Justus Bishop of Vienna, after long Exile was Martyred that year. As for our St. Timothy, St. Pius the Pope, in his Epistle to St. Justus, writeth of the Martyrdome of our St. Timothy; and by no account he lived not above four years longer, but was Marty∣red in this time. So by some accounts our glorious Countryman St. Marcellus, so diligent a procurer of the Conversion of King Lucius, was Martyred in this persecution. And to heap up the measures of fears for Christian Brittains, this Emperor did not only thus persecute us abroad but sent Calphurnius Agricola hither into Brittany with armed Troops, to keep the Brittains in subjection, as Roman Pagan Writers term it, but Brittains may say in slavery. These and such were the worldly temptations which allured King Lucius and many noble Brittains, to be more timerous and lingering to professe the Christian Faith, with such con∣stancy openly as inwardly they firmly believed and honoured, untill the Emperor himself, convicted by the written Apologies, and Miracles wrought by Christians, was enforced to yield the honour to Christ, and abstain from persecution, and many of his noble Pagans im∣braced Christian Religion. 'Imperator victoriam suam gaudenter attribuit. And this I take to be the chiefest occasion of the mistakings in some Historians or their Scribes setting down so many and several times, when King Lucius received the Christian Faith or professed it; many saying it was in the year of Christ 156. Others in the year 164. and others 185, as William of Malmesbury and others. Henry of Hartford 169. and others in other and later times. That such was the state of Brittany for spiritual Affairs in this Idolatry and superstition daily diminishing and decaying, and Christian Religion in all places and persons increasing and multiplying, both Authority and the known certain effect it self, the surest testimony in such cases shall witnesse. And this was the condition thereof until about the beginning of the Papacy of St. Soter, or in the end of the first year thereof, about the year of our Redem∣ption 175. when as it appeareth by the Edict of Marcus Aurelius Emperor, before the strange delivery of him and his Army by the Christians miraculous prayers, he suffered many Chri∣stians to live in quiet, and had a great number of them about him; Inveni{que} magnam eorum multitudinem; and seeing himself and his Army in distresse, sent for them and intreated them to pray for his delivery; Eos qui apud nos Christiani dicuntur ac accersivi ac rogavi Which he would not have done, being a wise and learned Emperor, but that either by the Apology of Athenagoras, the Vertues and miracles of many Christians, or some other invin∣cible Argument, his judgement was then wholly or almost convicted, that their Religion was holy and they also; and therefore likely to be powerable with God to procure his safety, which his own prayers and sacrifices to his Pagan gods were not able to doe; 'Deos patrios votis 'susceptis rogavi, sed cum ab eis negligerer, as himself publickly professed; and therefore pre∣ferring the prayers of the Christians appealed unto them. But after God by the prayers of the Christians which he procured them to make, had so miraculously delivered him and his Army, consisting but of four Legions, not 27 thousand Men, environed almost with a thousand thousands of Enemies, as the common reading is, 'Hostium nonagintorum & septuaginta 'septem millia; and his people distressed with thirst and hunger, not having drunk in five days, by sending a most cooling and comforting Rain into the Camp of the distressed Emperor, and Hail like fire and lightning among his Enemies, confounding and discomfitting them, he pre∣sently sent out his Imperial Letters and Edict, charging the Senate of Rome to confirm them with their Decree, wherein wholly ascribing this Delivery of his Army and himself, and confusion of his Enemies to the God of the Christians and their prayers unto him, wherein he gave free Liberty for any man to be a Christian. Concedamus talibus ut sint
Christiani. And no Man should be molested for being a Christian for Religion: cen∣seo neminem quod CHRISTIANƲS sit, esse in Crimen vel Judicium vocandum. And he that should accuse any Christian for Religion, should be burned alive; and that he that shall professe himself to be a Christian, shall be freed from all danger intended against him for that cause; and no Governour of any Province shall punish any such for his Religion, or deprive him of Liberty. Volo eum qui Christianum accusarit, vivum exuri; illum vero qui se Christianum esse professus fuerit, periculo omni quod ob eam rem intendebatur, liberatum. Is cui provincia commissa est, nequaquam ad poenitentiam adigat aut libertatem ei adimat; And he willed these things to be confirmed by the Senates decree, and this his edict to be proposed in open market place to be read; and that the prefect of the City then, Vetrasius Pollio should cause it to be sent to all Provinces, and no man should be forbidden to write it out, Hæc autem Senatus consulto etiam sanciri volo, at{que} hoc meum edictum in foro Divi Trajani proponi ut legi possit; curae autem erit Vetrasio Pollioni præfecto urbis ut ad omnes provincias hæc consti∣tutio mittatur, ne{que} quisquam qui eam exscribere vel ipse uti voluerit, prohibeatur. This was sent to the whole Senate of Rome, Senatui Populo{que} Romano, and by the Emperours publick charge and command, as into other Provinces, so likewise sent into Brittany for the priviledge of all Christians there, by the Emperours publick Officer in such Affairs, the Ruler of the Ctiy of Rome, ad omnes Provincias hæc constituo mittatur. Any man that would, might freely be a Christian; and no man under pain of cruel death to burnt be alive, might call any into question for that cause; And to give greater testimony of those things in Brittain, and see this Imperial edict for the freedom of Christians here take place and effect; whereas our English Antiquaries and others tells us,Floren. Wigorn. Chronic. anno 159. 181. that Trebellius and Pertinax, the Roman Lieutenants here a∣bout this time were Christians, our Countryman Florentius VVigorniensis plainly affirm∣eth, that Pertinax was a chief Commander in the Emperours Army, when this miraculous victory was by the Christians prayers, and this edict written and decreed for their freedome and liberty, and probably was then converted to the faith by this miracle: and the Empe∣rour himself, who in his publick cited edict, doth say of Christians, that in equity he must think them now to be defended by God, whom before he accounted for wicked men, and alienated from God, must needs be a Christian in Conscience and Judgement, and he must needs at the least believe that true God, whom he said the Christians did bear in their conscience; And in no wise a learned Emperour could or would, in Judgement, Reason, Equity and Conscience, make a Law to condemn men to so cruel a death as burning alive, which he afflicted upon the accusers of Christians, except he knew or probably thought their accusation was unjust, and the cause of the accused, Lawful, Just, and Holy. COILLƲS. COILLƲS the Son of Marius, was after his Fathers decease made King of Brittain, in the year of our Lord 125.K. Coillus brought up at Rome. saith Holinshed, Fabian saith 126. This Coillus or Coill, had his youthful education amongst the Romans, in the very Imperial City it self; who being of a Martial spirit, applyed his time to warlike exercises, in which he so excelled, that he was both admired and beloved by the Romans; and to requite their favours, and to continue towards him their good affections, he payed without any grudging or seeming discontent their accusto∣med Tribute, by which means he spent his dayes in peace and tranquillity; he so far excelled in bounty & liberality, that he drew unto himself the hearts and good wills, both of the Nobles and Commons. The building of Colchester is ascribed to this King, which is the chiefest City at this day in Essex, wherein Lucius, Helena and Constantine, the first Christian King, Empress, and Emperour in the world were born, which made Nechan to sing as he did. From Colchester there sprung a star, The rayes whereof gave glorious light Throughout the world in climates far, Great Constantine, Romes Emperour bright. This City is walled about, raised upon a high trench of earth, though now much decaied, ha∣ving six gates of entrance, and three posterns in the West wall besides nine watch Towers for defence, and containeth in compasse 1980 paces, wherein stand 8 fair Churches, and two other without the walls for Gods divine Service; St. Tenants & the Black-fryars decayed in the sub∣urbs, St. Mary Magdelens, the Nunnery St. John's and the Crochiet Fryers suppressed: within towards the East is mounted an old Castle, and elder ruines upon a trench containing two Acres of Ground, where as yet may be seen the provident care they had against all ensuing assault.
This City was graced with the honour of a Viscount, by K. James, who Created Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy of Chich 1621. Viscount Colchester in Essex, to him during his life; the remainder, to Sir Thomis Savage, of Roch Savage, in the County of Chester Knight and Baronet, who had Married one of his Daughters and Coheirs. Thomas Lord Darcy. Argent, 3 cinque foils, Gules. John Savage Viscount Rochester, Colchester. Argent, 6 Lyons ramp. 321 sable. Now was the time come (namely about one hundred and fourscore years after the Birth of our Saviour,) when Christian Religion which many years together had been for the most part shadowed with dark clouds of Heathenish superstition, began to discover it self more openly in this Iland by the means of Lucius, sirnamed Lever-Maur; who by permission of the Roman Lieutenant, did govern as King a great part of the Province; For it appeareth by the testimony of some ancient Writers, that Brittain received the Christian Faith even in the Infancy of the Church, immediately after the death of our Saviour, whose Apostles and Disci∣ples (according to his Commandment) published and dispersed the same in divers Regions, partly by themselves in their own persons, & partly by their Ministers, among whom were sent into Brittany Simon Chananaeus that after his peregrination in Mauritania (as it is repor∣ted) was slain and buried in this Iland, Aristobulus a Roman,Brittish Histo∣ry, fol. 108. l. 3. c. 3. of whom St. Paul in his Epi∣stles maketh mention, and Joseph of Arimathea, a noble Man of Jury specially remembred of Posterity for his charitable Act in burying the Body of our Saviour; This Man was ap∣pointed by St. Philip the Apostle then preaching the Christian Faith in Gallia, to instruct the ancient Brittains, among whom he began first, as some write, to institute an Eremitical life in a place then called Duellonia, and afterwards Glastenbury, where himself and his Companions imitating the austerity and zeal of solitude, which they had observed in Mary Magdalen, (with whom they travelled out of Jury unto Marsilia in France) sequestred themselves from all worldly Affairs, that they might freely attend to the exercise of piety which they professed; yea some Writers of former Ages have writ, that the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, in their own persons at several times, came into Brittain; and that afterwards one Sueton a noble Mans Son of that Country, being converted by such Christians as first planted the Faith there, and called (after his Baptisme) Beatus, was sent by them to Rome unto St. Peter, to be better in∣structed and confirmed in Christianity, and that in his return homewards through Switzer∣land, he found in the Inhabitants there such a desire and readinesse to receive the Christian Faith, as he resolved to continue in that place, where he erected an Oratory to exercise a Mo∣nastical life, and departed the world about the year of Grace 110. but who were the very first Teachers, and at that time the Christian Faith was first of all received there, it is not cer∣tainly known (saith this Author.) Howbeit it is likely that in the Expedition of Claudius the Emperor, which was about the third year of his Reign, and twelve years after the Ascension of our Saviour, some Christians of Rome and Scholars of the Apostles themselves became first known unto the Brittains; who in processe of time were drawn by the Exhortations and Ex∣amples of their Teachers to embrace the Truth. The unblamable life of those religious Men, moving sometimes even their Princes (though yet unbelieving) to protect and regard them, (as is shewn in Arviragus and others) as Lucius then began to doe; besides that the Roman Lieutenants also as well in Brittain as in other places, did sometimes tolerate the exercise of Christian Religion, as not altogether disliking it; howsoever for worldly respects they forbare to shew themselves openly in favour of it. But Lucius declared his inclination thereunto after another manner. For inwardly disliking the prophane superstition then used among the Ro∣mans, by the great constancy, vertue and patience of the Christians at Rome and other places, suffering Persecution and Martyrdome for the Faith of Christ, the number of Christi∣ans (whom many men esteemed for the Miracles they wrought) as contrary to common expe∣ctation daily encreased: That Pertinax and Tretellius, two worthy Senators of Rome, had been lately converted from Paganisme to Christianity, that Marcus Aurelius the Roman Em∣peror then reigning; began to conceive a better opinion of them, then himself and his Prede∣cessors had done; and so much the rather by reason that not long before he had obtained a famous victory against his enemies, the prosperous Event whereof he attributed to the prayers of the Christians at Rome: Upon these considerations Lucius determined to be instructed in the Religion which they professed; and first of all commanded Elevanus and Meduinus (two learned Men of the Brittish Nation) to go to Rome where Elutherius was then Bishop, to require some meet persons to be sent into Brittain to instruct him and his people; for which purpose Fugatius and Damianus were specially appointed by Elutherius with all speed to repair thi∣ther, where they afterwards not without some danger by tempest upon the Seas arrived, and applyed themselves both by doctrine and examples, to perform the charge committed unto them, the successe therein proving answerable to their endeavours; for the prince and his Fa∣mily was by them baptized, some of the Inhabitants that had formerly received the Faith,
were confirmed therein, and others that remained as yet in their infidelity were converted to Christianity. But Lucius the Prince having received instructions from the Sea of Rome, for direction of himself and his people, in the profession and exercise of Christian Religion, not desirous also to order his temporal estate according the Roman policy; and to that end sollicited Eluthe∣rius the Bishop, to send unto him the Lawes of the Empire, out of which he might elect and compose some certain Ordinances, for the Administration of civil justice; whereupon Eluthe∣rius sent Letters to the Prince, commending therein his former zealous disposition in embrace∣ing the truth; then exhorting him to read with humility, and reverence the holy Scripture (the divine Law) which he had lately received in his Dominions, and out of that, by Gods grace and advice of faithful Counsellors, to collect meet observations, for the framing of Laws necessary for the preservation of his estate; which observations so collected and Lawes so framed, he did affirm to be much better then the Imperial constitutions of the Romans, or any other whatsoever: that to make Lawes and execute Justice, was the proper office of a Prince, who was upon earth the Vicar of God himself, and received from him that Title and Authority, to the end he should use the same to the good of the Catholick Church, and of the people living under his obedience; hereupon Lucius began first of all to provide for establishment of that Religion, whereof he was become at the self same time both a professour and practiser; Then was the worshipping of Idols forbidden; the seats of the Arch-flamens at London, York, and Caerlegion, or Caerleon upon Ʋsk, were changed into Sees of three Arch-bishops in the same places; and those of the Flamens into so many Bishopricks, whereby the Temples vowed by Idolatrous Priests to prophane gods, were consecrated to the service of the only true God; the temporal estate he also adorned with good & profitable Laws, conformable to the rule of Christian Religion, whereupon ensued the blessings of plenty and peace in his dayes. It is reported that he was Foundet of a Church at Cornhill in London, which he dedicated to St. Peter, placeing therein one Thean an Archbishop to have the superintendence over other Bishops within his principality; and the Metropolitan seat continued there in the succession of thirteen Archbishops (about the space of 400 years) until the coming of St. Aug. who trans∣lated it to Canterbury. And now Christianity being thus Generally received amongst the Brittains, kept on her course, untainted and without opposition, till the time of Dioclesian the Emperour, who kind∣led the fire of that raging persecution (the last and longest in the Primitive Church) which consumed the lives of many Christian Martyrs, as well in Brittain, as other places; but return∣ing to the Reign of Lucius, and considering the state of Brittain under his Government, we may justly admire the Felicity of those times, ascribing to the Brittains for their greatest glory, that among all other Nations they had the happinesse to see and enjoy the first Christian Prince. Thus far compendiously and succinctly the Brittish History; but let us peruse a while (to the great renown of the Brittish Nation) the writings of that late, but rare light of Antiquity, the day star of his Countrey, Mr. Broughton, and consider what he expresseth concerning the passa∣ges and conversion of King Lucius; thus he begins. They who write of King Lucius, his Nobles, and Countries conversion, do write also how he wrote for and entreated it by supplyant letters to Pope Elutherius (not to Evaristus as some have imagined) Gildas saith, that King Lucius was baptized with all his Nobles of Brittain, 164 years after the coming of Christ, and Nennius saith it was three year after; so that whither we will take the account of Gildas or Nennius, for King Lucius his time of conversion, though others make a greater difference by 20 years and more, we see that King was converted 44 years after the death of Evaristus, whom some will have the Instrument of his conversion; and 54 from his first entrance into the Papacy, seven Popes, St. Alexander, Sextus, Telesphorus, Higinus, Pius, Anicetus, and Soter, being between him and St. Elutherius, in whose time by all account, St Lucius was converted, of which two such renowned Writers could not be igno∣rant; much lesse may we judge without great injury and dishonour unto them, and bold rash∣nesse in our selves, that they would or could erre in so high a degree; the one of them Nennius the meanest stiled by our Catalogists of such men, both ancient and modern, The most excel∣lent Doctor of the Brittains, Principal or Arch-abbot of the renowned Monastery of Bangor, fa∣mous both for Wisdom and Religion. The other St. Gildas, by common consent of all Wri∣ters, is stiled Gildas the Wise, or sirnamed the Wise. The first and principal means of the Conversion of K. Lucius is ascribed to certain learned Scholars of Cambridge:Theater of Brit. l. 6. c. 9. Sect. 9. Hollins. disc. Brit. The Theatre of Great Brittain tells us, That there were Christians at these times, though some exceptions may be taken against the Monk of Burton, the Reporter thereof, who saith in the year 141, and Reign of Hadrian, nine Masters of Grantcester were baptized themselves, and preached to others the Gospel in Brittain. The ancient Charter which the Antiquities of Cambridge ascribed to K. Arthur, do give this honour or a great part thereof to the learned Scholars of Cambridge,K. Lucius per∣swaded to be a Christian by the Christians of Cambridge. which being converted to the Faith of Christ, and di∣vers of them now become Clergymen and Preachers, moved K. Lucius by their preaching to be a Christian; which is more confirmed by the ancient Bull of Pope Honorius, the first of that Name, to confirm the Priviledges of the University of Cambridge 1000 years since; and other Testimonies there are, that say, that both K. Lucius did confer and confirm by his pub∣lick
Charter, great Priviledges and Immunities to that School, and Pope Elutherius likewise;Chart. Reg. Arturi, 7. Apr. an. 531. Bulla Honorii. Acad. Cantab. concess. 20. die Seb. an. Dom. 624. Caius Antiq. Cant. l 1. p. 75. 76. which he did not so for any thing we find in Histories, to any other School or University in the World, nor any of his Successors many years after. The chiefest motive of these exem∣tions and prerogatives to that place, we cannot interpret in any better sense, then that King Lucius had received much spiritual Benefit from thence, which he requited with temporal ho∣nour and dignity; and the holy Pope Elutherius bestowed such singular grace and favour to that School for the holy labours and fruitful effects it had wrought in the Church of Christ by their Conversion and Preaching, moving King Lucius and so many men of sundry de∣grees in Brittain to forsake superstitious Idolatry, and embrace the Christian Faith and Religion. We find some Apostolick Men in this very time to have preached the faith in Brittain to King Lucius himself as well as to his Subjects, and these to have been of this Nation.Pet. Marsaeus Catal. Epis. Tungren. & Archiepis. Treve. Among those two are chiefly commended unto us in this businesse, Saint Timothy and Saint Marcel∣linus or Marcellus. And to begin with St. Timothy, We find that he so far prevailed with King Lucius, that by his Learning our King was induced to the Religion of Christ: and to make this Opinion clear, Henricus Pantaeon writeth,Math. West. an. 159. Mar. Scel. an. 163. Bar. Tom. 2. Annal. an eod. That King Lucius of Brittain was the Disciple of St. Timo∣thy; for which he citeth the Magdeburgians, Stumphius and the Annals of Curre in Germany. And Naeuclerus with others writeth clearly, That one St. Timothy came into Brittain, and Lu∣cius King of Brittain and his Kingdome did receive the Faith of Christ from him. Mr. Brough∣ton affirmeth, That this our glorious Countryman St. Timothy was Son unto the Lady Clau∣dia, and Brother to St. Novatus, St. Pudentiana and Praxedes. Great honour it was for the first Christian King of this Nation, the first Christian King in the World, to be instructed in the Faith by so Noble a renowned Apostle of his own Nation! What were the Impediments in temporal respects which hindred King Lucius from publick profession of Christian Religion, wherein he was thus instructed until or near the Papacy of St. Elutherius, shall be shewed hereafter. This St. Timothy was assisted by St. Marcellus a Britain also, and preached here; and the Annals of the Archbishops of Trevers say of this Man, That Lucius King of Brittain, now Eng∣land, was baptized by his preaching. The Historie of Tungers speaketh more plainly, That this St Marcellus did by his preaching convert Lucius Prince of Brittain with all his Nation to Christ. And the same Catalogue of Trevers saith, That King Lucius was made a Christian, and Baptized by this our Renowned Countryman St. Marcellus. When the estate of Ecclesiasticall affairs had taken in Brittain so happy proceeding and effect, that both our King and many principall men were thus converted to the Faith of Christ, from their former errors and superstitions, and so great hope and forwardnesse there was, to have that faith publickly professed, which they privately embraced, and acknow∣ledged for the only Truth; many worldly temptations and oppositions did presently arise to hinder these new and untrained Souldiers of Christ, to make so bold and open profession of their holy Religion, as many holy Martyrs at that time, and they themselves not long af∣ter did, and the glory of that required;Divers hu∣mane fears and impedi∣ments now chancing and hindring of K. Lucius from open professi∣on of Christi∣an Religion in Brittain. for as we may probably with many Antiquities af∣firme, that the favourable edicts of divers Emperours, and among them Antoninus sirnamed Pius yet Reigning, had somewhat encouraged them in temporal respects, actually to be bap∣tized in that Religion, which their internal understanding and judgement was by many in∣vincible motives and arguments convinced before to be only true; so now by like contrary worldly events and letts, they were for some time more slow and dull to professe it openly. They did perfectly understand, that not withstanding the pretended and expected favour from the present Emperour, either by his command or permission, two holy Popes (to omit many other places) St. Telesphorus and St. Higinus, procurers of their conversion, cruelly were put to Death for that Religion, even in Rome it self, under the Emperours sight, within the space of four years or little more, by all accounts: and because present and home dangers do most terrifie, they did see and taste that the present Emperour Antoninus, was at this time incensed against the Brittains, and had already sent Lollius Ʋrbicus with forces hither, and he had Fought some battles against the Brittains, as both our own and the Roman Historians testifie. And to maintain and foster these conceived and ingendred humane fears and impressions, to live and continue longer then Antoninus was like to live, now being old and long time Em∣perour, when he came first to the Empire by the Adoption of Adrian, he was commanded or directed by him that Marcus Aurelius Antoninus,Act. St. Prax∣ed. per St. Pastor. Ʋsuard. & Ado. Peter. Catal. l. 5. c. 58. Baron. Tom. 2. An. 164. whom from his Infancy he had trayned up in the Gentiles Superstitions, should succeed him in the Empire; when he was but eight years of Age, he was put by Adrian into the Colledge of the Salii, most superstitious Priest of Mars, and was made Priest and chief Ruler of the Southsayers; So that there could be little hope but this man so superstitiously brought up, and such a maker and unmaker of their sacrifices, and an enchanter, would still continue the same, and professe himself an enemy to all Impugners of such proceedings, such as all Christians were, which he performed when he came to be Emperor, raising a general persecution against Christians; which to omit, but as it concerned this Kingdome, and the Christians thereof, the holy house of our glorious Countreywoman, St. Praxedes in Rome, which until then, both in the time of St. Novatus her brother, her holy
parents St. Pudens and St. Claudia,Baron. Tom. 2. an. 166. Sabinella or Priscilla, and likely before as under her pa∣rents, also Christian Brittains, had been a safe refuge, and as a sanctuary for persecuted Chri∣stians, was now cruelly ransacked, and tweny two holy Martyrs, together with the sacred Priest St. Simitrius, most barbarously without tryal, question, judgement, presently put to death; of which blessed company we may not but think divers of this Country to have been, and St. Timothy himself returning from hence to Rome,Julius Capil. Marc. Aurel. was there Martyred, if we may believe Matthew of Westminster his computation. Ibid. Virgil. in Hist. Angl. l 2. p. 42.These and such were the worldly temptations which allured King Lucius, and many Noble Brittains to be more timerous and lingering, to professe the Christian faith with such constancy openly, as inwardly they firmly believed and honoured, until the Emperour himself convicted by the written Apologies and Miracles wrought by Christians, was enforced to yield the ho∣nour to Christ, and abstain from persecution, and many of his noble Pagans embraced the Christian Religion;Tertul. Apol. c. 6. Euseb. Eccle. Hist. l. 5. c. 5. Math. West. an. 174. and this I take to be the chiefest occasion of mistaking in some Historian or their Scribes, setting down so many and several times when King Lucius received the Faith of Christ. or professed it: many saying it was in the year of Christ 156. others in the year 164. others 165. as William of Malmesbury with others. Henry of Hartford in the year 169. and others in other and later times, All which be true if we speak of the Religion of Christ which he held and believed from the very first of these assigned times; but for his and his Nobles publick profession thereof, and the Kingdome generally receiving it, with building of Churches, placing of Christian Bishops and Priests in them, & abandoning the superstitious rites of pagan Gentils, we must expect a later date in the time of Pope Elutherius. And this holy Pope had, long before he was Pope, the often occasion of K. Lucius; & others here writing & sending to Rome about this publick work might occasion some error in the Titles of Letters to Elutherius, when he was not yet Pope, but in high estimation with the Popes there, as a principal learned and holy Priest of the Church of Rome, as appeareth in the first Epistle of St. Pius to Justus Bishop of Vienna, wherein he only sendeth him Salutations from St. Soter after Pope, and Elu∣therius, as the chiefest Priests then in Rome, and so he recommendeth them; which Epistle was written,Pius Epist. 1. ad Justum Vien. Epist. Tom. 1. Biblioth. Sanct. and this honour given to St. Elutherius by that holy Pope almost twenty years be∣fore Elutherius was Pope. And yet he must needs be a renowned Man long before that time, and so no marvel if divers Letters were written to him from Brittain, and from him hither before his Papacy; especially if we reflect and consider how probable a thing it is that he was most resident with our Christian Brittains there, and the Popes of that time committed unto him to have a peculiar care of this Country, with his great credit and familiarity with Pope Pius conversing so much with our Brittains there,Euseb. Hist. & Chronic. Math. West. an. 157. Ethelwerd. Chronic. and with such principal Men as were sent into these parts, such as St. Justus of Vienna then was, will induce to think. And our own Annals doe sufficiently witnesse, that the Fame and Renown of St. Elutherius was great here in Brittain before he was chosen pope. And that this his glory was so great in Brittain before he was Pope, those our both ancient and later Historians prove, which say, that King Lucius wrote unto him the first year of his Consecration, to take order for the general conversion of this Kingdome.Mr. B f. 221. Man. Scot. aetat. 6. in Eluth. So doth the most authentical and approved relation of this History testifie, that it was in the very beginning of his Papacy that King Lucius sent those Letters and solemn Embassage unto him about this business, which plainly proveth that same and honor of St. Elu∣therius so well known in Brittain, did not now begin here with his papacy, but was of far more ancient continuance and antiquity. For the very beginning of any ruler or Governour cannot give him so singular a commendation so soon, especially where his Regiment is so great and ample, that in so short a time he can hardly take notice of the state of those things which be∣long unto his charge, much lesse take so good order for them all, that his Fame and Honour should be for that doing reported in all the World. And King Lucius sending unto him in the first year of his papacy, and the very beginning thereof, could not possibly have notice of his so renowned carriage therein, consult with all his Nobles, Flamens and Arch-flamens so dispersed in this so large a Kingdome, and have their general consent, for a general conver∣sion, and send notice of this by solemn Embassadours so long a journey to be there in the be∣ginning of his papacy: but that this great honour and fame of St. Elutherius was here renow∣ned long before, and this publick and general assent to forsake idolatry and embrace Christian Religion had been formerly concluded and agreed upon in Brittain; and very probably as our Cambridge Antiquities have told us, not only St. Timothy was sent or returned to Rome a∣bout this businesse but Eluanus and Meduvinus also, as they write, being but Catechumens to be instructed and consecrated there towards the performing so great a work in this Kingdom. Neither can we with equality of judgement think, that among so many Brittains now converted or so disposed here, these two onely went from hence thither to such end and purpose: But although these be the onely men remembred in Histories to have been there employed, as more worthy, or else designed and sent by King Lucius; yet there went many others about this time from Brittain thither, the better to enable themselves for a general Conversion of this their Country, and there continued to enable themselves with Learning and Religion, to be made fit Instruments and Workmen in those holy Labours, and were therein assisted both by the popes of those times (much conversant with our Country Brittains, and in their Houses at Rome) and others the most Renowned in the Clergy at that time, among whom St. Elutherius after Pope and happy Converter of this Nation was a chief Man.
Lud in their opinion which held the Title Cardinall, was given to that holy Priest,Onupheius Pa∣nuin. l. de Episc. Titul. & Diac. Cardinal. Da∣masus & alii in Cleto Eva∣risto Higenio. which was the chief and most eminent commanding Priest in every Church; or Titulus in Rome, ac∣cording to the Institution and Ordinance of the Holy Popes, Saint Cletus, Saint Evaristus, and Saint Higinus, (in whose time we now are) I cannot but probably think that Saint Elu∣therius, so high in Dignity and Renown, both with Saint Higinus and Pius, and his brother Saint Pastor, to whose disposing and distribution the first Titles or Churches in Rome (founded by our Christian Brittains, and still called by their names, Saint Pudentiana, and Saint Praxedes, and to this day giving the names of Honour to the Roman Cardinals so stiled) were left, was an eminent Cardinall and chief Priest presently after this time,S. Pastor. Epist. ad Timoth. Epist ad Pasto. To. 1. Bib. Sanct. & Tom. 1. Annal. Bar. Pius Epist. ad Justum. Fox Acts & Mon. l. 1. p. 5 in one of those our Brittish Churches in Rome, which among other bonds tyed him so firmly in love to this Nation, and this Nation to him, that he is so often honoured in Titles of Letters and otherwise, by our Antiquaries above all other Popes; Some add another testimony, which if it be true, it greatly maketh for the especial honour wherewith our Historians a∣dorned him; thinking that Saint Elutherius came personally into Brittaine and preached here: and this is that opinion which Mr. Fox thus remembreth, Timotheus in his story thinketh that Elutherius came himself, which wanteth not probable Arguments if they speak of his preaching here beforn he was Pope, sent hither by St. Timothy our Countreyman or some others sent by any of the Popes before him. Mr. Howes saith that King Lucius sent two Embassadours, Elevanus and Meduvinus (Brit∣tains most probably, though great controversies be amongst Antiquaries concerning the truth thereof) two learned men in the Scriptures, with his loving Letters to Elutherius Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send some devout and Learned men, by whose instruction both he and his people might be taught the Faith and Religion of Christ;Howes f. 38. in Lucio. whereof Elutherius being very glad, baptized these two Messengers, making Eluanus a Bishop, and Meduvinus a Teacher, and sent also with them into Brittain two Famous Clerks, Faganus and Damianus, by whose diligence Lucius and his people of Brittain were baptized and instructed in the Faith of Christ; There is (saith the same Author) and remaineth till this day in Somersetshire in the Deanery of Dunster, a Parish Church bearing the name of Saint Dervian, as a Church either by him Founded, or to him Dedicated; so likewise is there another in Glamorganshire called Saint Fagans, where every year is a very great Fair continuing many dayes, where also my honoured Patron, the Right Noble William Lewes of the Van Esq; Son to Sir Edward Lewes, and the Right Honourable Lady Beauchamp, Daughter of the Earl of Dorset, hath a stately Habitation, and if I mistake not, is Lord of the Mannor. Betwixt this Elutherius and King Lucius many Letters passed, and the said Bishop granted many priviledges to Universities and places of learning in Brittain; as to Cambridge, Stanford, Cricklade or Greeklade, and in Glamorganshire (I suppose this place was either Caerwent or Caerleon, for all which is now called Monmouthshire, was then called Glamorgan) where they say learning flourished, as well as at Cambridge, before the coming of Julius Cæsar;Mr. Bro. f. 270. and the Schoole of Glamorgan being so near Caerleon upon Ʋsk in that Countrey, where one of the three great Idolatrous Temples of Brittain, and seat of the Archflamen of those Western pro∣vinces was, and thereby a Nursery of Paganisme, which those holy men laboured by all means to root out; and for that cause, where Archflamens were, Archbishops were placed; and where Flamens, Bishops. The Brittish Histories, Ponticus Virunnius and others, say of these Prelates, that they delive∣red the Brittains from Idolatry, and converted them to Christ; Radulphus de Diceto in his ma∣nuscript History proveth as much, that they converted all the Cities of Brittain, as well as their Flamens and Archflamens, by whom they were directed in their Idolatrous worship as others; And the principal states and members of this Kingdome, King Lucius, his Nobles, Universities, Philosophers, Flamens and chiefe Priests and Teachers of the Pagan Subjects, and their chief places of commorancy and command, being thus converted, the conquest over the Vulgar sort was easie and soon effected. The Author of the Brittish History testifyeth,Mr. Br. f. 271. that so soon as the people of Brittain knew that their King was a Christian, they gathered themselves together to be Catechised, and received Baptisme; and that those holy Legates did blot out Pa∣ganisme almost through all the Island; and Ponticus Virunnius saith, that they baptized all the people of Brittany; all this may easily be confirmed by divers Authors; but I will conclude with Harding. Eluthery the first at supplication Of Lucius, sent him two holy Men, That called were Fagan and Dungen, That Baptized him and all his Realm throughout, With hearts glad and labour devout.
There were then twenty eight Flamens and three Arch-flamens to whose power other Judges were subject; and these by the command of the Pope his Legates delivered from Idola∣try; and where there were Flamens, they placed Bishops; where Arch-flamens, Arch-bishops. The Seats of the Arch-flamens were in the three most noble Cities, London, York and the City of Legions, which the old Walls and Buildings do witnesse to have been upon the River of Ʋsk in Glamorgan. King Lucius sent to Elutherius not only for his assistance in spiritual matters, but also in his temporal,Mr. Br. f. 301. 6. Bridges de∣fence l. 16. p. 1355. Galf. Mon. l. 2. c. 17. Bro. Virunnius, Stow Hollinshed. as the governing his people and making wholsome Lawes. The Lawes which were established here, were the old Brittains Lawes, ascribed for their greatest part to Mul∣mutius Dunwallo, corrected and made conformable to holy Christian Religion. We have all kind of Antiquities, Brittish, Saxon, French, Italians, Ancient and Modern for Witnesses. These Lawes were translated out of Brittish into Latine long before this time by the ancient Gildas, that lived about the time of the Birth of CHRIST, as many both ancient and late Writers agree, and continued here till late time, and in divers respects at this present. King Lucius being thus informed and secured in conscience by Saint Elutherius his Letters and by his Declaration, that the whole Kingdome of Brittain with the Ilands belonged to his temporal charge and government; and that so much as he could, he was to win his Subjects to the Faith and Law of Christ and his holy Church, and provide for the peace and quiet of the same and the Members thereof: he did first in receiving and admitting these new cor∣rected Lawes by the advice of the Clergy and Nobles of his Kingdome see them so qualified, that they were for the defence and propagation of Christian Religion; and further, Founded many godly, costly and memorable Monuments, as Churches, Universities, or Schools, Mo∣nasteries, and other such comforts, helps and furtherances of that holy end. So that as he was the first King that publickly with his Kingdome professed Christ, so he won the honour to be the first Nursing Father among Kings of his holy Church, as the Prophet had foretold, Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers. He was also first among Kings called properly the Vicegerent of God, being the first King which so religiously performed his will. And that Title which the Pope gave to King Henry the 8. when he was better then he proved after, Defender of the Faith, was among Kings the first due and right of King Lucius, for his so heroical and Religious fortitude and magnani∣mity in defending the Faith and Church of Christ. Being now come to celebrate the day of the death of our glorious King Lucius, for the joy that he enjoyed thereby,Mr. Br. f. 346. 1. and bewail it for the unspeakable losse this Nation received thereby, we are to fall into some difficulties both of the time and place thereof. William of Malmesbury in his Manuscript-History of Glasten. and other old Antiquities do prove, that St. Damianus and Faganus after they had converted this Kingdome, continued nine years at Glastenbury at the least; King Lucius still living and reigning here. Polidor, Lilly, Hollinshed, Stow and others, cleave to this Opinion. A great Controversie ariseth where this King died; many Forreign Authors say, That he forsook his Crown and Kingdome, and became a Clergyman, went into Germany to convert that Nation, was Bishop of Curre and there was Martyred: the day of his death is agreed upon by all, to have been on the third day of December; but if those Authors who transport this our blessed King into Germany, look but upon what hath been said before, they shall find that it was not Lucius who was actually King of Brittain, and converted by the means of St. Elutherius, but another Lucius who was indeed Son of a King of Brittain, and might have been King himself, had he not been banished for the reason before related: and this was that St. Lucius who with his sister St. Emerita were both Crowned with the glorious Crown of Martyrdome in Germany. That our first Christian K. Lucius could not be Bishop of Curre is evident; for having been so long King here, he was so disabled for Age, that he was nor capable of such a journey. Further, they which hold he was Bishop of Curre in Germany, and Martyred there, say his Martyrdome was about the year of Christ 182. whereas this our King was living nine years after; besides, they say that St. Emerita was his sister. But it is evident by our Histories, that our first Christian King Lucius had neither brother, sister, nor child begotten by King Coillus in his old Age, having no other Child; whereby it is evident, that this King Lucius had neither brother nor sister; and with what probability can it be affirmed, that a King so holy and loving of his Countries good and quiet, having no Christian Heir to suceeed him, would or in conscience could forsake his Native Country and Subjects in such a case, that were in justice belonging to his chiefest charge, which no other could execute, to preach unto Forreigners, which many of his Subjects and others could, and at his request most willingly would have performed. We read in Histories that many descended of Regal race, have in such cases been taken forth of their Monasteries and Religious Conversation to govern Kingdoms destitute of Heirs; but that a King so vertuous, wise, loving, and beloved of his Country, having no such Heir to succeed
him, but by such course to expose and leave his Kingdom to so many certain miseries and calamities, as fell upon Brittain by the death of King Lucius, and probably were foreseen of all wisemen, did, might, would, or could take such a course, Antiquities have no example, Justice denyeth it, Charity cannot allow it.Seb. Munster. Cosmog. l. 3. c. 344. Mr Bro. f 349. Coxion Hist. part. f in K. Lucius. Manu. Hist. Antiq. in Luco. Sebastian Manster saith plainly, that whereas there is a Vulgar report (he maketh no more of any Lucius preaching there) that one Lucius preached there, if it were so, it could not possibly be our first Christian King Lucius; for he never went out of Brittain, but very Godly lived and dyed here. Gaspar Bruchius doth also plainly reject all that History, as it is apply∣ed by some to our Lucius, and among other reasons addeth, that the great difference of years, will not permit it to be true. An old French Manuscript joyneth in the same, leaveth him living, dying, buried in Brittain. And if we come home to our own Historians and Antiquities, most likely to make the most true and certain relation of this their so renowned King, they set down the year, the day,Antiq. Eccles. St. Petri Cornhil. Harding Cron. c. 51. f. 44. and particular place of his death, and the very Church, one of his own foundation, where his body was interred: the day and year they say was the 201. year of Christ, the third day of October. For the place our old Brittish History saith, he dyed at Glocester, and was with honour buried there in the Cathedral Church; so likewise writeth Ponticus Virunnius. Matthew of Westminster setting down the time, as before, saith, he dyed at Glocester, and was honourably buried there in the Cathedral. The old Manuscript of St. Peters Church in Cornhil, at London, avoucheth from divers Antiquities, that he was buried at Glocester, where the Church of St. Francis was after builded, being at the time of his death, the Cathedral and Episcopal Church of the City. John Harding also witnesseth of this Kings death and bu∣rial at Glocester. At Caerglove buried after his dignity. And not to exclude the testimony of our later writers in this relation, in their Theater of Great Brittain, written and composed by divers able Historians,Theater of great Brittain l. 6. c. 9. sect. 18. and pub∣lished with common applause, they make this History of King Lucius his death in Brit∣tain, a matter without question true, and thus scoffingly condemn those writers, which would carry him to end his dayes in Germany: That this Lucius be the Apostle of the Ba∣narians, or that his sister Emerita was crowned with the flames of Martyrdom,Harrison disc. of Brittain. Stow & Howes Hist. fifteen years after his death, I leave to the credit of Aegidius Schudus, and Hermanus Schedelius the Reporters: Others of them plainly say: Lucius was buried at Glocester: yet this general consent of Antiquaries, for his first burial at Glocester doth nothing hinder, but as the known devotion, both of the Brittains, as Saxons after them, towards holy Relicks did often and with great devotion and solemnity remove the bodies of holy Saints, or parts of them for their greater honour. So it might, or did after fall out with the whole body of this renowned King, or some part thereof. And the Tradition of Winchester is, that the whole body of King Lucius, or a great part thereof being, once removed be∣fore, (probably to Caerleon, for some say he was buried there) was the second time translated thither, and there lyeth in the body of the great Church under a marble stone, elevated about two foot from the pavement, the same stone being now broaken in two places, having upon it, and those holy Relicks, a cross of seven great brass buttons, whereof 5. are set down in length the other two making the perfect figure, and forme of the cross, one on each side of the others making the length. And this Reverend Tran∣slation of St. Lucius his body to divers places in Brittain, is sufficiently insinuated by the old Author of the French Manuscript History, who although he confidently affirmeth that King Lucius dyed at Glocester, yet he addeth that he was afterwards buried in the chief See at Caerleon, and this he saith was in the year of Christs incarnation, 196. four or five years sooner then others before have set down his death, except the Manuscript Compilation, which hath the same computation of his death, saying, Sepultus est anno In∣carnationis Domini 196. herede carens, he was buried in the 196. year after the incarnation of our Lord, wanting Issue or heir. And both to assure us further of the undoubted truth of those Histories, which testifie the death and burial of St. Lucius to have been in Brittain, and not in any forraign Re∣gion, as also to give us better notion and trial, what honour, peace, and quiet, spiritual and temporal, with other happiness, this Kingdom enjoyed by King Lucius life, and lost them by the loss of him: it is the constant agreement of Antiquities, that Brittain now made by his death destitute not only of so worthy a King, but also of any certain heir or suc∣cessor of that Regal race, fell to intestine discord and variance, by which it was misera∣bly afflicted long time upon that occasion: a late Author tells us, King Lucius dyed without issue, by reason whereof after his decease, the Brittains fell at variance, which continued about the space of fifteen years, as Fabian thinketh, howbeit the old English Cronicle affirmeth, that the con∣tention among them remained fifty years, though Harding affirmeth but four; which his words of Hardings opinion, that this variance among them continued but 4. years, are to be a∣mended; for Harding setteth down the dissensions of the Brittains, as other Historians
do, and maketh them of as long continuance only, he saith that Severus the Empe∣ror came hither four years after the death of King Lucius to seek to appease things, so doth Matthew of Westminster, Florentius and others as far as Harding doth. This holy King, graunted, made and signed, many writings, Charters and Donati∣ons, for the defence, maintainance and preservation of Religion, and the chief teachers, and professors thereof, as to the University of Cambridge, the School of Bangor, Monastery of Salisbury and such others, and to every Archiepiscopal or Episco∣pal See in Brittain, both for the assuring the old revenues and priviledges of the Archflamens and Flamens as others new and more ample, which he conferred unto them, and such as should sit and succeed them for ever. And we find in Antiquities, that in the very time of King Lucius, besides the Ca∣thedral Churches in Great Cities, there were others also builded in them, as namely Glocester, Worcester, Caerleon, and others; for we read of divers kinds of Churches in them all, both Cathedral and others: King Lucius was buried at Glocester in the Church of the Chief or first Order. The same distinction is given for Winchester, which necessa∣rily inferreth other Churches, or a Church in either of them of inferiour Order; for the word first proveth a second; for the Inferiour Churches, besides the Cathedral in Caerleon they are remembred in Histories, (Viz. of St. Julius, and St. Aaron) so of o∣ther Cities not inferiour unto these, Glocester being then but a new, and no great City: we find others, as at Abington in Oxfordshire, Amsbury in Wiltshire, Cambridge, Stan∣ford and other places, where to have been Christian Churches in that time, there is still sufficient testimony left us.Mr. Bro. 307. 5. Gal Mon Hist. l. 5 c. 1. Math. West. an. 201. Bulla Honorii an. 624. Chart. Regis Cadw an 685. Chart. Reg. Art. An. 531. die. 7. apud Caium l. 1. de Antiq. Cont. John Harding Chron c. 25. fol. 22. John Ross Hist. Manus. Jo Caius A∣pol. A ca. Cantib & de Antiq l. 1. Will. Harri. Dis: Bi c. 3. T. of Univer∣sitie. p. 146.  H st. Bladud Bal. pref. in l de scrip. Twin. l. de An∣tiq. Ox. Ha is sup a Ha s manu. G aston Chron. Bal l. de ser. Brit cent 1. in Congello. Barnachoren. Gal Mor Hist. Brit l 1. c. 12. Math. West. an. 603. Harding. Chron. c. 50. f. 42 p. 2. Ma. h. West an. 124. Harding Chron. c. 51. f. 43. Hllershed H st. of Brit. fol. 57. And to provide as well for the continuall maintainance and repair of the house of God, at the first founding and building thereof, these ancient Schools or Universities of this Kingdom, which all now had received the faith and Religion of Christ, and so were to be as Seminaries and Mothers of Christian Divinity and holy learning, for preservation and upholding of Gods Church, King Lucius endowed with great priviledges and Immunities, that they might more quietly and diligently employ themselves to their so profitable and holy studies. This his Charter of priviledges to the University of Cambridge, the Antiquaries there∣of prove by divers Ancient Testimonies. The Bull of Pope Honorius 1000. years ago: the Charter of King Cadwalladrus, and King Arthur long before, wherein is con∣tained that he granted to the University of Cambridge, as King Lucius with other Kings had done before, to be free from all publick Vectigalls, and burdens, that they might the more freely and quietly attend their studies. The like I may affirm of Stanford, which from the time of King Bladud, untill it was interdicted by St. Gregory for the Pelagian heresie, continued an University, so of Glamorgan claiming but a little la∣ter original, Greeklade and Liechlade of such Antiquity, Bellisilum now Oxford as it pleadeth. Therefore whereas a late writer confidently sayeth, there were 600. Students, in ancient times, and others not so well remembred; to all which now converted to the faith of Christ, and training up spiritual Soldiers for the defence, profession and maintainance thereof, we have sufficiently grounds to affirm, King Lucius gave the like priviledges as unto Cambridge, one and the same reason being for all, and yet besides these, which he found founded before, he himself was founder of others, namely Bangor in Wales, which long continued in that State, untill it was after changed into so great a Monastery, that above 2000. Moncks, as our Histories testifie abode there. A late Author tells us of another University, for so he calleth it by the name of Accademia Legionensis, the University of Caerlegion, which he would to have to be Westchester, others rather take it to be Caerlegion upon Ʋsk in Glamorgan, making it a fourth distinct place from the Metropolitan Church, and the several Churches of St. Julius, wherein were sacred Nuns, and St. Aaron of Canon Regulars. In the time of Sixtus Bishop of Rome, reigned here in Brittain, either Coillus or Lucius his son, according to the diversity of opinions of several Authors; but seeing all Anti∣quities and Antiquaries confess so many great and renowned things, and of such labour and difficulty to have been performed, for receiving generally Christian Religion and abandoning the Pagan superstitions in this Kingdom in the time of K. Lucius, we must not keep the crown of Brittain from him, long after the death of Pope Sixtus. Harding who saith his Father Coillus reigned but 13. years, will make him King, all this Popes time, which Matthew of Westminster doth confirm, with four years addition at least to the time of his reign, in the time of Pope Alexander before: And yet he maketh the years of his whole age, but 87 from which, if we deduct the whole terme between the year 124. when the Monck of Westminster, saith Lucius began his reign, untill the year 142. or 143. when St. Sixtus was Martyred, to prove by all accounts, King Lucius reigned in some part of the Papacy of Pope Sixtus, we make the time of his reign, being very younge at the death of his Father, not so many years as some ascribe; John Harding saith, Lucius King of Brittain reigned 54 years, others allow but 53 years. Hollenshed in his History of England tells us, that Lucius having brought his people to per∣fect light and understanding of the true God, that they needed not to be deceived any longer
with the crafty temptations and feigned miracles of wicked spirits, he abolished all pro∣phane worshippings of false Gods, and converted such Temples as had been dedicated to their service unto the use of the Christian Religion, and thus studying only how to advance the glory of almighty God, and the knowledg of his word, without seeking the vain glory of worldly triumph, which is gotten with slaughter of many a guiltless person, he left his Kingdom, though not enlarged with broader Dominion then he found it, yet greatly aug∣mented and enriched, with quiet rest, good ordinances and (that which is more to be e∣steemed then all the rest) adorned with Christian Religion, and perfectly instructed with his holy word and doctrine. He reigned as some write 21 years, though others affirme but twelve. Again some testify that he reigned 77. others say 54. and Harrison 43. King Lucius dyed without issue by reason whereof ensued much trouble as is said before. Concerning the first inclination of K. Lucius to christian Religion in the time of Pope Higinius, Mr. Broughton thus discourseth, Although I do not find it expresly affirmed by a∣ny Antiquary but Harding, that St. Higinius in that time Bishop of Rome did so particular∣ly give assistance and direction in this business of our Brittains conversion, yet many and ve∣ry renowned Writers give such testimony therein that we must needs grant that to be most true which Harding affirmeth, and that after-coming Scribes and Copiers of their Hi∣stories have done the Authors wrong by their negligence or ignorance in writing one man for another, Elutherius for Higinius: for among others St. Bede as he is extant, saith, that King Lucius of Brittain did write to the Pope of Rome in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 156. that by his order and command he might be a Christian. The M. S. Antiquities of the Church of Landaff more ancient in probable judgment then St. Bede, and written by a Brittain, which should not be ignorant in that the greatest businesse of his Country, giveth the same testimony of the same year 156. The ancient author of the Brittish History also a Brittain maketh K. Lucius a christian in and before this year 156 in direct termes. So Testify∣eth the old History called Brutus, ancient Records belonging to Guild-hall in London, the Antiquities of St. Edwards lawes, Goceline in the life of St. Aug. so writeth Naucl. and di∣vers ancient manuscript writers, which I have seen, saith the learned Mr. Br. This was the state of the Church in Brittain, when new troubles began to the disturbance of the Province. For the Northern Brittains making a breach in the wall,Mr. Br. fol. 210. which Adrian the Emperour had built, and finding the borders but weakly guarded entered the province, and surprised the Roman General and killed many of his Souldiers, then ranging the Coun∣tries they wasted and spoyled everywhere without resistance, till Ʋlpius Marcellus, being sent over by Commodus the Emperor, stayed the fury, and with great difficulty forced them to retire within the wall, by which means the Province being quieted, he applied himself to reforme abuses in his Campe, reviving the ancient discipline of war, which had been for a time discontinued among the Roman Souldiers, whom long service and many victories had made bold to say and to do oftentimes more then became them. For Marcellus indeed was a man somthing austere in reproving and punishing, otherwise very temperate, dili∣gent in time of war, not idle in peace, his diet was the same which the common Souldier used, in quantity more sparing; for he would eat no bread, but such as was brought from Rome, which he did to the end he might avoid excesse, and take no more then sufficed nature, the staleness of his bread having taken away all tast that might either please the sense or provoke the appetite. The day time for the most part he spent in viewing his campe, and training young Souldiers, and giving direction to Officers. In the night he wrote letters and made dispatches into divers parts of the Province (as occasion required.) He slept very little by reason of his thin diet, and much business, wherewith he was conti∣nually occupied; for he thought that man who slept a whole night together, was no meet man to be either a Counsellour to a Prince or a Commander of an army. Every evening he used to write instructions upon twelve Tables made of Linden tree, which tables he de∣livered to one of his servants appointing him to carry them at sundry hours of the night, to certain of his Souldies, who thereby supposing that their General was still wa∣king and not gone to bed, were the more careful in keeping the watch, and preventing sud∣dain attempts in the night season: he was severe in execution of Justice, not to be led by favour, nor to be corrupted with bribe; he levied monies, only as necessary for the war, not to enrich himself or his friends, as other Governours in former times had done; for he never preferred his own private before the publick, nor a wealthy estate before an ho∣norable reputation. The fame of those vertues as they made him much respected, both of his own Souldiers and the Brittains, so they procured Envy which alwaies followeth vertue inseparably as a shadow doth the body. For Commodus the Emperor understanding how Marcellus had carried himself in Brittain was much displeased therewith, and thought it best to cut him off: but some accidents happening in the mean time to make him change that purpose, he only sent letters of discharge and so dismissed him of the Office. After departure of Marcellus the army having been kept in by hard hand, and finding now the reine let loose, upon a suddain began to be mutinous, and refused to acknowledge Commodus for their Emperor; these disorders Perennius one of his favorites took upon him to redresse, by displacing such persons as he suspected, and committing
their Offices to Men of meaner quality, wherewith the Legions were much discontented? disdaining that instead of Senators, & Men of consular degree, they should now be governed by upstarts and base companions. In the heat of those broyles, about fifteen soldiers for∣sook the Army and went to Rome, where they exhibited to the Emperor, a bill of com∣plaint against Perennius whom they charged as the chief Author of the dissention in the Army, by bringing in new customes, by exceeding his commission, and doing things derogatory to the Majesty of the Roman Empire. These and other things (as well false as true) were objected against him by the multitude, who for the most part dislike such as exercise authority over them, and keep no measure in their affections, either in love or hatred. But that which touched to the quick, was an accusation of treason, put up a∣gainst him for conspiracy against the life of the Emperor, and in seeking to advance his Son to the Empire: this point was quickly apprehended by Commodus who thought that the suspicion of the fact, or the report only to have intended, it was a sufficient cause of condemnation, howsoever the party accused was either indeed guilty or innocent. Hereupon Perennius was declared Traitor, and delivered to the Soldiers, who stripped him of his apparel, whipped him with rods, and in the end cruelly murdered him. Then Helvius Pertinax (a Man of mean fortune by Birth, as having risen from the State of a common Soldier to the dignity of a Commander) was sent into Brittain to appease the tumults there. He was one of them that Perennius had before discharged from bearing office, and sent into Liguria where he was born. At his first entrance he attempted by force to suppress the rebellion of the army, adventuring so far in a skirmish, that though he escaped with life, yet was he left among the dead, and supposed to be slain. Afterwards proceeding with better advice and success, he composed the troubles, severely punishing the principal offendors, and using some rigour in revenging his own injuries, by which means growing odious to the Soldiers, and distrusting his own safety, he made suit to be discharged of the Lieutenantship. Then was the government of the Province assigned to Clodius Albinus, a Man of Noble birth, very forward, and for the most part fortunate in his attempts, for which the Emperor Commodus, either upon fear or favour did honor him with the title of Cae∣sar, though Albinus seemed unwilling to accept it, and afterwards discovered his dis∣position more openly in affecting the ancient free State. For upon a false report of the death of Commodus, he made an Oration to the Legions in Brittain, in favour of the Senate, whose Government he had commended, and preferred the same before that of Emperors. But Commodus being advertised thereof, sent Junius Severus with all speed to take charge of the army. This Emperor Commodus though he were a most wicked man, ex∣ceeding all that went before him in impiety,Mr Bro. 247. 1. as Marcus Maximus, Lampridius, and in them the whole Senate of Rome with others are witnesses, yet as a scourge of God to the persecutors of Christians, he oppressed them, and was favourable to Chri∣stians, never molesting them, whether it was at the mediation of Marcia a Woman whom he exceedingly affected, and was as Dio saith, most friendly to Christians, Christi∣anorum studiosissima, or otherwise, I do not examine; he remained Emperor all Pope Eluthe∣rius his time. In the mean time Albinus retired himself from affairs till Commodus was dead, and Pertinax elected Emperor, then he continued himself with Didius Ju∣lianus whom the Soldiers (that then made open sale of the Empire) had elected after the death of Pertinax. But Julianus being infamous for his Vices, and fail∣ing to perform his promse made to the Soldiers, was in a short time forsaken of them, and afterwards was murdered: upon report of Julianus his death, Septinius Severus (a Man adorned with excellent gifts of nature) was declared Emperor, and for that he feared Clodius Albinus (who then recovered the Government of Brittain) he made him his aociate in the Empire, and sent Hereclianus to be Quietant of the Province, which Hereclianus soon after resigned to Virius Lupes. But desire of Soveraignty (that cannot long endure equal in decree) made the one jealeous of the other, and the fire of ambition (that had been smothered for a time) burst out at length into a flame, for Severus having pacified some tumults in the West part of the World, and after many conflict, subdued Pescenius Niger (who usurped the Empire in the East) pretended the breach of association, as a colour to make war upon Albinus, who understanding thereof, transported over the Seas a mighty army, furnished with a∣bundance of victual, out of the Isle it self, which then (through the industry of the In∣habitants, applying themselves to tillage and husbandry, yielded plenty of grain, and served the Romans, as a Garner of the West Empire out of which they carried year∣ly great quantities of corn to maintain their armies in Gallia and Germany.Lyons in Franco. Neer Lug∣dunum in Gallia Severus encountered with Albinus, whose forces were there defeated, and him self slain. Then Severus made preparation for his voyage into Brittain, which by reason of the often change of Governors was grown much out of order, and although the Brittains up∣on intelligence of his purpose did send over Embassadors to offer their voluntary submission
yet the Emperor in whom neither age nor sicknesse had abated the heat of ambition, would not directly accept thereof, but entertained them with delayes, till all things were in readinesse for his expedition (so earnest a desire he had to passe into the furthest part of Brittain, and to purchase the sirname of Britannicus, as an honourable addition to his o∣ther titles) his two sons Bassianus, commonly called Caracalla, and Getta, he took with him; as doubting their agreement in his abscence. To Getta his younger son, after his arrival in Brittany he committed the government of the Province there for civil causes, wherein Aemilius Paulus Papinianus the famous Lawyer (who as chief minister of Justice under him had his Tribunal at Eboracum) was commanded to assist and direct Him.York. Severus himself and Bassianus with the army marched Northward against the Meatae,The ancient Inhabitants of the hither part of Scotland. a people bordering upon the Calidonians, and in league with them, Virius Lupus but a little before had assayled to enter the Country by force, when the Meatae, (standing upon their own strength) withstood him, and forced him in the end to purchase his peace with money. Then Severus hasted into Calidonia, where finding the pas∣sages uncertain, and dangerous by reason of the Fens, Woods, and deep Waters he caused Trees to be felled, and Bridges and Cawsies to be made for his Souldiers to march over. The Calidonians in the mean time sallied out of the woods, and charg∣ed the Romans, who were much encumbred for want of firme ground, and were often times forced to trace the Country, and to disperse themselves into several companies, seek∣ing places of advantage: by which means a great number of them perished, while the in∣habitants (lying in ambush and sometimes leaving their cattel abroad a train to draw them within danger) suddainly surprised and killed them, before they could recover their camp. This was an unfortunate journey to the Romans; who besides the losse which they susteined by their enemies, were afflicted with diseases, by reason partly of the unwhol∣some waters which they drank, and partly of the contagious air that infected their spirits, yea many times they killed one another; for such as for feeblenesse could not keep ranck in marching, were slain by their own fellowes,50000. Ro∣mans lost at one time. that they might not be left a prey to their persecuting enemies There died in this enterprise above fifty thousand Romans, yet would not Severus withdraw his forces thence; till the Calidonians made offer to treat of peace, whereto he then hearkned the more willingly, for that he saw the difficulty and (in a manner) impossibility to bring the Northern part of the Isle wholly under subjection, by Reason of the Rocks, Mountains, and Marshes, as also for that the county being (for the most part) Baron and unfruitful, the benefit thereof was not deemed likely to countervail the charge in getting and keeping of it. The conditions were, that the Calidonians should first disarme themselves, and deliver part of the coun∣try (lying next the Province) into the Romans possession, and that from that time for∣ward, they should attempt nothing against the publick peace; which articles agreed upon, and assurance taken for the performance, Severus retired himself into the pro∣vince, leaving his son Bassianus to take charge of the army, which after the Emperors de∣parture grew carelesse and dissolute; wherewith the General seemed nothing displeased, either for that he was by his own nature inclined to the worst; or else for that he hoped thereby to win the Souldiers favour as a mean for his advancement to the Empire after his fathers death, which he had oftentimes attempted by indirect practises most unna∣turally to procure. In the mean while the Calidonians (notwithstanding the late contract) understanding what disorders were in that Roman camp, suddainly invaded it, killing and taking booty, which they shared with their Neighbours (borderers of the province) that had assisted them in in the enterprise. Severus being greatly incensed therewith, sent part of his ar∣my to pursue the Calidonians, expresly commanding, that they should be all put to the sword, without respect of age or fex. This sharp manner of proceeding, did somewhat quaile the hope of the Northren Brittains, who fled into remote parts of Calidonia; and Severus having rather stayed, then ended the troubles (as intending to prosecute the war with more advantage, spent some time in repairing and enlarging Adrians wall, which he carried thwart the Island from sea to sea, entrenching and fortifiing it, with Bulwarks and square Towers, in places most convenient (to give warning one to another up∣on any suddain assault) for defence of the borders. Then being wearied with age, sickness and travail,York. having his mind also much grieved with the disloyal and unnatural practises of his son Bassianus, he withdrew himself to Eboracum, a Colonie of the Romans, being then the station of the sixt Legion called Victrix, and afterwards growing to be one of the chief places of ac∣count among the Brigantes, for these stations of the Roman Legions were commonly the seed plots of towns and cities, both in this Isle and divers other parts of the Empire. It was reported that in his passage thither, a Moor with a Cypress Garland on his head, did meat and salute him by the name of a God, and at his entrance into the City, he was by error of the Southsayer (that guided him) brought into the Temple of Bellona, and that black beasts being appointed for Sacrifice, did of themselves follow him to his pallace. These things howsoever thew fell out accidentally, yet they
were interpreted as ominous in respect of the event, and now Severus perceiving his death to approach called before him some of his Councellors and chief Captains, unto whom he is said to have spoaken in this manner. It is now above eighteen years, since I was first declared Emperor by the army in Pannonia, during which time, with what care, pain, and travail I have weilded this vast body of the Empire, my continual employment in wars, both at home and abroad, may witness sufficiently. For at my first entrance I found the State encumbered eve∣ry where; and now I shall leave it peaceable even to the Brittains. The future prosperi∣ty whereof must depend upon the mutuall agreement of my two Sons. For neither multitude of men, nor abundance of treasure, are so available to defend and main∣tain Commonwealths, as amity and unity between Governors. For by concord we see that small things grow to greatness, whereas by discord the greatest fall to ruine. I must now leave to them (my Successors) the imperial Diadem, that which Bassianus hath so long thirsted after, though he know not yet, whether it be a thing to be wished or fear∣ed, as having not proved the difference betwixt a Prince and a private person. But ambition mindes are carried blindfold, they know not whether, in desiring that which having once obtained, they can neither keep without great care, nor leave without extream peril: such a thing is Soveraignty, whose greatness is not contained in it self, but consisteth for the most part in the opinion, and dependeth on the dispositions of other men, it is vertue only not glorious titles, which makes men truly great. My self at this present may serve for an example to shew upon what a weak foun∣dation, humane greatness is built. I have seen all things though now it avail me no∣thing, seeing I must pay my debt to nature, and after all my exploytes in the East and West parts of the World, I must dye, as I may say, out of the World in a strange Country, if any Country may be termed strange to the Romans, who have now by conquest made all Countries their own; I exhort you therefore as you tender the welfare of the Roman Empire, of your own selves, of your poste∣rity, be true and faithfull to my sons, as you have been to me, assisting them with your Councel, and perswading them to mutual concord, as the main pillar to support, both their Estates and your own. When he had uttered these or the like speeches he turned a side and shortly after yield∣ed up the Ghost. Baron. Tom. 2. Annal. an. D. 105 Manusc. Gal. lic. c. 100. Ma. West. an. 206. Galf. Mon. Hist. 4 Reg. Bit l 5. c 2. R. vit. Hist. l. 4. Selden A∣nale. c. 7. Gal. Mont sup. l. c. 3. Pro. Cata Reg. Brit. in Seve∣ra. Magdebur. Cent. 3 c. 16. Flo Wigorn. 198 220. Mat West an. 205 206.Baronius with others confess, that Severus was descended of most noble Parents; Con∣stat Severum fuisse majorum Claritudine nobilissimum, and yet not able to describe his Auncestry, doth sufficiently prove him a stranger to those Countries and their Historians, and to make further manifestation herein, although he was born in Africk about Tropolis, so far from Brittain, yet he married a Brittish Lady, as divers of the same Authors and others testifie, and had by her Basianus his Son, after King of Brittain, and Emperor; also some say her name was Martia, and the first wife of Severus, and sister of Fulgentius the Brittain, that warred against and slew Severus at York. Fulgentius Matris Basiani Frater. And this Brittish Lady could not be married to Severus, after his coming into Brittain, but long before, where he then lived in the East parts of the World. For in Brittain he lived, but a short time by our Modern calculation in their Catalogue of the Kings of Brittain, four years; The Magdeburgians have the like account follow∣ing Eusebius. Florentius Wigorniensis maketh his aboad here but three years. The Monck of Westminster scarcely alloweth him two years continuance here. The like have others, all agreeing, he was old and feeble at his coming hither, yet Bassianus his Son by our Brittish Lady was so old at his death, that he succeeded him both in this Kingdom and the Empire, who being Emperor but six or seven years was, as Dio and others witnesse, at his death going on his 29•h. year of age; Almost twenty years old when his Father first landed in Brittain. Divin Cara∣calla.The Brittains continuing in variance and contention about a Successor to Lucius King of this Kingdom, Severus the Emperor came hither, some say to quiet the Debates, others affirm, to win honour to himself, he being accounted very greedy and ambitious thereof, and to reduce the Kingdom wholly to the Roman subjection; not willing that any Brittain here born should reign, and therefore as some write they made a decree and law among them,Hector Boetius Scot. Hist. l. 5. f. 86. against such Government. Eo fere tempore post Lucium Regem Brittorum extinctum Romani gnari Brittannos Reges multarum in populo seditionum & rebelli∣onum in se fuisse autores, ut res Romana in Brittannia soret quietior, publico vetuere decreto, ne quispiam Brittanici sanguinis deinceps regia insignaretur dignitate. If there was any such decree of the Romans, it could neither be upon this surmised motive, that the Brittish Kings had been the occasion of any rebellions or seditions against the Romans; for it is e∣vident that in the time of the three last Kings, Merius, Coillus, and Lucius, peace was duely kept with the Romans, and their tribute paid unto them, and these Kings descended of Genuista a Roman Lady of the Emperors kindred, so as well as from King Arviragus
the Brittain, did participate both of the Brittish and Roman blood. And these were the onely Kings which were here, after the composition between the Romans and Brittains, in the time of Claudius and Arviragus, when Arviragus marrying the daughter of the Em∣perour, joining the Brittish and Roman Regal and Imperial lines together, thereby en∣ded all debates between them. Neither did any such Decree probably pass the Roman Senate, that none born of Brit∣tish blood should afterwards be King of Brittain, if we will be guided either by reason or authority herein; for how could the Romans, then neither having such power or possession, take upon them such a definitive sentence.Mr. B. 362: This had been the next way to have made a general defection from them here of all the Brittains. And the Brittains,Will. Harrison Disc. Brit. c. 22. Harding Chr. c. 52. f. 45. & alii apud Harrison. Hollenshed Hist. of Eng. l. 4. c. 21. except in some munici∣pal places, were governed by their own, and not by the Roman Laws. And for authori∣ty, we want not those that write how both our next Kings here, who came from Rome af∣ter this imagined Decree, Severus and Basianus his son and successor here, were Brittanici sanguinis born of Brittish blood, and yet both of them our Kings in Brittain, and Empe∣rours also, and by some Antiquaries, the next heirs to the Crown of Brittain. Harding in his Chronicle thus testifieth from antiquity of Severus. Severus thus the worthy Senator, Descended down-right heir to Androgeos, The eldest son of Lud that was the Emperour, Out of Brittain went with Julius; Which Senator aforesaid Severus, To Brittain came and was inthronisate, And with a Crown of Gold was Coronate. Therefore if Severus the Emperour was descended down right heir to Andro geos the el∣dest son of King Lud, the words of the Authors so obsolutely and consequently, not without good warrant affirming it, he must needs be both descended of the Regal Brittish race, and be also the undoubted next true heir to the Crown of this Kingdom at that time; all other lines which might by any probability make claim before him, being now extinct: and this of it self is more then any (Authour of like credit to him I have alledged) doth bring to prove, that Severus was not descended by lineal and lawful birth,Flor. Wigorn. Chro. an. 181, and 182. Matth. West. an. 192. Mar. Scot. Aetat. 6. Mart. Polon. an 213. Hen. Hunt. l. 1. Hist. in Severo. from our Brittish Regal race; but some other, in which I find a silence in Antiquity: onely divers write, (and nothing hindering his Regal Brittish Genealogy) that he was born at Leptis, in the Province of Tripolis in Africk, and was the onely African that ever was Emperour; yet none of them denieth thereby his descent from Brittish Parentage; but some of them yield to that which confirmeth it; and his ancestors being strangers, so long out of Brittain as from Julius Cæsars time, no wonder if he was born in that place of Africk, for I have shewed before in the time of Vespasian, we had many thousands of Brittains went into those parts, and without question divers of them married, and continued there in their posterity. So did divers Brittains at other times, even with wives and children go to Rome, and from thence were disposed into divers parts, never returning hither. Now to speak somewhat of Severus his alienation or affection from or to Christian Reli∣gion, it is the common opinion, and our own Antiquaries be of the same,Mar. Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6. an. 153. Matth. West. an. 195. Flor. Wigorn. in Chro. an. 189. and 211. Judas Scrip∣tor, Eccl. temp. Severi apud Euseb. that in divers places of the Empire, he was an enemy so far unto it, that many term him the fifth Perse∣cutor among the Emperours after Nero, and many Christians in divers Provinces were martyred in his Empire, Post Neronem Severus quintam persecutionem in Christianos excita∣vit, Plurimique Sanctorum per diversas provincias martyrio Coronantur. And it is so certain by all forreign antiquities, that there was such persecution in his time, that it was almost a common opinion, that the coming of Antichrist was at hand, as an Ecclesiastical Writer of that time hath left to posterity, Propterea quod persequutionis tumultus contra nos excitatus multorum mentes tam graviter per turbaret, Antichristi adventum omnium ore atque sermone jactatum, jam tum appropinquare arbitratus est: Yet we do not find any express Edict or Prohibition of him, until about the tenth year of his Empire, when as Spartanus wri∣teth in his journey from Syria to Alexandria, he made many Laws, forbidding under great penalty any man to be either a Jew or Christian: and as Dio, and others witness,Mr. B. 365. he consented men by his Imperial Letters, both to the depriving of St. Philip of the Augustal Prefectship of Egypt, being become a professed Christian, and giving authority to Terentius his successor, secretly to Martyr him. But for Severus excuse we find, the greatest and almost onely persecution of his time, either to have been in or about Jury, occasioned by the Tumults of the Jews, or in Africa, where Severus was born, and principally in Egypt, then full of Christians; the Præfect himself St. Philip a Christian, and so potent as the Letters of Severus unto him say, he lived more like an absolute King than Præfect; that Præfecture of Egypt being of so great authority and dignity.
Therefore Africk being the Countrey of Severus birth, and so formidable an ene∣my in former times to the Romans, as all Historians report, and now so abounding with Christians, slanderously accused by their Pagan enemies, to be enemies to the Roman Empire;Niceph l. 4. Hist. Eccle. Ie apud euidem & ad∣versus Hro. l. 1. c. 24. Severus may seem by such acclamations, against his own Inclina∣tion, to have given way to persecution. And the rather, because the Gnostick He∣reticks, given then over to all filthiness, that as Irenaeus, Nicephorus, and others write, they did publickly profess, and so practise, that all which would come to perfection of their Sect, which they onely allowed, must commit all wickedness. These Heretiques, being accounted Christians, with the Pagans might sooner pro∣voke the Emperour by such mens informations, against the most holy Professors of Christian Religion, which were so free from being such, as they were falsly reputed with those their enemies to be,Athenagoras Orat. pro Christian. that as Athenagoras in his Oration for them, in the name of the Christians, desired no mercy or favour, but to be utterly rooted out, if those impious slanders could be proved true against them. Nicephorus saith, Christia∣nity flourished in his time; and Tertullian, then living, affirmeth, That Severus al∣so himself, father to Antoninus, was kind to Christians; for he sought for Proculus a Christian, who had some time before cured him with Oyl, and kept him in his Pallace with him so long as he lived;Tertul. li. ad Scap. c. 4. he was exceedingly well known to Antoninus that was nur∣sed by a Christian woman; and Severus knowing both renowned women, as also most ho∣nourable men to be of this profession, was so far from doing them any hurt, that he com∣mended them, and openly resisted even to their faces the raging people. Therefore, if Severus the Emperour was of his own disposition so great a Lover of Christians in general, if he honoured Proculus in his Pallace so long as he lived, gave allowance that his son and heir Antoninus Bassianus King of Brittain, and Emperour after his father, should both be nursed by a Christian woman, and be so familiar with such known professed Christians as Proculus was, and was the Overseer of Evodus, the Tutor or Bringer up of Bassianus his son, as may be gathered both by Tertullian, Dio, and others; and both Severus himself, so great an honourer both of renowned Christian men and women, and his Lady and Empress Martia of Brittain so far affected and disposed to Christian Religion, that if she did not profess it in act, yet in affection and desire did so honour it, that she would not permit her son and heir to be nursed by any but a Christian woman, and the Overseer of so great a charge to be a Christian so famous and renowned for Faith, as Proculus was known of all men to be: These considered, I dare not boldly say, that Severus did in any time or place, of his own inclination, wittingly or willingly, without great incitation, condescend to such persecutions, as are remembred in Histories, to have been in his Empire. And after his coming into Brittain, we do not find the least suspition in our Antiquities, that he did of himself, or suffer any other to persecute any for Christian Religion; but rather both of himself, and at the instance of his Brittish Empress, at the least a Christian in affection and both powerable with him, and their son Bassianus his heir and successor, and for that love and trust he found in the Brittish Christians of all that part of Brittain. South to the Wall and Trench which Adrian and he made, joining with him against his e∣nemies, to possess him of the Crown of Brittain, he was a grateful friend to them, and their holy profession. And all our Histories are clear, that Religion was here in quiet, without molestation and affliction, until the Empire of Dioclesian, that great persecutor; yet we cannot deny, but all places in Brittain, being now full of war-like miseries, and the Christians here, both in Albania, Loegria, and Cambria, mixed and joined both with Roman and Scythian Infidels, many of them fell both to wickedness and Paganism also; which occasioned holy Gildas to write, that Christianity was received but coldly of the In∣habitants of Brittain, and with some continued perfect, but not so with others, before Dioclesian his persecution. And not onely in the time of Dioclesian his persecution, fol∣lowing in this age, we find even whole Cities and Towns, as Verulamium and others, wholly destitute of Christians; but long before or about this time we are assured, that there were very many Brittains, & not of mean estate, but such as were publickly employed about the affairs of the Kingdom, & sent from hence to Rome about it, that either were fal∣len from Christianity, or never forsook their Pagan Religion; for we read both in antient Manuscripts and other Authours, in the life of St. Mello, after Archbishop of Rhoan in Nor∣mandy, sent thither by St. Stephen, Pope, not onely that he and his Brittish Companions, which were then sent to Rome to pay the tribute of Brittains there, were Pagans, and Sacrifi∣ced in the temple of Mars; but it was then the custom of the Brittains coming thither about that Office so to do, which to be a custom, could not be younger than these dayes; time short enough between this and that time to make a custom: And it seemeth this custom had been from the first submission of the Brittains to the Romans; for both late Writers and others af∣firm, that in Octavius Augustus time Ambassadors came from Brittain to Rome, swearing sealty in the temple of Mars, offering gifts in the Capitol to the gods of the Romans; and we have testimony in our Histories, that after the death of King Lucius, and this very time which we have now in hand, it was the use & custom of our Brittains here, when any of their Nobility
were to obtain the dignity of Knighthood, to send them to Rome to receive that honour there, and after such Pagan rights and ceremonies, that Christians could not in Conscience so accept thereof. And yet such multitudes even in this time flocked thither from hence so to be created. Severus of himself was not addicted to a wicked life, but much renowned not onely for warlike affairs, but also for learning and knowledge in philosophy; and so great an enemy to incontinency, that he punished adultery by law with death, with such severity, that Dio writeth, that when he was Consul, he found by record that 3000 had been put to death for that offence. He was after his death made a God among the Pagans: and Herodianus saith, he died rather of grief for his childrens wickednesse then of sicknesse, which grief for the sins of his sons, as also of his own in permitting the Christians in many places be to most grievously persecuted, I would not deny; but that he dyed in any such grief is untrue, being most certain, that he after so many conquests in other Countries, when he came to fight against this Country Christians, was enforced dishonourably to make a wall and trench above 130 miles in length to keep his enemies back from invading him, and slain in battail by Fulgenius, or as others call him Fulgentius, brother to his first lawful true wife, the Empress Martia a Brittain. And by the Roman writers themselves, he was at this time when he was slain at Yorke 65 years old. And although he left thirty two Legi∣ons as Dio writeth, to defend that his temporal Empire, which had so persecuted the Church of Christ, yet that temporal Empire, with all those props began to stagger,Tertul. adver. Judaeos c. 7. and notwithstanding so great persecution in the Kingdom of Christ as Tertullian then living witnesseth, was adored and ruled in all places, and particularly here in Brit∣tain. And it is generally agreed upon by our, both Brittish and Saxon Historians and Antiqua∣ries, that after his discomfiture by Severus, he went over into Scythia, interpreted to be that Country which we now call Denmark,Geff. Mon. sup. c. 3. Fab. Hist. Polycr. Harris discrip. of Brit. c. 22. Hollensh. Hist. of Eng. l. 4. c. 23. Bede Eccl. Hist. l. 1. Capg. in St. Ninian. Hect. Boet. Scoto. Hist. l. 7. Bal. l. de scrip. cent. 1. in Ninia. and brought with him a great army of the people of that Nation, which our Antiquities call Picts, before he fought with Severus, and they both were there slain, or died at York. These were none of the Christian Picts, or Scots which lived in our Islands, who had joyned with Fulgenius before, and many of them were slain, as the same Authors testify; but they were Pagan Picts of whom many remained here after the death of these two Generalls, and had a place given them to inhabit in the Country of Albania. Thus write our Brittish Historians and our modern Antiquaries agree, when they say that Carausius gave unto the Scots, Picts and Scythians the Country of Cath∣nesse in Scotland, which they afterward inhabited, so these were those Pagan Picts and people which St. Ninian, and others sent from Rome, did long after convert to the faith of Christ, as St. Bede and others testify, for the Islanders which were Picts and Scots were converted in Pope Victor his time, which is another argument against the Scottish writers, which would have themselves seated in the Country now called Scotland, so long a duration of years as they claim. Bassianus being advertised of his fathers death, practised with the Souldiers, by bribes and fair promises, that he might be declared sole Emperour, whereto when he could not perswade them, for the reverence they bare to his father Severus, he made a league with the Northern Brittains that then assailed the Borders, and returned to York to meet with Julia the Empresse his mother in law, and Geta his brother. There he caused the Physiti∣ans to be put to death, for not ridding his father sooner out of the way, as he had com∣manded them, then he appointed secretly to the slaughter, all those that for their vertue and wisdom had been esteemed and advanced by his father; and all such as having been Tutors to him and his brother, and advised them to mutual concord. This done he en∣tred into consultation about his fathers funerals, which were solemnized by the Army with all due rights, according to the ancient custome in time of war. The ashes of the dead body being put into a golden Urne, were afterwards by Julia the Empresse, accompanied with the two Cæsars, carried to Rome, where Severus after the usuall ceremony was conse∣crated a God. Severus left as is related two sons Bassianus and Geta, and if Fulgenius, who is by divers called King (though indeed he was only Dux populi) had any right by descent to the Crown of Brittain, seeing we read of no child or brother he left behind him, that the title which he claimed must needs descend to the eldest son of Severus, which was Bassianus, son also to the sister of Fulgenius, as some before have written; now having by the death of his Father Severus and Uncle Fulgenius both their titles, with the allowance of the Empress Martia his mother, lawfully invested in him. Therefore to decide and end all controversies in this businesse, the Brittains with com∣mon assent did chuse and accept Bassianus both for their King (being the next and undoubt∣ed heir, whether we shall stand either upon his father or Uncles title) as also for Emperor,Mr. Bro. 370. 1 & 2. as the Eldest son and heir of Severus undoubted Emperor, and for his leaving sons behind (as the chiefest cause) made a God among the Romans. So writeth Herodian with others,Herodian l. 4. Stow. Hist. Roman. in Severo. Mos est Romanis consecrare Imperatores qui superstitibus filiis vel successoribus moriuntur. And an English Antiquary, though not citing authority, delivereth the same in these words.
The Romans accustomed to consecrate with immortality such Emperors as at their death leave ei∣ther Children or successors in the Empire behind them,Harrison disc. of Brit. c. 22. French ma∣nusc. antiq. c. 109. Galf. Mon. l. 5 c. 2. Pont. Virun. l. 5. c. 2. Mat. West. an. 206. Harding Chro in Sever. & Bass. Hollensh. Hist. of Eng. l. 4. c. 22. Harris. disc. Brit. c. 22. Tertul. ad scapu. c. 4. Spartian in Caracalla. and those which are endued with that ho∣nour they Canonize among the Gods. Therefore to use the speech of an other late Author, Severus by birth a Roman, but in blood a Brittain, and the lineal heir of the body of Androgeas son of Lud, and Nephew to Cassibelan, was Emperor and King of Brittain. Geta, born of a Ro∣man woman Julia, was chosen Emperor by divers Romans; but soon after slain by his halfe brother Bassianus the Brittain. This Bassianus reigned alone both Emperour & King of Brittain till his death; besides his hereditary title to this Kingdom, it seemeth that the Christian Brittains here were not a little moved to chuse and receive him for their King, for the hope they had he would either become a Christan, or at least a friend and no enemy to that pro∣fession, of which in his youth and tender years he had given no vulgar argument; for be∣sides many other hopeful graces and gifts he was then endued with, he was brought up by a Christian Nurse, and with Christian Children: when he did see any Christian Martyrs, brought to wild beasts to be killed and devoured, he would weep and turne his face away, as Spartianus is an ample witnesse. And being but seven years old, hearing that one of his Christian Play-fellowes was grievously beaten for that his Religion, as the common inter∣pretation is, he could not long after endure the Procures of his beating. And in this hope of the Brittains, now Christians, that Bassianus would rather be a friend then persecutor of such, they were not deceived. For although contrary to his first education when he was with Christians, being separated from them he fell to so many kinds of impieties, as writers do report, and put innumerable of the Pagan Roman Nobles to death, and many of them which had been greatest enemies to Christians; yet he died innocent from Christian blood and persecution,Mr. Br. 371. and by his severe punishment towards their adversaries was justly interpreted to be a revenger of their wrongs and former calamities. The common opini∣on is, that he reigned between six and seven years; although I find in an old Manuscript French History, entreating much of the affairs of this Kingdom, written above 400 years since, that he was King of Brittain 29. years, Bassian tenoit le Roilme d Brittanie 29. ans. Jacob. Senu∣on Epis. in Caral. Sanctor. in S. Amphibalo. Author of the English mar∣tyrologie. Joan Lydgate Monac. Buri∣ensis in ejus vita. Gerard Leigh in his Acci∣dence of Ar∣mory. Verumne. a∣pud Hect. Bo∣erius. Scot. Hist l. 6. f. 102. Hollins. of Scotland in Cyathlint. Jacob. Genuen. in vita St. Amph. Harris Ma∣nusc. Hist. Brit. l 3. c 35 Girald. Camb. Item Camb. l. 1. c. 5. David Powell Annot. 16. & in c. 4. disc. Cambriae. Dio in Macri∣no. Dio in Cara∣calla. Spartian in Caracalla. Manusc. Gall. Antiq. c. 14. Compilatio M. S. de gest. in Carausio. Fab. in Bass. fol. 47. b.In this Emperours time St. Zepherine was Pope, who converted our renowned countri∣man St. Amphibalus, who won by his preaching, life, and death, after so many thou∣sands of this Nation to Christ, of whom a late Authour citing divers antiquities, thus wri∣teth, St. Amphibalus being a noble young man of Brittain, and going to Rome with Bassianus son to Severus, was there by Pope Zepherinus instructed secretly in the Christian faith, baptised, made Priest, and sent back into Brittain, there to preach unto others. Neither may we with prudence judge, that so great a concourse of our Brittish Nation and Nobility being then at Rome, and St. Amphibalus thus converted (a great Noble Man, and termed in antiquities the son of a Prince, and so not without attendance) that he alone was thus converted, and employed by that holy Pope at this time, and not unprobable but some of those holy Apostolick men which are yet remembred in Histories, to have assisted St. Am∣phibalus afterward in preaching Christ in these parts or received their Ordination and in∣struction from the same at Rome now about this time; such as were Modicus, Priscus, Calanus, Ferranus, Ambianus, and Carnocus: there is no repugnancy in the time, for these were old men when the persecution of Dioclesian raged here, and St. Alban was martyred. Jacobus Bishop of Genua, and so to be termed of that City in Italy, a Roman writer, writing fourscore years, or thereabouts, before Matthew West, (who calls this Saint Clericus only, not expressing his name) testifies that his name was Amphibalus, a Brittain of this Kingdom, and son to a Prince thereof, relating his History and life at large. But our Monck might without blame be ignorant of that Author. And this forreign bishop addeth, that he went from hence to Rome with Bassianus, in the time of Severus, and was there Knighted amongst that noble company, most part of this Nation, recounted in number 1540. of which St. Alban was also one; and that St. Amphibalus was there made priest by the Pope of Rome, and sent home into his Country. Giraldus Cambrensis saith, he was borne as Caerlegeon, the renowned City and School in Wales. So have divers others: the old manuscript History of the Church of Winchester, saith, he was an holy Monck, and Doctour in the Church of Caermardyn in Wales. And this is the last certain place of his Residency, which that Antiquity giveth him, before his persecution, and going to the Scots; and so it seemeth not unprobable, but he was also Bishop of that city Caermar∣din, or without question, of some other City there; for otherwise how could he be con∣secrated Bishop among the Scots, by whose Annals he is accounted the first Bishop they had resident among them, but more of him hereafter. About the year of our Lord 220. or a little before, Bassianus Emperour and King of Brit∣tain, was murdered between Edissa and Carras, by Mardianus a Centurion: he marrying with the sister of the holy christian Lady Mammea, left their son Heliogabalus behind him, who soon after was Emperour. An old French Manuscript History saith, that Bassianus was slain by Carausius, who after reigned 38 years. The same hath the manuscript com∣pilation in these words, Et tandem faventibus Britonnibus Carausius demicavit cum Bas∣siano, & interfecit eum, & sic gubernaculum regni in sese suscepit; of this opinion also is Fabian.
Howes saith, Bassianus was cruelly given to sensuality and lust, insomuch that he espou∣sed his mother-in-law Juba, others call her Julia, as Hollenshed; Fabian Juliana; who saith, that Bassianus on a certain time breaking in to his brother Geta's chamber, slew him even in his mothers lap, and that himself was after slain at Edissa by one of his souldiers (but names him not) as he was about to untruss his points. Now the affairs of Brittain, for the space of almost fifty years together were passed over in silence, as being either omitted through negligence of Writers in that age, or perishing through the calamity of the times that ensued under the Emperours following, namely, Popilius Macrinus (the successor of Bassianus) Varus Heliogobalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus Gordianus the first, second and third, Philippus Arats, Decius Valerianus: These are the words of the Authour of the Brittish History; but we will leave him a while, to try what other Authours say; Fabian tells, that Carausius, &c. Finis Libri Tertii.
To the Right Honourable HENRY Earle of Oxford, Lord Bulbeck, Samford, Badlesmere, Scales, Knight of the Garter, &c. ALGERNON Earle of Northumberland, and Lord Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz Pain, Bryan and Latimer, Knight of the Garter, &c. JOHN Earle of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furnival, Verdon, and Lord Strange, of Blackmore. The Earle of OXFORD. Henry Very the Eighteenth Earl of Oxford of that name, Lord Bulbeck, Samford, &c. Descended, as Mr. Brooke, York Herald, fol. 162. and others say, from Aubrey de Vere, who married Mabel Daughter of Robert Consull Earl of Glocester, and natural Son to Henry the first, by Nest daughter to Rees Prince of Southwales, which Rees married Gladis, D. and sole heir of Rees ap Kenvin Prince of Powis, whose successor Robert de Vere, third of that name, and sixth Earl of Oxford, of that family, married Margaret daughter of Roger Lord Mor∣timer, son of Edmund Lord Mortimer, descended from Roger Lord Mortimer, who marri∣ed Gladis sister and heir of the whole blood to David, son to Llewellyn Prince of North∣wales, and Joane daughter to K. John, which Llewellyn was son to Jorworth, the son of O∣wen Gwineth, the son of Gruffith, the son of Conan, the son of Jago, the son of Edwal, the son of Meiric, the son of Edwal Voel, the son of Anarawd, the son of Rodery Maur, the son of Esylht, daughter and sole heir of Conan Tyndaythwy, the son of Roderike Molwynoc, the son of Edwal Ywrch, the son of Cadwallader last King of the Britains. Mr. Powel fol. 224 NORTHUMBERLAND. Llewellin ap Jorworth Prince of Northwales married Joane, natural daughter to K. John,Mr. Brook in K. John. begotten on Agatha daughter of William Earl Ferrers and Derby 1204. with whom her father gave in marriage the Castle and Lordship of Ellinsmere or Ellesmere in the Marches of Southwales, which deed beareth date at Dover, 17. April 6. Johannis, this Llewellin and Agatha had issue David Prince of Northwales, sans issue. Roger Lord Mortimer. Gladis sister of the whole blood to David Prince of Northwales, and his heir.Powel. fol. 314 Roger L. Mortimer and by right of inherit∣ance Prince of Northwales. Maud daughter to William de Bruse L. of Brecon. Edmund Lord Mortimer. Margaret Fendlesse. Roger L. Mortimer created Earl of March, by K. Edw. III. Joane daughter and heir to Sir Peter Geni∣vill or Jenevill. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March. —Daughter and co-heir of Bartholomew Badelsmere L. of Leeds in Kent. Roger Mortimer restored in blood Earle of March. an. 29. Edw. III. Philippa daughter of William Montague Earl of Sarum. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March. Philippa sole daughter and heir of Lyonel D. of Clarence. Sir H. Percy Knight, son and heir to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. Eliz. daughter to Edm. Mort. E. of March, & Philippa heir to Lyonel D. of Clarence. Henry Percy Earl of North. Elinor daughter to Ralph Nevil, first Earle of Westmerland of that name. Henry Percy Earl of North. Elinor D. and h. of Richard Lord Poynings. Henry Percy Earl of North. Maud daughter of Will. Herbert E. of Pem∣broke, by which match this honourable family descends from divers Welsh branches, as shall appear in the pedegree of the Earle of Pembroke.
Henry Lord Percy Earl of North. Mary D. to George Lord Talbot E. of Salop. Tho. Lord Percy E. of North. nephew to E. Henry. Anne d. to H. Somerset E. of Worcester, where again this family descends from the Welsh, as in the genealogy of Worcester. Sir Henry Percy brother to Earle Thomas, Earle of North. Katherine one of the daughters and co-h. of J. Nevil L. Latimer, which family of the Nevils, streams from the Welsh as in the pedegree of Abergavenny. Henry Lord Percy Earle of Northumber∣land. Dorothy daughter to Walter Devereux Earle of Essex. Algernon Percy Earl of Northumberland. Anne d. of Will. Cecil E. of Salisbury, by which this right honourable Family (to whom God grant a long and prosperous poste∣rity) descends from many Brittish pro∣genies, as in the pedegrees of Salisbury and Exceter. The Earle of SHREVVSBURY. John L. Talbot E. of Sbrewsb. descended from Gilbert L. Talbot, temp. H. 3. who married Gwenllian d. to Rees ap Gruffith P. of Southw. Maud d. and sole heir to Thomas Nevil L. Furnival, which family of Nevil descends from the Welsh, as in Abergavenny. John L. Talbot, E. of Shrewsbury, L. Furni∣val and Verdon. Eliz. daughter of James Butler Earle of Or∣mond. By this match of Verdon, by which the title of Lord Verdon came, appears an other stream of Welsh blood; for Theobald Lord Verdon married Maud daughter of Edmund Mortimer, descended from Llewellyn Prince of Southwales, ut ante in Oxford. John Lord Talbot Earle of Salop. Katherine d. to Humphrey D. of Buckingham. George Lord Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Anne d. of William Lord Hastings descended from the Prince of Wales. Francis Earle of Shrewsbury. Mary d. to Thomas L. Dacres of Gilesland. George Earle of Shrewsb. Gertrude daughter to Thomas E. of Rutland, descended from the Welsh line Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. Mary daughter of Sir. William Cavendish. Edward Earle of Shrewsbury. Joan daughter and co-h. of Cuthbert L. Ogle George Talbot son and heir to — Talbot of Grafton Esq; heir male of Sir Gilbert Tal∣bot of Grafton Knight Banneret, and Knight of the Garter, second son to John Lord Talbot, second Earle of Shrewsbury of that name, was by King James admit∣ted to the Earledom of Shrewsbury; but he dying without issue, the Earledome fell to the issue of John Talbot Esquire his brother.   John Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury. Mary daughter to Sir Francis Fortescue Kt. George Lord Talbot. — daughter of Sir Percy Herbert, L. Powis, by which match many Welsh branches devolve unto this honourable family.
THE ANTIENT & MODERN BRITTISH AND WELSH HISTORY, Beginning with BRUTE, and continued until King CHARLES the first. The Fourth Book. CARAƲSIƲS, a Brittain of unknown birth,Matth. West, an. 286. was of the Brittains made Ruler Anno Dominicae Incarnationis 218. Hollenshed also placeth Carausius next to Bassia∣nus, though others name him not.Galf. Mon. Hist. l. 5. c. 4. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Matth. West. an. 292, 293. 294. Harding Chron. c. 56, 57. Galf. Mon. lib. 15. Pont. Virun. l. 5. Hard. Chron. c 59. Matth. West. 302. Cat. Reg. Britt. & alii. Matth. West. an 286. Harrison. Discr. of Brit. Hollenshed Hist. of Eng. l 4. c. 23. The learned Mr. Broughton searcheth this bu∣siness to the quick; and therefore to give more life to this History, you shall hear what he saith. Bassianus being as before murthered, Macrinus, a Mauritanian or Moris∣can by Nation, with his son Diadumenus, or by some Diadumenianus, obtained the Empire; but they were both slain by their own Souldiers, rebelling against them when they had been Emperours but one year and two moneths; after whom Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Heliogabalus or Elagabalus, son of Bassianus Caracalla before spoken of, was chosen Em∣perour by the Army, his mother was named Soemiades or Semiamira, the daughter of Me∣sa, sister of Julia the Empress, the second wife of Severus; and this Soemiades, or Semia∣mira, or Semiamides, was sister to that renowned Christian Lady Mamea, mother to A∣lexander the Emperour; Henry of Huntington, and Florigerus ascribe four compleat years to the Emperour Heliogabalus; Martinus alloweth him not fully so long a reign; yet Mar∣tinus saith with Roman Writers, that he was Emperour four years and eight moneths. Flo∣rentius Wigorniensis hath the like words, both for that continuance of his Empire, and au∣thority of the Roman History, affirming it, that he was true and immediate next King of Brittain, not onely during the time of his Empire, but in that space also when Macrinus and his son Diadumenus were Emperours, even from the death of Antoninus Bassianus Cara∣calla his father, the undoubted King of Brittain, both by his fathers and mothers title. For although Martinus saith, that Severinus son of Bassianus was Emperour with his father, yet seeing this Authour who so writeth, consenteth with all others, that Macrinus immediatly succeeded to Bassianus Caracalla, and Heliogabalus to Macrinus; he must needs too justifie that his Testimony of Severinus being Emperour with his father,Matth. West. an 213. Otto Frising. Chron. l. 3. c. 29. Floren. Wigorn an. 204. & 226. Marian Aetat. 6 an 218. in Cara alla. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. l 5. c. 3. Pont. Vir. l. 5. that this Severinus died with his father or before, or was the same son of Bassianus, which others do call He∣liogabalus, Marcus, Antoninus, and other names which Heliogabalus is stiled by in Histories. While these things were acted with the Romans, the State of Brittainy was unquiet; and although Heliogabalus and his brother Severinus also, if Bassianus had any such son, was next true King of Brittain, yet neither of them enjoyed it; for by all Wri∣ters, one named Carausius was King of Brittain, not onely after Bassianus, but by divers Authours, sometime also while he lived, giving an overthrow to Bassianus the Emperour, or rather some Lieutenant or General of his, of the same or the like name here in Brittainy, and so made himself King of Brittain; after whom by our Brittish History, and Ponticus Virunnius, Asclepiodotus Duke of
Cornwall was made King, deposing Alectus, sent hither against Carausius with three Legions, and Matthew of Westminster and Harding write, was King three years, untill Asclepiodotus deposed him; next to Asclepiodotus was King Coelus, Father to the most renowned Empress St. Helena, married to Constantius Emperor, and Mother to great Constantine their son, our most glorious King and Emperor, after which time our History will not be so obscure and confused as now it is; for as in the succession of these I have now remembered there is question, so concerning the time of their Government, and their conversation also, whether it were Christian or otherwise, it is not free from dif∣ficulty. Antiquaries say that Carausius was next King to Bassianus. Therefore when Matthew West. and some others would not have Carausius to be King till about the 286. year of Christ, it must needs be an error either in them, their Scribes or Printers; for it is evident, and all the Roman writers prove, that Bassianus was dead many years, and divers Emperors had succeeded long before this time, and Math. Westm. himself saith, that Bassianus making war against the Parthians, was circumvented and slain of his Ene∣mies, between Edissa and Carras, in the year of Christ 213. which was above 70. years before he bringeth Carausius to attempt any thing for the crown of Brittain: Florentius Wigorne followeth the same account, and setteth down the very place of his death there to be Osdroena, and Mercinus affirmeth the same, with the Roman Histories, saying, it was in the year of Christ 218. And both our old Brittish History, and Ponticus Virun∣nius,Hect. Boeti. Scot. Hist. l. 6. ol. 88 89. who gave the greatest light in this matter, say plainly, that Carausius lived in the time of Bassianus. And add further that Carausius joyning with the Picts, which Fulgenius had got together against Severus Father to Bassianus, sought with his army, and over∣throwing it,Galf. & virun. was made King of Brittain. And these Picts and Scots must needs be those of which the Scottish Historians write, when they say Bassianus made peace with them, and the Brittains which followed Fulgenius,Hect. Boe. ut su∣pra. fol. 100. Holenshed in Grathlint. and so went from hence to Rome. And whereas the Brittish History and Virunnius say that Carausius did kill Bassianus, this was not Bassianus our King and Emperor, son of Severus and Martia, but one Quintus Bassianus a Legate of the Romans. Now being the common Opinion, received both of the Roman and other writers,Catal. Reg. Britainie Hist. Galf. Mon. that Severus dyed in the year of Christ 213. The Author of the Ca∣talogue of our Brittish Kings, thus setteth down their successions and Regiments, with their continuance, Bassianus Ceracel six years, Carausius seven years, Alectus six years, Asclepiodotus thirty years, Coelus twenty seven years. After whom Constantius his son in law by marrying his Daughter, St. Helena succeeded in the crown, by which accompt we have between the death of Severus and Constantius his reigning here 76. years, and from Carausius his death, and the begining of Constantius his reign 65. years, Harding ma∣keth the distance shorter, ascribing to Bassianus seven years, to Carausius 4. to Alectus 3. Asclepiodotus 10. to Coel 11. years, yet by this accompt also Carausius was dead many years before that time, wherein Hector Boetius and some others make him to have first ad∣vanced any title to the Crown of Brittain. Yet we may make some part of attonement between these opinions, if we shall say with the Brittish and other Histories,Math. West. an. 286. that Carausius was but a young man in the time of Bassianus or Heliogabalus the true Kings of Brittain. And he went to Rome to procure his Commission there of the Senate to be Admiral to keep the Brittish Seas.Howe. Hist. Ti∣tul. The Ro∣mans, an. 285. And after he was thus admitted Admiral, long time and divers years must needs be spent before he could come to that power by Sea and Land with Brittains Picts and Scots, to be King of Brittain, although he was as divers hold of the Kingly race, Ex regio Stemate, and Unkle to that renowned Christian King of Scots Grathnitus,Carausius of Kingly race. though some stile him to have been of base lineage unprobable in a man obtaining such honour of the Roman Senate,Hect. Boet. Scot. Hist. l. 6. and renown among Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and divers of them Chri∣stians. But to go no further out of my way, whether Bassianus or his Son Heliogabalus both Emperors and Brittains by parentage, or Carausius was in Brittain at this time, we are by this which is said assured,Hlenshed. in Scot. in Grath∣lint. that the Christians here were in quiet and peace; for if Bassianus still continued King, he had made peace with all Christians here, whether Brittains, Picts or Scots, before his departure hence to Rome. And although Heliogaba∣lus,Hoel. Boet & a∣lii. sup. Hard∣ing c. 53. was otherwise a Man of such wicked conversation, that I had rather refer any man desirous to know the manner, both of his own and his Fathers life, to forrain writers, then fill my pen with the dishonour of their race in them, yet no History maketh mention that he any way was a persecuter of Christians, if Carausius was King, it is not unprobable but he was a Christian, advanced, chosen, and honoured with that Kingly dignity by the Christians, confederate with, and assisted by the Christian Scots and Picts, their Kings or Ru∣lers and against the Pagan Romans, a professed Patron and Propugnator of the Right and Priviledges, and Revenger of the wrongs and Injuries of the Christians here, contend∣ing by all means he could even with the adventure of his life loosing in that quarrel, to restore the Christians of this Kingdom to that quiet and honourable Estate, to be free from the Thraldom of forraign Pagans, which they happily enjoyed in the Government of King Lucian, and the Roman Senate began now to infringe and violate; This was the pretended end, and scope of his designes, although by some writers, not with a little design of his own greatness and exaltation, no strange disease amongst great Princes in any age.
Hollenshed saith, that Alectus was sent from Rome with three Legions,Hollenshed Hist. of Engl. and slew him in the field. Fabian tells us, that in a Book which in French is called Merc de Histories, or the Mother of Histories in our Tongue, that this Carausius, or as he calls him Carassius, was first a Treasurer, or such a high Officer among the Romans; by reason whereof, he engrossed great abundance of Riches, and by that means became gracious with the Senators, and in time was elected Senator, and became a man of such authority, that Basianus made him Protector of the City and Country of Alexandria; from this his advancement and great∣nesse, issued pride, and that pride begat Tyranny, insomuch that the Country grew wea∣ry of their heavy and servile bondage and impositions, insomuch that his death was con∣spired and decreed, which he perceiving, first revenged himself upon the conspirators, and then left the Country and Province. At his comming to Rome the Senate finding him to be of an austere and ridged disposition, assigned unto him the rule of Brittain with three Legions. This is Fabians relation, but what is formerly set down from Mr. Broughton car∣rieth with it more authority. Alectus. Alectus sent from Rome by the Emperour and Senate, began the time of his government,Fabian fol. 49 c. 64. in the year of our Lord 227. We do not find that Alectus after he had slain Carausius in battail, and taken upon him the Kingdom, which he held for the space of three years, did persecute the Christian Brittains, under pretence of Religion, but for following Carausius, and not yielding subjection to the Romans as they required, where we see the reason of that affliction of the Brittains by the Romans; because they had forsaken the Common-Wealth, and Government thereof, and followed Carausius an Usurper, as the Romans estemed him. And other Historians make it plain, that only the followers of Carausius, and no o∣thers were thus persecuted by Alectus; and Mathew of Westm. also saith, that Alectus did af∣flict only those Brittains, who forsaking their Country had committed themselves to the command of Carausius; which Harding more plainly confesseth, when he saith of Alectus,Pont. Virum. l. 5. Galf. Mon. l. 5. c. 4. Mat. West an. 294. Harding c 56. Hollersh. Hist. of Eng. l 4. c. 23. Stow & Stowes in Ascepiod. Hard. c. 56. Galf. Mon. 5. c. 5. Virum. l. 5. Mat. West an 294. Allecto then crowned and made King of all Brittain, reigning fully years three, and well he ruled in all manner of working; or if Alectus or his Pagan Souldiers and under-Rulers did un∣justly persecute any Brittains for Religion, neither he nor they did escape the just ven∣geance of God executed upon them, by the Christian Brittains in the like kind, for when Alectus and his Infidel consorts were at London gathered together to make solemn sacrifice to their Idols, they were by the Christians driven from their sacrifice, Alectus shamefully put to flight and slain, his army scattered, and though by Livius Gallus his Collegue in some part renewed again, yet both the General Gallus and all his Romans were slain by the Christian Brittains in one day, and their Leader Gallus contemptuously thrown into a brook taking name, thereof as our modern Antiquaries with antiquity thus deliver, Asclepiodotus reco∣covered Britain and slew the Romans Captain named Livius Gallus neer unto a brook there at that time running, into which brook he threw him, by reason whereof it is called in Brittish Nant Gallon, since in the Saxon tongue Gallus or Wallus brook and to this day the street where sometime the brook ran is called Walbrook: And proveth the History of this brook both by pub∣lick Records and Inquisitions. This Alectus reigned according to Fabian six years. Asclepiodotus. Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornewal as saith Gaufride (but after the saying of Eutropius and Beda he was President of the Pretory of Rome) began his dominion over the Brittains in the year of our Lord 232, who upon his victory was crowned King of Brittain by Parliament, saith Harding, and by common consent of the people, (as both the Brittish History Pont. Virun. and Matthew of Westm.) being Duke of Cornwal before. All these last writers ex∣cept Matt. West, say Dioclesian his persecution began here in his time, of which I shall speak hereafter. And it seemeth that divers Historians not observing that Constantius was here twice, marrying St. Helena the first time, and the second time receiving her again, when Maximian the persecuting Emperour, had forced him to put her away, do thereupon vary and differ much about the years of our Kings in those times: an old manuscript Chronicle doth say Bassianus reigned 27 years, Carausius whom it calleth Carencius 39 years, Alectus 15 years, Asclepiodotus 10 years, Coel 4 years, and after him his son in law and daughter Constantius and Helena 11 years. The moderne Catalogue of our Kings, hath told us that Asclepiodotus did reign 30 years, the same hath Hellenshed, calling it the com∣mon accompt of our Chroniclers; and by the same Authors and divers others, King Coel in the latter end of whose reign the Romans by Constantius came in again, &c.
Authours excuse Asclepiodotus from being any mover of that persecution which then was in Brittain, but suffering the Tyrant Maximian to prosecute it, and not resisting him therein, which is rather imputed to want of power, than will and desire in him, when he saith, I mean Harding, Who for great fear suffered all this pain, (Of Christians) And durst nothing against this Tyrant steer, But him withdrew, to hide him, was full fain. Where he doth insinuate, that Asclepiodotus was in judgement a friend rather than per∣secutor of Christians; and himself in some sort persecuted by the Roman Pagans, in that respect which seemeth expressed, in that this Authour sayeth of him, That he was inforced to hide himself from the Pagan Roman persecutors: And we find divers Antiquities testi∣fying, that before there was not any persecution here against Christians, but their Reli∣gion was in peace and quiet publickly professed; and this Asclepiodotus, to redeem and preserve such Brittains liberty, in that and all other priviledges, warred against Alectus the Pagan Roman Governour, and in sign of his detestation of their Idolatry, beset and assaulted him and his Confederates, when they were doing their greatest and most solemn sacrifices to their gods. Now to calm these Tempests of Troubles, I suppose (by our best Histories) that this persecution of Dioclesian and Maximinian here raged about the space of nine or ten years, in the time of Asclepiodotus principally, and that now at the Martyrdom of St. Amphiba∣lus, so great miseries and afflictions had been laid upon our holy Christians here long time, as their flying from hence unto other Nations; their abode there, return hither again, and continuing no short space, before they were put to death, as is manifest in the case of St. Amphibalus, not martyred till almost a year after St. Alban, who was kept in prison six moneths before his Martyrdom, that now thousands were converted to Christ, and the chief municipal Cities themselves, where Idolatry so reigned, that a Christian was rare to be then found in them, as in Verulam, were now onely inhabited by Christians, and not a Pagan to be seen; and this by the Omnipotent working of God, and the Idolatrous Judge and Prince himself, that ruled here under the Pagan Romans, and persecuted by their power, even to the utmost bounds of Brittany, was made that he was unable to Rule and Govern any longer, but needed be Ruled and Governed himself by others. This Judge, King and Roman Lieutenant, as the Scottish Historians with others call him, was King Asclepiodotus, thus grievously either of malice or for fear of the Romans then perse∣cuting, and for so doing hated of God and Man. Coel. King Coel (who began his reign in the year of our Lord 262.) having now both Warrant and Way to advance the Title to the Crown of this Kingdom, and help to free the afflicted Christians thereof, from the miseries of their so long and grievous persecution (as it seem∣eth most probable) at this time and upon these occasions, he took Armes against Asclepio∣dotus, reputed King in this persecution, slew him and was crowned King, as our Historians deliver unto us: Harding also plainly saith, that Coel took Armes against Asclepiodotus, by reason of this great persecution. For which Duke Coel against him rose in Armes; Asclepiodotus for the first ten years of his reign was just, and ruled with the general applause of all, but after fell into wickedness and cruelty, so that King Coel might justly pursue his right to Brittain, in hope thereby in better manner to redeem the afflictions of his Countrey Christians, being more potent and able, and likely more willing than Asclepiodotus was, not so forward in any Judgements as he should have been in defending innocence, if he had not been an actual persecutor; which Harding himself thus in these plain terms expresseth: Harding Chron. cap. 58 fol. 57.This persecution as some Chronicles fain, The ten years war of Asclepiodote, For which Duke Coel again him rose full hot, The Duke Caer Colun, that hight Coilus Which City now this day Colchester hight, Then crowned was that slew Asclepiodotus, For cause he came not forth with all his might, The Tyramite fell to a canstand, as he hight, Wherefore Brittains were all full glad and fain, Of King Coilus that succoured all their pain. And howsoever Asclepiodotus concurred with the Roman persecutors, and pleased them in vexing and tormenting Christians here in Britany; yet otherwise he was very unpleasing unto them: He troubled the Roman power in all things, and therefore they were glad of his death. Ponticus Virunnius himself, a Roman, saith,
they did esteem him their great enemy, and as for such an one rejoyced at his death, and this joy was not onely of particular Romans, but of the whole Senate which ruled chiefly in matters of Estate. Therefore when our Antiquities assure us that Coel obtained the Kingdom, and was crowned, and as an old French manuscript speaketh, regna sur Britaniae, ruleth over Brittain, and was thus inabled and made power∣ful to redresse what he found offensive and wicked, being absolute King, and joyfully so re∣ceived of the Brittains, as our Historian said before. Wherefore Brittains were all full glad and faine, Of King Coelus that succoured all their pain. And he himself taking acception to Asclepiodotus, next to his charging him with usurping the Crown, for being to backward in resisting the Roman persecutors, would not fall into the like error with him, but as is proved already succoured all their pain, and utterly ceas∣ed the persecution against Christians of Brittain which were thus joyful of his coronation and thereby relieved and redeemed them from their afflictions all his time, which both by our own and forreign Historians, continued to the end of the third hundred of years.Mr. Broughton. The Romans having no power here either to persecute Christians, or to any other purpose. But as our Brittish and other Historians testify, wholly lost their government here, untill after the death of King Coel, or the comming of Constantius his son in law hither, the se∣cond time, very little before King Coel his death. Our Scottish Historians say that King Coel utterly destroyed both Romans and all the Brittains also, which were their favourers, and set forth a severe edict, to search forth all Romans and Brittains which had followed them here, and caused them to be punished and put to death, and so with most joyful and general applause of the people, Nobles and others, that the crown of Brittain was thus re∣stored to the true heir of their regal blood, was crowned King, and he established the King∣dom in the Brittish government. So that now so severe a law being made and executed both against the prosecuting Romans, and all such Brittains as had joyned with them against the Christian inhabitants of this nation, and all this done by the authority of our King, and with the consent both of the nobility and people; we must needs end the persecution here with the beginning of King Coels reign. And it would not be singular in this point if we should hold, that King Coel was actually a christian, and not only a friend to such; for first, all they which affirm him to have been Kinsman or Heir to our first christian King St. Lucius, easily prove him a christian, for such a man would not leave either child or kinsman, which by him had that title, to have any other education. Secondly by the time of his age, whether he was to King Lucius, so near or no we must needs confesse, he lived most part of his life, when christianity flourished in this Kingdom, being an aged man before Dioclesian his persecution began. Thirdly our Hi∣storians say that his daughter St. Helen, which had her education by his direction, was instru∣cted and taught in the christian faith. A late Authour thus speaketh, of this, Helena she was first instructed in the faith of Christ by Coel her father, as Petrus de Natalibus saith; and yet if we en∣cline to this opinion, we may easily answer them that will object the public and universal re∣stitution of christian religion, as building Churches, Monasteries, and such holy foundations was not in his time. For by the common opinion his reign was short, little, and not a∣bove four years, a great part whereof was spent, in extirpating the persecutors, and the rest in preparation to resist a new invasion of the Romans, not reigning in quiet and security from these troubles and fears the space of two moneths, by any writers: and so after so great and terrible a tempest of persecution, it was a wonderful comfort and happiness for the Brittish christians, to enter into such a calme and quiet, to live in security and rest, freed from their former miseries under so renowned a King which was all he could do, or they expect in such times and circumstances. The Roman Emperours after the death of Heliogabolus, until Constantius married first, or af∣ter received again Helena daughter of Coel, had little command in this Kingdom, there∣fore it will suffice to set down briefly their names & continuance of their Emperours, which our late Antiquaries do thus propose unto us. After Senerius Bassianus sir∣named Antonius Caracalla succeeded in the Empire, but was murdered by Martialis when he had governed six years, Macrinus one year, Antonius Heliogabalus three years, Alexan∣der Severus 13 years, Julius Maximus three years, M. Antonius Gordanus one year, Julius Philipus (they omit the second his son) the first christian Emperour five years, Decius two years, Trebonianus, Gallas and Vibius Hostilianus two years, Julius Aemilianus four moneths, Lecinius Valerianus six, Lacivius Gallicinus fifteen. At this time there arose in divers coun∣tries thirty usurpers, which are called the thirty Tyrants, of which Lollianus Posthumus, Victorianus Tetricius, as it is supposed kept Brittain from Gallimus: Flavius Claudius two, Aurelianus five, Tacitus 6 moneths, Florianus six moneths. This year 276. Aurelian the Dane was chosen Emperour, he hated christians, and in the 4 year of his reign he stirred up the 9th persecution upon the church of God, he reigned 5 years and 6 dayes. And after that, Tacitus succeeded in the Empire being a very fit and worthy governour, & after Tac. Probus Equirius
Son to Delinacius a Clown, and Gardiner by profession; this Probus Equirius was a most valiant Man at armes, and as good a Justitiar, as any that had the publick Go∣vernment, he began his reign in the year of Christ, 282. and reigned six years and four moneths,A Brittish History. Aurelius Probus five years. In which time Bonosus, (famous for excess in drinking) a Brittain born, usurped the Empire with Proculus at Cullen, and would have exempted from the Romans, Brittain, Spain, and part of France, but being vanquished by Probus, he strangled himself (that was the way to spoile his drink∣ing:) This Probus after he had reigned five years, was slain of the Soldiers, Carus was created Augustus, he made Carinus and Numerianus his Sons Cæsars, to Carinus he assigned Brittain, Gaule, Illiricum, Italy, and Spain, but Ca∣rinus was slain by lightning, and the other two within three years space lost their lives. Dioclesian was then chosen Emperor, who adjoyned Maximianus un∣to him; in like Government these two Emperours elected two Cæsars, Valerius Maximus and Constantius Chlorus, to which Constantius he committed the recovery of Brittany. When Dioclesian and Maximian the most offensive Enemies of the faithfull Servants, and Church of Christ, intended their merciless and matchless persecu∣tion against them, the ease to make it was as universal and general, as it was bloody and Tyrannical, and perceiving that neither Nero nor any other their predecessors in that prophane impiety had or could before them transport their rage in that kind, over our Ocean into this Kingdom, protected and rampired both by scituation and sea, and Christian Kings are Rulers, or favourers of Christianity and Immunities from the Roman severities in such nature, their study and practise was, first to surprise and overthrow these firm Bulwarks and Forts against them, and therefore assuredly knowing that by the Regal claim and title of Brittain, Queen Helena was the lawfull an undoubted heir and Owner thereof, that she was a Christian, and de∣scended of such parents, and absolute Queen of such a Country, the rare virtues and wisdom, she was endued with, her potency thereby, with her victorious and triumphant husband Constantius that they had children to succeed them in the Kingdom, and Government of Brittain, and such as by credible Antiquities before were Christians, and thereby more likely to enlarge and dilate, then to restrain or hinder the profession of Christianity, they knew these Impediments to their wicked disignements must be taken away before they could take effect, whereupon beginning with the chiefest and principal propugnacle, the title of Queen Helen, her marriage with Constantius, and love between them, they first assaulted this by pretended disability in that title and marriage. Her lawfull Title by Regal Lineal discent they frustrated in their Judgment, which then had no Judge on Earth, by their pretended and not to be examined Imperial claim and preheminence, taking and reckoning for their own whatsoever they could get and keep by force and sword; and their more then Panegeical Orator Mamertinus saith plainly in his oration to Maximian the Emperor, that the Brittains were not only subject unto him, and that he landing in Brittain, The Brittains received him with great Triumph, offered themselves unto his presence with their Wives and children, reverencing not only him∣self, but even the sails and tacklings of that ship which had brought his divine pre∣sence unto their coasts, and when he should set foot on Land, they were ready to lye down at his feet that he might as it were march over them, so desirous they were of him, that both the Brittains and Nations adjoyning to the bounds of that Isle were obedient to his commandement: And giveth nothing to Constantius, but as in the right and title of that Emperor. Like to this have some other flatterers of the Romans written, by which we see they went about utterly to disable the Queen to have any title to the Kingdom. This they so urged to Constantius, and so disgraced his marriage with that renowned Lady, that in the end they compelled him, to put her away, and take Theodora a Pagan, Daughter of the persecuting Emperor Maximian in her place, then they banished St. Lu∣cius and St. Emerita their holy children. Some by reason of the Identity of the name think this Lucius here spoken of to have been Lucius the King, but Harrison in his descripti∣on of Brittain clears that doubt, who thus relateth the occasion of Prince Lucius his for∣saking Brittain his native country. It hapned (saith he) that Lucius by reason of a quarrel grown between him and his Elder brother, either by a fray or by some other means, did kill his said brother, whereupon his Father exiled him, out of Brittain, and appointed him from thenceforth to remain in Aquitain in France. He became a Bishop in the Church of Christ. He erected a place of prayer, wherein to serve the living God, and is still cal∣led even to this our time, after Lucian or Lucius the first Founder thereof, and the origi∣nal beginner of any such house in those parts; in this also he and divers others of his friends continued their times in great contemplation and prayer, and from thence were translated as occasion served unto sundery Ecclesiastical promotions, in the time of Constantine his brother, so that by his short narration it is easie to see that Lucius the King, and Lucius son of Chlorus were
two distinct persons, and the same Author saith further and more at large in his relation hereof; Constantius Chlorus being at the first matched with Helena, and before she was put from him by the Royal power of Dioclesian, he had by her three sons, besides one Daughter called Emerita, of which the name of the first is perished, the second was called Lucius, and the third Constantine, that after was Emperor. And he after addeth thereunto, Her∣manius Sehedelius addeth also, how he went into Rhetia with Emerita his Sister, and near unto the City Augusta, converted the Curienses unto the Faith of Christ, and there like∣wise being put to death in Castro Martis, lyeth buried in the same Town, where his feast is held upon the third day of December.The Curienses converted to the faith by a Brittain. That Schedelius erreth not herein, also the ancient monuments of the said Abbey, whereof he was the original beginner, do yield sufficient testimony, beside an Hymne made in the commen∣dation, intituled Gaude Lucionum, &c. The said Schedelius setteth down likewise, that his sister Emerita was martyred in Trine castle neer unto the place where the said Lucius dwelled; and the same Authour saith further, that he converted all Bavaria and Rhetia between the Alps; and this narration is confirmed by Gaspar Bruchius thus,Bavaria and Rhetia con∣verted to Christianity by a Brittain. St. Lucius which preached to the Germans, was born of the regal race among the Brittains, and propogating the faith of Christ, came out of Brittainy into Germany, and preached first at Salisbury, then at Austburg, from whence he was cast out by the Infidels there, and then went with his sister St. Emeri∣ta to the City of Chur, where preaching again, both he and his sister Emerita were martyred by the Pagans, St. Lucius at Chur in the castle of Mars, and St. Emerita at Trine Ca∣stle. Lucius and Emerita being thus by means of the Roman Emperours Dioclesian and Maxi∣mian both banished and martyred, to make all sure in their proceedings they detained Constantine the other child, as Hostage at their command, and placed here in Brittain, none to bear office, but such as were Pagans, ready to execute the cruel and savage resolutions of that bloody persecuting Tyrant, against the holy christians here. These things thus com∣pleated, the state of Brittain by such means was now brought into the same condition for persecution with other nations, or rather worse, the number of christians being here then far greater, both in respect it was a christian Kingdom, and so had both more christian inhabi∣tants then other nations, and by the immunities and priviledges it should have enjoyed, many christians of other regions fled and resorted hither in hope of quiet and security from persecution. This violent storme of persecution raging through the whole Roman Empire, acted ma∣ny tragical Scaenes in this Isle. Harding in his Chronicle saith, Hard. c. 57. f. 41 The Emperour Dioclesian Into Brittaon sent Maximian; This Maximian to sirname Hercelius, A Tyrant false that Christenty annoyd, Through all Brittain, a work malicious, The Christen folk, felly and sore destroyed. And thus the people with him foul accloyed, Religious men, the Priests and Clerks all, Women with child, and bedrid folk all, Children sucking upon their their Mothers pappis, The mothers also without any pitty, And children all in their mothers lappis, The Creples eke and all the Christentee He killed and slew with full great cruelty, The Churches brent, all books and ornaments, Bells, Relicks, that to the Church appends. Dioclesian came to the Empire in the year of Christ 282, and did within two years after begin his most cruel persecution; the first that felt the heavy, but yet most blessed stroak here in Brittain, was St. Allan. Dicetus Dean of St. Pauls, London, doth set down this per∣secution in Brittain in the year of Christ 287. The old manuscript Annals of Winchester say that S. Allan in the eight year of Dioclesian & Maximian was put to death; and the same antiquities tell us that the Monks of Winchester were martyred by the Officers of Dioclesian in the second year of his reign, and their Church, then destroyed;Godwin. a late Bishop as he citeth from some Antiquities of that Church saith, this happened in the year of Christ, 289. and addeth that at this time, Dioclesian endeavouring to root out Christian Religion in Brittain, not only killed the professours of the same,Mr Br. f. 415. Hollen. Hist. of Engl. l. 4. but also pulled down all churches anywhere consecrated to the exercise thereof. The instruments of Dioclesian herein were Quintus Bas∣sianus Hircius, Alectus Gallus, as the most principal with others of inferior degrees; and Mamertinus the Panegyrist hath avouched to Maximian the persecutor, before that he was here in Brittain in his own person, which is confirmed by our own Antiquaries: Adding further that he persecuted in the Occidental parts, by commission from Dioclesian;John Lydgat l. 8. so testifieth John Lydgate the Monck of Bury with others.
Ant. Brit. Antiq. in tit. S. Alb. Cadgrave in e∣odem.St. Alban our first Martyr was rather descended of Noble Roman then Brittish blood, but probably both of Roman and Brittish blood, his abode and dwelling was at Caermunip, or Verulam, where all professed Roman Paganisme, and there he entertained, either for old acquaintance (for they were both Knighted at the same time in Rome, or hospitality sake, as being a man eminent, and by some stiled High Steward of the Brittains) St. Amphibalus; but when he began to speak of Jesus Christ the son of God, and incarnate for mans redem∣ption, he was so farr off from being a christian, that he had scarce heard of Christ before, but said, this testimony of Christ was strange unto him; and St. Amphibalus more particu∣larly declaring the mysteries of Christs Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, Alban was yet so far from believing, that he told St. Amphibalus he was mad to preach such things, that understanding did not apprehend, nor reason allow, and if the Citi∣zens of that place did know what he spake concerning Christ, they would most cruelly put him to death, and feared much that he would fall into trouble before he could go forth of his house. But what the preaching of St. Amphibalus prevailed not in, his earnest prayer and watching obtained of God for Alban. For as the old Brittish writer of his life, living in that, time relateth this History. St. Amphibalus watch∣ing in prayers all the night following, a strange and admirable vision appeared to Alban, wherewith he being exceedingly terrified and perplexed, presently rose and went to St. Amphibalus, thus declaring his vision, and desiring the exposition thereof in this or∣der, and these words. O my friend if these things which thou preachest of Christ are true. I beseech thee be not afraid to tell unto me the true meaning of my dream or vision. I did attend and behold a Man came from Heaven, whom a great and innumerable multitude of Men apprehended, and laid divers kinds of Torments upon him, his hands were bound with cords, his body worne with whips, and grievously torne, his body hanged upon a cross, and his hands stretched cross upon it. The Man which was thus tortured, was naked and had no shoes upon his feet. His hands and feet were pierced with nails, his side thrust through with a spear, and as it seemed to me blood and water did flow out of the wound of his side; they set a reed in his right hand, and put a crown of thorne upon his head, and having done all things which mans cruelty could work against him, they began to work him with words, saying unto him, Hail King of the Jewes: If thou art the son of God, now come down from thy cross and we believe thee, and then they used many revilings against him: that younge man answered not one word unto them. At last when they had said what they could a∣gainst him, crying out with a great voice he sayed. O Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and having so said gave up the Ghost. His dead body was taken down from the cross, the blood still largely issuing out of his wounds, they shut it in a tomb of stone, and covered it with a stone sealed, appointing watchmen to keep it. And a wonder to see, his body thus being dead came to life again, and receiving strength, did go forth of the Sepulchre, it still remaining shut. How he did arose from death, I did behold with my own eyes. Men cloathed with garments as white as snow did come from Heaven, and taking that Man with them, re∣turned from whence they came, and an infinite army of Men cloathed all in white doth follow him, which ceased not in all that journey, to sing prayses, and continually blessed a Father and his only begotten son, great and unspeakable joy was among them, so that none might wor∣thily be compared unto it. These and many other things which I neither will, nor is lawfull for any mortal Man to tell have been shewed to me in vision this night, what they do signifie, I beseech thee not to conceal from me; be not afraid. St. Amphibalus, hearing these things, per∣ceiving that his heart was visited by God, exceedingly rejoyced in our Lord, and forthwith pulling out a cross of our Lord which he had about him, said behold, in this sign thou maiest ma∣nifestly see what this vision this night meaneth, what it signifieth. For this Man coming from Heaven is my Lord Jesus Christ, who did not refuse to undergo the punishment of the Cross, that he might deliver us by his blood from the guilt, wherewith we were held bound by the preva∣rication of our first parent Adam. And so prosecuting to the mystery of the holy Trinity, which I need not particularly to relate, writing to Christian Readers, to speak in this old Brittish Authors words again; Alban greatly marvailing upon the speeches of St. Amphibalus, brake out into these words. The things which thou relatest of Christ are true, and cannot in any respect be reproved as false, for I this night have evidently known, how Christ overcame the Divel, and thrust him down to the bottom of Hell. I have seen with my eyes how that horrible one, lyeth enwrapped, in the knots of chains, hereby knowing that all thou hast spoken is true. I believe and from this time this is my faith, that there is no God but my Lord Jesus Christ, who for the salutation of Men, vouchsaving to take humanity upon him sustained the passion of the cross, the which the Father and the Holy Ghost is one God, and there is no other, and having thus said, he falleth down prostrate before the cross, as if he had seen our Lord Jesus hanging thereon, the blessed penitent craveth pardon for his sin. Tears mingled with blood, run down about his face, and in great quantity fell down upon the venerable wood of the cross. I saith he, renounce the Devil, and detest all the Enemies of Christ, believing in him, and commending my self to him, who as thou affirmeth rose the third day from death. Amphibalus saith unto him be of courage, our Lord is with thee, and his grace
will never be wanting to th. That faith which other mortal men have deserved to receive by the Tradition of Men, thou hast not learned it either of Man or by Man, but by the Re∣velation of Jesus Christ. Therefore being now secure of thee, I determine to go further to preach unto the Gentiles: but Alban entreating him to stay at the East one week longer, that he might in that time be more perfectly instructed in the Faith of Christ, he did so. Thus writeth this old Brittish Author of St. Alban his conversion,Gil lib. de Excid. Brit. cap. 8 Bede Martyr. 22. Julii. Bede l. 1. Hist. Eccle. c. 7. Matth. West. an. 303. which both St. Gildas and St. Bede, and others do in effect and substance also deliver, although not in so ample a manner: during the time of their abode together afterward, they spent their time, as St. Amphibalus by Bedes relation did before St. Albans Conversion, in continual watchings and prayers day and night, a great motive to St. Alban to receive the Faith of Christ; for every day towards evening they withdrew themselves from the City and Company of men, going to an house which St. Alban had without the City, where they spent the whole night in serving God; and although they observed this camelous dili∣gence, to keep themselves secret from the persecutors, yet it was by a wicked Pagan there revealed, and told to the persecuting Judge; which coming to the knowledge of St. Alban (before the Pagan Prince and persecutor could execute his designment,Gild. lib. 3. e exc. l. 8. Bede l. 1. Hist. c. 7. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 3. Mat. West an. 303. as at his first recei∣ving o St. Amphibalus, when he was as yet a Pagan, as our antient Histories say) he hid him in his house, being pursued by his persecutors, and presently, had not St. Alban so pre∣vented it, to be apprehended; so now being a Christian, exposed himself unto danger of death for him, imitating Christ, that gave his own life for his sheep; for when those ene∣mies of Christ had raised their Troops, even an Army, as our Antiquaries name them, to apprehend St. Amphibalus and St. Alban in the night, he before conducteth him forth of his house and past danger, and shifting garments with him, to save him from all peril, caused St. Amphibalus to wear his garment of dignity and priviledge, in that time free from all trouble and molestation; and the garment of St. Amphibalus, where the danger was (being a Caracalla, a Priests vesture, as they say) having been discryed, he put it it upon himself, together with the danger; and so returned to his own house alone, ha∣ving thus freed his holy Master and Tutor in Christ from that peril. St. Amphibalus being thus at this time delivered by St. Alban, the King,Bed. Hist. li. c: 7. Matth. West. an. 303. Jacob. Ger∣men. in vita St. Alba. Capgrave in vita St. Al. Prince or Judge (for St. Bede, Matth. Westm. and other, give all these Titles to that persecuting Magistrate) sent his souldiers to come at these two holy Saints; the old Brittish Writer of St. Albans life saith, there were horse-men, with an Army, great multitude, or power of foot-men, which were thus sent about this business: And St. Alban being so renowned a man in this King∣dom then, and St. Amphibalus so famous a Prelate, and so known to the persecutors that they pursued him to the furthest parts of the Roman jurisdiction, in the parts now called Wales, and from thence forcibly brought him by authority to Verulamium again, there to be Judged and Martyred, which none but the highest Roman power here could do,Mr. Bro. fol. 438. 1. The rage of the Judge a∣gainst St. Alban. Manusc. An∣tiq. in vita St. Amphiba∣li. Capg. in eodem Matth. West. an 303. & a∣lii. make it an opinion sufficiently warrantable, both that such forces were levied for this exploit, and the prime Magistrate himself supplied the place of Judge and Sentencer in this cause of so noble personages, the one spiritual, the other temporal, the greatest that are re∣membred in our Histories, to have suffered Martyrdom in Brittain in that raging perse∣cution: the Troops of souldiers of the wicked Prince, rushing into the house of St. Al∣ban like mad men; and searching every place and corner, at last found him in his Coun∣trey-house, where he used to watch and pray with St. Amphibalus, bare-footed praying before the Cross of our Lord, which his Master had left with him, wearing his Caracalla or Coat upon him, and so representing St. Amphibalus who before was conveyed from them by St. Alban; which they understanding, They lay violent hands upon St. Alban, setter him with locks and chains, some of them haling him by his Coat, others by the Hair of his Head: And being thus contumeliously used,The great de∣votion of St. Alban, and his reverence to the Cruci∣fix. Bed. l. 1. c. 7. Matth West. an. 303. Serp. vita St. Albani. he continually carried in his hands the Cross which St. Amphibalus gave him, openly to pronounce and profess himself a Christian. And being thus despight∣fully brought before the Judge, who laboured by all means he could to perswade and induce St. Alban to forsake his Chistian Religion, & sacrifice to their Pagan gods; but this was all in vain; for to speak in an old Brittish Authours words. St. Alban answered the Judge, that his words were vain & superfluous, he did not repent him for receiving the Faith of Christ, for the Mi∣racles wrought in it, restoring the weak and sick to health, do teach it by their testimony, to be the way of Salvation, he would not sacrifice to their gods; and being supported by the help of God, feared not their threats and torments: Ʋpon which words the company gathering together, whipped him grievously; who being thus beaten, said with a cheerful countenance, O Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee keep my mind from wavering from the state which thou hast given me, O Lord I desire to offer my life an Holocaust, & with effusion of my blood to be thy witness; & when the Tormentors hands were weary, the H. man was thrust into the bottom of the prison, & there kept six moneths: whereupon the Elements themselves did testifie the injury done unto the Martyr; for from the time of his ap∣prehension unto his death, neither rain nor dew did fall upon the earth, the winds did not blow, but every day continually the land was parched up with most fervent heat of the Sun, and in the night also was exceeding and intollerable heat; neither Fields nor Trees bore any fruit, the whole world did fight for the just one against the wicked. The Citizens not able to endure this affliction, said it was Christ whom Alban worshippeth worketh this, that no Corn nor Grass doth grow unto us, and ta∣king pitty upon the injuries done to this holy man, by the judgement of them all he is delivered
from the bonds of the chains; for which St. Alban was very sorry; and greatly fearing, least his Martyrdom might thereby be hindered, looking upwards to Heaven, groaning said, O Lord Je∣sus Christ, suffer not the malice of the Devil so much to prevail, that by his crafty devices, and assent of this people, he may hinder my Passion; and turning himself to the people, said unto them, Why do you stay? If you know not to give sentence, take Councel of your Lawes, exa∣mine the Statutes of your City, they will insinuate unto you what you ought to do; Why do ye make delay? Be it known to you all, that I am a great enemy to your gods; For how can they be worthy any honour, which are known to have no divine thing in them, being the works of mens hands, and you your selves are their witnesses, that they see nothing, hear nothing, understand nothing? Oh greatly to be detested vanity! to hope for life of them that never lived, to pray unto them that never heard, to seek health of things that never were well themselves; whereupon I abso∣lutely pronounce, That he which worshippeth such, is most mad; I demand of you, what can be more unhappy than that man, over whom his own works have dominion? Therefore woe unto Idols, and wo unto the Worshippers thereof. When they heard these things, with a general con∣sent they gave sentence of death against the holy man,Holinhirst. and bring him to a place called Holinhirst. Thus far this old Brittish Writer, Matth. Westm. Capgrave, and others consenting. Matthew of Westminster expresly further addeth, which others do also sufficiently testifie, That as before his Judgment, so now after it, St. Alban often kissing the Cross which he held in his hand, commended his cause to God; and continually kept and reverenced his Crucifix, until his head was stricken off, when also besprinkled with his holy blood,Matth. Westm. an. 33. in St. Albans. it fell upon the grass, and was secretly taken up and preserved by a Christian there present. This Authour, as he addeth this which the Brittish Writer wanteth, so wanteth he something before related from him; for whereas the Brittish Antiquary said, that the Citizens of Verulamium, upon strange punishments wherewith God afflicted them in the time of the imprisonment of St. Alban, did set him free and at liberty. But to return to the Brittish Authour, where I left him; thus he, with others proceed∣eth in the Narration of the Martyrdom of this holy Saint, so great a company of people resorted to the place of his Martyrdom, that although it was large in it self, yet in respect of the great multitude coming thither at that time, it seemed strait and little; and yet the heat of the Sun was so ardent,Script. Britt. supr. manu∣scrip. Antiq. vita St. Al∣bani. Bede l. 1. c. 7. Matth. Westm. an. 303. Capg. in St. Albans. Hen. Hunting. l. 1. Hist. in Dioclesian. that the ground burned under their feet: In their passage to the place, there was a most swift River to pass over, and the multitude so great, that they could scarce before night pass over, and thronging one another, many fell into the water and were drowned; which, when St. Alban perceived, falling down upon his knees, thus he prayed for their delivery, O Lord Jesus Christ, from whose most holy side I have seen both blood and water to flow, grant I beseech thee, that the waters decrease, and the Ri∣ver may go away, that all this people may safe and sound be present at my Passion. A wonderful thing to behold, whilst St. Alban thus kneeled and prayed, the stream was dryed up, and the tears of St. Alban left no waters in the Channel; the power of his Prayer consumed the River, and made a way for the people between the waters; and they whom the vio∣lence of the water had taken away, inclosed and destroyed, were found in the bottom of the River without any hurt, having no sign of death in them; the Souldier which drew St. Alban to these torments, seeing this strange Miracle, was as strangely thereby converted to the Faith of Christ, threw away his Sword, and prostrating himself at the feet of the Saint, craved pardon; but the other Pagans drew St. Alban up & down among the Bryers & rough places, so that the thorns and roots of trees did pull pieces of flesh from his feet; and yet this merciful and miraculous Saint, seeing the people to be afflicted with thirst in the Mountain, thus prayed for their relief, O God who didst create man of the slime of the earth, I beseech thee, suffer no creature to sustain any hurt for my cause; and presently a Well of wa∣ter sprung up before his feet, by which they were refreshed. The Executioner cut off St. Albans head, but his eyes fell out of his own head there∣with,Hiericus Gal∣lus in vita St. Gor. many so witnessing; among whom Hiericus Gallus in St. Germans life: Millia poenarum, Christi pro nomine passus Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia cæsi Sed non Lictori cessit res tuta superbo. Ʋtque caput Sancto reciderunt lumina sævo. So hath the Brittish Writer of St. Albans life, then living, a Pagan, as himself confesseth, and, as may be gathered by his own Narration, present at his Martyrdom, least they which shall come hereafter, may be doubtful of my name, they shall call me a wretched and the greatest sinner. And I go to Rome, that casting off the error of Paganisme I may be baptised, and deserve to obtain pardon of my sins, and this my short trea∣tise I will offer to the Examination of the Romans. That if any thing shall be utter∣ed in it, otherwise then it ought, Our Lord Jesus Christ, who Liveth and Reign∣eth God, World without end, may vouchsafe by them to amend it: wherefore see the great Honour and Reverence which the Christians and Christianly men of that age, even here in Brittain, did acknowledge as due to that holy See, that they referred the examen
and censure of their writings, even of Historical and practicall things, acted so far from thence, to the judgment thereof. But to finish this funeral honour of this our glorious Martyr, although we do not find any man then, which for fear of the persecutors presented himself to bury his holy body, but the valiant Souldier, (now the Souldier of Christ, converted unto him) which had boldly before them all reverenced the Reliques of St. Alban; who there digged a grave, and laid the Martyrs body therein, which was all he could do then,Mat. West an 303. yet God willing (in whose sight the death of his Saints is precious,) as he had now glorified his Martyrs soul in heaven, so yielded he from thence extraordinary honour to his body, so meanly buried, making his poor grave more glorious then the sumptuous Tombe of any Roman Em∣perour, his persecutor, or other; for in the next night now following a pillar of light was seen of all the Pagans themselves, to stretch up from the grave of the holy Martyr unto heaven, by which Angels descending and ascending spent all the night in praysing God, and among other things which they did sing, these words were often repeated and heard, The renowned man Alban the Martyr.Mr Br. f: 441. 5. Autho o Britt. vitae S. Albani. Manus. Antiq. in vita eius Capg. in eodem Manus. Antiq: in vita S. Amp Capg. in eodem Bed. l. 1. Hist. c 7. Hen. Hunt. l 1. Hist. M W. an. 303. Manus. Antiq. in S Amp. Cap. in eodem. Bede l 1. Hist. c 18. Tho. Walsing. Hist. Angl. in Edw. 2. Tho. Walsing. ut supra. And a thousand of Pagans were hereby converted to Christ; St. Bede witnesseth that from the martyrdom of St. Alban to his time, cures and oft miracles were wrought in the place of his martyrdom, so hath Henry Huntington long after, for his dayes also. The Crosse which he had in his hand when he suffered Martyrdom, and was thereby sprinkled with his holy blood, was reverently preserved by the Christians then, and present∣ed to St. Amphibalus with great honour: the very ground whereon St. Alban suffered retained drops of his blood when St. Germain was sent thither by Pope Caelestine, and he carried part thereof with him, as a great Relict. His coat Caracalla, which he had of St. Amphiba∣lus, and wherein he suffered Martyrdom, was kept as a great Relict, and in the time of K. Edward the II. (the King himself, with many Nobles present, witnesses) was so freshly bespotted with this Martyrs blood, as if it had been done but the day before, so miracu∣lously preserved, as the blood in the place of his passion. Great is the honour which our own both Brittish and English Histories, and also forraign yield to the Souldier (untill then Pagan) who being one that led St. Alban to his martyrdom and converted by his miracles by the way, was then and there also most cruelly martyred. St. Gildas saith, this martyr being converted by the miracles St. Alban shewed, when by his prayers the deep river gave place to him, and a thousand with him, to passe over, not wetting their feet, the waters on both sides standing like walls, as they did to the people of Is∣rael, to give them passage, was of a wolfe made a lamb, and did both vehemently desire, and valiantly endure martyrdom with him. St. Bede relateth this History in like manner, yet with more Emphasis of his glory, for having spoken of the same strange miracle, by which this Souldier was converted calling him Carnifex, the designed executioner to put St. Alban to death, as S. Gildas and others do, to shew how wonderfully the grace of Christ wrought in him, he addeth, that by divine Inspiration he made all speed he could to come to St. Alban, and casting away his sword that was drawn to behead St. Alban, prostrated himself before his feet, the whole assembly beholding it, greatly desiring that he himself might be worthy to be put to death with the martyr which he was commanded to strike, and so of a perse∣cutor he became a companion in Truth and faith. This St. Heraclius (for so was this happy souldier called) having resolutely denyed his Paganisme, craved pardon for his error, and confessed Christ openly before so many per∣secutors, and in the highest of their malice and rage against St. Alban, fell thereby into the same degree of hatred with them, for presently thereupon to speak in an old Authors words, The Enemies of truth apprehended him, beat out his teeth, rent his holy mouth, and brake all his bones, and although nothing remained in his body without hurt,Gild. l. 2. de excid. Brit. c. 8. yet his fervent faith remain∣ed without harme; and being thus left so maimed, lame, and baptised in his own blood, and also half dead, with all the power and strength he could, with his hands crept up to the hill, where St. Alban was martyred, whom when the judge espied, he said unto him, pray to thy Alban to set thy bones in order, and lay his head, here stricken off, to thy body, and thou shalt receive perfect health from him: bury thou him, and let him cure thee. Heraclius answered, I most firmly believe that St. Alban by his merits is able to heal me, and easily performe that you mock us with; Then reverently taking the head of St. Alban, and devoutly laying it to his body, he began to recover the former strength of the same, despaired before, and being thus miraculously recovered and made whole, ceased not in the hearing of all the people to preach unto them the merit of St. Alban, and power of Christ, and digging the earth buried the body of the martyred Saint before them there: which the Pagans seeing, said among themselves, what shall we do? this man cannot be put to death with sword, we have already broken his body, and he hath already received his former strength again. And apprehending him with horrible torment, they tare his holy body in pieces, and lastly cut off his head. And so this happy Soul∣dier, persevering in the faith of Christ, together with St. Alban, deserved to be honoured with the crown of martydom. The Judge himself was hereby so moved and convinced,Mr. Br. 443. 2. that he presently comman∣ded the persecution to cease. Jacobus Genuensis, Bishop of Genoa, and his old English translation say, this Souldier, called by some before Herculius, was a Knight.
And they yield a reason besides their assertion, which was the noble renown of St. Alban, who as they say was Lord of the City of Verulam, and Prince of the Knights, and Steward of the land;Bede l. 1. c. 7. and the Judge dread for to slay him, because of the great love that the Emperour had to him, and for reverence of his dignity, and power of his kindred, unto the time that he had in∣formed Dioclesian.Jacob. Gon. in vit. St. Alb. & S. Amp. Angli∣ca translat. ibid. Mr. Br. f. 455. And therefore when judgment was pronounced against him, the which was deferred six weeks until Miximian his coming into Brittain, to see such wicked execu∣tions, thus they deliver, then Maximian and Asclepiodotus gave final sentence on him, say∣ing, In the time of the Emperour Dioclesian, Alban Lord of Verulam, Prince of Knights, and Steward of Brittain, during his life hath despised Jubiter and Apollin, Gods, and to them hath done derogation and disworship, wherefore he ought by the law to be dead by the hand of some Knight, and the body to be buryed in the same place, where his head shall be smitten of, and his Sepulchre to be made worshipfully, for the honour of Knighthood, whereof he was Prince. And also the crosse that he bare, and Sklavin that he ware should be buried with him, and his body to be closed in a chest of lead and so laid in his Sepulchre. This sentence hath law ordained because he hath renied our principal Gods. These Authours say, Maximian and King Asclepiodotus gave this sentence; we have spoken elsewhere of those Martyrs which suffered at Litchfield. Let us therefore return to St. Amphibalus whom Almighty God had made the instrument to the conversion of so many souls. These bloody persecutors having thus barbarously and without all commpassion, of lineage, kindred, friendship, country, or whatsoever relation of love or mercy, put these holy Saints to death, they now pour out the bottom of their malice upon St. Amphibalus, neither regarding his noble descent before remembred, vene∣rable and old years,Mat. West. an 303. Manus. Antiq. in vita S. Amp Capg. in eodem Mr. Br f. 447. 1 learning, or whatsoever, but bind his arms with thongs, and drive him barefooted before their horses, so long a journey, from the borders of Brittain where they apprehended him, unto the City of Verulam, where the Prefect and Lieutenant then was resident. And as they thus contemptibly carried him barefooted and bound, a sick man lying in the way, in the sight and hearing of them all cryed out unto him, O thou servant of God Almighty help me, that I which lye oppressed by my own infirmity, may be relieved by thy intercession, for I do believe that by the calling upon the name of Christ thou art able presently to restore my health unto me. And forthwith the man, which lay thus sick before the eyes of them all, arose up joyfully and perfectly well. When these wicked Pagan persecutors had thus barbarously brought him within the sight of the walls of the City, as though this holy Saint had been unworthy to enter into it, and their Troops so great, by that is said before, that they could not be convenient∣ly received therein, they stay themselves, as it were pitching their tents, in a place then de∣sart, now called Redburne, three miles from St. Albans, throwing down their shields, and striking their speers into the ground. And thus resting themselves, only St. Amphibalus rested not, but preached continually the doctrine of salvation to his enemies, who in the mean time gave notice to the Prince, and those of the City of their return and bringing with them the instructor of St. Alban, and that they had put all those Christians before spoken of to death, in the uttermost parts of the Kingdom, after their long journey thither; which when the Governour heard, he called the people together, and exhorted them: Let us all go forth, and meet our enemy, that he that hath offended may receive re∣venge of us all. And so hasting forth, striving as it were who should go first, went by the way leading to the North, as our antiquities say, the better to set down the old place and situation of that antient City, which they then left almost vacant. And coming in this raging madnesse and multitude to torment and Martyr this holy Saint, they find him all wrapped in chains and bonds, and presently stripped him naked, slit his belly, and pulled out his entrails, tying them to a stake, which they had fastned in the ground, enfor∣cing him to be led round about it. And the holy Saint of God, shewing no signe of grief at all, among such and so many afflictions, the wicked persecutors thereby the more enraged, sent him for a mark as it were, and with their knives and spears, pierced and brake the rest of his body.Many conver∣ted at St. Am∣phibalus his martyrdom. Jacob. Gonnen. in vita S. Amp Manus. Antiq. Capg. in eodem. After all which this holy Martyr stood with as chearful a countenance as if he had suffered no hurt at all, and more constant, though he now bore the signes of his Martyrdom in all his body; Giving a miraculous spectacle of him∣self, that he could still live after so great torments, and so many kinds of death, where∣upon very many beholding, and more and more wondering at the constancy of the blessed Martyr, renouncing their Idols submitted themselves to the Christian faith, and prayed with a loud voice to God, that by the merits and intercession of the blessed Martyr they might be worthy to be partakers of everlasting life,1000 conver∣ted and pre∣sently put to death, at the martyrdom of St. Amphi∣balus. which when the Prince perceived and knew he pre∣sently called for the Tormentors, and commanded all that had rejected and forsaken the worship of their Gods, and embraced the doctrine of Amphibalus, to be put to death. Which savage Edict the Pagan Souldiers effected, and killed a thousand; which St. Amphi∣balus beholding, and commending their souls to God, perswaded his persecutors to re∣nounce their errors, and be converted to Christ, without whom no salvation can be had, no∣thing but hell and eternal damnation to be expected. But the persecutors did still persevere in their impiety, not ceasing so to torment this holy Saint with cruel stoning him, besides so many tortures before remembred, that when his body was afterward miraculously found,
there was not one whole bone in it. Although it seemeth by the History of his life, that many of his bones were broken with stones by those so enraged persecutors, that after his blessed Soul was separated from his body, thus lying still bound and tied, they ceased not to break it more with their casting great stones upon it. But so long as he lived in so great extremity of torments, although the stones were cast at him as thick as hail (as some write) he still persevered in prayer, never moving himself on the one side or other. And being now come to the period of his punishments, and to yield his Soul to God: looking toward Heaven as another St. Stephen, he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of his Father, and heard a consort of Angels in Heaven, and among them knew St. Alban, whom he invocated to assist him, saying, O holy Alban, pray unto our God that he will send a good Angel to meet me, that the dreadful Robber lead me not, nor the wicked part hinder me in my journey. And a voice spake to him from Heaven in the hearing of all, in this manner, Verily, I say unto thee, this day thou shalt be with thy Disciple Alban in Paradise. And two Angels shining with an heavenly brightness came down unto him, and taking with them the Soul of the blessed, resplendent with a wonderful whiteness, with Hymnes and Praises carried it to Heaven; which done, to make him both glorious there and ho∣nourable on earth, a Christian secretly conveying his body, reverently buried it. And God himself began now to honour him here, and be revenged upon his Enemies and Persecutors. Those lips of theirs which had been opened before to blaspheme towards God, and revilings towards his holy Saints, are now miraculously drawn away, that their speech is hindred. The tongues which had so abused him, now burn; and the faces of them which had so deformed him, were made deformed; all their members are so stiff, that the stoners and tormentors of this holy man, could not now lift one stone from the ground; and the Judge or Prince himself losing his understanding of reason, became mad; and how many soever had lifted up their hands against our Lord, did of him re∣ceive due revenge for their demerits. Hereupon the whole City received the Faith of Christ, and desired to be Baptized; and many by the inspiration of God forsaking their goods, go to Rome to bewail their sins, and confess their errours. With St. Amphibalus nine other Christians were martyred, as Matthew of Paris writeth; neither is it probable,Matthew Pa∣ris, Hist. pag. 179, 180, 181. 182, 183. that so renowned a Bishop as St. Amphibalus, was apprehended alone, being take as he was preaching to the people, or such rage as then reigned in the persecutors, would yield them much more favour than they did to St. Amphibalus; but their malice being most unto him, and he so famous, all our Histories remember him, almost forgetting the rest. It is no great marvel, though so few names of so great numbers and thousands are left unto us, when by some Writers the persecution was so great in Britainy, that except those which hid themselves, and could not be Witnesses of things publickly done, all the Christians of Brittain were then martyred;Harpsfield, Hist: Eccle. Ang. in 6. pri∣mis soeculis c. 10. p. 17. and St. Gildas himself doth seem to declare no less, when he saith, they which were then left alive, had hidden themselves in Woods, Deserts and Dens; yet he tempereth this hard assertion, where he saith, this persecution was so rigorous onely in some, not all places of this Countrey. And those parts which were then absolutely under the Romans command, were by their merciless cruelty in this estate. So many mutations of times, changes of the names of Places, the rages of Infi∣dels, Romans, Saxons, and others, have deprived us both of the names and holy relicts of those Martyrs. But after the death of so many renowned and glorious Martyrs,Maria Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6. Col. 304. in Con∣stant. Flor. Wigorn. Chron. an. 321. & 299. Capg. Catal. prefat. in vita St. Helenae. Marianas Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6. in Aurel. Bar tomo 2. Annal. an. 306 Jac. Gordon an. 273. in Aurel. Harris Hist. Eccl. Britt. Tom. 4. c. 2. Zosim. l. 2. Suid. in Con∣stan. Matth. West. an. 273. Mar. Sco. l. 2. Aetat. 6 in Aurel. whose blood beautified and encreased the Church of God (Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae) let us return to Constantius Clarus, and his most admired consort and chaste Spouse St. Helena: Some there be (whether to detract so great a glory from his Nation, and give it to another, or of Ignorance in History) do say, that one Theodora was the first lawful wife of Constantius, and the blessed Helena mother of that happy Emperour the great Constantine, was not on∣ly a stranger to this Nation, but of a mean estate (and which is unworthy to be written) not the wife, but concubine of Constantius, with name and attribute Concubina; this, the most noble Empress St. Helena is stiled by, not onely among divers forreign Writers, but of this Nation also, as Marianus Scotus, and Florentinus Nigorniensis (as they are now published) many of which do not, to the dishonour of that most holy Lady and this her Countrey, ab∣stain from the same phrase of speech. This errour being overthrown, overthroweth the other, that she was a stranger and basely born, for excepting those that wander in that Tract, all agree, she was the sole daughter and heir of the Noble Brittish King Coel, far from being either an Alien, or of base parentage and descent; and the more easily to overthrow them, it first fighteth with, and so overthroweth it self. Some which encline to this errour, say, that she did secretly fly out of her Countrey, and went to Rome, and there was so familiar with Constantius the Emperour; but it is evident by all Histories, that Constantius at the first acquaintance with Helena, was not Emperour, nor long after; neither was he at Rome, but in Brittain, in this time sent hither by Aurelianus the Emperour, in the year of Christ 273; and (as both Zosimus and Suidas say) lived most here; and being sent hither by Aurelianus the Emperour (as so many agree) to have long imployment, and great cause to stay here; he must needs come hither about that
time,Marti. Polo. Coxton fol. 38. Hollinshed Hist. of Eng. l 4. Capg. in St. Helen. Nicep. l. 7. c. 18. Andre. Chesne l. 4. Hist. Marie. l. 2 ae∣tat. 6. in Const. Flor. Wigorn. Chronico. Regi. in an. 243. Mar. Polo. In supputa. an. 307. Otto. Frigen. l. 3. c. 45. Bede l. Hist. c. 8. Martin. Polo. sup. an. 309. col. 66. Papinian. l. prefect. F. de ritu Nuptia∣rum. Joan. Capg. in Catal in præ∣fat. in vita S. Helenae. M. Aurelius Cassidorus in Chron. Zosimus Comes in Constantine l. 2. Mari. an. 292. c. 301. Maria. l. 2 ae∣tat. 6. an. 305. col. 303. Bede. Hist. l. c. 8. Floren. Wig. Chron. an. 328. & 306. Galli. Orat. Panyg. ad. const. apud. Baron. Tom. 2. an. 306. Hen. Spond. i∣bid. Harris Hist. eccl. Tom. 4. Nichol. Vigni∣er. Billiosh. Histor. ad. an. 306. Pompo Lae∣lus. in camp. Hist. Rom. in Const. Max. Eutropius. l. 10. Hist. Rom. Constan. Ma∣nasses. l. An∣nal. Hanibald. a∣pud. Frithem. l. de orig. Franc. Euseb. Cron. an. 294 Eutrop. l. 9. Hist. Rom. Victor. in Dio∣cle. & Maxi∣mi. for by all Antiquities Aurelianus died soon after, and was Emperor but a short time, so that neither Constantius nor Queen Helena could be either at Rome, or in any place but, in Brittain at this time. Nicephorus and some later after him would have her to be born in Bithinia at Drepa∣num, and the Daughter of an Inkeeper there, with whom Constantius passing that way to the Persians, fell in done, but this is made unpossible, by that is said before, of the be∣ing of both Constantius and Helena in Brittain, so remote from any part of Bithinia at that time, and neither of them coming to or neer Drepanum or any part of Bithinia, at or after this time, but when she an holy Widdow, many years after Constantius death, passed by Greece in her pilgrimage to Hierusalem, as is evident in all kind of Antiquaries, and will most manifestly appear in its due place. Others there be which do term this re∣nowned Empress by the name of Concubina, as Marianus, and Florentius Wigorniensis, as they have been lately published, and Regino, without speaking any thing of her parentage or country; and Martinus Polonus, who confesseth she was Daughter to the King of Brittain; but it is evident that either Martinus or his publisher, hath with gross Ignorarance abused the Readers; for he saith, that Constan∣tine (not Constantius) begot Constantine the great in the year of Christ 307. when by common opinion Constantius was dead before. And not content with this, they bring in Constantine the great to be Emperor in the year 309. when by their account he could not be two years old. The other three if their Publishers have not abused them speak in the phrase of the Pagan Romans, who in those times called all the Wives of their Lieutenants taken for strangers, though never so lawfully joyned in true marriage by the rude term of Concubine, as their old Pagan Decree is still witness against them, when I shall make it as clear as the Sun, that St. Helen was from the beginning the only true lawfull wife to Constantius. This I have written here to answer these frivo∣lous Cavils against that blessed woman, and with John Capgrave, call their Allegati∣ons no better then dreams, and to speak still in his words, That opinion doth not only blemish the fame of so holy a Woman, but maketh that most Noble Constantine to be a Bastard begot out of marriage, and so disableth him to have been the Heir of Constanti∣us either King or Emperor, when all Men know he came to the imperial Dignity by right of Inheritance. And thus he taxeth the Authors of Ignorance, these things pleased them, because they knew not the truth. Ipsos. forsan qui ista scripserunt talia placuerunt, quia potiara & veriora invenire minime potuerunt. Divers forraign Historians, as Baro∣nius, Spondanus, and others, write as plainly in this matter, and may with great war∣rant; for as Cassiodonus is an able witness, it is but a Pagan report, and raised first by Zo∣simus that most malicious Ethnick, and Rayler against Constantine, for professing and ad∣vancing of Christian Religion, and renouncing Idolatry: and this is evident by the best learned Authors themselves which in any sense called St. Helena by that name, for they do plainly confess, as namely Marianus, that St. Helen was the true wife of Constantius, and he forced by Maximian the Emperor to put her away and take Theodora his wifes Daughter. And further saith, Constantine was the true Son and heir of Constantius, and by that title succeeded him in the Kingdom and Empire, which could not be truly said, if Helen had not been his lawfull wife; neither could Constantius by this learned and holy Author be named a Religious Father, if he had not begot his Son lawfully in true marriage. And St. Bede confesseth from Eutropius, that Constantine succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Brittain, and so by him also must needs be his lawfull son, Florenti∣us Wigorn writeth in the same manner, and confesseth St. Helen to have been here in Brittain long after her son Constantine was Emperor, yet these be the chiefest Authors that in any sense have termed St. Helen by that name. It is evident by all histories, not only of Christians, that St. Helen was a most chast and holy Woman, and that Constantius also lived in conjugal chastity, marrying when he was but young, but also even by the Pagan writers themselves, as witnesseth Gal∣licanus the Orator that lived in this time, in his publick oration to his son Constantine, and others; therefore St. Helen being the first woman, that was thus wedded unto him in marriage, she must needs be his true lawfull wife by their own testimonies. And the same Author witnesseth before Constantine at the publick solemnity of his marriage with Fausta, in most plain and express words that Constantine was born in Brittain, so testifie divers Authors even of the Roman History, among whom one plainly saith, that Constantine was the lawfull son of Constantius and Helen, and born in Brittain, and that his Father Constantius was compelled by Herculius the Emperour to be divorced from Helen his true wife, to take Theodora Daughter in Law of that Emperor. Eutropius plain∣ly saith, that Constantine was son of Constantius in true marriage: Constantinus Manasses saith, St. Helen was the wife of Constantius; and a most blessed Woman. Hunibaldus a∣bove 1000. years since, relateth the History of the composition between Constantius and our Brittish King Coel, as our writers do. As soon as Coel heard that Constantius was arrived, he sent Embassadours desiring peace, and promised to pay the tribute, so that he might enjoy his Kingdom, to which Constantius agrees, this thus composed, Coel with∣in
40. dayes dyed, whose Daughter Helen (to whom for beauty, and loveliness, knowledge in the liberal sciences, and rare skill in musick,Theoph. Ceram in Chron. Egbert Albas Ser. 3. de mere & manif. Ca∣tho. fidei Be∣rengosus Ab∣bas l. de in vent & laud. S. Crucis. c. 1 Brittain never bred the like) Constantius took to wife, by whom he begat Constantine, who not only succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Brittain, but also (prevailing against Maxentius) in the Empire. Victor, Eutropius, Euse∣bius, and other ancient Authors, are witnesses, that when Dioclesian made Constantius and Galerius Cesars, he compelled then to put away both their lawful wives; Constantius to put away St. Helen, and to take Theodore his daughter in law; and Galerius, Veleria his own daughter, which account of theirs, that St. Helen was thus put away in the year 294. invincibly proveth, how according to Eusebius and many others, before setting down the age of Constantine to have been about 60 years, that St. Helen had been the wife of Constantius 20. years. Severus Sulpitius doth not only call St. Helen the true wife of Constan∣tius, but saith she was Empresse both in her husbands and sons time, which proveth her daughter and heir to Coel our Brittish King, by which title only she reigned with Constantine. Theophilus Cepameus, an old Greek writer, saith, there were Arrian Hereticks and Pagans which denied Constantine to be legitimate, and that the lyed therein, mentiuntur. Egber∣tus saith, she was Queen and mother of Constantine. Beringosus an eyewitnesse of the most things, writing of her, saith, first, she was a Queen and so the lawful wife of Constantius, for a Concubine of the greatest Emperour, that ever was, is not thereby a queen, as the Authors name her, Queen to Rule, to Governe: nor can the lawful true wives of Kings, be termed Queens by such worth Authours, except they were Queens by title of Inheritance, or such like, as our Antiquaries write of Queen Helen, that she was daughter and heir to her father King Coel, this worthy author doth also (though a stranger to us) confirme, when he proveth she was of most noble parentage: and by experimental arguments; because he had seen the old buildings of her stately pallace, continuing to in his time, the pavement whereof was marble and Touchstone, the most Regal Palace in all those parts, the walls were gilded with old, her chamber was so sumptuous, that the like was not in the World,Stately build∣ing of St. Helen Q. of Brittain. and to free her from all slanders, the chamber of her heart and soul was far more pure; in all things she was obedient to the will of God, and yet externally plea∣sing to her husband Constantius, although more pleasing to God then to her hus∣band. Thus we see how far this most blessed and noble Queen and Empresse,Bernigosus ibid. was in all times from being base, either by birth or conversation, such sanctify of life could never agree with that foule name, by which some have so wrongfully termed her; such parentage, Pallaces and Revenues, able to entertain the greatest Princes according to their state and dignity, must denominate their noble owners with better termes and attributes. The Hostesse, Inkee∣per, Stabularia, except we will expound them in so large a sense, that we shall so stile Abra∣ham and Lot that lodged the Angels, those that entertained Christ, all receivers of Kings, Princes and Emperours, and all Harbourers or Exercisers of Hospitality; for so both St. Helen and King Coel, entertained Constantius, the one a husband, the other a son in law, as Princes use. It seemeth this Pallace and lands in and about Trevers to have descended to St. Helen by her mother, or some Ancestour of that Country, for both Beringosus saith, St. Helen was brought up at Trevers; and Otho Frigensis saith, she was by some of her Ance∣stours come from thence. And Trevers being at that time, the most renowned place of those countries for Nobility, Learning and Christianity, and she the only child of her fa∣ther King Coel, and to succed him in the Kingdom of Brittain, he sent her thither to have the most noble education, and there it was probably where she first came to be acquain∣ted with Constantius, then living in those parts. And this made the Attonement between the Romans and K. Coel to be so soon and peacebly effected, without any effusion of blood, as our Antiquities tell us. The marriage of Constantius and Helena is by what is said so clear, that it is needlesse to speak any more of that subject. I will only add this for the present; The old Inscription of the Church of St. Gereon at Cullen, founded by her, proveth her to be a Queen, and an ex∣ample to Kings. Regibus exemplum, sacroque chrismate plena, Condidit hoc Templum Sancti Gereonis Helena. A patterne unto Kings, this heavenly light; St. Helen shining with all vertue bright. In honour of St. Gereon here did raise This stately Church to her eternal praise. At the agreement betwixt Constantius and Coel besides paying the Tribute,Galf. Mon. H. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Pont. Virun. and Coel to enjoy the Kingdom during his natural Life, it was further agreed that Constantius should take again his wife St. Helen, daughter and her to King Coel, and by her right be King af∣ter the death of her father. By which covenant and article agreed upon and truly executed as it was, the first marriage between Constantius and Helen was even by Roman
Pagan lawes themselves proved and declared to be true and lawfull, and the children therein begotten legitimate, and the taking of Theodora, living with her, and chil∣dren by her to be adulterate, and utterly unallowable in any sense, even by their own Pagan constitutions; for although those Pagan wicked decrees, did allow to the Presidents of Provinces which were unmarried without penalty to keep Concubines, pro∣phanely thinking (as some new seeming Christians have done) that men unmarried could not live chast, yet they never permitted it to married Præfects, and Presidents, such as Constantius was,Elius Lam∣prid. in Alex. Sever. as their own Historians witness. By which Heathenish Roman Law Helena was not only the Concubine, and no wife of Constantius, but a Concubine, prohi∣bited in their own proceedings, and her children in like case of reproach with her. Math. West. & alii supra. Manusc. Hist. Eccles. Win∣ton. Caius Hist. Cantabr. Academiae p. 19.Therefore Constantius being against his will by power of Maximian separated from St. Helen his true wife, and a Christian from that time ever in affection, could not but be ever most ready and joyfull to be so quietly and honourably reconciled unto her again, which is sufficiently insinuated by our Authors testifying that Constan∣tius in all things granted to King Coel his commands, requiring nothing of him for the Romans but their old Tribute, which as our Antiquaries say was 1006. pounds, only in money: one of our Historians saith of this matter in this manner. Harding c. 60.Of which Constance was glad of his entent, And here aboad at prayer of the King. Whereby he did sufficiently declare the great content and joy he had, of this recon∣ciliation to his wife St. Helen, and her Father, his Father in Law, King Coel, ra∣ther chusing and preferring, during his life, to make his aboad here as a Subject, then now being chosen and designed Emperor to continue in any other Nation with that greatest temporal glory and command. He retook He∣len Daughter of the King to conjugal soci∣ety.Thus he signified this so long and much desired attonement. Helenam Coeli Regis filiam in societatem Thori recepit, which word RECEPIT, that Constantius did at that time receive Helen again, if we had no other argument or authority used by divers our ancient Antiquaries, proveth that this was the reconciliation, and not the first marriage of those noble persons. And impossible it is that any of these Authors which speak of this union, should take it for the first union in marriage, for all of them acknowledge that Constantius died soon after this Reconciliation, (the Monck of West∣minster sayeth within three years) by Merianus within two years,Math. West. an. 302. 305. Mari. Sc. anno. 305. 306. by Martinus Polonus the same year. The like have others, by which account and confession Constantine should be either unborn, or not above two years old at the most, when he was King of Brittain, and Emperor also after his Fathers death. Shortly after this coming of Constantius, and this attonement between him and King Coel thus made, King Coel dyed within five weeks, saith Harding, a moneth and eight dayes, saith Galfridus, Viruunius saith within one moneth,Hard. Chron. c. 6. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 6. Pont. Virun. Hist. l. 5. Harding c. 61. Howes fol. 44. so likewise doth the Monck of Westminster, Hard∣ing writeth that Constantius was Emperor before he was King of Brittain. But King Constance of Rome was high Christain, By the Senate first made the Emperor, After King of Brittain and Governour. Howes in his Chronicle bringeth in Peter de Jeham to was tell us, that Coel Duke of Caric Glow of Glocester, Holinshed saith, he was Earl of Golchester, but where he died, or where buried, no mention is made. Fabian sayeth he ruled after the accord of most writers 27. years. Constantius. Constantius began his Empire with Galerius, the Empire was devided between them, so that Constantius should possess Affrica, Italy, France and Brittain, Galerius should have Ilyrica, Asia and the East parts, which done, they substituted under them two Cae∣sars; Constantius, holding himself content with the dignity of Augustus, refused to sustain the trouble, which he should have endured through the administration of the affairs of Italy and Africk. He sought by all means how he might enrich the people of the Empire. He abolished the superstition of the Gentiles in his Dominions, so that afterwards Brittain felt no persecutions. The year following he prepared war against the Picts, at which time his Son Constantine, who then served under Galerius, perceiv∣ing
his destruction to be contrived, posted to his Father in all hast, houghing and kill∣ing all the Post horses which way so ever he passed,Holinshed Hist. of Eng. 45. Fab. Sozom. Hist. Eccle l. 1. c. 6. Euseb. l. 2. de vita Const. Mr, Bro. fol. 460. and came safely to his Father in Brittain. Holinshed saith, Constantius was the Daughters Son of one Crispus, that was brother to the Emperor Claudius, and that he began his reign over the Brittains, 289. and so also saith Fabian. Constantius was not against the law, for Christians in Brittain to profess the Chri∣stian Religion in his time; but preferred the most constant Christians to highest pre∣ferments, and greatest trust. And so consecrated his whole family to God, that his Court was as a Church, wherein were both Clergy men, and Godly Christians, truly serving God. This blessing and benefit he brought to our Christians here in Brittain, and publickly maintained it even in those times, when the name of Christi∣an in other places was so odious, that without danger it could not be spoken of; which he further, Viz. Eusebius, confirmeth in another place,Euseb. Hist. Eccle. l. 8. c. 14. where speaking in the name of Christians, he saith, that among the Emperors of that time, only Constantius did nei∣ther in any sort persecute Christians, nor in any sort participate with them that did, but kept all them that were under him without hurt, and secure from all trouble; neither pulled down Churches,Idem. apud Ba∣ron. & Spon. an. 304. or did any thing against them and elsewhere he teacheth again, that the parts of the West Empire did generally receive quietness from persecution when Constantius reigned; which although Baronius and Spondanus do not so well allow upon Eusebius his words, in all places of the West; because as they alledge Constantius, neither presently could, nor would he be against the Edicts of the Emperors still living, when he himself remained in Brittain, in the end of the World, and Italy was then full of wars. But Eusebius writteth not this singularly, but Sozomen and others testifie as much, that when the Churches of God were persecuted in all o∣ther parts of the World,Sozomen l. 1. c. 6. only Constantius granted liberty of conscience to the Christi∣ans under him: and again generally, of all Christian Churches in the part of his Em∣pire; and were not only quiet under him, but thus lived in great joy, and did encrease, being honoured and rewarded by him. And, relating his experiment to prove constant Christians, before remembred, and how he admitted such for his nearest friends and Counsellors, he gathereth from hence, that the Gauls, Brittains, and others under him, were by him exempted from all penall lawes of the persecutors, he taking away and making them frustrate in his Dominions. And the objections which Baronius maketh, do rather prove then disprove the quietness of Christians in this Nation, when Constantius was here. For first the inquietness of Italy rather helped then hindered our peace, our persecution proceeding from thence, now not able to persecute us, nor take revenge of Constantius for protecting us. And his being in Brittain, his being so friendly alwayes to Christians, as Baronius often confes∣seth, must needs much more procure ease and freedom to our Christians, where there was no man of power to contradict or resist it; Constantius being both King and Empe∣ror here, and the Kingdom of Brittain a Christian Kingdom.Bede. l. Hist. c. 8. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Brit. l. 5. c. 5. Manusc. Gali. Antiq. c. 28. 29. Virun. l. 5. Hist. 1. Harding Chron. c. 57, 58, 59, 60. Hen. Hunt. Hist. l. 1. Socrates Eccl. Hist. 1. c. 1. Eusebius. l. 1. vit. Const. c. 9. Theodoret Hist. Eccle. l. 1. c. 24. Therefore howsoever his reasons make doubt of some other places, whose Estate and condition was not like unto ours of Brittain, they do not move any question of the quiet thereof in case of Religion, but establish and confirme it. And therefore our best allowed and ancient Authors St. Bede, Galfrid, Hen. Hunting and old French Manuscript, Virunnius, Harding, and others settle Constantius here in Brittain after all our perse∣cution ended, and nothing but all favour here to Christians in his time, and not only a tolleration, granted but publick profession of Christianity generally allowed, and by Regal and Imperial warrant of Constantius used and exercised, as shall ap∣pear. And if we had rather hearken to forraign Writers in or neer that time, we have sufficient warrant, not only that he recalled himself from the worship of the Pagan Gods, as divers are witnesses, but as Eusebius and others testifie of him, he gave free power and licence to all under him to exercise Christian Religion without any molestation. And this, as he writes, when the greatest perse∣cution was in other places; and had care to instruct his son Constantine the great, whom he left his heir, in the same Faith, as we may easily conclude from the words of Constantine himself, Registered by Theodoret, that even from the ends of the Ocean, meaning Brittain, he was assisted by God: and Sozomen saith, it is evident∣ly known unto all men,Sozom. Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 5. Chron. Mon. Abington apud Ncieph. Harsp. Hist. Eccle. sae∣cul. p. 203. c. 9. that great Constantine was first instructed in the Christian faith among the Brittains. And the Chronicle of Abington neer Oxford, testifieth, he was brought up in that old Abbey, which we must needs ascribe to his Parents Constantius and Helen; and we find not any other but Constantius, except we will apply it to King Coel, and then it was received and approved by him, who here in Brittain caused the persecutors to be put to death, and the persecu∣tion thereupon ceased, as Gildas writeth: For this must needs be applyed to perse∣cution in Brittain, and not to the Tyrants Dioclesian and Maximian:Gild. l. de con. Brit. c. 8. the persecution here ended long before their death, and neither of them, nor any other Emperor,
but Constantius, having power and command here at this time, and hereupon our late authors themselves thus testify of him;Stow & Howes Hist. tit. Rom. in Constant. & Constantin. Constantius abolished the Superstition of the Gentiles in his Dominions, so that afterward Brittain felt no persecutions. Constantius renounced the Idolatry of the Gentiles. I have shewed formerly that Dioclesians persecution continued in this Kingdome not ten Years, for Gildas in one place saith; The nine years persecution of Dioclesian the Tyrant, and in the next Chapter, not wholly ten years long; as also that it wholly ended, in the time of King Coel. Those persecutors then having no power or authority here, and so together with their other over-ruling and command∣ing Decrees, the bloody Edicts of persecuting Christians here, were utterly extinct, and made void, and never renewed, but altogether omitted by Constantius, this great friend of Christians; such of this Nation were fully and undoubtedly resto∣red to their antient Liberties, Priviledges, and immunities, in matter of Religion; it Constantius and Helen our Emperour and Empresse, King and Queen had then given no further and expresse approbation unto them; which we may not reaso∣nably call in question, when we remember their absolute and independing Regal right and possession without contradiction they had in this Kingdom, the natural love and affection they bore unto it, and that to them; with their religious care and desire they had to defend and advance Christian Religion, even in times and places, when, and where they were not so enabled nor drawn thereto, with so many and strong bands of duty and affection: we have heard that the other Chur∣ches under his Empire were endowed by his benefits and munificence, whereby they lived in great joy and encreased. The choycest Christians were his dearest friends, and made his Councellours. Mr. Bro. fol. 463. 1.And divers even of this Nation have delivered, that this our new King and Empe∣rour particularly place St. Taurinus Archbishop in York, wherein (although they be mistaken if they understand Taurinus Bishop of Eureux, neither the time or place allowing) yet we cannot safely say, but he might or did place some other of that name there, and if both these should fail, yet so many more authorities concur that Constantius gave consent and assistance to the publick restitution of Religion here in his time. For this we have the warrant of the most and approved Anti∣quaries, St. Gildas and St. Bede, after them Matthew of Westminster and others: St. Gildas writeth, That before the persecution had been here ten years, the wicked de∣crees against Christians were annulled and frustrate, and all the Servants of Christ after a long winter night with joyful eyes receive the clear light of the hea∣venly air,Bede. Hist. Ec. l 1. c. 8. they renew their Churches which were thrown down to the ground, they found,Matth West. an. 313. S. Albans Church built. Manusc. An∣tiq. Eccl. Winton. Ma∣rian. Sco. an 306. Martin Polo 307. Antiq. Gal. an 306. St. Julians & Lantarnam. Church built in Constantius time, about 309. after Christ. Matth. West. an. 305. 307. Baron & Spond. an 306 Gordon. an 306 Jacob Grinaeus an. in c. 15. l. 1 Euseb. de vita Constantini an. 308. Hen. Hunt. l. 1. Hist. Diocl. & Constantin. Regit. o Chro. l. 1. in Const an. 253. build, and perfect others in honour of their holy Martyrs, and as it were, set forth every where their victorious Ensignes, celebrate festival dayes, offer sacrifice with a pure heart and mouth, all of them rejoyce as children cherished in the lap of their mother the Church. St. Bede saith that so soon as the persecuti∣on ceased, the Christians which had hid themselves in Woods and Desarts, and se∣cret Dens presently came forth, and shewed themselves in publick, doing those pub∣lick works of Christian Religion, which St. Gildas before remembred. And wri∣teth plainly, that this was done in the time of Constantius, and that he dyed here whilst these things were thus in acting. The Monck of Westminster hath the same words with St. Bede, of this publick profession of Christian Religion here presently, upon the ending of the persecution during ten years, and addeth, that then the church of St. Alban was built to his honour within ten years of his martyrdom, in the quiet of Christian times here, which by that is said before must needs be in the time of Constantius. Likewise we find in the antiquitie of the old Church of Winchester; that being destroyed with the rest in this late persecution, it was perfectly re-edified in the year of Christ 309. and so either was in building or warranted to be built in the dayes of Constantius, then so, or lately before, by all accounts living and reign∣ing here, that it could not be done without his warrant or allowance. The like we say of the Churches of St. Julius, and St. Aaron, and other Martyrs of that time, and all both Cathedral churches and others, destroyed here by Maximian the most horrible fact-man, as Henry of Huntington calls him, after whose leaving the Em∣pire, Christians were quiet here, as he saith, and restored to their former liberties; and as Regino writteth, not only in Brittain, but generally where he ruled, both Bishops were restored to their private Sees, and many other things granted for the pro∣fit of Christian Religion; and particularly saith, that the Monastery of Trevers was begun in his time; then much more in Brittain, where he was both absolute Em∣perour and King to command, and no man daring to resist him: to this our late Antiquaries have given sufficient allowance, when they grant, that Constantius abolish∣ed the superstition of the Gentiles in this Dominions, especially in Brittain, where he now lived King and Emperour, as also in abolishing the Pagan rights, and obser∣vances;
for dislike of them and love to Christian Religion, must needs for his short time be an extraordinary advancer thereof.Stow & Howes in Constant. But when he had happily begun this holy work in repairing the ruines of the Church of Christ in this Kingdom, and before he could bring it to due, and his desired, perfection, he fell sick at the City of York, where soon after he deceased. Yet in this short time of his sicknesse his greatest care was to leave and commit this his charge both concerning his Empire, and this Kingdom to his Eldest son Constantine, Son of St. Helen; who, as he hoped for ma∣ny reasons, would be most ready and willing to maintain and defend true Religion and with Justice govern his Subjects. And to this happy choice, as both Zonoras and Pompeius Laetus do plainly testify,Zonoras Annal Tom. 2. in Constant. Pomp. Laetus Rom. Hist. Camp. in Const. max. Eseb. l. 1. de vita Const. mag. c. 18. Grin. amart. in cum locum. and Eusebius and others sufficiently insinuate, he was admonished and instructed by Gods direction, and an Angell; which is confimed by the effect, and event it self, not only of the general establishing of Christian religion in the world by Constan∣tine in the time of his Empire, but his extraordinary and miraculous preservation before he came to it; and at this very time of his fathers sicknesse, strangely es∣caping the Tyrants hands in Italy, and coming safely unto his sick Father Con∣stantius at York, in our Brittain, by the great providence of God, as Eusebius no∣teth; who had often preserved him to bring him thither, so long and dangerous a journey, at that very time to succeed his Father. And this Author immediately addeth; For presently when Constantine had escaped the stratagems of the deceits, he came with all speed to his Father,Euseb. in vita Const l. 1. c. 14. and after a long space of time which he had been absent from him, presented him to his sight: at that moment, Constantius was ready to die; but when (contrary to all hope) he saw his sonne, leaping out of bed, he embra∣ced him, saying, that he had now cast that out of his mind;Cap. 15. which only troubled him at the point of death, which was the absence of his Son, and therefore did earnestly pray and give thanks for it to God, affirming that now he rather desired to die then live; and setting himself in the midst of his Children, and in his place lying upon his Kingly bed, giving over the inheritance of his Kingdom to his Eldest Son, he departed this Life. Thus hath Eusebius then living in that time. Our Moderne Writers citing other an∣cient Authors, not differing from Eusebius,Hollenshed Hist of England l. 4 c. 28. 27. cit. Euseb: Sext Aurel. vict. Nicep. Tripart. Hist. thus Translate and Epitomate this Hi∣story from them. Whilest Constantine remained at Rome, in manner as he had been a pledge with Gallerius, in his Fathers time, fled from hence and with all post hast re∣turned to his Father in Brittain, killing and hewing by the way all such horses as were appointed to stand at Inns, ready for such as would ride in Post, least being pursued he should have been overtaken, and brought back again by such as might be sent on purpose after him. Constantius whilest he lay on his death bed, somewhat before he depar∣ted this life, hearing that his son Constantine was come and escaped from the Empe∣rors Dioclesian and Maximian, with whom he remained as a pledge, he received him with all joy, and raising himself up in his bed, in presence of his other sons and Councellours; with a great number of other people and strangers that were come to visit him, He set the Crown upon his sons head, and adorned him with other Imperi-Robes and garments; executing as it were himself the Office of an Herald, and with all spake these words unto his said son, and to his Councellours there about him: Now is my death come unto me more welcome, and my departure hence more pleasant; I have here a large Epitaph and Monument of buriall, to wit mine own son, and one whom in earth, I leave to be Emperour in my place, which by Gods good help shall wipe away the tears of the Christians, and revenge the cruelty ex∣exercised by Tyrants; This I reckon to chance unto me instead of most felecity. Thus careful was this holy Emperour even at his death to advance the honour of Christ. This he did prophesying how his son after him should advance Christian Religion, now by his father declared Emperour, but as Esebius writeth long before designed to that dignity by God, the King of all. This renowned Emperour Constantius died, by divers in the year 306. by others 307 and by some 308. and by all at such time as it is already proved: it must needs be he which among the Roman Emperours first gave order and warrant for the resto∣ring and re-establishing Christian Religion here in Brittain, after the desolation thereof by Dioclesian and Maximian, and died happily and most blessedly. And was so renowned that even by the Pagans he was accounted a God; and had after his death all honour given unto him, which belonged to an Emperour; he was most honourably and Christian like buryed in the City of York. Constantine his son the new Emperour present at his funeral, going before his corps, with an infi∣nite number of people and Souldiers attending with all honour and pompe; some going be∣fore, others following with most sweet harmony of singing. This was the End which God shewed of this Emperours Godly and Religious manners and life evidently to all peo∣ple then living, as Eusebius witnesseth, who also then lived and called him most holy,Euseb. l. 1. de vita Constan. c. 16. which he a learned christian Bishop could not give to any but an holy professed
Christian in his knowledge or judgement, and therefore attributeth so much to Constantius in this kind, that he calleth Constantine the great himself (whom he so much extolleth for his Christian Religion and advancement thereof) a follower of his fa∣thers piety in such affairs. Constantine the Great. Constantius having thus honourably ended his dayes, and declared Constantine his eldest son successor in his Empire, his whole Army doth presently with mutual consent and joy, proclaim him King and Emperour; and all Nations subject to his fathers Empire, were filled with incredible joy and unspeakable gladness, that they had without intermission so worthy and renowned an Emperour. Of the coming of this most no∣ble Brittain to the Empire, escaping and preserved from so many dangers and dif∣ficulties before;Euseb. c. 18. so generally and joyfully chosen and accepted, and proving after so happy a Ruler, Eusebius saith, that he was chosen by God himself, and that no mortal man could glory of this onely Emperour his advancement; for although he was generally and ordinarily chosen and accepted by men; yet as the same Au∣thour writeth, he was miraculously preserved by God, and by his extraordinary protection, brought safely from all danger to his father here in Brittain, old and ready to die, to be invested in the Empire after him: And so soon as he was Emperour, as the same Authour then living, and well known unto, and knowing Constantine,Euseb. l. 1. vit. Const. c. 12. testifieth, and so declared by the Armies, as the custom was, being cho∣sen of God long before to that end, insisted in his fathers steps, in favouring and advan∣cing Christian Religion.Euseb. Hist. l. 8. c. 14. So that in this part of the world, as Brittain and France, where Constantine succeeded his father, and now reigned there, was no persecution used against Christians, but all favour and indulgence towards them; and that assertion of divers Historians, both of this and other Nations, which affirmeth, that the per∣secution begun by Dioclesian and Maximian, did continue after their forsaking the Empire,Euseb. in Chron. Flo. Wigorn. in Chron. Mar. Sco. Aetat. 6. l. 2. in Const. and until the seventh year of the reign of Constantine, is to be understood of those parts, which until about that time were not under the Rule of Constantine; but of Galerius Severus, and Maxentius persecutors: and so Florentius Marianus, and o∣thers expounded it; and it can have no other construction to be true; for evident it is in Histories, that not onely from the beginning of the reign of Constantine; but in his fathers time, all Christians under their Government, were free from per∣secution. And so soon as Constantine had conquered Maxentius, and was sole and absolute Emperour; all Christians in the world under him were delivered from per∣secution, and set at liberty, even publickly to profess their Religion. And from his first entrance into the Empire, and to be King of Brittain, the Christians here in this Nation did not onely enjoy Religion, but as in the time of his father, made and freely had publick exercise and profession thereof; as our old Churches re-edified, new builded and erected, Bishops, Priests and all Clergy, and religious men, restored to their former Quiet, Revenues, Honours and Dignities, witness. Of this we have divers Testimonies and Examples in particular, yet left unto us; as out of the old Annals of Winchester, where we find of that old Church, builded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed in the late persecution: The Church of Winchester builded in the time of King Lucius, and hallowed, and dedicated October the twenty and ninth,Annals Eccle. Winton. one hundred eighty nine, by Faganus and Damianus Bi∣shops; amongst the rest, at this time of Dioclesian, went to wrack, the building thereof being ruined,Godwin Catal. of Bish. Winch. In initio. and made even with the ground; and the Moncks and all the Officers belonging unto it, either slain or enforced to flye for the present time; In the year three hundred and nine, the Church aforesaid was again re-edified, and that with such wonderful forwardnesse and zeal, as within one year and thirty dayes, both it and all the edifices belonging unto it, as chambers and other buildings for Moncks and Officers, were quite finished in very seemly and convenient manner. The fifteenth day of March following, it was again hallowed and Dedicated unto the honour and memory of St. Amphibalus that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, by Constans Bishop of Winchester, at the request of Diodatus Abbot of this New erected Monastery. It is evident by this relation, that this holy work so pub∣lick, with freedom and zeal was quite finished in the time of Constantine; his be∣ing here, before he went hence against Maxentius. And yet we see both Bishop, Priest, and Abbot, and religious men publickly and honourably restored to their for∣mer condition. The Church with unspeakable devotion builded, and dedicated to the holy Saint and Martyr, who in the late persecution was most hated by the ene∣mies
of Christ. So I say of the Church of St. Alban, a Church of wonderfull workmanship,Bede Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 7. Math. West. Anno. 313. and worthy of his Martyrdoni, was builded so soon as the Christians were here at quiet. Matthew of Westminster hath the same words, and explaineth this time of the quiet of Christians here, when this Church was so sumptuously builded, to have been ten years after his Martyrdome, the perfect finishing whereof he setteth down to have been the same year, in which Constantine went from hence towards Rome against Maxentius, which was by him in the sixt year of Constantine, and before the general occasion of per∣secution in other places. Constantine not being absolute and sole Emperor untill his victory against Maxentius, nor the general quiet then ensuing. Both St. Bede and the Monck of Westminster write, that in their several times, often curing of Infirmities and other miracles were wrought there The old Churches of St. Julius and Aaron,The foundati∣on of Lhan∣turnanus, and St. Julians Church in Ca∣erleon. Martyred in the late persecution, in the City of Caerlegion, derive their ancient foundation from this time, so do many others founded in honour of several Martyrs, then cruelly put to death for the name of Christ, so I affirm of all the Cathedral Churches, Archiepiscopal and Episcopal, with their particular Sees and Cities, foun∣ded in the time of King Lucius, and destroyed in the time of the Tyrants, Dioclesian and Maximian; as also those that were not Episcopal, but subordinate and inferior,Mr. Bro. fol. 469. overthrown with that tempest of persecution; for holy Gildas and St. Bede, and others testifie without exception, that all they which were then pulled down even to the ground, were now re-edified. Matthew of Westminster plainly writeth, that besides the new Churches builded in honour of their late Martyrs,Gild. de. excid. & conq. Brit. c. 8. Bede Eccles. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Math. West. an. 313. of which St. Bede and St. Gildas make this memory, the Christians here at this time received and builded again all the Churches dedicated to former Saints, which had been so destroyed and thrown down to the ground. And when we are waranted both by late and ancient antiquities also, that from the beginning of Christianity here, we had many Abbots, Moncks and Monasteries in eve∣ry age, and that these Monasteries were all destroyed in Dioclesian his persecution, we must needs assign their restauration to this time. To this I joyn the Monastery of Abing∣don, where this our great King and Emperor Constantine, as the old Annalls thereof do plead, had his education when he was young,Math. Parker Antiq. Brit. p. 8. Jo. Goscel Ec∣cles. Hist. Ma∣nusc. de Archi∣epis. Cant. pro∣pe initium. wherein there were (as it testifieth fur∣ther) above 500 Moncks living by the labour of their hands, in the woods and desarts adjoyning, upon Sundayes, and festival dayes coming to that Monastery; beside 60. which did continually abide in the same, serving God there. Therefore we cannot doubt, if we will accept this ancient Record for witness, but of all other Monasteries, this great Emperor had an especial care of restoring and endowing this his nursing place of education. To this we may assign the re-edifying of the noble Monastery,Manusc. Gall. Antiq. cap 28. first builded by the Founder Ambrius or Ambrey, after called Amsbury in Wiltshire, where, at the coming of the Saxons hither, there were 300 Religious Men, whose Foundation being long before the time of the Saxons, argueth it was builded before the time of Dioclesian and Maxentius, by them destroyed, and now restored. So we may conclude of the Religious houses, both of Men and Women in Kent and other places,Chron. Monast. Abington apud Nich. Harps∣field Eccle. Hist. saecul. 10. c. 9. renowned here at the Sax∣ons first entrance, even by our modern writers, thus delivering from Antiquity. Hen∣gist slew the good Archbishop Vodine, and many other Priests and Religious persons, all the Churches in Kent were polluted with blood, the Nunnes and other Religious persons, were by force put from their Houses and goods. Thus we must conceive of all other re∣ligious houses, whether of Men or Women, being very many in number, all of them being now happily repaired, and again imployed to their first institution and holy use, whether the old religious house of Glastenbury is to be accounted in the number of those that were destroyed by Maximian, and now builded again by Constantius and Con∣stantine, I dare not make so ready a resolution: likely it it is the poverty of the house, builded with writhen wands, the penitential and Eremitical life, those Re∣ligious their led there place, of aboad being separate in private Cells and in a Wil∣derness, in which kind of places other Christians hid themselves in that persecuti∣on, might both preserve them in that raging storm, and their manner of life con∣sidered now, not require reparation, which both William of Malmesbury in his written History of the antiquity of that holy place, and the old Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury seem to consent unto, when they absolutely deliver that from the time of King Lucius, untill the coming of St. Patrick thither, not speaking of the least intermission or discontinuance, there continually remained a succession of 12 Ere∣mits in that Island. When Constantine had reigned but a short time in Brittain and France, and such Western parts as his Father before him possessed,Euseb. l. 1 de. vita. Const. c. 20, 21. Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 1. Maxentius being proclaimed Empe∣ror in Rome, Italy and other places, and falling to Tyranny and Usurpation, put∣many Innocents to death, and exiling many, both Christians and others; divers e∣ven of the Nobility fled into Brittain to Constantine for succour and reliefe, complain∣ing
of the cruelty and usupation of Maxentius,Otto Frig. Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 7. Pont. Virun: l. 5. Math. West. l. 1. Hist. Holinshed l. 4. c. 28.. Stowe & Howes in Const. Hard. Chron. c. 62. p. 49. humbly inciting and entreating Con∣stantine as undoubted true heir to the Empire, even of that part which Maxentius had intruded himself into, to take armes against him, and solely to enjoy the Em∣pire. And he was not only thus sollicited by the Christians and others persecuted, re∣sorting hither, but by the Romans, which still continued at Rome, enduring the Ty∣ranny of Maxentius, as some write in this manner. The Senators of Rome by Letters well endite, Pray'd him to come to Rome as Emperor. For to destroy Maxence, and disinherit, Of Christen folk the cruel Tormentour. Of Christen faith the cursed Counfounder, For of his birth they said, it set him so, Maxence to destroy, that was his Fathers foe. Mr. Bro. fol. 471.Zonoras, Cedrenus, and other forraign Historians write the like, in this manner. Hereupon Constantine to revenge the Injuries done to the holy Christians, and un∣speakable wrongs to divers others, even the most noble of the Romans, and the enor∣mous sins of this Tyrant, for number not to be recounted, and for the horrible and loathsom grieviousness, to be surpressed with silence, assembled a great army both of Christian Brittains, and other Nations subject unto him (by Eutropius) and others with him,Eusch. in vita Const. c. 21, 22. Otto Frigen. Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Euseb. Hist. Eccle. l. 9. c. 9. in the fift, but by the more common opinion, the sixt year of his Empire. Having entered into these affairs, the better to procure the help and assistance of Hea∣ven, as Eusebius and other Strangers confess, before he had his miraculous vision, pre∣sently to be remembred, he resolved to have that true God, whom his Father had de∣voutly adored to be only adored and reverenced, wherefore; by his prayers he entreated his help, him he prayed, him he beseeched to declare himself unto him and assist him in this enterprise. Otto Frigensis and other strangers also say, that Constantine at this time was a Religious Emperor, favourer of Christian Religion, when he prepared him∣self for this warr.Euseb. ut sup. c. 22. Eusebius hath so witnessed, and plainly saith. He only received, wor∣shipped and prayed unto the God of his Father, the Lord of Heaven, and Jesus Christ the Saviour of all men, which none but a Christian would or could do: and Eusebius re∣ceiving what he wrote from Constantine, and swearing that it was true, thus proceed∣eth in his History.Cap. 23. Therefore whilst the Emperor prayed, and earnestly beseeched those things, a divine exceeding admirable vision appeared unto him, which if any other had reported, he would not have been so easily credited, but being the Emperor himself and Conqueror, both long time after, (when he did vouchsafe me acquaintance and familiar speech with him) both tell me and by oath confirm what he said,Cap. 24. this very history which we now commit to writing, no man can be doubtfull, but the narration is certainly to be believed, especially when we see the effect to have given testimony thereunto: when the Sun had ascended in the midst of the Heaven, and the day a little enclining to the afternoon, he said he did see the sign of a cross, made of the brightness of the light manifestly appearing to this eyes in the Heaven over the Sun,Sozo. Hist. l. 1. c. 3. Convocatis Christi Sacer∣dotibus. with an e∣vident Inscription which contained these words , In this thou shalt overcome: a great admiration fell upon him, and his whole army, all of them beholding this wonder. Con∣stantine earnestly meditating upon this vision, in the night following Christ appeared unto him in his sleep, with the sign of the cross which he had seen in Heaven, and commanded him to make another sign of the cross like unto it, and to use it as a safeguard in his wars with his enemies; he so soon as he arose imparted the vision unto his friends,Euseb. c. 25. and sent for Artisans, skillfull ingravers in gold and precious stones, and describing the shape of the sign, which he had seen unto them, commandeth them to make the like of gold and precious stone, which Image I my self have seen. Thus far Eusebius, in the next chapter largely setting down the proportion, manner and glory of this ensign so honourably preserved in that time.Socr. Hist. Gal. l. 1. c. 3. Sozo l. 1. c. 3. Otto Chron. l. 4. c. 1. Stowe & Howesin Con∣stantin. To this relation, if it needed more testimony, Socrates Sozomen, Otto and other old forraign writers are witnesses, and if any man desireth Modern consent herein, those of our Nation do thus relate this matter. About noon, the Sun something declining, Con∣stantine saw in the sky a lightsome pillar in form of a cross, wherein these words were en∣graven, In this oveercome: the which vision so amazed the Emperor, that he mistrusting his own sight, demanded of them that were present, whether they perceived the vision, which when all with one assent had confirmed, the wavering mind of the Emperor was setled, with this divine and wonderfull sight. The night following in his sleep, he seeth Christ, which sayeth thus unto him. Frame unto thy self the form of a cross, after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the same against thy Enemies as a fit banner or token of victory. He being fully perswaded of this Oracle, commandeth
the victorious Sign of the Cross, which as yet is reserved in the Pallace of the Emperour, to be made, and therewith proceedeth forward with great courage. Eusebeus and others say, that presently upon this Vision, Constantine concluded with his Christian Priests,Euseb. l. 1. de vita. Const. to have onely their God which appeared unto him, and no other to be worshipped. And thus preparing himself with all his Army to suppress the Tyrant, having God the Governour of all things for his Patron before his eyes, and calling upon Christ our Saviour and Helper,Cap. 31. placing the Image of the Cross as a Sign of Victory before his armed Souldiers and Guards, marched forward with his whole Army. And thus trusting in the help of God, his Army not being more than half the number of Maxentius,Zozom. l. 2. this consisting of 170 thou∣sand foot, and 18 thousand horse, and yet (as an old Panagerick hath) Constantine not fighting with more than the fourth part of his Army against 100000 of Maxentius men,Panegerick 1. Const. Baron. & Spond an. 312. Zozom. Baron. Spond. an 312 he set upon the Armies of Maxentius three of them, and presently overthrew them; and so passing through Italy hard by Rome, where Maxentius was, he so prosecuted him, that in his flight he was with his greatest forces drowned in the River of Tyber there miraculously, (as Eusebius and others testifie) like to Pharaoh and his Egyptians in the red Sea, swallowed up by the waters, by his own Engine of a new devised Bridge, of which he had made Boats to entrap Constantine withall, strangely failing, to his own miserable destru∣ction. So soon as Constantine had thus obtained Victory (as Eusebius, Socrates, and o∣thers are able witnesses) he gave thanks to God, who had so extraordinarily assi∣sted him, and delivered the Christians from persecution; those which were banished, he recalled home; the goods of those which were confiscated, he restored; those which were put in prison, he delivered; the Churches which were destroyed, he caused to be re-edified; all which he effected with great care and speed; his care was onely fixed in things belonging to the glory of Christ; he began to execute all the duties of a Christian man, to build Churches, and to adorn them with magni∣ficent and renowned Monuments, to shut up the Pagon temples, pull them down, and abandon the Statuas erected in them. Eusebius proceedeth further, and saith, that presently upon this victory, Constantine making his Prayer with Thanks-giving to God, Authour of his Victory, published unto all in famous Inscriptions and Pillars, publickly erected, the power of the Cross of Christ: and even in the midst of the City, in the most principal place thereof, erected a great Trophy against his enemies, and caused this Sign of Salvation to be engraven in it, with Chara∣cters that could not be blotted out, did demonstrate it was the Propugnacle of the Romans and all subjects to the Empire, and did openly propose it to be seen of all men; and his own Image being erected in a famous place of the City, and much frequented, holding in his hand a Spear, shap't much like a Cross,Euseb. c. 34. commanded this Inscription to be graven on it in Latine letters, With this saving Sign, a token of fortitude, I have delivered your City from the yoak of Tyranny; and setting the Senate and People at liberty,Euseb. c. 35. I have restored them to their antient Honour and Renown. And it immediately followeth in Eusebius, that Constantine hereupon with great boldness did openly profess and publish Christ the Son of God unto the Romans. He also published in all places his Edict, for restoring all men to their good, which had been unjustly deprived of them, recalling Exiles, and delivering Prisones; all these, and more of such things of Religious Christian nature,Ma. Sco. an. 205. & an. 312. this our noble King and Emperour performed presently upon his Victory against Maxeatius, commonly taken to have been in the 7th. year of his Empire, begun first in the Countrey of Brittain. And so their opinion, which before have told us, that the persecution continued in some western parts ten years from the last most cruel Edict of Dioclesian,Ma. Sco. Ae∣tat. 6. an. 312. Flor. Wigorn. in Chron. an. 292 and 300. 321. and 328. and until the 7th year of Constantine, is expounded by themselves, affirming, that this general peace to all Christians in the western world, was procured and granted unto them by Constantine, in the 7th year of his Empire; and after the ten years of Dioclesians Edict, after prosecuted by Maxentius, was ended. Floren. Wigorn. writeth, that in this year St. Helen, mother of Constantine, then being here in Brittain, wrote to her son to persecute the Jews which de∣nied Christ; Matth. of Westm. saith, this general peace of Christians was effected by Constantine, in the 313 year of Christ; Marianus will have it in the year 312. so hath Beronius Spondanus, and others; Harding relateth it done in the year of Christ 310. Mart. Polonus saith,Mar. Sco an. Baron. and Spond an 312. Harding c. 62. fol. 49. Flor. Wigorn. an. 306. Jo. Bal. lib. de S. rip. Britt. Centu. 1. in Flavio Const. Constantine became a Christian in the year 309. and then both gave liberty to Christians, and caused Churches to be builded in honour of Christ. Our Countrey-man Flor. Wigorn. by Dionisus his Computation, setteth it down three years sooner, in the year 306; to which our English late Writers assent, a principal man, & named a Bishop, saying, that Con∣stantine learned his Christian Faith in Brittain, of his most Christian mother St. Helen; and at his going from hence against Maxentius, behaved himself like a Christian in the midst of the Pagan superstitions, and honoured them which were professed Chri∣stians.
4 Reg. 5Having thus cleared our most glorious Countriman, Emperour Constantine, from imputa∣tion of his so long delaying his holy baptisme, as some have pretended, and so near as I can and dare, proposed the most probable time thereof, I must now speak though more briefly of the solemnity it self, and his most charitable Religious Christian acts, and conversion which ensued thereupon. The common opinion concerning Constantine before his baptisme is, the same which the Scripture witnesseth of Naeaman the Syrian Prince, though he was great, honoured, valiant and rich, yet he also was a Leper, before he was by direction of the prophet washed and healed in Jordane; yet great difference there was between these two Lepers of Syria and Brittain; the Leper of Syria was great, but with his own Lord the King of Syria, Commander of his armies, and he procured the quiet and safety of Syria; he was only cleansed of his corporal Leprosy: But our Brittish Leper was cured both in body and soul, he was not only great with a particular King, but a great, and the greatest King and Emperour, so stiled, that ever was in the world, he did not only bring tem∣poral safety and quietnesse to one Kingdom and Nation, but both Temporal and Spiritual happiness and salvation to the whole Empire, and to all Nations and Kingdoms. Aug. Quest. Evang. l 1. c 40 Edictum Const Tom. 1. Con Act Sylvest. Papa Plini. l. 26. c. 1. Adrio. 1. Epist ad Const Simon Metap in vira S. Sylv. Zonoras in vi∣ta Const. Greg. TurenConstantine being troubled with this infirmity, if I may call that so, which St. Augustine saith, is a defect of colour, and not of health or integrity of sences and members, and seek∣ing remedy, yet finding none among his bodily physitians the Pagan Flemmings advi∣sed him to make a Bath in the Capitol and therein wash his body with the warme blood of Infants; Pliny and others writing that this grief hath been so healed: which to effect these Idolatrous Gentiles prepared a great number of such children, intending to kill them, and to fill the Bath with their blood, which when Constantine considered, and beheld the tears and lamentations of the Mothers for their Children, he abhorred so great cruelty and wickednesse, causing the children to be restored to their mothers with rewards and means to carry them to their dwelling places. In the night following the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul do appear, and say thus unto him; O Emperour because thou hast detested to shed the blood of innocents, we are sent unto thee by Christ, to teach thee means to recover thy health; send for Bishop Sylvester, and he will provide an holy Bath in which he will baptise thee, and thou shalt be cured of thy Leprosy, and all diseases; which Constantine presently performed, sending for St. Sylvester, who shewed there unto him the pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul, which when the Emperour diligently beheld, he openly before his nobility confessed, that these were they which ap∣peared unto him; and being perfectly instructed by St. Sylvester, was baptised by him and mira∣culously cleansed from his Leprosie, an hand from heaven, as himself did see and testifie, touching him; and when he was thus wonderfully cured and christened, St. Sylvester ministred the holy Sacrament of Confirmation unto him, annointing and signing his forehead with sacred Crisme. Simeon Metaphraster, a Greek writer, saith, that at the time of Constantine his baptisme by St. Sylvester,Metaphr. in vita St. Sylv. Mr Br. f. 476 a light more bright then the Sun did suddainly shine about all the house, and the Emperour being baptised, his flesh was pure and sound without any hurt or scar, and the water wherewith he was baptised was full of such filth as came from his soars, like scales of fishes. Divers both Greek and Latine Authours say, that his son Crispus was then baptised with him. These things being of so great note and consequence in so great a Prince and Comman∣der,Theophan Ce∣rameus Chron Plantina in Mar. and so concerning all people, were not, nor could not be done in secret. The infirmity of Constantine's Leprosy was generally known, Physitians had been often times consulted, and done their best practise about it. The place of the Capitol where the Children should by the Pagans have been murdered about it was famous, the gathering them from many places and Provinces was known to all, the open outcries and lamentations of their mothers could not be concealed, the sending and seeking St. Sylvester were with honour and solem∣nity performed, so was his entertainment and conference with the Emperour in presence of his Nobility. The present conversion of Constantine thereupon, his preparation in Penance seven dayes before his baptisme. This Solemnized in the publick imperial pal∣lace, and in an holy Font so curiously provided, as all Histories agree, and so miraculous∣ly curing his corporal disease, which no art of man could heal, made this conversion of Constantine renownedly known and manifest to all. To the Christians for their unspeakable joy, to the Jewes and Pagans to the shame and confusion of their obstinacy, and salvation of many of them converted by this means. Euseb. l. 2. de vita. Const. c. 27 ut supra. Baron an. 321 Acta. Sylvest Niceph. l. 7. c 34 Egbertus Ab. Flor. Sem. 3 de Increm. & manifest cath. fidei.And Constantine himself did not only send his Imperial Edicts into all Countries both East and West for embracing Christian Religion, but made his publick perswading Orations to that purpose; as namely in the Church openly, to the Senate and People of Rome; where∣upon as Nicephorus a Grecian writeth, in the only City of Rome there was converted and baptised above twelve thousand men, besides women and young people in the same year. Egbertus from old antiquities seems to deliver that all the Senators were then converted to Christ, for he plainly saith, that Constantine gave the honour of the Senate of Rome to the Christian Clergy thereof, and he with all the Senators departed thence to Bisan∣tium.
Therefore a wonder it is how some Greek Writers should, or could plead Ignorance of so concerning and memorable a thing, so publickly acted with so many circumstances, which could not be concealed in the great commanding City of the World, by the sole Emperor thereof,Jodoc. Cocc. in the saur. Cath. Tom. 1. lib. 7. art. 9. and S. Sylvester the highest Ruler in the Church of Christ, and testified by almost all Ecclesiastical Historians, too many to be remembred, being accounted to be above 40 Classical Christian Authors and Writers of this matter, omitting many of great name, antiquity, and authority. The Pagans themselves, even of the same age, as Amianus, Marcellinus, Zosimus,Amia. Mar∣cel. l. 27. c. 2. and others give plain testimony unto it; the first expresly speaketh of Constantines Font in Rome. The other setteth down the whole History at large, after his Ethick manner. Zosimus also testifieth, that this History was common among the Pagan Writers in his time.Mr. Br. f. 47 5. Zosom. l. 2. de Constan. Zosom. Hist. Eccle. l. 1. c. 5. R. Abraham Levit. in Chr. Judaic. R. Abra. Ezra in c. 11. Dan. Glycas Pal. 4. Annal. Meno. Graecor. Calend. Janu. Nich. Pap. Epist. ad Mi∣chael. Imper. And the Jewes also even then most malicious against Christians, as R. Abraham Levita, and R. Abraham Aben Ezra do confess and prove the same. So do the best Greek Historians, Theophanes, Metaphrastes, Zonarus, Cedrenus, Glycas, Nicephorus, and others. Some of these, as Michael Glycas, calling them Arian Hereticks, who say he was bap∣tized at Nicomedia by the Arian Bishop thereof, and saith, it is out of doubt, that he was baptized at Rome; his Baptistery there continuing to confirm and prove it invin∣cibly true; so have the rest: and Theophanes plainly saith, this was one of the Arian Hereticks fictions and lies against Constantine, to stain his glory untruly with. And their authentical and publickly received Menologion of the Greek Church doth not only say, that Sylvester baptized Constantine at Rome, clensing him from his Leprosie both of Soul and Body, but also it receiveth and enrolleth this glorious Emperor in the Catalogue of holy Saints, and so he is generally honored among them; and in the Latine Church his name was ever Enrolled in the Ecclesiasticall Tables called Dyptica, and publickly recited at Masse, which was not allowed to any but Orthodox and holy Christians. Therefore he must needs be free from all such suspicion, wherewith those suspected Grecians have charged him, the chiefest of them making Constantine a professed Christi∣an, receiving Sacraments many years before the pretended Baptism at his death. There∣fore I may worthily say of this renowned Emperor with our learned and ancient Histo∣rian, That he was the flower of Brittain, a Brittain by Countrey, before whom,Henr. Hunt. hist. l. 1. in Cistit. Harding Chro. c. 63. f. 50. and after whom never any the like went out of Brittain. And another in his old Poem of the same our glorious King and Emperor, first testifying that he was Christened at Rome by Pope Sylvester, and there cured of his Leprosie, addeth, He dyed after that at Nichomeide In Catalogue among the Saints numbred; Of May the twentieth and one day indeed, Ʋnder Shrine buried and subumbred, Whose day and feast the Greeks have each yeer Solemnly, as for a Saint full clere. Our old English Chronicle also testifieth of this Emperor:Old English Hist. part 4. f. 38. S. Adelm lib. de Laud. Virg. c. 12. Nicep. l. Hist. 7. c. 35. & l. 8. c. 5. This Constantine was a glorious man, and victorious in battaile, In governing of the Commyn people he was very wise, and in necessity of byleve he was without comparison devote, his pietie and his holines be soe written in the books of holy Doctors, that without doubt he is to be numbred among Saints: And the Greeks say, that in the end of his life he was a Monk. S. Adelm saith, Great Constantine was corporally and spiritually cured in Baptism at Rome by St. Sylvester: and as Nicephorus a Grecian writeth this in the consent of the whole Church. This our triumphant Emperor and glory of Brittain, having thus victoriously conquered his spiritual as well as corporal Enemies, and by Baptism thus hap∣pily made so glorious and profitable a Member of the Church of Christ, the joyfull newes and tidings thereof was soon diffused and known to the holy Christians, though far distant from Rome, as that thing they most desired to be effected, and as much rejoyced to hear it was so religiously performed. And among the rest his blessed Mother St. Helen then living here in Brittain her native Countrey, after the death of her Husband Constantius, who had in the best manner she could, instructed her Son Constantine in the true Christian Religion, and desired nothing more than to understand, he publickly, and with so great zeal, now openly professed that which she had so often and earnestly exhorted him unto, was not a little joyed with the certain notice hereof. And with all haste she could prepared herself for so long a journey, by her corporal presence to be both more effectuall partaker and encreaser of such Christian comforts; and to give arguments of her joyes by messengers, in the mean time writing unto him from Brit∣tain, as our Antiquaries do affirm; and among other things, to expresse her great
zeal in Christian Religion, and to exhort her Son to the like understanding of the great malice of the Jewes against Christians, especially at that time, the Emperour being so solemnly and so miraculously baptized,Floren. Wigo. Chron. an 306 & 328. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. anno 321. perswaded him to persecute those Jewes which denyed Christ. Marianus Scotus writeth also, that St. Helen did write out of Brittain when she heard he was baptized by St. Sylvester. But his Publisher (as he is charged with many other things by Harkesfield to have done) either hath mistaken him in that which followeth, or published some Copy not so to be approved; for he bringeth in St. Helen, in the next words, to request her Son to deny Christ, and follow the Jewes, which cannot be the words either of Marianus, or any Learned Antiquaty, such as he was, confessing S. Helen to have been at this time in Brittain, as he doth; for, neither at this time, nor divers of hundreds of years after St. Helen her death, there is mention in Histories of any Jewes at all to have been in this Kingdome; then much more it must needs be Historically a thing im∣possible, and altogether untrue, that there should be one hundred forty and one of the most Learned of the Jewes here, and St. Helen should bring them with her to Rome, from hence, as seemeth by some to be set down in the Rela∣tion of the Dispute between St. Sylvester and the Jewes, before Constantine and St. Helen: But quite otherwise it is proved, that St. Helen was wholly Christian when she was in this Nation, before her going to Rome, and at the time of her writing to her Son Constantine there, after his baptism, when in the other sence that St. Helen wrote to her Son to Congratulate his Baptism, encouraged him constantly and religiously to profess Christian Religion, to be a Friend to the Servants and Friends of Christ, and a Suppressor of Jewes, and whosoever their Enemies, we have her own Religious Education, and all the Christian Clergy and Nobility of Btitrain, a Christian Kingdom and her native Countrey so calling upon her, and neither Jew nor Pagan of note, learning, or power, for any thing we read, continuing here either to hinder her in this, or advise her to the contrary, to the favour either of Jews or Gen∣tiles in their proceedings. The like I may answer to then, which although they with the truth acknowledge S. Helen to have been the Daughter of King Coel of Brittain, and born in this Nation; yet they say she went hence with Constantine towards Rome, at what time he went against Maxentius the Tyrant, and with the Children of Constantine travelled to Byzan∣tium, and dwelling there, was perverted by the Jewes; and so leaving off the Baptism of Constantine in that City of Bithynia, did write to him from thence, commending him for renouncing Idolatry, but reproving him for reproving the Jewish Religion, and being a Christian: but this is evidently confuted before, when by so worthy Authori∣ties and many Arguments it was proved that St. Helen was in Brittain,Mr. Brought. fol. 481. so far distant from Bizantium at this time. Math. West. an. 321. Baro. & Spon. Annal. an. 314 Severin. Bin∣nius Annot. in Conc. Arlesat. Tom. 1. Com. Epist. Const. ad Chrest. supr. Conc. Roman. Can. 1. Hist. Tripart. l. 3. c. 2. l. 2. c. 3. Mr. Br. f. 855.And what man of judgement can think this Empress, having been so fully instructed in the Mysteries of Christian Faith, to have fallen into Judaism? nothing but envy it self could invent such a Fiction. In the time of this our great Constantine was held the first great Councel of Arles in France, consisting of, as Nicephorus, Ado, and others say, 600 Bishops, as Baronius, Spondanus, and others from Antiquity do gather, in the year of Christ 314, and the 9. of this Emperor Constantine; in this Councel was present and subscribed Restitutus Arch-Bishop of London, and in probable judgement divers others of this our Brittain, and in this time of the meeting of the Bishops at the two Councels of Arles, especial care being taken by our renowned Emperor, that they should, at his charge and cost, be safely conveyed, with their due attendance, to that place, where these Councels were to be assembled, and there also to be provided for during the time of the Councels, at his cost. Nor did this Heroick Emperor confine his love and favours towards Christian Reli∣gion unto the Christians of his own, the West Empire, but unto all; as God by an holy Angel before revealed, (both ancient and modern Authors so acknowledging) the Christians in the whole world should be at peace, and Idolatry was to be generally overthrown by this noble Emperor. Bap. Mont. l 2. de vita S. Bla∣sii Joan. Bel. l. 2. de actis Pont. Roman. in Sylvest. 1.Nunc bonus expulsis Romana in Regna Tyrannis, Adveniet Princeps sub quo placabitur Orbis, Et finem accipiet veterum cultura Deorum. A Prince shall rule, whose power shall quite expell Those Tyrants who against Rome did rebell; The World by him shall quiet peace enjoy, And he the Pagan gods shall all destroy. As concerning Christian Churches, they which were large enough, and had been ruinated in the time of persecution, were repaired, others were builded higher, and with honour made greater; where there were none before, new were erected, even from the Foundation; and the Emperor out of his Treasury afforded money thereto,
and wrote both to the Bishops and Presidents of every Province; to the Bishops, that whatsoever they would they should command; and to the Presidents, that they should diligently do what they commanded: And so, with the prosperous estate of his Empire, Religion greatly encreased. Out of the Lands of his own Tribute in every City, he took a certain pension that was accustomed to be paid into the Treasurie and distributed it to the Churches and Clergy, and by Law decreed that his Gift to be perpe∣tual. He caused the sign of the Cross to be made upon the Armour of his Soldiers to ac∣custom them thereby to serve God. He builded a Church in his Palace,Mr. Br. f. 488 and used to have carried with him when he went to war, a Pavilion after the manner of a Church, that both he and his Army being in the field, might have a Church wherein to pray unto God and receive the sacred mysteries; Priests and Deacons, which, according to the Institution of the Church, should execute those Duties, continually followed that Tent. He took away by Law the old Punishment of the Crosse used by the Romans; he caused that sign to be made on his own Image, whether impressed on money, or painted on a Table. The Brittish History saith, that Constantine residing at York,Brittish Hist. fol. 138. although he seemed at first unwilling to accept the Imperial Title, and protested openly against it, yet when the Senate had confirmed the Election, he took upon him the Government of those Provinces which his Father had held in the West parts, and with an Army of Brittains and other Nations, he first setled France and Germany, being then in Arms against him, and afterwards subdued Maxentius, Maximianus Son, that usurped the Empire in Italy. Then with like success he made war upon Licinius, his Associate, who persecuted the Professors of Christianity in the East parts of the World, by which means Constantine alone enjoyed the Empire, and for his many and glorious Conquests was worthily sur∣named The Great. In this time the form of the Government in Brittain, both for Civil and Martial Causes, was altered, and new Lawes established. The Civil Government of the Province he committed to Pacatianus, who ordered the same as Deputy to the Præ∣fectus Prætorio of Gallia (an Officer entituled by him) with a limitation of place, and restriction of that power which the ancient Præfectus Prætorio had under the first Empe∣rors. Then Constantine intending to make war in Persia, either to defend or enlarge the limits of the East Empire, removed the Emperial Seat from Rome to the City of Bi∣zantium, (which he re-edified, and caused the same to be called of his own Name Constantinople) drawing thither the Legions in Germany, that guarded the Fronteers of the Western Empire, which was thereby laid open to the Incursions of those barba∣rous People that afterwards assayed it, and in the end possessed the greatest part there∣of. The borders also of the Province in Brittain were weakened by removing the Gar∣risons there into other Cities and Towns, which being pestered with Soldiers, (for the most part unruly Guests) were abandoned by the ancient Inhabitants. There be Authors that write,Hollin. Hist. of Engl. f. 92. that Constantine conveyed over Sea with him a great Army of Brittains, by whose Industry obtaining Victory as he wished, he placed a great number of such as were discharged out of pay, and licensed to give over the War, in a part of Gallia, toward the West Sea coast, where their posterity remain unto this day, and marvellously encreased afterwards, somewhat now differing from our Brittains, the Welshmen, in manners and language. Among those Noblemen which he took with him when he departed out of this Land, as our Writers do testifie, were the three Uncles of his Mother Helen, Hoelus, Trabernus and Marius, whom he made Senators in Rome. After the wars betwixt Constantine and the Persians,Mr. Br. fol. 532. the King of Persia sent Embassa∣dors unto Constantine to procure peace, and he writ back unto King Sapores, that the Christians in his Dominions, which were there in great numbers, might live at liberty and freedom for their Religion: And if we may believe Eusebius, then living,Euseb. lib. 4. Sozom. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 14. and best knowing the affairs and proceedings of this most noble Emperor, after all these things were compassed and brought to an end, he began that glorious and renowned work and Foundation of the most sumptuous Church of the twelve Apostles in Constantinople, where it is evident by this then living Author and witness, that he did not begin to build this Church till long after his triennial Feast. And yet the glory and stateliness of that work, as it is described by the same Writer, was such that it could not be effected and finished under many years, and yet that it was finished before his death it is cer∣tain; for, he there erected a Tomb for his own body to be buried in, and there was interred. There he erected (saith Eusebius) twelve Monuments, to the honour and memory of the twelve Apostles, and in the midst between them he placed his own Tomb, with six Apostles encompassed on either side; surely, as I have said before, considering with discreet Councel,Euseb. ut sup. that the Tabernacle of his dead body should worthily and decently rest there, when he had con∣sidered these things long time before, he dedicated the Church to the Apostles, thinking that their memory would bring much profit to his soul.
And both Baronius and Spondanus confess that Constantine did not begin this great and wonderfull work until the 336.Baronius & Spond. Annal. in ann. 336. year of Christ, and after his concluding peace with the Persians, had not before so much as resolved it. Therefore this Church be∣ing so costly and magnificent, as these men confess, and Eusebius at large proveth, and yet Constantius lived to see it roofed and quite finished; he must needs live a longer time than until the next year, the 337. of Christ, which they limit unto him to live, and much more longer than Socrates their Author continueth his life; for, by his reckoning, setting down his death the same year wherein the Persian Embassadors came to him for peace, we must be forced to say, this admirable Church was quite finished in the space of seven weeks; or if we should adventure, as Baronius doth, to make Socrates our Author, and yet add unto his account a whole year, as he doth, it must needs be yielded unto by such calculation, that it was not begun, or any mate∣rials prepared for it, and yet quite finished within the space of one year and seven weeks; for, as before it was not begun at the Feast of Easter, and yet ended the same year (by Socrates) before the Feast of Pentecost, when by Eusebius, Constantine died, and by Socrates about the eleventh of the Calends of June the 22. day of May, and by Baronius, before the Feast of Pentecost and the 22. day of May the year following, which is morally impossibly to be true; for, besides the amplitude thereof, and Orna∣ments therein,Euseb. lib. 4. de Vit. Const. c. 64. Socr. l. 1. c. ult. Eusebius, who had seen it, and knew the building of it, saith, that Constantine erected it to an infinite altitude, and made it from the ground with all va∣riety of Stones, even to the top; the Roof was curiously wrought, and within covered with Gold throughout, and covered above with Brasse and much Gold. And therefore Nicephorus also, a Greek Author, who had diligently examined Socra∣tes, and citeth his very words of this matter before related, affirmeth plainly and constantly, notwithstanding that opinion that Constantine did not die until the 342. year of Christ in the Feast of Pentecost,Euseb. lib. 4. de vit. Const. c. 64. Cap. 66. sup. towards the end of it about noon time of the day, to speak in Eusebius his words, this Emperor was received to his God, leaving his mortal part like to other mortal men to the earth, but joyning his Intelligence and Divine part of his Soul unto God: He dying in Bethinia, his Soldiers enclosing his Body in a Golden Coffin, covered it all over with Purple, and conveyed it to Constantinople, and placed it in the Emperial Palace, adorned with Emperial Robes, Purple and a Diadem; Lights set upon Golden Candlesticks round about it, which gave such an admirable shew unto the Beholders as was never seen: All the Nobles of his Army which worshipped him whilst he lived, kept their old manner and custom, at certain times entring in and prostrating themselves on the ground, saluted the Empe∣ror after his death, lying in his Coffin as if he had been still living. The Senate and all other Magistrates worshipped his Body with like reverence. All sorts of people, even Women and Children in infinite number came to see the solemnity; and these things were performed many daies. This blessed Emperor was he alone which reigned when he was dead;Euseb. Ca. 66. and to him alone, God himself being Author thereof, all honors which were wont to be given when he lived, were given after his death. For he being the only Emperor which in all the actions of his life piously and religiously worshiped God the King of all, and his Son Jesus Christ, he alone by right obtained this honour by the will of God to have that which was buried in death to reign among men. Howes of the Romans f. 45.In the 20. year of this Constantine was held (as saith Mr. Howes) the Councel of Nice with great Solemnity, wherein were condemned and suppressed the damnable Heresies of Arius Bigot, the vain-glorious and dissembling Minister, whereof the Arian Heresie took the Name, and for a long space after much troubled Christendom. And at this time the Nicene Creed was commanded to be sung and said in all Churches. And the forenamed Arius pretending to make a Retract of all his Heresies, took his leave of the Emperor,The fearfull end of an arch Heretick. as if he had great necessity to take Physick to purge his Body, which Purgation never ceased working, till it had purged him of all his bloud and bowels, and so he died most miserably and shamefully. How es ibid.About this time (saith the same Author) Octavius, whom Constantine left Governor in Brittain, rebelled, against whom Constantine sent Traherne his Uncle with a Legion of Romans, who after divers Conflicts was slain. Old English Chronic. f. 34 p. 4.The old English Chronicle saith: When Constantine went from this Land to Rome, he took all his lond to keep to the Earl of Cornwall, that was called Octavian. And anon as this Octavian wist that his Lord dwelt at Rome, incontinent be ceased all the lond into his hands, and therewith did all his will among hy and low, and they held him for King. But other Historians, both Brittish and English, Domestical and Foreign, affirm, that Constan∣tine at his going from Brittain to Rome, committed the Government of this Countrey to the Roman Proconsuls, and the named Octavian, or Octavius, took arms against them, slew them, and so obtained to be King here. The Monk of Westminster saith this Octavius was a King before, a Regulus, or Prince of the People in and about
Worcestershire. Harding saith, he was Duke of West Sex, (he must mean where the West Saxons after ruled, for they came not into Brittain till a long time after this. But after his day came one Octavius Duke of West sex that crowned was for King, That slewgh the Werdins of Constantinus Which that he set for Brittain governing, In his abscence to keep it in all thing. Besides this there be other difficulties among the Historians about this Octavius, and such as will discredit him, for having had many great and chief and long Commands as a King in this Nation, Math: Westm: setteth down his conquering the Roman Pro∣consul here in the year of Christ 314, when divers more ancient and received Historians say, that S. Helen, our Queen and Empress, continued here long after that time.Br. fol. 543. 4. And her Son Constantine Emperor now at the highest of his Glory, Power and Victories, and having so many Brittish Soldiers without imployment in France so near unto us, cannot be immagined to have suffered any Enemy in his own native Countrey so to have prevailed; or how could such a man as Octavius is supposed to be, assemble such an Army in Brittain, where that victorious Emperor was undoubted King, and whence he had so great an Army of Brittains so lately before, that by them, as our Historians write, he vanquished all most innumerable Companies of his most potent Enemies: And as these Relators of Octavius his proceedings themselves are Witnesses, the power with Constantine was so great that the Romans which came hither unto him, seeing his power, said, No Prince in the world was comparable to him for strength: Where then in Brittain could Octavius gather an Army so soon to en∣counter and overthrow three Legions of Roman Soldiers, besides their Adherents, as these men say? And Eusebius saith, that Constantine himself came hither again, and was here longer after this pretended Revolt, and at his death gave Brittain the ancient Patrimony to his Eldest Son. Again, these men say, Octavius was King here until Maximus his time, and married his only Daughter and Heir unto him, when it is a common consent in Antiquities, that this Maximus, or Maximinianus, was not King in Brittain, till after the 380. year of Christ. Therefore he must needs be granted to be very young, of too few years at the going of Constantine hence, for him to commit the Government of Brittain unto him, or for himselfe to have so soon Usurped against it so rightfull, and potent King and Empe∣rour. Our most ancient and best Historians, S. Gildas, S. Bede, Marianus, Florentius, Wigorniensis, Ethelwardus, Henry of Huntington, and William of Malmsbury, although as diligently as they could recounting our Kings of Brittain, never mention any such Octavius, or Octavian, but the chiefest and most ancient among them, S. Gildas plainly saith, that this Island was at this time, and until Maximus, or Maximinian, a Brittain took upon him the Empire, a Roman Island Insula nomen Romanum tenens. And divers Historians, both late and ancient do particularly set down our Kings after Constantine the Great, and Roman Leivtenants here until these daies, as Constantine, Constantius, Julian, Valentinian, Gratian, Emperors, or Kings, Martinus, Lupicinus, Nectaridius, Theodosius, Fraomarius, and other Roman Lievtenants and Governors here. And when the Councel of Ariminum was kept about the year of Christ 360, and the 23. year of Constantius son of Constantine the Great, it is certain, that this Constantius was our King in Brittain, and bore the charge of the poorest Bishops of this Kingdom as then under his Government which were present there, and he was so far from losing Brittain, or any other Countrey of his Empire then, as Sozomen and others testifie that Councel thus wrote unto him;Epist. Arimin. Conc. ad Con∣stant. Imp. a∣pud Sozoni. Hist. l. 4. c. 47. at this time this Empire so encreased, that all the World was under his Government: this was above twenty years after the death of the great Constantine, in whose time this Revolt of Brittain from him is thus supposed, and above twice so long time of the imagined usurpation here by Octavius. And Zonaras writeth, that this Constantius in the fourteenth year of his Empire, banished, or rather carried with him Athanasius into Brittain at his coming hither. Therefore I dare not assent, that in this time of the greatest flourishing Estate of the Roman Empire, and the power thereof in Brittain,Harding Cron. c. 63. f. 51. Galf. Mon. Hist. Reg. Bri. l. 5. cap. 9. Pont. Virun. Hist. l. 5. Math. West. an. 379. especially from whence the glory of it grew to that greatness, either Octavius, or any other so much prevailed here to bar the Emperors of that honour. But he might towards the time of Maximus, or Maximianus, when the Empire had more Enemies and less power, prevail in some such sort, as these Historians have written of him, although they differ also in Maxi∣mian as well as in Octavius; one saith, he was the Son of Traherne the Uncle of St. Helen, Maximian King Trahern his Son next Heir to Constantine; others say he was Son of Leolinus another Uncle of St. Helen, Great Uncle to Constantine;
and one of them,Gal. Mon. l. 5. c. 12.15. Pont. Virun. lib. 5. Math. West. an. 390, 392. Manus. Anti. in vit. S. Nin. Capg. in eod. Bal. li. de Scrip. Cent. 1. in Nin. saith Octavius, was King but 14 yeares, ending with the beginning of Maximian his Reigne; And so we may well allow such an Octavius to have the name of a King in Brittain in those troublesome daies of the Romans ruling here, divers pet∣ty Kings, being probably at that time, in this Nation, as well by the Testimony of these Authors which then make Octavian King, as others: So they terme Conanus a King, and that Maximian took his kingdom from him; So was Dionotus King in Corn∣wall, So was his brother Carodocus before him, and yet under one chief King and Em∣peror Maximian at that time; And St. Nimen who lived Bishop here, in the end of this age, had Kings for his Ancestors, and yet the great distance of the place of his birth from King Coel, argueth he was not of their line: And all these Kings or Re∣gents here, were most certainly by our Antiquaries Chatholick Christians. Constantinus. After the death of Constantine, the great Constantinus his eldest Son injoyed Brit∣tain as a portion of his Dominion, till making some attempts upon his brother Constans for the enlarging of it,Brittish Hist. fol. 239. he was by him slain. Then was the Empire divided between Constans and Constantius the two younger brethren; Constans seised upon the Provinces which Constantinus his brother had held, and made a voyage into Brittain, where Gratianus a Hungarian by birth had then charge of the Army; This Gratianus was surnamed Funarius, for that he being a young man was able (as it is written of him) to hold a Rope in his hand against the force of five Souldiers assaying to pull it from him, But Constans afterwards following ill counsel (the ready way to Princes ruines) and giving himself over to all kind of vice, was slain by Magnentius Taporus (the Son of a Brittain) who then invaded the Empire, usurping the Government of Gallià and Brittain till (after three years warr with Constantius the successor of Constans his brother) finding himselfe unable any longer to uphold his greatnesse,Mr. Br. fol. 548. 1. he murdered himself. This Constantius in processe of time was infected with the Arian heresy, but neither so as to endanger Brittain, or any other Nation under his command: He consented to the recalling of St. Athanasius out of exile, and sometime to his continuing his digni∣ty at Alexandrea; And whether it was for the love of St. Athanasius, or fear of his bro∣ther Constans writing expresly unto him in favour of St. Athanasius, is uncertain; he also consented to the calling of the great general Councel of Sardyce 10 or 11 years after the death of his Father, as Socrates and Sozomen affirm, wherein St. Athanasius was proved innocent, and as he (then present with many others) proveth, the Nicon faith was confirmed and utterly forbidden to be questioned. Mr. Bro. fol. 548. Socr. l. 2. c. 16. Soz. l. 3. c. 11, 12. Athan. Apol. 2 cont. Arianos. Divers Bish∣ops of Brit∣tain, 5 at the least present at the Coun∣cel of Sardyce Baro. & Spon. an. 347. Sex. Ruff. Brem. Rev. gest. po. Ro. ad Valent.And at the calling of this Councel, the same renowned Doctor called this said Con∣stantins, as also his brother, a known Cacholick Emperour, and a Religious Prince; and we are sure that at this time our Kingdome of Baittain detained the former glo∣rious estate, and glory of Religion it had before in the daies of Constantine, and was still free from Arianisme; For the same glorious Athanasius, present in that Councel, faith, that amongst more than 300 Bishops assembled there, which freed him, and pro∣fessed the Nicen faith, the Bishops from the Provinces of Baittain were there: And as the Roman writers testifie, there were from the division of the Empire by Constantine, and as many suppose, before, five provinces here in Brittain, Maxima Cæsariensis, Ʋalen∣tia, Baittannia prima, Brittania secunda, Flavia Cæsariensis. So that if we should allow but one Bishop out of every of those provinces to have been at the Sardyce Councel, and there to have subscribed for the rest of Brittain their Provinces or Dioceses, we must grant five Brittish Bishops to have been there, and supplyed this duty and Office for the rest of Brittain. That this our Country of Brittain flourished after this with great numbers of worthy Bishops, no City then vacant here of such a Pastor and Rider, we may gather from di∣vers Antiquities,Epist. Concilii Arimini ad Const. apud Socr. l. 2. Hist. c. 29. Soz Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 16. Sever sulp. sacra Hist. l. 2. c. 21. Lib. Notitia Epis. orb. Chr. sive Cod. Pro∣vin. Rom. as from the Epistle of the great Councel of Ariminum in Italy, not long after this time, written to Constantius the Emperour, where our Bishops were present, testifying unto him, that they were assembled there forth of all Cities to∣wards the West, most properly and significantly to be applyed to this Kingdom, most West from thence, And the words, All Bishops out of the Western Cities, cannot carry a∣ny other true construction; but our Episcopal Cities in Baittain were then so furnished, and many or most of them present at that Councel. This is confirmed by the number of Western Bishops above 400, as Sozomen and others write, assembled at Ariminum, be∣sides 160 from the East at the same time, gathered together at Seleucia in Isauria, when it is manifest in the old Manuscript Catalogue of Bishops, that Brittain and all the Western Nations present in the Councel of Ariminum had not at that time many more than 400 Bishops. Therefore we must needs grant, that the Bishops of all Cities as well of Brittain as other Countries of the West, which had not excuseable lets and im∣pediments, were there present in such sence as the Epistle of that Councel is cited,
and Severus Sulpitius is sufficient witnesse, that this our Brittain in particular, that it had many Bishops there, for relating the number to have been above 400 out of the West: And the Emperour the better to incline them to the Arian heresie as it seemeth, commandeth that provision should be made for them at his cost; But the Bishops of France, Aquitaine and Brittain refused it, and rather made choice to live at their own charges than to be maintained by the Emperour; and this refusal was general to all the Bishops of Brittain, Aquitaine and France, except three only of Brittain, which re∣ceived allowance from the Emperour, and refused maintenance by the other Bishops, themselves being poor. And the same Authors prove, that our Bishops were drawn or forced to come to that Councel by the Officers of Constantius, now after his brothers death, a professed friend to the Arian heresie; or rather a professed Arian then reigning in Brittain ma∣keth it evident, that our Brittish Bishops, which could not plead sufficient cause of ex∣cuse and absence, were generally present there. And it those few poor Bishops of Brittain, which were not able to bear their own charges, were drawn thither, to be maintained by the Emperour, how much rather must we judge the same of so many potent and rich in this Country, which could pretend no such excuse? So that we see no excuse, but infirmity either by age or sicknesse to have caused any Brittish Bishops absence thence. A late writer thinketh Iltutus then, as he conjectureth, Arch-Bishop of London, the Arch-Bishops of York and Gaerleon, the Bishops of Winchester,Harris Eccles. Hist. Tom. 4. c. 24. Chichester and Glocester with others were there. I see no particular warrant he bringeth more for those than any other, of so many Episcopal Brittish Cities of that time, which I have before remembred, all of them being in the same condition, for presence or absence, but where just excuses and lets were singular to any in particular above the rest: For good Authors have Testified that all in general were urged to be there, without any ex∣ception, or to be exempted: And almost all Bishops in the world were then caused to be either at Ariminum in Italy where those of the West were,Sulpi. Sever. Sacr. histor. l. 2. Epist. Conc. Arim. ad Con. apud Theod. l. 2. Hist. c. 19. Mr. Bro. fol. 552. Epist. Arimin. Conc. ad Con∣stan: Imp. a∣pud Theod. l. 2. c. 20. & alios. or at Seleucia appoin∣ted for the Easterne Bishops; and the command was for all Bishops generally to be there; this was the Emperors command to the Presidents of the Provinces to compel all to be present. And the Councel of Ariminum, it self in the Epistle to Constantius the Arian Emperour, testifieth plainly, that all the Bishops of the West were there assembled. The far greater part of these were Catholick Bishops, and of the whole number about 400. There was not by Severus Sulpilius his relation above 80. Arians. St. Athana∣sius saith, there were 50 and more, and St. Ambrose witnesseth, that the greatest part of the Bishops there confirmed the faith of the Nicene Councel, and condemned the Ari∣an errors. This is testified by the same Councel in two several Epistles to the Emperor, that they neither could nor would swerve from the doctrine of the Nicene Coun∣cell. And although the Emperour both by his Epistle to that Councel, and otherwise by fraud and terrours, endeavoured for to remove them from that holy minde, and communicate with the Arians, they plainly wrote answer again, constantly averring they would change nothing they had decreed, and gave their Legates charge to tell him as much in words: And to make it manifest, that although by many Writers di∣vers of the Bishops being convented and overcome, both with the deceit of the Arians, and persecution of the Emperour, did afterward subscribe to a material error, our Bi∣shops of Brittain were free, both from imputation and suspition thereof. Socrates, So∣zomen, Nicephorus and others prove that the Emperour neglecting to return answer to the second absolute resolution and Epistle, the Councel staying some time for answer, and having none, they all departed to their countries, and Sees,Hil. li. contra Arian. & Ar∣gent. Socrat. Hist. Ecoles. l. 2. c. 29, 41. So∣zom. Hist. l. 4. c. 18. and wholely dissolved the Councel. St. Hillary saith plainly this Councel endeth Religiously by all: So our Bishops must remove from Ariminum, none being returned home, or so far from recall∣ing by any new edict or stratagen of the Emperour then of Constantinople very far from Ariminum, and further from our Bishops travel into Brittain, they could be none of that number which were circumvented or verified to subscribe to the wicked Emperour and his Arian favourites designes. This persecution of Ʋrsatius by the command of Constantius the Emperour, stretch∣ed not so far as Brittain, his malice and indignation being against Liberius Pope of Rome, and the Bishops of Italy: And our Historians have made it doubtful, whether Constan∣tius had so much power in Brittain after this time to execute such cruelty. This Constantius was at the time of his death by Sozomen about 45 years old, full 45, saith Socrates, besides the time he reigned with his Father; after his death,Sozom. Hist. Eccle. l. 5. c. 1. Socrat. l. 2. c. 37 say Socrates, Sozomen and Nicephorus, he was Emperour 25 yeares; he died on the third day of the Nones of November by Nicephorus his account in the 367. year of Christ; some set down his death; somwhat sooner,Baron. & Spo. Annal. Tom. 4. as they have done his Fathers before above 25 yeares sooner than this account of Nicephorus of the year of Christ 367. for Constantius his death yet grant he was Emperour 25. years after his Father died. About this time Martinus (an aged man) was made Deputy of Brittain, when
Paulus a Spaniard surnamed Catena (a name well sorting with his nature) was sent thi∣ther as a Commissioner to enquire of such as had conspired with Magnentius.Brittish. Hist. l. 3. fol. 140. But un∣der colour of his authority, he called in question such as were not faulty, either upon false information or private displeasure, and sometimes to make a gain of those that were accused, which course Martinus the Deputy mislikeing intreated him, that such as had been no actors in Rebellion, might be no partners in punshment with offen∣ders: Whereupon Paulus discharging the Deputy himself as a favourer of Traytors and privy to the conspiracy, did so far forth incense Martinus, that (being either im∣patient of reproaches, or perhaps not altogether guiltlesse) he struck at Paulus with his Sword, intending to have killed him, but failing in the execution, he presently thrust the Sword into his own body. Gratianus Funarius, though he were not specially bound by oath to the Emperor, as some others had been, yet for that he had received Magnentius into his house, was adjudged to forfeit all his goods, the rest of the accused persons being fettered and presented to the Emperor, he condemned some to death, and some to exile. Julianus. Now was the Government of Gallia and Brittain assigned to Julianus (afterwards called the Apostata) whom Constantius had made Cæsar:Brittish. Hist. l. 3 fol. 141. Lupicinus Master of the Armour to the Emperor, (a good Souldier, but notorious for his pride, covetousnesse and cruelty) and after him Alipius, were sent into Brittain to represse the Inhabitants that had invaded the Province there, whilst Julianus himself remained in Gallia, not daring to passe into the Isle, both for that he feared the Gaules, who were ready (upon the least occasion) to revolt, and also doubted the Almanes, who were then up in Armes. Mr. Bro. fol. 562.Constantius the last over-living Son of Constantine being dead, Julianus brother to Gallus and Son to Constantius Chlorus by Theodora, a man by no title of descent heir, or King of Brittain, was acknowledged for Emperor; for although this Constantius last Emperour, by the instigation and perswasion of Eusebia the Empress made him a Cæsar in the Empire, (he himself not able to discharge the whole burden of so manifold trou∣bles and invasions of the Barbarous (for so the Romans called strangers) in divers places of the Empire, especially in Gallia, now France, whereas Zosimus saith, they took 40 Cities neer the River of Rhene) and gave unto him in marriage his Sister Helena, and sent him to Govern the part of the Empire on this side the Alps:Zosim. Hist. l. 3. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 1. Cassiod. Tri∣part. Hist. l. 6. c. 1. Nicep. l. 10. c. 1. Bar. & Spond. Annal. anno 360. Soc. l. 3. c. 1. Cassiod. Tri. Hist. l. 6. c. 1. Amianus l. 21. Socrates Cassio∣dorus and others testifie it was thought that when Constantius sent him into the dange∣rous wars of Gallia (his Wife Helena being then dead) he did it to have him slain by the cruel and potent Enemies; And Constantius limiting his power to do nothing with∣out consent of others. And not only this, but he secretly incited Vadomarus, King of the Franks, to take Armes against Julian, and incited others by his letters which they sent to Julian, for their excuse to invade the Romans, where Julian Ruled; which when Julian perceived, and remembring the old hatred he had born him from his Child∣hood, he required him with the like measure, shewing much love and favour to those under his command, whom Constantius hated or dis-favoured, which among Christians were the Catholick Bishops, and others whom he had persecuted. And this his favour and kindnesse towards Catholicks had continued with him, e∣ven from his first being Cæsar in these parts, as evidently appeareth in the case of St. Hillary that renowned glory of Gods Church, who at the same time he was exiled by the procurement of the wicked Arians and consent of Constantius unjustly, was by Ju∣lianus, whom he called his Lord and Religious Cæsar, adjudged Innocent; and for his love and defence of St. Hillary did suffer more reproach of the Arian persecutors, than St. Hillary endured injury by that exilement: Thus we see Julian whilst he continued in these Western parts, was a favourer of the Catholick Religion; but Julian quite lea∣ving these Western Nations, before either he persecuted Christians, or left the profession of their Religion, living so short a time Emperor, (not two years by two Moneths and three dayes,Baron. an. 363 as Baronius thinketh he doth demonstrate) and never returning Westward again, Brittain could not be afflicted with his Apostasie. After the death of Constantius (who is said to have repented three things at his last gasp; first, that he caused the death of his Son-in-Law; The second, that he made Ju∣lian who proved an Apostate Emperour;Mr. Bro. fol. 56. And the third, that he professed and favou∣red the Arian Heresie; for which offences craving pardon and repenting, he died a holy death,Gregor. Nazi∣an. in Orat. in Julianum. Nicep. l. 9. Hist. c. 50. British. Hist. 141. and was buried with such solemnities as the Catholicks use in the funerals of them that make a holy end. And to confirm the opinion of men with the authority and Testimony of Heaven and Angels, he saith it was commonly related, that his body was with such solemnity carried to Constantinople to be buried, there an Angelical Har∣mony was heard by many, as reward of his piety) Julianus possessing the Empire (which he had usurped in the life time (saith the Brittish History) of Constantius)
banished Palladius an honorable person into Brittain, and sent Alipius to repair the walls of Jerusalem, in which attempt God discovering his wrath by terrifying the Builders with thunder and lightning, and killing many thousand Jewes, gave an ap∣parent testimony how vain a thing it is for man to oppose himself against the uncon∣trollable Decree of Almighty God; and who so shall consider the strange and miracu∣lous death of this Julian, as being slain from Heaven, and his desperate crying out, Thou hast vanquish'd me, O Galilean, when he yielded up his damnable Soul, I suppose will be terrified both from falling into Apostasie, or taking any Oath of abjuration concerning his Faith and Religion. Jovian. Jovian succeeded Julianus in the Empire, which he held but few months; when he was chosen Emperor, as Ruffinus, Theodoret, Socrates and others testifie, he refused it,Ruffinus Hist. l. 2. c. 1. Theodoret l. 4. c. 1. Socr. Hist. l. 3. c. 19. Matth. West. ann. 366. and being thereto taken by the Soldiers against his will, openly professed, that he being a Christian, would not be Emperor over Infidels; but all of them confessing themselves to be Christians, he accepted the Empire. This Christian magnanimity appeared evi∣dently in this new elected Emperor before in the time of Julian: for Julian apostating and making a Decree, that Soldiers should either sacrifice to Idols, or leave the wars; he being then a Tribune, rather made choice to forsake all hope of temporal prefer∣ment than obey that wicked Edict. Whereupon Julian then standing in need of such Assi∣stants, retained him still in the number of his Commanders, notwithstanding he so cou∣ragiously professed himself a Christian. This renowned Man was at one and the same time, as Ruffinus cals him, a Confessor, Emperor, and Extinguisher of Error;Jovian com∣mended. and God wonderfully honored his constancy, even in his life, not only in the conferring the Im∣perial honor upon him, but in the manner thereof,Ruff. sup: Theodoret l. 4: c. 1. that being so professed a Catholick Christian, the whole Army did with one voice choose him Emperor, which joyned with that is said of them before, upon Jovianus refusing to be Emperor over Pagans, how with one voice they all confessed themselves to be Christians, sufficiently proveth, that either the Edict of Julian to force his Soldiers to sacrifice to Idols was never received or generally observed, or they sinned only in external act of Idolatry by that compulsion, still persevering in judgement and affection Christians.Socr. l. 3. c. 5. Ruff. l. 2. c. 1. Socrates saith he reigned but 7 months; Ruffinus eight. Valentinian. Now therefore although Jovianus was a worthy Catholick Christian Emperor, ever following that Religion and Doctrine against the Arians, as Socrates and others prove;Socr. l. 3. c. 20. and shutting up the Pagan Temples, and forbidding their Sacrifices; yet being Em∣peror so short a time, and chosen, living and dying in the East Countries far remote from Brittain, it did not receive so great benefits by so good an Emperor, as nearer Nations did; but during his short Regiment continued much after the same manner it did before, until Valentinian was chosen Emperor; who being a Catholick, and reign∣ing divers years over Brittain, and his Son Gratian after him, this Kingdom in their times was free from Heresie which they persecuted;Socr. l. 3. c. 11. for Valens himself being Brother to Valentinian, and by him chosen Assistant in the Empire, was then a Catholick, and so continued in the time of Julian, that he forsook all preferment under him rather than his Religion.Thodoret. Hist. l. 4. c. 12. And although by the perswasion of his Arian Wife and others, he after fell into Heresie, he being Emperor of the Eastern remote Nations from hence, this Kingdom was free from his afflictions, being under the command of the Ca∣tholick Emperors Valentinian and Gratian his Son, until Maximus, descended of a Brit∣tish race, was both King of Brittain and Emperor also, who also being a Catholick, Brit∣tain could not then be endamaged in spiritual affairs by the temporal Rulers thereof,Maximus Em∣peror, a Brit∣tain excused and defended: Ruff. l. 2. c. 14. Socr. l. 3. c. 11. although in civil respects it was much infested by the Scots and Picts, from which Maxi∣mus freed it in his time, by his climbing and aspiring minde to be Emperor, and to compass that ambition, spoiling Brittain of the armed force and power thereof, trans∣porting it into foreign Nations, gave occasion of greater miseries here afterward, both by the Scotch, Picts and Saxon Pagans. About this time (saith the Brittish History) the Picts, Scots,Brit. Hist. l. 3. fol. 142. and Atticots invaded the Roman Province here in Brittian. These Picts and Scots (as some Writers report) came first out of Scythia;Picts who, & from whence though it be not probable that the Picts were any other than such Brittains as being either born in the Northern Promontory of this Isle, or fleeing thither out of the South parts, en∣tred into confederacy with the Scotchmen, and retained for a time their ancient name of Picts, as being so called by the Romans (in respect of the old custom of painting their bodies) to distinguish them from the Brittains then dwelling within the Province. Neither is there any mention made of their name before the time of Dioclesian and Maximian. These Picts encreasing in number, did afterwards inhabit the Isles of the
Orcades, and being for the most part rude and Savage (as the Scottish men also then were) did often times harrow the borders, and grievously annoy their civil Country∣men (there being commonly no greater hatred, than that which is bred and nourished among the people of one Nation) when they are severed each from other by difference of manners and customes. The name of Picts in processe, of time being changed into that of Scotish men (as of the more popular Nation) was in a manner clean for∣gotten when by society and alliance they became one people. The Scots from whence at first.That the Scotish men had their original from the Scythes, their very name may seem in some sort to discover; howbeit divers histories affirm, that they travelled first in∣to Cantabria in Spain where (perhaps dislikeing that barren Soile) they continued not long, but sailed into Ireland, and from thence a great number of them came over in∣to Brittain,Brittish Hist. l. 3. fol. 142. landing in the North part of the Isle, where afterward they seated them∣selves: They were for the most part addicted to war, using peace only but as a means to repair their losses: (they were people of great courage and boldnesse, of stature tall: strong of body, their complexions some what Ruddy and high Coloured; their appar∣rel was either very slender, or none at all, save only to cover their shame:) Neither was their peace altogether Idle; for even then they accustomed their bodies to labour no less painfull than war it self, and ofttimes no lesse dangerous: To ride with swift pace up a steep hill, to swim over Lakes, and standing Meeres, to pass over Bogs and Fen∣ny grounds, were things in ordinary use with them, as being accounted exercises of recreation only: But above all others, the Nobility and better sort were delighted with hunting, and that in such measure, that they could more patiently endure the want of meat, drink and sleep, than restraint from that pastime, which they esteemed manly and generous. In their consultations they were very secret, and sudden in the execution thereof; by which meanes they ofttimes struck terror and amazement to the hearts of their Enemies, and so much annoyed the Roman Princes in Brittain. They were better contented with the necessities of nature, and more able to endure all extre∣mities of fortune than the Brittains in those times, as being lesse acquainted with the vain superfluities and delicacies of the Romans. In behaviour the Brittains were noted to be more civil, but the Scotish men (as a people unconquered, and admitting no customes but their own) refused to imitate them who were brought under the sub∣jection of a stranger, or to be reputed like to any other then to themselves: Wrongs and Indignities offered as well to others as themselves, they sharpely revenged; the slaughter, wounding or disgrace of any of their kinred, allies or companions, being com∣monly the occasion of rooting out the whole family of him that first gave the offence; violent persuits, seising by strong hand the goods and possessions of their neighbours: burning the houses and killing (upon cold blood) such as they had taken in War, (which others termed crueltie) they accounted manhood and policie: supposing the assurance of their estates to consist rather in diminishing the number of their enemies by open acts of hostility, than by pretended reconciliations, and leagues of amity, which are either kept or broken at the will of him that hath the greater power: Their names first mentioned in histories, about the reign of Constantine the Great: Though the Sco∣tish Writers affirme, that they were governed by Kings of their own Nation many hundred yeers before this time: But of things so ancient, to have the certain knowledg, it is no easie matter, neither is antiquity in it selfe very much to be regarded, where true Nobility and Vertue is wanting: For all nations at the first were of barbarous and uncivil behaviour, till time taugh them other customes, and emulation kindled the hearts of the better sort to seek fame by their own valour, rather then the Genea∣logies of their Ancesters. Those Scotish men and Picts, being now assisted with forraine power, presumed more boldly to assail the Brittains both by Sea and Land, killing Nectaradius the Admiral of the Brittish Fleet, and surprizing Bulchebandes one of their chief Captaines (the mutiny at that time in the Roman Campe giving them opportunity and boldnesse to do in a manner what they listed) For the Legionarie Souldiers refused to obey their Leaders, and even the Deputies themselves complaining of the partiality of their Generals, who punished the least offence of a Common Souldier, and winked at the great abuses of Commanders and Officers: hereupon a warlike troope of Almans were sent over under the Conduct of Fraomarius their King, who exercised there the authority of a Tribune: Severus the Emperors steward of his houshold, and Jovinius were appointed to second him with certain Auxiliarie forces out of Gallia. By this means the fury of those warlike Nations was somewhat restrained, until the coming of Theo∣dosius, who first appeased the mutiny among the Souldiers in Brittain, and afterwards prosecuted the service there with such good successe, as he restored the decayed Townes, strengthning the borders, appointing night-watches to be kept there, and in the end re∣covered the Province, which was then contented to admit of Governors (as in former times) & as a new conquered State, have a new name given it: For in the honor of the Emperor Valentinian the Province was for a time called Valentia; not long after one Valentinian a Pannonian entred into a new conspiracy there, which being discovered be∣fore it was ripe, the peril like to have ensued thereby, was easily avoided.
Gratian. Gratian, the brother of Ʋalentinian, was then created Emperor; He,Howes fo. 46. to the intent he might the better repair the decayed state of the Empire, made Theodosius a Copartner with him in it. The year 369 being the second year of Ʋalentinian the Emperor,A universal earth-quake, strange rain and Hail. was St. Jerome made Cardinal, and the next year after was St. Ambrose made Archbishop of Millain, and in the year aforesaid the vnerable Beda in his little book recordeth, that there was a great universal Earthquake throughout the whole World: And the next year, as other hi∣storians write, it reigned Wool, and there withall it hailed, which hail-stones were of wonderous greatnesse, and flew great numbers of the men and beasts at Constantinople,Nice destroy∣ed by an Earth-quake. and the next year after the City of Nice was utterly thrown down and ruinated by an Earth-quake, and this year died S. Hillary Bishop of Poytiers so oft-spoken of before. This Gratian succeeding Ʋalentinian, elected Ʋalentinian the second his brother, and Theodosius the Son of another Theodosius, to be his associates in Government. Maximus. Maximus then ruling the Army in Brittain,Baron Annal. Tom. 4. an. 383. Sigebert. Chr. an. 383. Virun. Brit. Hist. l. 5. Galf. Hist. Brit. l. 5. c. 11. Virun. l. 5. Theat. of G. Brit. l. 6. p. 272. Socrat. Hi. l. 5. c. 11. Ruffi. l. 2. c. 15, & 16. Beda l. 1. c. 9. Malms. l. 1. Stow, Howes in Maxi. upon emulation and envy of Theodosius his glory, usurped the Empire there. This Maximus was a Brittain by birth, as Socrates and other forrain, Authors, as well as our own Writers testifie; and although he seemeth to think, that he did untruly derive his descent from St. Hellen, yet he giveth some way to that opinion when he confesseth he claimed descent from great Constantine her Son. And Sigeberius Gemblacensis plainly confesseth, that he both was of the Emperial Race, and was kinsman of Constantine the Great, claiming part of the Empire by that title. The like hath Ponticus Virunnius in his Brittish history, he being an Italian, and addeth, that he was the Son of Leoninus uncle to St. Hellen, and great uncle to Const. the Great; in which, as in many other things, he differeth from the printed Brittish history translated by Galfridus (by common opinion) which calling Maximianus and not Maximus, mak∣eth him both true heir of Brittain, & Grand-child descended from King Coel, Father to St. Hellen, born both of the Regal Race of the Brittains and Romans, bringing in Cara∣docus Duke of Cornewall, for perswading Octavius to marry his daughter and heir unto him, making his title to Brittain better than that Octavius had. Our Writers of the Thea∣tre of great Brittain, alledging Camden also, for their opinion, affirm of this Maximus. Clemens Maximus descended linealy from Constantine the Great. And Ponticus himselfe doth after confesse as much, howsoever he can be accorded to himselfe before, saying that Leotin was his Father; And Socrates, with others, doth free him from the name of Usurper of the Empire, when he confesseth that Ʋalentinian did admit him in for Em∣peror. And St. Beda writeth of him, that he was a valiant and worthy man, and so far from intruding himselfe into the Empire, that he was by the Army created Emperor almost against his will, which Will. of Malm. also with others confirmeth, which is suf∣ficiently confirmed not only by the triumphant enemy of our Catholick Brittains and other such Nations assisting him: But our Brittish history, Virunnius and others prove, that he was first incited, invited and sent for into Brittain; both to be King here, and afterwards to take upon him the Empire, as his Right; yet, as some say plainly, Maximus a valiant man and worthy, was forced in Brittain to take the Empire upon him.Mr. Broug. f. 572. Hect. Boe. George Buch. Hist. Scot. Holishn. Hist. Scot. And if any man saith he was infamed by Writers for persecuting Christians, I dare not assent unto him; for ever from his first power and greatness, he honored and favoured Religion here in Brittain, making it all subject unto him; when he expelled the Scots, he gave or allowed, by their own historians, the Isle of Jonas to their Bishops, Priests and other Clergy and re∣ligious men; and it is evident that the Brittish Christians, & Catholicks, (and as sincere as any in the World) were they whom he most loved and favoured, and by whom, with o∣ther Chatholick Countries as France, Spain and others, he was assisted in his wars, and by their aid and assistance became so potent;Sozom. ut sup. and he was far from being a Persecutor of Christians, especially of Catholicks, that even by the ancient Writers of Roman histo∣ries themselves, that excepting his title to the Empire, he made it a chief motive of ta∣king armes against Valentinian the younger, seduced by his Arrian Mother Justina, be∣cause they went about to set up heresie and persecute Catholicks. And Theodore rela∣teth the heretical proceedings of this Valentinian and his mother especially against St. Ambrose that holy Doctor, and Catholick Bishop of Millain, and testifieth that Maximus understanding thereof, wrote unto Valentinian,Theodoret. Hi. Eccle. l. 5. c. 13. Paul. Oros. l. 5. c. 34. Paulus Diaco. l. 1. c. 3. perswading him to desist from such per∣secuting and heretical proceedings, otherwise he would warr against him in dafence of the Catholick religion, which he performed, and Valentinian forced to fly, dearly tasted what his Mothers heretical Counsels had brought him unto: Paulus Orosius also and Pau∣lus Diaconus call this our Maximus a valiant and good man and worthy to be Emperor. A worthy Emperor; St. Senerus Sulpitius is a sufficient witness also how renowned a man this our Brittish Emperor was in many respects, for concerning that great blemish which some cast upon him for usurping the Empire, and for deposing one Emperor, and killing another, which were the great exceptions, which that great and Apo∣stolick Bishop St. Martine took unto him, and therefore though often envited, to his Table refused to come unto it, He thus declareth himselfe, that the Empire was not
sought by him, but rather against his will imposed upon him by the Souldiers and pleasure of God,S. Severinus de vita S. Martini. Cap. 23. for defence and necessity of the Empire, God himself sufficiently gi∣ving testimony thereto, by the incredible event and victory following, and that he slew none of his adversaries but in the feild; upon which satisfaction St. Martin came to the feast, and was far more honored of this Emperor there, than any Prince (the Emperors uncle, brothers, and such others there present) sitting next unto the Emperor himself, and his own Priest and Chaplain sat among those Princes. Mr. Broug. fo. 573.And such was the honour and reverence our Emperor, did yeeld publickly to that holy Bishop, that in that solemn feast he refused to drink untill S. Martin had drunk out of the same bole before; he condemned Priscillianus the heretick & his Sectaries to death, and banishment, Justantius & Tiberianus into our Brittish Island, named Silley; his judgement against those Hereticks, was for things by them committed against his temporal estate. Hrris Hist. Tom. 4. c. 34. Magdeb. cent. 4. c. 16. Sylvius bonus. C. Max. Caes. Laudes. Io. Leland & Io. its. in Sil∣vio Bon. Harris sup. Zosim. l. 4. Baro. & Spon∣dan. 382 in Anal. Annal. Scot. apud Hect. Boet. l. 7. Scot. Hist. initio.Yet do I not so contend (saith Mr. Broughton) to free Maximus, that I would wash him clean from all spots and aspersions, wherewith he is stained by some Writers. I rather excuse him in profession of Religion, then conversation of life; yet both Symmachus Con∣sul of Rome, and our Brittish Writer Sylvius (stiled the good Sylvius) living in his time, wrote Books in his praise; and the very Scotish Antiquaries the greatest enemies he had, for conquering and expelling them out of Brittain, are forced to confesse that his carriage was such, that it drew even his enemies to love, honour and follow him, and give him that honour here in Brittain, which never any Emperor, King or Ruler in it since the first inhabiting thereof enjoyed before him: Which is, that Ruling here 17 years, he possessed and ruled over all Albion or Brittain. And in this his general com∣mand here, was a friend & favourer to good Christians, that Hiergustus being then King of the Picts, both he and all his subjects Christians, he freely for a small Tribute to testifie the whole Island belonged to the Roman Empire in his time, suffered, though a stranger, quietly to reign as King among the Picts; And plainly confessed that in Brit∣tain divers years he behaved himself, and in all mens judgement governed vertuously, couragiously, and as a good Emperor ought to do. And that both the Christian Brittains and Picts, the only then inhabitants here did marvelously well love him; his Brittish Wife, Queen and Empress, daughter of Octavius, is commended in the Histories to have been a very vertuous Lady. The Brittish History sayth that Maximus being overthrown by Theodosius, fled into Aquileia, when by the treason of his own Souldiers (whilst he was paying them their wages) he was delivered to Theodostus, disrobed of his Imperial ornaments, and spee∣dily put to an ignominious Death. Theodosius. Maximus being dead, Theodosius the elder, as he was Emperor, so was he King and Ru∣ler in Brittany; this man is most renowned in Histories for the honoring the Church, & hate of heresies; his praises be exceeding many among ancient Writers; therefore I will onely and briefly use the testimonies of modern Historians in his behalf, in their own words;Stow & Howes hist. Tit. Rom. in Thedosio. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. c. 7. Col. 568. Mag. Cent. c. 10. Theod. Hist. l. 6. c. 8. Theodosius the elder a most Christian Emperor; Theodosius did open pennance in Millaine, and fasted and prayed eight Months together, according as St. Ambrose had enjoy∣ned him, because in the first part of his Empire, he had commanded 5000 Citizens of Thessalonica to be slain, and for the executing the innocent with the wicked in form of civil justice; therefore the Arch-bishop would not permit him to rule in the Church, nor to receive the Sacrament until he had performed his pennace. The Magdeburgians of Germany say this Sacrament was. Sa∣cratissimum Domini Corpus, preciosus Domini Sanguis. Howes saith that St. Ʋrsula with 11000 Virgins, which were sent into little Brittain to be married, were martyred in this Theodosius his reign; but others say it was in the time of Maximus;Surius in St. Ʋrsula. one give this relation, Maximus entred into France & possessed it all, but espe∣cially one Province which was then called Formorica, which is now called Little-Brit∣tain, because the Brittains did conquer and rase it, and with great rage and fury put to Sword all the Natives thereof, left it uninhabited as a wildernesse; Maximus thought it necessary to people that Province again, because it lay fit for him, therein to conserve and transport his Brittish Souldiers,Surius & Ri. badeneira octob. 21. and for that purpose he divided the fertile feilds & lands of the Lesser-Brittain amongst his Souldiers, which came to him out of Brit. to the end they might Till and Husband it, and reap the fruit thereof: But because his Souldi∣ers might marry and have succession, and settle themselves in that Province, where there was no women, for that they were also put to the Sword, he determined to send unto the Island of Brittain, Scotland and Ireland for a great number of Virgins, which being brought into the new and lesse Brittain, might marry with those Souldiers who were for the most part naturals of their own Country. The chief Commander of all that Army was called Conanus, a man of great birth and of greatest estimation of all the Brittains,The Hist. of St. Ʋrsula. whom Maximus hath made his Leiuetenant General and Warden of all the Ports of that Coast. Conanus desired to marry with the daughter of Dionecius King of Cornwal called Ʋrs. a most Noble and vertuous Lady, in whom did shine all the gifts of cha∣stity, beauty & grace which might be desired in a woman; throughout the Province of
there were called forth 11000 Virgins as well for the intent above mentioned, as also that they might accompany Ʋrsula who was to be their leader and Lady; some of these Virgins went of their own accord, others by constraint; But seeing that the com∣mand of Maximus then Emperour was so peremptory that no excuse could be admitted, they embarked themselves in those ships, which were prepared for their passage unto the new Province of Brittain. It pleased our Lord that these ships lancing out of the Haven met with a quite con∣trary wind, which instead of carrying that blessed company towards Brittaine, it furi∣ously carried them quite contrary, and passing by Zeland and Holland drove them into the mouth of the River of Rhene, a River of great capacity and depth, and carried them so high as the water did ebb and flow. At that time when this happened, Gratian the Emperour understanding what Maximus had done in Brittain and France, and that he carried himself as Emperor and Lord, and not as Captain and Officer, for to represse and chastize him, he entertained into his service the Picts and Hunnes a feirce cru∣ell and Barbarous people, who had conquered the Gothes, and done wonderous things by their force of armes: These being gathered together under the command of Melga Captain of the Picts, and Gaunus General of the Hunnes, began to molest the Seas and to lie coasting about after the manner of Pirates, robbing & spoiling all that fell into their hands, with intent to passe over into Brittain and expulse Maximus, and to serve Grati∣an the Emperour, who for that purpose had entertained them; these Barbarous people were at that present where these blessed Virgins arrived, and perceiving that the ships belonged to their enemies, and to Maximus in particular, against whom they had un∣dertaken that voyage, they encountered with them, and seeing that they were loaden with Virgins (being as dishonest and lascivious as they were cruel and furious) they in∣tended to ravish them. But these holy Virgins (Ʋrsula being leader and encouraging them) determined rather to loose their lives than their chastity, and hereupon as well in deeds as in words, shewing their valour and constancy, and that they were pre∣pared rather to suffer what torments soever, than to offend God, the Barbarous people converting their love into fury and detestation of Christian faith, fell upon them like Wolves upon a flock of Lambs, and put them all to the Sword,11000 Brit∣tish Virgins at one time mar∣tyred. because they would re∣main there no longer, but passe over speedily into Brittain, which they thought had been uninhabited, because Maximus had drawn so many Souldiers from thence. Of all that holy and Virgin company, only one called Cordula remained alive, who through fear did hide herself at the time of that slaughter, but seeing what had passed, and that all the rest of her companions were martyred, being encouraged by the motion of our Lord who had chosen them all for himself, the next day following she discovered her self, and obtained also the Crown of Martyrdome. Some are of opinion,A strange wonder. that the place in which the holy bodies of these Virgins now re∣main is the very same in which they were martyred, because the earth on which that Church is built, will not retain any dead body, although it be a child newly baptized,Lindanus Bi∣shop of Rure∣mund., but by might it casteth it forth, as Lindanus Bishop of Ruremund recounteth, giving this as a token, that God will not have any other body to be buried where the bo∣dies of those so many Virgins and Martyrs lie; who shed their blood for confession of his Faith, and defence of their Chastity. Now the Roman Monarchy was drawing on to her fatal period, when Honorius suc∣ceeding Theodosius his Father in the Westerne Empire,Brit. Hist. l. 3. fol. 148. sent Stilico into Brittain to de∣fend the Brittains against the Picts and Scottish men, who assailed them in most parts of the Isle, working upon the weaknesse of the Province, in which (the most choice and able men, having been from time to time transported and wasted in the Roman Wars with other Nations) there remained not then sufficient to de∣fend it self. The common Souldiers there seeing the state in combustion, took upon them to elect and depose Emperours, first proclaiming Gratian a free Citizen of Rome; but not long contented with his government, they murdered him, and elected one Constantine (for the namesake only) supposing the same to be auspicious: Constantine transporting the flower and strength of all Brittain into Gallia, made many dishonou∣rable leagues (to the prejudice of the Empire) with the Barbarous Nations, that then envaded it, and sent his Son Constans (whom of a Monk he had made a Cæsar) into Spain, where Constans (having put to death some principal men whom he suspected to favour Honorius) committed the Government of the Country to Ge∣rontius his chief Captain, by whom he was afterwards slain at Vienna in Gallia: And Constantine his Father having run through many fortunes, was in the end beseiged at Arles, where he was taken and slain by the Souldiers of Honorius the Emperor, which then recovered Brittain. Chrysanthus a man of consular dignity, was then Deputy of Brit∣tain, where he won so great reputation, for vertue and integrity in the Government both of the Church (which was then tainted with the gracelesse heresie of Pelagius the Brittain) and also of the Weal publick of the Province, as he was afterwards (though a∣gainst his will) preferred to the Bishoprick of Constantinople.
This Pelagius the Brittish Heretick was (as the traditions of those parts say) born at Vsk, a Market Town in Monmoth-shire.Virun. Hist. Scot. Hector. Boet. Hist. l. 9. fol. 179. p. 1. Geor. Bucan. Rerum. Scot. l. 5. Reg. 52. p. 160. Hollinshed Hi. of Scot. in fre∣qua hand. Aug. Epist. 106. Bede Hist. l. 1. Hen. Hunt. Hist. l. 1. Math. West. Chron. an. 404. Floren. Wig. Chron. an. 413 alii 435. Mr. Bro. fol. 605. Aug l. de Heres. Cler. 88. l. 2. de Pecc. origin. c. 11. Epist. 106. l. 2. de pec. orig. c. 8, 9. 14. l. 2. Retr. c. 47. Hier. Ep. 79. & ad Alip. Dial. cont. Pelag. Prosper. de Ingrat. Isidor. Pelus. Epist. 314. Mr. Broughton fo. 606. Bed. l. 1. hist. c. 17. Math. West. Chron. an. 442. Pits. aetat. 4. p. 85. Bal. l. de scrip. cent. 1. in Pelag. The Heresies of this Pelagius, and he the first Au∣thour and name-giver unto them, have given the greatest stain and blemish in that kind to this Nation and in this time. For as his heresies were most pestilent, dangerous and infections, so they took first root, and afterward fixed themselves so deeply in this Brittain, that they were not rooted out, untill after the coming of St. Augustine hither about two hundred yeares after: Notwithstanding we had so many and worthy men here, both of our own Nation and others, divers of them sent hither by the See Apo∣stolick to oppose and suppresse it, as both our Scottish and English Writers do testifie: It is the common consent of Historians both of this and foreign Countries, that this Pelagius (as is said before) was a Brittain of this Kingdom; divers of our Antiqua∣ries hold that he was a Monk and Abbot after in our old received Monastery of Bangor, which is made more probable, both in respect that Leporius Agricola his Scholler and follower in his errors a long time, though after recanting them, was a Priest and Monk of the same Monastery, and of all places in Brittain, the places thereabout were most infected with the heresie rageing there long after the time of St. Germanus and Lupus, sent thither by Pope Celestine to suppresse it, and was in a Synod of all the Bishops, Abbots and chief Clergy men of Cambria there confuted and confounded by St. David. All authors agree that this Pelagius was very learned, and the title Arch-Heretick, which is commonly given unto him, doth so testifie: So did the great num∣ber of Councels gathered to condemn him; so did also the particular best learned men in those daies; St. Aug. Jerom, Innocentius, Orosius, Genadius and others which wrote against him; all the Errors wherewith he was charged, he at length renounced, though dissembled for fear, as appears by him after: I think it not convenient to set down his errors, the world being so apt to broach new doctrines, lest any giddy brain∣sick new molded Saint make use of them, both to the destruction of his own Soul, and of many other, the ordinary sort of people being so prone to follow after new Preachers. Yet to free our Kingdom of Brittain & Wales also of giving life to such a man, St. Hier. saith he was by nation a Scot, as Isidore Pelusiota noteth, and also a voluptuous Monk, both which may be reconciled, if we say he was born among the Scots, and bred in our great Monastery of Bangor and there long time a holy Monk, but after falling both in∣to heresie and lewdnesse of life, he was often condemned in divers Councels in Asia, A∣frica and Europe, whether he had spread his heresies, but not perfectly untill the time of Pope Zosimus about the year of Christ 418 being by him finally condemned, both he and his followers were driven into exile by Honorius the Emperor, and that heresie con∣demned in all the World; This Pelagius, though he had many followers, yet were they all strangers, for the great honour to this Nation, that it had such learned men, that even one of them falling into error did so much prevail and dilate it both in Europe, Africa and Asia, and yet in his own Country could nothing prevail, but was at the first convinced, rejected and exiled, and did only indeavour to infect Brittain his native Country, but could not effect his desire therein. Now the Romans about four hundred and seventy yeares after their first enterance into this Isle waxed weary of the Government of Brittain and Brittains, that had been many times assailed by their uncivil neighbours (consorted with strangers of divers Nations) perceived themselves unable to make resistance, as in the former times; where∣upon they sent Embassadors to Rome, requiring aid, and promising fealty, if the Ro∣mans would rescue them from the oppression of their enemies. Then was there a Legion sent over into the Island to expulse the barbarous people out of the province, which being with good successe effected, the Romans counselled the Brittaines for their better defence to make a stone wall betwixtThe firth of Dunbretton in Scotland. Glota andEdenbur. Firth. Bedatria (the two armes of the Sea that ran into the Island) and so departed thence, but this Wall was only afterwards made of Turves, and not of stone as they were directed, (the Baittains then not having any skill in such kind of buildings) by which means it served to little purpose; for the Scotshmen and Picts understanding that the Romans were gone, passed over the water in boats at both ends of the Wall, invaded the borders of the province, and with main force bare down all before them, whereupon the Embassadors were sent again out of Brittain, to declare the miserable state of the Province, which without speedy succour was likely to be lost. Upon the complaint and earnest sollicitation of the Brittains, there was another Legion sent over by Aetius the President of Gallia, under the Conduct of Gal∣lio of Ravenna to aid the distressed Brittains, and the Romans having reduced the Povince into her former state, did tell the Brittains, that it was not for their ease to take any more such long Journies, being costly and paineful, considering that the Empire it self was assailed, and in a manner overrunne by Strangers; and therefore that from thenceforth they should provide for their own safety, that they should learn to use Armour and Weapons, and trust to their own valour.
Howbeit the Romans (in regard of the good service done by the Brittish Nation in former times) began to build a Wall of Stone from East to West, in the self same place where Severis the Emperor had cast his Trench, the labour and charges of the work being born partly by the Romans, and partly by the Brittains themselves. This Wall contained eight foot in bredth, and twelve in hight (some Reliques thereof, saith the Brittish History, remaine to this day;) upon the Sea-coast towards the South, they raised Bulwarks (one somewhat distant from another) to empeach the Enemies landing in those parts; and this done, they took their last farewell, transporting their Legions into Gallia, as men resolved to return hither no more. As soon as they were gone, the barbarous people having intelligence thereof, pre∣sumed confidently, that without any great assistance they might now enter the Pro∣vince: and thereupon accounting as their own whatsoever was without the Wall, they gave an assault to the Wall it self, and with Graples, and such like Engines, pulled down to the ground a great part thereof, while the Brittains inhabiting the borders being awaked with the suddenness of the Enterprise, gave warning to the rest of their Countreymen within the Land to arm themselves with speed, and to make resistance. About this time also, which was about the year of our Redemption 430, the state of the Church in Brittain was much incumbred by the Heresie of Pelagius, (of which a little before, yet I here again repeat it in another Authors Language, for fuller satis∣faction of my Reader) which being by birth a Brittain, by profession a Monk, and as some think, trained up in the Monastery of Bangor, travelled first into Italy,Brittish Hist: fol. 152. l. 3. then into Sicilia, Egypt, and other East parts of the World, to learn and study as he pro∣fessed, whereby he wound himself into the good opinion of many men of great fame in those daies for learning and piety; as namely, of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and by his means, of S. Augustine, till the Heretical assertions, which himself and his Disciple Celestinus a Scotch-man, secretly taught, being by St. Hierom discovered, were after∣wards condemned by the Bishop of Rome Innocentius the first: whereupon they retur∣ned again into Brittain, being obstinately bent to maintain their former Heresie; which Agricola the Son of Severianus, a Bishop of that Sect, had not long before brought thither, whereby the same in short time was received and approved among the Christians in divers parts of the Isle; so that betwixt Heresie among the Brittains themselves, and Paganism professed by their Enemies, the light of Christian Religion seemed for a time to be eclipsed. Howbeit, some of the Brittains, disliking those heretical Opinions, which as yet they were unable by knowledge in the Scrip∣tures to confute; and perceiving withal what dangerous inconveniences to the State arose oft times by reason of their disagreement one from another in matters of Reli∣gion, earnestly required the Bishops of France to send over some godly, wise, and learned men, that might defend the truth of Christianity, which seemed to be born down by the subtil allegations of humane Reason. Hereupon the Bishops called a Synod, wherein Germanus the Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Cham∣paigne were appointed to go into Brittain, and to undertake the Cause; which they afterwards prosecuted with so good success, as many Hereticks among the Brittains were openly convinced, and Christians confirmed in faith. About the same time Ninianus Bernitius (of the Race of the Brittish Princes) was sent into Pictland to convert the Inhabitants there to Christianity:Brittish Hist. l. 3. f. 153. Palladius a Grecian was likewise ap∣pointed by Celestine Bishop of Rome to Preach the Gospel in Scotland unto such there as yet remained in Infidelity, and to suppress the Pelagian Heresie new sprung up in that Kingdom, to be the first and chief Bishop of the Church there; for which purpose also Patricius, surnamed Magonius, (born in Brittain) was sent to the Irish and Scotch men that then dwelt in the Isles of the Orcades and Hebrides: these three Religious Fa∣thers were much honoured in those dayes, for the reverend opinion which most men had of their Learning and Integrity of life, and they are accounted the Apostles and Patrons of the Scotish, Irish, and Pictish Nations, as being the several Instruments of the general Conversion of each of them. Within few years after the Brittains were again hotly pursued by the Scotchmen and Picts, who swarmed over a great part of the Land, taking from the Brittains for a time all opportunities of convening and assembling themselves together, as in for∣mer dangers they had been accustomed; whereby no small number of the Inhabitants of the Province (dispairing of better success) retired themselves, giving way unto the present necessity, while each man (as in common calamities oft times it falleth out) laying aside the care of the publick, made provision for his own safety, leaving the Enemy in the mean time to take and kill such as resisted. Some of the Brittains being driven out of their own houses and possessions, fell to robbing one another, encreasing their outward troubles with inward tumult and civil dissention, by which means a great number of them had nothing left to sustain them but what they got by hunting and killing of wild beasts. Others burying their
Treasures under ground (whereof great store hath been found in this Age;Brit. Hist. l. 3. fol. 158.) did flee themselves either into the Countrey of theSouthwales. Silures andNorthwales. Ordnices, and into the West part of the Isle, (where theCornwall & Devonshire. Damonians then inhabited) or else into Amorica in France; the rest being hemmed in with the Sea on the one side, and their Enemies on the other, sent to the Emperor for aid; which they could not obtain, for that the Goths and Hunns invading Gallia and Italy, the greatest part of the Forces of the Empire was drawn thither for defence of those places: by reason whereof the State of Brittain now declining with the Empire, and shrinking under the burthen of barbarous Oppression, the Brittains sent Embassadors again to Aetius the President in Gallia, desiring him to relieve their necessities, declaring withall, that themselves were the small remnant which survived after the slaughter of so many thousands whom either the Sword or the Sea had consumed; for the barbarous Enemy drave them upon the Sea, the Sea again upon the Enemies; between both which they suffered two kindes of death, as being either killed or drowned, that it imported the Majesty of the Roman Empire to protect them, who had so many hundred years lived under their obedience, and were now plunged into the depth of intollerable miseries; for besides the calamities of War both civil and foreign, at one instant they were affli∣cted with dearth and famine which forced them sometimes to yield themselves to the merciless Enemy. But their complaints availed nothing; for the Romans plainly denied to send them any more succour; whereof the Scotishmen and Picts being cer∣tainly advertised, and knowing how small a number of able men remained in the Province to withstand their attempts, assailed first such places of strength as guarded the borders, and afterwards entred the Province it self, where, by continual course of Conquests, they found a passage into the heart of the Isle, spoyled the People of their wealth, burnt their Cities, and brought the Inhabitants thereof under a mise∣rable Servitude. Thus about five hundred years after the Romans first Entrance, and four hundred forty six after our Saviours birth, the Isle of Brittain, which had been not only the principal Member of the Empire, but also the seat of the Empire it self, and the Se∣minary of Soldiers sent out into most parts of the World, was now in the time of Honorius bereaved of the greatest part of her ancient Inhabitants, and left a prey to barbarous Nations.
SHREWSBURY. SHREWSBURY is the principal Town in Shopshire, and stands neatly upon a Hill, and i almost encompassed round by the River Severus that part thereof which is not fenced by the River, being forti∣fied by a very strong Castle; built by Roger de Montgomery, the first Earl thereof. A fair and goodly Town it is, well traded, and frequented by all sorts of people, both Welsh and English, by reason of the Trade of Gloath and other Merchandise, this being the commont Mart and Empory between England and Wales: it standeth in the very midst or centre, as it were, of the whole Countrey, which generally is inferiour to none about it for delight and plenty; for the number of Towns and Castles standing exceeding thick on every side (as having formerly been a frontier Countrey) very far above them. It belonged anciently to the Cornavii, and at the Norman Conquest was bestowed on Roger de Mont∣gomery, who first made it eminent, and with his Successors, and sine them the honorable Family of the Talbots enjoyed the Stile and Title of Earls of Shrewsbury. 1. Roger de Montgomery. 2. Hugh de Montgomery. 3. Robert de Montgomery. 4. John Talbot Marshal of France, created Earl of Shrewsbury by K. H. 6. 5. John Talbot, L. Tre. 6. John Talbot. 7. Geo. Talbot. 8. Francis Talbot. 9. Geo. Talbot. 10. Gilbert Talbot. 11. Edward Talbot. 12. Geo. Talbot. 13. John Talbot now living, and Earl of Shrewsbury 1661. The Earl of DERBY. Thomas Stanley Earl of Derby, Knight of the Garter, &c. Elinor Daughter to Richard Nevil Earl of Salisbury. Tho. Earl of Derby, &c. Anne Daughter to Ed. L. Hastings, which Family descends from the Brittish line, as shall appear in its proper place. Edward Earl of Derby, &c. Dorothea Daughter to Thomas How∣ward Duke of Norfolk, by which March this honorable Family de∣scends from the Brittish line, as in the Pedegree of the Duke of Norfolk.
Henry Earl of Derby, &c. Margaret Daughter to Henry Clif∣ford Earl of Cumberland and Eli∣nor his Wife Daughter and Coheir to Charles Brandon Duke of Suf∣folk and Mary Queen of France, Daughter to Hen. 7. and Grand∣child to Owen Tudor, lineally de∣scended from the Prince of South-Wales. Ferdinando, Sans Issue male.   William Earl of Derby. Elizabeth Daughter to Edward Vere Earl of Oxon and Anne Cecil his Wife, by which March, as in the Polog of Oxford, Salisbury, and Ex c appears, this Family descends from the Brittish Prince∣ly St. James Earl of Derby lost his head as a most faithfull and loyal Subject for his leige Lord King Charles of blessed memory. Charlt Daughter to the Duke of Tremulia. Charles Earl of Derby, Lord Stanley of Latham, Lord Strange of Knocking, and of the Isle of Man, a faithfull Subject to his King, a Patron to his Countrey, and Terror to his Enemies.   DErby is a part of the Coritain, and took that name from Derby the cheif City, a Town coveniently seated on the River of Derwent, beautified with five Parish Churches, a goodly stone Bridge, and a large Market place; and no less famous for good Ale, than Banbury for good Cakes and Cheese: finally the Town is well traded, and of good resort, and is the usuall place of holding Sessions and Assises for all the County. The Countrey of the East and South parts well manured and fruitfull, yielding a very spacious and pleasing prospect, both out of Cutbury Castle and that of Boulsover. The West part, which they call the Peak, is not so pleasing to the eye, though possibly as profitable to the Purse, being rich in Iron, Lead, and Coals, which it yields abundantly, and grazing multitudes of Sheep on the Mountain tops. It contains in it 106 Parishes, of the which eight be Market-Towns, the chief thereof being Derby, as before is said; the Catalogue of whose Earls here followeth. 1. William de Ferrars. 2. William de Ferrars. 3. William de Ferrars. 4. Robert de Ferrars. 5. Edm: of Lancaster second Son to K. Hen. 3. after which this Title was continued in the House of Lancaster. 6. Henry of Lancaster Son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, created Earl of Derby in his Fathers life time, 11. Edw. 3. 7. Henry of Bullingbrook son of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, created Earl of Derby in his Fathers life, 9 Ri. 2.
8. Thomas Stanley created Earl of Derby by K. Hen. 7. Lord Constable. 9. Thomas Stanley. 10. Edward Stanley. 11. Henry Stanley. 12. Ferdinando Stanley. 13. William Stanley. 14. James Stanley. 15. Charles Stanley now Earl 1661. The End of the first Part, or Tome.
CAMBRIA TRIƲMPHANS, OR BRITTAIN IN ITS PERFECT LUSTRE, SHEVVING THE Origen and Antiquity OF THAT ILLUSTRIOUS NATION. THE Succession of their Kings and Princes, from the First, to KING CHARLES Of Happy Memory. The Description of the Countrey: The History of the Antient and Moderne Estate. The manner of the Investure of the Princes, with the Coats of Arms Of the Nobility. The Second Tome. By PERCY ENDERBIE, Gent. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crooke, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1661.
TO HIS ROYAL GRACE THE DUKE, BROTHER TO His Sacred Majesty, MONARCH of Great BRITTAIN, King of France and Ireland, &c. SIR, GOld the sinue and nerve of war (without which the greatest Princes and Polititians fall short of their desired ends) and History the faithfull mirrour, in which the most accomplish't of Commanders may dress and modifie themselves even to the very height of vertue and perfection, in this walk hand in hand, and keep an equal sympathy: that whether they flow from the hands of Peers or Peasants, they still retain the same vigour, force, and ver∣tue; why did great Alexander set so great an estimate, upon grave Ho∣mers works, but that he found in them examples worthy imitation, and also inglorious deeds, to be avoyded like Rocks in raging Tempests? This work great Prince, (which most humbly begs your Protection, as the safest Azylum) proceeds from a pen altogether Rural, yet doth it contain matter fit for imitation, selected from Authors of faithfull integrity. Behold a Constantius, memorable for an Act recorded by ma∣ny Ancient Historians, who to make trial of true Christians, and accor∣dingly advance them, first exiled from his Court, all who would not per∣petrate themselves and adore the Pagan Gods; and after trial made, the Complyers he abhor'd, and revoked the constant refusers; pre∣ferring them to places of greatest trust and honour; affirming that they would never be true to a mortal Emperour, that would be false to an im∣mortal Diety. Quomodo inquit fidem erga Imperatorem servare po∣terunt inviolatam, qui adversus Deum optimum maximum perfidi esse manifesto convincuntur: and therefore saith the same Author, Decrevit secum hos qui se fideles erga D. O. M. declarassent in ami∣corum atque adeo consiliorum munero habere: And for this and such like his pious and vertuous transactions: Fertur Constantio Angelus astistisse; which Pomponius Laetus in these words confirmes, Cum Pa∣ter Cæsarem fecerat, celesti nuntio admonitus, Constantinum, &c. The
body of this glorious Cæsar, was first withall Princely solemnity inter∣red at York, and after translated to Carnarvon in the time of King Ed∣ward I. and by him commanded to be enshrined in that Church. Apud Carnarvon maximi principis patris nobilis Imperatoris Constantini erat inventum & rege jubente honorifice collocatum. Thus we clearly see vertue and Noble actions not only crowned here upon Earth with glori∣ous Sepultures and inscriptions, but even approved by Heaven it self, by Divine and Celestial Revelation. Let us march a little further into the Court of Honour, and great Theater, where mighty Emperors and Monarchs act their parts, and there we shall find a great Brittish Constantine the first Christian Em∣peror, doing what? taking in hand a doubtfull yet cruel war, what did he then? Deum quem pater sancte adoravisset solum observandum, co∣lendumque statuit, Quo circa hujus opem precibus imploravit, hunc oravit, hunc obtestatus est ut tum quinam esset ipsi vellet significare, tum rebus quas apud animum proposuisset dexteram velut adjutri∣cem porrigere; he resolved to have the true God; whom his Father a∣dored devoutly to be only adored and worshiped, wherefore by his pray∣ers he implored his help, he prayed and intreated his aid, him he be∣sought to declare himself unto him, and assist him in his enterprise: and what followed these divine and Heavenly ejaculations and inspirations? About noon, (the day somewhat declining) Constantine saw in the Sky, a lightsome pillar in form of a cross, wherein were these words engraven. In this sign overcome: and the night following in his sleep he beheld Christ, who said thus unto him. Frame unto thy self the form of a Cross, after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the same against thy Enemies as a fit banner or token of victory. And that the effects were answerable to the divine promises, hear what Eusebius relates, as spoken by Con∣stantine himself. Hoc salutari figno vero fortitudinis judicio vestram Tiranidis jugo liberavi civitatem & S. P. Q. R. libertatem vindicans pristinae amplitudini & splendori restitui: You have here viewed Il∣lustrious Prince, our first Christian Emperor, and his Father; fit pat∣terns for imitation: Cast your Gracious eyes upon our first Catholick King, Lucius, and you shall find him, (Christianity being now esta∣blished) thus Charactered. Interea gloriosus ille Britonum Rex Luci∣us, cum intra regnum suum cultum vere fidei magnificatum esse vidis∣set, maximo gaudio fluctuans, possessiones & territoria quæ prius tem∣pla Idolorum possidebant in meliorem usum vertens Ecclesiis fideli∣um permancre concessit, & quia majorem honorem ipsis impendere debuerat, augmentavit; illas amplioribus agris & mansis, omnique libertate sublimavit. And a little after Lucius the first Christian King of this Land then called Brittain, founded the first Church in London, that is to say, St. Peters Church upon Cornhill, where he setled an Archbishops See, making that Church the Metropolis of his Kingdom: neither was his zeal and piety confined to that City, for you
shall find him erecting a goodly Cathedral at Caerlegion, in that part of England, (abusively called Wales) which now is known by the name of Monmothshire, as also the famous Ʋniversity of Bangor in the remotest parts thereof. This holy King, (saith my Author) granted, made, and signed many writings, Charters and donations for defence, maintenance, and preservation of Religion; as to the Ʋniversity of Cambridge, the School of Shaftsbury, with others: and when he had done all this, Anno 201. Inclitus Britannorum Rex Lucius in bonis actibus assumptus ab hac vita Claudiocesbriæ migravit ad Christum, & in Ecclesia primæ sedis sepultus honorifice. King Arthur sealed many grants for the advancement of Religion and Learning, and by reason of his great victories thrice changed his armorial ensignes, at last ad∣vancing the cross; for my Author saith, King Arthur, that mighty con∣querour and worthy, had so great affection and love to this sign, that he left his armes which he used before; wherein were figured three Dra∣gons, another of three crownes (or as some say of thirteen) and de∣picted in his shield a cross silver in a field vert, and on the first quar∣ter thereof he figured an Image of our B. Lady with her Son in her armes, and with this sign he did wonders in Arms. And to this hour we see the Knights of the Noble order of the Garter, of which num∣ber your Grace (the flower of chevaldry) is one, to bear Argent a plain cross Gules; the field signifying pureness of life; the cross, the blood that Christ shed for this our people, whom Trevisa calleth the people of God, and the Realm of Gods Land; the same ensign did Jo∣seph of Aramathia give unto Arviragus King of Brittain, not many years after our Saviours passion; Cadwalader the last Brittish Mo∣narch for his armes bore Azure a cross for my fitched Or: whole vo∣lumes may be compiled of this Subject, and the worthy and most Chri∣stian acts of your sanctly progenitors. But least I should convert an E∣pistle Dedicatory into History or Chronology, I will proceed no further, humbly offering up these my weak endeavours before the shrine of your goodness, with all integrity, beseeching Almighty God that you may if not excel, at least equal the most valiant and vertuous of your Royal Progenitors, which shall be the daily prayers of Your Royal Highness Most faithful and humble servant, PERCY ENDERBY.
The Duke of York. Anarawd King of Northwales. Eidwal King of the same. Meurick or Meirick. Eidwal II. Jago. Conan. Griffith King of Northwales. Owen King of Northwales. Jorwerth Son and Heir to Owen, married Marret D. to Madoc Prince of Powis. Lhewelyn Prince of Northwales. Gladis sole Daughter and Heir, married to Ralph Lord Mortimer, who in her right should have been Prince of Northwales. Roger Lord Mortimer. Edmund Lord Mortimer. Roger Lord Mortimer, Earl of March. Edmund Lord Mortimer, &c. Roger Lord Mortimer. Edmund Earl of March married Philip D. and H. to Lyonel D. of Clarence. Roger Mortimer Earl of March, left one only Daughter and Heir, married to Richard Earl of Cambridge. Richard Duke of York. King Edward the Fourth.
Elizabeth sole daughter and heir, married to King Henry the seventh descended from Owen Tudor. Margaret eldest daughter to Henry the seventh, and in her Issue his Inheretrix, was Grandmother to Mary Queen of Scotland, France, and England, Mother to King James, King of great Brittain, France, and Ireland, &c. Grand-Father to James Duke of York, who married Anne, daughter to Sir Edward Hyde Ba∣ron of Henden, and Lord Chancellor of England, and hath Issue Charles Duke of Cambridge. YORK. The City of York anciently called Eboracum, is seated upon the ri∣ver Ʋre, which we call Ouse, in the VVest-riding of this County, and is the second City of England, both for fame and greatness; a pleasant large and Stately place, all well fortified, and beautifully adorned, as well with private as publick edifices, and rich and populous with all; seated on the river Ouse, which cutteth it as it were in twain, both parts being joyned together with a fair stone-bridge, consisting of high and mighty arches: a City of great fame in the Roman times, and of as eminent reputation in all ages since, and in the several turnes and changes which have befallen this Kingdom under the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, hath still preserved its ancient lustre; adorned it was with an Archie∣piscopal See, in the time of the Brittains, nor stooped it lower, when the Saxons received the Faith, Richard the second, laying unto it a little Territory on the VVest side thereof, made it a county of it self; in which the Archbishops of York enjoyed the rights of Palatines: and for a further lustre to it, Henry the eighth appointed here a councel for the Government of the Northern parts, consisting of a Lord Presi∣dent, certain Councellors, a Secretary and other Officers, and yet in none of these hath York been more fortunate then that it adorned so many Princes of the Imperial line of Germany, and blood Royal of England, with stile and attribute of Dukes and Earls of YORK. 1. Otho of Bavaria Earl of York. 2. Edmund of Langley, fift Son to Edward the third, Duke of York. 3. Edward Plantagenet Son of Edward of Langley, Duke of York. 4. Rich. Plantagenet, Nephew of Ed. of Langley, Duke of York. 5. Rich. of Shrewsbury Son of King Edw. Duke of York. 6. Henry, second Son to King Henry seventh, Duke of York, after King of England. 7. Charles second Son of James King of England. 8. James second Son to King CHARLES now Duke of York.
The Duke of CUMBERLAND. It is needless to set down at large the Brittish line of this Heroick and VVarlike Prince Rupertus, being sufficient to tell you that he is Son to that Peerless and unparallel'd Princess Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia, daughter to James King of great Brittain; sister to Charles King of great Brittain of immortal fame and memory, and Aunt to Charles now King of great Brittain, whom we may justly call the miraculous; God of his infinite goodness having so miraculously preserved and re∣stored, and doubtless will still protect him. CUMBERLAND. Cumberland is the farthest County of England on the North-VVest side, anciently part of the Brigants. It is called Cumbria as being in∣habited by the true and natural Brittains, who in our language are cal∣led Kymry, when as the residue of those Northern parts had yielded to the conquering Saxon: a country for the Scituation of it, neither un∣pleasant nor unprofitabe, the valleys yielding corn sufficiently, the Mountains breeding great flocks of sheep, the Meeres replenished with all kind of wild fowle, and the adjoyning Sea affording variety of fish. It containeth in it not above 58. parish Churches, but very ma∣ny Chappels of ease as big and large as are the Churches; of these, there are nine market Townes, whereof the chief (next Carlile) for dispatch of business is that of Parith, wherein they hold their Sessions and As∣sises. Late was it ere this County became an Earldom, being now be∣come a Dukedom, when Henry the eighth bestowed the stile and dig∣nity of Earl of Cumberland, upon Henry Lord Clifford, and Charles the first, the dignity of Dukedom upon his Nephew Prince Rupert. Earls and Dukes of CUMBERLAND. Henry Lord Clifford created Earl of Cumberland by K. Henry the 8. Henry Clifford, Earl. George Clifford, Earl. Francis Clifford, Earl. Henry Clifford, Earl. Prince Rupert Duke of Cumberland.
Tomus Secundus. THE ANCIENT and MODERN BRITTISH and WELSH HISTORY. AFter the Romans had given over the Government and protection of the Brittains, the inhabitants of the South part of the Isle, being altogether,Brit. Hist part. 2. l. 1. fol. 176 by their own strength, unable any longer to withstand the furious assaults of the Scottish men and Picts (who were already come with their power as far as Stanford upon the River of Welland) assembled themselves toge∣ther in several companies,A Town in Lincolnshire. and the most ancient and best respected among them entred into consultation, what means might then be used for defence in a case of such necessity. But first of all for that they had found by their late experience what dangerous effects proceed from civil jars, they resolved with common consent to run all joyntly one and the same course: and for the better strengthening of this their purpose they elected a King whose name was Vortiger, a man much esteemed both for the Nobility of his birth (as being extract from the line of the Brittish Princes) and also for the General good opinion conceived of his sufficiency to undergo so weighty a charge, though the eminency of his degree did soon after lay open those vices and infirmities which his private life had concealed. To him did all the petty Princes in the Isle submit them∣selves. They then entered into Consultation together, and called to minde the Conditions of such Nations as were most known unto them, considering well with themselves, that from the Romans there was no more relief to be expected (Italy it self, the seat of the Empire, being invaded by strangers) and France was assailed as well as Brittain. That Germanie (though a mighty and ample Region) was not altogether free from incumbrance. For this Countrey had formerly been the common eceptacle of those Northren people, that dwelling beyond the Rhene and Panon, and being very fruitful in generation, came usu∣ally thither to disburden themselves, and to seek new habitations: by reason whereof the Germains themselves were much distressed, and now and then forced to abandon their Na∣tive Soyl, being sometimes also by consent among themselves chosen out by lots for that purpose; howbeit those strangers which had there planted themselves, were for the most part better able to annoy other Countreys, then to maintain in peace what by intrusion and vio∣lence they had gotten.Saxons re∣nowned both by sea & land. Among all the Germains there was at that time no one Nation which for great adventures both by Sea and Land was more renowned then the Saxons. For touch∣ing qualities of the minde, they were bold, hardy, and vain glorious, patiently enduring labour, hunger and cold, whereunto by the constitution of their bodies, and temperance of the Climate they seemed to be framed, as being very strong, and yet not unwieldy, tall of stature, but not uncomely or out of due proportion. For the North Region by reason of the coldnesse of the air, which driveth the natural heat inward, bringeth forth men commonly of greater courage and ability of body, then those countreys that lye nearer the sun. Their dyet was simple and homely, neither knew they any other a long time, till by attaching some of the Roman ships, stragling about the coasts of France and the Lower Ger∣many, they became first acquainted with their manner of Victualling. Their habit was nei∣ther costly nor cumbersome, but serving indeed rather for decency and ornament then for defence against the sharpnesse of the air, or such like annoyances. For their garments were commonly of linnen or yarne, woven with divers colours, and hanging loose about them, the locks of their hair (which in former time they had been accustomed to shave) being then curled and spread abroad in compasse, so that they covered their shoulders and upper parts of their cassocks. The weapons which they ordinarily used in fights, were
long spears, round targets, and betle axes, having also (trussed up at their backs) cer∣tain short swords, which they did wear continually for readinesse upon all occasions. In the art of Navigation they were very expert, and lived at the first by pilfery, and after∣wards by open robbery, being trained up therein, even from their childhood, under a kind of discipline: stormes at sea, unseasonable weather, perils of Rocks and Sands loss of goods and shipwracks (which terrifie other men) they carelessely contemned, while they seemed to have not only a certain knowledge of them,The customes and manners of the Saxons. but also a certain familiarity with them. The Offices of Souldiers and Marriners they executed with like skill, and often times with equall advantage. There was no kind of Cruelty, in a manner new or strange unto them. Neither were they altogether void of policie, in watching opportunity of time and place, to further their designs, albeit they were for the most part more suddain in attempting and procuring other mens harmes, then wary or well advised in avoiding their own. Su∣periority in degrees they hardly admitted, but each man commanded and obeyed as the cause required, being as ready to learn of his fellowes what he knew not, as to instruct others in those things wherein he happened to be skillfuller then the rest. Of their blood they were nothing at all sparing, but they exercised cruelty, sometimes even upon themselves, as making no account to cast away their own lives, rather then to endure any publick shame, scorn or disgrace. The wicked Sacrifices of the Saxons.When they did set forth to Sea upon any Voyage, their custome was to choose out of the number of their Captives every tenth man to be murdered, and offered up as a pur∣ging sacrifice to their profane Gods; esteeming it a work of Religion, and much more be∣hooveful for them, then to receive any ransome for redemption of such prisoners as they had taken. The Saxons from whence.The Ancestours of the Saxons (as approved Authors report) did fetch their Original from the Sacae, a people of Asia, that came first out of Scythia to Europe with the Goths, Sue∣vians and Dacians, and being either by nature inclined to War, or by necessity constrained thereto for supplying their own wants, ranged oft times from place to place, as men alwaies ready upon hope of spoyle to be drawn into any action, or to encounter any peril what∣soever. In processe of time they seated themselves in Cimbria Chersonesus (now called) Denmark, and in the Raign of Dioclesian the Emperour, became famous for their Piracies committed upon the Coasts of Brittain and the Lower Germany, when Carausius being sent forth with a Navy to represse them, under colour of that service attempted, and with some difficulty attained the Empire. Afterwards passing over the River of Elbe, they intruded themselves by little and little into the ancient seat of the Suevians, encroaching also upon Friseland and Holland,The Brittains send for the Saxons. then called Batavia; the greatest number of them planting them∣selves in that part of Germany which is now called Saxonie. These were the men whom the Brittains supposed best able, and most likely to assist them, and thereupon Messengers were sent to declare unto them, that the fame of their valour and experience in warlick actions had moved the Brittains to require their aid against the barbarous and bloody people, which assayed by force to subdue the whole Island: that next the Romans who had now abandon∣ed them,Brit. Hist. part 2. l. 1. they knew no Nation more worthy then theirs, that the very terrour of the Saxon name (if they should but once set foot in the Isle) was able to daunt their enemies, who were for the most part men unarmed, unskilful in military affairs, and many times confounded by their own multitude. Firly that if they would undertake this War they should want neither provision of Victual or any thing else for their maintenance; the Isle being very large and fruitful, yielding abundance of all things that might serve either for profit or delight. The Saxons being very glad of this occasion of employment (which themselves would have sought if it had not been thus offered) promise to satisfie the Brittains request by send∣ing over with speed such able men as they had then in readinesse till further provision could be made, and so the messengers were dismissed. Hengist and Horsa arrive in Brittain.The messengers had scarcely made report of their negotiation at their returne into Bri∣tain, when the news came, that certain Saxons under the conduct of Hengist and Horsa (two brethren) were landed upon the Coasts of Kent, whereupon the Brittains from most parts thereabout ran to meet them, receiving them with salutations, songs and feastings, af∣ter their country guife. The time of the Saxons first arrival here by the testimony of their own Writers, was in the year of our Redemption 450. But Vortiger the King and the chief of the Brittish Nobility entertained them in other manner, giving them thanks for the great care and diligence, which they had shewed by their speedy repair into the Isle: and acquainting them further with the present estate of their affairs.Agreement between the Brittains and Saxons against the Picts. Then was there a contract made between both Nations, namely that the Saxons should undertake the war against the Picts and Scottishmen, and that the Brit∣tains should provide for them all things Necessary thereto, as Victualls, Armour and Soul∣diers wages; the charge whereof should be borne by the Brittains only, who were to leavy the same by the way of tax, to be imposed upon every Inhabitant within the Province accord∣ing to his ability, which contract with other Articles depending thereupon being ratifyed on both parts (Hengist considering wisely the nature of the People with whom he was to
encounter, and the likely advantage of suddain attempts) thought it best to take the first oportunity by leading the Saxons (who were very desirous to fight) and such of the Brit∣tains also as he supposed fit for service, into those parts where the barbarous enemy was lodged: And to that end provision of Victual, and other necessaries were made in such measure as the shortnesse of the time would permit. The Scottishmen and Picts although they did not greatly fear the Brittains (whose cou∣rage was much abated by the ill successe that accompanied their late conflicts) yet hearing that new supplies of strangers were arrived to assist them,Brit. Hist part 2. l. 1. fol. 182. they waxed more wary keeping themselves for the most part in their strength: and now upon certain intelligence of the approach of a well ordered Army, they resolved to try with them, the fortune of a set battail; wherein they found themselves more hardly matched then in former times, by reason that the Saxons (nimbly avoiding the darts and spears wherewith they were as∣sailed) did fiercely rush upon the Picts, and with their keen swords and weighty axes,The first vi∣ctory of the Saxons against the Picts. made way through the thickest Troops: So that having borne down the most valliant be∣fore them, they enforced the rest to forsake the field and save themselves by flight. After this victory they returned to the Isle of Thenet (which at their first arrival was assigned to them for a place of Residence) and Hengist their Captain fortified there divers places for defence; hoping by that means both to keep his own Territory in surety, as also (as occasion might serve) to inlarge it; for he apprehended it as a matter of no great difficulty to make a conquest of the East part of the Isle, considering that the natural Inhabitants were already brought upon their knees, the King himself given over to ease and pleasure, and in his own conceit the more secure, the lesse he entermedled with publick affairs, that the state of the war now in hand rested meerly in his own direction, and the more freely he was trusted the more safely might he deceive: that (though he was sent for to help the Brittains) yet (this fair occasion being offered, which Fortune seemed to have cast into his lap) he had no reason to neglect it, by seeking other mens advantage rather then his own. And for the Contract made with them he was no further bound to it then the Brittains themselves, who had already failed in performance of some Covenants, that the breach of one diss¦veth all the rest, and finally that in him who hath power (to prevail where he attemp nothing can be judged unlawful. With those and other like cogitations, he nourished his ambitious humour: howbeit knowing well that the forces which were already brought into the Isle, would not be sufficient to accomplish the enterprize, he perswaded Vortiger, it was very necessary that more aid should be sent for out of Germany, and to that end he named his Brother Octha and his Son Ebusa, men of approved valour, who might be directed to land with a power in the Picts own Country, and to assail the Inhabitants there, while himself in the South parts pursued the rest of them (with whom he had already encounter∣ed) whose Forces being by that means diverted, from the heart of the Isle to succour their Country men at home, or wanting their wanted supplies, which should then of force be employed elsewhere for defence, there might be some hope of a speedy and full end of the war. The event whereof otherwise was now more to be feared then in former times, if the North Brittains, whetted with the desire of revenge, and having space of breath∣ing given them, should make head and assail them again. This counsel seeming profi∣table (howsoever it proved pernicious in the end) was allowed by the King, either for that he foresaw not the peril likely to ensue thereupon, or else for that such things as God himself hath determined are doubtlesse (though sometimes foreseen) yet never pre∣vented. In the mean while the Germains inflamed with continual reports of the wealth and fruit∣fulnesse of the Isle (and sollicited by Hengist who discovered unto them the weak estate of the Brittains, and the facility of supplanting them) hired certain small vessels, wherein themselves, Wives, Children, and Families were transported into divers parts of the land: At which time Rowen the Daughter of Hengist (a woman of excellent beauty, and not of the worst behaviour) having been specially sent for by her Father, arrived in Kent and was forthwith conveyed to the Pallace where Vortiger and Hengist made their abode. Of those Germains that then came over there were three several kinds of people, namely Saxons, Juites and Angles, though the Saxons seemed to bear the most sway, by reason both of the general respect of that Nation, for their many and great exployts,A God of the Saxons from whence we call the third day in the week Wedesn∣day. and also for the authority of their Captains Hengist and Horsa, who where of the linage of Woden, from whom the Saxon Princes that afterwards raigned in this Isle, used alwaies for honours sake to derive their descent. From these Saxons the East, West and South Saxons had their Original: The Juites as some Authours report, and as the affinity of the names may seem in some sort to inferr, were descended from the Jetes and Bothes, and dwelt in the upper part of Denmark, which is at this day called Juiteland, from them the Kentish men,The Kentish men from whence. with the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, and of that part of the Land which lyeth over against it, had their beginning. The name of the Juites was of no long continuance in Brittain, notwithstanding their posterity was incorporated into the Saxons and Angels, who were ac∣counted but one Nation, the name of either of them being indifferently used as common
to both, till in the end, the Angles possessing the greatest part of the land, they were all known and called by that name alone. The Angles in those dayes were a people well esteemed among the Germains, and in num∣ber exceeded both Saxons and Juites.Lin olnsh. Yorlsh. Nor∣thum. Noting. Derby, &c. from whence. Touching their ancient seat, the opinions of wri∣ters are differing, though it be most probable that they did sometimes inhabit that part of Denmark yet retaining the name of Angle, which lyeth between Juitland and Holsutia. From them came the East Angles, Mercians, and Northumbers. But Hengist knowing well that fraud and cunning practises oft times prevail where force it self cannot, resolved as occasion might serve to make use of both: and to that end ob∣serving well the Kings humour, he applyed himself in all things to follow it, specially by soothing and nourishing him in those vices, to which by nature he was most addicted, sup∣posing thereby to strengthen his own estate, and with more security to accomplish his de∣sire, while the King intended nothing more then the satisfaction of his own immoderate appetites in sensuall pleasures,Brittish Hist. par. 2. fol. 188 which had already brought him in contempt and hatred with his people, and would by all likelyhood open the way to his speedy destruction. Whereupon, one day inviting Vortiger to a feast, he appointed Rowen his daughter to attend upon him as his Cup-bearer, at which time by her fathers instruction she behaved her self in such manner, as the King fell in love with her, and although he had a wife then living, yet was he not ashamed to tell Hengist in plain termes that he earnestly desired to become his Son in Law, if he might attain his consent for the marriage of his daughter. Hengist (who had cast out this bait on purpose to catch him) pretended respect of Vortigers own reputation, which as he said should be too much impaired by matching with a poor maid, a stranger by birth, far inferiour to him in degree, and no way worthy of so great Fortune: howbeit in the end he seemed by intreaty to yield to that, which himself would voluntarily have offered, and so making use of the occasion he was content to take the thanks, which he of right should have given. Hereupon Vortiger having cast behind him, all regard both of Divine and Humane Lawes, did put away his lawful wife (by whom he had three chil∣dren) and contrary to the advice of his faithful Councellours,Vortiger mar¦rieth Hengist daughter, ha∣ving a wife of his own. married Hengist the Sa∣s daughter. Upon the conclusion of this marriage a great part of the Country of Kent, which had been many years together governed by Guorongus as the Kings Deputy there, was assigned to Hengist, who like a wilie serpent, having now gotten in his head found means in short time to wind in his whole body. It is reported by some writers that Vodin then Arch-bishop of London reproving the King for his incontinency and other vices (which drew him down with his Realm to ruine) was by the commandment of Hengist put to death,The Archbi∣shop of London put to death by Hengists command. with many other Priests and religious Vo∣taries as persons too well affected to their Country, and odious to the Saxons, for profession of Christianity. This inconsiderate match and immeasurable bounty of the King, was much disliked by the Brittains, for that the Saxons presuming of the Kings favour by reason of his new affinity with them, came over daily in great numbers, pestering the East parts of the Isle, and many times offering abuse to the natural Inhabitants; whereupon the Brittish Nobility, com∣plained to the King,Vortiger neg∣lects to hear his Brittish Nobles coun∣sell. that their estate was now much worse then before the Saxons arrival, that strangers (under the colour of friendship) robbed them of their goods, and bereaved them of their lands: that the secret practises of such as they trusted were no lesse to be feared then open Hostility; and that if speedy order were not taken to expell them, they would in short time root out the ancient Brittains, and make themselves Lords of the whole Island. But Vorteger whose affection to his wife and her Kindred weighed down all other respects whatsoever, neglected their complaints, till by his own experience he was taught what dangerous inconveniences proceed from wilful rashnesse and mis-government: For the Brittains disdaining to be any longer commanded by such a Prince,Vortiger de∣spised by his own Subjects. as had neither power to command his own affections, nor care to provide for the safety of his Subjects, declared him uncapable, and by a general consent deprived him of all Regall Au∣thority. Vortimer. Vortimer the Son of Vortiger (a Man in disposition of mind, much like his Father) was declared King, and renewed the war with the Saxons, whom he encountered in a pitcht field near Alisford in Kent. In that conflict, Catigern his Brother, and Horsa the Brother of Hengist, fighting hand to hand were both slain, whereby though the Saxons perished in greater number then the Brittains, yet by the loss of the Generals on both sides, the fortune of the Battail seemed in a manner to be equal. On the part of the Brittains there died no man of name, save only Catigern, in remembrance of whose death there was afterwards a Sepulchre of stone erected where the battail was fought, the like monument was also built by the Saxons for Horsa their Captain, though time hath now defaced it: howbeit the memory of the place it self, (if credit may be given to the in∣habitants
there) iscontinued amongst them even to this day, by a small village in East Kent, yet bearing his name. After this the Brittains made divers attempts upon their Enemies, sometimes winning, sometimes loosing, and then recovering again that which they had lost, when Vortimer the King ended his dayes, either by a natural death, or by the trea∣chery of Rowen his Stepmother. He was a Prince of great courage, adorned with many morall vertues (and as some writers have reported) a favourer and professor of Christian religion. Vortiger restored. Now was Vortiger (either by an hope that adversity had wrought upon him a reformati∣on of mind,Brittish Hist. part second fol. 191. or else for fear least any civil discord should arise by the election of an other) revoked with common consent of the Brittains, and restored to his former Estate. During his Sons reign, as Histories report, he lived a private life near Radnor in Wales, where he be∣stowed much cost in building a Castle for defence, as he vainly imagined, against any suddain assault. In the mean time the strength of the Saxons encreased by new supplies, which came daily out of Germany, and the Brittains doubted their own Estates so much the more, by reason that the Picts and Scottish Men, (their ancient Enemies) were dispersed in most parts of the Isle. The Saxons also for their own advantage, entering often times into secret conferences and mutual leagues with them. But Hengist supposing that he could not with safety enjoy the possession of that Territo∣ry which Vortiger had assigned unto him, so long as the chief and most valiant of the Brit∣tish Nation remained alive,The treache∣ry of the Sax∣ons. devised by a cunning practice (under pretence of hospitality and friendship) to draw them together into one place, and on the suddain to supprise them. To this end he prepared a solemne banquet, at which the King with divers noble per∣sonages (as bidden guests) were present, suspecting nothing less then what was intended against them. For the Brittains being warm with good cheer and wine, (whereof they had drunk immeasurably) were scoft at by the Saxons,Drunkenness the ruine of the Brittains. the one provoking the other so far, with reproachfull terms, that in the end they fell from words to blowes, in such furious manner as the Brittains (being about 300 in number all un armed and surcharged with wine) were slain in the place, and Vortiger their King taken prisoner, who soon after delivering for his ransome the whole Country of Kent, with other Provinces thereto belonging and adjoyning, into the Saxons hands, fled to his Castle in Wales, where supposing himself free from danger, he continued his vitious and prophane manner of living, till in the end both himself and his Castle (as some writers affirm) was by light∣ing from Heaven consumed to ashes. Thus Vortiger the last King of the Brittish blood, a Prince in manners dissolute, and weak in actions, was by strangers dispossessed of his Kingdom, living to see the ruine of his Country, whereof himself was the principal cause, and dying, in the end, a strange and unnatural death, which is commonly the issue of a disordered and infamous life. The report goeth that this fatal meeting was held upon Salisbury-plains, where not many years after Aurelius Ambrosius caused that strange building of stone (now call'd Stone-hedge) to be erected as a perpetual monument of so many worthy Brittains slain and buried there, concerning which sundry conjectures have been made, as being either framed according to mens particular conceits, or grounded upon common reports, re∣ceived by tradition. But by what means so ever they came thither, they are accounted at this day one of the miracles of England, in regard both of the stones themselves, which are of a huge bigness, as also of their position and order, whereby they seem in a manner to be supported with their own weight, in hanging one by an other; considering withall that there are no stones for building to be found within many miles of that place. Now were the Brittains driven from place to place, some flying to the mountains, o∣thers hiding themselves in Caves under ground, where they either perished for want of food, or (coming abroad to seek for relief) were cruelly murdered, their Enemies in the mean time ranging up and down without resistance, rafing their houses,The wofull condition of the Brittains. polluting the Altars in their Temples with the blood of their Priests, burning the Temples themselves, and committing all manner of sacriledge, and outrage without regard of place or person. For the Saxons as by little and little they planted themselves in the most wealthy and fruitfull parts of the Isle; so they endeavoured to supplant the true Christian religion, whereof they professed themselves open Enemies: as men meerly addicted to heathenish superstition, in worshipping divers Gods and Goddesses, among whom the Images of Thor, Woden, Frea, and Eoster, were placed in their Temples, as their chief Patrons: they painted Thor with a Scepter in his hand, after the same manner that the Poets used to describe the Image of Jupiter, and him they reverenced as the commander and disposer
of thunder and lightning, with all those Meteors which are engendered in the middle Re∣gion of the Air,From whence the name Thurs∣day first deri∣ved. consecrating to him the fifth day of the week, which was afterwards called Thursday. The name of Woden they attributed to Mercury, or as some write to Mars, whom they reverenced as a Protector in war, and a giver of strength and courage a∣gainst their Enemies. To him they usually sacrificed with mans blood, and dedicated the fourth day of the week, naming it Wodensday, as yet retaining the first denomination with very little difference.Wednesday from whence: Under the name of Fre they sacrificed to Venus (as the giver of peace and pleasure, whom they adored sometimes under the figure of Priapus, com∣mitting to her the Patronage of the sixth day called Frea-day. Of these three, Thor was placed upon a three footed stool in the midst,Friday from whence. and Woden, and Frea on each side. To the Goddess Eoster they alwayes offered Sacrifice in the moneth of April, which thereupon was called Eoster-moneth. In their consultations of any weighty matter they observed south-saying and casting of lots. Their custom of casting of lots was, first to cut a branch from a fruit-bearing tree into many pieces, which being distinguished with several marks, they did cast upon a white garment at a venture, then (if the matter concerned the Common-Wealth in general) the Priest;The manner of casting lots among the Saxons. if a private person, only the Master of the house (having prayed the Gods and looked towards heaven) did take up every one of the said pieces three times, and interpreted the future success according to the form and simi∣litude of the marks; if the lots fell out contrary to their minds they consulted no more that day, if otherwayes, yet they would make further tryal by observing the flying and singing of birds. They had another practise also to search out the event of great and weighty battails with their Enemies. For they would get some one of that Nation, with which the war should be made, and then take another choice man of their own, arming them both after their Country guise,Horses much honoured by the Saxons. and so make trial of their valour, conjecturing by the success of that fight, on whose side the victory should afterwards fall: but of all other passages the neying of horses was of greatest credit, both with the Preists and People, who fondly supposed that those beasts understood and were privy to their secrets.Why a horse for the Saxons Armes. And hereupon (as some suppose) the Dukes of Saxony in times past, gave a horse for their Ensign. The names also of Hengist and Horsa (the first men of note of the Saxon Nation that arrived in Brit∣tain) do signifie in their own language a horse,Brit. Hist. part. 2. fol. 195. Mr. Bro. fol. 199. Jo. Gosc. Hist. Eccle. Mat. Parker. Antiq. Brit. p. 8. Antiq. Glast. Capgrave in vita St. Patri∣cii. Gul. Malm. l. de Antiq. Caenob. Glast. which denominations, whether they were given in respect of their strength and courage (qualities by nature proper to that beast) or whether they received them upon any other occasion or accident, I cannot certainly affirm, sayes my Authour. In this age we had here in Brittain many Monasteries and Religious houses, both of Men and Women. Our old Religious house in Glastenbury, continued in this age, as in the former, having twelve religious Eremites belonging unto it, dwelling in the places and Cells of the first twelve in the time of St. Joseph of Aramathea. This is testified by the old Manuscripts of that place, and Will. of Malms, in his book of the antiquity thereof wit∣nesseth, that those holy men in the number of twelve, thus successively lived and served God untill St. Patricks coming. The names of the twelve then living were Brunbam, Dyregaan,The great sanctity of the Brittish Nobility. Viwall, Wentreth, Bantonnewing, Adeloobre, Loyor, Wellyas, Breden, Swellwis, Hinloirmus, and Alius, all of them descended of noble families, rather preferred this poor penitential eremitical life then worldly honour. The antiquities of Glestenbury further witness, that about this time, there was new founded or renewed an other little Religious house in honour of St. Michael the Archangel, and particularly to honour and pray to him. And that Arnulphus and Ogmar, two re∣ligious holy men, were the first that supplyed that office and duty there. Math. West. an. 543.That there were divers Monasteries in Brittain, as well in London, Winchester, Kent, and other places, appeareth evidently by divers Authors. For say they, Hengist the Pagan Saxon at his coming into Kent,Stow. & Howes Brit. & Sax. in Const. & Vortiger. found many religious houses both of Men and Women, and many of them were glorious Martyrs by the Saxon persecutors. Hengist slew the good Archbishop Vodine, and many other Priests and Religious Men. All the Churches in Kent were polluted with blood, the Nunns with other Religious persons were by force put from their houses and goods. These religious houses must needs be builded, and so furnished with goods, and con∣secrated persons before the Saxons entred, and so in, or before this age; these men be∣ing then Pagans were no founders but destroyers of such monuments,Bed. 1. c. 6. not only in Kent, but all places where they prevailed by all histories. Among these these sumptuous and stately Church,Math. West. an. 313. & 586. and Monastery of St. Alban, builded within ten years after his Martyr∣dome, was one; for the Monastery there, was not as Math. West. proveth, founded first by King Offa,Kaer Carodoc Salisbury. Manuscript. Gallic. Antiq. c. 24. Galf. Mon. Hist. Brit. l. 8. c. 9: but being destroyed by the Saxons was re-edified by him. There was also a noble monastery at Amsbury in Wiltshire, near Salisbury, in which, (as an old French Manuscript, and others say) there were at this time three hundred. This was founded long before the Saxons came, by one Ambrius near Kaer Carodoc Salisbury. Our old English Chronicle treating of the desolation which the Pagan Saxons wrought in this Kingdom, in destroying religious Houses and Churches, and how Aurelius Ambrosius
restored and builded them again, thus delivereth, that in general and particularly of this Monastery, King Aurelambros went throughout the Land,Mr. Breugron fol. 610. and put away the name of Hengist-Land, that Hengist after his name had called it before. Then he let call it again great Brit∣tain, and let make again Churches, and Houses of Religion, Castles, and Cities, and Boroughs,Old English Chronicle, part. 5. fol. 43. and Townes, that the Saxons had destroyed. The Brittains led him to the Mount of Am∣brian, where sometime was an house of Religion, which then was destroyed through the Paynims, whereof a Knight that was called Ambross, that sometime was founder of that house, and there∣fore the hill was called the holy Mount of Ambrian, and after it was called Ambesbury. The King Aurclambros let amend and redress the house of Ambesbury, and put therein Monks, but now there be Nuns. There was a Monastery of great renown at Abington in Berkshire, before the coming of the Saxons into Brittain, the old Chronicle of that house is witness, testifying that then there were five hundred Monks and more belonging to that Monastery, living in woods and desarts, getting their living by their labour,King Cissa a Saxon, a cruel persecuter of the Monks at Abington, and all Christian Brittains. and upon the holy dayes and Sundayes coming together in their Abbey, all excepting threescore which continually abode in the Abbey, serving God there. And that before King Cissa was a Christian, he put those Monks either to death, or forced them from their Monastery, and cruelly persecuted all Christians. In the mean time the Brittains coming together from the places of their retreat, and combining their dispersed forces the better to defend themselves against the power of the Enemies, were freshly assailed by the Scottishmen and Picts,Brit. Hist. part 2. fol. 196. a great number of the Saxons also being newly entred into association with them, whereupon Germanus the Bishop who came over into Brittain, a little before the Saxons arrival,Picts, Scots, and Saxons enter into asso∣ciation against the Brittains. and had remained there with Lupus, to the end they might instruct and confirm the Brittains in the true faith a∣gainst the Pelagians confident of the goodness of this cause, and to give encouragement to his new converts, offered himself to be the leader of the Brittish Army, which con∣sisted for the most part of such Christians as himself had lately baptized, the place where∣in they pitched was a fair valley enclosed on both sides with high Mountains, over which their Enemies were to march: the Bishop himself and certain Priests that attended him, standing in the midst of the Army, exhorted the Brittains to fight couragiously as the Sol∣diers of Christ, under the banner of the Crosse (which badge they had received in their baptisme) and commanded them all upon the enemies approach to answer him aloud with one consent in such manner as himself began. Thereupon the Saxons and Scottishmen ascending the further side of the hill, supposed to have charged the Brittains on a suddain, which when Germanus and his Priests who were about him perceived, they cryed out three several times Alleluja, all the Brittains seconding the cry, and the Eccho rebounding from the hills, redoubled the sound,A miraculous victory ob∣tained by the Brittains a∣gainst the Picts & Scots and Saxons; the word be∣ing Alleluja. by reason whereof the Pagans (imagining the number of the Christians much greater then it was indeed) cast away their weapons and fled, the Bri∣tains killing many of them in pursuit: and such as escaped the sword, being drowned in the River which impeached them in their flying. After this, memorable victory Germa∣nus perswading the Brittains to unity and constancy in profession of Christian Religion, as a means to make their attempts against their enemies prosperous, departed out of Brittain whether (as some writers report) he soon after returned, and by the assistance of Severus the Bishop of Trevers suppressed the Palagian heresie: Which after his departure sprung up again, and increased among the Brittains. In remembrance of whose zeal,Brit. Hist. part 2. fol. 197. and travail in that behalf sustained, the Christians of Brittain afterwards dedicated unto him (as a pro∣tecting Saint) certain Churches and Houses of Religion in divers paces of the Land. Aurelianus or Aurelius Ambrosius. The Saxons presently after perceiving that the Brittains were scattered in several troops, disarmed and unfurnished of all things necessary for support of the War, prepared them∣selves to follow them, and to empeach them from joyning their forces togeather any more, to which end they divided themselves into several companies, with a full resoluti∣on either utterly to destroy and expell them out of the Isle, which they had almost brought to passe, when Aurelianus Ambrosius coming out of France into Brittain, brought hither some of the Brittains that had seated themselves there, who pittying their distressed Country men in the Island, determined either to relieve them, or to perish in the enterprize. This Ambrosius was a Roman by birth, honourably descended, and as hath been conjectured,Brit. Hist. & sup. of the race of that Constantine, who for the hope of his name only (which was reputed ominous) had been elected Emperour by the Roman Army in Brittain. And being now the chief leader of the Brittains, he oft times encountered the Saxons, and by the assistance of Arthur a valiant Captain gave them many overthrowes.Howes Brit. & Saxons fol. 52. Aurelius Ambrose (saith Howes) was ordained King of Brittain, in whose time the Brittains by little and little, began to take courage to them, and coming out of their caves in which they lurked before, and with one consent calling for heavenly help, thet they might not
for ever be utterly destroyed. They having for their Captain and leader, the foresaid Aureli∣us, assemble themselves together, and provoked the Victors to fight, and through Gods assistance atchieved the victory, and from that day forward were the men of the countrey. The enemy had the victory till that year in which Bath was besieged, where they gave their Enemies a great overthrow, which was about the fourty fourth yeer of their comming into the Land. Of this Aurelius, William of Malms. writeth thus, Surely even then (saith he) the Brittains had gone to wrack, if Ambrosius who only, and alone of all the Romans, remained in Brittain, and was Monarch of the Realm after Vortiger, had not kept under the proud Barbarians,Stone-hedge built by Aure∣ius Ambrosius. with the notable travel of the warriour Arthur. Geffry of Mon. tells us that this Ambrosius caused Churches to be repaired, which had been spoyled by the Saxons. He caused also the great stones to be set on the plain of Salisbury, which is called Stone-hedge, in remembrance of the Brittains that were slain and buryed there in the raign of Vortiger. This ancient monument is yet to be seen, and is a number of stones rough and of a grey co∣lour, twenty five foot in length, and about ten foot in breadth, they are conjoyned by two and two together,Howes Ʋt. sulpa. and every couple sustained a third stone lying overthwart gatewise, which is fastened by the means of tenons that enter into mortases of those stones not closed by any cement. It appeareth that there hath been three rancks going round as circles, one with∣in another, whereof the utmost and largest containeth in compasse 300 foot, but the other rancks are decayed, and therefore hard to reckon how many stones there be. Gffr. Mon. Garal. Cam. Gerva. Doro.The Chronicles of the Brittains do testifie, that whereas the Saxons about the year of our Lord 450. had slain 48. of the Brittains Nobility by treason, and under colour of treaty, Aurelius Ambrosius now King of the Brittains, desirous to continue their memory with some worthy monument, caused these stones to be set up in the place of their murther and burial, the which stones had been first brought from Affrick into Ireland, and had been placed on Mount Killare, and from thence by the industrious means of Merlin were conveyed to this place, to the foresaid end. There are about this place certain little hills or banks, under which are found sometimes bones of big men, and pieces of armour, also not far from thence remain old ruines of the manner of a fortress, which the Romans most likely did build there in times past. Such was the devotion of this time, as we may gather by old Writers, testifying that after the Pagan Saxons had destroyed the Churches and Abbeys in Brittain, yet many still re∣mained,Will. Lamb. Peram. of Kent p. 330. Mr. Broug. fol. 601. Mat. West. an. 490. Idem an. 498. Galf. Mon. hist Brit. l. 7. c. 16 and their Abbats were honoured (and Will. Lamb. perambulation in Kent tells us; In ancient time even the greatest personages held Monks, and Nuns in such veneration and liking, that they thought no Citty in case to flourish, no house to have long continuance, no castles sufficient∣ly defenced, where was not an Abbey, Priory or Nunnery, either placed within the walls, or planted at hand or near adjoyning) and numbred among our Nobles, spiritual Lords be∣fore the temporal. So it was in that great solemnity, when Aurelius Ambrosius kept the feast of Penticost at Amesbury; he had there many Bishops, Abbots, and many other Noble per∣sons. And after Brittain was more decayed by those Pagans, yet there were still both Bi∣shops and Abbats here, and they buried the body of their King Aurelius Ambrosius in regall manner: thus it was in all places and Provinces in this Kingdom, where these Pagans reign∣ed most, London, Winchester, Lincolne, York, and other parts, where they destroyed Chur∣ches and all holy monuments,Mat. West. an. 462. martyred the Priests at the Altars, burnt holy Scriptures, defaced and obscured Martyrs tombs. They found every where Religious persons, who flying their persecution hid themselves, in caves, woody places, and desart crags of hills and mountains. Alla and his three sons, Kymon, Plineing, and Cissa came into Brittain with three ships, and landed with them in a place called Kimon shore,Howes Brit. & Saxon. fol. 53. and there slew many of the Brittains, forcing the rest to take their flight into a wood called Andredsleage. This Alla fighting with the Brittains in a place neer unto Macreds Boorn, or Micreds Rilear, slew many of them, and put the rest to flight. Alla and Cissa his sons, after long seige, brake into the Citty of Andredcester, and slew the inhabitants,Andredcester. from the greatest to the smallest. Port and his two sons Byda and Moegla arrived in Brittain with two ships, in a place called Portesmouth,Portsmouth. and there slew a young Gentleman, one of the Nobility of the Brittains, and divers others, The same year two Dukes, to wit Cerdic, and Kenric his son, came into Brittain with five ships, and arrived in a place called Cerdic shore, the same day they fought with the Brittains and put them to flight:Howes ut sup. Cerdic and his son Kenrie slew Natanland, King of the Brittains, and 5000 men, of whose name that countrey, as far as Cerdicsford, was called by the name of Natanleend. I beseech Mr. Howes to give me leave to tell him, that Port could not land at Portsmorth, nor Cerdic at Cerdicshore, being names at their arrivall utterly unknown, and questionlesse had other Brittish names; these nomenclations seemed to be taken from Port and Cerdic, and therefore the Authour should better have given their first appella∣tions. Ambrosius Aurelianus or Aurelius, being poysoned, dyed, when he had reigned thirty five
years and was buryed at Stone-hedge then called Chorsa Gigantum. It is strange to me, that a Prince so much a Christian, and a restaurator and repairer of Churches, Monasteries, and sacred places consecrated for the Sepulture of devout Christi∣ans, and that both Bishops and Abbots should be present at the funerals and obsequies of so deserving a King, and not afford him a Sepulcher in a Church, he having repaired and re-edified so many. Ʋter Pendragan. After that Aurelius Ambrosius was dead, his brother Ʋter Pendragon, whom Harrison cal∣leth Aurelius Ʋterîus Ambrosianus, was made King in the year of our Lord 500. The cause why he was sirnamed Pendragon, was, for that Merlin the great Prophet likened him to a Dragons head, that at the time of his nativity marveilously appeared in the Firmament,Hollenshed. Hist. of Engl. fol. 127. Howes & Stow Brittains and Saxons fol. 53 at the corner of a blazing star, as is reported. Others suppose that he was so called of his wisdome and serpentine subtilty, or for that he gave the Dragons head for his arms. This Ʋter, hearing that the Saxons with their Captains Octa or Occa the Son of Hengist and his brother Osca had besieged the Citty of York, hasted thither, and giving them battail put them to flight, and took Osca and Occa prisoners. Hector Boetius in his Chronicle is of an other opinion, for he saith, Ʋter Pendragon, at the death of his brother Aurelius was in Wales, as not yet fully recovered of a dangerous sicknesse, wherewith lately he had been extreemly molested; yet the Lords of Brittain, after the funerall of their last King, came unto him, and set the Diadem upon his head, and though he was not able to go against the Saxons (who by reason of Aurelius his death, were very busy and more earnest in pursuing the war then before) and army was yet prepared and sent forth with all convenient speed, under the leading of one Nathaliod, a man neither of ancient extraction, nor skill in military affairs. The Noble men were nothing pleased herewith, and misliking altogether the lack of discretion in their new King, they doubted much least in time to come he would have more delight to advance men of base lineage and degree, then such as were descended of noble parentage: yet because they would not put the state of the Land in danger, through any mutiny they agreed to go forth with him in that journey. Occa had advertisement given him by secreet letters sent to him by some close friends among the Brittains of the whole matter, and therefore in hope of the better successe, he made all possible speed to encounter the Brittains: and thus the one army coming in fight of the other, they prepare to the battail, and shortly after the first onset the Brittains retreated and turned their backs, by reason that one of their chiefest Commanders called Gothlois disdaining to be under Nathaliod, got him up to the top of the next hill; with such as were under his power and charge, leaving the other Brittains in eminent danger, which they perceiving began also to save themselves by flight. There dyed no great number of the natives; for Occa mistrust∣ing what Gothlois meant by his retreat, would not suffer the Saxons to follow the pursuit, but in the night following Gothlois departed secretly, and rested not till he was out of danger: Occa then perceiving himself to have the upper hand, sent an Herald unto King Ʋter, with a certain message threatning destruction to him and his people if he refused to do that which he should appoint. Ʋter perceiving what disloyalty rested in the hearts of his own Subjects, agreed that the matter might be committed to eight grave and wise Councellours, four Brittains and as many Saxons, which might have full power to make an end of all controversies and variances depending between the two Nations Occa was likewise contented therewith, where∣upon by the award, agreement, and sentence of these so nominated eight persons, suffi∣ciently authorised thereto, a league was concluded upon, certain articles concluded and approved, among the which the chiefest was, that the Saxons from thenceforth should quietly enjoy all that part of Brittain which lyeth before the Almain and Germain Ocean, the same to be called ever after England; and all the residue should remain to the Brittains as their own rightful inheritance. Thus Hector Boetius a true Scot,Thus far Hect Boetius but all he writes is not absolute∣ly truth. Fabian calls this Castle Tintagel ut supra, and the Lady Igwarne or Igorne. but we shall find the name of England imposed upon this Kingdom otherwayes; both in respect of time and cir∣cumstance. But let us return, saith Hollenshed, to Ʋter Pendragon, according to that which we find in the Brittish Histories. To proceed therefore after our own writers; when he had vanquished the Saxons and taken their two chief Commanders prisoners, in processe of time, he fell in love with a most beautyful Lady called Igwarne or Igerna, wife to one Garo∣lus or Garlois Duke of Cornewall, the which Duke he slew at length neer his own Castle, cal∣led Dinulioc or Dunilioc, to the end he might enjoy the said * Lady, whom afterwards he marryed, and begat on her that noble Knight Arthur, and a daughter named Agnis or Anna. Occa and Osca escaping also out of prison, assembled fresh powers, and again began to vex the Brittains, whereof Ʋter having advertisement, prepared to resists them, and
finally went himself in person against them, and at St. Albans, as some write, gave them battail, and slew them both in the field. Polidor Virgil will have that battail fought in this Kings reign, wherein St. German cau∣sed the Alleluja to be used, but questionlesse he mistaketh, as is before specified. But now to the incidents which happened in the reign of Ʋter; we find that one Porth a Saxon, with his two Sons Megla and Beda, landed at Portsmouth, about the beginning of the said Ʋters reign,Hollenshed. ut sup. fol. 130. and slew a noble young man of the Brittains, and many others of the meaner sort with him. Of this Porth the town and haven of Portsmouth took the name, as some have thought. Moreover about sixty years after the comming of the Saxons into this land with their leader Hengist, one Nazaleod a mighty King among the Brittains, as∣sembled all the power he could make to fight with Certicus the King of the West Saxons, who, understanding the great power of his enemies, required aid of Oska King of Kent, also of Elle King of Sussex, and of Porth and his Sons which were lately arrived: Certicus being then furnished with a competent army, divided the same into two battails reserving the one to himself and the other he appointed to his son Kenrick. King Nazaleod perceiving that the wing which Certicus led was of more strength then the other which Kenrick governed, he set first upon Certicus, thinking that if he might di∣stresse that part of the Enemies army he should easily overcome the other. Hereupon he gave such a fierce charge, that by pure force he opened the same, and so overthrew the Saxons on that side making great slaughter of them as they were scattered.The Brittish King Nazaleod slain. The Brittains overthrown. Mat. West. Hen. Hunt. Stuff and Whitgar ar∣rived, 514 An other o∣verthrow of the Brittains by the Saxons The which manner of dealing when Kenrick saw, he made forward with all speed to succour his Father, and rushing in among the Brittains, he brake their army in pieces, slew their King and put his people to flight. There died of the Brittains that Day five thousand, the residue escaping by flight. In the fixt year after this battail, Stufft and Wightgar, who were Nephews to Certicus came with three ships and landed at Certicestshore, and overthrew a number of Brittains, who came against them in order of battail, and so by the coming of those his Nephews, being right valiant and hardy men, the part of Certicus became much stronger. About the year of our Lord 519. the Brittains fought with Certicus and his son Kenrick atThis place was formerly called Nazal∣coy from Na∣zaleod King of the Brittains. The Isle of Wight con∣quered by the Saxons, with loss of the Brittains. Howes ut sup. Certicestford, where the Brittains valiantly behaved themselves, yet in the end (for who can resist what the he highest hath decreed) were put to flight, not without great slaughter, when greater would have been had not night befriended them, which impeached the bloody and barbarous enemy from further execution. In the thirteenth year of the reign of Cerdicus, he with his son Kenrick, and other of the Saxon Captains fought with the Brittains in the Isle of Wight at Witgaresbridge, where they slew a great number of the Brittains, and so conquered the Isle, which about four years after was given by Cerdicus or Cerdicius to his two Nephewes, Stuff and Wight∣gar. This King Ʋter reigned eight years and was buryed at Stone-hedge, Fabian saith, he dyed not without suspition of poyson, after he had reigned sixteen years, and was buryed at Corsa Gigantum. The Fable of Pendragons, taking upon him the shape of Igernies Lord and Husband, and so injoying the pleasures of her bed, by the inchantments of Merlin, I imagine to be a phantasie taken out of Plautus, the comical poet, where Jove took the shape of Amphitrio, and so leave it. King Arthur. Before I enter too far into the discription of this King, I shall desire my Reader to believe, that as I would not willingly add or insert any thing which may be fabulous, or without Hi∣storical grounds, so would I not leave out any thing which may redound to the true honour of so glorious a King, so heroick a souldier, and so good a Christian. Whereas he is commonly branded with the note of bastardy, if Hollenshed and others relate his history truly, that can not be; for if Ʋter first slew the husband, and then married the wife, and after wedlock begot this so much, as Gordon calls him (decantatum illum Arthu∣rum) admired and famed Arthur. Though the act was equally cupable with that of Davids yet were the children questionlesse legitimate. Mr. Brou. fol. 124. Jo. Pitseus l. de viris Illust. aetat. 8. an. 720 in cremit Brit. Ananimus in li. de. St. Graal Jo. Capg. in Catal. in S. Joseph of Ar.As concerning his descent (to leave the Trojon line) it is no hard matter to derive him from St. Joseph of Aramathea; for a learned Antiquary speaking of that blessed Saint and his associates, saith. Although our universal histories of St. Joseph of Aramathea, chiefly speak of the coming of him and his religious companions not above fourteen, by any account, yet we have Antiquities testifying that great number of other Christians came with him hither, or to our Islands adjoyning at that time Among these a Brittish Eremite living when Glasten∣bury Abby was builded by King Inas, where the Antiquities thereof were diligently sought and examined, and he so conversant in them, that he wrote a book of that subject, doth plain∣ly testify in his history here of named, The holy Graal, that there came hither in the company
of St. Joseph and his religious associates, which continued with him at Glastenbury in Eremitical conversation, above 600 Men and Women that were Christians,Fits & supra. and had vow∣ed chastity or continency untill they should arrive in this Land, miraculously assigned (as it seemeth) unto them to continue in,Ant. Glast. in Tab. Antiq. and because some take exception to this Author the most warranted and allowed Manuscript Antiquities of Glastenbury written in old let∣ters in parchment, upon broad tables anciently belonging to the Monastery, affirm the same, and how divers of them were noble personages, and such as in those times in small Islands were stiled Kings, and some of our Brittish Kings descended from them: a∣mong these was first Helaius, Nephew of St. Joseph,K. Arthurs pe∣digree from the family of St. Jo. of A∣rem. by his mother. of whom this old Manuscript-Antiquity thus relateth: Helaius Nephew to St. Joseph begat Josue, Josue begat Aminadab, Amina∣dab begat Castellors, Castellors begat Manaclaniel, Manaclaniel begat Lambrord, Lam∣brord begat a Son which begat Igerna, of whom Uter Pendracon begat the noble and re∣nowned Arthur, by which it appeareth, that King Arthur did descend of the race of Joseph. And these antiquities do thus further relate unto us, Peter Kinsman of Joseph of Aramathea King of Orcany begat Erlan, Erlan begat Melianus, Melianus begat Arguth,Antiq. Glasten. Cap. in St. Jo∣seph. Arguth begat Edor, Edor begat Loth, who took to wife the Sister of King Arthur, of whom he begat four Sons to wit, Walwan, Agranayans, Gwerches and Gaheries. Again the same Antiquities speak of St. Josephs Imprisonment presently after his coming into this Island, which was in Venedocia, now Northwales neer the Isle of Mona,Harris M. S. Hist. l. 1. c. 25. Hist. Boet. Hist. Sco. in Crathlinit. Bald. de. Script. cent. lib. in Amp. Theater of great Brittain l. 6. c. 9. §. 4. St. Josephs Sister married to a Brittain. i h. Vignier Biblior. Hist. an. 63. Theater of great Brittain l. 6. c. 9. S. 9. who was set at liberty by a noble Man, whom he had converted to the faith, named Mordraius whom the antiquity calleth a King: A late writer thinketh this Mordraius to be the then King, or Ruler of the Island Mona, and that the place where he was converted, named the City Saract, was Soder in the Isle of Man, which was the first Bishops See we read of in those parts, in the time and persecution of Dioclesian. And the writers of the Theater of Great Brittain, tell us of some others of this company of St. Joseph that lived in the World and were not of the Religious number that setled at Glastenbury, and among them they name a Sister of St. Josephs, called Eurgaine, who (to speak in their words) after∣wards married to a Brittain, named Siarklos, and they cite George, Owen Harry for the same opinion. And Nicholas Vignier a French Writer in his Bibliotheke Historial in the year of Christ, 63 plainly affirmeth: Joseph of Aramathea arrived this year in great Brit∣tain with a troop, or great number of his companions. To these I may add the testimony of Tertullian, of the timely receiving of the faith of Christ by our Northern Brittains, com∣monly confounded in Histories with the Scottish Nation, by reason of their dwelling long together, and how Petrus Cluniacensis writing to St. Bernard, cited by the Theater, which followeth him therein, supposeth the Scottishmen the more ancient Christians, as not being in the like subjection to the Romans as the other then were, which cannot more probably be affirmed of any then those that came, by those Antiquities, with St. Joseph into those outward Islands, where the Scots then inhabited, and with whom they united themselves, as also with our Northern Brittains: neither can we think but among so many, even hun∣dreds which came hither at that time, some of them left a posterity of Children, as is exem∣plified in two before, one the Nephew, the other the Kinsman of St. Joseph, and we may take notice from the names themselves of some of those that be recited, as Josue, Aminadab, and Loth that they were Christians, no others in those parts, in that time ta∣king names from Scripture but they only: and for Loth one of them that is named, cer∣tain it is by our Brittish and other Histories that he was a Christian, so of Igerna and King Arthur, which likewise by these antiquities did descend from those of the company of Jo∣seph of Aramathea, and although these three last were late in respect of that first age of Christ, and lived when Brittain generally professed Christian Religion, yet Helaius Nephew or Grandsonne of Joseph, placed in the first of that Genealogy in this Land, at the time of St. Josephs coming hether, and his Son Josue being by his name a Christian did proba∣bly live until the dayes of King Lucius and Donaldus, to be of those which continued a succession of Christianity here. Mr. Broughton proving that nine Schollers of Cambridge were converted to the faith,Cambridge the School of the Brittish King∣domes. K. Arthur a Benefactor to Schollers, learning and Religion. Apud Caium li. 1. de. Antiq. Cant. & in arce, London. Howes. fol. 53. and became fervent labourers in the Vineyard of our blessed Saviour, saith, which is fur∣ther confirmed by the publick Charter of priviledges and immunities of King Arthur to that renowned ancient Town, School and University of Cambridge, where among other memora∣ble things he declareth that his christian predecessours, Kings of Brittain, had been instructed there in learning and Religion, and in particular speaking there of King Lucius, what immunities he granted to that University, testifieth further, that this our first Christian King did receive the faith of Christ, by the preaching of the learned Christian Schollers of Cambridge. This Charter was dated at London, in the year of Christ 531 rhe 7th. day of April. Arthur therefore the Son of Ʋter born in Cornwal at the age of fifteen years was crowned King of Brittain as some say at Caerleon (and most likely, for that he received the crown at the hands of Dubritius who was Archbishop there) of whose Archbishops we have formerly spoken, others will have it that he was crowned at Winchester, and one old nameless pamphlet saith at Silicester, which in the Brittish Tongue was called Caerse∣gent, and was situate near Reading.
Hollensheed ist. of Eng. fol. 131.Of this Arthur, (saith Holenshed) many things are written beyond beliefe, for that there is no Ancient Author of authority that confirmeth the same: but surely as may be thought he was a most worthy man, and by all likelyhood, a great Enemy to the Sax∣ons, by reason whereof the Welshmen, which are the very Brittains indeed, much honour his memory. He fought, as common report goeth, twelve remarkable battails against the Saxons, and in every one of them carried away the victory. Yet could he not utterly ex∣pell them out of the Realm, but that maugre all his force they kept Kent, Surrey, Norfolk, and other places by strong hand and undaunted courage; howbeit some wri∣ters hold that they held these Countries as Tributaries unto King Arthur: But Authors of Credit avouch, that he held continuall war against them and the Picts, which were allyed with the Saxons. The Brittish writers affirm that Arthur, presently after he had received the Crown of Dubright Archbishop of Caerleon (in Monmoth-shire not West-Chester, as both, Harpsfield, Porter, and others have mistaken) went with his power of Brittains against the Saxons of Northumberland, which had to their Captain, one Colgrime or Colgerne, whom Arthur van∣quished, and chased into the City of York, in which place Arthur besieged him, till at length the said Colgrime escaped out of the City, and leaving it in charge with his Brother called Bladulff, passed over into Germany unto Childrick King of that Country, of whom he obtained succours, so that the said Childrick made provision of men and ships, and came himself over into Scotland, having in his company fifteen hundred Sails, one and o∣ther. When Arthur was advertised hereof, he raised his siege, and withdrew to London, send∣ing Letters with all speed unto Howell King of little Brittain in France, who was his Kinsman, requesting him earnestly to send him aid. Howell incontinently assembled his people to the number of fifteen thousand men, and taking Sea landed with them at South-Hampton, where Arthur was ready to receive him with great joy and congratulation, from thence they drew Northwards, where both the hosts of Arthur and Howell being assembled together, marched to Lincolne, which City Childrick did as then besiege. Here Arthur and Howell assailed the Saxons with great force and manhood, and at length, after great slaughter made of the Eenemie, they obtained the Victory, and cha∣sed Childrick with the residue of the Saxons that were left alive unto a wood, where they compassed them about within the same, in such wise, that in the end they were constrain∣ed to yield themselves, upon condition that they might be suffered to depart on foot to their ships, and so avoid the Land, leaving their horse, armour, and other furni∣ture unto the Brittans.A noble bat∣tail got by the Brittains a∣gainst the Saxons. Hereupon the Brittains, taking good Hostages for assurance, permitted the Saxons to go their wayes, and so Childrick and his people got them to their ships, with purpose to return to their Country: but being on the Sea they were forced by wind to change their course, and coming on the coasts of the West parts of Brittain, they arrived at Totness, and contrary to the articles agreed upon with Arthur, again invaded the Country, and taking such armour as they could find, marched into the Country, plundering and wasting where they went, till they came to Bath, which Town the Brittains held, and defended against them, not suffering them by any means to enter, whereupon the Saxons begirt it with a strong siege. Bath besieged by the Saxons.Arthur, enformed hereof, with all speed hasted thither, and giving battail to his Enemies, slew most part of Childricks men. Child i k slain by Cador D. of Cornwall, a Brittain.There were slain both Colgrime and Bladulffe, howbeit Childrick himself fled out of the field towards his ships, but being pursued by Cador, Earl of Cornwall (that had with him ten thousand men) by Arthurs appointment, he was overtaken, and in the fight slain with all his people. Howell be∣sieged by the Scots.Arthur himself returned from this battail at or near Bath with all speed towards the Marches of Scotland for that he had received intelligence; that the Scots had besieged Howell King of little Brittain, as he lay sick there. After that Cador had accomplished his enterprise, and slain Childrick, he returned with as much speed as was possible towards Arthur, and found him in Scotland, where he re∣scued Howell, and afterwards pursued the Scots, which fled before him. K. Arthurs victory against Guillomer K. of Ireland.About the same time one Guillomer King of Ireland, arrived in Scotland with a mighty Army of Irishmen (neer to the place where Arthur then lodged or hell his quarters) to help the Scots against the Brittains: Whereupon the prudent and victorious King Arthur, turning his forces towards Guillomr, vanvished him, and chased him into Ireland. K. Arthurs marriage with Guenhe∣za. The Kingdom of Ireland held from the K. of Brittain by conquest.This done he continued in pursuit of the Scots, till he caused them to se for pardon, and to submit themselves wholly to him, and so receiving them to mercy, and taking homage of them, he returned to York, and shortly after took to wife Guenhera a right beau∣tifull Lady, neer Kinswoman to Cador Duke of Cornwal. In the year following (which Harrison noteth to be 525.) he went into Ireland, and there overcame Guillomer in the open field in a pitcht battail, constraining him to yield, and to acknowledge, by doing to him fealty, to hold the realm of Ireland of him.
It is further remembred in those Brittish histories, that he subduedGothland. Gutland and Island, with all the Isles in and about those seas. Also that he overcame the Romans in the Countrey about Paris, with their Captain Lucius, and wasted the most part of all France, and slew in single combate certain Giants. (What the Author Holenshed here meaneth by Giants I know not, neither would I have any thing fabulous fastened upon so noble a King and Christian as Arthur was: true it is that we read, Genesis Chap. 6 And Gyants were upon the earth in those dayes. Some have thought that those Giants were not men, nor begotten by men, but that either devils which fell at the first from heaven,Erroneous o∣pinions con∣cerning Giants. Philo Judeus. Josephus. Tertullian. or other Angels allured by concupiscence begat them of the daughters of Cain. Philo Judeus in his book De Gigantibus, that those whom Moses then called An∣gels, the Philosophers called Genios, which are living creatures with airy bodies. Josephus (l. 1. antiq.) saith, that Angels begat those Gyants. Tertullian also, lib. de hab itu muie∣bri, holdeth the same errour, and divers more (otherwise good Authours.) But St. Cylril of Alexandria l. 1. c 9. adv. Juli. St. Chrisost. hom. 22. in Gen. St. Ambrose de Noe & a rca c. 4. St. Aug. l. 15. c. 23: de civit. St. Hierome Tradit. Hebraic. and other most principal Doctours teach it to be untrue, yea impossible that those Giants should have been begot∣ten by any other creatures then men: For that Angels and Devils are meer spirits with∣out all Natural bodies. And if they had airy bodies (as they have not, yet) they could not have such generation, for the power or force to engender belongeth to the vegitative soul, whose proper operations are to turne nutriment into substance of the subject wherein it is, and to engender new issue or offspring from the same, as Aristotle sheweth l. 2. de anima, textu 24. And in what body soever there is a vegitative soul, it must needs be that the same was engendered, and must sometime decay and die, and so the devills should be mortall. Moreover if they could have generation together with mankind, then such issue should be a distinct species both from man and Divell, as a mule differeth both from Horse and Asse, and again if spirits had abused women in assumpted bodies and shapes of men, yet they did not take them to wives, as the Scripture saith they did who begat these giants. Finally the holy Scripture expresly calleth the giants, men, These be the mighty ones, famous men. The modesty of Scripture terming them famous, whom our common phrase would call infamous, being more monstrous in wickedness of mind, then in hugenesse of body. For they were most insolent, lascivious, covetous, cruel, and in all kind of vices most im∣pious. And if Arthur had not been revoked home to resist his Cozen Mordred, that was son to Loth King of Pictland, that rebelled in his Country, he had passed to Rome, intending to make himself Emperour, and afterwards to vanquish the other Emperour, that then ruled the Empire: but for so much as there is not any approved Authour doth speak of any such thing, we will let it alone. At his returne into Brittain, he found that Mordred had caused himself to be made King, and having allyed himself with Childrick a Saxon, (not him whom Gaufride as ye have heard supposeth to have been slain before) was ready to have resisted his landing, so that before he could come to shore he lost many of his men; but yet at length he repulsed his enemies, but not without great losse of his own men; and at length landed at Sandwich, and then joyned in battail with his enemies: in this conflict was slain Gawin a noble Chieftain, whose death he much lamented, who was brother to Mordred, who like a faith∣ful Gentleman regarding more his honour and loyal truth then neernesse of blood, chose rather to fight in the quarrel of his lawful King and loving master, then to take part with his natural brother in an unjust cause, and so there in that battail was slain, together also with Auguisal, to whom Arthur formerly had committed the government of Scotland. Mor∣dred fled from this battail, and getting ships sailed Westward and finally landed in Cornwall. King Arthur caused the corps of Gawin to be interred at Dover (as some hold opini∣on) but William of Malmsbury supposeth that he was buryed in Wales, as after shall be shewed. The dead body of Anguisall was conveyed into Scotland, and there buryed. After that Arthur had put his enemies to flight, he had intelligence into what part Mor∣dred was withdrawn, with all speed he reenforced his army, with new recruits called out of several places, and with his whole puissance hasted forward, not resting till he came neer to the place were Mordred was encamped, with such an Army as he could assemble together from his friends and adherents. Here, as apeareth by John Leyland in his book entituled The assertion of Arthur; it may be doubted in what place Mordred was encamped, but Jeffry of Monmoth sheweth, that after Arthur had discomfited Mordred in Kent at the first landing, it chanced so that Mordred escaped and fled to Winchester whether Arthur followed, and there giving him battail the second time, did also put him to flight, and following him from thence, fought him after at a place called Camblan or Kemelene in Cornewall, or as some Authours have it, neer Glastenborough. This battail was fought with such prowess and eagernesse on both sides, that in conclusion
Mordred was their slain, with the most part of his whole army. And Arthur receiving di∣vers mortal wounds died of the same shortly after, when he had reigned over the Brittains by the terme of twenty six years. His Corps was buryed at Glastenbury in the Church yard, betwixt two Pillars, where it was found in the dayes of K. Henry the Second, about the year of our Lord 1191. which was in the last year of the reign of the same K. Henry, more then six of hundred years after the burial thereof. He was laid sixteen foot deep under ground, for doubt that his enemies the Saxons should have found him. But those that digged into the ground there, to find his body, after they had entered about seven foot deep into the earth, found a mighty broad stone with a leaden Crosse fastened to that part which lay downwards towards the Corps, containing this inscription, Hic jacet sepultus Inclitus Rex Arthurius, in Insula Avelonia. This inscription was graven on that side of the Crosse which was next to the stone, so that till the Crosse was taken off it was not seen. His body was found, not inclosed within a Tomb of Marble, or other stone curiously wrought, but within a great tree made hallow like a trunk, the which being found and digged up was opened, and therein were found the Kings bones, of such marveilous bigness, that the shin bone of his leg, being set on the ground, reached up to the middle thigh of a right tall man; as a Monk of that Abbey hath written,Hapsfield exb Alisto. Aug. fol. 39. and Nic. Hapsfield saith the same in manner, viz. Os tibiae procerissimam tum ho∣minis tibiam, adtrium digitorum longitudinem superaret, the length of the shin bone ex∣ceeded in length the shin bone of the tallest man then living three fingers in length, which lived in those dayes and saw it: but Giraldus Cambressis which also lived in those dayes, and spake with the Abbot of the place, by whom the bones of Arthur were then found, affirmeth, that by the report of the same Abbot, he learned, that the shin bone of the said Arthur being set up by the leg of a very tall man (the which the Abbat, shewed to the said Giraldus) came above the knee of the same man, the length of three fingers breadth, which is much more like∣ly then the other. The skull of his head was also of a wonderful largeness, so that the space of his forehead between his two eyes was a span broad, there appeared in his head the signs and prints of ten wounds or more, all the which were grown into one wemm, except onely that whereof it should seem he dyed, which being greater then the residue, appeared very plain. Also in opening the Tomb of his wife Queen Guenhera that was buryed by him (this Queen had taken upon her a Monastical habit,Mr. Broug. fol. 603. either after the death of her Husband, or else to do pennance for some crime committed (for some there are who affirm, that she was too familiar with Mordred, her husbands, both kinsman and capital enemy) the Mo∣nastery unto which she went to receive the habit of Religion, was one of the two which were in Gaerleon, dedicated to St. Julius our Martyr, and is yet called St. Julians, and is at present the Mansion House of the Right Honourable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbery) When the tombe of this Queen was opened, they found the tresses of her hair whole and perfect, and finely platted, of colour like to the burnisht gold, the which being touched im∣mediately fell to dust. The Abbot, which then was governour of that house, was called Stephan or Henry de Bloys, otherwise de Sullie, Nephew to King Henry the second (by whose commandment he had searched for the grave of Arthur) translated the bones as well of him as of his Queen, into the great Church, and there buryed them in a fair marble Tombe, laying the bones of the King at the head of the Tombe, and the body of the Queen at his feet towards the west part. In Commendation of this Warlick Prince certain verses are made in Latine, but because they are turned into English, I set not down the Latine, but give them unto my Reader as they are in Holinshed. Who vanquisht Saxon troops, with battails bloody broyles; And purchast to himself a name, with warlick wealthy spoyles. Who hath with shivering shining sword, the Picts so oft dismaid; And eke unweildy servile yoak, on neck of Scots hath laid. Who Frenchmen Pufft with pride, and who the Germains fierce in fight Discomfitted, and daunted Danes, with main and martial might. Who of that murdering Mordred did the vital breath expell, The Monster grisley, loathsome, huge, that diresome Tyrant fell. Here livelesse Arthur lies entomb'd, within this stately hearse Of Chievaldry the bright renown, and vertues nursling fierce. Whose glory great now over all the world doth compass fly. And of the airy thunder shales, the lofty buildings high.
Therefore you Noble Progeny of Brittains line and race Arise unto the Emperour great of thrice renowned grace. And cast upon his sacred Tombe the roseal garland gay. That fragrant smell may witness well your duties you display. The occasion that moved King Henry the second to cause his Nephew the Abbot to search for the grave of King Arthur, was for that he understood by a WelshThese Bards were as He∣ralds obser∣ving the true genealogies of the Coun∣try. Bard, that could sing many histories in the Welsh language of the Ancient Brittains, that in the fore∣said Church-yard of Glastenbury, betwixt two pillers the body of Arthur was to be found buried six foot deep under the ground, Giraldus Cambrensis affirmeth that the tree, in which Arthurs body was found inclosed, was an Oak, but others suppose, that it was an Alder tree, because that in the same place a great number of those kind of trees do grow, and also for that it is known, that an Alder lying under the ground where moysture is, will long continue without rotting. But the finding thus of the body of Arthur thus buried, such as believe that he was not dd but conveyed away by Fairies, (deluded it may be by this fantastick verse) Hic jacet Arthurus ReX quondam Rexque futurus. into ome pleasant place where he should remain till a time, and then to return again, and reign in as great Authority as he did before, might well perceive themselves deceived in crediting so vain a fable; on the other side as quite contrary, some seem to doubt whether any such man was ever, In rerum Natura. William of Malmsbury, a writer of good credit and authority among the learned, hath these words, in his first book entituled De Regibus anglorum, saying, But he being dead, meaning Vortimer, the face of the Brittains waxed feeble, their decayed hope went backward apace and even then suddenly had they gone to destruction, if Ambrosius (which alone of the Romans remained yet alive and was King after Vortigerne) had not kept under and stayed the lofty barbarous people, that is to say the Saxons, by the notable aid and assistance of the valiant Arthur. This is the same Arthur of whom the trifeling tales of the Brittains even to this day do fantastically descant and report wonders: but worthy doubtless was he of whom feigned fables should not have so dreamed, but rather that true Histories might have set forth his worthy prayses, as he that did for a long time sustain and hold up his Country, that was ready to go to utter ruine and decay encouraging the bold hearts of the Brittains in the war, and finally in the siege of Badon hill, he set upon 900 of the Enemies, and with in∣credible slaughter did put them all to flight. On the contrary part, the English Saxons, although they were tossed with several chances of Fortune, yet still they recruited their forces with new supplies of their Coun∣try men that came out of Germany, and so with bolder courage assailed their Enemies, and by little and little causing them to give place, spread themselves over the whole Island, for although there were many battails, in the which, sometimes the Saxons, sometimes the Brittains got the better, yet the greater number of the Saxons that were slain, the greater number still came over to the succour of their Country-men, being called in, and sent for over out of every quart of their Territory. Here is also to be noted that where the Brittish History declareth, that Gawen or Gallo∣wyn being slain in the battail fought betwixt Arthur and Mrodred in Kent, was buried at Dover, so that his bones remained there to be shewed long after. This Gawain as saith a French Author did bear for his armes; De Purpre a vu aigle d' Or; a Deux testes membres d' Or: Purpure an Eagle displayed with two heads Or: yet by that which Will. Malm. in the third book of his volume entituled De Regibus Anglorum, the contrary may seem true:The armes of Gawain. his words are these, When in the Province of Wales, which is called Ross, the Sepulchre of Walwain was found who was Nephew to Arthur by his Sister, not going out of kind from so worthy an Uncle, he reigned in that part of Brittain, which unto this day cal∣led Walwithia, a Knight for his high prowess, most highly renowned, but expulsed out of his Kingdom by the Brother and Nephew of Hengist,Will. of Malms. de Reg. Angliae. first requiting his banishment with great detriment and loss to those his Enemies, wherein he was partaker by his just desert of his Uncles worthy praise, for that he stayed for a great many years the de∣struction of his country, which was now runing headlong into utter ruine and decay.Hollenshed Hist. of Engl. fol. 156. But Arthurs grave no were appeareth, but the others tombe was in the dayes of William the Conquerour upon the Sea side, and contained in length fourteen foot, where he was (as some say) wounded by his Enemies, and cast up by shipwrack, but other write that he was slain at a publick feast or banquet by his own Countrimen. But here you must consider, that Malmesbury departed this life about the begining of the reign of King Henry 2. certain years before the bones of King Arthur were found. But now to speak some things of the Queen, King Arthur his consort, some are of
opinion that she took that name from her excellent beauty, because Cuynne, (if truly written) in the Welsh tongue signifieth fair, so that she was named Guenuere, or Guenllean, even as you would say the fair and butifull Heonere or Helen; she was brought up in the house of Cador D. or E. of Cornwall before Arthur married her, and as it appeareth by writers, she was evill reported of, as noted of Incontinency and breech of faith to her husband; but excellent beauties seldom escape the venemous blasts of detracting and envious tongues, and never want the amorous courtings of lascivious wantons. The Brittish history affirmeth that she did not only abuse her self by unlawfull company with Mordred, but that also in Arthurs absence, she consented to take him to husband. It is likewise found recorded by an old writer, that Arthur besieged the Marches near Glastenbury, for displeasure that he bore unto a certain Lord called Melva, who had ravi∣shed Guuennere, and led her into those Marches and there did keep her. Arthur had two wives as Girald. Cam. affirmeth, of which, the later saith he was buried with him, and her bones found in his own Sepulchre so devided, yet that two parts of the Tombe towards the head were appointed to receive the bones of the man, and the third part towards the feet contained the womans bones a part by themselves. Hector Boetius writeth, that Queen Guennere being taken by the Picts, was conveyed into Scotland, were finally she died, and was there buried in Angus. And this may be true, if Arthur had three several wives, each of them bearing the name of Guenhere, as Sir John Price avoucheth. But by reason of the disagreeing of writers touching the great acts atchieved by this Arthur, and also for that some difference there is amongst them, about the time in which he should reign, many have doubted of the truth of the whole history, which is writ∣ten of him. The Brittish histories, as also the Scotch do agree that he reigned in the dayes of the Emperour Justinian, about the fifteenth year of whose reign he died, which was in the year of our Lord five hundred forty one, as Harrison also confirmeth: some write other∣wayes. The writer of the book called Aurea Historia affirmeth, that in the tenth year of Cerdicus King of West Saxons,Leyland. Arthur the warriour arose amongst the Brittains. Also Di∣vionensis writeth, that Cerdicus fighting oftimes with Arthur, if he were overcame in one moneth, he rose in another more strong and fierce then before. At length King Arthur, over toyled with hard labour and warfair, after the twelfth year of the coming of Cerdicus, gave unto him, upon his homage done and fealty received, the Shires of South-Hampton and Somerset the which Country Cerdicus named West Saxon.West Saxon. In the while that this Kingdom was thus troubled with war and destruction, between the Brittains and Saxons, the Christian Religion was not only abolished in places where the Saxons seated themselves, but also among the Brittains the right faith was brought in∣to danger, by the reviving of the Pelagian Heresie, which began to be broached (saith Hollenshed) by divers naughty persons, and questionless they were so, and all such as fol∣low them. And although in the first part of this History speaking of this most pestiferous Arch-heretick and his damnable doctrine, I then expressed not his Theses, yet upon better consideration, that all vertuous Christians may avoid them, I think it not altogether amiss to lay them open to the World, and I must heartily wish that none may follow them. The Heresies of Pelagius. 1. First he was charged, that Adam was made motral, and should have died whether he had sinned or no. 2. That his sin did only hurt himself, and not humane kind. 3. That infants new born are in the same State, wherein Adam was before his fall. 4. That by the death and prevarication of Adam, all Mankind doth not die, nor all man∣kind rise again by the Resurrection of Christ. 5. Children may have eternal life, though they be not baptized. 6. Rich men that be baptized, except they renounce all their goods, if they are taught to do any good, thing it shall not be reputed to them, neither can they have the Kingdom of God. 7. That the grace and help of God is not given to every act, but is from the will, or in the Law or Doctrine. 8. That the grace of God is given according to our own demerits. 9. That Men cannot be called the Children of God except, they be altogether without sin. 10. And that it is not free-will if it wanteth the help of God, because every one hath in his own will to do any thing or not to do it.
11. That our victory is not from the help of God, but from freewill. 12 That to them that seek pardon, pardon is not given according to the Grace and mercy of God, but according to the labour and merits of them, which by penance are worthy of mercy. St. Augustine in divers places speaketh of this Arch-heritique, and of the Arti∣cles whereof he was charged, and recanted by Pelagius, though dissemblingly, for fear, as appeared by him afterward; so did divers others; and add more errours, which he held, as that 1. Before Christ man was without sin. 2. Prayer is not necessary. 3. Man is able by the power of Freewill, not onely not to sin, but not to be tempted. 4. That Women ought to sing in the Church. 5. That all men ought to be cloathed like Monks. St. Augustine addeth that 1. Man might not ear at all. 2. The life of just men in this life to be altogether without sin, and that the Church of Christ in this world consisteth of such. 3. He denyed that the Church should offer prayers either for Infidels, and such as re∣sisted, the doctrine of God, that they might be converted unto him: or for the faithfull, that their faith might be encreased and they persevere in it. For these heresies as is said before, he was condemned by a general Councell or Coun∣cels; but harder it is to reclaim an Heretick, then to convert an Infidel yet Almighty God out of his infinite goodness, never suffereth any heresy to arise but presently he send∣eth a remedy by providing both Learned and Pious men to withstand, oppose and sup∣presse it. Dubritius therefore that was Bishop of Landaff, and after Archbishop of Caerleon, Arnaske and his successor David with other learned men, earnestly both by preach∣ing and writing defended the contrary cause to the confuting of those errours and re-establishing the truth. This holy Bishop St. Dubritius was of such sanctity of life, that after St. German and his Associates departure hence,Capg. in St. Dubritius. Antiq. Eccl. Hard. Harpsfield Hist. Eccl. An∣gliae fol. 38. he together with St. David were the Popes Legats or greatest commanders here by the highest spiritual power; St. Dubritius was a famous Master to many learned Schollers. Harpsfield speaking of the remarkable, holy and learned men of that time, saith, Amongst whom Dubritius Gainius Vagensis, of or neer the River Wye, a South-Wales man (of Monmoth shire) first comes in order to be spoken of, who first set up a school neer the River Wye, where Thelianus, Samson, and Aidan were his schollers: he himself having former∣ly been a Disciple of St. German (under whose conduct the Brittains obtained a miraculous victory against the Saxons) who was an earnest opposer of the Pelagian heresie: whose example St. Dubritius followed, both by preaching and writing;John Capg. John Leyland. he was first Bishop of Landaff, and afterwards Atchbishop of Caerleon (Harpsfield here mistaketh, and placeth his See at Westchester, which never had either Arch flamen or Arch-bishop, but both these Cityes being called indifferently Caerleon, breeds that errour; Mr. Porter in in his Lives of Saints is in the same mistake) This blessed man growing full in years, left his honours and dignities,Pitseus Conc. Polid. and with other associates betook himself to the Wildernesse or so∣litary and unfrequented mountains, where they lived by the labour of their hands, and then at last rendred up his pure soul in all peace and tranquillity to his creator, the eigh∣tenth of the Kalends of December. Whilst this blessed man held the See of Landaff, Nod a Son of King Arthur, gave certain lands lying by the River of Taff or Teiny unto that Church, which were called Benalin and Landeiliaw Vanur,Hen. Hunt. l. 2. Cap. 13. as is recorded in the monu∣ments of that Church. This Bishop set the Brittish Crown upon the heads both of Au∣relius Ambrosius, as also Arthur, and in the famous and renowned battail fought against the Saxons at the City of Badan now called Bath, besieging that place, this Dubritius was per∣sonally present, with sweet and divine exhortations, encouraging the soldiers to fight manfully against the Pagans and enemies of Christian faith; laying before their eyes the lamentable destruction of their Country occasioned by those miscreants; and how glorious that death would be, where life was spent in so good a cause, and likewise what reward they might expect at the hands of Almighty God for so Christian-like; service, that day proved most glorious unto the Brittains, who purchased a most absolute victory, obtained, as all imagined, by the prayers of St. Dubritius. He dyed in the year of our Lord 555. in the wilderness or solitude before spoken of, called Enli. But in the year eleven hun∣dred and twenty his body was translated to the Cathedral Church of Landaff, by Ʋrban Bishop of that See. I esteem (saith Harpsfield) King Arthur (though many things are ridiculously foysted upon him) a Prince so worthy to have his glory eternized, that even in Ecclesiasticall History he deserves to have his name registred. For what can be more renowned and be∣coming
a true Christian Prince, then to expose his life, estate and all for Gods sake, with Arthur, who most valiantly opposed and overthrew the Saxons, who not only had trodden the Brittans, but even Religion it self under foot? Twelve times he joyned battail with them, and twelve times came out of the field victorious, amongst all which, the greatest trophy and triumph which he purchased was that at Bath, in which, saith this Authour, præcipue post Deum in beatae Mariae ope spem posuit, after Almighty God he put his chiefest confidence in the help of the B. Virgin, and therefore advanced her effigies and picture in his shield.King Arthurs armes. Mr. Boswel in his armory fol. 22. King Arthur, that mighty Conquerour and Worthy, had so great affection and love to the sign of the cross, that he left his armes which he bare before, wherein were figured three Dragons, and another of three crownes, or thirteen, as the French say, 33331. Viz. Azure 13. crownes Or, and assumed and took to his armes, as proper to his desire, a cross silver in a field Verd. on the first quarter whereof was figured an image of our Lady with her Son in her armes, and bearing that sign, he did many marvails in armes, as in his book of acts and valiant conquests are remembred. And what can be spoken (saith the former writer) more honourably of any con∣querour then may be said of this our Arthur? For that scum or dregs of miscreants, the Saxons, being in a manner quite swept out of Brittain, he soly applyed his thoughts to the repairing of Temples and Churches,Hen. Hunt. li. 9. p. 167. K. 168. which those Pagans had demolished and rui∣ned, especially at York, where the storm of that persecution did most rage, besides many others, as at Glastenbury where he spared no cost nor charge. In the time of this most heroick King, this Island was adorned with divers learned and e∣minent Men, as Iltutus, Canigellus, David Machutus and sundry others. Iltutus, born in the county of Glamorgan, and therefore called Morganensis (whom some also call Eclhu∣tus) contemning the greatness of his birth, and all the vanities and follies of the World, as impediments to devotion and heavenly contemplation, withdrew himself from all company of Worldlings, and went unto St. Dubritius to lead an austere and solitary life, where he arived unto so great perfection, that he himself became a spirituall Master, and had many Disciples, as Sampson, David, Paulinus, and Gildas Badonicus, and others. Iltutus died in the Ides of November; the Welsh even to these our dayes cele∣brate an Annual Festival day in honour of this Saint, as is manifest by the Church dedica∣ted unto him, and in that language called Llan Iltutus: Congellus was Abbot of the famous monastery of Bangor, the nursery from whence so many learned men as filled the whole Christian World with admiration of their learning and sanctity, did spring. Disciples to this Saintly Abbot, were St. Columbanus and St. Brandon. Columbanus took the habit of Religion at Bangor, and filled Scotland, Ireland, Italy, Gallia, and Germany, with admiration of his sanctity and learning. King Arthur, in the beginning of his reign had Enemies Lotho and Conradus his al∣lies, who envying his prosperitie, made war against him; but he valiantly vanquished them with their Picts and Scots, and at his pleasure appointed them a Governour na∣med Anguisel, whom the French Author of the book of the Knights of the round table, prin∣ted at Lyons 1590. Le Roy Aquisant d' Escosse, and sail H. portoit d' argent a un lyon de guen∣les,The armes of Anguisel. arme de sable un cordelire a l' entour, he fought 12. battails against the Saxons, and al∣wayes bare away the victory. These battails saith Nennius, were fought in these places following. The first battail was fought in the mouth of the Well Gleyne or Gledy. The Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth, nigh unto the River Douglasie, in the county of Lineux. The sixt on the River Bassus. The seventh in the wood Calidon, or Coile Calidon. The eighth beside the castle called Guinien. The ninth at Caerleon in Wales. The tenth by the Sea-side in a place called Trachenrith or Rithorwood. The elventh upon a hill named Agule Cathegonien. The twelfth at the hill or tower of Bath then named Bathenhill, where many were slain by the force of Arthur; for he alone (saith Will. Malmes.) having the Image of our Lady sowed upon his armour, set upon 900. of his Enemies, and with an incredible slaughter put them to flight. But now concerning this Bath before mentioned, it is to be noted that Bath in Somerset-Shire, standeth low, compassed about with hills, whereby it is e∣vident, that either it is removed from that place where it stood in Nennius his time, or else the place which he called Mons Badonicus was not the town it self, as Reyland and others conjecture, but some other high place near, which is not unlikely; for at this day within a mile of it is a town called Bannardowne, which is so called either cor∣ruptly for Bathendowne, or else in memory of the banners displayed there, Bannardowne as seemes to me, both upon the sight of the place, and report of such as have gathered caps full of mens teeth in following the plough there, to be the same that Nennius,
or Bede meaneth, though Polydore mistakes it for Blanchmere. Thus much of Badon Hill now. King Arthur having abated the rage of the Saxons,Howes fol. 55. Arthurs round table. he constituted the Order of the round table, into which order he only entertained such of his Nobility as were most renowned for vertue and chevalry. This round table he kept in severall places, especially at Caerleon in Monmoth-Shire, Winchester and Camilet in Somersetshire.Camilet Castle one of the places of the round table. This Camilet sometimes a famous Town or Castle, standeth at the South end of the Church of South Gadburie. The same is situate on a very high hill, wonderfully strengthened by nature, to the which be two enterings up by very steep wayes, by North one, and the other by South-VVest. The very root of the hill whereon this fortress stood, is more then a mile in compass. In the upper part of the top of the hill above all the trenches,The discripti∣on of Camilet as now. is Magna Arca, or Campus, of twenty acres or more, where in divers places men may see founda∣tions or Rudera of walls; there was much duskie blue stone, that people of the vil∣lage there by have carried away. This Camilet within the upper wall being more then twenty Acres, hath often been ploughed and born very good corn; much gold, silver, and Copper of Roman coyne hath been found there in ploughing, and likewise in the fields about the roots of the hill, with many other Antick things, especially by East: Such another place is at Caerleon triple-trenched, now called the lodge in the Park. There was found in memory of Men, a horse-shoe of silver at Camilet;The coat of Lord of Earl, Hungerford. the people can tell nothing there, but that they have heard say that Arthur much resorted to Cami∣let. The old Lord Hungerford was owner of this Camilet, who bore for his Coat of armes G. and V. indented per pale a cheveron Or, since the right honourable the Lord Hastings, Earl of Huntington, from which family my wife is descended by her Grand∣mother, Daughter to the Earl of Huntington, and wife to the Earle of Worcester; Elizabeth married to Edward Somerset, Father and Mother to Henry Earl of Wigorne, whose fourth Daughter Frances was married to William Morgan of Lantarna Esquire, who left issue Sir Edward Morgan Baronet, Henry Morgan, and Winefred wife to Percy Enderby Gentleman, Author of this book. There is to be seen in Denbighshire, in the parish of Lansanan in the side of a stone hill, a place encompassed, wherein be twenty four seats for men to sit in, some less, and some larger, cut out of the main Rock by mans hands, where children and young men coming to seek their cattel, use to fit and play. They commonly call it Arthurs round table. The Order and Institution of the round table. About the year of Christ 490. there reigned in England then called Brittain,Sir William Segar King at armes. a King named Arthur, whose valour was so great and admirable, that many men now living do hold the same rather fabulous then credible; yet who so shall consider enterprises of later times atchieved by private persons, may be easily induced to think that a great part of the praise written of that mighty Monarch, may seasonably receive belief; but o∣mitting to speak of his prowess (perhaps by others already over largely discoursed) I say that this most famous King having expulsed out of England the Saxons, conquered Norwey,King Arthur crowned in Paris. Scotland, and the most part of France, and was crowned in the City of Paris, from whence returnd, he erected a certain association, a brotherhood of Knights who vowed to observe these articles following. The Articles of the round table. 1. First that every Knight should be well armed, and furnished to undertake any enterprise, wherein he was employed by Sea or Land, on horse-back or a foot. 2. That he should be ever prest to assail all tyrants or oppressours of the people. 3. That he should protect widdowes and maids, restore Children to their right, re∣possess such persons as were without just cause exiled, and with all his force maintain the Christian faith. 4. That he should be a Champion for the weal publick, and as a Lyon, repulse the Ene∣mies of his Country. 5. That he should advance the reputation of honour, and suppress all vice, releive peo∣ple afflicted by adverse fortune, give aid to the holy Church, and protect Pilgrims. 6. That he should bury Souldiers that wanted Sepulture, deliver prisoners, ransome Captives, and cure men hurt in service of their Country. 7. That he should in all honourable actions adventure his person, yet with respect to justice and truth, and in all enterprises proceed sincerely, never failing to use his uttermost force of body and labour of mind. 8. That after the attaining of any enterprise he should cause it to be recorded, to the
end the same of that fact might ever live to his eternal honour and renown of the noble order. 9. That if any complaint were made at the Court of this mighty King, of perjury or oppression, then some Knight of the order whom the King should appoint, ought to re∣venge the same. 10. That if any Knight of forrain Nation, did come unto the Court, with desire to challenge or make shew of his prowess (were he single or accompanied) those Knights ought to be ready in armes to make answer. 11. That if any Lady, Gentlewoman, or VVidow, or Maid, or other oppressed person did present a petition, declaring that they were or had been in this or that Nation injured, or offered dishonour, they should be graciously heard, and without delay, one or more Knights should be sent to take revenge. 12. That every Knight should be willing to inform young Princes, Lords and Gen∣tlemen in the orders and exercises of armes, thereby not only to avoid Idleness, but al∣so to encrease the honour of Knighthood and Chevalrie. Divers other Articles inciting to magnanimous actions of honour in armes, those Knights were sworn to observe,Sir William Segar. ib. which for brevity I omit; nevertheless being used to lose my labour, I will adventure to say this little, and the rather because this order of Knighthood is ancient. I do not read of any Robe or habit prescribed unto these Knights, nor with what ceremonie they were made. The place of meeting and Convocation was the City of Winchester, where King Arthur caused a great round table to be made, and at the same the Knights at Pentecost or VVhitsunday did sit and eat; the proportion thereof was such as no room could be thought of more dignity then the rest, yet (as some writers say) one seat thereof was called the Sea Perilous, reserved for that Knight that did excel the rest in vertue. That place by thet consent of all the rest of the Knights was allotted to King Arthur, who for his valour surpassed all other Knights and professors of armes. Of Officers and Ministers belonging unto this order I do not read, but of a Register whose duty was to enter and keep records of all and every action enterprised, attempted, or performed by any of all those Knights which records were read and sung publickly to the eternizing of their honour and fame. Whether the number of these Knights, was many, or few, I do not find, but it seemeth imparted to a great many, all persons of high dignitie and much prowess; for unto King Arthur at Caerleon in Monmoth-Shire resorted at one time ten Kings,Caerleon more honour∣ed then any City of Brit∣tain. and thir∣teen Earls, besides many Barons and other Knights of meaner qualitie. As the conquests of the King were many, so was his bounty notable; for it is written that unto his chief Scheneshal or Steward called Kay, he gave the province of A∣vion, on his Butler Bedwere he bestowed Normandy, and to his Cozen Berel, he granted the Dutchy of Buriundy, and unto many other Lords and valiant Knights he allotted other magnificent gifts according to their vertue. Sir John Hay∣ward, fol. 4. in Will. Conq.Some are of opinion (the truth whereof I will not dispute) that this most victorious King was not born in lawfull wedlock; some make the like quere of Alexander, others of Julius Cæsar; many such have been brought into the World to the great admiration and astonishment of Posterity; and that bastards should inherit Kingdomes, Principalities and other Seigniories, it was no unusual thing. Sir John Hayward writing the life of William the Conquerour, who is commonly called William the bastard, tells us it was a generall custome at that time in France, that bastards did succeed even in dignities of highest degree and condition, no otherwise then children lawfull begotten. Thierry bastard of Clovis had for his partage with the dutifull Children of the said Clovis, the Kingdom of Austrasie now called Lowain; Sigisbert bastard to King Dagobert the first had his part in the Kingdom of France with Clovis the twelfth, lawfull Son to Dagobert; Loys and Carloman bastards to King Loyis le Begue succeeded after the death of their Father; so likewise in England, Alfride bastard Son to Oswine, succeeded his Brother Egfride. So Adelstane the bastard Son of Edward the Elder, succeeded his Father before Edmund and Eldred his younger Brothers, notwithstanding they were lawfully begotten. So St. Edmund the Martyr bastard Son to King Edgar, succeeded him in the state be∣fore Ethelbred his lawfull issue. Afterward Harold, surnamed Harefoot, bastard to Canu∣tus, succeeded him in the Kingdom before Hardi Canutus his lawfull son. The like custome hath been observed in Spain, in Portugall, and in divers other Countries. And it is probable that this use was grounded upon often experience that bastards (begotten in the highest heat and strength of affection) have many times been men of excellent proof, both in courage and understanding; this was verified in Hercules, Alexander the great, Romulus, Timotheus, Brutus, Themistocles, Arthur; in Homer, Demosthenes, Bion, Bartholus, Gracian, Peter Lumbard, Peter Comestor, John Andreas, and divers of most florishing name; but this custome now concerning succession of bastards in Kingdomes, Royalties, and other inheritances, is obsolete and quite abolished.
Concerning the Coronation of King Arthur, some Authours have written thus; the ap∣pointed time of the solemnity approaching,The Corona∣tion of King Arthur. and all being ready assembled in the City of Caerleon, the Archbishops of London and York, and in the City of Caerleon the Archbishop Dubrick, were conveyed to the place with royal solemnity to Crown King Arthur. Dubri∣tius therefore because the Court lay within his Diocesse,He was crowned at Lanturnam an ancient Ab∣bey, but now the house of St. Edward Morgan Baro∣net. furnished him accordingly to per∣form and solemnize this charge in his own person: The King being crowned was with all pompe brought to the Cathedral Church of that Metropolitan See; on either hand of him, both right and left, did the Archbishops support him, and four Kings, to wit, Angusell King of Albania, Cadvall King of Venedotia, Cador Kings of Cornewall and Sater King of Demetia, went before him, carrying four golden swords. The Companies also, and con∣course of sundry sorts of Officers played before him most melodious and heavenly har∣mony. On the other part the Queen was brought to the Church of professedSt. Julians, now the house of the Lord of Cherbery. Nuns, being con∣ducted and accompanied by Archbishops and Bishops, with her armes and titles royally garnished; and the Queens consorts to the four Kings aforesaid, carryed before her, as the order and custome was, four white Doves or Pigeons. At a solemnity held by this renowned King upon the feast of Pentecost, which was the usual day for the Knights of the Round-table to convene, a challenge was brought to King Arthur from a King of Northwales, the Copy whereof was given me by the right honorable Richard Lord Herbert of Cherbery and Castle Island, unto whom it was presented by Dr. Johnson a grave and learned Physitian in Worcester, who had it from a Manuscript in the Library of the right honourable Thomas Lord Windesore, which here I will insert for my Readers recreation. As it fell out upon a Pentecost day, King Arthur at Camelot kept his Court Royal With his fair Queen Gwinever the gay, And many princes sitting in hall, Hold Barons, Knights and Squires that day, Ladies attired in purple and pall, With Herehaughts in hewkes howling full high, Cried Larges Larges, Chaveliers treshardie. A doughty Dwarf to the uppermost Desk, Boldly gan prick kneeling on knee, Said, King Arthur, God thee save; and see, Sr. Reimes of North Gales greeteth well thee, And bids thee anon thy Beard thou him send, Else from thy jawes he will it off rend. For his robe of State is a rich scarlet mantle, With eleven Knights beards bordred about; And there is room left yet in a Kantle For thine to stand, to make the twelfth out; This must be done, be thou never so stout. This must be done, I tell thee no fable, Maugre the teeth of all the round table. When this mortal message from his mouth past, The Kings fum'd, the Queens scrich't, Ladies were agast, Princes pufft, Barons blusterd, Lords began to lower, Knights storm'd, Squires startl'd, like steeds in a Stower, Pages and Yeomen yeld out in the hall, With that came in Sr. Kay the Seneschal. Silence my Soveraign, quoth the courteous Knight, And therewith all the stur began to still, The Dwarfs dinner full deerly was dight Of Wine, and wisely he had his fill, An hundred peices of fine coyned Gold Were given the Dwarf for his message bold. But say to Sr. Rayns thou Dwarf quoth the King, hat for his bold message I him defie; or shortly I mean with Basons him to ring t of North Gales where he and I ith swords and not rasors will quickly try Whether he or K. Arthur will prove the best Barbor; And therewith he struck his good sword Esculabor. Concerning the mantle trimd with beards of Kings or Knights,Fol. 62. Mr. Draiton in his Polial∣bion giveth a hint, but something differing from the preceding Relation; his lines are these;
Then told how himself great Arthur did advance, To meet (with his Allies) the puissant force of France, By Lucius thither led those Armies that while ere Affrighted all the World, by him struck dead with fear. Th' report of his great acts, that over Europe ran, Is that most famous field which he with Emp'rour wan;This is but a Poetical fan∣cy; for Helena was never ravished. As how great Rithout self be slew in his repair, Who ravisht Howels Neece, young Helena the fair; And for a Trophie brought the Giants coat away, Made of the beards of Kings; then bravely chaunted they The several twelve picht fields he with the Saxons fought, The certain day and place to memory they brought. Then by false Mordreds hand how last he chanc't to fall, The hour of his decease, the place of buriall. These I have intermingled as Poets do interludes in the playes, setting Horace his rules before me, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci. Constantine. Howes ut sup.Constantine Kinsman to Arthur, and son to Cador Duke of Cornewal, was ordained King of Brittain, and reigned three years. This man was by the two sons of Mordred grievously vexed, for they claimed the land by the right of their father; But after many battails, they fled, the one to London, the other to Winchester, which Cities they obtained, and took them. But Constantine followed and sub∣dued them, and gained the Cities. And one of these young Lords he found in an Abbey at London, here he slew him neer the Altar, cruelly, and then buried him near Ʋter Pen∣dragon at Stone-hedge: The other brother was found at Winchester, where he was also slain, flying into the Church of St. Amphibalus. Aurelius Conanus a Brittain raised mortal War against Constantine the King, and afer sore fight, slew him in the field; after three years reign he was buryed at Stone-hedge. Of this Constantine that seemeth to be meant, which holy Gildas writeth in his Book en∣tituled De excidio Brittaniae, where, inveighing against the Rulers of the Brittains in his time, he writeth thus; Brittain hath Kings, but they be Tyrants: Judges it hath, but they be wicked, oft-times killing and harming the innocent people; revenging and defending; but whom? such as be guilty persons and robbers; having many wives, but yet breaking wedlock; oft-times swearing and yet forswearing themselves, vowing, and for the more part lying warring; but maintaing civil and unjust war, pursuing rude thieves that are abroad in the Country, and yet not only cherishing those that sit even at table with them, but also highly rewarding them; giving almes largely, but on the other part heaping up a mighty mount of sins; sit∣ting in the seat of sentence, but seldome seeking the rule of righteous judgment, despising the humble and innocent persons, & exalting, so far as in them lyeth, even up to the heavens, the bloody and proud murderers, thieves and adulterers, yea the very expresse enemies of God, if he would so permit, keeping many in prison, whom they oppresse in loading them with Irons, through craft, rather to serve their own purpose, then for any guilt of the persons imprisoned; taking solemn oathes before the Altars, and shortly after despising the same Altars as vile and filthy stones, of which heinous and wicked offence Constantine the tyrannical whelp of the Lioness of Devonshire, is not ignorant, who this year after the recei∣ving of his dreadfull oath, whereby he bound himself, that in no wise he would hurt his subjects, (God first, and then his oath, with the company of Saints and his mother being there present) did notwithstanding in the reverent laps of the two mothers, as the Church and their carnal mother, under the Coul of the holy Abbot, devour with sword and spear instead of teeth, the tender sides yea and the entrails of two Children of noble and Kingly race, and likewise of their two Governours, yea and that (as said) among the sacred Altars: the arms of which persons so slain, not stretched forth to defend themselves with weapons) (the which few in those dayes handled more valiantly then they) but stretched forth I say to God, and to his altar in the day of judgment, shall set up the ensignes of their patience and faith at the gates of the City of Christ, which so have covered the seat of the coelestial sa∣crifice as it were with the red mantle of their clottered blood. And those things he did, not after any good deeds done by him, deserving praise. For many years before overcome with the often and changeable filths of adultery, forsaking
his lawfull Wife, contrary to the Laws of God, &c. he now brought forth this Crime of killing his own Kinsman, and violating the Church; but neither being loosed, or un∣bound from his former evills, he encreaseth the new with the old.Harpsfield cap. 22. fol. 36. Thus in effect hath Gildas written; it is to be noted that there were two writers of emi∣nency of that name; the one stiled Albanius, the other Badonicus, of whom Harpsfield thus relateth his opinion, complaining first of the scarcity of Schollers and learned men in Brit∣tain by reason of the Saxons cruelty and persecution: Notwithstanding saith he, there florished eminent and worthy men both in Scotland, Ireland, and that part of Brittain,Gildas a Bit∣tain of princely pa∣rentage. which is now called Wales; whose acts as much as they concern the Welshmen, living in forrain Countries or abiding here at home, we shall deliver unto you as we have gathered them out of authentick and approved authours; it is therefore most certainly written that this age brought forth among other excellent and eminent men, two; both called Gildas; the one surnamed Albanius, which was the Disciple of the great St. Patrick, and he born of princely or regal parentage of the Brittains; the other Badonious surnamed Sapiens the wife. The first is much extolled for the nobleness of his birth, the great pilgrimages which he undertook even to Rome it self, the better to enable his soul in learning and vertue to op∣pose and beat down the Pelagian heresie, for singular devotion and solitary life, for the se∣vere and strict course of his living and rare abstinence and fasting, thereby to bring under the wanton and rebellious flesh, and make it obedient and subject to the spirit: in so much that through his extream fasting his face looked as though he had been in a continual fever or ague; He fled and avoided all terrestial and earthly negotiations, thereby to have his mind more free and ready to contemplate celestial mysteries, to which frame and example of life he exhorted his disciples with sweet and eloquent language: He is reported to have written the Lives and acts of Germanus and Lupus (the which I wish to God were extant) he lived and was an Inhabitant in a certain Island seated near the river Severne, where also he died about the fourth of the Kalends of February DXV. His body was carryed to Gla∣stenbury and there buryed. Gildas Badonicus, as he himself confesseth, was born that year when the great slaughter of the Saxons was at Badon, or Mons Badonicus, of which you have heard before; he was of Bangor Monastery, Learned, Religious, and as much as could be in those turbu∣lent times eloquent, and a most free-spoken man, inveighing without dread or fear (as may appear by his books) against the vices both of the Clergy, Kings and Princes of his time; reproving them with evident and convincing Text both out of sacred scripture and holy prophets; He flourished, Anno. 580. About 300. or rather more years after, an∣ther Guildas appeared, who cloaked many ridiculous things in the name of this our Ba∣donicus, and as it were casting a mist before his readers eyes, vended centons of lyes, which he had forged upon the Anvile of Gaufride the Fable teller. Aurelius Conanus. After that Aurelius Conanus had slain Constantine, as in the Brittish history is menti∣oned, the same Conanus was made King of Brittain, in the year of our Lord 546.Hollnshed ut supra. This Aurelius Conanus as is recorded by some writers, was of a noble heart, free and liberal, but addicted much to softer and boulster up strife and contention among his Subjects, light of credit, and naturally had an open eare to receive and hear the reports of such a accused others. Moreover he was noted of cruelty, as one who took his Uncle, who in all right and justice should have been King before him, and kept him in prison, securing his person, and not so satisfied, slew in Tyrannical manner his two Sons. But God would not suffer him long to enjoy a Crown purchased with so much blood; for he died after he had ruled two years, leaving a son called Vortiporus which accordig to the agreement of Authours succeeded him in the Kingdom. Of this Aurelius Conanus, Gildas writeth, calling unto him after he had made an end with his Predecessour Constantine, in this wise saying, And thou Lyons whelp, as saith the Prophet, Aurelius Conanus, what dost thou? Art thou not swallowed up in the filthy mire of murthering thy Kinsmen, of committing fornications and adulteries, like to the other before mentioned, if not more deadly, as it were with the waves and surges of the drench∣ing sea, overwhelming thee with her mercilesse rage? Doest thou not in hating the peace of thy Country, as a deadly serpent, and thirsting after civil wars and spoyles (oftentimes un∣justly gotten) shut up against thy soul the gates of Celestial peace and refreshment? thou being left alone as a withering tree in the midst of the field; call to remembrance I pray thee, the vain youthful fantasy and over-timely death of thy father and thy brethren; shalt thou being set apart, and chosen forth of all thy linage, for thy Godly deserts be re∣served to live an hundred years, or remain on earth till thou be as old as Methusalem? No, No.
And after these Reprehensions with further Threatning of Gods Vengeance, he exhor∣teth him to amendment of Life. Howes saith, that this King reigned thirty three years, for which he citeth Flores Hi∣storiarum: But Fabian agrees with Hollenshed, allowing onely two years, and citeth Gaufrid. The Kingdome of Northumberland, began first in Brittain, under a Saxon named Ida, a∣bout this time. Vorliporus. Vorliporus, the Son of Aurelius Conanus, succeeded his Father, and began to Reign over the Brittains, in the Year of our Lord 576. This Vorliporus vanquished the Saxons in Battel, as the Brittish Histories record, and va∣liantly defended his Land and Subjects the Brittains, from the Danger of them and their Alleyes: In the time of this King's Reign, Ella began to Reign in the South part of the Kingdome of Northumberland, called Peira, according to the Account of some Writers, who also take this Vorliporus to begin his Reign in the Year 548. Finally, after that Vorli∣porus had ruled the Brittains the space of four years, he departed this Life, leaving no Issue behinde him to succeed him in the Kindome. Against whom also Gildas turning his Pen, beginneth with him thus. And, why standest thou as one quite amazed? Thou, I say Vortiporus, the Tyrant of South-Wales, like to the Panther in Manners, and Wickedness, diversly spotted as it were with many Colours, with thy hoar head in thy Throne, full of Deceits, Crafts, and Wiles, and defiled even from the lowest part of thy Body to the Crown of the Head, with divers and sundry Murders committed in thine own Kinde, and filthy Adulteries: Thus proving a naughty Son of a good King, as Manusses was of Eze∣kias, How chanceth it that the violent streams of sins, which thou swallowllest up like plea∣sant Wine, or rather art devoured of them (the end of thy Life, by little, and little, now drawing near) cannot yet satisfie thee. What meanest thou, that with Fornication of all Evills as it were the full Heap, thine own Wife being put away, and by her honest Death, thou dost oppress thy Soul with a cer∣tain Burden that cannot be avoided, of thy own un-shamefac'd Daughter! consume not I pray thee the Residue of thy Daies to the Offence of God,Hollenshed in Vorliporus, &c. Thus Hollenshed out of Gildas. Fabian in Vorliporus.Fabian writing of this King, saith, Of which is little left in any Chronicle, except that Guido testifying him to be a victorious Knight; shewing briefly, that in sundry Battels, he discomfited the Saxons, and defended the Land and Brittains from the Danger of them, and other their Allyes. Howes in eo∣dem.Howes calleth him a vicious King, and a Tyrant, who put from him his Wife, and kept her Daughter for his Concubine. Harpesfield having spoken of several Saintly men, and great Schollers in the Reign of former Kings, continuing his History, saith, After whom, other famous and learned Brit∣tains are not to be forgotten; I mean Thelianus, Daniel, Petrocius, Kentegernus, Samp∣son, Cadocus, with others: Thelianus born of an Illustrious and Princely Off-spring, yet more illustrated his Family by his own most resplendent Virtues; he was first Disciple to Dubritius, Bishop of Landaff, and afterwards, together with Saint David to Paulinus. So strict was the Amity betwixt him and David, that they were esteemed the most admira∣ble Pair of Friends of that time; For the wonderfull Lustre of his Virtue, and Sanctity he was commonly called  (i. e.) The Sun; from whence by Corruption, instead of Elios, he is usually called Elive. He succeeded Dubritius in the Episcopal Dignity of Lan∣daff, where after the leading of a most holy Life, he rendred his blessed Soul into the hands of his Creatour, in the Ides of February, in the Reign of Vorliporus, Anno 540. Daniel, famous both for Learning and Virtue, associated himself with Dubritius and David, for Extirpation of the cursed Poyson of the Pelagian Heresie, and founded that Renowned Colledge of Acaon, in the province of North-Wales, which is now the Bishop∣prick of Bangor, where he was the first Bishop, and flourished untill the year 560. under Vortiporus. There is a certain Island in Wales, which the Cambrians or Welshmn, Scots, and English, call Bardsey, in which they say, not onely the Body of this Daniel, but of divers other Saints likewise are interr'd; neither want Authours, who affirm, that for the sakes of those Saints there buried, the Inhabitants of that Isle live extreamly long, even to the most decrepid Age that can be imagined. Who so desireth to have further Satisfaction con∣cerning the Renowned Brittains, in this Kings Reign, let him read Harpsfield in the first six Ages, c. 27.
Malgo Conanus. Malgo Pulcher Conanus of North-Wales, began his Reign over the Brittains, and conti∣nued his Reign five years. This Malgo was in proportion of body,Hower fol. 56. greater then any of the Kings or Dukes of Brit∣tain, but he delighted in the foul sin of Sodomy, he slew his first Wife, and then took to Wife his own Brothers Daughter. This Malgo (saith Hollenshed) is reported to have been the comeliest Gentleman in beauty and shape of Personage,Hollenshed 147. in Malgo. that was to be found in those dayes among all the Brit∣tains, and therewith of a bold and hardy courage; he manfully defended the Countrey which he had in Government from the malice of the Saxons, and subdued the out Isles, as Orkney, and others; but notwithstanding the Noble Qualities with which his person was a∣dorned, yet he spotted them all with the foul sin of Sodomy, so that he fell into hatred with Almighty God, and being pursued of the Saxons, received many Overthrows at their hands, as by the Report of the English Writers is gathered more at large: Finally, when he had reigned five years and odd Moneths, he departed this Life. It seemeth that this Malgo is named by Gildas Maglocunus, which Gildas, before he spea∣keth of him, inveigheth against one Cuneglasus, whom he reproveth, for that he warred both against God and Man; against God with grievous sins, as namely. Adultery in forsaking the Company of his lawfull Wife, and keeping to Concubine a Sister of hers, that had professed chastity: and against man with material Armour and Weapons, which he used to the Destruction of his own countreymen, with whom he kept Wars, and not against the Enemies of the Common-Wealth. From Cuneglasus he cometh to the foresaid Maglocune, whom he nameth The Dragon of the Isles, and the Expeller of many Tyrants, not onely out of their Kindomes, but also out of Life, the last of whom he intreateth as himself saith, but the first in all Mischief, and E∣vill, greater then many in Power, and likewise in Malice; right liberal in giving, and more plentifull in sin, strong and valiant in Arms, but stronger in Destruction of his own Soul; and so proceeding, chargeth him with the sin of the Sodomites, and sore blameth him for that whereas it had pleased God to make him higher then all other Chieftains of his Kindome, he did not shew himself better, but contrarily worse then they by far, in manners and conditions. He declareth also a little after, that this Maglo∣cune in his younger years, slew in Battel his Uncle being King, with the most valiant Soul∣diers in a manner that he had. Also, that whereas the said Maglocune took upon him the profession of a Monk, he after renounced the same, and became a worse Liver then ever he was before, abandoning his Wife, and keeping his Brothers Sons Wife, whilst her Husband was yet living. Thus, by that which Gildas writeth of the Kings and Rulers of Brittain, which lived in his daies, ye may perceive that they were given to all manner of Wickedness, and namely to civil Dissention, Rapine, Adultery, and Fornication; so that it may be thought, that God stirred up the Saxons to be a scourge to them, and to worke his just Vengeance upon them for their wicked and abominable Offences daily committed against his Divine Maje∣sty; so that we finde recorded by Writers, how that the Saxons in divers conflicts against the Brittains, had the better, and also took from them divers Towns, as hath been partly already, and shall hereafter be made manifest. Fabian tells us,Fab. fol. 99. that Malgo in his later daies being oppressed and pursued by his Ene∣mies, lastly dyed, when he had reigned thirty five years, whereas other Authours allow only five. Careticus. Careticus took upon him the rule and Goverment of the Brittains; this man loved ci∣vil War, and was odible both to God and his Subjects; They moved the Saxons (being accompanied with Gurmundus King of Ireland) to make war upon Careticus in such wise that he was faine to take the Town of Cicester, where they assaulted him, and fired the Town by tying fire to the wings of Sparrows, that he with his men fled from thence into Wales, by which means he left a great part of his Dominion, and ended his life when he had reigned three years. In the month of August there hapned great Earthquakes, and presently followed a most grievous pestilence, with extream great scabs and botches upon the People,Earthquakes and Pesti∣lence. The three Arch-Bishops of Brittain at once in Wales. so as it was hard to discern one man from another. Gurmumd the Irish King burned up the Land of the Brittains, from Sea to Sea; and the more part of that Isle called Leogrea, he gave to the Saxons: The Brittains gave place, and came into Wales, and the West parts of Cornwall; Theanus Arch-Bishop of London, and
Theodocus Arch-Bishop of York, when their Churches were all destroyed to the Ground, they with their Clergy fled into Wales, and many of them into little Brittain; This Plague fell upon the Brittains for their Covetousness, Rapine, and Lechery. Gurmund builded Gurmund-Chester. Harpsfield speaking of these Evils committed by the Brittains, in his seventh Age, saith, Incurrebant itaque primo in patriam barbari, &c. This barbarous destruction fell first up∣on this Countrey 449. an evil so great and terrible, that it is beyond Expression; yet was it courted and invited hither, I say, by the grievous and enormous sins, and wickedness of the Princes, Priests, and People, justly provoking the Divine Justice, to take a speedy and sharp Revenge of their Iniquities: and to lay more load upon their own shoulders, o∣verburdened already with sin, they send for the Saxons, a Nation, not onely void of, but even hating the very Name, and Faith of Christian Religion; a crime so odious, as the like in former times was never heard of; a Nation Christian, yea and renowned for their Faith, and Christianity, not to seek and implore the help and protection of that infinitely good and omnipotent God; but to invoke the assistance of Pagans, Miscreants, and Idolaters: Hu∣miliations, Prayers, and Repentance, had they wisely considered, had been far better means to withstand their Enemies: He that readeth Antiquities, shall finde many Desolati∣ons to have hapned unto Christians, by seeking aid and joining with Infidels. In this very se∣venth Age was Spain upon like pretences, over-run by the Saracons, and in our great great Grand-fathers time, Constantionople; and since that, a great part of Hungary by the Turks. Had Vortiger either read, or well considered the Scriptures, who was the principal Au∣thour of sending for the Saxons, he might have seen an Example sufficient to have deterred him, in Ezekias, a Prince otherwaies even by Divine approbation to be commended who (indiscreetly shewing his Treasures to the Ambassadours of the prophane King of Babylon) heard that heavy sentence from the Prophet, that not only himself, but also those Treasures and all his people should be transported,Osee 5.13. & sequ. and led captive thither. He might likewise have re∣duced unto his Memory that of the Prophet Osee, And Ephraim saw his Sickness, and Judah his Band, and Ephraim went to Ashur, and sent to the King a Messenger: and he shall not be able to heal you, neither shall he be able to loose the Band from you. And again, They invocated Aegypt, they went to the Assyrians, and when they shall go forth, I will spread my Net upon them; as a fol of the Heaven I will pluck them down,Osee 7.11. sequ. I will beat them according to the hearing of their Assem∣blies: Wo be to them because they have revolted from me, they shall be wasted because they have prevaricated against me, and I redeemed them, and they have spoken lyes against me, and they have not cryed to me in their heart, but they howled in their Chambers, upon Wheat and VVine they chewed their Cud, they are revolted from me. And presently the Prophet addeth, Their Princes shall fall by the Sword for the fury of their Tongue. And what befell to the Israelites from the Egyptians and Assyrians, upon whose help they relyed and depended; the same befell to miserable Vortiger and his posterity, by the Saxons, who in a short time became most eager and spitefull Enemies, turning the Edges of their Swords against the Throats of the most deplorable Brittains, which had hired them to protect them against the Picts and Scots. Things being brought into this miserable state and condition, had no other remedy but a hearty contrition and cordial Repentance, and an humble application of our selves to the mercies of Almighty God; but Vortiger was so far from such celestial and divine meditati∣on, that he did not onely deprave the whole Common-wealth with sloth, Idleness, and cor∣rupt living, but wallowed himself in the filth and mire of all voluptuousness, and carnali∣ty, insomuch that had not he himself invited in the Saxons, the just anger and indignation of the most holy One, would have sent either them or some other more cruel and barbarous people to chastise the enormous, hideous, and crying sins of that Nation. Shame and mode∣sty to offend chast and Christian Ears, forbids to speak the crimes of that Age; nothing will serve his turn but the lascivious embraces, and incenstuous bed of his own Daughter; nei∣ther was this wicked Adulterer content herewith, but becomes a Traitor even to sacred and Christian Wedlock, taking Roxana a Pagan Miscreant into his Bed, palliating the villainy with the Title of Wife, his former Lady being yet living. These things though they may seem incredible, yet are left unto us recorded by Au∣thors without exception, and are made evidently clear unto us, by the wicked lives of the Princes and people which followed in succeeding ages; who even when the Barbarians had engrossed the greatest part of the Island, yet sought out a remote corner, whereas they imagined they might freely and securely sin; where no eare was lent to Truth and Verity, while Lying, Adulation, Detraction and Flattery were esteemed Virtues; where Forni∣cation found such Entertainment as was never heard of, even among the Gentiles: The Prin∣ces, Prelates, and People, neglected their Duties towards God, the Princes polluting all places with filthy fornication, Bigamy, and unlawfull Marriages, Eyes Perjues, pilling, plundering the Religious, placing the wicked and impious in the chiefest seats of honour, wresting the Law to their own sense, and will prophaning sacred vowes, and religious Tem∣ples and Altars. Among these irreligious Princes, one was Constantine the Successour of that
renowned Arthur, who before the holy Altars against all Religion and piety vilanously murdered the two princely brothers, and then to heap sin upon sin, putting away his lawful wife, he made himself infamous, by his wicked adultery. Aurelius Conanus, and Vortipor came not much short of him in wickedness. Magoclunus an homicide of his own Unkle, turnes away his lawful wife, and takes her Neece into his bed, who had consecrated and vowed her widdowhood to perpetual chastity. These foul crimes he might perchance have expiated, had he not cast aside perfidiously that monastick calling and habit, which, prickt by the sting of a branded conscience, he had taken upon him to do pennance and make satisfaction for his former lewd living: but casting that aside, he seemed with his coule, or hood and habit, to cast away also all shame and feeling of piety and religion, and humanity it self; much more Gildas setteth down, which drew upon the Brittish Nation the just vengeance which almighty God poured down upon them. Cadwane Cadwane Duke of Northwales was made Soveraign of the Brittains,Howes fol. 56. who gave strong bat∣tail to Ethelfred King of Northumberland, and forced him to entreat for peace: After which concord being made, they continued all their life time loving friends; he reigned twenty two years. The Kingdom of the East Saxons began under Ercheminus about the year of Christ 614. The Kingdome of Mercia or middle England, began under Penda 626. Hollenshed also saith that he reigned 22 years (though, saith he, some allow but 13) and was slain by the Northumbers. Cadwallin. Cadwallin the son of Cadwane ruled over the Brittains;How. fol. 56. b. St. Martins in London by the Brittains. he warred strongly upon the Sa∣xons, and made Penda King of Mercia tributary to him. He reigned 48 years, and was buryed in London, in the Church of St. Martine neer unto Ludgate, which Church was then new-founded and builded by the Brittains, in anno 677. An other Authour maketh a longer relation of this Kings reign,Holl. fol. 166. Edwin was not son to E∣thelfred, but to Alla or Ella. and tells us that Cad∣wallo (for so he calls him) and Edwin the son of Ethelfred were brought up in France, be∣ing sent thether unto Solomon King of Brittain by Cadwane, when they were very young; (for this he cites Gaufred) and that after their return into this land, when they were made Kings, Cadwall of the Brittains, and Edwin of the Northumbers, there continued for the space of two years great friendship betwixt them, till at lenghth Edwin required of Cadwall that he might wear a Crown, and celebrate appointed solemnities within his do∣minion of Northumberland, as well as Cadwall did in his Country. Cadwall taking advice in this matter, at length by the perswasion of his Nephew Brian, he denyed to grant unto Edwin his request; wherewith Edwin took such displeasure, that he sent word unto Cadwall that he would be crowned without his license, since he would not willingly give it; whereunto Cadwall answered, that if he did so, he would cut off his head under his Dia∣dem, if he presumed to wear any within the confines of Britany. Hereupon discord arising betwixt these two princes, they began to make fierce and cruel war, each of them against the other, and at length joyning in battail with their main armies, Cadwall lost the field, with many thousands of his men, and being chased, fled into Scotland, and from thence got over into Ireland, and finally passed over the seas into Brittain the lesse, called Armorica, where of his cofin King Solomon he was courteously received, and at length obtained of him ten thousand men to go with him back into his Country, to assist him in recovering his lands and dominions, the which in the mean time were cruelly spoyled, wasted and plundered by K. Edwin. The same time Brian the Nephew of Cadwall, whom he had sent into Brittanie a little before, to kill a certain Wisard or Southsayer, whom K. Edwin had gotten out of Spain, nam∣ed Pelitus, who by disclosing the purpose of Cadwall unto Edwin, greatly impeached Cadwals designes, he fortified the City of Exceter, meaning to defend it till the coming of Cadwall: whereupon Penda King of Mercia besieged that City with a mighty army purposing to take it and Brian within it. Cadwall advertised hereof, immediately after his arrival hasted towards Exceter, and dividing his people into four parts set upon his enemies, and took Penda, and overthrew his whole army. Penda having no other shifs to escape, submitted himself wholly unto Cadwall, promising to become his liegeman, and to fight against the Saxons in his quarrel. And this Penda being subdued, Cadwall called his Nobles together, which had been dispersed abroad a long time, and with all speed went against Edwin King of Northumberland, and slew him in battail at Hatfield with his son Osfride, and Godbold King of the Isles of Ockney, who was come thither to his aid.
By this it should appear that Fabian hath gathered amiss in the account of the reigns of the Brittish Kings; for it appeareth by Beda and others, that Edwin was slain in the year of our Lord 634. And whereas Fabian attributeth that act and divers others unto Cadwan father of Cadwall, yet both Galmon and Beda. with the most part of all other writers, say that it was done by Cadwall. Hollenshed ut sup.Harding assigneth but 13 years to the reign of Cadwall, and declareth that he died in the year of our Lord 606. in the which year, as he saith, Cadwall began his reign, which opinion seemeth best to agree with that which is set down by others. But to return to Cadwall and his acts, as we find them recorded by the Brittish writers; After he had got this victory against the Northumbers, he cruelly pursued the Saxons, as though he meant, so far as in him lay, to destroy the whole race of them out of the land of Brittain; and sending Penda against King Oswald, who succeeded Edwin, though at the first Penda received the overthrow at Havenfield, yet afterwards Cadwall himself, high∣ly displeased with that chance,King Oswald slain. pursued Oswald, and fought with him at a place called Bourne, where Penda slew the said Oswald. After that Oswald was slain, his brother Osunus succeeded him in the government of the Northumbers, and sought the favour of Cadwall now ruling as King over all Brittanie, and at length by great gifts of gold and silver, and upon his humble submission, he obtained peace, till at length upon disgust, Penda obtained leave of Cadwall to make wars against the said Osunus, in with Penda himself was slain. Then Cadwal granted, after the space of two years, Ʋlfridus the son of Penda should succeed in the Kingdom of Mertia:Cadwall abso∣lute Prince of all Brittain. and thus Cadwall ruled things after his own will and pleasure; and finally when he had reigned, as before is said, as years, he departed this life the 22d. of November. His body being embalmed and dressed with sweet confections, was put in a brazen Image, by mervalous art melted and cast, the which being set on a brazen horse of excellent beauty, the Brittains erected aloft upon the West gate of London called Ludgate, in sign of his victo∣rious conquests, and for a terror to the Saxons. Cadwallader Cadwallader, the last King of the Brittains, descending from the Noble race of the Tro∣jans, by extreme plagues of death and famine was driven to forsake this his native Coun∣try and Kingdom, and to sojourne with a great number of his Nobles and Subjects, with his Cosin Alan King of Little Brittaine, which is called in the Brittish tongue Lhydaw. Of the first inhabiting of this place by the Brittains, we have already spoken. Conon of Meriadoc, now Denbighland, in the year of Grace 384. was the first Prince of the Brittish blood in Armorica or Little Brittain: the second was 2. Graldonus. 3. Solomon I. The names of the Kings of little Brittain4. Auldranus. 5. Budicus I. 6. Howellus Magnus. This Howel was with King Arthur in his wars. 7. Howellus II. 8. Alanus I. 9. Howellus III. 10. Gilquellus. 11. Solomon II. 12. Alanus II. Of whom mentions is made in this place, who descended of a daughter of Rune the son of Mailgon Gwyneth King of Great Brittain, who was mar∣ried to the forenamed Howel II King of Little Brittain. 13. Conobertus. 14. Budicus II. 15. Theodoricus. 16. Rualhonus. 17. Daniel Dremrost, (i. e.) with the red face. 18. Aregstanus. 19. Maconus. 20. Neomenius. 21. Haruspagius. 22. Solomon III, Who was slain by his own men, and then was that Kingdom turned into an Earldom, whereof Alen was the first Earl, who valiantly resisted the Normans, and vanquished them oft: at last it was a Dukedom. Cadwallader bein in Brittain, was certified that a great number of strangers, as Saxons, Angles, and Juthes had arrived in great Brittain, and finding it desolate, and without in∣habitants, saving a few Saxons, who had called them in, and certain poor Brittains, who lived by roots in Rocks and Woods, had overrun a great part thereof, and dividing it into Territories and Kingdomes, inhabited that part which was then, and yet at this day by the Welsh, who are the ancient Brittains, called Lhoyger and in English England, with all
the Cities, Townes, Castles and Villages, which the Brittains had builded, ruled, and in∣habited by the space of 1827. years under divers Kings and Princes of great renown; whereupon he purposed to return, and by strength of Brittish Knights to recover his own Land again. After he had prepared and made ready his Navy for the transporting of his own men, with such succours as he had found at Alan's hand, an Angel appeared to him in a Vision, and declared that it was the will of God that he should not take his voyage towards Brittain, but to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he should end his life, and be afterwards numbred a∣mong the blessed. Which vision after that Cadwallader had declared to his friend Alan, he sent for all his books of prophesies, as the works of both Merdhines or Merlins, to wit, Am∣brose, and Sylvester surnamed Merdhin Wylht, and the words which the Eagle spoke at the building of Caer Septon, to be now come, whereof they had prophesied. To this very day the Welsh, the very real ofspring of the Brittains, are much addicted unto prophesies, and so confident, that out of their old books (I know some my self, and those of good quality) they doubt not to tell you things to come; but those prophesies are never discerned to have come to pass till it be too late, as in Ragland Castle in Monmothshire, and others, which it concerns me not to speak of. Alan upon the relation of Cadwallader his vision or dream, counselled him to fullfil the will of God, who did so, and taking his journey to Rome, lived there eight years in the ser∣vice of God, and dyed in the year of Christ 688. So that the Brittains ruled this Isle, with the out-Isles of Wight, Mon in English called Anglesey, Manaw, in English Man, Orkney and Ewyst, 1137. years before Christ, until the year of his Incarnation 688. and thus ended the rule of the Brittains over the whole Isle. This glorious King bore for his armes, Azure a crosse firmie fitched, Or. He slew Lothayre King of Kent, and Aethelwald King of the South Saxons. Ivor the son of Alan. After Cadwallader had taken his journey towards Rome,Gerard Leigh in his acci∣dence of armo∣ry. fol. 33. leaving his son named Edwal the Roo and his people with his Cousin Alan, which Alan taking courage to him and not de∣spairing of the conquest of Brittain, manned his ships as well with a great number of his own people, as with those which Cadwallader had brought with him, and appointed Ivor his son and Inyr his Nephew to be leaders and chieftains of the same, who sailing over the narrow seas, landed in the West parts of Brittain; of whose arrival when the Saxons were certified, they gathered a great Army, and gave Ivor battail, where they were put to flight, and lost a great number of their people, and Ivor wan the Countries of Cornwall, Devon∣shire and Somersetshire, and peopled them with Brittains. Whereupon Kentwinus King of West-Sex gathered a great number of Saxons and Angles together, and came against the Brittains, which were ready to abide the battail; and as the armies were both in sight, they were not very desirous to fight, but fell to a composition, and agreement, that Ivor should take Ethelburga to wife who was Cofin to Kentwin, and quietly enjoy all that he had during the reign of Ivor. This Ivor is he whom our English Chronicles call Ive or Jew, King of West Saxons,H. Lhoyd. that reigned after Cedwel, and they say that he was a Saxon; for Kentwin reigned full five years after Ivors coming into England, and after him his Nephew Cedwel, who after he had reigned over the west Saxons two years, went to Rome, and left his Kingdom to Ive his Cousin. This Ive or Ivor whom the Brittains call the son of Alan, and the Saxons the son of Kenred, being King of the Saxons and Brittains which inhabited the West parts of Brittain, after many victories atchived against the Kings of Kent, Southsex and Mercia, left his Kingdome to Adelred, or as some call him, Adelerdus his Cousin, and took his journey to Rome, where he made a godly end, about the year of our Lord seven hun∣dred and twenty. Roderike or Rodri, the Son of Edwal Yworch. Roderike over the Brittains began his reign Anno. 720. against whom Adelred King of the West Saxons, raised a great Army, and destroying the Country of Devonshire,The Brittains victorious a∣gainst the Sax∣ons in three battails en∣tered Cornwall, where Roderike with the Brittains, gave him battail, in with the Brittains had the victory over the Saxons; the year after the Brittains obtained two other victo∣ries over the Saxons; one in Northwales at a place called Garth Maelawc, and an other in Southwales at Pencoed. At this time Belin the Son of Elphin a noble Man among the Brittains died. Ethelbaldus King of Mercia desirous to annex the fertile soil of the Country lying be∣tween Severn and Wye, to his own Kingdom, gathered an Army, and entered into Wales;A battail near Abergevenny. and destroying all before him, he came to the Mountain Carno, not far from Aberge∣venny,
where a sore battail was fought between him and the Brittains, Anno seven hundred twenty eight. This Mercian King called to his aid Adelard King of the West Saxons, and gave bat∣tail to the Brittains, where after a long and terrible conflict he obtained a bloody victory. And the next year after he gave the Brittains an other overthrow, and then depar∣ted this life. About this time died Theodor the Son of Belin, a Man of great estimation among the Brittains. Not long after, there was a great battail fought betwixt the Brittains and the Picts, at a place called Magedawc, where the King of the Picts was slain. About this time Rodri or Roderike Molwynoc, was driven by the Saxons to forsake the West Country, and to come to seek his own inheritance in Northwales, where ruled at that time the Children of Bletius or Bledericus Prince of Cornwall and Devonshire (who was one of them that gave Adelred and Ethelbert the overthrow at Bangor upon the River De) and injoyed the Government of Northwales, ever since Cadvan was chosen King of Brittain untill this time. Powels Chro∣nic. fol. 16.By this history it should seem (saith my Author) that the Brittains continued their Government in the VVest part of Lhoegria untill this time. But surely the consent in a man∣ner of all writers is, that the Brittish Kingdom ended in Cadwalader, after whom the Brittains had nothing to do beyond Severne, being constrained to keep themselves within the Countries of Cambria and Cornubia. It is also written by divers, that Ivor and Inir at their first arriving in Brittain were expelled by the Saxons, and driven into Wales, where Ivor ruled as Prince many years, whom this Rodri, the Son of Edwal, the Son of Cadwalader succeeded. VVhen Rodri or Roderike the King of the Brittains, had reigned above 30. years, he died, leaving two Sons after him, Conan Tindaythwy, and Howel. Conan Tindaythwy the Son of Roderike. Conan Tindaythwy began his reign over the Brittains, Anno Domini 755. About two years after there was a great battail fought at Hereford between the Brittains and the Saxons, where Dyfnwal the Son of Theodor was slain. Jo. CastoriusIn the year 776 the men of Southwales destroyed a great part of Mercia with fire & sword, and the summer following, all the Welshmen gathered together and entered the King∣dom of Mercia and did much harm. The Saxons which bordered upon the Country of Cambria, or Wales, did daily en∣croach upon the Lands of the Welshmen beyond Severn, especially towards the South part of the Country. Wherefore the natives put themselves in armour, and set upon the Saxons, and chased them over Severn again, and then returned home with great prey and booty; and thus they did oftentimes, killing and destroying all before them, and alwaies bringing home with them much Cattel, which thing caused Offa to conclude a peace with other Saxon Kings, and to bend his whole force against the Welshmen. Whereupon Offa King of Mercia, caused a great ditch to be made, large and deep, from Sea to Sea,Powel. John Castor Math. West. betwixt his Kingdom and Wales, whereby he might the better defend his Country from the incursions of the Welshmen. And this ditch is to be seen in many places as yet, and is called Clawdh Offa, Viz. Offa's ditch at this day. Offa's ditch. Shrewsbury the ancient Court of the Welsh Prin∣ces of Powys.After Offa had made this deep ditch, and chased the Welshmen from the plain Coun∣tries unto the Woods and Mountains, the seat of the Kings of Powys was translated from Pengweru, now called Salop or Shrewsbury, to Marthrual where it continued long after. About the year 795 there was a battail fought at Ruthlan, between the Saxons and the Welshmen, where Caradoc King of Northwales was slain. This Carodoc was the son of Gwin the son of Golhoyn the son of Ednowen the son of Blethin the son of Bletius or Cledericus Prince of Cornwal and Devonshire. Nole.In the year 800. died Arthen the son of Sitsylth the son of Clydawc King of Cardigan, and Run King of Dinet, and Kadelch King of Powis died in the year 808. This was a troublesome time, and as yet no staid government in Wales, and therefore such as were chief Lords in any country, were called Kings. In the year 810. the Moon was Ecclipsed on Christmas day, and the same year St. Davids was burnt by the Saxons. There was also a general murrain and death of Cattel through∣out all Wales; the next year ensuing Owen the son of Meredith the son o Terudos died, & the Castle of Degaunwy was destroyed with thunder. Conan Prince of Wales and his brother Howel fell at variance, in somuch that they tryed the matter by battail, wherein Howel had the victory. This Howel the brother of Conan King or Prince of Northwales, did claim the Isle of Môn or Anglesey for part of his fathers inheritance, which Conan refused to give him, and there∣upon they fell at variance, and consequently to make war the one against the other.
The next year there was much hurt done by thunder in divers places, many houses burnt to the earth. The same year dyed Gruffith the son of Run, and Griffri the son of Kyngen was slain by the treason of Elico his brother. Howel gave his brother Conan another battail, and slew a great number of his people, whereupon Conan levied an army in the year 817, and chased his brother Howel out of Anglesey, compelling him to fly into Man. And a little after died Conan, chief King of the Brit∣tains or Welshmen, leaving behind him a daughter called Esylht, who was marryed to a No∣ble man called Mervin Ʋrich the son of Gwyriad or Ʋriet the son of Elidur, and so forth in the right line to Belinus the brother of Brennus King of the Brittains, and his mother was Nest the daughter of Cadelth King of Powis, the son of Brochwel Yscithroc, that fought with the Saxons at Bangor, who was Prince of Powis. This Brochwel is called by the Latine writers Brecinellus and Brochmaelus, of whom,Galfride J. Cast. Math. West. Mr. Powel fol. 22. saith Mr Powel, I find thus written in Historia Divae Monacellae. Fuit olim in Powisia quidam princeps illustrissimus nomine Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul Legecestriae, qui in Ʋrbe tunc temporis Pengwern Powis, nunc vero Salopia dicta est, habitabat, cujus domicilium seu habitaculum ibi steterat, ubi Collegium Divi Ceddae nunc situm est. That is, There was sometimes in Powis a Noble Prince named Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul or Earl of Chester, who dwelt in a town then called Pengwern Powis, and now Salop, whose dwelling house was in the very same place where the Colledge of St. Chad now standeth: This man with Cadvan King of Brittain, Morgan King of Demetia, and Bledericus King of Cornwall, gave an overthrow to Ethelfred King of Northumberland, upon the river Dee, an. 617. of whom the Ancestours of divers in Wales living at this day, are known (by ancient books and records) to have descended. Mervin Ʋrich and Esylht the Daughter of Conan. The first year of the reign of Mervin Ʋrich and Esylht his wife Egbert King of the Saxons entered into VVales with a great and puissant army, and destroyed the whole Country unto Snowden hills, and seised into his hands the Country of Rhyvonioc in Denbigh∣shire. About this time there was a great battail fought in Anglesey, called the battail of Lhanvaes. In this year being the 819. ab incarnatione,819. Kenulph King of Mercia destroyed West VVales, and the Summer following he overcame Powis land, and did much hurt, and after died, and Kenelme reigned in his place. About the same year also Howel King of Man died; much about this time,828. a great battail was fought at a place called Gavelford betwixt the Brittains and the VVest Saxons of Devon∣shire, and many thousands cruelly slain upon either side, the victory being uncertain. In or about the year 836. the Danes landed in VVest VVales, and so passing through VVales into England with many of the Brittains which joyned with them, against Egbert, but they were all overthrown by Egbert at Hengistdown, who died the year following. In the year 841. died Edwalhan a noble man of Wales. And two years after was the bat∣tail of Kettel betwixt Burchard King of Mercia and the Brittans, where in as some do write,841. Mervin Ʋrich King of the Brittains was slain, leaving behind him a son called Rodri Maur, that is to say Roderick the great, from Rodri, by his son Anarawd, who bore for his arms Or, three Lyons passant Gules; Mervin, whose coate was Or, a Lyon rampant Gules, and Cadel who took for his armes Gules, a Lyon Ramp. within a border engraled Or; the worshipful and flourishing families of the Morgans in Monmothshire, who to this day quarter the two last coats, by matches and coheirs are rightly descended; of which line William Morgan of Lantarnam Esq who marryed Lady Frances daughter to the Earl of VVorcester, derived his pedegree, leaving issue Sr Edward Morgan first Baronet of that linage (father to Sr. Ed∣ward Morgan Baronet, now living) Henry Morgan, and Winefred Wife to Percy Enderbid, Compiler of this book. Roderike the Great. Roderike the great began his reign over VVales the year after Christ his incarnation 843. This Prince divided all VVales into the three territories of Aberstraw, Dinivour,The descri∣ption of Wales by Sr. John Price Kt and Hump. Lhoyd Gent. and Math∣raval. But before we proceed any further, be pleased to read over the description of Cam∣bria now called VVales, drawn first by Sir John Price Knight, and afterwards augmented and made perfect by Humphrey Lhoyd, Gent. Forasmuch as it is necessary for the understanding of the VVelsh history, to know the perfect description of the Country of VVales, to the end the acts atchieved and done, may the better be known, I thought good somewhat to travail therein, and so to lay down the same
as it was in those daies, and as it is now, that the Reader may by conference of both times, the better understand, both what hath passed from the time of Cadwalader, and what hereafter is to ensue. Therefore after the three Sons of Brutus had divided the whole Isle of Brittain into three parts, that part contained within the French Seas, with the Rivers of Severn (cal∣led in Brittish Hafern) Dee and Humber fell to the eldest Son Locrinus, which was after his name called Lhoyger, which name it hath in the Brittish Tongue to this day, but in English called England, and is augmented Northward to the River Tweed. The second Son, (or as some say the third) Albanactus, had all the Land Northward from Humber to the Sea Ork∣ney, called in the Brittish Tongue Norweryth, and in Latine Mare Calidonium. The third Son Camber, (or rather the second) had for his part that remained undivided, lying within the Spanish and Irish Seas, and separated from England by the Rivers Severn & Dee, part was after his name called Cambria, and the Inhabitants thereof Cambri, and their Language Camberaec, and so are at this day, so that they have kept the same Countrey and Language this 2690. years and above (saith this Authour, when that Chronicle was printed which bears no date) without commixtion with any other Nation, especially in North Wales. And because the name of the Country is changed, or rather mistaken by the inhabitants of England, and not by them called Cambry but Wales, I think it necessary to declare the occasion thereof, which is, That whereas the Saxons, a people of Germany, were the first that after the Brittains inhabited and ruled the greatest part of this Island, and drove the Brittains into that corner, a which according to the manner of their coun∣trey they called VVales,Wales why so called. and the countreymen VVelshmen, and the Tongue VVelsh, that is to say, strange, or not of them understood; for at this day, the Inhabitants of the Low-countreys call all their next Neighbours Language, Henegaw, or others that speak French, VValsh, as a Language to them unknown. Likewise the Inhabitants of Tyroll, and other the higher countryes of Germany, do name the Italian their next Neighbour a VValsh∣man, and his language VValsh. And this is an evident proof, that they which harped upon a Queen Gwallaes,Not from Queen Gwa∣laes, Nor from Prince Wala. and of a Prince VValla, (of whom neither Brittish, Latine or Eng∣lish History makes mention) were fouly deceived: and so likewise was a great Historio∣grapher of late daies, who saith that it was called VValia quasi Italia, because the rest of the Romanes which remained in the Isle were driven thither. Neither is this any new in∣vention; although Polidore Virgil with an Italian brag doth glory his self to be the first that found it out;Polidore Vir∣gil his brag. for divers antient Writers do alledge the same cause of the name of VVales, of whom Sylvester Giraldus is one who writ in the time of Henry the Second, after the Conquest before 380 passed, which is an evident token that the said Polidore Virgil did either never see it, or at least not read the ancient Histories of this Kingdome, or else dis∣sembleth the same to the advancement and praise of himself and his countrey: which to the learned and indifferent Reader, shall appear to be the only occasion he took that work in hand;Polidores jug∣ling in his Hi∣story. for all his book redoundeth only to the praise and honour of the Romanes, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and to blaze forth their Acts and Deeds within this Realm, and up∣on the other part he doth either openly slander, or else privately extenuate, or shamefully deny the Martial prowess and Noble Acts as well of Saxons, Danes, and Normans, as of the Brittains, all inhabiters of this Isle, which thing he that lists to prove, let him read and confer Cæsars Commentaries, Cornelius Tacitus, Herodianus, and other ancient Writers as well in Latine as in Greek, with his works. As for the Ancient Writers of the Brittish History, as the Brittish Chronicle, the History of Gildas, Ponticus Virunnius, yea the golden work of Matthew Paris, Monk of Saint Alban, who writ from William the Conquerour; to the last year of Henry the Third, I dare say he never saw them, they be in divers places to be had, so that the Truth may be eastly proved. To make an end, I say, that he being a stranger born, as also ignorant in our Histories, and in the Tongues and Languages wherein they were written,Polidores ig∣norance, the cause of many mens errours in History. could never set forth a true and perfect Chronicle of the same, but he having a good Grace, and fluent Phrase in the Latine Tongue, and finding himself in a countrey where every man either lacked Knowledge, or a Spirit to set forth the History of their own country, took this enterprize in hand to their great shame, and no less dispraise, because he a blinde leader should draw a great number of undiscreet and rash followers, as well Geogra∣phers & Cosmographers, as Chroniclers & Historiographers to the dark pit of Ignorance, where I leave them at this time, remitting the Reader to the Apology of Sir John Price Kt. and his Brittish History, written by him on purpose against the envious Reports, & slandrous taunts of the said Polidore, where he shall see a great number of his Errours confuted at large. And to return to my former matter concerning the name of Wales, which name to be given of late by a stranger Nation may be otherwise proved,That which is now abusive∣ly called Welsh, was the ancient Language of the first Brit∣tains. for the Welshmen themselves do not understand what these words Wales and Welsh do signifie, nor know any other Name of their countrey or themselves, but Cambry, nor of their Language but Cambrae, which is as much as to say as Cambers Language or Speec; so likewise they know not what England or English meaneth, but commonly they call the Countrey Lhogier the English∣men, Sayson, and the English Tongue Saysonaec, which is an evident token that this is the
same Language which the Brittains spake at the beginning; for the works of Merdhin, and of Taliessin who wrote above 1000. years since, are almost the same words which they use at this day, or at the least easie to be understood by every one which know∣eth perfectly the Welsh Tongue, especially in North-Wales. Besides this, whereas at this day there do remain three Remnants of the Brittains divi∣ded every one from the other with the seas, which are in Wales, Cornwal, (called in British Cerniw,) & little Brittain, yet almost all the particular words of these three people are all one, although in pronunciation & writing of the sentences they differ somewhat; which is no mar∣vell, seeing that the pronunciation in one realm is often so different that the one can scant understand the other. But it is rather a wonder, that the Welshmen being separated from the Cornish, well nigh these 900 years, and the Brittains from either of them,In this Au∣thors time. 290, before that, and having small traffick or concourse together since that time, have still kept their own Brittish tongue. They are not therefore to be credited which deny the Welsh to be the old Brittish tongue. And here I cannot passe over what one of the five Chroniclers writ of late, of the name of Brittain, affirming that it should be so called of Brittain in France, as the elder of that name; but sure he had either never seen Ptolomy, nor Cæsar, nor any other ancient writer, or read them with small judgment and memory; for there he might have learned that when this land was called Brittain, the other was called Armorica, and how in Maximus time Conan Meriadoc was the first that gave it that name, and inhabited it with Brittains out of this Isle; other derivations of these words, out of Greek and Latine, I am ashamed to relate, (of which I have spoken formerly) I will therefore returne to the description of Wales, which was almost in old time compassed about with the Irish seas, and the Rivers Dee and Severne, although afterwards the Saxons wan by force from the Brittains, all the plain (as is already said) and champion Countries over the rivers; and specially Offa King of Mercia who made a ditch of great breadth and depth to be a Meare betwixt his Kingdom and Wales; which ditch began at the river Dee by Basingwerk be∣tween Chester and Ruthlan, and ran along the hills sides to the South sea a little from Brit∣stol, reaching above an hundred miles in length, and is in many places to be seen at this day; bearing the name of Clawdh Offa, viz. Offa's ditch; and the Country between it and England is commonly called in Welsh Y Mars, although the greatest part of it be now inhabited by Welshmen, namely in Northwales, which yet keepeth the ancient limits to the River Dee, and in some places over it. Other (as Sylvester Giraldus) make the river Wy called in Welsh Guy to be a mear between England and Wales, on the South part called South-VVales, who measureth the breadth of VVales from Sallowe or VVillowford called Rhydyrhelig upon VVy, to St. Davids in Menevia a 100 miles; and the length from Caertheon upon Ʋsk in Gwentland, to Holy head called Caergibi in Anglesey, in Welsh called Môn above a 100 miles. And these be the common mears at this day, although the Welsh tongue is commonly used and spoken England-ward beyond these old mears a great way, as in He∣refordshire, Glocestershire, and a great part of Shropshire; and thus for the general description of Wales, which afterward about the year of Christ 870. Rodericus Magnus King of Wales di∣vided it into three territories, which he called Kingdoms, which remained till of late dayes. These three were Gwyneth, Northwales Dehenbarth Southwales, and Powis land, in eve∣ry of which he ordained a princely seat or Court for a Prince to remain at most com∣monly: as in Gwyneth (which some old writers call Venedocia,Abersfraw. for Gwinethia) Abersfraw in the Isle of Môn, or Anglesey. In Deheuberth, called in Latine Demetia 'Caermardhyn, from whence it was afterwards removed to Dinevowr eight miles thence.Dinevowr. In Powis Penguerne cal∣led Y Mwythic, and in English Shrewsbury,Methraval. from whence it was removed to Mtheraval in Po∣wis land. And because this history doth as well intreat of wars betwixt these three Pro∣vinces, as betwixt them and the Saxons, Normans and Flemmings, I think good to set forth the particular description of every part by it self; and first of Northwales as the chiefest part which he gave his Eldest Son,Northwales. ordering that either of the other two should pay him yearly 200. pound of tribute, as it appeareth in the lawes of Howel Dha, which are to be had in Welsh and also in Latine. Therefore Gwyneth called Northwales, had upon the Northside the Sea from the River Dee at Basingwerck to Aberdyni; and upon the West and Southwest the river Dini, which divideth it from Southwales, and in some place from Powis land. And on the South and East it is divided from Powis land, sometimes by the mountains, and sometimes with rivers till it come to the River Dee again. This land was of old time divided into four parts, of which the chifest was Môn, in English Anglesey,Môn. where the Princes chief house was at Abersfraw, which is an Island separated from the mainland, with an arme of the sea called Maenai, and had in it self three Cantreds or hundreds, which were subdivided into six Comots, as Cantreff Abersfraw to comot Lhion, and comot Malh∣traeth, Cantreff Cemais to the comots Talebolion and Tur Celyn,An other ab∣surd errour in Polidore. Cantref Rossir to the comots Tindaethwy and Menai. And at this day there is a trim town in that Island called Buemarish, and a common passage to Ireland at Caergibi, called in English Holy-head; but here I can∣not wink at that notable error of Polidore, which after his accustomed fashion, deemeth this Isle to be called not Môna, but Anglesia or Anglorum Insula, because it is called in English
Anglesey, and giveth this name Mona to Man, and so hath lost the names of both Isles: which ignorance and forgetfulness might be forgiven him, if he had not drawn a great number to this errour with him; which in their Charters do daily wrong-name these Isles, which may be easily proved. First because the Inhabitants of the Isle do know no other name but Môn, and it is called through all ƲƲales, Tîr Môn, that is to say, the land of Môn, unto this day, so that neither by memory of Man, neither by any Monument in writing in the Bri∣tish tongue, can it appear that ever it had any other name but Môn, yet there be manifest monuments for these 1000. years. It is also grown to a proverb through ƲƲales for the fertility of the ground, Môn mam Gymry, that is to say, Môn mother of ƲƲales. The ancient history of Cornelius Tacitus (which it seems, age had beaten out of Polidors head) saith, that the Souldiers of Paulinus Suetonius, and after of Julius Agricola, after they had passed through Northwales, then came over against Mona, where they did swim o∣ver an arme of the sea 200. paces, and so by force wan the Isle. Now whether is it more reasonable thus to swim over 200 paces, or 20 miles? I know there are many believe Polidor in this point; let all men therefore by this judge the rest. As for that which he saith of the great woods,Môn the seat of the super∣stitious Druids it is nothing; for both the Romans, and after when the Christian faith took place in the Realm, the Christians, did fall and root them out of the abominable Idolatry and superstition practised by the Druids in them, as is touched before, that the King of Man sent for timber to Mon:Great trees found in the Earth. read the life of Hugh E. of Chester; which also is evident by the great beeches, and other trees found in the earth in those dayes. His other reason is, because it is cal∣led Anglesey in the English tongue. So is Lhoyger called England, and Cambry Wales; are those therefore the old names? no surely; and what if the inhabitants called it so? (as they did not) had it not a name before the Angles wan it? yes I warrant you; but he had forgotten that. Now the name of Man was ever, or at the least these 1000 years, named in Brittish Manaw, of which cometh the English name Man. The Inhabitants there call it so, and no nation about it did ever call it Môn, nor any writer but Polidor, which was too young a Godfather to name so old a child. For Gildas writ above 900. years since, whose writings Polidor never saw, but untruly fathers upon his own device. Geraldus in his description of Ireland to Henry II, and Henry Huntington, do plainly call Man in Latine Eubonia, adding thereto either Manaw or Man for the better understanding of the name; will you believe them or Polydor? other arguments there are which I passe over till I have more leisure and occasion to write of this matter. Arvon.The seccond part of Northwales was called Arvon, which is as much as to say over against Mon, and had in it four cantrefs and ten comots. Cantref Abeer had in it three comots, Y Lhechwedh Ʋchaf, Y Lechwedhisat and Nanconwy. Cantref Arvon had two comots, Ywch Owyrnai, and Isgwyrnai. Cantref Dunodic had two comots, Ardudwy and Enionyth. Cantref Lhyyn containeth three comots Cymitmain, Tinlhain, and Canclogion. This is now called Carnarvonshire, the chief Town whereof is Carnarvon: heretofore it was strongly walled, and had a very fair Castle. Edward the II. King of England was here borne; and hence according to the custome of those times, entituled Edward of Carnarvon; The Princes of Wales had in this place their Chancery and Exchequer for all Northwales, which was no small improvement to it. Earl it had never any till this present age in which the late K. Charles conferred that title 1628. on, Robert Lord Dormer of Wing created Earl of Carnarvon 4o. Carol. Aug. 2. and lost his life in the said Kings service. Lord Dormer his son Earl of Carnarvon now living. Azure 10 billets 4, 3, 2, and 1. Or, in a chief of the second a Lyon Issuant sable, incens∣ed Gules. And as Carnarvon hath given title to an Earl, so hath Anglesey also, though not by her ancient name Môn; for anno 1624. Christopher Villiers brother to the D. of Buckingham, was created E. of Anglesey, September 24. Charles Villiers second Earl. Argent on a crosse Gules five escolops Or, a mullet for difference. This Môn is also called Anglesey shire, and hath both it and Carnarvonshire, the same di∣visions at this day. In this shire are Snowden hills called Eryri, neither in height, fertility of ground, wood, cattel, fish, and foul, giving place to the famous Alps, and without con∣troversie the strongest country in Brittain. Here is the Town of Carnarvon called in old time Caersegonce; and there is also Conwey
called Caer Giffin, and See of Bangor, with divers other ancient Castles and places of me∣mory, and vvas the last part of Wales that came under the Dominions of the Kings of England. It hath on the North the Sea, and Maenai; upon the East and South East the Ri∣ver Conwey, vvhich divideth it from Denbighshire, vvhose principal Tovvn is Denbigh vvhich hath had Lords good store and of several families; but none of them Parliamentary Peers (in reverence to it) till these latter times. Of late it hath given title both of Lord and Earl to tvvo several families, viz. to these; 1 Robert Lord Dudley created Baron of Denbigh and Earl of Leicester, Eliz. 6. Sep. 29 Or a Lyon Rampant his tail double forked vert. 2 William Viscount Fielding created Earl of Dinbigh, 20. Jac. Sept. 14. Master of the Ward robe, &c. Argent on fess. Azure 3. fusils, Or. This Shire is parted on the South West and West from Mirioneth with high mountains and Rivers and other Mears.Merionith. The third part of Gwineth was Merioneth, containing three Cantrefs and every Cantref three comots. The Cantref Mereon, hath three camots, Talibont, Pennal and Ysttumaner: the Cantef of Arustly hath these, Ʋwchcoed, Iscoed, and Guarthrenion.Guarthrenion. Cantref Perilhum hath these Ʋwchmeloch, Ismeloh, and Micnaint; and this keepeth the said name till this day, but not within the same Mears; it is full of hills and rocks, and hath upon the Northside the sea, notable at this day for the great resort and number of people that repair thither to take herings: it hath upon the East Arnon and Denbighland; upon the south Powis, and upon the West Dini and Cardiganshire. In this Country standeth the Town of Harlech and a great lake called Lhin Tigid, through which the river Dee runneth and medleth not withī the water of the Lake,Note a won∣der. which is three miles long; and also the Salmons, which are commonly taken in the river hard by the Lake, are never seen to enter the Lake; likewise a kinde of fish called Guymaid, which are like to Whitings, and are full in the Lake, and are never taken in the River; not far from this Lake, is a place called Garergay, which was the house of Gay Arthurs, foster brother. This shire as well as Arvon is full of Cattel, Fowl and Fish, with great number of Deer and Roes, but there is great scarcity of corn. The fourth part of Gwenith was called Y Berusdhwlad, which may be Englished, the Inland or middle Countrey, which contains 5. Cantrefs and had thirteen comots, as cantref Rivomoc had in it these comots, Ʋwbhalet and Isalet. Cantref Ystrat had Hiraethoc and Cynmeirch. Cantref Roff these, Ʋwchdulas, Isdulas and Crenthin, which all are in the Lordship of Denbeigh, saving the Crenthin, which is in Carnarvonshire, wherein the Castles of Dygandwy did stand, which was the Earl of Chester, and is commonly called in Latine & English Chronicles Gannoc. The 4th. Cantref was Difrin Clwid, which may be Englished the valley of Clwid, and now is called the Lordship of Ruthin, and hath those comots, Coleigion, Lhannerth, and Dogvelin. The fifth Cantref is Tengle, and is now a part of Flintshire having these comots, Counsylht, Prestatyn, and Ruthlan, and in this part is one of the fairest valleys within this Isle containing 18. miles in length, and 4, 5, 6, or 7. in breadth, as the hills either draw inward together or backward asunder, which high hills do enclose it on the East, West and South parts, and Northward the sea, it is plentiful of Cattel, fish, and foul, corn, hay, grasse and wood; and divided along in the middle with the river Clwy to whom runneth Clywedoc, Ystrad, Whilar, Elwy, and a great number of other rivers from the hills. In this valley two miles from the sea, is the town and Castle of Ruthlan, where sometime a Parliament hath been kept; and two miles above it is the See of Asaph, between the rivers Cly and Elwy, called in the old time the Bishops See of Lhan Elup. Four miles thence and two miles from the river is situ∣ate upon a rock the town and Castle of Denbigh, where is one of the gratest Markets of the Marshes of Wales, and one of the fairest and strongest Castles within this Realm, which be∣ing the house of David brother of Lhewelin the last Prince of the Welsh blood, was enlarged and strengthened by Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, to whom K. Edward gave the same Lordship. It is also the Shire Town of that Shire;Anno 12. Ed. 1. five miles above this is the Town of Ruthin, with a fair Castle, which sometimes belonged to the Lords Grey Earles of Kent. This part of Northwales hath upon the North the river Dee and the sea, upon the West Ar∣non and the river Conwey, South and east Merionith, and the country he called Powys, and these be the mears and bounds of Gwyneth or Venedotia; for the name of Northwales containeth beside this all Powis in these dayes: so there was under the territory of Terffraw 15. Cantrefs and in them 38 comots. The second Kingdom was Mathranal, which in right order was the third, as that which came to third brother; yet for the better understanding of the History following I have placed it here. To this Kingdom belonged the Country of Powis, and the land betwixt Wy
and Severne, which part had upon the South and West, Southwales with the river Wy and Twyl and other meers, upon the North Gwineth, and upon the East the Marshes of England, from Chester to Wy a little above Hereford; and therefore it was most troubled with wars as well of the Saxons, as afterwards of the Normans Lords Marchers who afterwards daily wan some part thereof, and by that means it was the first part that served the Kings of Eng∣land, and therefore lesse esteemed of all the rest. This part called Powis was divided a∣gain into Powis Ʋadoc, and Powis Wenwin win. Powis Vadoc contained in it self five Cantreds and 15 comots Cantref Y Barwn which hath three comots Dynmael, Edeyrneon and Glindourdwy, which be now in Merionithshire saving Dinmael which is in Denbighshire. Cantref Y Rhiw, whose comots are these Yal now in Denbigshire, Staytalin and Hop now in Flintshire. Cantref Treferd containeth these comots, Creosuam, Tref Y wayn, in English Chirk; and in Denbighshire Toesoswallt, English Oswestred and in Shropshire. Cantref Ʋwchnant hath these comots, Merforth in Flintshire, Maelor Gymraeg, in English Bromfield, now in Denbighshire, and Meoler Saesneg in Flintshire. Cantref Rayder with his comots, Morchnant, Israider Clynhaeth and Nanhendwy all in Chirkland and in Denbighshire. Also the Lordship of Whittington now in Shropshire, was in this part of Powis, which part at this day hath lost the name of Powis, and is situate in divers Shires, as it appeareth by the discourse before passed. In this part is the Castle of Holt in Bromfield, and the Castle of Chirk in Chirkland, likewise the Lordship and Castle of Whittington, which came by marriage to Goulh Fitzwarren. There is besides these the Lord∣ship of Oswestre, of the which the Fitz Allans have been Lords these 300 years and odd, and of divers other Lordships in those Marches, as Shrarden, the eleven townes, Clun and many others which are now in Shropshire. The second part call'd Powis Wenwinwin had. likevvise five cantreds and tvvelve co∣mots. Cantref Y Ʋyrnwy had these comots, Mechnant, Ʋwch, Rayader, Mechain, Iscoed and Lhanerch Hudol. Cantref Ystile hath these, Deuthwr, Gorthwr, Isaf and Strat Marchelch. Cantref Lhyswinaf had these, Caerneneon and Mechain Ʋwchcoed. Cantref Cydowen had comot Conan and comot Hauren. Cantref Conan had Cyveilioc and Mouthwy which is now in Merionithshire: of all these the three first Cantreds do only at this day bear the name of Powis, which are upon the Northside of Severne, and are all five saving the comot of Mothwy in the County of Mont∣gomery. This is a Country full of Wods, Hills, and Rivers; and hath in it these towns; the Pool, Newtown, Machinlheth. Arustly was in old time in this part, but afterwards it came to the Princes of Gwineth. These Lordships came by just delcent from the Princes thereof to a Woman named Hawys the daughter of Owen ap Gruffith, as appeareth in the history follow∣ing. Arustly and Cyneloc came to the Baron of Dudley, and afterwards was sold to the King. The third part belonging to Mathrual, was the land between Wye and Severn, containing four Cantreds and 13. comots. Cantref Melienith hath these Comots, Cery, Swithygre, Lewalalht, and Glin Sei∣thon. Cantref Elnel hath these, Ʋwch, Minydh and Lhochdhiffnog. Cantref Yclawdh these, Dyffryn, Teyveydat, Swydhygnogen and Pennwelht. Cantref Bulcht hath these, Swidhi, Vam, Drenlies and Isyrwon. Of this part there is at this day some in Montgomery shire, some in Radnorshire, and some in Brechnockshire, in this part and in the Lordship marching to it; which although at the time of the division, which was in the time of the last prince, were not in his subjection, yet to this day speak Welsh, and are called Wales, and in those comots are these Towns and Castles; Montgomery in these late wars utterly destroyed and levelled with the ground, though the Lord thereof Edward Lord Herbert took armes with the Parliament, called in Welsh Trevaldwin, a small Town, but a most beautiful Castle, a little before its desolation, much and magnificently enlarged and adorned by the said Lord, and for situation almost impregnable. The Castle of Clun called Colunwy which is the Earles of Arundel, who amongst his other honourable titles is Baron of Clun and Oswestrie. The Town of Knighton, in Welsh Trefilcawd. The Castle of Cymaron, Presthyn, in Welsh Lhanandras The Town and Castle of Radnor, in Welsh Maesynet, at this day the Shire-Town. The Town of Knighton and the Castle of Huntington called in Welsh Y Castelh Mayn, which were the Bohunes Earles of Hereford, and after the D. of Buc∣kingham; Castle Haye, Payne, Lhanvair in Buecht. These Lordships with Brechvoc and Aberga∣neny, were belonging to the Bruses Lords of Brechnoch, and after came divers times and by sun∣dry means to the Bohunes, Nevils, and; Mortimers and so in this Kingdom or Territory were found 14 Cantreds and 40 comots. Two of these parts which are Powis and Gwineth, are at this day called Northwales, and divided into six shires. Môn called Anglesey, Carnarvon, Merioneth,
Denbigh, Flint, and Montgomeryshire, are of all on the Northside Severn, saving a piece of Montgomeryshire. And here I think it good to let the Reader understand what the Brittish. Chronicle saith of Northwales, which affirmeth that three times by inheritance it came to Women; first to Stradwen, Daughter to Cadvan ap Conan ap Endaf, and wife to Coel Godeboc, Mother to Genaw, Dyvor and Gwawl. The second time to the same Gwawl wife to Edeyrn ap Padern, and mother to Cunetha Wledic; which Cunetha inhabiting in the North parts of England, about the year 540. after the incarnation of Christ, and hearing how the mingled Nations of the Irish, Scots and Picts had overrun the sea shore of Cardigan, which was part of his inheritance, sent his sons thither to enjoy their inheritance; of the which Tibiaon his eldest son died in Man, which land the said Irish Scots had wan; for Gildas saith that of the Children of Clam Hector, which peopled a great part of Ireland, Yscroeth with his people inhabited Dalrienda, which is a part of Scotland. Builke with his people came to Man; but I think it good to put in Gildas words, which saith, Builke cum filiis suis inhabitavit Euboni∣am Insulam vulgo Manaw quæ est in meditullio maris inter Hiberniam & Brittanniam; that is to say, Builke with his Children inhabited the Isle Eubonia, commonly called Manaw (for so it is and was named in Brittish) which lyeth in the middle of the sea, between Ireland and Brittain. This was not called Mona, as Polidore saith: The children of Bethoun inhabited Demetia, which is Southwales, with Gwyr and Cydweli till they were chased thence by the chil∣dren of Cunetha; thus far Gildas. Therefore the Sons of Cunetha being arived in Northwales (as well I think being driven by the Saxons, as for their inheritance) divided the Country betwixt them. And first Micreaon the son of Tibiaon the son of Cunetha had Cantref Meireaon to his part. Arustel ap Gwenetha had cantref Arust: Caradoc ap Cunetha had Caerdegion now Cardiganshire; Dunod had cantref Dunodic, Edeyrn had Edeyhnion, Mael had Dynmmael, Coel had Coleyon, Dogvael had Dogvelyn, Ryvaon had Rivomoc now Denbighland, Eneore Yrch had Caerneon in Powis, Ʋssa had Maesuswlht now Oswestre. For surely that which they say commonly of Oswald King of Northumherland, to be slain there, and of the Well which sprung where his arm was carried, is nothing so. For Beda and all writers testify that Penda slew Oswald at Maserfelt in the Kingdom of Northumberland, and his body was buryed in the Abbey of Bardney in the province of Lindsey on the third part of Lincolnshire, which Pro∣vince gave title of Earl to Robert Bertu, Lord Willoughbie of Eresbie, who was created, being Lord great Chamberlain of England by inheritance, Earl of Lindsey 2. Car. Novemb. 29 and was General for the King at Edgehill, where he valiantly lost his life, in his Masters right and quarrel, bearing for his arms, Argent 3 battering rams barwise proper headed and hoop∣ed Azure. The ruines of Bardney Abbey are yet to be seen. But to my former matter, these names given by the sons of Cunetha remain to this day. After this the Irish-Picts and Scots, which the Brittains called Y Gwidhyl Phichiaid, which is to say, the Irish Picts, did overrun the Isle of Môn, and were driven thence by Caswalhon Lhawhir, that is Caswalhon with the long hand, the Son of Eneon Yrch ap Cunedha, who slew Seoigi their King with his own hands at Lhany Gwydhyl which is the Irish church at Holyhead. This Caswalhon was father to Maelgon Gwyneth whom the Latines call Maglocunus Prince and King of Brit∣tain. In this time was the famous Clerk and great wise man Talissyn Ben Beirdh, that is to say the chiefest of the Beirdh or wise men, for this word Bardh in Cæsars time signified (as Lucan beareth witnesse) such as had knowledg of things to come, and so it signifieth at this day. This Maelgon had a son called Run, in whose time the Saxons united Gurmund unto Brittain, from Ireland who had come hither from Affrick, who with the Saxons was the utter destruction of the Brittains, and slew all that professed Christ,Gurmund an Affrican King of Ireland was the first that drove the Brittans over Severne. and was the first that drove them over Severne. This Run was father to Beli, who was father to Jago (for so the Brittains call James) who was father to Cadvan, and not Brochwell called Brecyval (as the English Chronicle saith) for this Brochwell Ysgithroc that is long-toothed, was chosen leader of such as met with Adelred, alias Ethelbertus Rex Cantiae, and other Angles and Saxons, who put Brochel twice to flight not far from Chester, and cruelly slew 1000 Priests and Monks of Bangor with a great number of Lay brethren of that house which lived by the labour of their hands. This Brochwel retired over Dee hard by Bangor, and defended the Saxons passage, till Cadvan King of Northwales, Meredith King of Southwales,1066. Saxons slain by the Brittains. and Bledrus or Bletius Prince of Cornwall came to succour him, and gave the Saxons a sore battail, and slew of them the number of 1066. and put the rest to flight. After which battail Cadvan was chosen King of Brittain, and was chief ruler within the Isle, after whom his son Cadwallon, who was father to Cadwallador the last of the Brittish blood that bare the name of King of Brittain,This was writ by a Northwales man, but Southwales far exceedeth it for beauty, profit and pleasure. was King. The third time that Northwales came to a Woman was to Esylht daughter to Conan Tin∣daythwy the son of Edwal Ywrch the son of Cadwalador. She was wife to Mervin Ʋrich, and Mother to Roderike the great, as hereafter shall be declared. By this you may understand that Northwales hath been a great while the chiefest seat of the last Kings of Brittain; it was and is the strongest countrey within this Isle, full of high mountains, craggy rocks, great
Woods and deep, valleyes, straight and dangerous places, deep and swift Rivers, as Dev which springeth in the hills of Merioneth, and runneth Northwest through Mouthwy, and by Machinlaeth, and so to the sea at Aberdini, dividing North, and Southwales asunder. Dee called in Welsh Dourdwy, springeth also in an other side of the said hills, runneth East through Penlhin, and the lake Tisgyd down to Corwen, and Lhangolhen, between Chirk∣land and Bromfield where it boweth Northward toward Bangor to Holt, and to Chester, and thence Northwest to Flint Castle, and so to the sea. There is also Conwel rising likewise in Merionithshire, and dividing Caernarvon from Denbighshire runneth under Suowdon, North-east by the Town of Aberconwey to the sea. Also Clwyd which rising in Denbighland runneth down to Kuthin, and plain North, not far from Denbigh, to St. Asaph, and so by Kuthlan and to the sea; there be many other fair Rivers, of which some run to the sea, as Mawr at Traethmawr, and Avon Y Saint at Caer∣narvon, and others that run to Severn, as Murnwy in Powis, and to Murny Tanat, some o∣ther to Dee, as Ceirioc betwixt the Lordships of Chirk and Wittington, Alin through Yal and Moldes dale, and Hopedale, and so to Dee, a little above Chester. And this shal suffice for the perfect description of that which in old time was called Gwineth and Powis, and at these dayes the six Shires of Northwales. Now remaineth the last Kingdom of Wales called Dinevowr, which although it was the greatest,Dinevour. yet was it not the best, as Giraldus writeth, chiefly because it was most molested by Flemmings, and Normans, and also that in divers parts thereof the Lords would not obey their Prince, as in Gwent and in Morganwc, which wrought their own confusion, as shall hereafter appear. This was divided into six parts, of which Caredigion was the first, and contained four Cantrefs and ten comots,Caerdigion. as Cantref Penwedic had in it these comots, Geneurglin, Perueth and Crenthin. Cantref Canawl had these Mevenith, Anhunoc, and Pennarch. Cantref Castelh had these comots, Mabwinion, and Caerwedros. Cantref Sirwen had these, Gwenionith and Iscoed, and this part is at this day called in English Caerdiganshire and in Welsh Swidh Aberleini. This is a champion country, with∣out much wood, and hath been divers times overcome by Flemmings and Normans, who builded many Castles in it, and at last were beaten out of them all. It hath on the East Northwales, with the River Dini, and part of Powis; upon the South Caermarthen∣shire, upon the West Pembrockshire with the river Teini, and upon the North the Irish sea. In this part is the Town of Cardigan upon Teini not far from the sea. The Town of Abery∣stwyth upon the river Ystwith by the sea, and Lhanbadern Vawr which was a great Sanctuary, and a place of religious and learned men in times past, and in this Shire was a great number of Castles, as the Castle of Strat Meyric, of Walter, of Lhanristed, of Dynerth of the sons of Mineaon, of Aber Reidol, and many more, with the Towns of Tregaron, Lhandhewibreni, as you shall understand hereafter. The second part was call Dinot, and at this day Pembrockshire and had in it eight cantrefs, and 23. comots, which where these; cantref Emlin, that had these comots, Ʋwchluch, Iscutch and Lenethir. Cantref Arberth had these, Penrhin, or Elays, Esterolet, and Talacaarn. Cantref Dangeld had these, Amgoed, Pennant, and Eudfre. Cantref Ycoed had these, Lhanhayaden, and Castelh Gwis. Cantref Penvro had these, Coedychaf, Maenorbyir and Penvro. Cantref Ros had these, Hulfforth, Castelh, Gwalhmai and Ygarne. Cantref Pubidioc had these, Miniw, Pencaer, and Pebidioc. Cantref Cemas hath these, Ʋwchnener, Isnener, and Trefdracth. In these parts are divers towns and havens at this day, as Pembroch Tenby, in Welsh Denbigh, Y Pis. Heref. in welsh Hulforth, with the fair haven of Milford, called in Welsh Aberdangeldhen; S. Davids or Menevia, called in Welsh Miniw, the chiefest see in all Wales, Then Friscare called Abergwain, & Newport named Trefdraeth, these be along the sea coast, and not very far of be∣sides these there be divers Castles as Cilgarran, Arberth, Gwys, Lanhayaden, Walwin, and di∣vers others. This part was wan first by the Montgomeries, Earls of Shrewsbery, and after given to the Marshalls, and so to Valence, and from thence to the Princes of Wales, most troubled with the Normans and Flemmings, who do remain and inhabit about Pembrock, Tenbie and in Ros to this day, which can neither speak Welsh nor good English as yet: Dinet (for so I will call it hereafter) hath on the West and the North the Irish sea, upon the South the Spanish sea, and upon the East Caermarthenshire, and on the North-East Caerdiganshire. The third part of Caermardhinshire having 4 cantrefs and 15. comots, as cantref Finioc with the comots of Harfryn, Dervedh and Isgeneny. Cantref Eginoc with these, Gwir, now in Glamorganshire, Cidwel, and Carnwill∣heon Cantref Baehan with these, Melhaen, Caeo, and Maenor Deilo. Cantref Mawr with these, Cethineoc, comot Mab Elvyw, comot Mab Ʋchdrid and Widigada. In this Shire are the Townes and Castles of Caermadhin, Dinevowr, which was the Princes
seat of that Country, Newton, Lhandeilo, Lhauymdhyfry, Elmin, Swansey, now in Glamor∣ganshire, called in welsh Abertawy upon the sea, the Castle of the sons of Ʋchtryd of Lhanste∣phan and others. It hath upon the West Dinet or Pembrockshire, on th North Caerdigshire, upon the Southwest the sea, and upon the Southeast Glamorgan, and upon the East Brech∣nockshire. This is counted the strongest part of all Southwales, as that which is full of high mountains, great Woods and fair rivers, specially Tywy. In this and in the other two parts of Southwales, were the notablest acts that their History treateth of, atchived and done. The fourth called Morganwc, now Glamorganshire, containeth 4 cantrefs with 15 comots, as cantref Croveth with these comots, Rwngueth ac Ʋvan, Tir Yr Hwndrwd, and Maenor Clynogwr. Cantref Pennythen with these, Meyskin, Glynrhodny, Maenor, Talavan, and Maenor Ruthyn. Cantref Brenbinol with these, Gibowr, Senghennyth, Ʋwcheaeth and Iscaeth. Cantref Gwenthwy which is now in Monmothshire with these comots, Yrhardh Ganol, and Eithafdylygion. In this part are these towns and castles; Lhandaf the Bishops See, Caerdiffe called Caerdhyeth, Cowbridge, called in Welsh Y bont Vaen, which is as much as to say Stonebridge, Lantwid, Caerftyli, and others; and hath divers rivers, which run to the South sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth, Avan, Ogwr and Lhychwr; it hath on the South the sea of Severne, which divideth it from Devonshire and Cornewall; upon the West and Northwest Caermar∣dhynshire; upon the Northeast Brechnocshire, and upon the East Monmothshire; of this you shall read very little; for one Jestyn being chief of the Country, and having war with his Neighbours, called on Robert Fitz Hamon with a great number of strangers to his aid, who after they had atchived his desires, liked so well the Country, that they found occasion to fall out with Jestyn, and inhabited the country themselves and their heirs, at least some of them to this day. The fifth pat was called Gwent, and now is in Monmothshire, which hath three cant. and ten comots, as cant. Gwent which had these comots, Ymynyth, Iscoed, Lhefnydh and Tref Y Grug. Cant. Iscoed these, Brinbuga, Ʋwchcoed, Y Teirtref and Ergnig ac Ewyas, now in Hereford-shire. Cant. Cough was the 7th. cant. of Morgamoc, which is now in Glocester-shire, and is called the Forrest of Dean. In this part is the ancient City of Caerlheon upon Ʋsk, where was the Archbishops See of Wales; here are also divers Towns and Castles, as Chepstow, Glyn, Strigol, Ros, Tinterne upon the River Wy. There is also Newport called Ycastelh Newyth, Ʋisc called Brynbuga, Grosmond, Raglan, White Castle, Abergaveny, and many others (as I shall shew, God wil∣ling, in my description of Monmothshire) this is a fair and fertile Countrey, of which like∣wise the Gentlemen were never obedient to their Prince, which was the cause of their own destruction. It hath on the West Glamorgan and Brechnock-shire, on the North Hereford-shire, Glocester-shire and the River VVy, and upon the South and South-East Severne. Last of all cometh Brecheinoc, now Brechnoch shire, which hath three cant. and 8. comots, as cant. Selef, which hath these comots, Selef and Trahayern. Cantref Canol these, Talgarth, Ystradyw and Brwynlhys or Eglwys yail. Cant. Mawr hath these, Tir, Raulfe, Lhywel and Cerrig Howel. In this part is the town of Brechnock upon the meeting of Ʋsk and Hodui, and is called Aberhodni: and Hay called Y Celhy which Talgarth, Buelt, Lhangors; it hath West Carmardhin-shire, with the river of Tawy, upon the North Radnor-shire with Wy, upon the East Hereford-shire and Monmoth, upon the South Glamorgan. This for the most part is full of Mountains, Woods, and Ri∣vers, especially Buelt. And the Lords of that Country called Bruses with the Mortimers most of all other Lords Marches, sometimes by might,Omne regnum in se divisum, nō postest stare. but oftner by treason have molested and grieved the Princes of Wales, as you shall understand by the Historie following. This Land came after the Bruses to the Bohunes, Earls of Hereford, and so to the Straffords, D. of Buckingham.Proditionem amo, Prodito∣rem odi. These six Shires being subject to the Territory of Dynevour with Radnorshire, which was belonging to Mathraval, are now commonly called Southwales, which Countrey is both great and large, with many fair plains and valleys for corn, high mountains and rocks full of pasture for cattel: great and thick woods with forrests and parks for red and fallow dear, clear and deep rivers full of fish, of which Severne is the chiefest, which with Wy and Reidol, springs out of a high mountain called Pymlhyman in the edge of Cardigan-shire, and are commonly called the Three Sisters. Severne runneth full East through Cyd∣win and under the Castle of Shraden to Shrewsberie, from whence it turneth Southward, and turneth to Bridgenorth, Beaudley, VVorcester, Glocester, and so to the sea. The second Sister is Gwy, in English VVy, which took her journey South-East by Rayader Gwy to Buelt, where Irwon meeteth her, thence to Glacebury, and so to Hereford, and Monmoth, and to the sea of Severne at Chepstow; for so they call Môr Hafren, the sea which severeth VVales from Somerset-shire, Devon-shire and Conwall. The third Sister named Reidol,
ran Northward to the sea being not farr of at Aberystwyth. There be other fair rivers as Ʋsk, which riseth in a high mountain called Y Mynydh duy in the Southwest part of Brechnoch∣shire; it runneth to Brechnoch, and so to Monmothshire to the town of Ʋsk, Caerleon & New∣port, and so to the said south sea. Tywy also rising not far from Wy, runneth South to Lha∣nymdhyfri, and then South West by Lhandeilo and Dinevour to Abingwily and Gaermardhen, so by Lhansteshen to the sea. Greek, Fiber, Latine, Bea∣ver English, Avane. Brit.Teini likewise, which riseth in the edge of Caermardhenshire, and runneth North West by Embly Cilgerren, Caerdegion, and so to the North sea. In Teini above all the rivers in Wales, were in Giraldus time a great number of Castors, which may be Englished Bea∣vers, and are called in Welsh Avane, which name only remaineth in Wales at this day; but what it is very few can tell. It is a beast not much unlike the Otter, but that it is bigger, all hairy, saving the tail, which is like a fish tail, as broad as a mans head; this beast useth as well the water as the land, and hath very sharp teeth, and biteth cruelly till he perceive the bones crack; his stones be of great efficacy in physick. He that will learn what strong nests they make,And believe him if ye please; this species here spoken of, is now I think quite lost if it ever were. which Giraldus calls Castles, which they build upon the face of the water with great boughs, which they cut with their teeth, and how some lye upon their backs holding the wood with his fore feet, which the other draweth with a crosse stick, the which he holdeth in his mouth, to the water side, with all other particularities of their nature, let him read Giraldus in his Topographia of Wales. There be besides these a great number of Rivers, of which some run to the South and some to the West, and North sea, as Tywy in Glamorganshire, Taf also in Caermardhenshire, which runneth to Cledhen, two rivers, either called Cledhen, which do give Milford the name of Abergavgledhw in Pembrockshire, Arth, Aeron, and Ystwyth in Caerdigan. There be also divers Lordships, which be added to other shires, and were taken heretofore for parts of Wales, and in most part of them at this day, the Welsh language is spoken, as Oswestre, Knocking, VVhitting∣ton, Esmer, Masbrook, Chitbury, Caurs, Clonn, which are now in Shropshire; Ewyas La∣cy, Ewyas Harold, Clifford, VVinsorton, Yardley Huntington, VVhitney, Loghardneis in Herefordshire. Also this country of Southwales as all the rest of Brittain, was first inha∣bited by the Brittains, which remain there to this day; saving that in divers places, spe∣cially along the sea shore, they have been mingled with Saxons, Normans, (which the VVelsh history calleth Frenchmen) and Flemings: For that the Princes of VVales, since the conquest of the Normans, could never keep quiet possession thereof, but what for strangers, and what for disloyalty of their own people, vexation and war, were for the most part compelled to keep themselves in Caermardhenshire. This shall suffice for the description of the Country After this great King had (as it is said before) disposed of his affairs, had had war with Burchved King of Mercia, which by the aid of Ethelwaph entred Northwales with a great pow∣er, and destroyed Anglesey, & fought with the VVelshmen divers times, and slew Meric a great Prince amongst them; 846. Math. West. Kongen P. of Pendieth at Rome. 871.The year 846. was Ithel King of Gwent or Wetland slain in fight by the men of Brechnoch, and in the year 854 Kongen King of Powis died at Rome, being slain or choaked (as some say) by his own men. Much about this time dyed Gwyan King of Cardigan. This was that noble Gwyan ap Mevric ap Dunwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylt, King or Prince of Cardigan, who as some Brittish books have, was at this time drowned by misfortune. The Danes having entred the land, & being with shame and ignominy beaten and repulsed, and compelled to abjure the Isle, they bent (whether equivocally or perfidiously) their force against Wales, and entred the Isle of Môn with a great army in the year of Christ eight hundred seventy three, where Roderick gave them two battails, one at a place called Menegd in Anglesey. Dav. Powel. fol. 34. 879.I find also (saith my Authour) that about this time Halden and Hungare, two Captains of the Danes arrived in Southwales, and overrun the whole Countrey, destroying all before them, with fire and sword, neither sparing Churches nor Religious houses; but within a while after, they received their deserved reward at the hands of the West Saxons who a∣waiting for them on the coasts of Devonshire slevv both Halden and Hungare vvith 1200 of their people. At this time Endon Bishop of Menevia or St. Davids, died; and Hubert was installed in his place. And within two years after Dungarth King of Cornwal was drowned by a mischance. In the year 876 the Englishmen entred into Anglesey, and fought with the Welshmen a sore battail, who in the year following slew Roderike King or Prince of Wales, and Gwyriad his brother, or as some say his son. This Roderike had by his wife Enharad the daughter of Meyric, the son of Difnwal or Dunwal the son of Arthen ap Sytsylt, divers sons, as Anarawd his Eldest son, to whom he gave Aberfraw, with Northwales, Cadelh the second son vvho had Dinevour vvith Southvvales,
and also took Mathraval and Powis land by force from his brethren after the death of Mervin the third son, to whom the father had given the same.A Welsh ma∣nuscript which I have, saith Rodri the great, did bear G. a che∣veron be∣tween three Roses arg. Quarterly Gules and Or, four Lions passant gardant Counterchange. The Authour who sets down this coat as belonging to this King or Prince,Mr. Mills ca∣tologue of honour. fol. 209. compendiously gives us this relation Roderike the great, in Welsh called Rodero Mawr, Prince of all Wales, a man of much strength and courage, the son Essilt, begotten by Mervin King of the Isles, whose Grandfather (by the Mothers side) was Conan the son of Roderike, the son of Idwall the son of Cadwallader, the last King of the Brittains. This Idwall conveyed the miserable Brittains (that were oppressed and afflicted with the invasions and inroads of the Saxons) into Cambria (now called Wales) and worthily governed them, under the name and title of Prince of Wales. Some are of of opinion that the Cambres were called Welshmen by this Idwallo, as in old time the Brittains took their name from Brute. But this is of no more truth, then theirs is that would have them of one Wallo their Duke and governour, or of Wendola a Queen of whom there is no mention made among them. This Roderike of all the Princes of Wales,The Authour also put Cam∣ber before Albanact pre∣ferring Wales before Scot∣land. was the first that caused the histories of the Brittains to be written: He renewed good Lawes, he caused strong Castles to be built, and procured that Churches or Temples should be kept and maintained for Divine Service; at his decease he left the Principality of all Wales to be divided unto his three sons, following the example of Brute, who made Locrine, Camber and Albanact Kings. This matter of division was the very true and first Originall of the Welsh mens ruine, as being divided into three Kingdomes; which they called Principalities. For allbeit whilst they lived, one man held and maintained his own with much stoutness and magnanimity, yet their posterity being distracted and fal∣ling to war among themselves, were enforced every each to defend his part as well from their general enemies the English, as from their Neighbours and Countrey∣men the Welsh, by which the whole Kingdome of VVales was wrackt and over∣thrown. Roderike ended his life in the eighty ninth year of his Age,Mr. Wills ut ante. and in the year of Christ eight hundreed seventy seven, Alured the son of the godly King Ethel∣wolph being then King of the English Saxons. He was buryed at Keyby Castle in Anglesey. Engharad Princesse of VVales, Wife of Roderike the great, was daughter and heir to Meirich the son of Dyfnwal the son of Arthen ap Sytsilt King of Cardigan,
Their Issue. Sab. a Lyon ramp. Arg. If I mistake not. Mervin Prince of Vendosia (or North-Wales) of whom more hereafter. Anarandus was second Son, to whom his Father gave the 105. Cantreds, or hundreds of Powis Land; and for that of all his Brethren he was the most valiant, and approved War∣riour, he seated him in the Marches or Borders of VVales; his principal Seat and Man∣nour was at Mathraval. The patrimony of this Anarandus, namely the Principality of Powis, in process of time, devolved and came into the hands of a Woman (named Hawis) as her Right and Inheri∣tance. She being married to one John Chorlton (an Englishman) enfeoffed him with her Right, and made him Lord of Powis. From this Family it descended at last to the Greys of the North, and thereby utterly lost that Name and Title of Principality: For Andornus or Owen, the Father of Hawis, (or Avis) being called and sent for to a Parliament, which King Edward the First held at Shrewsbury, by the Decree and Judgment of the King and Barons, took his Lands to be held in Capite under the Title and Tenure of Free Baronage of England, and resigned to the King, his Heirs, and to the Crown of England the name and Title of Principality. Cadel the youngest son, and Prince of Demetia, or South-VVales, which the VVelshmen call'd Dehenbarsh, that is, the Right Side, or South part; this Country, although it be ve∣ry fruitfull and far greater then North Wales, yet was it alwaies esteemed the worser part; and the reason was, for that the Nobles thereof refused to obey their Princes, and the sea-coast was evermore infested and troubled with the invasion of the English men, Nor∣mans, and Flemings, by which the Prince was enforced to leave his royal Seat at Marydune, and place the same at Dynefar in Cantremaur. And although these Princes had great Authority in VVales, yet after Rhese, the Son of Theodore the great, was by Treason of his own people slain (in the time of VVilliam Ru∣fus, Anno Domini 1093) they were no more called by the names of Dukes or Princes, but onely Lords, until at last by civil Wars amongst themselves, and the Lands divided a∣mong strangers and many others, the English seeking to possess all, the Principality was so weakned, and brought so low, that after the death of Rhese the Son of Griffith (a most worthy man) they lost both Name, and Authority of Principality and Lordship. And all this while the Lines of the Princes of Venedosia or North-VVales, did prosperously continue, and held on their course, as shall hereafter be specified by that which follow∣eth.
THE SECOND BOOK.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ANTHONY GREY Earl of Kent, Lord Grey of Ruthen, Ha∣stings and Valence. John Mannors Earl of Rutland, Lord Ross of Hamlake, Trusbut, and Belvoir. Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Herbert of Cardiff, Ross, of Kendal, Par, Marnnon, and Saint Quintin. Edward Sackvil Earl of Dorset, Lord Bukhurst. William Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Crambourn, Lord Cecil of Es∣senden. David Earl of Exeter, Lord Burley. THE EARLES OF KENT. GRiffith ap Meredith ap Blethin. Owen Cynelioc Gwenwynwyn. Griffith of Gwenwynwyn. Owen ap Griffith Lord Powis. John Charleton Lord of Powis, by the gift of King Edward the first, to whom he was Va∣lectus Regis, jure uxoris, Lord of Powis. Hawis Gardan (i. e.) the Har∣dy, Son and Heir to Owen ap Griffith, Lord of Powis.
John Charleton second Lord of Powis of that name. John Charleton third Lord of Powis of that Name. One of these Johns married a daugh∣ter to Roger Lord Mortimer, by which means this Family de∣scended from the Brittish blood. Edward Charleton fourth Lord of Powis of that Name. Alianor daughter, and one of the heirs of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent. Edward Charleton, the last, John dying without Issue, fifth Lord of Powis, and last of that Fa∣mily, who left onely two daugh∣ters his heirs.   Sir John Grey Knight. Jane daughter and co-heir to Ed∣ward Charleton Lord of Powis. Henry Grey Lord Powis, created Earl of Tankervile. Antigone natural daughter to umphery Duke of Glocester. EdwardOr Edmund. Grey Lord of Ruthine, descended from the Lord Grey, Lord of Powis, created Earl of Kent. Katherine daughter to Henry Per∣cy second Earl of Northumber∣land, by which match the Brittish blood descended. George Grey Earl of Kent. Anne Daughter to Richard Wood∣vile Earl Rivers. Richard Grey Earl of Kent, sans Issue. Elizabeth Daughter to Sir VVil∣liam Hussey Knight, Lord chief Justice. Reiginold Grey, grand-child to George by his second Wife daughter of VVilliam Herbert Earl of Pembroke, by which match comes in the Brittish blood sans Issue.   Henry Grey, Brother and Heir to Reginold Earl of Kent, Sans Is∣sue. Mary daughter to Sir George Cot∣ton of Cheshire Knight. Charles Grey Brother to the two former Earls, and their Heir. Susan daughter to Richard Cotton of Hantshire squire. Henry Grey Earl of Kent, sans Issue. Elizabeth, daughter and co-heir to Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. Anthony Grey of Burbage, Com. Leic. son of George, son of Antho∣ny Grey of Branspath, son of George Hrey, Lord Grey of Ruthin, second Earl of Kent by his wife, Daughter to William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, continueth the Brittish line. Henry Lord Grey.
KENT. Kent is a very rich and pleasant Country, lying between the Thames and the narrow Seas. A country very good for Corn, and fit for pastorage, according to the several Plots and parts thereof, and wondrous full of fruitfull and well ordered Orchards, from whence the City of London is supplyed with most sort of Fruit; the Villages and Towns stand exceeding thick, being in all three hundred ninety eight parishes, besides lesser Hamlets, which make up the two Diocesses of Canterbury and Rochester. It hath also divers safe Roads and sure Harbours for Ships, and those exceeding well defended with Forts and Castles: Cæsar when he arrived in Kent, found here four Kings, (for so they called the chief of the principal Families) and gives this Testimony of the Peo∣ple, that they were the most courteous and civil of all the Brittains; in the declining of whose Empire, Vortiger gave this County unto the Saxons, who being Heathens when the rest of the Isle were Christians, gave an occasion to the Proverb, Kent and Christendome; at that time it was made a Kingdome, as in the entrance of the Normans it was made an Earldome, and so it hath continued in the persons of these Earles of KENT Odo Bishop of Baieux, half Brother to the Conquerour, Lord chief Justice, and Lord Treasurer. William of Ypres. Hugh de Burg Lord chief Justice. Edmund of Woodstock, Son to King Edward the First. Edmund Plantagenet. John Plantagenet. Thomas Holland. Thomas Holland. Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey Edmund Holland Lord Admiral. Edmund Grey Lord Ruthin Earl of Kent. George Grey Richard Grey Reginald Grey Henry Grey Charles Grey Henry Grey Anthony Grey now living 1661 Henry Lord Grey heir apparent.
The Earle of Rutland. Owen ap Griffith Lord of Powis, who left one only daughter and heir, who married as followeth; Iohn Charleton born in Appley near Wellington, was Valectus Re∣gis. Hawis Guardan (i. e.) the hardy, sole daughter and heir to Griffith L. of Powis formerly a Prinpality. Iohn Charleton L. of Powis.   Iohn Charleton L. of Powis.   Iohn Charleton L. of Powis.   Edward Charleton his brother, dy∣ing without issue, Lord of Po∣wis, who left two daughters his heirs. Elinor one of the daughters and co∣heirs of T. Holland E. of Kent. Iohn Lord Typtoft of Worcester. Ioyce D. and Co-h. to Ed. L. Powis. Iohn L. Typtoft, E. of Wocester, sans issue, left his four sisters his co-heirs.   Thomas L. Ross of Hamlack, which line devolved into the family of Mannours E. of Rutland, by the marriage of Elianor sister and heir of Ed. L. Ross of Hamlack, Bel∣voir & Trusbut to Sr Roger Man∣nours Grandfather to Thomas first E. of Rutland of that name. Philip the eldest daughter and co∣heir to Iohn L. Tiptoft E. of Worcester. Thom. Mannours first E. of Rut∣land. Elinor daughter to Sr. Will. Paston of Norfolk. Sir Iohn Mannours second son, Kt. Elizabeth daughter and co-heir of George Vernon of Haddon in the Peak in Darbyshire Esq Note that Iohn Vernon son of Sir Henry Vernon, married Anne daughter to Iohn Ludlow Esq son to Sir Richard Ludlow and Elizabeth his wife daughter of Richard Grey L. of Powis, and Margaret daughter of Iames Audley, both which families are derived from Welsh progenitors. George Mannors of Haddon Esq Grace daughter to Sir Henry Peir∣point descended from Brittish line, as in the Marquess of Dor∣chesters pedegree.
Iohn Mannors L. Ross Belvior and Trushat. E. of Rutland 1661. Francis daughter to Edward Lord Montague. RUTLAND. Rutland for quantity is the least County of England; for quality not inferiour to the best, as being a pleasant and fruitfull Country, especially about the vale Catmoss. The earth thereof is generally very red of colour, so red that even the Fleeces of the sheep are co∣loured with it, in which regard it had the name of Rudland, the Saxons calling it Rud which we now call red. Heretofore it was reckoned for a part of North-hampton∣shire, not made a County till of late; it containeth in it 48. Parishes in the whole; the chief of which are Uppingham and Oakham, two small Market Towns; of which the last is the Shire town for the Assises, Sessions and all publick business; yet small and little though it be, it can shew the seats and titles of four Parliamentary Barons, and besides that, it hath honoured many a noble person with the name and title of Earls of RUTLAND. 1. Edward Plant. son of Edmund of Langley Duke of York. 2. Edmund Plant. second son of R. D. of York. 3. Thomas Mannors descended by his mother from the Duke of York Earl of Rutland. 4. Henry Mannors. 5. Edward Mannors. 6. Iohn Mannors. 7 Roger Mannors. 8. Francis Mannors. 9. Iohn Mannors. Iohn Mannors now Earl of Rut∣land, 1661. The Earle of Pembrock. Bernard Newmarsh or New∣mark L. of Brecon. Nest daughter of Grissith ap Lhe∣wellin Prince of Southwales. Milo Earl of Hereford. Sibil daughter and heir of Bernard Newmarsh. Herbert Lord of the Forrest of Dean. Lucy one of the daughters and co-heirs of Milo Earl of Hereford. Peter ap Herbert Esq Alice daughter and heir of Blethin Broadspear Lord of Llanthloell and Beachley. Reginald ap Peter Esq Margaret daughter to Sir John VVelsh Kt. Adam ap Reginald Esq Crisley daughter and h. to Gwaindy Lord of Gwarendy Esq
Ienkin ap Adam of Gwarendy Esq Gwenllian d. to Aron ap Bledri Kt. Gwinllin Ienkin of Gwarendy Esq Gwenllian daughter to Howel ap Ioroth or Yorrath of Tylegles Esq Thom. Gwillin Ienkin of Gwarendy Esq Maud daughter and heir of Sir Iohn Borley Kt. Sir VVilliam Thomas Kt. Gladys d. to Sr. David Game Kt. VVilliam Herbert created E. of Pem∣brook, temp. Hen. 4 Anne daughter to Sir Walter Deve∣reux K. William Herbert of Ewyas. of Sir Matthew Cadoc Kt. William Herbert created Earl of Pembrock 1468. Anne daughter of Thomas Par Baron of Kendal, and sister and co-heir of William Par Marquess of Northampton and Earl of Essex. Henry Herbert Earl of Pembrock, Mary daughter to Sir Henry Sidney. Kt. L. Deputy of Ireland. William Herbert Earl of Pembrock sans issue. Mary eldest daughter and co-heir to Gilbert Talbot E. of Shrewsbury. Philip Herbert E of Pembrock & Montgomery. Susan daughter and at length co-heir of Edward Vere Earl of Oxford, by which match this ho∣nourable family again descends from the Brittish line. Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and Montgomery 1661. PEMBROCK. Pembrockshire is a County plentifull of Corn and Cattel, and not distitute of Pitcoale, and which is far above all the rest (as Giraldus tells us) considering that it is so near to Ireland, of a temperate and wholesome air. It contains in it 140. Parish Churches, and five Markets, that which is most of note being Milford, renowned for its safe and capacious haven; but that from which it takes denomination, is the Town of Pembrock, seated upon a forked arm of Milford haven, and in the best part of all the Country, a Town consisting principally of one long street on a long narrow point of the Rock, and hath within the walls thereof two Churches. The Earls hereof in former times were County Palatines, and passed all things that concerned that Country under the Seal of the Earldom, and it continued so untill the reign of K. Henry VIII. when as Wales was reduced to England, and the authority of the great Lords there dissolved by Parliament, since when the Earls of Pembrock have been meerly titular, as of other places; and of each sort were those in their several ages, the
Marquesses and Earles OF PEMBROCK. Gilbert de Clare. Richard de Clare surnamed Strongbow. VVilliam Marshall married Isabel daughter and heir of Richard Strongbow. VVilliam Marshal L. chief Justice. Richard Marshall. Gilbert Marshall. VValter Marshall. Anselme Marshall. VVilliam de Valence half brother to K. Henry III. whose wife was daughter of a sister of Anselme Marshall. Agmer de Valence. Laurence Hastings who married the Lady Isabel de Valence. John Hastings. John Hastings. Humphrey D. of Glocester. William de la Pole D. of Suffolk. Jasper of Hatfield D. of Bedford. William Herbert. William Herbert. Edw P. of Wales son to K. Ed 4. Anne Colen Marchionesse of Pembrock, wife to K. Henry 8. William Herbert Lord Stewar reated Earl of Pembrock by K. Edw. 6. Henry Herbert. William Herbert Lord Stuard, and Chamberlain of Oxford. Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and Montgomery. Philip Herbert E. of Pembrock and Montgomery. 1661.
Earles of Dorset. THomas Sackvile Earle of Dorset. Cecily daughter to Sir John Baker Kt. Robert Sackvile E. of Dorset. Margaret sole daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by which match this right honourable family is diversly descended from the Brittish blood, as at large appear∣eth in the pedegree of the Dukes of Norfolk. Richard Sackvill E. of Dorset. Anne d. and sole h. of George E. of Cumberland, descended by a daughter and co-heir from Char. Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary Queen of France, daughter to King Henry VII. and Eliza∣beth his wife heir general to the house of York, and consequently to the Mortimers E. of March, of which family Raph L. Mortimer of Wigmore married Gladis si∣ster and heir to David, and daugh∣ter to Lhewellin Prince of North∣wales as likewise Henry the 7th. descended from Owen Tweder lineally sprung from the Princes of Southwales. Edward Sackvil E. of Dorset. Mary sole daughter of Sir George Curson Kt. Edward Sackvile now E. of Dorset 1661. DORSET. The County of Dorset abutteth upon that of Devon, having the Sea upon the South, and Somersetshire upon the North. The air good and of an healthful constitution, the soil fat and rich in many places; and wherein that is defective, it yields good store of Woods and Pasture. The Country generally very pleasant in her situation, as being no less beholden to the Inner-land Rivers, then the bordering Ocean; the one yielding Merchandise from far, the other the commodity of con∣veyance to the most parts thereof, and both of them good store of Fish. It contains in it 248. Parishes, and in them 18. Market Towns, the chief whereof is Dorchester, as that which doth denominate the whole County. A Town not much famous for much else then that it hath long been and doth still continue the honorary title of those noble Per∣sonages which have been severally
Marquesses and Earls OF DORSET. 1 Osmond de Sees. E. 2 John Beaufort Marquess L. Adm. 3 Thomas Beaufort Earl, Duke of Exceter, Lord Chancellor and Lord Admiral. 4 Edmund Beaufort E. and Mar{que} 5 Henry Beaufort Marq. 6 Edmund Beaufort Marq. 7 Thomas Grey Marq. 8 Thomas Grey Marq. 9 Henry Grey Marq. D. of Suffolk. 10 Thomas Sackvile Lord Buckhurst, created Earl of Dor∣set, 10 Jacobi, Lord Treasurer and Chancellour of Oxford. 11 Robert Sackvile E. 12 Richard Sackvile E. 13 Edward Sackvile E. Lord Chamberlain to the Queen. 14 Edward Sackvile now Earl of Dorset 1661. The Earles of Salisbury and Exceter. RObert Sitsylt came into Wales with Robert Fitz Hamon who conquered Jestin Prince of Glamorganshire. an inheretrix, by whom he had Hal∣terennis and other lands in Here∣fordshire and Glocestershire. James Sitsylt Esq;   Iohn Sitsylt Esq The Lady Maud de Frenes. Eustace Sitsylt Esq Elianor daughter to Sir VVill. Pem∣bridge Knight. Sir Baldwin Sitsylt Knight, temp. Hen. secundi. —daughter to Maurice de Brampton Esq Gerald Sitsylt Esq Mavil daughter to Sir Moygne Knight.
Robert Sitsylt Esq Alice daughter to Sir Rob. Tro∣gois Knight. James Sitsylt Esq Isabell daughter to Sir John Knell Knight. Gerald Sitsylt Esq Margaret Daughter to Stephan de Ber. John Sitsylt Esq Sibil daughter to Robert of Ewyas Esquire. Sir John Sitsylt Knight. Alicia sister to Sir Richard Basker∣vile Knight. Iohn Sitsylt Esq Jone daughter to sir Richard Mo∣nington Knight. Thomas Sitsylt Esq Margaret daughter and heir to Gil∣bert de Winston Esq Philip Sitsylt Esq Margaret daughter to Iohn Philips Esq Richard Sitsylt Knight, Cecil Esq Margaret daughter to Philip Vaug∣han Esq David Cecil Esq   Sir William Cecil Baron Burley Knight of the Garter, &c. Mary sister to Sir Iohn Cheek Kt. Rob. Cecil E. of Salisbury Elizab. d. to W. Brook L. of Cob. Will. Cecil E. of Salisbury 1661 Katherine d. to Tho. Howard E. of Suffolk. Charles Lord Cranbourne. Iane daughter to Maxwell Esq groom of the bed-Chamber to K. Charles of glorious memo∣ry. Tho. Cecil E. of Exceter. Dorothy d. and co-h. to I. Nevil L Latimer. Will Cecil E. of xceter. Eliz. d & h. of Ed. Mannors E. of Rutland. D. Cecil now E of Exceter 1661 descended from a younger son of William L. Burley. Eliz. d. to Iohn Egerton Earl of Bridgwater. SALISBURY. Salisbury is the chief City of Wilts; it was at first seated high upon an hill, as being a place designed for strength and war, yet honoured for a while with a Bishops See, and a fair Cathedral. But the Bishops and the Clergy finding no good quarter amongst the Soldiers which were there in Garrison, and being destitute of water upon so high an hill, about the time of Rich. I. began to leave it, and plant themselves down lower by the water-side; being once setled there and raising a new Cathedral for Gods publick ser∣vice, the people also followed after, and left old Sarum to it self which in short time be∣came so totally deserted that now the ruines of it are hardly visible: but for new Salis∣bury
that grew up presently to a great renowne, pleasantly seated on the river with water in every street thereof; and for the populousness of the place, plenty of provision, and spacious market place and a fair Town hall, is esteemed to be the second City of all that Tract, and which adds no small lustre to it, a place that hath been very fortunate in those eminent persons on whom the Kings of England have bestowed the title of Earls of Salisbury. Earles of Salisbury. Patrick d' Eureux. Will. d' Eureux. VVill Longespee base son to K. Henry 2. who married Ella daughter of VVill. d' Eureux. VVilliam Longespee. VVill. de Montacute VVill. de Mont. John de Mont. Tho. de Mont. Richard Nevil who married Elianor daughter of Thomas Mont. Lord Ch. Richard Nevil Earl of VVarwick. George Duke of Clarence, who maried Isabel daughter of Richard Earl of VVarwick. Edward eldest son of King Richard 3. and Anne the second daughter of Richard Nevil. Margaret daughter of George Duke of Clarence created Countess of Salisbury by King Henry 8. Robert Cecil Viscount Crambourne, created Earl of Salisbury 3. Jacob. VVilliam Cecil now Earl of Salisbury. 1661. EXCETER. Exceter is now the chief City of Devonshire, a fair and goodly seat; it is placed upon the Eastern bank of the River Ex from whence it had the name of Exceter. In circuit it contains within the walls about a mile and a half, besides the suburbs which every way stretch out to a great length, and in the circuit there are numbered fifteen Parish Chur∣ches, besides the Cathedral, the whole environed with deep ditches and very stronge wals, having many Towers therein, very well disposed; and yet the animosity of the Inhabi∣tants is a greater strength unto it then the walls or ditches, whereof they have given no∣table proof in these later times, to their great honour; here followeth a Catologue of the
Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles. John Holland E. of Huntington, made Duke of Exceter by Richard 2. Thomas Beaufort E. of Dorset, Lord Ch. and Adm. made Duke of Exceter by King Henry 5. Iohn Holland Duke Lord Adm. Henry Holland Duke Lord Adm. Henry Courtney E. of Devon, created Marquesse of Exce∣ter by K. Henry 8. Thomas Cecil Lord Burley created Earl of Exceter 3. Jaco. VVilliam Cecil. David Cecil now Earl 1661.
THE SECOND BOOK. Arma Paterna. ANARAWD the Son of Roderick began his Reign over VVales in the year of Christ 877. The year 878. died Fedan the son of Melht, a noble man of VVales, and the second year following there was a great Battel fought by the Danes, and the Englishmen of Mercia against the Welshmen upon the River Con∣way, where the VVelshmen had the Victory, and this was called the Re∣venge of the Death of Roderick. About this time, Eveneth the Son of Bledrid, a Baron of VVales died,Forrain and alwaies perni∣cious. and Anarawd King or Prince of North-Wales came with a great Army of English-men, and made War against his Brother Cadeth, and spoiled the country of Caerdigan, and Ystradgwy. The Danes being put hard to their shifts by Alfred, left their Wives and children in Es∣sex, and passed spoiling the Land toForsan Cow∣bridge. Quadbridge upon Severn, and so passed the River, and spoiled the countries of Brechnock, Gwentland, and Gwenthwg. About the year 900. Igmond with a great number of Souldiers, came to Anglesey, and the Welshmen gaue him a Battel at Molerein. There be some Brittish Copies of this History, which affirm that this battel between Ig∣mond Captain of the black Nations and the Brittains, (wherein Mervin was slain) was fought at a place called Meilon, of the which it was called Maes Rhos Meilon. The year 907. died Cadeth King or Prince of South-Wales, third Son to Roderick the Great, leaving behinde him three Sons; Howel Dha (that is to say Howel the Good) who succeded his Father in the Kingdome of South-Wales, Meyric, and Clydawc. Shortly after there came a great Navy from Tydwick, with Ʋther and Rahald, and past the Western Sea to Wales, and destroyed Saint Davids, and there fought the Battel Dinerth, where Mayloc (the Son of Peredur Gam) was slain. In the year 913 Anaawd chief King of Wales dyed and left behinde him two Sons, Ed∣wal Ʋoel who reigned after him, and Elise.
Mr. Mills fol. 292. Anno 877.Mr. Mills differeth here from Mr. Powel, the one setting Voel, the other Mervin to succeed: I will therefore set down both Writings; the former of these two saith, Mervin the first be∣gotten son of Rhoderick the Great, Prince of all VVales, by the Gift and Grant of his Father was made Lord or Prince of that Country of Wales, which the Inhabitants call Gwy∣neth, the Englishmen North-VVales, and the Latines Venedotia. This province was divided into four countries or quarters, which contained fifteen Cantreds: This word Cantred be∣ing compounded of the Brittish and Irish Language, is said to be such a portion of Land as may contain an hundred Villages. The chief and principal place of this Country was the Isle of Anglesey, or Mon, and in Aberfraw a city thereof was the Royal pallace of the Kings of North-VVales: now the reason why the Kings of Gwyneth were called Kings of A∣berfraw, was for that in the Laws of the good Howel (Prince and Law-giver) it was de∣creed, That as the Kings of Aberfraw ought of Right to pay threescore and three pounds in way of Tribute to the King of London, so the King of Dynefur and Mathraval should also be hound in like manner to pay the like mony unto the King of Aberfraw, as it were also by way of Tribute; by vvhich it appeareth, that this Lord vvas the chief Prince of VVales. The VVife of Mervin, the Son of Roderick, Prince of Venedotia or North-VVales thus saith Mr. Mills, but names her not. Their Issue. Idwallo, surnamed Voel Prince of Venedotia.
Edwal Voel. Ut ante. After that Edwal Voel began his Dominion over North-Wales,Mr. Powel fol. 46. Howel Dha being King or Prince of South-VVales and Powis land, a terrible Comet appeared in the Firmament, at which time the year following, Leicester was nevv built. The next year follovving, the men of Denelm, did destroy the Isle of Môn or Anglesey; and the year 917. Clydawc the Son of Cadeth, vvas slain by the hands of his brother Meyric; and about the same time the Englishmen did overthrovv the Danes. Much about this time, Elfled Dutchess of Mercia sent her vvhole Army into VVales,Ren. Cest. Math. West Hel. pa. 222. and fought vvith the VVelshmen, and vvan Brecknock, and took the Queen and three and thirty men. This vvas it vvhich is called in VVelsh, Gweythy Dinas Newydh, that is to say, The battel of the new Citty; also she vvon the Tovvn of Derby. John Castoreus reporteth this story in this manner; Huganus Lord of VVest VVales,Jo. Cast. perceiving King Edward to be occupied in the Danish VVar, far enough from him, gathe∣red an Army of Brittains, and entred the Kings Land, whereupon Elfled Lady of Mercia, and Sister to King Edward, came to Wales with a strong Army, and fought with the Welsh∣men at Brecknock, and putting Huganus to flight, took his Wife and thirty four Captives, and led them with her to Mercia; Huganus thus discomfited, fled to Derby, and there be∣ing peaceably entertained of the Countrymen with fifteen men of War, and two hundred Souldiers well appointed, joyned himself with the Kings adversaries the Danes, of which thing when Elfled was certified by the men of Derby, she followed him with a great Army, and entred the Gates of that Town, where Huganus resisted her, and slew four of her chief Officers. But Gwyane Lord of the Isle of Ely her Steward, set the Gates on fire, and furiously running upon the Brittains, entred the Town; then Huganus being overmatched,A stout reso∣lution of a valiant Welsh∣man. and choosing rather to dye by the Sword, then to yield himself to a Woman, was there slain. The same Authour also reporteth, that about this time Leofred a Dane, and Gruffith of Madoc, Brother in Law to the Prince of West Wales, came to Ireland with a great Army, to Snowdon, and minding to bring all Wales and the Marches thereof to their subjection, overran and subdued all the Countrey to Chester, before King Edward could be certified of their Arrival, whereat he was much discontented, and being loth to trouble his subjctes in that behalf, made a vow that he and his Sons with their own people, would he revenged on Leofred and Gruffith, and thereupon came to Chester, and wan the City from them, after which he divided his army into two Battails, whereof he and his Son Athel∣stane led the first, and Edmund and Eldred the second, and so followed them with as much celerity as he could, and overtook them at the Forrest of Walewood now Sherwood, where Leofred and Cruffith set upon him fiercely, so that the King in the beginning, was in some Distress, until Athelstane stepped in between his Father and Leofred, and wounded the Dane in the arme, in such sort, that he being not able to hold his spear, was soon taken and committed to the custody of Athelstane. In the mean time, Edmund and Edred encoun∣tring with Gruffith, slew him, and brought his head to their Father: Then Athelstane cau∣sed Leofred to be beheaded, and so both their heads were set up together on the top of the Tower of Chester. The year 933. Owen the Son of Gruffith was slain by the men of Cardigan.933. Wil. Malmsh. Hol. p. 225. Jo. Cast. Mat. West. Ren. Cest. Pwl fol. 50. The Btains removed into Cornwal. Math West. Hol. pag. 226. Then A∣thelstane did enter Wales with a great Army, and brought the Kings of the Country to subjection, and received yearly of Tribute twenty pounds in gold, and three hundred paid in silver, and two hundred head of Cattel; yet the Laws of Howel appointed to the King of Aberfraw, to pay yearly to the King of London, no more but sixty six pounds for a Tribute, and that the Prince of Dinevowre, and the Prince of Powis, should pay a like summ of sixty six pounds yearly to the King of Aberfraw. In the year 936. dyed Euneth the son of Clydawc and Meiric, the son of Cadeth, at this time also Athelstane did remove the Brittains that dwelt in Exeter, and thereabouts to Cornwal, and appointed the River Cambria, to be the utter Mere towards England as he had before appointed the River Wy, to be the Mere of England and Wales. About the year 940. Cadeth the son of Arthvael a noble Brittain, was imprisoned; and Edwal Voel, the Son of Anarawd, and Elise his Brother, were slain in a battel which they fought against the Danes and Englishmen. This Edwal had six sons, Meiric, Janaf, or Jenan, Jago, which is
James, Conan, Edwal, Vachan, and Roderick; after whose death Howel Dha his Cosin German ruled all ƲƲales during his life. Elise also had Issue Conan, and a Daughter na∣med Trawst, which was Mother to Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffith ap Sitsylht, and Blethin ap Co∣vyn, which two last were afterwards Princes of ƲƲales. Howel Dha. This Howel Dha King or Prince of Southwales, and of Powis, long before this time, after the death of Edwal Voel, his cosin, took upon him the rule and government of all ƲƲales, about the year of Christ 940. who, notwithstanding the sons of Edwal did something murmur against him, was for his godly behaviour, discreet and just rule, beloved of men. This Howel constituted and made Laws to be kept through his Dominions, which were used in Wales till such time as the Inhabitants received the laws of England, in the time of King Edward the First, and in some places thereof long after; These laws are to be seen at this day both in VVelsh and Latine. Howel Dha perceiving the laws and customes of his country to have grown unto great abuse, sent for the Arch-Bishop of Menenia, and all the other Bishops, and chief of the Clergy,A pious ex∣ample for all Princes. to the number of one hundred and forty Prelates, and all the Barons and Nobles of ƲƲales, and caused six men of the wisest and best esteemed in every Comote to be called before him, whom he commanded to meet altogether at his house called Y Tuy Gwyn Taf, that is, The white house upon the River Taf. Thither he came himself, and there remained with those his Nobles, Prelates, and Subjects all the Lent in prayer and fasting, craving the Assistance and direction of Gods holy Spirit, that he might reform the Laws and Customes of the Country of ƲƲales, to the honour of God, and quiet government of the people. About the end of Lent he chose out of that company twelve men of the wisest, gravest, and of the greatest experience, to whom he added one Clerk or Doctour of the lawes, na∣med Blegored, a singular learned and perfect wise man. These had in charge to examine the old lawes and customes of Wales, and to gather of such as were meet for the govern∣ment of the Country; which they did, retaining those that were wholesome and pro∣fitable, expounding those that were doubtful and ambiguous, and abrogating those that were superfluous and hurtful, and so ordained three sorts of Laws. The first for order∣ing of the King or Princes Houshold and his Court. The second of the affairs of the Country and Common-wealth. The third of the special customes belonging to parti∣cular places and persons. Of all the which (being read, allowed and proclamed) he caused three severall books to be written; one for his dayly use to follow his Court, an other to lye in his Palace at Abersfrew, and the third at Dinevour, that all the three Provinces of Wales might have the use of the same when need required.The King and Princes of Brittain, much obser∣vant of the See Aposto∣like. And for the better observation of these lawes, he procured of the Archbishop of St. Da∣vids, to denounce sentence of excommunication against such of his Subjects as refu∣sed to obey the same: whithin a while after Howel (because he would omit no∣thing that could bring countenance and authority to his said laws) went to Rome, taking with him the Archbishop of St. Davids, the Bishop of Bangor and Asaph, and thirteen other of the learnedst and wisest men in VVales, where the said lavves being recited before the Pope, vvere by his authority confirmed; then having finished his devoted pilgrimage, he returned home again vvith his company. 1. By these lawes they might not morgage their lands but to one of the same family or kindred which were de eadem Parentela. 2. Every tenant holding of any other then his Prince or Lord of the Fee, paid a fine pro defensione Regia which was called Arian Ardhel, in Latine Advocarii. 3. No Legacy of goods by Will, was good, otherwise then those which were given to the Church, to the Lord of the Fee, or for payment of debts.
4. Every man might destrain as well for debts as for rent of Lands, any goods or Cattel saving horses which were counted to serve for a mans necessary defence, and were not de∣strainable without the Princes licence. 5. Causes of Inheritance were not heard or determined but from the ninth of November till the ninth of February, or from the ninth of May until the ninth of August; the rest of the year was counted a time of vacation for sowing in the spring, and reaping in the harvest. This also is to be observed, that all matters of inheritance of Land were determi∣ned and adjudged by the King or Prince in person, or his special Deputy (if he were sick or impotent) and that upon the view of the said Land, calling unto him the Free∣holders of the same place, two Elders of his Councel, the Chief Justice attending alwaies in the Court, the ordinary Judge of the Country where the Land lay and the Priest. The manner of their proceeding was thus; the King or Prince sat in his Judicial seat higher then the rest, with an Elder on his right hand and an other on his left, and the Freeholders on both sides next unto them, which for this cause as (I think) were called Ʋchelwyr. Before him directly a certain distance off and a little lower sat the Chief Justice, having the Priest on his right hand, and the ordinary Judg of that Countrey on the left; The court being set, the Plaintiff came in with his Advocate, Champion and Rhyngyth, and stood on the right side, and last of all the Witnesses on both parties came, which stood directly be∣fore the Chief Justice, at the lower end of the Hall, untill they were called up to testify the truth of their knowledge in the matter in varitance. The figure of which I thought good here to lay down as ye see Ʋnderneath. Uchelwyr. An Elder. The King. An Elder. Uchelwyr. The Priest. THE Chief Justice. The Judge. The Defendant.   The Plaintiff. Rhyngyth.   Rhyngyth. Advocate.   Advocate. Champion. The VVitnesses. Champion. After the hearing of this book read, the depositions of the witnesses, and full pleading of the cause in open Court, upon warning given by the Rhyngyth, the chief Justice, the Priest, and the Ordinary Judge withdrew themselves for a while to consult of the matter, and then secundum Allegata & probata, brought their verdict, the Court sitting. Where∣upon the King or Prince after consultation had with the Elders or Seniors which sat by him, gave definitive sentence except the matter was so obscure and intricate that right and truth appeared not; in the which case it was tryed by the two Champions, and so the cause ended. This shall be sufficient for this time. Some Authors write that Lhewelin ap Sitsylht who was after Prince of Wales, assisted Edmund a Saxon King, and entered Cumberland, taking the two sons of Dummaille King of the Province, put out their eyes, and then gave that Country to Malcolme to be holden of him, with condition to keep the North part of the Realm from incursion of enemies, the which condition was afterwards but slenderly peformed. This Malcome was the son of Do∣nald King of Scotland, and was the next King, after Constantine the third, being in number the 76. In the year 942. died Hubert Bishop of St. Davids, and the year following, Marclois Bishop of Bangor, and Ʋssa the son of Lhavyr died; the year 944. the Englishmen entered
Wales with a stronge army, and spoyled Strad, Clwid, and returned home: At which time Conan the son of Elise was put in danger of death by poyson, and Everus Bishop of St. Da∣vids died. In the year 948 died Howel Dha, the noble and worthy King or Prince of Wales, whose death was much lamented by all men; for he was a Prince that loved peace and good order, and that feared God; he left behind him four sons, Owen, Run, Roderike, and Edwin, be∣twixt whom and the sons of Edwal, there ensued great wars, for the chief rule of Wales, as shall appear in the history following. After the death of Howel Dha, his sons did divide Southwales and Powis betwixt them. And Janaf and Jago the second and third sons of Edwal Voel ruled North VVales (because their elder brother Meyric was not a man worthy to rule) who coming of the elder house, would have had the chief rule of all Wales, which the sons of Howel Dha denyed them. And thereup∣on Jago or James and Janaf entred Southwales with a great power, against whom came O∣wen the son of Howel and his brethren, and fought together at the hills of Carno, where Jago and Janaf had the victory. And the year following the said brethren did twice en∣ter into Southwales and spoyled Dinet, and slew Dwnwalhon Lord thereof. And within a while after dyed Roderike one of the sons of Howel Dha. In the year 952. the sons of Howel gathered their strength together against Janaf and Jago, and entred their land at the river of Conwy, where they fought a cruel battail at a place called Gurgustu, or Lhanrwst as some think, where a great number were slain upon either side, as Anarawd the son of Gwyriad or Ʋriel, the son of Roderike the great, and Edwin the son of Howel Dha, in the which battail were overthrown the sons of Howel, whom Janaf & Jago pursued to Caerdigan, & destroyed their Country vvith fire & svvord. About this time Yarthyr the son of Mervyn vvas drovvned. In the year 958 was a wonderful hot summer, when Gwyan the son of Gwiriad the son of Roderike dyed: After the which heat there followed a great plague in March ensuing. In those dayes Jago and Janaf by force and strength ruled all Wales as they thought good. And yet for all their power Abloic King of Ireland landed in Môn, and having burnt Holy∣head, spoyled the country of Lhyyn. In the year 961 the sons of Edwin the son of Colhoyn were slain after they had destroyed all the country to Towyn. About this time Meyric the son of Cadvan, Rytherch Bishop of St. Davids, and Cadwalhon ap Owen departed out of this transitory life. Not long after the country of Northwales was exceedingly spoyled by the army of Edgar King of England. The cause of this was the not payment of the tribute that the King of Abersfraw, by the lawes of Howel Dha was to pay to the Kings of London: in the end there was a peace concluded;Jo. Cast. Holl. pag. 232. Wolves de∣stroyed by the Prince of W. for King Edgar understanding what hurt the Countrys of England and Wales received daily, by reason of the great multitude of Wolves, that then abounded, especially in Wales, which destroyed much sheep, and otherwayes did great harme, re∣leased the tribute of money, appointed by the said lawes of Howel Dha, and bound the Princes of Northwales to pay him yearly certain Wolves for his tribute, & so to be released of the other tribute in mony, which the said Prince performed, untill he had left never a Wolf in all Wales or England. In the year 966. Roderike the son of Edwal Ʋoel was slain by the Irishmen, by whom A∣bersfraw was destroyed. The next year after fell a great debate betwixt the two sons of Edwal, Jago and Janaf, which had ruled joyntly together from the death of Howel Dha till that time: and shortly
after Jago having taken his brother Janaf by force, very cruelly kept him in prison a long time, about the which time Eneon the son of Owen Prince of Southwales wan & seised to him∣self the land of Gwyr. And in the year 69. Machis the son of Haroald with an army of Danes did enter into Anglesey and poyled . The nes were suffered by Ed∣gar to inhabit quietly through all England till they re as strong as the Englishmen, and then they fell to such ryotousness and drinking that ch mischief ensued thereof,A law against immoderate drinking. where∣upon Edgar made a law, that every man should drink by measure, and caused a certain mark to be set in every pot, how deep they should drink, and so by these means he somewhat stayed the immoderate ingurgation. Not long after that Godfryd the son of Haroald did subdue to himself the whole Isle of Anglesey, which he enoyed not long▪  King Edgar likewise in the year 972 did send a great army to Gaon upon Ʋsk which shortly turned back without doing any notable act.Caerleon upon Ʋsk. The next year following Howel the son of Janaf raised a great pow∣er against his Uncle Jago, for the deliverance of his father out of prison, and overcame his Uncle in fight, whom he chased out of the land, and took his eldest Unckle Meyric the son of Edwal, and put out both his eyes, and kept him in prison where he dyed shortly after, lea∣ving behind him two sons, Edwal and Jonaval, of the which Edwal came afterwards the most worthy Princes of Wales. Howel notwithstanding he had set his father at liberty, yet took upon himself the whole rule of the land for his lifetime. He had three brethren, all men of great estimation Meyrich, Janaf and Cadwallon, whose lines shall ensue here∣after. Howel Son of Janaf. After that Howel the son of Janaf had expelled his Uncle from the land,Dunwalhon goes to Rome. he took the rule to himself. And at that time Dwnwalhon Prince of Strad Cwlyd took his journey to Rome. Then dyed Edwalhon the son of Owen. The year 976 Eneon the son of Owen King of Southwales destroyed the land of Gwyr the second time; the year ensuing Howel the son of Janaf, with a great army both of Welsh∣men and Englishmen made war against such as succoured and defended his Uncle Jago, and spoyled the Countries of Lhyyn and Kelynnoc Vawr, whereby shortly after Jago was taken by Howels men, who enjoyed his part of the land peaceably.  About the year 979.Edwal Vachan the son of Edwal Voel, was slain by his Nephew Howel. At this time Custenym Dhu, that is Constantine the black son to Jago (which then was prisoner) hired Godfryd the son of Haroald with his Danes against his Cosin, and they both together destroyed Anglesey and Lhyyn, whereupon Howel gathered his army together, and setting upon them at a place called Gwath Hirbarth, overthrew them, where Constantine was slain. The year 981. Godfryd the son of Haroald gathered a great army and entred West Wales, where spoyling all the Land of Dynet, with the Church of St. Davids, he fought the bat∣tail of Lhanwanoc. Likewise in the year next ensuing Duke Alfred with an army of En∣glishmen spoyled and destroyed Brechnock and great part of the lands of Owen Prince of Southwales, against whom Eneon the son of the said Owen and Howel King of Northwales did raise all their power, and overthrow them in battail, where the greatest part of Alfreds ar∣my was slain, and the rest put to flight. The year following the Gentlemen of Gwentland rebelled against their Prince, and cruelly slew Eneon the so of Owen which came thither to appease them. This Eneon was a worthy and noble Gentleman, who did many notable acts in his fathers time, and left behind two sons, Edwin and Theodor or Tewdor Mawr, of whom came afterwards the Kings and Princes of Southwales. In the year 984. Howel the son of Janaf King of Wales, entered England with an army, where he was fought and slain valiantly fighting. This Howel had no son, but his brethren reigned in his place.
Cadwallon the Son of Janaf. After the death of Howel, his Brother Cadwallon the second Son of Janaf, took in hand the government of Northwales, and first made War with Jonaval his Cofin the Son of Meyric, and right heir to the Land, and slew him; but Edwal the youngest Brother esca∣ped away secretly. The year following, Meredyth the Son of Owen, King or Prince of Southwales, with all his People entred into Northwales, and in fight slew Cadwallon, the son of Janaf and Meyric his Brother, and conquered the land to himself, wherein a man may see how God punished the wrong which Jago and Janaf the Sons of Edwal Voel did to their eldest bro∣ther Meyrick, who was first disinherited, and afterwards his eys put out, and one of his Sons slain; for first Janaf was imprisoned by Jago, then Jago with his Son Constantine by Howel the Son of Ianaf, and afterward the said Howel with his brethren Cadwallon and Meyric were slain, and spoiled of their Lands. Meredyth the Son of ap Howel Dha. This Meredyth ap Owen, havingslain Cadwallon, obtained the Rule and government of Northwales, in the year 986. Godfrid the Son of Haroald the third time entring the isle of Anglesey, where having taken Lywarck the Son of Owen, with two thousand prisoners be∣sides, he cruelly put out his eys, whereupon Meredyth the Prince with the rest escaped and fled to Cardigan, and the same year there was a great murrain of cattel throughout all Wales. In the year 987. dyed Ianaf the Son of Edwal, who had lived many years a private life. The same year also dyed Owen the son of Howel Dha, prince of Southwales. This Owen had three Sons, Eneon which dyed in his Fathers life time, Lhywarck which lost both his eyes, and Meredyth, which (as fore is declared) had won Northwales, and after his Fa∣thers death took also into his possession all Southwales, having no respect to his Brother E∣neon his Sons Edwin and Theodor or Tewdor. About the same time, the Danes sailed from Hampton alongst the Sea coast,The Tribute of the black Army. spoiled Devonshire and Cornwall, and so at last landed in Southwales, and destroyed Saint Davids, Lanbadarn, Lhanrystid, and Lhandydock (which were all places of Religion) and did so much hurt in the country besides, that to be rid of them, Meredyth was fain to agree with them, and to give them a penny for every man within his land which was called the Tribute of the black Army.
The year 989. Owen the son of Dyfnwal was slain; within a year after,Meredith King of Wales, destroyed the Town of Radnor, at which time his Nephew Edwin, the son of Encon, having to his aid Duke Adelf, and a great army of Englishmen and Danes, spoiled all the land of Meredith in Southwales, as Caerdigan, Dynet, Gwyr, Kydwch, and Saint Davids, where Edwin took pledges of the chief men of those Countries. In the mean time this Meredith with his people did spoil Glamorgan, so that no place was free from Sword and fire; but at the last Meredith and Edwin fell to an agreement, and were made Friends. Soon after Cadwalhon the son of Meredith dyed. Meredith being thus imployed, had so much to do in Southwales, that Northwales lay o∣pen for the enemy; which thing when the Danes perceived they arrived in Anglisey, and destroyed the whole Isle,Matth. West. pag. 383. Ja. Castor. 992. whereupon the Inhabitants of that country received Edwal the son of Meyric, the right heir of Northwales for their Prince, in the year 992. After these great troubles there followed within a year after, such famine and scarcity in Southwales, that many perished for want of food. Edwal ap Meyric the son of Meredith: This Edwal being in possession of the principality of Northwales, studied to keep and de∣fend his people from injuries and wrongs. But Meredith gathered together all his power, intending to recover again Northwales, with whom Edwal met at Lhagwm, and overthrew him in plain battel, where Theodor or Tewdor Manor, Meredith his Nephew was slain, who left behinde him two Sons, Rees and Rytherck, and a Daughter called Elen. A little after this, Swain the son of Haroald destroyed the Isle of Man, and entring into Northwales, slew Ed∣wal the prince thereof, who left behinde him a son called Jago. In the year of Christ 998. the Danes came again to Saint Davids, destroying all be∣fore them, and there they slew Morgency, or rather Ʋrgency, Bishop of that See; the same year also dyed Meredith the son of Owen, King or Prince of Wales, leaving behinde him one only Daughter called Angharad, which was married to Lewellin ap Sitsylht, and after his death to Convyn Hirdref, or as other do think, to Convyn ap Gwerystan, who had children by either of them, which was the cause of much war and mischief in Wales, as shall ap∣pear hereafter. Aedan the Son of Blegored. The death of both these Princes, (forsomuch as Meredith had no Issue male, and Ed∣wal left behinde him a childe within years, not able to take the charge of a Common∣wealth) did cause much trouble to ensue; for in Northwales divers did aspire to the Go∣vernment, and sought the rule of the Land, as Conan the son of Howel, and Aedan the son
of Blegored, who tried the matter in open field, where Conan was slain in the year, 1003. I do not know (saith my Author) neither could I ever finde what colour or pretence of Title this Aedan ap Blegored had to the principality of Northwales, nor yet of whom he de cended, or who descended from him, whereas all the other Princes are notoriosly known of what families they did descend, and who from them; neither yet do I read of any Blegored,, whose son he was, except it be that Doctor of Law, of whom mention is made in the Laws of Howel Dha, whose estate was too mean to challenge a principality: he is reported to have governed about twelve years. Of his Acts by him atchieved, there is very little written, saving of those two, battails, the one wherein he overcame Conan ap Howel, and the other, wherein he was overcome himself, and slain with his four sons by Lhewellin ap Sitsylht. In the year 1015. Lhewelin the Son of Sitsylht, raised a great power against Aedan, who by force had taken upon him the rule of Northwales, and slew him with his four sons in battel, and having no respect to Jago or James the son of Edwal, the right heir, took upon him the name and authority of King of Wales. This Lhewellin was descended from the Kings of Wales by his mothers side, whose name was Trawst, daughter to Elise, second son to Anarawd, which was eldest son to Roderik the great, who also had to wife Angharac, the only daughter of Meredith Prince of South∣wales, and so by these means he claimed and enjoyed the right of either country, as here∣after shall be shewed. Lhewellin the son of Sitsylht and Angharat the Daughter of Meredith. After that Lhewellin son of Sitsylht had taken into his hands the government of Wales, all things did prosper in the Land; for the earth brought forth double to the time before pas∣sed, the people prospered in all their affairs, and multiplyed wonderfully; the cattel encrea∣sed in great number, so that there was neither begger nor poor man from the South to the North sea, but every man had plenty, every house a dweller, and every Town inhabitants. In the year 1019. Meyric the son of Arthpoel, did raise a great army against Lhewelin, King or Prince of VVales, which met with him in the field, and manfully slew him, and discomfited his people. In the year 1020. a certain Son of low birth, came to Southwales, and named himself Run, the son of Meredith their late King, whom the Nobility which loved not Lhewelin, exalted to the regal Throne, and took him for their King, which thing when Lhewelin heard, he gathered his power in Northwales, and came towards the supposed Run, who had gotten all the strength of Southwales together at Abergwili, where with great pride he a∣bode the coming of Lhewelin; but when both the armies met, and were ready to joyn, Run full of brags and cracks, encouraged his people to fight, promising them the Victory: yet he himself (following the Proverb, which biddeth a man to set on his dog, and not to run after him) set on his people to fight it to the uttermost, and withdrew himself privately out of the way; whereas upon the contrary part, Lhewelin like a bold and couragious Prince, came before his people, calling for the vile Scot Run, that durst so bely a Princes Blood, and so both the Armyes joyned together with much malice and hatred; for the one party was so couragious to defend the quarrel of so worthy a Prince of their own blood, as the other was obstinate in the cause of a stranger; in the end, after great slaughter upon either part, the Northwales men remembring their old Victories, and encouraged by the prowess of their Prince, put their enemies to flight, and pursued Run so narrowly, that all his Scottish shifts could not save his life, and returned home with great spoil and prey. Then Lhewelin ruled all the land quietly, till the year following, he was slain by Howel and Meredith, the Sons of Edwin, leaving behinde him a son named Griffith ap Lhewelin.
After the death of Lhewelin, Jago or James the son of Edwal, took upon him the rule of Northwales, as right heir thereof; and Rytherick the son of Jestin governed Southwales by strong hand. About the year 1031. the Irish Scots entred Southwales by the means of Howel and Me∣redith the sons of Edwin ap Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who hired them against Rythe∣rick ap Jestin, whom they discomfited and slew, and by that means attained unto the go∣vernment of Southwales, which they two ruled jointly, but yet with small quietness; for the sons of Rytherick, gathered a number of such as were their fathers friends, to avenge his death, with whom Howel and Meredith met at Hyarthwy, and after long fight, put them to flight. But in the year following, Meredith was slain by the sons of Conan the Son of Sit∣sylt, brother to the worthy Prince Lhewelin, to revenge their fathers death, whom Mere∣dith and his Brother had slain. The year next ensuing, certain Englishmen entred the Land of Gwent, with whom Ry∣therick ap Jestin fought, and was by them slain. In the year 1037. Gruffith the son of Lhewelin ap Sitsylt, sometime King of Wales, raised a great number of people against Jago, then enjoying the Principality or Kingdom of Northwales, whom Jago likewise provided for as well as he could: but the more part & better souldiers were of Gruffiths side, for the love they bare to his Father, which afterward well appeared; for the Armies meeting, Jago was soon overthrown and slain. This Jago left behind him a son called Conan, by his wife Avandred, daughter to Gweir the son of Pilh. Gruffith ap Lhewlyn ap Sitsylt and Angharat. Gruffith ap Lhewlin after he had slain Jago, governed Northwales worthily, in all things following his fathers steps, who overcame both the Danes and the Englishmen divers times, and defended his Country and people manfully all his reign. In the first year of his go∣vernment he fought with the Englishmen and Danes at Crosford upon Severn, and put them to flight, and from thence he led his army to Lhanpadarn Vawr in Caerdiganshire and de∣stroyed it utterly and from thence passed all Southwales throughout, and received the peo∣ple to his subjection; for Howel ap Edwin their King fled before his face, and forsook the land. This Howel procured Edwin, the brother of Leofrike Earl of Chester or Mercia, to come with an army of Englishmen and Danes to his aid against Prince Gruffith; who met his ene∣mies
in the field and overcame them, and slew the said Edwin, but Howel escaped by flight: after the which victory Gruffith made sundry invasions upon the Marshes toward Hereford, and alwayes returned with great spoyles. When Gruffith had brought all Wale: under his dominion, he returned to Northwales a∣gain. The year ensuing 1038. Hernon Archbishop of Menevia or St. Davids died, a man both learned and godly; the next year following Howel King of Southwales gathered a great power of his friends and strangers, and entered the land, intending to overcome it again; wherefore Gruffith like a worthy Prince came with all speed to succour his people, and meeting with Howel at Pencadair, after he had incouraged his Soldiers, gave him battail, and overthrew him and pursued him, so narrowly that he took Howels wife, whom he had brought to the field to see the overthrow of Gruffith (which chanced otherwise) whom Gruffith liked so well that he kept her for his Concubine. In the year 1041. Howel came again to Southwales, and remained there a while, and shortly after a number of strangers landed in Westwales, and spoyled the Country; against whom Howel gathered his forces and fought with them, and drove them to their ships with much loss. At this time Conan the son of Jago (who had fled to Ireland to save his life) with the power of Alfred King of Develin whose daughter Ranulph he had married, entered North∣wales and by treason had taken Gruffith the King, and carried him towards the ships; but when it was known, the Country upon a suddain followed the Irishmen; and overtaking them rescued their Prince, requiting their foes with much slaughter, forcing them to their ships who returned with Conan to Ireland. The year following Howel the son of Owen Lord of Glamorgan dyed, being a man full of years. Then Howel ap Edwin called to his suc∣cour Danes and Englishmen with all the power he could make in Southwales, whereof Gruffith being certified, gathered his power together in Northwales, and came couragiously to meet his enemies (whom he had twice before discomfited) and overcame them and chased them as far as the spring of the River Towy, where after a long and dangerous bat∣tail Howel was slain, and his army routed, and so narrowly pursued that few escaped alive. After whose death Ritherck and Rees the sons of Ritherck ap Iestyn aspiring again to the rule and government of Southwales, which their father had once obtained, gathered a great army as well of Strangers as out of Gwentland and Glamorgan, and met with Gruffith King of Wales, who after his accustomed manner detracting no time, but couragiously animating his men with the remembrance of their former fortune and divers victories under his standard joyned battail with his enemies, whom he found disposed to abide and to win again the ho∣nour they had lost: wherefore when they met, the fight was cruell and bloody, and con∣tinued till night, which easily departed, both armies being weary with fighting, and ei∣ther fearing other, returned to their Countreys to gather more strength. This year Ioseph Bishop of Teilo or Lhandaf died at Rome.The Bishop of Landaff dyeth at Rome. The land being thus quieted, Gruffith ruled all Wales without any trouble; till about two years after the Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy did by treason kill 140 of the Prince his best Soldiers; to revenge whose death the King Gruffith destroyed all Dinet and Ystrad Towy. Here is also to be noted that such snow fell this year, that it lay upon the earth from the Kalends of Ianuary to the fourteenth of March. In the year 1050 Conan the son of Iago did gather an army of his friends in Ireland mind∣ing to recover his inheritance again; as he sailed towards Wales, there arose such a tempest that it scattered his navy abroad, and drowned the most part of his ships so that he was dis∣appointed of his purpose and lost his labour. This Earl Godwin that wicked Earl of Kent, whose lands were swallowed up by the Sea, and as this day called God∣wins sands per∣nicious and terrible to Na∣vigators, as late experience hath taught us.About this time Godwin being summoned to appear and answer before King Edward Conf. at Glocester, the guilty Earl Godwin fearing the Kings displeasure (who could never brook him since the death of his brother Alfred) gathered an army out of Kent and other Countries where his sons ruled or had power, and so came tovvards Glocester, reporting a∣broad that all his preparation was made to resist Gruffith Prince of Wales, who as they affirmed, was ready with an army to invade the Marches: but King Edward being certified by the Welshmen that there was no such thing in hand, commanded Godwin to send back his army. Matth. West writeth that about this time, to wit, anno 1053. Rees the brother of Gruffith King of Wales was slain in a place called Balendane, which place since was called Pen Rees, and lately belonged to Sir Ed. Morgan Baronet; but sold from the house, as he did much more to the ruin of his family, though the fault be laid upon upon his son (I say no more but God knows how  whose head was presented to the King at Glocester, the day before the Epiphany. According to the computation of Authours, neer these times Machbeth King of Scotland caused a noble man named Bancho to be cruelly murthered; whereupon Fleance the son of the sad Bancho escaping the hands of Macebeth fled to Gruffith ap Lhewelyn Prince of Wales where being joyfully received and entertained courteously, he grew into such fa∣vour with the said Prince that he thought nothing too good for him. But in processe of time Fleance forgetting the courtesy to him shewed, fell in love with the Princes daughter, and got her with child, which thing the Prince took in ill part that he in rage caused Fleance to be killed, holding his daughter in most vile estate of servitude for so suffering her
self to be de flowered by a stranger. At length she was delivered of a son, which was na∣med Walter, who in few years proved a man of great courage and valour, in whom from his childhod appeared a certain noblenesse of mind, and ready to attempt any great enter∣prise. This Walter on a time fell out with one of his companions who in that great heat of contention objected unto him, that he was but a bastard begotten in an unlawful bed, which reproach so grieved Walter that he fell upon the other, and slew him; whereupon fearing the punishment of the law, he fled into Scotland, and there fell into the company of those Englishmen which were come thither with Queen Margaret the sister of Edgar E∣deling; amongst whom he shewed himself so discreet and sober in all his demeanour, that he was highly esteemed of all men, and so attaining to higher reputation and credit, was afterwards imployed in the affairs of the Commonwealth, at length made Lord Steward of Scotland receiving the King revenues of the whole realme. Of the which Office he and his posterity retained that Sirname of Steward ever after, from whom descended the most noble Kings of Scotland, besides many other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Barons of great fame and honour. Whosoever desireth to be more fully satisfyed in this matter, let him read and peruse E. Holenshed, and he shall find James King of England to have descended from the Welsh blood. In the year 1054 Gruffith the son of Rythrick ap Iestyn, did gather a great army, as well of strangers as of others, against Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, King or Prince of VVales, but com∣monly called King of Northwales, who detracting no time, meeting him, fought with him and slew him. Shortly after; Algar Earl of Chester, being convicted of Treason against the King, fled to Gruffith into VVales, who gathered his power to revenge the Wrongs which he had recei∣ved at the Englishmens hands, who ever succoured his enemies against him. Therefore he together vvith Algar entred Herefordshire, and spoiled all the vvay vvith fire and svvord to the City, whether all the people had fled, and they boldly issued forth (Earl Randulf be∣ing their leader) and gave him battel, which Gruffith wished for above any other things, as he that had won five set battels, and couragiously receiving his Enemies, fought with them, which fight was long and doubtfull, till such time as Gruffith encouraged his people with the remembrance of the prowess and worthy Acts of the ancient Brittains their fore∣fathers, saying, that they were the same enemies, whose backs they had so often seen formerly, which doubled their strength and force, and so they pressed forwards, that their foes were compelled to forsake the field, and trust to their feet, and thought to have ta∣ken the Town for their defence; but Gruffith and his men pursued them so hard, that they entred with them, and after a great slaughter, returned home with many worthy priso∣ners, great triumph and rich spoiles, leaving nothing in the Town but blood and ashes, and the Walls razed to the ground. There be some that think that King Edward by evil counsel (as it is thought) banished Algar the son of Earl Leofrike, whereupon he got him into Ireland, and there providing eighteen ships of Rovers, returned and joyned himself with Gruffith, King or Prince of Wales, who both together invaded the Country of Mercia, about Hereford, where Earl Ranulph Earl of that Country, who was Son to King Edwards Sister, named Ioda, by her first husband Walter de Maunt, came against them with a great army, and met them above two miles from Hereford, where after a sore fight for the space of three houres, Ranulph and his army were overcome, and five hundred of them slain, the rest being totally rou∣ted, whom Gruffith and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entring the Town, set the Cathe∣dral Church on fire, and slew the Bishop named Leoger,A barbarous act amongst Christians. (an Act fitter for Pagans then Christians) with seven of the Canons, spoyled and burnt the Town miserably; where∣upon King Edward being advertised hereof, gathered an Army and sent Haroald, the Son of Earl Godwin against them, who pursuing the enemies to Northwales, passed through Stradelwyd to Snowdon; but Gruffith and Algor being afraid to meet Harald, got them again into Southwales, whereof Haroald having notice, left one part of his army in Northwales, to resist the enemies there, and returning with the residue to Hereford, cau∣sed a great Trench to be cast round about the Town, with a high Rampire, strongly forti∣fying the Gates of the same. After this, by means of a Parly had with Gruffith and Al∣gar, at a place called Beligelhag, a peace was concluded, whereupon Algar being pardoned by the King, and restored again to his Earldome, returned home to Chester. About two years after, Algar was accused again of Treason, so that he was the second time exiled the land, and repaired to his old friend Gruffith, Prince of Northwales, by whom he was joyfully received, and restored again to his Earldome by the aid of certain strangers, which came by chance from Norway, whereupon King Edward being highly of∣fended with Gruffith, sent Haroald again with an army into Northwales, to do revenge up∣on him, who coming to Ruthlen, burned the Pallace of Gruffith and his Ships, and then re∣turned to the King at Glocester. Not long after these Transactions, Roderick Son to Haroald King of Denmark, came with a great army to Wales, and there being friendly received by Gruffith, joyning his
power to King Gruffiths, entred England, and cruelly spoiled and burned great part of the Land, but shortly after, Roderick was compelled to return to his Ships, and to sail to Den∣mark, and Gruffith came to Wales loaden with spoiles. Mr. Powel. fol. 101.This year (saith Mr. Powel) died Owen the son of Gruffith ap Rytherick. Also Haro∣ald and his Brother Tosty, by the procurement of Caradoc ap Gruffith, ap Rytherick and o∣thers, gathered a great Power and entred Southwales, and subdued a great part thereof, and wrought so with those that were about Gruffith the King, that as soon as he had gathe∣red his people in Northwales, and began his journey to meet with Haroald, he was cruelly and traterously slain by his own men, and his head brought to Haroald, who appointed and placed Meredith, the son of Owen ap Edwin, Prince and Ruler of Southwales, and he with his brother Tosty returned home. Some do report that Haroald about Rogation week, by the Kings commandement, went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by Bristol, round about the Coast, com∣passing in a manner all Wales. His brother Tosty that was Earl of Northumberland, met him by appointment with an host of horsemen, and so joyning together, they destroyed the Countrey of Southwales in such sort, that the Welshmen were compelled to submit them∣selves, to deliver hostages, and conditioned to pay the ancient Tribute, which before time they had payd. Southwales submits to the English.The people of that Countrey, because Gruffith their Prince fled at the coming of Haro∣ald, and left them to be a prey to the enemies, hated him so, that as soon as he returned again unto them, they slew him, and sent his head to Haroald, which he sent to the King. After whose death King Edward granted the Principality of Northwales to Blethyn and Ry∣walhon the sons of Convyn brethren to Gruffith by the Mothers side, who did homage unto him for the same. This Gruffiuh ap Lhewelyn governed Wales thirty four years valiantly and worthily; he never fough: but that he departed out of the field victorious; he was gentle and affable to his Subjects, and cruel to his foes; beloved of the one, and feared of the other; liberal to strangers, costly in apparrel, and princely in all his doings, and unworthy of that cru∣el death, that the ambitious desire of Rule did provoke his unkinde Subjects, and unnatural osins to prepare for so noble a Prince, and so gentle a Master as he was. Blethin and Riwalhon the Sons of Convyn. After the decease of King or Prince Gruffith, Meredith the son of Owen ap Edwin (which Edwin was son, as some Writers say, to Howel Dha) did take upon him the government of Southwales; and Blethin and Riwalbon the sons of Convyn and half Brothers to King Gruffith ap Lhewelyn (as they which were born of Angharat, daughter to Meredith King of Wales) did govern Northwales; Conan the son of Jago being all this time with his Father in law in Ireland. Caradock ap Gruffith ap Rytheryc, was the first that procured Haroald to come into Wales against Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, hoping by him to attain unto the Government of South∣wales; but it fell ontotherwise; for when Haroald understood that he should not get that which he looked for at the hands of Caradock, which was a certain Lordship within Wales nigh unto Hereford, and knowing also Caradoc to be a subtile and deceitfull man, compoun∣ding with Meredith ap Owen for that Lordship, he made him King or Prince of Southwales, and banished Caradoc out of the Countrey. Afterward Haroald having obtained that Lordship, builded there a stately and princely house, at a place called Portashlyth, and di∣vers times earnestly invited the King to come and see the same, and at length the King be∣ing then at Glocester not far of, granted him his request, whereupon Haroald made such preparation as was most wonderfull, and as much abused: Soon after this, the said Caradoc ap Gruffith came to the same house, and to be revenged upon Haroald, killed all the work∣men and labourers that vvere at vvork, and all the servants and people of Haroald that he could finde, and defacing the vvork, carried avvay those things that with great labour and expences had been brought thither, and set out and beautified the building.
William commonly called the Conquerour, was now King of England; and Edrik Syl∣vaticus the son of Alfrike, Earl of Mercia, refusing to submit himself as ohers had done, when he saw that the King was departed to Normandy, rose against such as were left in his absence to keep the Land in obedience; whereupon those that lay in the Castle of Hereford, Richard Fitz Scroop and others, oftentimes invaded his Lands, and wasted the goods of his Tenants; but as often as they came against him, they alwaies lost some of their own men; at length he calling to his aid the Kings of VVales, Blethyn and Rywalhon, wasted the Country of Hereford even to VVye bridge, and then returned with great booty. This year also 1068. Meredith and Ithel the sons of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, raised a strong army against Blethyn and Rywalhon Kings of Northwales, and met with them at a place cal∣led Mechain, where after a long fight there were slain upon the one part Ithel, and upon the other Rywalhon, and Meredith put to flight, whom Blethyn pursued so straitly, that he star∣ved for cold and hunger upon the mountains, and so Blethyn son of Convyn remained the only King of Powis and Northwales. Carodoc the son of Gruffith ap Rytherck ap Jestyn, caused a great number of Frenchmen (for so the Brittish book calleth the Normans) to enter Southwales, to whom he joyned his power of Gwentland, and gave Meredith the King of that countrey an overthrow, and slew him upon the River Rympyn. About this time the Normans brought great forces into Westwales by sea, and destroyed Dynet, and the Country of Caerdigan, and carried away much spoil, and did so likewise the year following. Bleythyd Bishop of Menevia or Saint Davids, died about this time, and Sulien was Bishop in his place. Radulf Earl of East Angles, his Mother came out of Wales, which was the cause of the Welshmens assisting him against William the Conquerour;Matth. West. lib. 2. fol. 6 Math. Parker p. 11. for Ranulf sent for many of his Mo∣thers friends and kinsmen to come unto him, meaning through their aid and procurement to get the Princes and people of VVales to joyn with him in his enterprise; but VVilliam having notice of this plot, and coming before he was sent for, he hanged some of the VVelshmen among others, put our the eyes of many, and banished the rest. In the year 1073. Blethyn ap Convin King of VVales, was traiterously and cowardly mur∣thered by Rees ap Owen, and the Gentlemen of Ystrad Tywy, after he had governed VVales thirteen years. This man was very liberal and mercifull, doing Justice and Equity all his Reign; he had divers weomen and many children; First Meredith by Haer, daughter to Gythyn, Lywarck and Cadogan by another woman, Made and Ryrid by the third, Jorwerth by the fourth. Trahern the Son of Caradoc. After the death of Blethyn, Trahern ap Caradoc his cosin German, took upon him the rule of Northwales, and Rees ap Owen with Rytherck ap Caradoc, did jontly rule Southwales; Then Gruffith son to Conan, son to Jago or James, right Inheritour of Northwales, came from Ireland with succour with his brethren, Encumalhon King of Ʋltonia, and Ranalht and Mathawn had delivered him, and landed in the Isle of Môn, or Anglesey, and brought it to his Subjection. At this time Kynwric ap Rynalbon, a noble man of Maelor or Bromfield, was slain in Northwales. This year also, Gronow and Lhewelin the sons of Cadogan ap Blethyn, did joyn their pow∣ers with Caradoc ap Gruffith ap Rytherck, to revenge their Grandfathers death, and then fought at a place called Camdhwc, where the Sons of Cadogan obtained the Victory; short∣ly after, Gruffith ap Conan passed over the water, from Môn to the main land, and Trabern ap Caradoc met with him at Bronyrew, where Gruffith was put to flight, and retired back to the Isle, In the year 1074.Rytherc ap Caradoc was slain by Treason of his own cosin German Meyrchaon ap Rees ap Rytherc, and Rees ap Owen ruled Southwales alone. Nevertheless, the sons of Cadogan gathered their powers, and came against him and fought with him the se∣cond time at Gwaynyttyd, where he was put to flight; but yet he gathered new forces, and kept the land still. Then Trahern ap Caradoc King of Northwales moves his forces against Rees, who boldly met him with all the power of Southwales, at a place called Pwlhgwttic
where after long fighting, Rees was put to slight, and after great slaughter of his men, he fled from place to place, fearing all things, like a stagg that had been lately chased, which mistrusteth every noise; but at the last, he with his Brother Howel fell into the hands of Caradoc a Gruffith, who slew them both in revenge of the wise and noble Prince Blethyn ap Convyn. At this time Sulien Arch-Bishop of Saint Davids, did forsake his Bishoprick, and Abraham was chosen Bishop in his place. In the year 1077. Rees the son of Theodore the son of Eneon, the son of Owen, the son of Howel Dha, as right Inheritor to the Kingdome of Southwales, claimed the same, and the people received him with much joy, and made him their Prince. The next year Menevia was all spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham the Bi∣shop died, after whose death, Sulien was compelled to take the Bishoprick again. In the year following, Gruffith the son of Conan did bring a great Army of Irishmen and Scots into Wales, and joyned with Rees ap Theodore, as two right heirs of the whole Coun∣trey: Gruffith of Northwales, and Rees of Southwales, descending both lineally from Rode∣ric the Great, against whom came Trahern ap Caradoc, and Caradoc Gruffith and Mailer the sons of Rywalhon ap Gwyn, his cosin Germans (for Gwyn ap Blethin was their Grandfather) who in those daies were the chief Rulers of all Wales: and after they had met at the Mountains of Carno, they fought a cruel battel, and were the more eager, because upon that daies work lay the lives and honour of either party; but at length the victory fell to Gruffith and Rees, and Trahern with his cosins were all slain, and most part of their people; then the Kingdomes of Wales came under the rule of the right heirs again. At this time also, a noble man in VVales called Ʋrgency ap Sitsylht, was slain by the sons of Rees Sais (i. e.) Rees the Englishman; for so they used to name all such as had served in England, or could speak English. Gules three Lyons pass. Gardant; or other say, onely passant, which I rather approve of. Gruffith the Son of Conan. The Welsh Princes do homage to VVilliam the Conquerour.After the death of Trahern, Gruffith ap Conan did quietly rule Northwales, and Rees ap Theodore Southwales. In the year 1079. William commonly called the Conquerour, entred VVales with a great Army, and passed as far as Saint Davids, where he offered, and took homage of the Kings of the Land. And not long after, the Sepulchre of VValwey, King Arthurs Sisters Son, was found up∣on the sea shore in the Countrey of Ros; the body by estimation upon viewing of the bones was thought to be fourteen foot in length: VValwey in his life time was a right noble and valiant Warriour, of very good reputation, who ruled that Country, which to this day from him is called VValwethay. Caerdiff built.And this year Sulion forsook his Bishoprick the second time, and VVilfrid was enstalled in his place; and in this time also, the Town of Caerdyff was built. About the year 1087. the sons of Blethyn ap Convyn, sometime King of VVales, gathe∣red their strengths together against Rees of Tewdor, who not being able to meet them, fled to Ireland, and there he purchased to himself great friends, and got an Army of Irishmen and Scots, to whom he promised great Rewards, when he should obtain his Kingdome, and so landed in Southwales with those strangers, which when his friends heard of, they drew to him; and the other came in all haste, thinking to fight with him before his power should encrease, and at Lhechryd they gave him battel, where they were overthrown, and two of the Brethren slain, to wit Madoc and Riryd, and the other fled and forsook the Countrey. As soon as Rees was in quiet possession of his Kingdome, he sent home his stran∣gers with great rewards. About this time the Shrine of Saint David was stollen out of the Church, and when all the Jewels and Treasures were taken away, the Shrine was left where it might be found again. About this time, the Earls of Hereford and Shrewsbury, with the VVelshmen, burned all VVorcestershire and Glocestershire, to the very gates of ƲƲorcester. And in the year 1088. there was a terrible Earthquake through all the land; and the year following dyed Sulien the godliest and wisest man, and the greatest Clerk in all Wales,
being 89. years old. About this time certain strangers, which were Rovers upon the seas landed at St. David, and robbed it and burned the Town; at which time also Cadinor the the son of Colhoyn Lord of Dinet dyed, whose sons Lhewelyn and Eneon moved Gruffith the son of Meredyth to make war against their Lord and Prince Rees ap Tewdor, and so joyning all their strength together came against him to Lhandydoc where Rees was, who gave them battail, and putting them to flight, pursued them so sore that he took Gruffith ap Meredith and put him death, but Eneon son to Cadinor ap Colhoyn fled to Jestin Lord of Morganwc (who likewise rebelled against Rees ap Theodor) and promised upon condition to have Je∣stins daughter in marriage and certain other covenants then agreed upon between them, to bring to their succours an army of Normans (for he had served in England before, and was well known and acquainted with all the English Nobility) which things being thus con∣cluded, they were fully determined to be revenged upon Rees. And so Eneon went to Eng∣land and wrought such means that he procured Robert Fitzhamon (in the reign of William Rufus) which twelve other Knights, to gather a great army of Frenchmen and Normans to come to their aid, who shortly after landed in Glamorganshire, where Jestin ap Gurgent Lord of the Land received them with much honour, and joyning his power to theirs burned and spoyled Prince Rees; it grieved him exceedingly, whereupon he suddainly gathered his people and met him not far from Brecknock, where after a terrible fight he was slain, with whom fell and decayed the Kingdom of Southwales. This Rees had by his wife the daughter of Rywalhon ap Convin a son called Gruffith, who at his fathers death was but a very child, and one Grovo that was in the Kings prison. These Normans after they had re∣ceived their promised Salary and great rewards of Jestin, returned to their ships. When E∣neon burthened Jestin with the promise of his daughter in marriage, Jestin laughed him to scorn, and told him that he would bestow his daughter otherwise: whereupon Eneon full of anger and despite followed the Normans, and when he came to the shore they were all a shipboard. Then he shouted to them and made a sign with his cloak to call them back, and they returned again to know his meaning. Then he went to the chiefest of them and shewed his abuse at Jestins hands, declaring withall how easie it was for them to win that fair and pleasant Country from Jestin, whom for his treason to Rees none other Prince of Wales would succour, whereunto they (easily perswaded) turned all their power against him, for whose defence they had come thither, and at whose hands they had been well en∣tertained, and recompenced with rich gifts and rewards. And first they spoyled him of his country who mistrusted them not, and took all the fertile and valley land, to themselves and left the barren and rough mountains for Eneon his part; the names of Robert and the twelve Knights and parcels which fell to each ones share were these, Robert Fitz Hamon had Cardiff who bore for his armes Azure a Lyon rampant gardant Or encensed gules.
Those men, whose Coats are mentioned, and their Heirs, have enjoyed the Coun∣try to this day, who were the first strangers that ever Inhabited Wales since the time o Camber. Of this King or Prince Master Mills saith, Griffin Prince of Northwales, son and suc∣cessour of Conan, the Prince; between this Griffin, (or rather Gruffith) and Blethyn Prince of Powis and Rees, the son of Theodore, Prince of Demetia, there was a great search and enquiry made concerning their Armes, and military Ensigns; as also of the Royal Blood of the antient Kings of Brittain, which being made known by the judgment and industry of wise men of Wales, it was found that there were three principal Lines or Badges, and fifteen progenial Lines of the ancient noble blood of the Brittains. These three principal Badges or Coats, which Master Mills speaketh of, I suppose are these; for in this Tract of the Princes of ƲƲales he imparteth no more, (viz. fig. 13, 14, 15.) But another Authour, or rather the parcel of an Authour, which was bestowed upon me, saith, there be five Kingly Races in Cambria or ƲƲales, (whose Arms are reduced to fig. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.) deducing from them by Sir Owen Tudyr, and King James. As for the fifteen progenial Lines, I dare not undertake to determine which they be, only I will offer unto my Reader the Noble ƲƲelshman, such Coats as I have collected, not de∣siring to give offence to any in matter of precedency, which here I intend not, but will set them as I found them in an ancient Manuscript. Southwales. That Cadisor or Ridivour ap Gwaith Voeth (whose Arms are mentioned with fig. 22.) had eight sons. viz. 1. Kedvour ap Gwaith Voeth Lord of Caerdigan. 2. Gworestan Lord of Powis. 3. Rydrych Lord of the Gwyway. 4. Aythan Lord of Grismont. 5. Gwin Lord of Lenflgwyn. 6. Back Lord of Skinfreth. 7. Kynan Lord of Degaingle. 8. Ednowen Bishop of Lhanbadern Vawn. Aythan the fourth Brother and his sons, built three Chappels in Monmothshire, Aythens Chapel in Clytha, Bettus Chapel, alias Botus Aythan, and by old writings, it is called Bettus Fvour, Aythan and Brungunei Chapel, Ʋt fertur.
1 Willy de Londas had for his share Domer and bare B a fess Argent 2 Robert de S Oumim had Lhan Blethian and bare  cheuerons Gulis on a Cheife Arg: a fess or barr vnd B 3 Richard de Grana Ʋilla or Grene pille had Neth & bare Gules 3 rests or 4 Richard de Sward had Talavan & hare Argent a Cross storie fitchs Sable 5 Pagan de Turber vile h Coity and bare Checky arg & Gules a fess Ermine 11 Peter de Sore had Peterto and bare quarterly or and Gules in ye first q a liō past Azure 12 Willyam de Elterling had S Donals and bare paly of 6 ar & azure, one a bend Gules  5 soiles or 13 1 quarterly Gules & or 4 lyons pass gard: Cou¦nterchandged 14 2 Gules 3 lyons passi gar: arg: intensed Azure 15 3 bert 3. Egles dis played in fess or 21 Tudor or Theodore: Ga lyō ramp̄t wth in a border Engrald or Incen¦ed Azure 22 Cady for Gwayth voed or a lyon ramp̄t g¦rd: Sable 23 LLawdden Gules a Griffon Saer¦greant o 24 Kadyvor ap Dynawal Sable a speares head inter 3 scaling ladders a on a Chief Ga Tower tri ble tower del 2 de 25 Tarynn Ga cheueron intet 3 de liz or in chiefe a lyon ramp̄t del 2 do 31 meinch Cough Azure a wolfe Salia Argent 32 Memok of Diuet a cheueron between 3 Cocks memb: or 33 Kadiver Vawr Arg a lyon passt: gard Sable nicensed Gules 34 Lwch Hawen vawr Sable a boare by a tree arg: head G in closed or 35 Morda vrygh Ermin a cheuerō or in a Chiefe arg: a lyon passt G 41 Sr Iames Willyams K or on a fess inter 3 Ra∣uens H as many Cress∣ants del primo aspe∣ars head del 2 do 42 Ido wyllt Arg: a lyon ramp̄t Sable hedd paws & halfe y queue Ash Colour: 43 Pemb: Pwyll pen Devig Azure a lyon ramp̄ inter 7 roses or 44 Sr Trustan Gulas a cheueron inter 3 true love knotts  arg 45 Cradock of Newton Argent on a chauerons Azure 3 garbes or 51 Cradoc Azure 3 bores head arg 1 semy croscroslets or 52 Sr Raph Maylor Or a lyon ramp̄t besante 53 Rhiwr Percy Azure a lyon ramp̄t or 54 Ivoi Pety Sable a lyon ramp̄t regardant arg 55 Sr Iohn Brigon Arg: a stagg Gules attired or
6 Gilbert de Humfrevil ad Penmarke & bare Gules a synque foile wt  an pre of ciosscroslets 7 Roger de Beckrolles had East Orchard and bare B cheueron between 3 Cressants or 8 Iohn de ffleming had 8 George and bare Gules a frett of 8 peeces or a Thieft B 9 Reynold de Sully had Sully and bare Gules 6 wastalls or roundell 321 Conterchanged 10 Oliuer de Sr Iohn had Fonmon & bare Argent of a Chiefe Gules two mnllevs or. 16 Griffith Cenan: Pr f North w: Gules 3 lyons paff gard: ar Incensed Azue 17 Iestyen ap Curgant Gules 3 Cheuerons Argent 18 Rees ap Tewdor Gules a lyon ramp̄t wth m a border endent¦ed or Incensed Azure 19 Blethij Prine of Davis or lyon ramp̄t Gules sume say sable ye lyon arg other, arg, ye lyon Sable. 20 Elistan Prince of fferlix Gules a lyon ramp̄ regardant or Incens¦ed Azure 26 Karedig Sable a lyon ramp̄t Arg: meensed G 27 Elffm or a Griffan Sergre∣ant vert: incensed G 28 Tudwall K of Diuet Azure a molfe Sali∣ant Argent 29 Philip ap Ivor Vert 5 Eaglet in cross or membred 30 Ʋrien Reged Arg: a cheueron be∣tween 3 rauens sable 36 Glon Benarw Sable a Cheueron or 3 greyhounds Cursant ar colored del 2 do 37 St Griffeth ap Elydr Arg: on a Cross Sable 5 cressants or m y first  quarter a spears head Gules 38 Grono Goch Azure 3 bucks heads Cabosed or 39 Bledery Arg 3 bules heads Sable 40 Kydrih Sable a lyon ramp̄t regard: or 46 Ryod of Han stepha Gules in a bend arga lyon passe Sable inter 3 trifoyles slipped or 47 48 Testyn ap Guryant Gules 3 cheuerons Arg 49 Inion ap Gollwyn Sable a cheueron inter 3 de liz ar: ye coat is quarted by ye  Prot: 50 Lewes Prihard K  Sable a lyon Ramp̄ arg: 56 Griffith Gwyr arg: a stagg lodged Gules ared o holding an oake branch  per 57 Philiphir Arg: a dragons head ertased vert hold a a hand Couped at the wrest 58 Km Haer arg 3 Cooks Gules mem∣bred and J closed or 59 60 Inork of Gwent party per pale Azure und Sable 3 de liz: or
Howell of Caerleon Gules 3 Towers triple Towered arg: Morgan ap Meredith Arg: a lyon ramp̄t Gules Blethin Broad speare quarterly arg & Gules on a cross Sable 5 mullets or Tygar ap Tegan Or a griffon sergreant Sable incensed Gules St Iohn Morgan Kt of the sepulcher Sable a cross angraled inter 4 speares heads pctm i nailes arg: Mereiddig Sable 3 Childrens heads Couped a ye shoulders wrap¦ped about wth suakes pro¦per perukes or Inon L• of Kymwyd or 3 verspertileas Azare Teleglas Gules on a garb or 3 Rauons proper Owen Getien Azure a Stagg Saliant Arg: attired or Elystan Gules a lyon ramp̄t Regardant or Pr of Powis Or a lyon Ramp̄t Gules Brochwell Sable 3 naggs heads Errased arg: Elistan & Cadogan Quarterly ye two coats as in Radnor Madog Dannowth Ermin a lyon ramp̄t sable wth in a border Gules besante Allho or 3 lyons heads errased G incensed B wth in a bord• engraled  3 Brichan Sable a fessor inter 2 swords points in chief & bast arg: hilts del 2 do vrien Reged Arg: a cheueron be∣tween 3 rauons Sable Cradoc vrach vras Sable a cheuerō inter 3 spears head arg: gond Rodery ye great Gules a cheuervn inter 3 roses Arg: Brochwell yssgithro K of Pois Sable a cheron nter naggs heads rrased Arg: K. Kadwalader Azure a Cross pate fitche Or Rees ap Tewdor Gules a lyon ramp̄t wth in a border endent∣ed or Gruffith ap Kynan Gules 3 lyons passant Argan Blethm ap Kynan Or a lyon ramp̄t Gules Iestyn ap Gurgan Gules 3 cheuerons Arg Gollwyn ap Tangno Sable a cheron inter 3 de liz Arg: Myaylag Kcwn Arg: on a cheueron Sable 3 cheribimes or Nefydd hardd Arg: 3 speares heads Sable Briant Hir Azure a crss flory Ermin Hedd Molwyn Sable a stagg trippin Arg:
Knymyllon ap Pris gogh argent a dragons head t ante Aython Arg: a Salloir azure Brochan Sable a fess Or inter 2 swords poynts in chief and bast arg: hilts del 2 do Blethin Sable a cheueron between 3 spears heads arg: goa¦ed ppor Kadogan ap Elystan Arg 3. boars heads Sable incensed or m Cre gerith Sable an Eagle diplaed Arg: mem: & beaked Gules Madoc ap Iorworth Azure on a fess arg: inter 3 lyons ramp̄t ras many crosses pate fitohe sable Trystan arg: a cheueron Sable in 3 speares heads Azure goared pp Euyon Glyd Gules a lyon ramp̄t arg: wth in a border of ye 2d ogresse Brute Or a lyon ramp̄t gard Gules on his neck and sholder 3 crvwnes in pale Locrme Arma paterna Camber Arg 2 lyons passt gard Gules Albanact Gules a lyon ramp̄t or Kadrod Katsh vynydd B a lyon ramp̄t arg incensed G Karedig K of Cardigā Sable a lyon ramp̄t arg Yrien for ye round table Vert 3 lyons passt gard or Elssm ap Gwyddno or a Griffon Sergreant vert incensed G. Lord Rees Gregg Arg: a lyon ramp̄t Sable Corone or Elistn P of fferlix Gules a lyon ramp̄t regardant Or Lemarch ap Bran Argent a chcuervn inter 3 rauons carrying each an  in his beak sable Hufa ap Kynddeliv Gules a cheueron be∣tween 3 lyons ramp̄t O Geiridd ap Rees Gogh Arg: on a bend Sable 3 leopards heads or Kilm m Troytyn Argent a legg Couped at ye calfe sable Edwin ffreum Ar: a cross engraled florie inter 4 rauons Sable Ayarch Hiron wei B a lyon ramp̄t arg: Edwayn Benn dew Arg a cheueron inter 3 boars heads Sable En̄ydd ap Gwergoun Azure a lyon ramp̄t or Owain ap Bradrwen Gules 3 snakes braced Arg:
Gwayth voed Or a lyon ramp̄t regardant Sable Owyn Gwynedd Vert 3 Eagles in fess or membred & beared Gules Pr: Llhewelr quarterly Or & Gules 4 lyons passt gard con∣erly Edeuynet byohan Gules a cheueron inter 3 helmetts closed Arg: Madoc ap Meredith Argent a lyon ramp̄t Sable Ym aur Dorchog Azure a lyon passt gard queene betweene his leggs reflaxed uer his back of arg Ithel Velm Gules a cheueron arg. inter 3 goats heads errased or Sionas ap Growy Azure 3 boares passt arg; biosled armed & buguled o Llm ap byt Paly of Six or & Gules Cradoc ap Gwell than quarterly Gules & arg 4 lyons passt gard Counterly Blaidd Rhydd or Gest Azure a wolfe passt Argent Reynalt Ld of man Gules 3 leggs conioned in y thigh slexed in triangle Ilhel Ld of Brinn Argent 3 greyhounds Cur¦sant Sable collered Or Marchan Azure a fess or inter 3 woules heads errased Arg: Thahem• descended frō Ld Rees Azure a cheueron inter 3 dolphins hauriant Argent Madoc dy of Egeiangh barry of 8 arg: & Sable Hona ap Ierworth ap yena ap Runry K Sable 3 lyons passt arg Tlhell Lloyd Azure a lyon passt arg Enion ap Iesun ap Madoc Arg 3 beares pawes Er∣ected Sable incensed Gules Kadrod Hardd Arg: 2 wolues in com Gules incensed or Kynfrig Efell Gules on a bend arg a lyon passt Sable Sr Griffith Lloyd K. Gules a cheueron or chife Ermme Tegwared ap Rhobert Sable 3 de liz arg: a border plale Morgan ap Traherne Arg: a cheuerō inter 3 boares heads Gules ap Kynreg Ermine a lyon passt gard queue between his leggs Gules Madoc Kloddaith Gules a chēron Arg: betweene 3 plates LLyddoccu ap Kradoc braych vras Azure a lyon ramp̄t party perfess or & Arg: aborde del lertic: Gryffeth Maylor paly of 6 Ar: & Ga lyon Ramp̄t Sable M Ayerchydd Gules a Saracens head proper
Tydor Treuor party per bend Sinister rmm & Ermines a lyō ramp̄t or Matha farne Argent a lyon pass Sable inter 3 de liz Gules Hona ap Kynnerig ap Rywalhon Ennine a lyon ramp̄t Sable Einiin ap Ryhylyn Sable at ye root of a tree a childe in Swathing cloathes thereon a goat argent brow∣sing at the tree Elivr ap Rh Saie Ermine a lyon ramp̄t Azure Rydid Vlaidd Vert a cheuēron inter 3 wolues heads errased Argent Blaidd ap Elnarch  a cheueron inter  wolues heads errased or Cadogan ap Blethin Or a lyon ramp̄t Azure incensed Gules Madog or Hendor Arg: on a cheueron Gules 3 de liz Or Eimon ap Cradoc Arg: 3 sadles wth stirrops Sable Ilhel Vanchan Arg: a boares heads Sable Griffith ap Howell ap Gri∣ffith ap Torwerth Gules alyon passt gard Argent. Howell barfe beinog Argin a crosshumeta cou∣ped quarterly Gules & Sable a cressant or Iarlldyr of LLcehweldd Gules a cheueron inter 3 bucks heads Arg Llaherne of Rros Gules a cheueron inter 3 bucks heads Or St Owen ye good Knight Azure a lyon ramp̄t or Howel Coed mor Azure a cheveron betweene 3 speares heads. Arg: Eimon Euyll pty per fess Sable and Arg: a lyon ramp̄t Coun∣terly Kadwalladr ap Gronwy Ld of Mouhnant Arg: a chēron inter 3 pheons there poynts turned to ye center of ye Sheild Sable Madoc ap yrien of Mayngwynedd Arg: a crossngrald Sable inter 4 Changhs on a chief Azure a boares of ye first Madoc ap Iarthyr Vert a Stagg Saliant arg: attired or LLyowarch Holberth Vert a Stagg tripping Owam Brogyntyn Argent a lyon ramp̄t Sable batune Gules Ld off fflint Or a lyon ramp̄t Sable borderan graled Erm∣ine Santhe hardd Arg: a lyon ramp̄t Or Semy broome flippe proper Herbert party perpale B a G 3 lyons ramp̄t Arg: ince∣nsed conterly Cliftord Chechy or & B a fess G Milburne Gacheueron between 3 escolops arg:
Basset Arg: a cheuerō Azure inter 3 bugles Sable Rumsey Arg: a fess Galabell of M  B Sitsyltats Cseill barry of to Arg: & Azure on Six escouchcons 3 2 1 Sable as many lyons ramp̄t Arg: Herbert party per pale Azure & Gules 3 lyons ramp̄t Aubery verl a cheueron betweene 3 Eagles heads Errased Or Kemeys vert on a cheueron Arg: 3 pheons Sable Gunter Sable a cheueron inter 3 gantlels clutchc Or Havert Arg: a bulls head cabosed inter 3 mulets Gules Walbeise Arg: 3 bulle pale wayes Gules armed & vnguled Or Gamage Arg: a bend losengy Gules on a chiefe Azure 3 escallops Or Wiston Gules a cher̄on Ermine Maunsell Arg: a cher̄on betweene 3 Maunches Sable About this time, or shortly after, Bernard Newmarsh a noble man, also of Normandy, obtained by conquest the Lordship of Brecknock containing three cantreds, and married Nest the daughter of Nest, daughter to Gruffith ap Lhewelin Prince of Wale, by whom he had issue Mahael and a daughter. This Mahael being a worthy Knight, was dis-inherited by the malice of his own mother, who contrary to the matrimonial duty kept unlawful company with a Knight whom she set more by then her husband; whereupon Mahael being offended with the dissolute life of his mother, warned her to avoid infamy; and on a time meeting with the said Knight coming from her, fought with him and hurt him; wherefore Nest to be revenged of her son for that fact, went to K. Henry the first, and solemnly,Gerald Itin. Camb. rather of malice and revengement, (as Giraldus noteth) then of any Truth, sware upon the Evan∣gelists, that the said Mahael her son was not begotten by Bernard Newmarsh her Husband, but by another Lover of hers; by reason of which Oath (or perjury rather, as Giraldus thinketh) Mahael was disinherited, and his Sister (whom the Mother affirmed to be the very Daughter of Bernard) was by the said King with the whole Inheritance,King Henry the First confes∣seth the VVelshmen to be the lawfull inheri∣tours of the Country. bestowed upon Milo the son of Walter the Constable, who was after created Earl of Hereford, Lord of Glocester, Brecknock, and the Forrest of Dean. This Milo Earl of Hereford, told King Henry the First, of the singing and triumphing of Birds, by the pool called Lhyn Sanathan at the passing of Gruffith ap Rees ap Theodor, the said Milo a Pini-Fitz-John, Lord of Ewy∣as Land being present; whereunto the King answered, that it was not a thing to be won∣dred at so much; for in truth (said he) we by our great force and strength, do offer inju∣ry and violence to that Nation, yet are they well known to be the lawfull inheritours of hat Countrey. The sons of this Milo dyed all without issue, yet he left three daughters. First, Margaret married to Humphery de Bohune, in her right Earl of Hereford,Many if not most of the English No∣bility by this match des∣cedd of the Welsh blood Henry the 4th. descended from Lhewe∣lin Prince of Wales. and Con∣stable of England, from which match, and so consequently from Bernard Newmarsh his Wife, daughter of Nest, who was daughter of another Nest, daughter from Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, Prince of all Wales, most of the ancient Nobility descend from Lhewelyn the great Prince; for the last Humphry de Bohune Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton, and Con∣stable
of England, had issue two daughters and heirs. Elianor the elder, was married unto Thomas Plantagenet, alias Thomas of Woodstock, the sixth son of Edward the Third, who was by King Richard the Second, created Earl of Buckingham, and after Duke of Glocester, and in her right Earl of Essex, Northampton, and Constable of England. Mary the second Daughter, was married to Henry Plantagenet, alias Bullingbrook, Earl of Derby, after King of England, by the name of Henry the Fourth. Plantagnets, Staffords, and Bouochier from Lhewe∣lin Prince of Wales.The said Thomas Plantagenet Duke of Glocester, &c. had Humphry Lord of Brecknock, who dyed without Issue, and four daughters, heirs after their Brother. Ann the elde stmar∣ried to Edmund Stafford, Earl of Stafford, who by her had Issue Humphry Earl of Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock, &c. and afterwards the said Ann was mar∣ried to William. Viscount Bourchier, created Earl of Ewe in France, by King Henry the Fifth, Father of Henry created Earl of Essex, by King Edward the Fourth. This Humphry Earl of Stafford was created Duke of Buckingham by King Henry the Sixt, and so the Lord∣ship of Brecknock came to the Dukes of Buckingham, and by the Attainder of Edward the last Duke of that family, came to the Crown. But let us return again to the daughters of Milo; you see what gallant Issue proceeded from the first. Secondly, Bersa the second Daughter was married unto Philip Bruse, created by King Stephan Lord Bruse of Gower, Bould, and Brimber, and in his Wives Right Lord of Breck∣nock. Thirdy, Lucia the third daughter was married to Herbert the son of Herbert, a base son to King Henry the First, who was in her Right, Lord of all the Forrest of Dean, of whom descended the Fitz-Herberts of Derbyshire. Awbery, Wal∣beif, Gunter, and Hanara no Welshmen properly.With Bernard Newmarsh before spoken of, there came many Gentlemen at that time to Brecknock, upon whom he bestowed divers Mannors, as to the Awberies the Mannor of Abercynrick, and Slowch, to the Walbeifes the Mannor of Lhanhamlack and Taly Lhyn, and to the Gunters the Mannor of Gilston, to the Hanards the Mannor of Pont Willym; an easie matter to cut large thongs out of another mans Hide. About this time Cadogan ap Blethyn ap Convyn, destroyed all Dynet in the end of April; and shortly after, the same summer, the Normans in great companies, landed in Dynet or Westwales and Caerdigan, and builded Castles there, and so began to inhabit the Countrey upon the Sea-shore. The Normans having gotten into their hands all the lands and livings of the Nobility of England, began to pry and peep into the commodities of Wales; and seeing that Robert Fitz-Hamon and other Knights, that went with him had sped so well, they made suit to the King to grant them the lands of the Welshmen, whereupon the King thinking that to be the best way for him, as well to encourage them to be more willing to serve him, as also to provide for them at other mens cost, granted to divers of his Nobles sundry Countries in Wales, to hold of him by Knights Service, for the which they did Homage, and sware feal∣ty unto him as followeth. First, Roger Montgomery Earl of Arundel and Salop, did his homage for the Lordship of Powis and Caerdigan. Secondly, Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, did homage for Tegengel and Rynonioc with all the Land by the Sea-shore unto the River of Conwey. Thirdly, Arnulph a younger son of Roger Montgomery for Dinet. Fourthly, Bernard Newmarch for Brecknock. Fifthly, Ralph Mortimer for Eluel. Sixthly, Hugh de Lacie for the land of Ewyes. Seventhly, Eustace Cruer for Molde and Hopedale; and many others for other Lands. Montgomery why so called.Then Roger de Montgomery, to whom the Conquerour had given Powis, entred the land, and wan the Town and Castle of Baldwyn, which he fortified, and called it Montgomery after his own name. About this time also, Gruffith ap Conon, King of Northwales, with Cadogan ap Blethyn who then ruled Southwales, entred the Land of Caerdigan, and killed a great number of Normans, being not able any longer to suffer their great Pride and Cruelty; but after their Return, the English Captains sent to England for more men, and thought privately to make a Road into Northwales, which journey was discovered unto Cadogan, who gathered his Power, and met with them in the Wood or Forrest of Yspys, and set upon them with great Hue and Cry, and they defended themselves manfully, but in the end they were put to flight with great loss, and Cadogan followed them hard and spoiled the Countrey of Ca∣dogan and Dinet, and destroyed all the Castles saving two, which were Pembroke and Ryde∣ors which he could not get, and so returned to Powis with much Joy. King Rufus not able to prevail against the Welsh, to his dishonour returneth home. In the year 1093. the Normans that inhabited the Countrey of Glamorgan, spoiled the Territories of Kydwely, and Yrad Tywy, and left them without any Inhabitants. When VVil∣liam Rufus had been informed of the great slaughter of his Subjects, as well in Cheshire, Shrop∣shire, VVorcestershire and Herefordshire, as in VVales, which Gruffith ap Conan, and the sons of Blethyn Convyn had done, he gathered his power together, and entred VVales at Mountgo∣mery,
which Castle being lately overthrown by the VVelshmen, he re-edified again: but the VVelshmen kept so the straits of the mountains with the Woods and Rivers, that the King did no good, but lost his labour and his men; therefore he returned back to his great Dishonour. In the year 1094. dyed VVilliam the son of Baldwyn, who at the Kings commandement, had built the Castle of Rydcors, after whose death the Castle was forsaken by his men, and the Inhabitants of Gwyr, Brecknock, Gwent, and Gwent Ihwc,Welshmen hardly over∣come unless by Treason a∣mong them∣selves. cast from their Necks the burthen of the Normans that had won their Countries, and held them in subjection, and chased them out of their Territories; but shortly after they returned again with greater Power. Then the countrymen detesting their insolency, met with them at a place called Celly Tarvawc, and couragiously encountred them, so that they put them to flight, with great Slaughter, and chased them back again out of the Land: nevertheless, the greedy Nor∣mans would not give over, but recruiting, returned again to Brecknockshire, making a vow to leave no living thing within that Countrey (it is not good to reckon before mine Host, nor count our Chickins before they be hatch'd) for the country people flying before them, staied at a strait passage, and killed many of them. About this time, Roger Montgomery Earl of Salop and Arundel,Powel fol. 153. and VVilliam Fitz Eu∣stace, Earl of Glocester, (though I read of no such man, for Master Mills fol. 358. as also o∣ther Authors, set Robert, base Son to King Henry the First, the first Earl of that place) Ar∣nold de Harecourt, and Neale le Vicount were slain between Cardiff and Brecknock, by the VVelshmen; and ƲƲalter Evereux, Earl of Sarum, who dyed in Normandy, and Hugh Earl Gurney were there hurt. Patrick de Evereux was first Earl of Sarum or Salisbury, created so by King Stephen, and therefore could not be in this time; but it is he that was son to Walter Evereux,Mr. Mills fol. 1034. who built the Abby of Bradenstock, 1139. the fift of King Stephen, and being an old man, did take upon him the habit of a Monk there; others say, this Walter was Earl of Rose∣mer. When the Normans saw that they had all the loss, they manned and victualed the Ca∣stles which formerly they had builded, and returned home; but in their retreat, Gruffith and Ivor the sons of Edverth ap Cadogan met them unexpectedly, at Aberlhech, and encoun∣tring them slew most part of them, the rest escaping into England. Notwithstanding, the Norman Captains defended the Castles valiantly, and kept them till they were driven by force for safeguard of their lives to forsake them: then the ancient Inhabitants possessed their own quietly. Moreover certain Lords of Northwales, namely Vokthed the son of Ed∣win ap Grono, and Howel ap Grono, with the Children of Cadogan ap Blethyn of Powis land,Pembroke Ca∣stle built by a Norman. gathered a competent Army, and passed through Caerdiganshire to Dynet, (which Country a little before, the King had given to Arnulph son to Roger Montgomery, who had builded the Castle of Pembroke, and appointed Keeper and Governour thereof one Giraldo de Windsore) and there burned, spoiled and destroyed all the countrey except Pembroke Castle, which they could not win, and so returned home with great booty. After the return of these Lords, Girald issued out of the Castle, and spoiled the lands of Saint Davids, and took many Prisoners. The year following, William Rufus returning from Normandy to England,Fasting and Prayer used by the Welsh in their great∣est danger. and hearing of the great slaughter of his men committed by the Welshmen, gathered all his forces, and with great pomp and pride entred VVales. But the Brittains fearing the great strength of the King, put all their hope onely in Almighty God, returning to him in Fasting, Prayer, and Repentance of their sins; and he that never forsaketh the penitent and contrite heart, heard their prayers, so that the Normans and Englishmen durst not enter the land; but such as presumed were slain, and the King returned with small Honour, after he had built certain Castles in the Marches. In the year following, viz. 1096.The Arms of Hugh Montgo∣mery. Hugh de Montgomery (who as his Father before him had for his Arms, Azure a Lyon rampant Or, within a border) his Father before spoken of, buil∣ded the Abbey of Shrewsbury, wherein he was buried; the Earl of Arundel and Salop, whom the Welshmen call Hugh Goch, that is, Hugh with the red head, and Hugh Ʋral, that is Hugh the fat Earl of Chester, who bore for his Arms Azure six Garbs, 3 2. and 1. Or. and many Nobles more did gather a strong and powerfull army, and entred into Northwales,The Welsh e∣ver their own destroyers. being thereto moved by certain Lords of the Country. But Gruffith ap Conan the Prince, and Cadogan ap Blethyn fled to the Hills and Mountains for their defence, as not being of force sufficient to fight the Earls, neither durst they well trust their own men; and so the Earls ap∣proached the Isle of Môn or Anglesey, where they built the Castle of Aberthiennawc. Then Gruffith and Cadogan went to Anglesey, thinking to defend the Isle,Aberthien∣nawe Castle built by the Normans. and sent for succour to Ireland, but found there little comfort; and now the Treason began to break forth; for Ow∣en ap Edwin (who was the Princes chief Councellour, and his Father in Law, whose Daughter Gruffith had married, having himself also married Everyth the Daughter of Con∣vyn Aunt to Cadogan) was the chief Caller of those Strangers into Wales, who openly went with his power to them, and did lead them to the Isle of Anglesey, which thing when Gruffith and Cadogan perceived, they sailed to Ireland, mistrusting the Treason of their
own people. Then the Earls spoiled the land, and slew all that they found in the Isle; and at the very same time Magnus the son of Haroald, came with a great Navy of Ships towards England, minding to lay faster hold upon that Kingdome then his Father had done; and being driven by chance to Anglesey, would have landed there, but the Earl impeached his landing there, and there Magnus with an arrow stroke Hugh Earl of Salop in the face, that he dyed thereof, and suddenly either part forsook the Isle, and the Englishmen returned home, and left Owen ap Edwyn Prince thereof, who had allured them thither. In the year 1098. returned Gruffith ap Conan and Cadogan ap Blethyn from Ireland, and made peace with the Normans, and gave them part of their Inheritance; for Gruffith re∣mained in Môn, and Cadogan had Caerdigan, and a parcel of Powis Land. About this time the men of Brercnock slew Lhewelyn the son of Cadogan; then Howel ap Ithel of Tegengel went to Ireland: Also Rythmarck the Arch-Bishop of Saint Davids dyed, the godliest, wisest, and greatest Clerk, Sulien except, that had been in ƲƲales many years before. About this time also dyed Crono ap Cadogan, and Gwyn ap Gruffith. In the year 1101. Robert de Blesmo, son to Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Salop, and A∣nulph his Brother Earl of Pembroke, did rebel against the King, which when the King heard, he sent for them to come unto him; but they made blinde excuses, and gathered their strength, and fortified their Castles, and then gave great gifts, and made large promises to the sons of Blethyn ap Cadogan, and Jorwerth, Cadogan, and Meredyth, and inticed them to joyn their powers with them. Robert fortified four Castles, Arundel, Tekinhill, Shrewsbury, and Brugg, which Castle was the cause of the War. For Robert had erected it without the Kings leave, and Arnulph fortified his Castle of Pembroke: Then they entred the Kings Land, and burned and spoiled it, carrying away rich booties. And Arnulph to have more strength, sent Gerald his Steward to Murchard King of Ireland to desire his Daughter in marriage, which he obtained with promises of great succours, which did encourage him the more against the King; but Henry the First gathered a great Army, and first besieged the Castle of Arundel and took it, as also he did Tekinhil, and then led his power before Brugg, which for the scituation and depth of the ditches, being also well mann'd and victualed, the King doubted the speedy winning thereof. There he was counselled to send privately to Jorwerth ap Blethyn, promising him great gifts if he would forsake the Earl, and serve him, recounting what wrongs the Earls Father, Roger, and his Brother Hugh had done to the ƲƲelshmen. Also the King to make him more willing to stick unto him, gave him all such Lands as the Earl and his brother had in VVales, without Tribute or Oath, which was a Moity of Powis, Caerdigan and Dynet, and the other half had the son of Baldwyn, with Stradtywy and Gwyr; Jorwerth being glad of these offers, received them willingly, and then coming himself to the King, he sent his powers to the Earls Land, which doing their Ma∣sters command, destroyed and spoiled all the Countrey; for the Earl had caused his people to convey all their cattel and goods to ƲƲales, little remembring the mischiefs that the ƲƲelshmen had received at his and his Brothers hands. When these tydings came to the Earl, to Cadogan and Meredyth, Jorwerths Brethren, they were all amazed, and despaired to be able to withstand the King, for Jorwerth was the greatest man of power in ƲƲales: And at this time Arnulph was gone to Ireland for his wife and succour; also a little before, Mag∣nus again had landed in Anglesey, and received of Gruffith ap Conan and hewed down as much Timber trees as was needfull for him, and so returning to the Isle of Môn, which he had won, he builded three Castles there, and sent to Ireland to have the Daughter of Murchard in marriage for his son, which he obtained and made his son King of Môn. The Earle Robert hearing this, sent to him for aid, but obtained none: therefore seeing no remedy, he sent to the King, desiring him that he might forsake the realm, which the King granted, and he sailed to Normandy. And likewise the King sent word to his brother Arnulph, that either follow his brother and depart the land, or yield himself to the Kings mercy and plea∣sure, but he chose the former proposition he should, and so went away. Things thus transacted, the King returned home, and Jorwerth took his brother Meredyth, and sent him to the Kings prison: for his brother Cadogan agreed with him, to whom Jorwerth gave Caerdhyth and a piece of Powis. Then Jorwerth himself went to the Kings Court to put the King in remembrance of his pro∣mise; but Henry when he saw all quiet, forgot the service of Jorwerth and his own promise, and contrary to the same took Dynet from Jorwerth, and gave it to a Knight called Saer, and Stradtiwy and Gwyr he gave to Howel ap Grono, and Jorwerth was sent home em∣pty. At this time K. Henry gave divers Castles and Lordships in Wales to Normans and English∣men, of whom there is mention oftentimes in this history. This year died Grono the son of Rees ap Theodore in prison. And in the end of this year the King sent divers of his Councel to Shrewsbury, and willed Jorwerth ap Blethin to come to meet them there to consult about the Kings business and af∣fairs; but when he came thither, all the consultation was against him, whom contrary to all right and equity they condemned of treason, because the King feared his strength, and that he would revenge the wrongs which he had received at the Kings hands, and so he was committed to prison.
About this time (as Bale noteth) the Church of St. Davids began to be subject to the See of Canterbury, being alwaies before the Metropolitan Church of Wales, since the Pall was car∣ried from Caerleon upon Ʋsk. In the Year 1103 Owen ap Edwyn died after great Misery and long sickness. Then also Richard the son of Caldwin did fortifie the Castle of Ridcors and chased Howel ap Grono out of that Country, to whom the King had given the custody of that Castle; who nevertheless returned shortly after, and burned all the country houses, corn and hay, and slew a great number of the Normans as they returned homeward, and kept all the Country in his sub∣jection, except the Castles and Garrisons. At this time the King took the rule of Dynet from Saer to whom he committed the same, and gave it to Gerald who had been sometimes Steward there under Arnulph. Then the Normans who were in the Castle of Ridcors and other castles thereabouts, seeing they could not have the upperhand of Howel ap Grono in open fight, fell to their accustomed practice of treason, and so obtained their purpose in this manner; There was one Gwgan ap Meyric who had nursed a son to Howel ap Grono, and therefore very well trusted and be∣loved of him, as the Custome of Wales is:An odious & detestable treason. This Traitour being corrupted by the Nor∣mans, procured his Masters death, inviting him one night to his house to make merry, whether he came willingly: Then Gwgan gave notice to the Garrisous of the Castles, who in the dawning of the day entred the Town, and coming about the house, gave a great shout, which awaked Howel, who couragiously leaped out of his bed and sought his wea∣pons, but the Traitor Gwgan had conveyed them away, when he was asleep. Then he called for his men, but they were all fled to save their lives; and as he would have gotten away,The Welshmen still over∣thrown by their own na∣tion. he was taken by Gwgan and his company and strangled, which cut off his head, and brought it to the Castle of Ridcors: and this traiterous murder of the Kings Lieutenant was left unpunished; for whatsoever fault the Normans committed, was alwaies winked at; and if the VVelshmen did never so little offend the Laws of the King, it was thought a most hei∣nous and unpardonable Crime, which was the cause that afterward they rebelled against the King, who sought nothing but their utter destruction. About this time Meirick and Gruffith, the sons of Trabern ap Caradoc,Easie for an Enemy to o∣vercome where the na∣tives destroy one another. were both slain by Owen ap Cadogan ap Blethyn, and Meredith ap Blethyn brake the prison, where he had been a long time, and recovered again his own Inheritance, which he enjoyed in peace and Tranquillity. The year 1108. the Rage of the Sea did overflow, and drown a great part of the Low-Countries of Flanders, in such sort, that the inhabitants were forced to seek new dwellings and places of abode, who came to King Henry, and desired him to give them some void place to remain in, who being very liberal of that which was none of his own, gave them the land of Ros, in Dynet or VVestwales, where Pembroke, Tenby, and Hanerford are now built, and there they remain to this day, as well may be perceived by their speech and conditions, far differing from that of the Countrey. At that time Gerald the Steward dyed, who built again the Castle of Pembroke, in a place called Congarth Vechan, and brought thither all his householdstuff and other goods with his wife and children. Then also Cadogan ap Blethyn, made a great feast in Christmas,Christmas ob∣served in those dayes. and in∣vited all the Lords of his Countrey to his house in Dynet, among whom came Owem his son, who being at his Fathers house, and hearing Nest the Wife of Gerald Steward of Pembroke praised above all the Weomen in the land, he was inflamed with a desire to be∣hold her. And forasmuch as Gladis daughter of Rees ap Theodore or Tewdor, and Mother to Nest, was daughter to Rywalhon ap Convin, and cozen Germane to Cadogan his Father, he with a few under the colour of Friendship or cosenage, went to see her; and finding the truth to surmount the fame, he came home wounded with Love, and in that doting humour, the same night returned thither again with a crew of wild companions or Hectors, entred the castle privately, and compassed the chamber about, and set the house on fire, which awaked Gerald and his wife, who would have issued out to know the cause of the Noise; but his wife fearing some Treason, impeached him, and advised him to go to the Prince, where drawing up the board, she helped him out that way, which done, she came to the Chamber door, and said that there was no body but she and her children; yet they forced in and sought round about, but not finding him, they seized on her and her two sons, and a son and a daughter born by a Concubine to Gerald, and carried them away to Powis; and burning the Castle they spoyled all the Country. When Cadogan understood this rumour, he was much displeased, fearing the Kings heavy displeasure; and forthwith went to Powis, and commanded his son to send to Gerald his Wife and Children with his goods; but Owen by no means would depart with the Lady, yet at her request he sent un∣to Gerald his Children again. And when Richard Bishop of London,The Welsh still made authors of their own ruine. whom the King had appointed Warden of the Marshes, being at Shrewsbury heard of this, he was highly offended, and sent for Ithel and Madoc the sons of Kyrid ap Blethyn, to whom he promised rich gifts and great rewards besides the rule of the Country, if they could take or kill Owen, to re∣venge the dishonour that he had done to the King; and to them he added Lhywarch the son
of Traburne ap Caradoc (whose two brethern Owen had slain) and Ʋchtrid the son of Edwyn: which four promised the Bishop to bring him Owen and his father either alive or dead; and thereupon forthwith gathered their power to destroy the whole Country; but Ʋchtryd sent word privately before, that all such of the People as would have their lives saved should come to him. And when the Country heard this, some fled to Arustly, some t Melienith, and some to Stradtywy, and some to Dynet, where Gerald was destroying the Coun∣try. And at that time Walter Bishop of Hereford, gathered an army to defend Caermarthyn, and met with such as fled to Arustly and Mehenyth, and destroyed a great number of them. Those that went to Stradtywy were gently received by Meredyth ap Rytherck; and Ʋch∣tryd saved all such as came unto him; and thus these four came with their powers to the Castle of Rydcors, and thought best to have entered the Country by night for fear of Am∣buscado, and to take Cadogan and Owen unawares, but Ʋchtryd disswaded them from that stratagem, counselling them to enter by day with their men in good order. In the mean time Cadogan and Owen got a ship at Aberystwyth which was lately come from Ireland, and escaped away so; that the day after when they entered the Land, they found none of those whom they sought for, laying all the fault upon Ʋchtryd; therefore they burned and plundered all the Country, except the Sanctuaries of Padam and Lhandhewi Breni; yet they took divers men out of those places, and carried them away Prisoners, and thus returned to their Castles again. Owen with such as had been with him at the rape of the Lady and firing the Castle, fled for Ireland to King Murcard who received him with great expressions of joy; for he had been there before in time of the war of the two Earles in Anglesey or Môn, and had brought the King rich gifts from Wales; but Cadogan kept himself privately in Powis, and sent to the King to declare and manifest his innocency. The King allowed of his submission and alle∣gations, and granted that he should remain in the Country, and enjoy the town and lands which he had by his Wife (for she was daughter to a Lord of Normandy) called Pigot de Say. Then Madoc and Ithel his two Nephews divided such Lands as he and his son Owen had in Powis betwixt them, and ruled it very evil, for they could never agree amongst themselves. Within a while after Cadogan made such friends to the King that paying 100 pound fine he should injoy his lands again in Caerdigan; and that the inhabitants should return to their houses, and manure and till their ground; for the King had given commandement that no Welshmen nor Norman should dwell within Caerdigan; when they that were in Ireland understood this, they returned privately, and hid themselves in the houses of their kindred and friends, after whom Owen followed, but not to Cadogan; for his father had re∣ceived that Land upon such condition, that he should not suffer Owen to come therein, nor aid him either by counsel, money, or men. Howbeit Owen came to Powis, and would gladly have sent Messengers unto the King, but he could get no man that would venture to speak to him. Much about this time there happened ome variance between Madoc ap Riryd and the Bi∣shop of London, Lieutenant of the Marshes, about certain fellows of England that had fled to him for succour, whom the Bishop sent for, but could not get; wherefore he was highly displeased with him; Riryd understanding hereof, sent to Owen, and desired his friendship, whose greatest enemy he was before; and by this means they were made friends, and swore each to other, that neither of them should betray the other, nor agree by himself with the King or his Officers without the other, and thereupon they burned and spoyled the lands of such as they loved not, and destroyed all things that they met with∣all. This year appeared a terrible Comet; and the King took into consideration Jorwerth ap Blethyn whom he had kept long in prison, and sent to know of him what fine he would pay to have his liberty, and he promised the King 300 pounds, or the worth thereof in cattel or horses; then the King set him at liberty, and gave him his land again; and gave ten pounds of that mony to Henry the son of Cadogan by the daughter of Pigot. All this while Owen and Madoc were burning and plundering the Englishmen and Nor∣mans, and ever withdrew themselves to the land of Jorwerth, which thing grieved him great∣ly; whereupon he sent word of his danger, desiring them to spare his land and Cadogans, For if it were known that they came in any of theirs, the Land was forfeited to the King; when Owen and Ryrid heard this, they frequented his territories the more often then for∣merly, which Jorwerth perceiving chased them quite away. Then he went to the coun∣try of Ʋchtryd in Merionethshire, and the sons of Ʋchtrid sent word to their people to with∣stand them, and so they did; for meeting them by the way, they set upon them, and Owen and Madoc defended themselves manfully, but at the last they and their men were driven back, so that they were forced to fly; Owen to Caerdigan to his Fathers Country, and Madoc to Powis. Then Owen with his companions made divers roads to Dynet, and spoyled it, carrying a∣way both men and cattel to the ships that came from Ireland, and after ransomed them,
and then gathering fresh recrutes, he set upon a town of the Flemmings and fired it, re∣turning from thence to Gaerdigan, nothing valuing his Fathers danger or the Kings displeasure. At this time it chanced that Owens men among other mischiefs,Owen guilty first of a Rape, and now mur∣der and sacri∣ledge. laid wait for a Bishop belonging to the King, whose name was William de Brabant, and slew him and all his Men: Whilst these things were in agitation, Jorwerth and Cadogan were at the Court to treat with the King concerning certain business of their own; and as the King talked with them, behold, there came in a Flemming brother to the murdered Bishop, who made an exclamation how Owen ap Cadogans men had slain his brother, and many more, and how they were succoured in Cadogans land. The King hereupon highly displeased, as∣ked Cadogan what he could say to the matter; and he laying all the fault upon his Son, excused himself as well as he could. Then said the King to Cadogan; Seeing thou canst not keep thine own, but that thy Son and his adherents shall be succoured there, in their disorder, I will give it to one that shall keep them out; here I will maintain thee all thy life at my proper charges, charging thee upon thy Allegiance that thou enter not into Wales, until such time as I have taken further order. And so the King gave him twenty dayes, and set him at liberty to go whether he would, (Wales excepted;) when Owen and Madoc heard this, they departed to Ireland. The King forthwith sent for Gilbert surnamed Strongbow; this Gilbert was youngest Son of Gilbert de Clare Lord of the honours of Clare in Suffolk, and Grand-child of Robert Fitz-Gilbert, and Rohesia his wife daughter to Walter Gilford Earl of Longeville in Normandy;Chepflow and Strigul once belonged to the Clares. Tyntern Ab∣bey founded by Walter Clare, Lord of Caerwent, and Unkle to Gil∣bert Strong∣bow Earl of Strigul. 1131. this Gilbert was Lord of Chepstow and Strigul Castle in Monmothshire, (part of whose ruines yet remain) who for his much keeping of that Castle was commonly called Earl of Strigul; he gave Doglesdon to the Church of Worcester, and in a certain deed where he gave Lands to an Abbey, Gilbert de Gurney, Richard Son of the Earl, and Henry Mal∣travers being witnesses, he is entitled Earl of Pembrock, and Lord of the Rape of Penen∣sel; his Unkle Walter de Clare was Lord of Caerwent in Monthmoshire, and the Marsh of Leigh by Tunbridge; And founded Tyntern Abbey in Wales not far from Strigul, 1131. This Gilbert the fourtenth of King Stephen, 1149. had been Earl of Pembrock and Strigul ten years, whose armes were Or three Cheverens, Gules a labell of five B. But to return to our History, the King therefore sent for Gilbert Earl of Strigul, who was a Valiant and worthy Knight; to whom he said thus; Thou hast been divers times a suitor to me to have some Lands in Wales, and now I give thee all the Lands and Inhe∣ritance of Cadogan ap Blethyn; win it and take it; Gilbert received it joyfully and thank∣ed the King, and gathered forces, and landed in Caerdiganshire, and brought the Country to his subjection without any opposall: where he builded two fair Castles, one towards Northwales upon the River Ystwyth at the Sea shoar a mile from Lhanbadarn; an other towards Dynet upon the River Teini, at a place called Dyngerant, where Roger Montgomery had begun a Castle before. And shortly after Madoc ap Riryd returned from Ireland, because he could not well brook the Manners and conditions of the Irishmen, and being arrived came to the Coun∣try of his Unkle Jorwerth, who hearing that, and fearing the loss of his Lands (as his Brother Cadogan had done) made a Proclamation that no Man should aid him, but take him as an Enemy; which when Madoc understood, he enticed many unthrifts and outlaws, and kept himself in the Rocks and Woods, contriving how he might be revenged on Jorwerth for so great a discourtesie as he imagined, and thereupon concluded a friend∣ship privately with Lhywarch ap Trahearn who hated Jorwerth to death; and having in∣telligence that Jorwerth lay one night at Caerneon, they two gathered all their strength, and environ'd the house about midnight, which Jorwerth and his Men perceiving, armed themselves and defended the place, till their foes set it on fire, which when Jorwerth's Men perceived, every one shifted for himself, so that some were slain, others burnt, few escaping. Jorwerth having the true heart of a noble Prince, chose rather to adventure and manfully to dye with sword in hand then to be burnt, without a glorious action; came out; but his merciless Enemies received him with the point of their spears, and violently cast him into the flames of the raging fire, where that gallant man payed what was due to nature, death, yet by which his name is eternized. As soon as the King understood this, he called Cadogan before him, and gave him his brothers Land, which was Powis, and promised Owen his pardon, willing his Father to send him to Ireland. When Madoc saw his other Unkle Cadogan rule the Country, he hid himself in rough and desert places, and adding one mischief upon an other determined also to murder him by one way or an other. Therefore after Cadogan had brought the Country to some stay of quietness, and administred Justice therein, having ever an eye and respect to the King, he came to Trallwug (now called Pool) and the elders of the Country with him, and determining to dwell there, began to build a Castle. But Madoc hatching nothing but mischief, hearing this, came suddainly upon him, and Cadogan thinking no hurt was slain before he could either fight or fly.
After this Madoc sent incontinently to the Bishop of London the Kings Lieutenant at Shrewsbury, and entreated him to remember what he had promised, when he chased Owen out of his Land; for the Bishop hated Owen and Cadogan, and gave Madoc all such Lands as his brother Ithel was possessed of. Meredyth the Son of Blethyn hearing of the death of both his brethren, posted to the King, desiring of him the Lands of Jorwerth, which Cadogan had lately obtained, and the King gave him the rule thereof, till such time as Owen Son to Cadogan, should come from Ireland, who came shortly after and went to the King, who received him to his peace and gave him his Lands, whereupon Owen promised to the King a great Fine and gave pledges for payment of the same; like∣wise Madoc did fine to the King for his peace and lands; nevertheless the King wisht him to take heed of the Kinsfolks of such as he had murdered upon his own peril In the year 1112. Meredyth ap Blethyn sent a party to make an Inroad into the Coun∣try of Lhywarch ap Trahearn ap Gwyn who was Meredyths and Owens Enemy, as he that succoured Madoc to kill his Unkles Jorwerth and Cadogan, Meredyths brethren. These Men as they passed through the Country of Madoc in the night, met with a Man which belonged to Madoc,The welsh de∣spairing one of another, make way for their enemy to sub∣vert them all. whom they took, and examined where his Master was: he at first said that he could not tell; but being threatned with death, he confessed that he was not far from thence. Therefore they lay quietly all that night, and in twy-light next morning they came suddainly upon Madoc and his men, where they slew many of them, and taking Madoc prisoner, they brought him to their Lord, who was right glad thereof, and secured his person till he had sent word to his Nephew Owen, who immediately upon the news repaired thither;A great curte∣sie no question to put out a mans eyes and save his life. then Meredyth delivered Madoc unto him; And albeit he had slain Owens Father, his own Unkle, yet Owen remembering the friendship and Oath that had been betwixt them in times past, would not put him to death, but putting out his eyes let him go. Then Meredyth and Owen divided the Lands betwixt them, which was Caerneon, Aberhiw and the third part of Devthwr. The year following King Henry prepared an Army against Wales, being thereunto pro∣voked by such as would have the Welshmens Lands, to wit Gilbert Strongbow, Earl of Strigyl, to whom the King had given Caerdigan, who made grievous complaints against Owen ap Cadogan, declaring that he received and maintained such as robbed and plun∣dered the Country; Also Hugh Earl of Chester said no less by Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales,A rash and unchristian oath. how that his men, and the Men of Grono ap Owen, ap Edwyn Lord of Tegengl wasted the Country of Cheshire, adding to aggravate the matter, that Gruffith did neither acknowledg to owe service, nor pay tribute to the King; whereupon the King swore that he would not leave one living Creature in Northwales and Powis Land, but new colonize them. Then dividing his army into three parts, the leading of the first he committed to Gilbert Earl of Strygull,Two great Kings against two petty princes, a great conquest no doubt. wherein was the whole power of all the fourth part of Eng∣land and Cornwall against Southwales; Alexander King of Scotland had the leading of the second division with Hugh Earl of Chester, wherein the power of Scotland and the North was, which went against Northwales; and the King led the third himself, wherein was the strength of midle England; Then Meredith ap Blethyn fearing this came and yielded himself to the King. But Owen fearing to commit himself to them who were so greedy of his Lands, fled to Gruffith ap Conan to Northwales, whereupon the King turning all his strength that way, came himself as far as Murcastelh, and the King of Scots as far as Pennant Bachwy: but the people fled to the mountains and woods, and carried all their victualls and cattel with them, so that the King could not follow them; and such of his Men as entered the Land, were either slain, or galled in the Straits; Then the Scottish King sent to the Prince to come and yield himself to the King, and promised him the Kings peace, but he was ac∣quainted with such promises, and would not. The King therefore because he would not return without doing something, sent to Owen to come to him, and to forsake the Prince who was not able to defend himself, but was ready to make peace with the Scottish King and the Earl of Chester; but for all this Owen would not trust the King, until such time as his Unkle Meredyth came from the King to him, and counselled him not to forsake the King of Englands offer, but rather to trust to his promise, and to make haste before the Prince agreed with the King, who offered him all his Lands without tribute. Owen hearing this, came to the King who received him graciously, and told him because he had trusted the Kings word and promise, he would not only perform that, but also ex∣alt him above all his kin, and give him his lands without tribute. The Prince also hearing of this, sent to the King to have his peace, which (because the King could not come by him) he obtained for a great summe of mony. Some Brittish copies write that the submission both of Gruffith ap Conan and also of Owen ap Cadogan was procured by subtle policy of Meredyth ap Blethyn and the Earl of Chester, the one working with Gruffith, and bearing him in hand that Owen had sub∣mitted himself to the King, and made his peace with him, before it was so indeed: so that the Prince something yeilding to the Earls request, if Owen had so done, contra∣ry to his oath (for they were sworn each to other, the one not to agree without the assent
of the other) seemed to encline to peace. On the otherside Meredyth going himself in person to his Nephew Owen,This Nation still brought to ruine by the nobles thereof. affirmed for a truth that the Prince and the Earl of Chester were throughly agreed concerning peace, and that the Prince was on his journey towards the King to make his submission: and in the mean time all messengers between Owen and the Prince were (by the procurement of Meredyth) intercepted; where upon Owen willingly yielded himself to the King. The King having finished his businesse in Wales, called Owen to him, and told him that if he would go with him into Normandy and be faithful unto him, he would perform all his promises with him; whereupon Owen went with the King into Normandie, where he was made Knight, and had all promises performed by the King at his return, the Year fol∣lowing. At which time dyed Griffith Bishop of Menevia; and the King made one Bernard a Nor∣man Bishop in his place, contrary to the minds of all the Clergy of Wales, who were al∣waies accustomed to choose their Bishop. At this time there was a rumour through all Southwales of Gruffith the son of Rees ap Theodore, who for fear of the King had been of a child brought up in Ireland, and had come over two years since, which time he had spent privately with his friends and Kinsfolk and Allies, as with Girald Steward of Pembrock his brother in law and others, but at last he was accused to the King, that he intended the Kingdom of Southwales as his father had enjoyed it, which was now in the Kings hands, and that all the Country hoped for Liberty by his means; therefore the King sent to secure him; but Griffith ap Rees hearing of this, sent to Griffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales, desiring his and and that he might remain safely with him in his country, which he granted and received him joyfully for his fathers sake. Howel the brother of this Griffith being committed to prison, Arnulph Earl of Chester, in the Castle of Montgomery where he remained prisoner a long time, made an escape and be∣ing sore hurt and bruised, fled to Gruffith ap Conan where his brother was. Which thing when the King heard, he sent gentle letters to the Prince, desiring him to come and speak with him, which Griffith ap Conan did, whom the King received honoura∣bly, and gave him rich gifts and pretious Jewels after the usage of the Normans who make much of men to serve their turns; afterwards he talked with him of Gruffith ap Rees, pro∣mising him mountains of gold to send the said Griffith or his head unto him, the which thing the Prince (being deceived with the fair words of the King) promised to do, and so re∣turned home joyfully. But Gruffith ap Rees and Howel his brother had counsel given them to withdraw themselves out of the way awhile, untill they understood what the Prince would do, for their friends suspected the Kings message. The Prince as soon as ever he came to his pallace at Aberfraw, inquired for Griffith ap Rees, and learning where he was, sent certain horsemen for him to come to his Court; and as they came towards his house where he was, he had warning of their coming, and with much ado escaped to the Church of Aberdaron and took Sanctuary there. Then the Messengers returned again, and declared to the Prince how all things fell out, and the Prince being highly offended commanded him to be taken out by force: but the Clergy of the whole Country with stood that, and defended the liberties of their Church. That night some who took compassion to see the young man innocent to be sought as a Lamb to the slaughter, conveyed him away out of Northwales to Stratywy in Southwales, where he was compelled for safeguard of his own life to rebell against the King, and so ga∣thering all the power he could to him, made war against the Flemmings, and Nor∣mans. The next year after to wit 1116. Gruffith ap Rees did gather his forces and laid seidg to a Castle that was over against Arberth, and wan the same, and utterly dismantled it, laying it level with the ground; which done, he approached the Castle of Richard de Pwns at Lhanymdhyfry, to whom the King had given the Cantref Bychan and would have burnt it; but Meredyth ap Rytherck ap Caradoc Lieutenant of the same, and the Garrison, defended it couragiously; yet Gruffith fired the outworks, and slew many of the Souldiers, but not without losse on his own part, and then returned without any advantage. From thence he went to Abertawy, and beleagur'd a Castle which Henry Beaumont Earl of Warwick had built, burning the outguards and destroying the Country of Stratywy: Upon these tran∣sactions several haire-brain'd young men in great numbers from all parts adjoyned them∣selves to Gruffith; So that his power began to be considerable; which so elevated his thoughts that he made attempts and inroads into Ros and Dynet, spoyling and plundering the Coun∣try. The Normans and Flemmings seeing this mischief, entered into consultation how to remedy so grand a tempest, calling unto their aid and assistance all such as were the Kings friends, amongst which were Owen ap Ritherck and Rytherck ap Theodore and his sons Meredyth and Owen whose mother was Heynyth the daughther of Blethin ap Convin, and Owen ap Caradoo whose mother was Genlhian an other daughter of Blethin ap Convin, and Meredyth ap Ry∣therck, and asked whether they were true and faithful to the King of England; who answer∣ed
affirmatively. If you be, said they, you must keep and defend the Castle of Carmarthin, and that after this manner; first Owen ap Caradoc shall keep it a fortnight, and Rytherck ap Theodor and his sons an other fortnight, and so by course; which they were content to do. Then Owen took upon him the keeping of the Castle; and the Castle of Robert Court∣main in Abercomin or Abercorran, was committed to Blethyn ap Cadovor. Shortly after Gruffith ap Rees sent his scouts to discover the condition of Caermarthyn, and the Castle, who surveying it returned with welcome news; whereupon he came unex∣pected and beleaguered the Town, ecchoing great shouts and outcries, which caused Owen ap Caradoc to repair speedily to the place where the noise was, thinking that his men would have followed him, but the most part of them fled, and so Owen dyed in the bed of honour, making his valour sufficiently appear, in which conflict the Town was won and the Castle defaced. This done, Gruffith returned to his place of Residence and strength, full fraught with spoyl and plunder. This fortunate attempt allured fresh supplies of young and gallant spirits, who came Vo∣lunteers to serve under his banner, thinking all to be their own; puft up with this good successe, Gruffith attempteth Gwyr, and surpriseth a strong fort, committing it to the mer∣cilesse Element of fire; which William de Londres perceiving, forsakes his own Castle, and with his men betakes himself to his heels; which gave an easie entrance to Gruffith, who sets fire to the Castle, and carries away all the cattle and spoyle of the Country. Fortune seemeth now a propitious deity to Gruffith; which animates the men of Cardigan to invite him to be their Protector and defender, as being both their kinsman and Countryman; the hitherto fortunate Gruffith embraceth their election and proffer, friendly visits them, and is joyfully received by Cadavor ap Grono, and Howel ap Diverth, and Traberne ap Ithel who had forsaken Dynet, leaving it full of Normans, Flemings and Englishmen. There were also many strangers in Caerdigan which ruled that Country, whom the peo∣ple hated, not forgeting the wrongs which they had formerly received from them. Not∣withstanding Henry King of England had brought all that Country into subjection, partly banishing the Natives, partly by force, but especially by gifts, fair promises and rewards, but all this could not dismay or impeach heroick Gruffith from coming to Caerdigan Iscoed, where he fiercely begin a strong fortresse, which Earl Gilbert and the Flemings had erected at Blaen Porth Gwithan, were after long fight and divers assaults, with great destruction of the besieged, and the onely losse of one of his men, the place was committed to fire and flames, and the Country brought into subjection. This so affrighted the strangers that they fled confusedly relinquishing the houses and habitations to the mercy of the Natives who burnt all before them to Penwedic. The next enterprise taken in hand was the assailing of a fort in Stradpythilk, which belonged to Ralph Earle Gilberts Stewart, which was won, and the souldiers therein put to the sword. From thence they encamped at Glasgryg a mile from Lhanbadarn, where they offered violence to the Church, took away cattle (to Victual themselves) which were within com∣passe of Sanctuary, purposing the day following to besiege the Castle of Aberystwith, which being declared to Ralph the Steward, he sent secretly to the Castle of Stratmeyric, which Gilbert had built for succour, which from thence came to him by night. The day following Gruffith came to the Castle out of order and discipline, as fearing no∣thing nor knowing what strength was within, and so stood upon a hill (the river being be∣twixt him and the Castle with a bridge to passe over) where he and his Chieftains called a Counsel of War concerning the fabricating of Engins to give the assault; this consultati∣on continued till night, at which time the Normans seeing their disorder, sent archers to the Riverside to skirmish with them, hoping thereby to allure and draw the Welshmen to the Bridge, that the armed horsemen might suddenly issue out and fall upon them. The Welshmen ignorant of this design and stratagem, approach the bridge with manful resolu∣tion, fight  enemy, when suddainly issued forth one single horseman, who would have passed the bridge, but his horse was wounded by a pike and began to fail; and as he en∣devoured to retreat, he fell from his horse, and the Natives pursued him over the bridge. When the Englishmen saw that, they fled towards the Castle, and the Welshmen followed to the hill top, when suddainly the Ambuscado of horsemen that lay under the hill inter∣posed betwixt them and their fellow souldiers, and those who seemed to fly returned with haughty spirits, having fresh recruits, so that the Welshmen were surrounded, and the bridge so maintained that no rescue could come to them, where they were for the most part slain as being naked and unprovided for such an entertainment. The rest seing the great num∣ber of men armed, which they look't not for, turn'd faces about and departed the Coun∣trie. But when the King of England heard all these transactions and passages, he sent for O∣wen ap Cadogan; to whom when he came, the King said; Owen, I have found thee true and faithful unto me; Therefore I desire thee to take or kill that murderer Gruffith ap Rees who doth so molest my loving Subjects; I assure thee my chief trust is in the, and in Lhywarch ap Traberne who shall go with thee, and you two shall wait upon my son Robert
whom I will send shortly against that Traitour with an army; and look how thou servest me at this time, so will I recompence thee without fail. Owen herewith being overjoyed that the King put such confidence in him, encouraged his men to do their endeavour, at this time, to work the Kings ends, as they had done heretofore to offend him: and so joyning with Lywarck, they went toward Stratywy to meet with the Kings son. And when they came to the confines of the Country, they made a vow, that neither man, woman or child should escape their hands alive.A cruel vow. VVhen the people understood of this cruel and bloodthirsty army, they fled out of the Country, some to woods, other to rocks and caves, and some to the Kings Castles to save their lives: thus they divided their forces to enter the Woods and Straits, which vvere very many in that Country; and Owen himself took with him about 100 men and entered the wood, and perceived that men and cattle had passed that way, whom he followed and overtook, and slaying some of them, put the rest to flight, then taking their cattle returned back towards his company. But at the instant behold Girald the Steward of Pembroke with all his power of Flemings was coming to meet the Kings son, and met with them that fled, who cryed out to him for help, and declared to him that Owen ap Cadogan had spoyled them of all their goods; now when Girald and the Flemmings understood that Owen was there with so little company, they thought the opportunity very seasonable to be revenged for their old vvorngs, and so pursued them to the Woods. Owen having intelligence by his men that a great number pursued him, advised him to make haste away, who utterly refused it,Drinking no new vice a∣mong the Dutch. because he conceived them that followed him to be the Kings friends and nothing doubting of them. But when they approached nigh, they began to shout at his men, who would have had Owen to fly, but he turned manfully to his Enemies, and encouraged his men to fight,A just punish∣ment for one that assisteth a forreign ene∣my against his own kin and Country. affirming that although their enemies were se∣ven to one, yet they were but Flemmings and such as feared their names, and were good for nothing but to empty cups, and with that set upon them couragiously. And it chanced that at the first meeting Owen was stricken with an arrow to the heart and slain; which when his men perceived, they fled and brought word to Lywarck ap Traherne and their fol∣lowers, who suspecting the Kings army, seeing they could not trust them in the Kings ser∣vice, returned to their Country. After the death of Owen, his brethren divided his Lands between them,The Children of Cadogan ap Blethyn. saving that which he had taken by force from his Unckle Meredyth, being the Lands of Madoc ap Riryd, ap Blethyn; the names of his brethren were these, Madoc whose mother was Gwenlhan the Daughter of Gruffith ap Conan, Eneon whose mother was Sanna the Daughter of Dyfnwall:This Family of Picot, if I mistake not, were Lords of Ragland Castle in Monmoth∣shire, one of which marri∣ed the d. and h. of Sir Rich. Enderby, bro∣ther to Sir Will. Enderby, from whom descended Percy Ence by the collector of this histo∣ry. Morgan whose Mother was Evelbivv or Elhiw the Daughter of Cadivor ap Colhoyn Lord of Dynet: Henry and Gruffith whose mother was the Daughter of the Lord Pigot, Cadogans wedded wife. Meredyth by Eururon Hoedliw, Owen was Son of Inerth the daughter of Edwyn. After this Eneon ap Cadogan and Gruffith ap Meredyth ap Blethyn did lead their forces against a Castle that Ʋchtryd ap Edwyn had built at Cymmer in Merionyth; for Cado∣gan had given to his cosin Germain Ʋchtryd, Merionyth and Cevilioc, upon condition that he and his should be friends to his friends, and Enemies to his Enemies in all cau∣ses: but contrary to that condition, he and his Sons were ever against Cadogans chil∣dren, in every enterprise that they went about. Therefore after they had set upon the Castle, and slain divers of the Garrison, the rest yeilded unto them; and thus when they had won all the Country, they divided it betwixt them, whereupon Gruffith ap Meridith had Mowthwy, Cyneliock and halfe Penlhyn, and the other half of Penlhyn and Merioneth came to Eneon. In the year 1116. dyed William Strongbow of a Consumption, and the next year fol∣lowing fel a great variance betwixt Howel ap Ithel Lord of Ros and Rivonioc (now Denbighland) and Riryd and Lhywarch the Sons of Owen ap Edwyn.Ingratum dixe∣ris, omnia dix∣eris. Then Howel sent to Meredyth ap Blethyn and to Eneon and Madoc, Cadogans Sons for succour, who came down from Merioneth with 400. Men well appointed, and met with the Sons of Owen in the vale of Clwyd their own Land, which Sons of Owen sent for their cosins the Sons of Ʋchtryd to come with their aid to relieve and succour them: All these met together with enraged hearts, and fought manfully, but in the end after great slaughter, Lhy∣warch the Son of Owen ap Edwyn was slain, and with him Jorwerth the Son of Nudh, who was a Noble man, and a worthy Soldier, and Riryd fled. So that Howel ap Ithel had the victory, but he was so sore wounded, that he dyed within 40 dayes after. Meredyth ap Blethyn and the Sons of Cadogan hasted home for fear of the Frenchmen, who lay in garrison about Chester. About the year 1121. King Henry the first prepared a great army against Wales, and came to Powis Land, which when the Lords of the Land, Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the three Sons of Cadogan, Eneon, Madoc, and Morgan, saw they sent to Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales to desire succours from him; but he answered that they should not have any from him, nor enter within his lands, for that he had made peace with the King.
Thus having no hope of aid from him, they purposed to defend themselves within their own Land, after the best manner they could, and set men to keep and defend the Straits whereby the Enemies must needs pass. And as it chanced, the King himself with a small number came unto one of those defended places for this whole Army had gone a further way about by reason of their carriages, at whose coming the Men who kept the straits, skirmished with the Kings Men, and with their arrowes having the advantage of the ground, slew some and hurt many. Among those one drew his bow, and shooting towards his foes, by fortune struck the King a great blow upon his brest, but by means of his coat of Male, the arrow hurt him not; nevertheless he was wonder∣fully dismaid, and considering how rashly by misfortune he might lose in that wild Country the honour and fame which he had won before, did send to parle with them that kept the passage, and to will them under assurance to come and speak with him; which they did; then he asked them whose men they were, and how they durst be so bold as to put the King in such dangers; and they said that they vvere Meredyth ap Blethyns men, and did nothing but their masters command in keeping the passage; vvhereupon the King vvilled them to go for their master, and counsel him to enbrace the Kings peace, and he should receive no hurt, vvhich he and his cozens did, and fined to the King for their of∣fences 1000. heads of cattell, and the King returned into England, leaving the Lord Fitz-VVaren Warden,Jo. Cast. or Lieutenant of the marches. The year ensuing, Gruffith ap Rees, ap Theodor, did kill Gruffith ap Sulbaern, and Eneon the Son of Cadogan dyed and gave his part of Powis, and Merioneth vvhich he had vvon, to his brother Meredyth; but his Unckle Meredyth ap Blethyn, put him back by force and took it to himself. At this time the King did set at liberty Ithel ap Riryd ap Blethyn vvhom he had kept prisoner many years, vvho came home thinking to enjoy his Lands: When Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales heard that Meredyth ap Blethyn had taken by force the Lands of his Nephevv Meredyth ap Cadogan, he sent his Sons Cadwalhon and Owen vvith a povver to Merioneth, vvho brought all the Country under their subjection, and carried the chiefmen and the cattel to Lhyn. And after the Sons of Cadogan destroyed the Lands of Lhyarch ap Trahern,Murder upon Murder. because he joyned vvith the Sons of the Prince. The year 1125. Meredith ap Blethyn slew his brothers son Ithel ap Ririd. And shortly after Gadwalhon ap Gruffith ap Conan slew his three Unckles, Crono, Riryd and Meiler, the sons of Owen ap Edwin. And also Morgan ap Cadogan slew his be brother Meridith with his own hands. About the year 1127 Gruffith ap Rees was put besides his lands, which the King had suf∣fered him quietly to possesse, by the false accusations of the Normans which dwelt in the Country with him And then also Daniel Arch-Deacon of Powis died, a man both learned and pious, who travelled all His life time to set Peace and Concord betwixt His Countrey∣men. Anno 1128. died Gruffith ap Meredyth ap Blethyn, and the same year Lhewelin the son of O∣wen ap Cadogan took Meredyth ap Lhywarck and delivered him to Pain Fitz John to be kept safe in the Castle of Bridgnorth; this Meredyth had slain Meyric his cosen german,An easy mat∣ter for the Normans to conquer when the Welsh murder and betray their own kindred and country∣men. and had put out the eyes his two cozen germans the sons of Griffith. The year ensuing Jevaf the son of Owen, put out the eyes of two of his brethren and banished them the country. Also Lhewelin ap Owen slew Jorwerth ap Lhywarck. And Meredyth ap Blethyn took the same Lhewelyn ap Owen his Nephew, and putting out his eyes gelded him, to the end he should beget no children, that he might have his lands, and slew Jevaf ap Owen his brother. Putting out of eyes a com∣mon revenge in those times.Also Meyrick slew Lhywark and Madoc his son, his own cozens, who himself was so served a while after. Then Morgan the son of Cadogan repented exceedingly for the murder of his brother Me∣redyth; wherefore he took his journey to Jerusalem, and died in his returne at Cy∣prus. About the year 1133. Cadwalhon the son of Gruffith ap Conan was slain at Nanhawdwy, by Eneon the son of Owen ap Edwin his Unkle (whose three brethren he had slain) with Cado∣gan ap Grono ap Edwin. That year also dyed Meridyth ap Blethin and Convin the greatest Lord and chiefest man in Powis, as he that had gotten his brethren and nephews lands by hook and crook into his own hands. An excellent character of Cadwalader & Owen Gwyneth the sons of Gruffith ap Conan.About the year 1135. Richard before spoken of and Gilbert his son were slain by Morgan and Owen. And shortly after Cadwalader and Owen Gwineth the sons of Gruffith ap Conan (in whom remained the hope of all Wales, for they were gentle and liberal to all men, terrible and cruel to their enemies, meek and humble to their friends, the succour and defence of wid∣dow and fatherlesse and all that were in necessity, and they transcended all other in good
and laudable exercises and vertues, so they were paragons of strength, beauty and well proportion'd bodies) gathered a great power against the Normans and Flemmings,Walter Especs & Aberystwyth Castles taken. who entred Caerdigan, subdued, destroyed and fired the whole Country with the Castle of Walter Espec, the Castle of Aberystwith which was very strong and well manned. And thither came Howel ap Meredyth and Rhees ap Madoc ap Ednerth who went forward and raz∣ed the Castle of Richard de la Mare, and the Castle of Dynerth and Caerwedros,The Castle of Rich de la Mers Dynerth & Caerwedros taken from the strangers. and returned home with much honor. Afterward towards the end of the same year they returned again with 6000 footmen and 2000 horsemen well armed, & to them came Gruffith ap Rees & Howel ap Meredyth ap Breck∣aock & his son, & Madoc ap Ednerth who subdued the whole Country to Aberteini placing again the old inhabitants and chasing away the strangers. Against this army came Steph. Constable of Aberteini, R Fitz Martin, the sons of Girald & Will Fitz John, with all the power of Normans and Flemmings and Englishmen that were in Wales or the Marshes. And after a most fierce and cruel battel the strangers according to their manner put all their hope in their forts and forsooke the field, and the Welshmen followed so close that besides 3000 that were slain,The Natives obtained a glorious victo∣ry over the strangers. a great number were drowned, taken and carried away Captives. This victory atchived, Owen and Cadwaladen rran the whole Country, and returned home with rich spoyles in armour and horses as well as in other things with much triumph. The year 1137. dyed Gruffith ap Rees ap Theodore, the light,The praise of Rees ap Theo∣dore. honour and stay of South∣wales, who had by his wife Gwenlhian the daughter of Gruffith ap Conan Rees commonly called the Lord Rhees. Floren Wigorn. saith, that this Gruffith ap Rees Prince of Southwales, died by the de∣ceitful practise of his wife. Towards the end of the same year died Griffith ap Conan King or Prince of Northwales,Flor. in r. Sc ot. Ma the only defence and shield of all Wales, after he had escaped many great dangers by sea & land, in Ireland and Wales, and after many worthy victories, when he had brought Northwales, which he found full of strangers, to peace and quietnesse, having ruled the same worthily 50 years. 1. This Prince had many children by divers women; first by Angharat the daughter of Conan ap Edwin he had sons Owen, Cadwalador and Caddalhon who was slain before his fa∣ther died, and daughters Marret, Susanna, Ranulht, Agnes and Gwenleban. 2. And by his second wife he had Jago, Iscani, Edwal Abbot of Penmon Dolhing, who was also a Priest and well learned; and Elen the wife of Hova ap Ithel Velyn of Yal; he refor∣med the disordered behaviour of Welsh Minstrels by a very good sttatute which is extant to this day. There are three sorts of Minstrels in Wales. The first sort named Beirdh which are makers of songs and odes of sundry measures, where∣in not only great skill and cunning is required, but also a certain natural inclination and gift which in Latine is called furor poeticus; these do also keep records of Gentlemens armes and pedegrees, till of late the Welsh are so mingled with the English that these kind of He∣ralds are to seek, and of no such estem as formerly, using yearly visitations, and are the best esteemed and accounted of amongst them. The second sort of them are players upon Instruments, chiefly the Harp and the Croutch, whose musick for the most part came into Wales with the said Gruffith ap Conan, who being on the one side an Irish man by the mother & grandmother, & also borne in Ireland, brought over with him out of that Country divers cunning Musitians into Wales, who devised in manner all the instrumental Musick that is now there used, as appeareth as well by the books written of the same, as also by the names of the tunes and measures used amongst them at this day. The third sort called Atteneaid, as those who do sing to the Instrument whilst an other doth play, and those as yet be in use in Wales. This statute or decree here mentioned, doth not only prescribe and appoint what reward every of the said Minstrils ought to have, and at whose hands, but also of what behaviour and conversation they ought to be; to wit to make no debates, no vagabonds nor Ale-house hunters, no drunkards, nor brawlers nor Whoremongers, no thieves nor companions of such; In which things if they offend, every man by the said statute is made, and officers are au∣thorised to arrest and punish them, yea and take from them all that they have then about them; and they are also in the same statute forbidden to enter into any mans house or to make any song of any man without special licence of the party himself. And this statute or decree hath been oftentimes allowed by publick authority of the chief Magistrates of that Country, as appeareth by sundry commissions directed to divers Gentlemen in that behalf.
Vert three Eagles in fess. displaid Or. Owen Gwyneth so of Gruffith ap Conan. The name of King ceaseth in Wales.After the death of Gruffith ap Conan, his sons divided his lands betwixt them, after the manner of Wales. And Owen surnamed Gwineth the eldest son was made Prince of North∣wales, (for the name of King is no further used in the Brittish book) who in the begin∣ning of his reign,Caermarthyn and three ca∣stles destroy∣ed. together with his brethren made their expedition into Southwales and overthrew the Castle of Strad Meyric, and Castle Stephan, and Humphreys Castle, and burned the town of Caermarthyn, and returned home with much honour. At this time dyed John Archbishop of Lhanbadarn who for his godly life is canonized a∣mongst the Saints. In the year 1140. Cynwric the son of Owen was slain by the men of Madoc ap Meredyth ap Blethyn ap Convyo. About the year 1141 Madoc ap Ednerth a man of great estimation in Wales died, and the sons of Blethyn ap Gwyn slew Meredyth ap Howel. Two noble Welshment slain by the treason of the Flemmings.In the year 1142. Howel-ap Meredyth ap Rytherc of Cantref Bychan, and Rees ap Ho∣wel were slain by treason of the Flemmings; likewise Howel-ap Meredyth ap Beethyn was slain by the treachery of his own men. Then also Howel and Cadogan the sons of Madoc ap Enerth did kill each other. And shortly after there fell a variance betwixt Anarawd son to Gruffith ap Rees Prince of Southwales, and his father in law Cadwalader the son of Gruffith ap Conan and brother to Prince Owen Gwineth,By homebred quarrels the Welsh destroy one another, and make way for the Norman. who from words grew to blowes, where Anarawd was slain, the hope and prop of Southwales; for the which thing Prince Owen took such displeasure at his bro∣ther, that he and his son Howel gathered an army against him, and destroyed all his coun∣try, and burnt his Castle of Aberistwith; for Cadwalader himself had fled to Ireland, and had hired Octer (son to Octer) and the son of Turkel and the son of Cherulfe with a great number of Irishmen and Scots for 2000 markes to his succour: and landed at Abermenay in Caernarvonshire, against whom the Prince came with great forces; but before the armies met, there was a peace concluded betwixt the brethren; which when the Irishmen under∣stood, they detained Cadwalader as prisoner for their wages, & he delivered unto them 2000 heads of cattle,Wales plenti∣ful of Cattel. besides many prisoners and spoyles that were taken in the Country. But as soon as the Prince had notice that his brother was set at liberty, he fell upon the Irish∣men, and slew a great number of them, and recovered all the cattel with the prisoners and other spoyles: as many as escaped alive, returned home with great losse and shame. Flemmings & Normans de∣feated by the Welsh.About the year 1143 Howel and Gadogan the sons of Prince Owen gathered an army a∣gainst the Flemmings and Normans, and gave them an overthrow at Aberteini, and keeping the town returned home with great honour; also this year dyed Sulien ap Rythmarck a man of great knowledg, one of the Colledge of Lhanpardarn. Carmarthen Castle built.Neer this time Gilbert Earl of Clare came with a great power to Dynet, and built the castle of Carmarthen and the castle of the sons of Ʋtchtryd. Then also Hugh Mortimer slew Meiryc ap Madoc ap Ryrid, and Meredyth ap Madoc ap Ed∣werth. Cadelth the son of Gruffith ap Rees Prince of South Wales won the castle of Dynevowr, which Earl Gilbert had built, and after he and his brethern Meredyth and Rees gathered their powers and laid seige to the castle of Carmarthen, which was yielded unto them, re∣serving only the lives to them of the Garrison:Carmarthen Castle yielded to the Welsh. And from thence they conducted their ar∣my before the castle of Lhan Stephan, where the Normans and Flemmings meeting with them had a great overthrow, and so the castle was reduced: Whereupon the Normans and Flemmings inhabiting that country all about,The Normans & Flemmings overthrown by the Welsh. gathered their power; their captains and leaders were the sons of Girald and William de Hay, who laid seige to the same castle with∣out discovery. But Meredyth ap Gruffith to whose custody the castle was committed, encou∣raged his men to fight and defend the place; and that which was wanting in him in strength (for he was very aged) he supplied in courage and discretion: he suffered his enemies
to scale the Walls, and when the Ladders were full, he gave the Watch word and signal,A politick stratagem of the Welsh. and his Souldiers did both manfully and with great dextery over-turn the Ladders with certain Engines contrived for such purposes, and maimed many both armed men and ex∣pert Souldiers, putting the rest to flight. Shortly after died Run the son of Prince Owen of North VVales, a fair and goodly young man, whose death when it came to his fathers ears, did so trouble him, that no kinde of pleasure could comfort his heavy heart, so that he spent the night in tears, and the day in sadness, till God who took compassion upon the poor remnants of the Brittains,Mould Castle a curb to the Welsh. even as he had discomforted the Prince with the death of his son, so he did glad his sorrowful heart with the overthrow of his enemies; for there was a Castle at the Mould very strong and well manned which did trouble the whole Countrey, and had been oftentimes assaul∣ted, but never won; Prince Owen levied an Army and beleaguered it, yet the Garrison defended it and endured many assaults:Mould Castle utterly dis∣mantled, by the Brittains. at last maugre all their endeavours the presence of the Prince did so encourage his men, that they entered perforce, and put many to the Sword, and taking the rest, razed the Castle to the ground; which Victory did so please the Prince, that he forgat his doleful accents and solitary retirement, and fell to his ac∣customed pastimes. About this time Cadelh, Meredyth, and Rees the sons of Gruffith ap Rees ap Theodore did conduct their forces against the Castle of Gwys, which after they perceived they could not win, they sent for Howel the son of Owen Prince of North-VVales to their aid, who for his prowess and valour in the field, and his discretion in consultation, was esteemed the flower of Chivalry; whose presence was thought also onely sufficient to overcome any Fortress: He being desirous to purchase honour, gathered his men and came to these Lords before the Castle of Gwys,Granados not yet in request. whom they received with general acclamations and great expressions of joy. When he had viewed the place, he caused Engines to be made to batter the Walls with force of men, and others to cast great stones to their enemies,The strong Castle of Gwyl taken by the Brittains. thereby to disquiet the Garrison, which preparations when they within beheld, their hearts failed, and forthwith they yielded the Fort, which done, Howell returned home with great honour. Shortly after there fell a great dissension betwixt Howell and Conan Prince Owens sons and Cadwalader their Uncle, whereupon they rallied their Forces and entred the Countrey of Merloneth, which caused the people to fly to Sanctuary for security of their lives. These two young Lords made Proclamation, that no man should hurt such as would sub∣mit themselves, whereupon the people which had fled returned to their houses without any dammage or hurt; Thus they brought by fair means all the Countrey under their wished subjection, and led their Army unto the Castle of Cynvael which Cadwalader had built and fortified; wherein was the Abbot of Tuygwyn or Whitehouse, to whom the Lord had com∣mitted the defence of the Castle.A Crosier fit∣ter for an Ab∣bot than a Corslet. Howell and Conan summoned the Fort with great threat∣nings, but they within defied them; whereupon Howell and Conan promised the Abbot Meruni great rewards to let them have the house. But he like a faithful servant, whom neither terrible menaces nor gilded promises could move to betray a trust, continued faith∣ful, and denied them entrance, chusing rather to dye with honour than to live with shame; with which answer the young Lords were greatly offended, that a Priest should stay their prosperous proceedings, and thereupon gave an assault to the Castle so terrible that after they had beaten down the Walls, they entred by force and slew and wounded all in the Garrison, saving the Abbot, who escaped privately by means of friends which he had in Howells Army. In the year 1147. died Bohthred Bishop of Landaff; Mr. Godwyn called him Ʋthryd, and saith he had a daughter, (before he was Bishop) married to Jorwerth ap Owen ap Caradoc Lord of Carleon upon Ʋsk, a great and mighty man in those parts,Godwin in Landaff fol. 426. but he affirmeth that he died 1141. Powell saith, whom Nicholas ap Gurgant succeeded, but Godwyn tells us that H. Jorwerth was his successor, who died Anno 1153. In the year 1148. died Barnard Bishop of Davids or Menevia; of this Barnard thus writeth Godwyn; Barnard a Norman, Chaplain unto K. Hen. I. and Chauncellour unto his Queen, was consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury July the 12. 1115.Godwin Cat. Episco. in Landaff fol. 418. not chosen by the Clergy of Wales (as hitherto hath been accustomed) but forced upon them by the King, who had then newly conquered Wales; This man being in great favour with the King, and presuming upon the goodness of his cause; began to take upon him the title of Archbishop, and caused his Cross sometime in Wales to be carried before him; After long sute and much money spent in this cause betwixt him and the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Barnard had prevailed at the last (as Giraldus Camb. seemeth to perswade) had not two suborned Witnesses deposed a flat untruth in the presence of the Pope. Giraldus doubteth not confidently to pronounce that the power and wealth of the Archb. of Cant. hath out-born the poor Bishop of St. David in this matter without all right; This Bishop (saith Giraldus) was a man in some other respect praise-worthy, but unreasonable proud and ambitious, as most of the English-men were in those times, who were thrust into Bi∣shopricks; again, he was a very ill husband to his Church, alienating divers lands and let∣ting others for the tenth penny of that his predecessors had made of them, so thinking to
make a way by gratifying of Courtiers unto some better Bishopricks in England, he was deceived of his expectation: having been Bishop of St. Davids about 33 years, he died 1148. Of this old Menevia in succeeding times called St. David, you may read before in this History; but I think it not amiss to set down the Succession of that See, having now fit opportunity according to Godwin.Godwin fol. 413. in St. David. The British Histories do all report that in this Island at the first planting of Christian Religion here, there were established 28. Episcopal Sees. Of these 28. three were Arch∣bishopricks, London, York, and Carlegion or Caerleon upon Ʋsh in Monmothshire. At Caer∣leon (which was then a great and populous City) in the time of King Arthur sate Dubri∣tius the son of Eurdila a Gentle-woman of great birth; but who was her father it was never known. He was a man of excellent learning and singular integrity, in regard whereof when first he had taken great pains many years, as well in teaching and reading unto his Schollars (whereof he had a great number) as in preaching unto the people, he was appointed first Bishop of Landaff, and having stayed there no long time, was made Archbishop of all Wales, by Germanus and Lupus two Bishops of France, that were entreated by Aurelius Ambrosius King of Brittain to come over and yield their best help for the extin∣guishing of the Palagian heresie that had taken great root in this Countrey: Aurelius Am∣brosius being dead, he crowned Ʋther Pendragon, and afterwards that great Arthur King of this Iland, and waxing old he resigned his Bishoprick unto David a Disciple of his; he died and was buried in the Ile of Enlhi now called Bardsey (where he led a solitary life many years) October 14. Ann. 612. his bones were after removed to Landaff by Ʋrbanus Bishop there, May 7. 1120. 1. St. David. David before named, was Unkle unto K. Arthur and son of Xanthus a Prince of VVales begotten upon one Melearta; a man very learned, eloquent and of incredible austerity of life and conversation: he was also very tall of stature, and of a comely personage; by his diligence Palagianisme was quite rooted out, and many earnest professors of the same converted unto the Truth; with the consent of K. Arthur he removed his See from Caer∣legion to Menevia, which ever since of him is called St. Davids, a place neither pleasant, fertile or safe; for (as Girald. Cam. reporteth of it) it is neither furnished with Wood, watered with Rivers, beautified with Meadows, nor inriched with any kind of fruitful soil, affording plentifully nothing but Rocks and barren Hills, vehement Windes and Tempests, and lastly dangers and injuries, whereunto solitary places near unto the Sea are subject by Pirates and otherwise: It seemeth he misliked the frequency of people at Caerlegion, as a means to withdraw him from contemplation whereunto that he might be the more free, he made choice of this place for his See rather than for any fitness otherwise.St. David liv'd 146 years, built 12 Mo∣nasteries. He sate long, viz. 65. years, and died at the last Anno 642. (having first built 12. Monasteries in the Countrey thereabout) being now 146 year of age, as Bale out of the Brittish Histories re∣porteth; he was buried in his own Cathedral Church, and many hundred years after Ca∣nonized a Saint by Pope Calixtus the second; many things are reported of him which I leave unspoken of, referring those that are desirous of further satisfaction to Mr. Porter, who writeth his life at large, and Laurentius Surius; although I doubt not but God affor∣ded many Miracles in the infancy of his Church (yea and daily yet doth) neither there∣fore would I be so peremptory in derogating too much from such reports as we see no rea∣son why they may not be true. Of him they say that his Birth was foretold 30 years before hand; That he was alwayes attended by an Angel that kept him company; That he be∣stowed upon the waters at Bath that extraordinary heat they have, and (to report no more) That upon a time preaching to a great multitude of people at Brevy, the plain ground grew up so high in their sight and encreased under feet to a pretty hillock. After St. David sate successively these, as Giraldus setteth them down. 2 Cenauc 3 Eliud or Teilau 4 Ceven 5 Morwal 6 Haerunen or Haernurier 7 Edward 8 Gurnuen 9 Leudiuord 10 Gorwyst 11 Gorgan 12 Cledauc 13 Anian 14 Elvoed 15 Ethelmen 16 Elanc 17 Malsced 18 Sadermen 19 Catellus 20 Sulhiathnay 21 Noais 22 Etwoll 23 Asser 24 Arthuael.
A certain antiquity belonging to the Church of St. David, reporteth a Catalogue somewhat differing from this of Giraldus; to wit, this that followeth. 1. St. David 2 Eliud 3 Kenea 4 Mornael 5 Haenurier 6 Elnaeth 7 Gurnel 8 Leudywyth 9 Gorwist 10 Gorgan 11 Cledaucke 12 Eynaen 13 Eludgeth 14 Eldunen 15 Elnaeth 16 Maelsdhwyth 17 Madenew 18 Catulus 19 Sylnay 20 Namys 21 Sathveney 22 Doythwall 23 Asser 24 Alhuael 25 Sampson. Of these forenamed Bishops until Sampson there remaineth no memorial but their names only;7 Suffragans under St. Da∣vids. In this time the See of St. David had 7 Bishops Suffragans subject unto it (as the afore Antiquity declareth) viz. Exceter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Banger, St. Asaph, and Fernes in Ireland; while he was Bishop, it happened the people of all that Countrey were wonder∣fully vexed with the Jaundice, so that great numbers of them died daily of that disease; By the importtnity of his Clergy and Disciples he was induced to fly the Countrey, and sailed into Brittain, where the Bishoprick of Dola being void, he was straight way elected un∣to the same. He brought thither with him the Archiepiscopal Pall of St. David, and used it during his life, as did also his Successors for many years, until they were compelled by the Pope at the sute of the Archbishop of Turon to leave it, and make profession of obe∣dience unto him as in former times. By this occasion it fell out that the Successors of Sampson in St. Davids, what for want of their Pall, or for poverty, or negligence, or some other occasion, lost their title of Archbishop, and to this day never recovered the same. Howbeit they used all Authority belonging to an Archbishop, by consecrating of other Bishops, &c. neither ever did they make profession of subjection unto Canterbury, until the time of K. Hen. I. of England: whereof formerly, and more hereafter. After Sampson succeeded these, 26 Rucline 27 Rodherch 28 Elguni 29 Lunuerd or Lywarch 30 Nergu or Vergu 31 Sulhidir or Sulhidu 32 Eneuris. 33 Morgeneu. This man (saith Giraldus) of all the Bishops of St. Davids presumed first to eat flesh, which none of them had ever done before; for punishment of which hainous offence he supposeth it fell out, that afterwards he was murdered by Pirates; reporting withal how that after his death he appeared to a Bishop in Ireland, using these words, Quia carnes co∣medi, caro factus sum, For eating of flesh I am become nothing but flesh. 34 Nathan. 35 Jevan, he continued Bishop but onely one night. 36 Argustel. 37 Morgenueth. 38 Ervyn or Hernnu, a godly and learned man, died anno 1038. 39 Tramerin or Carmerin. 40 Joseph. 41 Bleithud, he died the year 1070. 42 Sulghein, he forsook his Bishoprick the year 1070. 43 Abraham; the year 1078. or thereabouts St. Davids was spoiled and destroyed by strangers, and Abraham the Bishop what through grief or sickness died; whereupon Sul∣ghein was constrained to re-assume his Bishoprick, which notwithstanding he resigned again about the year 1085 and 1088 died, being 80 years of age, the godliest and wisest man, and the greatest Clerk in all Wales: so saith the Chronicle of him. 44 After him a son of his called Rythmarch succeded (as the Chronicle delivereth) and died about the year 1100. 45 Wylfrid, he died 1115, this is he whom the Chronicle stileth Griffri. 46 Bernard a Norman, of whom before. 47 David Fitz Girald, Archdeacon of Cardigan succeeded, he died the year 1176. 48 Peter or Peirs, a Benedictine Monk, Prior of Wenloch, was consecrated the same year; this Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Andrew and St. David, had been often∣times formerly destroyed by Danes & other Pirates, and in his time was almost quite ruina∣ted;
he bestowed much in re-edifying the same, and may in some sort be said to have built the church which now standeth. 48. Geffry Prior of Lanthony (a Religious house in Monmothshire very ancient, of which I will take occasion in the end of this work to speak, when I shall, God willing, give an account by way of supplement, of all the Monasteries throughout VVales) a Regular Ca∣non was prefered to this See by the means of Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury. 49. Silvester Giraldus was born in Pembrockshire neer Tinby, of very noble parentage, being neer of kin to the Princes of Wales, a very comely and personable man of body, and for his mind witty, discreet, studious, vertuous and well given. In his youth he travelled over most part of Christendom. At Paris he read publickly in the English Colledge with great commendation; returning home he grew in great esteem with K. Henry the II. and became Secretary unto his son John, with whom he went into Ireland, and being there, writ a description of the Country, as he did also of England and Wales. Some affirm he was Archdeacon of Landaff. Of Brecknock and St. Davids he was for certain; being elect unto this See An. 1199, he made challenge unto the title of an Archbishop at Rome, which controversy how it was debated and ended, ye may read at large in R. Hoveden his report of the year aforesaid. He was once accused of treason, but happily acquitted, lived till he was 70. years of age and upward, and dying was buryed in his own Church. He writ many books, the Catalogue whereof ye may find in Bale. 50. Jorwerth or Edward was consecrated 1215. 51. Alselmus or Anselmus. 52. Thomas Archdeacon of Lincolne a Welshman, and a great Clerk, forsaking other great preferments, accepted of this Bishoprick, (being a miserable poor thing at that time) the year 1247. 53. Richard Carren. 54. Thomas Beck, he founded two Colledges, one at Abergwily, and another at Lhan-dewy∣breny. 55. David Martin. 56. Henry Gower, he built the Bishops Pallace at Saint Davids, and dyed in the year 1347. 57. John Teresbie or Thorsby, Translated to Worcester 1349, and thence to York, 1352. 58. Riginald Brian translated to Worcester, 1352. 59. Thomas Fastock, died the year, 1361. 60. Adam Houghton founded a colledg neer to the Cathedral Church of St. David; he was Chancellour of England for a time, about the year 1376. 61. John Gilbert Bishop of Bangor was translated to Hereford 1376. and thence hi∣ther 1389. 62. Guido de Mona died in the year 1407, who while he lived (saith Walsingham) was a cause of much mischief. 63. Henry Chichley was consecrated at Sienna by the Popes own hand, June the 12. 1409. sat five years, and was translated to Canterbury. 64. John Keterich or Catarich, sometime Archdeacon of Surry, was translated hence to Coventry and Lichfield the year 1415. and after to Exceter. 65. Stephen Patrington a Jacobine Fryer, as one saith, or rather a Carmelite, as another saith, being at the Councel of Constance, was by the Pope translated to Chichester, in De∣cember 1417. (as the records of St. Davids do affirm) others say (and I take it to be true) that he refused to accept of the Popes gift. 66. Benit Nicols Bishop of Bangor suceeded him. 67. Thomas Rodborn, a man of great learning, was brought up in Oxford, and became first Archdeacon of Sudbury, then Bishop of St. Davids; he writ divers works, amongst, the rest a History or Chronicle. The year 1434, the King endeavoured to translate him to Ely, but could not. 68. William Lynwood Doctour of Law, first Chancellour to the Archbishop of Canterbury, then keeper of the privy seal, having first been employed in Embassages to the Kings of Spain, Portugal, and other Princes, He writ much; amongst other his works, he is fa∣mous for putting in order such provincial constitutions as had been made by the Archbishops of Canterbury, from the time of Stephen Langton unto Henry Chichley; he florished about the year 1440 but just what time he became Bishop, or when he died, I cannot tell. He lyeth buryed at St. Stephens in Westminster. 69. John Langton dyed within 15. dayes after his consecration. 70. John de le Beer. 71. Robert Tully a Monk of Glocester. This man I take to be him that by the name of Robert Sherborne, is said to have been translated to Chichester the year 1508. 72. Richard Martin. 73. Thomas Langton. 74. Hugh Pany, he impropried to the Vicars Choral of St. Davids the Church of Lan-saint-Fred.
75. John Morgan dyed in the Priory of Caermarthyn, and was buried in his own Church. 76. Edward Vaughan built a new chappel in his church of St. David. 77. Richard Rawlin. 78. William Barlow translated to VVells (having sat here 10 years) about the year 1548, and after to Chichester. 79. Robert Ferrar, of whom read Fox if ye please. 80. Henry Morgan died Decemb. 23. 1559. 81. Thomas Young, staying here but a very short time, was translated to York, Fe∣bruary 25. 1561. 82. Richard Davis Bishop of Asaph. 83. Marmaduke Midleton Bishop of Waterford in Ireland. 84. Anthony Rud Doctor of Divinity, born in Yorkshire, brought up in Cambridge, after he had been the space of nine years Dean of Glocester, was consecrated June the 9. 1594. 85. Richard Milbourne translated to Carlile. 86. VVilliam Laud 1621. translated to VVells 1626. from thence to London, being Chan∣cellor of Oxford, lastly translated to Canterbury 1633. and lastly beheaded on Tower∣hill. 87. Theoph. Field 1627. translated to Hereford 1635. 88. Roger Mainwaring Bishop of St. Davids, 1641. at the beginning of that Parliament so fatall to Bishops. The Bishoprick of St. Davids was valued in the Exchequer at 426l— 22d ob, and in the Popes books at 1500 Ducates. Let us now return to our former matter in hand. About the year 1149. Owen Prince of Northwales did build a castle at Yale,Yale Castle & Lhanrystyd ca∣stle built. and his bro∣ther Cadwalader built another at Lhanrystyd, and gave Cadogan his son part of Ca∣erdigan. Toward the end of this year Madoc the son of Meredyth ap Blethyn did build the castle of Oswestrie (which now gives the title of a Barony to the honourable family of the Howards) and gave his Nephews Owen and Meiric the sons of Gruffith ap Meredyth his part of Cynelioc.Oswestrie Ca∣stle built. The year after Prince Owen did imprison Conan his son, for certain faults committed a∣gainst his father: Also Prince Owens son took his Uncle Cadwalader prisoner, and brought his country and castle to his subjection. At this time also Cadelh the son of Gruffith ap Rees fortified the castle of Caermarthyn, and from thence conducted his army to Cydwely, where he destroyed and spoyled all the coun∣try, and after his return he joyned his forces with Meredyth and Rees his brothers, and entering Caerdigan wan that part called Is-Aeron. Not long after there fell a variance betwixt Randol Earl of Chester and Owen Prince of Northwales,The Welsh still joyn with their enemies to cut their own throats. which caused Randal to gather supplies and Auxilaries from all his friends in England, to whom Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis (disdaining to hold his lands of Owen) joyned all his power, and they both together entred Prince Owens land; who like a worthy Prince not suffering the spoyle of his Subjects, met them at Counsylht, and boldly bade them battail, which they refused not, but being more in number,The Welsh ob∣tained an ad∣mirable victo∣ry against the Normans. and better armed and weaponed, were glad of the occasion; yet before the end they threw away both wea∣pons and armour, and trusted to their feet, whom the Northwales men did so pursue, that few escaped, but were either slain or taken, the chief Chieftains excepted whose nimble horses carryed them swiftly away. In the year 1150. Cadelh, Meredyth and Rees, the sons of Gruffith ap Rees Prince of South∣wales, conquered all Caerdigan from Howel the son of Prince Owen, except the Castle of Lhanvihengel in Pengwern; and at the Castle of Lhanrystyd they lost many of their men, for which reason they slew all within the garrison when they took it, and thence they march∣ed to the Castle of Stratmyrick, which they fortified and manned, and then returned home. This Cadelh took great pleasure in hunting, and spent much time in that recreation; which when the Inhabitants of Tenby or Denbigh Y Pyscot in Pembrock shire understood, they laid in Ambuscado for him, and when his hounds were uncoupled, and he pursued a stag, with few in his company, they fiercely set upon him, and finding him weakly accompa∣nyed, and attended, and also unarmed, they easily put them to flight, and wounded Ca∣delh very much; yet he escaped their hands, and came to his house, where he lay long in danger of death: Upon this affront Meredyth and Rees his brothers entered Gwyr, where burning and destroying all the country,Aherthychwr Castle razed. they surprised the castle of Aberthychwr and razed it to the ground, and then returning home with great booty re-edified the castle of Dinevowr. The same year also Howel the son of Owen Prince of Northwales fortified Humphreys castle in the valley of Caletur.
An act more fit for a Turk than a Chri∣stian.In the year 1151 Owen Guyneth took Cunetha his brother, Cadwalhon his son, and put out his eyes, and gelded him, least he should have children to inherit part of the land. Lhewe∣lyn also the son of Madoc ap Meredyth slew Stephen the son of Baldwyn. About the same time Cadwalader the brother of Prince Owen escaped out of his nephew Howells prison, and subdued part of the Isle Môn or Anglesey to himself; but his brother Owen sent an Army against him, and chased him thence, who fled into England for succour to his wives friends, for she was the daughter of Gilbert Earl of Clare. And the same year Galfride Arthur was made Bishop of Lhanelwy, called in English Asaph. Godwin fol. 430.Mr. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops saith, For want of instructions I cannot as yet set down a perfect Catalogue of the Bishops of Banger and St. Asaph, and therefore passeth them over; but be pleased to hear what a later Writer exposeth to open view. A help to English Histo∣ry; Anonymus, printed for Abel Roper over against St. Dunstans Church, MDCLII.The Bishoprick of St. Asaph (saith he) is exceeding antient, first founded by one Ken∣tigern a Scot, and there Bishop of Glasco about the year 560. The Cathedral there first bulit by him upon the banks of the River Elwy, whence it is called by the Welsh Lhen-Elwy, the Bishop in the antient Latine Elwensis or Elguensis, by us St. Asaph; from St. Asaph a holy man, whom Kentigern returning into Scotland, left here his successor. It seems it stood not long in credit, there being a great hiatus in the succession of the Bishops, none to be found between St. Asaph and Geofry of Monmoth, who was here Bishop in the latter end of K. Stephens raign; and which is more, Henry of Huntington in his Recital of the Welsh Bishopricks, reckoneth only three, St. Davids, Banger and Lhandaff; which may be pro∣bably imputed to the frequent Wars in this bordering Countrey (for it is seated in the County of Flint not far from Chester) which made it an unquiet seat for religious persons. The Bishoprick being at the best not very rich,Bishop Par∣few was a good mem∣ber to begin a Reforma∣tion in the Church. was made much poorer in the time of Bi∣shop Parfew, who lived in the dayes of King Edward the sixth; for where the Bishop had before five Episcopal houses, there is none now left but St. Asaphs onely, the rest together with the lands to them belonging by him made all away, and aliened from the Church for ever, that keeping a house above his means, he was fain to let the residue of his lands into tedious leases not yet expired. This Diocess containeth in it no one whole County, but part of Denbigh,Questionless, he had ano∣ther wife be∣sides his Church, and provided better for her children than those of the Church. Flint, Montgomery, Merioneth, and some Towns in Shropshire, wherein are to be numbred 121 Parishes, most of the which are in the immediate patronage of the Bishop; It hath but one Archdeaconry, called of St. Asaph, which is united to the Bishop∣rick for the better sustentation of it; the Tenth of the Clergy cometh to 186 li. 19. s. 7 d. ob. q. and for the Bishoprick it self, it was valued in the Kings Books at the summe of 187 l. 11 s. 6 d. Bishops of St. Asaphs. An. Chr.   560 1 Kentigern.   2 St. Asaph. 1151 3 Geofry of Monmoth.   4 Adam. 1186 5 Reinerus. 1220 6 Abraham. 1235 7 Howell ap Ednever. 1248 8 Anian. 1268 9 Anian 2d. 1293 10 Lhewelyn de Bromfeild. 1319 11 David ap Blethyn.   12 Ephraim.   13 Henricus.   14 John Trevaur. 1357 15 Lhewelyn ap Madoc. 1373 16 Willgam de Stridlington. 1382 17 Laurence Child. 1390 18 Alexander Bach. 1395 19 John Trevaur 2d. 1411 20 Robertus. 1423 21 John Lowe, translated to Roche∣ster. 1444 22 Reginald Peacock, translated to Chichester. 1450 23 Thomas. 1484 24 Richard Redman, translated to Exceter. 1503 25 David ap Owen. 1513 26 Edward Birkhead. 1519 27 Henry Standish. 1535 28 William Barlow, translated to St. Davids.   29 Robert Perfew, translated to Here∣ford. 1555 30 Thomas Goldwell. 1559 31 Richard Davis, translated to St. Davids. 1561 32 Thomas Davis. 1573 33 Thomas Hughs. 1595 34 William Morgan. 1604 35 Richard Parry. 1622 36 John Hanmer. 1629 37 John Owen, Bishop of St. Asaph, 1641. Thus much of St. Asaphs; Again to our History. Also Simon Archdeacon of Cynelioc, a man of great worthiness and same, died about the same time; and the year ensuing Meredyth and Rees, the sons of Gruffith ap Rees, con∣ducted
their forces against Penwedic before the Castle, which did belong to Howell the son of Prince Owen, and with great pains got it;Penwedic Ca∣stle taken. shortly after privily by night they came to the Castle of Tenbie, which was in the keeping of Fitz Girald, and scaling up, suddenly surprised it, and by that means revenged their brothers hurt. And returning thence,Tenbie Castle surprised. they divided their Army, and Rees went to Stratcongen, which he destroyed and spoiled; and went thence to Cyvelioc, which he destroyed in like manner; but Meredyth laid siege to the Castle of Aberaven, and wan it, returning home with rich spoils.Aberaven Ca∣stle subdued. In the year 1153 died Meredyth ap Gruffith ap Rees, Lord of Caerdigan and Stretewy, in the 25 year of his age, a worthy Knight, and fortunate in battel,Anonymus ut suprain St. A∣saph. just and liberal to all men; also the same year died Jeffrey Bishop of Landaff. Lhandaff is one of the most ancient Bishops Sees, either in England or Wales, and clai∣meth direct succession from the Archbishops of Caerleon upon Ʋsk, as unto the Bishoprick, though for the Metropolitan dignity it be content to let St. Davids have what is left there∣of. The first Bishop here, of whom is any good record, is St. Dubritius, consecrate by Saint Lupus and Germanus; that time they came hither out of France, for the extirpation of the Pelagian heresie. The Church he dedicated to St. Thelianus, the next successor to St. Dubritius, founded on the River Taff, and thence called Landaff, then in the Welsh tongue signifying a Church or Holy Place, a Church very well endowed by the munificence and piety of great persons in those times, so well that it is affirmed by Mr. Godwin, that were it possessed now of the tenth part onely of what once it had, it might be reckoned one of the richest Churches in all Christendom. The ruine of it came in the time of Bish. Dunstan, alias Kitehin, who thereupon is called Fundi nostri calamitas, by Bish. Godwin. The Diocess containeth onely part of Glamorganshire, and part of Monmothshire, though the most of each; and in those parts 177 Parishes, whereof 98 Impropriations, and for them one Archdeacon, which is called of Lhandaff; the Bishoprick was valued in the Kings book 154 l. 14 s. 1 d. the Clergy paying for their Tenth somewhat near the same, viz. 155 l. 5 s. 4 d. It is to be observed, or may be observed if it please the Reader, that neither here nor at St. Davids there is any Dean,Godwin in Landaff fol. 423. nor ever was in any of the times before us; the Bishop being the head of the several Chapters, and in his absence the Archdea∣con here, as is the Chaunter at St. Davids. The Cathedral Church of Landaff is reported to have been first built in the time of King Lucius, about the year of our Lord Christ 180. But I perceive not that any Bishop sate there before Dubritius, who by Germanus Bishop of Altisiodore,The antiquity of the Church of Landaff. and Lupus of Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was removed to the Archbishoprick of Caerleon. Of the occasion of their double journey into these parts (for they were twice here) and of Dubritius we have spoken already. So we must account St. Dubritius the first Bishop of Lhandaff; not that I deny any other to have sate there before him, but because he is the first whose name is re∣membred; and it is probable he had no predecessors, because the memory of all his suc∣cessors is so carefully preserved. St. Tebian, alias Eliud, the second Bishop, was very nobly born and brought up under Dubritius his predecessor, and Saulinus together with St. David. I find delivered than soon after his coming to the Bishoprick, he was constrained by a strange disease reigning in those parts to fly into France; whence after a season he returned again, bringing home with him in three Ships his Countrey-men that had fled with him upon the same occasion; he was afterwards slain in the Church of Lân-Delia-Hechan, by a certain noble man called Guraeddan; his Cathedral Church, where it seemeth he was buried, hath ever since born his name unto it; in the time of this man and his successors, many Kings of England and Princes of Wales have given much land, and granted many notable priviledges; amongst which, these are accounted the chiefest benefactors. King Iddon, the same of Juyr Grevent,Benefactors to Landaff Church. gave Lanerth with all the lands there that be∣longed heretofore to St. Dubritius; he gave also Lhanteilian porth halawg, with the Terri∣tory unto the same belonging. Maredud the son of Reni K. of West-wales, gave 3 Churches. Aireol Lawhir the son of Fryfan K. of West-wales, gave divers lands. Cadwgawn a King, was also a great benefactor; as were all these that follow. Maurice, King of Morganwy. Tendric or Theoderick, a King. Morgant, King of Morganwy. Augustus, King of Brecheiniawc. Iddug the son of Nudd, a King. Morgant, King of Glewissig. Ithael, a King. Gurwodius Kings of Ergnig. Cuiuni Gurgant
Clodri Noble Men of Wales, called in Evidences by the name of Kings. Lluddgwallawn Clydiawc Nagwy Hywell Gruffith ap Owen. Rys King of Glewissig. Arthmael Kings of Gwent. Rhodri. Rhiderck Kings of Morganwc. Jestin ap Gurgant Caradock. Gruffith ap Lhewelyn, King of all Wales. 3 Oudoceus or Odoceus succeeded St. Telian; he was also very nobly born, and after his death reputed a Saint, as was also his predecessor; he died July the 2d. the year I find not. 4 Ʋbelwinus alias Ʋbelwin. 5 Aidenus. 6 Elgistill. 7 Lunapeius. 8 Gomergwinus, alias Gomergius. 9 Argwistil. 10 Gervanus or Gurven. 11 Gwydlonius, alias Gwod loiw. 12 Edilbinus, alias Edilbin. 13 Grecielus. 14 Berthywynus. 15 Tricanus l Trican. 16 Eluogus. 17 Cadgwaret. 18 Cerenhir. 19 Nobis. 20 Pater. 21 Gulfredus, alias Gulfrit. 22 Nuth, alias Nudd. 23 Cymeiliawc, alias Cymbelinus, he died 917 24 Libianth, or Libianch, he died 929. 25 Gogwenus was consecrated by St. Dun∣stan Archbishop of Canterbury 982. so it see∣meth this See was long void. 26 Marchluid, l Marchlwyth. 27 Bledry or Bletheri, chosen by the Kings, Clergy and People of the Countrey, was Consecrated by Alaricius Archbishop of Can∣terbury 993. he died 1022. 28 Joseph was consecrated by Alnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, Octob. 1. 1022. he died at Rome in the year 1046. 29 Herewald was consecrated at London, by Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, in Whit∣sun week 1056. he died March 6, 1103. being 100 years of age, and having continued in his Bishopriek 48 years. 30 Ʋrbanus Archdeacon of Landaff, was consecrated together with divers Bishops August the 10, 1108. being then but 32 years of age; at the first coming he found his Bishoprick in a very poor and miserable estate; the Church ruinated almost even to the very ground in the time of the late Wars under William the Conquerour, the revenues of themselves small, and yet so ill husbanded by the negligence of his predecessors, as they could now scarcely maintain two Canons besides the Bishop, whereas there were wont to be 24; com∣plaining hereof to the Pope Calixtus the second, at what time he was at the Councel at Rhemes; viz. the year 1119. he afforded him his Letters to the King, as also to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and the Clergy and Gentlemen of his own Diocess, earnestly pray∣ing them to yield him their best assistance for the Reformation of his Church so disorde∣red; The Archbishop the rather to draw on the liberality of men, in contributing to∣wards the new building of the Church, took upon him to release the fourth part of pen∣nance inflicted upon such as should bestow any thing toward the same. By this means ha∣ving massed great sums of Money,The now Church of Landaff built 1120. began the building of that Church which now standeth, April the 14, 1120. and having, finished it, built anew also all housing belonging to it. Then next endeavouring to recover the lands lost or alienated from his See, he challenged divers parcels which were held by Barnard Bishop of St. Davids, and Richard Bishop of Hereford; and moreover, complained that they had usurped on the jurisdiction of these places, Gwhyr, Cedwely, Cantref, Bychan, Ystrad, Yw, and Ergeng, upon deposition of 6 wit∣nesses, that all these were of the Diocess of Landaff; they were so adjudged by the Popes definitive sentence, who also writ unto the King and Archbishop to restore that right unto the Bishop of Landaff, and to the Inhabitants to yield obedience to him and his successors, as their Diocesan. Howbeit (how it cometh to pass I know not) those places are now and long have been esteemed part of the Diocess of St. Davids, and part of Hereford, and none of them of Landaff: This Bishop died beyond Sea, travelling betwixt this and Rome, anno 1133. Vacat sedes annos 6.
31 Ʋchtred that succeeded, had a daugter married (before he had orders) to Jorworth ap Owen ap Caradoc Lord of Caerlbeon upon Ʋsk, a great and mighty man in those parts; he died an 1141. 32 Geffry died 1153. 33 Nicolas ap Gurgant died 1183. 34 William de Salso Marisco. 35 Henry Prior of Burgavenni, was Founder of 12 Prebends in the Church of Landaff; he died 1218. 36 William Prior of Goldeliff in Monmothshire, died January 28, an 1229. 37 Elis de Radnor died May the 6, 1240. 38 William de Burgo, Chaplain to King Henry the 3d. was consecrated the year 1244. and died June 11, 1253. having lived blind 7 years before his death. 39 John de la Ware, Abbot of Margan, died about the end of June 1253. 40 William de Radnor died January the 9, 1265. 41 William de Brews died in the end of March 1287. he lyeth buried under a Marble engraven, in the East end of the Church of Landaff, towards the North wall. Vacat sedes annos 9. 42 John de Monmoth Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated Feb. 10. 1296. at Canterbury, and died April 8, 1323. he lyeth in the midst of the East end of the Church Celceuliere, commonly called our Ladies Chappel, under a flat Marble, having a French inscription, now somewhat defaced. 43 John de Egliscliff, a Fryer Preacher, was consecrated at Rome, and came to his Dio∣cess of Landaff upon the eve of Trinity sunday 1223. he died at Lankadwaladar Jan. 2. 1346. and was buried at Caediff. 44 Iohn Paschall Doctor of Divinity, a Carmelite of Ipswich, was a Gentleman born in Suffolk, of a Family yet remaining there, and brought up in the University of Cambridge; by William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, was made a titulary Bishop, and his Suffragan by the name of Episcopus Scutariensis, from that Imaginary See; he was translated by the Pope to Landaff, an. 1347. died 1361. and was buried at Landaff; he was a man of great learning, and left divers Monuments thereof in writing behind him. 45 Roger Cradoc, a Fryer Minor. 46 Thomas Rushook, a Fryer Preacher, and Doctor of Divinity, was translated to Chi∣chester. 47 William de Betlesham, made Bishop of Bethelem by the Pope, was translated first to Landaff, and after to Rochester. 48 Edmund de Bromfield, was a Dr. of Divinity, and Monk at Burie; where being known for a a man of a very pragmatical and stirring humour, that he might not trouble them at home, the Covent thought good to maintain him at Rome, for the dispatch of their ordina∣ry business there, taking first a corporal Oath of him, never to seek any office or preferment of their house without their privity and direction. This Oath notwithstanding, when shortly after it fell out that the Abbot died, he found means that the Pope should intitle him to the Abbotship, whereunto the Covent with the Kings good liking, had now alrea∣dy elected another man far more meet, called Iohn Tymworth. For this bad kind of dea∣ling, as also because as those provisory Bulls had been forbidden by Parliament, he was committed to the Tower, and there lay prisoner a long time; but in the end the Bishop of Landaff ut ante, being translated to Rochester, he was preferred to that See. 49 Tydemannus, Abbot of Beaulieu succeeded Bromfield, and (if I mistake not) was that Tydemannus de Winchcomb, that anno 1395 became Bishop of Worcester. 50 Andrew Barret, Doctor of Law. 51 Iohn Burghyll, a Frier Preacher, being Bishop of Landaff, and Confessour unto the King, was translated to Liechfield in Sept. 1398. 52 Thomas Peverel, a Carmelite, and Doctor of Divinity, was first Bishop of Ossery in Ireland, translated thence to Landaff 1399, and thence to Worcester 1407. 53 Iohn la Zouche, a Fryer Minor, and Doctor of Divinity. It should seem that this man built either a great part, or else happily all of the house at Mathern near Chepstow,The Bishops house of Ma∣therne built. the only house that is now left the Bishop (if there be any such) to put his head in; his armes fixed in divers places of the walls and windows, to my judgement import, so much; viz. Gules ten besants 432. and 1 a Canton Ermine, encircled with a girdle of St. Francis to show his Order. 54 Iohn Wellys was likewise a Minorite, and Doctor of Divinity. 55 Nicholas Ashbie, Prior of Westminster. 56 Iohn Hunden, a Minorite, Doctor of Divinity, and Prior of Kings Langley. 57 John Marshall, Doctor of Divinity, sometime Fellow of Merton Colledge in Oxford, was consecrated 1479, and was (I take it) translated to London the year 1489. 58 John Ingleby, sometime Prior of Sheen, a Carthusian. 59 John Smith, Doctor of Divinity, died October 16, 1511. and was buried at Christ-Church
in London in the Chapel of All-Saints on the North side of the Altar. 60 Miles Salley, sometimes Almoner to the Abbey of Abington, and afterwarde Abbot of Eynsham. 61 George de Attigna, a Spaniard, a Fryer, Preacher and Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated March the 8, 1516. 62 Robert Holgate, Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated March the 25, 1537. and 1544 was translated to York. 63 Anthony Kitchin, alias Dunstan, Doctor of Divinity, and sometimes Abbot of Eyns∣ham, was consecrated May 3, 1545. and enduring all the tempestuous changes that hapned in the mean time, continued till the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, and then died (and high time) having first so impoverished the Bishoprick by unreasonable demises of what∣soever was demiseable, that there was no great cause he should live any longer: He is called Kitchin, though he might have rather been called Schullian; yet indeed he made his Church a Kitchin, and like a Schullian swept all away, leaving poor Daff without Lan or land. Sedes vacabat annos 3. 64 Hugh Jones, Batchelour of Law, was made Bishop May the 5, 1556. 65 William Blethyn, Batchelour of Law, was appointed Bishop April the 17, 1575. I ob∣serve few Families sprung from Bishops, to prosper or continue long; yet such as do, in my judgement should not be so averse as to eradicate all spiritual function. 66 Gervage Babington, Doctor of Divinity, was placed in that See Aug. 29, 1591. from thence translated to Exceter, and after to Worcester. 67 William Morgan, Doctor in Divinity, was appointed to this See July the 20, 1595. and translated to St. Asaph, September the 16, 1601. 1601. 68 Francis Godwin, translated to Hereford; this Francis Godwin being then Sub∣dean of Exceter, was he who compiled the Catalogue of Bishops here cited. 1618. 69 George Carleton, translated to Chichester. 1619. 70 Theophilus Field, translated to St. Davids. 1628. 71 John Murrey, Bishop first in Ireland, a Scot by Nation; had his Majesty had Bishopricks sufficient to have stoptd all their mouths, Episcopacy had not so been bandied against. 1639. 72 Morgan Owen, Bishop 1641. This Bishoprick was valued in the Exchequer at 154 l. 14 s. 1 d. and paid for first fruits 700 Ducats. In the beginning of King Henry the 2d. his reign, and in the year of our Lord God 1155 Rees ap Gruffith ap Rees, whom the Welsh book surnameth Lord Rees, and all the Latine and English Writers of that times name King of South Wales, did leavy all his Forces to defend his Countrey from Owen Gwineth, whom he understood to be raising of men to con∣quer South Wales. So that Rees came as far as Aberdyni over against North Wales, and perceiving the rumour to be false, built a Castle there, and so returned back. Caerneon Ca∣stle built.At the same time Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis, did build a Castle at Caerneon, be∣sides Pymer; at that time Meyric his nephew escaped out of prison, where he had been long kept;Eglwys Vair built. then also Eglwys Vair in Myvot was built. At this time King Henry banished the Flemmings, whom King Stephen had brought in, and sent some of them to their cozens into West VVales. About this time Caradocus Lhanoarvan, who is reputed and taken of all learned men to be the Authour of the Welsh History, ended his Collections of the Brittish Transactions from Cadwalader to this present time; of whom some studious Antiquary composed this following Distichon: Historiam Britonum doctus scripsit Caradocus, Post Cadwalladrum Regia scripta notans. In these two Abbies the Princes of Wales were usually buriedThe Successions and Acts of the Princes of VVales after this time, until the year 1270, were kept and recorded from time to time in the Abbeys of Conwey in North VVales, and Stratflur in South VVales; as witnesseth Gutryn Owen, who living in the dayes of Ed∣ward the 4th. wrote the best and most perfect copy of the same. The King gathered his Forces from all parts of England, intending to subdue North VVales, being thereunto procured and moved by Cadwalader, whom the Prince his bro∣ther had banished out of the land, and bereaved of his living, and by Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis, who envied at the liberty of North VVales, which knew no Lord but one; and hereupon the King conducted his Army to VVestchester, and encamped on the march called Saltney: So also Owen like a valiant Prince, listed all his people fit for service, and came to the utter Mears of his land, purposing to give the King battel, and encamped himself at Basingwerk; which thing when the King understood, he selected out of his Army divers of the chiefest bands, and sent certains Earls and Lords with them towards
the Princes Camp; and as they passed the Wood called Coed Zulo, David and Conan the Princes sons met with them, and fiercely assaulted them; and what by reason of the advantage of the ground, and suddenness of the action, the Englishmen were put to flight, and many slain, the rest being pursued to the Kings Camp. They being exceedingly vexed with this disaster, removed alongst the Sea coast, thinking to get betwixt Owen and his Countrey; but Owen fore-seeing the intent, retreated back to a place which is called to this day, Cil Owen (that is, Owens retreat) and the King came to Ruthlan. In the first voyage of King Henry against the VVelsh, he was put in great danger of his life in a strait at Counsylth not far from Flint, where Henry of Essex, whose office was by in∣heritance to bear the Standard of England, cast down the same, and fled; which thing so encouraged the VVelsh, that the King being sore distressed, had much ado to save him∣self, and (as the French Chronicle saith) was glad to fly; on whose part Eustare Fitz John, and Robert Curcie two worthy Knights, with divers other Noblemen and Gentle∣men were slain. After this Owen encamped and entrenched himself at Brynypin, and daily skermished with the Kings men; whilst in the mean time the King fortified the Castle of Ruthlan; his Navy which guided by Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis, anchored at Môn or Angle∣sey, and landed the Souldiers, who spoiled two Churches, and some of the countrey there∣about; but as they returned unto their ships, all the strength of the Isle set upon them,Sacriledge punished. and slew them all; so that none of those who plundered the Churches brought tidings of their fortune. The Marriners beholding this, liked not the harbor, but weighed up anchors & made for Chester; in the mean time, there was a peace concluded between the King and the Prince,K. Hen. buil∣deth a house for the Tem∣plers in Wales. upon condition that Cadwalader should have his lands again, & his brother should be friend∣ly unto him. Then the King having the Castles of Ruthlan and Basywerk well fortified and manned, after he had built a house thereby, for the Templers returned into England. At that time also Jorwerth Goch ap Meredyth got the Castle of Yale, and burnt it;Yale Castle burnt. The year following Morgan ap Owen was traiterously slain by the men of Jorwerth ap Meyrick, with whom died the best Poet in the Brittish Tongue of his time, called Gurgan ap Rees; and his brother Jorwerth got the Town or City of Caerleon upon Ʋsk,Caerlheon up∣on Ʋsk City taken. and the lands of Owen. Now it was that the King made peace with all the Lords and Princes of VVales, ex∣cept Rees ap Gruffith ap Rees Prince of South VVales; which Rees fearing the Kings power, caused his people to remove their cattel and goods to the Wilderness of Tywy, he still ma∣king War against the King. Therefore the King sent for him to come to his Court to conclude a peace before the Forces both of England and VVales, should be sent for him: Rees after consultation came to the King, and an order was taken that Rees should enjoy the Cantref Mawr as it should please the King, so that his land should be whole together, and not in divers Places and Shires; but the King did contrary to his promise, appointing Rees divers lands in several Places and Lordships intermingled with other mens lands; which deceit, although he perceived well enough, yet he received it piece-meal as it was, and lived quietly until Roger Earl of Clare hearing this, came to the King and desired his Highness to give him such lands in VVales as he could win; which the King granted. Then he came with a great Army to Caerdigan, and first he fortified the Castle of Stratmeryc, and afterwards the Castle of Humphrey of Dyny; of Dynerth and Lhanristyd; when these Castles were well manned and fortified, VValter Clifford, who had the Castle of Lhanynd∣hyfir, made a road to the roads of Rees, and returned with a booty after the slaughter of some of Rees his men. Upon this Rees sent to the King to complain, and to have a Redress; who had only fair words and nothing else; for the King winked at the faults of the Englishmen and Nor∣mans, and punished the Welshmen cruelly. Rees seeing this, begirt the Castle of Lhanynd∣hyfri, and in short space wan it. And Enedon the son of Anarawd, Rees brothers son, being a lusty Gentleman, and desirous to make his Countrey free from servitude, and perceiving his Unkle to be discharged of his Oath to the King, laid siege to the Castle of Humphrey, and by force wan it, putting the whole Garrison to the sword, wherein he found Horses and Armour to furnish a great number of men. Likewise Rees seeing he could enjoy no part of his inheritance, but what he obtained by the sword, gathered his power and entred Cardigan, left not a Castle standing in the whole Countrey, of those which his enemies had fortified, and so brought all under his subjection: Wherewith the King being highly offended, returned to South Wales; and when he saw he could do no good, he suffered Rees to enjoy all that he had gotten, and took pledges of him to keep the peace in his absence: and then returning into England, he sailed into Normandy, and made Peace with the French King. But the next year Rees Prince of South Wales, did lead his power to Dynet, and destroyed all the Castles that the Normans had fortified there; and afterward laid siege to Caermarthyn, which when Reignold the Earl of Bristoll the Kings base son heard, he called to him the Earl of Clare, and his brother in law Cadwalader, the brother of Prince Owen, with Howell and Conan Prince Owens sons, and two other Earls, and came to raise the siege with a great Army; whose coming Rees stayed not, but betook him to the Mountains called Kefu Rester, and there kept himself, and they camped at
Dynwyl hîc and built a Castle there, who after they could not heard of Rees, returned home without doing any notable act. In the year 1160 dyed Madoc ap Meredith ap Blethyn Prince of Powis at Winchester. This man was ever the King of Englands friend, and was one that feared God and relieved the poor; his body was conveyed honourably to Powis, and buryed in Mynot. He had by his wife Susanna the daughter of Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales three sons, Gruffith, May∣lor, Owen, Elise, and a daughter also called Marred; he had base sons Owen; Brogynton, Kynric Evelh, and Endon Evelh, which base sons were not basely esteemed, for with the o∣ther they had part of their Fathers inheritance, and so had others through Wales, if they were stout and of noble courage. And here I think it convenient to declare how Powis land came to be divided into so ma∣ny parcels, and thereby weakned and brought under the Normans, before the rest of Wales: Meredyth son to Blethyn ap Convyn Prince of Powis, had two sons, Madoc of whom we spake, and Gruffith, between whom Powis was divided; Madoc had that part which was called Powis Vadoc; which part again was subdivided into three parts, betwixt his three sons; Gruffith and Maylor had Bromfield, Yale, Hope, Dale, Manhewdwy, Mochnant, ù Rhayard, Chirk, Glynlhayth, and Glyndoverdwy. Owen Vachan had Mechain Iscoyd. And Owen Brogynton had Dynmael, and Edeyrneon. The other part of Powis, called after Powis Wenwynwyn, was the part of Gruffith ap Meredyth, after whose death his son called Owen Civilioc enjoyed it. The Lordship of Powis before King Offa's time reached Eastward to the Rivers Dee and Se∣vern, from a right line from the end of Broxen hills to Salop, with all the Country betwen Wy and Severne, whereof Brochwel, Yscithroc was possessed; but after the making of Offa's ditch, the plain Country toward Salop being inhabited by Saxons and Normans, Powis was in length from Pulford bridge Northeast to the confines of Caerdiganshire in the parish of Lhanguric in the Southwest; and in breadth from the furthest part of Cyvilioc Westwards, to Elsmere on the Eastside. This Country or principality of Powis was appointed by Roderike the great for the portion of his third sons Anarawd, and so continued entirely untill the death of Blethyn ap Convyn; After whom although the Dominion was diminished by limiting parts in severality amongst his sons Meredyth and Cadogan, yet at length it came wholy to the possession of Meredyth ap Blethyn, who had issue two sons, Madoc and Gruffith, between whom the said Dominion was divided. Madoc married Susan the daughter of Gruffith ap Conan Prince of Northwales, and had that part which was after called from his name Powis Vadoc; which dominion and signiory was divided, and so forth; see Mr. Powel fol. 216. The same year Cadwalhon ap Madoc ap Ednerth was taken by his brother Eneon Clyd, and delivered to Owen Prince of Northwales,A help to En∣glish History, printed by A∣bel Roper. MDCIL. who sent him to the Kings Officers to be imprison∣ed at VVinchester, from whence he escaped presently after, and came to his country. The year next following dyed Meiric Bishop of Bangor. Bangor another of the Bishopricks of VVales, is of antient standing, but by whom founded (saith this Author) not yet known; the Cathedral there is dedicated by the name of St Daniel who was Bishop there about the year 516,Bangor. which being cruelly defaced by the wretch∣ed Rebel Owen Glendour, was afterward repaired by Henry Dean who was once there Bishop. The ruine of this bishoprick came in the time of bishop Bulkhey (a blessed Reformer question∣lesse) who not content to alienate and let out lands,Sacriledge by miracle punished. made a sale also of the bells, and go∣ing to the Seashore to see them shipt, in his return was stricken with a suddain blindnesse. This Diocess containeth in it the entire Country of Carnarvon, wherein Bangor standeth, and the whole Isle of Anglesey, together with parts of Denbigh, Merioneth and Mongomery, and in them to the number of 107 Parishes, whereof 36 impropriated. It hath moreover in it three Archdeaconries, viz. of Bangor, Anglesey and Merioneth, one of which is added to the bishoprick for support thereof. This Bishoprick was valued in the Kings books 131 l. 16 s. 4d. and answereth for the Clergies tenth 151 l. 14s. 3d. q. Bishops of Bangor. An. Ch.   516 1 St. Daniel.   2 Hernaeus translated to Ely. 1120 3 David. 1139 4 Maurituis.   5 Gulielmus.   6 Guido, alias Gwianus. 1195 7 Albanus 1197 8 Robertus de Salopia. 1215 9 Caducan, alias Cadogan. 1236 10 Howel. 1267 11 Richardus. 1306 12 Anianus.   13 Cadogan II. 1306 14 Griffith. 1320 15 Lodovicus. 1334 16 Matthaeus. 1358 17 Thomas de Ringsted. 1367 18 Gervasius de Castro. 1370 19 Howel II. 1374 20 John Gilbert, translated to Saint Davids.
1376 21 John Clovensis.   22 John Swaffan. 1400 23 Richard Younge translated to Ro∣chester.   24 Lodovicus the II. 1408 25 Benedict, Nicols translated to St. Davids. 1418 26 VVillyam Barrow translated to Carlile.   27 Nicolaus. 1436 28 Thomas Cheriton. 1448 29 John Stanbery, translated to Here∣ford.   30 Jacobus. 1464 31 Thomas Edwane. 1196 32 Henry Dean translated to Salisbury. 1500 33 Thomas Picot. 1504 34 John Penvy translated to Carlile. 1505 35 Thomas Skenington. 1534 36 John Capon translated to Salisbury. 1539 37 John Bird translated to Chester. 1541 38 Arthur Bulkeley or Bulkeby the bell∣seller. 1555 39 VVillyam Glynn. 1559 40 Rowland Meyric. 1566 41 Nicholas Robinson. 1585 42 Hugh Bellot translated to Chester. 1595 43 Rich. Vaughan translated to Chester. 1596 44 Henry Rowland. 1616 45 Lewes Bayley. 1632 46. David Dolvin. 1633 47 Edward Gruffith. 1637 48 VVillyam Roberts Sub-Almoner., Bishop of Bangor 1641. About the year 1162. Howel the son of Jenaf ap Cadogan, ap Athelstan Glodrydh got the Castle of VValwern in Cyvelioc, and razed it, which thing when it was told Owen Prince of Northwales, it displeased him wonderfully, at the which he was so grieved that nothing could make him merry untill such time as he had gathered his power, and came to Lhanthinan in Arustly, and thence sent away great spoiles, which caused the People of the Country to come unto their Lord Howel ap Jenaf, who followed the spoile to the Severn side, where the Princes camp was; the Prince apprehending now an occasion of revenge offered him, was right glad and set upon his Enemies, and slew the most part of them; the rest with their Lord escaped to the woods and rocks. The Prince being well pleased with this revenge, built up his Castle again and fortified it strongly.Castelh Catrec Hova. The year following Owen the son of Gruffith ap Meredyth, named Owen Cyvelioc, and Owen ap Madoc ap Meredyth, got the Castle of Carrechona by Oswestrie and wasted it. About the year 1163. King Henry the second gathered a strong army against South∣wales, and came himself as farr as Pencadyr beside Brecknock, where Rees came to him and did homage, and gave him pledges, which done, the King went out of Wales. About this time Eneon the Son of Anarawd ap Gruffith, Nephew to Prince Rees, was murdered in his bed by a Man of his own, named Lhywarch. Also Cadogan ap Meredyth was slain in the like manner by one Walter ap Ricard. The Lord Rees, as he is called in Welsh, or King Rees, as Latin Authors call him, took the Cantreff Maur (which is a great Country) and the Land of Dynevowr and enjoyed it. And this year died Cadivor ap Daniel Archdeacon of Caerdigan, and Henry ap Arthen who was the worthiest Clerk that had been in Wales many years. The year ensuing, the Lord Rees seeing he was not able to maintain his Estate with such Lands as the King had appointed him, entered into the Territory of Roger de Clare, Earl of Glocester (for by that Earls means his Nephew was murdered) and wan the Castles of Aberheidol, and of the sons of Wywyaon, and raised them. And thus in short time he brought all Caerdigan under his subjection; from thence he made many inroads against the Flemmings, and brought away great spoiles. This hap∣py fortune caused all VVales to conspire the shaking off of the Norman yoak (whose trea∣son and cruelty they could not abide) and to elect Princes of their own Nation. In the year 1165. David the son of Owen Prince of Northwales did destroy all Flintshire, which was the Kings,K. Henry's third voyage in vain against the Welsh. and carried all the people and cattel with him to the Dyffryn Cloyd now called Ruthin Land, which when the King had notice of, he levyed an army in haste, and came to releive his Castels and people as far as Ruthlan, and after he had rested there three dayes, and could do no good, he returned into England, where he gathered ano∣ther Army of selected Soldiers, and chosen through all his Dominions, sending for Auxiliaries from Flanders and Brittain; and then returned to Northwales, with resolu∣tion to destroy all that had life in the Land; and coming to Croes Oswalt called Oswald∣stree, incamped there; on the contrary side, Prince Owen and his Brother Cadwalader with all the power of Northwales, and the Lord Rees withall the forces of Southwales, and Owen Cyvelioc and the Sons of Madoc ap Meredyth with the strength of Powis, and the two sons of Madoc ap Edwerth with all the people betwixt Wye and Severne, gathered themselves together and came to Cawen in Edierneon, with purpose to defend their Coun∣try. But the King understanding that they were so nigh, being wonderous desirous of battail, came to the river Ceireoc, and caused the wood to be felled, whereupon a num∣ber of the Welsh understanding the passage, unknown to their Captains, met with the Kings Ward, where were placed the choyce men of all the Army, where began a hot skir∣mish, and divers worthy Men were slain on each side, but in the end the King obtained the passage, and came to the Mountain of Berwyn, where he lay in camp certain dayes, and so both the Armies stood in awe each of other: the King kept the plains, as being
doubtfull to be entrapped in straits; but the Welsh watched for the opportunity and ad∣vantage of the ground, and kept the King so straightly, that neither forrage nor victu∣all might come to his camp,The Welsh u∣nited invinci∣ble against the English. neither durst any Soldier stir abroad; and to augment these miseries there fell such store of rain, that the Kings Men could scarce stand upon their feet upon those slippery places; in the end the King was compelled to return home without his purpose, and that with great loss of Men and Ammunition, besides his charges; therefore in a great choler he charged the Pledges eyes,A cruel act of K. Henry 2. (whom he received long before that) to be put out, which were Rees and Cadwalhon, sons to Owen, and Cynwric, and Me∣redyth the sons of Rees,Roger Hove. and other. I find also saith Mr. Powel, written by divers, that in the assailing of a bridge the King was in no small danger of his life; for one of the Welshmen shooting directly at him, had pierced him through the body, if Hubert de St. Clare, Constable of Colchester (perceiving the Arrow coming) had not thrust himself betwixt the King and it;Hol. page 408. whereby he saved his Master, and lost his own life. Then after long consultation the King came again to North Wales, intending to have his Army conveyed by Sea, and to Land in some convenient place of the Countrey, and with his design he came to Chester, and there reposed a certain time, till all his Navy was gathered together, as well hired ships of Ireland as his own; and upon the suddain he brake up his Camp, and gave both ships and men leave to depart. The same year Rees Prince of South Wales laid siege to the Castle of Aberteini,Aberteini Ca∣stle won by the Welsh. and wan it, and laid it flat with the ground; and likewise wan Pilgeran, and razed it. At which time he took pri∣soner Robert the son of Stephen (his cozen German, son to Nost his aunt, who after the death of Girald had married Stephen Constable) and so returned home with great honour, and rich spoil. About the same time died Lhewelin, son to Pr Owen, a worthy Gentleman, and of great towardness. In the year ensuing, the Flemmings and Normans came to West Wales; with a great power against the Castle of Cilgerran (which Rees had fortified) and laid siege unto it, assaulting it divers times; but it was so manfully defended, that they returned home as they came; and shortly after they came before it again, where they lost many of their best men, and so departed. The same year Owen Pr. of North Wales, laid siege to the Castle of Basygwerke, which the King had fortified, and in short time wan it, and dismantled it. About the same time Jorwerth Goch was spoiled of his lands in Powis, by Owen Cyvelioc the son of Gruffith ap Meredyth Lord of Powis, by Owen Bachen second son to Madock ap Meredyth: which lands they divided betwixt them, so that Owen Cyve∣lioc had Mochant above Rayader, and Owen Vachan Mochnant beneath Rayader. In the year 1167 Owen Prince of North Wales, Cadwalader his brother, and Rees Prince of South Wales, brought an Army into Powis against Owen Cyvelioc, and wan all his lands, and chased him out of the Countrey, and gave Caereneon to Owen Vachan the son of Madoc ap Meredyth to hold of Prince Owen; and the Lord Rees had Walwern, because it stood within his Countrey; but within a while after, Owen Cyvelioc returned with a strength of Normans and Engleshmen to recover his Estate, and laid siege to the Castle of Caereneon; and winning the same, burnt it to the ground. Also the same year the afore∣said Princes,Ruthlan Ca∣stle taken by the Welsh, which King Henry had built. Owen, Rees and Cadwalader, laid siege to the Castle of Ruthlan, which the King had lately built and fortified, where the Garrison defended it most valiantly; yet the Princes would not depart, until they had won it; which they did at two months end, and razed it. After that they gat the Castle of Prostatyn, and destroyed it; and then brought all Tegeugl to Owens subjection, and returned home with much honour. In the year following Conon the son of Prince Owen, slew Ʋrgeney Abbot of Lhwythlawr, and Lhawthen his nephew. In this year also Robert the son of Stephen the Constable, was released out of his cozens the Lord Rees his prison, and was sent to Ireland with great Forces to Dermot the son to Murchart, who landed at Lochgarmon, and won it, and so went forward. In the year 1169 Meyric ap Adam of Bueltht, was murthered in his bed by Meredyth Bengoch his cozen german.A Giants bo∣dy 50 foot found. Also this year there were found the bones of a Gyant cast up by the Sea, of such length, that his body seemed to contain after fifty foot in height. This year Owen Gwyneth, the son of Gruffith ap Conan, Prince of North Wales, passed out of this life; he had Governed his Countrey well and worthily 32 years. This Prince was fortunate and victorious in all his affairs; he never took any enterprise in his hand, but he atchived it; he left behind him many children, begotten by divers women, which were not esteemed by their mothers and birth, but by their prowess and valiantness; first, he had by Gladus the daughter of Lhywarch ap Trahevern ap Caradoc, Jorwerth Drwyndwn (that is, Edward with the broken nose) Conan, Maelgon, and Gwen∣lhian, by Christian the daughter of Grono ap Owen ap Edwin; he had David, Roderik Cad∣walhon Abbot of Bardsey, and Augharat wife to Griffith Maylor; he had besides these, Co∣nan, Lhewelin, Meredyth, Edwal, Run Howell, Cadelh, Madoc, Enon, Cynrwric, Philip and Riryd Lord of Clocharn in Ireland by divers women; of whom, Run, Lhewelyn and Cynwric died before their father; the rest you shall hear of hereafter.
THE Third Book OF THE ANTIENT & MODERN BRITTISH AND WELSH History.
TO THE Right Honourable JOHN Earle of Bridgwater, Baron of Elsmere, Viscount Brackley. Earle of Carnarvon, Lord Dormer. RICHARD Earle of Carburie, Baron of Emlyn. ANTHONY Viscount Montague, &c. JOHN Lord Abergavenny. WILLIAM Lord Sturton, &c. HENRY Lord Arundel, Count of the sacred Roman Empire, and Baron of Wardor. The Earles of BRIDGWATER. Edward Earle of Derbie. Dorothea Daughter of Tho. How∣ard, Duke of Norfolk, by which Match this Honourable Family of the Egertons, by Frances Daughter and Coheir to Fer∣dinando Earl of Derbie, descends from the Brittish line, as appears at large in the Pedegree of the D. of Norfolk. Henry Earle of Derbie. Margaret Daughter to Henry Clif∣ford, Earle of Cumberland, and Elinor his wife, Daughter and Coheir of Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and his wife Mary Queen of France, Daughter to K. Henry VII. and Elizabeth Heir general to the house of York, and Lord Mortimer; whose Ance∣stour, Ralph Lord Mortimer, married to Gladis, sister and Co∣heir
  to David, and Daughter to Llewelin Prince of Northwales; and K. Henry VII. was Grand∣childe to Owen Tudor, lineally descended from the Princes of South Wales. Ferdinando Earle of Derbie. Alice Daughter to Sir John Spen∣cer, Knight. Sir John Egerton Knight of the Bath, Lord President of Wales, Earle of Bridgwater, Baron of Elsmere. Frances Daughter and Coheir of Ferdinando Earle of Derbie. John Egerton Baron of Elsmere, Viscount Brackley, Earle of Bridg∣water, now living, 1661. BRIDGWATER (but more properly in old Records Burgh∣walter, that is VValters Burgh, so called of VValter de Duaco, who came in with the Normans, and had fair Lands given him in those parts by the Conquerour) is a Town in Sommersetshire: A great and populous Town, descending by the Chawworths to the Dutchy of Lan∣caster, and was by King Henry VIII. Heir of the Lancastrian line, ad∣orned with the Title of an Earldom, which he bestowed on Sir Henry Daubeney, son of that Giles Daubeney, who came in with King Henry the Seventh from Brittain in France, and was by him made Lord Cham∣berlain, and Knight of the Garter, which Henry dying without issue, this Title lying long asleep, was afterwards awakened in another Family, ordained to be a Seminary for the Earles of Bridgwater. Henry Lord Daubeney created Earle of Bridgwater 30. Hen. John Egerton Viscount Brackley, created Earle of Bridgwater May 15. Lord President of Wales, &c. John Viscount Brackley, created Earle of Bridgwater, now living, 1661. The Earle of CARNARVON. THis Right honourable Earle now living, is the worthy Heir of that most worthy and Heroick Robert Lord Dormer, and Earle of Carnarvon; whose loyal Fidelity to his King, hate to Tyranny, love of his Countries Liberty, and contempt of Rebellion, made him appear in in the field like a true Son of Mars, where he did wonders beyond ex∣pression;
and for justice, religion and loyalty, sacrificed his life upon the Altar of never-dying Fame. He married the Daughter of Philip Earle of Pembrock, & Montgomery &c. by which means this now Earle of Carnarvon is many wayes descended from the Brittish Princely line, as doth most amply appear in the Genealogie of the Earle of Pembrock, which for brevity I forbear to expresse. CARNARVON. CARNARVON is a Shire of Northwales, butting upon the Irish Seas, and parted from the Isle of Anglesey by a streight, or fretum; a Mountainous and Rockie Countrey: but the defects thereof are supplyed plentifully by the Isle adjoyning. It took name from Carnarvon, the chief Town thereof, heretofore strongly walled, and fortified with a very fair Castle. Edward II. King of England was born there, and hence ac∣cording to the custom of those times entituled Edward of Carnarvon; for the occasion of it I referr you to the common Chronicles. The Princes of Wales had in this place their Chancery and Exchequer for all Northwales, which was no small improvement to it; Earle it never had any till this present Age, in which King Charles of ever blessed memory, conferred the Title on Robert Lord Dormer, created Earle of Carnarvon, 4 Caroli, Aug. 2. Lord Dormer, Earle of Carnarvon 1661. The Earles of CARBURIE. Gwaith Voed Lord of Cardigan. Gweriston Prince of Powis, Second Son of Gwaith Voed. Kynvyn. Blethyn. Meredith. Madoc, Lord of Powis Vadoc. Griffith Mailor, Einon Edvel, alias Elvel. Rhyn. Jevan, Esq;
Madoc Cough, Esquire. Madoc Kyffin, Esquire. David Vaughan, Esquire. Griffith, Esquire. Hugh Vychan, Esquire. John Vychan, Esquire. Walter Vychan, Esquire. Sir John Vaughan of the Golden Grove, Knight. Richard Vaughan, Earle of Carbu∣rie, Lord Vaughan, Baron of Emlyn, now living, 1661. Alice, Daughter of John, Earle of Bridgwater. FRANCIS Viscount MONTAGUE. Sir George Brown, Knight of the Garter, temp. Hen. 8. Lucy Daughter to John Nevil, Mar∣quess Montague, and Coheir to her Brother George Duke of Bedford. This John, Marquess Montague, married Isabel Daughter and Heir to Sir Edward Englethorp, or (as Mr Powel fol. 217. calls him) Edmund, who married Joan, third Daughter to John Lord Typtoft Earle of Worcester, and Coheir to Ed∣ward her Brother, which Earle John married Joyce, Daughter and Coheir of Edward Charleton, Lord Powis, descended lineally from John Charlton Lord Powis, in right of his wife Hawis the hardy, sole Daugh∣ter and Heir to Owen ap Griffith, Lord Powis, whose Forefathers were Princes of Powis. Anthony Brown Knight of the Gar∣ter, created Viscount Montague, tem. Phil. & Mariae, at Hampton Court. Iane Daughter to Robert Ratcliff, Earle of Sussex. Anthony Brown Esquire, obiit ante patrem. Mary, Daughter to Sir William Dormer.
Anthony Viscount Montague. Joan or Iane Daughter to Thomas Earle of Dorset. Francis Browne, now Viscount Montague, 1661. Elizabeth Daughter of Henry Mar∣quesse of Worcester, by which Match the Heir apparent, with the rest of that honourable issue, are descended from the Brittish line, as is manifest in the Genea∣logie of the Marquesse of Wor∣cester. Brown, Heir apparent. LORD ABERGAVENY. Iohn, Lord Nevil, Baron of Aber∣gavenny, descended from Sir Edward Nevil, Knight. Elizabeth Daughter and Coheir of Iohn Chamberlain, alias Tanker∣vile of Sherburn Castle, Com. Oxfor. Sir Edward Nevil Knight, third Son of Ralph Nevil, Earle of Westmerland. Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Richard Beauchamp, Earle of Worcester, and Lord of Aberga∣venny, in whose right the said Edward was Lord of Aberga∣venay. This Elizabeth descended from William Beauchamp, Baron of Burgavenny, who was fourth Son of Thomas Beauchamp, Earle of Warwick, Marshall of England under King Edward III. and one of the Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter: who married Katherine, Daughter of Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wig∣more, son of Edmund son of an∣other Roger, by right of inhe∣ritance I have seen a Deed of the Advow∣son of St. Bride in Monmoth∣shire, granted to the Forefather of William Iones of Lansan∣fride, (i. e.) St. Bride, the very place where this Advow∣son is, thus, Edwardus Nevill Miles, & Elizabetha de Beau∣champ,
(as Mr. Powel saith fol. 316.) Prince of Wales, as be∣ing son to Sir Roger Mortimer, who married Gladys, Heir to her brother David, and Daugh∣ter to Llewelin ap Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales, and Ioan Daughter to King Iohn. Domina de Burgavenny, omnibus ad quos præsentes literae pervenerint, salutem: Noveritis nos pro bono consilio & laudabili servitio, Philippo Thomas dedisse concessisse & hoc præsenti scri∣pto confirmasse Philippo, heredi∣bus & assignatis suis dominati∣onem Ecclesiae beatae Frigittae in nostro Dominio de Burgavenny, habendum & tenendum, &c. Sigilla nostra apposuimus in Ca∣stro nostro de Burgavenny vi∣cessimo secundo die Julii, anno regni Regis Henrici sexti, post Conquestum vicessimo septimo. The Arms upon the Seal. Quarterly Beauchamp and Warren in the First: and in the Second Nevill: the Third as the Second: the Fourth as the First. THE LORD STURTON. VVilliam, Lord Sturton, descended from John Sturton, created Baron Sturton, tempore Henrici Sexti, one of whose Successours, Charles Lord Sturton, married the eldest Daughter to Edward Earle of Derbie, and Dorothea, Daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by which Match this Honourable Family descends from Brittish Princes, as plainly appears in the Genealogies of the Duke of Norfolk and Earle of Derbie. The Heir apparent of this Right Honourable Lord married a Grandchilde of VVilliam Lord Petre of VVrittil in Essex, and Ka∣tharine his VVife, Second Daughter to Henry Earle of VVorcester, by which Match this right Honourable Family again descends from Brittish Progenitors; as in the Pedegree of the Marquesse of VVor∣cester.
VVilliam Sturton Esquire, Second Son to VVilliam Lord Stur∣ton, married Margaret, Daughter to George Morgan of Lansore in the County Monmoth Esquire, descended from Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kilsant, who was one of the Peers of Wales, of the Blood-Royal of Brittain, paternally descended from Bely the Great, King of all the Brittains, who died in the year 1084. and was buried at Caer∣marthyn. This Family of the Morgans (whose ancient seat is Mau∣ghan in Monmothshire, from whence have sprang many flourishing Families) descended also from Rees ap Tuder King of Southwales: from Ivor king of Gwent, from Rhiallon ap Kinvin Prince of Powis, Gwillim ap Ayddan Lord of Grismond: all which Coats this No∣ble Family quarters. HENRY LORD ARUNDEL OF WARDOR, COUNT of the SACRED ROMAN EMPIRE. Sir Thomas Arundel Knight. Margaret Daughter and Coheir to Edmund Lord Howard, third Sonne to Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, by which Coheir the Brittish Bloud descends upon this Honourable Family, as ap∣pears in the Genealogie of the Dukes of Norfolk. Thomas Arundel Count of the Em∣pire, and Baron of Wardor, Grandchilde to Sir Thomas A∣rundel. Mary Daughter of Henry Writch∣sley Earle of South-Hampton.
Thomas Arundel Count of the Em∣pire, and Baron of VVardor. Blanch Daughter of Edward Earl of VVorcester, by which Match this Honourable Family severall wayes descends from the Brit∣tish bloud Royol. Henry Arundel Count of the Em∣pire, and Baron of VVardor, now living, 1661. Cicely Daughter to Sir Henry Com∣pton Knight of the Bath. Thomas Arundel, Heir Apparent.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Antient and Modern Brittish and Welsh HISTORY. THis Owyn with five of the chiefest of Wales, did homage to Henry the second; and like∣wise to his eldest son Henry at Woodstock, in the eighth year of Henry the father, Anno Dom. 1165. Quarterly Gules and Or 4 Lyons pass. gard. Coun∣ter-change. David the son of Owen Gwyneth. AFter the death of Owen, his sons fell in debate who should inherit after him, for the eldest son born in Matrimony, Edward or Jorwerth Drwndwn, was counted unmeet to Govern, because of the maim upon his face;Howell base son of Owen slain. and Howell who took upon him all the Rule, was a base son begotten upon an Irish woman: Therefore David gathered all the power he could, and came against Howell, and fighting with him, slew him, and afterwards enjoyed quietly the whole land of North Wales, until his brother Jorwerths son came to age, as shall hereafter appear: Madoc, another of Owen Gwyneths sons,Mahoc be∣takes himself to Navigation left the land in contention betwixt his brethren, and prepared certain ships with men and ammunition, and sought Adventures by Sea, sailing West and leaving the cost of Ireland so far North, that he came to a land unknown, where he saw many strange things. This land must needs be some part of that which the Spaniards affirm themselves to be the first Finders of,H. Lhoyd. since Hanno's time; for by reason and order of Cosmography, this land to which Madoc came, must needs be some part of Nova Hispania or Florida; whereupon it is manifest, that the Countrey was long before by Brittains discovered,India, first discovered by the Brittains. before either Columbus or Americus Ve∣spasius conveyed any Spaniards or Portugues thither. Of this Voyage and return of this Madoc there be many fictions, as the common people do use in distance of place and length of time, rather to augment than diminish; but sure it is that there he was. And after he had returned home, and declared the pleasant and fruitful Countreys that he had seen
without inhabitants; and upon the contrary part, for what barren and wild ground his brethren and nephews did murther one another; he prepared a number of ships, and got with him such men and women as were desirous to live in quietness, and taking leave of his friends,Madocs second voyage to the Indies. took his journey thitherward again: Therefore it is to be supposed, that he and his people Colonized part of those Countreys; for it appeareth by Francis Lones, that in Ancusanus and other places the people honoured the Cross; whereby it may be gathered, that Christians had been there before the Spaniards; but because this people were not many, they followed the manners of the land unto which they arrived, and used the Language they found there. This Madoc arriving into that Western Countrey, unto which he came in the year 1170.Mr. Powel. left most of his people there, and returning back for more of his own Nation, Ac∣quaintance and Friends to inhabit that fair and large Countrey, went thither again with ten Sails, as I find noted by Gutyn Owen. I am of opinion, that the land whereunto he came, was some part of Mexico; the causes which makes me think so, are these: 1. First, The common report of the Inhabitants of that Countrey, who affirmed, that their Rulers descended from a strange Nation that came thither from a far Countrey; which thing is confessed by Mutezuma King of that Province, in an Oration made for quiet∣ting of his people at his submission to the King of Castile, Hernando or Fernando Curt being then present, which is declared in the Spanish Chronicles of the conquest of these Indies. Evident proofs that the Welsh first discovered the West In∣dies.2. Secondly, The Brittish words and names of places used there even unto this day, do argue the same; as when they talk together, they use this word Gwrando, which is hear∣ken or listen: Also they have a certain Bird which they call Pengwin, that is, Whitehead; but the Island of Corroeso, the Cape of Bryton, the River of Gwyndor, and the white Rock of Pengwyn, which be all Brittish or Welsh words, do manifestly shew that it was that Coun∣trey which Madoc and his people inhabited. About this time Rees Prince of South Wales came with great power into Powis, and sub∣dued Owen Cyvelioc the Lord thereof, and took Pledges of him, and then returned home with honour. K. Henry and P. Rees at∣toned. Rees supply∣eth the King in his journey towards Ire∣land.When King Henry prepared for the Conquest of Ireland, Prince Rees came and met him, who received him courteously, and confirmed all what formerly had been accorded; inso∣much that Rees promised the King towards his expedition into Ireland 300 Horses, and 400 Oxen, and gave him 14 Pledges. Thus done, the King came to South Wales, and entring Caerlheon upon Ʋsk, took the (formerly sumptuous) City from the Lord thereof, Jorwerth ap Owen ap Caradoc keeping the same to his own use;The Arms of of this Lord were Gules 3 Towers Arg. now quarte∣red by the Morgans. wherefore Jorwerth departed from the King, and calling to him his two sons Owen and Howell (who was called Howell of Caerlheon, and bare for his Arms Gules 3 Towers Argent; which Coat is now quarted by the Morgans of Mahan and Lan∣tarnam, &c.) and his sisters son Morgan ap Sylsit ap Dyfnwal, gathered forces, and upon the Kings departure entred the Countrey, spoiling and burning as they went, and took the Town of Caerlheon, and destroyed it, saving the Castle (now ruined by time) which they could not get:The destru∣ction of the once famous Caerlheon. The King kept on his journey to Pembrock, and there he gave Rees all Caerdigan, Stratywy, Aberustly and Eluel: Rees coming to Aberteini, which he had won from the Earl of Glocester, and lately fortified, removed from thence to Pembrock in the Kalends of October, and spake with the King, returning the day after, and then culled out of his Horses the promised number, or at least 86, and sent them to the King, who chose out 36, and sent the rest back with many thanks.K. Hen. 2. of∣fereth at St. Davids. The same day the King went to St. Davids, and offering there, dined with the Bishop the son of Girald, cousin german to Rees. Whether Rich. Strongbow Earl of Strigull (an antient Castle formerly in Monmothshire, part of whose ruines yet remain) came from Ireland to confer with the King, and after dinner the King returned to Pembrock; within a while after, the King being at the white house, rendred to Rees, Howell his son, who had for a long time been pledge with him; and then also he gave him day for the other Pledges, and for his tribute, till his return from Ireland. The next day being the morrow after St. Lukes day, the King took shipping there, and had fair passage into Ireland, where he landed at Dublin, and there lay quiet that winter. In the year 1172 there fell a great Plague among the Kings souldiers in Ireland, by reason of the change of the air and victuals;K. cometh to Pembrock, and the solemni∣zeth the feast of the Resur∣ction of our B. Saviour. which caused the Kings return, who landed in VVales in Passion week (if such a week be now remembred) and remained at Pembrock on Easter day (which, did it not constantly fall upon Sunday, would be as well forgot, or at least disesteemed, as the Birth-day of our most Holy and Blessed Saviour and Reedeemer; (For he who honours not that blessed Nativity, can we think that he reverenceth his glo∣rious Resurrection?) and the day following and on Tuesday took his journey towards Eng∣land; the Lord Rees careful to comply with the King, waits his coming at Talacharn, and there presents his duty.Caerlheon Ca∣stle anew re∣paired, not built by King Hen. 2. The King as he passed from Caerdiff by the new Castle upon Ʋsk, sent for Jorwerth ap Owen ap Cadogan, to come and speak with him under safe conduct for him, his sons and friends, meaning to conclude a peace with him, and so to quiet all Wales; upon these summons or message Jorwerth took his journey towards the King, and sent word
to Owen his son, being a lusty young Gentleman, to meet him by the way; but as he came at his fathers command, the Earl of Bristolls men (by this Earl of Bristoll I know not whom Mr. Powell means) Reynold Earl of Cornwal and Bristoll, as Mr. Mills calls him, base son of Hen. 1. (for in our usual accounts of Earls,Mr. Mills, fol. 69. John Lord Digby of Sherborne is accounted the first of that place, being created Earl of Bristoll Sept. 15. Jac. 20. but in those dayes many were stiled Earls of places, as Strongbow Earl of Strigull, which are not numbred in the Catalogue of Earls) hearing of it, came out of the now Castle of Caerlheon upon Ʋsk, and laid wait for him by the way, being under the Kings safe conduct, and trusting to his pro∣mise, and suddenly set upon, and murthered him traiterously and cowardly,A most un∣worthy act. being un∣armed and having but a few in his Company: Which hard and unchristianly act when his father understood by some of his followers that escaped, he was much perplexed, and returned home with all his friends, and his son Howell,A just re∣venge. and would never afterwards trust neither the Kings promise, nor any Normans; but forthwith gathered all his power and friends that he could make, and without mercy destroyed all the Countrey with fire and sword to the Gates of Hereford and Glocester, to avenge the death of his son: Howsoever, K. Henry made Lord Rees chief Justice of all South Wales by Commission,Usual then as now for the Welsh to have By-blows, and look up∣on them as sons. Abergavenny Castle supri∣sed. and took his journey into Normandy. In the same year died Cadwalader ap Gruffith ap Conan Prince of North Wales, who had by his wife Alice daughter of Richard Clare Earl of Glocester, Cunetha, Radulph and Ri∣chard; and by other women he had Cadvan, Cadwalader, Eneon, Meredyth, Goch and Cad∣walhon. Towards the end of this year Sytsilt ap Dyfnwall, and Jevan ap Syrsilt ap Riryd got the Castle of Abergavenny by surprise, and took the Kings Garison prisoners: and the year ensuing was the fairest winter that ever was seen. About this time Rees Prince of South Wales sent unto King Henry his son Howell with a goodly Company of men to serve him; which much pleased the King;Hol. pag. 437. who returned cor∣dial thanks to Prince Rees: If I mistake not, this Prince Rees, as also other Princes of South Wales, bore for his Ensignes of honour, Mars,The Arms of P. Rees. a Lyon rampant and border endented Sol, incensed Jupiter. In the mean time Jorwerth ap Owen brought his Forces against Caer∣lheon, and they of the Town fought with him, whom he overthrew, and took many priso∣ners of them, and wan the Town, and laid siege to the Castle,Caerlheons Town and Castle taken. which was yielded him forth∣with in exchange for prisoners. Then also Howell his son brought all Gwent ît Coed (the Castle onely excepted, the Castle here meant by Mr. Powell I conceive, was Strigull which belonged to Earl Strongbow) under his obedience, and took Pledges of the Inhabitants. Al∣so at that time David ap Owen Gwyneth Prince of North Wales, made war against his bro∣ther Maelgon, who kept the Isle of Môn or Anglesey, and brought his people over Mênai (for so that arm of the Sea is called) which separateth that Isle from the main land; and chasing his brother out of the Isle to Ireland, brought all the Isle under subjection; also he expelled all his brothers and cousins out of North Wales,A Turkish po∣licy. and took all their lands to him∣self; and taking his brother Maelgon as he came from Ireland, detained him close priso∣ner. Then Conan his brother died. In the year 1175.The Welsh much addi∣cted to geld their kindred. Howell the son of Jorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon took his unkle Owen Pen Carne prisoner, and putting out his eyes, gelded him, least he should beget children to inherit Caerlheon and Gwent; but God provided a punishment for him; for upon the Saturday following there came a great Army of Englishmen and Normans before the Town,Caerlheon ta∣ken by the English. and wan it with the Castle, Maugre Howell, and his father who was not privy to his sons lewd deed. This year also David Prince of North Wales (being bold of the King affinity) did im∣prison his own brother Roderike in bolts, because he desired part of his fathers lands. This year also Rees Prince of South Wales, came to the Kings Court at Glocester, and brought with him such Lords of South Wales as had offended the King, to do him homage; which pleased his Majesty exceedingly; whose names were these, Cadwalhon ap Madoc of Melyenyth, Reeses cousin german, Eneon Clyt of Eluel, Eneon ap Rees of VVerthrynion; which two had married two of his daughters, Morgan ap Caradoc ap Jestin of Glamorgan, Gruffith ap Ivor ap Meyric of Senghennyth, Silsyt of higher Gwent,Caerlheon re∣stored to Jor∣werth by the K. of Engl. which three had mar∣ried his sisters, and Jorwerth ap Owen of Caerlheon, whom the King received under his pro∣tection, restoring to him Caerlheon again; and so they returned home well satisfied: But shortly after VVilliam de Bruse Lord of Brecknock, desired Silsyt ap Dyfnwall, Geffry his son, and a great number of the Gentry and best men of Gwentland to a feast at his Castle of Abergavenny (which he had received of them by composition) and they mistrusting no harm, came thither; but like a Traytor and a Murtherer he had a great number of armed men within the Castle, which fell upon this Lord and the rest,Hol. pag 439. Marthi West, lib. 2. and without any mercy or remorse put them to the sword, and forthwith went to Silsyts house (being not far from thence) and took his wife, and slew Cadwalader his son before his mothers face, and de∣stroyed the house; and this was a lamentable day to all Gwent, and a lesson to all men to take heed of a reconciled enemy. This William Lord Bruse having the Welshmen within his Castle of Abergavenny, to seek a quarrel, propounded unto them certain Articles to be by them kept and performed;
& among other things, that none of them should at any time carry about them in their jour∣ney, either Bow or Sword; for the observing of the which, he would have had them to be sworn; which they refused to do: Whereupon he falling out with them, called his men, which were ready for that purpose, and caused them all to be murdered; and when that deed was done (to cloak this Treason with some reasonable excuse) he caused it to be re∣ported abroad, that this he did in the revenge of the death of his unkle Henry de Hereford, whom they on an Easter even before had slain. In North Wales Roderike brake his brothers prison, and escaping came to Anglesey, where all the Countrey received him for their Lord, because they abhorred the ingratitude of the Prince, who unnaturally had disinherited all his brethren in boldness of his brother in Law the King. This Roderike also was received as Lord and Prince in all the Country about the River of Conwey. Then Prince David fled over Conwey, and there remained for a time. This year died Cadelh, the son of Gruffith ap Rees, and brother to the Lord Rees, after long sick∣ness, and was honourably enterred at Stratflur. The next year died David Fitz Girald, Bi∣shop of Menevia, and Peirs was installed in his place. This year the Lord Rees, Prince of South Wales, made a great feast at Christ-mass (a time now almost forgot, if not denied) in the Castle of Aberteini, which feast he caused to be pro∣claimed through all Brittain long before,A sumptuous Invitation of P. Rees. and thither came many strangers, which were ho∣nourably entertained, so that no man departed discontended: and among deeds of Arms and other Courtly pastimes, Rees caused all the Poets of Wales (which are makers of Songs, and Recorders of Gentlemens Pedegrees and Armes, of whom every one is intituled Bardh, in Latine Bardus) to come thither, and provided chairs for them to sit in the Hall, where they should dispute together, and try their cunning and gift in their faculties, where great re∣wards and gifts were appointed for the Victors; amongst whom, they of North Wales wan the prize; and among the Musicians, Reeses own houshold-servants were accounted best. Shortly after Eneon Clyt and Morgan ap Meredyth were both slain by Treason of the Nor∣mans who inhabited the Marches. At this time the Lord Rees built the Castle of Rayder Gwy, that is to say, The Fall of Wye,Rayder Gwy Castle built. for the River of Wye falleth there over a high Rock. About this time the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth made war against him: then also Cadwalhon, the brother of Owen Gwyneth, and unkle to David and Roderike, who had fled to the King for succour, as he was conveyed home by the Kings men, to enjoy his patrimony, was cruelly murthered by the way, and found those whom he imagined to be his assistants and friends, to be indeed Traytors and Butchers. This year the bones of K. Arthur and Queen Gwenhonar his wife were found in the Isle of Avilon, without the Abby of Glastenbury 15 foot within the earth, in a hollow Elder-tree; but of this formerly. And now Ranulph de Poer with a great number of Gentlemen was slain by certain young men of Gwentland.Giral. Cam. This Ranulph was Sheriff of Herefordshire, as saith Girald, whose death the same Authour seemeth to impute unto himself, for his cruel and unreasonable dealing with the Welsh: but the King construed it otherwayes, who being sore incensed against them, assembled a mighty Army, and came with the same to Worcester, meaning to invade Wales;The Prince South Wales becomes liege man to the K. of Engl. but the Lord Rees ap Gruffith fearing the Kings puissance thus bent against him and his Countrey men, came by safe conduct unto Worcester, where submitting himself, he sware fealty to the King, and became his liege-man, promising to bring his son and nephews to him for Pledges: But when according to his promise he would have brought them (they remembring how the other Pledges were before used) refused to go with him, and so the matter rested for that time. About this time Cadwalader, the son of Lord Rees, was slain privily in West Wales, and bu∣ried in Twy Gw yn. The next year Owen Vachan, the son of Madoc ap Meredyth, was slain in the Castle of Carregona, hard by Oswestred, in the night time, by Gwenwynwyn, and Cad∣walhon the son of Owen Cyvelioc. And shortly after, Lhewelin son to Cadwalhon ap Gruffith ap Conan was taken, and had his eyes put out. The Visita∣tion made by the Archb. of Canterbury in∣to Wales. Many noble Welshmen list themselves for the Holy land. 1188. Tenbie de∣stroyed.About the year 1187. Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury having in his company Giral∣dus Cambrensis Arch-Archdeacon of Brecon, visited that Countrey; whom the Clergy of Wales began to resist, alledging the liberties and priviledges of their Metropolitan Church of St. David, but they prevailed not. In this visitation he perswaded (which Giraldus de∣scribeth, calling his Book Itinerarium Cambriae) and exhorted as many as ever he could to take the Cross, and to vow the voyage against the Saracens, whereunto he perswaded many of the Nobles of Wales, as appeareth by the same Giraldus. In the year 1188. Maelgon son to Lord Rees, brought his Army against Tenbie, and by plain force wan the Town, and spoiling the same, burned it to ashes. This Lord was fair and comely of person, honest and just, beloved of his friends, and feared of his foes, against whom (especially the Flemmings) he atchieved divers victories. This year also the Lord Rees gathered all his strength, and wan the Castles of Seynclere, Abercorran, and Lhanstephen, and brought all the whole Countrey under his subjection, ta∣king Maelgon his son,The father imprisoneth his son. in whom remained all the hope of South Wales, whom he kept in prison.
In the year following Rees did build the Castle of Chewely; and Gwenlhian his daughter, the fairest and goodliest woman of all Wales died. At this time also Gruffith Mailor Lord of Bromfield a noble man and wise, and one that in liberality passed all the Lords and no∣blemen of his time died, and was buryed at Mynot;Mynot. he had by his wife Angharat the daugh∣ter of Owen Gwyneth Prince of Northwales, a son called Madoc, who succeeded his father in that part of Powis called Powis Vadoc. And prince Rees wone the Castle of Dinevowr, and Owen his son died a Stratta florida or Stratflar, and shortly after Maelgon his other son e∣scaped out of prison, where his Father had kept him long time.Lhanhayaden castle won. But the Lord Rees got the Castle of Lhanhayaden, and the Country about. At which time Gruffith ap Cadogan died. In this year Roderike the son of Owen Gwyneth, by the help of Gothrick King of Man, entred the Isle of Môn, and reduced it under his subjection; b before the End of the Year, the sons of his brother Conan chased him out of the Isle, and got it to themselves. And at this time Maelgon laid sieg to the Castle of Strat-Meiric and wan it.Stratmeic castle take. Also Howell (surnamed Saer, that is to say, the Saxon or English, because he had served in England) son to the said Prince Rees, got the Castle of Gwys by surprise, and took Philip de Gwys, his wife, and his two sons Prisoners therein,Gwys castle surprised. but because he had more Castles then he could well defend, he determined to dismantle the Castle of Lhanhayaden: whereof the Flem∣mings having notice, gathered all their power and came thither the day appointed to raise the Castle, and fiercely assaulted the men of Howel and Maelgon, and put many of them to the sword, the rest escaping by flight; neverthelesse shortly after they gathered new forces and came thither again, and demolished the Castle without any impeachment.Lhanhayaden castle destroy∣ed. Upon this Anarawd another son of Prince Rees (moved with filthy ambition and co∣vetousness of lands) took his two brethren Howel and Madoc prisoners, under pretext of friendship, and put out both their eyes. In the year 1194, Maelgon the son of Prince Rees, gave his brother Anarâwd the Castle of Stratmeiric for his prisoners, whom he set at liberty; then Rees himself did re-edifie the Castle of Rayader Gwy, and his own sons laid wait for him, and took their father pri∣soner, fearing least he would revenge their cruel and unnatural deeds,The sons im∣prison the fa∣ther. but by means of Howel who was blind, he escaped out of prison, and took the Castle of Dynevowr, which Ma∣elgon kept, and destroyed it; also the sons of Cadwalhon wan the castle of Rayader Gwy, and fortified it for themselves. At this time Lhewelin the son of Jorwerth Drwyndwn, who was the eldest son of Owen Gwineth prince of Northwales, remembring his right and title to his inheritance in North∣wales (although his father had been dis-inherited by his brother David) called together his friends by his mother (which was Marred, daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth P. of Powis) & also drew to his side his cosens, the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwineth, & then challenged the rule of Northwales, and entered the country, to whom the people willingly yielded, and took him for their Lord, and so without bloodshed he received all Northwales into his protection and tuition, except three castles, which his Uncle David kept by force of Englishmen, in whom was all his trust; having married Emma daughter of Jeffrie Plantagenet Earle of Ancow and Cevoman or Maine, and Maud the Empresse, and sister to King Henrie the second: and thus Da∣vid lost his land, and Lewelin got his birthright 1194. Quarterly G. and Or 4. Li∣ons passguar. counterchang Lhewelin or Leoline magnus. After that Lhewelin or Leoline the great (as Mr. Mills call him) the son of Jorwerth,Mr. Mill f. 306 had gotten the principality of Northwales, Roger Mortimer came against him with great forces to Melyenith, and built the castle of Cimaron, and so brought that country under his command,Cimaron ca∣stle built. and chased away the two sons of Cadwalhon ap Madoc Lords of that place. About the same time Rees and Meredith the sons of Prince Rees (being two valiant Gentlemen) gathered together a company of Madcaps or Hectors, as we now call such hair-baind fellows, and came
to Dinevowr, and got the Castle from their Fathers Garrison; and after that exployt they went to Cantred Bachan, where the whole Country received them gently, and delivered the castle to their hands, which much displeased their father, who laid privy wait for them; and by treason of their own men (who were afraid any further to incense their Lord and Prince) they were taken and brought to their father, who presently secured them. Caermarthyn destroyed.The year ensuing Prince Rees listed a gallant army, and laid seige to the town and castle of Caermarthyn, and in short time wan them both spoyling and destroying the same, and then returned with great plunder.Clun Castle fired by P. Rees. After which conquest he conducted the same forces to the Marshes before the Castle of Clun, which after a long siege, and many a fierc assault, he got and burned it; and from thence he marched to the Castle, of Radnor, and likewise wan it; to the defence wherof ca Roger Mortimer and Hugh de Says with a strong army of Nor∣mans and English; but Re who had won the Castle, determined not immure his men with∣in the walls, but boldly like a worthy Prince came into the plain besides before the town, and gave them battail; where his men (although for the most part unarmed, and not accustom∣ed to field discipline) declared that they descended of Brittish blood,A brave reso∣lution of the Welsh, and a famous victo∣ry against the English. (whose title the Noble Roman Emperours did so much desire, as a token of manhood and worthinesse) chosing rather to dye with honour, in the defence of their Country, then to live with shame, and did so worthily behave themselves, that their enemies forsook the field, with great losse of their men, whom Rees pursued, till the benefit of the night shadowed them with her dark∣nesse, and forthwith he laid siege to the Castle of Paine in Elvel and got it. Thither came William de Bruse the owner thereof,Payne Castle taken. The Archb. of Cant. led an army against the Welsh. Matth. Park. pag. 138. and made peace with Rees, from whom he received the same Castle again. Not long after the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom Richard who was then King of England, had substituted his Lieutenant in England) came with a huge power towards VVales, and laid siege to the Castle of Gwenwinwin at the pool; but the garrison defended the hold so manfully, that he lost many of his men, but could do no good; for the Welshmen made him know that it was better and more secure to be in a pulpit, then a pavilion, and that the miter and helmet fitted not the same head; yet the Martial Prelate would not so be bafled, but sent for Miners, and set them on work to undermine the walls; which when the garrison discovered, and knowing that their enemies were three to one, they were content to yield up the Castle upon condition that they might depart with their armes freely: whichafter the Archbishop took, suffering them to pass quietly, fortifying the Castle strongly to the Kings use, and placing therein a garrison for defence thereof, de∣parted into England. But immediately ƲƲenwinwin or Gwenwinwin begirt it again, and in short space reduced it upon the same conditions that his men had surrendred it, and kept the same to his own use. P. Rees dieth Hol. p. 534.The next year after, the fourth of May, Rees the son of Gruffith ap Rees ap Theodore P. of Southwales died, the only hope and stay of all that part of VVales, as he that brought them out of the thraldom and bondage of strangers, and set them at liberty, and had de∣fended them divers times in the field manfully,Mr. Powel Fol. 249. daunting the pride and courage of their cruel enemies, whom he did either chase out of the land, or compelled by force to live quietly at home;The Encomi∣ums of prince Rees. woe to that cruel destiny that spoyled the miserable land of her defence and shield, who as he descended of noble and princely blood, so he passed all other in commendable qualities and laudable vertues of the mind; He was the overthower of the mighty, the setter up of the weak, the overturner of the holds, the separater of troopes, the scatterer of his foes, among whom he appeared as a wild bore among the whelps, or a Lyon that for anger beateth his tail to the ground: See more of him in Polychronicon and Grafton. The Kings of England de∣scend from this P. Rees.This Prince had many sons and daughters, as Gruffith, who succeeded his father, Cad∣walhon, Maelgon, Meredyth Rees; and of his daughters one called Gwenlhian was marryed co Ednivet Vachan, who was ancestor of Owen Theodore or Tudor, that married Queen Katha∣rine the widow of K. Henry the fifth, and the rest were marryed to other Lords in the coun∣try. After the death of Rees, Gruffith his son subdueth all the country to himself, and en∣joyed it in peace, untill Maelgon his brother (whome his father had dis-inherited) made league with Gwinwynwyn the son of Owen Civelioc Lord of Powis, who both together, levied forces and came suddainly upon Gruffith, and slaying many of his people, took him priso∣ner, and so recovered all the Country of Caerdigan with the Castle. Thus Maelgon ha∣ving taken his brother, sent him to be imprisoned with Gwinwynwyn, who in despite deliver∣ed him to the English. Then Gwenwynwyn gathered his power and entred Arustlie and sub∣dued the same to himself. About this time there was a great war in Northwales; for the late Prince David ap Owen came with a great army, as well English as Welsh, purposing to recover the land again; but Lhewelin his Nephew who was the lawful heir, and then in possession thereof, came bold∣ly and met him,Powis Wen∣wynwyn why so called. add gave him battail, and putting his people to flight, took him prisoner and secured him, by which means he injoyed his country in quiet tranquillity. Towards the end of this year Owen Cyvelioc prince of higher Powis died, and left his territories to Gwenwinwin his son, after whom that part of Powis was called Powis Gwenwinwin, for a diffe∣rence from the other called Powis Vadoc, which was in the possession of the Lords of Bromfield.
At this time also dyed Owen the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Bromfield and Brichtyr, the son of Howel ap Jevaf, likewise Maelgon the son of Cadwalhon ap Madoc, Lord of Melie∣nyth. Not long after Traherne Vachan (a man of great power in the Country of Brecknock) as he came to Lancors to speak with William Bruse Lord thereof, was suddainly taken,A cruel mur∣ther. and by the Lords command, tyed to a horse tail, and drawn through the town of Aberhodny or Brecknock, to the gallows, and there beheaded, and his body hanged up by the feet three dayes. This cruelty shewed upon no just cause, caused his brother, wife and Children to avoid the Country. The year ensuing Maelgon the son of Prince Rees, after he had im∣prisoned his elder brother, got his Castles of Aberteini and Stratmeiric; also the youngest son of P. Rees wan the Castle of Dinevowr from the Normans. The Summer following Gwenwinwin intending to extend the limits of VVales to the old Meers, gathered a great army, and laid siege first to the Castle of Paine in Eluel, which was of the possessions of ƲƲilliam de Bruse, making a Proclamation, that as soon as he had won the Castle, he would burn all the whole Country to Severne, without mercy, in re∣venge of the murder of Traherne Ʋachan his Cosen, but because he had not Engins and Miners, he lay three weeks at the Castle, whilst the murderer sent to England for aid; whereupon Jeffrie Fitz Peter Lord Chief Justice of England raised forces, and joyning with him all the Lords Marchers, came to raise the seige. And because Fortunes in battails are various and uncertain, he sent first Gwenwinwin to have a treaty of peace concluded, but he and his adherents would by no means condescend thereunto, but answered that they would that journey revenge their old wrongs.The Welsh still made instru∣ments to one anothers ru∣ine. Whereupon the English Lords did first en∣large Gruffith the son of Prince Rees of Southwales, whom they knew to be an enemy to Gwenwynwyn, which Gruffith gathered a great power, and joyned with the English Lords, and so they came towards the Castle, against whom Gwenwinwin advanced very stoutly, and there began a cruel fight, with much slaughter on either side, but at the last the En∣glish carryed the victory, and Gwenwynwyn lost most of his men, among whom were Ana∣rawd son of Eneon, Owen ap Cadwalhon, Richard ap Jestin, and Robert ap Howel; also Me∣redith ap Conan was then taken prisoner, with divers others. Matthew Paris saith, that this battail was fought before Mauds Castle, and that of the Welshmen were then slain 3700.3700 Welshmen slain. A. Lhoyd. Mat. Paris pag 259. and after this victory the English Lords returned with great honour. And forthwith Gruffith son to P. Rees recovered by force and favour of the people all his land, except the two Castles Aberteini and Stratmeiric, which his brother Maelgon by the aid of Gwenwin∣win, had wrongfully taken from him. This his brother Maelgon, fearing his displeasure, took a solemn Oath before both noble and religious men, which endeavoured to make peace betwixt them; that if his brother Gruffith would give him pledges for assurance of his own person, he would deliver him by a Day the Castle of Aberteini: whereupon Gruffith did so;Perjury never prospers. but as soon as Maelgon got the pledges, he fortified the Castle and manned it to his own use; and sent the pledges to Gwenwinvvin, who hated Gruffith to death, there to be kept in prison; but shortly after by Gods help, they broke the prison, and escaped home. In the year 1199. Maelgon son to prince Rees laid seige to the Castle of Dinerth, and getting it, slew all the Garrison which his brother Gruffith had left to defend it, But at the same time Gruffith won the Castle of Cilgarran, and fortified it. This year as King Richard did view the Castle of Chalens in France,The end of K. Rich. and be∣ginning of K. Johns reign. he was strucken with a quarrel, and sore wounded, whereof he dyed the ninth of Aprill, and left by his Testament John his brother, Inheritor of all his lands, having no respect to Arthur, who being son of an elder brother was right heir. The year after Gruffith son of Conan ap Owen Gwineth a noble man died,Noblemen buried in Monks habits. and was bury∣ed in a Monks Cowle at the Abbey of Conwey, and so were all the Nobles (for the most part) of that time buried. This year Maelgon ap Rees, seeing he could not well keep Aberteini,The Key of Wales sold treacherously. of very spite to his brother, and hatred to his Country, sold it to the Englishmen for a small summe of money, being the very key of ƲƲales. The same year Madoc the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Bromfield, did build the Abbey of Lhannegwest, called in English commonly Ʋale Crucis. The year 1201 Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth Prince of North Wales, being a proper young Chivalier, banished out of the land his cozen Meredyth, the son of Conan ap Owin Gwyneth, suspected of Treason, and seized the Cantref of Lhyyn and Evvyonyth to his own hands, which were Conans lands. Then shortly after Meredyth the son of P. Rees was slain at Carnwelhion by Treason;  whose elder brother Gruffith seized upon his Castle in Lhanymdh∣fri, and all his lands; this Gruffith was a wise and discreet Gentleman, and one who was like to bring all South Wales to good order and obedience, who in all things followed his Fathers steps, whom as he succeeded in Government, so did he in all Martial prowess, and nobility of mind, but cruel fortune which frowned upon that Countrey, suffered him not long to enjoy his land; this Prince died on St. James day ensuing, and was buried at Stratflur with great solemnity; he left behinde him a son called Rees as right Inheritor of
South Wales, whose mother was Maud the daughter of William de Bruse. Gwerthryneon Castle de∣stroyed.The next year after certain Lords of Wales got the Castle of Gwerthryneon, which was Roger Mortimers, and laid it plain with the ground. Then Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth P. of North Wales, calling to memory his Estate and Title, and how all the other Princes by the Ordinance of Roderike the great, and by the lawes of Howell Dha, ought of right to acknowledge the King or P. of North Wales as their liege Lord, and hold their lands of him, and of none other, notwithstanding that of late years, by negligence of his predecessors, they had not used their accustomed duty; but some held of the King of England,A Parliament called by the P. of Wales. others ruled as Supreme power within their own Countries; wherefore he called a Parliament of all the Lords in Wales, which for the most part appeared before him, and swore to be his liege men; but Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis would not come thither, nor take the Oath of Allegiance; which disobedience the Prince declared to all his Lords, and they all thought that it was requisit that Gwenwynwyn should be constrained by force to do his duty, or else to lose his lands; yet one of his Lords named Elise ap Madoc would not condescend to hurt Gwenwynwyn in any case, but depar∣ted away suddenly. Then Lhewelyn came with an Army to Powis; but by the means of certain learned men, Gwenwynwyn and the Prince were made friends; and Gwenwynwyn became the P. his liege man, and confirmed that both by Oath and Writing. Then Lhewelyn remembring how Elise ap Madoc had served him, seized upon all his lands, and Elise fled the Countrey; but afterward yielded himself to the Princes mercy, who gave him the Castle of Crogen, and 7 townships withal. Concerning the by-name Crogen.And here I think it not amiss to declare the cause why the English call the Welsh Cro∣gens, as a word of reproach and despite; but if they knew the beginning, they should find the contrary; for in the voyage which K. Henry the 2d. made against the Welshmen to the Mountains of Berwin, as he lay at Oswalstred, certain of his men that were sent to try the pas∣sages, as they would have passed Offas ditch at the Castle of Crogen, at which place there was and is at this day a narrow way through the same ditch; these men, I say, as they would have passed the strait,Adwy'r bedhev. were met withal, and a great number slain, as doth appear by their graves there yet to be seen, whereof the strait beareth the name. Therefore the English∣men after, not forgetting the slaughter, used to cast the Welshmen in the teeth in all their troubles, with the name of Crogen, as if they would signifie unto them thereby, that they should look for no favour, but rather revenge at their hands: which word in process of time, grew to be taken in another signification. Balani Castle fortified. Lhanymdhyfri Castle taken.Now when Lhewelyn had all those parties in good order, he returned to North Wales, and by the way fortified the Castle of Balani Penlhyn; about the same time Rees son of Gruffith ap Rees (by right P. of South Wales) got the Castle of Lhanymdhyfri upon Mi∣chael-Mass day. The Prince of Wales marri∣eth the King of Englands Daughter.About this time Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, took to wife Jone daughter of K. John, with whom the said King gave the Lordship of Elsmere in the Marches of Wales. The year next ensuing, the aforesaid Rees ap Gruffith ap Rees got the Castle of Lhanga∣doc, and fortified it to his own use; but shortly after Maelgon his Unkle with his friend Gwenwynwyn came with a stronge power before the Castle of Lhanymdhyfri, and wan it; and from thence they removed to Lhangadoc, got the same; likewise suffering the garrison to depart:Gwenwynwyn. From thence Maelgon went to Dinerth, and finished the Castle which he had begun there. About this time David sonne of Owen Gwyneth, after that Prince Lhewelyn his nephew had set him at liberty, fled to England, and got an Army to restore him to his antient estate in North Wales; but all in vain; for his nephew met him, and overthrew him in the way; whereupon he returned into England, and there shortly after died for very grief and sorrow. The next year to this, Howell the son to Prince Rees, being blind, was slain at Ce∣maes by his brother Maelgons men, and buried by his brother Gruffith at Stratflur. Al∣though this Maelgon in those dayes bare all the rule in South Wales; yet his brother Gruf∣fiths sons, Rees and his brethren wan from him the chief defence of all his country; to wit, the Castle of Dyncvowr and Lhanymdhyfri. Then William Marshall Earl of Pembrock laid siege to the Castle of Cilgarran, and wan it; not long after Maelgon ap Rees hired an Irishman to kill Gadiver ap Griffri, whose 4 sons Maelgon took and put to death. These were hopeful Gentlemen, and nobly descended; for their mother Susanna was daughter to the said Howel ap Rees, by a daughter of Madoc ap Meredyth Prince of Powis. The Castle of Abereneon built.The year 1205 Maelgon did build a Castle at Abereneon; at which there came such abun∣dance of fish to Aberystwyth, as the like was never seen before. The same year Gwenwynwyn came to Shrewsbury, to speak with the Kings Councel, and was there detained prisoner; whereupon P. Lhewelyn conquered all his countrey, with all the Towns and Castles therein, and kept the same to his own use; which, when Maelgon ap Rees understood that, and Lhewelyn would visit also South Wales, he overthrew his Ca∣stles of Aberystwyth, Sratmeyric and Dynerth, which he before had fortified, dispai∣ring to be able to withstand the Prince; but the Prince held on his journey to A∣berystwyth, and reedified the Castle, and fortified it, and seized to his own hands the
Cantref of Penwedic, and the land betwixt Dyni and Aeron, which he gave to Maelgons nep∣hews the sons of Gruffith ap Rees, and so returned home with great joy. Within a little af∣ter, Rees Vachan son to Prince Rees, besieged the Castle of Lhangadoc, and want; not regarding his promise and league with the sons of his brother Gruffith ap Rees, forgetting how worthily they had served him in his necessity. Therefore as soon as they heard of this, both Rees and Owen came before the said Castle, and wan it by assault, and slew and took prisoners all the garrisons; and then demolished quite the Castle. In the year 1210, the Earl of Chester re-edified the Castle of Dyganwy, which stood upon the Sea-shore, East of the River Conwey, which Prince Lhewelyn had formerly ruined; also he fortified the Castle Treffynnon or St. Winfride. Then Prince Lhewelyn entred the Earls land, and destroyed a great part thereof, and returned home with the plunder. Also Rees Vachan fearing Prince Lhewelyn, who defended his nephews the sons of Gruf∣fith in their right, went to the King for succour, which he received with good will, and by their aid he laid siege to the Castle of Lanymdhyfri; now when the garison perceived no hope of relief, they desired that they might depart with bag and baggage, horses and all; and so they did. Likewise Gwenwynwyn, whom the King detained in prison, was set at liberty; and the King fearing the Prince his power, sent an Army with him, by whose means he received all his countrey again in short space.Maelhon vio∣lating his Oath. Maelgon also when he heard the same came to the Kings Court, and became his man, who returning home with a great company of Normans and Englishmen, joined to them all the power he could make in Wales, and contrary to the Oath that he had made to his nephews Rees and Owen, began to spoil their countrey, and coming to Cantref Cenwedic, encamped at Cilkennyn, and lay there all night consulting upon his voyage. In the mean time his nephews hearing this, having but a small power, not above 300 of chosen men, came and lodged hard by, undiscove∣red by their enemies: and having notice by their Scouts that all was quiet in Maelgons camp, and how that his men mistrusting nothing, behaved themselves carelesly; these two Lords prosecuted boldly the enterprise which they had taken in hand, and peaceably en∣tring the camp, came where they thought Maelgon lay, and before they were discovered, they gave an Alarum, and slew a great number before they could awake, and the rest hearing the noise half amazed, by reason of the darkness escaped away,A valiant ex∣ploit of the Welsh. thinking some great power had been there; but Maelgons men defended themselves manfully, until such time as their Lord had gotten upon his feet, and escaped away by the benefit of the night. Then his nephew Conan ap Howell, and his chief Councellour Gruffith ap Cadogan were both taken, and Eneon ap Caradoc with a great number more slain. About this time Gilbert Earl of Glocester fortified Bueltht,Cruelty a∣gainst the Welsh reven∣ged by God. where a little before he had lost many men. This year also Maud de Bruse wife to Gruffith ap Rees died, and was buried in a religious habit at Stratflur. You have heard before of the great and treacherous u∣sage which William de Bruse used towards the Welsh at Abergavenni and Breconi; but King John (Gods just judgement so ordaining) banished him and his wife into Ireland, and seized all his lands; yet his wife and son were taken, and William himself forced to flye into France. The next year ensuing, King John had many complaints made unto him by the Marchers against Lhewelyn, how he entring their countrey, burned and spoiled all as he went, and slew their men; Wherefore the King gathered a great Army through all England, and called to him such Lords and Princes of Wales as held of him, as Howell ap Gruffith ap Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, whom Lhewelyn had banished; Madoc ap Gruffith Maylor, Lord of Brom∣field, Chirk, and Yale; Meredyth ap Rolpert Lord of Cydewen; Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis; Maelgon and Rees Vachan the sons of P. Rees, Rulers of South Wales;The Welsh still enemies to themselves. with this great Army he entred into North Wales by Chester, resolving to destroy all that had life in that coun∣trey: The Prince hearing of all this preparation against him, as well of his own coun∣trey as others, commanded all such as inhabited the inland or middle countrey (which is now part of Denbigh and Flint Shires) to remove all their goods and cattel to Snowdon Hills for a time; and so the King came along the Sea coast to Ruthlan,The English distressed by the Welsh. and there passed o∣ver the River Clwyd, and came to the Castle of Teganwy, and there remained a while: but Lhewelyn cut off his victuals behind him, so that he could have none from England, and there could no man scatter from the Skirmishes unfought withal, where the North-Walesmen alwayes both for the advantage of the straits,King John with disho∣nour forced to return home. and knowledge of the places had the upper hand; at the last the English Souldiers were glad to taste horse-flesh for pure need. When the King saw no remedy, he returned home in great rage, leaving the countrey full of dead bodies. In August next ensuing, he returned again with a great Army, and the Lords before na∣med with him, and entred into Wales at Blanchmonasterie, now Oswastred,King John an enemy to Clergy men. whereof John the son of William Fitz Allen was Lord; at this time the King passing the river of Con∣wey, encamped there by the river side, and sent part of his Army with guides of the coun∣trey, to burn Bangor, who did so, taking Rotpert the Bishop prisoner,A strange ransome for a Bishop. who was afterwards ransomed for 200 Hawks. The distressed, yet couragious Prince, seeing all England and Wales against him, and a great part of his land won from him, thought it best to capitu∣late
with the King; and thereupon he sent Joan his wife, the Kings daughter, to her fa∣ther,The Inland of NorthWales granted to K. John for ever to make a peace, who (being a discreet woman) found the means, that upon pledges given for safe conduct, the prince came to the King and made peace with him, and did him homage. And giving pledges, promised towards his charges 20000 heads of Cattel, and forty Horses. Moreover he granted to the King the Inland for ever, whereupon the King returned to England with great triumph, after he had brought all Wales under his sub∣jection, saving Rees and Owen the sons of Gruffith ap Rees. Therefore at his departure he gave strict command to Fulk Visconnt of Caerdff (called Warden of the Marshes, a cruel Ty∣rant,Caerdif ho∣noured with a Viscount. yet well beloved by the King) to take an army with him, that he joyning with Ma∣elgon and Rees Ʋachan, might compell the aforesaid sons of Gruffith to obey him. This Foulk calling to him Maelgon and Rees came to the Cantref of Penwedic, when the young Lords seeing no remedy, sent to him for peace and safe conduct to passe to the Court, upon their submission to the King, with the gift of all their Lands betwixt Aeron and Dyn;All Wales in homage to K. John. they were received by him very gently, and courteously entertained; and after they had done him homage they returned home again. Fulk before his departure out of the Country fortified the Castle of Aberystwith, and manned it to the Kings use. But within a while after Maelgon (as he was very unconstant) and Rees Ʋachan re∣pented them of the peace they had made with the King, and thereupon sat down before Aberistwyth, and getting the same, destroyed it. When the Nephews Rees and Owen per∣ceived that their Uncle had broken the Kings peace, they made a road into Maelgons coun∣try, and slew a great number of his men, and returned home with great booty. The next year prince Lhewelin, being not able to endure the displeasures which the gar∣risons (left in his Nephews castles in Northwales) did to his people, called to him Gwenwin∣wyn from Powis, Maelgon ap Rees from Southwales, Madoc ap Gruffith Maylor from Brom∣field, Meredyth ap Rotpert from Cydewen, and opened to them this miserable case, how they which were wont to have a prince of their own Nation, now (by their own willfulness) were brought under subjection to a stranger; and declared also unto them, how, that if they would agree among themselves, they might defend their antient Estate still, which they all promised to do, and swore fealty to prince Lhewelyn, and forthwith gathered an ar∣my and wan all the Castles except Ruthlan and Dyganwy; then coming to Powis they laid siege to the Castle which Robert Ʋepont had made at Mathraval.Mathraval Castle razed by K. Johns command. The King no sooner had notice of these transactions, but he leavied an army and came thither to raise the siege, and after caused the Castle to be razed, and then returned home having greater matters in hand between him and his Nobles, and being at Notingham, he caused all the pledges out of Wales to be hanged,A tyrannous execution. as Howel the son of Cadwalhon, Madoc the son of Maelgon and others, to the number of 28. striplings; also Robert Ʋepont did hang at Shrewsbury Rees the son of Maelgon not being yet 7 years of age, and so cruelly murdred the innocent to revenge the the offences of others. Rees the son of Gruffith ap Rees, who was heir to prince Rees, seeing he could have no part of his Fathers Lands, but that his Uncles did keep all from him by force, made his complaint to the King; and the King pittying his Estate, sent to Foulk Viscount of Caerdyf, and to the Steward of Hereford commanding them to take all Stratywy from Rees Ʋachan, (whom others call Rees Gryc) unlesse he would let his nephews enjoy the castle of Lanymdhfry, with the territory belonging thereunto, and they sent to Rees to know his resolution, who an∣swered them stoutly, that they should not have one foot of Land of him. Therefore Foulk gathered a great army together, and met with young Rees at Talhwynelgain, where he looked for him with a number of men that he had gotten in Brecon, and thence they mar∣ched in three battails towards Dynevowr, of which young Rees had the leading of the first, Foulk the second, and Owen, brother to Rees, the third; Rees Ʋachan notwithstanding came boldly to give them battail, where in the end he was put to flight, with great losse of his men; whereupon he went immediately and manned the castle of Dynevowr and set fire to the town of Lhandeilo vawr, keeping himself in the wild and rough places; his enemies seeing this, besieged the castle of Dynevour, and at the first assault they wan the first ward, so that they of the garrison were compelled to take the Koxe for their defence, which they manfully defended, but the assailiants made engines to cast stones of great bigness, and began to undermine the walls in such sort, that the Captain fell to that composition, that if he were not succoured by the next day at noon, he would deliver up the castle upon con∣dition, that all his men might depart with their armour and weapons, and so they did, for they had no relief. Afterward they brought the Cantref Maur under subjection, which caused Rees Ʋachan to remove his wife and children to his brothers country, and left the castle of Lhanymdhfry well fortified and manned. After the departure of Fulke, young Rees came with an army of Welshmen and Normans to Lhanymdhfri, but before they were encam∣ped the Captain delivered up the castle, and the garrison departed, their lives granted. And shortly after Rees Ʋachan was taken at Caermarthyn and committed to the Kings prison. At this time prince Lhewelyn laid siege to the castle of Dyganwy and Ruthlan, & won them both, so that he left the King neither hold nor castle within his land.
After this fortunate success and happy attempts, Lhewelyn in the head of a gallant Army marched to Shrewsbury; which Town and Castle were delivered unto him without any re∣sistance; and there he remained a while. In the mean time Giles de Bruse, the son of Wil∣liam de Bruse, a man of great power and nobility, was consecrated Bishop of Hereford,Godwin in Hereford. Sept. the 24, 1200. In the Barons Wars he took part with them against the King, and at last was fain to flye the land; afterwards being suffered to return, and received into the Kings, favour, he travelled homeward, and died at Glocester, Novemb. 17, 1215. he left great possessions, descended unto him by his ancestors, which he left to Reginald Bruse his bro∣ther, that married the daughter of Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth Prince of North Wales. This man lyeth buried upon the North side of the Presbytery; the Image that lyeth upon his Tombe, holdeth the likeness of a Steeple in his hand, whereby it should seem he built one of the Towers or Steeples: thus far B. Godwyn. This Giles as chief of the conspiracy, sent his brother Reynold to Brecnock, and all the people received him as their Lord,The large possessions of that Bruse in Monmothshire. and so he got all his Castles without gain-saying of any man; to wit, Abergwenny, Penkelhy, Gastelth Gwyn, or White Castle, Grismond and the Isle of Cynuric. But when the Bishop came thither himself, they delivered him the Castles of Abechodny, Hay, Bueltht, and Blaynthyfery; and he to strengthen himself in that Countrey, promised Castle Payn, Clune, withal Eluel to Walter Vachan the son of Eneon Clyd: In the mean time young Rees, son to Griffith ap Rees, and Maelgon his Unkle were made friends, and went both to Dyneth, where they re∣covered all the land to themselves, saving Cemai, and overthrew the Castle of Aberth, and Maynclochoc. Then Maelgon and Owen, brothers to Rees, went to North Wales to P. Lhe∣welyn, and did to him homage; and young Rees gathered an Army, and came to Cydwe∣ly, and brought withal Caruwylheon to his subjection, and razed the Castle there,Lhychwr Ca∣stle razed. and like∣wise the Castle Lhychwr. From thence he conducted his army to the Castle of Hugh de Miles at Talybont, and ha∣ving taken the same by force, slew many of the garison; the day after he took his jour∣ney to Senghennyth, where the garison which lay there, burnt the Town and departed. Therefore Rees laying siege to the Castle of Ystymlhwynarth,Senghennyth burnt by its own garison. got the same the next day following, and set both it and the Town on fire; and he got the Castles of Gurland within three dayes after, and then returned home with Victory and Triumph. At this time Rees Vachan, unkle to young Rees, and son to the Lord Rees, was set at liberty by the King,Young Rees prosperous in Glamorgan. leaving his son and two other Pledges for him. This year two Abbots were made Bishops, Jorwerth of St. Davids, and Cadogan, of whom formerly. Shortly after Lhewelyn Prince of North Wales, came with a great Army to Caermarthyn, and laid siege to the Castle, which was yielded unto him the 5th day after, which he ra∣zed to the ground, as he did also the Castles of Lhanstephan, St. Clare, and Talachern;P. Lhewelyns fortune. from thence he went to Caerdigan, and winning the new Castle in Emlyn, he subdued Ce∣maes, and got the Castle of Trefdracth (called in English Newport) and razed the same to the ground. Then the garison which kept the Castle of Aberteini, delivered the same un∣to him upon St. Stephens day, and the day after he had the Castle of Cilgerran; from whence he returned to North Wales with great Honour and Triumph. In the which voy∣age these Lords accompanied him; viz. Howell ap Gruffith ap Conan, Lhewelyn ap Meredyth, Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis, Meredyth ap Rotpert, Maelgon and Rees Vachan the sons of P. Rees, Rees and Owen the sons of Gruffith ap Rees, and the power of Madoc ap Gruffith May∣lor Lord of Bromfield. The year following the Prince went to Aberteini, to make an agreement betwixt Mael∣gon and Rees Vachan, sons to Prince Rees on the one side, and their nephews young Rees and Owen on the other part, where he divided South Wales betwixt them after this man∣ner; to Maelgon he gave three Cantrefs in Dyneth Gwarthaf; Penlhwynoc, Cemaes, and Em∣lyn, with the Castle of Cylgerran; two in Stratywy, Hiruryn and Malhaen, and Maenor Byd∣vey with the Castle Lanymdhifri; and two in Caerdigan, Gwynionyth and Mabwyneon to young Rees; and to Owen his brother he gave the Castle of Aberteini, and the Castle of Nant yr arian (or silver dale) and three Cantress in Caerdigan withal; and to Rees Vachan the Castle of Dynevowr, the Cantref Mewr, and the Cantref Bachan (except Hyruryn and Mydhuey, and the Comots of Cydwely and Carnwylhion.) This division being accomplished, the Prince returned homeward; to whom by the way it was signified, that Gwenwynwyn (contrary to his Oath and bonds in Writing) had forsaken him,A fickle Lord. and became the Kings subject; which grieved the Prince very much, and therefore he sent unto him Bishops and Abbots to move him to remember his Oath, and Promise and Pledges given to the Prince, and to shew him his owr hand, and thereby to see if he would come again, and to promise him the Princes favour; but he would in no case hear of reconciliation, wherefore the Prince entred into Powis with fire and sword, and subdued the Countrey to himself; which caused Gwenwynwyn to flye unto the Earl of Chester for relief, where he stayed a while. In the mean time Reynalt de Bruse (who had received many favours from the Welsh) did agree with the King without the knowledge or consent of P. Lhewelyn, and contrary to his promise; whereupon young Rees and Owen his sisters sons (seeing that he in whom they
trusted most, deceived them) rose against him, and won all Buelht from him, saving the castle; but when the prince heard of this agreement, he was much offended therewith, and coming with an army to Brecknock, he laid siege to the town of Aberhadny, where the Burgesses of the town came to him, and by means of young Rees the prince taking 100. marks and five pledges of them, raised the siege, and took his journey over the black mountains towards Gwyr, where he lost much of his carriages. And as he encamped at Lhan∣gruc, Reynalt Bruse came to him with six Knights in his company, and desired of his father in Law pardon for his defence, who receiving him lovingly did not only forgive him, but gave him also the castle of Sengbennyth, and Reynalt committed the same to the custody of Rees Vachar. Lhewelin after he had set all things in good order in that country, marched to Dynet, and being at Cefu Cinwarchan, the Flemmings sent to him to desire peace, but the prince would not grant them their request. Then young Rees was the first that passed the River Cledhen to fight with them of the town; whereupon Jorwerth Bishop of St. Da∣vids with all his clergy came to the prince to desire peace to the Flemmings, which after long debating was thus concluded. First that all the Inhabitants of Ros and the Land of Pembrock should become the Prince his Subjects,Articles of peace be∣tween Lhe∣welin and the Flemmings. and ever from thenceforth take him for their Leige Lord. Secondly that they should pay him a 1000 marks towards his charges before Michaelmas next coming. Thirdly that for performance of these they should deliver forthwith to the Prince twenty pledges of the best in all the country, which things they did; Then the Prince returned into Northwales with much honour.Caerleon ta∣ken by the E. of Pembrock. Shortly after William Marshal Earl of Pembrock got the town of Caerlheon, and made war against the Welshmen, whom contrary to their pro∣mise, the Barons left out of the conclusion of peace. The Barons were very glad of the friendship and aid of the P. of Wales to serve their own turne;The Barons pacifying France and England, con∣spire, against Wales. but now in a general con∣clusion of peace, contrary to their oath and promise, they reserve out Wales to keep them play withall, hoping to get some more land thereby; therefore let us take heed how we trust to self serving friendship. Hereupon Rees Vachan razed the Castle of Senghennyth and all the Castles he had in his custody in that Country, and banished all the English there inhabiting, with their wives and Children for ever,Strangers ba∣nished out of Wales. and divided the Country amongst the Welsh, who have kept it ever since. The year ensuing, Prince Lhewelyn put Garrisons into the Castles of Caermarthyn and Aberteini. Then young Rees, by the Prince his consent, went to the King, and did ho∣mage for his lands. In the year following Rees Gryc married the daughter of the Earle of Clare, and John de Bruse married the daughter of P. Lewelin. The Flem∣mings violate the Oath. The year 1220 Lhewelyn Prince of Wales conducted an army to Pembroke against the Flemmings, who contrary to their Oath and League had taken the Castle of Aberteini, which Castle the Prince won and destroyed, putting the Garrison to the sword, razed the Castle, and went thence to Gwys, where he razed that Castle, and burned the town. Also he caused all Hanerford to be burned to the Castle gates, and destroyed all Ros and Dongled∣han; and they who kept the Castle, sent to him for truce till the first of May, which was concluded upon conditions, and so he returned home.  Also this year certain Lords of Wales besieged the Castle of Buelht, which belonged to Reynalt de Bruse, therefore the King came with an army to the Marches, and raised the siege, and came as far as Montgomery, and built a Castle there.Montgomery castle built by K. John. The year following, there fell a great difference betwixt Prince Lhewelin and Gruffith his son; for this Gruffith enjoyed the Cantref of Merioneth without his fathers consent, and therefore his father sent for him to come unto him, which he denied to do: Therefore the Prince sware that he would be revenged upon him and his confederates for that disho∣nour, and then came with a great army to Merioneth; but the son not fearing his father, got his people into the field ready to abide the battail; but as they were in fight, there was a peace concluded, and Gruffith yielded to his father, and cryed him mercy. Then Lhewelin, although he forgave his son the offence, yet he took Merioneth and Ardydwy from him, and building a Castle there, returned home again. At this time young Rees forsook Prince Lhewelyn because Aberteini was not delivered him as the promise was at the division of South-Wales, and went to William Marshal Earle of Pembroke, which caused Prince Lhewe∣lyn to come to Aberystwyth, and seize the castle and all the Territories to his own use. Young Rees hearing this, went to the King to complain upon Prince Lhewelin, and the King sent for the prince to Shrewsbury, and made him and Rees friends; the prince promising to deale with Rees for Aberteini, as he had done with Maelgon for Caermarthyn. This Winter John Bruse by the consent of prince Lhewelyn fortified the Castle of Senghennyth. Young Rees dies and is buried at Stratlur.The year after young Rees departed out of this life, being a lusty Gentleman, and en∣dued with many notable vertues, and was buryed at Stratflur, whose inheritance Lhewelin divided between his brother Gwen and his Vncle Maelgon. In the year 1223. William Marshal came from Ireland, and landed at St. Davids with a
great army; and shortly after laid seige to Aberteini and got it, and from thence marched to Caermarthyn, and likewise got the same. Lhewelin prince of Wales, at what time William Marshal Earle of Pembrock prosecuted the wars in Ireland, took the two castles in VVales belonging to the Earle. And now speaking of this Earof Pembrock as formerly I have done, I will set down a Catalogue of the Earles of that place with their armes. Pembrockshire was inhabited of old by the Dimetae; a Country quite surrounded by the sea, save where it joyneth unto Caerdegan and Caermarthynshires, a country plentiful in corne, and cattel, and fish, not destitute of pitcoale, and which is far above the rest (as Giral∣dus tells) considering that is so near to Ireland, of a wholesome and temperate air; it contains in it 140. parish churches, and 5. Markets; that which is most of note being Milford, renowned for its safe and capacious haven; but that from which it takes its denomination, is, the Town of Pembrock, seated upon a forked arme of Milford haven, and in the best part of the country, the Town consisting principally of one long street, on a long narrow point of a rock; and hath in the walls thereof two churches. The Earles hereof in former times were County Palatines, and passed all things that concerned that County, under the seale of the Earldom, and it continued so until the reign of K. H. VIII. when as VVales was redu∣ced to England, and the authority of the great Lords there dissolved by Parliament, since which the Earles of Pembrock have been meerly titulan, as of other places; and of each sort were these in their several ages; the Marquesses and Earles of Pembrock. 1 Gilbert de Clare. 2 Richard de Clare surnamed Srongbow. Or 3 Cheverons G. a Cressant for difference. 3 William Marshal married Isabel daughter and heir of Rich. Strongbow. 4 William Marshal Lord Chief Justice. 5 Richard Marshal. 6 Gilbert Marshal. 7 Walter Marshal. 8 Anselme Marshal. Party per pale Or, and vert a Lyon Rampant Gules incensed Azure. 9 William de Valence half brother to Henry III. whose wife was daugh∣ter of a Sister of Anselme Marshal. 10 Aymer de Valence. Ten Clossets Argent and B, as many Martlets in Ʋrle Gules, Mr. Broch∣cals larnly of 10. pieces. 11 Laurence Hastings who married the Lady Isabella Valence. 12 John Hastings. 13 John Hastings,; this John bore quarterly Brotherton, Hastings Or a Manch Gules. Valence and Brotherton 14 Humphrey Duke of Glocester. Quarterly France and England a border Arg. 15 VVilliam de la Pole Duke of Suffolk. B. a fess. between three Leopards heads Or. 16 Jasper of Hatfield, brother to King Henry the Sixt, after Duke of Bedford. Quarterly France and England in a border B. 8 martlets Or, Mr. Brock calls them Semy. 17 VVilliam Herbert. 18 VVilliam Herbert. Party per pale B. and G. 3 Lyons Ramp. Arg. 19. Edward Prince of VVales, son of K. Edw. IV. Quarterly France and England a Label Arg. 20 Anne Bullen Marchioness of Pemb. wife to Hen. 8. Arg. a Cheveren G. between 3 Bulls heads coupe, Sable.
21 VVilliam Herber created Earle by Edw. 6. 22 Henry Herbert. 23 VVilliam Herbert Lord Steward and Chancellour of Oxford. 24 Philip Herbert Earle of Pembroke and Montgomery. 25 Philip Herbert now living. Quarterly Band G 3 Lions Ramp. Arg. a border Gotone of the second and Or besants; this border is now laid aside. Lex Talionis.This Earle hearing that Lhewelin had taken his Castles, and put his men to the sword, returned from Ireland with all speed, and recovering his forts, used the same courtesy to∣wards Lhewelins men as he had shewed to his; and then entring further into the Princes Country; destroyed all before him as he went. Mat. Pais 423 who saith that the Earl had the victo∣ry, and hat there were slain 000. persons.These tidings coming to Lhewelins ear, did much vex him, whereupon he sent Gruffith his son with a power of men to impeach the Earl from passing further. Griffith went to Cye∣weli, and understanding that the Burgesses of the town meant to betray him, burned the town, churches and all to the ground. Then VVilliam Marshal passed the River Tywy at Caermardhyn, where Gruffith met with him, and gave him battail, which was long time doubtful, and endured until night, and then either party withdrew themselves, and the River betwixt: and after they had abode so for certain dayes, Gruffith for lack of victuals (for his men were about 9000 persons) returned back,Cilgerran Ca∣stle built. and the Earle went to Cilgerran and began to build there a very strong castle; but receiving letters from the King to come & speak with him, he went to the Court by sea, and left his army to continue the work which he had begun. The King and the Archbishop being at Ludlow sent for the Prince, and would gladly have composed matters between him and the Earl, but it would not be, and so they departed. And when the Earle would have passed to Pembrock by land, with the strength of the Earle of Derby and Henry Pigot Lord of Ewyas, the prince sent his son to keep the passage at Carnwylhion, and he himself came as farr as Mabedryd; which when the Earle understood, He retreated back to England, and the prince bent his course for North-VVales. The year 1226. Rees Vachan son of Rees Gryc, took his father prisoner, and would not set him at liberty, till he had delivered him the Castle of Lhanymdhfry. At this time Me∣redyth Archdeacon of Caerdigan son to prince Rees, was interred by his father at St. Davids. The year following K. Henry the III. now King of England, came with a great army into Wales as far as Ceri and encamped there;K. Henry 3. of England. Mat. Paris. p. 463. and on the other side Lhewelyn called to him all the power of VVales, encamped not far off, and there passed divers great skirmishes, and chiefly upon one day, the most part of both armies was in the field, and many of the Kings men, at which time William de Bruse son to Reynalt was taken prisoner, who offered for his ransom the Country of Buelht,P. Lhewelin a worthy prince and a great summe of money beside. Then was a peace concluded between the King and the prince, whereupon the Prince came and did honour unto the King, but not as his King and Lord, and every party returned home. Mr Powel. fol. 282.This History saith Mr. Powel, is somewhat otherwaies set down by Matt. Paris, which I have thus translated out of the same Author. About the same time those Souldies which lay in Garrison in the Castle of Montgomery, went out with some of their Neighbours to amend a certain passage in the highway, leading through a great wood thereby, where the Welshmen were wont to rob and slay such as traveled that way, and coming to the place, with their axes and other weapons, began to fell trees and to cut down the bushes, whereby the way might be enlarged, which thing when the Welshmen understood, they came with a great power, and setting upon their enemies, com∣pelled them to take the Castle for their defence (certain being slain on both sides) and then casting a trench about the same laid siege to it.The Castle & honour of Mntgmery given to Hu∣bert de Bg. This being speedily carried to Hubert de Burge Chief Justice of England, to whom a little before the same castle and honour was gi∣ven: The King himself with convenient speed coming, raised the siege, and when his whole army came unto him (for few Souldiers came with him thither) he went to the said wood, which was very large, being five miles in length, and by reason of the thick growth of the same, very hard to be mooted, howbeit the King caused the same with great diligence and travail to be asserted and consumed with fire.King Henry causeth d a Abbey to be burnt. Then leading his ar∣my further into the Country, he came to an Abbey of white Monks, called Cridia, being a refuge for the Welsh to fly unto, which he caused to be burnt to Ashes: where Hubert de Burg, (to whom the place seemed very fit for fortification) having the assent of the King, caused a castle to be built; but ee the work could be finished many were slain on both sides; and Will de Bruse a valiant Souldier and Chieftain, who went out to make provision for the army, was taken by the Welshmen and secured; and divers others went out for the like pur∣pose, whereof one being Knighted a few dayes before, seeing some of his fellows in danger & like to be distressed, rushed boldly into the midst of his enemies, killing many about him; yet in the end with many others of the Kings men was slain: several also of the Kings men being con∣federates with P. Lhewelyn did very remisly defend themselves & his cause, with whome they
came thither; whereupon the King wanting necessary provision, and perceiving the double dealing of some of his own men, was constrained to conclude a dishonourable peace with the Welshmen, giving his assent that the Castle which with so great expences of men and money was almost finished, should be razed at his own charges,An ignoble peace to the English. taking of P. Lhewelin 3000 pound toward the same; the peace being thus confirmed, both parties went home∣wards. Thus the King of England, after he had bestowed three moneths in the building of the said Castle, and disbursed an incredible some of mony in vain, leaving William de Bruse one of his nobles in the Prince his prison, returned home with great stain of honour. The name also which Hubert the Chief Justice had given to the Castle viz. Huberts folly,Stulitia Hu∣berti. did now move many to laugh at those things, who seeing that costly and sumptuous building to be laid even with the earth, said that Hubert was a prophet, and much more then a pro∣phet; so much out of Paris. About the year 1230 Lhewelyn the son of Maelgon deceased, and was entombed at Conwey.Adultery pu∣nished by death. Abergaveny businesse re∣venged. Prince Lhewelin caused William Bruse to be hanged, being as tis reported, taken in adulte∣ry with his wife, who was the Sister of K. Henry. About this time Maelgon was buried at Stratflur whose patrimony young Maelgen his son, inherited after his father. This year the King led a great army to Wales, and after he had remained in the Marshes a while, he returned into England, and left Hubert de Burge Earle of Kent with his army to defend the Marshes, and hereby his spies understood where certain Welshmen had entred the Marshes to plunder, and set upon them by Montgomery, killing many of them. The Prince herewith being much troubled gathered his forces, and to revenge his men,A gallant re∣venge. enter∣ing the Marshes he destroyed all with fire and sword who withstood him, and burnt the Castles and Garrisons without mercy;  and first the Castle of Montgomery, for the Earle withdrew himself for fear; then the castle of Radnor, Aberhodny, Rayader, Gwy, and so he went to Caerlheon, and after long fight, and loss of many of his men got the Town, and left nothing therein but Ashes; the like he did with the Castles of Neth and Cydwely.The utter de∣struction of Caerlheon. Therefore the King came to Hereford with a mighty army, and sent a great number of his nobles with the most part of his army to ƲƲales, who using the direction of a Fryer of Cymer, met with a company of ƲƲelshmen which at the first encounter sled, whom the Englishmen fol∣lowed to the Straits, where the ambushments lay, which fell upon them,A Fryer ven∣tureth his life in behalf of his country. Maud Castle built by K. Henry the III. The Welsh well enough required for deerring their own Countrymen. and slew a great number of the best Souldiers; the rest escaped by flight. Therefore the King would have burnt the house of Cymer; yet the Prior redeemed it by paying 300 marks, and so the King returned into England, after he had built the Castle of Maud; whilst these things were in agitation, Maelgon the son of Maelgon ap Rees laidsiege to Aberteini, and got the Town and destroyed it to the Castle gates, putting all the inhabitants to the sword. And shortly after he returned with his cozen Owen son to Gruffith ap Rees, with certain of the Princes Captains, and brake down the bridge upon the River Teini, and laid siege to the Castle, and with engines and mines threw down the same, and so with much honour return∣ed home. The next year this gallant and heroick Brittain Lhewelyn entered England, and brought back a rich spoyle both of goods, cattel and men; which forced the King to impose a sub∣sidy to subdue the Brittains. About this time John Earle of Chester, surnamed Le Scot, from the place of his birth,Mr Brook York He∣rald fol. 5. The murder at Abergaveny punished in the Family of de Bruse. Earl of Huntington and Cambridge, &c. son of David brother to the King of Scots, who bore for his armes Or three garbs Gules, married Helin daughter to Lhewelin P. of Northwales: al∣so Ephraim Bishop of Lhanelwy died; and John de Bruse falling off his horse, his foot stick∣ing fast in the stirrup, was drag'd till he dyed most miserably. The year following Richard E. of Cornwal fortified the Castle of Radnor, which the Prince had lately destroyed. Shortly after Prince Lhewelin came with an army to Brecknock, and destroyed all the towns and castles of the Country, and lay a moneth at the siege of the Castle of Brecknock,P. Lhewelin a scourge to the English adhe∣rents. but yet went without it, and burning the town retreated home with great plunder. In his journey by the way, he burned the Town of Clun, and recovered all the Country called Dif∣frin Teneidiat, which was the possession of John Fitz Allen, but he could not get the Castle. After that he overthrew the Red Castle in Powis (now the house of the Right Honourable Sir Percy Herbert Lord Powis a right worthy Gentleman,Red castle in Montgomery shire.) a Garrison formerly for the Parlia∣ment, and at this present: and burned the town of Oswestre and so came home. And a∣bout this time Richard Marshal fell at variance with the King, who with Huber de Burge, that escaped out of the castle of Devises (where the Bishop of Winchester intended to have starved him) came to Wales, and joyned with the prince against the King. Then the Earle with Owen ap Gruffith ap Rees came to Menevia or St. Davids,The English with the Welsh against their King. Abergavenny with other Castles taken. K. Henry by Grismont lost 500. Horse. and killed and spoiled all the Kings Friends within the Town. Also Maelgon and Rees Gryc with the power of the prince joyned with them who in that voyage wan all these Castles, Caerdiff, A∣bergaveny, Pencelhy, Blaynlhefyini and Bwlchy Dynet, which they razed all, except Caerdif. This so incensed the King, that he raised a mighty army, as well Flemmings, Normans, and Gascoines and Englishmen, and entred ƲƲales, thinking to destroy the whole Country, and en∣camped at Grismont, where the Earle with the power of Wales encamped hard by him; and as the Kings men would have entred further, they were met withall and lost 500 horse;
and so upon better consideration returned home, after whose departure the Earl with the power aforesaid lay before Caermarthyn three moneths; but it was so manfully de∣fended that they went without it, and at last there came in the Kings ships, and man∣ned and victualed the town; which caused the besiegers to rayse their siege and depart. About this time Rees Gryc Son to the Lord or prince Rees, dyed at Lhandeilo vawr, and was buried honourably by his Father at St. Davids, and then also Maelgon the son of Maelgon finished the Castle of Tresilan which his father had begun. John of Mer∣meth forced to y.In the year 1234. John Lord Monumetensis, a noble warriour, Captain or General of the Kings Army, being made Ward of the marches of Wales, levied a power, and came against Earl Marshall and the Welshmen, but when he had once entred Wales, he came back in post leaving his Men for the most part slain and taken behind. Ma. Paris p. 520.This History is reported by Mathew Paris after this manner; About the feast of St. John Baptist, John of Monmoth a noble and expert warriour, who was with the King in his wars in Wales, gathered a great army, meaning to invade the Earl Marshal at unawares; but he being certifi'd thereof, hid himself in a certain wood, by the which lay the way of his Enemies, intending to deceive them who went about to do the like by him; when the Enemies therefore came to the place where the Ambuscado was,Ham watch, ham catch. the Earl Marshals army gave a great shout, and so set upon their Enemies being unprovided, and suddainly put them all to flight, putting to the sword an infinite number of them, as well Poictavians as o∣thers: John of Monmoth himself escaped by flight, whose Country with the villages, buildings and all that he had therein, the Earl Marshall did spoil and plunder, leaving no∣thing but what fire and sword could not destroy, and so full fraught with spoil returned home. Salop taken by P. Lhewe∣lyn.Afterward, in the week of Epiphanie, Lhewelyn P. of ƲƲales, together with the Earl Marshall joyning their forces, and entering the Kings land, destroyed all with fire and sword from the confines of Wales unto the town of Salop which they also took, and burnt a great part thereof, enriching themselves with the plunder of the Country: The King of England being all this while with the Bishop of Winchester t Glocester,The K. care∣less of his honour. little re∣garding war, who for want of sufficient strength, durst not meet his enemies in the field, but being ashamed of the matter, departed towards Winchester, leaving the marches to be destroyed by the Enemies, as any man might imagine. The same year Richard Marshall Earl of Pembrock, by councel of Geffrey de Marisco, went with an army to Ireland, where he was slain in fight by treason of his own Men, after whom his brother Gilbert succeeded in the Inheritance: Mr. Brook reporteth the story thus, that whilst he with Lhewelyn was thus busied against the King, word was brought him that Morice Fitz Girald, and other Irish had sacked his Countries and Lands in Ireland;Mr. Brook, A∣lias Yorke, fol. 270. upon the hearing whereof he hasted thither with fifteen Knights to en∣counter with his Enemies, and joyned battail with them upon Saturday the first of April. 1234. and fought eleven hours, untill his horse was slain under him. And then he fal∣ling to the ground, one of the Irish perceiving his back part ill-armed, lifted up his Ha∣bergeon, and thrust a knife into his back up to the halft, giving him his deadly wound, and then brought him to a Castle of his own named Kilkenny (which the said Morice had taken a little before from him) where he died fifteen dayes after without issue.What K. Hen. cannot do by the sword, he thinks to do by the word. In that year the King sent the Archbishop of Canterbury with the Bishops of Rochester and Chester, to intreat with Lhewelyn to make peace with the King, but they returned without doing any good. Mathew Paris saith that the King going at this time to meet Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops which he had sent to conclude a peace with Lhewelyn, Prince of Wales, came to VVoodstock, where being certifi'd of the death of the E. Marshall (by certain messengers which came from Ireland) he fell into great weeping and sor∣row, for the death of so valiant a Knight, affirming withall that he had not left his Peer behind him in the Realm. From thence he went to Glocester, where the said Arch∣bishop and Bishops coming unto him, declared the treatice and form of peace, taken between him and the said Lhewelyn;The Welsh constant to their confede∣rates, in con∣cluding of peace. yet nevertheless upon this condition that the Noble∣men of England which were confederates with the said Lhewelyn, and by evill councel were exiled, should first be reconciled to the King, whereby the said peace might be more firm and stable. Moreover the Archbishop said that with much ado they had brought the matter to that pass, adding sometimes threatnings on the Kings behalfe, with his Clergy: To the which threatnings the said Lhewelyn is reported to have answered that he more regarded the Kings almes-deeds, and his holy behaviour, then he did fear the war of all his Clergy. Then the King who wished peace with all his heart, caused by his letters all the Nobles that were outlawes, to be called again unto him to Glocester, and Sunday before Ascension day next following, to have their pardons, and to receive their Inheritance,Osculum pa∣. which the King had seised into his own hands; then Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent came to the King, and obtained his favour, whom the King reverent∣ly embraced and kissed. Prince Lhewelyn also this year set Gruffith his Son at liberty, whom he had kept in
prison six years for his disobedience; and this year Cadwalhon ap Maelgon dyed, and the next year Owen the Son of Gruffith ap Rees being a Noble Gentleman, and very well beloved, was buried by his brother Rees at Stratflur. The year after Madoc the son of Gruffith Maylor, Lord of the lower Powis or Brom∣field, Chirk, and Pale, a Man very just and mercifull, dyed, and was buried very honoura∣bly at the Abbey Lhan Egwest or Vale Crucis, which he had built, and left behind him a son named Gruffith, to inherit his Lands; also Owen ap Meredyth, ap Rotpert, ap Cydewen departed out of this World.Marchan Ca∣stle. The same year Gilbert Earl of Pembrock by treason got the Castle of Morgan ap Howel, called Marchan, and fortified it very strong for fear of the Prince. The next spring Joan the daughter of King John, Princess of ƲƲales, was bu∣ried upon the Sea-shore, within the Isle of Anglesey at Lhanvaes, as her pleasure was,Lhewelyn builds a Fry∣ery at Lhan∣vaes over his Wives Sepulchre. where the Prince did build a house of barefooted Fryers over her grave. In the year 1237. Lhewelyn Prince of ƲƲales called all the Lords and Barons of ƲƲales, (if any such title as Baron was amongst them, it being altogether Norman, as I conceive) before him to Stratflur, and there every one of them swore to be faithfull subjects, and did homage to David P. Lhewelyns son.An Act of a discreet Prince. At this time Lhewelyn being impotent (by reason of a palsey which had taken him) and sore urged and disquieted by his son Gruffith, sent Embassadours to the King to signifie unto him, that forasmuch as his years were now well near spent,The Prince of Wales whom power could not compel, voluntarily submits him∣self. he was desirous to lead the rest of his dayes in peace and quietness; and therefore purposed now to submit him∣self to the government and protection of the King of England, and that he would hold his lands of him, promising withal, that whensoever the King should stand in need of his aid, he would be ready to help him with men and money to the utmost of his power. There were sent as Mediators in this behalf the Bishops of Hereford and Chester, who travelled about the same with the good liking of many of the Nobles of Wales, although some open∣ly opposed it, and in no case would except of any such peace. Then the said David took from his brother Gruffith Arustly, Ceri, Cyvelioc, Wowthwy, Mochant and Caerneon, and let him onely enjoy the Cantref of Lhynn. This Gruffith was the elder brother, and a lusty Gentleman, but base born. This David son to Lhewelyn, did contrary to his Oath, take his brother Gruffith (being in in safe conduct with the Bishop of Bangor) upon whose promise he was content to speak with his brother, and imprisoned him in the Castle of Crickieth. The year 1240 Lhewelyn ap Jorwerth, the most valiant and noble Prince, who brought all Wales to his subjection, and had so often put his enemies to flight, and defended his coun∣try, enlarging the Meers thereof further than they had been many years before, passed out of this transitory life, and was honourably buried at the Abbey of Conwey, after he had governed Wales well and worthily 56 years; this Prince left behind him one son called David, begot upon his wife Joane, daughter of King John; by whom also he had a daughter called Gladys, married to Sr. Ralph Mortimer;Mr. Mills fol. 307. Mr. Powell calls his other son Gruffith base; but Mr. Mills saith, he was lawfully begotten, and that Lhewelyn ap Jor∣werth married Tanglosta daughter of Lhoirth ap Brooi of Anglessa to his first wife, by whom he had this Gruffith. S. John Dodridge Knight, late one of his Majesties Judges of the Kings Bench, saith, That the Dominion of Wales ever was holden in chief and in fee of the Crown of Eng∣land; and the Prince thereof being then of their own Nation compellable upon Summons to come and appear in the Parliaments of England, and upon their rebellions and disor∣ders the Kings of England devised their Scutagium or Escuage,Les auncient Tenures fol. 116. Com. Plow. as it is called in the Lawes of England; that is, to levy aid and assistance of their Tenants in England which held of them per ser vitium militare, to suppress the disordered Welsh tanquam rebelles, & non hostes, as rebels, and not as forreign enemies. And hence it is that King Henry the 3d. upon those often revolts of the Welsh endea∣voured to resume the Territory of Wales as forfeit unto himself,Edw. 1. took upon him the name of P. of Wales. Record. Turris Lond. 29. Hen. 3. & conferred the same upon Edw. Longeshanks his heir apparant; yet nevertheless, rather in title than possession, or upon any profit obtained thereby; for the former Prince of Wales continued his Government notwithstanding this, between whom and the said Edward wars were continued; whereof when the said Edward complained, the said King made this answer, as recordeth Matthew Paris, a Cosmographer living in that time; Quid ad me terra tua? Est ex dono meo;Matth. Paris anno 1257. ex∣ere vires primitivas, famam excita Juvenilem, & de caetero timeant inimici. But the Charter of this gift is not now readily to be found among the records; for after this time it appeareth by the records of the Tower of London, that by the mediation of Othalon Deacon Cardinal of St. Andrews,Patent. 51. Hen. 3. pars prima. a peace was then concluded betwen the then Prince of that Welsh blood, and the said King Henry the 3d. which nevertheless, as it see∣meth, continued not long; for sundry battels were a fought between them; viz. Edw. of England, and Lhewelyn last Prince of Wales.
David the son of Lhewelyn. David, to whom all the Barons in Wales had made an Oath of Fidelity, took the Go∣vernment of Wales after his father, who within a month after came to the King to Gloce∣ster, and did him homage for the principality of Wales; and also all the Barons of Wales did to the King homage for their lands. But forthwith the Englishmen began to trouble the Welsh after their accustomed use; for Gilbert Marshall came with an Army, and fortified the Castle of Aberteini. The year ensuing, the King came with a great Army into Wales, and many noble men yielded to him, because they hated David betrayer of his brother, and accursed by the Pope; or as Paris saith, excommunicated by the Bishop of Bangor: Thus he writeth, When Richard Bishop of Bangor saw that David dealt so hardly with his brother Gruf∣fith, contrary to his faithful promise made unto the said Bishop, he excommunicated him; and then withdrawing himself out of Wales, made a grievous complaint to the King a∣gainst David, most instantly requesting the King to deliver Gruffith out of prison, least the rumour of that fact being notified in the Court of Rome and other Countries out of the realm, should be some stain of the Kings honour, if he should not withstand such outra∣gious and unlawful dealings. The King therefore greatly blaming David his nephew for abusing his brother in such sort as he did, requested him with most pithy perswasions to set his brother at liberty, as well for the preserving of his own credit and fame, as also for the avoyding of the excommunication, and other eminent dangers which might ensue of that matter. To the which request of the King, David answered plainly, that he would not deliver his brother out of prison; affirming constantly, that if his brother were enlarged, the Countrey of Wales would be in great disquietness. Whereof when Gruffith was certi∣fied, he sendeth privately to the King, promising that if he would forcibly deliver him out of his brothers prison, he would hold his lands of him, and pay him 200 marks year∣ly; offering not only to be sworn upon this, and deliver Pledges for performance there∣of, but also to aid the King to bring the rest of the Welshmen under his subjection. Fur∣ther Gruffith Lord of Bromfield did assure the King of aid, if he would come to Wales with an Army, to chastize David for his falshood and injury used towards his brother. More∣over the Bishop of Banger procured the land of David to be interdicted. Hen. 3. being al∣lured by these promises on Gruffiths behalf, levied a puisant Army to go into Wales; straightly commanding by his Writs all such as ought him service in time of War, to give at∣tendance upon him, ready with Sword and Armour at Glocester the first day of August fol∣lowing, to set forward against his enemies, whether the King came at the day appointed; and from thence went to Salop, and remained there 15 dayes. During the Kings abode at Salop, divers noble men were great suters unto him in the be∣half of Gruffith, as Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, Walter Clifford, Roger de Monte alto Steward of Chester, Maelgon the son of Maelgon, Meredyth ap Rotpert Lord of Cyde∣wen, Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield, Howell and Meredyth the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwyneth, and Gruffith the son of Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis; these wrought so with the King, that there was a league concluded between him and Senena the wife of the said Gruf∣fith in the behalf of her husband, lying then in his brothers prison, according to the Arti∣cles comprized in this Charter following:
Convenit inter Dominum Hen. 3. regem Anglorum illustrem ex una parte, & Senenam uxorem Griffini filii Leolini quondam Principis North-walliae, quem David frater ejus tenet carceri mancipation cum Owino silio sao, nomine ejusdem Gruffini ex altera, &c. Articles of Agreement between Hen. 3. King of Eng. on the one party, and Senena the wife of Gruffith the son of Lhewelyn, sometimes Prince of North-wales, whom David his brother detaineth in Prison with Owen his son, in the name of the said Gruffith on the other party. I. Inprimis, The said Senena undertaketh that the said Gruffith her huband will give unto the King six hundred Marks, upon condition that the King do cause the said Griffith and Owen his son to be delivered from prison wherein they are kept, and will stand at the Judgement of the Kings Court, whether by Law he ought to be imprisoned or no. II. Item, The said Gruffith and his heirs will stand to the Judgement of the Kings Court, for and concerning that portion of the Inheritance of the said Lhewelyn his father, which of right ought to pertain unto him. III. Item, The said Senena undertaketh for the said Gruffith and his heirs, that the said Gruffith and his heirs shall yield and pay yearly to the King for the same lands the sum of 300 hundred Marks, whereof the first third part to be paid in money, the second in kine, and the third in horses, by the estimation of indifferent men, and the same to be paid yearly at Michael-Mass and Easter by even portions, by the hands of the Sheriff of the County of Salop, for the time being. IV. Item, The said Senena undertaketh further for the said Gruffith and his heirs, that they and every of them shall observe the peace against the said David, and suffer him quietly to enjoy such portion of his fathers inheritance, as to him shall be found to be due. V. Item, The said Senena doth further undertake for the said Gruffith her husband his heirs, that in case any Welshmen hereafter shall happen to rebel against the King, that they at their own costs and charges shall compel the said Offender to make satisfaction to the King for his disobedience. VI. Item, For the performance of the Premises, the said Senena will deliver unto the Lord the King, David and Roderike her sons for Pledges, who promise that if the said Gruffith and Owen, or either of them shall happen to dye before their delivery out of pri∣son, it shall be lawful for the said Senena to have one of her sons released, the other re∣maining with the King for Pledge. VII. Item, The said Senena hath sworn upon the holy Evangelists, that the said Gruf∣fith her husband and his heirs, and every of them shall accomplish and perform all the Pre∣mises on their behalf; and further undertaketh, that the said Gruffith her husband, upon his delivery out of prison, shall take the same Oath. VIII. Item, The said Senena in the name of the said Gruffith her husband, submit∣teth her self concerning the observation of the Premises, unto the jurisdiction of the re∣verend fathers, the Bishops of Hereford and Liechfield; so that the said Bishops, or either of them at the Kings request, shall compel the said Gruffith and his heirs to observe all and singular the Premises on their behalf by sentence of excommunication upon their persons, and interdiction upon their lands. IX and lastly, The said Senena doth undertake & promise (bona fide) to see & procure the full performance of all the Premises, and that the said Gruffith her husband and his heirs shall allow and perform the same, and thereof shall deliver his instrument in writing to the King in form aforesaid; to this Charter both parties put their Seal, Gruffith and Senena to that part which remained with the King, and the King to that part which remained with Senena. Moreover, for the sure performance of these Arricles, the said Senena for and in the name of her husband, put in for Pledges the aforesaid noble men; to wit, Ralph Mortimer, Walter Clifford, Roger de Monte Alto, &c. who bound themselves by their several writings obligatory to the King, in manner and form as followeth,
Omnibus hoc scriptum visaris Rogerus de Monte Alto Senescallus Ce∣striae salutem, &c. To all and singular to whom this writing shall come, Roger de Monte Alto Steward of Chester sendeth greeting; Know ye that I have constituted myself pledge for Senena the wife of Gruffith the son of Lhewelin sometimes Prince of Northwales, and have un∣dertaken for her to our Soveraign Lord King Henry of England, that the said Senena shall accomplish and perform all and singular those Covenants and Articles agreed upon, between our said Soveraign Lord, and the said Senena, for and concerning the Deliverance of the said Gruffith her huband and Owen his son out of the prison of David his brother, and the portion of Inheritance due unto the said Gruffith, which the said David keepeth from him by force. In Witnesse whereof to this present writing I have put to my seal. Dated at Salop the Munday before the feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, in the 25 year of the Reigne of the said King. The like Charters were made by every one of the other Noble men Pledges, who bound themselves with the like words; further such of the said Lords as favoured Gruffiths cause, were out among themselves, and were now made Friends, as Morgan ap Howel Lord of Kery and Sr. Ralph Mortimer, who before were at variance, whereupon David being driven to extremities, having most of the Nobility against him; especially Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield, favoured him not, who being a man of great wisdom and power, was entirely be∣loved of the King; again the sentence of excommunication and the interdiction of his Land did not a little vex him. But the Kings presence with so puissant an army, did so move his spirits that he could not be quiet, till he had sent to the King to desire peace, with this submission following. The Charter of the Articles of Davids submission to the King. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos præsentes literæ pervenerint, David filius Leo∣lini salutem, &c. To all Christian People to whom these present Letters shall come, David the Son of Lhewelin sendeth greeting; Know ye that I have granted and promi∣sed to deliver unto Lord Henry the Noble King of England, Gruffith my Brother with his Son and Heir, whom I keep in in prison, and all other Prisoners, who by occasion of the said Gruffith lie in durance. Item, I shall stand to the judgment of the Kings Court, as well in that case, whether the said Gruffith ought to be detained prisoner, or No; as also for and concerning the part of the Inheritance of the said Lhewelin my father, claimed by the said Gruffith, accor∣ding to the custome of Wales, so that the peace be maintained between me and the said Gruffith. Item, I and the said Gruffith, and either of us, shall hold our portions of Land of our said Soveraign Lord the King in Capite; acknowleging him Chief Lord there∣of. Item, I shall restore unto Roger de Monte Alto Steward of Chester his land of Montalt or Mould with the appurtenances. Item, I shall also restore to all other Barons, all such Lands, Lordships and Castles as were taken from them, since the beginning of the wars between the Lord John King of England and the said Lhewelin Prince of ƲƲales my father, saving the right of all covenants and Grants by writing to be reserved unto the judgment and determination of the Kings Court. Item, I shall give and restore unto our Soveraign Lord the King, all his charges in this present voyage laid out. Item, I shall make satisfaction for all dammages and injuries done by me, or any of my Subjects unto the King or his, according to the consideration of the Kings Court, and shall deliver such as shall be malefactors in that behalf. Item, I shall restore unto the said Lord the King all the said homages which the late King John his father had, and which the said Lord the King of right ought to have, especially of
all the noblemen of Wales, and if the King shall set at liberty any of his captives, the pos∣sessions of that man shall remain to the King. Item, the Land of Elsmere with the appurtenances shall remain to the Lord the King and his heirs for ever. Item, I shall not receive, or suffer to be received, within any Countrey of Wales, any of the Subjects of England outlawed or banished by the said Lord the King or his Ba∣rons of Mercia. Item, For confirmation and performance of all and singular the premises on my be∣half, I shall provide by bonds and pledges, and all other waies and means as the said Lord the King shall award, and will accomplish the commandement of the said King, and will obey his laws. In witnesse whereof to this present writing I have put to my Seal; Dated at Alnet by the River of Elwey in the feast of the dedication of St. John Baptist in the 25 year of the reign of the said King.Mr. Powel fol. 306. For the Observation of these Articles, the said Prince David, and Ednivet Vachan were sworn. Upon these atonements David sent privately unto the King,Justice done, not for Justice sake, but for self ends. to desire him that he would suffer him, being his Nephew and the lawful heir of Lhewelin his father, to enjoy the principality of Wales, rather then Gruffith who was but a Bastard (though some account him legitimate) and nothing of kin unto the King; giving him withal to understand, that in case he did set Gruffith at liberty, he should be sure to have the war renewed: whereup∣on the King knowing those things to be true, and understanding also that Gruffith was a va∣liant stout man, and had many friends and favourers of his cause, inclined rather to assent unto Davids request, then otherwise to be in danger of further troubles, and therefore wil∣lingly granted the same. Shortly after David sent his brother Gruffith unto the King, and other pledges for him∣self for the performance of the said Articles,M. Paris p. 765 From prison to prison, like a fish out of the frying pan into the fire. which the King sent forthwith to the Tower of London, there to be safely kept, allowing to Gruffith a Noble dayly for his maintenance. And within few dayes after Michaelmas P. David came to the K. Court, and did him homage, and swore fealty, who for so doing, and because he was the Kings Nephew, was sent home again in peace. When Gruffith saw how all things went, and that he was not like to be set at liberty, he began to devise means how to escape out of prison. Wherefore deceiving the Watch one night, he made a long line of hangings,An unfortu∣nate end of a desperate at∣tempt. coverings and sheets, and having got out of a window, let down himself by the same from the top of the Tower; but by reason that he was a mighty personage and full of flesh, the line brake with the weight of his body, and so falling down headlong from a great height, his neck and head was driven into his body with the fall, whose miserable Carkass being found the morrow after, was a pittiful spectacle to the beholders. The King being certified here∣of, commanded his son to be better looked unto, and punished the Officers for their negligence. About this time the King fortified the Castle of Dyserth in Flintshire, and gave to Gruf∣fith son to Gwenwynwyn, Lord of Powis, his inheritance, and to the sons of Conan ap Owen Gwy∣neth their Lands in Merionith. The Bishop of Bangor (a constant friend to that party) came to the Court to sue for the deliverance of Gruffith son to Lhewelin the Prince; but the King knowing him to be a man of great courage, would in no wise grant his liberty. About this time Maelgon Vachan fortified the Castle of Garthgrugin; John de Mynoc also fortified the Castle of Buelht, and Roger Mortimer the Castle of Melienyth. The summer following the King began to vex the Welsh extremely, and take their Lands by force, with∣out just title or rightful cause; and now died Rees Mechylh son to Rees Gryc of South-Wales. During these transactions,Varium & mutabile sem∣per. David gathered all his strength to be revenged of all the wrongs which the Earls of Clare and Hereford, which John d Monurch and Roger de Alto Monte and other Merebers did to his people, whom all the Lords of VVales obeyed, and took for their Soveraign, saving Gruffith son to Gwenwynwyn and Morgan ap Howel, which two also were shortly compelled to obey, and then the Prince entered the March Lands spoyling and destroying a great part thereof, with whom the said Earles fought divers battails, and sometimes the one, and sometimes the other had the victory.300 Welshmen slain neer Montgomery. M. Par. p. 884. English put to flight. K. Hen. 3. no∣thing fortu∣nate against the Welsh. The year ensuing the Marchers and the VVelshmen met not far from Montgomery, where was a cruel fight, and 300 of the VVelshmen slain, and a great number of the English; among whom was a noble Knight called Hubert Fitz Matthew, whereupon the King being weary of his dome∣stical troubles, gathered a vast army of English and Gascoynes and entred Northwales, intend∣ing to destroy the Country: but the prince met with his people in a straight, and fought with them, and put them to flight. There the King lost a great number of his most worthy Soldiers and Nobility, and most part of the Gascoines; and now seeing he could do no good, he sent for the Irishmen who landed in the Isle of Môn or Anglesey, and spoyled a great part thereof, till the Inhabitants of the Isle gathered themselves together and met
with them, being loaden with plunder, whom they chased to their ships; and thus the King being not able to do any more,Mat Paris p. 917. manned and victualled his Castles, and so returned home. Of this Voyage a certain Nobleman being then in the Kings Camp, wrote thus to his friend, about the end of Septemb. 1245. The King with his army lyeth at Gannock, fortifying of that Strong Castle, and we lie in our Tents thereby,Gannoc castle. watching, fasting, praying and freezing with cold; we watch for fear of the Welshmen, who are wont to invade and come upon us in the night time; we fast for want of meat; for the half penny loaf is worth five pence;The Welshmen teach the En∣glishmen three excellent ver∣tues of watch∣ing, fasting, & praying. we pray to God to send us home again speedily; we starve for cold wanting our winter Garments, and having no more but a thin linnen cloth betwixt us and the wind; there is an arme of the sea under the Castle, whereunto the tide cometh, and many ships come up the haven thither, and bring victuals to the Camp from Ireland and Chester; this arme of the sea lyeth betwixt us and Snowdon, where the Welshmen abide now, and is about a flight shot over when the tide is in. There came to the mouth of that haven a certain ship from Ire∣land with victuals to be sold, upon Munday before Michaelmas day, which being negligently look't unto,Ma. Par. p. 924. was set on drie ground, at the low ebb, at the further side of the water, over against the Castle: which thing when the Welshmen saw, they came down from the hills and assaulted the vessel being now upon drie ground; whereupon we on the otherside beholding the same, sent over by boats 300 Welshmen of the borders of Cheshire and Shropshire with certain Archers and arm∣ed men, to the rescue of the said ship, whereupon the Natives withdrew to their accustomed places in the rocks and woods, whom our men followed as far as two miles being on foot, by reason they could transport no horses, and slew many of them. Our men being over geeedy and covetous, spoil∣ed the Abbey of Aberconwey, and burned all the houses of Office belonging to the same. Which do∣ing caused the Welshmen to run thither,Aberonwey Abbey plun∣dered by the English. who like desperate men set upon our Souldiers, being loa∣den with spoyles, and slew a great number of them, following the rest to the water side, of whom some got to the boats, and so escaped, and some cast themselves into the water and were drowned, and such as they took they hanged and beheaded every one. In this conflict we lost many of our men,The Welsh re∣venge the sa∣criledge. especially of those that were under the conduct of Richard Earle of Cornwal, and Sr. Alen Buscel, & Sr. Adam de Maio, Sr. Geffry Estuemy, & one Raymond a Gascoyne, whom the King highly fancied, and divers others, besides 100. of common Soldiers. In the mean time Sr. Wal∣ter Bisset worthily defended the said ship, untill the tide came, and then came away with the same manfully, wherein there were 60 Tuns of wine besides other provision, &c. Many other things are contained in the said writing of the hard shifts that we made in the Kings camp, for vi∣ctuals, and the dearth of all things that were to be eaten. In the beginning of the year 1246. David Prince of Wales, after he had gotten the love of his subjects, and atchived many notable victories, dyed, and was buryed at Conwey by his father, after he had ruled Wales five years, leaving no issue of his body, to the great discomfort of the Land. Mr. Mills speaking of this David, saith, he was disquieted with a number of cares in his life time; he wasted and destroyed his Country, he did many slaughters, and after perjury and killing of his brother, was overwearied with sundry tribulations. He left Wales most miserably desolate and disquiet, so as they found this saying true, Every Kingdom divided in it self shall be made desolate; he caused the Nobles to swear fealty unto him, and so continued Prince 6. years, and di∣ed Anno 1246. Quarterly ut ante. Lhewelyn and Owen the sons of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn. When all the Lords and Barons of Wales understood of the death of their prince, they came together, and called for Lhewelin and Owen Goch, the sons of Gruffith son to Prince Lhe∣welyn
brother to David as next Inheritors (for they esteemed not Roger Mortimer son to Gladis,Rg. Mortimer right heir, put by his right. sister to David and right inheritor by order of Law) and did them homage who di∣vided the principality betwixt them two. The King hearing of the death of prince David, sent one Nicholas de Miles as Justice of Southwals to Caermarthin, and with him in commission Meredyth ap Rees Gryc,K. H. 3. makes another at∣tempt against Wales, but in vain. and Meredyth ap Owen ap Gruffith to dis-inherit Maelgon ap Ʋachan of all his lands; wherefore the said Maelgon fled to the princes into Northwales for succour, with Howel ap Meredith (whom the Earle of Clare had by force spoyled of all his lands in Glamor∣gan) against whom the King came with a great army, who after he had remained a while in the Country and could do no good, returned home again. The Prince of Northwales was a superiour prince of all Wales, to whom the other prin∣ces of Southwales and Powis did pay a certain tribute yearly, as appeareth by lawes of Ho∣wel Dha, and in divers places of this history; and was the right heir of Cadwalader, as is evident by all writers, whose line of the heir male from Roden Mawr endeth in this, David the son of Lhewelin, the son of Jorwerth, the son of Owen Gwineth, the son of Gruffith, the son of Conan, the son of Jago, the son of Edwal, the son of Meiric, the son of Edwal Voel, the son of Anarawd, the son of Roderi Mawr, the son of Eselht, the daughter and sole heir of Conan Tindathwy, the son of Roderike Molwynoc, the son of Edwal Ywrich, the son of Cadwalader, the last King of the Brittains. Lhewelin ap Jorwerth prince of Northwales, father to David, married two wives; the first Jone Daughter of K. John, by whom he had David, who dyed without issue, and Gladis married to Mortimer, from which match the Kings of England are descended by the mothers side from Cadwalader. About this time Harold King of Man came to the Court and did homage to K. Henry,M. Paris p. 938 The K. of Man doth homage to the K. of England. and he dubbed him Knight; the Summer following Rees Ʋachan son to Rees Mechyl got the Castle of Carvec Cynnen; which his mother of meer hatred conceived against him, had de∣livered to the Englishmen. The Abbots of Conwey and Stratflur made sute to the King for the body of Gruffith ap Lhewelyn; which he granted unto them, and they conveyed it unto Conwey, where he was honourably buryed. In the year 1254. there arose a great debate between the princes of Wales; for Owen could not be content with halfe the principality, but got his young brother David unto him,All cover, all lose; or Harme watch, harme catch. and they two levied an army to dis-inherit Lhewelin, who with his men met with them in the field, and after a long fight gave them an overthrow, where he took them both prisoners, and then seized all their lands into his own hands enjoying alone the whole principality of Wales. The year ensuing all the Lords came to prince Lhewelin, and made their complaints to him with weeping eyes, how cruelly they were handled by prince Edward, and others of the Nobility of England; their lands being taken from them by force; and if at any time they did offend, they were punished with extremity; but where they were wronged, they found no remedy. Therefore they protested before God, and him,A gallant re∣sold on of the Welsh. that they would rather die in the field in defence of their right, then to be made slaves by strangers: whereupon the prince pittying both his own estate and theirs, determined together utterly with them to refuse the rule of the Englishmen, rather to dye in liberty then to live in thraldom, shame and opprobry. And gathering all his power, first recovered again all the Inland Country of Northwales, and afterward all Merionith, and such lands as Edward had usurped in Caer∣digan, which he gave to Meredith the son of Owen ap Gruffith,An heroick Prince. and Buelht he gave to Mere∣dyth ap Rees, chasing away Rees Ʋachan out or the same, and so honourably divided all that he wan among his Barons, that he kept nothing to himself but a perpetual fame of his liberality. Then also he recovered Gwerthryneon from Sr. Roger Mortimer. The Sum∣mer following prince Lhewelin made war against Gruffith ap Gwenwinwin (who served the King) and wan all Powis from him, saving the Castle of Pole, and a little of Caerneon and landed by Severne side. Rees Ʋachan ap Rees Mechylh meaning to recover his lands again,A bloody battail. obtained of the King a great army, whereof one Stephen Bacon was Captain, and came to Caermarthin by sea, and marching from thence towards Dynevowr laid siege to the Castle;The English overthrown. but the princes power came with his cosens to raise the siege, where there was fought a bloody battail as ever had been in Wales, of so many men, and in the end the Englishmen were put to flight, and lost of their men above 2000 Soldiers; from thence the Princes army went to Dynet and burned all the Country, and destroyed the the castles of Abercorran, Lhanstephan, Maenclochoc,The Welsh victorious. and Aberth, and then returned home with much spoyle, and forthwith not being able to abide the wrongs which Greffry Lanley (Lieutenant to the Earle of Chester) did to them,M. Par. p 1251 Tho. Walsh Hy∣podigma p. 61. Brave-spirited men. the Prince entred the Earles lands, and destroyed all to the gates of Chester on either side the wa∣ter. Whereupon Edward the Earle fled to his Uncle (who was then chosen King of the Romans) for succour, and returning back with an army durst not fight with the prince, who had 10000 armed men every one sworn to dye in the field (if need requred) in the defence of their country;A Judas a∣mongst his countrymen. M. Par. p. 1253 yet Griffith ap Madoc Maelor commonly sirnamed Lord of Dynas Bran (which is a castle standing upon a very high Mountain, of scituation impregnable in the Lordship of Chirk) forsook the Prince and served the Earl with all his power, which Earle
was counted a cruell and unjust man, having no regard to right promise or oath. Mat. West p. 277.The next year Prince Lhewelyn seising into his hands Cymeys, and making peace be∣tween Rees Gyc, and Rees Vachan his brothers son, got the Castle of Trefdraeth, or Newport with all Ros,A ust punish∣ment for a traytor o his Country. O thirds not caught with chief. saving Hanerford. Then destroying the Country in his way to∣wards Glamorgan, he raised the Castle of Lhangymwch, and returning to Northwales, met with Edward Earl of Chester by the way, whom he caused to retire back, and then destroyed the Lands of the said Gruffith Lord of Bromfield. Therefore the Kings of Eng∣land and Almain wrote to him gently to depart home, which he refused to do, but de∣viding his army into two battails, in every of which as Mathew Paris said, there were 1500.Mat. Par. fol. 128. The Welsh beat the Irish at Sea. Mat. Par. fol. 1271. A prudent and politick Prince. King Hen. un∣fortunate in his underta∣kings against Wales. Mat. Paris fol. 125. English. Al∣mains, Gas∣cones and I∣rish against Wales. Mat. Paris fol. 1274 & 1279. footmen, and 500. horsemen well appointed: Whereupon Edward sent to the Irish∣men to come to him to his succour; whereof the Prince being certified, made ready his Bishops, and sending them to Sea, with sufficient power to resist the coming of his Ene∣mies that way, prevented him, so that the Irish were overcome and sent home with great loss; wherefore the King with his Son (being in a great rage) gathered all the strength of England from St. Michaels mount to Twede, and came to Northwales as far as Tegenwy; but the Prince caused all the victualls to be removed over the River Conwey, and kept all the Straits and passages so narrowly, that the King was compelled to tetire to Eng∣land with great loss. Then Prince Lhewelyn calling unto him all the power of Southwales, came to the marches where Gruffith Lord of Bromfield yielded himself unto him (because the King could not defend his lands,) and seising into his own hands all the lands in Powis, he banished the Lord Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn, and wan the Castle of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Glo∣cester, where also he gave the English men an overthrow, and slew a great number of the worthiest Soldiers and such as the King loved well, which caused the King to call his strength unto him, and sent to Gascoyne and Ireland for succos, and then coming into Wales in harvest time, destroyed all the corn that was in his way; yet he went not far beyond Chester, but returned back without doing any notable act; for God, as Matthew Paris saith, defended the poor people that put their whole confidence in him. The Lord James Audly (whose daughter Gruffith Lord of Bromfield had married) brought a great number of horsemen from Almain to serve against the Welshmen,God the Pro∣tectour of the Welsh. who with their great horses, and unaccustomed kind of fight overthrew the Welshmen at the encounter; wherefore the Welshmen minding shortly after to revenge the displeasure, made roads into the said Lord Audleyes Lands, where the Almains set upon them, pur∣suing hard such as fled to the Straits, who (using that flight for a policy) returned a∣gain so suddainly, and so fi rcely upon the Almains, that they being not able to re∣treat,Great scarci∣ty in England for want of commerce with Wales. upon the suddain were almost all slain. At this time there was great scarcity of Beeves and horses in England, whereof they were wont to have many thousands yearly out of Wales, and all the marches were made as a desolate and desert place. The next spring all the Nobles of Wales came together and sware to defend their Country to death, and never to forsake one another, and that upon pain of cursing; but shortly after Meredyth ap Rees of Southwales,A subsidy de∣manded to conquer Wales. not regarding his oath, served the King. Then the King called a Parliament for a subsidy to Wales, when he had so many losses, and of late all the Country of Pembrock burnt and spoiled, where the Welshmen had found salt plentifully, which they lacked, in the which Parliament no Subsidy was granted.Mat. Pais fol. 1807. Shortly after the same Parliament by propagation was called at Oxford, where the Lords of Wales offered to be tryed by the law for any offence they had committed against the King iiustly;To this pa∣trick the Lordship of Cydwely was given if he could win it. Easie to give l ge thongs out of ano∣ther mans hide. Trea hery re∣venged by the Welsh. but Edward would not hear of it, but sent one Patrick de Canton as Lieutenant for the King to Caermarthyn, and with him Meredyth ap Rees; and this Pa∣trick desired to speak (upon peace) with the Princes Councel, whereupon the Prince meaning good faith, sent his brother whom he had set at liberty with Meredyeh ap Owen and Rees ap Rees to Emlyn, to treat with them of peace; but Patrick meaning to en∣trap them, laid an ambushment of Men armed by the way; and as they should have met, these miscreants fell upon the Welsh, and slew a great number of them; but the Lords which escaped, raised the Country forthwith, and followed Patrick and slew him, and the most part of all his men. And after this the Prince desirous of peace and quiet∣ness to redeem the same, and to end all troubles, and to purchase the Kings good will, offered the King 4000 marks, and to his son 300. and to the Queen 200. to have peace; but the King answered, What is this to our losses? and refused it. It appeareth by the records in the Tower, that about this time, to wit An. 43. Hen. 3. there was a commission to William Bishop of Worcester, John Mansel Treasurer of York, the Kings Chaplain, and Peter de Montfort, to conclude a peace with the Welshmen; but it is like there was nothing done to any effect in that behalfe; for the war continued still. Notwithstanding I find by Mathew Westminster that there was a certain truce agreed upon between the King and the Welshmen for a year. I read also in the same Author that the Bishop of Bangor was this year about Michaelmas sent from Lhewelyn the Prince, and all the Barons of Wales to the King, to desire peace at his hands, and to offer un∣to
him the summe of 16000. pound for the same, so that he would grant the Welsh to have all their matters heard and determined at Chester, as they were wont to have, and to suffer them to enjoy the lawes and customes of their own Country; but what answer the Bishop brought again, the said Author maketh no mention. The year 1260. Prince Lhewelyn destroyed the lands of Sr. Roger Mortimer, because he contrary to his oath, maintained the Kings quarrel and took from him all Buelht, sa∣ving the Castle, which the Princes men got by night without bloodshed,Aber. P. Lhew∣elyns Court, or Palace. and therein much ammunition; and so after the Prince had passed through all Southwales, he returned to his house at Aber, betwixt Conwey and Bangor. The year following died Owen ap Me∣redyth Lord of Cydewen, and this summer certain of the Princes men surprised the Castle of Sr. Roger Mortimer in Melienyth, and slew the garrison, taking Howel ap Meyric the Captain thereof, with his wife and children, and the Princes Lieutenant came and destroyed it. Then Sr. Roger Mortimer hearing this, came with a great strength of Lords and Knights to Melienyth, whether the Prince came also, and Sr. Roger kept himself within the walls of the broken Castle, and sent to the Prince for li∣cence to depart without hurt the Prince having his Enemie within his power,A most Chri∣stian and he∣roick act of Lhewelyn. took compassion upon him, because he was his cozen; and suffered him to depart with his peo∣ple without hurt; from thence the Prince went to Brecknock at the request of the people of that Country which swore fidelity unto him, and so returned to Northwales. Prince Lhewelyn being confederate with the Barons against the King, destroyed the Earldom of Chester, and raised two of Edwards Castles, Tygannwy and Deserth, and thither came Edward, but did nothing to speak of. This year John Strange the younger being Constable of Montgomery, came with a great number of Merchers by night, through Ceril to Cydewen; which when the Countrymen understood, they gathered themselves together, and slew 200. of his Men, but he escaped with his men back again. Shortly after the Merchers and the Welshmen met neer Clun,Rara est con∣cordia fra∣num. where the English had the victory, and slew many of the Welsh. At this time David the Princes brother (whom he had set at liberty) forsook him, and succoured his foes with all his power. Then Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn got the Castle of Molde and raised it. At this time died Meredyth ap Owen the defender of Southwales. The Year ensuing King Henry led a great army towards Wales, and by the means of Olobonus the Popes Legate, there was a peace concluded betwixt the King and the Prince at Montgomery Castle, for the which the Prince gave unto the King 30000. marks, and the King granted the Prince a Charter to receive from thenceforth, homage & fealty of all the Nobility and Barons of Wales saving one, so that all the aforesaid Barons should ever after hold of the Prince as their Leige Lord, and he to be called and written from thenceforth Prince of Wales; and in witness of this the King put his seal and hand to the said Charter, which was likewise confirmed by the authority of the Pope. The year after this dyed Grono ap Ednyvet Vachan, a Noble man, and chief of the Princes Councel. In the year 1270. dyed Gruffith Lord of Bromfield, and was buried at Vale Crucis; and here endeth the Brittish copy. At this place leaveth the Brittish Copy,Mr. Lhoyd. and writeth no further of the end of this Prince, but leaveth him at the highest and most honourable stay that any Prince of Wales was in, of many years before. The writer (peradventure) being ashamed to de∣clare the utter fall and ruine of his Countrymen, whereunto their own pride and discord did bring them, as it doth evidently appear to him that searcheth out their Histories; but I intending to finish the History, during the Government of the Brittains, have sought out in other Chronicles written in the Latine tongue, especially in the Chronicle of Nicholas Trivet,King Hen 3. dyeth. (who wrote from the begining of the raign of King Stephen to the Coronation of Edward the second) and such other, as much as I could find concerning this matter. In the year 1272. dyed King Henry the third, and Edward his Son coming from the holy Land two years after, was crowned at Westminster King of England, to which Coro∣nation the Prince of Wales refused to come, although he was sent for, alledging for his excuse that he had offended many Noblemen of England, and therefore would not come in danger, without he had for pledges the Kings brother, with the Earl of Glocester, and Robert Burnell Chief Justice of England; wherewith the King was highly dis∣pleased. King Edward could never brook P. Lhewelyn since the time that he was compelled to flight by him at their meeting in the Marches as before;Thom. Walsh; on the other side Lhewelyn liked no better of the King then the King did of him; again those Noblemen, who for their disobedience were dis-inherited by Lhewelyn, were received and entertained by King Edward, which things caused the Prince to fear some evil practice by those and other such as hated him, if he should have been at the Kings Coronation to do his homage and fealty according to the writ directed unto him in that behalfe, as appeareth by an instru∣ment sent by the said Prince to Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of Yorke, and other Bishops, sitting then at their Convocation in the new Temple at
London, Anno. 1275. wherein the causes of this war are contained: which instru∣ment it self (as it was then sent) is extant to this day, written in parchment, with the Princes great seal thereunto appendant, which I have seen (saith this Author) and copied out of the Original verbatim,Mr. Lhoyd. being then in the custody of Thomas Yale Doctor of Law, of late Dean of the Arches (a great searcher and preserver of the antiquities of Wales) which I thought convenient here to lay down for the fuller understanding of this History. Reverendissimis in Christo Patribus & Dominis, Roberto Dei gratia Archiepiscopo Cant. totius Angliæ Primati, & Archiepis. Eborum, ac eorum suffra∣ganis, &c. To the most Reverend Fathers in Christ and Lords, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, and the Archbishop of Yorke, and their Suffragans being now together at London in Councel. Their devote Son Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snow∣don, greeting; with due Obedience, Reverence and Honour in all things. Be it known unto your reverend Father-hoods, that where heretofore contention and discord, (whereof war followed, and long continued) arose betwixt the King of Noble memory, Henry King of Eng∣land of the one party, and us of the other party; the same contentions and strife were at the last appeased by authority of the See Apostolick, and means of the reverend Father Lord O∣tobanus, Deacon and Cardinal of St. Adrian, Legate into England, as it appeareth in the form of Treaty and Peace betwixt the said King and Edward his first begotten Son, Lord Edward now King of England, and their Successors on the one party, and us and our Succes∣sors on the other party, by the corporal Oath of both parties assured; Which form of peace was committed to writing with the said Legate, with the seal of the said King, and the seal of the said Lord Edward now King, and with our seal also, in the which peace it is contained amongst other things (as you do well know, as we believe) that we and our Successors should hold of the King and his Successors the Principality of Wales. So that all Welsh Barons should hold their Baronies and Lands of us and our Successors in Capite, and should do homage and fealty to us, and to our heirs, (one Baron excepted) for the which we and our Successors should do homage and fealty to the Lord the King and his Successors. It is further contained in the same peace, that neither the said King nor his Successors should receive any of our Enemies, or any running from us or our Successors, nor should help or maintain any such against us or our Successors. The which all are contained in the form of peace, the Tenor whereof the Reverend Fathers of Strata Florida and Aberconwey bearers hereof, can shew you. But see Reverend Fathers, the Lord Edward now King of England, after the said peace ta∣keth into his hands certain Barons Lands in Wales, of which they and their Ancestors have been long possessed, and keepeth a Barony in his hands, which should be ours by the form of peace; o∣ther Barons of our Land being from us fugitives, runing to him, he keepeth, helpeth; and main∣taineth, David ap Gruffith, and Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn who purposed our death and destruction. Notwithstanding that since their departure they have robbed within our Land, com∣mitted slaughter, and burning of houses, do daily the like against the peace aforesaid; and al∣though we have often sent our griefs and complaints by solemn messengers to the said Noble Lord Edward, as well before he was King as since, yet unto this day he never did any redress therein; also that which is more perilous, he called us unto a place (not to us safe) amongst our deadly Enemies, our fugitives and fellons, and their spies, and murderers, to do him homage and fealty, to which place we can no wayes come without danger of our body, especially seeing our E∣nemies above said to be in that place at the Kings table, and sometimes in Councel, and openly brag themselves. And though lawfull and reasonable excuses were alledged by our messengres before the King and his Councel, why the place was not safe nor indifferent, yet he refused to allow or appoint any other place indifferent for us, to do homage and fealty, which we were and are ready to do unto him in any safe place by him to be appointed, if he will appoint any, and to perform the other articles of the peace concluded and sworn. And for that it pleaseth him not to come to any place where we could with safety do him homage, we were suiters to him to send any from him to receive our oath and homage, untill it pleased him to appoint a place where we shall do our homage to him personally, the which thing he utterly denyed to do. We therefore beseech your Father-hoods earnestly that it may please you to consider what danger should happen to the people both of England and of Wales, by reason of the breach of Cove∣nants of peace abovesaid, if now wars and discord should follow, which God forbid, attend∣ing and calling to remembrance the prohibition of the Holy Father, the Pope lately in the Coun∣cel at Lyons, that no war should be moved amongst Christians, least thereby the affairs of the ho∣ly Land should be neglected; that it would please you also to help with your Councel with the Lord and King, that he would use us, and order us according to the peace agreed upon, the which we will no way infringe. And if he will not hearken to your Counsel therein, (which God for∣bid) that you will hold us excused; for we will no waies as much as lieth in us, procure the trouble and disquietness of the Realm. And if it may please you to give credit to our messen∣gers
which we do send to the King, at the day by him to us appointed) to alledge our lawful ex∣cuses in those things which they by mouth shall on our part shew unto You, resting to do Your will and pleasure, if it please You to write again. Dated at Talybont the eight Day of October Anno 1275. Shortly after the King came to Chester,Thom. Walsh. fol. 6. Mar. West p. 364. willing the Prince to come thither and do him homage, which when the prince detracted to do, the King gathered an army to compel him thereto. The year following the Countesse of Leicester, wife to Simon Montfort (which remained at a Nunnery in France) sent her daughter to Wales to marry the prince, as it was 'agreed betwixt them in her Fathers time, and with her came her brother Admerike and a courtly company, who fearing the coast of England, bent their voyage to the Isle of Sylly, where∣by chance they met with four ships of Bristol, which set upon and took them, and brought them to the King, who entertains the Lady houourably, sending her brother to be kept prisoner in the castle of Corff, from whence he was removed to the castle of Sherburne. Then the King prepared two armies,A prodigious Omen to Wales. whereof the one he conducted himself to Northwales as far as Ruthlan, and fortified the castle, and the other he sent with Paganis de Camurtiis a worthy Souldier to Westwales; they burned and destroyed a great part of the Country, and this year itrained blood in divers places of Wales. The year ensuing the Lords of Southwales came to the Kings peace,The jangling of the Welsh among them∣selves their utter over∣throw. and did him ho∣mage, and delivered the Castle of Stratywy unto the K. Lieutenant Paganus de Camurtli, (if his sirname be not mistaken for de Cadurcis, it is the family of Chaworth in Notinghamshire.) This Prince understanding this, and seeing that his own people had forsaken him, sent to the King for peace, which was agreed upon these conditions. 1. First that all such as the Prince kept prisoners of the Kings, and for his cause, should be set at liberty. 2. Item, That the Prince should pay to the King for his favour and good will 50000 marks to be paid at the Kings pleasure. 3 Item, That four Cantreds should reman to the King and his heirs for ever; which Can∣treds I think were these; cantref Ros, where the Kings Castle of Teganny stood; cantref Ryni∣vioc where Denbigh; cantref Tegengl where Ruthlan standeth; and cantref Dyffryn Clwd where Ruthin is. 4 Item, That the Lords Merchers should quietly enjoy all the Lands that they had con∣quered within Wales. 5. Item, That the Prince should pay yearly for the Isle of Môn or Anglesey 1000 marks, which payment should begin at Michaelmas then next ensuing; and that also he should pay 5000 marks out of hand; and if the prince dyed without issue, the Isle should remain to the King and his heirs. 6 Item, That the Prince should come to England every Christmas to do the King homage for his lands. 7. Item, That all the Barons in Wales should hold their lands of the King, except 5. in Snowden, who should ackowledg the Prince to be their Lord. 8. Items, that he should for his lifetime enjoy the name of Prime, and none of his heirs after him, so that after his death, the foresaid five Barons should hold of the King, and none other. 9. Item, that for the performance of the Articles, the prince should deliver for hosta∣ges ten of the best in Wales, without imprisonining, disinheriting, or time of deliverance determined, and also the King to choose twenty within Northwales, that should take their oathes with the prince for performance of these Articles; and if the Prince should swerve from any of them, and being thereof admonished, would not amend and redresse the same,Th. Walsh. p. 7 they should forsake him and become his enemies. The prince was also bound to let his brethren enjoy their lands in Wales, of whom David had long served the King, whom the King had made Knight, contrary to the manner of Wales, and had given him in marriage the daughter of the Earle of Derby, whose first husband was lately deceased; to whom the King gave Denbigh in Northwales and 1000l. lands therewith. And his other brother Ro∣derike was lately fled to England out of prison, and Owen the third was delivered at this composition. This peace was concluded in the Kings absence, who appointed one his Commissioners,Mr. Trinet Sol p. 787. to wit the Lord Ripiost to take an oath of him, and authorised the said Robert, Antonio Becke and William de Southampton Prior Provincial of the Friers predicant, Commissioners ap∣pointed on his behalf to receive the like oath of the said Lhewelyn, for whose part Theodor or Tudor ap Ednivet and Grono ap Heilin were Commissioners. At this time the King builded a Castle at Aberystwyth, & returned into Eng. with much ho∣nour; unto whom the people granted a subsidy of the twentieth part of their goods towards his charges in this war. The year following the marriage was celebrated at Worcester be∣twixt Elianor daughter to Simon Montfort and prince Lhewelin, where the King & Queen and the most part of the Nobility of England were present. Also the year after Roger Mortimer set up at Killingworth a round table for a hundred Knights to be exercised in the feats of
arms,The Kof Scots sucoueth a∣gainst the Welsh. and thither resorted many Knights from divers Countries. At this time the King of Scots did homage to K. Edward, and obtained the Kings letters that his succours in the last wars of Wales were not done by the name of service but good will. The peace concluded betwixt the prince of Wales and the King of England, did not long continue, by reason of the severe and strict dealing of such Officers as the King appointed rulers in the Marshes and the Inland country of Wales, who hunting after their own gains, oppressed the Inhabitants, burdening them with new exactions, contrary to the custom of the country; and also shewing themselves too much affectionate and partial in matters of contro∣versy betwixt party & party, especially when any Englishman had to do in the matter, which poling and partiality did altogether alienate the hearts of the people from the King of En∣gland, so that they had rather die, then live in such thraldom; whereupon assembling them∣selves together, they so moved David the Lord of Denbigh to be at unity with prince Lhewe∣lin, and to take pitty upon their affliction and misery, that he being agreed with his brother, became their Captain. This reconciliation consisted chiefly in this, that David should never after serve the King of England as he had done before, but become his utter enemy, who laid siege to the ca∣stle of Hawarden and took Roger Clifford (a noble Knight) slaying all that resisted,The Welsh im∣patient of ser∣vitude. and after spoyling all the country, he with his brother the prince laid siege to the Castle of Ruthlan; the King hearing of this, hasted thither with a great army to raise the siege, whereupon the prince retreated with his army. Seek to reco∣ver their li∣berty. Aberystwyth castle built by the King, taken. Godwin in Canterbury, fol. 77.Also the same time Rees the son of Maelgon and Gruffith ap Meredith ap Owen, which o∣ther noble men of Southwales too the castle of Aberystwyth and divers other castles in the Country, spoyling and plundering all the Kings people that inhabited thereabouts. There∣fore the King sent the Archbishop of Canterbury to confer with the prince and his brethren; but he returned without doing any good, so that he denounced an excommunication; this Archbishops name was Jehn Beckham, who (as B. Godwin saith) took great pains in labou∣ring a peace between K. Edw. l. and prince Lhewelin of Wales, unto whom he went in per∣son and travailed long with him, but all in vain. Articles sent from the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, to be intimated to Lhewelin Prince of Wales, and to the People of the same Country. 1 Because we came to those parts for the spiritual and temporal health of them, whom we have ever loved well, as divers of them have known. 2. That we came contrary to the will of the Lord our King, whom our said coming, as is said, doth much offend. 3 That we desire & beseech them for the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they would come to an unity with the English people, and to the peace of our Lord the King, which we intend to procure them as well as we can. 4. We will them to understand, that we cannot long tarry in those quar∣ters. 5. We would that they considered that after our parting out of the Country, they shall not perhaps find any that will so tender the preferring of their cause, as we would do, if it pleased God (with our mortal life) we might procure them an honest, stable and firm peace. 6. That if they do contemn our petition and labour, we do intend forthwith to signifie their stubbournesse to the high Bishop and the Court of Rome, for the enormity that many wayes happeneth by occasion of this discord this day. 7. Let them know that unlesse they do quickly agree to a peace, that war shall be aggra∣vated against them, which they shall not be able to sustain; for the Kings power encreaseth daily. 8. Let them understand that the realm of England is under the special protection of the See Apostolick, and the See of Rome loveth it better then any other kingdom. 9. That the said See of Rome will not in any wise see the state of the Realm of England quaile, being under a special protection. 10. That we much lament to hear that the Welshmen be more cruel then Saracens; for the Saracens when they take christians, they keep them to be redeemed for money, but (they say) that the Welshmen by and by do kill all they take, and are only delighted with blood, and some time cause to be killed them whose ransom they have received. 11. That whereas they were ever wont to be esteemed, and to reverence God and Eccle∣siastical persons, they seem much to revolt from that devotion, moving sedition, and war, and committing slaughter, and burning in the holy time, which is a great injury to God, wherein no man can excuse them.
12. We desire, That as true Christians they would repent, for they cannot long conti∣nue their begun discord, if they had sworn it. 13. We will, That they signifie unto us, how they will or can amend the trouble of the Kings peace, and the hurt of the Common-wealth. 14. That they signifie unto us, How peace and concord may be established; for in vain were it to form peace to be daily violated. 15. If they say, That their Laws or Covenants be not observed, that they do signifie unto us what those be. 16. That granting it, That they were injured (as they say) which we in no wayes do know; they which were Judges in the cause, might so have signified to the Kings Majesty. 17. That unless they will now come to peace, they shall be resisted by decree and cen∣sure of the Church. The Answer of Prince Lhewelyn, to the above-written Articles. To the most Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord John, by Gods grace Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Primate of all England, his humble and devote son Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snowdon sendeth Greeting. With all Reverend Submission and Honour, we yield our most humble and hearty thanks unto your Fatherhood, for the great and grievous pains, which at this present for the love of us and our Nation you have sustained; and so much the more we are beholden unto you, for that besides the Kings pleasure you would venture to come to us. In that you re∣quest us to come to the Kings peace, we would have your Holiness to know, That we are most ready and willing to the same, so that our Lord the King will duely and truely ob∣serve and keep towards us and ours. Moreover, although we would be glad of your con∣tinuance in Wales, yet we hope there shall not be any delay in us, but that peace (which of all things we most desire and wish for) may be forthwith established, and rather by your travel and procurement than by any other mens, so that it shall not be needful to complain unto the Pope of our wilfulness; neither do we despise your Fatherhoods re∣quests and painful travel, but with all hearty reverence, according to our duty do accept the the same: neither yet shall it be needful for the Lord the King, to use any force against us, seeing we are ready to obey him in all things, our Rights and Laws (as aforesaid) re∣served. And although the Kingdom of England be under the special protection of the See of Rome, and with special love regarded by the same; yet when the Lord the Pope with the Court of Rome shall understand of the great dammages which are done unto us by the Englishmen; to wit, The Articles of the peace concluded and sworn unto, violated and broken, the robbing and burning of Churches, the murthering of Ecclesiastical persons, as well religious as secular, the slaughter of women great with child, the children sucking at their mothers breasts, the destroying of Hospitals and Houses of Religion, killing the men and women professed in the Holy Places, and even before the Altars: We hope that your Fatherhood, and the said Court of Rome, will rather with pity lament our case, than with rigor of punishment augment our sorrow. Neither shall the Kingdom of Eng∣land be in any wise disquieted or troubled by our means (as is affirmed) so that we may have the peace duely kept and observed towards us and our people: Who they be that are delighted with blood-shed and war, is manifestly apparent by their deeds and behaviour; for we would live quietly upon our own, if we might be suffered, but the Englishmen co∣ming to our Countrey, did put all to the sword, neither sparing sex, age or sickness, or any thing regarding Churches or sacred Places; the like whereof the Welshmen never committed. That one having paid his ransom, was afterwards slain; we are right sorry to hear of it, neither do we maintain the offender, who escaping our hands, keepeth him∣self as an Out-law in the Woods, and unknown places. That some began the war in a time not meet or convenient, that understood not we of till now; and yet they who did the same, do affirm, that in case they had not done as they did at that time, they had been slain or taken prisoners, being not in safety in their own houses, and forced continu∣ally for safeguard of their lives, to keep themselves in Armour; and therefore to deliver themselves from that fear, they took that enterprise in hand. Concerning those things which we commit against God, with the assistance of his grace,A true Chri∣stian resolu∣tion in Lhe∣welyn. we will (as it becometh Christians) repent and turn unto him; neither shall the war on our part be continued, so that we be saved harmless, and may live as we ought: but before we be disinherited or slain, we must defend our selves as well as we may. Of all injuries and wrongs done by us, we are most willing and ready (upon the due examination and trial of the trespasses and wrong committed on both sides) to make satisfaction to the utmost of our power, so that the like on the Kings side be performed in like manner towards us, and our people: and to conclude and establish a peace, we are most ready. But what peace can be established, when as the Kings Charter so solemnly confirmed, is not kept and performed? Our people are daily oppressed with new exactions. We send unto you also a note in writing of the
wrongs & injuries which are done unto us, contrary to that Form of the peace before made, we have put our selves in Armour, being driven thereunto by necessity; for we and our people were so oppressed, trodden under foot, spoiled and brought to slavery by the Kings Officers, contrary to the Form of peace concluded against justice, none otherwise then if we were Saracens or Jewes; whereof we have oftentimes complained unto the King, and never could get any Redress, but alwayes those Officers were afterwards more fierce and cruel against us; and when those Officers through their ravine and extortion were enri∣ched, other more hungry than they, were sent afresh to flea those whom the other had shorn before; so that the people wished rather to dye than to live in such oppression: And now it shall not be needful to leavy any Army to war upon us, or move the Prelates of the Church against us, so that the peace may be observed duely and truly, as before is expressed. Neither ought your holy fatherhood to give credit to all that our adversaries do alleadge against us; for even as in their deeds they have and do oppress us, so in their words they will not stick to slaunder us, laying to our charge what liketh them best. Therefore forasmuch as they are alwayes present with you, and we absent from you, they oppressing, we oppressed, we are to desire you, even for his sake from whom nothing is hid, not to credit mens words, but to examine their deeds. Thus we bid your Holiness farewell, Dated at Garth Celyn, in the Feast of Saint Martin. Certain Griefs sent from Lhewelyn to the Archbishop, translated word by word out of the Records of the said Archbishop. Where that it is contained in the Form of Peace concluded as followeth: 1. If the said Lhewelyn will claim any right in any lands occupied by any other then by the Lord the King without the said 4 Cantress, the said Lord the King shall do him full ju∣stice, according to the Laws and Customs of those quarters or parts where the said lands do lye. Which Article was not observed in the lands of Frustly, and betwixt the waters of Dyni and Dulas; for that when the said Lhewelyn claimed the said lands before the Lord the King at Ruthlan, and the King granted him the cause to be examined according to the Laws and Customs of Wales, and the Advocates of the parties were brought in, and the Judges, which vulgarly they called Ynnayd, before the King to judge of the said lands, according to the Lawes of Wales; and the Defendant appeared and answered, so that the same day the cause ought to have been fully determined, according to the appointment of our Lord the King; who at his being at Glocester, had assigned the parties the said day; and though the same cause was in divers places often heard and examined before the Justice, and the lands were in North Wales, and never judged but by the Laws of Wales, neither was it lawful for the King, but according to the Laws of Wales to prorogue the cause: All that notwithstanding, he prorogued the day (of his own motion) contrary to the said Laws; and at the last the said Lhewelyn was called to divers places, whither he ought not to have been called; neither could he obtain justice nor any judgement, unless it were according to the Laws of England, contrary to the said Article of peace; and the same was done at Montgomery, when the parties were present in judgement, and a day appoin∣ted to hear the Sentence, they prorogued the said day, contrary to the aforesaid Laws, and at the last the King himself at London denied him justice, unless he would be judged accor∣ding to the English Laws in the said matter. 2. All Injuries, Trespasses and Faults on either part done, be clearly remitted unto this present day. This Article was not kept, for that as soon as the Lord Reginald Grey was made Justice, he moved divers and innumerable accusations against the men of Tegengl and Ros, for trespasses done in the time of King Henry, when they bare rule in those parts; whereby the said men dare not for fear keep their own houses. 3. Whereas it was agreed, That Rees Vachan ap Rees ap Maelgon shall enjoy his posses∣sions, with all the land which he now holdeth, &c. After the peace concluded, he was spoiled of his lands in Geneurglyn, which he then held, with the men and cattel of the same. 4. Also our Lord the King granteth, That all Tenants holding lands in the 4 Cantrefs or in other places, which the King holdeth in his own hands, shall hold and enjoy the same, as freely as they did before the time of the wars, and shall use the same liberties and cu∣stoms which they used before; contrary to this Article, the Lord Reginald Grey hath brought many new customs against the Form of peace aforesaid. 5. All Controversies moved or to be moved betwixt the Prince and any other, shall be decided after the Law of the Marches (if they have their beginning in the Marches) and after the Laws of Wales, such as in Wales have their beginning; contrary to this Article, the King doth, and sendeth Justices to Anglesey, who presume to judge there the men and subjects of the Prince, setting fines upon them contrary to the Lawes of Wales, seeing neither this, nor any like, was ever heard of in times past,
imprisoning some, out-lawing others, when the Prince is at all times ready to do justice to all men that complain upon any of his men. 6. Where it is in the peace, That Gruffith Vachan should do homage for the land in Yale, and to the Prince for the land in Ederneon, The Kings Justices brought the Lady of Maylor into the said land of Ederneon; The knowledge of which cause onely pertained to the Prince, and not to the said Justices; and yet for peace sake, the said Prince tolle∣rated all this; being at all times ready to minister justice to the said Lady. 7. And though the said Prince submitted himself unto us and our will, yet we never∣theless will and grant, that our will in no case go further than is contained in those Arti∣cles. Contrary to this Article Gold was exacted for the Queens works, at every pay∣ment made to the King; which Gold was never demanded in the time of King Henry, or any other King of England; which Gold yet for quietness sake the Prince paid, though it were not spoken of, or mentioned in the peace. And now further it is exacted, for the old Queen, the Kings mother that now is (for the peace concluded with King Henry) 2000 Marks and a half; and unless it be paid, the King threatneth to occupy the goods and lands of Lhewelyn and his people, which he could find in his Realm, and sell men and beasts till the sum were paid. 8. When the King invited the Prince at his Feast at Worcester, promising with ve∣ry fair words, that he would give his kinswoman to him for wife, and enrich him with much honour; nevertheless, when he came thither the self same day they should be mar∣ried, before Mass the King required a Bill to be sealed by the Prince, containing amongst other things, That he would never keep man against the Kings will, nor never maintain any, whereby it might come to pass, That all the Princes forces should be called from him; the which Letter sealed, he delivered the King by just fear, which might move any con∣stant man: yet was not this contained in the peace, whereas the conclusion of peace was, That the King should require nothing that was not contained in the same. 9. Where in the peace all Customs be confirmed to the said Prince, as his ance∣stors of long and daily observed Custom have received to their own use all Wrecks hapning upon his own lands; The Justice of Chester took a distress of the Prince for goods of Ship∣wrack, received by him before the wars, contrary to the Form of the said peace, by the which all trespasses on either side were remitted, and contrary to the Customs aforesaid; and if in case it were forfeited, yet he took such a distress, 15 pounds of honey, and many horses, and imprisoned his men; and this he took of the Princes own proper goods: And further, took booties of Bagiers which came to Lyrpool with Marchandize, and never de∣livered the same, until he had taken so much money for the same as it pleased him. 10. When certain men of Geneurglyn had taken certain goods of some of their Neighbours of Geneurglyn, when they were in the Dominion of the Prince in Meyreon, the Kings men of Lhanbadarn did take away the said goods out of the said Dominion of the Prince; and when the Princes men came thither, and asked the cause why they took the said prey, the Kings men killed one of them, and wounded others, and the rest they did imprison; neither could the Prince get any justice for the said goods to this day. 11. And where it is contained in the peace, That all things committed in the Marches, shall be redressed in the Marches; yet the Kings men would no where hear the Princes men, but put them in the Castle of Lhanbadarn; which is against the peace aforesaid. In these Articles and divers others the King standeth sworn to the Prince, and his people. And although the Prince as well by himself as by his people have often requested the King to cause the said peace to be kept, yet was it in no point kept, but daily the Kings Justices did more and more heap injuries and griefs upon the people of those parts: So that it cannot be blamed, if the Prince did assent to them that first began the wars, seeing the Oath which the Lord Robert Typtoft sware unto the King, was kept in no point; and chiefly seeing the Prince was forewarned, that he should be taken as soon as the King came to Ruthlan, as he had been indeed, if the King had come thither after Christmas, as he purposed. These Griefs following were done by the King and his Officers, to the Lord David ap Gruffith. 1. When the said David came to the Lord Edward then Earl of Chester, and did him homage; the said Lord Edw. did give by his Letters Patents to the said David two Can∣trefs, Dyffryn Cluyd and Crinmeyrch with all the appurtenances: afterwards when he was made King, he confirmed the said gift to the said David, and gave him possession of them; After, when Gwenlhian Lacy died, who held some Towns in the said Cantrefs for term of life, which after her decease appertained to David by force of the aforesaid grant; which Towns yet the King took from him, contrary to his Letters Patents. 2. Item, When the said David did hold of the Lord the King the Villages of Hope and Eston in Wales, of the which he ought to answer no man, but according to the Laws of Wales; yet the Justice of Chester caused the said David to be called to Chester, at the suite
of one William Venable an Englishman, to answer for the Title of the said Villages; and although the said David did often and instantly desire him the said justice, not to proceed against him injuriously in the County of Chester, where he was not bound to answer by the form of the peace; yet he plainly denied him to be judged, either in Wales, or after the Laws of Wales. 3. Item, The said Justice of Chester, to the injury of the said David, did cut down his Wood of Lhyweny, and his Woods at Hope, as well by the Dwellers of Ruthlan, as o∣thers; and yet the said Justice had no jurisdiction in those patts; and not being conten∣ted to get Timber there for building, as well of Ruthlan as of other places, but also de∣stroyed the same Woods, sold it and carried it into Ireland. 4. Item, Where the said David took certain Out-lawes and Rovers in the Woods, and caused them to be hanged; yet the said Justice accused David to the King, for suc∣couring and maintaining the Thieves aforesaid; which was not like to be true, seeing he caused them to be hanged. 5. Item, It is provided in the peace, that all the Welshmen and their causes should be judged after the Lawes of Wales. This was in no point observed with the said David and his people. Of these aforesaid griefs the said David required often amends, either according to the Laws and Customs of Wales, or of special favour; but he could never obtain any of them both at his hands. Further, the said David was warned in the Kings Court, that as soon as Reginald Grey should come from the Court,Good service ill requited. the said David should be taken and spoiled of his Castle of Hope, his Wood should be cut down, and his Children taken for Pledges: who seeing he had taken great pains and peril for the King in all his wars, as well himself as his people, both in England and Wales, and had lost thereby the most part of the Nobility of his Countrey; and yet nevertheless could obtain neither Justice, Amends, nor favour at his hands, having such great wrongs offered unto him, and fearing his own life and his Childrens, or else perpetual prison, being enforced as it were against his will, began to defend himself and his people. Griefs and Injuries offered by the King and his Officers, to the men of Ros. 1. This is the Form of peace which the King of England did promise the men of Ros before they did him homage, which he promised them to observe inviolably. That is to say, That the King should grant to every of them their Right and Jurisdiction, as they had in time of King Henry, according as the said men do report that they had in the time of King Henry. 2. Item, The Lord the King did promise the same men, that they should have Justice in their Suites; after granting of the which Articles the said men did homage unto the King. And then the King promised them with his own mouth, faithfully to observe the said Ar∣ticles. This notwithstanding, a certain Nobleman passing by the Kings high way with his wife in the Kings peace, met certain English Labourers and Masons going to Ruthlan, where they did then work,A notorious ouragious murther and iniustice com∣mitted against the Welsh. who attempted by force to take away his wife from him, and while he defended her as well as he could, one of them killed his wife, and he who killed her with his followers were taken, and when the kindred of her who was slain re∣quired Law at the Justice of Chesters hands (for their kinswoman) they were put in prison, and the murtherers delivered. 3. Item, A certain man killed a Gentleman, who had killed the son of Grono ap Heilyn, and was taken; but when certain of the kindred required justice before the Justice of Che∣ster, certain of them were imprisoned, and the Offender set at liberty, and justice denied to the kindred. A profitable Judge to him∣self, but un∣just to the oppressed.4. Item, Certain Gentlemen claimed some lands, and offered the King a great sum of money to have justice, by the Verdict of good and lawful men of the Countrey (then the lands being adjudged to the Claimers) Reginald Grey took the same lands, corn, goods and all upon the ground; so that they lost their lands, money, corn and cat∣tel. 5. Item, It is our right, That no stranger should cut our Woods without our leave; yet this notwithstanding,A hard case. there was a Proclamation at Ruthlan, That it should be lawful for all other men to cut down our Woods, but to us it was forbidden. 6. Item, Where divers honest men had lands of the gift of the said David, the Justice taketh the said mens lands away. A slavery worse than Jewish.7. Item, When any cometh to Ruthlan with Merchandize, if he refuse whatsoever any Englishman offereth, he is forthwith sent to the Castle to prison, and the Buyer hath the things, and the King hath the price; then the Souldiers of the Castle first spoil and beat the party, and then cause him to pay the Porter, and let him go.
8. Item, If any Welshman buy any thing in Ruthland, and any Englishman do meet him, he will take it from him, and give him less than he paid for it. 9. Item, The King contrary to his promise made to the men of Ros, hath given the Territory of Maynan, Penmayn and Lhysuayn. 10. Item, Certain Gentlemen of the Cantref of Ros bought certain Offices, and paid their money for the same; yet the Justice of Chester took the said Offices from them without cause. 11. Item, Grono ap Heilyn took to Farm of Godfrey Marliney the Territory of Maynan and Lhysuayn, for the term of four years; yet Robert de Cruquer with Horses and Armes, and 24 Horsemen, came to vex the said Grono so, that he had no safe going neither to Ruthlan nor Chester, without a great guard of his kindred and friends. 12. Item, Certain Gentlemen were arrested for trespasses done before the wars, and imprisoned, and could not be delivered until they had paid 16 Mark; which was contrary to the peace concluded. 13. Item, Our causes ought to be decided after the custome of our Lawes; but our men be compelled to swear against their Consciences, else they be not suffered to swear. Furthermore, we spent 300 Marks in going to the King for justice in the aforesaid Articles.Sr. Reginald Gey a cruel Tyrant over the Welsh. And when we believed to recover full justice, the King sent to our parties the Lord Reginald Grey, to whom the King hath set all the land, to farm, to handle the men of the said Can∣tref as it pleaseth him; who compelled us toTo swear by his hand, whereas we should swear by the hand of the King. swear in his name, whereas we should swear in the Kings name; and where the Kings Cross ought to be erected, he caused his Cross to be erected, in token that he is the very true Lord: and the said Reginald at his first coming to those parts of Wales, sold to certain servants of the King Offices for 60 Marks, which the said servants bought before of the King for 24 Mark, which Offices ought not to be sold at the choice of the Lord. 14. Item, The King gave Meredyth ap Madoc a Captainship for his service; Reginald Grey took it from him, neither could he get any remedy at the Kings hand for the same. 15. Item, One of the Councel of the said Reginald, Cynwric Vachan told us by mouth, that as soon as the said Reginald Grey returned into Wales, he would take 24 men of every Cantref, and either behead them or imprison them perpetually. 16. Item, Whereas we paid our Taxes and Rents in old money, half year before the co∣ming of new money, they enforced us to pay new money for the old. These griefs and the like the said Reginald offered us, and threatned, that if we would send any to the King to complain, he would behead them: and when we sent any to the King, they could never speak with the King, but spent us much money in vain; for which griefs, we believe our selves free before God, from the Oath we have made to the King. These Griefs following the King and his Justices offered to Rees Vachan of Stratywy. 1. After that the said Rees gave the King his Castle of Dynevowr, since the last peace the said Rees then being in the Tent of the Lord Payne de Gadersey, at the same time there were slain six Gentlemen of the said Rees his men; for whom they never had amends, which was to him great grief and loss. 2. Item, John Gifford claimed the said Rees his Inheritance at Hiruryn, and the said Rees requested the Law of his Countrey of the King, or the Law of the Countrey of Caer∣marthen; in the which Countrey the Ancestors of the said Rees were wont to have Law, when they were of the peace of the Englishmen, and under their regiment; but the said Rees could have no Law, but lost all his lands. They would have had him to answer in the County of Hereford, where none of his Ancestors ever answered. Further, in the lands of the said Rees were such enormities committed, which do most appertain to the State Ec∣clesiastical; that is to say, in the Church of St David, which they call Lhangadoc,Grievous sa∣criledge com∣mitted by the English. they made Stables, and plaid the Harlots, and took away all the goods of the said Church, and burning all the houses, wounded the Priest of the said Church before the high Altar, and left him there as dead. 3. Item, In the said Countrey they spoiled and burnt the Churches of Dyngad, Lhan∣tredaff, and other Churches in other parts, they spoiled their Chalices, Books, and all o∣ther Ornaments.
These be the Griefs which the King and his Justice gave to Lhewelyn ap Rees, and Howell ap Rees. After that a Form of peace was concluded betwixt Henry then King of England, and the Prince of Wales, the said King granted and confirmed by his Charter to the said Prince, the homage of the said Noblemen, so long as they stood friends with the Prince, according to the said gift and confirmation: But Edward now King disinherited the said Gentlemen of their lands; so that they could not have their own lands, neither by law nor by favour. These be the Griefs done by the Englishmen, to the sons of Meredyth ap Owen. 1. After that the King had granted the Gentlemen their own inheritance of Geneurglyn and Creuthyn, he contrary to the peace disinherited the said Gentlemen, denying them all lawes and customs of Wales, and of the County of Caermarthyn. 2. The said King in his County of Caerdigan, by his Justices compelled the said Gentle∣men to give judgement upon themselves, where their predecessors never suffered the like of Englishmen. 3. The said Justices of the King having taken away the Courts of the Noblemen in Wales, and compelled the people to satisfie before them for trespasses, when as they ought to have satisfied by the said Nobles. 4. When a Wrack happeneth upon any of the grounds of the Noblemen, whose ancestors had the Wrack, they should have the same, yet the King forbiddeth them; and the said King by colour of that Ship-wrack, contrary to their custom and law, did con∣demn them in eight Marks, and took away all the goods of the Ship-wrack. The Complaints of the Noblemen of Strattalyn, of the Wrongs and Griefs done to them, by Roger Clifford, and Roger Scrochill, Deputy to the said Roger Clifford, contrary to the Priviledge, Justice and Custom of the said Noblemen, as they say and prove. 1. When the said Roger compelled the said men of Strattalyn, to give them (to have their customs and priviledges) 20 Marks starling, and after the payment of the money, they brake by and by, after this sort to put upon 12 men according to the laws of Eng∣land, which was never the manner or custom of the said Countrey. 2. Item, Madoc ap Blethyn was condemned in 4 Marks unjustly, contrary to the laws and use of the Countrey. 3. Item, Grono Goch was likewise condemned 5 Marks and 12 Beasts, contrary to the customs of his Countrey. Dear Venison.4. Item, The said Roger took the lands of the men of the Countrey as forfeit; and for one foot of a Stagg found in a Dogs mouth, three men were spoiled of all they had. 5. Item, Itlhel ap Gwysty was condemned in a great sum of money, for the fact of his fa∣ther done 40 years before. 6. Item, The said Rogers laid upon us the finding of all the English Souldiers, where as before there was but one half. 7. Item, We were given to Mr. Maurice de Cruny, and were sold to Roger Clifford, which was never seen in our parents time. 8. Item, The widow of Robert of the Mowld asked of the King the third part of the land in the Mowld in Ward, whereas it was judged before the King, that the said lands were never given in Ward. These be the Articles of Grief done to the men of Penlhyn, by the Constable of Henry Chambers of the White Abbey, and his men. 1. Cynwric ap Madoc was spoiled by them in the time of peace, of 8 pound, 4 Oxen, Corn, the work of one plough for two years, and to the value of 3 pound, of 3 of his men, and they had the worth of 16 pound for the said 8 pound, and did beat him besides, which was more wrong, for then he was the Princes Constable at Penlhyn; and all the cause that they pretended to make this spoyl, was only, that they said they had found 24 sheafes of Tythe in the house of a servant of the said Cynwric.
2. Item, Adam Criwr was condemned in 8 s. 8 d. and a Mare, price 20 s. and was taken and beaten, for that he had taken the Stealer of that Mare, and brought him bound with him; the which Thief was forthwith delivered. 3. Item, Jorwerth ap Gurgenen was condemned in 4 l. for that he had scaped out of their prison in time of the wars, and was found in the same Town in time of peace; and this is directly against the peace concluded betwixt the King and the Prince. 4. Item, Cadua Dhu, servant to the Constable of Penlhyn, was condemned because he would not receive the old money for new. 5. Item, Gruffith ap Grono, the Princes man, was spoiled of an Oxe, price 11 s. 8 d. and after that the Constable had ploughed with the said Oxe 7 moneths, he paid to the said Gruffith for the said Oxe 3 s. 4 d. 6. Item, Two servants of one named YBongan, were spoiled of 2 l. for that they took a Thief that robbed them by night; and yet the Thief was delivered. 7. Item, Eneon ap Ithel was taken, beaten, and spoiled of two Oxen, price 24 s. and 2 d. for this cause onely, That the said Oxen went from one street to another in the Town. 8. Item, Guyan Maystran was spoiled of his money, because a certain Merchant of Ar∣dudwy owed them certain things, and yet the said Merchant was not of their Baliwicke. The Griefs of Grono ap Heilyn 1. A Tenant of Grono ap Heilyn was called to the Kings Court without any cause. Then Grono came at the day appointed to defend his Tenant, and demanded justice for him, or the Law which the men of his Countrey did use: All this being denied, the said Tenant was condemned in 27 l. 1 d. ob. which caused the said Grono to go to London for justice; which was promised him, but he could never have any, where he spent in his journy 15 marks. 2. A certain Gentleman was slain, who had fostered the son of Grono ap Heilyn; and he that killed him was taken, and brought to Ruthlan Castle; then the said Grono, and the kindred of him that was slain asked justice, but some of them were imprisoned, and the Killer discharged: Then Grono went again to London for justice, which the King did promise him, but he never had any, but spent 20 Marks. 3. The third time Grono was fain to go to London for justice, in the premises, where he spent 18 Marks 6 s. 6 d. And then likewise the King promised him that he should have ju∣stice; but when he certainly believed to have justice, Reginald Grey came into the Coun∣trey, and said openly, that he had all doings in that Countrey by the Kings Charters, and took away all the Baliwikes which the King had given to the said Grono, and sold them at his pleasure: Then the said Grono asked justice of the said Reginald, but he could not be heard. 4. The said Grono took to Farm for 4 years of Godfrey, Marliney, Maynan and Lhyffayn; then Robert Cruquer came with his Horses and Armes, to get the said land by force; and for that, Grono would not suffer him to have the said lands before his years were out, he was called to the Law, and then the said Reginald Grey came with 24 Horses to take the said Grono: And for that, that day they could not have their purpose, they called Grono the next day to Ruthlan; and then Grono had councel not to go to Ruthlan: Then they called him again, to answer at Caerwys; but the said Grono durst not go thither, but by the conduct of the Bishop of St. Asaph, for that Reginald Grey was there, and his men in Har∣ness. 5. For these griefs, for the which he could get no justice, but labour and expences of 54 Marks, and more; and for that he durst not in his own person go to the Court, he sent Letters, one to the King, another to his brother Lhewelyn, to signifie to the King that he should lose all the favour of the Countrey, if he kept no promise with them; and so it came to pass, because the men of Ros and Englefield could get no justice, the King negle∣cting the correction of these things, lost the whole Countrey. Humbly sheweth to your Holiness Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, the Noblemen of Tegengl. That when the said Noblemen did their Homage to the Lord Edward King of England, the said King promi∣sed them to defend them and their Goods, and that they should use all kind of Right, Priviledge and Jurisdiction, which they did use in the time of King Henry, by the Grant of the said King, whereof they were after spoiled. First they were spoiled of their Right, and Priviledges, and Customs of the Countrey, and were compelled to be judged by the Lawes of England, whereas the Tenure of that
their priviledge was to be judged according to the Laws of Wales at Tref Edwyn, at Ruth∣lan and at Caerwys, and the best men of the Countrey were taken, because they desired to be judged at Tref Edwyn, according to the Tenure of their priviledges, by the Laws of Wales. 2. Whatsoever one Justice doth, his successor doth reverse the same; for in Davids case, Reginald Grey revoked that which his predecessor confirmed and allowed. 3. If he do take any Gentleman of that Countrey, he will not let him go upon securi∣ty, which he ought to do. 4. If any Gentleman be brought to the Castle of Flint, upon a small accusation, and his cattel withal, they can neither be delivered or have delay, until they give the Consta∣ble an Oxe, and until they pay 3 l. fees to Cynwrick, for having of the delay. 5. Reginald Grey gave the lands of the men of Merton to the Abbot and Covent of Ba∣singwerk, against the Laws of Wales and Custom of the Countrey, and contrary to the Form of peace betwixt Lhewelyn and the King; that is to say, 16 Caratatas terrae. 6. The Noble and Best of the Countrey be injured, for that the King builded the Castle of Flint upon their ground, and the King commanded the Justices to give the men as much good ground, or the price; but they are spoiled of their lands, and have neither other lands nor their money. 7. Reginald Grey will not suffer men to cut their own Wood, until he have both mo∣ney and reward, and until they pay for it also; but permitteth others to cut it down freely, which they ought not to do by the Laws and Customs of Wales. 8. When the men of Cyrchynan Covenant with the King, to give the King half a Mea∣dow, upon condition the King should not suffer the Woods to be cut down, Howel ap Gruf∣fith being present; yet Reginald Grey hath broken the same, permitting every man to cut their Woods, and spoil them also of their Meadow. 9. The same Cynwric ap Grono was taken at Ruthlan, and put in prison without any cause at all, neither would the Kings Officers deliver him, unless he would redeem the gage of a certain woman; for the which he was constrained to pay much more than the pawn lay for. 10. When the Bailiff of Ruthlan was at a Feast, Hicken Lemaile wounded a Gentleman cruelly in the presence of the said Bailiff; by occasion of which wound, Hicken was con∣demned in 8 l. and when he which was hurt would have demanded the 8 l. he was put in prison by Hicken. 11. The messengers of Reginald Grey attempted an absurdity not heard of, and requi∣ring the people of the Countrey to plough his ground, and sowe the same; and the messen∣gers were Cynwric Says, and Hicken Lemayl; and the said Cynwric swore openly before the whole company, that unless all men should plough Reginald Greys ground, they should shortly repent it; then the people feared much, as in that case any constant man would fear. 12. The heirs of Tegengl bought their Offices for 30 Marks of the King; but afterward Reginald Grey spoiled them of their Offices and money, contrary to the Laws and Customs of England. 13. Seven Gentlemen were wrongfully killed by the Englishmen, but as yet the Parents of the Gentlemen can have no amends, and though the offenders were taken, yet the said Constable let them go without punishment. 14. The Constable of Ruthlan kept two of the Kings souldiers in prison, for that they took an Englishman who had wounded a man. All these things contained in these Articles are contrary to the priviledge, liberty and right of the said men, and contrary to the Laws and Customs of Wales; neither dare the Inhabitants send their Complaints to the King, for fear of Reginald Grey (which fear any constant man might have) because the said Reginald said openly, that if he could come by any such their messengers, he would cut off their heads, as it is certainly told us by one of his Councel; further, neither tongue can tell, nor pen write, how cruelly the men of Tegengl have been ordered. Humbly complaineth to your Lordship my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, Lhewelyn ap Gruffith ap Madoc, of the Constable of Oswalds Cross, the King and of the men of that Town, who have spoiled the said Lhewelyn of the third part of a Town called Lhedrot, and his fathers house, without any Law, or Right, or Custom of the Countrey. Further, the said Constable and his Complices have against the Laws and Customs of the Countrey, spoiled the said Lhewelyn of his Common and Pasture, which he and his predecessors have used time out of mind, and further condemned the said Lhe∣welyn for the said Pasture in 70 Marks: And further the King of England granted certain Letters to a Bastard called Gruffith Vachan of Cynlhaeth, to law with the said Lhewelyn for his whole Lordship and possessions; by the occasion of the which Letters, the said Lhe∣welyn hath spent 200 l. of good money. Also the said Constable compelled the said Lhewelyn to send two Gentlemen to him; whom when they came to him, he caused to be hanged; which Gentlemen ought not by
right to have been hanged, whose parents had rather have given him 300l. Afterward the said Constable imprisoned 60. of the Men of the said Lhewelyn (no cause alledged) but that a certain Page spake a word, who could not be delivered out of prison untill every one of them paid 10 s. When the Men of the said Lhewelyn came to the said Town to sell their Oxen, the said Constable would cause the beast to be driven to the Castle; neither would he restore the beasts, nor mony for them. Further the said Constable and his men took away the Cattle of the said Lhewelyn from his own ground, and did their will with them. Further the Kings Justices compelled the said Lhewelyn contrary to the law and custome of Wales, to deliver to the Sons of Eneon ap Gruffith, a certain Town which both he and his Ancestors ever had held. The said Constable took the horse of Lhewelyns Baliffe, when the said Baliffe owed him nothing, who could never get his horse again, nor any sa∣tisfaction for it. Furthermore when the said Lhewelyn should have gone to a Town called Caerlheon to appear there, as he was appointed, the Sons of Gruffith ap Gwenwynwyn and the Soldiers of Robert Strange by the Councel of the said Roger, took the said Lhewelyn and his Men, and imprisoned them, to their great damage, which the said Lhewelyn would not for 300 l. starling, who could by no means be delivered untill they had found sufficient sure∣ties. The Archbishop receiving these and other Articles, came to the King, and requested him to consider these wrongs, and to cause amends to be made, or at the least excuse the Welshmen, having so just cause of grief; who answered that the Welshmen were to be ex∣cused, yet he said he was ever ready to do Justice to all them that complained. Where∣upon the Archbishop besought the King again, that the Welshmen might have free ac∣cess to his Grace, to declare their griefs, and to seek remedy; the King answered they should freely come and depart, if it should seem that by Justice they deserved to de∣part. The Archbishop hearing this, went and came to the Prince of Wales in Snowdon, that he might move him and his Brother David, and the other company to submit them∣selves, whereby he might incline the King to admit them; to which after much talke and conference with the Archbishop, the Prince answered, that he was ready to submit to the King; reserving two things, that is to say his conscience, which he ought to have for the rule and safe-guard of his people, and also the decency of his State and calling; which answer the Archbishop brought and reported to the King. At the which the King said, that he would not any other treaty of peace then that the Prince and his peo∣ple should simply submit themselves. But the Archbishop (knowing well that the Welsh∣men would not submit themselves but in form aforesaid, or in other form to them tolera∣ble, and of them liked, requested the King that he might have conference in this matter with all the Noble Englishmen then present, who after much conference agreed to all these Articles following. The which Articles the Archbishop did send in writing to the Prince by John Wallensis. These are to be said to the Prince before his Councel. 1. First that the four Cantreds and the Lands, by the King given to his Nobles, and the Isle of Anglesey, we will have no treaty of. 2 Item, Of the Tenants of the four Cantreds, if they will submit themselves, he pur∣poseth to do as becometh a Kings Majesty, and we verily believe he will deal with them mercifully, and to that end we will labour and trust to obtain. 3. As touching the Lord Lhewelyn, we can have none other answer, but that he shall submit himself simply to the King; and we believe certainly, he will deal mercifully with him; and to that end we travail all we can, and verily believe to be heard. The following are to be said to the Prince in secret. 1. First, that the Nobility of England have conceived this form of a favourable peace, That the Lord Lhewelyn should submit himself to the King, and the King should honoura∣bly provide for him 1000l. starling, and some honourable County in England, so that the said Lhewelyn would put the King in quiet possession of Snowdon,Durum telum necessitas. and the King will provide honourably for the daughter of Lhewelyn according to the State and condition of his own blood; and to these they hope to perswade the King. 2. Item. if it happen that Lhewelyn marry a wife, and so have by her any heir Male, they trust to intreat the King, that the same heir Male, and his heirs for ever shall have the same 1000l. and County. 3. Item, to the people, subject to the said Lhewelyn, the King will provide as becometh their Estates and condition, and to that the King is well enclined.
These are to be said to David Brother to Lhewelyn in secret. A specious banishment.First, That if for the honour of God (Juxta debitum crucis assumptae) he will go to the holy land, he shall be provided for according to his degree, so that he do not return, un∣less he be called by the King, and we trust to intreat the King to provide for his child. 2. And these things we tell our selves to the Welshmen, that a great deal greater peril do hang over them, then we told them by mouth, when we were with them. These things which we write seem grievous, but it is a great deal more grievous to be oppressed with armes, and finally to be rooted out, because every day more and more, their danger doth increase. One of Jobs comforters.3. Item, It is more hard to be alwayes in war, in anguish of mind, and danger of body, alwayes sought and beseiged, and so to dye in deadly sin, and continual rancor and malice. 4. Item, We fear (whereof we be sorry) unless you do agree to peace, we must cer∣tainly aggravate the sentence Ecclesiastical against you for your faults, of the which you cannot excuse your selves, whereas you shall find both grace and mercy if you will come to peace. And send us your answer of these in writings. To the most Reverend Father in Christ, the Lord John, by Gods grace, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, his Obe∣dient Son Lhewelyn Prince of Wales, and Lord of Snowdon sendeth greeting. Most heartily with all Reverence and Honour we are content and ready holy Father, as you have committed us, to submit our selves unto the Kings grace, so it be in that form that shall be safe and honest for us: But because the form of submission contained in the Articles which were sent unto us, is neither safe nor honest, as we and our Councel do think (at the which Articles all men do marvail) tending rather to the destruction of us, and our people then any security, or honest dealing, we may in no wise yield our as∣sent unto it, and if we should so do our Nobles and People would not agree to the same, knowing the mischiefs and inconvenience that is like to ensue thereof. Nevertheless we beseech your holy Father-hood, that for the reformation of a decent, honest and firm peace (for the which you have taken so great pains) you do circumspectly provide, having respect unto the Articles which we send unto you in writing. It is more honourable for the King, more agreable to reason that we should hold our Lands in the County, where we do dwell then, that we should be dis-inherited and our Land given to other Men. Dated at Carth Celyn. The Answer of the Welshmen. First, though the Lord, the King will have no treaty of the four Cantreds, the Lands that he gave to his Nobles,The right of lands derived from Camber. nor the Isle of Anglesey, yet the Princes Councel will no peace be made unless treaty be had of them, For that the four Cantreds be of the mere Tenure of the Prince, whereas the Princes of Wales, had more right, since the time of Camber Son of Brute, so that they be of the principality of VVales. The con∣firmation of the which the Prince obtained by Otobanus, the Popes Legate in England, by the consent of the King and his Father. As it doth appear by the Letters Patentes. And more just and equal it is that our heirs do hold the said Cantreds of the King for mo∣ny,The P. of Wales justly taxeth the K. of England. and used service, then the same to be given to strangers, which abuse the people by force and power. 2. All the Tenents of all the Cantreds of VVales altogether do say, that they dare not submit themselves to the King, to do his pleasure, first for that the King kept neither co∣venant nor oath, nor grant by charter from the beginning, to the Prince or his people. Secondly that the Kings men do cruelly exercise Tyranny towards the Church and Churchmen. Thirdly that they be not bound to any such matter, seeing they be the Princes Tenants, who is ready to do, used and accustomed service, and to obey the King with and by the said service, 3. To that which is said that the Prince should simply commit himself to the Kings will it is answered, that none of us will dare come to the King for the cause aforesaid; we al∣together will not suffer our Prince to come in that manner. 4. Item, where the great Men of England would procure a provision of a 1000l. per annum in England; let it be answered, that such provision is not to be accepted, for it that is procured by them, who go about to disinherit the Prince to have his Lands in VVales. 5. Item, The Prince ought not to dismiss his inheritance, which his predecessours held
in VVales since the time of Brutus, and confirmed by the See Apostolick, and to take lands in England, where he knoweth neither tongue, manners, lawes nor customes, wherein he shall be soon entrapped, by his neighbours the Englishmen, his old malicious enemies, whereby he should lose land also. 6. Item, Seeing the King goeth about to deprive him of his ancient inheritance, it is not like that he would suffer him to possesse Lands in England, where he claim∣eth no right; seeing that the Princes Lands in VVales, of his own inheritance, is but barren and untilled, it is lesse like the King would suffer him to enjoy good fertile land in England. 7. Item, The Prince should give the King possession of Snowdon for ever. Let it be an∣swered, that seeing that Snowdon is of the appurtenances of the principality of VVales, which the Prince and his predecessours, hold since the time of Brute; His Councell will not suffer him to renounce that place, and to take a place in England lesse due unto him. 8. Item, The people of Snowdon do say, that although the prince would give the King possession of it, yet they would never do homage to strangers, of whose tongue, Manners, Lawes, they should be ignorant; for so they should be for ever Captives, and as cruelly handled as the Cantreds have been by the Kings Bayliffs, and other the Kings men, handled more cruelly then Saracens, as it doth well appear by the notes of their griefs which the men of the Cantreds sent to you holy Father. These are to be Answered; For David the Kings Brother. When he is disposed to see the Holy Land, will do it for Gods sake voluntarily, not by such inforcement against his will; for he intendeth not to go on pilgrimage in that sort, because he knoweth enforced service not to please God; and if he hereafter shall for devotion see the holy land, that it is no cause for ever to disinherit his Ofspring, but rather to reward them. And for that neither the Prince nor his people, for County nor for gains do move war, invading no mans lands, but defending their own Lands, Lawes and Liberties; and that the King and his people of inveterated hatred, and for covetuousnesse to get our Lands, invading the same moved war: We therefore see our defence is just and lawful; and herein we trust God will help us, and will turne his revenge upon de∣stroyers of Churches, who have rooted up, and burned Churches, and taken out, both all sacraments and sacred things from them, killing Priests, Clerks, Religious, Lame, Dumb, Deaf, Younglings, Sucklings at their mothers paps, Weak and Impo∣tent, both man and woman, and committing all other enormities, as partly it appear∣eth to your Holinesse. Wherefore God forbid that your Holinesse should fulminate sentence against any, but such as have done such things; we who have suffered all those things at the Kings Officers hands, do hope at your hands remedy and com∣fort, and that you, will punish such Church Robbers and killers, who can defend themselves no wayes, least their impunity be cause and example for others to do the like. Very many in our Country do much marvel, that you councelled us to leave our own land, and to go to another mans Lands, to live among our Enemies; for seeing we cannot have peace in our own Land, which is our own right, much lesse should we be quiet in an other mans amongst our enemies; and though it be hard to live in warr and peril, harder it is to be utterly destroyed and brought to nothing, especially for Christians seeking nothing else but to defend our own, being by necessity dri∣ven thereunto and the greedy ambition of our enemies. And your Holinesse told us that you had fulminated sentence against all that for hatred or gaines do hinder the peace; and it appeareth evidently who do war for those causes, the fear of death, the fear of imprisonment, the fear of perpetual prison, the fear of dis∣inheriting, no keeping of promise, Covenant, Grant or Charter, tyrannical Domini∣on, and many more like, compell us to be in war; and this we shew to God, and to your Lordship, desiring your godly and charitable help. Furthermore if any in England have offended the King (as many do offend him) yet none of them be dis-inherited; so if any of us have offended the King, let him be punish∣ed and make satisfaction as he may, without exhereditating. As we trust in you, we pray you holy father to labour to this end; if they lay to us that we break the peace, it appeareth evidently, that they (and not we) brake the same, who never kept promise nor Co∣venant, nor Order, made any amends for Trespasses nor Remedy for our Com∣plaints. When the Archbishop could not conclude a peace, he denounced the Prince and his Complices accursed; then the King sent his army by sea, to the Isle of Môn or Anglesey, which they wan, and slew such as resisted them; for the chiefest men served the King,
as their oath was; so they came over against Bangor, where the arm of the sea called Mê∣nath,Spaniards, Scots, and Gescoynes, Ger∣mans, Normans and English, all concurr a∣gainst the Welsh. Quantae molis erat Bri∣tannam perde∣re gentem. Gramercy horse. The Welsh rout their enemies. which divideth the Isle from the main land is narrowest, and the place called Moely Donn, and there made a bridge of boats and planks over the water, where before Julius A∣gricola did the like, when he subdued the Isle to the Romans; and not betwixt Man and Brittain, as Polidore Virgil ignorantly affirmeth. This bridge was accomplished so that three∣score men might well passe over in a front. VVilliam Latimer with a great number of the best Souldies, and Lucas Thany Steward of Gascoine with his Gascoynes and Spaniards (where∣of a great number were come to serve the King) passed over the bridge, and there saw no appearance of enemies; but as soon as the sea began to flow, down came the VVelshmen from the hills, and set upon them fiercely, and either slew or chased them to the sea, to drown themselves; for the water was so high, that they could not attain the bridge, saving VVil∣liam Latimer alone whose horse carried him to the bridge, and so he escaped. There were slain and drowned at this time many worthy Souldiers, and amongst others that famous Knight Sr. Lucas Thany, Robert Clifford, Sr. VVilliam Lindsey, and two Gen∣tlemen of good accompt, that were brethren to Robert Burnel then Bishop of Bath. There perished in all thirteen Knights,Hol p. 791. Tho. Walsh. p. 11. Chro. Dunst. The K. of Eng. hard put to it by the valiant Welsh. 17. young Gentlemen, and to the number of 200 footmen, which happened upon St. Leonards day. Thomas Walsingham writeth, that the King lost in this voyage, a little before this, 14 ensignes, at which time the Lord William de Audley and the Lord Roger Clifford the younger and many other were slain, and the King himself was dri∣ven to take the castle of Hope for his safeguard. In the mean time was the E. of Glocester and Sr. Edmund Mortimer with an army in South∣wales, where were many that served the King, and there sought with the Princes friends at Lhandeilo Vawr, and gave them an overthrow, wherein on the Kings side young William de Valence his cosen germane, & four Knights more were slain. All this while the Prince destroyed the country of Caerdigan and all the lands of Rees ap Meredyth, who served the King in all those wars. But afterward the Prince separated himself from his army with a few, and came to Buelht, thinking to remain their quietly for a while; and by chance, as he came by the water Wy, there were Edmund Mortimer and John Gifford with a great number of Soldiers, and either party were abashed of other, Edmund Mortimers men were of that Country, for his father was Lord thereof. Then the Prince departed from his men, and went to the valley with his Esquire alone, to talk with certain Lords of the Country who had promised to meet him there. Then some of his men seeing the enemy come down from the hill, kept the bridge called Pont Orewyn, and defended the passage manfully, till one declared to the Englishmen where a ford was a little below, through the which they sent a number of their men with Helias VValwyn, who suddainly fell upon them that defended the bridge, in their backs, and put them to flight. The Princes Esquire told the Prince (as he stood secretly expecting the comming of such as promised to meet him in a little grove) that he heard a great noise & cry at the bridge.P. Lhewelyn slain, & with him the glory of Wales. And the prince asked whether his men had taken the bridge, and he said, Yes; then said the prince, I passe not, if all the power of England were upon the o∣ther side. But suddainly behold the horsemen about the Grove; and as he would have es∣caped unto his men, they pursued him so hard, that one Adam Francton ran him through with a staff being unarmed, and knew him not; and his men being but a few, stood and fought boldly, ever looking for their prince, till the Englishmen by force of Archers mixt with the horsemen wan the hill, and put them to flight, and as they returned, Francton went to spoyle him whom he had slain, and when he saw his face he knew him very well, and struck off his head, and sent it to the King at the Abbey of Conwey, who received it with great joy, caused it to be set upon one of the highest Turrets of the Tower of London. This was the end of Lhewelyn, betrayed by the men of Buelht, who was the last prince of the Brittains blood, who bare dominion and rule in VVales, so that the rule and govern∣ment of the Brittains over continued in some place of Brittany from the first coming of Bru∣tus,Mr. Powel fol 374. which was (as Mr. Powel saith) in the year before Christs incarnation 1136. to the year after Christ 1282 by the space of 2418. years. Varium & mutabile sem∣per vulgus.Shortly after that the King had brought all the Country under his subjection, the coun∣try men themselves brought to him David the princes brother, whom he kept in Ruthlan Castle, and after put him to death at Shrewsbury. Then the King built two strong castles in Northwales,Conwey and Carnarvon ca∣stle built by K. Edw I. the one at Conwey, and the other at Caernarvon; when Rees Vachan heard how all things went, he yielded himself to the Earle of Hereford, who at the Kings com∣mandement sent him to the Tower of London to be imprisoned there, and so the King passed through all VVales and subjected the whole Country to the Kingdom of England. Mr. Mills fol. 310.Two religious men, the one a VVelshman, the other an Englishman, have written late in Verses in praise and dispraise of this Lhewelyn, not unworthy to be remembred, the sub∣stance whereof is this;
The VVelshman thus, The Englishman thus, Here lyeth he that terrifieth the En∣glish men, and Wales he did as valiantly defend, Lhewelyn the Prince of Northwales, the bul∣wark, the jewel of his time, a flower of Kings past, a pattern of future ages; the Captain, the light, the beauty and law of the People. Here lyeth the Prince of error, the spoyle of men, traitor to England, bright firebrand of the guilty, the VVelshmens God, a traitor Cap∣taine, and death of the godly, the scum of Trojans, a lying stock, and cause of much mischief. His Issue. Katherine Lackland, or without land, married to Malcome Earle of Fyke in Scotland. Madoc was his bastard son, who in the latter time of K. Edward I. raised war in North∣wales, but where the King came; he builded the Castles of Beaumarish, and cut down there woods which yielded them succour and refuge in time of war; he fortified the Castles a∣bout the sea coast. Shortly after he was taken, & from that time the Welshmen ceased to make war, and the King gave to his eldest son the Principality of Wales, and with it the Earldom of Chester.
THE Fourth Book OF THE ANTIENT & MODERN BRITTISH AND WELSH History.
TO THE Right Honourable Sir PIERCY HERBERT, Lord Powis. EDWARD HERBERT Baron of Cherbery in England, and Castle-Iland in Ireland. Sir CHARLES SOMERSET, Knight of the Bath, and Son to the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Worcester. Sir EDWARD STRADLING, alias ESTERLING of St. Donats, Baronet. Sir EDWARD MORGAN of Lantarnam, Baronet. Sir TREVOR WILLIAMS of Langibbie, Com: Mon: Baronet. WILLIAM LEWES of the Van, Esq RICHARD LEWES of Edigton Esq THOMAS MORGAN of Maughan, Esq The Lord POWIS. Sir EDWARD HERBERT of Red-Castle, Montgomery∣shire, descended lineally from Brittish Progenitors, as in the Geneology of the E. of Pembrock largely appears. Sir William Herbert created Lord Powis. Elianor Daughter to Henry Earl of Northumberland, by which match this honorable Family descends from the Brittish line, as appears in the Genea∣logy of the Earl of Northum∣berland. Sir Piercy Herbert Lord Powis. — sister to the Lord Craven. William Herbert Esq Heir appa∣rent. Elizabeth Daughter to Edward Marquesse of Worcester, by which the Brittish bloud is a∣gain renewed and conjoyned, as appears in the Pedegree of the Marquess of Worcester.
The Lord HERBERT Baron of Cherbery and Castle-Iland. Edward Lord Herbert of Cher∣bery. Anne Daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton of Cherck Castle de∣scended anciently from Brit∣tish noble Progenitors. Richard Lord Herbert, &c. Mary Daughter to John Egerton, Earl of Bridgewater, by which match the honourable Family is linked into the Brittish bloud, as appears in the Gene∣alogy of the Earl of Bridge∣water. Edward Lord Herbert, &c. Mary Daughter and Heir to Sir William Herbert of St. Julians Com: Monmoth. Here take natice, that these two honorable Families, both Male and Female by a long continued Series and Genealogy descend from Noble and Princely Brittish Progenitors: The first whereof Her∣bert Lord of the Forrest of Dean married Lucy, Daughter and Coheir of Milo Earl of Hereford, who married Sibil Daughter and Heir of Bernard Newmarsh Lord of Brecon, and his Wife Nest, Daughter and Heir of Griffith ap Llewellin Prince of Southwales; the first of this Family who setled in Wales was Peter ap Herbert, who married Alice Daughter and Heir of Blethin Broadspear, he was Lord of Llanthloell in Monmouthshire and Beachley in Glocester∣shire; and from this branch are sprung, The Earl of Pembrock and Huntington, the Marquess of Worcester, The Earl of Pembrock and Montgomery, the Lord Powis, and several Noble ancient and mighty Families, who do, and have born several honorable Offices in this Kingdom. Sir CHARLES SOMERSET of Troy in the County of Monmouth, Knight of the Bath. SIR Charles Somerset Knight of the Bath at the creation of Henry Prince of Wales third Son to Edward Lord Herbert of Chepstow Ragland and Gower Earl of Worcester, and Elizabeth Daughter of Francis Hastings Earl of Huntington, and Katherine his Wife Daughter and Heir of Henry Poole Lord Mountague descended from
the Brittish line, married the sole d: and h: of Sir William Powel of Troy Knight, extracted from an ancient and long continued series of Brittish Progenitors; and hath three Daughters and Coheirs, the eldest married to Squire Anderton of Lostock, Com: Lan: Esq and hath Issue Male; the other two as yet unmarried. I shall need to say no more concerning the extraction of this honorable and most vertuous Knight from the Brittish line, the Genealogy of the Mar∣quess of Worcester will make it appear: only I shall dayly pray that Almighty God will prolong his life for the good of the poor; and at his departure crown him with a crown of glory, & bless his posterity. Sir EDWARD STRADLING Baronet. SIR Edward Esterling was one of the twelve Knights who came into Wales for the subduing of Glamorganshire, and for his good service had St. Donats Castle and Mannor given him, where this Knightly and Noble Family hath hitherto continued. Sir John Esterling, Knight. Sir Morris Esterling, Knight. Sir Robert Esterling, commonly called Stradling Knight. Sir Gilbert Stradling, Knight. Sir William Stradling, Knight. Sir John Stradling, Knight. Sir Peter Stradling Knight. Julian sole Daughter and Heir to Tho. Hawey, Esq Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Elianor Daughter to Gilb. Strad∣ling of a yonger Family Esq Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Wenlian Sister and Heir to Sir Lawrence Beccols one of the twelve Knights. Sir William Stradling Knight. Isabell Daughter and Heir to Joht St. Barbe Com. Somer Esq Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Jane Daughter to Henry Beau∣fort, after Cardinal. Sir Henry Stradling Knight. Eliz. Sister by the whole bloud to William Earl of Pembrock. Thomas Stradling, Esq Jenet Daughter to Tho. Matthew of Kayder Esq
Sir Edward Stradling Knight. Eliz. daugh. to Sir Tho. Arundel of Llanheyron Com. Devon, Kt. Sir Thomas Stradling Knight. Katherin d. to Sir Tho. Gamage Kt. Sir Edward Stradling, Knight. Agnes d. of Sir Edward Gage Kt. Sir John Stradling Knight, crea∣ted Baronet by K. James, being the 6th. Baronet so created.   Sir Edward Stradling Baronet. — d. to Sir Tho. Maunsel Baronet. Sir Edward Stradling. Bar: A Lady from London. Sir Edward Stradling Baronet, now living, 1661. Sir EDWARD MORGAN of Lantarnam Com. Mon. Baronet. Kidivor Vawr Lord of Kylsant, one of the Peers of Wales, of the Royal bloud of the Brittains paternally descended from Bely King of Brittain. Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kilsant. Elen d. and h. to Llewelen Vawr one of the Peers of Wales. Bledry Lord Kilsant. Clydwen d. and h. to Griffith ap Kydrych Lord of Gwenvay. Ivor ap Bledery de eodem. Tauglust d. and h. to Howel Sais Lord of S. Clere. Llewelin ap Ivor Lord of St. Clere. Augharand d. and h. to Sir Mor∣gan Meredith L. of Tredegar, Kt. Morgan Llewellin Lord of S. Clere and Tredegar. Mallt daugh. to Rhyn ap Gronwey Lord of Kybor. Philip Morgan of Langston Com. Mon: Esq a second brother. —daughter and heir of Sir John Norris of Langston Knight. Jenkin Philip of Langston Esq Cicely d. to Sir John Welsh Kt. Morgan Jenkin of Langston Esq Eliz. d: to Roger Vaughan Esq Sir Thomas Morgan of Penloyd Kt. Com: Mon: Joan d: and h: to John Gwillym Herbert of Itton Esq John Morgan of Caerleon a se∣cond Son, Esq Eliz. d: to Lewes ap Richard Wyn of the Van Com. Glamor: Esq Will: Morgan of Lantarnam, Esq Eliz: d: to Sir Rees Maunsel, Kt. Edward Morgan of Lantarnam, Esq Eliz: d: and h: to Hugh Smith of Long Ashton Com: Som: Esq William Morgan of Lantarnam, Esq The Lady Frances daughter to the Earl of Worcester.
Sir Edward Morgan of Lantar∣nam Baronet. Mary, daughter to Sir Francis Englefeild Baronet. Sir Edward Morgan of Lantar∣nam Baronet, now living 1661. Frances daughter to Tho: Morgan of Maughon, Esq Edward Morgan Esquire, Heir apparent. Sir TREVOR WILLIAMS of Langibbie, Com. Mon. Baronet. Cradoc Vraych Vras E: of Ferlix. Tegayr d: and h: to K. Pallinor. Maynarck Lord of Brecon. Elinor d: to Synon L. of Cwnwe. Rees ap Maynarck Lord of Istra∣dyw. Joan d: to Kydwayn ap Elistan P. of Ferlix. Ruylhyn ap Rees Goch Lord of Istradywe. Jonet Daughter and Coheir to Howell of Caerleon. Kynvyn ap Kuylhyn, Esq Gladys d: to Sitsilt ap Difnwall of Ʋpper Gwent Esq Arthur ap Kynvyn Esq Elinor daughter to Meirick ap Cradoc Esq Howel ap Arthur Esq Joan d: to Gronwey Vychan Esq Griffith ap Howell Esq — d: and h: to Gronwey Vychan ap Gronwey ap Ririd of Penllin. David ap Griffith Esq Maud d: and heir to Llewellin ap Kynvrige Vychan Esq Howell Gam David Esq Joyce d: to Sir Scudamore Kt. Evan ap Howell Esq Alice d: to Morgan Vawr Esq Philip ap Evan Esq Jonet daughter to Meirick Ha∣nard Esq Howell ap Philip Esq Jonet d: to Rog: David ap Meirick Gwillym ap Howell Esq Gwellian d: to Jenken David ap Rees ap Gronwey Esq Tho: Guillym Howell Esq Gwellia d: to Meirick ap Evan ap Gronwey Esq John Thomas Esq Anne d: to David Goch ap Jen∣kin Grant Esq William Jones Esq Margaret d: to Edward Jenkin ap Roger of Martholy Esq
Roger Williams Esq Dorothy d: to Sir Baynam Kt. Rowland Williams Esq Cicely daughter to Sir Edward Maunsel Knight and Baronet. Sir Charles Williams Knight. Anne daugh: to Sir John Trevor. Sir Trevor Williams Baronet, now living, 1661. Eliz: daughter to Tho: Morgan of Maughan Esq and Coheir by her Mother to that never suffi∣ciently admired Ralph Lord Hopton her Uncle. — Williams Esq Heir apparent. WILLIAM LEWES of the Van, and RICHARD LEWES of Edington Esquires, and Brothers. Cloddien ap Gurgan Prince of Dryswyn. Morvid d: and sole h: to Odwin ap Teith Lord of Cardigan. Gwaith Voed Lord of Gardigan in right of his Mother. Morvid one of the daughters and Coheirs of Iuyr K. of Gwent. Kydrych ap Gwaith Voed Lord of Gwyn Vai Nest daugh: to Tango ap Cadvael Pr. of Ardydwy. Cadivor ap Kydrych Lord of Twch Cayack. Mevamwy daughter to Gurgan King of Morganog. Moirick ap Cadivor Lord of Ywch Cayack. Gladys daughter to Eiddyn King of Gwent. Ivor ap Meirick, alias Ivor Petty Lord Royal of St. Sein henidd. Nest daugh: and heir to Madoc ap Cradoc Lord Royal &c. Griffith ap Ivor, &c. Elen daughter to Griffith ap Rees Tudor Prince of Wales. Howell ap Griffith, or Howell Ve∣lin Esq Sarah d: and coheir to Sir Mayo Sore Lord of St. Fagans. Madoc ap Howell of Marthyr Esq Efnydd d: and one of the Heirs of Lewes descended from Minarch Lord of Brecon. Llewellin ap Madoc of Marthyr Esq Llewellin Vychan of Marthyr Esq Rees ap Llewellin Vychan of Marthyr Esq Llewellin ap Rees of Marthyr Esq Joan d: of Howel Gam Lord of Penrose Com: Mon: Esq Richard Gwyn of Marthyr Esq Jonet Lady of Marthyr sole d: and Heir to Jeuan Esq
Lewis ap Richard Gwin Esq Gladys d: and sole h: to Jenan ap John descended lineally from Brecon Lord of Brecknoc. Edward Lewis of the Van Esq Anne d: of Sir William Morgan of Pencoed Kt. John Morgan of Ca∣erleon 2. son of this Sir William married Eliz. sister of this Edw: Lewis, from which cross match the Lewisses of the Van and Morgans of Lantarnam are des∣scended. Tho: Lewis of the Van Esq Margaret d: to Robert Gamage, Lord of Coyty Esq Sir Edward Lewis of the Van Knight. Blanch d: to Thomas Morgan of Tredegar Esq Sir Edward Lewis of the Van Knight. The Lady Anne d: to Robert Earl of Dorset, and widdow to the Lord Beauchamp. William Lewis of the Van Esq now living. 1661. — sole d: and h: to — Banister Esq Rich: Lewis of E∣dington Esq now living. 1661. — d: and h: to — James Esq Lewis Esq Heir apparent. Lewis Heir apparent. THOMAS MORGAN of Maughan Esq Kydivor Vawr Lord of Blain Cych paternally descended from Bely the Great King of Btittain, married Elen Daughter and Heir to Llewellen Vawr. Bledry ap Kydivor Vawr Lord of Kylsant. Clidwen d: and h: to Griffith Ce∣derch Lord of Gwnfay. Ivor ap Bledry Lord of Kylsant Esq Tanglust d: and h: to Howell Sais Lord of St. Clere y moch Esq Llewellin ap Ivor Lord of S. Clere Esq Lleykye d: to Griffith ap Eli Lord of Gilfeild in Powis. Ivor ap Llewellin Lord of S. Clere Esq Nest daughter to Cadwgan, and Great Grandchilde to Elistan Pr: of Ferlix.
Llewellin ap Ivor Lord of S. Clere and Tredegar Esq Augharand daughter and heir to Sir Morgan Meredith Knight, Lord of Tredegar. Morgan ap Llewellin Lord of Tredegar Esq Maud daughter to Rhun ap Grono ap Llwarch Lord of Kybor, Esq Llewellin Morgan of Tredegar Esq Jonet daughter to Dd. Ychan of Rydodyn Esq Evan Morgan of Tredegar Esq Denis daughter to Tho: ap Howell Ychan Esq Sir John Morgan of Tredegar Kt. Jonet daughter and heir of John Matthewes of Landaff Esq Thomas Morgan of Machen Esq his Brother Sir John dying Sans Issue. Rowland Morgan of Manghan Esq Thomas Morgan of Maughan and Tredegar Esq Sir William Morgan of Tredegar Knight. — Daughter to Wintour Kt. Com. Glonc. Thomas Morgan of Maughan and Tredegar Esq now living, 1661. — Daughter and Heir to — Windham. Com: Somer: William Morgan Esq Heir apparent. I Have seen a Pedegree of this noble Family deduced even from Brute; but because I affect brevity, I have only selected what serves for my purpose, giving you to understand, that all Morgans, or of what Name else soever, who either bear for their Armes Argent, a Lion Rampant, gardant, sable, or else Or, a Griffon Ser∣greant sable for their Paternal Coat, must acknowledge themselves to descend from this ancient Family
THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE Antient and Modern Brittish and Welsh HISTORY. The Princes of VVales of the blood Royal of England, collected for the most part, out of the Records of the Tower. Edward of Caernarvon. KIng Edward albeit he had brought all Wales under his subjection, and by a statute made at Ruthland, An. 12. Edw. I. incorporated and united the same to England; in the which Statute there be many good lawes concerning the division of Wales into Counties, and concerning divers Offices and Officers, and concerning Trial, and the divisions of actions, and the the formes of many writs, and the proceeding therein much like to the lawes of England; yet he could never win the good will of the common people of the Country to accept him for their prince, except he were of their own nation, for the Welshmen having experience of the government of the English Officers, and knowing that the King would rule the Country by his Deputies, could not abide to have any English man to be their Rulers, who often times upon the Kings motion, answered that they were con∣tent to take for their prince any man whom his Majesty would name, so that he were a Welshman, and no other answer could he ever get from them by any means; whereupon the King sent for Q. Elianor out of England in the deep of Winter, being then great with child, to the Castle of Caernarvon, and when she was nigh to be brought to bed, the King went to Ruthlan and sent for all the Barons, and best men in Wales to come unto him, to consult concerning the Weale publick of the Country. And when they were come, he deferred the consultation till he was certified that the Queen was delivered of a son, then sending certain Lords to the Christening of his child and informing them how he would have him named, he called the Welshmen together, declaring unto them, that whereas they were oftentimes suiters unto him to appoint them a Prince, he now having occasion to depart out of the Country, would name them a prince if they would allow and obey him, whom he should name. To the which motion they answered that they would so do, if he would appoint one of their own Nation to be their prince, whereunto the King replyed, that he would name one that was born in Wales, and could speak never a word of English, whose life and conversation no man was able to stain, and when they all had granted that such an one they would obey, he named his own son Edward born at Caernarvon Castle a few dayes before. Then the King having the whole country at his will, gave whole Towns and Lordships in the midst of Wales unto English Lords, as the Lordship of Denbigh to Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne, the Lordship of Ruthin to the Lord Reginald Grey, second son to J. Grey of Wilton, and other lands to many of his Nobility.
This Hen. Lacy Lord of Denbigh was the son of Edmund Lacy, the son of John Lacy Lord of Halton, Pomfret, and Constable of Chester; who married Margaret the Eldest Daughter, and one of the heirs of Robert Guincy Earl of Lincolne, the said Henry married Margaret the daughter and sole heir of William Longesped, Earl of Sarum, and had Issue Edmund and John, which both dyed young, of whom the one perished by a fall into a ve∣ry deep well, within the castle of Denbigh; and a daughter named Alicia married unto Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, who was in the right of his said wise, Earl of Lin∣colne and Sarum, Earl of Denbigh, Halton, Pomfret, and constable of Chester, After the death of the said Thomas, King Edward the second gave the Lordship of Denbigh to Hugh Lord Spencer Earl of Winchester. After whose death the said Lordship was given by King Edward the third, Anno regni sui primo, as it appeareth on record, to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, with divers other Lordships in the Marches, in performance of the Kings pro∣mise while he remained in France with his mother, for the provision of 1000 l. lands of a reasonable extent for the said Roger, as soon as by Gods grace he should come to the pos∣session of the crown and Kingdom of England, which in few years after, the Earl of March being attainted, the said Lordship of Denbigh was given by the said King to the Lord Mortague Earl of Sarum, but shortly after Anno 29. Edward 3. it was restored again with the Earldom of March to the Mortimers, in the which family the same remained untill the whole inheritance of the Mortimers came with a Daughter to the house of York, and so to the crown:A help to En∣glish History fol. 263. and it was given by Queen Elizabeth, Anno regni 610. to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, who was created Baron of Denbigh; it is accounted one of the greatest and best Lordships of England. This Town is well seated on the banks of the River I∣strad, which from thence runneth into the Cluyd, the fairest River of this Country; a Town well peopled, and inhabited, especially since it became the head of the Country, which was not till the 27. of Hen. 8. what time the 5. new shires were added to the rest of Wales, of which this was one: but before that it was the head Town of the Barony of Denbigh, being conceived to be one of the goodliest Territories of all England, as having more Gentlemen holding thereof in Fee and by service then any other Lords, it hath had good store, and of several families, but none of them a Parliamentary Peer, (in reverence here∣unto) till these later times; of late it hath given title both to Lord and Earl of two several families. Viz. to these. 1. Robert Dudley created Baron of Denbigh, and Earl of Leicester. Eliz. 6. Sept. 29. 1622. Or, a lyon rampant quene fourche vert, incensed Cules a cressent for difference. William Viscount Fielding created Earl of Denbigh 20. Jac. Sept. 14. Master of the Wardrobe, &c. Arg. Or a Fess. B. 3. Fusils or Lozenges Or. The Lordship of Ruthin continued in the possession of the Greyes, untill the Reign of Hen. 7. George Grey Earl of Kent, and Lord of Ruthin passed the same upon some bar∣gain to the King. There came at the same time with King Edward divers Gentlemen, who grew after∣wards to be men of great possessions in the County, many of whose posterity continue to this day. Rees ap Meredyth served the King in all these wars, who did most hurt of all men, and was in good hope of great preferment at the Kings hand, whom after the overthrow of the Prince, the King made Knight, and fed with many fair and good words. After that he and all other his Countrymen and Neighbours had submitted themselves to the Go∣vernment of the King of England, it hapned that the Lord Pain Tiptoft, Warden of the Kings castles nigh unto Rees his Country, and the Lord Allen Plucknet the Kings Stew∣ard in Wales called the said Rees, as they did all other of the Country to the Kings Court, whether he refused to come, alledging his ancient priviledges and liberties: with the Kings promises; but the said Officers proceeded according to the law against him, whereupon a great variance arose between the said Pain Tiptoft and the said Sir Rees ap Meredyth, so that sundry Skermishes were fought betwixt them, and men slain on both sides, to the great disturbance of the Country. The King hearing of these things, being then beyond Sea, wrote unto Rees Meredyth, requiring him to keep the peace till his re∣turn. At what time he promised to reform all things in due and reasonable order, but Rees would not give over the enterprise which he had begun: Whereupon the King sent to the Earl of Cornwall, whom he had left his Lieutenant in the Realm during his absence, to send an army of Men into Wales to withstand the disordered attempts of the said Rees, who went into Wales himself, and overthrew Rees his Castle at Drofolan; but by undermining the walls of that Castle, with the fall thereof the Baron Stafford, and the Lord William de Monchency, with many other Knights and Esquires, were oppressed and brused to death. Afterwards Robert Typtoft Lord Deputy of Wales gathered an army, and meeting the said
Rees after the slaughter of 4000. of his people discomfited and took him, who about Michaelmas following, at the Kings going into Scotland, was had to York, and there con∣demned and executed. Not long after the King wanting money, there was a great subsidy granted towards the maintainance of the war in France, about levying of which there was much a do in several places; but especially the Welshmen, who were never wont to be acquainted with such contribution, stormed against it, so that they took one of their own Captains na∣med Roger de Puelesdon, who at the Kings command gathered the said subsidy, and hanged him with divers others; and afterwards beheaded the said Roger. Whereupon the King being sore offended for the death of the said Roger, whom he greatly favoured, and hearing that the VVelshmen began to stir against him in divers places; for the VVest∣wales Men had chosen Maelgon Vachan for their Captain, and destroyed all Caerdigan and Pembrock, and returned with spoiles. They of Glamorgan and the Southparts took one named Morgan for their leader, and driving the Earl of Glocester out of the Country, they restored to the said Morgan again the possessions which the Ancestors of the said Earl by force and great wrong had taken from the said Morgans Predecessours. The Northwales men had set upon Madoc, being of the kindred of the last Lhewelyn, who gathering a great power, came to Caernarvon, and slew a great number of Englishmen, which were come thither to the Fair, and spoiled the whole Town; then I say the King called back his bro∣ther Edmund Earl of Lancaster, and Henry Lacy Earl of Lincolne, and John Lord Den∣bigh, who had an army ready to pass into Gascoyne.The remnant of the Welsh, foyle the English. These Earls came towards North∣wales, and as they approached neer unto the castle of Denbigh upon St. Martins day, the VVelshmen with great force encountered them, and giving them battail, drove them back and discomfited their people. Upon this ungratefull newes the King himself came into VVales and there kept his Christmas at Aberconwey, where Robert VVinchesey Archbishop of Canterbury came unto him and did him homage, and then returned home; the King as he passed further into the country, lost much of his carriages, which the Welshmen took, being loaden with victu∣alls and provision for the army, so that the King and his people endured great penury, and were constrained to drink water mixt with hony, and eat very gross and course meat, where he was very like to have been distressed, had not the other part of his army come to him in time. While the King remained in Snowdon, the Earl of Warwick hearing that a great num∣ber of Welshmen were assembled together, and lodged in a vally betwixt two woods, chose out a company of horsemen with certain cross-bowes and archers, and coming upon the Welshmen in the night, compassed them round about, who pitching the ends of their spears, and turning the points against their Enemies, stood at defence so to keep off the horsemen. But the Earl having placed his battail so that betwixt every two horsemen there stood a crossbow, a great part of the Welshmen, who stood at defence in manner afore∣said with their spears were overthrown and broken with the shot of the quarrells, and then the Earl charged the residue with a troop of horsemen, and bare them down with such slaughter, as they had not sustained the like losse of people (as was thought) at any time before. After this the King builded a strong Castle within the Isle of Anglesey, and called the same Beaumarish, and so setting all in quietness, and punishing such as had put to death Roger de Puelesdon, he returned home with his army;Madoc victori∣ous against the Lord Strange of Knooking and the Marchers. but Madoc within a while after levying an army, came to Oswestred where the people yielded unto him, and meeting with the Lord Strange with a company of Marchers not far from Knooking, o∣verthrew him, and spoiled his Country miserably, and shortly after he gave the Marchers another overthrow. But for all that the Lords Marchers nothing dismayd, at this mischance, gathered new forces, and met Madoc as he was coming towards Shrewsbury up∣on the hills of Cefn Digolh, not far from Caurus Castle, where after a long fight Ma∣doc was taken, and his men discomfited and put to flight. Then he was sent to the Tower of London, there to remain in perpetuall prison. Some there be who affirm that Madoc was not taken but rather after many adventures and sundry conflicts, when the VVelshmen were brought into great extremity, the said Madoc came in and submitted himself to the Kings peace, and was received upon condition that he should pursue Morgan till he had taken him and brought him to the Kings prison, which was done, and so all things were quieted, and many hostages of the chiefest Nobility of Wales were delivered to the King, who sent them to divers Castles of England, where they were safely kept almost to the end of the wars which followed in Scotland. In the 29th. year of K. Edw. 1. Edw. Prince of Wales came to Chester where he re∣ceived the homage of the Free-holders of Wales; as Henry Earl of Lancaster did homage and fealty for Monmoth. Regynald Grey for Ruthyn. Fulk Fitz Waren for his lands in Wales. The Lord William Martin for his lands in Cemais.
Roger Mortimer, for his lands in Wales. Henry Lacy Earl of Lincolne, for the land of Ros and Ryveneoc in Wales. Robert Lord Montalt, for his land in Wales. Gruffith Lord of Poole, for the Lordship of Powis. Sr. Gruffith Lhoyd Knight. Tuder ap Grono of Anglesey. Madoc ap Tuder Archdeacon of Angelsey. Eneon ap Howel of Caernarvon. Tuder ap Gruffith. Lhewelyn ap Edninet. Gruffith Ʋachan, the Son of Gruffith ap Jorwerth, Madoc Vachan d'Englefield. Lhewelyn Bishop of St. Asaph. Mr. Richard de Pnelesdon, this man (as appeareth by the Records in the Tower) was made Sheriff of Caernarvonshire, during his life, with the stipend of 40 l. staring, yearly Anno. 12. Ed. 1. Gruffith ap Tuder. Ithel Vachan. Ithel ah Blethyn &c. The Lord Richard Sutton Baron of Malpas, did homage and fealty to Edward Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester for the said Barony of Malpas apud Ruthlan. 27. die Aprilis Anno supradicto. Aniamis or Eneon Bishop of Bangor, and David Abbot of Maynan did homage and fe∣alty to the said Edward Prince of Wales apud Conwey 28. April. An. sup. dict. Lewis de Felton the son of Richard de Felton did homage and fealty to Prince Edward for the Lands which the said Richard held of the Prince in Maelor Saesneg. John Earl Warren did homage and fealty to Edward Prince of Wales in the Chap∣pel of the Lord John de Kerby, sometime Bishop of Ely at London. 25. die Julii. Anno. 30. Ed. 1. for the Lordships of Bromfield and Yale. The same John Earl Warren swore fealty unto the said Ed. P. of Wales for the lands in Hopedale. The Lord Edmund Mortimer, the 6th. day of November an. 30. Ed. 1. in the house of the Bi∣shop of Ely at London, did homage and fealty to Edward P. of Wales before his Councel for his lands in Cery and Cydewen. About the year 1322. one Sr. Gruffith Lhoyd Knight, gathered a great number of Welsh∣men, and took divers Castles in Wales which were kept by the people of the Lord Mor∣timer the Elder, he took also the Castles of Mould, Chirk, &c. The keepers whereof coming to P. Edward at Shrewsbury who then was King of England, submitted themselves to him, and were shortly after sent to the Tower of London. This Edward of Carnarvon, was known by the name of Edward the second King of Eng∣land, living in a turbulent time between him and his Barons, was after deposed for his ill Government,and came to a violent death in the Castle of Berkeley; nevertheless in his life time he created his son P. of Wales.Hol. p. 863. Edward of Windsor. The same year being the 15. of K. Ed. the second Edward de Windesore the Kings El∣dest Son, was in a Parliament holden at York, created Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aqui∣tane. Edward of Woodstock surnamed the Black Prince. Mr. Mills ut ante.Edward born at Woodstock, Son and Heir to King Edward, was created Prince of Wales 12. of May, anno. 17. Ed. patris, when he was fourteen years of age, who in time grew to be the flower of Chivalry of all Europe; he took John the French King prisoner at the battail of Poyteirs, and dyed, his Father yet living, the eighth of July in the 46. year of his age, and the 50. of his Fathers Reign, a Prince of such excellent demeanour, so va∣liant wise and politick in his actions, that the very and perfect representation of Knight∣hood appeared most lively in his person; for such was his towardness, or rather perfecti∣on in Princely Government, that if he had lived and attained the crown, every man Judged that he would surely have exceeded all his predecessors.Sr. John Do∣dridge fol. 6. Edward the third (saith Judge Dodrige) at a Parliament holden at Westminster 15. regni. created Edward his eldest Son,Ex. harta cre∣ationis in Par∣liamento. a. 15. Ed. 3. (surnamed the black Prince) Prince of Wales, being then of tender years, and invested him in the said principality with these ensignes of ho∣nour, as in the Charter is contained, Per sertum in Capite, & anulum in digito aureum & virgam argenteam juxta morem, by a Chaplet of gold made in manner of a garland, for so the
word sertum importeth, by a gold ring set on his finger, and by a Verge, rod and Scepter of silver, howbeit in the investure of succeeding Princes, this Rod or Scepter, (as ap∣peareth by the Charters of their several Creations) was changed into a Verge of gold. The said King for the better maintainance of the said Prince his Son in honourable sup∣port according to such his State and dignity, gave unto him by his Charter, Dated 12. of May in the 17. year of his Reign of England, and in the 4. year of his reign of France, and inrolled in the Exchequer in the Term of St. Hillary, in the 18. year. of the said King Ed∣ward the Third, the said principality and the mannors, Lordships Castles and land en∣suing to appertain to the said principality. Viz. All his lands and Lordships, in Northwales, Westwales, and Southwales. 1. The Lordship, Castle, Town and County of Caernarvon. 2. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Convey. 3. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Crucketh. 4. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Beaumarish. 5. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Hardlagh. 6. The Lordship, Castle, and Townes, and Counties, of Anglesey and Merioneth. 7. The Lordship, Castle, and Town and County of Caermaden. 8. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Lampader vawr. 9. The Lordship, and Stewardship of Canter mawr. 10. The Lordship, Castle, Town and County of Cardigan. 11. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Emelyn. 12. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Buelht. 13. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Hverford. 14. The Lordship, Castle and Town of Montgomery,. And all the lands that were of Rees ap Meredyth,The large li∣berties and priviledges of the Prince of Wales. which came to the hands of King Ed∣ward the First, together with all the Lordships, Cities, Castles, Burrowes, Townes Manours, Members, Hamlets, and Tenements, Knights fees, Voydances of Bishopricks, Advowsons of Churches and of Abbeys, Priories, and of Hospitals, with customes and prisages of wines. The exercise and Execution of Justice, and a Chancery; Forrests, Chases, Parks, Woods, Warrens, Hundreds, Comos, &c. And all other Hereditaments, as well unto the said principality, as unto the said King, in those parts then belong∣ing, To have and to hold the same unto the sad Prince and his heirs Kings of England. This limitation of Estate of this principality unto the prince and his heirs Kings of England, may seem strange to our Modern Lawyers. For how is it possible that the Kings of England can inherit the principality, since the principality being the lesser dignity is extinguished in the Kingly Estate, being the greater; for in presentia majoris cessat id quod minus est, for as much as the Heir apparent of the crown (being Prince) is presently upon the death of his Ancestor eo instante King himself, and the principality as the lesser not compatible with the Kingdom, being the greater. But when I consider that this age where in this Charter was penned, was a learned age of Judges and Lawyers (by whose advice no doubt in a matter of this importance this Char∣ter was penned) and this age much commended for exquisite knowledg of the lawes, by those learned Men that lived in the succeeding times, I cannot but think reverently of an∣tiquity, although I cannot yield sufficient reason of their doings therein. Nevertheless for as much as all the Charters in the ages following made to the Prince, do hold the same manner of limitation of Estate,Sr. John Do∣dridge his o∣pinion con∣cerning a dif∣ficulty. I am perswaded some mystery of good policy lies hid therein, which as I conceive may be this, or such like. The Kings of England thought to confer upon the Prince and heir apparent, an Estate in Fee simple in the lands that they bestowed upon him; for a lesser than an Inheritance had not been answerable to so great a dignity. And yet they were not willing to give him any larger Estate then such as should extinguish again in the Crown when he came to be King or died, for that he be∣ing King should also have the like power to create the Prince or his heir apparent, and to invest him into that dignity, as he, being the Father, was invested by his Progenitor. For the wisdom of the Kings of England was such, as that they would not deprive themselves of that honour, but that every of them might make new Creations and Investitures of the principality to ther Eldest Son, and next succeeding heir apparent, and that those lands so given unto the Prince, might when he was King be annexed, knit and united again to the crown, and out of the crown to be anew conferred, which could not so have been if those lands had been given to the Prince and his heirs generall, for then the lands so given would have rested in the natural person of the Princes after they came to the King∣dome distinct from the Crown, Lands; and might as the case should happen, descend to others then those which were his heirs apparent to the Crown. And herein I do observe a difference between the principality of Wales given to the Prince, and the Dutchy of Corne∣wall
given unto him. For every Prince needeth, and so hath had a new creation and in∣vestiture. But he is Duke of Cornewal as soon as he is born, if his Ancestor be then King of England; and if not, he is Duke of Cornwall eo instante that his father is King of En∣gland. The said King also by an another charter, dated the 20 of September in the said 17. year of his reign, granted unto the said prince all arrerages of rents, duties, accompts; Stocks, stores, goods and chattels remaining in all and every the said parts due, or by right belong∣ing unto the King, and thereupon the prince accordingly was possessed by vertue of these charters of all these aforesaid. It resteth that here we set down the Total Annual value of the said Principality of Wales by it self, as it appeareth upon a diligent Survey thereof taken in the 5. year of the reign of the said King Edw. the III. of England, and in the 37. of his reign over France. The survey of the principality of Wales is drawn out of a long Record, and to avoid te∣diousness, the value of the revenues of every County or Shire, is here set down, and then the total of the whole, omitting the particulars of every Mannour, Lordship, Town or other profit in every of the said Counties: The setting down whereof at large would have been exceeding combersome and intricate. It is therefore in this manner. The Province of Northwales. The summe total of all the Princes Revenues in the County or Shire of Caernarvon. 1134l 16 s 2 d ob. q. The summe total of the Revenues of the province in the County of Anglesey. 832 l 14 s 6 d ob. q. The sum total of the revenues in the county of Meryoneth amounteth unto 748 l 11 s 3 d. ob. q The perquisites and profits of the Sessions of the Justices of Northwales. The summe Total of all the former Revenues in Northwales, amounteth to 3041 l 7 s 6 d. q. Whereof deducted the yearly Fee of the Justice of Northwales, and there remains the summe of 3001 l 7 s 6 d. q. The Province of Southwales. The summe totall of the yearly Revenue of the prince in the county of Caerdigan. 374 l 11 s 3 d. q. The summe total of the yearly Revenue of the prince arising in the County of Caer∣mardhyn. 406 l 1 s 7 d. The Fee Farme of Buelht. 113 l 6 s 8 d. Montgomery. 56 l 13 s 4 d. Perquisites and profits of the Sessions of the Justice of Southwales. 738 l 6 s 9 d. ob. Perquisites of the Courts of Haverford. 41 l. 5 s. 3 d. ob. The summe total of the Revenues in Southwales. 1730 l 4 s 11 d q. Out of which deducted for the Fee of the Justice of Southwales 50 l. there then remaineth 1681 l 4s 11 d q. The total of all which Revenues of the Principality of VVales, cast up in one entire summe together, is 4681 l 12 s 5 d q. This survey was made upon this occasion as it seemeth; after the death of the prince called the black Prince, the Princesse his wife was to have her dowry to be allotted unto her, out of those Revenues; which could not be without an extent or survey thereof first had by Commissioners thereunto appointed. And because the yearly value of the said re∣venues, by reason of the casual profits thereof, were more or lesse yearly, and not of one certain value, the Commissioners observed this course; they did make choice of three seve∣ral years, viz. 47, and 48, and 49. of Edw. III. and did take out of the several profits of those years, and did cast them all into one summe, which they again divided into three se∣veral parts equally esteeming one of the said three parts to be the just yearly value of the said Revenues Communibus annis, that is, one year, with an other. And in this account, we find no other charges allowed then the Justics Fees only.
This survay and account made about 200 years past, is here inserted, to the end it might appear, what the Revenues of this Principality alone was. The said prince of VVales, surnamed the Black prince;Mr. Mills fol. 315. after many fortunate victories atchieved by him, having subdued a great part of France, and having taken John the French King prisoner at Poyteers in France; and after that also having vanquished Henry at Naveroit in Spain, and restored Peter King of Aragon, dyed, in June;Sr. John Do∣dridge fol. 15. leaving behind him Richard his Son and Heir, born at Burdeux, and thereof sirnamed Richard of Burdeux. Richard of Burdeux. Richard son of Edward Prince of VVales, was after the death of his father created prince of VVales at Havering at Bower the 20. day of November, in the 50. year of King Edw. III. his Grandfather, he was after the death of his said Grandfather K. of England, by the name of K. Rich. II. This Richard (saith Judge Dodridge) sirnamed of Burdeux, son and heir of Edward the black prince, was created prince of VVales (ut supra) being about the age of XI. years, and upon Christmas day next following the said King Edward the third caused the said prince (being his Nephew or Grandchild) to sit at the table in high estate, above all his Uncles being the Kings sons, as representing the personage of the heir apparent to the Crown, and gave to him the two parts of all the said principality, Counties, Lordships, Castles, and the most of the said Lands, which belonged to the said black prince, and the reversion of the third part thereof; the possession of the third part there of then being to the mother of the said Rich. to her dowry with an 113 l. 6 s. 8 d. yearly rent, payable by the Earle of March, as a Fee Farm for the Lordship and Lands of Buelht; and 85. marks for the fee farm of the Castle, Lordship and Land of Montgomery, with the vacations of Bishopricks, excepting the Fees of the Baron Marchers of VVales, who do alwaies hold of the Crown in Capite; and excepting the avoydance of the Bishoprick of St. Davids in VVales, which anciently also belonged to the Crown, with the like limitation to the estate viz. To the said Richard and his heirs Kings of England. It seemeth that these Lordships of Buelht and Montgomery, being formerly granted to Edw. the black prince, were before this time given away in Fee Farm. After the death of the said K. Edw. III. which was in the 51 year of his reign, the Kingdom of England descended to the said Richard being his grandchild, and he was crowned King thereof, by the name of Richard the second, and in the 23 year of his reign he resigned his Kingdom, or to speak more truly, was deposed against his will, and after by a violent death, departed this life without issue. Henry of Monmoth. Henry of Bullingbrock, a Town or Castle in Lincolneshire, and heretofore belonging to the Lacies Earles of Lincolne; and by the marriage with Alice daughter and heir of Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne to Thomas Earle of Lancaster, this with the residue of the lands of Lincolne, became united and incorporated with those of Lancaster. It hath been almost ever since this time one of the honours (as we call them) of the Crown of England, but never made any honorary title unto any family untill King James conferred it on Sr. Oliver Saint John, who possibly might affect to be thence denominated, as fetching his descent from the Lady Mar∣garet Beauchamp, Grandmother to King Henry the seventh, the heirs of the Lancastrian fa∣mily, by which descent likewise, as well as otherwayes he is descended of the Welsh blood and beareth for his armes, Argent on a chief gules, two mullets Or: but to our former matter; this Henry of Bullingbrock, by the name of Henry IV. who was formerly Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, Earle of Derbie, Leicester, and Lincolne, son and heir of John of Gaunt the fourth son to K. Edward the third, by his Charter dated at Westminster 15. Octob. in the first year of his reign, created Henry his eldest son prince of Wales, and invested him in the said princely Ornaments, viz. the chaplet, gold ring, verge or rod of gold, To have and to hold unto him and his heirs Kings of England. And by another Charter of the same date gave to him and his heirs Kings of England the said principality, with the Lordships,Sr. John Do∣dridge fol. 17. Castles and Lands before mentioned in the Charter made to the black prince, together with four Comots in the county of Caernarvon, viz. the comots of Ifaph, Ʋghaph, Nantconwey and Crewthin, not named before, and the reversion of the Lordship of Haverford, with the prices of Wines there, and of the Lordships of Newin and Pughby in Northwales; which Thomas Percy then Earle of Worcester held for term of life of the demise of King Richard the Second, together also with the reversion of the county and lordship of Anglesey in Northwales, and the castle of Beaumarish, and the comots, lands, tenements and hereditaments belonging thereunto, which Henry Percy son of the Earle of Northumberland then held for terme of his
life, of the demise of the said K. Hen. IV. and by an act of Parliament made in the first year of K. H. IV. whereby the Dutchy of Lancaster is severed from the Crown of Engl. the stile of the said P. is declared to be this, P. of Wales, D. of Aquitane, of Lancaster & of Cornwal, & E. of Chester, for the said K. H. IV. having been himself D. of Lancaster before his assumption to the Crown, and knowing that the name of Duke, being an inferiour dignity, would extinguish and be surrounded in the crown as in the superior, desired (as by that Act of Parliament ap∣peareth) not only to separate the said Dutchy of Lancaster, and the lands thereof from the Crown, to the intent he might still hold the said Dutchy as his antient patrimony, if he were put from the Crown, it being but his new acquired dignity, but also to preserve the said stile,Mr. Lhoyd fol. 385. title, and name of Duke of Lancaster in his posterity, which as the said act af∣firmeth his ancestours had so worthily borne and sustained. In the time of K. Rich. II. there was one Owen ap Gruffith Vachan, descended of a younger son of Gruffith ap Madoc Lord of Bromfield. This Owen was first a Student at the Lawes of the Realme, and became an utter Barrister, or an apprentise of the law (as they term it) and served King Richard in great credit and favour; between whom and the Lord Grey of Ru∣thin happen some discord about a piece of Commons lying between the Lordship of Ruthin and the Lordship of Glyndourdwy, whereof Owen was owner, and thereof took the sirname of Glindour; during the reign of K. Richard, Owen was too hard for the Lord Grey, being then a servitour in court with K. Rich. (with whom he was at the time of his taking in the ca∣stle of Flint by the Duke of Lancaster) but after that K. Richard was put down, the Lord Grey being now better friended then Owen, entred upon the said Commons, whereupon O∣wen having many friends and followers in his country, (as those that be great with princes commonly have) put himself in armour against the Lord Grey, whom he meeting in the field overcame and took prisoner.The Welsh e∣ver addicted to believe prophesies. This was the very beginning and cause Owens rising, and at∣tempts: upon the taking of the Lord Grey, and spoyling of his Lordship of Ruthin, many re∣sorted to Owen from all parts of Wales, some thinking that he was now as well in favour as in K. Richards time, some other putting in his head, that now the time was come wherein the Brittains through his means might recover again the honour and liberty of their an∣cestours.A caveat for Mr. Pugh, and such as are over credulous in prophesies. These things being laid before Owen, by such as were very cunning in Merlins prophesies; and the interpretations of the same (for there were in those dayes, as I fear there be now, some singular men which are deeply overseen in those mysteries, and hope one day to mete velvet upon London bridge with their bowes) brought him into such a fools paradice, that he never considering what title he might pretend, or what right he had, proceeded and made war upon the Earle of March, who was the the right Inheritor, as well to the principality of Wales, as appeareth formerly, as to the Crown of England after the death of K. Rich. being descended from the elder brother, next to Edw. Prince of Wales fa∣ther of K. Rich. of which insurrection & rebellion, there ensued much mischief unto the Welsh∣men, for the King conceiving great hatred against them, shewed himself a manifest opressour of all that nation, making rigorous lawes against them, whereby he took in a manner all the li∣berties of subjects from them;Cruel Lawes against the Welsh. probibiting all Welshmen from purchasing lands, or to be chosen, or received Citizens or Burgesses in any City, Burrough, or market towns, or to be recei∣ed or accepted to any office of Maior, Bailiffe, Chamberlain, Constable, or Keeper of the gates, or of the goale, or to be of the Councel of any City, Burrough or Town, or to bear any man∣ner of armour within any City, &c. And if any suit happened between a Welshman & an En∣glishman, it was by law ordained that the Englishman should not be convict, unlesse it were by the judgment of English Judges, and by the verdict of the whole English Burgesses, or by In∣quests of English Burroughs, and Towns of the signiories, where the suit lay; also that all En∣glishmen that married Welshwomen should be disfranchized of their liberty, no congregation or meetings in councel was permitted to Welshmen, but by licence of the chief Officers of the said signiory, and in the presence of the same Officers. That no victualls nor armour should be brought into Wales without the special licence of the King or his Councel. That no Welshman should have any Castle, Fortresse or house defensive of his own or of any other mans to keep; no Welshman to be made Justice, Chamberlain, Chancellour, Treasurer Sheriff, Steward, Constable of Castle, Receiver, Eschetor, Coronor, nor chief Forrester, nor other Officer, nor Keeper of Records, nor Lieutenant in any of the said Offices, in no part of Wales, nor of the councel of any English Lord, notwithstanding any patent or li∣cence made to the contrary. That no Englishman which in the time to come shall marry any Welshwoman, be put in any Office in VVales, or in the Marches of the same. These with other lawes, both unreasonable and unconcionable (such as no prince among the Heathen ever offered to his subjects) were ordained and severely executed against them. Nei∣ther was it any reason that for the offence of one man & his complices, all the whole nation should be so persecuted, whereby not only they that lived in that time, but also their children and posterity should be brought to perpetual thraldom and misery;A law more cruel then that Julian the Apostate. for these lawes were not ordained for their Reformation, but of meer purpose to work their utter ruine and de∣struction, which doth evidently appear in that they were forbidden to keep their children at learning, or to put them to be apprentises to any occupation, in any Town or Burrough in this realme. Let any indifferent man therefore judge and consider, whether this extre∣mity of law, where Justice it self is meer injury and cruelty, be not a cause and matter suf∣ficient to withdraw any people from civility to barbarisme.
This Hen. dyed in the 10th. year of his reign leaving a son behind him, being an infant of ten moneths, who by reason of his tender age, was not (as by any word extent can be proved) ever created prince, but was proclaimed King immediately, after the death of his father, by the name of Henry the Sixt. Edward of Westminster. Henry the sixt by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, given to him in his Parliament holden in the 31 year of his reign, did afterwards by his charter bearing date 15 day of March 32. Regni, created Edward his son, born at Westminster by one and the self same patent to be both prince of Wales and Earle of Chester, and invested him therein,His Creation. with the usual Ensignes of that dignity, as had been in former time accustomed, TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said dignities to him and his heirs Kings of England;Sr. J. Dodridge which Charter is recited in the Act of Parliament, holden at Westminster. 9. Julii anno 33. regni. In the which Act of Parliament is also recited another Charter, likewise confirmed by the said Parliament; whereby the said King, did give unto the said Prince, the said prin∣cipality of Wales together with all the Lordships and lands, Castles, and Tenements, by speci∣all names above mentioned, and all in the former Charters granted and conveied to the former Princes, and the said Fee Farms and Rents of 113 l. 13 s. ob. out of the Lordship and Town of Buelht, and the said 56l. 13s. 4d. out of the Lordship, Castle and Town of Montgomery likewise mentioned in the Charters of the former Prince To have and to hold to him and his heirs Kings of England. By the same Act of Parliament also, it was enacted (because the said prince was then of tender years) and there was assigned unto him a certain number of Servants, to attend him according to his estate and dignity, which should be at diet in the Kings house, untill the said prince should accomplish the age of 14 years, and that the King should have all such summes of money as should clearly remain unto the prince due of all manner of Issues and Revenues, which the Prince then had in respect of his said Principality, Dutchy, and Earle∣dom, untill the said age of 14. years, The said Revenues to be accounted for to the King in his exchequer, reserving unto the said Prince, untill he should come to be of the age of eight years, 1000 l. yearly, and from that age till he came at fourteen,The K. to have the revenues till the P. ac∣complish the age of 14: 2000 marks yearly for his Wardrobes, Wages of Servants, and other necessary expences. But saving alwaies unto the King the Advousons of Bishopricks and spiritual livings, and the gifts of all Offices, Wards, Reliefs and Escheats belonging to the said Prince, untill he should ac∣complish the said age of fourteen years, saving such estate in certain of the said lands as the Queen had to her before the said time assured, untill the Prince should be of the said age of fourteen years; and saving certain particular summes of money in the said Act of Parli∣ament mentioned, as were formerly appointed out of the said lands, as well for expence of the Kings of England for their houshould as otherwise, during such particular times as are therein declared; provided that all Offices formerly granted by the King, and needing actual exercise, and the Fees to the same should not be prejudiced by the same Act. Afterwards by another Charter,Ex Charta Re∣gia dat. In Scaccaria penes Reme∣mor Thesaur. remo∣te. the said King doth release unto the said Prince all the said Grant, of the said yearly summes of money, issuing out of the revenues aforesaid, and all things by the said Act granted and appointed unto the said King yearly 527 marks 4 s. 7 d. ob. and out of the said Dutchy, untill the said prince should be of eight years of age, then reserving out of the said Principality and Earldom yearly unto the King 277 marks 4 s. 7 d. ob. and out of the said Dutchy yearly 517 marks 11 s. 7. ob. untill the said age of 14. years of the Prince for the said Dutchy, and to be employed towards the charges of the Kings houshould, and not otherwise. And the said King by his letters Patents, dated 18 of January anno regni 35. during the minority of the said Prince, ordained the then Archbishop of York,In Chartes l. 35. H. 6 part 2. a Privy Coun∣cellors ap∣pointed to the Prince. the bishops of Winche∣ster, Hereford, Lichfield and Coventry, and the Lord Keeper of the privy Seal, the Earles of Shrewsbury, Stafford and Wilts, the then Viscount Beamont, and also John Sutton, and Thomas Stanley Knights, to be of the privy Counsel to the said Prince, enjoyning all Offi∣cers and Ministers of the Prince, that they and every of them should be obedient to the ex∣ecution of all commandements and warrants of the said Councellours, or at least four of them together, with the assent and consent of the Queen, in all causes and matters con∣cerning the titles rights, possessions and Interests of the said Prince: and that the said com∣mandements and warrants should be as available, in that behalf, as if the said had been made or done by the said Prince himself, being of full age, which commandement in all leases of the said Princes inheritance was pursued accordingly. In the 39. year of the said K. Henry VI. reign he being of the house of Lancaster (such is the mutability, and so unstable are all humane things) that the said King being a man (devout and religious) the founder of Schooles and Colledges, vertuous, and a lover of peace, was by the violence of the heirs of the house of York, put from his Kingdom and secured in prison, and Edward Earle of March, son and heir to Richard Duke of York reign∣ed in his stead by the name of Edw. IV. But yet behold the hand of God, for in the tenth year of the said King Edward IV. upon
a discontentment conceived against him by Richard Earle of Warwick, a man more popular and potent then was fit for a Subject; the said Richard with a collected power so pressed the King, that he was driven to fly the realme, and to seek forraign aid, seeing his homebred subjects proved so unfaithful. In Chartes pat. 35. H. 6. pars 2.Then King Henry VI. after 10 years imprisonment, readepted the Kingdom, and in the said tenth year of King Edward IV. wrote the 49 year of his reign, having endured 10 years intermission in the computation of his time, as appeareth in the books of law of that age, but being thus seated he was unsetled, & after much effusion of blood (for in a civil war there is no true victory, in as much as he that prevaileth is a loser) K. H. 6, was compelled again to give place to his adversary, & after to make that part sure was deprived of life, having lost also Edw. his son P. before spoken of, the hope of all his posterity, in the battail at Tukesbury. Edward of Westminster. Edward IV. having gotten the Crown which had been thus shaken from his head, did by his Charter dated the 26 of June, 11 regni, created Edward of Westminster his son and heir appa∣rant P. of Wales and E. of Chester,11 Ed. 4 pars 1. memb. 1. and by another like Charter of the same year gave unto him the lands and revenues of the said principality, to have and to hold to him and his heirs Kings of Engl. This Ed. the P. being of tender years was born in the Sanctuary, whether the Queen his mother was fled for security, and during the time that the King her husband had avoided the realm. Afterwards the said King by his letters patents dated the 8. of July in the said 11 year of his reign, ordained his Queen, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of Glocester, brothers to the said King, the then Bishop of Bath and Wells and Durham,Sr. J. Dodridge fol. 25. Anthony Earle Rivers, the then Abbot of Westmonastery Chancelour to the Prince Will. Hastings Knight, Lord Chamberlain to the King, Rich. Fines, Lord Dacres Steward of the said Prince, John Fogg, John Scot Knight, Thomas Vaughan Chamberlain to the Prince, J. Alcock and Rich. Farler to be of Councel to the said Prince, giving unto them and every 4 of them thereby, with the advice and expresse consent of the Queen, large power to advise and councel the said Prince, and to order and dispose the lands, revenues and possessions of the said Prince and the nomination of officers to him belonging, when they should happen to become void, or that the parties were insufficient. The said authority thus given unto the said councelours to continue untill the said Prince should accomplish the age of 14. years, which was performed by them accordingly in all leases, dispositions and grants of the reve∣nues of the said prince. The said K. Edw. by another Charter composed in English, and bearing date 10 of Novem. 13o. regni, appointed the said E. Rivers (being brother unto the Queen) to be governour of the person of the said prince, and to have the education and institution of him in all ver∣tues worthy his birth, and to have the government and direction of his servants. King Edward the fourth having reigned full 22. years, left this mortal life 24. regni at VVestminster, and was enterred at VVindsor, Edward his Son and Heir then being at Ludlow neer the Marches of Wales, for the better ordering of the Welsh under the Go∣vernment of the Lord Rivers his Unkle, on the Mothers side, and upon the death of his Father drawing towards London to prepare for his Coronation fell into the hands of his Unkle by the Fathers side, Richard D. of Glocester, and the said Lord Rivers being upon his way to London,Dulce ven∣num regnum. was intercepted and lost his head at Pomfret; for what cause I know not other then this, that he was thought to be too great an obstacle between a thirsty Tyran∣nous desire, and the thing that was so thirstily and Tyrannously desired. Edward the 5. King of England, for so he was, although he enjoyed it not long, be∣ing thus surprised under the power of his natural, or rather most unnatural Unkle and mortal enemy, was brought to London with great solemnity and pompe, and with great applause of the People flocking about to behold his person, as the manner of the English Na∣tion is to do, whose new joyes cannot endure to be fettered with any bonds. His said Unkle calling himself Protector of the King and his realm, but indeed was a wolfe to whom the lamb was committed, for having thus surprised the Kings person, he labou∣red by all means to get into his possession also the younger brother, being D. of Yorke, knowing that they both being sundered,Vindex nocen∣tes sequitur a tergo Deus. the safety of the younger would be a means to preserve the elder, and therefore by all sinister perswasions and fair pretences having ob∣tained the younger D. from his mother, the King and the D. both for a time remained in the Tower of London,Ed. v. upon his return to England. and there shortly after, both in one bed, were in the night smothered to death, and buried in an obscure and secret place, unknown how or where, un∣till one of the Executioners thereof, after many years being condemned to dye for many other his manifold crimes, confessed also his guilty fact in this tragical business, and the circumstance thereof, of which by reason of the secresie and incertainty, divers had be∣fore diversly conjectured. And by this means all for the Coronation of Innocent Ed∣ward, served the turn to set the Crown upon the head of Tyrannous Richard. Out of which by the way I cannot but observe how hatefull a bloody hand is to Almighty God the King of Kings, who revenged the bloodshed of those civil broyles, whereof Edward the Father had been the occasion, and the breach of his oath upon these his two Inno∣cent Infants
Edward Son of Richard III. This Tyrant, and stain of the English story,Inter warr. ad magnum sigil∣lum in Cancel∣laria. Henricus rosas Richard D. of Glocester usurped the King∣dom by the name of Richard the third, and became King, yet as our Records of Law wit∣ness de facto non de jure, and in the first year of his reign created Edward his son, being a child of ten years of age, Prince of Wales, Lieutenant of the Realm of Ireland. But for that the prosperity of the wicked is but as the florishing of a green tree, which whiles man passes by is blasted, dead at the roots, and his place knoweth it no more, so shortly afterwards God raised up Hen. Earl of Richmond the next heir of the house of Lancaster to execute justice upon that unnatural and bloody Usurper, and cast him that had been the rod of Gods Judgment upon others, into the fire also; for in the third year of his reign at the battail of Bosworth, whereunto the said Richard entered in the morn∣ing crowned with all Kingly pomp, he was slain, and his naked carkass with as much de∣spight as could be devised, was carried out thereof at night, and the said Henry Earle of Richmond, the Solomon of England, Reigned in his stead, by the name of King Henry the Seventh. Arthur Son of K. Henry VII. Henry the VII. took to wife Elizabeth the eldest daughter, and after the death of her brothers, the Relict heir of King Edward IV. by which marriage, all occasions of conten∣tion between those two noble Families of York and Lancaster were taken away and utterly quenched and the red Rose joyned with the white. The said K. Henry the seventh by his letters patents dated the first day of December 5. regni created Arthur his Eldest son & heir apparent, being then about the age of three years, Prince of Wales. But before we proceed any further, treating of the Princes of Wales, let us consider from whence this Arthur descended, and admire the goodnesse and providence of the highest and great God towards the VVelsh nation, to bring the honour and principali∣ty to one descended of the Ancient Welsh or British blood; I will bring the pedegree as∣cendent, the noble Prince Arthur was son to Henry the VII. Arthur.The King of England from the Welsh blood first thus. Henry VII. Elizabeth Eldest Daughter to K. Edward IV. Edmund Earle of Richmond. Margaret Daughter and Heir to John Duke of Somerset. Sr. Owen Tudor. Katherine, Queen Dowager to K. Henry the V. Meredyth son to Tudor. Tudor son to Grono. Grono son to Tudyr. Tudyr son to Grono. Grono son to Ednivet. Ednivet Vachan married Gwenlhian, daughter to Rees Prince of Southwales. Gruffith King of Southwales Rees ap Tudyr King of Southwales Whose Armes were, Gules a Lyon Ramp. within a border indented Or. I could deduce this family from several English matches, as Holland, Tuckets, Norris, but I should be too prolix and seem to exspaciate beyond my bounds, and therefore I will return to our Prince of whom we now speak.
Dodridge fol. 28.Also there was a Charter of the Grant of the Lands of the said principality, Earledom of Chester and Flint, dated the 20 of February in the said fift year of the said King, made unto the said Prince. The said King Henry the VII. by his Charter bearing date the 20. day of March in the eight year of his reign did constitute and appoint the said Prince Arthur, to be his Justice in the County of Salop,Inter war. ad magnum sigil∣lvm in Cancel∣laria. Hereford, Glocester, and the Marches of Wales adjoyning to the said Shires, to enquire of all liberties, priviledges and franchises, being possessed or claimed by any person or persons, and which were to be seized into the Kings hands, and of all escapes and Fellons and those inquisitions, so from time to time to be taken, to certifie into the Chancery. And by the same Charter gave him power to substitute and appoint others un∣der him for the better execution of the same, which afterwards by Commission was executed accordingly. And the said King also by his Charter bearing date 14 Junii, 8o regni, made and consti∣tuted the said Arthur Prince of Wales, and Governour and Warden of the Marches towards Scotland; and substituted as his Lieutenant and Vice-Warden under him Thomas Earle of Surrey for the due execution thereof. Likewise the said King by his letters Patents, dated 5. Novemb. 9. regni, in augmention of the Revenue of the Prince, did grant unto the said Prince the Honour, Castle and Lordship of Wigmore, and divers other Castles, Mannours, and Lands, which some time had been be∣longing to the Earldom of March, which came to the Crown by King Edward the IV. who was himself Earle of March, before he assumed the regal estate, To have and to hold, during the pleasure of the King, yielding yearly the Rent of 200 l. A Councel as∣signed the P.The Prince was sent unto the Marches of Wales, for government of that Country, and in the 17 regni Henry VII. had a Counsell of wise and very worthy men assigned unto him as namely Sr. Richard Pool, chief Chamberlain of the said Prince, Sir Henry Ʋernon, Sir Richard Crofts, Sir David Philips, Sir William Ʋdal, Sir Thomas Inglefield and Sir Peter Newton Knights, John Wilson, Henry Marian, Doctor William Smith (after Bishop of Lin∣colne, where he was buryed) President of the Councel, and Doctour Charles; where not long afterwards the said Prince died in the Castle of Ludlow without issue. I may not let passe what Mr. Lhoyd writeth concerning Sir Owen Tuder, he saith, that Sir William Stanley then Lord of Cromfield,Mr. Lhoyd fol. 391. Yale and Chirkland, aided Henry VII. being followed by the Welshmen, and that the said Henry, knowing and pittying the thraldom and iniuries of that Nation, from whom he descended, took order to reform the same, and granted vnto them a Charter of liberties,The bondage of Hen. IV. ta∣ken from the Welsh by Hen. VII. whereby they were released of that oppression wherewith they were afflicted, by lawes I have set down before, more heathenish then chri∣stian: and here I cannot omit, but some thing answer the reproachful and slanderous as∣sertions of Joannes Bernardus, Pontus, Henlerus and others (I my self have seen a manu∣script, where he is called a Shereman, but rather ignorantly I hope then maliciously) who go about to abase the noble parentage of Owen Tuder the Kings Grandfather, following more their own affections, then any good proof or authority; for if they would read that noble work of Matthew Paris, they shall find in page 843. of the printed book, that Ednivet Ʋachan one of his Ancestours, was the chiefest of Councel to Lhewelin ap Jorwerth, otherwise called Leolenus Magnus, and to David ap Lhewelin Princes of Wales, as for∣merly. They may also find in the Records of the Tower of London, in an. 29. Edward I. in the general homage done to Prince Edward of Caernavon, first prince of Wales of the English bloud, that Tuder ap Grono, another of the Ancestours of Owen, did his homage among the Nobles of Wales,Owen Tuder descended from the K. of England. as appeareth in the said Records. Further the said Owens Grandmother the wife of Tuder ap Grono, was Margaret the daughter of Thomas the son of Elianor, which was the daughter of the County of Barr, by Elianor his wife, daughter to Edward I. King of England. Besides all this there was a Commission at this time directed by King Edward VII. to the Abbot of Lhan Egwest, Doctor Owen Pool Canon of Hereford, and John King Herald, to make inquisition concerning the parentage of the said Owen, who coming to VVales tra∣velled in that matter, and used the helps of Sir John Levof, Guttin, Owen Bardh, Gruffith ap Lhewelin ap Evan Vachan, and others, in the search of the Brittish or Welsh books of Pe∣digrees, out of the which they drew his perfect Genealogy from the Antient Kings of Brit∣tain, and the Princes of VVales, and so returned their Commission, which return is extant to be seen at this day. And I God willing will set forth what I have, in a compendium which I intend to annex to this present treatise, of many things which cannot be well digested in method of History, yet much conduce to the Glory of the Welsh, the several princely stems from whence Owen Tuder, and consequently the succeeding Kings of England descended.
Henry Duke of York. After the death of Prince Arthur King Henry VII.Charta creati∣onis P. Wal. by his letters patents dated the 18 of February 19 regni, in a parliament, created Henry, then his only son, who after was King Henry VIII. and whom before that in the 11. he had made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, by an other Charter of the same year, Constable of the Castle of Dover, to be Prince of Wales, Earle of Chester, being then about the age of twelve years. To have and to hold to him and his heirs Kings of England for ever, being the like limitation of Estate, and with the like investure as in former times had been acustomed. But whether the King did grant the lands and revenues belonging to the said principali∣ty unto the said Henry or no, as he had done unto Prince Arthur his brother doth not ap∣pear by any Charter therof that as yet can be found. After the death of King Henry VII. the said Prince Henry was King of England by the name of King Henry VIII. he had a issue son called Henry who dyed very young, he like∣wise had issue the Lady Mary afterwards Queen, and the Lady Elizabeth, and lastly prince Edward the youngest in years, who first reigned after the death of his said father by the name of Edward the Sixt. Mary The Lady Mary daughter to the same King Henry the VIII,Mr. Lhoyd fol. 393. by the Queen Catherine his first wife, was Princesse of Wales, and in the 17. year of King Henries reign, he sent John Voiseie Bishop of Exeter to be Lord President of the Councel of the said Princesse in the Marches of Wales. Elizabeth. Elizabeth daughter to King Henry the VIII.Mr. Lhoyd fol. 394. was in a Parliament begun the 15 day of Ja∣nuary in the 25 regni, declared Princesse and Inheritrix of the Crown of England, with all the Dominions to the same belonging, in default of issue male of the body of the said King Henry. Sr. John Dodridge, doth not approve of King Edward VI. Queen Mary, or Queen Eliza∣beth, to have been Prince or Princesse formally, for he saith there cannot be found any Charter among the records, whereby it may appear that any of them were created Prin∣ces of Wales, or whereby any of the Revenues of the said principality were given or con∣ferred unto any of them; so that it seemeth they were princes generally by their birth, and not princes of Wales by any creation or investure; for in a record of an account of the Duke of Cornwal, in the time of the said Edward, he is called by the name of prince of England, and not by the name of prince of Wales. And thus much touching the succession or ranks of the princes of Wales, which I have drawn in an Historical, though in a plain and homely manner, thereby the better to take the harshnesse of the particularities of records intermingled therewith, which of themselves al∣though they offer profitable knowledg, yet they do carry with them small delight; but also for that the variety of things in those succeeding ages, in the sundry occurrences and accidents thereof, do yield good matter of observance and worthy memory, representing as it were the English state for the time of more then 200 years. Now therefore do rest nevertheless three things concerning the said principality to be further considered of. First in what manner and order the said principality and Marches of Wales were govern∣ed and directed under the said prince. Secondly, what Officers, as well Domestical as others, the said princes had a∣bout them, and their Fees, as far forth as I could come to any certain knowledge thereof. And thirdly an abstract of the Revenues of the said principality, as they lately stood, Whereby it may be perceived what in time past the said Revenues have been. The manner of Government of the Principality of Wales. The said principality being under the government of the princes of the Welsh blood (whose ancient patrimony yet remained untill the conquest thereof by K. Ed. I. as hath allready been shewed) was guided, governed and directed by their own municipal lawes, and the customs of the country, most of which had their commencement from the constitutions of one of their
ancient Princes, called Howel Dha, as their Historians report: but being reduced under the yoak of the said King Edward, he divided certain parts of that Territory into Shires, he caused the Welsh Lawes to be perused, some whereof he did allow and approve some others he did abbrogate and disanul, and in their place appointed new, altogether according to the English manner of executing Justice. He caused to be devised certain briefs, writs, or formula juris, and he instituted their manner of processe, pleadings, and course of their judi∣cial proceedings. All which things do manifestly appear by the Act of Parliament made at Ruthlan in Wales, called therefore Statutum Walliae, and when they want a writ of form to serve the present case, then use they the writ of Quod ei deforciat which supplieth that defect, and although the Principality of Wales as hath appeared by some of the Records were devided into 3 Provinces, Northwales, Southwales and VVestwales, for so in some of the former patents they are mentioned, yet for the Jurisdiction thereof it was divided into two parts Northwales and Southwales; for a great part of VVestwales was comprehended with∣in the Shire of Pembrock, which is a very ancient Shire of Wales, and the territory thereof conquered by the English in the time of William Rufus, long time before the general conquest of Wales by Richard Strongbow, being English, and the Earle thereof, and called also by some Earle of Strigulia or Chepstow (or rather Strigul Castle) was the first that at∣tempted the conquest of Ireland in the dayes of Hen. II. The Province of Northwales and Southwales were governed by law in this manner. The Prince had and used to hold a Chancery and a Court of Exchequer in the Castle of Gaer∣narvon for Northwales, and had a Judge or Justice which ministred Justice there to all the in∣habitants of Northwales, and therefore was called the Justice of Northwales. The like Courts of Chancery and Exchequer he held in the Castle of Caermardhyn for Southwales, where he had a Justice likewise called the Justice of Southwales;3. Ed. 3. 9. & in le novel prin. 63. a 7. Hen. 35, 6. and the Courts of the Ju∣stices or Judges so held within the several Provinces, were called the great Sessions of those Provinces, and sometimes those Justices were Itenerant, and sat in every of the several Counties of his province. In those great Sessions the causes of greatest moment, real, per∣sonal and mixt, and pleas of the Crown, concerning life and members were heard and de∣termined.Ministers ac∣compts 18. H 7. In these great Courts also upon creation of every new Prince, there were grant∣ed by the people of that Province unto the Prince, nomine recognitionis ad primum adventum principis, certain summes of money as it were in acknowledgement or relief of the new Prince, which summes of money are called by them Mises; these mises or summes of mo∣ney were granted by the people unto the prince for his allowance of their lawes and anti∣ent customes, and a general pardon of their offences, sinable or punishable by the prince, and that summe of those mises, for the Shire of Caermardhyn only, amounted unto 800. marks, and for the Shire of Cardigan, the total summe of the mises amounted unto 600 marks, as by sundry Records doth appear; these summes of money were paid at certain dayes by several portions, such as were appointed, and in the said Sessions agreed upon. Al∣so in every Shire of every the said provinces, there were holden certain Inferiour Courts, called therefore County Courts and Shire Courts and Tourns, after the manner of England and which by some were also called the petty Sessions, and there were also Courts inferiour in sundry Counties, for ending of causes of lesse moment and importance, and if any wrong Judgment were given in any of those leferiour Courts,19. H 6. 12. b. 21. H. 7. 33. a. the same was redressed by a writ of false Judgement in the Court Superiour. And if any erroneous judgment were given in the great Sessions which was the supreme Court of Justice that error was either re∣dressed by the judgment of penal Justices Itenerant, or else in Parliament, and not other∣wise in any the Courts of Justice now at Westminster. A noble poli∣cy of William Conq. good for himself, but destru∣ctive to the Welsh.As touching the government of the Marches of Wales, it appeareth by divers ancient mo∣numents that the Counquerour after he had conquered the English, placed divers of his Norman Nobility upon the Confines and Borders towards Wales, and erected the Earldom of Chester being upon the borders of Northwales, to a Palatinate, and gave power unto the the said persons thus placed upon those borders, to make such conquest upon the Welsh, as they by their strengh could accomplish, holding it a very good policy, thereby not only to encourage them to be more willing to serve him, but also to provide for them at other mens costs. And hereupon further ordained, that the lands so conquered should be holden of the Crown of England in Capite; and upon this and such like occasions divers of the no∣bility of England having lands upon the said borders of Wales, made roads and incursions upon the Welsh, whereby divers parts of that Country neer or towards the said borders, were won by the sword from the Welshmen, and were planted partly with English Collonies: and the said lands so conquered were holden per Baroniam,Another poli∣cy. and were called therefore Baro∣nies, Marchers; In such manner did Robert Fitz Hamon acquire unto himself and such others as assisted him, the whole Lordship of Glamorgan, using in some resemblance the Roman Policy, to enlarge Territories by stepping in between two Competitors, and by helping the one, he subdued the other, and afterward turning his sword against him whom he had assisted, & making this the pretence of his quarrel, alledged, that he whom he had assisted, had denyed to make unto him sufficient recompence for his sustained travels, and so made him∣sel
absolute owner of all. Likewise Bernard Newmarsh conquered the Lordship of Breck∣nock, containing three cantreds, and established his conquest by a marriage in the Welsh blood;The Original of the Baro∣nies Marchers (but she proved a blemish to her country) Hugh Lacy conquered the lands of Ewyas called after his name Ewyas Lacy, and others did the like in other places of the borders, all which were Baronies, Marchers, and were holden by such the conquerours thereof in capite of the Crown of England: and because they and their posterity might the better keep the said lands so acquired,Sr. J. Dod. fol. 38. 13 Fitzh. Jur. 23 47 Ed. 1. 5, 6, 7 6 H. 5. Fitzh. Juris 34 7 H. 6. 35. 36. 30. b 6. 6. b and that they might not be withdrawn by sutes of law from the defence of that which they had thus subdued, the said Lordships and Lands so conquered were ordained Baronies Marchers, and had a kind of palatine Jurisdiction erected in every of them, and power to administer Justice unto their Tennants in every of their territories, having therein courts with divers priviledges, franchises and immunities, so that the writs of Ordinary Justice out of the Kings Court were for the most part not currant amongst them. Neverthe∣less if the whole Barony had come in question, or that the strife had been between two Baron Marchers touching their Territories or Confines thereof, for want of a superiour they had recourse unto the King their supreme Lord; and in these and such like cases, where their own jurisdiction failed, justice was administred unto them in the superiour Courts of this Realme. And this was the state of the Government of the Marches of Wales, both before and after the general conquest thereof made by K. Edw. I. untill the 27 year of K. Henry VIII. And as touching the first councel established in the Marches of Wales, it is conceived by the best and most probable opinions amongst Antiquaries, that the same began in or about 17o. Edw. IV. when as prince Edward his son was sent into the Marches of Wales, under the tuiti∣on of the L. Rivers his Unckle by the mothers side, at what time also John Bishop of Wor∣cester was appointed L. president of Wales. Prince Arthur the son of K. Henry VII. in the 17. of his reign, went into VVales, at what time Dr. VVill. Smith (after Bishop of Lincolne, and there buried) was then president of the Councell of the Marches, he founded Brasonnose Colledge in Oxford, and bore for his arms arg a fess. dancette inter gules. This man was also president in the time of King Henry VIII, untill the fourth year of the reign of the said King. At what time Geffry Blyth Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, succeeded in the Office of president in the said Coun∣cel. There succeeded him in the office of president of the councel of the Marches of VVales, Rowland Lee Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and this was the state and government of the principality of VVales, 27o. H. 8. The said King by a Statute made 27o. regni,Wales annex∣ed to England & the English laws brought into Wales. united and annexed the principality and Dominion of VVales unto the Realme of England, altering in many parts, the former Jurisdiction and Government thereof, bringing the same to the like administration of Justice as was, and yet is usual in England, apponting that the lawes of England should take place there, and that all Welsh law,Welsh lawes abrogated. sinister customes and tenures not agreeable to the Lawes of England, should be thenceforth abrogated and abolished. Of which union and An∣nexion; First, for that thereof hath ensued great peace, tranquility, and infinite good to the inha∣bitants of that country of Wales. Secondly, because in some respect it may serve as a project and president in some other union and annexion of as much of more consequence and importance.Peradventure the annexion of Scotland was meant. And thirdly, because the said union doth contain an expresse Image of the poli∣tique Government of this Realme of England, I have presumed with convenient brevity upon this good occasion here in this place to expresse the same. Therefore whereas in for∣mer time there had been in Wales anciently 8 several Shires or Counties,Judge Dod. fol 40. Statutum de 24. b. 8. cap. 26 besides the county of Monmoth which was the ninth, and that some other Territories in Wales were then no Shire Grounds, by reason whereof the Lawes of England could have no currant passage therein. For all the ordinary Ministers and Executioners of the processe of the Lawes of England, or which have Viscountile Jurisdiction are the Officers of particu∣lar Shires, as the Sheriffs, the Coroners, the Escheaters, and such like. Therefore by the said Act of Parliament there were erected in Wales 4 other new ordained shires of the lands not formerly so divided, namely the several shires of Radnor, Brecknock, Montgomery, and Denbigh, so that now the shires are 13. viz. 1 Radnor shire. 2 Brecknock shire. 3 Monmoth shire. 4 Glamorgan shire. 5 Carmarthyn shire. 6 Pembrock shire. 7 Cardigan shire. 8 Montgomery shire. 9 Merionith shire. 10 Caernarvon shire. 11 Denbigh shire. 12 Flint shire. 13 Anglesey shire. And these four last also with the former antient Shires together, are by that Act of Par∣liament,
and by Statute of 38. H. 8. subdivided into Cantreds,The Marches divided be∣twixt the Welsh and En∣glish Shires. and all the March ground being then neither any part of Wales, although formerly conquered out of Wales, neither any part of the Shires of Engl. The said King by the said Act of Parliament did annex & unite partly unto the said Shires of Engl. & partly unto the Shires of Wales next adjoyning, as was thought then (by reason of vicinity of place & other correspondency) most convenient as by the said Act of Parliament appeareth: which the said King was the rather occasioned to do for most of the said Baronies Merchers, were then in his own hands. And for that also divers murders, rapes, roberies and enormities, and odious offences had been there committed, and by rea∣son of the flight of the offendours,Monmoth made an En∣glish Shire. from one Barony (as is usual upon the borders) they had escaped due and condigne punishment, for their such enormities and crimes, he ordain∣ed also that the county of Monmoth, formerly being a shire of Wales, should be governed from thenceforth in like manner,Stat. 27. H. 8. cap. 26. and by the same Judges as other Shires of England, and for the other 12 Shires he ordered a special jurisdiction and Officers, but yet in substance a∣greable, and after the lawes of England, although for the circumstance of time and place and persons in some few things discordant. He ordained that out of every of the said Shires of Wales, there should be one Knight and out of every of the Shire Towns of Wales named in the said Act of Parliament,Stat. 276. cap 26. there should be one Burgesse, elected after the English manner, which Knights and Burgesses so elected, and duly upon the summons of every parliament in England, returned, should have place and voice in the parliament of England, as other the Knights and Burgesses of England used to have. Circuits 34. H 8. cap. 26. StatAs for the administration of justice in the said 12 Shires of Wales, there was by an Act of parliament of 34. H. 8. ordained 4. several circuits, precints, or Conventus Juridicus allotting to every of them three of these Shires, so that the Chief Justice of Chester hath under his jurisdiction the three several Shires of Denbigh, Flint and Montgomery, his Fee is yearly 100 l. Justice.The Shires of Carnarvon, Merioneth and Anglesey, are under the Justice of Northwales, whose Fee is, 50 l. The counties of Carmardhin, Pembrock and Cardigan have also their Justice, whose Fee is 50 l. The counties of Radnor, Brecknock and Glamorgan have also their Justice whose Fee is 50 l. After by an Act of parliament made 18. Eliz. cap. 8. one other Justice assistant was ordained to the former Justices,Stat. 18. Eliz. cap. 8. so that now every of the said four circuits, have two Ju∣stices, viz. one chief Justice, and a second Justice assistant. Their Jurisdiction. These Justices in every of their circuits have almost the same Jurisdiction that the anci∣ent Justices in Eyre, or Justices Itenerants had. First they had power to hear and deter∣mine all criminal causes which are called in the lawes of England, the pleas of the Crown, and herein they have the same absolute jurisdiction that the Judges have of the K. bench, commonly so called. They have also Jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil causes, which are called in the lawes of England, common pleas, and to take the acknowledgment of Fines levied of lands or hereditaments without suing any dedimus potestatem; and herein they have the same jurisdiction that the Justices of the Common pleas do execute in the hall at Westminster, al∣so they may hear and determine all Assizes upon disseisons of lands or hereditaments, where∣in they equal the jurisdiction of the Justices of Assize. They may hear and determine all notable violences and outrages, perpetrated or done within their several precints, and therein they have the power, authority and jurisdiction of the Justices of Oyer and Terminer. Their Chancery, Seal and Writs. For as much as no suite can commence between party and party, nor orderly Justice can be done without complaint of the pursevant, and summons and admonition given unto the defendant; which summons the policy of England from the beginning of the first foun∣dation of this Common-wealth hath appointed to be performed by that kind of formulae ju∣ris which the common law calleth a Writ or Brief so called as Bracton saith, Breve quia rem quæ est & intentionem petentis breviter enarrat, and which writ is alwaies conceived in form quondam of the Kings name, in manner of a preecept Royal, and sealed with the Kings or Potestates great seal.Writt either Judicial or Original. Therefore in the appointing of this Jurisdiction, there is ordain∣ed to every Circuit or precint, a several Seal for the sealing of such writs and commissions as the case shall require within that Circuit. And for as much as all Writts are either Ori∣ginal,
such as begin the suite, or else judicial, such as command and warrant the execution thereof. It is by the said Statute made in the 34 Hen. 8. ordained, that the Seal serving for Original process in several shires of Denbigh and Montgomery, should be in the custody of the Chamberlain of Denbigh, and what the original Seal of Chester shall be and stand for the Original Seal of Flint, and shall be in the custody of the Chamberlain of Chester; the like seal serving for the several shires of Carnarvon, Merioneth and Anglesey, to be in the custody of the Chamberlain of Northwales. The like seal concerning the several Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and Glamorgan, is com∣mitted to the custody of the Steward of Brecknoc. And finally, the like Seal serving for the several Shires of Caermardhyn, Pembrock and Cardigan, is in the usage of the Chamberlain of Southwales. These Chamberlains are as Chancellours in this behalf, and have the sealing of all Ori∣ginal writs and commissions within the several precints, and these Chamberlains may also a∣ward out several writs to all Under-Receivers of the Revenues, and ministers to make their accounts. The Seal for sealing judicial writs, is appointed by the said Statute 34 H. 8. to be and re∣main by the Justices of every the said circuits for the more expedite execution of their Judgment.The great ses∣sions. Their Sessions and manner of Sitting. Every of these Justices in their several circuits shall be Itenerant, twice every year, and sit in every of the Shires with their authority by the space of six dayes together, at a place certain by them so appointed, and upon proclamation of summons to be made 15 dayes be∣fore the said sittings,Adjournments. where all persons requiring Justice may purchase their writs and pro∣ceed in their suits. And where Adjournments of the causes there depending shall be De die in diem, and if the cause can have no end during the sitting, then from Sessions to Ses∣sions, as the nature of the business shall require, and according to the discretion of the said Justices, and these sittings are called the great Sessions.34. H 8 cap. 26.  33 Pety Sessions. And if their shall be such multitudes of pleas personal, as that they cannot be tryed at the same great Sessions, then the issues there in trial shall and may be tried at some Sessions before the Deputy Justice, which is therfore called the petty sessions. And if any erroneous judgment be given by the said Justices in any real Action, the same shall be reversed by writ of error, before the Justices of the Kings bench. And if the said erroneous judgment shall be in any Action personal, the same shall be reversed by bill before the Lord president of the Marches, and councel there. Officers, Ministers, Clerks, and Writers, for the expediting of the said great Sessions. First, there are the Chamberlains of every the said circuits, as hath been said, who are properly and Originally the Treasurers of the Revenue within their charge, and by the said Statutes are also Keepers of the seals as aforesaid, therein they do undertake in part the Office of a Chancellour. And in every of the said circuits there is the Atturney or Regius Advocatia, and Solli∣citor. There is a Protonotary or chief Register who draweth all the pleadings,Protonotary Clrk of the Crown. entereth and engrosseth the Records and Judgments in civil causes, and ingrossing Fines. And there is also a Clerk of the Crown, which draweth and ingrosseth all inditements and pro∣ceedings, arraignments and judgments in criminal causes; and these two Officers are at the King or States appointment. There is a Marshal to attend the persons of the Judges at their common sitting and going from the Sessions or Court.There is a Marshal. There is a Cryer, Tanquam publicus preco, to call forth such persons, whose ap∣parences are necessary, and to impose silence to the people. And these two Officers last remembred are deposed by the Justices. And thus much touching the Justices of the great Sessions. There are also other ordinary Officers appointed for every Shire in Wales, by the said Statute 34. Henry 8. such and in like manner as in other the Shires in En∣gland. There is a commission under the great Seal of England, to certain Gentlemen,What a Ju∣stice of peace. giving them power to preserve the peace, and resist and punish all turbulent persons, whose misdemeanour may tend to the disquiet of the people, and these are called, Justices of peace, and every of them may well be termed Eirnarcha, the chief of them is called
Custos Rotulorum, in whose custody all the Records of their proceedings are resident: Others there are of that number called Justices of the peace, and Quorum, because of their Commissions, whereby they have power to sit and determine causes, concerning breach of peace and misbehaviour: the words of the Commission are conceived thus, Quorum such and such Ʋnum vel duos, &c. Esse volumus, and without some one or more of them of the Quo∣rum, no Sessions can be holden; and for the avoiding of the superfluous number of such Justices,8. Justices onely allowed in every County of Wales. for through the ambition of many, it is accounted a credit to be burthened with that Authority. The Satute of 34 Hen. 8. hath expresly prohibited that there shall be above eight Justices of Peace, within every of the Counties and Shires of Wales; which, if the number were not indefinite for the Shires in England, it were the better: These Ju∣stices do hold their Sessions quarterly. And it is further ordained by the Statute of 34 Hen 8. that two Justices of peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, may hold their Sessions without any greater num∣ber. In every of the said Shires, where the said Commission of peace is established: There is also a Clerk of the peace, for the entring and engrossing of all proceedings before the said Justices, and this Officer is appointed by the Custos Rotulorum. Sr. John Dod, fol. 49.Every of the said Shires hath a Sheriff; which word being of the Saxon English, is as much as to say a Shire-Reeve, or Minister, or Bailiff of the County; his Function or Of∣fice is twofold, Ministerial and Judicial: As touching his Ministerial Office, he is the Mini∣ster and Executioner of all the Process and Precepts of the Courts of Law, and thereof ought to make return and certificate;Why the Tourne Court so called. and as touching the Judicial Office, he hath Autho∣rity to hold two several Courts of distinct natures, the one called the Tourne; because he keepeth a Tourne or Circuit about the Shire, holding the same in several places, wherein he doth enquire of all offences perpetrated against the common Law, and not forbidden by any Statute or Act of Parliament.The County Court deri∣ved from Ju∣stice Commu∣nicative. And the Jurisdiction of this Court is derived from justice distributive, and is for criminal offences; The other is called the County Court, where he doth determine all petty and small causes civil, under the value of 40 s. arising within the said County, and thereof it is called the County Court. And the Jurisdiction of this Court is drawn from Justice Communicative, and is held every Moneth. The Of∣fice of the Sheriff is annual by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. it is ordained that the Lord Presi∣dent, Councel and Justices of Wales, or three of them at the least, whereof the Presi∣dent to be one, shall yearly nominate three fit persons for that Office, of whom the King or State may elect one, who thereupon shall have his Patent, and be Sheriff of the said Shire. Escheator, why so calledEvery of the said Shires hath an Officer called an Escheator, which is an Officer to at∣tend the Kings Revenue, and to seize into his hands all lands either Escheated, goods or lands forfeited, & therefore he is called Escheator; and he is to enquire by good enquest of the death of the Kings Tenants, and to whom the lands are descended; and to seize the bodies and lands for Ward, if they be within age, and is accountable for the same. And this Officer in Wales is nominated,Escheator, 34 Hen. 8. cap. 16. by the Lord Treasurer of England, by the advice of the Lord President, Councel and Justices, or three of them at least, whereof the Lord Presi∣dent to be one. There are also in every of the said Shires two Officers called Coroners; they are to enquire by enquest, in what manner and by whom every person dying a vio∣lent death, came to his death, and to enter the same of Record, which is matter criminal, and a plea of the Crown,Coroners, why so called and thereof they are called Coroners or Crowners, as one hath written, because their enquiries ought to be publick, Et in Corona Populi: These Officers are are chosen by the Free-holders of the Shire, by vertue of a Writ out of the Chancery, De Coronatore Eligendo. And of them I need not speak more, because these Officers are elsewhere. The Goal.Forasmuch as every Shire hath one Goal or Prison, appointed for the restraint of liberty of such persons as for their offences are thereunto committed, until they shall be delivered by course of Law. Finally in every hundred of every of the said Shires, the Sheriffs thereof shall nominate sufficient persons to be Bailiffs of that hundred, and under Ministers of the She∣riff, and they are to attend upon the Justices in every of their Courts and Sessions.
The Government of the Marches of Wales, after the Statute of An. 27. & 34. H. 8. By the said Statute of 34. Hen. 8. cap. 26. It is furthered ordained, that the President and the Councel in the said Dominion and Principality of VVales, and the Marches of the same, with all Officers, Clerks and Incidents thereunto, should continue and remain in manner and form as was then formerly used and accustomed. And therefore Rowland Lee, being Lord President of the Councel of the Marches of Wales, at the time of making of the said Statute, so continued after the making thereof until his death, being in the 34 year of the said King Hen. 8. after whom succee∣ded in the Office of the said President, Richard Samson Bishop of Chichester, and after re∣moved to Coventry and Liechfield, who continued Lord President until the second year of K. Edw. 6. At what time John Dudley, then Earl of VVarwick, and after Duke of Northumber∣land, was President of the said Councel, who so continued until the 4th year of the said King; and after him succeeded Sr. William Herbert, Knight of the Noble Order of the Gar∣ter, and after Earl of Pembrock, who continued president until the first year of Queen Mary; next succeeded Nicholas Heath, Bishop then of Worcester, and after Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellour of England; and upon removing of the said Archbi∣shop, the said William Herbert succeeded again as President of the said Councel, until the 6th year of the said Queen Mary; at what time followed him Gilbert Brown, Bishop of Bath and Wells, who continued until the death of the same Queen: In the beginning of the late Queen Elizabeth, Sr. John Williams, Lord Williams of Tame, of whom the Lord Norris was descended, was appointed President of the said Councel, and died the same year; and after him succeeded Sr. Henry Sydney, Knight of the Noble Order of the Gar∣ter, whose love to learning; and favour to learned men, need not here to be spoken, he continued Lord President of Wales about 24 years and 6 Moneths, he served in Ireland 8 years and 6 moneths, being there 3 several times Lord Deputy General in that Countrey; During some part of the time of tho abode in Ireland of the said Sr. Hen. Sydney, there served as President or Vice-president John Bish of Worcester, after Archbishop of Canter∣bury; after this succeeded Hn. Earl of Pembrock, son in law to Sr. Henry Sydney, and fa∣ther to the honourable Earl of Pembrock; and after him Edward Lord Zouch.Quare who succeeded. The President and Councel of the Marches of Wales,The Jurisdi∣ction of the Councel of the Marches of Wales, Statutum 34. H. 8. cap. 26. had power and authority to hear and determine by their wisdom and discretions, such causes and matters as be, or shall be assigned to them by the Kings Majesty, and in such manner as shall be so prescribed unto them by Instruction, signed by his hand. The Councel assisting the Lord Prince consisted of these, the chief Justice of Chester, together with the three other of the said Justices of VVales, who after their Sessions ended, are for the most part resident at the Councel; and these are ordinary; there are divers extraordinaries, both Lords and Knights, and such others, as are learned in the Laws, and are to be called to Councel, when the Lord President shall think requisite; and every such of the Councel extraordinary learned in the Laws, when they are called and do serve there, they are allowed their diet for them and their men, and 6 s. and 8 d. per diem, during the time of their attendance. The Officers there serving to the administration of Justice (as I am informed) are these;Sr. John Dod∣ridge, fol. 54. The Clerks of the Councel; The Clerk of the Signet; The Register; All which were granted to one man by the late Queen Elizabeth: And are Executed by his Deputy; The Examiner; The Remembrancer; The Receiver of the Fines; The Atturney, The Solicitor; The Porter: To whose custody such Delinquents as deserve to suffer restraint of liberty, are committed, &c. Two Messengers, and a Sergeant at Armes. And thus much briefly touching the Antient and Modern Estate and Government of the Principality of VVales, and of the Marches of the same.
Next followeth to be considered (according to the former Order proposed) the Antient and Modern Officers of the said Principality serving the Lord Prince, and what Fees Sallary were allowed unto them: The Antient Officers their Names and Fees, Collected out of divers Ancient Accounts, were these following in North Wales. The Justice of North VVales, whose antient fee was uncertain, but yet for the most part yearly his fee was 50 l. Howbeit, I find that Sr. VVilliam Standley Knight, to whom K. Hen. 7th. gave the Office of Justice of North VVales, for his life had the yearly fee of 133 l 8 s. 8 d. d. a. 1. Hen. 7. But this seemeth to have been of favour. Chamber∣lain. Auditor.The Chamberlain of North Wales, whose antient fee was yearly 20 l. The Auditor of North Wales; viz. Chester and Flint, the antient fee was 10 l. yearly, with allowance of 10 s. per diem, while he was in executing this Office, and finishing the account 10 l. Countroul∣ler. Atturney.The Countrouller of all Pleas, Fines, Amercements and Redemptions, or Ransoms, his yearly fee was 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. b. The Atturney of North Wales; viz. of the Counties of Carnarvon, Merioneth and Anglesey, his yearly fee was 56 s. 8 d. Surveyor.The Supervisor or Surveyor of the Castles, Mannors, Lands, Tenements and Heredita∣ments of the Prince of North Wales, his yearly fee was 10 l. Constable.The Constable of the Castle of Carnarvon, his fee was uncertain, sometimes 60 l. and sometimes but 40 l. Captain.The Captain of the Town of Carnarvon, his fee was yearly 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. d. and sometimes one man had both the Offices of Constable of the Castle, and Captain of the Town, having 60 l. yearly, for both the Offices 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. Souldiers.There were allowed sometime unto the said Constable and Captain 24 Souldiers, for the safe custody of the Castle and Town, and every of them was allowed 4 d. per diem, amounting in the whole unto 146 l. by the year 146 l. Porter. Constable.The Porter of the Gates of the said Town of Carnarvon, whose fee was yearly 3 l. 10 s. The Constable of the Castle of Conwey, his fee was yearly sometimes 40 l. and some∣times 50 l. Captain.The Captain of the Town of Conwey, had for his yearly fee 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. and most commonly he that was Constable of the Castle, was also Captain of the Town 12 l. 3 s. 4 d Souldiers.There were also allowed to the said Constable and Captain 24 Souldiers, for the safe cu∣stody of the said Town and Castle, and every of them was allowed 4 d. per diem, amoun∣ting yearly to 146 l. Porter. Constable.The Keeper and Porter of the Gate of Conwey, his fee was 4 d. per diem. The Constable of the Castle of Hardlaigh in the County of Merioneth, his fee yearly was 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. in some accounts he was allowed 50 l. which I think was of both Offices of Constable and Captain 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. Souldiers.There were also allowed 24 Souldiers for the Guard of the said Town and Castle of Hardlaigh, their wages amounting yearly to 146 l. Constable. Captain.The Constable of the Castle of Beumarish, his yearly fee was 40 l. The Captain of the Town of Beumarish, his yearly fee was 12 l. 13 s. 4 d. There were also 24 Souldiers allowed for the Guard of the said Town and Castle of Beumarish, every of which were allowed 4 d. per diem, amounting to 146 l. Porter. Forrester.The Porter or Keeper of the Gate of Beumarish, had for his fee 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. The chief Forrester of the Forrest of Snowdon, his fee 11 l. 8 s. The Office of the Steward of the Towns of Newborough and Roffaire, his fee was year∣ly 10 l. The Marshal and Keeper of the Justice house in the Town of Carnarvon, his yearly fee was 26 s. 8 d. The Clerk of the great Sessions I find not. Exchequer.There was a Court of Exchequer of the Princes Revenues for North Wales holden in the Castle of Carnarvon, in which Court there were certain fees allowed, for the expen∣ces of Parchment, Paper, Bags for Money, and for Portrage of Money, and such other small charges, which were variable according to the occasions and times. South Wales. Justice.The Justice of South Wales, whose antient fee was yearly 20 l. at sometimes 46 l.
The Auditor of South Wales,Auditor. his antient fee was yearly 40 l. but sometimes his fee was but 20 l. 5 s. per diem, whiles he exercised his Office. The Atturney of South Wales, who had yearly for his fee 8 l. 13 s. 4 d.Atturney. Constable. Sheriff. Steward. The Constable and Usher of the Castle of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee was 20 l. The Sheriff of the County of Caermarthen, whose fee was yearly 50 s. The Steward general of the Comotts of the County of Caermarthens fee 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Clerk of the County, Courts, and small Sessions in the County of Caermarthen, his yearly fee 40 s. The Cryer of the County Courts, and small Sessions in the said County, whose fee is yearly 6 s. 8 d. The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Caermarthen, his fee 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.Steward. Penkeys. Steward. Clerk. Bailiff. Bailiff. Constable. Sheriff. Clerk. The Office of the Penkeyes in the Comots Widegada and Elvet, his fee 4 s. The Steward of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, his yearly fee 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Clerk of the Welsh Courts of Widegada and Elvet, whose yearly fee 6 s. 8 d. The Bailiff Itenerant for Caermarthen, whose yearly fee was 5 l. The Bailiff Itenerant for Cantred, whose yearly fee was 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Constable of the Castle of Cardigan, whose antient fee was yearly 40 l. The Sheriff of the County of Cardigan, whose yearly fee was 5 l. The Clerk of the County Courts, Tornes, and small Sessions of the County of Cardi∣gan, his yearly fee was 40 s. The Cryer of the County Courts and small Sessions in the said County,Cryer. his fee 6 s. 8 d. The Clerk of the Hundreds in Cardigan, his yearly fee was 6 s. 8 d.Clerk. Steward. Clerk. The Steward of the Welsh Courts in the County of Cardigan, his fee was 10 l. The Clerk for writing the Rolls in the Welsh Courts, his yearly fee was in the Coun∣ty of Cardigan 6 s. 8 d. The Bailiff Itenerant of Cardigan, his antient fee was yearly 5 l.Bailiff. Bailiff. Captain. The Bailiff Itenerant of Lampaderne, his yearly fee was 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Captain of the Town of Aberystwyth, his yearly fee was 18 l. 5 s. he was allowed 12 Archers for the custody of the said Town and Castle. The Escheator for the two Shires of Caermarthen and Cardigan,Escheator. his fee was yearly 10 l. The Clerk of the great Sessions for both the Counties of Caermarthen and Cardigan,Clerk. his yearly fee was 5 l. There was a Court of Exchequer likewise,Exchequer. for the Revenues of the Prince of South Wales, kept in the Castle of Caermarthen, and yearly allowance for the expences thereof, as in the Province of North Wales. By this it appeareth, that the Province of South VVales, chargeable to the Prince, ex∣tended for the most part into the two Counties of Caermarthen and Cardigan; the rest of South VVales, as Munmothshire and Glamorgan, &c. were in the hands of others. The reason of the difference of the Officers that were in South VVales, from those that were in North VVales, was, North Wales was divided in Counties, and framed into Shires, and ordered according to the English Laws, by the Statute made at Ruthlan, called Statu∣tum Wallioe, often before mentioned, made in the time of King Edw. 1. whereas South VVales nevertheless remained governed in some things according to the VVelsh Laws and Customs, even until the said Statute made in an. 27. H. 8. Thus much concerning the Offices of both Princes of North VVales and South VVales. The Prince of VVales had also divers and sundry Officers about his person, and of his houshold, which were these that follow out of Records, where mention is made of them: The Councel of the Prince, consisting of divers honourable,The Coun∣cel. Governour. worshipful and learned persons, to Councel for the leasing and good disposing of his Revenues. The Governour of the Prince his person, to whom the Education and Institution of the young Prince was committed; such was the Lord Rivers unto Prince Edw. son to King Edw. 4. wherein also the Queen, Mother to the Prince, had a special interest; for few things were done concerning the Prince without her privacy and advice. The Chamberlain to the Prince;Chamber∣lain. 21 Edw. 1. pat. part 2. it appeareth that Richard de la Beere was Chamber∣lain to the Black-Prince, son and heir of King Edw. 3. and Sr. Thomas Poole was chief Chamberlain to Prince Arthur; so was Thomas Vaughan to Prince Edw. son to King Edw. 4. The Atturney General to the Prince: VVilliam Rudhall,The Attur∣ney. 11 Edw. 4. pat. part 1. Clerk. was sometimes Atturney to the Prince. The Clerk of the Prince his Councel, or Secretary, and Keeper of his Books, Wri∣tings and Records, his fee was 10 l. per annum, and his diet; one Thomas Tamworth had this Office.
The Usher of the Councel-chamber of the Prince, his fee was 10 l. per annum, and his wages for attendance of the Councel there: one Thomas Ferris sometimes had this Office. The Gentleman Usher of the Princes private chamber: Sr. Thomas wroth had this Office to P. Edw. in the life of K. Hen. 8. and yet was that Prince never created Prince of Wales. The Keeper of the Princes Ward-robe, who sometimes was one Giles Davies, and had a patent thereof, with a fee of 5 l. 10 s. yearly. The Officers that follow are principally necessary, besides many other Officers inferiour left out, and no doubt did serve the Princes of this Realm, although no mention of them of Record. The Treasurer or Receiver general of the P. of all his Revenues; which appeareth in this, That he had his general Exchequer at Westminster. The Princes chief Secretary. The Master of the Princes horses, and those that teach him to ride. The School-masters of the Prince, as namely those that teach him The Arts and Phylosophy. The tongues of French, Italian and Spanish, &c. The Principles of the Laws of the Realm, and of the Civil and Ecclesiastical. A Note of the Officers, both modern and present, of the local Prin∣cipality of Wales; which Officers are allowed Fees, and other Charges going out of the Principality, as doth appear by divers accounts before the Auditors the last year, viz. the 44 year of Eliz. Carnarvon Shire.The Chamberlain of North Wales, in the Counties of Carnarvon, Anglesey, and Merio∣neth, his fee is 20 l. The Constable of the Castle of Carnarvon, his yearly fee is 60 l. 10 s. The Porter of the Town of Carnarvon 3 l. 10 s. The Porter of the Town of Conwey 6 l. 1 s. 8. The Constable of the Town of Conwey 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. The said two Justices are allowed yearly, while they are in circuit in the time of the great Sessions 6 l. The two Justices for the Counties of Carnarvon, Anglesey and Merioneth, each of them having for his yearly fee 50 l. amounting in the whole to the sum of 100 l. The Atturney in the three Counties aforesaid, is allowed for his fee yearly 6 l. 6. 8 d. The chief Forrester of Snowdon, his fee 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. The Controuller of the pleas, fines and redemptions before the Justices of North Wales, his yearly fee was 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. The fee of the Marshal and Keeper of the Shire-house, in the Counties of Carnarvon, Anglesey and Merioneth 2 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Protonotary and Clerk of the great Sessions is allowed for a reward for his la∣bour, in ingrossing of the estreets of the Sessions holden in the the said three Coun∣ties 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Barons of the Exchequer of Carnarvon 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. For their attendance at Carnarvon yearly 40 s. Towards the expences allowed the Clerk of the Exchequer, attending the great Sessions in the said Counties of Anglesey and Merioneth, for writing of the Original Writs of every Sessions 10 s. For the expences of parchment, paper, ink, and other necessaries, spent in the Office of the Clerk of the Crown 1 l. 6. s. 8 d. The Cryer, whose yearly fee is 13 s. 48. For expences of paper, parchment, ink, and other necessaries, in the Exchequer at Carnarvon, and for baggs to put money in 1 l. 10 s. For expence of Bailiffs Itenerant, bringing the Writs for colecting of the money by the Receivers 11 s. Summa totalis Carnarvon 303 l. 1 s. 7 d.
The Constable of the Castle of Beumarish, and Captain of the Town, whose yearly fee was 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Steward of Meney, whose fee was yearly 5 l. The Steward of Rossaire, whose fee was 20 s. Summa totalis Anglesey 32 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Constable of the Castle of Hardleigh, whose fee was yearly 50 l. The Auditors, whose yearly fees are 61 l. 18 s. 4 d. And for their charges they are allowed 90 l. The Receiver, whose yearly fee and allowance for portage of money 30 l. 18 s. 6 d. The Surveyor, whose yearly fee was 20 l. The Woodward, whose fee was yealy 10 l. Summa totalis Merioneth 262 l. 16 s. 10 d. The total sum of North Wales 599 l. 8 s. 5 d. South Wales. The Protonotary and Clerk of the Crown in the Counties of Cardigan, Caermar∣then, Pembrock, and the Town of Haverford West, whose fee is 40 s. The Atturney in the Counties Caermarthen, Pembrock, Cardigan, Brecknoc and Radnor, whose yearly fee is 8 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Stewards of the Welsh Courts, whose yearly fee is 6 l. The Sheriff of Cardigan, whose fee is 5 l. Summa totalis Cardigan 21 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Chamberlain and Chancellor of Caermarthen,Caermarthen Shire. whose yearly fee is 35 l. 11 s. 8 d. The Cryer of the great Sessions holden in the Counties of Caermarthen, Cardigan and Pembrock, whose fee is 6 . 8 d. The Constable of the Castle of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee is 20 l. The Steward of the Welsh Courts of the County of Caermarthen, whose yearly fee is 10 l. The Justices of the Counties of Caermarthen and Cardigan, their yearly fee is to each of them 50 l. and they are allowed for their diet in the times of their great Ses∣sions 5 l. Summa totalis Caermarthen 215 l. 19 s. 8 d. The present revenue of the Principality of Wales, as the same was in charge before the Auditors this last year past; viz. 44. Elizabeth. The Farm and yearly Rents certain of the Manners, Lands and Tenements in the County of Carnarvon amounteth unto 423 l. 3 s. 4 d. ob. The casual profits thereof 76 l. 19 s. 9 d. ob. Summa totalis 500 l. 3 s. q. The Farm and yearly Rents certain of the Lands,The County of Anglesey. Manners and Tenements in the County of Anglesey 398 l. 19 s. 11 d. q. The casual profits thereof 26 l. 10 s. 10 d. Summa totalis 425 l. 10 s. 9 d. q. The Farm and yearly Rent, certain of the Manners,Merioneth. Lands and Tenements in the Coun∣ty of Merioneth 202 l. 9 s. ob. q. The casual profits 60 l. 16 s. 10 d. Summa totalis 263 l. 5 s. 10 d. ob. q. Summa totalis of North Wales 1138 l. 19 s. 8 d. q. South Wales. The Farm and Rents, certain of the County of Cardigan amounted to 213 l 2 s. 2 d. The casual profits thereof 86 l. 9 s. 2 d. Summa totalis 299 l. 11 s. 4 d.
The Farm and Rents certain of the County of Caermarthen amounteth to 185 l. 6 s. 3 d. ob. The casual profits 180 l. 11 s. 7 d. Summa totalis 376 l. 17 s. 10 d. ob. The yearly sum total, being cast up together, amounteth to 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob. q. The charges above specified, and other, issuing all manner of wayes out of the same re∣venues, amount to 530 l. 6 s. 7 d. Which being deducted out of the former total sum of 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob. q. there doth rest clear the yearly sum of 1335 l. 2 s. 3 d. ob q. Whereby may be observed, that the Revenues of the principality of Wales, which in the time of Prince Edw. called the Black Prince, about 300 years ago, without deductions amounted to 4681 l. 12 s. 5 d. q. is now worn and wasted to the sum of 1865 l. 8 s. 10 d. ob q. and with the ordinary deductions and reprizes taken out of it at this present in charges, fees to Officers, and other Reprizes, is brought to the sum of 1335 l. 2 s. 3 d. ob q. Which small sum also (as the Revenue was to Queen Eliz.) was much lessened, for that a greater sum in the whole amounting yearly to 1789 l. 13 s. 2 d. which did partly arise by reason of the allowance of the diet of the councel of the Marches, being yearly 1106 l. 13 s. 4. the fees of the Barons of the Exchequer in Wales, the Auditors fees, Woodwarps fees, Receivers fees, Surveyers fees, and for the portage of money, was charged as well upon this Revenue of the Prince, as upon other Lands or Revenues belong∣ing to the Crown within the several Counties of Wales. Prince Henry. Mr. Holl. pag. 247.James King of Scotland (onely son and heir of Henry Stewart King of Scotland) the name of Stewart here first presenting it self as concerning the right of succession to the Crown of England, I think is convenient to shew unto my Readers out of Mr. Hollenshed the descent of that Noble, Antient and Regal Family, which hath much of the Welsh blood in it: Mackbelih, after he had obtained the Crown of Scotland by indirect means, fearing the posterity of Banquho, a Nobleman, whose children and off-spring the three wo∣men told should enjoy the Crown and sway the Regal Scepter, invited the father Banquho with his son Fleance to his Palace to supper, but caused certain of his wicked adherents and Ministers, treacherously to murther them before they entred his Court; which assascina∣tion fell too heavy upon the father, for there he lost his life; the son by the (Divine assi∣stance) escaped the massacre; and having intelligence by some private friends in the Pa∣lace, that his life was sought after, to avoid the further peril, he fled into Wales; where by reason of his carriage, proportion and Court-like behaviour, he found such courteous en∣tainment, that better he could not desire from the Prince, the Courtiers admire his gal∣lantry, the Ladies his person, his pleasing and charming behaviour, the Princes daughter is so ensnared with Cupids bewitching allurements, that she admits him privately into her most secret closet, where what hearts content they enjoyed, unseen by any but themselves, appeared openly to the world in a short time, by the encrease and exuberance of Her bel∣ly; in revenge whereof Fleance is slain, and the poor Lady kept in miserable condition, for having thus suffered her self to be deflowred by a stranger; at the last she was delive∣red of a son named Walter, who within a few years proved a man greater in courage & for∣titude, than any commonly was found, although he had no better bringing up (by his Grand-fathers command) than amongst the baser sort of people; howbeit, he shewed ever from his infancy, that there reigned in him a certain stoutness of stomack, ready to attempt high enterprises. It chancing that falling out with one of his companions, after many taunting words which passed between them, the other to his reproach objected that he was a Bastard, and begotten out of lawful Wedlock; which so incensed him, that he slew him forthwith. This sad accident forced him to leave Wales, and betake himself to Scotland, to seek some rising fortune there; where he happened into the company of certain Englishmen, which came thither with Queen Margaret, and behaved himself so soberly in all his actions, that within a while he grew into high esteem amongst them. Not long after, by such means raising high esteem, he was sent with a great power of men into the Western Isles, and other places of the Realm, to free the same from the Tyranous and Injurious oppressions there,Walter made Steward of Scotland. exercised by divers misgoverned persons; which enter∣prise, according to his Commission, he atchieved with such prudent policy and manhood, that immediately upon his return to the Court, he was made Lord Steward of Scotland; with assignment, to receive the Kings Rents and Duties out of all parts of the Realm.
This Walter Steward had a son named Allan Steward, who went after with Godfrey of Bulloin Duke of Loraine, and Robert Duke of Normandy,Alan Steward. son to King William Conquerour into the Holy Land, at what time they with other Western Princes advanced thither, An. 1099. Allan had issue Alexander Steward, that founded the Abbey of Pasley of St. Benedicts Order, who had issue Walter Steward,Alex. Steward. Walter Ste∣ward. whose valour was notable in the battail of Largis. This same Walter had issue two sons, the one named Alexander, who fought right valiant∣ly at the foresaid battail in defence of his father,Alexander and Robert bro∣thers, from whence the Earles of Ié∣nox and Dern∣ly. John & James Walter inhe∣tor of Bonkil. The Crown of Scotland, comes to the family of the Stewards. John Steward alias Robert Rex. Duke of Al∣banie. and the other named Robert Steward got the lands of Terbowtoun, and married the heir of Cruckeistoun, from whom descended the Earles of Lenox and Dernly. Moreover the abovenamed Alexander that founded Pasley, had divers other sons, as John & Iames, &c. howbeit they took new sirnames by the names of those lands unto the which they succeeded. The abovenamed Iohn Steward, after the death of his brother Iames, married the heir of Bonkil, a virgin of great beauty, and had by her Walter Steward, that inherited the lands of Bonkil, Runfrew, Rothsay, Bute and Stewardrown, after that his father Iohn was slain at Fulkyrk. He married Margery Bruce, daughter to K. Robert Bruse, by whom he had issue K. Robert the second of that name. This Robert the second took to wife one Isabel Mure, a Damosel of excellent beauty, she was daughter to Sr. Adam Mure Knight, and brought forth issue three sons & three daughters, the eldest son called John Steward, and by some Robert, who succeded immediately after his fa∣fathers death in the Kingdom. The second called Robert was made Earle of Fyfe and Mentrith, also he was created Duke of Albanie, and ruled the realm of Scotland under the name of Governour by the space of XV. years. The third son named Alexander, was Earle of Buchquane and Lord of Bondzenot.The Earle of Buckquane a Steward. The eldest daughter was married to James the son and heir of William Earle of Dowglas, the second daughter was maried to John Dunbar brother to George Dunbar Earle of March, and was made to his more honour Earle of Murray. He got on her one only daughter that was married to the Dowglas, and so Dowglas came to be Earle of Murray. The third daughter was married to John Lyoun, that was made after∣ward Lord of Glammis. Moreover the foresaid Robert, that was the first of the Stewards,The Earle of Athol and Stratherne Stewards. which ware the crown of Scotland, married Eufamia daughter to the Earle of Ross, and had by her two sons, Walter E. of Athol, and David E. of Stratherne. This Walter solicited Robert D. of Albanie to slay David Steward D. of Rothsay. After that James the first was returned out of England,Nec lex est justior ulla. Quam necis artifices arte perire sua. he did what he could to move him to put to death all the lineage of the said Duke, still being in hope after the dispatch of his Kinsmen to come to the crown himself, which hope moved him to procure his Nephew Robert Steward and Robert Graham his daughters son to murder K. James the I. also for the which crime the said Walter was convicted and destroyed with all his sons. His brother David Earle of Buchquane died without issue, and so the lands of both those brethren returned again to the crown, without any memory of their blood. Sir Robert Steward Duke of Albanie married the E. of Lenox daughter, and had by her 3 sons Walter, Alexander, and James. Duke Murdo himself with his first two sons were slain at Striveling, by K. James I. and the third brother James in revenge thereof, burnt Durbertane, and was after chased into Ire∣land, where he deceased without issue. Robert the third of that name, married Annabel Drommound, daughter of Sir John Drommound of Stobhal Knight, and had by her David and James, the first dyed in Faulkland, and the other attained the Crown, and was called James the first, and married the Lady Jane, daughter to John Beauford Earle of Somerset in England, he had by her two sons born at one birth, Alexander and James, the first died young, the second reigned, by the name James the second. James the first had also 6 daughters,James the 1. his issue. the eldest whereof was given in marriage to the Dolphin in France, the second to the Duke of Brittain, the third to the Lord Feir, the fourth to the Lord of Dalkeith; the fifth to the Earle of Hantley, and the sixt had no succession. James the II. married Margaret daughter to the Duke of Gelderland, and begot on her three sons and two daughters. The first succeeded him in the Kingdom and was called James the III. the second na∣med Alexander was Duke of Albanie, and married the Earle of Orkneys daughter, and had by her Alexander that was after Bishop of Murray, and then parting with her went into France, where he married the Countesse of Bullogne, and begot on her John Steward D. of Albany, who was Governour of Scotland many years in the minority of James V. The 3 son John Steward was E. of Marr, whose chance was to be slain in the Cannogat in a Bath-fat. The first daughter of James the second, was married to the Lord Boyd, who had by her
a son that was slain by the Lord Montgomery, and a daughter that was married to the Earle of Cassels. After the death of the Lord Boyd she was married to the Lord Hamilton, and by that means was the house of Hamilton decorate with the Kings blood, which they have well re∣quited in the late transactions. The other sister was married to the Lord Creichton. James III. married Margaret daughter to the K. of Denmark, of which marriage was born James IV, Alexander, Bishop of St. Andrews and D. of Albanie, and John Steward E. of Marr, which two died without issue. James the IV. married Margaret daughter to K. Henry VII of England, and by her had James the fifth, who marrying first the Lady Magdaline, daughter of Frances the French King had no issue by her; for that she dyed in the year next after her coming into Scotland: and then shortly after the said James the fifth married the Lady Mary de Lorayne, Dutchesse of Longuile, a widdow, and by her had he issue Mary Queen of Scotland, that took to husband Henry Darnely alias Steward, by whom she had issue Charles James, after King of England, on∣ly son as I said before, of Henry King of Scotland, and of Queen Mary his wife, Dowager of France and heir of Scotland, who married Anne daughter of Frederike the second King of Denmark, by whom he had Issue Henry Frederike, created Prince of Wales, at whose creati∣on Charles Duke of York. Sir Rab. Bartu Lord Willoughby of Earesby, after Earle of Lindsey, and General for K. Charles at Edgehil, and there slain. Sir William Compton, Lord Compton, after Earle of Northampton. Sir Grey Bridges, Lord Shandos. Sir Francis Norris, Lord Norris of Ricot, after E. of Berks. Sir Will. Cecil after Earle of Salisbury. Sir Allan Percy brother to Henry Earle of Northumberland. Sir Francis Mannors after Earle of Rutland. Sir Thomas Somerset brother to the Earle of Worcester, and Viscount Cassel after in Ireland. Sir Thom. Howard second son to the E. of Suffolk, after E. of Berks. Sir John Harrington, son to John Lord Harrington of Exton. Prince Charles. Charles Duke of Albanie, Marquesse of Ormond, Earle of Roth, and Lord of Ardmanoch the third son of James King of great Brittain, was created Duke of York at Whitehal on Tueseday the sixt of January 1604. and after on the 4 of November 1616. he was likewise at Whitehal created Prince of Wales, Earle of Chester, &c. at whose Creation these Knights of the Bath were made. James Lord Matravers, eldest son to Thomas Earle of Arundel. Algernon Lord Percy, after Earle of Northumberland. James Lord Writchesly, eldest son to the Earle of Southampton, Kt. Theophilus Lord Clinton, after Earle of Lincolne. Edward Seymore L. Beauchamp, grandchild to the Earle of Hertford. George Lord Berckley, after Lord Berckley. Henry Lord Mordant, after Earle of Peterborough. The Earle of Mar his eldest son, after Lord Fenton. Sir Henry Howard, after Lord Matravers, &c. Sir Robert Howard, fift son to the Earle of Suffolk. Sir Edward Sackvile, after Earle of Dorset. Sir William Howard, sixt son to the Earle of Suffolk. Sir Edward Howard, seventh son to the said Earle, after Lord Escricke in Yorkshire. Sir VVilliam Seymor second son to the Lord Beauchampe, after Earle of Hertford. Sir Montague Bartu, son to Robert Earle of Lindsey, and after Lord VVilloughby and Earle, &c. Sir VVilliam Sturton, son to the Lord Sturton. Sir William Parker, after Lord Morley and Monteagle. Sir Dudley North, after Lord Morth. Sir Spencer Compton, after Earle of Northampton. Sir William Spencer, after Lord Spencer. Sir Rowland St. John, brother to Oliver Earle of Bullingbrook. Sir John Cavendish, second son to William Earle of Devon. Sir Thomas Nevel son to Henry Lord of Abergavenny.
Sir John Roper, after Lord Tenham. Sir John North brother to the Lord North. Sir Henry Cary Viscount Faulkland. Prince Charles. This Prince had the title of Prince of Wales, but not the Investure and Creation as had his father and Uncle; a thing formerly practised, as before is shewed, and is also of the Welsh blood, though born in England, by the line of King James, from the Stewards whose ori∣ginal came out of Wales, from Henry VII. who descended from Owen Tewdor, ut ante, who descended from Blethin King of Powis, Gruffith ap Conan King of Northwales, Jestin Lord of Glamorgan, Meyric King of Gwent, Cadeth King of Southwales, Anarawd King of North∣wales, and from Cadwalader last King of the Brittains thus, Henry the seventh married Elizabeth eldest daughter to King Edward the IV. who was son of Richard Plantagenes, Duke of York, descended from Richard Plantagenet of Conesbourgh Earle of Cambridge, by Anne his wife, sister and co-heir of Edmund Mortimer the fift Earle of March, who was son and heir of Rog. Mortimer fourth E. of March, who succeeded Edmund Montimer the third Earle of March, who was heir unto Roger Mortimer Grandchild to Roger Mortimer first Earle of March, and son to Edmund Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, who died in the Castle of Ludlow, and was buried in the Abbey of Wigmore, whose Father was Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, who was created the first Earl of the Marches of Wales, in the second year of King Edward III. at a Parliament held at Salisbury, &c. he was son to Edmund Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, who was son to Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore (and by right of inheritance Prince of Wales) for he was son to Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmore and Gladys, his wife, who was daughter and heir (her brother David being dead) to Lhewelin ap Iorwerth, Prince of Northwales, from this Gladys, her brother being dead sans Issue, as I said, thus descendeth from Cadwalader Gladys daugh∣ter and heir to Lhewelyn, who was the son of Iorwerth, the son of Owen Gwineth, the son to Gruffith, the son to Conan, the son to Iago, the son to Edwal, the son to Meyric, the son of Edwal Voel, the son of Anarawd, the son of Rodery Mawr, the son of Esylht, the daughter and sole heir of Conan Tindaythwy, the son of Roderick Molwynoc, the son of Edwal Ywrich, the son of Cadwalader the last King of the Brittains; what transactions have happened while this prince had the stile of that Principality. I will forbear to speak or relate in this place and only give you a copy of the Charter used at the Creation of the Princes of Wales. Here should have been the Picture The Kings Charter for the Creating of the Princes of Wales. HENRY by the grace of God King of England and of France, Lord of Ireland, &c. To all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Iustices, Viscounts, Governours, Ministers, and to all our Bayliffs and Faithful subjects Greeting, out of the excellency of Royal preheminence, like as beames from the Sun, so do inferiour honours proceed, neither doth the inte∣grity of Royal lustre and brightnesse by the natural disposition of light affording light from light, feel any losse or detriment by such borrowed light, yea the royal scepter is also much the more extol∣led and regal throne exalted, by how much the more Nobles Preheminencies and Honors are under the power and command thereof. And this worthy consideration allureth and induceth us which desire the encrease of the name and honour of our first begotten and best beloved son Edward, in whom we behold and see our selves to be honoured, and our royal house also, and our people subject to us, hoping by the grace of God (by conjecture taken of his gracious future proceedings) to be the more honourably strengthened, that we may with honour prevent and with abundant grace prosecute him, who in reputation of us is deemed the same person with us, wherefore by Councel and consent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earles, Viscounts, and Barons of our Kingdom, being in our present Parliament, we have made and cre∣ated, and by these presents make and create him the said Edward, Prince of Wales and Earle of Chester, and unto the said Edward we give and grant, and by this Charter-have confirmed the Name, Stile, Title, State, Dignity and honour of the said Principality and County. And him of the said Principality and County, that be may therein, in governing, rule, and in ruling di∣rect and defend, we by a Garland upon his head, by a ring of gold upon his finger, and a verge of Gold, have according unto the manner invested him, To have and to hold the same unto him and his heirs, the Kings of England for ever, wherefore we will and straitly command for us and our heirs that Edward our son aforesaid, shall have the name, stile, title, state, dignity and honour of the principality of Wales and county of Chester aforesaid, unto him and his heirs the Kings of England aforesaid for ever, these being witnesses, the reverend Fathers John Cardinal and
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, our Chancellour, and William Archbi∣shop of York Primate of England, Thomas Bishop of London, John Bishop of Lincolne, Wil∣liam Bishop of Norwich; our most well beloved Cosens Richard Duke of York, Humphry Duke of Buckingham, our well beloved Cosens, Richard Earle of VVarwick, Richard Earle of Salisbury, John Earle of Wiltshire; and our beloved and faithful Ralph Cromwel Cham∣berlain of our house, VVilliam Faulconbridge and John Stourton Knights. Dated at our Pal∣lace at VVestminster the 15 day of March, in the year of our reign 32. By the King himself, and his Councel. Things required unto the Creation of the Prince of Wales. First, an honourable habit, viz. a Robe of purple Velvet, having in it about 18 elles, more or lesse, garnished about with a fringe of gold, and lined with Ermines. A Surcote or Inner garment having in it about 14 elles of Velvet of like colour, fringe and fur. Laces, Buttons and Tassells (as they call them) ornaments made of purple silk and gold. A girdle of silk also to gird his inner gown. A sword with a scabbord made of purple silk and gold, garnished with the like girdle he is girt withal, thereby shewing himself to be Duke of Cornwal by birth and not by Creation. A cap of the same Velvet that his robe is of, furred with Ermines, with laces and a button the tassels on the crown thereof made of Ʋenice gold. A garland or a little coronet of gold to be put on his head together with his cap. A long golden verge or rod, betokening his government, a ring of gold also to be put on the third finger of his left hand, whereby he declareth his marriage made with Equity and Justice. All these things were almost with royal sumptuousness prepared for Edward son to King Henry VIII. to have been created Prince of Wales, but prevented by his fathers death, he was crowned King, sixt of that name, yet the forme with the rights and ceremonies belong∣ing to the investing of the Prince into the Principality of Wales you may perceive by what is above set down. FINIS
