F1129 08121975 40916
THE ART OF Preserving and Restoring HEALTH. Explaining the Nature and Causes of the Distem∣pers that afflict Mankind. Also shewing That every Man is, or may be, his own best Physician. To which is added A Treatise of the most Simple and Effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Men and Women. Written in French by M. Flamand, M. D. and faithfully translated into English. LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, in Covent-Garden; H. Bon∣wick, in St. Paul's Church-yard; and S. Man∣ship, at the Ship in Cornhill. 1697.
THE French Author's PREFACE. I Shall have all the Reason in the World to com∣plain of the Injustice of the Public, if my Charitable Design in Publishing this lit∣tle Treatise be look'd upon as an effect of my Vanity, or an Arrogant Undertaking to prescribe Rules to Physicians. I am sensible of the vast ac∣knowledgments we owe for
the daily and important dis∣coveries they make in that useful Art; and that they do not stand in need of any Light to direct 'em, but what they acquire by their own Experience and Studies. I never entertain'd a Thought of controverting the just Right they are possess'd of, to give Laws to the rest of Mankind; nor was ever guilty of the least Intention to disswade my Readers from following the Instructions of their lawful Guides: My on∣ly Design was to serve the Necessities of those, who, tho' they are not profess'd
Physicians, are nevertheless Masters of a sufficient Stock of Sense and Judgment, and are neither too scrupulously fond, nor unreasonably ne∣gligent of their Health; for 'tis eertain that the two op∣posite Extremities are equally to be avoided upon all Oc∣casions. I hope I shall easily obtain pardon for retaining some Terms of Art, when the Subject cou'd not be di∣stinctly handl'd without 'em, especially since I have always taken care to explain 'em. I never intended to court any Approbation but that of the Candid Reader; and I shall
think my self abundantly re∣compens'd for all my La∣bour, if there be any thing found in my Book that may deserve it.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contain'd in the following Treatise. THE Art of Preserving Health, and Preventing Diseases by Instinct, assisted by the Light of Reason, Page 1 OBSERVATION I. That Man is endu'd with Instinct. Ib.
The Definition of Instinct, according to the Ancient Philosophers, Ibid. Of the Nature of Instinct, according to des Cartes, and other Modern Philosophers, 2 The Doctrine of Instinct confirm'd by Reason and Experience, Ibid. Cato the Censor was Physician to himself and to his whole Family, 3 Montaigne relates the same of his Ancestors, tho' he was a profest Ad∣mirer of Medicine, 4 That Man may be assisted by Reason in the choice of proper Remedies, 5 That a Man cannot make use of a bet∣ter Physician than himself, Ibid. OBSERVATION II. Of the Temperaments or Constitutions of Bodies, and of the Causes of Dis∣eases in general, 6
Of the Nine sorts of Temperaments, according to the Doctrine and De∣finitions of the Schools, Ibid. That the Knowledge of the Tempera∣ments serves to discover the Incli∣nations of Men, and the Distem∣pers to which they are subject, 7 That there are two sorts of Persons; the one strong and healthy, the o∣ther Feeble and Tender, 8 CHAP I. Of the principal Causes of Diseases in the general. Ibid. That there are Four Causes of Disea∣ses, two remote, and two more im∣mediate, Ibid. Of Melancholy, The first remote Cause of Diseases: Of the bad Effects it produ∣ces both in the Body and Mind;
and of the Remedies that may be us'd against it, 9 What ought to be done in order to prevent the Effects of Vexation and Melancholy, 12 That there are two sorts of Cures, the one perfect or eradicative, and the other imperfect or palliative, Ibid. That Melancholy is a Distemper both of the Mind and of the Body, Ibid. The Cure of Melancholy or Vexati∣on, 14 Of Debauchery or Intemperance, The Second remote Cause of Diseases, 15 CHAP. II. Of Excess in Eating and Drinking, Ibid.
How Distempers are occasion'd by Ex∣cess in Eating and Drinking, Ibid. Rules to be observ'd with respect to Eating and Drinking, by those that are in Health, 17 The Signs of good and wholsome Food or Nourishment, Ibid. CHAP. III. Of the immoderate Ʋse of the Plea∣sures of Love, 18 That the immoderate use of Amorous Enjoyments is prejudicial to health, and for what reason, Ibid. What ought to be done by such as live single, in order to subdue their lustful Inclinations, 19, 20 Of the Diseases that may be occasi∣on'd by a rigorous abstinence from the Pleasures of Love, when care is not taken to prevent 'em by the use of cooling and opening Me∣dicines, Ibid.
That the excessive use of those Plea∣sures is more dangerous than an entire abstinence from 'em, and for what reason, 20 CHAP. IV. Of the quantity or abundance of the Blood, the first immediate Cause of Diseases, 21 How Diseases may be occasion'd meer∣ly by the quantity or abundance of the Blood, 22 An account of the Distempers that proceed from the Redundancy of the Blood, 23 CHAP. V Of the Depravation of the Blood, consider'd as an immediate Cause of Diseases, occasion'd by the re∣taining of the Excrements in the Body▪ 24
How the Digestion of the Aliments is perform'd by the Stomach, Ibid. How a Cacochymy or ill dispositi∣tion of the Blood is produc'd, 26 Two Objections answer'd, 27, 28 The Excrements compar'd to a heap of Dung, 28 That the Liver alone is not able to free the Blood from all its Impu∣rities, and for what reason, 29 How that little quantity of Blood that passes thro' the small Vessels of the Gut Colon, may infect the whole Mass of the Blood, Ibid. CHAP. VI. Of the Cure or Removal of the First immediate Cause of Diseases, by lessening the Quantity of the Blood. 30 Two ways to lessen the quantity of the Blood; Abstinence or a spare di∣et, and Bleeding, Ibid.
How the quantity of the Blood is lessen'd by Abstinence, and in what Cases this Method is most proper, 31 Of Bleeding, and when we shou'd have recourse to it, Ibid. CHAP. VII. Of the ways to remove the Second immediate Cause of Diseases oc∣casion'd by the too long continu∣ance of the Excrements in the Cavi∣ties of the great Guts, 32 Four ways with which Animals are inspir'd by Instinct, to hasten the Expulsion of the Excrements, 32, &c. Diet is the first Expedient that con∣tributes to the Evacuation of the Excrements, 33 The ill consequences of an irregular Diet, Ibid.
What use ought to be made of this Ex∣pedient, in order to prevent Di∣stempers, 34 Bleeding is the second way to faci∣litate the voiding of Excrements that are too long retain'd, Ibid. The Ʋsefulness of Bleeding in De∣fluxions, Wounds, Child-birth, &c. Ibid. How Bleeding promotes the Expulsi∣on of the Excrements, 35 That Bleeding ought to precede the use of purging Medicines, and for what reason, Ibid. Of the most proper times for Bleed∣ing, 36 Of the Rules that are to be observed in order to make a right use of Bleeding, 37, 38. The ill Consequences of Bleeding with∣out necessity, 38
CHAP. VIII. The Signs by which every Man is fore∣warn'd by his own Instinct, of an approaching Distemper, 39 The bad Effects of Purging without necessity, 42 When a Man is threaten'd with Sick∣ness by many and pressing Signs, he ought to prevent the danger by a speedy use of proper Remedies: But if the Signs be few and in∣considerable, he may defer the use of Remedies, and for what Reason, 43 Tho' 'tis dangerous to use Medicines too much or too often, yet the stron∣gest and most healthy Persons may sometimes stand in need of Re∣medies, and why, 44
CHAP. IX. Of Clysters and other Medicines; the third Expedient which Instinct has taught Animals to forward the Ex∣pulsion of their Excrements, 45 That we ought not to make a Custom of taking Clysters, and why, 46 How to know when we ought, or ought not to use Bleeding by way of Pre∣vention, Ibid. CHAP. X. Of the way of using Remedies for the Preservation of Health, 47 That Clysters ought to precede the use of Medicines, and why, 48 That the Effect of Clysters is very ir∣regular, and what must be observ'd on such occasions, 49 That a Purging Medicine shou'd ra∣ther be taken by way of Infusion
than in Substance, and why, 49 Four Observations concerning the right use of Purgatives, 50 CHAP. XI. Of Purgatives, and how they operate: Of the Time and Manner of using them. 53 Of a common Property of all Evacu∣ating Medicines, 54 CHAP. XII. Of the Purgatives that ought to be used for the preventing of Disea∣ses, 56 Medicines that purge by stool ought to be preferr'd before all other Evacuating Medicines, and why, Ibid. What manner of Persons those are who may expect Benefit by the use of Vomits, Ibid.
Who may use Sudorifics, Ibid. Who may have recourse to Diuretics; and so of the rest, Ibid. A Rule of great Importance to be ob∣serv'd in the use of all Remedies whatsoever, 58 That nothing can be more uncer∣tain than the effect of Purgatives, Ibid. That the most gentle Purgatives, and such as are most agreeable to our Constitution, are of two sorts, 59 What our Opinion is concerning the effect of Remedies, Ibid. CHAP. XIII. The Solution of certain Difficulties that deter most Persons from ma∣king use of Purging Remedies for the preventing of Distempers, 61
The First Objection, against Clysters and Purgatives answer'd, 61 The Second Objection answer'd, 64 The Third Objection answer'd, 65 The Fourth Objection against Bleed∣ing answer'd, 66 The End of the Table.
BOOKS lately Printed. THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion and Go∣vernment of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, Missionary from the French King. Adorn'd with igures. Done into English. The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion, and overnment of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon, mbassador there in the Year 1693. Adorn'd with igures. The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Riche∣eu, Principal Minister of State to Lewis XIII. King France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8vo. Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a ithful and particular Account of the Transactions the Court of France, relating to the Publick Inte∣st of Europe. With Historical and Political Re∣ctions on the ancient and present State of that ingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor. The Roman History, from the Building of the ity to the perfect Settlement of the Empire by ugustus Caesar: Containing the Space of 727 Years. esign'd as well for the Understanding of the Ro∣an Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By Laurence chard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge. A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the hief Towns, Churches, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, atues, and Antiquities of that Country. Toge∣er with useful Instructions for those who shall tra∣vel
thither. By Maximilian Misson, Gent. Do into English, and adorn'd with Figures. In tw Volumes. 8vo. The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbe Late Minister and Secretary of State to Lewis XI the present French King. Done into English from French Copy, printed at Cologn this present Year 169 A New Voyage to the Levant: Containing Account of the most Remarkable Curiosities Germany, France, Italy, Malta, and Turkey; W Historical Observations relating to the Present Ancient State of those Countries. By the Si du Mont. Done into English, and adorn'd with gures. The Compleat Horseman: Discovering the su Marks of the Beauty, Goodness, and Vices of H∣ses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their ∣eases; and the True Method both of their Pre∣vation and Cure. With Reflections on the Reg and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. T∣gether with the Art of Shooing, and a Descrip of several Kinds of Shooes, adapted to the var Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation those that are good; and the Best Method of Br∣ing Colts; with Directions to be observ'd in Bac 'em, and Making their Mouths, &c. By the de Solleysell, one of the Heads of the Royal Acad at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Review'd and thodically Augmented; Done into English, Adorn'd with Figures. Folio.
THE ART OF Preserving Health. OBSERVATION I. That Man is endu'd with Instinct. THE Word Instinct may be con∣sider'd, either according to its Sig∣nification or Etymology. Instinct, according to the Etymo∣logy, comes from the Latin Word Instigo; which in English signifies to incite, stir up, &c. According to the signification, Instinct in Beasts is an Impulse, which moves them to∣wards those things that are useful, and makes them shun those things that are hurtful.
This is the Opinion of Plato, Socrates, Ari∣stotle, and, in a Word, of all the ancient Phi∣losophers: But, according to des Cartes, and other modern Writers, the Instinct of Beasts is a certain Principle, which is the cause of all their Actions, just as the Wheels of a Watch make it point out and strike the Hours; for, according to the Moderns, Beasts are nothing but a sort of Clock-Work, or meer Machines: But this Opinion begins to lose Ground, as well as others. This being premis'd, we may define the Instinct of Animals to be a Power of A∣cting; which is, as it were, the Cause of the Actions that contribute to their Preservation, which we commonly ascribe to their Instinct And may not Man then have such a Principle, which in him may be the Cause of the like Actions? if we consider him purely as an Animal, for, Abstrahentium non est mendaci∣um, say the Philosophers, we may presume that Man, as well as the Beasts, acts by In∣stinct for his own Preservation. Reason and Experience confirm this Truth; for it cannot be deny'd, that Man in his In∣fancy, while Reason is clogg'd and obscur'd by the Imperfections of the Organs of his Body, does many things which are advan∣tageous to him, and which can not proceed but from that Principle which is common to him with the Beasts, since at that time he has no use of his Reason; for we find that an Infant, assoon as 'tis born, applies it self
to the Nipple which is presented to it by the Mother or Nurse, and sucks out the Milk, without considering that it wants it for its Nourishment. And soon after, when the Or∣gans of his Senses are strengthen'd, and when he begins to fix his Eyes upon such Objects as present themselves to his sight, do not we see that he endeavours to avoid those that are disagreeable to him; that he cries and is troubled when an unknown or deform'd Per∣son takes him out of his Nurse's Arms? And is it not plain that these are the Effects of Instinct, since Beasts do the same, with∣out the Light of Reason. But we are not only guided by Instinct during our Infancy, for we are sensible of it even in the Vigour of our Age. How often does it happen that while our Thoughts are ntent upon some important Affair, we ap∣proach the Fire in the Winter, or eat a hear∣ty Meal, and do several other things with∣out thinking on them. Cato the Censor, one of the wisest Persons among the Romans, was Physician to him∣self, and to his whole Family; and he who writes his Life, tells us, that that Illustri∣ous Roman was wont to boast that he al∣ways kept himself and his Family in per∣ect Health, by the help of such Physick as he prepar'd himself; which is as much as f he had intimated to us, that he was a di∣igent Observer of the Dictates of Nature.
Montaigne, one of the most refin'd Wit of our Age, relates the same of his Ance∣stors, in the Second Book of his Essays, Chap. 3 My Father, says he, liv'd seventy four Years my Grand-father sixty nine, and my Great Grandfather near eighty, without so much as tast∣ing any Medicines; for whatsoever was not com∣monly us'd, serv'd them instead of Drugs. Nevertheless, 'tis certain that he did no write this because he had an Aversion to Phy∣sick, for he was too wise and judicious no to have a particular value for so useful a Art; as appears by another Passage of hi Works, where he expresses himself in the Words, Health is a precious thing, which rea deserves that a Man shou'd employ not only b time, but every thing else, for its Preservation. If Men will join Reason to their Natu∣ral Instinct, they may know themselves be∣ter than the Beasts can possibly do, whic perhaps have no Knowledge, or at le are incapable of Reflexion. I am not ignorant that Monsieur de Chambre, a very Learned and Eminent Phy∣sician, hath written a particular Treatise co∣cerning the Reasoning of Beasts: But t Reader will give me leave to own that am neither of his Opinion, nor of that some other Philosophers, who affirm th Beasts act formally and directly for the a∣taining of their End, tho' in an imperfe manner; since, according to the Philosopher the distinction of Degrees, or More and Le
does not imply a special Difference; and since there is no Effect that does not depend upon, or proceed from, an Internal Cause, which can hardly be allow'd to Beasts. Besides, Reason enables a Man to choose, out of many Remedies, that which he knows to be the most proper for himself; whereas all other Animals of the same Species, use the same Remedies, because they are not capable of making so nice a Distinction. To conclude; as 'tis plain that certain Jun∣ctures of Time, and other Circumstances, have a considerable influence upon the Effect of Me∣dicines, it must also be acknowledged as whol∣ly owing to Reason, that a Man who has made use of the same Remedies at different times, when he comes to reflect upon their various Effects, is able with more exactness and Judg∣ment to choose fit Opportunities to secure or promote their Success. 'Tis thus that many Husbandmen, Labourers, and other Country People preserve their Health for the space of seventy or eighty Years, and live to a great Age, without having need of any but their own Internal Physician, that is, their natural Instinct, and the Light of their Reason, which admonishes 'em to avoid Debauchery, Excess, and Ambition. 'Tis certain then that we can make use of no better Physicians than our selves, provided we wou'd seriously apply our selves to the Pre∣servation of our Health and Strength, and di∣igently follow our Instinct and the Light of our Reason.
OBSERVATION II. Of the Temperaments or Constitution of Bodies, and of the Causes of Dis∣eases in general. 'T WOU'D be needless to trouble th Reader with the Definition or Etymolo∣gy of the Word Temperament or Constitution and its Division into nine different Species which are the common Subjects of Dispu∣tation in the Schools; since there are ver few who know not that a Temperament nothing else but a Mixture of the four Quali∣ties, viz. Heat, Coldness, Moisture and Dry∣ness. And on the other Hand, tho' a Man shou know that there are nine Species of Tempe∣raments, viz. one temperate, and the other eight intemperate, he wou'd not, perhaps, b the more Learned; Nevertheless, lest my Si∣lence shou'd be imputed to Ignorance, I wi give such an account of 'em, as may in som measure satisfie the Reader's Curiosity. The Temperate Constitution is that which is composed of a due and convenient Mix∣ture of the four first Qualities, either accord∣ing to the Quantity, which we call a Tempe∣rate Constitution ad pondus, i. e. to weight▪
or according to the Quality, ad justitiam, fit for every Faculty to perform its Operations aright. I leave it to be decided by my more Learned and Experienc'd Brethren, whether they ever met with such a Constitution in their Practice. An Intemperate Constitution is that in which there is an Excess of one or more Qualities above the Temperate; and it is twofold, viz. Simple and Compound. The Simple is that which is caused by the Excess of any one Quality, viz. Hot, Cold, Dry, or Moist separately. The Compound is that which is produc'd by the Excess of two or more Qualities: Thus Heat and Moisture conjunctly make a San∣guine Constitution, which answers to Adole∣scency and the Spring; Heat and Dryness a∣gree with Youth; Choler, and the Summer; and so of the rest. An Intemperate Constitution, as well Simple as Compound, may be either Healthful or Sickly, Equal or Unequal, with or with∣out Matter, &c. But since these Distinctions wou'd engage me in unprofitable Debates, I refer the Reader to those Authors who have treated on that Subject. And tho' the Knowledge of the Constitu∣tions may be of some use, to discover the Inclinations of Men, and many Diseases to which they are subject, I will chuse rather to say with a late Author, that there are but two sorts of Persons, one that are
endow'd with a healthy and strong Con∣stitution; and the other with a feeble and weak Constitution, who are almost always sick, and enjoy but very little Health. 'Tis a great Advantage to be naturally well-disposed both in Body and Mind; for such a Person may enjoy a perfect Health by leading a regular Life: But when one is naturally of an ill Constitution, he loses his Health as often as he neglects the Admo∣nitions of his Instinct, and consequently must lead a very troublsome and uneasie Life. CHAP. I. Of the principal Causes of Diseases in the general. THERE are four Causes of Diseases viz. two remote, which are Melancholy or Vexation, and Debauchery; and two imme∣diate, which are an excess of Blood, and the too long continuance of the Excrements in the great Guts.
Of Melancholy, The first remote Cause of Diseases: Of the bad Effects which it produ∣ces both in the Body and Mind; and of its Remedies. THere are very few Persons who are not acquainted with Melancholy, either by Reason or Experience, since the Life of Man is a continual Revolution of Prosperity and Adversity; and the Oppositions betwixt those two Conditions, excite in us contrary Motions, and very different Passions. That Tranquillity of Mind which accompanies good Fortune, is very proper to preserve the Health; for tho' the Mind and the Body are of a different Nature, yet they have an Affinity, which keep 'em in such Dependance one to the other, that there is nothing regularly done in the whole Composition, unless it be carry'd on by an equal Combination of the two Parts. All our Actions are perform'd by the assi∣stance of the Vital and Animal Spirits; and 'tis their Commerce which maintains that perfect Union, between the Heart and the Brain, which are the principal Organs of the Body. For 'tis plain that the Brain cannot produce the Animal Spirits, unless the subtil
parts of the Blood be convey'd thither through the Arteries; and that the Heart, which is a Muscle, hath not power by its continual Motion, to diffuse the Blood through the whole Body, but by the assistance of the Animal Spirits: Now when the Mind is serene and undisturb'd, that all the Parts may be sensible of her Impressions, she furnishes 'em with a sufficient quantity of Spirits, to enable 'em to perform their respective A∣ctions. But, on the other hand, when the Mind is agitated with a Croud of dismal Appre∣hensions, that give Entrance to Grief and Melancholy, she is perpetually ruminating on the Causes of her Disasters, and endeavouring with all imaginable Application, to remove 'em, which must needs occasion a vast ex∣pence of Spirits. So that all the Animal Spirits which are generated in the Brain, are scarce able to supply those Parts which are subservient to the designs of the Soul, in the performance of those hasty Motions she requires from 'em; and consequently since so large a quantity of the Spirits flows into the Nerves, that are bestow'd upon those Parts, there are but few left for the other Nerves: Now the Parts which help to change or digest the Aliments, and are subservient to all the Actions which are call'd Natural, being of no use to the Passions, 'tis plain that the Nerves which go to those Parts, re∣ceive but few Spirits from the Brain, and
consequently that their Fibres are very weak∣ly mov'd, and their Actions disorderly and ir∣regular; so that the Excrements can hardly be expell'd; and their too long continuance in the Guts is the immediate Cause of Dis∣eases. We may add, that the great dissipation of the Animal Spirits, when the Soul is vex'd and disturb'd, is the occasion that a greater quantity of Blood than usual is sent from the Heart to the Brain, to make up the Loss of those Spirits; and consequently the Nou∣rishment of all the other Parts is both much lessen'd and chang'd as to its quality. For 'tis always the best part of the Blood that runs to the Brain, and the Body is depriv'd of its best Nourishment, particularly the Mem∣branous Parts, which are weakned and dry'd up, for want of fit Matter to preserve them; and this Inconveniency reaching the Intestines, as well as all the other Parts, 'tis certain that they cannot expel the Excrements with vi∣gour, by their Vermicular or Peristaltick Mo∣tion, being depriv'd of the Animal Spirits, by whose Assistance they were moved. We also see, that those who are naturally of a melancholy and peevish Humour, who apply themselves to study, or to other Em∣ployments, which require much application, are usually lean, and subject to be often Co∣stive, and commonly fancy themselves to be extremely sick, before they have the least disposition or tendency to Sickness.
What ought to be done in order to pre∣vent the Effects of Grief or Me∣lancholy. ALL Diseases, as well of the Body as of the Mind, may be cured either perfectly or imperfectly. A perfect Cure consists in the entire destru∣ction of all the Causes of the Disease, which must necessarily cease when the Causes are re∣mov'd; Sublatâ causâ tollitur effectus: This sort of Cure is call'd cradicative. Grief is not only a Disease of the Body, but 'tis one of the most considerable Distem∣pers that can possibly afflict the Mind. It cannot be always cur'd by an entire re∣moval of its Causes, since they are not always in our power; and the best Reasons that can be alledged, to persuade a Man to raise him∣self by the Strength of his Mind, above the reach of Ill Fortune, may serve indeed for a fine Amusement to a contemplative Geni∣us; but are rarely able to allay the torment of an afflicted Mind: For as it is easie for those on whom Fortune smiles, to comfort the Miserable, so it is hard for those who are in trouble not to feel the weight of their Mis∣fortunes. As for Example; if a Man was entirely ruin'd, or reduc'd to extreme want by a litigi∣ous Action enter'd against him by his Ene∣mies;
a grave Philosopher might indeed ad∣monish him that the Estate he had lost was transitory and perishable, and that he ought not to have settl'd his Affections on it, neither as a Man, because he shou'd have consider'd that he must have left it sooner or later; nor as a Christian, because as such he ought not to look upon such fleeting Enjoyments as his Portion, but upon those which are Ever∣lasting? These are certain and undoubted Truths, but wou'd not, in all probability quiet the Mind of a Person in such Circumstances, or make him forget his Loss. And 'tis no less certain that the Recovery of his Estate wou'd be the most effectual Expedient to restore the Tranquility of his Mind. Grief may be also occasion'd by many o∣ther Causes, which are no less without our power, and beyond the reach of Medicines, than the former. But that which seems to be peculiar to this troublesome Distemper, is, that whereas o∣ther Distempers are commonly cur'd by things that are contrary to 'em; that which is con∣trary to this, commonly augments, rather than abates the Distemper. For a Man who is drowned in Sorrow is incapable of taking Pleasure in any thing; and Joy, which is opposite to his Grief, is so far from easing him, that he cannot en∣dure to perceive the least appearance of it in another.
'Twou'd be needless then to attempt the Cure by endeavouring to divert his Thoughts; and therefore, (in expectation that Time, which is the only Physician in such Cases, may heal the Wounds of his Mind, or some of those unexpected Revolutions, to which all the World is subject, may put an end to the Cause of his Sorrow) we must content our selves with persuading him at least to resist the fatal Influence which this Passion may have upon his bodily Health, because of the strict Union that is between those two Parts which compose the Man. 'Tis certain that Grief may be the Spring and Fountain of many Diseases, by causing the Excrements to remain too long in the great Guts: And therefore we must endeavour to make the best use of the Signs by which the Internal Physician acquaints us with the stoppage of those Impurities in these Passages, lest the Mind shou'd by degrees communicate the infectious Contagion of its Distemper, to the Body; that is, we must expel those Excrements as soon as we perceive any signs of fulness; and in order to this, we must chuse the most convenient Medicines. For, as I intimated before, we must either entirely re∣move the Causes of a Disease, or at least en∣deavour to prevent their Fatal Effects.
Of Debauchery or Intemperance, The Second remote Cause of Diseases. DEbauchery consists chiefly in two things, viz. in excess of Drinking and Eating, and in the immoderate use of the Pleasures of Love; for 'tis by this means that the most healthy Persons destroy themselves, and shorten their Days, even tho' they be otherwise of a stronger Constitution than o∣thers. CHAP. II. Of Excess in Drinking and Eating. THAT we may comprehend the manner how Diseases are occasion'd by excess in Eat∣ing and Drinking, we must examine the Acti∣on of the Stomach and Guts in converting the Food into Chyle: for if we consider that all the Fibres which compose the Contex∣ture of those Parts, are as it were so many small Springs, being which successively slacken'd and contracted, keep the Food in a continual Mo∣tion, which, with the assistance of dissolving Acids, attenuates, bruises, and entirely changes
its Nature. Now 'tis plain that these Springs may lose their force and activity by a con∣tinual Pressure and distension, occasion'd by an excessive quantity of Food, which fills the Spaces that are formed by their Turnings and Windings, even as the Springs of our Machines are stopt when their Relaxation is hinder'd by a strong Pressure: For as a Bow cannot long retain its Spring if it be kept continually bent, and the finest Machine in the World will decay insensibly if it be not diligently kept in Order, so the most vigorous Stomach may be spoil'd by an o∣ver-proportion'd quantity of Food, because the Fibres both of that and of the other Parts which help Digestion, are either broken, or so weaken'd by a continual Extension, that they cannot afterwards contract and expand themselves, either to concoct the Food, or to expel the Excrements that are separated from it: Now Indigestion and the Stoppage of the Excrements in the Body, are, in a great measure, the immediate Causes of Dis∣eases. But let us suppose that the Stomach, tho loaded with Food, may nevertheless be able to digest it when the Body is very strong and vigorous, what must be the consequence of such a Digestion, but that the redundant Chyle flowing out of the Stomach, and not being ad∣mitted into the Milky-Vessels of the Mesente∣rium, must remain in the small Guts, and af∣terwards pass with the Excrements into the
greater, where it must quickly be corrupted, for want of a sufficient ferment to keep up its Motion, and consequently must of necessity corrupt the Excrements, and occasion all those Disorders which shall be mentioned in the Chapters that treat of the immediate Causes of Diseases. We ought therefore diligently to avoid ex∣cess in Drinking and Eating; and for that reason 'tis necessary that every one should be acquainted with his own Constitution: As for Example; the Cholerick have occasion to eat oftener than the Phlegmatick, because those are much hotter than these, and the Heat not meeting with Matter to digest, takes hold of the Alimentary Juice, and there∣by insensibly weakens the principal parts of the Body. Whoever enjoys a perfect Health, ought to use indifferently every thing that is fit to Nourish him, especially when he has observ'd that any particular sort of Food is endu'd with all the necessary Qualities; as first, when it is agreeable to the Taste; for when the Stomach loaths any particular kind of Meat, tho' at the same time it be very good and wholsome, we ought to ab∣stain from it, because it will infallibly either cause Indigestion, or provoke Vomit∣ing. Secondly, When 'tis easily digested, with∣out occasioning either a slackness or straitness in the Belly: These are the surest Marks of
wholsome Food; and there remains nothing more to be observ'd, but that the Quantity must always be moderate. We must then, to preserve our Health, eat when we are hungry, and drink when we are thirsty, what∣soever is proper to be eaten or drunk, with∣out forcing Nature, and without either star∣ving or cloying our Stomachs. CHAP. III. Of the immoderate Ʋse of the Pleasures of Love. THIS sort of Intemperance is no less dan∣gerous and prejudicial than the former: I need not mention those infamous Marks and Effects of Lechery, the Gonorrhaea both simple and virulent, Phimosis, Paraphimosis, Excrescencies, Bubo's, and in a Word, the Disease which is commonly entertain'd by all Nations, tho' none of 'em are willing to own it as a Native, these are the usual Conse∣quences, and the just Rewards of unbridl'd Lust. But besides, it is certain that the immoderate use of those Pleasures dissipates the Spirits, extremely weakens the Brain, robs the Nerves, and Membranous Parts of their proper Nourishment, is fatal to
those who have a weak Breast, heats and drys up the whole Body, and makes way for a whole Army of Diseases, by weaken∣ing the Action of the great Guts, by dis∣sipating the Spirits, and by drying up the Fibres. It is therefore necessary to moderate the Pleasures of Love, if we wou'd preserve our selves from irrecoverable Ruine; and conse∣quently in our amorous Inclinations, we ought to consult our Strength, and never to give a full career to our eager Desires. We must be entirely Masters of our selves, that we may be able, upon Occasion, to curb the heat of a Passion which has in all Ages fooled the wisest Heads, and baffled the se∣verest Vertue; since the Wisdom of Solomon, the Holiness of David, and the Strength of Sampson, could not moderate the Sallies of this ungoverneable Passion: And 'twas this that made the modest Virgil say, Omnia vincit Amor, & nos cedamus Amori. Reason, which ought to guide us in all our Steps, is never less obey'd, nor more strangely puzzl'd than when she attempts to calm the impetuous Motions of Love, that are stirr'd up in us by an infinite Number of Objects, and after a thousand several ways. To make our selves Masters of this Passi∣on, we must not only be possest of an un∣shaken Firmness and Resolution, but be fur∣nish'd
with constant Supplies of Grace; for Chastity in Youth is a sort of Martyrdom, or as a Father of the Church terms it, Mar∣tyrium sine sanguine. This Consideration obliges me to advise all unmarry'd Persons to abstain entirely from the Pleasures that are propos'd to them by this Passion, provided their ordinary Food be not too Juicy and provocative, such as new-laid Eggs, Capons, Partridges, Wood∣cocks, Pigeons, Artichokes, Asparagus, Ce∣lery, all sorts of Salt and Pepper'd Meats; as also some kinds of Pulse, because of their Windiness, as Pease and Beans; and there∣fore such Persons must content themselves with less Nourishing Food, and cool their Bodies more or less, according to their Age and Constitutions; which they may do ve∣ry easily by consulting their Physicians; for o∣therwise they may, by abstaining entirely from the Pleasures of Love, render them∣selves obnoxious to many Diseases, as Stop∣page of Urine, the Gravel, Stone, Va∣pours, Faintings, the Jaundice, and Green-Sickness. 'Tis certain that an excessive use of the Pleasures of Love is more dangerous than an entire abstinence from them; for the Ebulli∣tion of the Blood ending sooner or later with Age, the Passions are extinguish'd with it, and the Calm we enjoy after the Storm, makes us soon forget all the Pain we suffer'd to resist it: whereas the Inconveniencies that
remain after the immoderate use of those Pleasures, such as the trembling of the Nerves, Palsie, Shortness of Breath, Phthisis, Gout, &c. make us pay very dear, in a long and infirm Old Age, for the transitory Charms we enjoy'd, and the frivolous Amuse∣ments of our Youth. What has been said may suffice to give us an Idea of the remote Causes of Diseases; and therefore in the next place we must proceed to consider their more immediate Causes. CHAP. IV. Of the Redundancy or too great Abun∣dance of Blood, the first immediate Cause of Diseases. THE Blood, which is the Treasure of Life, when it exceeds either in Quantity or Quality, may prove the Cause of Death when there is more than a sufficient quantity of it in the Body, which we call a Plethora, or a fulness of Blood; or when it hath ac∣quired some bad Quality, which we call Ca∣cochymia, or a depravation of the Humours: Bleeding destroys or removes the former, and Purging the latter.
We may easily comprehend how Disea∣ses may be occasion'd meerly by the Quan∣tity of the Blood, if we reflect upon the Disposition of the Organs which contain and convey the Blood, and conduce to its Mo∣tion. In order to this we may compare the Veins and Arteries of our Bodies to the Pipes of a Fountain, the first of which, or those that are next the Spring-head, are very big and large, but grow insensibly smaller as they spread themselves into Branches; supposing, for Example, that the first gives passage to a Foot of Water, and that the last do not give passage to above an Inch. The same Obser∣vations may be apply'd to the Blood-Ves∣sels. The Arteries which proceed from the Heart are very large, and are divided into others of a middle bigness; these again are divi∣ded into smaller Branches which are succes∣sively subdivided, till they become so small, that they are usually call'd Capillarie (or Hair∣like) and Invisible. And in all parts of the Body where these invisible Arteries are found, they meet with very small Veins, which grow larger as they meet, and join with one an∣other, and return at length to the Heart, where they terminate, and are as large as the Arteries at their coming out of the Heart. Now the Blood flows thro' all those Pipes, and the Heart directs its Motion, as a Con∣duit-Maker directs that of the Water in the
Pipes of the Fountain. And as it often hap∣pens that the Water-Pipes are either stopt or broken when a Body that is Bulky e∣nough to fill up the Passage enters with the Water, or a greater quantity of Water than they can contain; so the Blood-Vessels are frequently obstructed, and sometimes bro∣ken, when the Liquor they contain is either redundant, or thicker than it ought to be, from whence proceed Fevers, Ebullitions of the Blood, Abscesses or Impostumes, both in the inward Parts, and upon the Surface of the Body, Bleeding at the Nose, and other Parts, Apoplexies, Suffocating Defluxions, and Obstructions of the Intrals, which make way for an infinite Number of Diseases. But if the Abundance of Blood may be look'd up∣on as the Cause of so many Distempers, 'tis certain that the depravation of it may produce a far greater Number of more stub∣born and dangerous Diseases.
CHAP. V. Of the Depravation of the Blood, consider'd as an immediate Cause of Diseases, occasion'd by the re∣taining of the Excrements in the Body. SINCE the retaining of the Excrements in the great Guts is that which most fre∣quently makes the Blood lose that good Dis∣position in which our Health consists, and oc∣casions a Cacochymia which we have already intimated to be the Cause of the most stub∣born Diseases; 'twill be convenient to give the Reader a comprehensive View of this fatal Source of Distempers. The Meat which we eat receives its first Change in the Mouth, by the help of the Teeth, which are as it were small natural Knives, to mince it; and of the Spittle, which may not improperly be said to serve instead of Salt, to help its Concoction. From the Mouth 'tis carry'd through a long Chanel, which Anatomists call the Oesaphagus or Gul∣let, into a spacious Cavity, call'd the Sto∣mach, where either by a proper and pecu∣liar Vertue belonging to that Part, or by the help of an Acid, or some other Ferment
which it meets with there, 'tis chang'd into a liquid and greyish Substance, which they call Chyle. Then continuing its Journey downwards, it goes out of the Stomach by its inferiour Orifice, and slips into the up∣per part of the Intestines, to the several Parts of which Anatomists have given different Names, according to certain Remarks and Observations they have made upon these Parts. The first part, which in the dissection of several Animals, they found to be about twelve Inches long, is call'd the Duodenum; that which follows, which some pretend is not so full as the rest, is term'd the Jeju∣num; that which consists of most Folds is call'd the Ileon; and so of the rest. The greatest part of this Intestine is fasten'd about a Part, which by reason of its Folds or Plaits, resembles those Ruffs that were formerly worn about the Neck, and is call'd the Mesen∣tery: Its Figure renders it very apt to retain in a small space a considerable part of this In∣testine, which is variously wound or twisted about its Folds. 'Tis in this part of the Intestines that the most useful part of the Chyle insinuates it self into the Mouths of certain Vessels, call'd the Lactean or Milky, which run along between the Membranes of the Mesentery. And the grosser Particles, which cannot enter into the Branches of those Vessels, continuing their Course, descend from that part of the In∣testines
which is fix'd to the Mesentery, and enter into the great Guts, where they are stopt. This being premis'd, I proceed to shew that the remaining part of the Chyle, which is properly an Excrement, after its entry into the great Guts, infecteth the Blood, by its too long continuance in that part wit a Cacochymia, which, as I intimated before, i the immediate Cause of most of our Indi∣spositions: For since the Excrements are un∣fit for Nourishment, and are of no use in the great Guts, they cannot continue there long without Corruption. Now there can be n Corruption of any Matter without Fermer∣tation, by which some subtil Particles a loosen'd and separated from the corrupte Matter, which meeting with a Porous Sub∣stance, are easily disperst thro' it by the i∣petuosity of their Motion. Thus the Cac∣chymia is at last communicated to the H∣mours; for the Excrements that remain lo in the great Guts are fermented, after whic the Subtil Particles that are separated by th Fermentation, striking against the Sides Coats of the Guts, find the Pores of th Vessels which surround them, fit to receiv them, and slipping into those Passages, com∣municate their Corruption to the Blood th circulates thro' those Vessels, which, co∣tinuing for a considerable time, they inf the whole Mass of Blood; and this Inf∣ction proves the Source of many Diseases.
It may by objected, that it does not seem probable that the Excrements shou'd be cor∣rupted by remaining in the Body, since it has been observ'd, that those which have re∣main'd long in the Body are not so stinking, as those that have lain there only so long as they ought to do naturally; that Stench is the most certain Mark of Corruption, and that consequently the longer they stay they ought to stink the more, if they corrupted pro∣portionably to the time of their continuance in the Guts. But the reason why the Excrements stink less when they have remain'd long in the Guts, is, because their Humidity is dissipated by the continu'd Action of the Heat; for the moist Particles being rarify'd and subtiliz'd by the Heat, exhale from the Mass of the Ex∣crements, and finding, as I observ'd before, the Pores of the Vessels which environ the great Guts, disposed to receive 'em, they slip into these small Passages, and produce an Alte∣ration in all the Blood that passes that way, which makes it degenerate from its natural State; and therefore it will not follow that the Excrements which are retain'd are ex∣empted from Corruption, because their Smell is not so offensive, but that the Heat ha∣ving consum'd all the Moisture that was on their Surface, and having dry'd, or rather burnt it up, they cannot be suppos'd to yield so noisome a Smell as before those Steams were exhal'd.
The same Alteration may be observ'd in a Heap of Dung, which after it has been long expos'd to the Sun, casts forth no bad smell, provided it be not mov'd or a∣gitated; but if it be turn'd or mov'd to the Bottom, it will smoak, and cast forth a more noisome smell than when it was first brought to the Dunghil. After the same manner the Excrements that have remain'd long in the Body, are dry'd up in their Sur∣face, and are scarce offensive to the Smel when expell'd naturally; but when they are agitated by the Bile, as in a Dia∣rhoea or Loosness, their Stench is insup∣portable. It may further be objected, that the Vei and Arteries which environ the great Guts are so inconsiderable, that 'tis hard to conceiv how that little quantity of Blood which pass thro' them, can spoil the whole Mass, because th small Portion of Blood being forthwith carry back from those Vessels into the Trunk the Vena Porta, is freed from all its impur∣ties; and even supposing that there remain some ill quality in it, it may be presum that so small a quantity of ill Blood passi from the Roots of the Vena Porta into th Vena Cava, and from thence to the Heart, so at last mingling with all the Blood of Body, can no more corrupt the whole Ma than a Glass of Water thrown into a Hogshe of Wine can weaken that Spirituous Liquo
For a satisfactory Answer to this Objecti∣on, we must examine whether the Liver is able to purge the Blood of all its Impuri∣ties: now 'tis certain that the Liver alone is not able to perform so great a Task, since the Spleen, Reins, and other parts, are ap∣pointed for the same use, and since the Li∣ver serves properly to purge the Blood on∣ly from the Bile. It will not then follow, when the Blood is infected with corrupt Particles, that slip into the Vessels which environ the great Guts, that in its passage thro' the Liver, it throws off all its Infection upon that En∣tral, because that Part being only proper to separate the Bile, 'tis probable that the Corpuscles which insinuated themselves into the Vessels of the Intestines, being of another Figure than those of the Bile, may pass thro' the Liver with the rest of the Blood, without any Stoppage or Se∣paration. In the second place we must consider whe∣ther the small quantity of bad Blood which passes thro' the minute Vessels of the Gut Colon, is able to communicate its ill qualities to all the Blood of the Body. To this second Difficulty, I answer, that since the Blood circulates thro' the whole Body, 'tis plain that a great quantity must pass in one Day thro' the smallest Vessels, and consequently that the Fermentation of the Excrements which are not unfrequent∣ly
retain'd eight Days, and sometimes lon∣ger, in the great Guts, giving occasion du∣ring all that time, to a continual Efflux of Subtil Particles, which are receiv'd into the Pores of the Vessels of that Intestine, may in many Circulations corrupt so large a quantity of Blood, that it may in a short time infect the whole Mass; And by the same Hypothesis we may give a Natu∣ral and Satisfactory Account how the ve∣nomous Particles that are darted by a poy∣sonous Insect into one of the Capillary Vessels, and that even in the Extremities of the Body, may, in less than an Hour, spread their Infection thro' the whole Mass of the Blood. CHAP. VI. Of the Cure or Removal of the First immediate Cause of Diseases, by lessening the Quantity of the Blood. THERE are two general ways by which we may lessen the quantity of Blood, viz. by preventing its Increase, and by eva∣cuating with all convenient speed, what is al∣ready generated: And to answer these Indi∣cations
there are two great Remedies, viz. Fasting and Bleeding. We may have recourse to the first, when we perceive some inconsiderable Symptoms of Diseases that proceed from the excessive quantity of the Blood; in which case we may content our selves with a very regular Diet, which tho' it has not so quick an Operation as Bleeding, at last it produces the same Effect, and that without occasioning any re∣markable weakness; for Abstinence hinder∣ing the production of new Blood, does, for the same reason, occasion a dissipation of part of that which is already generated; and consequently answers both the Indications that were propos'd. But if the Disease requires a speedy Cure, which cannot be perform'd by Abstinence, as it oftentimes happens, we must have recourse to Bleeding, which by a present Evacuation of the Blood, destroys the Cause of the ap∣proaching Disease. 'Twou'd be ridiculous to object that Bleed∣ing causes greater Alterations in the Body than Abstinence, or a thin Diet, that it occasions a sudden dissipation of the Spirits, and conse∣quently is attended with a much greater de∣cay of Strength; for that Loss will be much sooner and more easily repair'd, than the Dis∣orders that are occasion'd by Diseases.
CHAP. VII. Of the ways to remove the Second immediate Cause of Diseases oc∣casion'd by the too long continu∣ance of the Excrements in the Cavi∣ties of the great Guts. 'THO the Excrements that are retain'd in the great Guts are meer Impurities, and extremely prejudicial to Health, yet we must proceed with Caution in the means we use to expel them. We must not begin with the quickest ways, because they occasion great Disorders in the Body, and it has been too often observ'd, that inconsiderable Distempers have been exaspe∣rated and confirm'd by an over-hasty Cure, and therefore gentle Remedies are both safest and most successful. Instinct has furnish'd Animals with two sure and effectual Expedients to procure the expul∣sion of the Excrements that are retain'd in the Cavities of the great Guts, viz. Clysters and Purgative Potions, which, 'tis probable Men began to use when they observed the great Ad∣vantages which Animals receiv'd from them.
Bleeding and Abstinence, which second the Effects of the former Remedies, are also Lessons which Men owe to the Brutes; and these four Expedients acting either jointly or separately, are the safest and most effectual Means that can be made use of, to hinder the stoppage of the Excrements in the great Guts, and consequently to prevent the Diseases which proceed from such Obstructions. It is easie to conceive how Abstinence or a regular Diet may contribute to the Evacuati∣on of the Excrements, if we consider that those Excrements are the remainders of our Nourishment; That the more we eat and drink, the more Excrements are bred in those Parts, so that the Evacuation of those Ex∣crements wou'd be an endless Work, if the empty'd Guts were presently fill'd with the superfluities of a greedy Stomach. But in the mean time, a Diet which is only prescrib'd for prevention, ought not to be so regular or thin as that which is enjoyn'd to sick Persons. It is known that too nice or sparing a Diet is prejudicial to Health, and is so far from as∣sisting Nature in the Evacuation of the Ex∣crements, that it renders her unable to expel 'em. Besides, the Liquor which serves to dis∣solve the Food, not finding Matter to work upon, acts upon the parts that contain and receive it, by drying and consuming them.
It may be further added, that a Man who takes Physick only for prevention, does not abstain from Labour and Exercise, and there∣fore stands in need of Nourishment to repair the expence of his Spirits. Wherefore, to prevent Diseases, one ought only to fast moderately; at the same time he ought to avoid as much as he can, eating in Company, because People are usually wont to eat a little more than is necessary; and be∣sides, he ought to chuse such Aliments as will leave but few Excrements in the Body; and especially he must take care never to eat to satiety. The second Expedient we propos'd to facili∣tate the Passage of the Excrements, is Bleeding, which is doubtless one of the best Methods that Nature cou'd suggest to Animals; for it is cer∣tain, that besides that there is no Remedy which depends more absolutely upon the Pleasure of the Person who either orders or performs it, so there is none which in most Cases gives more speedy relief to the Patient. Every Surgeon knows how useful Bleeding is to put a stop to Defluxions, and the fal∣ling down of Humours, which are always apt to fall upon wounded Parts, how effe∣ctual it is to dissolve large Tumours, with which Wounds are frequently accompany'd; how powerfully it stops the inordinate Flux of Blood in the Wounds of the Vessels; and both Surgeons and Midwives know how helpful it is to facilitate so difficult a
Work. Our Business at present is to en∣quire how it may contribute to the Expulsi∣on of the Excrements out of the Cavities of the great Guts. The Expulsion of the Excrements retain'd in the Cavities of the great Guts, is perform'd chiefly by the Contraction of its moving Fi∣bres, assisted by those of the Muscles of the lower Belly, and by the continual In∣spiration which obliges the Diaphragma to press all the Guts. All these Actions are perform'd by means of the Animal Spi∣rits, which upon such Occasions flow plenti∣fully to the Parts which are the Organs of these Actions. Now these Spirits are conti∣nually dissipated, and that expence must be repair'd by the Blood of which they are com∣pos'd, provided there be a reasonable quanti∣ty in the Vessels which are appointed to contain it; for when there is a Redun∣dancy of Blood, the Spirits are as it were suffocated and drown'd in the abundance of their Matter; so that the best Office we can do to Nature on such Occasions, is, by Bleed∣ing, to reduce the Mass of Blood to a mode∣rate quantity, in order to ease her of an un∣necessary Burthen which obstructs the liberty of her Actions. Bleeding ought always to precede Purgations when both these Remedies are indicated by the signs of a Redundancy, excessive Heat, or Corruption of the Blood: For we find by Experience that Purgatives operate both more
gently and effectually, when the Vessels are empty'd, and the excessive heat of the Blood allay'd, and its Depravation corrected by Bleeding. 'Tis further observable, that we ought rather to bleed early in the Morning, than at any other Hour of the Day; and that when we are oblig'd to have recourse to this Remedy in very hot Weather, we ought to be let Blood before the Rising, or af∣ter the Setting of the Sun; and in very cold Weather, at Noon: But, in the general, we ought to avoid Bleeding as much as we can, when the Season is either excessively hot or cold; for 'tis certain that Bleeding is always attended with better Success when these Cautions are observ'd than when they are neglected, With respect to the Age of the Patient, we ought to bleed Infants less frequently, and to take less Blood from them than from other Persons, because a great part of their Blood is consum'd in the Nourishment and Growth of their Body in all its Dimensions: So that from six Weeks or two Months after the birth of an Infant, which is the time at which we may begin to let him Blood, if there be a pressing Occasion, to the Age of five or six Years, I wou'd not take away more than from three to six Ounces of Blood: From six to ten or twelve Years, you may take six or eight Ounces: From twelve to fifteen, and so to fifty, you must
observe the Signs of Repletion, and the Strength of the Patient, and accordingly you may take away from nine to twelve or fif∣teen Ounces of Blood. After fifty Years of Age, we must be more cautious and moderate both as to the frequen∣cy of Bleeding, and the quantity of Blood we take away, for fear of causing too great a dis∣sipation of the Spirits, which from that Age to extreme old Age are daily decaying both in Quantity and Quality. The visible Signs of a Redundancy of Blood in the Vessels, are the large or frequent Eva∣cuations of it by the Nose, or other parts of the Body, the swelling or distension of the Veins, Boils, Pimples, or other Eruptions, fre∣quent Ebullitions or Flushings towards the Skin, Erysipela's, Inflammations of the Eyes and Throat, a continual desire to Sleep, and a Weariness and Heaviness of the whole Body, not occasion'd by any Labour or vio∣lent Exercise. When you perceive all, or most of those Symptoms, and when they continue for some time, you must immediately open a Vein, and take away a large quantity of Blood; for the superfluous Blood which is not employ'd in the Nourishment of the Body if it be not e∣vacuated, will soon putrefy, and occasion a Fever, Obstructions in the small Passages of the Intestines, or an Accumulation of Hu∣mours in some part of the Body.
In fine, that we may make right use of Bleeding, we ought to consider how the Pati∣ent usually bears it; for those who undergo it easily, may be let Blood oftener, and more plen∣tifully than those who cannot bear it without trouble and difficulty. Thus one who commonly finds himself weak or faint after Bleeding, ought rather to Bleed twice, and in small quanti∣ties, than to put himself in danger of fainting or swooning away, by a large Evacuation: For 'tis certain that Fainting and Swooning do extremely disturb the whole Oeconomy of the Body, notwithstanding the ridiculous Opinion of those who imagine that Bleeding can never be effectual, unless it be continu'd till the Patient faint away. Bleeding without necessity, that is, when there is no Superfluity to be voided, no excess of Heat to be allay'd, and no Putrefaction to be corrected, robs Nature of the pure Blood, which is necessary for the Nourishment of the Body, and the production of Spirits, which are the principal Instruments of the Soul in all its Actions. 'Tis plain from hence, that after such unnecessary Evacuations, Nature acts slowly and feebly, that the Entrails are heated, and that all the Parts are dry'd up, which makes way for a long Train of Dis∣eases. It is not therefore pertinent to use Reme∣dies at all times for the preservation of our Health: But 'tis necessary before we take 'em, that our Instinct shall let us know the necessity of 'em by the presages of some future Distem∣per.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Signs by which Instinct makes every particular Person foresee most of his Diseases. THE most usual Symptoms of an ap∣proaching Distemper, are a Weariness and Heaviness of all the Body, without ha∣ving been fatigu'd by any violent Exer∣cises. A Yellowness all over the Body. An Erysipela, or Ulceration all over the Skin. The Itch or Scab. Boils or Inflammations in divers parts. A sudden pining away, or leanness of all the Body, and of the Face. Wandering and frequent Rheumatical Pains, accompany'd with irregular Shiverings. An almost continual desire to Sleep, but chiefly after Eating; or, on the other hand want of Sleep, or an interruption of Sleep by frightful Dreams and vain Fears. An unaccountable Dulness and Melancho∣ly, which will not give way to any sort of Pleasure. Nocturnal Sweating.
Frequent Pains of the Head, Vertigo's, and a Numness of the Part when one puts on his Hat. A Redness all over the Face. A languishing and sinking, or an unusual shining of the Eyes, a Tincture of Yellow or Black on the Eye-lids. Bleeding at the Nose, or any other Part of the Body. A Singing or Hissing Noise in the Ears. Redness or Dryness of the Cheeks and Lips. Yawning, and involuntary Sighs. Little Whitish Ulcers on the Palate, and in all the inside of the Mouth. The Clamminess or Foulness of the Tongue. Dryness of the Throat, especially in the Morning; unless the excess of the foregoing Day be the cause of it. Kernels about the Ears, Necks, and Arm-Pits; and painful Tumours in the Groyne. Stinking Breath, not proceeding from any Corruption of the Teeth, or from any Ulcer or Impostume in the Mouth. Loss of Appetite, or a rising of the Stomach against Meat. Vomitting of sweet, bitter, or salt Water, especially in a Morning. Rheums or Defluxions, a Cough and Diffi∣culty of Breathing, without a sharp Pain of the Breast, but rather proceeding from Oppres∣sion or Stoppage.
The Distension and Swelling of the Belly, with a Noise and Griping in the Guts; and small Loosenesses which return fre∣quently. A Hardness and Heaviness in the Stomach, as if it were a great Stone; and a trouble∣some Sensation, as if the Belly were squeez'd with a Cross-Bar. Piles or Emerods of long continuance and painful. Great Heat in the Palms of the Hands. A Swelling of the Veins in the Face, and in all the Extremities of the Body. All these Symptoms, and many others, of which every one may have had Experience, are so many signs to give us notice that our Health is in danger of yielding to the Insults of a Disease, if we do not take care to sup∣port it. The Inquiry wou'd be more curious than necessary, to examine for what Reasons those Symptoms give us notice of approaching Distempers; for as it is sufficient for a Pi∣lot to have a Needle touch'd with a Load-Stone, and to know that it turns always towards a certain Pole, without being oblig'd to know the natural Cause of so surprizing a Phaeno∣menon, so 'tis also enough for any Body to know that the signs of which we have spo∣ken, are so many Fore-runners of Distem∣pers, without troubling himself to examine particularly why every one of these Sym∣ptoms is an effect of this general Cause;
wherefore we are forewarn'd sometimes by some of them, and sometimes by others; sometimes by one alone, and sometimes by many: But it being generally known that one or many of 'em, or this and that Sym∣ptom, are certain Marks of a Depravation of the Health, we may chuse either to wait till the Disease appears, and afterwards cure it with difficulty, or to prevent it easily be∣fore it is form'd: Now 'tis most certain that a Man shou'd rather be his own Physician, while the Disease is yet unform'd, than to wait till it appear, that he may avoid fall∣ling into those Extremities to which it may reduce the stoutest Heart, by excess of Pain, impatient uneasiness under the Cure, and perpetual fear of Death. From this Principle we may infer that 'tis not only unnecessary, but even dangerous to take Physick when we are not troubl'd with any of those Symptoms, because nothing that is able to cause an Alteration in the Body can be taken without making some Impres∣sion on it, either good or bad: For Exam∣ple; the Food which we take in too great a quantity, or which is of hard Digestion, engenders a great quantity of Crudities and Excrements, which are, as we have already intimated, the Cause of most Diseases. Purgative Medicines taken without neces∣sity, drive the useful Liquors or Juices to∣wards the places where they are expell'd, and not finding any that are superfluous or
deprav'd, weakens the Fibres of the Inte∣stines, Veins, and Arteries, by unnecessary Irritations, and produces an unusual Heat in the whole Body. When we are forewarn'd of Diseases, either the Symptoms are many and pressing, or few and inconsiderable: When they are many and our Instinct seems to redouble its Ad∣monitions, we must lose no time, but with∣out having regard either to the Season of the Year, the Age of the Moon, or the Tem∣perature of the Air, take such Physick as we think necessary to preserve us from fal∣ling into any Disease. But if these Sym∣ptoms are but small, and few in Number, since we know by Experience that Purga∣tives work more mildly and easily in a Tem∣perate Season, as in the Spring and Har∣vest, than during the excessive Heat of the Summer, and great Cold of the Winter; when the Moon is in her Wane or Declination, than during her Increase; in Dry rather than Moist Weather, and that they weaken the Body much more in the Dog-Days, the Sol∣stices and Equinoxes, than at other times; we may defer the use of Physick for some Days, that we may take it at a time when all those Circumstances, or most of them will be in a condition to make it succeed the better. 'Tis commonly believ'd that only weak and sickly Persons ought to take care to preserve their Health, that those who are of a strong
or healthy Constitution, ought not to trou∣ble themselves about it, because Nature can in strong Bodies remove and destroy, by its own Force, the Causes of all their Distem∣pers; and because Physick disturbs the Oecono∣my of our Body much more than it is of use to support it; since we see by Experi∣ence that most of those imaginary sick Per∣sons, who spend all their time in the Pre∣servation of their Health, die sooner than those who never have recourse to Physick but when they are absolutely forc'd there∣to by some pressing Distemper. I know that it is dangerous to be too fond of Medicines, that is, either to take too much, or too often; but I may venture to affirm, that there is no Man, let him be never so strong and healthy, but has sometimes need of the help of Physick; for as the best Water in the World leaves al∣ways some Dregs in the Pipes thro' which it passes, which gathering insensibly, Obli∣ges those who stand in need of the Water, to cleanse the Pipes, and to hinder their be∣ing quite stopt; so it is certain that the best Blood that can be imagin'd to flow in a perfectly sound Body, will leave some Dregs and Filth in the Vessels thro' which it pas∣ses to all the Parts of the Body: And these Dregs gathering by degrees in the Vessels, hinders the free Motion of the Blood, the interruption of which occasions those premo∣nitory Disorders which we call Presages of Instinct; and in this Case 'tis plain we ought
to take Physick to prevent Sickness: For it happens at last, that most of those obsti∣nate People, who despise all sorts of Reme∣dies under pretext of the healthiness of their Constitution, are attack'd with Diseases which are so much the more troublesome and dan∣gerous, as their Health seem'd to be perfect; so that oftentimes their Aversion to Physick costs 'em their Life. And tho' they escape, they must expect to suffer all the Incommodities of a tedious languishing Distemper, and will never be able to recover what they have lost. CHAP. IX. Of Clysters and Medicines. AS for the way of purging by Clysters, 'tis certain that they may be us'd at all times when we find any Symptoms of the Stoppage or retention of the Excrements in the great Guts; for it being impossible to make these Injections ascend higher than the Intestine call'd Caecum, because of the Ob∣stacles they meet with there, they cannot be suppos'd to occasion a great Irritation in that Passage, whose Structure is not so sine as that of the small Guts, unless they be impregnated with very violent Purgatives.
We must not make the taking of Cly∣sters a setl'd Practice or Custom, as many People do, who wou'd fansie themselves sick if they shou'd omit 'em two Days; for the too frequent use of Clysters, makes Nature lazy, and the laziness of Nature is the fatal Cause of many Diseases. Yet I will not pretend to censure those who bleed and purge constantly in the Spring and in Autumn, especially if they be young, vigorous, and of a full Body, if they eat much, or live a sedentary Life, without Motion or Exercise, or if they are already habituated to that Custom; for it is certain that many Dis∣eases may be prevented by this means, and that one exposeth himself almost infallibly to very dangerous Distempers, by interrupting this practice after he has once accustom'd him∣self thereto. It may also be proper to take Physick after a long Journey, or extraordinary Labour; and, to conclude, we ought always to purge once a Year, if our Instinct discovers any Sym∣ptoms of a future Disease; for thereby we may prevent the great Collection of Excrements in the great Guts, where they are always apt to stick, unless they be expell'd by the irrita∣tion occasion'd by purging Remedies.
CHAP. X. Of the way of using Medicines in Order to the Preservation of Health. SINCE Health is no less preserv'd by the right use of Meat and Drink than by Medicines that are able to remove the Causes of our Distempers, the Reader must remember what we hinted about Diet, that we must avoid all manner of Excess, and ab∣stain from all sorts of crude Aliments, and such as are apt either to make the Belly too loose or too costive; that every Man is able to make a right choice and Judgment of the Medicines that are most proper for him, and that after he has found some that are agree∣able to those Rules, he ought to prefer them before any Remedies that may be recommend∣ed to him by others. I will not repeat what I have already said about Diet, or the use of Aliments, which do not deserve the Name of Medicines, but briefly consider the two general ways of at∣taining to Health, viz. Bleeding and Pur∣ging. And since I have also deliver'd my Opini∣on concerning Bleeding, and the Rules that
ought to be observ'd in that case, I shall content my self with referring the Reader to what I have already said on that Subject, and only treat of the use of Laxatives, or Purging Medicines. 'Tho' the Purgatives of which Clysters are compos'd, cannot much disorder the Body, yet there are some Measures to be taken in order to the right use of these Remedies. First, they ought to precede the use of such Purgatives as are to be taken by the Mouth, because they facilitate their Operation by pro∣curing the Expulsion of the Excrements that are retain'd in the great Guts, which wou'd oppose their Passage, and that of the Excre∣mentitious Humours which they draw from the Stomach, small Guts, Veins and Arte∣ries; for as in a Woodmonger's-Yard when People come to buy Wood for Fuel, when one Pile is sold, and the Woodmonger de∣signs to sell another, since it wou'd be a need∣less trouble to climb up to the top of the Pile to serve every single Customer, he over∣turns the whole Pile, by drawing out five or six pieces of Wood at the bottom; the same effect is produc'd by Clysters, which, by voiding the greatest part of the Excre∣ments and Filth retain'd in the Cells of the Intestines, facilitate the Operation of purging Potions, which finding the Passage free, are easily able to carry off the Matter they have squeez'd out of the Arteries, and the slimy and gross Humours which they bring from the
Stomach, and from the small Guts, and be∣sides, expel the rest of the Gross Excrements which they find lodg'd in the Cells of the great Guts. We must further observe, that the Operati∣on of Clysters is very irregular; for in some Persons a Clyster of Oxycrate will procure wonderful Evacuations, which in others wou'd be altogether unprofitable; and in some the strongest Clysters will not produce the least effect: And that which operates well at one time, will not work at all at ano∣ther; wherefore we must learn to prepare se∣veral sorts, observing, nevertheless, to chuse always such as are mild and simple rather than such as are violent, and hard to be pre∣par'd. As for Purgatives that are taken by the Mouth, 'tis better to take them by way of Infusion than in Substance, that we may spare the parts thro' which they must pass, a double Labour; for besides, that they must suffer the Opera∣tion of the Medicines that are taken in Sub∣stance, they must also unfold and disentan∣gle the Particles in which their Purgative Vertue consists, from many others of which they are compos'd; whereas the Liquor in which they are infus'd, imbibes only their Purgative Particles, and, by reason of its flui∣dity, infinuates it self more easily into the small Passages of the Body, than the gross Sub∣stance can be suppos'd to do.
In order to the right use of these Medi∣cines, there are four Observations to be made. The First is, to take 'em by degrees, that is, to begin with the most Mild and Simple: But if their Weakness hinder their Operati∣on, we must augment the Dose, or take a stronger Medicine, till such time as the Eva∣cuation be made proportionable to the Sym∣ptoms we perceive of a greater or smaller fulness or redundancy of Humours. The Second Observation concerns the quick∣ness of their Passage, which is of great im∣portance, because they cannot remain long in the Body without occasioning a violent Irri∣tation of the parts they touch, which may be attended with very dangerous Consequen∣ces; for a purging Medicine has almost the same Operation on the parts of the Body thro' which it passes, as a Spur has upon a Horse; because as the Horse goes faster when the Rider spurs him but once, and kicks and winces when he keeps the Spur constantly in his Sides, so the Purgative by its first Irri∣tations, moves the Parts thro' which 'tis car∣ry'd, to expel the Excrements that are con∣tain'd in 'em; but when it stays too long, it enflames the Parts, and renders the Hu∣mours hot and dry, and consequently unfit for Evacuation; so that its Operation is both inconsiderable, and extremely troublesome to the Patient.
To avoid this Inconveniency in the use of Laxatives, they ought always to be accom∣pany'd with some Vehicle, that is to say, a Substance fit to insinuate it self into the closest parts of the Body, notwithstanding all the Obstructions it may meet with in the Parts that are appropriated for separating the Humours, as the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and all the Entrals. These Vehicles may be made of Decocti∣ons impregnated with the subtil Parts of cer∣tain Plants that are proper to slip into the smallest Pores of the Capillary Vessels, as are, for Example, the Decoctions of the Roots of wild Succory, Strawberry-Leaves, Dog-Grass, Agrimony, Sorrel, Chervil, and many other Herbs which are endu'd with the same Vir∣tues. Instead of these Decoctions, you may use the Juice of a Limon, or Orange, Verjuice, White-Wine, Whey, and many other Reme∣dies, which every one may chuse from his own private Experience, to facilitate the Ope∣ration of Purgatives. The Third Rule to be observ'd in the use of purging Medicines, is, to chuse such as do not make you costive after the use of 'em; for this is the surest Mark that the Physick is proportionated to the Strength of the Pa∣tient on whom it works, especially since 'tis but too frequently confirm'd by Experience, that the more violent the Medicines are, the Patient is the more costive after the use of
them. One might inferr from hence, that the same thing happens on these Occasions to the moving Fibres of the Intestines, as to Per∣sons who being forc'd to undergo involunta∣ry Labour, are so wearied and jaded with their forc'd Exercise, that they work no lon∣ger than while the Rod is over their Heads; so the Fibres of the Intestines having been too roughly and frequently shaken by the Operation of the Medicine, are so weary'd with these forc'd Contractions, that they cannot afterwards perform the Motions that are ne∣cessary for the Expulsion of the Excrements which gather daily in their Cavities; so that we are obliged either to accustom our selves to Physick, or, if we neglect to use it, must expect a new Accumulation of Excrements, which will soon after be the Cause of a new Disease. To conclude; The last Observation in the use of Purgatives relates particularly to those weak Medicines that produce little or no Effect, when they are often repeated in a little time; for the moving Fibres of the Intestines are soon accustom'd to the Impres∣sion of such Remedies, and become perfect∣ly insensible of such feeble Irritations: Just as the Organs of the Senses are not sensible of the Impression of these Objects to which they are accustom'd. In this case we must change the Remedies, because even the weak∣est Purgatives remaining in the Body, cannot but occasion some disturbance in it.
CHAP. XI. Of Purgatives, and how they operate: Of the Time and Manner of using them. IT is certain that the Operation of Purga∣tives destroys the most immediate Causes of the greatest part of our Diseases, whether they be taken inwardly, or injected by way of Clysters. However, it must be acknowledg'd, that the way of administring 'em occasions some difference in their Operation; for since Cly∣sters reach no further than the great Guts, they can only facilitate the Evacuation of the Excrements that are retain'd in those Intestines; whereas, when they are taken in∣wardly, they not only cause the same Irri∣tations in all the Parts which they touch, and consequently by augmenting their Natural Motion, hasten the expulsion of the Matter which they contain; but many of their Par∣ticles mingle with the Chyle in the Vessels which carry it to the Heart, in which, as well as in the Arteries, they excite divers Fermentations, that promote the separation of the different Particles of the Blood, in the several Parts of the Body where they are
usually separated from its Mass, according to the disposition that each of those Reme∣dies has, to put certain parts of the Blood in Motion, rather than others. Thus we may observe that a visible Fer∣mentation or Ebullition is produc'd in certain Liquors, when they are mix'd with other Fluids that are dispos'd to put 'em in Mo∣tion, whereas they remain undisturb'd when they are mixt with others. And from the Operation of Purgatives on different parts of the Blood, there arises a distinction of Names: For Example; some are call'd simply Purgatives, which are again divided into Hydragogues, Cholagogues, Melana∣gogues, and Phlegmagogues; or Medicines that purge Watery Humours, Choler, Melancho∣ly, and Phlegm: Others are call'd Emeties, Sudorifics, Errhines, &c. Now those Names are very fitly impos'd, either with respect to the Parts of the Body thro' which they pro∣cure the Evacuations, or to the parts of the Blood which they are particularly apt to put in Motion. From hence we may observe, that all those Remedies are endu'd with one common Property, that is, to excite a Motion in the Blood; and that their different ways of Ope∣rating proceed only from the different Fi∣gure or Contexture of their Parts; for by reason of their peculiar Configuration, they are more easily admitted into certain parts of the Body than into others, and by the
Irritation they occasion in the Parts, they pro∣mote the Separation which is perform'd there, of some particular Excrements from the Blood. And upon this Score we may reasonably say, that they are proper to purge such and such Parts; as for Example, such as are proper to purge the Liver, we call Hepatics; and those that are peculiarly adapted to the Spleen, are term'd Splenetics. Besides, according to the various situation or contexture of their Parts, they are dispo∣sed to agitate Certain Particles of the Blood, to which they unite sooner than to others: And upon this account we may say that such a Medicine is proper to purge such a Hu∣mour. This Observation is confirm'd by Experience, particularly what relates to Hydragogues, or Medicines that purge Watery Humours; for the Evacuation of Serosities is much more sensible than that of the other Particles which compose the Blood, because that which the Purgative drives into the Intestines, whether it be separated by the Glands of their inward Membrane, or squeez'd out of the Biliary and Pancreatic Ducts, being mixt with the Slime and Excrements which it finds in the Inte∣stines, it is very hard to determine what Humour hath been chiefly wrought upon or expell'd by the Purgative Medicine.
CHAP. XII. Of the Purgatives that ought to be used for the preventing of Diseases. PƲRGATION by Stool ought to be preferr'd before all other Evacuations, be∣cause 'tis the most natural and ordinary way, and that which best answers the design we ought to have in order to the removal of the Cause of Diseases, speedily to expel the Ex∣crements that are stopt in the great Guts, and to correct the ill Quality of the Blood, which is the Consequence thereof. Nevertheless Emetics or Vomits may be useful to some Persons when they are troubl'd with an inclination to Vomit, such as those who have a strong and large Breast. And o∣thers may profitably use Sudorifics, namely, those who are Choleric, and whose Pores are very open. Diuretics, or Medicines that provoke Urine, are proper for those who feel a heaviness and heat in their Kidneys, such as are subject to the Gravel, live unmarried, and abstain from the use of Women. Some may make use of such as occasion Spitting, and others of those which expel the Excrements by the Nose.
Those who have a weak Breast, and wet Brain, may find benefit by the use of these Re∣medies, provided they have no Polypus, or other Impediment in the Nostrils. In a Word, every Man ought to be directed by his own Ex∣perience, and either have recourse to, or ab∣stain from such sorts of Evacuations, according to the good or bad Effects which he finds they produce upon him. For Example; a Person who is apt to Vo∣mit without any considerable trouble, when he finds his Stomach over-charg'd, will re∣ceive greater benefit by a Vomit than by or∣dinary Purgations; whereas those who can∣not Vomit without an unusual disturbance, ought rather to use Simple Laxatives, least the Fibres of the Stomach be weaken'd by such over-violent Motions. Others who labour under Faintness or Weariness, provided they be not natural∣ly too dry or lean, will find themselves eased if after Bleeding they take a Medicine to procure a moderate Sweat. The People in the Levant by this means prevent a great number of Diseases. Those who are troubl'd with Pains in their Kidneys, and whose Urine is of a high Co∣lour, or thick, may, after the use of cooling Remedies, have recourse to Medicines that provoke Urine, either alone, or mixed with Laxatives.
Those who are naturally inclin'd to Spit∣ting, and have a moist Brain, may both pre∣vent and cure their Distempers by raising a Salivation by the use of Remedies that are proper to produce that Effect. In fine, every Man ought to consult his own Experience, and study the Constitution of his Body; and afterwards use those Re∣medies which he finds to be most useful and agreeable to him. There is one important Rule to be ob∣serv'd in the administring of all those Re∣medies, and that is, To begin always with the gentlest and most simple. It is certain that when we use Remedies meerly for preventi∣on, we ought to be our own Physicians; for since the bare Presages or Signs of a future Disease cannot be suppos'd to have de∣priv'd us of the use of our Reason, we may chuse those Medicines which upon trial have formerly succeeded, and which cannot be so well known by a Stranger as by our selves. Besides, it ought to be observ'd, that there is nothing more various or uncertain than the Operation of Purgatives on Humane Bodies. Some Persons are violently purg'd by weak Medicines, when a stronger Remedy wou'd not produce the least effect upon 'em: There are others on whom mild Physick will not work at all, and even the strongest Medi∣cines are scarce effectual: On the other hand, some are so easily purg'd, that a Decoction
of Herbs will suffice; and to others half an Hours Conversation in an Apothecary's Shop: Some are purg'd by Strawberries, Cherries, Gooseberries, Peaches, Pears, &c. Some by sour Milk, fresh Pork, &c. and others by a moderate Entertainment with jovial Compa∣nions; for Mirth contributes as much to the Passage of the Excrements, as Melancholy or Sadness does to their Stoppage in the Guts. Some are purg'd by a simple cooling De∣coction when they begin first to drink it; and in others Clysters produce a plentiful Evacuation, tho' they are hardly mov'd by internal Medicines. To conclude; there is nothing less regu∣lar than the Operation of Purges on different Bodies; and it is impossible for the most ex∣pert Physician in the World to discover this variety in every particular Person: And there∣fore, as I intimated before, we ought to stu∣dy our selves, that we may be able to chuse out of so great a number of Remedies that have been often try'd, those that are most agreeable to our Bodies. The gentlest Purges, and those that are most agreeable to our Constution, are of two sorts, viz. some are brought to us from For∣reign Countries, aud others grow in our own Climate. The safest foreign Purgatives are Senna, Cassia, Tamarinds, Rubarb, Manna, &c. and the mildest that grow in our own Climate are Roses, Peach-Flowers, Violets, our Garden Ru∣burb,
the great and small Centory, Briony, A∣sarabacca, Mint, Bawm, Spanish Broom, Thyme, Polypody of the Oak, Black Maiden-Hair, Ce∣terach, Wall Rue, Betony, Lettice, Purslane, Sorrel, Chervil, Black Hellebore, the Tops of Hops, the Yellow-flower'd Flagg or Flower∣de-Luce, the Bark of Elder, the Black Plum or Prune, Wallwort, wild Cucumbers, and many other Plants. You may press out the Juice of these Herbs, or infuse 'em, or make 'em up into Powders, Syrups, Conserves, Tablets, Pills, Troches, or any other Form what∣soever. Besides, tho' I prefer simple Remedies be∣fore such as are compounded, I do not pre∣tend to blame the use of certain Mixtures that are common in Pharmacy; for the Ad∣dition of Sugar, or some other such Ingre∣dient, cannot take away the Vertue of the Simples. In the mean time, 'tis certain that we ought to abstain from all violent Remedies, espe∣cially Chymical Preparations, when we only take Physick for prevention. I am persuaded that the most Simple Re∣medies are the best, and that all the Secret lies in the right use of them; for as the Colours upon a Painter's Pallet are of themselves on∣ly fit to make a confus'd and disagreeable Mixture, so Medicines, especially Purgatives, are in their own Nature only fit to weaken the Patient, and to cause a violent Motion in his Blood: But, on the other hand, as
the same Colours placed upon a Cloth by an Ingenious Painter, make a very valuable and beautiful Picture, so the same Remedies, tho they are contrary to Nature when mis∣apply'd, may assist her to overcome a Di∣stemper when they are rightly administer'd. CHAP. XIII. The Solution of certain Difficulties that deter most Persons from ma∣king use of Purging Remedies for the preventing of Distempers. THOSE who refuse to admit of Purga∣gatives, excuse their Obstinacy by one of those three Reasons which shall be pro∣pos'd and answer'd in this Chapter. OBJECT. I. Against Clysters and Purges: YOU advise me, Sir, says one to his Physician, to take a Clyster, or a Purging Medicine, but I have no occasion for such Remedies; I go daily and regularly to stool, and why shou'd I be tormented with Cly∣sters and Purgatives?
I answer, That tho a Man goes daily and regularly to stool, yet it does not follow that he ought to be exempted from Purgation either by Clysters and Medicines, since 'tis frequently observ'd that those who go natu∣rally to stool every Day, do, notwithstand∣ing, perceive by the above-mention'd Sym∣ptoms, that there are some Excrements left behind in those Passages which serve for their Expulsion: Now 'tis plain that their Excrements must be evacuated, to prevent the Diseases that proceed from the Corru∣ption of these Impurities. If any Person desire to be satisfy'd how when a Man goes daily and regularly to stool, any Excrements can remain in the great Guts; The Answer is easie, if we remember what has been already said of the Structure of the great Intestines, the Parts of which are as it were so many Bags or Cavities fasten'd at certain distances to those Intestines. Now 'tis sufficient for the Passage of the greatest part of the Excrements which are sepa∣rated from our daily Nourishment that the middle Part of the Gut be open and free; but in the mean time, some of the Excrements may slip into the bottom of those Cells or Bags, and by degrees fill up their Cavity; so that at last the middle Pas∣sage may be almost entirely stopt by those distended Bags; and 'tis then that we per∣ceive the Signs of an unusual Load and Ob∣struction in those Parts.
This Doctrine may be further illustrated by comparing these Obstructions in the great Gut to the Stoppages that happen frequently in the Conduits that are made to convey the Filth from our Streets; for the Dirt sticks by degrees to the sides of the Pipes, and fills up all the Holes and Cavities it meets with, tho' it does not immediately hinder even some of the thickest Mud to slip away; so that unless they be sometimes scour'd by a pretty violent Shower, that may force a great quantity of Water into the Cavities of the Pipes, and by the Rapidity of its Cur∣rent, carry off the Filth; they must be open'd from time to time, and the stagnant Dirt loosen'd, and driven forwards into the Common Sink, by the help of Convenient Instruments. The same Observation may be apply'd to the great Guts, both with respect to the Excrements that are detain'd in its Cells, and which pass daily through its Cavity; for when a great quantity of em is gather'd in these Bags or Cells, and begin to corrupt there, the pressure of these distended Cells upon the neighbouring Parts, and the cor∣rupted Corpuscles which slip into the Ves∣sels that environ them, produce the Symptoms of an approaching Indisposition tho a con∣siderable part of our daily Nourishment having still a free Passage through the Ca∣vity of the Gut, may furnish sufficient Mat∣ter for Stools. 'Tis plain then, that we have need
of Clysters and purging Medicines, to draw the Excrements out of the places where they are stopt; and that consequently tho' we go to stool naturally every Day, we may some∣times stand in need of an artificial Evacua∣tion. OBJECT. II. ANother will perhaps be apt to say, You order me a Clyster, or a purging Medi∣cine, tho' I have not tasted any sort of Nou∣rishment these four or five Days: how can there be any Matter left to be evacuated in a Body so empty as mine must be after so long an Abstinence? But this seeming Difficulty may be very easily answer'd, for when a Man for some Days has been troubl'd with a constant▪ Aversion to all sorts of Nourishment, 'tis an evident sign that there is a great Collection of Impurities in the place where we have made it appear that they are usually apt to stop. Nor will it appear strange that a Per∣son should lose his Appetite when the bot∣tom of the Stomach is drawn downwards by such a Load of Excrements, if we con∣sider that the unusual weight that hangs like a Clog upon the Stomach, may be reasona∣bly suppos'd to produce the same Effect up∣on it as if it were fill'd with a hearty Meal.
So when we advise a Man in that conditi∣on to take Physick, our design is not to eva∣cuate the remainder of his Meat, since we suppose he has fasted for some Days, but to pro∣cure the evacuation of those Impurities which being insensibly stopt and gather'd in those parts, wou'd otherwise occasion those Dis∣orders in the Body, of which I have already discours'd. OBJECT. III. ONE that is troubl'd with a Looseness will perhaps be extremely surpriz'd when he is order'd to take a Clyster, or a purging Medicine, and will be ready to look upon that advice as a sure way to encrease his Distemper, which in his opinion has purg'd him but too thoroughly already, without the assistance of Physick. This Objection will appear as groundless as either of the former, if it be consider'd that a Looseness is usually either the ef∣fect of Indigestion, in which case it ceases af∣ter some time, and hardly requires the use of Remedies; or 'tis a sign that the Excre∣ments are stopt in the great Guts, and then if there be a copious Evacuation, we must re∣cruit Nature, and repair her decay'd Vigour, by good Nourishment taken in small Quan∣tities: On the other hand, if the flux be incon∣siderable,
or if the Patient be frequently troubl'd with a desire to go to Stool, with∣out voiding any thing, since 'tis evident from thence, that the Motion of the Intestines is not sufficient to expel those Impurities that cause such frequent Irritations, we must in the first place by the use of Clysters endea∣vour to dissolve that corrupt and biting Mat∣ter; and afterwards when the Irritation cea∣ses, we must take some Purgative Medicine to expel the remainder of that excrementiti∣ous Matter that may be lodg'd in some pla∣ces, which the Clysters cou'd not reach. OBJECT. IV. Against Bleeding. 'TIS the usual Cant of those who are profest Enemies to Bleeding, that the Blood is the Treasure of Life, and conse∣quently that we ought rather to furnish the enfeebl'd Patient with a fresh supply of that precious Liquor, than to rob him of what he is already possest of. But I must beg those Gentlemen's leave to put 'em in mind, that the Blood can never deserve so noble a Title if it be either deprav'd or redundant: For if it exceeds either in Quantity or Quality, it is so far
from preserving our Health, that it exposes us to the most dangerous Distempers. As our Life is manifestly endanger'd when too large a quantity of Blood is lost, so it is secur'd and supported when a moderate quantity of impure and corrupt Blood is ta∣ken away; however, it must be acknowledg'd that this Evacuation ought always to be per∣form'd with a great deal of Caution, accord∣ing to the Age and Strength of the Patient, the Nature of his Disease, and the Seasons of the Year. And therefore those who are desirous to be their own Physicians, ought to try seve∣veral Remedies, and to make choice of such as produce the same Effects upon them which in the foregoing Chapters are ascrib'd to safe and useful Remedies.
A TREATISE OF Particular Remedies.
THE PREFACE. WHen I form'd the De∣sign of publishing the preceding Treatise, I did not intend to have added a Colle∣ction of particular Remedies, because I look'd upon that as a Subject that had been suffici∣ently handl'd, and even almost wholly exhausted by so many Authors who have compos'd en∣tire Volumes of this Nature. But since I have been desir'd by several Persons whom I wou'd not willingly disoblige, to com∣pleat
my Ʋndertaking by sub∣joining an account of such Re∣medies as I had observ'd to be most esteem'd, and found to be most useful and effectual, I cou'd not deny 'em so small a Favour. And that I might render my Performance in this kind more serviceable to the Public, I thought fit to add some short Reflexions, according to the variety of the Subject.
A TREATISE CONTAINING An Account of the most Simple Re∣medies, and such as are most fre∣quently used for the curing of several Diseases. Of Medicines in General. MEDICINES or Remedies are mix'd Bodies, which, being taken by the Mouth, if they are Inter∣nal, or applied outwardly, if Ex∣ternal, serve to restore our Health, by al∣tering the bad Disposition of our Bodies. They differ both from our usual Food, and from Poyson; the first of which preserves and supports our Health, and the latter de∣stroys it. We ought not to have recourse to Purga∣tives unless the Intestines be stuff'd with clammy and thick Humours, or the Mass of
the Blood be full of salt or bulky Particles, that hinder its Circulation, which may be known by a Hardness or Swelling of the Belly, Drowsiness, Weariness, &c. 'Tis expe∣dient to make use of Clysters some Days before Purgation, that the purging Medicine not meeting with any Obstacles, may operate more strongly and quickly, and occasion less disturbance in the Body. An Ounce, or an Ounce and a half of extracted Cassia dissolv'd in a Glass of Whey, or mixed with an equal quantity of com∣pound Syrup of Apples, moistens and cools the Body, loosens the thick Humours that are lodg'd in the Breast, and helps one to Spit freely. Feeble and weak Persons, such as those who are extremely lean, whom we usually call Phthisical or Consumptive, as also Wo∣men with Child, may be safely purg'd with an Ounce or two of Manna, taken in Veal or Chicken-Broath. When we design to purge, scour and wash away the slimy Matter that sticks in the Intestines, we may profitably use the Juice of Roses, from one Ounce to two. And 'tis also a good Remedy for a Loose∣ness. Rhubarb taken in Substance, from half a Dram to a Dram, purges Choler, helps those that are troubl'd with a Looseness, and serves to kill Worms. It may be also us'd by way of Infusion, from a Dram to half an Ounce, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient.
To evacuate Hydropical Humours, or bring down Women's Monthly Courses, we may use the Root of Briony, from half a Dram to a Dram, or its Juice to half an Ounce. I will not speak of Agaric, Scammony, Ja∣lap, Mirabolans, and Mechoacan, because they operate too violently; nor will I trouble the Reader with an Account of Chymical Medi∣cines, which ought not to be used but with a great deal of Precaution, nor without the Ad∣vice of a Physician. Of Diuretics. DIureticks serve to augment the serosity or fluidity of the Blood, to agitate the Se∣rous, and coagulate the Fibrous Part, and to retard the Course of the Humours. We ought never to use them without an antecedent preparation of the Body by Pur∣gation, least the gross Particles which they a∣gitate, and drive towards the Reins, shou'd breed an Obstruction in those Parts, and oc∣casion a stoppage of Urine. River-Water, Mineral-Waters, and White-Wine, are the mildest opening Medicines we have. The Five great opening Roots, viz. Aspara∣gus, Fennel, Parsley, Smallage, and Butcher's-Broom, provoke Urine, and even sometimes procure Sweating; but I shou'd rather chuse to make use of those which are call'd the les∣ser opening Roots, because they do not occa∣sion
so great an agitation in the Blood, and consequently open a freer Passage to the Se∣rous and Saline Particles. Those Roots are Dogs-Grass, Capers, Eringo, Madder, and Rest∣harrow. You may prepare a Decoction of 'em, adding, if you please, a sufficient quan∣tity of Sal Prunellae. A Spoonful of the Juice of Roses in a little Spanish Wine, or in two or three Spoonfuls of Brandy, is also a very good Remedy for the Colic, occasion'd by the Pain of the Kid∣neys. A Simple Bath of lukewarm Water is Diu∣retical, because it dilates the Passages of the Urine, and augments the Serosity of the Blood. Of Emeticks or Vomits. VOmitting is a contraction of the Fibres of the Stomach, by which the Matter con∣tain'd in that Part is forc'd upwards thro' the Oesophagus or Gullet. Emeticks may be profitably used when the Stomach is burden'd with ill-digested Food, or full of corrupt Humours, in which case we are troubl'd with an aversion to Meat, fre∣quent Reachings, Bitterness in the Mouth, Dimness of Sight, and sometimes with a Li∣enteria, that is, when we void what we eat or Drink by Stool, without any signs of Di∣gestion.
Melancholic or Phthisical Persons ought to abstain from the use of these Remedies, and likewise Women with Child, unless in some cases to hasten their Delivery. A large Draught of warm Water proves E∣metic to those who are naturally enclin'd to Vomiting, because it slackens the Fibres of the Stomach, and agitates the Saline Parti∣cles that are lodg'd in it. Asarabacca taken in Substance, from half a Dram to a Dram, provokes Vomiting; but if it be infus'd in Wine, you may take from one Dram to three. Black Hellebore taken from four to eight Grains, purges upwards and downwards somewhat violently; and, ac∣cording to the Opinion of Paracelsus, cures the Apoplexy, Gout, Dropsie, and Epilepsie. Of Sudorifics and Diaphoretics. WE call a Medicine Sudorific when it procures Sweating, and Diaphoretic, when it works by insensible Transpiration. They are both endu'd with a power to drive the Serosities outwards, by putting the Mass of Blood in Motion. Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, Butter-Burr, Car∣duus Benedictus, wild Marjoram, Penyroyal, Thyme, Sage, Sweet Marjoram, Bay-Berries, Corn Poppies, Treacle, and Brandy, are Sudo∣rifics. The Dose of the Roots is from half an Ounce to an Ounce and a half to each Quart of the Decoction; and the Dose of the Leaves is a handful.
The Shavings of Harts-Horn, from one Dram to two, is both Sudorific and Cordial; as are also those of Ivory, from a Dram to a Dram and a half. They must be taken in two Ounces of Carduus and Baum-Water; and the Patient must be kept very warm in Bed. Of Sneezing Medicines and Errhina. SNeezing being occasion'd by the Irritation communicated from the inferiour Mem∣brane to the Dura Mater, by the mediation of the Olfactory Nerves, causes a Contracti∣on by the reflux of the Spirit into the Car∣nous Fibres; so that the Motion of the Spi∣rits being almost entirely stopt for some time after the Pressure is over, they run most im∣petuously into the freest and openest Passa∣ges, which are those that are bestow'd upon the Muscles of Respiration. And therefore when one sneezes after the Contraction is over, he finds always some difficulty in Breathing. From hence it may be inferr'd, that such Remedies as provoke Sneezing are very useful in the Obstructions of the Substance of the Brain, because the Dura Mater pressing the Spirits, communicates to them a sufficient de∣gree of Motion, to make way for them∣selves. The most common Sneezing Medicines are Betony, Tobacco, Pellitory of Spain, Sage, Sweet
Marjoram, Ginger, and all other Plants which abound with a sharp Salt. These Remedies must be avoided in the Epilepsie, Convulsions, and in the Hysterical Passion, because they encrease those Distem∣pers which consist in a disorderly Motion of the Spirits. Errhina are Medicines which bring forth mucous and impure Humours from the Nose without Sneezing. They may be made of the Juice or Decoctions of those Plants which I have already recommended for Sneezing. Of Incrassating or Thickening Medicines. THey are such as fix and put a stop to the inordinate Motion in the Mass of the Blood, occasion'd by the eating of such things as are full of sharp and volatil Salts. Decoctions made of the Roots of Succory, Sorrel, Marsh-Mallows, Water-Lily, &c. are of this nature. The Dose of the Roots is an Ounce or an Ounce and a half to each Quart of the Decoction. The Leaves of Purslain, Lettice, Sorrel, and of wild and Garden Succory, produce the same effect, if a handful of all together be added to each Quart of the Ptisan or De∣coction. The four greater Cold Seeds, viz. Cucum∣bers, Gourds, Citruls, and Melons, and the four lesser Cold Seeds, viz. Lettice, Purslan, and both
sorts of Endive, produce the same effect. The Dose of all together may amount to half an Ounce in Emulsions. They are useful in heat of Urine. The Juice of Limons, from half an Ounce to an Ounce, may also be reckon'd an In∣crassating Remedy. Of Narcotics, or Medicines that procure Sleep. THey quiet the unusual and preternatural Motion of the Muscles, and the vio∣lent Convulsions of the Nervous Parts, by Procuring a peaceable and quiet Sleep. When they reach the Mass of the Blood, they unite themselves to the Spirits, and hinder both their Action and Separation; for these Medicines are compos'd of Volatile Sulphurs mixt with Terrestrial and Oily Particles. They are frequently given to those who are Delirious or Light-headed; as also to such as are troubl'd with violent and obstinate Evacuations. The four Cold Seeds, either greater or lesser, taken from a Dram to half an Ounce, in any convenient Liquor, may be used for this purpose. The Roots of Henbane applied externally, by way of Cataplasm, may also serve to procure Sleep. Opium may be also taken, from half a Grain to two or three Grains.
Of Styptics or Astringents. BInding or Astringent Medicines dissipate the Serous Particles of the Blood, and render it less fluid. They must not be us'd in the beginning of Evacuations that are set on foot by Nature, which must not be stopt for some Days, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient. Rhubarb may be profitably us'd in such ca∣ses, from a Scruple to a Dram. Nor ought Claret to be omitted on such occasions. Of Carminative Medicines. THey are such as dissipate and expel Wind. The most Natural and most Common Carminatives are Cloves, the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, and Coriander; and 'tis to be obser∣ved, that they are more agreeable to the Stomach when they are confected and crusted over with Sugar, or mixt with Comfits. If you are troubl'd with Wind in the lower part of your Belly, you must pre∣pare a Clyster of a Decoction of those Seeds, with an Ounce of the Oil of Walnuts. Having given you a short Account of Me∣dicines in general, I shall proceed in the next place to mention some Specific and particular Medicines, which in the Schools are call'd Topical Remedies.
'Tis to be observ'd, that before the use of those particular Medicines, you must eva∣cuate the grosser Impurities by Clysters, and lessen the excessive quantity of the Blood by Bleeding. Of Particular Remedies. A Remedy for the Head-Ach. WHEN the Head-Ach proceeds from Phlegm, or from a Cold Cause, which is known by a Drowsiness and Heaviness of the Head, the Brain must be purg'd thus: Take the Leaves of Rosemary, Thyme, Be∣tony, and Sweet Marjoram, of each a handful; dry them in the Sun, or in an Oven, beat them to Powder, and sift 'em thro' a Searce. Take a convenient Dose of this Powder every Morning and Evening, about an Hour or two before you eat. It mitigates the Pain of the Head by purging the Brain. But when the Distemper proceeds from heated Choler, you must provoke Sleep with some of the Remedies mention'd in the Chap∣ter that treats of Narcotics.
Against the Apolexy. YOU must immediately open the Patient's Teeth with a Spoon, and put into his Mouth several large Corns of Salt; then Bleed him in the Arm, and apply Cupping-Glasses with all convenient speed. Against the Palsie. TAke two Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, three Ounces of Oil of Bays; mix them with an Ounce of Balsam of Peru, and having incorporated 'em together, make a Liniment, with which you must anoint the Part affected, and wrap it up with a Linen-Cloth as hot as you can. A Remedy for the Rheumatism, hard Swellings in the Joynts, for all Cold Swellings, and to strengthen the Nerves. TAke four or five handfuls of Sage, beat it with a Pound of fresh Butter; then boil all together for a Quarter of an Hour; after which strain it through a course Cloth, and rub the Parts affected with the Straining▪ melting the Ointment every time you use it.
To Purge Melancholy. TAke Polypody of the Oak and Tops of Hops, of each half an Ounce, and boil 'em with two or three Rennet-Apples cut in Slices, in a sufficient quantity of Water. Then strain the Decoction thro' a Linen-Cloth, and in∣fuse in it two or three Drams of Sena, with as much beaten Anniseeds as you can take up between your Fingers and your Thumb. Take this Medicine in the Morning, and about two Hours after drink some Broath. To Purge Choler. MAke a Broath or Decoction of Lettice, Pur∣slane, and Succory; infuse in it accord∣ing to the Season a handful of March Violets, Peach-Flowers, or Pale Roses, and take it in the Morning fasting. You may also take half an Ounce of Con∣serve of Pale Roses fasting, and a little after take a Broath made of cooling Herbs. To Purge Phlegm. BOil fifteen Grains of Asarabacca-Leaves in a-sufficient quantity of Wine, with a lit∣tle Mint or Baum. Take three or four Spoon∣fuls of the strain'd Liquor in the Morning fasting, and an Hour or two after drink a lit∣tle Broath.
For the Itching of the Eye-Lids. TAke an Ounce of White-Wine, as much Rose-Water, a Dram of Hepatic or Liver-Aloes in Powder, mingle 'em together, and apply a piece of fine Linen dipt in this Liquor to the Eyes. For an Inflammation in the Eyes. TAke a Spoonful of Rose, and of Plantain-Water; drop the Mixture into the Cor∣ner of the Eye, and keep your Eye shut. For Deafness. TAke Juice of Onions, and Brandy, of each an Ounce and a half; mix them together, and put some Drops of the Mixture luke∣warm into the Ears, and afterwards stop 'em with Cotton. To stop Bleeding at the Nose. LAY a Key upon the Patient's Back, be∣twixt the Shirt and the Skin; or throw a Glass of cold Water in his Face. A Stone of Cyprus-Vitriol put into the No∣strils, stanches the Blood. The same Vitriol is also good to cure Ul∣cers in the Mouth, by touching them two or or three times with it; but you must not swal∣low your Spittle after it.
To Cure a Red Face, and take away the Pimples. DIssolve a sufficient quantity of Cyprus-Vi∣triol in Plantain-Water; and when you go to Bed, wash the Pimples with a little Cot∣ton dipt in the Solution; and in the Morning wash your Face with River or Fountain-Water. For Shortness of Breath. DRink a Glass of Mead in the Morning for Eight Days; and if that be not suffici∣ent, put into it five or six Drops of Spirit of Tobacco. For Obstructions of the Lungs. TAke Jujubes, Sebestens, dry'd Figs, Damask-Raisins, and ston'd Dates, of each half a Pound; Dogs-Grass, Liver-Wort, Hyssop, the Leaves and Flowers of Colts-Foot and Scolo∣pendria, of each a handful; the four Capilla∣ry Herbs, of each half a handful; Liquorice four Ounces; and three Pounds of Sugar. Make a Syrup of all; use it often, and swal∣low it as slowly as you can.
For the Pleurisie. TAke half an ordinary Glass-full of the Juice of Bugloss or Borage, and an equal quan∣tity of the Juice of Broom; Mix them toge∣ther, and drink the Mixture warm be∣fore you go to Bed; lying upon that side where you feel the Pain, or upon your Back. For a Cold. TAke a Spoonful of Oil of Sweet Almonds, two Spoonfuls of Syrup of Violets, and a Glass of Ptisan; mix them together, and drink off the whole when you go to Bed. To stop Vomitting. TAke a Spoonful of the Juice of Pome∣granates or of Limons, and half a Dram of Salt of Wormwood; mix them for a Draught. To Strengthen the Liver. TAke a Pound of the Juice of Endive, and an Ounce of the Juice of Burnet; mix them well together, and take half a Glass every Morning for eight or fifteen Days.
For the Spleen. TAke two handfuls of the Leaves of Harts-Tongue, chop them, and put them into a strong Bottle, with two Pints of White-Wine; cover the Bottle with a piece of thick Cap-Paper, making several Holes with a Pin in it; then boil the Wine softly till it sink a few Inches in the Bottle. Take half a Glass of this Liquor in the Morning fasting, for eight Days. For the Jaundice. TAke the Dung of a young Goose, Chicken, or Hen, dry it in the Sun, and beat it to Powder. Take from half a Dram to a Dram of this Powder every Morning in a Glass of White-Wine, with a little Sugar and Cinamon, for eight Days. For the Dropsie. TAke half a Glass of Juice of Chervil, with an equal quantity of White-Wine, and about two Hours after drink a little Broath. You must continue the use of this Me∣dicine till the Swelling be abated; and in the mean time drink very moderately. In∣fuse Burnet in Water, and mix it with an equal quantity of White-Wine for your ordi∣nary Drink.
For the Nephritical Colic, or Stone in the Kidneys. TAke two Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds drawn without Fire, with a like quan∣tity of Juice of Limons, or Citrons; or, if you please, you may take the Oil in two Ounces of White-Wine. For the Bilious Colic. TAke Rose-Water, and Oil of Sweet Al∣monds, drawn without Fire, of each two Ounces; mix them for a Draught. For the Wind Colic. TAke a greasie Dishclout, and apply it pret∣ty hot to the Belly, or where you feel the Pain. Renew it often. Another. DRY a handful of common Salt, put it in a Linen Cloth, and apply it pretty warm to the place affected. For all sorts of Colics. TAke a Dram of Walnut-Flowers in Pow∣der, in a Glass of White-Wine.
For a Looseness. TAke every three Hours a Pint of Cow's-Milk boil'd with the Yolk of an Egg, about half an Ounce of Sugar, and as much White-Bread as you think fit: You must neither eat nor drink any thing else; and besides you must keep your self in Bed, or at least in a dry and warm place. For a Dysentery. TAke two Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds drawn without Fire; or, if that cannot be had, take the like quantity of Sweet Oil-Olive, two Ounces of Rose-Water, and one Spoonful of Sugar. Mix them all toge∣ther for a Draught to be taken in the Morn∣ing fasting. The Signs of a Dysentery are a Looseness accompany'd with a griping Pain, and the voiding of Blood, or Excrements mixt with Blood. About two Hours after the taking of the above-mention'd Medicine, you may drink some Broath, and eat a new-laid Egg. You may make your Broath with a Leg of Mutton, or a Cock. So long as the Distemper lasts, you must take a Clyster every Day made only of the Decoction of Barley and Bran; and when you are just ready to take it, add the Yolks
of two raw Eggs, with a little Sugar, and beat them well together. You must be let Blood once or twice in the Arm, and must drink nothing but a Ptisan made of the Decoction of Barley and Liquorice. You must not take a purging Medicine till eight or ten Days after the Cure. Then you may take half an Ounce of Catholicum dissolv'd in about four Ounces of Rose-Water. For the Worms. TAke two Spoonfuls of the Juice of Li∣mons or Citrons, with the like quantity of Sweet Oil, or of White-Wine, and mix them for a Draught to be taken in the Morning fasting. For the Worms in little Children. CHafe the Belly about the Navel with Oil of Bitter Almonds, and lay a Plai∣ster of Aloes over it. For the Piles either Internal or External, whe∣ther they void Blood or not. TAke small Male Sengreen, or Prick-Ma∣dam, and fresh Butter a sufficient quan∣tity, beat 'em together in a Mortar, and ap∣ply it to the Part, renewing it three or four times a Day.
For the Pain of the Kidneys. DIP a Linen Cloth in Oxycrate, and ap∣ply it to the Part affected. Oxycrate is a Mixture of six parts of Wa∣ter, and one of Vinegar. For the Stoppage or Suppression of the Ʋrine. INfuse an Ounce of Linseed in a Pound of River or Fountain-Water, for twenty four Hours. If it be in the Summer, you must infuse it in a cool place; and if in the Winter, in warm Ashes. Afterwards strain it off, and put it into a Glass Bottle. Drink a Glass of it every Morning, Noon, and Night.
FOR THE DISEASES OF WOMEN. To bring down the Courses. BEAT two or three Heads of Garlick, and make a Plaister of them, which must be apply'd to the lower par of the Back, on the Right-Side. To stop the immoderate Flux of Blood which happens to Women in Labour, or after they are brought to Bed. INject two or three Clysters of Oxycrate every Day.
For the Suffocation of the Womb. Take an Ounce of Cinamon cut into small Pieces, three Ounces of fine Sugar in Powder; mix them, and add four Ounces of Rose-Water, and six Ounces of strong Brandy; let them stand twelve Hours in Infusion, strain it two or three times thro' a Woollen Cloth, and keep the Liquor in a Glass-Vial. The Patient may take two or three Spoon∣fuls of this Liquor, to prevent the Return of a Paroxysm; and even during the Fit, that she may be the sooner delivered from it. For Fits of the Mother. TAke a handful of the Herb call'd Avens, beat it, and infuse it for the space of an Hour or two in a Pint of White-Wine, and let the Patient drink a little of it when sh is thirsty. For a Woman in Labour, to hasten her Delivery. TAke the Liver and Gall of the fattest Eel you can procure, dry 'em in an Oven after the Bread is drawn out, and beat 'em to Powder. The Dose is one
Dram in three or four Spoonfuls of the best Wine. To expel a dead Child. GIve the Sick Woman an Ounce of the Juice of Hyssop, in half a Glass of warm Water, with a Spoonful of Brandy. For the Colic, or griping Pain of the Belly, which frequently assaults Women that are newly deliver'd. TAke Orange-Flower-Water, and Syrup of Maidenhair, of each two Ounces; mix and  a Draught. To bring Milk into the Breasts of Women that are newly deliver'd. GIve the Woman a Dram of the Pow∣der of Fennel-seed in Cabbage-Broath, or in a Glass of White-Wine. For those who have too much Milk. TAke Rose-Water and Verjuice, of each two Ounces; mix them together with five or six Grains of Salt; heat the Mix∣ture upon a Chafing-Dish; then dip a Li∣nen Cloth four or five times doubl'd, in the Liquor, and apply it warm to the Breast, laying over it two pieces of Linen well
heated. You must renew the Application twice a Day; and if the Distemper conti∣nue, you must apply it also the Day fol∣lowing. To dry up the Milk in those who are not wil∣ling to suckle their Children. TAke a Bitter Orange, pierce it in several places with the Point of a Knife, or with a Bodkin, squeeze out the Juice, and put the Orange into a little Earthen-Pot, which you must fill with Oil-Olive; boil a∣way two thirds of the Oil, and then rub the Breasts with it very softly, and as warm as it can be endured. For the Inflammation of the Breasts. TAke the Crum of a White-Loaf, boil it in a sufficient quantity of Milk; add an Ounce of Oil of Lilies, and make a Pul∣tiss, which must be apply'd to the Breast. For the Fits of a Tertian-Ague. IN the beginning of the third and fourth Fit, take half a Glass of the Juice of Borage, mixt with the like quantity of White-Wine; but you must take a Cly∣ster, and be let Blood the Night before.
For an Intermitting Fever. TAke a handful of the Leaves of Burnet, Infuse them twelve Hours in a Pint of White-Wine; then strain out the Wine thro' a Linen Cloth, and give the Patient half a Glass of it at the beginning of the cold Fit, continuing after the same in the three or four succeeding Fits. For a Quartan Ague. DIssolve the Yolk of a new-laid Egg in a Glass of Wine, and drink it at the beginning of the cold Fit. For a Purple Fever. TAke the Leaves of Wood-Sorrel, Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, and Queen of the Meadows, of each one handful; boil them in a sufficient quantity of River or Foun∣tain-Water. To the strain'd Liquor add four Drops of the Spirit of Vitriol, and half an Ounce of sine Sugar. Let the Patient take half a Glass of this Liquor before or during the Fit, continuing after the same manner five or six Days. Let him drink a Ptisan made with Bar∣berries and Scorzonera-Roots. Let him not take a purging Medicine till the Fever disappear.
For the Plague. MElt an Ounce of old Hogs-Grease, with a like quantity of Honey; then re∣move the Vessel from the Fire, and add an Ounce of Rie-Meal, and two Yolks of Eggs, stirring them all the while. Spread this Ointment upon Leather, and apply it to the Bubo's, changing it twice a Day. When a Carbuncle or Bubo is suppurated, and breaks, put into it a Tent dipt in the same Ointment, and lay a Pultiss o∣ver it. For Carbuncles or Plague-Sores. TAke the Ointments Populeon and Basili∣con, of each one Ounce; mix them, and spreading a sufficient quantity upon a piece of Leather, apply it to the Sore till the Scab or Eschar fall off. A Remedy for Corns. BOil a sufficient quantity of the Crum of Brown-Bread in Milk, to the thick∣ness of Broath; and after you take it off from the Fire, add to it a proportionable quantity of Ʋnguentum Rosatum, spread it upon Linen, and apply it to the Corn.
To preserve the Face from being mark'd by the Small-Pox. DIP a Feather in Oil of Sweet Almonds, drawn without Fire, and anoint the Pocks as they come out for the space of Nine or Ten Days. To preserve the Sight in the Small-Pox. PUT a little Saffron in Plantain-Water; mix them well together; then drop it into the Patient's Eyes. Another. TAke a piece of Gold, heat it red-hot in the Fire, quench it several times in Plantain-Water, and pour some Drops of the Water into the Eyes of the Patient. You must continue in the use of this Remedy from the first appearance of the Small-Pox, or the space of three Weeks or a Month. For the Sciatica. TAke Mustard-seed and Figs, of each two Ounces; beat 'em to a Mash, which must be apply'd like a Plaister to the Part ffected, and often renew'd.
For the Itch. AFter you have been let Blood in the Arm, and purg'd, according to your Strength and Constitution, rub the Palms of your Hands, your Wrists, the Soles of your Feet, and even your whole Body, with an Ointment made of two Ounces of fresh Butter, and half an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, well mixt together: warm it every time you use it: And that it may work more effectually, you may anoint your self near the Fire. For a Tetter or Ring-Worm. TAke three Drams of new Wax, melt it with four Ounces of Oil of Roses, and two Ounces of Honey of Roses. When 'tis all melted, take it off the Fire, and put to it an Ounce of Soot, and half an Ounce of Ceruss in Powder; stirring it till it be cold. When you have occasion to use it, spread it upon a Linen Cloth, and apply it to the Part affected.
For a Cut or Wound. TAke a red-hot Coal out of the Fire, beat it to Powder, and put some of it into the Wound. It will immediately stanch the Blood. For Burning. TAke four Spoonfuls of Water, in which unslack'd Lime has been quench'd, the like quantity of Oil of Nuts, and beat them up to the thickness of a Liniment; then a∣noint the burnt Part with a Feather, and cover it with brown Paper. To open all sorts of Tumours without a Lance. TAke fresh Butter and Verjuice, of each two Ounces, mix and boil them to∣gether: Dip a fine Linen Rag, or piece of brown issue-Paper into the Liquor, and apply it pretty hot to the Place affected.
For all sorts of Inflammations that happen either before or after the Breaking of a Tu∣mour. TAke a fine Linen Rag, dip it in Oxy∣crate or Water; then spread a little of Galen's Ceratum upon it, (which may be found at any Apothecary's Shop) and ap∣ply it to the inflamed Part. For Bruises. TAke a quarter of a Pint of thick Red-Wine, two Ounces of fresh Butter, two Pugils of Provence Roses, and one Pu∣gil of Wheat-Bran; boil all together to the thickness of Broath, spread it upon a Li∣nen Cloath, and apply it to the Part af∣fected. For all sorts of Wounds. TAke a Pound of fresh Butter, a quarter of a Pint of the Juice of Sage, the like quantity of the Juice of Wall-Wort, an Ounce of Bay-Berries in Powder, with a quarter of a Pint of good Wine. Boil all together in a Vessel upon the Fire, to the thickness of an Ointment, or till the Moisture be consum'd, and reserve it for use.
For all Gun-shot Wounds. TAke two Ounces of Birth-Wort, either long or round, put it into an Earthen Pipkin with three quarters of a Pint of Wine, and boil away one half; then take the Pot from the Fire, and put in two Ounces of Sugar. Keep this Liquor for use in a Glass-Bottle. When the Wound is large, lay on the first Dressing with the Whites of two Eggs beat up to a Froth, to which add a Dram or two of Bol-Armenic in Powder; then spread the whole upon the Tow of fine Hemp, and leave it upon the Wound till the same Hour next Day. After twenty four Hours you must take away the first Dressing, put some of this Water into a Spoon, heat it lukewarm, dip a Linen Rag in it, and wash the Wound; and lay upon it ano∣ther piece of Linen dipt in the same Wa∣ter: taking care to keep the Wound al∣ways Moist. For all sorts of Ʋlcers. TAke Burgundy-Pitch, Rosin, and new Wax, of each two Ounces; put them all in∣to an Earthen-Pipkin, and melt them on the Fire; then add six Ounces of fresh But∣ter, with a Dram of Vardigrase in Powder,
stirring 'em all the while. Put this Balsam into an Earthen Pot, and keep it for use. For a Gangrene. INfuse half a Pound of Ʋnslak'd Lime for the space of six Hours, in a Pint of Smith's-Water; then pour it off softly, with∣out▪ removing the Vessel. In this Water infuse a Dram of Sublimate for the space of a Night. Then add a sixth part of recti∣fied Spirit of Wine, and pour it all off with∣out stirring the Sediments. Wash the gan∣gren'd parts every Morning, Noon, and Night, with this Water a little heated. OF Ptisans or Decoctions. THEY may be prepar'd several ways, according to the various Uses they are made for. The most common are Purgative, Laxative, Cooling, and Pecto∣ral; tho' many other sorts may be made, ac∣cording to the different Distempers that at∣tack Human Bodies. But I shall only men∣tion
those that are most frequently us'd, and most easily prepar'd. A Cooling, Opening, and Pectoral Ptisan. TAke half a Peck of good Oats well cleans'd, wild Succory and Burnet, of each one handful; boil them softly in a Gal∣lon of River-Water, for a large half Hour, or three quarters of an Hour; after which add half an Ounce of Sal Prunellae, with a quarter of a Pound of the best Honey you can procure; and boil it again softly for half an Hour: Then take it off the Fire, strain it thro' a Linen Cloth, and pour the Liquor into an Earthen Pot. Take a Draught of it two Hours before, and two Hours after Meals. A Purgative and Laxative Ptisan. POur two Quarts of River or Fountain-Water, into a close Pot, and set it near the Fire; put into it half an Ounce of Sena, four or five Roots of Wild Succory, two lit∣tle Sticks of Liquorice, more or less, accord∣ing to the Palate of the Patient; and a Dram of Green Fennel-seed; then tye a Dram of the raspings of Ivory, and the like quantity of Harts-Horn in a Linen Rag; boil 'em a little longer with the rest of the In∣gredients in the Pot, and afterwards strain out the Liquor. Drink a Glass of it eve∣ry
Morning fasting for Eight or Ten Days. A Pectoral Ptisan. TAke Jujubes, Sebesten, and Damask Rai∣sins, of each one Ounce; a Stick of Liquorice beaten, and a quarter of a Pound of Honey; Boil them softly in two Quarts of River-Water, for a quarter of an Hour; and afterwards strain out the Liquor thro' a Linen Cloth. You may drink a Glass of it every Morning, and another at Night when you go to Bed; It must neither be too hot nor too cold when you drink it. OF SYRUPS, And their Vertues. THE Syrups that are most frequently us'd, are the Syrup of Pale Roses, the Syrup of Peach-Flowers, com∣pound Syrup of Apples, compound Syrup of Succory. Syrup of Violets, Syrup of Maiden-hair, and the Syrup of Corn-Poppies.
The Syrup of Pale Roses serves to evacuate all sorts of Serosities, either Phlegmatic, Bi∣lious, or Melancholic; it strengthens the Sto∣mach, and opens Obstructions in the Capil∣lary Vessels of the Liver, and of the rest of the Entrals. The Syrup of Peach-Flowers is good for those who are Hydropical, and is particular∣ly adapted for expelling Serous Humours. Compound Syrup of Apples evacuates the Melancholic Humour which infects the Mass of the Blood. It is also very good to purge the Spleen. Compound Syrup of Succory, prepra'd with Rhubarb, purges the redundant Bile, strengthens the Liver and Stomach, and opens Obstructions in other Parts of the Body. Syrup of Violets purges Choler, cools, and promotes Expectoration: You may take an Ounce or a Spoonful of it in a Glass of Water; but you must have two Glasses, and pour it out of one into the other several times, to dilute the Syrup. Syrup of Maiden-Hair is of excellent use in Diseases of the Breast; it frees it from the corrupt Humours that are log'd in it, and helps the sick Person to spit. Syrup of Corn-Poppies procures Sleep: The Dose is from an Ounce to two Ounces at Night.
FOR THE TOOTH-ACH. AFTER Eating, you must gargarize your Mouth, and wash your Gums with Wine and Water; then take the Ashes of the second Bark of the Ash-Tree; mix 'em with a Spoonful of Brandy, and make a Plaister, which must be apply'd to the Temples on that side where you feel the Pain. Another. PUT a Clove or two upon the aking Tooth, then shut your Teeth, and hang your Head on that side where the Pain lies; this will draw out abundance of Water, and by that means give you ease. If the Tooth be rotten or carious, you must pull it out, or else put a Drop of Aqua-Fortis into it.
OF CLYSTERS. A Cooling Clyster. MAKE a Clyster of Oxycrate, that is, mix a Pint of lukewarm Water with six Spoonfuls of Vinegar. A Clyster for one who is Costive. TAke a quarter of a Pound of Oil of Nuts, and the like quantity of common Honey, put them into a Pint of Water, and if you are troubl'd with Gripes, add as much Pow∣der of Anise or Fennel-seed as you can take up between your Fingers and Thumb: If not, add half a quarter of a Pint of Vinegar, and boil it as usually. A Clyster to stop a Looseness. MAke a Decoction with White Mullein, Provence Roses, and Plantain, of each one handful; Lin-seed and Quince-seed, of each a Dram; half an Ounce of Starch, and
the Yolk of an Egg. In the beginning of a Looseness you ought not to make use of Astringent Medicines, but must let Nature act without disturbance for some Days, ac∣cording to the Age and Strength of the Pa∣tient. FINIS.
AN INDEX OF The Principal Matters contain'd in the TREATISE of REMEDIES. OF Medicines in general, 73 Of Diuretics, or Medicines that pro∣voke Urine, 75 Of Vomits, 76 Of Sudorifics and Diaphoretics, or Medicines that procure Sweating and insensible Tran∣spiration, 77 Of Sneezing Medicines, and Errhina, 74 Of Incrassating or Thickening Medicines, 79
Of Narcotics, or Medicines that procure Sleep, 80 Of Styptics or Astringents, 81 Of Carminatives, or Medicines that dispel Wind, Ibid. Of Particular Remedies. FOR the Head-Ach, 82 For the Apoplexy, 83 For the Palsie, Ibid. A Remedy for the Rheumatism, hard Swel∣lings in the Joynts, for all Cold Tu∣mours, and to strengthen the Nerves, Ibid. To Purge Melanchly, 84 To Purge Choler, Ibid. To Purge Phlegm, Ibid. For the Itching of the Eye-Lids, 85 For an Inflammation of the Eyes, Ibid. For Deafness, Ibid. To stop Bleeding at the Nose, Ibid. To cure a Red Face, and take away Pim∣ples, 86
For Shortness of Breath, Ibid. For Obstructions of the Lungs, Ibid. For the Pleurisie, 87 For a Cold, Ibid. To stop Vomiting, Ibid. To comfort and strengthen the Liver, Ibid. For the Spleen, 88 For the Jaundice, Ibid. For the Dropsie, Ibid. For the Nephritical Colic, or Stone in the Kidneys, 86 For the Bilious Colic, Ibid. For the Wind Colic, Ibid. Another, Ibid. For all sorts of Colics, Ibid. For a Looseness, 90 For the Dysentery, Ibid. For Worms in the Belly 91 For the Worms in little Children, Ibid. For the Piles, either internal or exter∣nal, whether they void Blood or not, Ibid. For a Pain in the Back or Kidneys, 92 For a Stoppage or Suppression of Urine, Ibid.
Remedies for the Diseases of Women. TO bring down the Courses, 93 To stop the immoderate Flux of Blood which happens to Women in Labour, or after they are brought to Bed, Ibid. For the Suffocation of the Womb, 94 For Fits of the Mother, Ibid. For a Woman in Labour, to hasten her Delivery, Ibid. To expel a dead Child, 95 For the Colic, or griping Pain of the Belly, which frequently assaults Women that are newly deliver'd, Ibid. To bring Milk into the Breasts of Women that are newly deliver'd, Ibid. For those who have too much Milk, Ibid. To dry up Milk in those who are not wil∣ling to suckle their Children, 96 For an Inflammation of the Breasts, Ibid. For the Fits of a Tertian-Ague, Ibid. For Intermitting Fevers, 97
For a Quartan-Ague, Ibid. For a Purple Fever, Ibid. For the Plague, 98 For Carbuncles or Plague-Sores, Ibid. A Remedy for Corns, Ibid. To preserve the Face from being mark'd by the Small-Pox, 99 To preserve the Sight in the Small-Pox, Ibid. Another, Ibid. For the Sciatica, Ibid. For the Itch or Scab, 100 For a Tetter or Ring-Worm, Ibid. For a Cut or Wound, 101 For Burning, Ibid. To open all sorts of Tumours without a Launce, Ibid. For all sorts of Inflammations that happen either before or after the Breaking of a Tumour, 102 For Bruises, Ibid. For all sorts of Wounds, Ibid. For all Gun-shot Wounds, 103 For all sorts of Ulcers, Ibid. For a Gangrene, 104
Of Ptisans or Decoctions. A Cooling, Opening, and Pectoral Pti∣san, 105 A Purging and Loosening Ptisan, Ibid. A Pectoral Ptisan, 106 OF Syrups, and their Vertues, Ibid. Syrup of Pale Roses, 107 Syrup of Peach-Flowers, Ibid. Compound Syrup of Apples, Ibid. Compound Syrup of Succory, Ibid. Syrup of Violets, Ibid. Syrup of Maidenhair, Ibid. Syrup of Corn-Poppies, Ibid. Remedies for the Tooth-Ach, 108
OF Clysters, 109 Cooling Clysters, Ibid. A Clyster for one that is Costive, Ibid. A Clyster to stop a Looseness, Ibid. The End of the Table.
