F2304A 13745062 101698
Licensed according to Order. May 24th, 1689.
A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Inhumane and Bloudy Cruelties OF THE PAPISTS TO THE Poor Protestants, IN IRELAND, In the YEAR. 1641. Published now to Encourage all Protestants to be Liberal in their Contribution for their Relief, and speedy Delivering them now out of the hands of those Bloudy-minded People. LONDON, Printed for Peter Richman in Duck-Lane, 1689.
Here followeth a true Description or Relation of sundry sad and lamentable Collections, taken from the mouths of very credible per∣sons, and out of Letters sent from Ireland to this City of London, of the perfidious out∣rages and barbarous cruelties, which the Irish Papists have committed upon the per∣sons of the Protestants, both Men, Women and Children, in that Kingdom. Annoque Domini. 1641. THE Irish Nation is well known to be a people both proud and envious. For the Commonalty (they are for the most part) ignorant and illeterate, poor and lazy; and will rather beg or starve than work: and therefore fit subjects for the Priests and Jesuits to spur on upon such bloudy Actions and murtherous Designs. Ignorance is their Mother, which is devoid of mercy: God deliver all good Christians from the Cruelty of such a Mother and Children.
It is too well known, (the more is the pity and to be lamented) that the Irish have murthered of the Protestant party in the Provinces of Ʋlster, Lempster, Connaght and Munster, of Men, Women and Chil∣dren, the number of fifty thousand, as it is credibly reported by Englishmen, who have been over all parts of the Kingdom, and do protest upon their Oaths that there are above five thousand Families destroyed. The Kingdom of Ireland hath four Provinces, wherein there are contained two and thirty Counties, besides Cities and County Towns, in all which places the English are planted up and down in all parts, where the Irish have most murtherously and traiterously surprized them upon great advantages, and without respect of persons either of age, youth, or infancy, of young Men or Maids, or of old Men or Babes, stript all to their skins, naked as ever they were born into the World, so they have gone out of the World, many hundreds having been found starved to death in Ditches for want of food and rayment, where the rebellious Irish have shewed them no more mercy or compassion, no not so much as they would do to their Dogs. Thus much for the general, now I come to particulars. At one Mr. Atkins's house, seven Papists brake in and beat out his brains, then ripped up his Wife with child, after they had ravished her, and Nero like, view'd Natures bed of conception, they then took the child, and sacrificed it in the fire.
They have flead the skin from the bones of others like Butchers: the principles of whose Religion is bloud. Witness our Books of Martyrs; those Chro∣nicles of bloud. Witness those thousands of butcher'd Protestants in France and Germany. They burned others, firing their Houses, Towns, Villages, those sons of the Coal, as if their habitation were in Hell. They vowed to root out all the English Nation out of this Kingdom. They turned all the Protestants out of Kilkeny. At Belturbalt, in the County of Cavan, the Popish Rebels demanded the Town on promise, that if they would surrender, they should pass free with bag and baggage, they back'd their promise with Oaths and Execrations, cursing themselves, if they did not let them go withall. On serious considerations of the Inhabi∣tants and the Governour, they were persuaded to yield it up, which when they had done, and drawing away their goods and moneys, they like treacherous Villians sent about twenty or thirty to-guard them, when they had guarded them seven miles from the Town, they with more of that desperate forsworn rabble seized on them, robbed all the Protestants, being between five hundred and a thousand persons, Men, Women and Children; who submitting themselves to their mercy, found no quarter but cruelty: they stript them all naked, and turn'd them out of their houses into the open fields in bitter could weather, in a most vile and
shamefull manner, not affording them one of their lowzy rags to hide those parts which should be cove∣red. Take notice of the faith of a Papist, who for his own advantage, casts off all bounds of fidelity and common honesty. They are remarkable for persidiousness and treache∣ry, as you may behold in that Master of Mis-rule, the Arch-rebell Sir Philem O-Neal, basely pretending to be a Suiter to the old Lady Cawfield, being a Widow, and made fair promises of his respects to her, and when he had his advantage of possession of her house and goods, turned them out of all, and bound them prisoners, and made her whom he intended his nearest Companion to be his lowest Vassal. In the Town of Lurgon, in the County of Armagh, the Mac-kans skirmishing with the Englishmen, slew divers of our men, whereupon they entred parly de∣manding the Town: Sir Willian Brunlow being Go∣vernour of the Castle, on some considerations thought good to yield, thereupon they promised and backt it with Oaths and great Protestations, that they should have fair quarter, and pass without prejudice to their lives: yet behold the perfidiousness of these brutish creatures, as men not fearing God, or Devil whose practice they imitate, who was a lier from the beginning. Not∣withstanding all these fair pretences they knew no mercy, killed Men, spoiled Women, nay, in their boundless rage, slew and massacared, and stript help∣less Ministers, whose calling might have pleaded pity.
But what speak we of pity to men, that have no bowels? In London-Derry, at the Town of Belly-hagh belon∣ging to the Londoners. Sir Philem O-Neal, promised under hand and seal to let the poor Protestants to pass with bag and baggage, onely to part with their Town, which was a fair goodly place: yet this per∣fidious Rebel? as if it was not enough to make these poor souls harborless, to lay them open to wind and weather, but to add to all their misery, stript Man, Woman and Child, took their cloaths for a prey, and sent them out naked, without a shirt or smock to their backs, left them not worth a groat, this was one of their works of mercy, if they scaped with their lives: but how many lives might be lost by this immodest and inhumane act, judge. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. Will you behold another mercifull Act, and Record it. Captain Rory Macquire, at the beginning of the Robellion for the first fortnight commands his Soldiers to give quarter to Women and Children, but to mas∣sacare all the Men, to spare none. Wo to him that makes the Wife a Widow, and the Children Father∣less, but after they began to resist, and to gather into Companies: then hear the Charge of this bloudy man, Gie no quarter, no not to Women, though Tears and Prayers interpose, yet know no pity: no not to harmless Babes, though it was death enough to kill their Parents, nor spare neither Man, Woman, or Child.
It is reported by an ominent Gentleman that had long dwelt among the Rebels, but its thought fit to forbear the names of those that gave intelligence of the barbarous cruelties of these savage beasts▪ because they threaten to be the death of them that shall un∣mask them. It is reported by this Gentleman that the Handlowans came to Town-regis, divers of them assaulted the Castle, of which Captain Saint John was Commander, he with his Son got away with some difficulty, leaping over the wall, they fearing they might setch supplies to recover their lost Castle, most inhumanly took the Captain's Wife, (poor Gentlewoman) and set her on the wall having stript her to her smock, who was big with Child (and with∣in an hour of her delivery) that in case the Captain and his Son should have assaulted the Town, his Wife should have been the white at which he must have levelled: Oh extreme and unheard of cruelty! As for the Protestant Ministers whom they sur∣prize, their cruelty is such towards them, at it would make the hardest heart to melt into tears. Their manner is first to strip them, and after bind them to a tree or some post where they please, and then to ravish their Wives and Daughters before their faces (in sight of all their merciless rabble) with the basest Villains they can pick out, after they hang up their Husbands and Parents before their faces, and then cut them down before they be half dead, then quarter them, after dismember them, and stop their mouths therewith.
They basely abused one Mr. Trafford a Minister in the North of Ireland, who was assaulted by these bloudy Wolves of Rome's brood, that know not God, nor any bowels of mercy. This poor distressed Mi∣nister desired but so much time to bethink himself before he took his farewell of the World to call upon God: but these merciless wretches would admit no time, but instantly fell on him, hackt and hewed him to pieces. Dr. Tate Minister of Belly-Hayes, they stript starke naked, and then wounded him dangerously in the head, and then let him go towards Dublin, where he lay long sick. Sir Patrick Dunston's Wife ravished before him, slew his Servants spurned his Children till they died, bound him with rouls of Match to a board, that his Eyes burst out, cut off his Ears and Nose, teared off both his Cheecks, and cut off his Armes and Legs, cut out his Tongue, after run a red hot Iron into him. Many Gentlewomen they ravished before their Husbands faces, stripping them first naked to the view of their wicked companions, taunting and mockings. them (after they have spoiled them) with bitter and reproachsull words, sending them away in such a shamefull, or rather shameless manner, that most of them have died with pain and grief, or else have starved with want and cold. Base cruelty un∣heard of, exceeding the brute beasts, and so much the
worse because they are reasonable, which makes them skilfull to destroy. One Mr. Luttrell, dwelling within three miles of the Burrough of Cavan, a Gentleman worth by report, two or three hundred pounds a year, with a very great stock of Cattel, was basely betrayed by an Irish Boy that he had bred up in his house. See the baseness of the Popish brood, who when he was at Dinner (being upon the thirtieth day of October last) was surprized by threescore of those Irish unmercifull Villains, with a company of dirty Whores and Bas∣tards that followed them, which this Boy let in at a back door, where pulling him and his vertuous Wife from the Table, and four small Children, the eldest of them being not six years of age, and one sucking at her breast, without pity or humanity, stript them naked, notwithstanding their prayers and tears to have let them kept their cloaths, and then thrusting them in a cruel and violent manner out of doors, threatned to kill them if they went not speedily away. Take notice how uncertain all our outward comforts are. So they departed, (for fear) away, being ashamed to be seen of their servants, some of them running one way, and some another to shift for themselves, but the distressed Gentleman with his Wife and Children, and a little youth, directed their course towards Dub∣lin, hoping to find some of their friends in the way to relieve them, but the farther they came the more miserable they were, meeting their loving Friends
robbed (by others) in the same manner, which struck in them such amazement and fear, that their hearts failed them, so that being naked and hungry, help∣less and hopeless, the poor Infants crying in their Ears, which must needs kill their Hearts, they went not far but sate down under a Hedge or Ditch, and there died: being not at that time above six miles from his own house, for this little youth that he had bred up (being an English Boy) forsook not his Master when the rest ran from him, but continued with him till death: the same day, some Horsemen or Troopers riding that way to coast the Countrey, met this youth, unto whom he told this sad story, and being not far from the place led them to this lemantable sight, where they beheld the true love of Man and Wife, embracing each other in their death, the three eldest Children dead, but the suckling Child was preserved through heat, being between them both, and grabling and gaping for the dead Mothers Breast. So the Troopers took up the Child, carrying it to a Nurse, for they knew the Parents well, and bestowed some Cloaths upon the English youth, who came to Dublin within few days after, and related the story in my hearing. In the County of Roscommon, near the Town of Roscommon, there fled into the Parish Church, eleven-score of the English, Men, Women, and Children, where they remained three Days and Nights without any sustenance, till they were almost starved, so that at last (what with the cries of their Children and their
own wants) they were forced to commit themselves to the cruelty of the Irish, who according to their usual manner first stript them naked, after drove them through the Town like so many harmless Sheep and Lambs over a Bridge at the Towns end, having before broke down one of the middle Arches where a strong Water runneth, so that either they must leap in or come back, their intent being there to murther them, as they did; For the poor wretches being Sickly, Weak and Faint, for want of Food and Sleep (yet unwilling to hasten their own ends) some returned back whome they killed without mercy, others they thrust into the Water who were drowned, some that could, did swim towards the shoar, and there Inhu∣mame Villians, Bruitish Furies, ran and met them before they got to Land, and knock'd them in the head in the Water, some few escaped that did swim to the other side of the River, where the Irish could not come at them, having before broken down the Bridge themselves, and so escaped to Dublin, to be sad witnesses of this lamentable Tragedy. Mr. Blandry a Minister they hanged, after pulled his flesh from his bones in his Wifes sight. Many Ladys and Gentlewomen (which they have surprized in the Province of Ʋlster) being great with Child, they have turned them out of their houses naked into the fields, where they have been delivered without the help of any Women, and so have ended their misery, others that have escaped death in Child∣bearing,
they have mercilesly carred away upon Carts (lying in lowsie and stinking straw naked,) to places where they and their poor Infants have been de∣stroyed. There was one Gentlewoman which was Wife to Mr. King, a Dean, (Brother to the Bishop of Glogue) and Parson of Dundalke, in the County of Lowth, who having three thousand Inhabitants in his Parish, had but thirty Communicants of the Protestant Party, the rest being all Irish and Papist, and although this Gentleman did for many days together (by his own relation to me) sollicite his Wife to go to Dublin, and to remove his goods thither living at a place about two miles from Dundalke, she being great with Child, yet would not be persuaded, although she knew the Rebels were at the Newry within eight miles of Dundalke, whereupon he left her and his Family, and going to a Friend's House within two miles of his own (for fear of the multitude of the Irish, that lived about his own House) he remained there but two days when tidings was brought him, that the Irish had seized upon his Wife and all that he had, so that he was forced to fly away for his Life with his Friends, who was pursued by the Rebels about twelve miles, but through God's mercy he escaped with his precious Life (which they hunted after) with the loss of his whole estate, and Wife whom they turned out of (doors having first abused her) where she was delivered in straw, without the heip
of any Woman, and so perished. She was a charitable Gentlewoman, and in her life time had relieved many hundreds of the poor Irish, and this mercy they afforded her for her Charity. The Lord Blany escaped their cruelty, being forced to ride fourteen miles upon a poor carrion Jade, without either Bridle or Saddle to save his Life, his vertuous Lady being surprized by these Villains the same day, and his Children, who use her most ignobly and cruelly, neither regarding her Nobleness of Birth, nor her Lord, but forced her to lodge in straw with a poor allowance of two pence a day to relieve her and her Children: and to add affliction to the good Ladys misery, slew a Kinsman of hers, and caused him to be hanged up before her face two days and two nights in the Room where she lay to terrifie her, telling her withall, she must expect that end. In the County of Tir-Oen (even in that rebellious part) whith is above all other inhabited by those Romish Locusts and Wolves, which in Nature differ not from the Dog-Wolves that breed amongst them, was the cruellest murther (of all the rest) committed by some of the Soldiers belonging to Sir Philem O∣neal, that Tyronish off-spring, and Rory Mack-Guire, the Lord Mack-Guire's Brother, who are known to be the most eminent Rebells in this Treason, upon the Bodies of one Mr. Charles Davenant, his Wife, and two young Children. The Villain which first entred the House and most forwardest in cruelty
was known by his name, to one of the servants in the House, to be sometime a servant to this Mr. Davenant, and lived at the time of this Tragedy not far from Dunxannon in the County of Tir-Oen. The Servant of the house that knew him was born in Ireland, in the City of Clogher in the said County, but of English Parents, his name is Thomas Maddin, but he could speak good Irish, and so escaped, being an Eye-wit∣ness of these passages ensuing. This Swillyvane and his rout broke in forcibly into the House where they found three or four servants that made no resistence, in the Kitchin, but going farther into the house they found Mr. Davenant, sitting by a fire with his Wife and Children, two young Daughters, they imme∣diately seized upon him and his Wife, and bound them both fast to their Chairs, making a very huge and great fire, after they stripped the two Children, the eldest being not seven years old, slew them in the sight of their Parents, and after roasted them upon spits before their faces, such barbarous cruelty was never known. With great patience they were compelled (poor souls) to behold that cruelty which they could not help, after they stript his Wife, for∣cing her most uncivilly and unmercifully before his face, and afterward cut her Throat, the distressed Gentleman being overpressed with the lamentable sight of the death of his Wife and Children, strived and strugled in his Chair where he was bound, and held, hoping they would have killed him, chusing
rather to dye the death, than to live any longer. So when they had made an end of his Wife and Children in this barbarous manner, they untied him and stript him, and afterwards murthered him, when he had confest to them where his money was. There was a Letter written about the middle of November last, from Stabound in the said County of Tir-Oen, by one Mr. Birrom, unto one Mr. Cusack dwelling in High∣street in Dublin, which Letter I read and took a Copy of: and before I came out of Ireland the above∣said Thomas Maddin, came from the City of Clogher, in the County of Fermanagh unto Dublin, and testified the contents of this Letter, being an Eye-witness of the certain passages thereof, and did give God great thanks that he had escaped their hands in my hearing, for he said his Soul could not endure to be any longer amongst them, they did daily commit such cruelty, murther and outrages, upon the English Protestants in those parts. At the Burrough of Kello, or, as some Letters report, at the Burrough of Trim, being both in the County of Meath, in the Province of Ʋlster, the Rebells surprized the house of one Arthur Robinson, he himself being at that time in Dublin, which was upon the sixh day of November last, about some suits he had in Law, being in the last Michaelmas Term, he not knowing that the Rebells were risen in those parts there, he intending to have gone home to his Wife and Family, five or six days after, hoping by
that time to have ended his business, and indeed when he came from his house to Dublin, which was on the twentieth day of October, the Rebellion was not begun in any part of Ireland, but before his appointed time to return home, a Messenger preven∣ted him with heavy tidings, even his onely Daughter whom he quickly knew, though she were much disguized, for the Rebels had slain most of his Family, robbed and pillaged the House, after they had stripped his Wife and ravished her, they sought out for this young Virgin (being about fourteen years of age) who had hid her self in a Barn, where the Villains quickly found her: but she made what resistence she could to preserve her Chastity, and with a Knife she had (unseen to them) wounded one of them, which the rest perceiving seized upon her violently, stripped her, and then bound her with her Armes abroad, in such manner as she could not help her self any way, and so like hell-hounds defloured her one after another, till they had spoiled her; and to shew their unheard-of malice, were not herewith content, but pulled the hair from her Head, and cut out her Tongue, because she should not report the truth and their cruelty, but the Maid could write, though she could not speak, and so discovered their inhumane usage to her and her Mother. The Maid was sent with a letter from her Father in Dublin, to Mynhead in Somersetshire, to her Uncle William Dyer, her Mothers Brother, living within three miles
of Mynhead, which Letter I have seen here in Town, containing the Contents above written, being Dated at Dublin, the twentieth of November last. About the eighth of Januanry last, a distressed Minister came to Dublin, that had left some goods with a supposed friend, sent for them, the goods could not be delivered, unless He or his Wife came for them, he would not go, but she went, and when she came where her goods were (as if that were too little to lose her estate, but her life must go also) they hanged her up. Was there ever such Barbarism among the Heathens? In the County of Fermannagh, in the Province of Ʋlster, they murthered one Mr. Champion, a Justice of Peace, and a Burgess of the Parliament for the Borrough of Iniskillin in the said County, who was betrayed by an Irish Villain his Tenant, whom he had saved himself twice before from the Gallows. The Rogue's name was Patrick Mack-Dermot, who finding one of his Companions, brings him to Mr. Champion's House, and tells Mr. Champion that he found this Thief stealing the Cattel, the Gentleman knowing this Mack-Dermot, said unto him before one Mr. Iremonger an Attorney, I am glad thou art turned from Thief to catch a Thief, whereupon he returned him this peremptory Answer, that he was no more Thief than himself. No sooner had he uttered these words in the Court before His House, but there rushs in upon them a great number of
these Rebels, who without respect of mercy stabbed Mr. Champion, instantly before he could get into his House: so that he fell down immediately, but their fury went further than death, for they wounded him with their Skeins in thirty places after he was dead, and then cut off his Head to make sure work, whlie the rest ran into the House after Mr. Iremonger, whom they followed so close that he had not time to lay hold on his Sword to help himself, but falling down upon his Knees, and calling upon God for mercy, they fell upon him, and ran him through and through, and so he died. One of Mr. Champion's Servants escaped to Dublin, and reported this in my hearing in December last. A third was likewise slain, then the Rebells entred the House and killed more: his Wives Sister and her Brother-in-law, with two others in the house they kept prisoners, taking possession of all they had within the house and without, his Wife was down upon her Knees to beg a Sheet to put her Husband's dead Body in. And another Gentleman with other Friends that came to visit him over Night, lost their lives next Morning. In the County of Monaghan, within two miles of the Town of Monaghan, they murthered one Mr. George Foord in his Garden, a great company having gotten into a room or lost over a Stable (being between him and the house) surprized him, This was upon the one and twentieth of November last,
being the Lord's day, for when he with his Wife and Family were gone to Church, in that place they hid themselves till their coming back from Church, and so watching their time and opportunity, first set upon him without any words, and then entred the house, for the house was strong and not easily to be broken, unless they were let in at the doors, so they bound all the servants being some English, and some Irish, till they had found Mrs. Foord, whom they stript naked and bound, taking from her, her Keys, having also with them her Husband's Keys, who lay mur∣thered in the Garden, and risled, and opened every Trunk and Box in the House to find their Money, where they found but little to what they looked for, for they knew that Mr. Foord was rich and well monyed, wherefore they began with threats to kill her if she did not speedily tell them, but alas! she could not, then they fell to torturing of her, heating a pair of Tongs in the fire, and clapping them to the soals of her Feet, and to the palms of her Hands, so that with the pain thereof she dyed. After she was dead, they ript her Body to see if she had not swallowed any Gold into her Guts, and so when they had pillaged the house, and carried away with the Gentlewomans own Horses and Carts, all that was worth the carriage, they unbound the Irish servants which they before had bound, and murthered such of the English as they pleased, and then de∣parted. I heard Affidavit made of the truth and
certainty of this Massacare, in this manner before recited, before divers of the Privy Council in Dublin in Ireland. They set up Gallows five miles distant in divers places, on purpose to hang up the Protestant Spies, which they did accordingly; they likewise cruelly set Women and Men on red hot Grid irons to make them confess where such Coyn, and Money, and Goods as they had, or whether they had hid or sold any. And all these cruelties were not done without the advice and animation of the Fryars, Priests and Jesuits, and their religious men, or rather Fire∣brands of Hell; who at their Masses, and their In∣cendiary Sermons, stirred up the people to the com∣mitting of these Massacares, promising them pardon for the same, and assuring them the more merit, by how much the more they exceeded in their villainous Cruelties: they themselves being still in the first of these executions. For no stratagem of War, nor other horrid Action or Dessign whatsoever, was there undertaken, without them. They going on with their Soldiers in the head and front of every Battel, and by their mischievous Advices and Coun∣sels did make them mad, Tyger-like, with fierceness and cruelty, assuring them that to imbrue their hands in the Bloud of the Protestants (which they term Hereticks) shall add to their merits and Cano∣nization of Saints, and gain them higher places and reward in Heaven.
Mr. Jerome Minister, they basely abused who lived near Dublin sometimes; but when he was thus murthered, he lived near the Burrough of Athie, in the County of Kildare, they hanged him, then mangled his Body, cut off his Members, stopt his Mouth with them, then quartered him. This is reported a by Citizen of Dublin, now in London, to bear witness of this truth. A Proclamation was made that neither English nor Irish should either sell or keep in their houses, any Powder upon the loss of Goods and Life: except with license, and at two shillings the pound. Ministers they hate, and breath out cruelty, Massa∣caring their Bodys, burning their Books, and tearing them in pieces, and it is likely where they can light on them they use them accordingly. They robbed all English Protestants, stripping them starke naked, and so turned them into the open Fields and Mountains in Frost and Snow, where hundreds perished. They destroyed the English breed of Cattel, out of malice to the Protestants, that the poor dumb creatures fared the worse and were spoiled, though one of ours is worth four of theirs. They cut off Mens Privy Members and stopt their Mouths with them, (like cruel savage beasts) that they might commit such horrid villanies without noise, and lest their pittiless bowels might be moved with the cries of those so cruelly Massacared Protestants.
At. Waterford, some poor Protestants ready to be starved, came to the Town for relief, and their charity threw them some Bread over the wall: it is likely the Dogs should have had the same entertainment. These bloudy Papists forced the Protestants to pull off their Cloaths, and then killed them on purpose, that they might have their Cloaths without holes. After they had knocked a man down dead, they fearing he might counterfeit they doe run their Swords twenty times into his Body lest he might revive again They stripped Ladys and Gentlewomen, Virgins both old and young stark naked, turning them into the open Fields. Many hundreds were sound dead in Ditches with cold and want of food and rayment, esteeming them no better than Dogs. They laboured what they could to make death appear more dreadfull then it was in it self: they hanged up Husband, Kindred, Children, before the faces of their living Wives, and tender Mothers ready to dye for grief, a death worse than death it self, and this they do on purpose to increase their dolorous pain and anguish. They forced (as is reported) some to turn to their cursed bloudy Religion, and then persuaded them that they were fittest to dye, and then trea∣cherously murthered them, and so did what in them lay to damn their Souls.
Debtours basely murthering their Creditours. Tenants sheathing their Swords in their Land∣lord's bowels, Servants unnaturally slaying their Masters, others possessing themselves of their Lands, Goods, Plates, Money, Jewels, Houshould-stuff, Corn and Cattel, and thrust them out of door naked. Oh inhumane cruelty! Many great Men's Servants, being Irish, ran away from their Masters with their best Horses to the Rebels. Many of the Protestants usually took into their Houses, Irish Boys, as Servants, and those did basely betray their Masters, like Judas, into the hands of these bloudy Wolves. A good Caveat to look to our Servants before we take them, and to instruct them in the fear of God when we have them. Others they wounded to death, and then left them languishing, their Bellys being ripped up and Guts issuing out, they poor wretches lying on Dung∣hills, (see the charity of cruell Papists) all this lest they should be out of their misery too soon. It seems it was their delight to linger out their cruelties (like men that wanted Bowels) for whereas the primitive Persecutions were exquisitely cruell, yet they made a quick Dispatch of them: but these sons of Belial found new ways of persecution by extreme Cold and Hunger to starve (which aggra∣vates their cruelty) tender Women with Child, poor helpless Insants and sucklings.
An Irish Rebell (as a credible friend reports) snatched an innocent Babe out of the Armes of the Mother, and cast it into the fire before her face, but God met with this bloudy wretch: for before he went from that place, he broke his Neck. The Rebells burned all the Plantation Towns in the County of London-Derry. One hundred and twenty they threw into the water by force, drowning some that could not swim, others that could they knocked on the head. Many rich and great Men fled into England, and carrying their Estates with them, they left no relief for the poor distressed people that came hither. Thousands thus fled into Dublin, many hundreds starved to death with Hunger and Cold, the poor Citizens relieved them beyond their abilities the charge lying on the poorer sort. Many of their Wives they ravished in their sights, before the multitude like brute beasts, stripping them naked to the view of their wicked companions, taun∣ting them, scoffing them, and then sending them away shamefully, that they died with Grief, or starved with Cold. One Mr. Wells Minister, losing his Notes, went back to look them, and as he returned, he met the Rebells crying, Kill all, kill all, the head Rebells command. Thereupon he fled over a Mountain, was up to the Breast in cold Snow-water and so scaped to Dublin very hardly with his Life.
Three thousand six hundred poor souls fled naked into Dublin, and starved with Hunger, came to eat something and died with eating, twenty in a day∣lay dead in the open Streets, as Men smitten with the Plague. Sir James Crag being in his Castle, having many with him was besieged with the Rebels, and almost famished the Knight was constrained to put forty out of the Castle which else must have been famished with the the rest: behold the cruelty of these bloud-sucking Papists, when they were turned out, and lest to their mercy, they made quick dispatch set on them, and slew every man. Another came into an English Gentleman's House, and found him a Bed, and there began to cruciate and torture his naked Body, that he might extort of him a consession where his Treasure lay, which when this poor distracted Gentleman acknowledged in hopes to be eased, they cruelly killed him, and then stripped his Wife naked, and turned her out of doors, as if they would make all savage like themselves: and lastly, Mac-Quire took his Daughter being a proper Gentlewoman, and satisfied his beastly lust on her, deflouring her, as if that was too little to kill her Fa∣ther, turn her Mother out of doors, and abuse her himself, but like an inhumane Villain cut off her Gar∣ments by the middle, and then turned her to the mercy of the common Soldiers, to be abused at their pleasure.
Take notice of the bloudy practices, and cruelties of the Romish party, especially of the Jesuits and Priests, those fire brands of Hell, who at this very day to incourage their Disciples to murther, as is afore∣written, do anoint them with the Sacrament of the Unction, assuring them that for their meritorious service (if they chance to be killed) they shall imme∣diately enter into Heaven, and escape Purgatory, and what they get from the Protestant party, by Murthe∣ring, Robbing and Stealing, the one half shall be their own, and what man would not be willing to venture upon such conditions, to get Wealth upon Earth, and purchase Heaven for Murther. Oh damnable Doctrine and Doctours. They usually mangled their dead Carcasses, laying wagers who should cut deepest into their flesh with their Skeins. At Carvagh, near Colerane, the Rebells came to begirt the Town, Mr. Rowly, Brother to the worthy Knight Sir John Clotworthy, came forth with a small Company, about three hundred men to prevent them, they came upon them with a very great company, and slew all but eight of the Protestants, base cowardise where they want courage, they make it up with heaps and multitudes of frighted Hares, and the more fearfull and cowardly, ever the more cruel upon any advantage. All their cruelties were usually on disarmed Men, in small Villages, where was no strength to resist them, there they have tyrannized over the weaker Sex,
Women, and they basely triumphed over little Chil∣dren, their rage hath been exercised. Oh base cow∣ardise if they ventured sometimes on our Men, it hath been when they were naked, as they have been flying from those Furies which their party have newly stripped naked: by and by they met with more of those white-livered Villains in companies. They would likewise abuse those poor naked Pro∣testants like Dogs, adding to their misery, beating them and bruising their naked Bodys with Cudgels, breaking the Heads of some and wounding others, that if they had not died, they have been dangerously sick with the inhumane usage of those merciless wretches: nay, rather than they will be (no body) they will shew their manhood in abusing dead Bodys, as this story declares by very credible testimony from their own Country-men. Here I shall acquaint you with a remarkable Story, which I received from a Citizen of Dublin's testimony, of good repute there and here: wherein you may behold the promise made good to the Protestant side, which the Lord himself made to his People Israel, that five should chase a hundred. It pleased God by one man and few with him, to out-dare about thirty thousand of those cowardly Rebells, whose cause is base, whose Religion is but a mere pretence for their bloudy designs, and thus it was as that Citizen related.
A very great Army of about thirty thousand Rebels besieged Drohedah, wherein was that valliant and religious Commander Sir Henry Tichbourn, with a few of the Protestant party with him in comparison of those multitudes of Rebells, trusting to their great Army, boldly demanded the Town, if they would yield, no question, but they should have fair Quarter: But Sir Henry knowing them (its likely) very well how perfidious they were, and the less to be believed, the more they swore and execrated them∣selves, resolutely replied, and sent the Rebells this Answer. Be it known to you I am a Soldier bred, and will never yield but upon Three Conditions. 1. Before I Surrender I will kill all the Papists in the Town. 2. I will destroy all the Nunneries. 3. I will fire the Town, and march in the light of it, by the help of God, to Dublin. Nay, rather than I will give up, I will feed on a piece of a dead Horse, and if that fail, I will eat the Soulders of an old Popish Alderman. This Bone he threw among those hungry Dogs, and you may imagine how they relished it. And that remarkable instance which was published by order of the Right Honourable the House of
Lords, concerning this Noble and Religious Knight, Sir Henry Tichbourn, how it pleased God to honour him with a successfull Victory against the Rebells, they being driven in Drohedah, to eat Horse-flesh for want of other provision. The Rebells having chained up the River in hope to keep out provision by Sea, that no relief might come from Dublin, it pleased God to raise such a storm that broke the Chain, and scattered the Enemies Boats, and opened a free passage from Dublin, whereby they were relieved, blessed be God. Thus the Lord Fought for them by Winds and Seas. Pulling them about the Streets by the hair of the Head, dashing the Childrens Brains against the Posts, saying, These are the Pigs of the English Sows. And also by Land an Army lying before the City, assaulted them in hopes to famish them: whereupon this Noble Captain, Sir Henry Tichbourn, sallied out of the Town, but with forty Musquetiers, and as many Horse, beat off four hundred of the Enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore Cows and Oxen, and two hundred Sheep, burned four Towns and brought home two of their Co∣lours. Here take notice of their cowardise again attempted on a Noble Lady, by a Letter sent from seven of the grand Rebells, with her resolute and undunted Answer to them as follows.
THE Rebells Letter To the LADY OFFALIA In her Castle at Geshel. TO The Right Honourable and thrice Vertuous Lady, the Lady Digby, these give. Honourable, WE His Majesty's Loyal Subjects being at the present employed in his High∣ness Service for the taking of this your Castle, you are therefore to deliver unto us free possession
of your said Castle, promising faithfully, that your Ladyship, together with the rest in the said Castle restant shall have a reasonable composition; otherwise upon yielding of the Castle, we do assure you that we will burn the whole Town, kill all the Protestants, and spare neither Man, Woman nor Child, upon taking the Castle: Consider (Madam) of this our offer, and impute not the blame of your own folly unto us, think not that here we brag: your Ladyship upon submission, shall have a safe Convoy to secure you from the hands of your Enemies, and to lead you where you please. A speedy reply is desired with all expedition, and thus we surcease: Henry Dempsy. Charles Dempsy. Andrew Fitz-Patrick. Conn Dempsy. Phelim Dempsy. John Vicars. James Mac-Donel.
The Lady OFF ALIA her Answer to the Rebells. For my Cosin Henry Dempsy, and the rest. I Received your Letter, wherein you threa∣ten to sack this my Castle, by his Majestys Authority; I am and ever have been a Loyal Subject, and a good Neighbour amongst you, and therefore cannot but wonder at such an Assault; I thank you for your offer of a Con∣voy, wherein I hold little safety, and there∣fore my resolution is, that being free from offending His Majesty, or doing wrong to any of you, I will live and dye Innocently, and will doe my best to defend my own, leaving the issue to God; and though I have been, and still am, desirous to avoid the shedding of Christian bloud, yet being provoked, your threats shall no whit dismay me. Lettice Offalia.
These Stories I relate that all true-hearted Prote∣stants may take heart, and likewise take notice that God is vindicating his own Glory against these despe∣rate Atheists that began to insult, and to ask (as we are credibly informed) what is become of the God of the Protestants, and likewise what spirit and courage God is able to put into the hearts of those that fight for him, and for his cause against his bloud-thirsty enemies. And therefore be not dismaid you Protestants, 'tis a great honour to fight under the Banner of Christ, they fight under the banner of Anti-christ, the Lord is with you while ye are with him. See the blasphe∣mies and cruelties of these bloudy men: it is that their names (as Amalek) may be blotted out from under Heaven, for surely the day of recompence is comming, that God will make his Arrows drunk in their bloud, they love bloud, and therefore God will give them bloud in great measure. As for instance, I shall relate you a bloudy story of one of those cruell beasts. The Protestant Troopers, about the beginning of Febr. 1641. marched out of Dublin, as they used to do, to view the Coasts, they espied a cruell Rebel hewing and mangling a Woman in so horrid a manner that it was impossible to know her, having acted his Devilish part he triumphed over her dead Corpse, and washed his hands in her bloud, whereupon the Troopers apprehended this barbarous Villain in the very act of cruelty, and brought him to Dublin with his hands all bloudy, and was adjudged
to be hanged immediately, he ascended the Ladder, and would not stay till the Executioner turned him off, but desperately leaped off and hanged himself. This was in the beginning of February, and was credibly reported by a Citizen of Dublin, who saw him thus hanged with his hands all bloudy. It is remarkable to take notice of the rise of this bloudy act, it was thus. A Fryar and this Villain was drinking together in a Village, the Fryar hearing a poor English Woman there, he commanded this Rebel to murther her, which he did, as you have read, attested by a Gentleman of Ireland, of good credit. Thus these poor deluded wretches gull'd with their Jesuits damnable Doctrine, who assure them on their words, that the more cruel, the more meritorious. An Article no where to be found, but in the Devil's Creed. Would any man believe that these Villains should take Children and toss them with pitch-forks like Dung into Rivers? one was an Eye-witness (who lost a great Estate there, but since received relief from the Parliament) who saw a cruel wretch, throw a Wo∣man crying with tears one way, and her Child with a pitch-fork another way. They cruelly murthered Women great with Child, and then left them in Ditches, to the fury of their Dogs, who learned to be cruel from their bloudy Masters, for they eat the Children out of the Bowels of the Mother.
At Lesgoole Castle, in the County of Fourmanagh, they burned fifty Scots, Men, Women and Children. Sixteen Scots more they barbarously hanged at Cloy∣nes in the County of Monaghan. Thirty Scots they burned in Tolagh. It is remarkable that they dealt thus cruelly with those Noble Scots, who have been renowned through the Christian World, for their zeal against that Anti∣christian Rabble, that these Rebells would wish they had but one neck, that they might cut them off at one blow, but the Protestant Cause shall stand in England and Scotland, when they and their Babel shall be cast into the bottomless Pit. Rory Mack-Quire at New-Town, in the County of Fourmanagh, above four hundred poor Protestants fled into the Church to shrowd themselves under its roof, for safety from the rage of those men of bloud, where they might have been famished, but the mercy of this merciless beast affords them quarter to go away with their Cloaths to Dublin, and vows he will not hurt them: before they got out of the Town, the Soldiers stript some and killed others like base perfidious wretches. The Irish Lieutenant pretending they came from the King, perfidiously come under favour, pretends to borrow the Arms of the Inhabitants, as they said, to quell the Rebells, then break into their Houses, and turn their weapons against themselves, made havock, taking their feather-beds, and throwing out their
feathers, and in the Ticks, put up what pretious things they could find in the House, and carried all away, and so turned them out of doors, the next company taking away their cloaths, and cloathing them with their rags. The next company thinking they may have Money in those rags, take them also, search their Mouths, and those parts which modesty will not admit of an expression: if they can find none, they set their Skeins at their Breasts, to try if they can extort any thing when the poor Protestants are naked. Blush, O Sun! to behold the inhumane cruelties and beastly usages of these unheard of Cannibals. They enslaved the poor Protestants under them, making them work like Horses all day, digging and delving for them, and then shut them up all Night, not knowing what wages, whether life or death should be allotted, and so every Night lay trembling and praying that they might be delivered from their cruelties. Some Ministers they whipped, others they set in the Stocks, and made others to go to Mass against their wills, then told them, now that they had saved their Souls, they would hang they Bodies. A Minister seeing his Wife abused, and his Children roasted, and desiring them to put him out of his extre∣mity of anguish, which he suffered by seeing such cruelty committed on those so near him, they most inhumanely cut his Tongue out of his Head. And for a conclusion of this dreadfull Tragedy, it is related from one of the last Letters from Ireland,
that seventeen of those barbarous monsters came to a Minister's house, where they violently fell on him and his Wife, stript them naked, bound them back to back, then cut off the Ministers privy members, after∣ward ravished his Wife on his back, and then inhu∣manely cut their Throats: transcendent cruelty, ex∣ceeding Pagans and Atheists. For the Oppression of the Poor, and for the Sighing of Needy: now will I arise, saith the Lord, and set him at liberty from him that Oppresseth him. Psal. 12. 5. FINIS.
