G513 R14046 13335768 99088
THE GENEROVS ƲSƲRER Mr NEVELL in Thames-street, who allow∣eth his maid usually a black pudding to dinner. Who once bought a Pullet for his wife when shee was sicke; but he would goe to Market himselfe, because he would not be cosened by the Messenger; and brought the feathers home in his hat when it was pulled; because he would not loose them; and how he was troubled there∣with when the Lord Major seeing him called to speak with him. And how he made lamentable moane to his Neigh∣bours, that his maid had robd him; because shee gaue her Sweet-hart a piece of bread and cheese. woodcut of man LONDON Printed for Salomon Johnson, 1641.
A DIALOGVE BE∣tween the Maid and the Nurse, about their Master, Mr. Nevell his Generositie. Maid. NVrse, I will tell you what I heard my Master say even now of you. Nurse. Why, what did he say? I pray thee tell me. Ma. He said that he would turn away both you, and me: you to morrow, and me the next day after. Nur. How can I go away, and my Mistres so ill? thou talkest strangely; or thou either, why what is the matter with him now? it is the strangest man, he is never contented, never quiet. Maid. For your part he saith, that you are so chargeable to him, and put him to such cost for my Mistrisse, that he will not by any means endure it. Nur. He is a base fellow, for all he is my master, would he have to starve my mistrisse? I will have that which is fitting for her, that I will, a doore sick
woman, I think he would starve her, if he might have his will. Maid. Truly I must needs say that he is very mi∣serable, I am sure I have felt it, and known it; for I did live with him when he was a Widower. Nurse. Was he not then more generous and free, then he is now? Maid. Free? I will tell you how free he was; I was all the family he had; and he gave me but 18. s. a yeer, and we lay in bed (commonly) till 9. or 10. of the clock in the morning; and went to bed before candle light to save charges; and he would let me make but one meal a day for the most part (as him∣self had) and that was with a black pudding to din∣ner, and an half peny loaf, except by chance some∣times he cut me a slice of bread and cheese, and that very thin: which he alwayes used to lock up in the Cubboard himself, because he would not trust me with it. Nur. Had you no supper then never, nor break∣fast too? Naid. Sometimes he would cut me a little thin slice of bread and cheese; or else give me a slice of bread onely, or at other times he would give me an half peny for meale, and an half peny for butter, to make me an hasty pudding. Nurs. Oh monstrous, I never heard of the like. But what drink did he allow you? I hope you kept a good vessel of drink in the house. Maid. We had alwayes a firkin of foure shilling Beere in the house; but I could never come at it, except I went to him for the key, which was very
irksome to me to do, he gave it me so mutteringly. Nurse. Oh, fie upon it; how could you endure to dwell with him? Ma. I must tell you that I could never have born it, but that he promised me, that if I would live with him untill he died, he would give me an hun∣dred pounds to my portion; which he being old, moved me to undergo the greater hardship. Nurs. I do assure you that he is very covetous, and miserable, as ever I heard of any man in my life; if it were not for my Mistresse, I would not stay an houre in the house. Maid. Did you not hear what a trick he plaied yesterday, when he went for the Pullet for my Mi∣stresse? Nur. No, why what did he do, I know it was a very poore, lean, starved fowl; I do not think but it was some smothered pullet: was that it? Ma. No I assure you, he bought it at one of the Poulterers shops in Gracious street, it cost him 10. d. But here was the jest. We have a feather tub, and it will not hold I think half a bushell, and I have lived with him this 3. yeers and a half, and I dare say that there is scarce so many feathers in it, as will well cover the bottome of it; we have had such store of fowl since I dwelt with him: and yet he was so covetous, ihat when he had bought the Pullet, and made the woman to pull it and all, he called for the feathers, and took them from the wo∣man, and put them in the crown of his hat, and put it upon his head, and so came home: But as he was coming home, he chanced to meet the Lord Maior,
who had sent yesterday two or three times to our house, to speak with him about something, I think to speak in the behalf of a friend of my Lords, that oweth him money; and my Mr. seeing my Lord coming, went into an Haberdashers shop, and made an excuse to beg a sheet of paper to put the pullet in, to carry it home; but my Lord espied him, and commanded an Officer to go into the shop to call him to my Lord, which he did. Then was my Mr perplexed what to do, because of the feathers in his hat, to talk to my L. Major with his hat on was very misbeseeming, and not fit∣ting: and how to put off his hat, and not descry the feathers in it he could not tell. But whilest he was pausing upon the matter, my Lord himself drew nearer to the shop, and called to him, M. Nevell (quoth he, I would speak with you) then he came came to my Lord, blustring by as if he had been in wondrous haste; and giving his hat brim a little touch with his hand, went to passe by my Lord, tel∣ling him, that he would be with his honour present∣ly at his house, but now he could not stay, his wife was sick, and his haste concerned her life. But the Lord Major being very importunate, would needs speak with him. Then my M. moved his hat up and down a little with his hand, and my L. held him in talk so long, till at last the feathers began to flie out about his eares forth of his hat. What (quoth my Lord Maior) have you got a birds nest in your hat, M. Nevell, that the feathers flie about so. Then my M. put off his hat quite, and shewed it my Lord, saying, that because his wife,
had longed for a Pullet, being not well, he brought home the feathers and all, least shee should long for them too: But oh how my Lord, and his Officers, and the people about him laughed at it. Nurse. Laugh (quoth I) how could they choose but laugh; I cannot forbeare laughing my selfe. I never heard of the like to him in every thing; but me thinks this is as pretty a jest as ever I heard; how can my Lord Major, or any that saw it, choose but laugh as long as they live, every time they see him. Maid. But you little thinke what a quarter my Master keeps now? did you not heare him rayling at me even now; and I must be gone now that I must? Nurse. Come (quoth I) I thinke it will be the better for you; but what was the matter? Maid. My Master (you know) was called forth in the Morning to goe to Grayes-Inne, and as it seemes knew that he should stay forth; and therefore left me the bread and cheese out; which was I confesse a great favour from him; for he doth so very sel∣dome; but he had written upon the Cheese, which was about halfe a Cheese, within about an inch of the edge, he had written these words; Cut this Cheese even; and it so fortuned that about three houres since, a friend of mine came to see me, who when he came, I was glad that I had the bread and Cheese to set before him; and did therefore desire him to sit downe, and set it before him; you was then very busie in the next Chamber with my Mi∣stris.
But here was the mischiefe, that he espied this writing upon the Cheese, which he read, and know∣ing him to be a miserable covetous fellow, concei∣ved that he writ it from a niggardly disposition, and therfore drew out his knife, & cuts it quite through the Cheese very handsomely, and cut about halfe the halfe Cheese, which was two or three pounds, at the least, and when he had done, he took his pen and inke out of his pocket, and writ very neare the edge thus; Is not this Cheese cut even; and put the rest in his pocket; and after some few words of discourse between us, took his leave of me; and so we parted: but I was in a terrible perplexitie to see him carry away the Cheese; yet I was ashamed to forbid him. But even now my Master came in, and found his Cheese gone; but oh how he cryed out against me for his Cheese; so I was faine to tell him how it was: then he called me whore, and jade, and theefe, and I know not what, & I must be gone that I must; and now he is gone and complaines to our neigh∣bours, that I have let in theevds to rob him; which God knowes was nothing but a piece of bread and cheese, which I promised to pay him for out of my wages; but he would not heare me speake, oh, he is gone forth in a terrible chafe. Nurse. Hark, hark, some body knocks, I thinke. Maid. No, no, I warrant you, goe goe downe and see who is at dore, I will goe in to my Master. Thus they parted, and their discourse ended. FINIS.
