H570B 18762564 108222
OF THE REASONABLENESS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. By H. H. D. D. . 1 Pet. 3. 15. The third Edition. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. ROYSTON, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1650.
OF THE REASONABLENESS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. The Introduction. IT hath always been accounted more Reasonable to doubt of Principles first, and then to throw off the Deductions that naturally arise from them, then to contest the Conclusions, when the Princi∣ples or Premisses are granted. This occasioned that saying of Picus Mirandula, That the Spe∣culative Atheist was the greatest prodigy, but one, and that was the Practical Atheist. To acknowledg Christian Religion to be true, and consequently that without sincere obedience to all Christs Precepts, not onely the infinite rewards of the Gospel are for∣feited, but the infinite torments become our portion; and yet to live lives of profaneness, and luxury, and indulgence to every liberty, that suites with our humors, without fear, or discom∣feiture of minde, is a shortness of discourse, that no man that hath consideration enough to examine, or judgement to compare, can choose but discern and condemne in himself. As therefore the —nam si nul∣lum sinem esse putarent Aerumnarum homines, nulla ratione vale∣rent, Religionibus at{que} minis ob∣sistere vatum. Lucret. l. 1. Epicurean that was resolved not to be represt, or live in the awe of Religion, and Priests, counted it but necessary to dis∣believe the perpetuity of torments beyond this life, so hath it
been Satans method (and the advantage which he hath taken of these times, from the commonness of casting down mounds and hedges, of disputing, and questioning the most establisht Truths) to offer it to the Reason and Judgment of his Clients, Whe∣ther it be not more easie and hopeful to break up the foundation it self, then, while that remains in its firmness, to demolish that which is erected upon it, and by entangling men in those practices, which render them uncapable of receiving benefit by Christianity, to oblige them to endeavour to cast off the doctrines, and to rid themselves from the ill consequences of it. Thus have some men taught themselves the skill, and dexterity of unravelling principles, and by giving themselves liberty to disobey Christ in some pleasant, or gainful particulars, have at last in their own de∣fence (that they may salve their phaenomena, and appear congruou to themselves) arrived calmly to the scorners chair, the casting off Christianity it self. In stead of gainless complaints, I shall therefore hasten to give some check to this growing evil, and reduce the whole matter of debate to these two heads. First, I shall consider the Grounds of Christianity in the gross, or bulk, all of it together, and in some measure, justifie the reasona∣bleness of them; and then secondly, I shall descend in the retail, to the survey and vindication of those particular branches of Christianity, which appear to men at this time to be least suppor∣ted with Reason. CHAP. I. The Grounds of Christianity, or the Reasons upon which men embrace Christian Religion in the gross, all of it together. IN lieu of the many grounds (or several branches, and improve∣ments of the same one complicated ground) which H. Grotius, and Phil. Mor∣ney du Pleisse, &c. other men have very rationally enlarged on, This present discourse (which desires not to expatiate, nor to suppose the Reader to have renoun∣ced
his Christianity wholly) shal confine it self to these two heads: First, the Testimony on which Christianity is built: Secondly, The advantages that those, which embrace it, shall reap by it. The first will render the belief rationall, and conclude it impious to doubt of it. The second will render the belief gainful, and conclude it most uncharitable to our selves, yea, and unsafe, and treacherous not to adhere to it. The first will pronounce it, with the Apostle, a faithful saying; the second, worthy of all accepta∣tion. The first will reconcile it to our brains, the second to our hearts: The first will give it possession of our understandings; the second will ravish our wills with the beauty and luster of it. The Testimony on which we beleive Christianity, i. e. on which we beleive that Christ was sent from God, to reveal his Fathers will unto us, and to be beleived in all that he delivered to the World, (which, when it is beleived, it necessarily follows, that all and every part of Christian Religion is infallibly true, and capable of no farther doubting) is the most important, and con∣vincing of beleif, or faith, which can be imagined. For if the Apostle had not said it, it is yet in it self most evi∣dent to common sense, That Faith commeth by hearing, i. e. that I cannot believe any thing to be true on any better, nay on any other ground, but onely that I hear it thus affirmed: And as the affirmation is, such is the belief: If the affirmation be from a fallible person, from a meer man, the belief must be a fallible belief, but if the person affirming be infallible, then is the beliefe in∣fallible also. That infallible affirmer is but one, viz. God, of whose nature it is, to be veracious, to be able to do any thing, but to lie, which was also affirmed by Christ out of the Principles of com∣mon nature. Let God be true, and every man a lier, i. e. though no infallibility of testimony can be attributed to any meer man, yet whatsoever is testified by God, doth certainly deserve to be fully credited. And therefore if God shall testifie the truth of any thing, there can be no farther scruple or possibility of doubting, or sus∣pecting the truth of what is so testified, then there is actuall doubt, whether the God of Heaven be God, or whether the God of truth,
be the father of lies: which as it is a degree above the denying of Christ, and above the infidelity either of the Jew, or Maheme∣tane, or even of Heathenism it self, in that notion, wherein it signifies the . acknowledgment of more gods then one, (for all that have adoted any deity, have acknowledged that God, or gods to . speak nothing but truth) so is the pretending to it peculiar to very few since the beginning of the World. There being not many that appear in story to have affirmed that there is no God at all, and those not able to perswade others, that they did believe themselves when they so af∣firmed. Now this affirmation or testisication of God, that Christ was sent from him, to declare his will to us, &c. (upon which being once supposed, the truth of all Christian Religion truly so called, is immediately and infallibly founded) hath more then one way been authentically interposed. Such are the many repeated testimonies of the Prophets in the Old Testament (which finding a perfect completion in Christ, and none but Christ, do amount to a divine testimony.) Such was the coming of the Angel to Mary the Mother of Christ, and to Elizabeth the Mother of Iohn Baptist, in the New Testament; as also the Star which lighted the wise men of the East unto him. (and of which the Est quoque alia vencra∣bilior & sanctior historia, que perhibet ortu stellae cu∣jusdam insolitae non mor∣bos morésque prae untiatos, sed desiensum Dei venera∣bilis ad humanae servati∣onis (without question  in the Greek, though that be not extant) rerumque mor∣ialium gratiam, quam à Chal∣dais observatam suisse testan∣tur, qui Deum super natum mor eribus venerati sunt. Calci∣dius in Plat. Timaeum, p. 219. Hea∣thens themselves have affirmed, not onely that it was an especial Star, that never before appeared in the Heaven, but also that it had a portentous significancy, pointing at the descent of a venerable God, for the sal∣vation of men, and the good of Mortals) So again that of the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles, which are another kinde of Gods speaking to us in men, and upon Earth (particularly that of raising the dead) and are by the Apostles styled, what in reason they are, demonstrations, Acts 2. 22. and testi∣fications of God himselfe, Heb. 2. 4. But above all his own Resurrection out of the Grave, after he had been Crucified by them. God by thus raising him is said (most truly according to the dictates of rea∣son) to have , Acts 17. 31. given to all men Faith, i. e. an argument of full conviction, that he was what he pretended to be, and so
to . 1 Pet. 1. 21. set him out as the person to be believed on, , Rom. 1. 4. being powerfully and determinately pointed out, by that great act, to be the Son of God. But because all of these would much lengthen this discourse above the designed proportion, and because each of them are largely insisted on by others, and because no testimony is ordi∣narily deemed more Authentick, then that of audible voice, I shall therefore choose principally to insist on that one ordinary way of Gods testifying to men, known to the Jews by the title of , the daughter of voice, or of thunder, i. e. a revelation from Heaven, delivered in (or coming out of the midst of) thun∣der, which, say the Jews, was the speciall way of Gods revealing himself under the second Temple. And by this God three times gave testimony to Christ. First, im∣mediately after his Baptism, Behold, the Heavens were opened to him, i. e. visibly and miraculously parted asunder, and he, i. e. John that baptized him, saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and com∣ing upon him, i. e. descending, as a Dove descends upon any thing, visibly hovering, & lightning on them, And behold, a voice out of the Heavens saying, i. e. as the Heavens parted asunder, a clap of thun∣der came out, and with it a voice delivering these words, This is my beloved Sonne, in whom I am well pleased, i. e. this is my Son, whom I have sent, his comming to the world, and his undertaking is perfectly agreeable to, and hath its original wholly from my wil: From which testimony of Gods, it is consequent, That what∣soever he teaches, comes from God, and is to be embraced, as that which is perfectly his Will, and Law. And it is observable that in one of the old prophecies of the Messiah, where it is fore-told, that Gods Spirit should descend upon him, it is affirmed almost in the very words, which were here said to come out of the thun∣der, that this was Gods beloved, in whom his soul (i. e. he) was well pleased. So again a second time, in the presence of three sober men (which was the number, by which the weightiest matters were authentically testified) Peter, and James, and John, be∣ing all with him in a mountain, Behold, a lightsom cloud over∣shadowed them, and a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Hear him. Giving an unquestioned authority to all, that should ever come from him after.
Thirdly, At a time, not long before his death, when he was a praying to his Father, to glorifie his Name, A voice came frō Hea∣ven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorifie it again. And of them that stood by, some said that it thundred, others, that it was an Angel that spake to him: From both which, it is easily concluded, That God, whether by, or without the Ministery of an Angel, was heard to speak to him out of the Thunder. What was thus done personally to Christ, was with some small variation promised, (and so by John Baptist first foretold) that it should be performed (after his departure) to his Apostles, or Disciples, who were to preach his Doctrine, and what they knew of him, after his going out of this world; and accordingly, in the very manner which was fore-told, it came to pass, as all other things foretold by him, did punctually follow. For as they were all together; there was suddenly a noise from Heaven, as of a violent wind, and filled the whole house where they sate. And so this (styled the Acts 1. 5. Baptizing them with the Holy Ghost, i. e. Receiving them with a far higher Ceremony then that of Baptism, viz. with a shining glorious descent of the Spirit of God upon them) did at once give them their Commission from Heaven, and was a testimony of God himself, That what they should teach from Christ, was the very doctrine, which God required to be embraced by the World. And of this sort there was yet farther one most eminent pas∣sage. A known and eminent Jew, one Saul, who by his Sect (a Pharisee) and by his extraordinary warmth, and zeal to the Jewish Law, in opposition to Christianity, had interessed himself profestly in the persecuting of it, had a principall hand in the put∣ting St. Stephen to death (as appears by the witnesses, laying their garments at his feet, Acts 7. 58.) and was engaged in a most vehe∣ment, bloody designe against the Christians in Damascus, and ha∣ving gotten Letters of Commission from the High Priest to that purpose, Acts 9. 1. was now very rageful upon his way thither; This man thus breathing out threatnings, and slaughters against the Church, and as he was close to Damascus, his journeys end, on a sudden a light from Heaven shone about him, like lightning flashing about his ears; and falling to the ground, by that means he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? In words so convincingly delivered, that he knew assuredly, that it was God, that by an Angel thus appeared, and spake to him; and thereupon he gave answer immediately, Who art thou Lord? The voice replyed, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, with the addition of other words, which struck him into such a horror, that immediately trembling, and in agony of Passion, He said, Lord what wilt thou have me to do? And was again an∣swered, what he shold do, Go unto the City, and there he should receive particular Directions. Which accordingly happened, and this person became immediately a prime Apostle, or Preacher of Christianity. This thing was not done privately, but every cir∣cumstance of the story was publickly known at that time; his Letters from the High Priest were known to the Sanhedrin; and before he came to Damascus, the news of them was come thither, so far, that Ananias a Christian there, that in a vision from God was bid to go to him in such a house, made this ob∣jection against obeying the command, That this was the man, that had done so much mischief, and was now come with such a Commission to apprehend all that profest the worship of Christ in that place. And besides, there was company with him on the way, when the prodigy befel him, and all they heard the voice, and saw no body, Vers. 7. 'Tis true indeed, that in one relation of that passage, Acts 22. 9. it is said, That they heard not the voice. But that (as all other seeming contradictions of the Scripture) is easily salved by observing, that the word  in Hebrew, which signifies a voice, signifies thunder also, as Hebr. 12. 26. Whose voice, i. e. Thunder shaketh the earth, and so very often. And so where it is said, That they heard the voice, the sense is, That they heard the thunder, which was joyned with the lightning that flasht about him; and when it is said, They heard not the voice, it is exprest in the place, what is meant by it, They heard not the voice of him that spake to him, i. e. The voice of Christ immediately appearing from Heaven, and calling unto him, Saul, Saul, &c. but onely saw the lightning, and heard the thunder: but what was said to him, he onely heard that was concerned in it, but by the effects, his answers, and consequent change, they easily discerned that also, though they heard it not. This story did this man alwaies avow as a notorious Truth, whensoever he
was called in question by Jews or Romans, for Preaching Christ; and there was never any question made of the truth of it: And this went for his Commission to be an Apostle of Christ; and he never sought for any other: And after doing more service in the Church, then all the rest of Christs own (regularly chosen, and designed) Apostles, he at last laid down his life for the testimony of that Truth, which before this he had so sharply persecuted. This is not all yet; for at the beginning of the diffusion of the Gospel to the Gentile World, and for the declaring of Gods Will in that particular, there was not onely a vision to Cornelius, and an extasie, and an audible voyce from Heaven to Saint Peter, in these words, Arise Peter, kill and eat, (the obscurity of which words, and of the representation, to which they belonged, was presently interpreted by the effect.) But beyond both these, it follows, That at the Preaching of Peter to Cornelius, and the rest of his company of Gentile believers, the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the Word, i. e. probably came down upon them in some way of visible appearance, (the like Acts 10. 44. See Acts 15. 8. & 11. 15. &. 17. as before had befaln the Apostles,) or if not so, yet in such manner, as evidenced it self by giving them power of speak∣ing strange languages, and other gifts, and graces, sitting them for several conditions in the Church: And this was seen by the Jews, that were very far from being inclinable to believe such a thing of Gentiles, and being convinced by the evidence, Vers. 45. were astonished at it, rapt with admiration at the strangeness, but no way doubting the truth of it: And it so fell out, that Peter afterwards being called in question by other Jews, for what he had then done in Preaching to Gentiles, (which they thought utterly unlawful) by this relation of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon those Gentiles, Acts 11. 15. & 18 Acts 19. 6. he satisfied them; which sure he could not have done, if there had remained any doubt of the truth of it. And the same fell out again to the Ephesian Disciples, and the truth that it did so, was evidenced, by their speaking all strange languages (which they had never learned) and prophecying. Two gifts, which were so constant consequents of that coming of the Holy Ghost on any, that they testified it convincingly to those, that had no evidence of the fact.
The propriety of this descent to this turn, and to that other grand one of giving Commissions (and authorizing, and so testifying the truth of all that should be taught by them, on whom the Spirit thus descended) may perhaps be better understood, by remem∣bring the customs appointed by God among the Jews. Those that were, among them, called to be Prophets out of their Schools, were assumed, and consecrated to it by anointing, (a ceremony of ad∣vancing to some eminent office; and therefore the Chaldee Para∣phrase for unction, reads ordinarily  advancement.) Now for many yeers, before this coming of Christ, Prophecy had failed among the Jews: Under the second Temple, say they, there was no Oyl, nor any Gradus Revelationis Divinae quatuor, Nesuah prophetia per visio∣nem, & spectra. Ruach Hacadosh, afflatus Spiritus Sancti, qui erat sinc istis, ut in David, &c. Urim & Tummim in pectorali judicii (splēde∣scentia pectoralis, seu Hoschen prae∣nuntians Judaeis victoriam, quod cessavit splendescere. An. 200. an∣tequam ego scriberem, inquit Jo∣sephus, cum Deus irasceretur ob transgressiones Legum, vid. Suid. in voce Ephod) & Bath Col. i. e. vox coelitus audita, & haec ultima erat sub templo secundo, &c. vid. P. Fagi∣um in Targum Pentat. Exod. way of Revelation, save only that of the voice from Heaven. Now therefore when God was thus pleased to send His Son, to reveal his compleat Will unto the World, and from him to continue the same, by his Apostles, and others after him; in stead of that solemn Cere∣mony of Ʋnction, is this visible descent of the Holy Ghost on him, and on them, in a shining fiery cloud, and with it these words of consecration to Christ, This is my Beloved Son, &c. and in lieu of that voice, the gift of Tongues, to the Apostles, and others. This was foretold by one of the Jewish Prophets long before, That the Lord should anoint him to Preach, and that the Spirit of the Lord should be upon him, i. e. that he should be anointed, i. e. or∣dained to this office of Preaching Gods Will, not by material oyl, but spiritual unction, by the real descent of the Spirit of God up∣on him. And accordingly one of his Disciples, Saint John, being to confute a sort of Antichristian Hereticks of his time, which denied Christ to be come really in the flesh, useth no other Argument (to fortifie them, to whom he writes) but onely the mention of this Testimony from Heaven, this descent on Christ and the Apostles, and others, who had instructed them in Christianity; which he vails under the title of the Ʋnction, viz. that unction vulgarly known among them by that name; the unction from the holy One, as he calls it, i. e. from God in Heaven, 1 John 2. by which (as by their Teachers it had been communicated to
them) they knew all things (i. e. were sure that the Doctrine they had been taught, was true) and needed not to be taught by any, i. e. wanted no more Arguments to confirm this truth unto them: That unction, as he farther addes, teaching them of all, i. e. giving them sufficient instructions in that matter, and in all other such fundamental truthes of the Christian Doctrine, testified to them by those who had been thus anointed immediately from Heaven, authorised to teach them Truth: This same again, as far as con∣cerned Christ, is by another Acts 10. 38. Evangelical writer joyned with his working of Miracles, and called Gods anointing him with the Holy Ghost, and with power, (as in Acts 4. 27. another place Gods anointing him, alone) which is directly the same with that other phrase used by Saint Paul, the Cor. 2. 4. demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, the descent of the Spirit, and working of Miracles: The two things, which he urged to the Jews or Heathens, wheresoever he preach∣ed, (as things, which he was sure, they could no more contradict, then demonstrations themselves, there being so many then alive, that could witness the truth of them.) In which respect, he after tells them, of Gods having confirmed them into Christ, and an∣ointed and sealed them, all in the same sense, to signifie Gods having afforded them these convincing testimonies of the truth of Christi∣anity, preached to them by those, on whom the Holy Ghost had descended and who wrought Miracles among them. That this was a very competent confirmation of the Doctrine of Christ, may yet farther appear by considering, first the persons to whom this was to be done, the then Church of God, the people of the Jews, which were acquainted with his voices, and his Pro∣phets, and his Oeconomies formerly among them: Secondly, the matter that was thus to be confirmed, no greater change, then to which this way of attestation may in reason be deemed abun∣dantly proportionable. For the things to be beleived, onely the real completion of some things, which had been before foretold, and the revealing some truths, which had been more obscurely represented in the Old Testament; and then those, how high and mysterious soever, yet being clearly revealed by Christ, and the A∣postles in the New, and the explicit belief of them, no further re∣quired of any, then in proportion to the degree of the revelation of them, the revealing of them must be looked on, as the satisfy∣ing
of an appetite, a desire of more knowledg (which is naturally in all men, and is sharpened by the having received some imperfect rayes of it) and consequently should not in reason be expected to be attested with such a pomp of signes, and prodigies, as impo∣sitions of tasks, and exactings of obediences are wont to be. Then for the things to be done in Christianity, the duties and observan∣ces; It is again considerable, that the change in that respect was not such, as would denominate it a new Religion, but onely the re∣forming and perfecting that which was before received among the Jews, and the making it more tolerable and easie to be received by other parts of the (Gentile) World. The worship of the one true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, (contrary to the false worships of the many gods, and idols of the Heathens, and to all the unnatural lusts attending them) had been sufficiently testified to the Nation of the Jews, by many voices from Heaven, and undeniable attestations of God himself (and indeed to other Nations by the fearful, miraculous judgments, shewn in Egypt, and on the Cana∣anites, under the conduct of Moses, and Joshuah, &c.) and by Gods continual residing among that people, and his attesting that by the Ʋrim and Thummim. by the several Prophets sent by him, and the other ways of revelations. And to those that granted all this, it was foretold (so often that no Jew doubted of it) that there should come days of Reformation, that there should come a Messias. This was long ago promised through all passages of their story; to Adam under the title of the Seed of the woman; to Sem, that God should dwell or pitch his tabernacle in the Tents of Sem, take flesh upon him in his family; to Abraham, to Judah, to David, and all along through the writings of their Prophets: Concerning this Messias, their carnal hearts had pre-conceived some mistakes, as that he should be a glorious King here, and make them again, (after their being subdued by the Romans) a most victorious, glorious people on Earth, and this, howsoever they demean'd themselves, onely by the priviledg of having A∣braham (to whom great promises were made) to their father. At last this Messias (otherwise described by their Prophets, as one that should come in a mean and lowly manner, no way desireable to the eye of the world, Isa. 53.) comes just as he had been fore-told, a forerunner being sent before him, on purpose to prepare
his way, to dispossess them of their fond perswasions of their ab∣solute election (by having Abraham to their father) and pointing him out particularly as the Son of God, the Messias that was now to be received (as he had been so greedily, and so long expected) by them. This forerunner, that thus foretold, and after pointed him out, was (as they, that crucified Christ, confess) by all the Matth. 21. 26. Jews taken for a Prophet. And moreover to this testimony of this acknowledged Prophet, comes in the addition of the miracu∣lous descent of the holy Spirit, and the voice from Heaven, and all that hath been mentioned consequent to that. And to those, among whom this had always been acknowledged an authentick way of attesting Gods will, nothing could be more required but this; Christ then (or God himself in humane nature, assumed of a virgin, and born after a supernatural manner) when he came to thirty yeers old (the age of a Doctor among that people) sets to this business, which it was foretold he should perform, tells them how the former law was to be reformed, (and especially their former lives, from external observances to internall purities) and how to be filled up, and perfected in some particulars; and then lightly changes some ceremonies customary among them, and accommodates them to present use, removes the wall of di∣vision, which had been between them, and all the rest of the world, shews them, that that was meant onely to keep them from imitating the Heathens sins, and now that there was more need that Heathens, and they should love one another, and joyn to reform both their lives, and practice Christian virtues, then keep that supercilious distance from one another; and in a word, he brings the whole matter to such a model, as all other men, but the Jews, like extremely better, then that which was be∣fore among them, and consequently, come in, in sholes, at the preaching of it: And the Jews, that doe not so, acknow∣ledg the onely reason why they do not, to be their zeal to their law of outward performances, and the perswasion of their absolute election, that is, in effect, that they had no other quar∣rel to him, but onely that he did not teach the doctrines that they liked, and were before imbued with, which if he had, he had by that very means done contrary to the prophecies by them allowed of, which foretold he should work a reformation.
Upon these unreasonable terms, they crucifie him: And by their doing so, more wonderful attestations yet are given to all this. In his very death the Sun is miraculously eclipsed▪ at a time of the Moon, when by nature it was absolutely impossible, and so far against all rules of Astronomy, that learned men in other places took notice of it to be a violence done to nature, which must sig∣nifie some great matter. Then a prodigy befalls the Temple, and that a very significant one. Then the bodies of many dead men a∣rise and go to Jerusalem, and are seen by many. But above all, he himself riseth from the dead, and Angels again are sent to give no∣tice of it: And those that at his death had feared themselves de∣luded (as adversity is a great temptation, and by Christ himself, foretold to be so) are every one of them confirmed by seeing, touch∣ing, talking with him: And what is seen, and testified by them, was seen also by five hundred persons at once, which lived many years to attest the truth to all that doubted it; And at length (which was the must immediate testification of the truth of all the former) he is bodily and visibly taken up into Heaven, before their eyes. When that was done, there was but one imaginable method behinde, that, according as he had promised, while he was upon Earth, he should, being himself departed, send the Paraclet, which by descending visibly upon the Apostles, and by enduing them with the gift of doing Miracles, and of speaking of all Languages, which they were known never to have learnt, should enable them to convince the World, by the testimony of Christs Resurre∣ction, and Ascention, and destroying of Satan by his death (the most improbable means of working victories) that he was the Messias foretold, that Seed of the Woman, that should break the Serpents head. On strength of this, they which so lately doubted, now cheerfully lay down their lives, in testifying of all these truths: And those Jews that did not yet believe on him, were according to his distinct predictions, many times repeated, (they, their Temple, in which they trusted, their City, their whole Nation, and infinite multitudes of them, wheresoever they were found) most stupendiously destroyed by the Roman Eagles or Legions. All this (thus hastily put together, so as necessarily to omit many weighty circumstances under every head) is sure
prodigy enough to attest, and authorize no greater a change, then the clearer Revelation of some obscurer truths, the confutation of some false Doctrines, and the Reformation of some ceremonies, and the perfecting and heightning of some Laws less perfect before, and the instituting of a few useful ceremonies in stead of many burthensome ones, can be thought to amount to. This first gound of beleiving Christianity being thus menti∣oned, is not capable of any dispute from any reasonable man, unless from him which shall question, whether this be not fabulous in the relation, i. e. whether first there were ever indeed heard such voi∣ces, or secondly, whether they were not delusions of the hearers, or at least the voice of some other, and not of God. And to him that shall make the former scruple, I shall be able to give as sa∣tisfactory an answer, as is possible to be given, of a matter of this nature, of any the lightest or weightiest consequence: To a matter of this nature, I say, i. e. of a matter of fact, (for such it must needs be, that such a voice was heard from Heaven) and that fact past so many hundred yeers ago: For first, that fact was of necessity to be confined to some determinate time and place, to be done somewhere, and why not in Judaea, where it is said to be done? to be seen by some particular men, and by them of ne∣cessity (if it were to be known) to be attested to others; nay, if it had been done so as to be heard, and seen by the whole World then living, (though that this should point out that one person Jesus, would not be well reconcileable with that, because his body could not be in every place) yet could not the next Age come to know this, but must be forced to make use of the attestation of men of that Age to reveal it to them, and so proceed by the very way that now is allowed us, that of faith or beleiving. For secondlly, should there at this hour come the like voice from Heaven, in the hearing of any the most creditable honest men of this Age, what way would be expected to convince the Ages to come (who should not be present to hear it) of the truth of this, but by the constant affirmation of those, who are now ear-witnesses of it, and by their committing all this to writing now, so that all that should now live, and suspect, or beleive it a forgery, might be able to exa∣mine and discover the truth of it; especially, if to that they should joyn the doing of the greatest Miracles, which coming onely
from God, cannot be conceived to be by him allowed to assist the bringing a lie into the World. Beyond such testimony of eye, or ear-witnesses thus publickly and authoritatively protested, and conveighed to posterity, there is no rational evidence imaginable, for those that lived not in that age; nor doe men at any time exact or require any more authentick proofe of matters of fact, or ground of believing any thing. For as to the voice of God again from Heaven, (which alone can pretend to be above this) this is not at all commodious to this turn; for this were for God to multiply prodigies, impro∣perly and unseasonably, 'tis sure unnecessarily, and to all that were not present, this would be again as questionable as the former. For the testifying an high important truth, which cannot otherwise be known, God hath been pleased thus personally to in∣terpose his own power, and authority, and to speak from Heaven, yea, and to repeat that again and again, that there may no matter of doubt remain concerning it: But when that hath been thus done by God sufficiently, then are there sufficient humane means to convey the truth or history of this fact to other men, viz. the testimony of those, that saw or heard it. And as it were ridicu∣lous to suppose, or expect from God, that he should testifie from Heaven, that such men did hear that former voice from Heaven, so the same Law of God, and Nature, which forbids lying, as sinful, forbids also incredulity, as irrational, when a thing is by unsuspected witnesses, upon certain knowledg, with so many im∣provements and advantages, thus sufficiently testified: And if God upon mans several incredulities, should be still obliged to give witness to his truths by his own voice, then should he cut off that rule for beleif, which in all other things (agreeably to the dictates of reasonable nature) he hath made standing among men. And in this case to require any higher testimony, were the same incon∣venient absurdity, as not to beleive any thing upon any other ground, then that of sight (which is indeed to mistake knowledg for beleif, or evidence for adherence, and must necessarily leave nothing of virtue rewardable in that Faith, which is so violently and unavoidably produced) or to expect a voice from Heaven to give me daily assurance of all the passages, or relations of history,
and not to beleive that there was such a man as Alexander, or Caesar, or William the Conqueror, or Elizabeth the late (but before our birth) Queen of this Kingdom, unless some voice of God from Heaven attest it to me. They that cannot beleive at any cheaper rate, then of a new minuitly prodigy from Heaven, for every act of beleiving a pro∣digy from Heaven, or (more plainly) they that will not beleive any thing, but what they know, must be fed also as well as taught by miracle, or else must be obliged to abstinence (greater then any man inflicts upon himself) by continuing constant to that princi∣ple. For no man hath demonstration, or infallibility, or evidence, for his safety in any bit of meat, that he eats, or the firmness of any floor he stands on; it being always possible, that what doth most nourish, and sustain, might by some poysonous mixture, smite and destroy; that the roof that covers, and protects, might mi∣nuitly overwhelm and bury us; yet are we not such Hypochondriacks in these matters of daily use, (and in them that are▪ it is interpre∣ted an eminent defect, or decay of reason, and not an higher pitch of it) as to deprive our selves of the benefit of food and raymen, upon consideration of these remote possible dangers, nor to fear all things but what we know infallibly. And if it shall be said that eating is necessary for the preser∣vation of life, and that that consideration makes it reasonable to trust on those grounds, because by distrusting, we should subject our selves to a certainly of that, whereof the other is at most but an hazard; I answer, First, that this instance was produced onely to shew, that we think it reasonable, without fear, or doubt, to relie on some things, for which we have no demonstration, or knowledg of the impossibility of the contrary, and that is still proved by this instance, though it be granted, that eating is neces∣sary; because if the necessity of eating were the cause that made men venture that hazard, they should never venture it, till they were necessarily to starve without it; and when they did so, they should do it with continual doubt, and fear of the possible danger; neither of which are thought rational, nor practised by conside∣ring men. And secondly, the interpretation of [being fed] in the instance, was [the whole course of men in feeding] which is not the proportioning of food to the necessities of life, or the Lessian
or Cornarian diet, but the free manner of feeding among men, such as wa parallel'd to the standing on a floor, that might possibly fall, that is, being in an upper room; which being not at all necessary to life, and withall possible in nature that it shall minuitly be our death, is yet made use of among all Wise men, with as much confidence, and fearlesness, as it is expected of us, that we should beleive the Gospel. This may be enlarged to the severall businesses of the World, wherein all men act most confidently; to that of Trafficking, and Trading, and all kindes of Merchandizing, which are really mixt with not improbable hazards; the whole life of the husband∣man, is a continual example of those, that think fit to adhere, and beleive, and act accordingly, without having received any demon∣stration. And none of all these are ever counted irrational, even by those who have fixed no thoughts beyond this life, and the thriving, and prospering in it, and who consequently are to lose their chief, and onely good, if it should miscarry, and who in all things of that nature are generally as rational, and wary, and hard to beleive without securities, as the wisest men in the World. And if we will in the business in hand (the beleiving of the Apostles relations concerning those Testimonies given Christ from Heaven, wherein we have infinitely stronger grounds, to build our Faith on, securities, and convictions incomparably more pregnant and vehement) allow it reasonable for us to do that once, which in all other things we do confidently every minuit of our lives, viz. beleive, what we have all reason to beleive, without exacting of evidence or demonstration, there will be no more re∣quired of us in this matter. That this is directly the case in hand, and over and above this, that the testifying of the Gospel hath all imaginable advantages, wil appear by a bare application of the particulars. The voices from Heaven concerning Christ, are testified by the joynt-concurrence of all that were present at them, no one finding any cause of scruple, or interposing any doubt concerning them. Those very persons with the addition of many more, are allowed the favor of seeing him after his Resurrection, of using all the most infallible means of securing themselves and others
of the reality of this. Being thus assured, they make it the business of their whole lives after to communicate it to others, some in writings, all in preaching through all parts of the World, (whither they travelled on purpose to propagate this truth) agreeing in the whole matter of story, and in every circum∣stance of it. The truth of what they say, they again back with Miracles on one side, with completion of predictions, both of the Prophets of old concerning Christ, and of Christ, concerning them, and the succeeding Ages, (especially that concerning his speedy coming in vengeance against his crucifiers) on the other side: Both, Testimonies of God, to authorize their testimonies. In propagating this doctrine, as they use not strength, or force, which hath been the engine by which all other Religions have received their growth, so they never endevour to disturb States or Go∣vernments, for (or by) the planting this Doctrine, but always Preach subjection to the powers, which are any where established, and without all resistance, Profess (and by their actions demon∣strate) themselves obliged to suffer, whatsoever their lawfull Magistrates inflict on them, and contend only with their prayers to God, that they may live quietly and peaceably under them, ha∣ving still their cross in their hands, and many times on their shoulders, to follow Christ. And if this were not sufficient to pre∣vent, or to satisfie the jealousies of Heathen Princes, yet, upon that very account, it is the greater testimony of the truth of their Doctrine, when they that propagate it, are so far from design∣ing any temporal advantages to themselves, which might bribe them to the deposing an untruth, that they actually part with their very lives; and consequently with all capacity of those possible advantages, and acquire nothing but reproches, and torments and death it self; and all this without any other imaginable reward, or payment, in commutation, or reparation for all this, save only the future expectation of that, for which they yet had no farther assu∣rance, then the truth of that, which they thus confest; nay yet far∣ther, when they have given this costly testimony to this truth, God again bears testimony to them, and by Miracles wrought at their Monuments, being dead, they yet speak. That all this is thus true, is again it self testified, not onely by records still extant under their hands, who wrote the Gospels,
and the Acts, and by footsteps and remainders of all others preach∣ing, wheresoever they taught, but also by the like consent of the whole Church, i. e. whole multitudes of that age, wherein this is pretended to be written and taught, who being convinced with the truth of what we now enquire after, readily gave up their names to the belief of it, and to the consequent confession of Christ, though the doing it, did in like manner cost them very dear, the parting with their espoused customs of livings, whether among the Jewish, or Gentile world, their pleasures, their worldly wealth, and oft-times their lives also. Beyond all this, the success which attended it, had so much of strangeness in it (viz. that from such mean and simple be∣ginnings and instruments, without any kind of power, or earthly authority to back it, without one sword ever drawn in defence of it, Christianity should soon obtain such a victory over the heart of men, in so great a part of the world) that nothing but truth, which hath that over-ruling force in it, can be deemed to have been its Champion. Lastly, that these are the writings, those the tradition of those eye-witnesses, whose they pretend to be, and that they were by such sholes, such multitudes of men of all Nations believed then, and that belief signed by the blood of many, by the hazards and adventures of most, by the profest non-resistance of all, this is as fully testified to us, as any matter of fact can be supposed to be, by the concurrent testimonies of all of that age, which say any thing of it, and by a generall successive attestation of all in∣tervening ages, since that time, (the authority of Among the  the confest wri∣tings of Scrip∣tures, attested by all, and not  contradicted by any, . Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. . The four Gospels are first to be placed, and then the story of the Acts of the Apostles. those wri∣tings being never contested by any) i. e. by the same means of probation, upon which we believe those things, which we least doubt of, and against which men cannot feigne any sound, or shew of proof, save onely that testimonies are not demonstrati∣ons; which exception will in like manner be in a like or far greater force against all other things, which we believe most con∣fidently.
I am not willing to leave any possible scruple unsatisfied in this matter, and therefore I shall proceed to that other bolder ob∣jection still behind, That that which is pretended to be the voice of God, may not have been such, but some delusion of the hearers, or at least the voice of some other, and not of God, as the de∣vil in the oracle delivered himself by voice; and therefore though it be confest, that if this voice were Gods, it is infallibly credit∣able, yet there will need some certain way of discrimination, to assure it was his. To this I answer, That the person whose ob∣jection this may be supposed to be, is either a bare Theist, that acknowledges a God, but not the God of Israel; or else he that acknowledges what the Jew did, the truth of the Old Testament: I shall reply somewhat to each of these. To the former, That if this way of objecting would be of force, there could be no way for God to reveal himself to man, Veracity would be an empty attribute of God, of no signification to us; For it is not imaginable that there should any greater assurance of Gods speaking to men, then by the Heavens open∣ing, and from thence the Spirit of God descending visibly, and lighting on one, and out of the clouds a voice delivered; what∣soever else can be imagined or named will not be above this. And if all the ways that God can use, be not able to give assurance, that it is God that speaks, what are we the neer for knowing that God cannot lie, as long as there is supposed for us no way to know, what at any time he saith? nay, to what use (as to this particular) is his omnipotence, if he cannot reveal himself to us in such a way, that may be reasonable for us to believe to be his, and not some deceivers voice? Nay, in this, God shall not be able to doe so much, as any ordinary man; for he can so reveal him∣self, or speak, as no man that is present, and doth not stop his ears, shall be able to doubt of his speaking. To the second sort of objecters, I answer, That the objection will lose all its seeming force, if it be remembred; that although now among us, voices from Heaven, are not heard, and (therefore we are not at this distance so competent judges of the clearness or certainty, that such, when they were, were not delusions, and accordingly the assent required of us of this age, is but proportio∣nable to the grounds of belief, which we enjoy) yet among that
people of the Jewes, this was very ordinary. Gods Law was given to Moses in that manner, and God lead that people by a pillar of cloud, and fire, which was answerable to this: And in after times under the second Temple, they confess this the onely way of Gods revealing himself to them. And therefore in this very matter it was allowed, and pleaded by some prime men of that people, that if the Spirit, or an Angel had spoken to Paul, the re∣sisting him would be a fighting against God: And thereupon, Acts 23. 9. they confessed, that they found no harm in him; that God had thus spoken to him, those men then thought probable, but did not avow the knowing it certainly, having no present evi∣dence of the fact, save onely the affirmation of Paul himself at that time. But had they had evidence of the fact, by being pre∣sent at it, (as they that testifie the voice to Christ, were eye and ear-witnesses of it) they would not then have thought reasonable to make any farther question, whether that, which they call the voice of the Spirit, or an Angel, were such or no, and being such, whether the resisting what was spoken by it, were the fighting against God. For the testifying therefore of the truth of such pretended facts; and indeed to leave no place for rational doubt in this matter, there is yet a farther answer, That the power of miracles, and the gifts of tongues that attended these voices, and descents of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, were irrefragable testi∣monies, and evidences of the reality of them, and could not be the immediate effects of delusions, being such as could not be wrought by the power of the devil, nor ever were pretended the effects of his oracular responses. Many other ways of discrimination there are, by which the voices of the devil, or delusions magical might be distinguished from Divine, as that of concordance with predictions, acknow∣ledged to have come from God; and such was the voice that was delivered at the descent of the Spirit upon Christ, the same that was foretold by the Prophet, and by him joyned with the mention of the descent of Gods Spirit upon him. And to the same belongs also the completion of the so many other things in him, which had certainly been foretold of the Messias, which Concordance with Divine truth, is most diametrically contrary to delusion. And besides, of the miracles which he did, most were to dispossess,
and cast out divels, (to restore health, as they brought diseases) who consequently look on him as (and proclaim him) their enemy; and although this may be thought to be done by them for some greater advantage (as the Devil may suffer one charm to counter-work another,) yet could they not here be thought to have used those endevours to raise Christ into that power of destroying them, or to assist their utmost, to give him an authority in the world. Indeed the whole doctrine of Christ was so di∣rectly contrary to that, which had been maintained by the Oracles, that it cannot be imagined to proceed from that principle, to which they pretend. And the story is approved by Plutarch (and the effect hath made it not improbable, that there was some truth in it) that about Christs time, a voice was heard on the Sea, that the great God Pan was dead, and an huge bellowing, and roaring, as of infernal mourners, following it; and that this was probably the cause, acknowledgedly the forerunner of the Devils silence, and never speaking in the Oracles any more. As for the manner of the Devils giving his Responses in the Oracle, it is confest by all, that then lived, and knew them, that they were delivered constantly by a man, who was seen, when he did it, and was called the , one that spake under the Oracle, out of the caverns of the Earth, (by the vapor of which Plutarch conceived him inspired, and so turned Enthusiast) which is a far different thing from a voice (no man being seen) which came in a clap of thunder, with a bright shining cloud from Hea∣ven. This may reasonably satisfie the importunity of that ob∣jection also. And so much for the first part of the ground of our Faith in gross, the testimony on which it is built, which being an infallible word, derived and conveyed to us by the most creditable means, and which we have no temptation from Reason to doubt of, may sure be concluded a rationall ground of belief.
CHAP. II. A Digression concerning the use of Reason in deciding Controversies in Religion. HAving proceeded thus far for the convincing of the gain∣sayer; it may not be amiss to consider the beleiver awhile, and give him the bounds or limits, within which Reason is obliged to contain it self, in matters of Faith, and this even by the ver∣dict of Reason it self. And I shall do it by a brief stating of this Question. Whether Right Reason be appointed the Judge of Controver∣sies? Whether all doubts of all sorts be to be determined by the dictates of Nature, in the Hears of every Man which hath the use of Reason? To this I shall ground my answer in these two Rules, or Postu∣lations. 1. That The measure of mans natural power of knowing or judging of things, is his participating of those things (in some degree) with God, in whom they are as in the Fountain. So that the man may finde, and behold them in himself as truly, though not as eminently, or in the same degree, as they are in God. For certainly, if a man denudate of all experimental, acquired, revealed knowledge, of all forain helps, left onely to himself as a man endued with Reason, should be questioned in any thing, and supposed able to express his conceptions, he would be fain to fetch out every word that he said, from within him, say onely what his own heart could discern within himself, otherwise he should be supposed to answer more, then he had means to come to the knowledge of; The work done would be above the proportion of the means to it; the conclusion would have more in it then the premises. From hence follows this second Rule, That Men are naturally able to judge onely of those things, which by some sure connexion depend on those attributes of God, which are communicated to (and particularly by) men, and are the like (as
far as the adumbration or transcript, is to the exemplar or pattern) for kinde, though not degree, in man as in God. Now all Controversies, (i. e. all things subject to judgement) are reducible to two heads, Goodness or Truth; so that the Question now is, Whether Right Reason can infallibly judg, what is good, or bad, true or false? And then to this I answer, First, Concerning the first Head. For a thing to be good morally (for Metaphysical goodness is all one with truth) depends, by sure connexion, from that eternal justice which is primarily in God, That being the rule, as it is the Fountain, of all moral goodness in men, or things: Every thing be∣ing good, more or less, as it more or less partakes of that justice, which is in God. Now this being one of the attributes of God, which are called Communicable, it is truly affirmed, That that justice, which is in God, is the very same in substance, communicated to men, though in a lower degree. And therefore it follows by the second rule, that man by the light of nature, and general impressions, i. e. by a power of seeing, whatsoever is within his sphear, is enabled by God to judge what is just, what not, what morally good, what bad. And no man judges amiss in these things, but he that hath his judgement corrupted by some prepossession, or habituall vice, or present prevailing temptation; and therefore of moral Contro∣versies, i. e. whether a thing naturally, or in it self, be good or bad, just, or not, Right Reason is a Judg. Yet this with this Caution, or limitation, that it be not extend∣ed to those things, wherein the Law of Nature hath been eleva∣ted higher by any positive Law of Christ. For as Right Reason: cannot judge what is lawful in any particular Kingdom, because what Nature hath made lawful, the Municipal Laws of that place may have forbidden, and made unlawful, (and that Right Reason cannot take notice of, unless it be told so) so in Christs Kingdom, the Church, when he hath forbidden what Nature had left free and unforbidden, Reason (untaught by Christ) cannot say, that that is unlawful, yet generally will be found to bear that Testimony to Christ, that what Christ hath super-added to the Law of Nature Right Reason will of its own accord commend, as best, or most laudable, and excellent in them that do it, though
not knowing any precept for it, it will not affirm that it is necessa∣ry, so as it cannot be omitted without sin. Then concerning the second Head, I answer, That for a thing to be true, i. e. to have a Being either potential or actual, depends partly on Gods Power, partly on his Will. In respect of its potential Being, it depends on his Power, in respect of its Actual, on his Will. Now Gods Power, though it may in some sense be said commu∣nicable to the Creature, because all ability in the Creature is a gleam of infinite ability in God, yet is not this so communicated, as his Justice or Goodnesse was said to be. For Goodnesse in the crea∣ture is a kinde of image truly resembling the goodnesse in God, and that a kinde of natural image, as is the face in the Glasse, not a voluntary one, which hath its Being from the variable Will of the Artificer. But power, or ability in the Creature, is not thus a natural image of Gods power, but as a reflection of a thing, which voluntarily, and variously casts its beams. Voluntarily, I say, be∣cause the dispensing of his Power, either in manner, or measure, is a free act of his Will; and variously, because he doth it, first, un∣equally; and secondly, not so to any, but that he can (and some∣times doth) withdraw or suspend it, when it is bestowed; so that I cannot say, that as that which is just in God to be done, is just to be done by the Creature, so what is possible to be done by God, is possible to be done by the Creature. The reason of the not communicating of Gods Power to the Creature, as well as his Justice, may be this, because it conduced not to the end of the Creatures Creation, as the other did: For though God intended to make a Creature truly good, and just, yet he did not truly powerful. Power indeed being in it self not a ver∣tue, as justice is, nor in it self morally good, or evil, and therefore not so agreeable to the condition of a Creature, but rather indeed peculiar to the Majesty of a Creator. From all this it follows by the said second rule, that man is not able to fathom Potentiall truths, because Power is not the same in substance in God, and in the Creature, and therefore by what is in the Creature, he is no way enabled to conceive what is in God, and so consequently to define of any Potentiall truth, be∣cause though it may not be wrought by any thing that is in
the Creature, or within his sphere of knowledge, yet it may be by God. All the natural impression, or light, that in this behalf a rational Creature hath, is that two contradictories cannot be true at once, and therefore I think, all Principles that are not thought fit to be proved in any naturall science, (if they be truly so) may easily be resolved into this one, A thing cannot at once be, and not be. And this natural impression rises not from any observation of the power communicated to the creature, (for then still it would hold, that though man cannot do contradictories at once, yet God may) but from a sight, that this would be an effect of extreme impotency, more then is conceiveable in any Creature, and therefore cannot be imputed to God, who is conceived Omni∣potent, nor consequently to man, unlesse God should take away all degrees of power quite from him, and then he should be an∣nihilated. Now for actual truths already in Being, which are works either mediately, or immediately of Gods Will, our Reason is no farther judg of them, then as Gods Will is communicated to us by some Images, or Pictures of it, either substantiall and reall, as when a thing done, is presented to the faculty, to which it is objicible, there a real image of Gods Wil is imprest in me, (& by that I may judg distinctly) or when it is revealed to me either from God, or from any other witnesse, of which in this matter I am convinced, that he partakes of Gods veracity, i. e. would not lie to me, and this may be called an intentionall Image of Gods Will imprest in me. Thus may Right Reason judg of things in Being, either because it is so really represented to the senses, and that is evidence; or because is either revealed, or else attested by God, which Rea∣son knows can neither erre, nor deceive, and this is adherence; or because such a concurrence of testimonies agrees to tell me so, as I have no Motive or Reason to disbeleive, and this is humane Faith, (which may reasonably take place, untill I either see some∣what, or receive somewhat by an higher testimony revealed to the contrary) which also is weaker, or stronger, according to the im∣portance of the matter, authority of the testifiers, my particular dan∣ger, if I be deceived in it, &c.
Hence the Conclusion is, That Right Reason is able to judge of all meerly Moral objects, whe∣ther any thing be good or bad morally; of Naturall objects in matter of fact, whether such a thing be done or no, by the help of the means specified, and by discourse, and analogy from things that we see are done, to judg that such another thing is possible: But of supernatural truths, such things as it never discerned in Nature, either in the kinde, or the like, it cannot judg any far∣ther then thus. Either first, that though we cannot do it, yet for ought we know it is possible, (nay it hath a Being) with God; or secondly, that God hath affirmed it so, therefore I am sure it is; or thirdly, that comes to me from authority, that I have no reason to suspect, but on the contrary concurrence of all Reasons to be perswaded by it; nay, there are some inward Characters in the thing it self, that makes me cast off all jealousie or doubt of such affirmations, and therefore I believe it is so. But generally, and in thesi, it is no way Judge of these last kind of Contro∣versies. And therefore though God, in moral actions, even in himself, submits and appeals to mans reason, Isa. 5. 3. Ezek. 18. 25. yet in these latter he derides all those, that goe about to judge of them by reason, 1 Cor. 1. 20. And agreeably Saint Paul in his Preaching the Gospel, for the proving the truth of Christianity, was fain, saith  Cont. Cels. p. 4. Origen, to use a peculiar way of demonstration. First, by comparing of Prophecies in the Old Testament, concerning Christ: Secondly, by Miracles; but in practical matters he appeals to that which was written in every ones heart, Rom. 2. 15. To this purpose hath Eulogius an Oration against those, who think to be able to comprehend the true Theology of Christians (i. e. Christians discourses concerning the Persons of the Deity) , p. 862. by the Wit, or Reason of Man; and Photius hath approved of that discourse of his, that he doth . talk of God Piously, and devoutly, and set Christian divinity a pitch beyond humane wisdom, . superior to all other Vid. Just. Mart. p. 5. & 6. A & 8. C. 9. A. So Just. Mart. p. 375. A. & for the , p. 379, So for the  of the union of Christs na∣tures, 382. B. , 386. B. 387. D. 388. A. artificial method, or rules of Art.
In sum, it is observable in the writing of the Scripture, that generally in defining these last sorts of Truths, Gods authority is set down, as the onely proof of what is said, without using any o∣ther way of arguing, or secular demonstration: All that is indulged to mens Reason, being onely this; First, to consider, whether it be not very equal, and reasonable to believe God, without any other motive, or topick of proof, even in those things, which are above, or beside Right Reason, nay, against the proposals of corrupt; and secondly, to search (by what helps soever a reasonable mans prudence and diligence can suggest, or furnish him with) which is that Word of God, which contains these revelations, which Reason tells them, they must believe without farther reason∣ing. But not to suffer my self to believe any thing (though reveal∣ed by the Scriptures) but what Reason otherwise would lead me to, is the same that Celsus perswaded the Heathens (of his side) to, against Christ, to . Orig. cont. Cels. p. 8. follow Reason, and the rational guide in all the doctrines, we receive, all error and deceit being, saith he, brought into the world by Faith; and that they that believed any thing without Reason for it, are like them that delight in Jug∣lers, &c. and therefore he laughs at all those who requiring not Reason for what they believe, use this phrase, . Doe not examine but beleive, thy Faith shall save thee, as men that are displeased with wisdom, and in love with folly. To all which Origen, as acute a Reasoner as any, opposes nothing, but the Evidence of Prophecies, and the Word of God for this rule of Faith. Which if it be not simply beleived without any Philosophical rational enquiry, con∣cerning the things affirmed in it, many will of necessity still wal∣low in infidelity after all that God hath done for the rescuing them out of it, and only a few find that by rational search, which before they beleived by simple Faith.
CHAP. III. Of the power of the affections and interests in matter of Faith. THe belief of Christianity being in the first Chapter supposed to be thus sufficiently recommended to the understand∣ing, which is a wel-natured faculty, and very ready to hear Reason, when it is offered to it: There is but one obstruction possible, and that is from mens affections, or interests, and that by two ways of proceeding: First mediately; secondly, imme∣diately. First, they work mediately by the will, and have sometimes that unhappy institence upon that, as by their importunity to perswade it to interpose, before the full representment or proposal of the object, and so to hinder the free access of the Argument to the understanding. Thus we see it often in prejudicate and passionate men, who are impatient of hearing or considering any thing that may dis∣possess them. And thus we see it sometimes in those of a better temper, who yet being unwilling to lose any advantages, which they can make use of to maintain their present perswasions, are so intent upon their own part of the dispute, that they do not receive the opposite Arguments, with that equal Justice of im∣proving them to the height, with which they are offered, or to which if it had happened, that they had undertaken the mainte∣nance of the other part, they could have heightned them. This latter, being not an effect of so great a distemper, is not so dis∣cernible (to our selves especially) as the other, but yet is a fault, and that of ill consequence, and a deviation from the rules of distributive Justice, which would allow as much of our attention, or diligence to the improving of the Arguments of the one part, as of the other, and express as impartial a kindness to the Neigh∣bor as to my self. And in all this the Will is culpable for being thus (more or lesse) instrumentall to the affections. And so it is Ne∣gatively also, whensoever we do not use that industry of search as our condition permits, and the importance of the matter requires of us,
But then secondly, The affections and interests do themselves immediately, sometimes, perform their own business, they cloud and darken the understanding, and make it less capable and recep∣tive of such representations as are made to it. This made Aristotle to affirm, That Pleasures are in some men . corruptive of principles, i. e. that those common dictates of nature, &c. which are by all unbyassed men naturally consented to as true, and unquestioned, do yet to voluptuous men (and the same holds in matter of fear, and interest, and the other passions, and ill habits also) become matter of dispute, whether they be true or not; not because in Reason any thing can there be offer∣ed sit to infuse scruples into a rational man, or to combat with the far greater potency of Reason on the other side, which denomi∣nated them principles, but because these rational dictates having somewhat in them which is contrary to, and unreconcileable with passions, and sensitive pleasures, those consequently that have indul∣ged to them, and espoused them, as the most desireable things, do, for the enjoying of them, undervalue, & despise the rational Argu∣ments, which would cost them so dear (even the parting with their lusts) if they continued in that reputation, which is due to them. Hence is it, that the more prudent of Heathen Philosophers have proposed it as the best preparative, to the studying and search of truth, to have mens affections and appetites well re∣gulated first (though not by reading, or studying the Books, and Science of Morals or Ethicks, yet) by . Simplic. in Catheg. Arist. assuetude, and virtuous custome, by inartificial precepts, and sober education, &c. modera∣ting and tempering their passions, and bringing them , Anonym. Schol. in Categ. to live Or∣thodoxly, . Id. lest having their Reason disturbed by passions, they be not able to pass an exact judgment of things; And without this, say they, it is as impossible for a man to behold and judg aright of truths (such truths as have any thing any way contrary to passions) . Hierocl. in Praef. ad . as for a man with sore eyes to behold illustrious splendid objects, without being anointed or cured of their distemper.
Accordingly it hath been observed in the first Ages of the Church, that luxurious and intemperate men were of all others most hardly brought to beleive the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, and Immortality of the Soul, because their carnal joyes being so material and gross, and contrary to what Christ hath taught of an Eternall life, and of Spiritual bodies, and bliss, their being so deeply engaged, and immerst in the former, fortified them pertinaciously against all impression from the latter, and enabled them to hold out finally against the belief of those Christian Truths, which others of more ruly tem∣pers, upon equal Reasons, and the same representation, did most readily embrace and assent to. And it is worth our present consideration and enquiry, whe∣ther they which are now most willing to entertain doubts of the truth of Christianity, are either more sharp discerners of truth, then all others, that are not (or then themselves, before they) arrived to this pitch of Stanchness, and Scepticism; or again whether they have seriously spent any considerable time in re∣viewing their Principles, and, doing so, have sprang any special new Arguments, which they had not considered before, and those of such weight with them, that they wil contentedly expose them∣selves to all the torments of Hell (the sure reward of an Athei∣stical Antichristian life) upon the bare probability of those their Arguments, (which cannot be rationally done by them, unless their pretensions against Christian Religion exceed ours for it, in strength of credibility, as far as an eternal Hell exceeds those short sufferings of this life, to which Christianity betrayes us, or as an eternal state of spiritual bliss in Heaven, doth surpass the transitory, unsatisfactory short pleasures of sin in this life) or whether it be not really their freer indulgence to some liber∣ties, which Christianity admits not of, (and that more against light, and against the importunity of Gods judgements, then be∣fore) or perhaps some change of affairs abroad, which hath made the practise of Christianity a more inconvenient, costly thing, then it was wont to be; most men being willing to have the advan∣tages of Religion, as long as there be but few, and supportable encumbrances, that attend it; and after changing their opinion of it, when they have run any hazards by it.
Which truly is so far from being new, or strange, that it was a part of the Character, that our Christ set upon himself, and his Doctrine, both in that parable of the Seed, that fell upon stony ground, which is supposed to be scorched at the rising of the Sun upon it, and by that cloze of his answer to Johns Disciples, Blessed is he that is not scandalized at me, foretelling them that the most eminent and considerable danger to Christian Religion, is, That they which in prosperous times are forward professors of it, will, when their Religion begins to offer them smart, fairly forsake, and fall off from it. Thus much hath been premised to this second Head of Ar∣guments, on purpose to shew the influence, that matter of advan∣tage may have on belief, and that on either side, not onely where mens interests do chance to thwart their perswasions, but also, and as discernibly, when they appear on their sides, to assist and confirm them. For so certainly did the sweetnesse, and wel-tastedness of the Manna work as effectually on the Faith of some Jews, make them as willing to adhere to God, and Moses, in opposition to re∣turning to Egypt, as the new miraculous manner of the coming of that down upon them; and the Milk and Honey of Canaan, were very good motives, and alectives, and engagements to the faith, and obedience of others: And so in like manner the carnality of the paradise, that Mahomet promised to his disciples, hath much advanced the credit, and facilitated the beleif, and disguised the grossness and absurdities of the Alcaron. And because advantages are not to be disliked, because they are such, but because they pretend, and are mistaken to be such, when they are not, and by so doing, do rob us of those that are truly so, or that are infinitely weightier, and more considerable; and because that which is really the most advantagious, is always most rational, most prudent for man to choose and pursue, and aspire to: Therefore it is, that to the former Argument of the reasonableness of the ground, or testimony on which we believe Christian Religion to be true, I now proceed to the advantages, that those that embrace shall reap by it, both because most mens Objections against Christianity, are founded in an opinion, that it is not an advantagious profession, and would have no other
quarrel to it, if they were satisfied that it were, and also because though advantageousness no way contributes to the making, or proving a thing to be true or false, yet it doth to the making it more or less worth beleiving, or embracing, (for every slight truth is not such) and so more or lesse fit to be set up in our hearts, as our Religion. For that by Religion every man entertains hopes of acquiring somewhat of benefit to himself, and would not chuse to enter in∣to those bands, if he did not promise himself some advantage by it, is a maxime, which I shall not think fit to prove, or confirm in this place. CHAP. IIII. Of the advantages of Christian Religion in the gross. THere is nothing therefore after the testifying of the Truth, so proper for this present disquisition, as the consideration of the advantages of Christian Religion, and those advanced above all other imaginable advantages of any other Religion, as much as the credibility of Christian Religion is above the credibility of any other that pretends against it. This I am by my premised method obliged to consider here onely as true in the gross. And that will be done by this one consideration, which hath been enlarged on Second Ser∣mon on Mat.  30. in other Papers: That the Precepts of Christ, especially his supperadditions to the former Laws of Moses, and of Nature, are, beyond all the con∣trary vices, or the lower degrees of the same vertues, perfectly agreeable to Humane reason, cultivated, and improved, and height∣ned by Philosophy; so that that shall confess those things to be still most commendable, and most excellent, which Christ hath thought fit to command his followers. This might be demon∣strated through all particulars; but I shall more strictly restrain my self to the advantages of a Christian life, by considering it first in order to outward, and secondly, to inward advantages. The outward advantages, are again more publick, or more pri∣vate:
Or the publick there is none sure more valuable, and more fundamental to all other, then that of Peace, and that is so immediately and inseparably annext to the Christian Do∣ctrine, that would men think fit to be guided by that rule, were but Christs precepts constantly practised, there would be no occasion of destemper, or disturbance, through the world, either between Christian Potentates among themselves, or betwixt any Christian Prince, and the Subjects of his own Kingdom. First, In What state or condition soever a man is placed in any Nation be he King or Subject, this commands him most strictly therein to abide with God; every man to content himself with his present portion, whether it be of Soveraigntie, or of inferior estate under subjection: Then secondly, wheresoever the Supre∣macie of power is placed by the Laws of any Kingdom, there Christ requires subjection, and non-resistance in all subjects; and both by himself, and in the writings of his Disciples Matth. 22. 21 Acts 23. 5. Rom. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 18. repeateth and impresseth that far more earnestly on the subject, then he doth the dutie of protection on the Supreme; and where they Ephes. 5. 22, 25. & 6. 1, 4, 5, 9. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 7. conjoyn them both, there they begin constantly with that of subjection in the inferior, as being of more universal concern∣ment to the peace and preservation of the whole, and as that which earns the superiors performing of his dutie, as a due re∣ward to their obedience. Thirdly, Christ prohibits self-love, think∣ing highly of ones self, all covetousness, ambition, animosites, re∣venge, doing, or returning of injuries, whisperings, backbitings, di∣strusts and jealousies, all scrupulous preventions of remote possible dangers; and fourthly, he commands doing as we Would be done to, blessing of enemies, contempt of the world, not valuing any thing which is most tempting in it, and, above all things, pursuing of peace, with all men, (in the greatest extent imaginable) as much as in them lies, and whereever it is possible, even over the whole world. And fifthly, the Precepts delivered by Christ, (plain and intelligible to all) as they are a standard, by which every man is to measure his own actions, so are they also to examine others, and consequently they will fortifie against seducers, and slie distur∣bers of a peoples peace, if, according to Christs direction, we trie them by their fruits, and reject and stop our ears against all those, whose doctrines bring not exact concordance to Christian
practise along with them. And where these precepts are put in practise, what possible inlet is there left, for disturbance or sedi∣tion to enter? After Peace, Plentie is the most desireable publick good, and that is hardly separable from the former; but, beside the con∣tributions, which all the fomenters of peace have made toward plentie also, Christian Religion hath peculiar waies of ascertaining any people of that, if its Laws be embraced and practised: For, first, Christ commands labor, and industrie, and diligence, banishes the idle, as a . 2 Thes. 3. 6. disorderly walker, disbands him as soon as he ap∣pears to be such. Secondly, he makes the rich man his Almoner, or Steward to distribute to every mans wants, as he is able; and as he blesses his liberalitie; and renders it the most probable course to make him rich, so he convinces him, that gathering, and hoarding up wealth is the meanest, and withall the most disadvantageous follie, and that the only real commoditie, in riches, is the joy, and happiness of relieving others, and the enhansing of their future reward by so doing. Thirdly, he forbids rapines, de∣fraudings, gaining to our selves by any other mans losses: And fourthly, by putting the wealth of the world in a channel, to de∣scend from superiors to inferiors, from him that hath to him that hath not, from the part that is filled, to that other that is emptied, he makes a certain provision for every part of the bodie. And be∣yond all this, fifthly, he hath taught men, that all the good of plentie is to be enjoyed in a competence, or a sufficience, (and that there is onely more trouble, and more charge, and more fears, and more temptations annexed to any greater abundance;) And sixthly, he hath given all his faithful servants assurance, that he that hath the disposing of all, and knows what they have need of, will never so destitute them, that they shall want these necessarie things. And when plentie is thus interpreted, and these provisions made for it, there will be little possibilitie, that any people that live according to these rules, shall fail of that cer∣tain benefit of them. Then for the private outward advantages to every Christian liver, they will be as discernible also. And these are of two sorts, First, those that have an universall influence on the comfortable∣ness, and cheerfulness of the Whole life, without which neither
health, nor Wealth, nor any particular advantage, will have any taste or relish in them. Secondly, Those particulars of health, &c. Of the first sort, I shall be confident to prefer the observance of one Christian Precept, Attending to a mans particular call∣ing, which, as it is the strict dutie of every Christian, of what rank, or quality soever, so is it that, which sweetens the whole life to him, that lives orderly according to that rule. It is certain that assuetude, and custome hath a moral efficacie in it, to make every thing pleasant, that is accustomed, (were it not upon that score, it is not imaginable, that some sins to some men, which have natu∣ral aversions to them, should ever be taught to go down so smooth∣ly.) By this means, business and bodily labor it self, which at the distance seemes most uneasie, to those that have been brought up in it, proves most pleasant and delightful. To such an one idle∣ness, and Want of employment is realy the most uneasie affliction of his life. And for him that is not brought up to either of these, yet we see by experience, and are able to give the reason of it, from the active temper both of the bodie, and minde of man, that there is no such constant torment, as the not knowing what to doe with his time, the having his hours lie upon his hands; for the remo∣ving of which, most of the vain, or sinfull mixtures of our lives are sought out, as cures, or divertisements, and having no real pleasantness in them, do yet imitate some, by ridding us of the contrary uneasiness, the burthen of that idle time, which is made more supportable by such varieties. Thus hath that uncharitable, and very mean qualitie of censuring, and bakbiting, and deriding of others, become so frequent, and fashionable in the world, (so inseparable from all our conversations, the onely modern good companie, as it is called) onely because many persons have no other imployment for their time, but that of talking, and of that sort this is the most obvious to those, who have neither zeal enough to their own good, nor so much of friendship to those with whom they converse, as to make the faults of one another (in order to the reforming or fortifying one another) the subject of their discourse. To this and all other sins and vanities of this na∣ture, this dutie of attending the calling, is a certain Antidote or Cure: The advantages of which cannot be more eminently ex∣exemplified,
then among those men, who by mistake are conceived to have no Obligation of Calling upon them, I mean those, of the Nobilitie and Gentrie in a Kingdome. I shall inlarge on this in∣stance a little. The Calling of those that are not born to Estates, of Possessi∣ons, is generally acknowledged to be somewhat of labor, or in∣dustry for the acquiring of Wealth, and to them may reasonably be confined that part of Adams curse (which is yet sweetned to Chri∣stians by Christ) that in the sweat of their brows they shall eat their bread. But then, those that have ample possessions left them, suffi∣cient for themselves and familie, (and much more) and besides, a perpetuitie of that to their families for ever, are certainly un∣der no such obligation to labor, to encrease so fair an heap, or to spend that pretious time and sweat, and industrie on the bring∣ing more water into the Ocean, or indeed more Weight unto that burthen of wealth, which lies already an encumbrance (more commonly then a real advantage) on their shoulders. Their call∣ing therefore, without question, consists in the scattering, not en∣creasing, in the discreet, charitable distribution of that yeerly re∣venue, which is committed to their stewarding, i. e. in the using that wealth (to the richest advantages they are able) to the service of God. Such is the spending their time, as Citizens not of one Ci∣tie, but of the World, enquiring what is the dutie of mankinde, and how they may serve God cheerfully in those Precepts of Christ, which are of the greatest perfection, observing the wonderful things of Gods Law, and the harmonie which those notes of dis∣cord make, which to the unskilful or untuneable ear are so harsh. This and much more in reference to God, and then in order to men, the well ordering of that part of the Common-Wealth, wherein they are employed, the releiving of those that want, the attracting inferiors, by Exhortation, Admonition, Correp∣tion, (but especially by exemplarie acts of all pietie) to the prac∣tice of Christianitie, and, as much as in them lies, bringing vir∣tue into countenance, and reputation, into fashion, and credit in the world. That Wealth, and eminencie of place are very proper instru∣ments toward this end, will not be needfull to be demonstrated here, all that is seasonable will be, to consider what a Treasure of
Joy and Sweetness would come in to every such person in a King∣dom, by a constant cheerful attendance on the severals of this call∣ing, every one of them infinitely more proportionable to the appe∣tites of a generous, ingenuous minde then any thing else, which his ambition could suggest to him: Nothing vulgar or mean in it, and (beside all the particular delights in every act of each) the great transcendent comfort of having satisfied Conscience, the not having lived an unprofitable burthen of the Earth, the having, in some measure, performed the task, for which he came into the world, would be to him that comes to reap them, unspeakable ravishments, though, at the distance, perhaps the sensuall designer discerns not such excellencies in them. Next are the several particular external advantages, as they are the desired portion of every individual man, (which beyond all other prudential methods imaginable) Obedience to Christs Pre∣cepts provides for us. Of this sort, First, the health of the bo∣die (the foundation of all other outward comforts) cannot bet∣ter be preserved from diseases, then by strict rules of constant temperance, and sobrietie, and of fasting, and abstinence some∣times, of continence, or conjugal chastitie, of active and industrious pursuit of the business of the calling; nor can it better be secured from wounds and maims, and violent deaths, then by mildness, and quietness, and sobrietie, and bearing of injuries, all which are the speciall charges of Christian Religion. The very same practises, beside these proprieties of advantage to the health, and ease, and strength of the bodie, have in them a far greater delight, and pleasure, and gratefulness to the senses, then any of the unchristian contraries. No pleasure in eating and drink∣ing, like that in the temperate feeding on the plainest, wholesomest diet, and so in the rest. For Reputation, another special outward advantage, it is clear, that besides, that Christian Religion teaches every man to think better of others then himself, forbids judging, and reproaching, and backbiting, and so most certainly preserves that Jewel entire to every man. The practise of Christian Virtues, commands esteem and value even from those, which least exercise them them∣selves. The proud man cannot chuse but reverence the meek, the debaucht man the temperate, the greatest self-seeker him that
most divests himself of all his self-interests. There are not three things in the World, which so certainly bring a good reputation along with them, as Charity, and Humility, and Constancy; and these three are the prime commands of Christian Religion. After the outward, I proceed to the inward advantages, the ad∣vantages of the Soul, and those either of this life at the present, or in order to another life. The Christian Precepts tend evidently to the bettering of the soul in this life: First, by purging it: The Heathen Philosophers, Porphyrie, and divers others, especially the Pythagoreans, were much concerned in the pollutions of the soul, which they discerned, and beyond all things in the World desired, and endevoured the purging them out, sought to Magick and Sorcery to that end, but terribly mistook in that way to it. Our Christ hath done this by the Grace, and Doctrine of Repentance, as far as is necessary for an inferior State. And so, is foretold by the old Prophets under the style of [the desire of all Nations] and [the exspectation of the Gentiles] as he that brought with him in his precepts and in his graces, a full satisfaction to all the gaspings, and thirsts, of the most rational, and earnest appetites about us. Secondly, by cultivating it with all usefull knowledge, and true wisdom. For such, by the Oracles own confession, is Practical Knowledg, and of that kinde all the Philosophers that ever were, never ascended to so high pitches, as Christs one Sermon in the Mount hath done. Thirdly, by satisfying it, allowing it here those injoyments, which of all others a rationall soul is pleased with, 1. The plea∣sures of friendship, of profitable conversation, admonishing, and instructing one another. 2. The pleasure and speciall ravishment of relieving, and refreshing those that want, of making a poor man happy. 3. The pleasure of contentment, and desiring nothing but what we enjoy. 4. The pleasure of victories, in resisting, and over∣coming temptations of all sorts, but especially of overcoming evil with good; and, whenever there is any unpleasant mixture, then 5. The pleasure of a difficult obedience, thereby to approve our love and zeal to him, who hath given himself for us. And fourthly, by daily rewarding of it: 1. By the comforts, and joyous reflexions of a good conscience (as that is set off by the
contrary Hell and torments of a bad.) 2. By the severall eases that the severall Christian virtues give men here, the ease of patience, contrary to the uneasiness of rage, the ease of contempt of the world contrary to the perpetual drudgery, and toiles of the worldling, the ease of the continent man, contrary to the flames, and ds∣quiets of the libidinous. 3. By the present experience of Gods lo∣ving kindness here, in answering of those Prayers which are useful for us; in denying those which would be hurtful, in restraining us sometimes, in exciting us at other times, in speaking peace to our souls, &c. 4. By conversing with God by meditation, by thanks∣giving, singing Hosannahs, and Hallelujahs to him, the most joy∣ous employment in the World. Nay, by a perpetuall cheerfulness, rejoycings alwayes, which, as it would be another mans reward, so is it the duty of a Christian. 5. By the exspectations of a re∣ward in another life, which though future, is yet by the be∣nefit of two Christian virtues, faith and hope, forestalled, and anticipated, and made present to us. And all these, if there were not infinitely more, were sure advantages enough, to entertain a short life of fifty or threescore years, and secure it from being wearisome to a Christian, or from needing those sinful, shame∣ful, unworthy divertisements, that all other sorts of men, on pur∣pose, that their time may not lie upon their hands, are fain to seek out unto themselves. Lastly, the advantages, which a Christian reaps by Christ, are in order to another life. And those I shall best represent to you, by shewing these two things. 1. The Valuableness of the reward promi∣sed by Christ, and aspired to by Christians, infinitely above all other rewards, that any other Religion pretends to bestow upon men. 2. The Attainableness of that reward, and the blame that will light on none but our selves, (so that we shall be bound to acknowledge our selves most stupidly wretchless, and irrational) if we do not at∣tain to it. For the former, the Valuableness of the Christians future re∣ward, infinitely above the wages of any other Religion, that will appear, 1. by the Immaterialitie, and 2. by the Eternity of it: Both those it is defined to be by Christ, and by being so, is con∣cluded to be an eternal, infinitely blisful state; And that Christ said true in that, neede not again be proved, God Himself
having been proved to bear him witness, that all that he said is true. The Immateriality of this reward demonstrates it agreeable, and proportioned to the nobler part of us, the upper or rationall soul, all other grosser pleasures, the Mahumetans enjoying of Wo∣men, and the Jews long life in a Canaan, being gratifications to the viler parts of us, our senses, or bodies, and to those too, in their vilest state, as they are natural, not as they shall be spiritual (and equal to Angelical) bodies. Having said this, I need not adde the shamefulness, and empti∣ness, and unsatisfactoriness of all bodily pleasures, proceeding part∣ly from the covetous ingrateful condition of that best-part of us, as the heathens have styled the body, partly from the great meanness, and poorness, and baseness of all bodily contents, (so un∣worthy to be the ambitions▪ or any thing, but the servants, and at∣tendants of the reasonable soul) and the instant satieties, and irk∣somnesses, that they alwayes are attended with, such, as nothing could make any meer man place any considerable value upon them, were not he either cheated into it at the distance, by the false glosses that other men put on them, and by seeing, what hazards are willingly run in pursuit of them; or were he not early engaged in an habitual indulgence to them, which makes that difficult to part with, which he hath enjoyed so long, and consequently which imitates some pleasure, (and is mistaken for it) by the contrary painfulness of giving it over. Whereas on the other side, the immaterial, spiritual, more sub∣lime satisfactions to the pure undefatigable Spirit, the rational, immortal soul within us, as they cannot be liable to those base∣nesses, and emptinesses, so neither are they in danger of those satie∣ties; and by satisfying, and blessing that part of us, which is in∣finitely most excellent in our natures, must of themselves necessari∣ly be concluded most superlatively excellent, and deserve, as such, to be infinitely preferred, and most valued by us. Having said this one thing of the immateriality of the Christi∣ans future reward, and agreeableness to that part about us, which alone is worth providing for (the happinesses of the other inferior parts being consequent to, and included in this, and a provision withall being (by the wisdom of our God) made for them that they shall no longer desire, or want those enjoyments, which
is perfectly the same, if not, with some advantage, better, then if they had them) it is not possible any farther improvement, or ac∣cession should be made to this reward, but onely by the perpetu∣ating of it. And that is that other part of Christs promise, That the bliss, which he thus bestows, shall in respect of its own plenitude never be exhausted or diminished, nor again, through the Repentance of the doner, or the envie of any other, ever be withdrawn or forced from us. And this is a great enhansement, and evidence of the ratio∣nalness of our Religion, how severe soever Christs commands, or how rigid his exactings are supposed to be, or what sharpness soever we here are forced, or permitted to endure, in ap∣proving our obedience to him. If there be any difficulty in the obe∣dience, or ungratefulness in the sufferings of a Christians life, yet the abundant recompense of the present advantages, and, after those, of the soul-ravishing unspeakable bliss (infinitely above the weight of the hardest; or roughest part of Christ task of performances, and above the proportion of the sowrest portion, that any pious man tastes in the afflictions of this life) were they supposed to be of the same equal duration, would make our hopes, and patience, and perseverance perfectly rational, according to the ballances with which indifferent men weigh, or Husbandmen labor, or Merchants traffick here on Earth. But when to every minuit of a pleasant, not painful obedience, to every mite of pressure (which God that sends, gives strength also to bear cheerfully, makes matter not of patience, but victory, and rejoycing to us) there is most immutably ascertained to us by Christ an eternal (ETERNAL) weight of glory, how impossible is it, that those few soure drops of so short transitory obedience, and patience, should not be drowned, and lost in that vast Ocean, whereinto within a while they shall be really, and at the instant, by Faith, and Hope, they are (in effect, and by equivalence) poured out? If there be any thing now left disputable in this matter, it must be, whether it will not be justly deemed irrational, that God should so over-heap his measure, so over-proportion his wages to us, reward that so gloriously, which, if there were never a
Heaven hereafter, were, at the present, reward sufficient to it self, and infinitely preferrable before the condition of any other mans life. But the advantage of that being on our side, we shall have little reason to dispute or complain of it. The onely thing imaginable to be replied, will be, that Christs infictions are as immaterial, and as eternal, as his rewards, and the reason not presently discernible, why our short, empty, nauseated pleasures, the sins of a short life, and the joyes of those sins, far shorter then the shortest life, should be punished so sadly, and so eter∣nally. This scruple of the Atheist hath been searched to the bot∣tome, and answered Pract. Cat. last Edition. pag. 303, 30. in other Papers; and the brief of it is this, That the choice being referred to us, to take of the two, which we best like, Eternal death set before us on the one hand, to make eternal life the more infinitely reasonable for us to chuse, on the other hand, and the eternal Hell (whensoever we fall into it) being perfectly our own Act, neither forced on us by any ab∣solute decree of Gods, nor irresistible temptation of the Divel▪ nor our own flesh, but as truly our wish and choice, and mad purchase, nay, much more truly, and properly, then eternal Heaven is (when our obedience is first so wrought by Gods Grace, and yet, after that so abundantly rewarded by the doner,) it is certain that if there be any thing irrational, it is in us unkinde, and perverse Creatures, (so obstinate to chuse what God so passionately warns us to take heed of, so wilful to die, when God swears, he will not our death) and not in him, that hath done all, that is imaginable to be done to reasonable Creatures (here in their way, or course) to the rescuing, and saving of us. And so this hath by the way demonstrated also, the attain∣ableness of that reward, and the no kinde of fault of Gods (he hath sent his Prophets, his Son, his Spirit, his Ministers, his Mer∣cies, his Judgements, all sorts, and new methods of working deliverances: and salvations for us and all slaughtered, and cruci∣fied, and grieved, and abused by us) but all meerly of our selves, if through our irrationall prides, or sloths, we do not attain to it. I shall not need therefore farther to inlarge on that, especially having Pract. Cat. 1. Sect. l. 1. p. 6. elsewhere abundantly demonstrated the truth of it.
CHAP. V. The exceptions against some particulars in Christian Religion; and 1. Gods dispositions of Providence. IT now remains that I proceed from the gross to the retail, from the general to the particular view, and consideration of those particular branches of Christian Religion, which seem to men at this time to be least supported with Reason. And they will be of two sorts, either concerning Gods Providence, or concerning Gods Commands now under the Gospel. The first concerns his wis∣dom in dispensing the things of the World among men, the second his choice of duties, wherein to exercise us. For the first of these, it will briefly be reduced to this questi∣on, Whether it can be deemed rational, that injustice should prosper, and patience never be relieved or rewarded in this life, as it is every where taught to be the Method of God, and is most eminently exemplied on Christ himself, in his own person, in the Gospel. Where first, If the question were, whether Injustice could be really favoured by God, or by him so approved, and encouraged, as to be thought worthy of any the least reward, though but of a cup of cold water, by him, or (as consentaneous to that) whe∣ther Injustice by going unpunished here, and by being triumphant in this World, might be thence concluded to be an act either of sanctity or of innocence, owned, and commended, and justified by God, by its thus prospering, I should then, I confess, acknow∣ledg this to be irrational, and not plead, or undertake to be the advocate of that Religion, which should teach one such Doctrine as this. For this were to make a God (who by being such, is supposed to be of an immutable wil, and justice) to become inconstant and contradictory to himself, to forbid oppression, as contrary to his wil, and yet without making any change in the matter (with∣out withdrawing what he hath given to one, and disposing it to another, as in the case of the Aegyptians Jewells, and the Ca∣naanites land) to reward it, as agreeable to his wil, to pronounce
that no covetous person, without repentance, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet to give the covetous, beside an in∣fallible title to the Kingdom of God, continued to him, as a spe∣ciall Saint of his, the addition of all the blessings of this life. In a word, this were the same irrational thing, as to affirm, that thief, which prospered in his assault, and actually robbed the Traveller, and perhaps killed him too, to be by that means turned honest man, and that nothing but miscarrying in his attempt could denominate, or demonstrate him a thief; that no sin were any lon∣ger a sin, if it were once acted, no oppression any longer oppressi∣on, if it were permitted to come to its fulness; that every the fou∣lest violence as soon as it were come to the height, bearing down all the resistances of divine and humane Laws, and force, did then presently cease to be violence, and by being the lowest fiend in hell commence ipso facte the most rewardable Saint: And there∣fore the onely Religion, that hath been known in the World to maintain and countenance this, that of the Turk or Mahometan, I profess to believe absolutely irrational. But for Christianity, that is so distinctly contrary to this, that the great fundamental History, upon which all our Religion at once is built, is the most lively example, and doctrine of the con∣trary. For when Christ himself was delivered up into the power of wicked men, and by them arraigned, and reviled, and cruci∣fied, not onely the Disciples, which were his constant atten∣dants, but his Army of Miriads of Angels, that were alwayes at his command, doing nothing toward his release, when this consultation of the Sanhedrin became successful, and obtained the desired event against him (the highest, and most prosperous oppression of the greatest innocence and virtue) then though there were more circumstances, which might affixe this on God his Father, and seem to draw him into partaking in it, then we finde recorded of any, or all other sinful actions (as that Gods Hand and Counsel did foredetermine this to be done, that God foretold it by all his Prophets, and from the certainty that they could not lie, doth, when it is done, conclude, that Christ ought thus to suffer, that they that did it, even the chief Rulers of them, Acts 3. 17. had the excuse of some ignorance, untill Gods raising him from the dead dispelled this mist from before their eyes, that what
God had thus foretold, and praedetermined, viz. that Christ should suf∣fer, he had thus fulfilled, Acts 3. 18. that he that suffered, voluntarily laid down his life, and by a speedy taking it up again, was freed from the saddest part of death, the remaining under the power of it, nay was, in the issue, so far from being the worse for suffering, that, beside the glorious advantages that came to his disciples and children by it, he himself was in that humane nature of his highly rewarded, and exalted for this his suffering; though, I say, all these circumstances concurred to make the injury less, the crime more excusable, and altogether more fit, and more honourable to be charged upon God, and so to turn it from the crime of murther, to the vertue of obedience to Gods will, and charity, and benefaction to mankinde, (and even to him that suffered) set this one act of the Jews, their doing, against the express command, and will of God, that thing, which yet was by God . determined to be done, their crucifying an innocent person, that desired nothing, but their a∣mendment, their committing that act, which by God was forbidden, under the Commandment of murther, is thought fit by that God, whom the Christians worship, to be punished most prod giously, and exemplarily, that ever any sin of the deepest die, and the most mischievous effects, was ever punished, even with the utter desola∣tion of the whole Nation, and all the prodigies that have been read of, the greatest pomp of aggravating circumstances, the calling Heaven and Earth together, to make the execution of these cru∣cifiers the more solemn and remarkable; so far is Christianity from owning any such irrational doctrine as this. But this being thus disclaimed, and the Doctrine, which is ac∣knowledged to be Christian, being cleared to be onely this, that in Gods dispensations and providence, and governing of the World, under the Gospel, it is not unusual for injustice to prosper, and pati∣ence, and innocence never to be relieved, or rewarded in this life. This I shall now assume on me to be clear to be perfectly reason∣able; and it shall be by thus taking it asunder. First, That wicked men should be permitted to be wicked, when all fair rationable means have successlesly been used to bring them to repentance, to restrain them from waxing worse and worse; that they that will not mend by all the probablest, and most effectual means, should at last be left to themselves, and
become incorrigible; that God should not proceed from per∣swasion to violence, and force them to be good (contrary to the na∣ture of man in this his state of proficiency, who was created with a wil, or freedom of doing evil, if he pleased, and contrary to the nature of free, and rewardable goodness, which, if compelled, ceaseth to be such) who will not be restrained from evil without force: This will never be deemed rational in God, who hath an∣other Tribunal to arraign▪ and punish those, who will not sub∣mit to Exhortation, and Discipline here. But on the contrary it will very ill become the servant of God for his own ease, and se∣curity, to wish the disturbance of that method of God with man∣kinde, to expect that man, which, when he was in innocence, was created with a liberty to chuse the evil, should now amidst the briers, and thorns, after the provocations of a long vitious life, have such shackles laid on him, as that he should not be able to break Gods Bands and Laws; and all this onely that the good man may be protected, who, if he be not, knows that 'tis far more for his advantage, then if he were. Secondly, That they which are wicked, and have cast off all restraints of Divine and Humane Laws, which break through all the ties, and securities, that promises and oaths can lay upon them (the greatest protection for innocents, that any Religion, or Law, hath ever provided for them) should, by these advan∣tages above other men, be able to over-reach, and defraud o∣thers; and by this means having acquired a power of hurting, should, when they have it, make use of this power, to do what is most agreeable to their lusts and interests to do, This again hath nothing in it strange, or irrational: It is far more strange, that it is not alwayes thus, that (wicked men, allowing themselves all the liberty, and being by their very sins furnished with all armor, and instruments to work their will, and all innocent men, that resolve to continue such, being by this means disarmed, and naked be∣fore them) the wicked should not get the whole World into their possessions. This certainly were to be expected, and by this means all that have wicked inclinations, would, in any humane likelihood, be encouraged to act to the height of their power of hurting, were there not a peculiar hedg of providence to defend the meek, with∣out
any of their own (considerable) contributions toward it, to guard them wonderfully in the open field, without any visible means of doing it: And if this shall otherwise happen at some one time, perhaps but once in many Ages, and that for some very great end, in Gods Wisdom more considerable to the God∣like Government of the whole World, then the miraculous re∣scuing of a few meek innocents from a short oppression (in earthly things, which are not worth their possessing) could be deemed to be; there is sure no great wonder in this, nothing irrational in the sometimes permitting of it. He that were secured in his inheritance in a quiet Kingdom, as long as any man enjoyed his own, as Majesty were permitted on the throne, or Law, and Justice on the bench, would never desire a fairer conveyance, or a longer lease of the most valued pos∣sessions of this life; and this security remains to the meek man, though once in many Ages it may have happened not to prove good unto him. And as there hath been nothing strange, or irrational on the part of the wicked oppressor that prospers, so next on the part of the patient, or sufferer, that smarts under him, there will appear to be as little. For first, Absolute innocence is a thing, which (save in the per∣son of Christ) hath never been met with in Man or Woman on the Earth; and therefore he that is guilty of no fault in one par∣ticular, may yet be culpable, and punishable in many others; he that is legally possest of an estate, and hath done nothing to forefeit it in Law, may yet have sinned against God, and so have punishments due to him from that eternall Justice; which if they fall upon his body, or estate in this World, there is no∣thing irrational in that, but especially if so light a Discipline may passe for all the revenge, and (through the sufferings of Christ, and interposition of mercy) avert all future punish∣ment, and be accepted in commutation for the torments of another Judicature, this sure is all the charity and bounty in the World, that may be admired, but not complained of as un∣reasonable. Secondly, That those that for their other faults might justly be punished, should have this punishment inflicted on them by
those which themselves are  wicked, and are actually such in thus afflicting them, If this seem to have any thing unreason∣able in it, it will soon be answered by the necessity of the mat∣ter, which makes it impossible for any but wicked men to be employed in it. The Israelites were once used to root out the Nations, but that by an infallible Commission from God, the Su∣preme Law-giver (and whose will being once made known, over-rules all former Laws) and the universal owner and dis∣poser of all the World, and the possessions thereof: And by this Commission this became to them not onely lawful, but ne∣cessary, an act not onely of justice, but of obedience; and so upon the like Commission, the Levites killing their Brethren was an act of sanctity, a consecrating themselves unto the Lord, those bloody Sacrifices were in a manner the Ceremonies of their Con∣secration to their Priests Office. But then, first, all this depen∣ded upon the infallible validity of their Commission, which had it been falsly pretended by them, or had they not been as∣certained that it came from God, their actions had been as un∣godly, and murtherous, as Abrahams sacrificing his son must have been deemed, without the like Commission: And secondly, this Commission was by no means to be enlarged to any other, but those particular subjects, or matters, to which it was given. The Jews might not at that time have destroyed or invaded any other Nation, upon the face of the Earth, nor might the Levites at any other time have killed their Brethren, on strength of that command, much less may any other People of any other Nation, on strength of that example. And so now that such Commissioners are out-dated, when all is left by God in the hands of standing Laws, in opposition to new Revelations, and consequently when that which is most just for me to suffer, or God to permit (or by prospering in him, to inflict on me) is most injurious in him that doth it, were it not perfect fury, much above the pitch of irrational, to demand that Gods dearest Children should act as the vilest men? To require such explicite contradictions, that none but godly men should be permitted to oppress, to kill, to commit Sacriledge, to lay waste, and to destroy, to break all those Commandments of God, which he that doth, ipso facto, ceaseth be to godly? If there be
any wickedness to be done in a City, shall the righteous be the onely men to doe it? This were worth wondering at indeed: But for the wicked, whose trade it is, whose joy of heart to be thus for∣ever occupied, he is in his element, he needs no call, or incita∣tion to do it. The turning him out of that office, and employ∣ing any body else, were the greatest unkindness to him, as the casting the Divels out from tormenting the man, was by them looked on as the destroying them before their time, whereas the Angel of Light, would have looked upon it as a de∣gree of Hell, had hee been sent in, on that errant to torment him. Thirdly, Beside the perfect reasonableness of having offen∣ders punished temporally here, (which were reasonable, if it were for ever in another World) there is a second, not onely Justice but Mercy in such sufferings, on whomsoever they fall. They are Admonitions, and Doctrines, and Spirituall Medicines, Disciplines of the soul, to awake us out of secure, and stop in wilful sinning, and are by God on purpose made use of to that end, when prosperity hath been long used, and experimented to have no such auspicious influences in it, to be proper to feed, and foment, very improper to starve, or sub∣due enormities. And if the Physitian administer a bitter Po∣tion, if the Surgeon apply a Corrosive, or Caustick, when Julips, or Balsoms are judged, and proved to be uneffectu∣all, sure it is not the manner of men to count such methods ir∣rationall. Nay, it will be no Hyperbole to affirme, that the addition of such documents as these, may sometimes deserve to be preferred, and more pretiously valued, then all the Doctrines in the Book of God it self without these, one such seasonable Application, then all other Receipts in his dispensatorie. The Word of God gives rules of living to all men, but those so general, and un∣applied, that it is ordinary for passionate men not to see them∣selves concerned in them. These punishments and visitations will be able to bring home, and make us, while we are under the Discipline, confess, that we are the very men to whom by pecu∣liar propriety they appertain. But there is yet a third sublimer benefit, of such dispensa∣tions
of God under the Gospel, which will render them abun∣dantly rational. And that is the exercise of many Christian graces of the greatest price in the sight of God, and such as shall be sure to be the most richly rewarded by him, which were it not for such changes as these, would lie by us unprofitably, such are Patience, Meekness, Humility, Contentedness with whatever lot, faithful dependance on God in all outward things, thanks∣giving for plenty, and for scarcity too, a submitting to Gods Will in suffering, as well as doing it cheerfully, yea, and to his Wisdom too, in resolving Gods choices for us to be absolute∣ly fitter for our turns, then any our own wishes; and lastly, that Wisdom, which Saint James speaks of, the skill of Spiritual judg∣ing, James 1. 5. which can really prefer this state of suffering for Christ, (an ex∣cellence that Angels do not partake of) beyond any other state or condition of life. Were it but onely for the variety, that all the burthen of the day might not lie on those graces, which are exercised in fair weather, but that those other, provided for the storm or winter, might take their turns and give them some relaxation, this would be very ra∣tional and useful for us, as Aristotle saith, that the change of mo∣tions from up hill to down hill, and so back again, doth provide against lassitude, more then the constancy of any one, be it in the easiest smoothest plain, because that layes all the burthen incessantly upon one pair of muscles, without any relief or assistance from any other. But when withall, every exerise of each of these graces hath attending it an addition of more Gems in our Crown, more de∣grees of Glory in another World, (that I may not adde also of present Joy, and Satisfaction, and Ravishment in the present exer∣cises here) then sure the superfluities, and pleasures of this life, the any thing that is ever taken from us by the Harpies, and Vultures of this World, are richly sold, and parted with by the Christian (which knows how much, or indeed how little they are worth enjoying) if they may thus bring him in that rich fraight of never fading bliss in another World. And this will serve for justifying the rationalness of Gods dealing with us now under the Gospel, in respect of his Providence.
CHAP. VI. The exceptions against Christ's Commands. IT remains that I proceede to Christs Commands under the Gospel, and shew the rationalness of them. And having done it so largely already on the head of Ad∣vantages, I shall now onely descend to that one, against which our Modern Exceptions are most frequently made, viz. The great Fundamentall dutie of taking up the Crosse to follow CHRIST; i. e. of approving my Obedience to CHRIST in all and every particular, even when the extrea∣mest danger, the loss of my Life is like to be the Price to be paid for it. The unreasonableness of this is argued and concluded from the contrarietie of it to that liberty of self-defence, and to that Law of self-preservation; which nature is supposed to dictate to every man. And the shewing the weaknesse of this Ob∣jection, will be a full vindication of the rationalness of the Precept. And this is done by putting us in minde, what is meant by Self-preservation, and what by Nature, and what by Law. A man is made up of a Body, and a Soul, a mortal and an immortal part, and those may be considered either severally, or united: And consequently Self-preservation may be set to signifie any one, or more of these four things. Either, first, the preserving that material mortal part of him from present hurt, or secondly, pre∣serving the immortal part of him in well, and happy being, or thirdly, preserving the present union of one of these with the other, or fourthly, the providing for the perpetual happy union of them eternally. The first is the preserving the body, and with it the estate, and liberty, and reputation, &c. from present loss or diminution. The second is preserving the Soul in innocence, or virtue. The third is preserving of this life of ours, which wee live in the naturall Body. And the fourth is providing for a
joyfull Resurrection, and an everlasting Life attending it. Then for Nature, that may signifie either blinde unenlight∣ned Nature, which sees no more then the reflection upon it self, and the Book of the Creatures, and Natural instincts repre∣sent to it; or else Nature, as it is enlightned by Revelation, i. e. by Gods making known some things in his Word, which Nature had never known, had they not been thus revealed: Such are the Doctrines of our Faith, and particularly the eter∣nal rewards, and punishments which are revealed to us in the Scripture. Then for Laws, those may be either absolute, and peremptory, which yield not to any superior Laws; or else conditional, and subordinate, when a superior Law doth not interpose to the contrary. To bring all this home to our present discourse. If by self-preservation be meant either the first, or the third notion of the self, the preserving my body, or my life, then though it may truly be said that it is a Law of Nature, that men may, and that (when no superior Law requires the contrary) they ought, and are bound to preserve these imperfect mutilate selves, these bodies; yet then as there is a higher notion of a man then as that barely signifies his Body, his Soul being the far more ex∣cellent part of him, and the eternall union of body and Soul to∣gether, being most eminently the Notion, that he is con∣cerned in, so there must be a superior Law of self-preservation, then that which commands onely the preserving the Body, and though bare un-lightned Nature, that is able to look no far∣ther then this life, doe not give any Law in this matter, yet Na∣ture being supposed instructed in the Christian Doctrine, that there is another life of Body, and Soul after this, to last for ever, must needs be resolved to do it, it being impossible, that reason∣able Nature, when two things are represented so distant, as the life of a few yeers here in the midst of such sad mixtures, and an everlasting life hereafter in the fulness of all joyes, should not enjoyn the preserving of the latter, even with the contempt of the former, when the care of the former may bring any danger to the latter. The short of it is, That when eternal life is in the hand of
Christ to give to them, that continue obedient and constant to him, and to none else, and when the fearing of them which can hurt, and kill the body, the caring for, or preserving of this present life, doth at any time, or in any case, resist, or obstruct the performance of that duty, which Christ then requires or expects from me; there Nature commands me to despise the less, and preserve the greater; and if it be not absolutely willing to Sacrifice the present to the eternall Life, and con∣sequently to prefer the obeying of Christ to the preserving of this fading short life, it must acknowledge it self a blinde Hea∣then Nature, (that knows nothing of an eternall future life, and of him that can cast both Body and Soul into Hell) or else an irrational wilde Nature, that knows these distances of finite, and infinite, and doth not thinke them worth con∣sidering. It is therefore my most charitable opinion of those that ob∣ject the Principle of self-preservation to the Doctrine of taking up the Crosse, and determine us free from the Obligation of paying obedience to Christ, when it cannot be done without endangering of Estate, or Life, that they speak out of their memory onely, what they have read in Books of that supreame Law of the preserving ones self, but do not withall remember, that if that self signified onely the Body, it was the Philosophie of them, that knew nothing of the immortality of the Soul, or the endlesness of an other Life, or if they were aware of the Christian Doctrines of eternity, they never called the Body, that self, that was to be so solicitously tended. And therefore it is observable in the first Ages of the Church, that those Hereticks that were enemies of the Crosse of Christ, that taught it to be . Euseb. l. 4. Eccles. Hist. c. . Euseb. l. 6. c. . out of Origen on Psal. 82. indifferent and lawfull in time of Perse∣cution to forswear, and renounce Christ, and offer Sacrifice to Idols, were a sort of men (the Gnosticks) that immerst them∣selves in all unnaturall filthiness, and depended not at all on the Promises of another Life, and having first taught, that
Christ did not , vid. Ig∣natii Ep. ad Smyrn. , vid. Cyril. Hier. Catech. . Non hic, nec apud homines confessionem putant constitutam, sed in coelo. Tertul. cont. Gnost. c. 10. really suffer in the Flesh, but onely in ap∣pearance, would not be perswaded that either hee had any Nec Deus humanum sanguinem sitit, nec Christus vicem passionis, quasi ipse de eà salutem consecuturus, exposcit. Tertul. cont. Gnost, cap. 15. need of their lives, or indeed exspected it from them, Semel Christus pro nobis obiit, semel occisus, ne occideremur, si vicem exspectat, num & ille salutem de meâ nece exspectat? Tert. cont. Gnost. c. 1. being come, as they said, to save their lives, to die, that they might not be killed. Where the mistake was clear and visible, that they thought they were these transitory Lives, that Christ came to preserve, and not those other lives, which were to be convey∣ed over to Eternity. The fate of those Gnosticks at that time, was very remark∣able, and that which will render our irrational fondness of these bodily lives yet more irrational. Their great care was to pre∣serve their lives, and their prime dexterity, in order to that, to comply constantly with the powerful persecutor; that was, especially, with the Jews; (for though the Sword was in the Heathens hand, yet the great malice against the Christians was in the Synagogue, from Synagogae Judaeorum fontes perse∣cutionum, Terti. b. c. 10. thence sprang all the Persecutions.) To this end, those Gnosticks took upon them to be great zealots for the Mosaical Law of Circumcision, and generally pieced with the Jews, and approved themselves to them. At last the Roman Army comes against Jerusalem, takes Jews, and Gnosticks together, and destroyes them all; and so Christ was as re∣markably a true Prophet in that, as in any one particular, That he that would save his life, should lose it, (that very tempo∣rall life, that all his compliance with the Jews was designed to save) and hee that would lose, i. e. venture, and lay down his Life for Christs sake, should finde it, i. e. have it more pro∣bably preserved, and continued to him here, then they that were most solicitous for it, and, whether he lost or kept it here, have it restored to him to continue eternally. And if that promise of the Gospel have truth in any sense of it; then is the command no irrational command, of taking up the Cross to follow Christ, when he can, if it be for thy turn, except
of thy taking up the cross, without its bearing thee, or, if he do not, can pay thee abundantly, for what thou losest, reward thee with Eternity. If I could foresee any other command of Christ, that could fall under our jealousie, and censure: I should proceede to it, and be confident of approving it exactly rational. As it is, I am at an end of my designed Method, and am glad it hath been contrived into so small a compass, being now at leisure to retire to my Meditations, which will, I hope, be more calm, being thus disburthened, and make it my first Theme to dis∣course with my▪ self, how extremely rational it is, that those very turns of Providence, which have been our great tempta∣tion, and they say, made many Atheists among us, should be reviewed again, and upon second demurer thoughts engage, and instruct us all to become more Christian. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things; Prudent, and hee shall know them? For the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walke in them, but the transgressor shall fall therein, Hos. 14. 9. FINIS.
