H674A R10834 13011405 96483
THE Happy Return, OR An Account of his Grace the Duke of MONMOUTH'S Surrendring Himself (After his long Absconding) to the Se∣cretary of State at the Secretaries Office in White-Hall, on Saturday the 24th. of this In∣stant November. HIS Grace the Duke of Monmouth, upon Notice of his being Impeached as a Party concerned in the late Design, in order to a Rising, &c. having withdrawn himself, as not supposing it safe or Convenient at that time, to behold the angry Frowns of In∣censed Majesty, but rather suffer Displeasure to waist, that Paternal Compassion might in some measure return, and Re∣lenting Goodness, Pitty the frailties of his Youth, & accept of his unfeigned Submission and Sincere Repentance for his un∣advised Rashness, in suffering himself to be drawn into so many ill Conveniences displeasing to his Father and Sove∣reign, nor did he altogether fail in his Expectation, for his most Sacred Majesty, that Fountain of never failing Pitty and Compassion, taking his deplorable Condition into his Princely Consideration, and being moved by the Incessant Prayers and humble Supplications of the Dutches of Mon∣mouth, &c. out of his Inate kindness and tender thoughts, notwithstanding a Proclamation Commanding the Duke to Surrender himself, and 500 l. for any that should seize him,
and upon his not Surrendring, Process upon a Bill of In∣dictment, in order to an Out-Lawry, being made, His Ma∣jesty, as the first Token of his Relenting, caused the Pro∣ceedings to be staved when the said Out lawry was about to be entred up, of which as 'tis supposed, the Duke being ad∣vertised by his Friends and Well-willers, and receiving some other Incouragements, resolved no longer to Abscond, but Voluntarily, to lay himself at his Fathers Feet and prevent any farther trouble in searching after him, whereupon he on the 24th Instant, contrary to the expectation of most Men, came from the place of his Abode in a Chair, and carrved by two hired Men, passed through the Centries undiscovered of any till he came into the Secretaries Office, declairing his Intent to lay himself at his Majesties Feet and wholy rely on his Mercy, expressing much sorrow for offend∣ing or Displeasing so good a Father and Gracious Sovereign, or to this effect, shewing both in his Countenance and Gesture much Contrition and a Deep Sense of his Failings, Answering with much humility to such Interrogatories as were put to him, when having continued there some time, His Majesty and Royal Highness came thither; where∣upon, he was Commanded to his own Lodgings in the Cockpit, there to continue till further Orders, not without hopes of obteining Forgiveness and Recovering is M∣jesties Favour by his present Submission and future Obediene and Service. On the 25th Instant the Council Sate befoe whom it was expected by many, that the Duke would be Convened, but as yet we do not hear he has been before that August Assembly. Entred according to Order. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for L C. 1683.
