h82 15305759 103400
A TREATISE OF The GREAT ANTIDOTE of Van Helmont, Paracelsus and Crollius; By them called the Elixir Proprietatis: Known by all Physicians to be the greatest Cordial and onely Medicine in the World for long and sound Life, restoring Nature even at the point of Death, and effectually taking away the Seeds of all DISEASES. AND An Examination of AUTHORS concerning its true Preparation: As also, A ready way to Volatile Salt of Tartar, by which this Elixir is truly prepared. Written by J. H. a Lover of truth, and made publick for the good of all people. London, Printed for the AUTHOR. 1667.
TO THE READER. I Have here shewed thee several ways to make the Elixir Proprietatis, by which thou mayest understand the difference betwixt a good and a bad; and for that end I have set down Crollius his way of prepareing it with Oyl of Sulphur,To joyn a Mineral with a Ve∣gitable, is an Abor∣tive in Philosophy. which is that middle way that Van Helmont saith (being so made) it is of no worth. I have set down the sayings of Van Helmont concerning Volatising Salt of Tartar, and its Virtues being Volatised, which is the only Solvent by which this Medicine is truly made: and for the virtues thereof, I am of Paracelsus's mind, that the Age of a Man, is too little for the finding out of them: I have exprest some few experiments, but could have done more, and more considerable, as healing the Leprosey, the Scroffulous humour commonly called the Evil, two sorts of Gouts, the bringing forth the Mercury of those that have been Salivated for the Venerial Disease: and many others, too tedious to mention. If thou art Ingenious thou may∣est profit thereby. Farewell. Since the Fire, from my House in Ʋpper Shadwell, betwixt the New Church and Ratcliff, at the Sign of John Baptista Van Helmont. J. H.
IOhn Baptista Van Helmont in the 457 pag. saith, he will speak so far as the order of Charity will per∣mit, of the revealing of Arcanums or secrets in Medicines: First of all, Nature hath by the good∣ness of God, produced singular remedies in the vegetable Monarchy, whereby Diseases are sin∣gularly restored and cured, which hitherto for want of diligent searching, a covetous desire and envy of the Devil, have remain∣ed hidden; for so the Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus, cureth the Asthmah, the Falling Sickness, Appoplexy, Palsey,A Con∣sumption for want of Nourish∣ment. Atrophia, Tabes or Consumption of the Lungs. And because this Elixir is not prepared but by a Skilful Phylosopher, who not by thinking but by knowing is perfectly and doublely chosen thereunto, and so hath obtained the Title of our Adeptist, therefore out of Com∣passion, I will unfold a middle way: R. best Myrrh, bright Alloes, of the best Saffron, of each one Ounce, if thou take more thou shall find it done in vain; let the two first be beaten and the Saffron role it into a round figure, put them into a large glass with a long neck, and seal it Hermetically and digest them in a gentle heat, for fear of breaking the glass, untill you see the whole lump grow to the bottom of the glass, and a cleer oyl and water circulate in the sides of the glass, then open the glass, and poure on a pinte of Cinnamon water, and distil it in moist sand until no more will ascend: with thfs Medicine, saith he, I have as well dissolved Quartan-Agues as continual Feavers, so that he who over night had taken the Holy Sa∣crament, and received his Sacro Sanctum Viaticum, and the extreme Unction of Oyl, hath had me his guest by his Bed at dinner. Paracelsus in his Archedoxes hath these words, R. Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron, of each a like quantity, put them in a Pelican closed for two Months in a sand Furnace in a gentle heat: after put the matter in a Limbeck and distill over the oyl without burning, cicrulate this oyl for a month, and after keep it for use. He saith the virtues of all Balsams are contained in this Medicine, and that it doth keep back old Age, the most of any one Medicine, and that the life of a Man is two short for the finding out its virtues.
Crollius in 250 page. writes thus thus, R. Myrrh, Alloes, Saffrou, of each four Ounces, powder them, and pour on them so much Alcalizate Spirit of Wine, as will reduce them into them form of paste, then pour on so much Oyl of Sulphur made by a Bell still as will colour them black, then pour on Spirit of Wine tartarized as will cover them four fingers over, put them in a glass in digesti∣on for two days, seperate the tincture, and pour on pure Spirit of Wine, circulate it two months, seperate the tincture and distill the fecis by a gentle heat. What comes over add to the tinctures, and it will be far better than the vulgar way distilled; for the virtues, he saith, it removes all obstructions of the Lungs, and Chest Pipes, prevents popular Infection, and Infectious Airs, and Pestilential Feavers, removes all pestifferous humours in the Stomach and Bowels, and eases all pains there: Takes away all obstructions of the Brain, curing the Virtigo, Megrim, and dimness of sight, comforts the memory, pre∣vents the Palsey, and Gout, quickens the Intelects and all the senses, breaks the Stone in the Reins or Bladder, comforts the Heart and exprells Melancholly, eases the Illiaco Passio, and dolour of the Ribs, carries away Salt humours insensibly, and all Surfeits from intempe∣rance of Diet or Drinking, cures the third day Ague, and Hectick Feaver, brings forth congealed blood, and speedily heals all inward Ulcers and Wounds; and, saith he, all diseases proceeding either from head or cold; are by this Medicine healed: now thus far he. My way of preparing of it is this: R. the best Myrrh, bright Alloes, of the best English Saffron, of each four ounces; beat the the Myrrh and Alloes but not the Saffron, put them into a Bolt-head, and pour on them a pint and a half of volatil Salt of Tartar, vo∣latized with Spirit of Wine, disgest them in a gentle heat, till the gummousness be fully gone, and there remain no more bitterness then is contained in the Saffron; then seperate the pure Spirit from the fecis, and keep it for use. This Elixir thus prepared, will in co∣lour resemble the pure Arterial Blood of a sound and healthy man; and in tast will be fragrant, in which the Myrrh and Saffron, will plainly appear very strong in tast, without any offensiveness or nauseousness, but grateful to the Stomach. Now that I may not tantalize the Reader, in mentioning the vir∣tues of volatile Salt of Tartar, and not shewing the way to make it,
therefore I shall express it as far as it is lawful. Take ofAccording to Ramund Lulley in his Testi∣menta Nova. red Tar∣tar qs. calsine it till it be white, then dissolve it in Spirit of Wine, twice its weight such as will burn having Gunpowder in it, till if fire the powder, and continue feeding it three months, untill the Salt and Spirit sublime together, then seperate his Flegm, and keep it for use; this is that Solvent which I prepare this Elixir with and which Van Helmont in his Treatise of Feavers, 780 page. Quod si autem ad stud ignis arcanum, non pertingatis discite sal∣tem saem Tartari reddere volatilem, ut hujus medio vestras disso∣lutiones perfeciatas qui etsi sua soluta anatice homogenia deserat digestus in nobis: illorum tamen aliquot vires mutuatus est quas intrò desert plurimorum morborum domiarices. Which sounds thus in English: If you cannot attain to thatHis great Solvent called the Alkahest. hidden Fire at least learn to make the Salt of Tartar volatile, that by it you may make your dissolutions of Bodies, which being truly homogenial and although digested in us, yet it hath borrowed the virtues of the dissolved matter, which it contains to our principles as the subduer of most Diseases. And in 787 page. Sufficit mihi quod ille Spiritus alcali ad hisce Corporibus in salem redactus volatilem & coagulabilem in officinia stomachi ad nermam ciborum redactus transeat in mesaraicas saltem per lotium ist hac deportatus & trans∣eundo lambat resolvatque sordes ibidem subnatas vi exotica sibi assumpta, saith he, it is sufficient for me that Salt of Tartar vola∣tized, and reduced in the hop of the Stomach, unto the form of meats, passeth into the Meseraick Veins, or being conveyd thether by the Urine doth clense all obnoxious humours there congealed, though they never so obstinately adhere to the Vessels. And in the 802 page. Naturam esse morbeum medicatricem eam Confortandam ideo non Consternandam. Nature being the Physicianess of Diseases she is to be Stengthened and Comforted, and not hurt or hindre▪ Si enim sordes primis adhaeserent latebris insistendum resolutivis & abstersivis natura tuto satagente reliquum: sui vero penetiori recessu aliquid pertinacius occultiusque restiterit assumenda sunt alcalia volatilia que instar saponis cuncta abstergunt. Saith he, if foulness shall adhere to the first vessels, we may use clensing Medicines, Nature safely doing the rest; but if stubborn obstructions shall secretly lodge in a more inward part, then volatile alcalies are to be made use
of, which wash away the causes of all Diseases, as Soap washes Linnen: And in the same page, he saith, Its a wonder how much the Salt of Tartar will perform, for it scours all dreggishness of obstructing Filths out of the Veins, and all collections of Aposthums; and saith he, being made volatile with Spirit of Wine, and not Oyl, is made good the saying of Paracelsus, that where ever this Spirit will not reach, scarce any other pirit more powerfully shall come; this is part of the praise that Van Helmont and Paracelsus give of the volatile Salt of Tartar, which is the Spirit by which this medicine is made by adding only Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron, which Mr. Woodall in his Chyrurgeons Mate, affirms that by these three ingredients without any preparation, he hath cured the Tokens. Now if this Spirit be so Noble, and enriched by these ingredients for this Liquor by the help of the fire clenses that is foul, digests that is vitulent, and inverts its malignity, and by means thereof is the virtue exalted and made more Noble by a thousand fold: So that wee have here a Spirit not corrosive but familliar to the vegital nature, the most Noble of all Dulcified Salts made Ballamical, and of a seminal virtue, by its own Spirit, by which the three species, viz. Myrrh, Alloes, Saffron, are opened volatized, and made Spiritual, so that besides the Fragrant Spirit, there is also the substantial tincture, and all joyned which such a Salt that is friendly to nature, which by reason of its alcalizate nature, it is marvelous abstersive, resolving all muceous foulness, cutting and attenuating all tough Flegmatick coaggulations which it finds in its passage, bringing them forth part by Urin and Sweat, and sometimes Siege. This Medicine thus prepared, is that which I have had experience of for some years, for which I owe eternal thanks and praise to Almighty God: for had I not had this, (though I have many others by which I have performed many excellent cures) yet for all them, I had not been here to have writ this, for in the height of the Sick∣ness in August 1665, I was taken with a Lethargy with that vio∣lence, that for the space of seven days I could take nothing but drink, my drink was sometimes Sack, and sometimes Ale; some∣times I was senseless for many hours together, and when I recovered my senses a little, I did still call for and took this Medicine, and by Gods blessing on it, was perfectly cured, though it was reported with much confidence, that I was both dead and buried, and by no
inconsiderable persons neither, and at the same time all my Family was most dangerous Ill, my Son, a Child of eight years old, was taken with an Impostumation in his Neck near the jugular Vein, which Distemper he had two years before in the same place, when formerly coming out of the Country, was taken with it the next day, and now by reason of my illness, I could not so mind it, but that it came to a supputation, and I being a little recovered, was much troubled to see, but in short time brought forth the matter and healed it, and since he hath continued well. My daughter of the age of ten, had a Blane on her Breast, but did not keep the house four days for it. May wife had a Pestelential Feaver, but was cured of it in three or four days, though in the beginning of the Feaver, by taking this Medicine, there came forth many Feaver Spots, and the Nurses seeing them, did conclude she had the Tokens, and it was talked publikely abroad, that I had cured her of the Tokens, which thing I absolutely deny to be within the reach of any Mortal Man to cure the real Tokens, though there are many sorts of Spots not much unlike, which are as easily cured as the Disease they proceed from, as Surfeit Spots, Purple Scurvy or Feaver Spots, and such like; but the Tokens are, I am confident, Marks sent from God, and it is as impossible to cure any that once have them, as to contradict the Divine Decree; and besides my own Family, many came to me both in my sickness, and before and after, so that there was not a day during the Visitation, but from Visited houses, and some that had running Sores, came daily to me, which I no more refused, then the soundest and healthiest bodies, nor shall not God willing upon a just occasion, nor to Visit a Friend or Acquaintance in the greatest of dangers, for I have seen many that have had many Sores and Blanes, some that have had the Tokens. And those that had Risings, I always advised them to annoint the Rising with Oyl of Lillies, and Oyl of March Mallows, of each a like quantity; and if they broke, as some did, then to apply only that Oyntment, called Ʋnguentum Apostolorum, and any Playster, to keep the Lint that the Unguent was on to the Sore, and to take daily this Medicine inwardly, according as I shall afterward direct. So doing they have been perfectly cured by Gods assistance and this Medicine, and never troubled any Chy∣rurgeon, though sometimes there hath come forth a large Core.
Neither is this Medicine only for this Disease, as the Authors men∣tion, and my own experience have found, for the greatest part of my Practice hath been this many years, and it to this day, in those Distempers which are by common Physitians accounted uncureable, and I have wrought and still do no many other ingredients both Vegetables, Minerals, and Metals, and yet in all of them, I could never find neither so safe, nor so speedily effectual a Medicine, as this one, which being of a Solar nature (that is cordial) that as the Sun by his Beams removes all Fogs and vapours from the earth, so this Medicine expells all venomous all obnoctious humours from the principle parts of the body, for it is so general a clenser of the blood, that had I not seen the effects, I should not have believed it, for I have applyed it both to persons in Pleurisies and Quincies, and in one hour the party hath been left perfectly at ease going to sleep, and in their sleep have been in a small Sweat, and have waked well, not losing one drop of blood, as the common custom is. I have often cured a Feaver in two or three days; the small Pox, which is a rotted putrid Feaver, I have cured in three days, the venom being breathed forth in a small gentle sweat, and the party perfectly well, and not any of the Small Pox hath ever come to matter, though they have been before much swell'd with them; the Hectick Feaver, which will not admit of bleeding without Death, is by this Medicine suddenly cured: The Convulsions I have frequently cured, even where there hath been no hopes of life, according to common reason; and I do my self, and advise all my friends to give of it to their Children, first after they are born, six drops in a Spoonful of Ale; and I have had several that have given me thanks, and I always find the Child the better for it for a long time; and if the Mother of the Child take it so soon as she is delivered, it will ease her of after pains, and prevent the vapours of the Mother, being taken for a few days night and morning inFear not the heat of the Sack for no Fea∣ver will ever trou∣ble you if you take this Medi∣cine. Sack, fasting one hour after. I have had many Patients of the vapours, and been long in the curing of them, though I used the best means I could devise; but since I have made use of this Medi∣cine for that sad unquiet restless Distemper, I have found that a few dayes will cure it, except the party be old, and have had it many years, and then some longer time must be allowed, and by Gods blessing, you will not miss your expected desire. For the Palsey I
have several times cured the worst sort of them, that is, the Palsey in both sides; that in one side is but a trifle to the other, for in one there is but part of the Brain obstructed, in the other it is all ob∣structed. The Swimming in the head, which is a forerunner of Melancholly, is presently by this Medicine cured. Many are, by reason of bruises, troubled with Impostumations in the head, which, after having taken this Medicine, do cast forth much corrupt matter by the Nose, and after become well, and sometimes the Hearing is obstructed, and sometimes the Sight grows dull by reason of a foul humour in the Brain, which I find is much helped by this Medicine; And although I have Spirit of Eye-bright in the house, and Essence of Sullandine, yet I prefer this Medicine before both, for the dimness of the Eyes, which I, by much working in the Fire and Mineral fumes cannot avoid the often receiving dammage both to the Eyes and Brain. That Disease called the Tremor, I have cured in Fourteen dayes, when the shaking was so violent, that if you held the hand still, it would force the body to move; and one thing I am to inform those that are Lovers of Children, when a Child in the month is froward, either by reason of some crudities it received from its Mothers overmuch eating of fruit, or from hurt or bruise in the birth,, or by reason of wind, then for some Diascor∣dium, saith the Nurse; and that, saith she, is a harmless thing, and will bring it to sleep: and then the Mother presently consents, though it proves the Childs ruine, for though they do not give it so much, as contains so much Opium, as to cause it never to wake again, yet that little cold poyson is the worst of poysons which will lodge in the body till it either brings the Convulsion fits, or, if the Child be so strong of nature to pass that danger, then after succeeds either the Rickets or Weakness in the Limbs. Which want of knowledge many after repent when it is too late. I had rather any Child of mine took Mercury, then half its weight in Opium, for I can speak by experience of what I have seen in Children whom I have seen after they were born, and what they are brought to by this errour. There happens many times a windiness in the Pleura, that is a skin within the Ribs near the Heart, which by delayes proves dangerous, alwayes coming with a difficulty of breathing, which is by this Medicine removed presently, and by taking of it three or four dayes together, is fully cured; the windiness of the Stomach is presently expelled by it.
The Scurvy, a Disease seldom taken notice of by people till their Teeth drop out, or a Dropsie followes them, or the Jaundies; and then what will they not do to be cured? They that have any of the three, or two of the, or all the three, let them take this Medicine and it will rid them of their grief: but observe always, the more the Disease is plycated, the longer is required for to continue the taking thereof. Always observe, fixt Diseases require the longer for the removing, and are for the most part in less danger of death. The Spleen, causing either a pain in the side, of some∣times sending up vapours into the head, causing unquiet sleep, makes those that are troubled therewith to be peevish, produces Melan∣choly, it being the seat and receptacle of Melancholy. He or she that takes this Medicine shall find a pain and tearing near the Spleen after an evacuation of much Wind downward, the Spleen being so near the Hypocondriacks, that seldom one is well and the other obstructed, but commonly both together. I had a patient near six years agoe, that was in a deep Melancholy, that if he saw any one laugh would be very angry: alwayes he desired this Medi∣cine, after he had once take of it, though he had others by: I have cured many Melancholy people, but by the taking this Me∣dicine when the obstructions opened, he broke so much wind back∣wards, that the neighbour at the next house wondred what noise that was; and after that, he was cured in a little time. That Disease the Seamen call the Belly-ake, which in the West-Indies kills so many brave men for want of help, had they with them but a small Glass of this, they might be thereby preserved, for it would quickly remove that intollerable pain, and send the cause forth at the back-dore. There is no Medicine in the world will sute better with those that go long Voyages to Sea, especially into hot Counteys: for let them carry it to what part of the world they will, and keep the Glass close stopped, it shall not lose any thing of its virtues; for neither the heat of the Summer, nor coldest frost that is, will take any more impression on it then on a stone: That which will not preserve it self, cannot preserve another. All sorts of Fluxes is by this Medicine cured, sometimes a Looseness and Vomiting is cause by reason of Worms, which is always accompanyed with much Flegm: this Medicine breaks the bed of Worms, and leaves the Patient fully recovered, though few but have therewith a strong
Feaver, which is cured also. There is a Disease which is called Lupus Phlegmaton, but by many foolishly taken for the Dropsie Tympanities, the Belly being swelled to a great bigness, by reason of congealed flegm. I have a Gentlewoman of near 50 years in this Distemper, and taking this Medicine three weeks or a month, found little alteration, but then did begin to be loose, voiding much flegm; the next day she vomited and was loose, and the vomiting continued for two days, and every day came from her many Basons full of flegm, and at the end ceased both vomiting and looseness, having voided that which was the cause of her Distemper: during all the time of her Illness, she still continued taking this Medicine, and now happily rid of her Disease. This Medicine is both a great clenser and strengthener of the Spermatick Vessels in men or women, thereby begetting fruitfulness in both Sexes; for it doth search every corner of the body, and cast forth what ever is offensive to nature. The difficulty of making water doth arise from several causes, as from wind, from the stone, and from a slimy matter furring that passage of the Urine, and sometimes by a carnosity of the three first; I have had experience and find them easily helped by this Medicine: the Stone only desires a long time for the break∣ing, and yet I sent some five years ago this Medicine to a Person of quality, and in Fourteen days after they sent me word that it had so broken the stone, that there had come away two spoonfuls of Sand every day, for a long time. Now whether this was the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, I know not; for the Patient was a hundred Miles from me, but this I do not question, but it will as well reach reach the Bladder as the Reins; for I once applyed it to a person that had an Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder, a man of near fifty years old, there was a tumor betwixt the Scrotum and the Fundament, the botch being broke before I knew it, so that the Urine came forth there every time he made water, and always in making water he had a great smarting in that place, after, as well as before the irregular passage of the Urine was stopped; yet I could find no Medicine that he found so much good by: but in short time he was by this perfectly cured, without the least ob∣struction in making water, although it brought away much mattery substance during the time any thing of corruption remained there. The symptoms by which you may know the Ulcer in the Bladder or
the neck of the same, are pricking pain after making water in the end of the yard in men, and in woman in the passage of Urin: sometimes there comes away a mattery substance with the Urin, sometimes like hairs will appear in Urin, sometimes both, some∣times a smarting in making of water: and when there is nothing of the Venereal Disease, when these symptoms appear, then you may conclude there is an Ulcer either in the Bladder or in the Neck of the same: and in outward Ague-sores, I have seen its effects, for being taken inwardly without ever applying any thing outwardly but a scorch'd rag, the sores have run till the matter hath been fully taken away, and they have healed of their own accord: the Patient taking this Medicine daily till they were fully healed, after hath continued well many years, and I question not but most sores may be so healed, and the most venomest of Ulcers, Cancers, &c. may be made by the taking of it more apt to heal, for as they do proceed from a venomous humour, so this Medicine doth expel the greatest of venoms: For when I have been by accident in Mineral fumes that will poyson any man to continue in, I have taken no other Antidote against them. The Dropsie will fly be∣fore this Medicine, for the Liver being freed from obstructions and and the Urinary-passage, nature will do the rest, unless it be accom∣panyed with a Consumption, and then there is but small hopes of a cure. The Piles, a distemper much following Melancholy peo∣ple, and oftentimes that sort called the blind Piles, which alwayes with a vehement pain and burning, as though fire was in the place, by the taking of this Medicine, it doth much mitigate the pain, and by degrees takes it fully away, but doth not fully stop the bleeding Piles, for that is the sink of the body, and would be much injurious. Ruptures called Broken Bellies, which proceed from wind or water, this Medicine doth speedily take away. A Rupture, is a wind in the lower Bowels causing an extention of the Peritonaeum, and in men and boys the Bowels extending the Kall, so that they fall into the Scrotum or Cod; and obstructions of the Bowels being removed, the Distemper hath no place to lurk in. But what need I spend so much time and paper in mentioning particulars; since there is no Disease that I have met with, but this Medicine will cure: for I find that the obstructions being opened, and the parts strengthened, there can remain not any thing of a Disease in any
part of the body.I have gi∣ven half a spoonful in peracute diseases & advise to giverather more than the dose. Now I shall direct how I always order the taking of it, my advice is to take it Night and Morning in a glass of Sack, and fast one hour after, but not longer. The quantity to a strong body, threescore drops, to a Child new born six drops, to one of a year old ten drops, of four years twenty, and to one of twelve years old forty; alwayes observing that some are as strong at six years, as others at ten, and then the dose is to be according. Those that take it against Infections, need not take above twenty drops, and only in the morning, unless they go where infected people are, and then it is necessary to take it as often as they come where danger is. Some∣times it will be needful for those that have the Infection, and have had it a day or two before they take it for them, then to take it four times a day, in the Morning, and at ten before noon, and at four after noon, and at night. Those that are taken either with Plurisie, Quinsie, or any other peracute Disease, let them take it so soon as the Disease appears, and if the first dose doth not move it to their minds, then let them take it again two hours after, alwayes putting themselves into bed so soon as they have taken it: and if they be dry, let them drink as much drink as they will in reason desire; but always I forbid them small beer: it being of a crude quality requires the more concoction, and so hinders the operation of the Medicine; but those that are not lovers of strong beer, let them mix Sack with their small beer, and they will find that the less quantity of drink will allay their dryness. Now a word or two to my Brother Tyro, let me advise thee when thou goest about any chymical preparation, first to learn to know the three-fold Salt in nature, the three-fold Sulphur, and the three-fold Mercury; and the sympathy and anti∣pathy in them; their seperation and union, and the cause of their not uniting, the degrees of heat and cold required for their putrefa∣ction: understanding these, and then thou mayest be in hopes of accomplishing some part of thy desire; for if thou failest in any of them, thou wilt lose thy labour. A word to those that take this Medicine: before they take it, let them seriously consider whether they can have patience in fix'd Diseases, to continue the taking of it, as in old setled Griefs will be required, and if they cannot, I desire them to let it alone; if they will take it, then let them in the first place desire a blessing from God on it, and then questionless they shall obtain their desire;
and having obtained their desire, let them return thanks to God for it; alwayes concluding they that receive any thing of good,The Ar∣cheusis is the best Schoolman in dyet. and not giving thanks to God for it, do but rob God. For order in dyet, let the Patient eat what is most agreeable to the Stomach, alwayes observing that the Stomach better knows what will agree with it, then the Doctor doth, and let them sone after the taking of it not walk abroad without eating, nor drink without eating. For per∣fume against Infectious airs, I always had Red Saunders and Rose∣mary of each a like quantity, and do approve it best, as the one comforting the Heart, the other the Brain. This Medicine truely prepared, that neither the heat of the Sun, nor the coldest frost, nor age can hurt it, is to be had at this Authors House, at the Sign of John Baptista Van Helmont in Ʋpper Shadwell, near Ratcliff; at Mr. Gavel's at the Falcon in Westminster-Hall, at Mr. Playford's in the Temple, at Mr. Nathaniel Brooke at the Angel in Gresham-Colledge towards Bishopsgate-street, at Mr. Flemin's at the Lamb in White-Chappel, near the Church, and at Mr. Constable's a Potter in Montague-Close in Southwark. Each Glass contains either one Ounce, or Half an Ounce: the Price being 5 s. the Ounce, and 2 s. 6 d. the Half. FINIS.
