j223 27153694 110011
His MAJESTIES Most Gracious PARDON, To the Poor Prisoners in NEW GATE. On Friday the 26th. of February. 1685/6 A Midst the innumerable Virtues and Graces that have been inherent in the Royal Line, of our Most Gracious PRINCE, and his Glorious Predicessours, Mercy and Compassion (the two Cardinal Endowments of a Good Christian Profession) have at all Times and Seasons, been very obvious and apparent: It was these, and such other Prince like Qualities and Blessings, that have left such an immortal Fame, on the venerable Memories of many (if not the most part) of our most Renowned and Deceased KINGS, whose admirable Clemencies bear a most laudable Eccho, through the farthest Bounds of Christiandom, this Royal Inheritance (in all Ages) has most meritoriously Commanded the unfeigned Love and Cordial Allegiance of all good Subjects; 'tis this which procures Man both Reputation and Happiness in this World, and is a good Step and Introduction to that which  to come, which Noble Virtue the short space (but propitious Experience) of the auspitious Govern∣ment, under His Most Excellent MAJESTIE, doth give very satisfactory Testimony, that we are ke to suffer no manner of umbrage or ecclipse of that transparent qualification in the person of our pre∣sent KING; but on the contrary, a superlative Lustre to all those Blessings we have hitherto enjoy∣ed a sufficient Test of whose Royal Commiserations, intirely is disscovered in this following Account. At the Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Goal-Delivery of Newgate, Held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, the 24th. 25th. and 26th. of February. 1685/6; Be∣fore the Right Honourable Sir Robert Jefferies Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir John Holt Kt. Recorder of the aforesaid City, with other of His MAJESTY's Justices of the Peace, for London and Middlesex: The Tryals being over, His MAJESTY's most Gracious Pardon was produced and read; the persons contain'd in which, were Sixty One in Number, whereof Thirty One came under the Free-Pardon, and the other Thirty order'd to be Transported. Those in the Free-Pardon were, Jonathan Becket, John Spencer, Thomas Draper, Catharine Banse, Edmund Lawson, William Rawson, John Price, William Grubb, John Drildell, John Muntith, Thomas Wanckl, William Vanderhrst Thomas Weal, Nathaniel Page, John Henly, John Somerset, Francis Martin, John Fernly, William Ring, Catharine Brown, David Hunter, Julian Pell, Anne Dye, Jane Sineklow, Daniel Mackrow, John Hoadly, Robert Brewell, Robert Frewen, Pascha Rose, Ellenor Steel, Alice Garret. Those to be Transported were, John Thompson, Cassandra Widdows, Mary Fisher, Harbert Thomson, Edward Hawley, Robert Brooks, Richard Osbern, Thomas Drew, John Dykes, George Arwell, Samuel Anderton, John Smith, Mary Hancock, Thomas Golesburrow, Elizabeth Hacker, Thomas Genister, Lionell Fenwick, Thomas Gardner, Richard Jones, Matthew Morgan, Mary Collward, Anne Davis, Richard Coy, Zacharah Thompson, Leonard Beat, Ambrose Staplin, George Smith, Sarah Warral, Isaac Smith, David Barton, This may be Printed, February the 27th. 1686. R. P. LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, for D. Mallet, at the sign of the Black-Ball near Bridwell-Bridge.
