j161 16182888 105002
J2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King, A DECLARATION. JAMES R. AS We cannot Consider this Invasion of Our Kingdoms by the Prince of Orange without Horror, for so Unchristian and Unnatural an Undertaking in a Per∣son so nearly Related to Us; So it is a Matter of the greatest Trouble and Concern to Us, to reflect upon the many Mischiefs and Calamities which an Army of Foreigners and Rebels must unavoidably bring upon Our People. It is but too evident by a late Declaration Published by him, That notwithstanding the ma∣ny specious and plansible Pretences it carries, his Designs in the bottom do tend to nothing less than an Absolute Usurping of Our Crown and Royal Authority, as may fully appear by his assumming to himself in the said Declaration the Reg Stile, requiring the Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, and all other Persons of all Degrees, to obey and assist him in the Execution of his Designs; a Prerogative Inseparable from the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And for a more Undeniable Proof of his Immoderate Ambi∣tion, and which nothing can satisfie but the Immediate Possession of the Crown it self, he calls in Question the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales Our Son, and Heir Apparent, though by the Provi∣dence of God, there were present at his Birth so many Witnesses of Unquestionable Credit, as if it seemed to have been the particular Care of Heaven, on purpose to disappoint so Wicked and Unparal∣lell'd an Attempt. And in Order to the effecting of his Ambitious Designs, he seems desirous in the Close of his Decla∣ration, to submit all to the Determination of a Free Parliament, hoping thereby to Ingratiate him∣self with Our People, though nothing is more Evident, than that a Parliament cannot be Free, so long as there is an Army of Foreigners in the Heart of Our Kingdoms; So that in truth he him∣self is the sole Obstructor of such a Free Parliament: We being fully Resolved, as We have already Declared, so soon as by the Blessing of God, Our Kingdoms shall be delivered from this Invasion, to call a Parliament, which can no longer be liable to the least Objection of not being freely Chosen, since We have actually Restored all the Burroughs and Corporations of this Our Kingdom, to their Ancient Rights and Priviledges, and in which We shall be ready not only to Receive and Redress all the Just Complaints and Grievances of Our Good Subjects, but also to Repeat and Confirm the As∣surances We have already given to them, in Our several Declarations of Our Resolution, by Gods Blessing, to Maintain them in their Religion, their Liberties and Properties, and all other their Iust Rights and Priviledges whatsoever. Upon these Considerations, and the Obligations of their Duty and Natural Allegiance, We can no ways doubt, but that all Our Faithful and Loving Subjects, will readily and heartily concur and joyn with Us, in the Entire Suppression and Repel∣ling of those Our Enemies and Rebellious Subjects, who have so Injuriously and Disloyally In∣vaded and Disturbed the Peace and Tranquillity of these Our Kingdoms. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 6th day of November, 1688. In the Fourth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING. London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1688.
