K356 12576739 63609
THE Romanists best DOCTOR, Who by one Infallible Remedy. Perfectly Cures all Popish-Diseases whatsoever in a Quarter of an Hours time, or Half an Hour at utmost, By an Approved Dose which never yet Failed His Patients. Which Approved Remedy may Once a Month be had at TYBURN, neer Paddington, of that Eminent Physitian of long Practice, John Ketch, Esq; Physitian in Ordinary to the POPE: A Small Dose whereof being Rightly applyed, and Compounded with a Grain or Two of His Holiness Absolution, and Free Pardon, Cordially Administred, sends the Patient Bolt-upright to Heaven in a String, without Calling at Purgatory by the way. It likewise Perfectly Cures these Popish Distempers Following, Though of never so long Continuance: VIZ. Treason, Murther, and Rebellion. And all other Popish Contrivances whatsoever, with the utmost speed imaginable. And without the least hindrance to Christian-Honesty. The aforesaid Remedy takes immediately away the Popish-Clap, known by these Following Symp∣tomes, Viz. Treasonable Contrivances against the King Kingdoms, and Countries good, which it Cures with speed beyond Imagination. It likewise quenches all Popish-Zeal to the Roman-Catholick-Cause, not got by Innocency, as is by Some CONCEIVED. This Remedy will be Delivered to any Patient at Thirteen-Pence-Half-Penny the Dose; Provided they be legally Condemned, but to Roman-Catholiques, Gratis, provided they can bring His Holiness Hand and Seal to Certifie they have been Actors in the late Treasonable De∣signs on Foot, in that Horrid Blood-Thirsty Plot. Together with a Letter Testimonial from his Holiness to St. Peter to admit you without Scruple, yet the Hand being old Roman, St. Peter himself does not well Understand it. To prevent your mistake, you may certainly find the Doctor every Execution-Day; at the Sign of the Jesuits-Cap at Tyburn, between the Hours of Eleven and Twelve at Noon, ready to afford you his Remedies aforesaid, in order to your immediate and spedy Cure. Remarkable Cures Performed by this Eminent Physitian and his Predecessors, since Queen Maries GENTLEMEN. To the intent I may no way Deceive your Expectations, I shall here give you a particular of some several Persons Cured by Me and my Predecessors, and referr you to your own Judgtment, whether I Speak more then We have Performed. IN the Year 1582, My Grand-father Cured Mr. Babington and the rest of his Accomplices, for attempting the Murther of Queen Elizabeth, of Happy Memory; being Fourteen in number: He Cured them in two days time, with only one Doze to each per∣son administred. These Persons having been in Spain, Italy, and France, where meeting with no Cure, their Malignity Raging worse then ever; upon their first coming hither they were freely discharged of the same. Their Destemper being a Blood-Thirsty attempt upon the Queens Majesties Person; which was perfectly Dissolved with the first Hempen Doze. I could give you an account of some more Cured by my aforesaid Grand-father, but hope these suffice. In the Year 1605, My Father Cured Guido Faux of a Malignant Feavor, which was so wonderfully strong, that it had like to have blown up both King and Parliament; He no sooner came into his Clutches, but of Roaring Lyons, he made them as Tame as Lambs, and sent them to Pluto's Territories without Bail or Main-prize. At the same time he not only Cured him, but the rest of his Ac∣complices, beyond expectation. In the Year 1660, My Father Grigory Cured Major General Har∣rison, Hugh Peters, Olivers Jester, and several more, of a violent Madness; which Frenzy attained to so high a pitch, as made them destroy their Father, the most Gracious King living, and turned Re∣ligion and Episcopally out of Doors; they were Cured with one Swing on the High-Rope. Since which, my Father Dunn hath Cured several Fifth-Monar∣chy-Men under Captain Venner, who stunk so much of Popery, that he could hardly distinguish at the hour of death what they were, yet they were perfectly Cured by my first Dose; which had likewise this singular Opperation, that it not only Cured them, but some scores if not hundreds; Besides, upon whom my Medicine so far opperated, as through fear they never since durst attempt the like Rebellion. Since that he Cured one Hubert a French-man, of a Scald Head, miserably scorched by the Fire in 66, yet he is forced to sing Lacri∣my, in respect only one poor Forreigner should partake of his Phisick, whereas many of his Country-men deserve the like. Thus much for Cures performed by my Father and Grand-father, now to my own. First, I Cured Mr. Stayly living in Covent-Garden London, of a Bloody Design against his present Majesty. Secondly, Five Remarkable Jesuits, Gaven and his Fellows, who though they dyed as innocent as the Child unborn, have reason to bless me for sending them to Heaven before their time. Next, I perfectly Cured Ireland and Groves, who were so well satisfied with my Cure, that they gave me my Fee with considerable Interest. Gentlemen, These are but a Touch for a taste of my Cures; I hope in my next to make an Addition of some persons now in Custody, and then I hope to ren∣der my self eminent: I hope it is not only my desire, but the request of all true Protestants, to put a final Period to Treason; and then I shall have work enough. You may Speak with me at the Hour, Time, and Place aforesaid. FINIS. Printed in the Year, 1679./80.
