L1549 R216547 99828274 32701
A LETTER, giving A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISTHMUS OF DARIAN: (Where the SCOT'S COLONIE is settled;) From a GENTLEMAN who lives there at present. With an Account of the Fertilness of the Soil, The Quality of the Air, The Manners of the Inhabitants, And the Nature of the Plants, and Animals. &c AND A particular MAPP of the Isthmus, and Entrance to the River of DARIAN. EDINBƲRGH, Printed for John Mackie, in the Parliament-Closs, and James Wardlaw on the North Side of the Street a little below the Cross, at the sign of the Bible. Prince 7 Pence. M.DC.XC.IX.
A LETTER, giving a Description of the Isthmus of Darian, (where the Scot's Colony is settled) from a Gen∣tleman who lives there at present. SIR, COnform to your Desire, and mine own Promise: I have sent You the following Description of Darian; I was up the Country when the two Gentlemen went for Scotland who brought the News of our arrival: but having now an Occasion I have sent you the following Account. You desired a particular Account of the said Darian, long since, And according to your Desire, I have sent a particular Account of the Nature of the Ground, Animals, Fruits, and Trees; and what Minerals they have, with a Draught of the Place, The Habits of their Kings and Queens, The Form of their Houses, The Way of their Fighting with the Spaniards and other Enemies. Since our safe Arrival We have vieued, transvers'd, and gone about near an hundered Miles in the Country formerly called Darian: but We have named it CALEDONIA, and there is a Fort very conveniently built, which We call New-EDINBƲRGH. The Isthmus of Darian is situated in the Main-Land o America, on the North of the Equinoctial Line, 8 degr. 11 min. Latitude; The Land is narrower from the North to
the South Sea, which you will see by the Mapp: As for the great River of Darian, it is situated something to the East∣ward ot the Golden Island. The golden Island is but a small place, not much bigger than Inch-Keith in the Firth of Forth. There are a great many Islands westward from the golden Island 14. Leagues called Zanblas Islands. The Situation of our Fort does ly very conveniently, ha∣ving a Bay upon the West, with many small Rocks, which make it inaccessable; On the East, the great River of Darian. The Soil is as good here, as in any other place in America; up the Country there are long Ranges of Mountains, well cloathed with Trees, which for the most part are Palm, and Yellow-Sanders; The Inhabitants call it Bois de Chandle, or in English Candle-Wood; It burns like a Candle, and serves them with Light while they fish in the Night time. Here grows also Lignum sanctum, or Guiacum, its Virtues are very well known, more especially to those who observe not well the VII. Commandment, and are giv'n to impure Copula∣tions; Physicians drawing hence in severall Compositions the greatest Antidote against all venerall Deseases, as also for cold and vitious Humors. The Tree likewise that affords Gummi Elemi grows here in great Aboundance; As doth Radix Chinae, or China-Root; There is a Prickle Palm, so call'd because it is infinitly full of Prickles from the Root to the Leaves; with these Prickles the Indians use to torment the Prisoners they take in Battle, they tye them to a Tree, then takeing these Thorns they put them into little Pellets of Cotton dipt in Oil, and stick them
in the Sides of the miserable prisoners, as thick as the Bri∣stles of an Hedg-Hogg: which cause an incredible Torment to the Patient; Then they set them a Fire, and if the tor∣mented Prisoner sing in the Midst of his Torments: He is e∣steem'd a couragious Soldier, who neither fears his Enemies nor the Torture; But if on the contrary, He cry out, they e∣steem him a Coward, and unworthy of any Memory. This Custom was told me by an Indian, who said He had used his Enemy thus, oftentimes. But to return to the Prickle-Palm, I shall only tell you that these Palm Trees in this only differ from the ordinary Palms, The Leaves are like these of other Palm Trees, only a little bigger, and rounder, and full of little Kernels, as pleaseing to the Taste as the Walnuts in Europe. The Wine-Palm is so call'd from the Aboundance of Wine gathered from it, of an extraordinary Shape or Form for from the Root up half Way, it is only three or four In∣ches thick; but upward, something above two thirds of its Height; It is as big, and as thick, as an ordinary Bucket, & within it is full of a certain Matter very like a slender Stock of white Cabbage, which is a very juicy of a Liquor much pleasing to the Palate; This Liquor after Fermentation and Settling of the Grounds, becomes very good and clear Wine. The Fruit is much like to that of other Palms, but smaller, like Cherries; To write farther of the Trees, it would fill a great many Sheets; But I will only name them: Palm a Chapelet, or Rosary-Palm, so called by the French, and Spa∣niards; Caremit-Tree, very like our Pear-Tree, very pleasing to the Taste; Genpa-Trees, like to our Cherry Trees; besides these, there are diverse other Sorts of Trees, as Cedars in great Aboundance, which this Part of the World produces; They are very usefull for building Ships and Canoa's, These Ca∣noa's
are like little Ferry-Boats, being made only of one Tree hollowed, and fitted, for the Sea: They are so swift, that they may be called Neptun's POST-HORSES. The In∣dians make these Canoa's without any Iron Instruments, by only burning the Trees nigh the Root, and then so govern∣ing the fire, as nothing is burnt more than what they would have; Some have Hatches of Flint wherewith they scrape or pare off whatsoever are burnt too far, and these by fire only they give that shape which renders them capable of naviga∣ting 60. or 80. Leagues with ordinary Security. Here is Ba∣sile-Wood, Yaco is another Sort of Tree; Here are a great ma∣ny Cabbage-Trees, the Cabbage growing on the Top of it. Here grows the Coco-Nut, of which the Chacolat is made. Here grows the Pinn-Apple, and a great dale of Plantine, or Sugar-Canes, of which they make Sugar; And a great dale of other Trees, which being too tedious to give you an Account of, I forbear; You may have any Trees, Roots, or Herbs, that grow in Europe as well as others that will not grow there, as Mammi; &c. You may have a great dale of Tobacco if you plant, much better than in any Place to the Northward. I shall give you an Account of the makeing Sugar & Indigo in another place. Flies as Insects severall Sorts of them, these are as big as Horse-Flies in Enrepe, and denting themselves upon Mens Bo∣dys, stick and suck the Blood till they can no longer fly, which obliges the Inhabitants to wear continually Branches of Trees to Fan them away; There are a great dale of other Sorts, as Cochinilla's; There are monstruous Adders which are very frequent in these Places, upon which Account I durst neverly on the Grass; Here are very good Land Tortoises, which are very good meat; There are also Crocodiles, I could tell you, a good true story about One of them, but being too tedious I forbear.
There is a great dale of Doggs, Deer, Rabbets, and Monkeys, and many other Sorts of Quadrupeds, which Ye have not the like of in Europe. You have a great dale of all Sorts of Fowls many wherof do not breed in Europe, as Parrots; They make their Nests in Holes of Palmito Trees, which Holes are before made by other Birds, for they are not capable of excavating any wood tho' never so soft, having their own Bills too crooked and blunt; Hence provident Nature hath supplyed them with the Labour of other Birds called Carpenteros, or Carpinters; These are no bigger than Sparrows: Yet having such hard and pierce∣ing Bills, that no Iron Instrument can be made fitter to ex∣cavate any Tree, though never so solid, and hard; And these Holes the Parrots getting Possession of build their Nests. Of Pigeons of all Sorts we are aboundantly provided; There is another small Bird here called Cabreros, or Goat-Keepers, and chiefly feed upon Crabs of the Sea; In these Birds are seaven distinct Bladders of Gall, and their Flesh is as bitter as Aloes: Of these We have aboundance. There are very many Crows, or Ravens, more troubleome, than usefull, who make a most hideous Noise. We have several fruits & roots very usefull, as Potats, they dres them only by well boiling them in a Kettle, with fair clean water; Then we cover them with a Cloath for half an Hour where they become as soft as boiled Chesnuts; Of the said Pa∣tates we make a Drink called Maiz: They cut them into small slices, and cover them with hot water; when they are well imbibed they press them through a course Cloath, and the Liquor that comes throgh tho something thick they keep in Vessels made for that Purpose; Hereafter settling two or three Days, it works: And having thrown off its Lees, is
fit for Drink They use with great Delight, and tho' it be somewhat four: Yet it is very pleasant, substantial, and ex∣traordinary wholsome; The Invention of this is wholly owing to the Indians, as well as many other things found out for the Preservation of Mans Life. There is a Root called by the Indians Cazave of which they make a Liquor called Vey-Con much like unto Beer. Another Fruit called Bananas, is an excellent Liquor, which in Strength, and Pleasantness of Tast, may be compa∣red to the best Wines of Spain: But this Liquor easily cau∣ses Drunkenness. VVe begin now to plant Tobacco for Trade; The Manner whereof is this: VVe make Bedds of Earth 12. Foot square, these thay cover with Palmito Leaves, that the Rays of the Sun may not reach the Earth; Then we water them when it doth not rain, as we do our Gardens in Europe; Being grown about the Bigness of young Lettuce: we transplant it into streight Lines in spacious Fields, setting every Plant 3. Foot distant from each other; The Tobacco must be weeded very carefully: seing the least Root of any other Herb comeing near it hinders its Grouth. There is a sort of Fish which the Indians many times eat of it is much like unto a Cow, because its Head, Nose, and Teeth, are very like to them; They are found commonly where under the Depth of the waters its full of Grass, in wich its thought they feed; They have no Ears, but in place of them two little Holes, as wide as ones little finger; Near the Neck thy have two Finns, under which are two Uders like the Breast of a VVoman; The Skin is very closs, this Skin on the Back is two finger thick which being dryed is as hard as whalebone, and may serve to make walking staffs
the Belly is in all things like that of a Cow, as far as the Reins; their manner of engendring is the same with that of a land Cow, the Male being every way like that of a Bull; they conceave and breed but once, but what Time they go with Calf, I could learn; These Fishes have a very acute Sense of Hearing, so as in takeing them the fisher-men make∣ing not the least Noise do not row unless very slightly, for this reason they use certain Instruments for Rowing, by the Indians called Pagayos with which they row without any Noise to fright the fish while they are a fishing they speak not one to another only make signs, they dart them with Javelins having two Hooks at the End; These fish are ordinarly from 20 to 24 Foot long; Their Flesh is good to eat, being in like in colour to that of a land Cow, but in taste to Pork It hath much Fat, or Grease, which We make Oil of. We have also another fish called Tortoise, of an indiffe∣rent Bigness, and of a green Colour, their Scales are some∣what hard, and of a very pleasant Taste; There is another Sort somewhat smaller; this Sort commonly keep themselves among the Rocks, whence they crawl out for Food, which is generally Sea-Apples; These other above mentioned, feed on Grass, which grows in the Water on the sandy Banks; Their Eggs are almost like these of a Crocodile, but without any shell, being only covered with a thin film; They are found in such prodigious Quantitys along the shore, that were they not frequently destroy'd by Birds, the Seas would abound with Tortoises. The Way and Manner of fishing them is as follows; viz. by makeing a great Nail, or Kind of Dart; this they fix at the End of a long Pole, with which they kill the Tortoi∣ses whenever they appear above Water.
The Indians for the most part are very dextrous in takeing these Tortoises. I will give you an Account of our shooting of some Mon∣keys, and Birds called Pheasants; The Toil of shooting did seem, at least to me, to be sufficiently compensated with the Pleasure of killing the Monkeys, for at these We made ordi∣narly 15 or 16 shot before We could kill three or four, so nimbly would they escape our Hands, and aim even after be∣ing much wounded; On the other side it was a Diversion to see the femal Monkeys carry their little Ones on their backs when any Person passed under the Trees-where these Monkeys are sitting; They will commonly squirt their Excrements u∣pon our Heads and Cloaths; likewise if shooting at any, one happen to be wounded, the rest flock about him, and do lay their Paws upon the Wound to hinder the blood from issuing forth, others gather Moss from the Trees and thrust into the Wound, and hereby stop the Blood; At other times they gather such or such Herbs, and cheuing them in their Mouth apply as Poultties, all which caused in Me great Admiration, seing such strange Actions in these irrational Creatures, which testified the fidelity and love they had for one another. I shall give you an Account, by the way, of the People; I have learned to speak somewhat of the Language by One of them them who can speak tolerable good English. I enquir'd into their Customs, Lives, and Policy: whereof I give you this Account; They are governed by a King, and severall Princes: they have generally a great Hatred a∣gainst the Spaniards, There are a great many persons of them; they are very courtious to any that give them any thing. Here are two Sorts of People of them: The one Sort cultivates the Ground, and make Plantations; these are most numerous,
the other is a lazy sort, never seen but at Night: They have Hutts that they live in all Day, till Night; they not care∣ing for any other Habitation They use no other Cloaths than an Apron ty'd to their Middle, comeing down so as to hide their Privitys; such Aprons are made of the Rinds of Trees, which they strongly beat upon Stones till they are sofned; The same they use for Bed-Cloaths, except a few who make them of Cotton, they are whiter than the whitest in Scotland. The other is of a Brownish Colour, but very handsome Bodys of Men and Women tightly limb'd, the Men of them are verie dextruous at Bow and Arrow, and very good spears the common Sort use spears of Timber, the points are shod with Iron, or teeth of Crocodiles. They are most dextruous in Swimming, I did never see the like of them in Doucking for they will continue near half an Hour below the Wa∣ter. I could never learn what Religion they have, all I could learn was they neither believe in, nor serve the Devil: as many other Nations in America, do; Hereby they are not so much tormented by him as other Nations are. They are ve∣ry attentive at our Form of Worship; they did tell me they did not like Spaniards Religion, for they are as ill as those that worship the Devil, for that Religion can not be good which is so cruel. Their ordinary Food consists in severall Fruits, a little in∣dian Corn; Fruits, such as Bananas, Racoves, Ananas, Pota∣tos, Cazave; As also Crabs, and severall Fish, which they kill in the fea with Darts, which they are wonderfully dex∣truous at. They are pretty expert in makeing certain pleasant and de∣licat
Liquors; The commonest among them is called Achioc, this is made of a certain Seed of Palm-tree, bruised and steept in hot water, till it be settled at the Bottom. This Liquor being strain,d off, hath a pleasant tae, and is very nourish∣ing. Other sorts of liquors they prepare, which I shall omit for brevity; only I'll say something of that made of Platanos These they knead hot with water, and then put into great Calabashes, full of cold water for eight Days, during which it ferments as well as the best wine. This Liquor they drink for Pleasure, and as a great Regale, so that when they invite any of their Friends, or Relations, they cannot treat them better than with this pleasant Drink. They are very unskilful in dressing Victuals; so that they very seldom treat one another with Banquets. But when they invite others they desire them to come and drink of their Liquors. Before the invited Persons come to their House, those that expect them, comb their Hair verie well, and anoint their Faces with the Oil of Palm, mixt with a black Tincture which renders them very hideous, The women, also dawb their Faces with another Sort of Stuff, which makes them look is red as Crimson. And such are their greatest Orna∣ment, and Attire, Then He that invites, takes his Arms, which are three or four Azagayas, and goes out his Cottage 3 or 400 Steps, to wait for, and receive the invited persons. As soon as they draw nigh, he falls down on the Ground, lying flat on his Face, without any Motion, as if he were dead; being thus prostrat, the invited Friends take him up, and set him on his Feet, and go altogether to the Hutt. Here the Persons invited, use the same Ceremony falling down to the Ground, as the Inviter did before. But he lifts them up one by one, and giving them his Hand, conducts them into his
Cottage, where he causes them to sit. The VVomen on these Occasions use few, or no Ceremonys. Being thus brought into the House, they are presented every one with a Calabash, of about two Pynts of Scotish Measure, full of Achioc almost as thick as Water-Gruel, or Children-Pap. These they are to drink off, and get down at any Rate. These Calabashes being emptied, the Master of the House, with many Ceremonys, goes about the Room, and gathereth his Calabashes. And this Drinking hitherto is reckon'd but one Wellcome. Afterwards, they drink of the Achioch above mention'd, to which they were invited. Then follow many Songs and Dances, and 1000 Caresses, to the Women; So that oftentemes, for a Testimony of their great Love, they take their Darts, and with the points, they pierce and wound their genital parts. This I could believe, though often affirmed to me, till my own Eyes were Witt∣nesses of these and the like actions. Neither only on this Oc∣casion do they use this Ceremony of pierceing their Genitals, but also when they make love to any Woman, thereby to let them understand the Greatness of their Affection, and Con∣stancy. They marry not any young Maid without the Consent of her Paients. If any desires to take a Wife; he is first exa∣mined by the Damsels Father concerning feverall Sorts of good Husbandry. These are commonly, whether He can make Azagayas, Darts for fishing; or spin a certain Thread, which they use about their Arrows. Having answered to Satisfa∣ction, the Examiner cals to his Daughter, for a little Caba∣lash full of Achioc. Of this he drinks first; then gives the Cup to the young Man; and He to the Bride, who drinks it out and with this only Ceremony the Marriage is made. When
any one drinks to the Health of another, the second Person is to drink out the Liquor, lest in the Calabash, but in Case of Marriage, as was said, it is consum'd only among them three: And the Bride allways obtaining, by far, the greater share. When the Woman lys in, neither She nor her Husband ob∣serve the Time, costomarie among the Carribes; But as soon as the VVoman is delevered, she goes to the next River, Brook or Fountain, and washes the new-born Creature, swathing it up in certain Rowlers, or Swath-Bands, there call'd Cabalas. This done she goes about Her ordinarie Labour. When the Man dies, his Wife burys Him with all his Azagayas, Aprons, and Ear-Jewels; and comes every Day to her Husbands Grave bringing Him Meat, and Drink, for a whole Year after. Their Years they reckon by Moons, allowing fifteen to e∣very Year, which makes their entire Circle, as our twelve Moneths, do ours. Some Writers of the Carribbe-Islands, affirm, that this Cere∣mony, of carrying of Victuals to the Dead, is generall among them; and that the Devil comes to the Sepulchres, and carries away the Meat and Drink. But I know the contrarie, ha∣ving my self taken away these Offerings, and eaten them; for I knew that the Fruits used on these Occasions, were of the choicest, and the Liquors of the best Sort. The Widow ha∣ving compleated her Year, opens the Grave, and takes out all her Husbands Bones; These she scrapes, and washes very well & puts them in a Cabala, or Satchel, & is obliged for another year to carry them upon her Back all Day, and to sleep upon them all Night, till the Year be out. Then she hangs up the Bagg and Bones, against the Pest of her own Door, if she be a Mi∣stresse of an House, if not she hangs them at the Door of her
next Neighbour, or Relations. The Widows cannot marrie the second time, according to their Customs, till after two Years End; the Men are bound to perform no such Ceremonys for their Wives; But if anie Pirrat marrie an indian Woman, she is bound to do in all things as if he were an Indian. I shall proceed now to give you an Account of the Men, Women, and their Habits; They wear as an Ornament in their Noses, a Gold, or Sil∣ver-Plate, in Form of an Half-Moon; which when they drink, they hold up with one Hand, while they lift up the Cup with the other. The Men paint themselves sometimes with Streaks of Black, and the Women with Red. The Wo∣men have in their Noses a pretty thick Ring of Gold or Silver and cover themselves with a Blanket only. They are general∣ly well featured: Among whom I saw severall fairer than the fairest in Europe, with Hair as white as the finest Flax. 'Tis reported of them, that they see better in the Dark, than in the Light. I shall further give You an Account of our going up the country to their King or chief Captain; we marching from our Fort with Captain Andraeas, and other of their Princes: We began our March towards their head Place, where their King resided, first through a small Skirt of a Wood, and then over a Bay almost three Miles, or a League in Length. After that We went about six or seaven Miles up a woody Valley, and We saw here and there some old Plantation, and had a very good Path to march in. There we came to the side of a Ri∣ver, which in most places was dry, and built Us Houses, or rather Hutts, to lodge in. The Indians forbad us to ly upon the Grass, for Fear of
monstruous Adders, which are very fiequent in those places. Breakeing some of the Stones that lay in the River, We found them shine with Sparks of Gold; These Stones were driven down from the neighbouring Mountains in Time of Floods. The next day of our March We mounted a very steep Hill, and on the other side, at the Foot thereof, We rested on the Bank of a River, which Captain Andraeas told us, ran into South Sea, being the same River on which the Town of Santa Maria was situated. Hence We continued our March till a∣bout Noon, and then ascended another Mountain, far high∣er than the former; Here We were often, and in many pla∣ces in great Danger, the Mountain being so nigh to a Per∣pendicular, and the Path so narrow, that but one Man at a Time could pass, We arrived in the Evening on the other Side of ihe Mountain, and lodg'd again by the Side of the same River. Next Morning, We march'd all along the River aforemen∣tion'd, crossing it often, almost at ev'ry half Mile, sometimes up to the Knees, and at other times up to the Middle, in a very rapid current. About Noon we came to a place, where we found some Indian Houses. These were very large, and neat: The sides were built of Cabbage-Trees, and the Roofs of wild: Canes, thatch'd with Palmito-Royal; They had ma∣ny Partitions, or distinct Ground-Roomes, but no Ascent by Stairs. At this place were four of these Houses together, all within a Stone's throw of one another, each of them have∣ing a large Plantan Walk before it. Half a Mile from this place, liv'd the King, or chief Captain of the Indians of Da∣rian whe came to visit Us in Royal Robes, with his Queen. and Family. His Crown was made of small white Reeds cu∣riously
woven, having no other Top than its lineing, which was red Silk. Round about the middle of it was a thin plate of Gold, about two Inches broad, lac'd behind, in which stuck two or three Ostrich Feathers. About this Plate went also a Row of golden Beads, which were bigger than ordinar Pease; underneath which was seen the red lining of the Crown. In his Nose he wore a large Plate of Gold, in Form of an half-Moon; and in each Ear a great gold Ring, nigh four Inches diameter with a round thin plate of Gold of the same Breadth, having an small Hole in the Center, by which it hung to the Ring. He was covered with a thin white Col∣ton Robe, reaching to the small of his Leggs, and round its Bottom a Frienge of the same, three Inches deep; so that by reason of the length of this Robe, We could see no farther than his naked Anckles. In his Hand He had a long bright Lance as sharp as any Knife. With Him He had three Sons each of them having a white Robe, and their Lances in their Hands, but standing bare-headed before Him; as also did eight or nine Per ons more of his Retinue, or Guard. His Queen wore a red Blanket, which was closly girt a∣bout her wast, and another that came losely over her head and shoulders. She had a young child in her Arms, & two Daugh∣ters walked by her, with their Faces almost covered with stripps, or streaks of red, and about their Necks, and Armes almost loaden with small Beads of severall Colours. These Indian Women of Darian, are generally very free, airy, & brisk; yet withall very modest, and cautious in their Hus∣bands Presence, of whose Jealousie they stand in Fear. With these Indians We made an Exchainge, or had a Truck, as it is called, for Knives, Pins, Needles, or any such-like Tri∣fles; but in our Dealing with them we found them to be very cunning.
He gave Us a Calabash full of Liquor which they make of Plantans; This sort of Fruit is first reduced to Mash, then laid betwixt Leaves of the same Tree, and so used with Wa∣rer. After which Preparation, they call it Miscelaw. On our March hither We found in our Way, here, and there, an House or two, whose Owners commonly stood at the door and gave, as we Passed by, to every one of Us, either a ripe Plantan, or else a Cazave, or some other sweet and pleasant Root. This Captaine or King, is the head of their other Captains when they go to Battle against the Spaniards, somewhat to the South-ward of this Place is a pleasant Plain, the generall. Place the Indians rendez-vous in. I shall now give You an Account of the rest of their Cap∣tains. Captain Ambrosio commands from the River Pinas, Bono∣nos, Mango, and Cocos, to the Samblas, He is a Man above sixty, but strong and vigorous, a mortall Enemy to the Spa∣niards, with whom He has had long War; He is esteem'd the bravest, and most succesfull of all their Commanders on every Occasion; He's of a middle Size, well made, strongly limb'd, and of a grave, and somewhat stern Countenance. He has a Son in law, one Pedro, a brisk little Fellow who speaks good Spanish, haveing been a Slave to them at Panama for severall Years, and who can never forget, nor forgive, their Usage of him there. Captain Diego commands from the Bottom of the Gulph of Ʋraba on this side to Caret-Bay, and has about 3000. Men under his Command; He is esteem'd the most powerfull a∣mongst them, and has been at War with the Spaniard about
a twelve Month. The Occasion was this: The Indians ha∣veing found three Gold Mines within his Jurisdiction, being two small ones, and a very great Vein, consulted with them∣selves what to do; And being sensible that they did not understand how to work them, concluded to discover them to the Spaniards, provided they'd allow them such a share of the Profit. This was agreed to, and faithfully promised by the Spaniards, but no sooner had the Indians shew'd the Mines but they shut up two of them, and put strong guards upon them, and fell to work upon the third, of which the Indians demanding their share, they beat and abused them, calling them their Slaves, and threatned to exterminat them, which provock'd them so, that a little time after, they siez'd upon 20. Spaniards, and 3. Priests, and cut them all to pieces. The next to Diego, is one Captain Powsigo of Caret-Bay, He is one of the Indian Clergy-Men, and commands that Part of the Coast which lyes between Caret-Bay, and golden Island; He is but a small Captain; and Brother in Law to Andraeas. The Peninsulae which we possess, and which we found un∣inhabited (nor has it ever been by any heretofore, that we have yet hear'd of,) lys betwixt his Bounds, and Captain Andraeas's. From Golden-Island, to the River Pinas; about a League to the West-ward of the Isle of Pinas, Andraeas, and his Brother Pedro command, they are greater than Powsigo, but not so powerfull as Diego; yet their united Interests by Consan∣guinity, together with the Vicinity of their Commands to our Settlement, makes their Friendship of much greater Conse∣quence.
These People have had a good Correspondence, for seve∣rall Years past, with the Spaniards, and have suffered some of them to reside among 'em to give an Account by Land to Panama, from time to time, who were upon this Coast about two months before our Arrivall here. Captain Ambrosio, who has the adjoyning Command, for∣ced them to enter into the common Confederacy, and cut off ten Spaniards who lived on the Main of the golden-Island, I distinguish it thus, by reason the Natives call all the Main opposite to the Island, by the same Name that it bears. A∣bout a League from the Water side there is an high Moun∣tain wherein they assure Us are severall Mines of excellent Gold. The Spaniards are very sensible of this, and from time to time have taken great Care by fair or soul Means, ne∣ver to let them be opned, well knowing that (being so near the North-sea) they should have the least share of them to themselvs. Captain Andraeas has often been at Panama, the Mines of Sauta Maria, and the South-Sea; The Spaniards believeing he might be usefull to them, made Him a Captain, by giveing Him a stick tip't with Silver, upon which He values himself above others, and that has (we are apt to believe) endeared Him to their Interests; yet the Love of ones Country, and Liberty is so naturall, that we have good Reason to believe that as soon (being a sensible cunning Fellow) as He finds we are able to protect Him, he will heartily join to our In∣terest. Captain Pedro is esteemed by Ambrosio, and all his People whose Daughter he has to VVife, as also two of her Daugh∣ters by himself, which is allowed here, yet it seems that they believe it a Crime, since if they have any children during the
Life of their mother, they are buried alive, (I mean the child ren) which is very strange, that the innocent should suffer for the guilty. They prest Us very hard to come and live by them, as also joyntly to make war with the Spaniards, whom they would engage upon the Forfaulture of their Heads, if we would as∣sist them with an hundered arm'd Men, and as many Arms, with 2000. of their own People, to drive. not only out of the Mines, (which are but three Days Journey from this Place,) but even out of Panama it self. VVe gave them fair words, and promised to go to the West-ward with them to vieu the Coasts, and if there were any convenienter Harbour for our ships, we would be their Neighbours. The Sanblaz to the River Conception, is commanded by one Corbet. Next to Corbet from the River Conception, is one Nicola, a Man who speaks Spanish as well as any naturall Spaniard, ha∣ving been for about a dozen of Years of his Youth among them; He likewise reads and writes it perfectly, and under∣stands the State of Europe very well: which none other of them have any Notion of; He is said to be wise and extrem∣ly beloved by his People, for his Justice, and good Nature, in so much that there has been Designs to cut off Ambrosio, and place Him in his Room, for He is of a rough military temper, and often upon slight pretinces makes bold to take away what they have from them; However if they do not love him, they fear him, and his near Alliance, and strick Friendship with Diego in the Gulph, a powerfull, and gal∣lant old Fellow, renders Him very secure. This Nicola was in good Terms with the Spaniards till a∣bout a twelve Month agoe, a Triffle made Him brake with them: and 'twas this;
He had got an excellent French Fuzie from a Buccanier, which He valu'd extremly: 'Twas somewhat out of Order, nor did He know how to right it again; A Spanish Don from Porto-Bello being at his House, told him he would car∣ry it with Him, and get it mended for Him, which the o∣ther consenting to, with a Desire it might be return'd as soon as possible, They parted. The Don shew'd it to the Gover∣nour, who liked it extremly, and said 'twas too good for an Heathen; So ordered an old rusty Match-Lock to be sent in Lieu. This He took so hainously, that He fell upon the Spa∣niards wherever He sound 'em, and cut them off, neither is He to be reconsil'd to them. Ambrosio who all the rest allow to be the most dareing, and brave, as also the most faithful to his Promise; being a true Friend, and a most inveterat Enemy to the Spaniards: keeps Him within Bounds. From the mouth of the River Coco, about a good League We went to Ambrosio's House, it standing upon the Bank of this River, with about ten or a Dozen lesser Houses about it. When We came near, Ambrosio advanc'd about fifty Paces, with twenty Followers, all cloath'd in white loose Frocks, with Frienges round the Bottom, and Lances in their Hands. He saluted Us kindly, and gave Us a Calabash full of Li∣quor almost like Lambs-Wool, which they call Mishlow, be∣ing made of Indian Corn, and Patatoes. This they get drink withall often; Before the house, about twenty Paces it was very smooth and clean. The house was about 0. Foot in Length, 35. in Breadth, and 30. in Height. I was curi∣ovsly thatch'd with Palmetto-Royal, and over that Cajan Leavs, The Floor was of a firm Earth, like Tarras, very smooth, and
clean. The Sides were of large Canes, about the Bigness of a Mans Legg, and near an Inch asunder. In this House live Ambrosio, and Pedro with their whole Familys, in all about 40. Persons. There was an old Woman who cook'd their Victuals for them, and was very stirring about the House; She seem'd to Us to be near sixty. (and was Ambaosio's Grand-Mother) but upon asking Her Age, We were inorm'd She was an hun∣dred and twenty; We could not believe it, and were per∣suaded they must mistake in the Computation of Time: but as an infallible Demonstration, they shew'd to Us the sixth Generation of this Womans Body in the House, which was indeed very surpriseing; And we were assured 'twas common amongst them to live 150. or 60. Years; Yea 'tis observed those of them who converse often with the Europeaus, & drink their strong Liquors, are short liv'd While We stay'd there, Ambrosio, and Pedro went out with their Guns to kill some Fowl for Us; Pedro return'd with some Partridges, the largest, and best that e're I saw, be∣ing bigger than our Capons, and exceeding sweet. On November 30. Captain Andraeas came a-board the St. Andrew, We waiting an Oportunity of clearing some Suspicions We had of his Correspondence with the Spaniard, We taxt Him with it, and He ingeniously confest that the Spaniards had been friendly to Him, and had made Him a Captain; that He was obliged for his Safty to keep fair with them, They assureing Him We were nothing but Privateers, who had no Design to settle, but to plunder both Spaniards, and Indians, and be gone in two or three Months time, as they used to do, and if so, if He assisted Us in any Measure,
as soon as We were gone, they'd destroy both Him, and His. VVe gave Him all possible Assurances of the Contrary, so that He was fully satisfied, and desired we would give Him a Commission, and receave Him, and his People into our Prote∣ction; which if we did, He'd give Us all his Right to his part of the Country. VVhereupon a Commession was ordered for Capt. Andraeas, and being read and approven of, it was delivered to Him. The Commission being read, and rendered Verbatim to Him in Spanish, He agreed to every Article: then before 7 or 8 of his own People, and severall of ours, it was delivered unto Him with a broad basked-hilted Sword, and a Pair of Pistolls, with which He solemly promised to defend Us to the last Dropp of His Blood, against all our Enemys. Upon Advice of the K. of Spain's Indisposition, Count Mon∣tizeuma Vice-Roy of Mexico, born in that Kingdom, and of the Race of these great Emperors, had made such an Interest that 'tis not to be doubted that he will speedily set up for himself. Carthagean has likewise been in a civil War, which is only covered, not quencht. At Porto-Bell about 700. Slaves got into a Body, which in a little time encreast to above 1500. The Governour not be∣ing able to suppress them, was forced to come to very dis∣honourable Terms, viz. to allow them to be a free People, in∣dependent o the Spaniards, and only call'd their Friends. Captain Powsigo of Caret-Bay, told us of severall Gold-Mines within two Miles of us, and shew'd us a Sample of the Gold, which was extraordinary fine. FINIS.
