L284B R6276 13088682 97332
The LAMENTATION OF A SINNER, OR Bradshaw's horrid Farewel, Together with his last VVILL AND TESTAMENT. Dedit Deus huic quoque finem (utinam funem.) LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.
The Lamentation Of A SINNER. TIs not unknown to any, that death must be ac∣quainted with all men, with some sooner, with others later; some he leads gently out of the World, others he violently drags along: and this he doth, not that he loves or affects this man, more than that; for Kings, and Pesants, Devils incarnat, and Pro∣tectors, Presidents, Generals, Speakers, with such like (last named) Rake-hels, are all alike to him; he must and will execute his Office, and leaves the event thereof to Almighty God, of whose mercifulnesse and goodnesse, we have here before us an evident sign and token in this our Bradshaw (whose name without any farther Cha∣racter, fully bespeaks him what he is) I say in depriving him of life (though by a Hell-resembling tormenting death) by which he is freed from a most shameful and wretched end; Dye he must, Death is not to be bribed, all his ill gotten mony (besprinkled with the tears of Orphans and Widows, and dyed red in human blood)
could not tempt Death, to stay one minute longer; Phy∣sicians were not wanting that might allure his Soul, with pleasing Julips and Cordials, to still remain a Tenant to his body; but would needs remove its lodging, and tra∣vel (and as some think) to the Stygian lake, there to find out the Ghost of its dearly beloved Patron Oliver. Precious Cordials proved to him the worst of Corrosives. When I looked over but the Catalogue of those Receipts that were administred him, and all proving in effectual, I was ready to have blamed Physicians Art, had I not look'd up to a higher (avenging) power; amongst a ma∣ny which I found, I cannot but leave to the World for the good of posterity this one receipt, which he took in 1648. Oliver then being his Doctor, There was by a Glisterpipe infected into him half a pint of Diabolical, Machayllian Counsel, 'twas after this thought fitting, that a strong Composition of Atheism, Impudence and Hipocrisie should be given him, to purge out his Conscience, least it might any wayes offend or trouble him; after this he took an Electuary, and dyet∣drink to Consume within him, those small seeds of vir∣tue Nature had sown in him, which he was to drink every day, lest it should predominate over his vice. Now to confirm the cure, there was administred him, one Firkin of Aurum Potabile, mingled with two run∣lets of Widows tears; these two last ingredients so much inlivened and strenghned his body, as well as his purse, insomuch that he could walk in his Pontificalibus to Westminster, and there talk too (see more of that in the relation of the Kings tryal) Had he not after this (by a fa∣tal mistake) drunk too much of royal blood, and thereby took a deep surset, he might (in all probability) have re∣covered from the malady that then possest him. Though it did not dispatch him presently (to the astonishment of most) (as it did utterly extinguish Miltons eyes:) yet it lay like lingring poyson in his guts, that so inwardly fry∣ed
him, that ere he was dead, he was ready roasted, and fit to be served up (the next dish to Oliver) unto the Devils Table. Well he is gone to the place from whence Libera nos Domine; And I cannot chuse, for that love I and my Country owe him, but pisse a tear upon his stinking memory. VVhat I say of him I am necessitated to do, otherwise I should be silent; Because where I cannot speak the least good of this dead man, I hold it in some part a duty not to speak all the evill I know of him. I need not Carachterise him whose life hath been so notorious. One act alone (in sentencing his King) had he otherwise been virtuous, was sufficient to have doo∣med him vicious, and sent him (where now we suspect he is gone) to the place where is weeping, wayling and gnashing of teeth. And as if God intended to terrifye all those that may be King-killers for the future, tormen∣ted him here in such manner, as that his torments were little different from those he must suffer eternally here∣after. Me thinks the dyn of his yellowings rings still in my Ears, and his last words have left so deep an impres∣sion in my mind, as I cannot but ecchoe them to the VVorld. Thus in a trance he exprest himself, as to an infernal spirit, he saw then attending on him, Hold thy soul-tor∣menting Paw; give me one hours respite. Good Devil stay, for that good and acceptable service I have done thee; Give me but time to make my Will at least, and I shall promise thee not to advise my fellow Murderers, Dissemblers, national Deceivers, and thy obedient sub∣jects. Let mony Bribe, since ambition hath damn'd thee: both which hath ruined me eternally, and will (without a miracle;) utterly undoe the Republican Pub∣lican Grand-Army Officers. So, et mee but speak, though in torture; my King-judging tongue being red-hot, and those irreverent and peremptory words I spoke to my Soveraign, being now hot glowing Coals, frying my En∣tralls.
I that would hardly admit of any security for treasonably suspected (though innocent) persons, can∣not now my self perswade Death or the Devil to accept of any mortal Bail, longer than I shall declare my last Will and Testament. My time being short, tis my de∣sire, that St. Johns (whose name signifies more than ever his actions performed) be the Pen-man thereof. Imprimis to the Earth I bequeath my body, my soul to him that it belongs to. I do hereby constitute and ap∣point Lambert and (his shooing-horn) Fleetwood to be my lawfull Executors of this my last Will. To my well-beloved friend Hazelrig I give 600 l. on condition he let not Old Nick have any of his New-Castle Coals to in∣crease Hell fires, and my torments. I likewise give 400 l. and if it should not be thought enough, as much more, to buy the best sort of hemseed, and that it be sown in White hall Palace Yard, &c. to the intent the Army Officers, and such like, may not want Hempen Chains to adorn their Necks withall. To Lambert I bequeath a hidden receipt how to make o Pill that never fails, being admininistred, to dissolv Parliaments, one grain whereof scattered among his Enemies shall make their swords drop out of their hands; Probatum est. I likewise give ten pounds for the erecting of two Poles, on which of each Vanes and Needhams Heads may be placed, for to demonstrate (truer than any Wethercock) which way the wind blows (the cours of State mat∣ters) To the preaching Officers I give 200 l. to buy tubbs to hold forth in, that the brethren may speedily be furnished with good Estates. Let 500 l. be laid out for the cure∣ing of all those that Sir Harry Matin (with his fellow Statists) hath wounded in Venerial Combats. It is my will likewise that Col. Benetts pension be augmented twice as much as he now possesseth, on condition he will preach for the future but three words in eight of truth, and but
one of sence to his fellow Simpletons his Auditors. To Sir James Harringtong 1000 l. to be expended in his fur∣ther discovery of his new found Common-wealth Oceana; and that he send as many as he can of the mad-peopse of great Bedlam hither for the prevention here of future discord and confusion. To Desborow I give one hun∣dred pound to buy an Herd of Swine and that they shall be fed in his own yard, before his Chamber window, to put him in mind of his Quondam Occupation, which may occasionally give him a Cation that he bring not his hogs to a fair Market. My breach fails me, by reason of which I am not able to insist further, in the bestowing of my ill-gotten Estate, in such like pious uses. I therefore shall conclude with this, that is Lambert and Monk agree not, the last shall have my free consent that the sit next in the Chair of State; provided he can shew more Wit, and lesse Honesty, than the rest of his Competitors.
AN EPITAPH ON Iohn Bradshaw. HEre underneath this heap of dirt lies dead, One that bereav'd our Soveraign of his Head. Here lies that Villain, that same cursed Slave, Wh' intomb'd 3. Kingdoms in Charls Martyrs grave, This towring Rascals downfall, who'l bemoan, That dash'd his brains out 'gainst his Soveraigns Throne? None parallels this Fiend, unless he be The Devils abstract, Hells Epitomie, FINIS.
