L2922 R2827 12961086 96075
LONDONS DECLARATION, IN THE DEFENCE OF THE CITISENS now in Arms. CONCERNING, CERTAIN ASPERSIONS cast upon them; some calling them Traitors and Rebels to the King. OF WHICH, They here nobly cleere themselves, proving of themselves to the whole Kingdome, in stead of Traytors and Rebels, carefull, true, and Loyll Subjects both to King and Kingdome. LONDON, Printed for IOHN GREENSMITH, 1642.
London's DECLARATION, IN THE DEFENCE OF THE Citizens now in Arms; concerning cer∣tain aspersions cast upon them: Some calling them Traitors and Re∣bels to the King, &c. WHereas reports neither honest nor just have blown up and down the kingdome, that we the Citizens of Lon∣don, have done little lesse then risen up in Armes against King Charles, sole and law∣full heir apparent to the crown of England, our most loyall Soveraign: We to clear our selves of so unjust aspersions, here to declare
to the whole Kingdome our loyall intents, howsoever disloyally taken. To take up arms against our soveraign we acknowledge and confesse i to be no other∣wise then capitall Treason, which should we go about to do, we were worthie to be pro∣climed Rebels and Traitors to both King and Country, but such were not our thoughts; for why, it stands unto no sence, that we, who by peaceable trading maintain both our selves and families, should go about to disturb that peace, to the utter unoing of our selves and families. Were it nor a madnesse for a Mer∣chant, having a ship well fraughted with rich merchandises, and a fair wind to bring it to land, then wilfully to burn his own ship; even so would it be with us, should we go about to destroy our selves and estates, when we may live peaceably and quiet; no, our intents are not for rebellion, but for supporting of true Religion, which for, a time hath as it were slept in oblivion, and now is the onely time to awaken it or never. If it be rebellion for the hand to give suste∣nance to the mouth, and consequently to the whole body, then may it bee said that vvee are rebels for going about to ayd and assist those which are as the mouth of the Commonalty (religious Knights and Burgesses we meane) who are bound by their places to demonstrate our Greevances.
Put a Quere may be made, whither those which wee tke be our friend, are not the Kings soes, and cosequently the whole king∣domes. To such (if ny such) Quee be, wee thus answer. If any of our Knigts or Burgesses can bee proved so to be (traytors to his Majesty wee say) and we should goe about to uphold them in any such mischievous attempts, we should againe prove our selves guilty of Rebellion, which far be from us: if any Knights or Bur∣gesses whatsoever be knowne, nay, but suspe∣cted to be guilty of treason, either toward his Majestie, or Majesties Kingdome, we would so far be from joyning with them, that with all our power and strength, we would endeavour (being commanded) to deliver them up; with this proviso, they comming to a tryall, malice or envie may not be their accuser. We further also declare, that whereas it hath beene reported that the Major part of the city, being encouraged thereunto by the governors thereof, are intended to alter our Protestant Religion, and bring it to a Sect called Brow∣nists, which we utterly abhor and deny, desi∣ring nothing more but a setled government nailed in the Church, all popish Ceremonies being abolished, and the founders of them made exemplary well-affected Ministers, being
chosen in their places, for so long as lazie droans are suffered to feed in the hives of labo∣rious Ministers, there is no hope that either the Gospell will flourish or Peace continue with∣our borders. We also the Citizns of London doe further declare, really and truly without the least in∣tent of Hipocrisie, that our intents are still good towards his Majesty, and have the rather published this Declaration, to the intent that no city or village whatsoever should take ani∣mation from us to arise vp in arms: it is our prayer that our meaning be not misconstrued by any, thinking that we are in arms to offend the King; whereas God is our witnesse, wee will chuse rather to defend him, and doe not feare but by the helpe and assistance of God, but that very briefly the whole kingdome will confesse, that those men which were in Arms to defend the House of Commons, are as rea∣dy to be opened in the defence of the King. FINIS.
