L3020A R10008 13546423 100141
A Looking-Glass for Loyallists: OR, THE Doctrine of the Presbyterians Paralell'd with the Doctrine of the Jesuites. SINCE the League of France, and the English Covenant were both made upon Pretence of Religion, it's not unworthy our Pains to consider the Conformity of their Doctrines, which they employ to maintain, both the One, and the Other; and how the Jesuites Maxims are the Chief Support of the Covenant. Both in the League and Covenant, the People are encouraged to take up Arms against their King, by this Opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine's; who teacheth, (Bellarm. de Con∣cil. Lib. 2. Cap. 19.) That in the Kingdoms of Men, the Power of the King comes from the People, because (he saith) it's the People that make the King; and that the People do never so transfer that Power over to the King, but they retain it in Habitu; so that they may reassume it again, when they please: Which is also the Judgment of Navarrus, whom the Cardinal highly extols. And thus the Author of Observations upon the King's Declaration, who is the Master of the Sentences with the Covenanters, teacheth us, That originally the Power is in the People, who are the Fountain and Efficient Cause; and that the Authority is not in the Prince, but Secundarily and Derivatively. [All these State-Philosophers are full of School-Terms, but little Reason.] And he adds, That this Au∣thority founded by the People, cannot be dissolved, but by that Power which gave it Constitution: Which is as much to say, That the People may take away the King's Power and Authority when they please. But the Cardinal explains himself more clearly in that which before he had written in Covert Terms; saying, (Lib. 3. de Pontis. Chap. 7.) That a King (such as he there describes) may, yea ought, by the Consent of All, to be deprived of his Authority. And Goodman, (pag. 144. and 149.) Knox, Layton, Caryl, Gouge, Sedgwick, and several others, is of the same Opinion, That Evil Princes ought to be Deposed, and that this alone belongs to the Inferiour Magistrates, to put in Execution. We learn from Dr. Charron, That the French Leaguers eluded the Strength of St. Paul's Texts, which forbids the Opposing of Sovereigns, in saying, (in his Christian Discourse, about the End of his Book of Wisdom,) That the Commands had regard only to the State of the Christians of those Times, because they were not then strong enough to make Resistance. I have shew'd, how Bellarmin, Buchanane, and the Champions of the Covenant, make use of the same Reasons and Expositions, to maintain their Hellish Designs. But to clear the way, and make it smooth to come to the Deposing of Kings: These two Parties are wont to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance: Emanuel Sa, the Jesuite, saith; (in Vice Tyrannus,) That the People may Depose their Prince even after they have sworn perpetual Obedience to Him. And Mr. Knox saith, (Knox to Engl. and Scot. pag. 78.) That if Princes prove Tyrants, their Subjects are free from their Oaths of Allegiance, &c. To the Excommunication, and the Deposing the Prince originally, there follows Execution accor∣ding to the Authentick Bull; That it's no Homicide, to Kill an Excommunicated Person. The French League produces Two Examples in the Persons of their Kings; (Papa Ʋrban. causa. 23. Qu. 5. cau. Excommunicatorum. de Jure Regni, pag. 70.) And this also agrees with the Doctrine of Buchanan, That Ministers may Excommunicate Princes; and that a King, after he is cast into Hell by Excommunication, is unworthy to live, or to enjoy Life upon Earth. But observe in passing, the Reformed Churches do not teach, That the Excommunicatio Major does cast any Man into Hell; but Excludes them from the Outward Communion of the Visible Church: But in This, as in other Things, Buchanan hath shewed himself to be less skilled in Divinty, than in Poetry. And as for the Doctrine of King-Killing, which is a familiar Doctrine amongst the Jesuites; They, to lessen their Crime, quote in their Writings (Jesuita Vapulans, Chap. 13.) the Passages of Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, &c. who, together with Them, teach the same Doctrine. The Author of Sions Plea animates the People to War, and to pull down the Bishops; speaking thus, (Sions Plea, pag. 240.) Smite neither Small nor Great, but the Troublers of Israel; wound that Hazael in the Fifth Rib; yea, if your Father, or your Mother stand in your way, dispatch them also: Pull down the Ensigne of the Dragon, set up the Standard of Jesus Christ. What! If the Father of the State should stand in your Way, when you are busie in this Holy Cause, must he be dispatched too? No doubt, but they would tread upon him to make way, and would serve the Son as they have done the Father. 'Tis a point resolved on by the same Author, They must strike the Basilisk Vein; none but That can heal the Pleurisie of State: Which is much as to say, in good English, That they may cut the King's Throat for the Publick Good, which is the very words of those Jesuits, Guignard and Scribanius, had they not too grosly borrowed their Terms: For, say they, France is Sick, and we must cut the Basilisk Vein, to Heal her: Which is the very words of the above-mentioned Author, in his Book call'd, Sions Plea against Prelacy. Oh rare Flowers of Diabolical Rhetorick! Oh the Shame of Christian Religion! Is this the Simplicity and Meekness of the Gospel? Is this the Way to guide Conscience into the way of Peace, and to set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, or Christ on his Throne? If St. Paul were alive, doubtless these Men would even maintain to his Face, That he understood not the Nature of the Spiritual Kingdom, when he said, Rom. 14.7. That the Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and when he read this Lesson to the Christians, Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to which Peace ye are all called in one Body. They would have taught him, That the Kingdom of Jesus Christ ought to be set up by the Mur∣thering of Kings, the Destruction of the People, and the Over-throw of States; and would have
sent him to their Catechiz (Vid. The Souldiers Catechism, Composed for te Parliaments. Army, by Robert Ram, Minister; Published by Authority: pag. 14, 5. of the 7th. Edition) to be instructed, That the Parliament Souldiers ought not to look upon Ʋs, as their Fellow-Citizens, or their Parents, or their Companions in Religion; but as Enemies to the Good Old Cause. And therefore, their Eyes should not pity us, nor their Swords spare us. These are the words of that Abominable Catechism, Published by Authority, for the Use of the Covenanters Army. Oh, behold the Principles of Faith, where-with these dull Souls are instructed! Behold the Bread of Life, where-with these Divines feed the Consciences of the poor People! I have seen in the Prophet of Hierusalem, an horrible thing, they committed Adultery, and walk in Lies; they streng∣then also the Hands of evil doers: Israel, the Days of thy Visitation are come; thy Prophets are Fools, and thy Men of Revelations are Mad, Jer. 23.4. To these prodigious Doctrines, I shall joyn that Aphorism, in the Book Intituled Altare Damasc∣num; That all Kings have a Natural Hatred against Christ: If you will believe this Man, or rather this Monster, every one that Loves Christ, must bear an Irreconcileable hatred to all Kings. Was there ever a more Seditious and Hellish Maxime, after such a Doctrine, pronounced by an Author of such Account? Let us ask, who hath put Weapons into the Hands of this Superstitious People against their Soveraigne? For these poor miserable People hate the King, for the Love of God; ye may account him an Enemy of Christ, even because He is a King? That we may the better discover by what Spirit this Man is led, Observe how he deals with King James, of most Glorious Memory; He calls him Infestissimus Ecclesiae Hostes, the most Mortal Ene∣my of the Church: Without doubt, those who read this, will Question what Religion this Man was of, who so quallifies that Incomparable Defender of our Faith? Who hath so vigorously and sincerely maintained the Truth, that if there were a Christian in the World, who knew not that Great Prince, neither by His Admirable Writings, nor by the Renown of His Piety and Wisdom, and should hear Him call'd the most Mortal Enemy of the Church, he might well Imagine, that King James had turned Turk, and Changed the Churches of His Kingdom into Mosques, and sold His Christian Subjects for Slaves to the Moores. It were to do wrong to the Testimony that himself hath given by the Immortal Monuments of His Religous Wisdom, and by His truly Christian and Fatherly Government, to undertake here to defend Him against so unequal an Adversary; wherein the Injuries spoken of this Excellent Prince, turns to the Ruine, and Perdition of him that spake them; like unto the biteings of the Weasel who consumes his Teeth by knawing of Steel? But for the present, These rare Adages, which Curse the best of Kings, and Royalty in General, are gathered as Choice and Golden Sentences; Witness this other, which comes from as great a Liar as himself, who hath this passage, (Vindiciae, Philadel.) He errs not much, who saith, That there is in all Kings a Mortal Hatred against the Gospel; they will not suffer willingly the King of Kings to govern in their Kingdoms: Yet he owns God hath some amongst the Kings, who pertain to him; but very few, it may be One in a Hundered: But since he is upon a Number, instead of counting a Hundred Kings one after another, Let him account only a Hundred Years, without going out of England; and, I intreat this good Man to consider, what Kings have Reigned over this Kingdom, within this Hun∣dred Years, and then let him in good earnest tell me, which of them he would leave to God, and which he would give to the Devil: Let him consider the Piety of Him, whom God hath made a Saint, and They a Martyr; Let them find if they can, in all his Kingdom, a Man more just and Meek, more Temperate and Religious, and let Envy and Rebellion, who finding nothing to bite at in the Life of this great Monarch, burst a sunder at his Feet, and hide themselves in their own Confusion? I shall but mention one thing more of the Observator upon His Majesties Declaration; who speak∣ing of all Kings now Reigning, but with a particular Application to His Soveraign, faith; That to be the delight of Mankind (as Titus Vespatian) is now a sordid thing amongst Princes; but to be Tormentors and Executioners of the Publique, to Plot and Contrive the Ruine of their Subjects, which they ought naturally to protect, is now accounted a Work worthy of Caesar. If Reviling, and speaking reproachful Words a∣gainst the King were Blasphemy, according to the stile of the Civil Law of Israel, 1 Kings 21.10. then this Impious Person is a Blasphemer in the Highest degree against the Sacred Majesty of Kings; and moreover, exceeding ridiculous, as well as wicked, to appropriate this Description to His King, whose known Piety, Justice and Clemency, deserved rather the Title of The Delights of Man∣kind, than that Emperour upon whom the Love of the People conferred it? The Lord Rebuke those black Souls, who Curse God in the Person of His Anointed; their Sentence is Written, and their Qualities painted out to the Life by St. Peter, 2. Pet. 2.10, 11, 12. Who De∣spise Dominions, presumptious, self-willed; they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities; where as Angels, which are greater in Power, bring not railing Accusations against them, before the Lord; but these are na∣tural Brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroy'd: speak evil of things, which they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own Corruption. I might heap many more passages of the Presbyterians, which teach Murther, Rebellion, and Ha∣tred of Kings; in which they seem to dispute with the Jesuits themselves; to which take this De∣scription of their Devotion: A Seditious Piety, a Factious Religion, which would be Judge of the Consciences of Princes, who abhorr their Religion, because they hate their Government, who make Good Subjects, and Good Christians, to be things incompatible. Whosoever would weary his Patience, and behold how ingenious the Presbyterians have been, even to Exercise the patience of God, and insult over the Persons and Authority of Kings, let them Read their Sermons, which were daily Printed by Authority, after they had Preach'd Them before the House of Commons; wherein the filthy Torrent of Seditious Eloquence, and the Fantasticalness of a Bastard Devotion, were Imploy'd to tear apieces the King, to disfigure him in odious Colours, and stir up the People to all Cruel and Bloody Courses against Him: Out of which might be Col∣lected Thousands of Modern Authorities, in favour of their Wickednesses, which passed from them as Doctrines of Religion; from which Hellish Principles, Heaven deliver us. That which I have Ci∣ted out of known Authors, shall suffice to let the World see, with whom we have to do, and that we are called to the Condition of S. Paul, To Fight with Beasts. London, Printed for T. S. in the Year, 1682.
