L534 R16691 12280389 58697
The Last Words and Sayings OF THE TRUE-PROTESTANT ELM-BOARD, Which Lately Suffer'd Martyrdom in Smithfield, and now in Southwark: TOGETHER WITH A TRUE RELATION OF A Conference between Dr. B—, and the said Board. Christian Reader, THis Board was Born in the Parish of Barn-Elms, of a very Antient Stock, and growing up in Years, was preferred to the Service of Sh. B—l in the nature of a Dresser-Board, in whose Kitchen he past his days in ease and quietness, free from the Burthen and Oppression of many Dishes, and such like Popish and Antichristian Ceremonies; but this happiness was too great to continue, for the Cheapness of Victuals soon invited his Master into the York-shire Climate, so that he was forthwith exposed to the Malice of a Popishly-Affected Cook-Maid, who boyling some Holy-Water for a Crop-sick Catholick, most inhumanely placed the red-hot Skillet upon him, which Barbarous Action could not but extort from him most hideous Groans and Howlings, all which notwithstanding, he firmly adhered to his first principles, and chose rather to be Martyr'd in Smithfield, than to dwell in a Popish Gluttonous Kitchen, tho' exposed to the Rage and Fury of Merry-Andrews, Jack-Puddings, red-hot Irons, and Toreys. The Reverend Scot, Dr. B—, so Remarkable for disturbing the Sick, no sooner heard of the Torments and bitter Agonies of his Be∣loved Board in the Lord, but he made hast to give him some crums of Christian Consolation, before he departed this Life, by which he might
be the better Enabled to undergoe with Patience so Fiery a Tryal, the Salamanca Doctor was designed to be sent for, because he had sworn through many Boards, and therefore was the fitter to Pray by one, but Dr. B—'s voluntary Visit prevented it, who upon his first En∣trance saluted the Board with an Holy Kiss, and said, Be of good Com∣fort my Brother, suffer Patiently, your Reward is great, thou shalt be the Royal Oak in Paradise, and when thou shalt have put off this Touch-wood Ta∣bernacle, thou shalt be as one of the Cedars of Lebanon, where there will be no Merry-Andrews, no Jack-Puddings, no Cook-Maids, no red-hot Irons. The Board return'd the Dr. many Thanks for his Ghostly Advice, and desired him to sit down upon him. The Dr. being a profest Ene∣my to all manner of Ceremony, complyed, and sat him down, and re∣flecting with himself, That those who draw near their latter End, have commonly a foresight of future Events, proposed several Questions to him, concerning the deplorable condition of this Nation: First, Dr. Shall the D. of M. be King? Board. Ummmmm- No. Dr. Shall Scotch Kirk-Government ever prevail in England, to which he Groan'd No, as God shall judge me: quoth the Dr. I am exceeding∣ly sorry for it. Dr. Shall we ever have a Parliament? for I long to be Thank'd for my Regalia. Board. Ah, Dr. had the last Westminster Parliament continued, you had not only had their Thanks, but had been Chair-man of an Assem∣bly, by this time. Dr. What think you of Mr. Papillion and Mr. Dubois, (my very good Friends) being Sheriffs? Board. Beware, if they are not you will all come to an Untimely End. Dr. Shall the Polish Tapski, dye in his Bed? Board. Let him stick close to Papillion and Dubois. Dr. Shall I ever be Rector of the Kirk called Mary Hill? Board. Ummmmm- No, No. Dr. You are a Papist in your heart, and so farewell, for I will not Absolve you. Board. Pray then Dr. do not sham the World with a Narrative of my Life. LONDON: Printed for F. Shepherd. 1682.
