L7A R43330 27207271 110034
England's HAPPINESS: In a DISCOURSE Occasionally Written on the glorious Solemnity of the CORONATION. Of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, The 11th. of April. 1689. By B L. portraits of William and Mary with crowns Printed for J. Blare on London-Bridge 1689.
England's HAPPINESS; In a DISCOURSE Occasionally Written on the glorious Solemnity of the CORONATION Of King VVilliam and Queen Mary, the 11th. of this instant April. BEING An Incitement to Loyalty and Obedience, and a Christian Acknowledgment to God Almighty for His Mercies and Favours towards these Kingdoms, in Blessing us with so gracious a King and Queen, and the extraordinary Felicity we are like to possess in our Great and Miraculous Delivery from the Danger we might have expected. By B. L. Licensed according to Order. Printed for J. Blare at the Looking-glass on London-Bridge, 1689.
ENGLAND'S HAPPINESS, &c. Prov. 29.2. When the Righteous are in Authority the People rejoice. WHat greater Blessing can fall to the share of any Kingdom, or People on Earth, than to be Governed with Uprightness, and Truth; to see her self fenced about with Justice and Judgment; her Laws, that are her se∣curity, to run smooth in an interrupted Chanel of Impartiality, where no Cor∣ruption can turn them aside to destroy the Innocent, nor free the Guilty? in such a Case, I say, a Nation is happy, and this depends mainly on the supreme Power; for where the Fountain runs with a Chrystal Stream the Waters are pleasing, and desirable; they refresh
the fainting Heart, and spread a Joy through those that partake of them; but when it proves the contrary, no sa∣tisfaction is rendered; for according to the Saying of the wise Man, Prov. 29.2. When the Righteous are in Autho∣rity the People rejoice: but when the Wicked beareth Rule the People mourn. And we find that when God more immediately designed to favour his People Israel, he gave them his Servant David to be their King, and to Reign over them; and with him he gave them Plenty in their Gates, and Victory over their E∣nemies, brought under the Oppressour, and the Spoiler was no more seen in the streets, the Cries of the oppressed were turned into Songs of Deliverances, and they were made to hear of Joy and Gladness; for how plainly may we behold in Holy Writ the Face of things to be changed, and that People, who but a little before were compelled to bow their Necks to the Yoke of the Philistines, a cruel and mercifull Ene∣mies, had their Lands wasted and spoi∣led, looking every moment to be de∣stroyed, suddenly raised to unexpected Advantages; their Enemies were put
to flight, they had Peace in their Dwel∣ling, their Vineyards, and Olive-yards flourished, and Corn and Wine encrea∣sed, so that they might conclude them∣selves, by a sudden and unexpected Change, more happy than the Nations round about them, and it must conse∣quently be a greater satisfaction to any People, and create in their Minds a larger sense of Joy, and thankfull Ac∣knowledgment, to be snatched from a Chaos of Disorder and Confusion, threatning every moment Ruin and De∣solation, into Calmness, Serenity, and a prospect of lasting Tranquility, than if they had been in no such Danger. Holy David gives extraordinary Praise and Acknowledgment on this occasion, Psalm 124.6, 7, 8. Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us a Prey to their Teeth; our Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is broken, and we are escaped: our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. And indeed it has been no less in all Ages of the World; for any Man de∣livered from a sharp and torturing pain, or from an extream peril and danger, concludes that Deliverance an extra∣ordinary
Happiness; then it behoves us to raise our Souls to a highth that may fill us with Joy, for a more than ordi∣nary Deliverance, in considering the Royal Instrument is in the Hand of the Authour of all our Happiness, from whom we have our being, and our well-being; for as it is written, Prov. 23.11. He that loveth pureness of Heart, for the Grace of his Lips, the King shall be his Friend. And what can be more desira∣ble? for the favour of a Righteous Prince is more excellent than Gold, and his Love above the price of all precious things; he sits fearless from Danger, and is the brightness and lustre of his Kingdom: And as a more excellent E∣pethite, the wise Man says, Prov. 29.14. The King that faithfully judgeth the Poor his Throne shall be established for ever; and, as no small honour, and peculiar favour of Heaven, even the Church of Christ hath a comfortable Promise, viz. That Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers. These things bring us to a further consideration, which may more and more open our Eyes to behold what may make us with a Holy Zeal cry out,
This is the Lords doing, and it is mar∣vellous in our Eyes; for who but a short time since could have foreseen the Mira∣cles he has done by the Prudence, Con∣duct and Courage of the happy Instru∣ment in his hand, which in the perfor∣mance required Vertues, hardly to be credited, till seen. Great indeed, have been the Actions and Fame of Men in most Ages, for being renowned in War, celebrated in Learning, or excellent in curious Arts, which has caused their Names to be Registred in the Golden Robes of Fame; but in this the diffe∣rence is vastly transcendent, and no∣thing but wonder and astonishment can fill our minds, whilst we contemplate it, and are carried away with thoughts of our happiness, when the Righteous are in authority, the people rejoice. But to come nearer, there ought to be in this Case a great and more than ordinary sense of the highest Gratitude incumbent on us; and first let us lift our Eyes to Heaven, and give hearty Praise and Acknowledgment, adoring his Good∣ness and Mercy, confessing with Holy David, Psal. 126. v. 3. The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are
glad; & especially according to the Ad∣vice of the Authour to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.1. Let Brotherly Love continue. Let us own our selves unworthy of so great a Blessing, and humble our selves before him that exalteth the lowly, and abaseth the Proud: Let us com∣mit our ways to the Lord, and put our Trust in the Shield and Rock of our Sal∣vation, and ever bless his Holy Name, that we live to see this happy day, in which we beheld the Work of our De∣liverance so fully wrought, and as our Hearts ought ever to be full charged with Joy, for the Peace and welfare of Zion, so let us study to preserve & main∣tain it to the utmost of our power, by uniting in Peace, and Unity, that by our Breaches or Divisions, we may give the Enemy to advantage over us, that by the old Machiavilian Policy we may not divide, thereby to suffer breaking in or going out; and that there may be no murmuring or complaining in our Streets. We, no doubt, are one of the best Governments, founded upon whole∣some and substantial Laws; the Purity of the Gospel shines bright as the Morning-Star amongst us, Plenty flows in our
Land, and the Oppressours are remo∣ved from our Gates; let us then con∣clude our selves a People in a happy Condition; yea, rather let us conclude our selves so, because our God is the Lord, who, with a mighty and out∣stretched Arm, has raised up Salvation to us, and heard us out of his Holy Hill in the time of trouble, and has bound himself by a holy promise, if we provoke him not by our sins, he will never leave nor forsake us. O! that Men would therefore Praise the Lord. But secondly, O let us Kiss the Son, least after all these Mercies, he be angry, and his anger burn against us, for making no better use of so great a Mercy. A Wise Man is as stedfast as the Foundation of the Earth, says the Philosopher, and in Holy Scripture finds, he builds a House upon a Rock, and that Rock is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and therefore his House is never shaken down, though the Storms or Tempests be ne∣ver so rough and raging, He that trust∣eth in the Lord, shall stand as Mount Sion. This made Holy David bold, when he said, Psal. 23. Though I should walk through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, thy Red and thy Staff, they shall comfort me and again, Psal. 27. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? When Ezekiah heard the proud Mes∣sage of a Scribe sent to him and his Peo∣ple, by Rabshaketh the King, stood not much to consult the Arm of Flesh, but went unto the House of the Lord, and prayed unto the Lord to save him and his people out of the hands of their Enemies, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth might know he is alone God, and accordingly the Assyrian Host fell before them, without any loss to the Israelites. This Miraculous Deliverence may in somemeasure be applyed to our Case; God sent his Angel to put fear into the Hearts of those who, a little before, thought of nothing but our Ruine, blasting and withering all their Courage, and enfeebling them, that they were not able to carry on their Devices to any kind of perfection, that had cost them extraordinary Treasure, Labour and Industry. This we must own to be the Lord's doing; for it is most plainly demonstrated, as it was revealed to the
great Babilonian Monarch, that the most High God rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to whom he pleases; 'Tis he that rules the Hearts of Kings and Princes, disposing of them as it seemeth best to his Godly Wis∣dom; all Crowns and Scepters are be∣fore him, and in his Hands are the Bal∣lances of the Earth; his looks dry up the Deep, and the Winds are in the hollow of his hand; Power and Might are ever before him, to do what seems best to his infinite Wisdom; for whatever he wills, that he has Power to perform. These things considered, What Persons ought we to be in all Holiness and Conversation, that he may continue his Love and Favour towards us, that he continue his Protection and Favour towards us? for although his Mer∣cy is, and has been very great, yet if we triffle with such transcendent Goodness, What can we expect, but that he should change his Smiles into Frowns, as hath happened to many, who have turned his Grace into wantonness? O let us not, like Gesserun, wax Fat, and kick against our Maker; but rather seri∣ously consider what he has done for this
Land and People, with all the thoughts of Humility and Gratitude, that we enjoy the Royal Blessings, on whose Heads the Crowns flourish in Righte∣ousness, and may their Thrones be e∣stablished, that every one sits under his Vine in peace, not constrained or com∣pelled to violate his Conscience, or to undergoe hard-ships upon the Score of Conscience or Religion: And the better to mind us of it, let us look back a lit∣tle into the times of Persecution, where∣in the Saints of God suffered all manner of ignominy, and torment, being hated of all Men for the Name of Christ, de∣spised as the Filth of the World and Dung of the Earth; yet they continued faithfull and constant, arming their Hearts with the comforts of God's Pro∣mises in his Gospel, and were so far from repining, that they suffered joy∣fully, and many run violently to flames and torments, not accepting Delive∣rance, singing Triumphs, even in the Arms of Death; and when they were called before Kings and Princes, and o∣thers of Authority, and commanded to forsake the Truth of the everlasting Go∣spel, they notwithstanding continued
faithfull unto Death, to gain a Crown of Life and glorious Immortality. These Tryalls, I say, are not before us, we live at Peace under a Pious and Vertuous King and Queen, who make Religion the brightest Jewels in their Crowns, and the highest concernment of Regal Glory: We live under such Laws as guard and secure our Religi∣on, Lives, Liberties and Properties to us. This might raise us to the Rapture of the Kingly Prophet, when he says, Thou Lord, shalt have both Man and Beast, how excellent are thy Mercies, O God! and the Children of men shall put their trust un∣der the shadow of thy Wings; they shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy House, and thou shalt give them to drink at thy pleasure, as out of a River; for with thee is the Well of Lafe, and in thee we shall see Light, Psal. 36.7, 8, 9. and certainly no Eye can perceive, nor Heart con∣ceive, the high and sudden pleasures which God has in store, for those that with thankfull Hearts and Minds obey, and serve him; be earnest then, in run∣ning the Race that is set before you, contend for the Prize of an inestimable value, that may Crown you with Imor∣tality,
and Eternal Life; and be carefull to consider what the Apostle says, Gal. 6. Look what a man soweth, that shall he reap; he who soweth in the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that soweth in the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap ever∣lasting Life; for God, says Holy David, Rewardeth every man according to his work, Psal. 16.12. Let us take heed to our selves therefore, that we mistake not our way, and wander upon the dark moun∣tains; for as the wise Man says, Eccl. 21.10. The way of sinners is paved with stones; but at the end thereof is Hell and Dark∣ness, and Pains; but let us with fear and reverence approach the Throne of that Tre∣mendious Majesty, who makes Darkness his secret place, and Clouds and thick Mists are round about him, yet dwells, in unap∣proachable Brightness, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand, are pleasures for evermore. Great, we must confess, it is to dwell in glittering Courts and gilded Palace, to enjoy the Smiles and Favours of a Prince, to have Attendance, and Trains of Pomp and Grandeur, followed with State, and even the Ensigns of Majesty cringed too, served with a kind of an Adoration; this
must raise the mind to a very high pitch, though supported with an ex∣traordinary vertue; but when we con∣sider this world, and the Fashion of it passes away, of what little moment and duration all earthly things consist, then we must confess them of two small a value to six our hearts upon, and own that here we have no tarrying City, but look for one above, the bright celestial City, the new Jerusalem, there our im∣perfect joys will be made full and com∣plete, when we shall be found worthy to attend on the Throne of the King of Kings, with Songs of Praise and Thanks∣giving, and our Fellow-Courtiers shall Seraphim, Cherubim, Arch-Angels, Patriarchs, Apostles, Saints and Mar∣tyrs, and all the Souls of just men made perfect. These are things worthy of our highest contemplation, and the Stairs that lead to this Mansion, built without hands, are Faith, Hope, Cha∣rity, Justice, Uprightness, and many other Graces and Vertues, that ought to shine in the Soul of a good Christian, as the Stars in the Firmament guiding him through the Wilderness of this
World, that he wander not into the Paths of error, which at the enterance appear in prospect exceeding fair, and many times be desired, but are full of stumbling Blocks, and paved with Ruine, to overthrow and bring to de∣struction, such as go astray, and of this the Wise man gives us an Item, Prov. 28.18. Whose walketh uprightly shall be saved, but he that is preverse in his ways, shall fall at once, and this brings me to the third consideration and exhor∣tation, to follow the way of vertue and uprightness. Since the Wisdom of the Father has declared, that by him Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice and Judgment, we ought to look upon them as extra∣ordinary persons, with a distence, of re∣spect and obedience, becoming the highest Character upon Earth; and more immediately charged by the Al∣mighty with the care of the Kingdom, Nation, or People, committed to their Trust and Care; and here we are com∣manded to tender to Caesar the Things that are Caesars, Rom. 13 8. And let e∣very Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God; the pow∣ers
that are, are ordained of God. Tit. 3.1. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves Dam∣nation 1 Pet. 2.13. Put them in mind to be subject to the principalities and powers, and to obey Magistrates, and again, submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governours, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that do well. These are the Commands of Heaven, carrying with them an undisputable Au∣thority, which demands our Obedience in so strict a sense, that they leave us no place of turning to the right, or the left, and therefore our Circumspection must be great; but a good Prince even commands the Hearts of his Subjects, and there flows a universal concurrence in Duty and Affection, from secret Springs of the mind; for when the Righ∣teous are in Authority the People rejoice. A good Man, a value and esteem inse∣parable from vertuous Actions, which gives Life to those that are Influenced by him, and obliges them to Joy and
Gladness, even amidst their melancholly Thoughts: But on the contrary, as 'tis in the latter part of the Verse, when the Wicked beareth rule the People mourn. This is not difficult to be proved, but rather evident, if we look upon our present Condition for the former, and on our Neighbour Kingdom for In∣stances of the latter. I might lay down many particulars more than are already mentioned, to exhort and persuade all to true Loyalty and Obedience, but think it, in our Case, altogether needless in a generous Nation, whose Souls scorn any thing beneath themselves, and hold it the blackest of all Crimes to be branded with Ingratitude, unless by the way I should take notice of the Sons of Rome, who are bigotted into Opinions, for which they cannot give us the least Reason, unless they shuffle it upon a blind Obedience to their pretended spiritual head, who sits upon his seven Hills, and sends his Foxes with Fire∣brands at their Tails to inflame the World; but we find his Measures have been taken amiss, the Snare is broken,
and we are escaped; and what shall we now say, but that our Hearts are filled with Joy and Gratitude to our Delive∣rer? who, when they thrust sore at us, and we had almost fallen, upheld us, even when with holy David, we might truly have said, If the Lord had not hel∣ped me it had failed, but my Soul should have been put to Silence, Psalm 94.17. when on the contrary, though in a low∣er degree, we may sing with Solomon, Cant. 2.10. Arise my Love, my fair One, and come thy way; for behold Winter is past, the shower is over, the flowers have appeared in our Land. And now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Power, Glory, Honour, and Dominion, World with∣out end. Amen.
A Prayer for the King and Queen, and preservation of the Protestant Reli∣gion. O Lord God, Holy, and Righteous, in whose Hands are the Hearts of Kings and Princes, we, with all hu∣mility, and low prostration, im∣plore thy Benediction upon Their most gracious Majesties King William and Queen Mary, protect them with thy Almighty Power, and give them Wisdom from above; endue them with all Princely Graces, give them the Blessings of the right and left hand, and inspire them with
Zeal and Courage, ever to pro∣tect thy sacred Truth; make the King a nursing Father, and the Queen a Nursing Mother to thy Church, and let their days be as the days of Heaven. Grant O most Mercifull Lord God, that the Vine which thou hast planted with thy own right hand, may prosper and flourish, till its Branches o∣verspread the Earth; prosper our Counsellours in great Affairs, and inspire our Senators to carry on with a fervent Zeal, whate∣ver may tend to thy Glory, and to the good and wellfare of the Kingdom, for the sake of our ever blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, Amen. FINIS.
portraits of William and Mary in roundels
