M2107 12741343 93142
A DISCOURSE Shewing In what state THE THREE KINGDOMES Are in At this present. Printed in the yeare, 1641.
In what State the three Kingdomes are at this present. SIR, AS the faces of all Britane shew their hearts and inclinations, so if their hearts were glazed with a Christall, they would appeare fearefull of the future: were not the representative bo∣dy of the State carefull to cure the present malady, purge the distempered humours and save the much gan∣grend body, by cutting some rotten and putrifide mem∣bers off; which infect, infest and invade the republique; this makes me cheerefull to discover the conceptions of the wise, and not as an Orator, but relate their opinion as their auditor: I hope it will take away from me ostenta∣tion, and trouble from the reader even to give ease of discourse. Their profound sighes and earnest prayers might quicken my ingenie, better then the sound of excellent instruments can revive the spirit; to present this with all obedience to my Soveraigne, and faith to the Coun∣try, and declare what is convenient to be done at this time, submitting my self modestly to head and body. Now if those streame of teares and sweet perfumes, make not my penne fruitfull and odoriferous, pardon my rudenesse, and consider the state we are now in.
When our miserable condition perceived (before the accesse of the universall body) by the wrinckles, put on the brow of ruined affaires, councell weakned, and re∣putation of State blasted, that the people crie out against such instruments; what miserable condition are wee brought to? Oh God! suffer not ill Councellors to be as a bad spleene, to swell so big as to make leane the Common-wealth, that our empty purses bee not filled with bloud, though with teares: wherefore I humbly beseech the head to produce such effect, as the Sunne on moist and cold grounds, to reduce the generall capacity to such an influence of Justice, Peace, Religion and li∣berty; and that in lieu thereof, the people may make him a rich and potent King. As all Rivers returne to the Ocean, so shall the La∣borinth we are in, be by the helpe of wise Ariadnes escaped, and the golden fleece, continuance of Gospell, Justice, Peace and downy tranquility, with helpe of those godly Medeas, be preserved and procured: There∣fore not as a Lawyer, give mee leave as a welwisher to the State, to put the case by way of supposition. If the fundamentall Lawes bee quite overthrowne, Religion altered, the Nobility taken away by counsells of warre (as the Lord Mount Noris should have beene) the meaner sort used as Pryn, Burton & Bastwick; the pro∣priety of goods taken away from the subject; an Army force an Arbitrary way of government, and justice bought & sold; what misery will follow? when the Jud∣ges shall affirm it legall, the Clergie wrongfully in their Pulpits teach it, and the Cabinet Councell authorize the conveniency for matter of State; therefore to have our Lawes established, Religion maintained, the pride of
Prelates abased, Justice administred, Liberty settled, and Peace continued for after times: It is necessary the King Lords and Commons, joyne in a most severe punish¦ment, that none in the Postea, dare to enterprise the sur∣prise and ruine of the common good, for it is an infallible maxime, the King is richer in the hearts, then in the treasures of his Subjects. Surely there was never a fitter time, nor a more con∣venient occasion then now, when three Kingdomes unite for their owne safety; when the Scot hath an army on foote for this purpose, and the King hath promised they shall not be interrupted in their Counsells, and God re∣quires it for his glory. Especially when Ministers of State have begun to act this fatall Tragedy, the guiltinesse by so many lively te∣stimonies proved, and the treason by presidents & weigh∣ty authority assured, by Law maintained, and by all the Commons house adjudged, who have power by 25. Ed. 3. and when it is brought to so good a passe by the Lords, who both have Legislative power, why should not Lords and Commons bring it to perfection; that the King signe; that who shall dare to alter Religion, innovate Law, or take away liberty of the Subject, be condignly punished, and for the future, cause an expresse Law to be made on purpose, to attaint bloud, forfeit life, lands and goods, if any shall assay such crying exorbitances. If by the Law it bee high treason to kill a Commissi∣oner of Oyer and Terminer, in feare of justice; à majore to confound the whole body, when a Commissioner is but one poore member of the body politique. 2. To make a Law, none be capable of any place of government, that hath or shall give such counsell, and
leave the rest to the trienniall Parliament, and not graspe too much, lest all the harpies flie away. Likewise it is necessary to make a remonstrance of the necessity of giving 300000. to the Scots, to give satisfa∣ction to future ages, that it was no pusilanimity, but up∣on mature deliberation; because the evident necessity and inevitable dangers cast upon us by ill counsell, justly caused it. To the purpose, the house of Commons hath done wisely, to endeavour to clip the wings of the Clergy, that they may fly into no temporall place, whose pens and tongues have uttered such poison against the common good, and in their pride would willingly adhere to Rome, as by many superstitions it plainly appeares; they have introduced some Babilonian ceremonies, and made a bridge unto the Church by the Arminian opinion, to passe over to Popery. The State of Venice jealous of any their members, confederating with enemies cause them to bestrangled and hanged up betweene Columnes, confiscate their goods and estates, bannish their children and make them incapable of government: if for jealousie, much more for so foule acts committed, ought they dye, by the Law of God and man. Among the Athenians, Lacedemonians and Romans; whosoever should goe about to alter the forme of go∣vernment, or Lawes without publique consent, hath been ever accounted the highest Traitor; witnesse their Ostracisme, and many such exemplary punishments, u∣sed to such wretches. If destroying the head bee high treason, then ruining the state of the body must be; for if it be suffocated
with grosse spirits the head will not onely ake, but bee Apoplecticall or Lethargicall, such a sympathy or rather relation is betwixt head and members, that no Rheto∣rique or eloquence can take it away: In this case it is no pitty, but convenient to destroy the brood of such vi∣pers, and by our Law the intention makes it treason. But how many waies the Lord of Strafford hath perpe∣trated this intention, hath been often proved. In 18. and 21. Iacobi, The whole house adjudged it treason, to alien the hearts of the Subjects from the Sove∣raigne, which hath beene done by his Counsellors. His imprisoning without Law, was high Treason, in Sir Haukin Hanby 25. E. 3. Art. 61. who was drawne, hanged and quartered. Judge Thorpe for giving such an oath contrary to Law, was high Treason; and is not his? The reason Rich. 2. was deposed (plainly manifested) was because he suffered divers malefactors to escape, (condemned by Parliament) which caused the oppression of the Subject and ruine of the Kingdome. In all ages a Lethargy in Kings hath caused their ruine: witnesse Ed. 2. Rich. 2. and H. 6. (I humbly desire God to blesse his Majesty.) But consider wee, that the three Kingdomes will not be satisfied unlesse the wrong recei∣ved be expiated with the oblation of some, have caused a heretick condition. The Lord of Strafford hath had counsell in case of treason, when none hath had the like since the Con∣quest. So the whole world may see with what temper, gra∣vity and patience they proceed. Ed. Earle of Northumberland, in the 8. of Rich. 2.
(because his Deputy let the Scots take Barwicke Castle) was condemned of high Treason, and yet he never con∣sented thereunto, for it was done without his privity: but the Lord of Strafford writ to the Major of Newcastle to let in the Scots, and caused the Arms to be taken away from the foure adjacent Counties, making them inca∣pable of defence. Wherefore it is visible as the sunne, he is guilty, be∣sides his other crimes; now his delay of punishment hath kindled such a fire, as all the Subjects of the three King∣domes are on a flame, and wil not be satisfied: Ex parvis magna Crescunt. I pray God divert the evill, and give us true repentance. FINIS.
